High temperature electrical energy storage: advances, challenges, and frontiers  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CS00012F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CS00012F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5848-5887High temperature electrical energy storage: advances, challenges, and frontiers

        
          
            Xinrong 
            Lin
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Maryam 
            Salari
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Leela Mohana Reddy 
            Arava
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Pulickel M. 
            Ajayan
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Mark W. 
            Grinstaff
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartments of Biomedical Engineering and Chemistry, Boston University, Boston, MA 02115, USA. E-mail: mgrin@bu.edu
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48202, USA
cDepartment of Materials Science and NanoEngineering, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA
Received 
      6th January 2016
    First published on 26th August 2016AbstractWith the ongoing global effort to reduce greenhouse gas emission and dependence on oil, electrical energy storage (EES) devices such as Li-ion batteries and supercapacitors have become ubiquitous. Today, EES devices are entering the broader energy use arena and playing key roles in energy storage, transfer, and delivery within, for example, electric vehicles, large-scale grid storage, and sensors located in harsh environmental conditions, where performance at temperatures greater than 25 °C are required. The safety and high temperature durability are as critical or more so than other essential characteristics (e.g., capacity, energy and power density) for safe power output and long lifespan. Consequently, significant efforts are underway to design, fabricate, and evaluate EES devices along with characterization of device performance limitations such as thermal runaway and aging. Energy storage under extreme conditions is limited by the material properties of electrolytes, electrodes, and their synergetic interactions, and thus significant opportunities exist for chemical advancements and technological improvements. In this review, we present a comprehensive analysis of different applications associated with high temperature use (40–200 °C), recent advances in the development of reformulated or novel materials (including ionic liquids, solid polymer electrolytes, ceramics, and Si, LiFePO4, and LiMn2O4 electrodes) with high thermal stability, and their demonstrative use in EES devices. Finally, we present a critical overview of the limitations of current high temperature systems and evaluate the future outlook of high temperature batteries with well-controlled safety, high energy/power density, and operation over a wide temperature range.
Xinrong Lin
Dr Xinrong Lin received her BS in Chemistry from Wuhan University in 2008, and obtained her PhD from Boston University under the mentorship of Professor Grinstaff in 2014. Her PhD research focused on the synthesis and characterization of ionic supramolecular assemblies. She is currently a postdoctoral fellow in the Grinstaff Laboratory and is evaluating new ionic liquids and ionic liquid polymers as non-flammable electrolytes for high temperature electrical energy storage (EES) devices.
Maryam Salari
Dr Maryam Salari completed her BSc in Materials Engineering at Tabriz University in 2005, and MSc in Materials Selection and Characterization at Amirkabir University of Technology in 2007. She obtained her PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from University of Wollongong, in 2013. After obtaining her PhD, she joined the Intelligent Polymer Research Institute (Australian Research Council (ARC) Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science (ACES)) as an associate research fellow to develop new materials for efficient and sustainable photoelectrochemical water splitting. She joined the Grinstaff Laboratory at Boston University in 2015 as a postdoctoral fellow. Her research interests include the synthesis of self-organized TiO2 nanotube arrays and inorganic materials for energy storage applications.
Leela Mohana Reddy Arava
Professor Leela Mohana Reddy Arava is an Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering at Wayne State University. He completed his BSc and Msc at Sri Venkateswara University, and earned his PhD from the Indian Institute of Technology. Prior to his current position, he was a Research Scientist and a Postdoctoral Associate at Rice University, and a Postdoctoral Associate at the University of Pittsburgh. Leela has published more than 70 papers and his research interests include high energy and safe batteries for electric vehicles, micro-batteries to power micro-sensors, and flexible hybrid energy devices for wearable assistive technologies (http://blogs.wayne.edu/arava/).
Pulickel M. Ajayan
Professor Pulickel M. Ajayan is the Benjamin M. and Mary Greenwood Anderson Professor in Engineering at Rice University. He is the founding chair of Rice University's Materials Science and NanoEngineering department and also holds joint appointments with the Department of Chemistry and Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering. Ajayan research interests include synthesis and structure–property relations of nanostructures and nanocomposites, materials science, and applications of nanomaterials, energy storage, and phase stability in nanoscale systems. He is one of the pioneers in the field of carbon nanotubes and was involved in the early work along with the NEC group. He has published more than 600 journal papers. Ajayan has received several awards including the Spiers Memorial Award by the Royal Society of Chemistry (UK), Senior Humboldt Prize, and MRS medal (http://ajayan.rice.edu/pulickel-ajayan/).
Mark W. Grinstaff
Professor Mark W. Grinstaff is the Distinguished Professor of Translational Research and a Professor of Biomedical Engineering, Chemistry, Materials Science and Engineering, and Medicine at Boston University. Mark's inventive scientific contributions span biomedical engineering, biological engineering, biotechnology, applied chemistry, medicine, and energy producing transformational discoveries, technologies, and products unique to the convergence of these fields. His awards include the ACS Nobel Laureate Signature Award, NSF Career Award, Pew Scholar in the Biomedical Sciences, Camille Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar, Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship, the Edward M. Kennedy Award for Health Care Innovation, a Fellow of the American Academy of Nanomedicine, a Fellow of AIMBE, and a Charter Fellow of the National Academy of Inventors. Mark is an author or co-author on more than 240 peer-reviewed publications, an inventor on more than 200 patents and patent applications, and co-founder of five companies (http://people.bu.edu/mgrin/).
1. Introduction and scope
Electricity or electrical energy is the primary form of energy used in modern society. The need for electrical energy has been growing exponentially for portable consumer electronics as well as for transportation, grid-level applications, and load leveling.1 For example, electricity accounted for 40% of all United States energy consumption in 2002,2 and the demand for electricity is predicted to double by 2050. About 25% of electricity is produced via renewable resources and the remaining 75% is generated by burning fossil fuels (16300 terawatt hours, TW h, ×1012 watt hours, as of 2013).3 This is compounded by the fact that most major industries (e.g., transportation, agriculture, public services and residential) still rely heavily on oil (39.9%), natural gas (15.1%) and coal (11.5%). Use of these non-renewable resources generates 32190 Mt of carbon dioxide (CO2) per year. Electrical energy is the preferred form of energy to gradually replace these fuels, as it can be generated from sustainable and clean resources such as solar, wind, and geothermal energy. Due to the intermittent and uncontrollable nature of these renewable resources, energy must be harvested and stored. While non-renewable fuels will continue to supply the majority of energy for the next several decades, electrical energy storage (EES) devices are penetrating new major markets and will eventually dominate future energy storage and supply.4
By definition, EES refers to the process of converting electrical energy from a power network into a form that can be stored for converting back to electrical energy when needed.5 This process enables electricity to be produced at times of either low demand or from intermittent energy sources and to be used at times of peak demand or when no other generation means is available. EESs are used in numerous applications including portable devices, transport vehicles, and stationary energy resources and, primary EES devices include pump hydro storage (PHS), compressed air energy storage (CAES), flywheel (FW), batteries, supercapacitors, and fuel cells.6 Of these EES devices, batteries and supercapacitors will be the focus of this review.
Batteries and supercapacitors share a number of common material components, cell configuration, and electrochemistry.4,7–11 Specifically, batteries and supercapacitors are comprised of electron-conducting electrodes, ion-conducting electrolyte, and separators that are ion-conducting but electron-insulating to prevent electrode shorting. Batteries are efficient energy storage devices with relatively high energy density (150 W h kg−1) and high coulombic efficiency (>90%). Supercapacitors, on the other hand, possess substantially higher power density (25–100 kW kg−1) because of fast charge transfer during charging and discharging. Therefore, they can be charged/discharged quickly for tens of thousands of cycles, and are useful in assisting the start-up of engines and regenerative breaking systems, which require a short burst of power. For further comparison, fuel cells8 deliver about twice the combustion efficiency (∼50%) of gasoline but the energy delivered is dependent on fuel supply. Fuel cells experienced a height of popularity in the 1990s, yet the high cost of producing hydrogen and the related infrastructure constrain their widespread commercial use.12,13 Ongoing efforts are focused on improving power density, lifetime, and reliability.
Widely used at ambient conditions, EES devices are also subjected to extreme conditions – defined by the air temperature and the immediate surroundings. For example, batteries in our cell phones may suddenly shut down in harsh winter outdoors or catch fire in hot climates as the environmental temperature is beyond the working range of the battery. While the former leads to instability of energy supply and device malfunctioning, the latter raises significant safety issues with a resultant catastrophic thermal runaway of the system. Widely publicized accidents such as exploding laptops, glowing cellphones, plane crashes, and oil spills exemplify these safety issues.14,15 Therefore, there is substantial research interest and market demand for EES devices that operate at low, high, and low-to-high temperatures for applications in oil drilling, mining, military, aerospace electronics, and electric vehicles. Since traditional EES material devices fail to meet this demand, thermal management and cooling systems are installed, adding increased weight, volume, and energy consumption to the integrated power system with often a subsequent reduction in reliability and efficiency. Moreover, these thermal management and cooling systems are not feasible in some compact or miniaturized devices.
There are many challenges to developing thermally stable EES devices. The major ones are chemical and materials centric, and include the thermal stability of cathodes, anodes, separators, and especially electrolytes, as well as the reactions within and between these essential components.8,16–18 Discovery and development of stable materials working over a wider or higher temperature range (e.g., 40–300 °C) remain limiting factors because the elevated temperature or swings in temperature result in changes in structure and electrolyte properties, as well as undesirable electrolyte–electrode interfacial reactions. Accelerated material aging at higher temperatures can also lead to deterioration of the electrodes, separators, electrolytes, and salt. Thus, given the current knowledge base and market demand for new technologies in the consumer and industrial sector, there is an unprecedented research opportunity in the material and chemical fields. This review focuses on batteries and supercapacitors for use at temperatures from 40 to 300 °C. We start with a discussion of existing high temperature energy storage technologies and a brief market analysis, and follow with a discussion of the challenges with high temperature EES devices including material limitations, as well as thermal degradation mechanisms. We then present recent developments in the preparation of thermally stable electrolytes via cases studies using novel or reformulated materials. This includes general principles, successes, and failures, followed by a critical evaluation of the limitations of current high temperature systems. The review concludes with remarks on the field, the design requirements for an optimal battery with safety, high energy/power density, and wide temperature operation, and future directions (Fig. 1 and 2).
 Fig. 1  The structure and compositions of a lithium-based battery.19 Adapted from ref. 19. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 2  Temperature dependent applications of energy storage devices. 
2. High temperature electrical energy storage market opportunities
Temperature has been long recognized as an important criterion that influences material stability, device life-span, safety, and performance; it also dictates the operation environment and corresponding applications. EES devices, first invented and commercialized to power small gadgets, are now an integral part of the broader energy storage arena and are intended to play key roles in future energy transfer and delivery in electric vehicles, large-scale grid storage, and demanding or restrictive specialty environmental applications. Traditionally, engineers relied on active or passive cooling systems when designing electronics that must function outside of normal temperature ranges. Although cooling systems effectively extend temperature limits of the electronics built with existing technologies, safety issue caused by thermal runaway cannot be fundamentally eliminated but only mitigated.20–23 Moreover, thermal management becomes more critical and difficult for a larger battery pack because the surface area/volume ratio of batteries decreases with increasing battery size, resulting in a lower heat transfer rate per unit of heat generation. In some applications where cooling may not be possible, or when it may be more appealing to operate at elevated temperatures in order to improve overall system performance, materials with low thermal stability are simply not appropriate choices for device components. Batteries possessing standard materials may indeed work at elevated temperatures, nevertheless, they are not safe. Size is an overarching issue when dealing with cooling systems. The extra weight and volume associated with the energy storage system greatly reduces the practical gravimetric and volumetric energy density that both the research and industry communities have strived to gain. The addition of a cooling system also increases the overall cost of the electronics. For example, the price of batteries in the Tesla S automobile is estimated to be 20% of the car cost in 2015. Nevertheless, despite the lack of materials and devices rated to power in elevated to high temperatures (as well as harsh environmental conditions), many industries are in need of electronics that operate reliably under these conditions. In 2020, the global high temperature energy storage (HTS) market is predicted to be $2.5 billion.
2.1 Oil and gas industry
The oldest market-pull for new and improved battery performance at elevated and high temperatures comes from the oil and gas industry, which is one of the largest user of high temperature electronics. Typically 30 to 50 feet away from the drill tip, electronics and sensors are integrated in measurement-while-drilling (MWD) and logging-while-drilling (LWD) equipment.24 They record geological data and need to be powered by batteries to avoid the inconvenience of using extension cords in high-angle, extended-reach, or horizontal conditions in many of today's wellbores. The total worldwide market for oil drilling batteries in 2011 was about $100 million; it is expanding fast due to increasing popularity of unconventional fuels such as shale gas, and the emergence of new drilling technologies including horizontal and deep well drilling. The wellbore temperature is usually a complex function of wellbore geometry and depth, flow rate, fluid composition, and formation properties, etc.25 In an over-simplified conversion, the typical geothermal gradient is about 17 °C per 100 ft of depth increase in the hydrocarbon-producing areas. This increase can be ten-fold greater in thin-crust areas such as volcanic and geothermal areas.26 Reservoir temperatures typically ranged from 60 to 120 °C with the average temperature at around 85 °C.27 Therefore, batteries used to power the MWD tools mainly employed lithium thionyl chloride (LiSOCl2). Nowadays, with the declining number of easily accessible reservoirs, along with improved technologies for deeper drilling, the demand for specialty batteries is increasing. In the US alone, about 30% of the natural gas supply comes from reservoirs below 15000 ft, where the reservoirs possess maximum temperatures of over 200 °C, and are considered as hostile high pressure/high temperature (HP/HT) environments. In these cases, active cooling is not practical, hence battery-operated equipment is not used. Instead, temperature and pressure data collection relies on mechanical registers that use a stylus to scratch marks on a metallic cylinder that turns at a constant slow rate. In response to this need, Industry partner FastCAP Systems recently reported an ultracapacitor that is fully operational at 200 °C, extending the upper limit of high-temperature energy storage and electronics.28,29 The next generation of miniaturized sensors (i.e., freely mobile micro- or nano-sensors) require new battery technologies, as these independent sensors will be deployed in reservoirs, move towards desired locations, and collect real-time data on important metrics such as temperature, sulfur content, water/oil ratio, pressure, etc.
2.2 Military and aerospace
Energy storage devices are used in a wide range of specialized applications in the military and aerospace industries. Their market is significantly greater (10 to 100 times) than the oil drilling industry30 (Sandia National Laboratories, 2005). Military batteries encompass a number of different chemistries including lithium sulfur dioxide (LiSO2), lithium manganese dioxide (LiMnO2), silver–zinc, and lead-acid. Advances in military technology have led to an ever-increasing power requirement on the battlefield, and in turn, triggering a significant demand for reliable military batteries. A variety of high-tech military products, such as unattended ground sensors, sonobuoys, GPS, night vision, and radio systems depend on battery systems for their prompt and freely mobile functioning.31,32 For military applications (military equipment is used in extreme environmental conditions, carried by soldiers on their backs for extended periods of time, and stockpiled during peace time for future wartime use), batteries must operate over a wide range of temperature conditions, be lightweight, and exhibit minimal energy loss when not in use. Furthermore, when used in miniature explosive devices, thermal batteries need insulation layers in order to continuously keep the temperature between 400 to 700 °C and to protect adjacent components from overheating.
The aerospace industry utilizes high temperature electronics. One of the emerging applications driving battery performance is the motivation to migrate the traditional hydraulically driven actuators and associated systems on aircrafts to all electric counterparts in order to enhance reliability and reduce weight. Power electronics for motor controls and electric brakes require high temperature capacitors and control sensors since actuators raise the ambient temperature up to 350 °C. Replacement of the centralized engine controls with distributed control systems that are installed close to the engine on commercial aircrafts is underway, and could reduce the amount of interconnections by a factor of 10, saving hundreds of pounds of aircraft weight. Batteries or supercapacitors powering the electronics, near the engine, must endure temperatures ranging from −55 to 250 °C. Space exploration also requires power for satellites, astronaut suits (extravehicular activities), planetary and lunar rovers, and surface systems during night-time or peak power operations.33,34 While most space applications require low temperature operation (−80 to 0 °C), battery operation at high temperatures is needed for planetary surface activities (e.g., Venus surface temperature can be as high as 480 °C). As with the military needs for batteries, similar demands in battery performance at elevated and high temperatures are required for the aviation and aerospace industries.
2.3 Automotive and electric vehicles
Another large market opportunity for high temperature electronics and corresponding energy storage and supply is in the automotive and vehicle traction industry. Compared to EESs in the highly specialized and relatively low volume markets in the above-mentioned industries, the competitive and high-volume electric vehicles market, which is projected to be worth $25 billion by 2020, is very receptive to new battery technologies. High temperature electronics are used in the engine as well as the transmission and brake systems for conventional cars. The operating temperature is a function of location, power dissipation, and the thermal design.35 For example, the temperature around the engine and transmission is 150–200 °C; the exhaust sensing element is usually under 300 °C but can reach up to 800 °C. In the hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) or electric vehicles (EVs), not only are the mechanical and hydraulic systems for motor control and power conversion replaced with electronics, but also the major power source is switched from the fossil fuels to EES devices.35,36 In this regard, EES devices need to withstand temperatures of least at 60 °C, which is beyond existing technologies. Thus, extensive thermal management systems are used to control and offset the temperature. Such systems usually consist of long wires, interconnectors, and cooling plumbing, which significantly increase the weight, cost, and lowers the energy density of the EVs.37 In addition, electronically controlled systems also require more sensors, most of which must work at high temperatures. While a modern Li-ion battery delivers about 150 W h kg−1 of energy, the net calorific value (NCV) of fossil fuel is over 12000 W h kg−1. Even if at a low 30% efficiency of an internal combustion engine, the energy from a battery is only a fraction compared to fossil fuels. Despite these issues, consumer demand for more electronics in vehicles is increasing and expanding the market for EES devices. Finally, such EES systems will enable increased capability along with a reduced negative environmental impact.
Battery research and development at elevated and high temperatures will meet current market demands as well as facilitate the advancement of new electronics for use in the oil and gas, military, aviation, aerospace, and the automotive and electric vehicle sectors. High temperature battery operation is also of interest for mainstream consumer products, and include: the battery inside a laptop, a starter battery under the car hood, or stationary batteries under the hot sun, to name a few. As technology and new product concepts are continuously emerging and evolving, the economic benefits of high temperature electronics in various energy storage systems is likely orders of magnitude greater than the markets described today.
3. Existing high temperature energy storage technologies
As of August 2013, Department of Energy reported a cumulative energy storage of 24.6 GW (×109 watts) in the US alone, with the global value significantly larger and rising yearly with the commercial transformations undergoing in China and India.1 In the US, pumped hydro electrical energy accounts for 95% of the operational capability as a result of its large unit sizes and longer history as the technology of choice for energy storage. The remaining 5% is divided between thermal storage, compressed air, and batteries. As opposed to thermal energy storage, which takes advantage of the heat capacity of medias (e.g., water or ice-slush tanks) and stored from nature or excessive heat from industrial processes, electrochemical energy storage is the most controllable and convenient way to convert energy between electricity and chemical energy. These newer technologies enable facile transport and energy on-the-go use. Current commercial elevated-to-high temperature systems are primarily based on electrochemical devices, batteries, in particular.
Despite the desirability for lower or higher temperature operation, currently there is no “one-for-all” EES device suitable for applications over all temperature ranges. Temperature impacts the structure and properties of materials comprising the devices and the cell chemistry involved. Current EES devices are designed to operate at selected temperature ranges. For the convenience of discussion in this Review, these temperature ranges are categorized into low temperature (<0 °C), room temperature (0–40 °C), elevated temperature (40–80 °C), high temperature (80–300 °C), and extremely high temperature (>300 °C). The borders between different temperature sections are not strictly set and adjacent regions may overlap with regard to discussions on the tested temperature and closely related applications. For the more challenging temperature ranges (low, elevated, high, and extremely high), EES operation is limited in performance time, rechargeability, and power (Table 1).
Table 1 Performance specifications of existing high temperature energy storage technologies




Battery chemistry
Type
Voltage (V)
Specific energy (W h kg−1)
Operation temperature (°C)




Li–SOCl2
Non-rechargeable
3.5
500
−55 to 150


Li–SO2
Non-rechargeable
2.9
250
−55 to 70


Li–MnO2
Non-rechargeable
3.0
280
−30 to 60


Li–CuO
Non-rechargeable
1.5
300
−30 to 150


Li–FeS2
Non-rechargeable
1.5
300
400 to 500


Li–Cl2
Non-rechargeable
3.5
2180
>650


Na–S
Rechargeable
1.7
150
400 to 700


Na/NiCl2 (ZEBRA)
Rechargeable
2.6
90
270 to 350


Liquid–metal
Rechargeable


787
500 to 1000


Solid oxide fuel cell
Rechargeable
4.1
410
>500




3.1 Non-rechargeable systems
Non-rechargeable batteries or primary batteries are used because of their long shelf-life, readiness of operation, and simple construction. In situations where consistent power is required without charging, primary batteries are adequate as they do not exhibit voltage delays even after long storage periods. Some batteries possess a state-of-charge indicator that monitors the operational lifetime of the battery.

Li–SOCl2 battery. 
The lithium–thionyl chloride (LiSOCl2) battery is one of the most robust lithium metal-based batteries. LiSOCl2 batteries operate over a wide temperature range (up to 150 °C and as low as −55 °C) as well as in environments experiencing strong vibrations, and, consequently, are the most common type of batteries used in the oil and gas industry.24,38 Liquid thionyl chloride (SOCl2) serves as both the cathode and electrolyte in the battery configuration. Alternatively, SOCl2 is the “catholyte” and when coupled with lithium metal as the anode provides a nominal voltage of 3.5 V per cell. Lithium aluminum chlorate (LiAlCl4) is also dissolved in SOCl2 to increase the ionic conductivity and a layer of nonwoven fiberglass, as a separator, is placed between the electrodes to prevent short-circuit. With a specific energy of over 500 W h kg−1, LiSOCl2 batteries offer about twice the capacity of the current Li-ion battery. One of the main advantages of the LiSOCl2 battery is it produces limited emissions, even under abusive conditions, compared to other liquid-based battery technologies which generate gas byproducts at elevated temperatures. However, similar to alkaline batteries, LiSOCl2 batteries exhibit high internal resistance and can only be used for moderate loads. A significant drawback of these batteries is that liquid SOCl2 is toxic and reactive in contact with water and, thus, is a HAZMAT item. An additional concern is that the battery exhibits a delay in producing a good terminal voltage when put into service. Finally, the LiSOCl2 battery is a non-rechargeable battery and possesses limitations of convenience, cost, and safety.


Lithium sulfur dioxide (Li–SO2) battery. 
Lithium sulfur dioxide (Li–SO2) batteries are widely used in military and aerospace applications. In this battery, SO2 is bonded onto carbon as the cathode and a mixture of lithium bromide, liquid SO2, and a small amount of acetonitrile (ACN) are the electrolyte.39 The Li–SO2 battery exhibits high power density and stable performance from −55 to 60 °C. The ability to deliver high current especially at low temperatures, is a defining performance feature. However, the Li–SO2 battery requires two atmospheres of pressure to retain the electrolyte in a liquid state and must be vented to prevent pressure build up. In addition, the service life and energy density is less than half of the Li–SOCl2 battery.


Other lithium–metal based batteries. 
Lithium manganese dioxide (Li–MnO2) batteries are the most common consumer grade lithium–metal based batteries.40 With many advantages including high energy density (280 W h kg−1), high power pulse, long life, and low cost, these devices constitutes 80% of the lithium battery market. It employs the Li/MnO2 configuration with lithium perchlorate (LiClO4) dissolved in propylene carbonate (PC) and dimethoxyethane as the electrolyte. The nominal voltage is around 3 V and the working temperature range is between −30 °C and 60 °C. Battery performance is compromised at temperatures above 60 °C, including a high self-discharge rate.
The lithium copper oxide (Li–CuO) battery, with LiClO4 dissolved in dioxolane or in mixtures of polyethylene oxide (PEO) and molten dimethyl sulfone (DMSO2) as the electrolyte, operates from around −30 up to 150 °C, but is of limiting usefulness because it displays a high difference between the open-circuit and nominal voltage.38,41–43 The CuO half-cell is known for its stability across a broad temperature range and can cycle over the potential range of 1.5–3.0 V (vs. Li/Li+). Fast capacity loss and limited cycling are obtained at room temperature, however, new reaction pathways associated with the electrodes or electrolytes arise at higher temperatures. For example, early studies reported that the discharge curve of CuO exhibited two distinct voltage plateaus at 1.2 and 1.9 V (vs. Li/Li+) at 70 °C, while affording only one discharge plateau at 1.5 V (vs. Li/Li+) at 20 °C.38,42 The Li–CuO battery has been replaced by the lithium–iron sulfide (Li–FeS2) battery, which utilize molten salts (e.g., LiCl–KCl binary eutectic halides) as the electrolyte with an increased working temperature range from 400 to 500 °C. A similar design was adopted for lithium chloride batteries (Li–Cl2) where molten lithium chloride is used as the electrolyte along with a liquid lithium and chloride gas filled in carbon as the electrodes. This type of battery delivers high energy (2180 W h kg−1) but the operational temperature must be maintained at 650 °C or higher.44

3.2 Rechargeable systems
Rechargeable batteries or secondary batteries possess higher energy density, higher capacity, and longer lifecycle, and are used for a wide range of applications. These batteries are also cost effective as they can be recharged using an external power source. Secondary batteries are subjected to normal self-discharge, and thus, they do incur maintenance costs. Proper maintenance procedures need to be followed depending on their application, environmental operational conditions, and their chemical composition. All of the rechargeable batteries discussed below share these merits and limitations.

Na–S and ZEBRA batteries. 
Sodium–sulfur (Na–S) batteries are extensively used in industry and represent the largest category in the high temperature battery market since their initial development by the Ford Motor Company in the late 1960s.45–47 Sodium as a non-toxic, abundant, and low cost alkali metal with low reduction potential (−2.71 V) attracted significant research efforts with the goal to reduce global dependence on lithium.48 The active materials in Na–S battery are molten sodium (m.p. 98 °C) as the negative electrode and molten sulfur (m.p. 115 °C) as the positive electrode. The two liquid electrodes are separated by a solid ceramic, sodium-β-alumina (NaAl11O17), which is electronically insulating and allows sodium ions to pass through. Na–S batteries exhibit high energy density (150 W h kg−1), high coulombic efficiency (∼90%), high specific power, and long lifecycle. In fact, it was successfully tested on the space shuttle mission STS-87 in 1997.49 However, because of the high operating temperatures of 400 to 700 °C, and the highly corrosive nature of the sodium polysulfides in use, these cells are primarily suitable for large-scale non-mobile applications, such as grid energy storage.
Dendritic sodium forms in Na–S batteries and, thus, is a safety concern. To address this dendrite-sodium issue in Na–S batteries, the Zeolite Battery Research Africa (ZEBRA) battery was invented in 1985, which utilizes a combined molten sodium tetrachloroaluminate (NaAlCl4)/sodium-β-alumina and molten sodium electrolyte and molten nickel/nickel chloride (Ni/NiCl) as the negative and positive electrodes, respectively.46,50 The operating temperature is in a range of 270 to 350 °C, where the resistance of β-alumina is marginal and NaAlCl4 is melted (melting point 157 °C). Moreover, the battery has a shelf life of 10–20 years at room temperature.


Liquid–metal battery. 
In contrast to other thermal batteries, where a solid-state electrolyte or separator is between the liquid cathode and anode at operational temperature, in liquid–metal batteries all the essential components, namely the cathode, the anode and the electrolyte are in their liquid forms during operation, and are self-segregated via different densities.51–53 There are several performance benefits of these batteries. For example, the fast charge transfer kinetics between all-liquid phases of electrodes and electrolytes leads to low ohmic losses and high rate capability. Also, the use of inexpensive, earth abundant electrodes and simple cell fabrication suggests that the energy cost can potentially be as low as $100 kW h−1, expanding market opportunities into wider applications such as grid-scale energy storage. However, despite these benefits, liquid metal batteries also possess several disadvantages. Corrosion of the cell construction materials including container, insulator, current collector, is a primary concern due to high working temperature and high reactivity of the electrodes. In addition, the operation temperature is typically between 500 to 1000 °C to maintain the liquid status of the electrodes, which consumes 2–5% of the energy it generates to maintain the extremely high temperature and requires advanced thermal management and insulation layer to protect nearby components from ultra-high heat related damage. Moreover, the three-liquid layer configuration renders the battery sensitive to vibration or motion, limiting liquid metal batteries for stationary EES applications.


Fuel cells. 
Although not the focus of this review, several types of fuel cells operate at elevated or high temperatures.13 Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM) fuel cells use a polymeric film as an ion exchange membrane electrolyte, which possesses high proton mobility for high power density.54 The typical working temperature is between 20 and 100 °C. Presently, high cost limits wide-spread adoption. Phosphoric Acid Fuel Cells (PAFCs) employ liquid phosphoric acid in an inorganic matrix as the electrolyte, and must operate at 150 to 220 °C due to the poor acid ionic conductivity at low temperatures. The low power density output restricts their use for only multi-kilowatt stationary applications. Alkaline fuel cells, which are used in the space shuttle, employ aqueous potassium hydroxide as the ionic conducting electrolyte. The operating range of the cell is between 20 and 100 °C. A fundamental limitation of these cells, is the sensitivity of the basic electrolyte to carbon dioxide, leading to the formation of potassium carbonate and precipitates. In addition, these systems use only pure oxygen, which lends them impractical for most applications.
Two other special classes of fuel cells work at extremely high temperatures (>500 °C), namely Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC) and Solid Oxide Fuel Cells (SOFC).55 Similar to thermal batteries, molten carbonate fuel cells utilize an electrolyte composed of a molten carbonate salt mixture suspended in a porous ceramic matrix of β-alumina.56 Typically working at temperatures greater than 650 °C, fuels convert hydrogen at the anode under the high temperatures, reducing cost and improving efficiency. An external reformer to convert fuels to hydrogen is not needed. In contrast, solid oxide fuel cells possess a solid oxide electrolyte.57 Depending on the ceramics comprising the cell stack, SOFCs function at temperatures ranging from 500 to 1000 °C. These types of fuel cells usually exhibit high efficiency, long-term stability, relatively low cost, and can be used with a variety of fuels. In addition, as compared with batteries, fuel cells operate with unlimited cycles in theory, as long as fuel and oxidizer are supplied. However, the extremely high operating temperature results in longer start-up time and may bring about mechanical and chemical compatibility issues.
Despite their advantages and disadvantages, EES technologies exist and are being used for numerous applications. It is apparent that EES operation at temperatures between 25 and 60 °C is straightforward, and there are several devices for working at temperature greater than 300 °C. However, there is a void of EES options for operation between 60 and 300 °C, where a variety of important applications would fall into (vide infra). Thus, there is an opportunity for new chemistry and materials along with EES designs to fill this gap and to resolve this long-standing challenge.

4. Challenges associated with high temperature electrical energy storage systems
High temperature EES systems are important for a number of uses in both specialized fields and the broader markets, however, the storage and delivery of energy are challenging for five primary reasons.
(1) The majority of the materials investigated for EES are those that exist and function nominally at room temperature. As expected, current EES devices incorporate material components that perform in a limited temperature range.
(2) Some EES devices still experience heat loss in various circumstances despite having sophisticated internal and external protection mechanisms in place. It is possible that a failed cell could rupture, and the flame could spread across the cell pack, leading to failure of the whole pack. Materials with low flammability could effectively localize the damage to the individual cell in the event of one cell failing. Unfortunately, the materials used in EES devices, especially the electrolyte materials, are flammable and have low boiling points. These electrolyte materials are a critical safety concern.
(3) The different materials comprising the EES devices function independently, as well as interact with each other to enable performance. The resulting electrochemical reactions and transfer phenomena are thermally controlled, as described by the Arrhenius equation.58 At high temperatures, not only are the desired reaction kinetics and charge carrier mobility faster, but also the side reactions, interface deterioration, internal resistance, heat accumulation and self-discharge are increased, adversely affecting the life-span and performance of the devices. In other words, high temperature alters the compatibility of the cell components that are kinetically compatible and stable at room temperature, leading to more dynamic interaction(s), as a consequence of increased reactivity.
(4) The performance and life cycle are highly dependent on the kinetic stability resulting from the synergetic interactions between the cell components. The replacement of a single component with a thermally resistant material might reduce or minimize the added stability gained by the solid–electrolyte interphase (SEI) effect, for example, and would not necessarily lead to the thermal enhancement of the device overall.
(5) The higher chemical reactivity of materials at elevated temperatures also causes increased corrosion of the non-active materials of the battery such as the current collectors, packaging container, circuits, insulators, and sealing, etc. These materials are important to the integrity of the energy storage cell performance. The degradation of such materials at high temperatures is destructive to the long-term performance and service life of the EES devices.
The above-mentioned challenges are diverse and multifaceted. Existing energy storage devices do not address all of these issues. In fact, tackling any one of them requires a thorough understanding of the failure and aging mechanisms at high temperatures as well as advances in new materials discovery or optimization – thus significant opportunities exist for basic and applied research. A variety of new or existing techniques, both post-term and in situ, are being employed to investigate thermally-induced device performance reduction and to characterize the degradation products formed in the electrolyte or at the surface of the electrode. While many of the reactions or degradation mechanisms are still not clear, due to the complex nature of the co-existence of various species, as well as different materials utilized in different cell types with different chemistry, considerable efforts are devoted to gain a deeper understanding.59 The reader is referred to excellent reviews by Bandhauer et al.60 and by Choi et al.10 for additional information. Here, we will focus our discussion on the limitation of the electrolyte solvent, salt, electrode, and separator at high and elevated temperatures.
4.1 Limitations of traditional materials

Electrolyte solvent. 
While electrode materials determine the energy density of EES devices, electrolytes profoundly affect the rate capability and cell kinetics.61,62 The electrolyte consists of a solvent that is a high dielectric medium and a salt. The operation of the electrodes in a cell requires suitable electrolyte with the following desired characteristics: (1) wide electrochemical window, within which the electrolyte is kinetically stable with the electrode couples; (2) high ionic conductivity to facilitate ion(s) transport between the electrodes and low electronic conductivity to inhibit self-discharge; (3) chemical and thermal stability in order for the electrolyte to be compatible with other cell components such as separators, electrodes, etc.; (4) non-flammability and low vapor pressure to avoid cell pressure build-up and fire in case of battery failure; (5) low toxicity; and (6) low cost.
Aqueous electrolytes are inexpensive and have high ionic conductivities, and were widely used before the emergence of non-aqueous solutions. However, the low decomposition voltage of aqueous electrolytes (1.5 V vs. Li/Li+) limits the operation voltage, thus motivating researchers to pursue new electrolytes with performance at higher voltages. In 1994 Tarascon and Guyomard discovered an optimized formulation using a blend of dimethyl carbonate (DMC) and ethylene carbonate (EC) which provides low viscosity and high dielectric constant.63 This combination of solvents affords up to 5.0 V of electrochemical stability towards spinel cathodes and prolonged lifetime due to the formation of a stable SEI on the graphite anode. This materials discovery was quickly adopted by the battery community and industry, and this electrolyte is used in billions of lithium-ion batteries manufactured today. The linear carbonate can be replaced with diethyl carbonate (DEC), ethylmethyl carbonate (EMC), and propylmethyl carbonate (PMC), but these solvents exhibit either low boiling points or low flash points (Table 2), which limit their use for high temperature applications.64–70 Supercapacitors employ acetonitrile or an organic carbonate solvent with quarternary ammonium salts as the electrolytes, and, therefore, possess similar elevated and high temperature operational limitations as batteries. For example, the boiling point of acetonitrile is only 82 °C, near or above this temperature the solvent begins to evaporate and increase the internal cell pressure. In addition, the flash points of the linear carbonate solvents are generally below 30 °C, resulting in a cell highly susceptible to ignition during a short-circuit.71
Table 2 Common electrolyte solvents in energy storage devices.61 Adapted from ref. 61. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society




Name
Structure

M
w


T
m (°C)

T
b (°C)

η (cP, °C)

ε (25 °C)
Dipole moment (Debye)

T
f (°C)

d (g mL−1, 25 °C)




Ethylene carbonate (EC)



88
36.4
248
1.90 (40 °C)
89.78
4.61
160
1.321


Propylene carbonate (PC)



102
−48.8
242
2.53
64.92
4.81
132
1.200


Dimethyl carbonate (DMC)



90
4.6
91
0.59 (20 °C)
3.107
0.76
18
1.063


Diethyl carbonate (DEC)



118
−74.3
126
0.75
2.805
0.96
31
0.969


Ethylmethyl carbonate (EMC)



104
−53
110
0.65
2.958
0.89
27
1.006


γ-Butyrolactone (GBL)



86
−43.5
204
1.73
39
4.23
97
1.199




Besides the commonly used carbonate solvents shown in Table 2, γ-butyrolactone (GBL) based solvents with increased thermal stability are also being used and exhibit greater tolerance to operation at high temperatures. The melting point, boiling point, and flash point of gamma-butyrolactone are −44, 204 and 101 °C, respectively.72 An exothermic reaction was found from differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) profile above approximately 200 °C.73,74
The properties of commonly seen electrolyte solvents are summarized in Table 2. Despite the excellent performance of carbonate solvents in energy storage devices operating at ambient temperature, their instability at elevated to high temperatures limits their use in more temperature demanding applications. Another limitation of the carbonate-based electrolyte solvents is their narrow operation voltage window. They undergo continuous oxidative decomposition during cycling and form non-passivating SEI on the electrodes at operation beyond 4.3 V. The overall safety concern when using these flammable solvents is further exacerbated when operation is performed beyond their stable voltage limits and at high temperatures. To address these limitations, ionic liquids are being explored to replace the carbonate solvents as safe and stable electrolyte solvents. The detailed discussion on ionic liquids is forthcoming in Section 5.


Salt. 
The conventional salt being used with the carbonate solvents, lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6), also limits battery usage at high temperatures.66,75–77 LiPF6 is by far the most widely used salt in commercial batteries because LiPF6 possesses a high conductivity of 10 mS cm−1 in a 1.0 M solution of EC and DMC at room temperature, and it is able to form an SEI at the surface of graphite, kinetically stabilizing the anode and prolonging the life cycle.78 However, it thermally decomposes starting at 50 °C and the degradation increases dramatically from 70 °C to 130 °C. Furthermore, LiPF6 is reported to undergo an autocatalytic decomposition into lithium fluoride (LiF) and PF5, with further hydrolysis to afford toxic hydrogen fluoride (HF).79 This process occurs in the presence of trace amounts of moisture and/or above 60 °C.79 Although hydrolysis cannot proceed completely without a sufficient amount of water (<25 ppm), trace quantities of water can start hydrolysis, only with a slight increase in temperature, for instance from 25 to 35 °C.71 In addition to hydrolysis, LiPF6 undergoes polymerization and alkoxylation reactions in the presence of carbonate solvents, giving decomposition products including dialkylethers (R2O), phosphorus oxyfluoride (OPF3), fluorophosphates (OPF2OR, OPF(OR)2), fluorophosporic acid (OPF2OH, OPF(OH)2) and phosphorus polyethylene glycol (Fig. 3).71,75 These processes result in dissolution of the electrode materials and subsequent capacity loss.
 Fig. 3  Decomposition mechanism of LiPF6.75,80 Adapted from ref. 75 and 80. Copyright 2005 The Electrochemical Society and 2015 Elsevier. 
In contrast, lithium bisoxalatoborate (LiBOB) exhibits a lower conductivity of 4.5 mS cm−1 in a similar combination of solvents (Table 3). However, it is thermally stable up to 300 °C.81 It is also capable of forming a stable passivation layer on aluminum, which is used as the current collector, and on graphite anodes, inhibiting exfoliation of the intercalant material by the solvent. This improves the overall battery cycling stability. Lithium bistrifluoromethane sulfonimide (LiTFSI) is a new promising salt for high temperature operation.82–84 It possess a conductivity comparable to that of LiPF6, thermal stability up to 250 °C, and forms a stable passivation layer on graphite and lithium metal. All of these salts are sensitive to the presence of impurities such as water, which decreases cycling efficiency and increases capacity fade, and it can also react with lithium metal and release hydrogen gas. The properties of other common salts as possible electrolyte salts for Li-ion batteries are summarized in Table 3.85 The selection of an appropriate lithium salt is key to the thermal stability, electrochemical stability, conductivity, and compatibility with other parts (current collector, separators, etc.) of the electrolyte.
Table 3 Common lithium-ion conducting salts used in EES




Salt
Structure

M
w (g mol−1)

T
d (°C)
Conductivity (mS cm−1)




LiPF6



151.98
107

10.7
EC:DMC = 1:1



LiAsF6



195.85
475

11.1
EC:DMC = 1:1



LiBF4



94.02
320

4.9
EC:DMC = 3:7



LiTFSI



286.93

360
236 (melts)


9.4
EC:DMC = 1:1



LiFSI



187.06

200
145 (melts)


9.7
EC:EMC = 3:7



LiBOB



193.98
306

4.5
EC:EMC = 1:1







Electrodes. 
Electrodes are the focus of intensive research since the electrode couple determines the cell chemistry and the maximum amount of energy the device can store. The cathode materials are classified into layered, spinel, and olivine structures. LiCoO2 is the most common layered cathode material. Its discovery by John Goodenough in 1979 revolutionized rechargeable batteries, and it is the cathode material of choice.86 LiCoO2 possesses an average potential of 3.6 V relative to Li/Li+ in carbon, and a specific capacity of 140 mA h g−1, affording an energy density of about 0.5 kW h kg−1. Although ubiquitous in batteries, LiCoO2 cathodes are known to become unstable in their delithiated states, particularly at high temperatures (Fig. 4). Oxygen is released from the LiCoO2 above 200 °C and becomes hazardous in presence of volatile electrolyte solvents.76,87–91
 Fig. 4  (a) Electrochemical characteristics of three classes of insertion compounds; (b) crystal structures of three lithium-insertion compounds.92 Adapted from ref. 92. Copyright 2014 MDPI AG. 
Among the various cathode materials, LiFePO4 and LiMn2O4 show promise for use at elevated and high temperatures.93–96 While no oxygen is released below 400 °C from LiMn2O4, it becomes a poor lithium-ion intercalant switching from λ-MnO2 to β-MnO2 above 190 °C. LiFePO4 exhibits a voltage of 3.3 V, a specific capacity of 150 mA h g−1, and an energy density of 0.5 kW h kg−1, comparable to LiCoO2. The PO4 structure is more stable than the MO2 structure at high temperatures, reducing the likelihood of oxygen-evolution and, thus, improving safety. Upon charging, lithium ions leave LiFePO4, forming FePO4. LiFePO4 possesses several advantages over other cathode materials, including high thermal stability up to 300 °C.97 Also, the strong P–O covalent bonds in (PO4)3− of LiFePO4 significantly reduce the rate of O2 release. Additionally, iron is abundant and of low cost. The major drawback of working with LiFePO4 is the poor electronic conductivity (10−9 S cm−1). This was improved by Chiang et al. demonstrating an increase of almost 108 in conductivity for a LiFePO4 material by supervalent cation doping and incorporation of nanosized particles.98 LiFePO4 is less reactive at high temperatures than spinel and layered cathode materials as measured by DSC (Fig. 5c, in the presence of 1.2 mol L−1 LiPF6 in EC–EMC (3:7) electrolyte). Fig. 5b shows the DSC profiles of LiMn2O4 at various voltages. Dashed lines are from the LiCoO2 sample at the indicated voltage for a comparison. LiMn2O4 exhibits improved thermal stability over LiCoO2. The occurrence of the exothermic peaks is dependent on the charged voltage and in general higher voltage leads to weaker thermal stability. The DSC profiles of LiMn2O4 charged to 4.2, 4.4, and 4.6 V are very similar because minimal lithium remains in the structure at these voltages, and, thus, the electrodes are almost identical. Although LiMn2O4 at 4.2, 4.4, and 4.6 V display an initial thermal instability near 220 °C, it does not release the majority of heat until a temperature of 280 °C. The thermal behavior of other cathode materials which exhibit inferior thermal stability have also been studied and include, for example, LiNiO2, Li2FeSiO4 LiVPO4F, LiNi0.8Co0.2O2, Li1.1[Ni1/3Mn1/3Co1/3]0.9O2, LiCoPO4, LiMnPO4, and LiMn1.5Ni0.5O4, etc., (Fig. 5a).77,93,99–103
 Fig. 5  (a) Analysis of DSC profiles (To: onset temperature; Tp: peak temperature; Pp: peak power; Htot: total evolved heat);93 (b) DSC profiles of LiMn2O4 charged to indicated voltages (solid lines). Duplicate scans are from a nominally identical sample, while dashed lines are from the LiCoO2 sample at the indicated voltage;93 (c) DSC spectra of over-charged layered, spinel and olivine cathodes with traces of 1.2 mol L−1 LiPF6 in EC–EMC (3:7) electrolyte at 10 °C min−1.104 Adapted from ref. 93 and 104. Copyright 2002 and 2012 Elsevier. 
While the cathode can produce appreciable amount of heat due to the release of oxygen at high temperatures (usually above 200 °C, see discussion of thermal runaway below), the anode and its reaction with the electrolytes can occur at much lower temperatures. The melting temperature for lithium metal is 180 °C, which is a thermal limit for the traditional Li-metal batteries, as well as advanced battery systems such Li–S battery or Li–air battery. For common Li-ion batteries, despite graphite's high thermal stability,105 the carbon anodes may react with the electrolytes and the polymer binders decompose at elevated temperatures.106–108 The formation of the SEI is another important criterion associated with the thermal stability of the anode.62,109–111 The formation of a SEI at the cathode will not be examined in this review, due to limited research reports. In a typical Li-ion battery, the SEI is formed during the initial charging process of a fresh lithium-ion cell using a graphite anode and an ethylene carbonate/LiPF6-based electrolyte in the potential window 0.6–1.3 V versus Li/Li+.112,113 It is commonly agreed that the conventional SEI formed on graphite is generally composed of organic components and some inorganic components, such as LiF, Li2O, and Li2CO3; these inorganic components are insulators to both Li+ ions and electrons.78,114 The multilayered, mosaic-structured SEI on the graphite anode protects against the highly reactive electrolytes, typically undergoing decomposition at temperature 70 °C or greater. Continued decomposition and re-growth of the protective layer result in the consumption of both electrolyte and anode materials. These reactions accelerate the battery capacity loss and cause exothermic reactions that eventually lead to thermal runaway. The composition of SEI depends on the anode and electrolyte materials used, thereby the thermal decomposition temperature also changes when new materials are employed. Considerable research is ongoing focused on understanding the SEI compositions with newly formulated anode/electrolyte combinations and on the development of a stable artificial solid electrolyte interphase to stabilize the lithiated graphite and improve both safety and cycling performance.


Separator. 
A separator is a porous membrane placed between electrodes of opposite polarity that is permeable to ionic flow but prevents electrical contact of the electrodes.115 Materials such as polymer membranes (e.g. polyethylene (PE), polypropylene (PP), poly(tetrafluoroethylene) (PTFE), poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC) and nonwoven fibers (e.g., cellulose, polyesters), are widely used as separators in batteries that operate at elevated high temperatures (<150 °C).115,116 The separators need to be chemically and electrochemically inert to all other cell components including the electrodes and electrolytes. In addition, the pore size of the separator needs to enable ion flow. Commercial membranes possess a pore size in the range of 0.03–0.1 μm, and porosity of 30–50%. The most commonly used separators are comprised of PE, PP, or combinations thereof. However, as the operational temperature approaches the melting point of the polymers, 135 °C for PE and 165 °C for PP, the pores close and the battery stops performing. To overcome this limitation, ceramics such as SiO2, Al2O3, CaCO3 were coated or added as a filler to the polymer separator to increase the working temperature range. For example, SiO2 and Al2O3 were coated onto a porous polyethylene terephthalate (PET) which increased the melting temperature to 220 °C.117,118 Porous membrane separators have also been fabricated from ceramic particles.115,116 Recently, Carvalho et al. prepared a separator using SiO2 bonded with hydroxypropyl guar gum (HPG) and this membrane is stable up to a temperature of ∼240 °C in N2 and ∼200 °C in O2.119


Others (binder, sealing). 
In addition to the essential components described above, other seemingly trivial assembling components such as binder, cell casing, and the sealing material also play key roles in cell performance at elevated or high temperatures. PVDF is widely used as a binder for electrode materials because of its good electrochemical stability and strong adhesion to the electrodes and current collectors. However, at elevated temperatures, PVDF reacts with lithiated graphite (LixC6) and metal lithium to form the more stable LiF and unsaturated >CC–F– bonds.106,107,120,121 In addition, PVDF can dissolve and swell in non-aqueous liquid electrolytes, especially at elevated temperatures, thus compromising the electrode integrity. As a result of PVDF swelling or dissolving, adhesion of the electrode materials to the current collector deteriorates causing an increase in the contact resistance between electrode materials and ultimately battery failure. Therefore, alternative binders that can overcome these drawbacks are needed.
In addition, high temperature tolerant adhesives are also needed to seal the joining materials on casing. Glass and metal adhesives are commonplace but they tend to be weak at elevated temperatures. Chemically bonded adhesives such as chalcogenide sealants (e.g., CaAl2S4) were developed to meet high temperature requirements and performed successful in Li–FeS2 batteries demonstrating 400 cycles with less than 10% capacity loss at 425 °C.122

4.2 Stepwise thermal changes at elevated to high temperatures
The physicochemical and electrochemical properties of the above-mentioned materials are temperature dependent, and are susceptible to thermal damage. While understanding the thermal response of the individual cell components is crucial, thermal behavior of the whole cell should also be studied under various applied voltage and current rates to characterize the synergistic interactions between the cell components. These studies also reflect the thermal changes occurring in a real scenario.123–131 Using extended volume accelerating rate calorimetry (EV-ARC), incremental capacity analysis (ICA), DSC and TGA to characterize battery aging, the heat released with increasing temperature and the onset temperature of the exothermic chemical reactions can be determined. For example, Fig. 6 shows the thermal processes ongoing within a 550 mA h prismatic Li-ion cells with a Sn-doped LiCoO2 cathode and graphitic carbon anode in the presence of a 1 M LiPF6 in EC:DMC:DEC electrolyte. PVDF was used as the binder.129
 Fig. 6  DSC and TGA scans of anode (negative) graphite and cathode (positive) LiCoO2 after 100% charging. (PE: positive electrode; NE: negative electrode).129 Adapted from ref. 129. Copyright 1999 The Electrochemical Society. 
The specific thermal response of cells composed of different electrode and electrolyte materials as well as the cell type and configuration will clearly vary. In addition the surface area of the anode, the amount of electrolyte, and state-of-charge (SOC) will also affect the decomposition temperature. Here we provide a general step-by-step process to guide our discussion and understanding of the thermal changes occurring within a conventional battery upon increasing the temperature.123,129,130
(I) In the first step, the capacity starts to fade at temperatures higher than 50 °C due to the increasing dissolution of active materials from the electrodes into the electrolyte solvent. This results in an increase of the electronic conductivity and, in turn, the rate of self-discharge.
(II) In the second step, SEI decomposition begins with release of heat around 100 °C.
(III) The negative and positive electrode material reacts exothermically with the solvent at temperatures above 150 °C, with the reaction peaking near 200 °C although this reaction may be complicated due to the presence of the salt, typically LiPF6. Fluorinated binders can also react with the lithiated carbon, but this usually does not occur because the reaction between the negative electrode and the electrolyte occurs first, depleting the available lithium. Heat generation from the cathode is usually greater than from the anodes at a fully charged state because of the oxygen evolution from the cathode lattice above 200 °C.
(IV) In the next step, the separator begins to melt between 120 and 140 °C, and eventually, the melted separator will lead to a short circuit, generating additional heating.
(V) In step five, electrolyte decomposition is evident (>200 °C).
(VI) In step six between 140 and 240 °C, the cathode material begins to react with the electrolyte and release heat.
(VII) Finally, the aluminum current collector melts at 660 °C, along with decomposition of the binder and sealer.
These degradation processes occur over a wide temperature range as well as several degradation reactions can occur simultaneously, further complicating the analysis. Therefore, for high temperature applications, not only will self-discharge and capacity loss be evident, but also thermal runaway develops as substantial heat is generated within seconds from the latter steps at higher temperatures. The consequences are particularly significant for large format batteries.
5. Development of new materials for thermally stable electrical energy storage devices
The discovery of new thermally stable materials is at its infancy for batteries despite market demand. These advanced materials may arise from exploratory basic research or result from cleaver combinations of existing materials to improve overall elevated and high temperature battery performance. Individual cell components are being developed for high temperature use, with electrolyte materials being one of the major ones for improvement. Current electrolytes prevent operation at elevated temperature ranges. The electrolyte performs a central role in energy storage devices as it directly contacts with every essential component in the cell, hence, the effect of temperature is paramount. Therefore, this review places an emphasis on the electrolytes and the recent advances in the development of thermally stable electrolytes and their demonstrative use in batteries and supercapacitors. Specifically, EES that demonstrated elevated to high temperature performance with three classes of electrolyte materials, namely ionic liquids, solid polymer electrolyte, and ceramics are discussed. Several examples also describe blended electrolyte solutions to explore the combined advantages or enhanced properties at elevated temperatures. Materials that are potentially thermally stable but not employed in high temperature EES are not discussed or in limited detail. Aqueous electrolytes are also investigated in EES at elevated to high temperatures (40–80 °C). For example, Meng et al.132 reported the increase in specific capacitance from 128 F g−1 at 20 °C to 162 F g−1 at 60 °C (with current density of 1 A g−1) with a supercapacitor consisting of a 1.0 M KOH electrolyte and porous Fe3O4/carbon composite electrodes. These aqueous electrolyte systems are limited by the boiling point of water, and are not suitable for use at temperatures higher than 100 °C. Thus, they will not be a focus of this Review.
5.1 High temperature electrolytes

5.1.1 Reformulated carbonate solvents. 
Carbonate based electrolytes are known to be volatile and flammable (Table 2). However, this exothermic phenomenon can be suppressed by mixing multiple carbonate solvents together. The thermal stability of various carbonate solvent mixtures was recently re-investigated.133 Among the selected solvents of EC, PC, DMC, DEC, DME and the combination of them, the EC:PC mixture displayed an onset temperature of exothermic process at nearly 250 °C, representing the highest thermal stability of a conventional carbonate solvent (Fig. 7a).133 Using this particular combination of carbonate electrolyte, a calcium-based battery successfully operated at 100 °C.134 At relatively high temperatures (50–100 °C), the EC:PC mixture with dissolved Ca(BF4)2 enabled reversibly plating and striping between −1 to 0 V (vs. Ca2+/Ca). The potential shifts depended on the temperature and salt concentration used, while interestingly no such reversible peaks are observed at room temperature or when using other calcium salts. A symmetric Ca/Ca cell demonstrated 30 repeated cycles with 0.45 M of Ca(BF4)2 in EC:PC at 100 °C without considerable decay (Fig. 7b). The electrolyte is electrochemically stable at 100 °C between −0.5 to 3.5 V (vs. Ca2+/Ca), with a decrease in the current intensity during the initial CV cycles and then remaining constant afterwards. This finding is an indication of a gradual formation of an SEI (Fig. 7c), the composition of which is mostly CaF2 as determined by energy-dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX). Thus, high temperature in this case kinetically increased the rate of electroplating and striping, while posing no noticeable impact on the electrolyte decomposition.
 Fig. 7  (a) DSC heating curves up to 350 °C of solvent mixtures;133 (b) cyclic voltammograms (100 °C, 0.2 mV s−1) of a calcium deposit (grown by potentiostatic electrodeposition at −1.2 V versus Ca2+/Ca passivated, 5 h, 100 °C) in 0.45 M Ca(BF4)2 EC:PC electrolytes;134 (c) SEM micrographs of deposits obtained in 0.3 M Ca(BF4)2 EC:PC at −1.5 V versus Ca2+/Ca passivated at 100 °C for 200 h.134 Adapted from ref. 133 and 134. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry and 2016 Macmillan Publishers. 


5.1.2 Ionic liquids. 
Ionic liquids are salt-like materials bonded through ionic interactions, which have melting points below 100 °C. Despite being around since the early 1900s, this class of materials is undergoing a renaissance in interest due to their remarkable use as solvents and as functional materials.135–146 Ionic liquids are composed of one or more organic cationic centers, such as an imidazolium, pyridinium, pyrrolidinium, phosphonium, ammonium or sulfonium, and one or more inorganic or organic anions, such as alkyl sulfate, methansulfonate, tosylate, hexafluorophosphate, tetrafluoroborate, halide or carboxylic acid. For example, the prototypical IL, 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride, possesses a melting point of 77 °C, whereas NaCl has a melting point of 801 °C. The strong ionic interactions within ionic liquids result in negligible vapor pressure, non-flammable materials with high thermal, mechanical, and electrochemical stability. Consequently, ionic liquids are being investigated for a wide range of use as “green” solvents, separation media, liquid crystals, thermal fluids, and electrolyte solvents.
The wide range of possible cation and anion combinations allows for a large variety of structures and compositionally dependent properties. Within this family of materials, several ionic liquids display melting temperature below room temperature, and hence are referred to as room temperature ionic liquids (RTIL).147–154 RTILs are promising electrolytes for batteries, supercapacitors, and fuel cells. Among them, imidazolium, piperidinium, and ammonium cations are extensively studied and combined with different cathodes and anodes. The majority of research efforts are devoted to room temperature studies, with or without additives.150,155–159
It is well known that one of the shortcomings of IL electrolyte solvents is their relatively low conductivities compared to carbonate based organic solvents. This low conductivity originates from their higher viscosities (ranging from several mPa s to the order of Pa s). In contrast to the 0.1 mS cm−1 of benchmark conductivity of a carbonate-based electrolyte, most ILs exhibit conductivities from 10−5 to 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature. In addition, the high viscosity of the ILs leads to poor wetting with the electrodes. Therefore, significant efforts are underway to increase the conductivity of ILs, including means such as varying the chemical structure and doping with organic solvents. Several excellent reviews highlight the intensive research efforts being made on ILs in batteries, supercapacitors, and fuel cells, particularly at room temperatures and the reader is referred to these reviews.61,62,136,148–150,152,154 The use of ILs also expands the anodic potential of electrolyte materials, thus enabling the utilization of high voltage cathodes. Improved conductivities could significantly address the low power density observed with ILs based systems at room temperature.
One strategy to decrease the viscosity (lowering the flow activation energy) of the IL is to increase the temperature. At higher temperature, the conductivity is also improved, enhancing the electrolyte performance. For example, an ether substituted ionic liquid N-methoxyethyl-N-methylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)-imide (PYR1,2O1-TFSI) possess a conductivity value of 1.9 mS cm−1 at room temperature, which increases to 6.7 mS cm−1 at 60 °C. This value is comparable to that of the carbonate based solvents (5–10 mS cm−1).160 Cyclic and linear sulphites, specifically ethylene sulphite (ES) and dimethyl sulphite (DMS) when blended with PYR1,2O1-TFSI, enable cycling in Li/MCMB and Li/LiFePO4 based battery up to 60 °C (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Molecular structures of the mixture components: dimethyl sulphite (DMS), ethylene sulphite (ES), N-methoxyethyl-N-methyl-pyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)-imide (PYR1,2O1TFSI) and lithium difluoro(oxalate)borate (LiODFB); (b) Li/LiFePO4 cells containing LiODFB–PYR1,2O1TFSI/ES, LiODFB–PYR1,2O1TFSI/DMS, LiODFB–EC/DEC or LiPF6–EC/DEC electrolytes at various temperatures with a current density of 0.1 C.160 Adapted from ref. 160. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Shin et al.161,162 also reported battery cycling with a blend of a N-methyl-N-propylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (PYR13-TFSI) ionic liquid and a polyethylene oxide salt P(EO)20LiTFSI electrolyte in a Li/LiFePO4 cell configuration at slightly elevated temperatures (40–60 °C). The free-standing film, prepared by hot-pressing the two salts with the polymer, exhibited low capacity loss (<0.06% per cycle) over 500 cycles at 40 °C, with varied current rates from C/20 to 2C. Addition of 30 wt% IL to the neat polymer film increased the conductivity by an order of magnitude and the corresponding 150 wt% IL composition exhibited a conductivity of 10−3 S cm−1 at 40 °C. Operation at elevated temperature decreased the viscosity of the corresponding mixture and resulted in increased specific capacity by about 10 times from 20 °C to 60 °C.
Blending SiO2 with a pyrrolidinium ionic liquid, specifically N-butyl-N-methyl pyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (PP14-TFSI), afforded a quasi-solid-state Li+ conducting electrolyte as the SiO2 serves as a solid matrix to immobilize the IL using a sol–gel route (Fig. 9a).163 The thermal decomposition of this electrolyte system occurred above 390 °C, which increased the degradation temperature by 30 °C compared to the neat ionic liquid. The addition of SiO2 also enhanced the mechanical strength of the electrolyte and afforded a free-standing membrane as the electrolyte, without significant conductivity decrease and the use of extra separators. An assembled Li/LiFePO4 half-cell underwent charge–discharge cycles at 40 °C and 55 °C, with a high coulombic efficiency approaching 100%. The capacity increased as the operational temperature increased due to the conductivity change, as evidenced by the impedance decrease upon changing the temperature from 40 to 50 °C. The cells cycled without noticeable capacity loss over more than 30 times, yet a gradual increase in impedance occurred over the cycles, as determined via electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Specifically, the impedance increased from 130 Ω to 200 Ω at 40 °C from the 3rd to 31st cycles, however, parallel cycling revealed that the impedance increased from 110 Ω to 300 Ω at 55 °C (Fig. 9b). The authors concluded that thermal damage caused the impedance increase and might ultimately lead to faster capacity loss and shorter lifecycle, although high temperatures increased the conductivity of the electrolyte material and allowed the corresponding cell to generate a higher capacity.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic representation of the PP14-TFSI + SO2 pore transporter and TEM image of mesoporous SiO2 matrices; (b) cycling performance of cells at 55 °C. Insets: Impedance spectra of cells discharged to 2.5 V after selected cycles at the two operating temperatures.163 Adapted from ref. 163. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH. 
LiTFSI is widely used in batteries as a novel thermally stable salt replacing LiPF6. However, it is known that severe corrosion of the aluminum (Al) current collector, of the cathode electrode, occurs above 3.5 V vs. Li/Li+ when LiTFSI is used with carbonate based solvents.164 Ionic liquids are reported to mitigate the aluminum corrosion. For example, Garcia et al.165 found that Al corrosion is not as extensive when using ionic liquid electrolytes due to the poor dissolution of the as-formed Al–TFSI complex in the ionic liquids. Whether the same Al corrosion suppression effect in ILs stands at elevated temperatures is of importance to the development of high temperature electrolytes. Consequently, Nadherna et al. studied two ionic liquids, 1-butyl-2,3-dimethylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (BMMI-TFSI) and 1-butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (PYR14-TFSI) in the presence of LiTFSI at 60 °C (Fig. 10a).166 The electrolytes exhibited ionic conductivities of 3.3 mS cm−1 and 4.5 mS cm−1, respectively. Importantly, the IL electrolytes showed good stability (∼3.0 V) towards the aluminum – still comparable to 1 M LiPF6 in EC:DEC at elevated temperature, as determined by cyclic voltammetry. In addition, no discernable differences in performance are noted between the two ILs, whether the electrolyte contained LiPF6 or LiTFSI. This stability is even greater when the ILs are evaluated against an aluminum current collector covered with carbon black and binder (as a blank electrode without active compounds) and the anodic voltage extended to about 4.0 V. This observation agreed with the findings reported by Peng et al. in 2007, which showed that increasing the temperature from 25 to 60 °C shifted the anodic oxidation potential of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis[(trifluoromethyl) sulfonyl] amide (BMI-TFSI) from 3.5 V to 2.9 V (first cycle, Fig. 10b).167
 Fig. 10  (left) Cyclic voltammograms of the aluminum current collector in six different electrolytes. (a) PYR14-TFSI with LiTFSI, (b) PYR14-TFSI with LiPF6, (c) BMMI-TFSI with LiTFSI, (d) BMMI-TFSI with LiPF6, (e) 1 M LiPF6 in EC–DEC, and (f) 1 M LiTFSI in EC–DEC at 0.5 mV s−1 scan rate;166 (right) cyclic voltammograms for Al foil electrode in 1 M LiTFSI/BMI-TFSI at 25, 40 and 60 °C (sweep rate: 10.0 mV s−1).167 Adapted from ref. 166 and 167. Copyright 2009 The Electrochemical Society and 2007 Elsevier. 
Ionic liquids generally exhibit high thermal stability between 300 and 450 °C, yet, their performance as electrolytes in batteries at temperatures higher than 80 °C has not been widely investigated. In 2009 by Mun et al.168 reported seminal work on high temperature ionic liquid electrolyte based batteries. The authors compared the thermal and electrochemical stability of 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (EMI-TFSI), 1-propyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (PYR13-TFSI), and 1-propyl-1-methylpiperidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (PP13-TFSI) with carbonate-based organic solvent at 120 °C. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) results suggested that the broad lithiation and de-lithiation peak observed at 1.3–2.0 V (25 °C) evolved into three discreet pairs of redox peaks, as a result of increasing the temperature (Fig. 11b). A shift in the reduction peak from 0.4 V (25 °C) to 1.1 V (120 °C) is also observed. Similar to observations at room temperature, the imidazolium-based RTIL undergo significant cathodic decomposition above 1.1 V resulting in the deposition of a resistive surface film on the electrode and eventual loss of cell performance. This effect is more pronounced at 120 °C, demonstrating the lower electrochemical stability of imidazoliums compared to pyrrolidiniums and piperidiniums. In sharp contrast, cathodic decomposition and concomitant film deposition are negligible with pyrrolidinium- and piperidinium-based RTILs even at this high temperature, supported by results from field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) studies (Fig. 11e). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) investigations of the deposition layer revealed a significant N 1s peak indicating that the composition is a consequence of EMI-TFSI decomposition related to both the TFSI anion and EMI cation. The influence of this deposition layer is also noted by impedance measurements of the TiO2-B/Li cells, where a remarkable increase of impedance is observed for the EC:DEC and imidazolium IL electrolytes, while that of PYR13-TFSI and PP13-TFSI showed marginal increase (Fig. 11d). Subjecting the TiO2-B/Li cells, each containing one of the three ionic liquids, to cycling at 120 °C from 1.2 to 2.5 V revealed the following capacity dependencies. The capacity decreased after a short time period and even if left at 2.5 V in the charged state, the self-discharge yielded 3% to 33% of capacity loss (Fig. 11c).
 Fig. 11  (a) Structures of ionic liquids under investigation; (b) cyclic voltammograms for TiO2-B electrode in three different electrolytes, scan rate = 0.1 mV s−1 and T = 120 °C; (c) capacity loss at high-temperature (120 °C); (d) impedance spectra for TiO2-B/Li cell after 5 cycles at 120 °C. Measurements made at discharged state (1.2 V for TiO2-B electrode); (e) FE-SEM images of TiO2-B composite electrode surface at initial state (e1), after 20 cycles at 120 °C in 1.0 M Li-PYR13-TFSI (e2).168 Adapted from ref. 168. Copyright 2009 Elsevier. 
Lane et al.169 investigated a morpholinium ionic liquid electrolyte, specifically N-methyl-N-butylmorpholinium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (C4mmor-FSI) (Fig. 12a), in a Li/LiFePO4 half-cell operated at 85 °C with a C rate of C/6.5. Morpholinium based ILs are more viscous than other commonly used ILs. The conductivity of the C4mmor-FSI electrolyte at 25 °C is 0.73 mS cm−1, far less than that of a structurally similar piperidinium ionic liquid, PP14-FSI (3.7 mS cm−1). Thus, use at high temperature is expected to decrease the viscosity of this IL and facilitate ion transport. An in-depth mechanistic study revealed no obvious difference in electrochemical stability at 50 °C compared to 23 °C, except that enhanced metal alloying and lithium plating and striping occurred from −4.0 to −2.0 V vs. Ag/Ag+ at the high temperature. Operation at the higher temperature also eliminated dendrite formation, at the surface of lithium metal, in a lithium symmetrical setup and prolonged the lifecycle, especially at higher current densities. In a short-circuit test at 85 °C, the cell continued to function for 15 hours, compared to 5 hours at 50 °C (Fig. 12b).
 Fig. 12  (a) Structures of N-methyl-N-butylmorphlinium and N-methyl-N-propylpiperidinium, and bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide; (b) C4mmor-FSI + 0.4 mol kg−1 at 0.2 mA cm−2, showing short circuit and possible welding behavior at 50 °C.169 Adapted from ref. 169. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
In contrast to the nitrogen based ionic liquids, phosphonium ionic liquids are less studied and exhibit both greater chemical and thermal stability than imidazolium and pyrrolidinium ionic liquids. Ab initio quantum chemical calculations (DFT-B3LYP) of the thermal stability of several ILs, with different cations incorporating similar alkyl chain length, paired with the tetrafluoroborate based ILs revealed that stability increased in the order of pyridinium, pyrrolidinium, ammonium, imidazolium and phosphonium, with calculated thermal activation energies ranging from 134 to 204 kJ mol−1.170 Taking advantage of the enhanced thermal stability of phosphonium based ionic liquids, Lin et al.171 reported a prototype lithium metal battery using a phosphonium IL/LiTFSI electrolyte. The Li/LiCoO2 battery cycled at 100 °C for a month with 50% of capacity loss at C/10. A series of long-chained alkyl phosphonium ionic liquid electrolytes are described where the tri-alkyl chain length is varied from two carbons to ten carbons, while maintaining a fourth decyl chain linked to the phosphonium center (Fig. 13a). This design enhanced thermal stability and minimized potential crystallization or packing interactions via the alkyl chain asymmetry around the phosphonium. The selected IL mono-(C6)3PC10-TFSI electrolyte composition possessed a high decomposition temperature (355 °C), no phase transitions, and moderate conductivity (1.7 mS cm−1) and viscosity (0.3 Pa s) at 100 °C. The results from a long-term thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) experiment at a constant temperature of 100 °C documented the high temperature stability of this phosphonium ionic liquid. The battery exhibited an initial high capacity of 135 mA h g−1 which decreased to 70 mA h g−1 after 70 cycles in a Li/LiCoO2 cell (Fig. 13b); this value still represents more than 50% of the initial capacity. Instant on–off battery operation is realized via the significant temperature dependence of the electrolyte material, demonstrating the robustness and potential for use at high temperature, while minimizing discharge during RT storage between uses (Fig. 13c).
 Fig. 13  (a) Chemical structures of a series of phosphonium ionic liquids; (b) charge–discharge cycling for mono-(C6)3PC10-TFSI with 1.6 M LiTFSI, current rate at C/7; (c) demonstration of battery working only at high temperature and retain capacity at room temperature.171 Adapted from ref. 171. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Kalaga et al.172 also reported stable battery cycling at 120 °C using a PP13-TFSI electrolyte blended with dry bentonite clay. The addition of clay afforded a slightly decreased thermal decomposition temperature of 355 °C, compared with that of the IL alone (370 °C), yet the use of clay eliminated the need for extra separators. The composite electrolyte displayed an electrochemical window of 3.0 V at 120 °C. The ionic conductivity is ∼3.0 mS cm−1 at 120 °C with a lithium transport number of 0.08. When the Li/LTO half-cell cycled at C/3, the initial discharge capacity is approximately 75 mA h g−1 and quickly decreased to 60 mA h g−1 (Fig. 14a). It remained constant thereafter likely due to the low lithium transport number. Changing the current rates (from C/16 to 1C) influenced the capacity, and higher rates, and in general, led to greater degrees of capacity loss (Fig. 14b).
 Fig. 14  (a) Cyclic stability of LTO half cells cycled at 120 °C at C/3. (b) Rate capability of LTO half cells at 120 °C cycled at different C-rates using clay/PP13-(1 M) LiTFSI composite electrolyte.172 Adapted from ref. 172. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
In order to address the high reactivity of lithium metal, especially at elevated temperatures, silicon is being investigated as an alternative anode material. Markevich and Salitra et al.173 reported stable cycling of a high loading Si electrode (1.3 mg cm−2 of loading, 7 mm thick) with PYR13-FSI containing LiFSI (0.5 M) at 60 °C. Limiting the charge capacity to 600 mA h g−1 ensured a failure-free cycling of more than 800 times. At elevated temperatures, the FSI-based IL electrolytes outperformed the 1 M LiPF6 FEC/DMC electrolytes, which is known to be one of the most promising organic electrolyte solutions for Si anodes. Interestingly, a thinner surface passivating film formed on the Si electrodes in the LiTFSI/PYR13-FSI electrolyte at 60 °C as compared to the one formed in the 1 M LiPF6 in FEC/DMC electrolyte solution (Fig. 14b and 15a). This difference is attributed to the better performance of the Si anode in the IL electrolyte at elevated temperature. A three-dimensional (3D) nano Si coated porous electrode (0.7–0.9 mg cm−2 of loading, about 0.4 mm thick) was also fabricated by Ababtain et al.174 When used with a PP13-TFSI/0.8 M LiTFSI electrolyte, the cell showed excellent cyclability at high temperatures from 60 to 100 °C, as well as demonstrated minimum capacity loss (Fig. 14d and 15c). The use of 3D nano-Si afforded high specific capacity of 0.41 mA h cm−2 (1912 mA h g−1). The addition of 20% PC lowered the viscosity of PP13 and facilitated the operation of the battery at room temperature, while maintaining the safety and performance at 100 °C.
 Fig. 15  SEM images of the cycled at 60 °C silicon electrodes (a) after about 700 cycles in 1 M LiPF6 in FEC/DMC 1:4 and;175 (b) after about 870 cycles in 0.5 M LiFSI in PYR13-FSI; (c) temperature-dependent performance of 3D Si electrodes with PP13-TFSI; (d) comparison of cycle life of 3D Si electrode at 100 °C with PP13-TFSI and 20% PC + PP13-TFSI electrolyte mixtures.176 Adapted from ref. 175 and 176. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry and 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Ionic liquid electrolytes are also finding applications in sodium-ion batteries. Sodium secondary batteries have attracted considerable attention as alternatives to lithium based batteries, as sodium is abundant, available, and of low cost. The motivation for investigating Na-ion batteries at elevated temperatures originated from the fact that at room temperature Na+ transport is slow due to the large ionic radii of Na+ (1.02 Å), which will increase at higher temperatures. Nevertheless, the above-mentioned much lower melting point of Na, limits the higher temperature range in its solid-state. Sodium iron pyrophosphate (NaFePO4) is a commonly used sodium based cathode material, analogous to LiFePO4, and is synthesized via chemical delithiation of LiFePO4 followed by electrochemical sodiation of FePO4177 Wongittharom et al.178 studied the cycling behavior of NaFePO4 in the presence of the PYR14-TFSI ionic liquid electrolyte with various sodium solutes, namely NaBF4, NaClO4, NaPF4, and NaN(CN)4 (Fig. 16a). Of the investigated electrolytes, the PYR14-TFSI/NaBF4 exhibited the highest conductivity and least capacity decay with 85% of the capacity maintained for 100 cycles at 50 °C. At 75 °C, the measured capacity increased to as high as 152 mA h g−1 (at 0.05C) nearing the theoretical value (154 mA h g−1) (Fig. 16b). This temperature effect is similar to that observed in lithium based batteries. Moreover, 60% of this capacity is retained when the charge–discharge rate is increased to 1C. Recently, Chen et al.179 reported a higher operational temperature for a Na-ion battery when using a sodium vanadyl(IV) orthophosphate (NaVOPO4) cathode, and the PYR13-FSI electrolyte with NaFSI. Specifically, stable cycling of more than 300 times with near 100% of coulombic efficiency at 1C is observed at 90 °C. NaVOPO4 possessed high operating potentials outside of the vanadium redox couple and a high theoretical capacity (145 mA h g−1), which compensated for the lower overall energy density of Na-ion batteries compared with Li-ion batteries. XRD measurements revealed that the charge–discharge process involved a single-phase reaction. Analysis using galvanostatic intermittent titration technique (GITT) highlighted a three to five-fold increase of the apparent Na chemical diffusion coefficient in NaVOPO4 upon increasing the temperature from 25 °C to 90 °C, which accounted for the superior electrochemical performance at 90 °C (Fig. 16d). However, only capacities of 60 and 101 mA h g−1 are observed after the first cycle, at 25 and 90 °C, respectively. A large irreversible capacity loss occurred, attributed to SEI layer formation, between the first and second cycle. After the latter, the capacity decay decreased only slightly due to the formation of this SEI layer.
 Fig. 16  (a) Cyclic stability (measured at 0.3C) of Na/NaFePO4 cells with various kinds of electrolytes at 50 °C; (b) effects of temperature on discharge capacity at 0.05 C;178 (c) cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of the NVP/AB-8h electrodes at 298 and 363 K. Cut-off voltage: 2.5–4.2 V. Current density: 1C (145 mA g−1); (d) GITT evaluation of the NVP/AB-8h electrode at 298 K and 363 K. Conditions: 30 min charging/discharging segments at C/20 (7.25 mA g−1) followed by 12h relaxation.179 Adapted from ref. 178 and 179. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society and 2015 The Electrochemical Society. 
Ionic liquids are used in other types of energy storage devices such as supercapacitors, which, in turn are widely used now in power electronics for back-up memories and peak power saving. For example, in electric cars supercapacitors are coupled with fuel cells or batteries to deliver high power during acceleration as well as to recover the energy during breaking. Similar to batteries, the operation temperature of supercapacitors is limited by the stability of the electrolyte. The commonly used acetonitrile or carbonate based electrolytes are flammable and possess a high vapor pressure. Thus, additional thermal control devices such as cooling units are required. Sato et al.180 described the first supercapacitor for high temperature applications. They used a N,N-diethyl-N-methyl-N-(2-methoxyethyl) ammonium tetrafluoroborate (DEME-BF4) ionic liquid as the electrolyte. DEME-BF4 exhibits a melting point of 10 °C and room temperature conductivity of 4.8 mS cm−1. Assembled with activated carbon electrodes, the supercapacitor delivered 500 cycles with only a 15% loss in capacity at 100 °C (V = 0–2.5 V, I = 15 mA). Three years later, Balducci et al.181 reported the construction of a supercapacitor using a microporous activated carbon as the electrodes and PYR14-TFSI ionic liquid as the electrolyte. The microporous activated carbon exhibited a specific capacitance of 60 F g−1, measured using a three-electrode cyclic voltammetry experimental set-up at 20 mV s−1 scan rate, with a maximum operating potential range of 4.5 V at 60 °C. The resulting supercapacitor cycled for 40000 cycles without any change of capacity and cell resistance at current densities ranging from 10 to 100 mA cm−2, demonstrating stable elevated temperature cycling. Thus, this type of supercapacitor is suitable for high temperature applications (>60 °C).
In 2011, Lin et al.182 reported the construction of an electrical double layer capacitor which not only extended the upper temperature limit to 100 °C, but also enabled device operation down to −50 °C, over a wide voltage window (up to 3.7 V) and at high charge/discharge rates of up to 20 V s−1. A 1:1 (molar ratio) eutectic mixture of PP13-FSI and PYR14-FSI gave a working electrolyte for this wide temperature range. In particular, the choice of blending two different IL cations with the same anion reduced ordered packing and crystallization affording no phase transitions from −50 to 100 °C. The voltage window is dependent on the temperature. At room temperature a broad voltage window of 3.7 V is observed, whereas at 100 °C the window decreased by almost 1.0 V, limiting high temperature operation up to 3.0 V (Fig. 17a). Largeot et al.183 reported the effect of pore-ion size on the capacitance of microporous carbon electrode combined with the PYR14-TFSI ionic liquid electrolyte at 100 °C. The authors noted that when the carbon pore size matched the ion size of the ionic liquid, ideal capacitive behavior and a maximum capacitance of 130 F g−1 are obtained (Fig. 17b).
 Fig. 17  (a) CV at temperatures from 50 °C to 100 °C at 100 mV s−1 for CNTs; (b) cyclic voltammograms of carbide-derived carbon electrodes (TiC-CDCs) with various pore sizes tested in the PYR14-TFSI electrolyte at 100 °C; potential scan rate: 5 mV s−1.182,183 Adapted from ref. 182 and 183. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society and 2011 The Electrochemical Society. 
If the maximum operational temperature is 100 °C, ammonium salts paired with high boiling point carbonate electrolytes may address this requirement. Masarapu et al.184 compared the capacitive properties and long-term cycling performance of a supercapacitor assembled with single-walled carbon nanotube (SWNT) and a mixture of tetraethylammoniumtetrafluoroborate–propylene carbonate (TEA-BF4/PC) at 25 and 100 °C, respectively. The cells showed excellent stability over more than 200000 cycles with 80% efficiency (Fig. 18a). Operation at high temperature afforded no noticeable cell damage but instead increased the specific capacitance, which is attributed to the enhanced adsorption of the electrolyte ions onto the surface of the electrode. To extend the temperature beyond 100 °C, Borges et al.185 employed a composite electrolyte/separator structures composed of bentonite clay and 1-butyl-2,3-dimethylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsuphonyl)imide (BMMI-TFSI) ionic liquid. This electrolyte is stable to temperatures as high of 300 °C. Conductivity is slightly compromised by introduction of clay, reaching 1 mS cm−1 above 50 °C. Increasing the temperature increased the conductivity and afforded a maximum conductivity of about 5 mS cm−1 at 180 °C. The continuous increase in temperature led to a decrease in conductivity of about 2.5 mS cm−1 at 200 °C. The assembled device possessed a specific capacitance of 40 F g−1 operated from 0 to 2.5 V with almost 20% of capacity loss after 10000 cycles (Fig. 18c). An abrupt decrease of capacity in the initial cycles is observed and attributed to the SEI formation. To prepare a free-standing electrolyte film (Fig. 18d), the thermoplastic poly(urethane) (TPU) is added to the electrolyte mixture at 10% wt. The capacitance reduced (20–35 F g−1) at 200 °C within the 0–2.5 V window due to the decreased conductivity of the electrolyte membrane with added TPU.
 Fig. 18  (a) Displaying the ultralong cycling stability of the cell by running 246700 and 224000 cycles of charge–discharge with a current density of 20 A g−1 at 25 and 100 °C;184 (b) cyclic voltammograms for supercapacitor based on clay:RTIL electrolyte at 60 mV s−1. The capacitor exhibits a box-like shape using a potential window of 5 V at different temperatures: RT, 120 °C and 200 °C; (c) cycling stability of the capacitor RGO|Clay:RTIL|RGO at 200 °C with different voltage windows 2 V and 2.5 V; (d) free standing membrane based on TPU:Clay:RTIL working as electrolyte/separator for supercapacitor until 200 °C.185 Adapted from ref. 184 and 185. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society and 2013 Macmillan Publishers. 


5.1.3 Solid polymers. 
Since Wright et al. first demonstrated ion conduction in poly(ethylene oxide)–salt complexes (PEO) in 1973,186 the potential use of these polymers as the ion conducting electrolyte in energy storage devices has attracted significant attention.151,187–190 This interest is motivated by a number of unique advantages such as non-flammability, lightweight, and processability. Thus, PEO-based electrolytes may provide a solution to the safety and leak problems associated with liquid electrolytes. Compared to ceramic or ionic liquid systems, polymers are flexible and easier to be shaped consistently according to the design requirement and fabricated using roll-to-roll printing on large scale. These advantages support the development of polymers as an ideal electrolyte candidate for operation at room temperature or high temperature. An additional merit to using polymer electrolytes, as opposed to liquid electrolytes, is that separators are not required, which reduces the weight and cost of producing a cell as well as eliminates the thermal instability and compatibility issues associated with using liquid electrolytes and separators. State-of-the-art polymer electrolytes can be categorized into two types: (1) solvent-free solid polymer electrolytes where the salt is dissolved in a high-molecular-weight polymer. Lithium ion conduction is assisted by the segmental motion of the polymer chains, and these systems generally possess low conductivity (10−5 S cm−1) at room temperature. (2) Gel or plasticized polymer systems where liquid electrolyte is doped in a non-conducting solid polymer which provides both mechanical support and lithium-ion conduction. Gel systems can display comparable conductivity (>10 mS cm−1) as liquid electrolytes, however, safety and thermal stability issues remain with loading of liquid electrolyte. Since polymer electrolytes also serve as separators, mechanical integrity is a critical requirement. Therefore, a balance is required between high conductivity, hence “liquid-like” electrical behavior, and mechanical integrity, hence “solid-like” mechanical behavior. The reader is referred to several excellent reviews on the development of polymer electrolytes.61,62,187,188,190,191
In 2011, Hu et al.192,193 reported the charge and discharge cycling of a graft copolymer electrolyte (GCE)-based lithium-ion battery at temperatures up to 120 °C. The GCE consists of poly(oxyethylene) methacrylate-g-poly(dimethyl siloxane) (POEM-g-PDMS) (Fig. 19b, inset), where the microphase separation between the hydrophilic block and the hydrophobic block yielded a flexible, ion-conducting domain to transport the ions, as well as a mechanically strong domain to support the matrix. The low Tg of POEM (Tg = −60 °C) and PDMS (Tg = −123 °C) conferred sufficient room-temperature ionic conductivity to the material. The authors demonstrated the potential of GCE-based Li-ion batteries for high-temperature applications by studying the temperature stability and cycling behavior of the GCE-based lithium-ion batteries in a Li/LiFePO4 cell doped with LiTFSI. However, fast capacity loss (>60%) is observed within 30 cycles during charge–discharge cycling with a continuously decreasing coulombic efficiency (from >95% to <70%) (Fig. 19a). One possible explanation for this decrease in coulombic efficiency is the limited long-term thermal stability of the polymer. An isothermal TGA study at 140 °C of the graft polymer, under inert atmosphere, revealed a weight loss of less than 2% over 50 h, suggesting suitable stability. Yet, the graft copolymer showed discoloration after long exposure to elevated temperatures. FTIR analysis of the graft polymer before and after heating revealed degradation of the polymer. For instance, the decreases in intensity of the symmetric and asymmetric stretching modes of C–H in the methyl CH3 (peaks between 2800 and 3000 cm−1) and the stretching mode of the carbonyl (CO) groups (∼1730 cm−1) are indicative of the decomposition of the methacrylate backbone (Fig. 19b). Nevertheless, the GCE polymer electrolyte showed >30% of capacity loss after 50 cycles at room temperature at the same current rate, despite an increasing coulombic efficiency reaching about 95% after cycling. The discrepancy in the cycling efficiency change behavior between high temperature and room temperature is unclear.
 Fig. 19  (a) Charge and discharge curves of LiFePO4/GCE/Li at 120 °C. The current density used was 10 mA g−1; (b) FTIR spectra of unheated and heated (140 °C) graft copolymer. Chemical structure of the graft copolymer (inset). The graft copolymer shows discoloration after heating (inset).192 Adapted from ref. 192. Copyright 2011 Elsevier. 
Compared with the reduced stability of the GCE polymers described above, an anionic block copolymer electrolyte (A-BCE), specifically a poly(ethylene glycol-co-lithium styrene trifluoromethanesulphonylimide) P(STFSILi)-b-PEO-b-P(STFSILi) (Fig. 20a) showed promising performance at temperatures tested up to 80 °C as reported by Bouchet et al.194 A short-term TGA study showed the thermal decomposition temperature of the copolymer to be 350 °C. A prototype cell based on the A-BCE polymer, a Li anode, and a LiFePO4 cathode provided stable cycling at 60, 70, and 80 °C with varied current rates (from C/60 to 2C). The cell exhibited a large 5 V electrochemical window versus Li/Li+. No capacity fading was observed regardless of the tested temperature after 90 cycles. Of note is the fact that the polymer electrolyte generated extremely high current rates and subsequent power, which are greater than previous dry polymer systems. For example, even if operated at C/2, the system retained 85% of its capacity at 80 °C. This remarkable improvement in power density is realized through the “single-ion” effect polymer, as revealed by a Li+ transference number of greater than 0.85. Polyelectrolytes containing immobilized anions to increase the fraction of ionic conductivity via the cations (Li+) have been studied. In contrast to non-ionic polymers, these polymers prevent the build-up of a salt concentration gradient across the cell and the accumulation of anions on the anode, which are thought to cause lithium dendrite formation and power loss. Although the ionic conductivity of the A-BCE polymer is only 1.3 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 60 °C (Fig. 20b), most of the conductivity is the result of the cations (Li+) and afforded higher power delivery and longer lifecycle. Theoretical calculations also support the conclusion that materials with high Li+ transport number exhibit better cycling performance compared to those with low Li+ transport number (typically 0.1–0.5 for IL or polymer based electrolytes) but higher conductivities.195 Another advantageous feature of the polymer electrolyte is the enhanced mechanical strength compared to the gel-type electrolytes (10 MPa at 40 °C by stress–strain test). Due to the microphase separation effect, as observed in the GCE polymer as well, the A-BCE polymer, with 31 wt% P(STFSILi) exhibited substantially stronger mechanical properties than the neutral triblock analogous copolymer, polystyrene–PEO–polystyrene (PS–PEO–PS, 25 wt% of PS), both with LiTFSI doping at [EO]/[Li] = 30 (Fig. 20c). Yet, it was also noted that the mechanical properties quickly decreased by more than 10 times (0.55 MPa) at 60 °C, which may pose issues such as a short-circuit during high temperature operation.
 Fig. 20  (a) Chemical structure of the triblock copolymer P(STFSILi)-b-PEO-b-P(STFSILi); (b) plots of conductivity as a function of inverse temperature for several P(STFSILi)-PEO-P(STFSILi) A-BCEs. Inset: Isothermal conductivity at 60 °C according to the wt% of the P(STFSILi) block; (c) comparative tensile tests at 40 °C for the neutral copolymer PS–PEO–PS with 25 wt% PS loaded with LiTFSI at [EO]/[Li] = 30 (blue curve) and the copolymer P(STFSILi)-PEO-P(STFSILi) with 31 wt% P(STFSILi) (red curve); (d) cycle-life of the prototype with different temperatures and different C-rate.194 Adapted from ref. 194. Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers. 
The observation of high capacity cell performance with a low conducting electrolyte possessing a high Li+ transport number, which represents the portion of effective current carried by lithium ions in Li-ion batteries, is reported by Wong and Thelen et al.196 They described a dry polymer electrolyte composed of a low molecular weight (Mw = 1000–4000) methyl carbonate-terminated perfluoropolyethers (PFPE-DMCs) that possessed a strikingly high Li transport number of 0.91 at 85 °C (Fig. 21b). This value approaches unity at lower temperatures such as 40 °C. Regardless of a rather low conductivity of 2.5 × 10−5 S cm−1 measured for the polymer electrolyte at 30 °C, the Li/LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 (LiNMC) cell showed stable galvanostatic cycling at current rates varied from C/20 to C/8 at 30 °C, with a constant coulombic efficiency of >98% after 20 cycles (Fig. 21d). The authors speculated that the high lithium transport number arose from the: (1) increase in Li+ free movement caused by the delocalization of electrons due to the electron-withdrawing effect of fluorine moieties; and (2) concomitant decrease in mobility of the fluorinated anion (from LiTFSI) resulting from the strong interactions with the fluorinated PFPE polymer backbone. Although the cell was not evaluated at high temperatures, the absence of a flash point and burning when ignited along with the high decomposition temperature (>200 °C) suggest that this polymer electrolyte is of potential use for high temperature energy storage.
 Fig. 21  (a) Chemical reaction scheme describing the synthesis of PFPE-DMC from PFPE-diol; (b) transference number t+ (green △) and temperature-dependent conductivity (blue ■) of PFPE1000-DMC; (c) discharge profiles obtained at 30 °C at different rates from C/20 to C/8 for a typical prototype Li/PFPE1000-DMC-LiTFSI/LiNMC; (d) cycle performance of battery prototypes showing discharge (green □) and charge (blue △) capacities, as well as overall efficiencies (gray ●).196 Adapted from ref. 196. Copyright 2014 National Academy of Sciences. 
Recently, Konieczynska et al.197 explored a polycarbonate based on the biocompatible building block of glycerol as a high temperature electrolyte. The repeat unit of the polymer resembles the molecular structure of low molecular weight linear and cyclic carbonates, as well as possesses a higher oxygen to carbon ratio, than pure aliphatic polycarbonates for greater dissolution of lithium salt. Specifically, poly(butyl ether 1,2-glycerol carbonate), synthesized via the ring-opening copolymerization of the corresponding glycidyl ether with carbon dioxide using the [rac-SalcyCoIIIDNP] catalyst, does not possess a glass transition (Tg) and decomposes at temperatures >200 °C (Fig. 22a). Low conductivity (10−5 S cm−1) is observed at 25 °C, but raising the temperature to 100 °C significantly increased the conductivity by approximately 2 orders of magnitude (10−3 S cm−1 at 120 °C) (Fig. 22b). This result is consistent with increased polymer chain mobility and, thus, enhanced Li salt mobility and conductivity. Also, these values are comparable to those of well-optimized PEO-based electrolytes and higher than the existing polycarbonate-based systems. The storage modulus (G′) of the polyglycerol carbonate at 2% strain is approximately 104 Pa at 1 Hz and 25 °C, indicating insufficient mechanical properties for preparation of a free-standing membrane between the electrodes (Fig. 22c).
 Fig. 22  (a) Reaction of glycidyl ether and CO2 to yield poly(ether 1,2-glycerol carbonate) (DNP = 2,4-dinitrophenoxy); (b) conductivity measurement of poly(butyl ether 1,2-glycerol carbonate) as a dependence of temperature by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy; (c) frequency sweep at 2% strain of poly(butyl ether 1,2-glycerol carbonate) at 25 °C.197 Adapted from ref. 197. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Khurana et al. reported on crosslinking polyethylene with poly(ethylene oxide) segments, using a ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP), as one way to suppress crystallization of PEO chains (Fig. 23a).198 Copolymerization of cyclooctene (COE) with PEO using the Grubbs' 2nd generation catalyst gave a transparent film. The unsaturated double bonds were reduced via hydrogenation in the presence of an iridinium catalyst to give the polymer electrolyte for lithium metal batteries. The conductivities of the polymers are on the order of 10−6 to 10−5 S cm−1 at 25 °C with varied cross-linker length and different ratios of COE, similar to other improved PEO systems.199,200 When a low molecular weight polyethylene glycol (PEG) (Mn 275 g mol−1) is added to the cross-linked polymer (39 wt%), the ionic conductivity increased by about ten times to 2 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 25 °C (Fig. 23b). A decrease of 65 °C for the glass transition temperature was also observed for this composition, indicating the suppression of PEO crystallization. At 100 °C, the ionic conductivity increased to the order of 10−2 S cm−1. Galvanostatic lithium plate/strip electrochemical cycling measurements, in a symmetric Li/SPE/Li cell, quantified the effect of PE–PEO cross-linking on the dendrite formation time.201,202 The measured short-circuit time, caused by dendrite formation, is dependent on the current density applied and the percentage of PEG added. Dendrite growth resistance is observed at 90 °C (short circuits at 430 hours) with the 39 wt% PEG at 0.26 mA cm−2 (Fig. 23c). As a comparison, Rosso et al. reported a short circuit time of 2 h at 0.25 mA cm−2 and 90 °C for a PEO–LiTFSI polymer electrolyte.203
 Fig. 23  (a) Polyethylene/poly(ethylene oxide) solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) synthesis; (b) plot of DC ionic conductivity as a function of temperature for 70PEOX electrolytes having different weight percent of PEG275 plasticizer. All films had [COE]:[1] ratio of 15:1 and [EO]:[Li] composition of 18:1; (c) galvanostatic polarization tests. Plot of short circuit time (tsc) as a function of current density at 90 °C for various 70PEOX electrolytes having different weight percent (wt%) of the plasticizer (PEG275).198 Adapted from ref. 198. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Solid polymer electrolytes are also investigated for high temperature tolerant supercapacitors, as these materials generally possess greater thermal stability. In contrast to ionic liquid electrolytes, solid polymer electrolytes have only limited contact with the electrode and can not access the porous structure. Thus, the electrical double layer (EDL) only forms at the surface of the electrode. A strategy to overcome this contact issue is to use a homogenously distributed ionomer in the electrode and provide more sites for the electrolyte to form the EDL through the micro- or mesopores of the electrode material. Recently Kim et al.204 reported a high-temperature operating supercapacitor consisting of two reduced graphene oxide (RGO) electrodes and a poly-[2,20-m-phenylene-5,50-bibenzimidazole] (PBI) electrolyte doped with phosphoric acid (H3PO4) (Fig. 24a). The polymer electrolyte exhibited a high conductivity of ∼100 mS cm−1 immersed in a 85% of H3PO4 solution. The ion-hopping mechanism occurred at 100 °C and is facilitated by doping with H3PO4. The substantially enhanced charge transfer led to a high capacitance of 170 F g−1 at 160 °C (Fig. 24b). Capacitive behavior is observed from 30 to 160 °C, with higher capacitance at higher temperatures. A high capacity of 150 F g−1 along with <10% of capacity loss is observed over 100000 cycles at 120 °C. Coupling three RGO-PBI SCs devices in series powered a red light-emitting-diode (LED). An attractive feature of this system is the free-standing, mechanical strong, and bendable electrolyte film, which showed excellent mechanical durability after hundreds of bending cycles (at bend angles of 60–180°). Thus, the polymer film can be easily adapted to flexible and demanding cell configurations. A similar finding is reported by Hastak et al.,205 who mixed poly[2,5-benzimidazole] (ABPBI) with H3PO4. They demonstrated supercapacitor operation at up to 200 °C using activated carbon (AC) electrodes. Compared with the previous example, the conductivity of the ABPBI electrolyte at 100 °C is around 10 mS cm−1 with 67% of H3PO4 doping (Fig. 24c). The specific capacitance increased linearly with temperature and with the percentage of ABPBI polymer doping in the electrode, as the binder amount influenced the specific capacitance. The highest capacitance reached is around 200 F g−1 at 120 °C, when 25% of ABPBI is used (Fig. 24d).
 Fig. 24  (a) Schematic view of thermally activated, nanoscale-confined ionic transport at elevated temperatures; (b) long-term stability (3500 GCD cycles at 1 A g−1) of RGO-PBI SC under dynamic thermal stresses (temperature variations per 500 cycles);204 (c) ionic conductivity of ABPBI doped with 67% of phosphoric acid at different temperatures; (d) specific capacitance of supercapacitors at different temperatures.205 Adapted from ref. 204 and 205. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society and 2012 Elsevier. 


5.1.4 Ceramics. 
Ceramic electrolytes offer potential advantages including thermal stability, a large electrochemical stability window, absence of fluid leakage, and a resistance to vibrations and shocks. Ionic transport occurs in solids due to atomic disorder in the crystal structures.189,206–209 The conductivity is inversely related to the activation energy of the ions moving between the lattice, and the mobility is correlated to the ionic radius.210 Multivalent ions exhibit lower conductivities because they carry larger charge and have higher activation energies. Most solid ion conductors use monovalent ions, such as lithium, potassium, and sodium. NaAIV2(PO4)3; AIV = Ge, Ti, or Zr) and Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12, 0 < x < 3, developed in the 1970s, are well known and referred to as Na Super Ion Conductors (NASICON).46,211–213 They exhibit high conductivities of 10−3 to 10−2 S cm−1 at room temperature, which are comparable to liquid electrolytes, and are thermally stable up to 200 °C. For example, Lalère et al.214 recently reported an all-solid sodium battery incorporating Na3V2(PO4)3 as the electrode and Na3Zr2Si2PO12 as the sodium ion conducting electrolyte. The battery, assembled through spark plasma sintering at 900 °C, operated at 1.8 V and 200 °C to give a capacity of 1.04 mA h cm−2 (C/10) with less than 10% of capacity reduction after 25 cycles.
On the other hand, inorganic solid Li ion conductors are of particular interest as solid-state electrolytes in Li-ion batteries, and the reader is referred to reviews by Adachi, Knuath, and Robertson.207–209 One of the most studied ceramic electrolyte is lithium phosphorus oxynitride (LiPON; Li2.88PO3.73N0.14). LiPON exhibits a room temperature conductivity of 10−6 S cm−1. LiPON possesses a unity lithium cation transference number, an electrochemical window greater than 5 V versus Li/Li+, is stable at elevated temperatures, is compatible with lithium metal, and thin films can be prepared by sputtering. Li ion conductors based on the NASICON crystallographic structure are also prevalent with, for example, LiGe2(PO4)3, LiTi2(PO4)3, and LiTi0.5Zr1.5(PO4)3 exhibiting ionic conductivities ranging from 10−5 to 10−3 S cm−1 between 100 and 200 °C. The observed conductivity between 25 to 250 °C is governed by the grain boundaries present within the materials. Li ion conductive is increased upon doping with Al, and Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 exhibited a conductivity of 10−3 and 10−1 at 25 and 200 °C, respectively. Replacing the large Ti4+ cations with smaller Al3+ cations reduces unit cell dimensions and increases ionic conductivity. The presence of the Ti cations and their susceptibility to reduction limits the use of these materials with Li metal electrodes. The perovskite (ABO3)-type lithium lanthanum titanate ionic conductors (LLTO) exhibit conductivities that are dependent on the Li concentration and on the order of 10−3 S cm−1. Lithium transport occurs via a vacancy mechanism. Other solid conductors such as LiTi2(PO4)3, thio-LISICON Li3.25Ge0.25P0.75S4, Li5La3Ta2O12, Li5.5La3Nb1.75In0.25O12, and Li3PO4–Li2S–SiS2 have also been explored and possesses conductivities on the order or less than 10−3 S cm−1.
One of the highest Li+ ionic conducting solids reported are Li3N single-crystals. Li3N exhibits a two-dimensional layered structure, similar to β-alumina, where the Li+ transports between the layers.215 A conductivity of 1.2 × 10−3 S cm−1 is measured for the crystal at room temperature. At temperatures above 100 °C, the conductivity of lithium nitride increases in magnitude to 10−3 to 10−1 S cm−1 depending on the doping and stoichiometry, reaching as high as 8.8 S m−1 at 400 °C.216 A low cathodic decomposition potential prevents it from being used with high-voltage cathodes and from wide-spread adoption. Similarly, the related Li2S glasses also possess a conductivity of around 1 × 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature.217–220 The high conductivity is proposed to be a consequence of the smaller bonding energy between Li+–S and the larger tunnel size for Li+ migration in a glass compared to a crystal. Although these high Li+ conducting electrolytes show promise, decomposition in air remains a limitation.
As is shown in Fig. 25, ceramics are generally more thermally stable than ionic liquids and solid polymer electrolytes, although they are brittle materials. While possessing excellent high temperature tolerance, up to 800 °C, they typically exhibit conductivities above 10−3 S cm−1 when the temperature is greater than 100 °C and are suitable electrolyte materials when the desired operation temperature falls into the range of 80–300 °C, where a number of ceramics may provide satisfactory conductivities (for example, the conductivity of LiPON is above 1 mS cm−1 above 100 °C). Their use is typically limited to as then films (<1 μm thick) for batteries, where the electrolyte impedance is minimized. These solid electrolytes can be produced through thin-film techniques, such as RF magnetron sputtering, which is challenging to implement on the commercial scale. In addition, other processing conditions that utilize high-temperature sintering (>1300 °C) limit the practical implementation of ceramic based electrolytes.221,222
 Fig. 25  Ionic conductivity of ceramics, solid electrolytes, organic liquid electrolytes, polymer electrolytes, ionic liquids and gel electrolytes.223 Copyright 2011 Macmillan Publishers. 
A significant advance in the field is reported by Kamaya et al.,223 who described a new solid-state electrolyte (Li10GeP2S12) that exhibited an ionic conductivity of 10−2 S cm−1 along with a wide electrochemical potential window from −0.5 to 5 V at 27 °C (Fig. 26b). This lithium superionic conductor, is prepared using a thermal synthesis route. Synchrotron X-ray diffraction (XRD) and neutron diffraction studies revealed one-dimensional (1D) chains within the lattice formed by LiS6 octahedra and (Ge0.5P0.5)S4 tetrahedra (Fig. 26a). Specifically, a common corner shared by the PS4 tetrahedra and LiS6 octahedra defined the 1D chains. Li transport is proposed to occur via displacement from the 16h and 8f sites toward interstitial positions between two 16h sites and between the 16h and 8f sites. Subsequent evaluation of an all-solid-state battery comprising the Li10GeP2S12 electrolyte, a LiCoO2 cathode, and an In metal anode functioned for eight charge–discharge cycles at 27 °C. Upon cycling, the battery showed an initial 20% capacity loss, and then gradually stabilized at approximately 120 mA h g−1, at a current density of 14 mA g−1 (Fig. 26c). The authors did not report the performance of the battery at elevated temperatures, but given the preparation of the electrolyte at 550 °C, and the conductivity versus temperature response measured, these experiments are of merit.
 Fig. 26  (a) Crystal structure of Li10GeP2S12; (b) impedance plots of the conductivity data from low to high temperatures and Arrhenius conductivity plots of Li10GeP2S12. The plotted conductivity represents the sum of the grain boundary and bulk conductivities; (c) charge–discharge curves of an all-solid-state battery consisting of a LiCoO2 cathode, a Li10GeP2S12 electrolyte and an In metal anode. The current density is 14 mA g−1.223 Adapted from ref. 223. Copyright 2011 Macmillan Publishers. 
Hibino et al.224 reported the performance of a solid-state supercapacitor composed of a Sn0.95Al0.05H0.05P2O7–polytetrafluoroethylene composite electrolyte sandwiched between two pre-treated acid carbon electrodes immersed in 105% H3PO4. The 250 μm thick electrolyte membrane itself exhibited temperature independent ionic conductivity on the order of 0.01 S cm−1 (Fig. 27a), and CV experiments revealed stable performance between −2 to 2 V. When operating the supercapacitor between 100 and 200 °C at low current densities (e.g., 3 A g−1), high energy densities are achieved between 15 and 32 W h kg−1. Increasing the current density to as high as 13 A g−1 still provided energy densities as high as 12 W h kg−1. At room temperature and at 100 °C, the energy density remained unchanged over 7000 cycles, with the supercapacitor operating at 100 °C providing approximately 50% more W h kg−1. Increasing the operational temperature to 150 °C afforded a 27% loss in capacity after 7000 cycles (Fig. 27b). At the highest temperature reported (200 °C), the capacity retention and lifecycle of the device are significantly compromised within 1000 cycles. The poorer performance of the supercapacitor at higher temperatures is attributed to the dehydration and decomposition of the 105% H3PO4 as well as to the loss of adhesion from the sealing tape, used to secure the device, allowing air to leak into the supercapacitor.
 Fig. 27  (a) Temperature dependence of proton conductivity for the SIPO, SAPO, and FTPO-PTFE composite membranes, and 85% and 105% H3PO4; (b) energy density as a function of cycle number measured at various temperatures with the current density set in the range of 4.5–6 A g−1.224 Adapted from ref. 224. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers. 

5.2 New thermally stable Li salts
Xu et al.225 reported that lithium bis(oxalato)borate (LiBOB) can be used as a thermally stable Li salt, when dissolved in an electrolyte, between two electrodes and enable battery operation up to 70 °C. However, LiBOB possesses limited solubility in carbonate solvents or ionic liquids, and the SEI it forms is highly resistive leading to deterioration of cell capacity and rate capability. In response to these limitations, Zhang et al.226,227 described the design and synthesis of lithium oxalyldifluoroborate (LiODFB) which resembles the structures of LiBOB and LiBF4 (Fig. 28). LiODFB, synthesized by reacting BF3 etherate and Li2C2O4 in a 1:1 molar ratio, possessed better solubility, a lower viscosity, and stabilized the SEI on the surface of a graphite anode. The conductivity of LiODFB is slightly higher than LiBOB at low temperatures (<10 °C), however, as the temperature increased, the conductivity of LiODFB also increased but its value is lower than that of LiBOB and above LiBF4. Although the decomposition temperature of LiODFB is approximately 100 °C lower than that for LiBF4, the salt did not decompose until 250 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1, enabling the potential of high temperature application. When this salt is dissolved in PC:EC:DCM and added to a graphite/LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 cell, the cell performed for 200 cycles at 60 °C with less than 10% of capacity loss.
 Fig. 28  (a) Structure of LiBOB and LiODFB; (b) TGA traces of LiBF4, LiODFB, and LiBOB, which were recorded during heating at a rate of 10 °C min−1 under a nitrogen flow; (c) Ahrrenius plots of the ionic conductivity of LiBF4, LiODFB, and LiBOB in a 1:1:3 (wt) PC/EC/EMC solvent mixture; (d) high temperature (60 °C) cycling performance of the Li-ion cell with a 1.0 M LiODFB 3:3:4 (wt) PC/EC/EMC electrolyte, which was recorded by charging and discharging at 0.5 mA between 2.5 V and 4.2 V with charging current tapered to 0.05 mA.226 Adapted from ref. 226. Copyright 2006 Elsevier. 
A lithium borate cluster salt Li2B12H12 (Fig. 29) is recently described as a new electrolyte salt. It displays moderate conductivity from 2.5 mS cm−1 (25 °C) to 5 mS cm−1 (80 °C) with increasing temperature. An additional advantage of this lithium salt, is that it acts as a “redox shuttle” and provides overcharge protection in cells.228–232 Chen et al.233 reported two variants of these salts, Li2B12F9H3 and Li2B12F12, both of which showed redox reactions at 4.4–4.7 V (vs. Li/Li+) and prevented cathode de-lithiation above 4.4 V at 55 °C (Fig. 29). Specifically, 0.4 M Li2B12F9H3 and 0.1 M LiBOB were dissolved in a 3:7 by weight ration of EC and ethyl methyl carbonate (EMC) followed by addition of 1.0 wt% of 2-(pentafluorophenyl)-tetrafluoro-1,3,2-benzodioxaborole (PFPTFBB), as a Lewis acid, to produce LiDFOB and LiTFOP in situ and enhance SEI stability. The graphite/Li1.1[Ni1/3Mn1/3Co1/3]0.9O2 cell containing this electrolyte operated at 55 °C for 1200 cycles with only a 30% loss of capacity. The performance is superior to that of cells containing LiPF6 or LiDFOB. In situ HEXRD experiments revealed that this lithium salt delayed the phase transformation of the spinel Li1.1[Ni1/3Mn1/3Co1/3]0.9O2 cathode and the reaction between the delithiated cathode and electrolyte by several tens of degrees. The better tolerance of Li2B12H12 to the presence of water (up to 35000 ppm) is also noted.
 Fig. 29  (a) Reversible redox reaction of B12F122− and B12F9H32− for overcharge protection of lithium-ion cells; (b) cyclic voltammograms of 10 mM Li2B12F9H3 and Li2B12F12 in 1.2 M LiPF6 in EC/EMC using a Pt/Li/Li three-electrode cell at a scanning rate of 10 mV s−1; (c) discharge capacity as a function of cycle number for graphite/Li1.1[Ni1/3Mn1/3Co1/3]0.9O2 lithium-ion cells cycled between 3.0 V and 4.1 V at a constant current of 0.5 mA (C/3) at 55 °C.233 Adapted from ref. 233. Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers. 
There is also a special class of high temperature electrolyte utilizing molten salt. Muñoz-Rojas et al.234 studied molten LiTFSI at 250 °C as the electrolyte itself sandwiched between a Li anode and a LiFePO4 cathode using a customized Swagelok cell. All plastic parts in Fig. 30a were switched from plastic to metallic to enable high temperature operation up to 300 °C. LiTFSI is an ideal molten salt for this application as it melts at approximately 230 °C and does not decompose over the temperature range of interest. Glass fibers were utilized as separators in this cell. Direct contact between the liquid lithium metal and the cathode, at this high temperature, was avoided by placing a stainless steel grid (0.5 mm pore size) between the lithium anode and separators. This design prevents liquid lithium from penetrating through the separators by capillarity forces. A special high temperature silicone XTS 320 (INTEK Adhesives, UK) replaced the Al2O3-based glue as the glue reacts with LiTFSI. All these modifications are important to enable high temperature operation (>250 °C). Eight charge–discharge cycles are obtained at 250 °C with a capacity between 150 and 180 mA h g−1. However, polarization is observed due to the low conductivity of LiTFSI at 250 °C, and the use of a thick stainless steel grid. For example, a less significant polarization is observed when using the thinner grid of 25 μm, compared to that of the 500 μm one.
 Fig. 30  (a) High temperature customized Swagelok cell; (b) charge–discharge curves obtained at high temperature (230 and 250 °C) using molten LiTFSI as electrolyte and molten Li as negative electrode in a modified high temperature Swagelok-type modified cell using metallic grids of 500 and 25 μm. Inset: Charge–discharge curve for LiFePO4 at room temperature using LiPF6 in EC/DMC 1:1 as electrolyte.234 Adapted from ref. 234. Copyright 2007 Elsevier. 
6. Critical evaluation and limitations of current systems
In a number of respects, the existing EES systems are far from ideal, as demonstrated by the preceding summary. Therefore, additional EES research and development efforts are needed to further understand the fundamental thermodynamics and kinetic processes at temperatures above ambient temperature and to discover new materials or refine existing materials with optimized properties that integrate with the other components of the device.
• Ionic conductivity. Despite the improved ionic conductivity observed with new electrolyte materials, which is further enhanced by virtue of operation at temperatures greater than room temperature, the conductivity is still less than 10 mS cm−1 with an unsatisfactory rate capability term (i.e., high C-rates cannot be reached) compared to carbonate solvents. At temperatures greater than 100 °C, the conductivities of most ionic liquids are still on the order of 10−4–10−3 S cm−1 in magnitude, while that of most polymers and ceramics are on the order of 10−5–10−3 S m−1, with a few exceptions in which the polymers and ceramics showed exceptional conductivities. Structure–property relationships are needed for describing the dependence of conductivity on electrolyte composition, viscosity, and temperature to guide future studies.
From a polymer perspective, low Tg polymers are being designed, synthesized, and evaluated to increase the ionic conductivity. However, it has been proposed that polymers also need to possess a high shear modulus (at the magnitude of 109 Pa, Chazalviel theory)201,235,236 to reliably separate the electrodes and effectively suppress dendrite growth. However, Khurana et al. recently reported that a polymer of relatively low-modulus on the order of 105 Pa at 90 °C mitigates dendrite growth.198 Unfortunately, most of the polymers that achieve high ionic conductivities (10−3) by doping in a liquid plasticizer, lead to a reduction of mechanical strength. Some of the systems that show conductivity at high temperatures (e.g., polycarbonates) also possess low Tg, and the viscous character precludes the formation of a free-standing film, further limiting the processability required for industry scale manufacturing. Moreover, the lack of systematic conductivity and mechanical data on the polymers at high temperatures exacerbates the challenge to generate composition–structure–property relationships to aid in the identification or the design of new polymer-based electrolytes. Increasing the temperature softens the polymeric material, reduces the shear modulus, hence deteriorating the mechanical strength. The requirement for ionic conductivity and mechanical strength appear to be contradictory, and optimal materials may represent a compromise on both fronts. A few reports described an alternative strategy to the prevailing low Tg solution, and proposed that ion transport is facilitated in an ordered environment of the crystalline phase, instead of solely relying on the segmental movement of the polymer chains in the amorphous phases.237,238 Using this approach high ionic conductivity and high shear modulus may be obtained simultaneously, and additional research is required to validate this approach and understand the underlying ion transport mechanism(s).
• Long-time thermal stability. Ionic liquids, polymers, and ceramics are generally considered as thermally stable materials, but this is dependent on the working temperature. While ceramics are stable at temperatures between 200 to 300 °C, ionic liquids and solid polymers are generally not. At temperatures between 40 and 150 °C, all three electrolyte materials exhibit thermal stability, but the ionic conductivity can be significantly different between the classes of materials. The thermal decomposition temperatures of the materials are most commonly measured by TGA, where the temperature is ramped relatively quickly at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 or even faster. Consequently, there may be insufficient time for the heat to dissipate throughout the material, thus, the measured decomposition temperature may not reflect the actual temperature at which the material starts to degrade and overestimates the thermal decomposition temperature.239,240 The specific heating rate may also influence the thermodynamics and kinetics of thermal reactions being studied. In addition, TGA is an analytical technique that measures only the weight loss of the material. However, chemical transformations or phase transitions can occur before the weight loss is detected, which would alter the ion transport properties of the electrolyte. For example, Del Sesto et al. reported that the ionic liquid butylmethylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)amide (C4MIM-TFSI) started to decompose around 200 °C as observed by optical techniques, and this temperature is significantly lower than the previously reported decomposition temperature of around 400 °C.241 This may explain why some electrolyte materials are reported to have superior thermal stability, yet show poor performance at temperatures below their decomposition temperatures.
Furthermore, long-term thermal stability at a constant desired high temperature is rarely determined, which is critical for selecting the materials for rechargeable energy storage devices that will perform for hundreds or thousands of charge–discharge cycles. Unfortunately, most of the TGA measurements or voltammetric cycling studies are conducted within a short time frame (within hours or tens of minutes for most cases), which provides minimal insight to predicting long-term stability, performance, and/or shelf-life. The study conducted by MacFarlane and co-workers exemplifies this point, where they showed the decomposition of 1 wt% of PYR14-TFSI electrolyte occurred after isothermal heating for 10 hours at 271 °C, while the same electrolyte decomposed at 435 °C when using a fast ramp heating process.242
Finally, the confirmation of material thermal stability is further complicated by the sensitivity of the instruments used. The bulk material, chemical bonds changes, and small amounts of impurities are being detected using standard techniques such as TGA and NMR. However, it is difficult to detect trace amount of species using these techniques. Del Sesto et al.241 reported that when more sensitive spectroscopic detection methods are used, for example, fluorescence spectroscopy, decomposition of several commonly used pyrrolidinium and imidazolium ionic liquids occurred at hundreds of degrees below the TGA measured temperatures previously reported.240 Pyschik et al. also studied the long-term aging of the commonly used PYR14-TFSI and EMI-TFSI at 95 °C.243 After 16 months the decomposition species were detected by ion chromatography/mass spectrometer (IC–MS). The mass spectrum and proposed decomposition mechanism at 95 °C for PYR14-TFSI is shown in Fig. 31. The side chain of the cation cleaves at high temperature and subsequently reacts with the cationic center to form the new decomposition species. Such decomposition or degradation processes will adversely affect the cell performance and lead to persistently fading capacity, increasing internal gas generation, and decreasing power density. This may also explain the long-standing observation that some ionic liquids slowly change color upon heating at temperatures below their decomposition temperature. Nevertheless, the decomposition routes of existing and new materials are poorly understood, and additional detailed studies are needed to gain more insight into the corresponding device failure. These thermal stability studies need to be carefully performed via thoughtfully designed protocols with identification of the underlying chemical reactions and products using highly sensitive spectroscopic methods.
 Fig. 31  
m/z-ratios of the decomposition products of PYR14+ (from the IL PYR14-TFSI) in the ESI-MS chromatogram (a) after storage at room temperature for 16 months with/without electrolyte salts and; (b) after storage at 95C for 16 months; (c) proposed decomposition mechanism of the cation PYR14+.243 Adapted from ref. 243. Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
• Compatibility between cell components and SEI stability. In addition to addressing the thermal stability and performance of the individual cell components, it is also critical to assess the effect of temperature on the interfacial reactions and changes in material properties. Increasing the temperature, for many reactions, not only accelerates the kinetics of known reactions occurring at room temperature, but also promotes new chemical or electrochemical reactions. Electrolytes, in particular, are in contact with almost every cell component, thus compatibility is required across a range of temperatures from 25 to 300 °C. The above-mentioned examples showed decreased anodic potential in the electrochemical window as temperature increased. Therefore, operation at a specific temperature greater than ambient conditions pose stringent requirements on stability. Once the operational temperature is identified, every component needs to be evaluated in concert with each other, optimized, and validated for long-term studies.
It is well accepted that the formation of the passivating SEI stabilizes the interface between the electrolyte and electrode, especially the anode in conventional batteries, and affords extended cycling. However, this may not be the case for battery operation at high temperatures as the SEI (produced by the standard carbonate solvents and graphite) is found to degrade at higher temperatures, resulting in persistent consumption of electrolyte and electrode, as well as a build-up of internal resistance. Currently there are no reports of a stable SEI at elevated to high temperatures. In fact, due to the elusive nature of this thin and fragile interface, it is still unclear which noncarbonate electrolytes can form an effective SEI. Since the composition and properties of the SEI are highly dependent on electrolyte, salt, and electrode composition, comprehensive data are needed to construct composition–structure–property relationships to guide the rational choice of electrolyte and electrode to yield the desired, protective SEI at high temperatures.
• Energy density. As mentioned above, energy density is determined by the electrode couples and the efficiency of Li conduction in the electrolyte and transference between the electrodes and electrolyte. For the electrode materials, high temperature limits the choice of known cathodes to LiFePO4, which has a low theoretical capacity compared to other non-thermally stable cathode materials. The relatively low operational voltage of LiFePO4 also limits the energy density of this material. Therefore, the search for new thermally stable cathode materials is a high priority. For the anode, graphite exhibits high thermal stability but the polymer binders used decompose at high temperature leading to degradation of the electrode. Lithium metal, which is still considered as the “holy grail” among anode materials with the lightest weight and lowest potential, unfortunately melts at 180 °C, thus restricting operational temperature to below this value. In addition, lithium metal is a key component in high temperature Li–air and Li–S batteries, which provide several times higher energy densities than other systems. For supercapacitors, where cyclability and power density are usually not the greatest concern, substantial effort are focused toward increasing the energy density using pseudocapacitive materials, such as metal oxides or conducting polymers. However, the use of pseudocapacitive materials can limit the cyclability of the device. Therefore, high surface area electroactive materials, with thermal stability, are of particular interest to enhance the energy density. Moreover, developing hybrid devices combining the features of batteries and supercapacitors that bridge the energy density and power density gap between these two primary energy storage devices, as desired for room temperature applications, may also represent future endeavors in developing high temperature thermal stabile EES.
• Long-term cyclability. For room temperature applications, tens of thousands of cycles are required for commercial products. At temperatures greater than 80 °C, cycling beyond 100 times without capacity decay remains a significant challenge. Long-term cyclability is directly related to the quality of SEI and its stability at high or fluctuating temperatures. It also depends on the composition of the electrolyte, electrodes, separators, etc. that comprise the cell. The requirement for long-term cyclability will become particularly important for high temperature batteries as the application space transitions from the specialty industries to the automotive industry, for example, where tens of thousands of cycles are required. Thus, improvements in cyclability will likely rely on advances in the individual material components as well as engineering the interfacial stability between the electrolyte and the electrode materials.
7. Concluding remarks, perspectives, and future directions
The past decade witnessed an ever-increasing demand for high temperature EES with concurrent expanding research activities in discovering, developing, and understanding the thermal behavior of batteries and supercapacitors. At present, the range of applications for temperature-stable lithium-ion batteries is large and the market is likely underestimated. Potential applications include but are not limited to electrical vehicles (EVs), exploration vehicles for planetary surfaces, and measure-while-drilling (MWD) tools used by the oil industry. These established and forthcoming emerging applications, require components that are stable in elevated or high temperature environments. High temperature energy storage devices are advancing from single-use, hazards-containing systems that require mandatory cooling systems to ensure proper function, to rechargeable and safer systems that utilize inherently non-flammable electrolytes.
However, high temperature EES systems are still in an early stage of development and suffer from limited thermal, chemical, and electrochemical stability at increased temperatures, resulting in short working lifetimes. Among the various cell components, electrolyte and electrode materials are the greatest impediment to the progress towards high temperature operation. Nevertheless, improvements in the thermal stability of the separator, binder and other assembling parts are welcomed. Meanwhile, future successful development of high temperature durable and efficient energy storage devices requires not only the introduction of innovative materials such as ionic liquids, solid polymers, cathode and anode materials that individually suit the high temperature applications, but also the synergetic interaction between the components needs to be understood and enhanced to afford an the optimized combination with improved cycling, rate capability, and capacity. In order to design high temperature energy storage devices at a faster pace, there is a need for further advances and for continued systematic studies to understand the reaction pathways and mechanisms involved with the material itself or its interfacial reactions with other cell components.
While we have focused on EES operation at elevated and high temperatures, future efforts should extend the working temperature range to include those at room temperature or below. Despite the wide-spread success of Li-ion batteries, safety continues to be a concern due to the flammable nature of the conventional electrolytes. The use of non-flammable electrolytes is a fundamental logical solution to this safety issue, as opposed to reformulating the flammable electrolyte by adding flame retardant or installing safety control devices.74,244–247 In addition, the discovery of new materials or new properties as a function of shape or size are likely to create unique solutions to challenges in ionic conductivity and materials, as well as the interface stability at non-ambient temperature conditions. By leveraging new materials, approaches, and designs, we are positioned to advance battery technology for the benefit of systems that operate over a wider temperature range than previously feasible in a high performance, reliable, and safe manner. These concerted efforts from both academia and industry will address the energy density, rate capability, and cycling duration needs of modern society.
The purpose of this manuscript is to review the field of high temperature batteries and supercapacitors, to promote new research in materials and materials characterization, and to stimulate discussion. Our interest in high temperature EES devices arose from discussions, funding, and a collaboration with the Advanced Energy Consortium, and we are grateful to them for facilitating our work as a team composed of PIs, and their corresponding graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, with diverse backgrounds and expertise: Grinstaff (synthetic and physical organic chemistry, ionic liquids, polymers, biomaterials) Ajayan (engineering and nanoscience, supercapacitors, carbon electrodes, Li storage), and Reddy (mechanical engineering, material science, Li ion batteries, electrodes, device integration). This team approach to science is both scientifically rewarding and intellectually stimulating. We encourage all to investigate this exciting area of energy storage and use, and its potential commercial applications.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Abbreviations

ACNAcetonitrile
ACActivated carbon
AlAluminum
A-BCEAnionic block copolymer electrolyte
LiBOBBis(oxalato)borate
BMI-TFSI1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis[(trifluoromethyl) sulfonyl]amide
BMMI-TFSI1-Butyl-2,3-dimethylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide
CDCCarbide-derived carbon
CAESCompressed air energy storage
CVCyclic voltammetry
COECyclooctene
DFT-B3LYPDensity functional theory, B3LYP hybrid functional
R2ODialkylethers
DECDiethyl carbonate
DEGDMADiethylene glycol dimethacrylate
DSCDifferential scanning calorimetry
DMCDimethyl carbonate
DMSDimethyl sulphite
EVsElectric vehicles
EESElectrical energy storage
EDLElectrical double layer
EISElectrochemical impedance spectroscopy
EDXEnergy-dispersive X-ray
ECEthylene carbonate
ESEthylene sulphite
EMCEthylmethyl carbonate
EV-ARCExtended volume accelerating rate calorimetry
EMI-TFSI1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide
FESEMField emission scanning electron microscopy
FECFluoroethylene carbonate
OPF2OR, OPF(OR)2Fluorophosphates
OPF2OH, OPF(OH)2Fluorophosporic acid
FTIRFourier transform infrared spectroscopy
GITTGalvanostatic intermittent titration technique
GBLGamma-butyrolactone
GC-MSGas chromatography mass spectrometry
GPEGel polymer electrolyte

T
g
Glass transition
GCEGraft copolymer electrolyte
GPEsGel polymeric electrolytes
HP/HTHigh pressure/high temperature
HR-ESI-MSHigh resolution electrospray-ionization mass spectrometry
HTSHigh temperature energy storage
HEVsHybrid electric vehicles
HFHydrogen fluoride
HPGHydroxypropyl guar gum
ICAIncremental capacity analysis
ILIonic liquid
IC–MSIon chromatography/mass spectrometer
LiBOBLithium bisoxalatoborate
LiTFSILithium bistrifluoromethane sulfonimide
Li–CuOLithium copper oxide
LiPF6Lithium hexafluorophosphate
Li–MnO2Lithium manganese dioxide
LiClO4Lithium perchlorate
LiPONLithium phosphorus oxynitride
Li–FeSLithium–iron sulfide
LiFePO4Lithium iron phosphate
LiNMCLithium nickel cobalt manganese oxide; LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2
Li–SO2Lithium sulfur dioxide
Li–SOCl2Lithium–thionyl chloride
LiFLithium fluoride
LTOLithium titanium oxide; Li4Ti5O12
LixC6Lithiated graphite
LWDLogging-while-drilling
LTP-HR-MSLow temperature plasma ambient ionization high-resolution mass spectrometry
MWDMeasurement-while-drilling
PFPE-DMCsMethyl carbonate-terminated perfluoropolyethers
DMSO2Molten dimethyl sulfone
MCFCMolten carbonate fuel cell
PP14-TFSI
N-Butyl-N-methyl pyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide
PYR13-TFSI
N-Methyl-N-propylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide
PYR14-TFSI
N-Methyl-N-butylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide
C4mmor-FSI
N-Methyl-N-butylmorpholinium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide
PP13-FSI
N-Methyl-N-propylpiperdinium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide
NCVNet calorific value
NMRNuclear magnetic resonance
PYR1,2O1-TFSI
N-Methoxyethyl-N-methylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)-imide
DEME-BF4
N,N-Diethyl-N-methyl-N-(2-methoxyethyl) ammonium tetrafluoroborate
Ni/NiClNickel/nickel chloride
LiODFBOxalyldifluoroborate
PCPropylene carbonate
PEMProton exchange membrane
PAFCPhosphoric acid fuel cell
PANPolyacrylonitrile
ABPBIPoly[2,5-benzimidazole]
PEPolyethylene
PEOPolyethylene oxide
PETPolyethylene terephthalate
PPPolypropylene
PBIPoly-[2,20-m-phenylene-5,50-bibenzimidazole]
PS–PEO–PSPolystyrene–polyethylene glycol–polystyrene
PTFEPolytetrafluoroethylene
PTFEPoly(tetrafluoroethylene)
PVDFPoly(vinylidene fluoride)
PVCPoly(vinyl chloride)
PFPTFBB2-(Pentafluorophenyl)-tetrafluoro-1,3,2-benzodioxaborole
OPF3Phosphorus oxyfluoride
PTPANPolytriphenylamine
POEM-g-PDMSPoly(oxyethylene) methacrylate-g-poly(dimethyl siloxane)
P(STFSILi)-b-PEO-b-P(STFSILi)Poly(ethylene glycol-co-lithium styrene trifluoromethanesulphonylimide)
H3PO4Phosphoric acid
PF5Phosphorus pentafluoride
PMCPropylmethyl carbonate
PHSPump hydro storage
RFRadio frequency
RGOReduced grapheme oxide
LEDRed light-emitting-diode
ROMPRing-opening metathesis polymerization
SWNTSingle-walled carbon nanotube
SPESolid polymer electrolyte
NaAlCl4Sodium tetrachloroaluminate
NaFePO4Sodium iron pyrophosphate
NaVOPO4Sodium vanadyl(IV) orthophosphate
Na–SSodium–sulfur
SOFCSolid oxide fuel cell
SEISolid–electrolyte interphase
SOCState-of-charge
TGAThermogravimetric analysis
TEA-BF4Tetraethylammoniumtetrafluoroborate
TPUThermoplastic poly (urethane)
XRDX-ray diffraction
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
ZEBRAZeolite battery research Africa project

Acknowledgements
This article was supported in part by BU and by the Advanced Energy Consortium: http://www.beg.utexas.edu/aec/. Advanced Energy Consortium Member companies include Petrobras, Repsol, Shell, Statoil, and Total.
References
Department of Energy, Grid energy storage, http://energy.gov/oe/downloads/grid-energy-storage-december-2013, accessed February 2016.
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
The International Energy Agency, Key World Energy Statistics, http://https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/KeyWorld_Statistics_2015.pdf, accessed January 2016.
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. B. Goodenough, Basic research needs for Electrical Energy Storage, http://www.sc.doe.gov/bes/reports/files/EES_rpt.pdf, accessed February 2016.
H. Chen, T. N. Cong, W. Yang, C. Tan, Y. Li and Y. Ding, Prog. Nat. Sci., 2009, 19, 291–312 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Linden and T. B. Reddy, Handbook Of Batteries, McGraw Hill, New York, 3rd edn,  2001 Search PubMed .
B. Scrosati, Chem. Rec., 2005, 5, 286–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 587–603 CrossRef CAS .
N.-S. Choi, Z. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, X. Ji, Y.-K. Sun, K. Amine, G. Yushin, L. F. Nazar, J. Cho and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9994–10024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Carrette, K. A. Friedrich and U. Stimming, Fuel Cells, 2001, 1, 5–39 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jacoby, Chem. Eng. News, 2013, 91, 33–37 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, P. Ping, X. Zhao, G. Chu, J. Sun and C. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 210–224 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Whittingham, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 411–419 CrossRef .
M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Aricò, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-M. Tarascon and W. van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Palacin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2565–2575 RSC .
D. Doughty and E. P. Roth, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2012, 37–44 CAS .
J. Watson and G. Castro, Analog. Dialog, 2012, 46, 1–7 Search PubMed .
B. Allard, C. Buttay, D. Tournier, R. e. Robutel and J.-F. Mogniotte, Automotive Power Electronics, 2011, 1–10 Search PubMed .
P. G. Neudeck, R. S. Okojier and L.-Y. Chen, Proc. IEEE, 2002, 90, 1065–1076 CrossRef .
D. Hensley, M. Milewits and W. Zhang, Oilfield Rev., 1998, 1–16 Search PubMed .

          M. Kutasov and L. V. Eppelbaum, Proceedings World Geothermal Congress, 2015, pp. 1–12.

          http://petrowiki.org/Reservoir_pressure_and_temperature, accessed January 2016.
F. R. Haeberle, Oil Gas J., 2001, 2, 30–38 Search PubMed .

          J. Cooley, R. Signorelli, M. Green, P. S. Kuttipillai, C. Deane and L. A. Wilhelmus, Power system for high temperature applications with rechargeable energy storage, US 20120268074,  2012 Search PubMed .

          N. M. Brambilla, F. Martini, J. J. Cooley, R. Signorelli and H. Kyle, Advanced Electrolytes for High Temperature Energy Storage Device, WO 2015102716A220150709,  2015 Search PubMed .

          R. A. Normann, First High-Temperature Electronics Products Survey 2005, Sandia Report, 2006.
H. Oman, IEEE Aerosp. Electron. Syst. Mag., 2002, 17, 29–35 CrossRef .

          G. Bruce and B. Audette, Military takes aim at high battery costs, http://www.rfdesign.com, accessed January 2016.
R. A. Marsha, S. Vuksona, S. Surampudib, B. V. Ratnakumarb, M. C. Smartb, M. Manzoc and P. J. Dalton, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 25–27 CrossRef .
C. Buttay, D. Planson, B. Allard, D. Bergogne, P. Bevilacqua, C. Joubert, M. Lazar, C. Martin, H. Morel, D. Tournier and C. Raynaud, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2011, 176, 283–288 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Johnson, J. L. Evans, P. Jacobsen, J. R. R. Thompson and M. Christopher, IEEE Trans. Electron. Packag. Manuf., 2004, 27, 164–176 CrossRef .
E. Karden, S. Ploumen, B. Fricke, T. Miller and K. Snyder, J. Power Sources, 2007, 168, 2–11 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Rao and S. Wang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 4554–4571 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Bates and Y. Jumel, Lithium Batteries, Academic Press, London,  1983 Search PubMed .
D. Linden and B. McDonald, J. Power Sources, 1980, 5, 35–55 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Julien, A. Mauger, A. Vijh and K. Zaghib, Lithium Batteries – Science and Technology, Springer, New York,  2016 Search PubMed .
N. A. Hampson, S. A. G. R. Karunathilaka, R. Leek and T. J. Sinclair, Surf. Technol., 1982, 15, 101–112 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tranchant, R. Messina and J. Perichon, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1987, 233, 189–198 CrossRef CAS .
P. NovAk and P. Podhajecky, J. Power Sources, 1991, 35, 235–247 CrossRef CAS .

          G.-A. Nazri and G. Pistoia, Lithium Batteries – Science and Technology, Springer, New York,  2003 Search PubMed .

          N. Weber and J. T. Kummer, Annual Power Sources Conference, 1967.
B. L. Ellis and L. F. Nazar, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2012, 16, 168–177 CrossRef CAS .

          J. T. Kummer and N. Weber, Battery Having a Molten Alkali Metal Anode and a Molten Sulfur Cathode, US Pat., 3413150,  1968 Search PubMed .
J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Garche, Encyclopedia of Electrochemical Power Sources, Elsevier,  2009 Search PubMed .
J. L. Sudworth, J. Power Sources, 2001, 100, 149–163 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, D. A. Boysen, J. M. Newhouse, B. L. Spatocco, B. Chung, P. J. Burke, D. J. Bradwell, K. Jiang, A. A. Tomaszowska, K. Wang, W. Wei, L. A. Ortiz, S. A. Barriga, S. M. Poizeau and D. R. Sadoway, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 2075–2099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Deshpande, J. Li, Y.-T. Cheng and M. W. Verbrugge, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A845–A849 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, K. Jiang, B. Chung, T. Ouchi, P. J. Burke, D. A. Boysen, D. J. Bradwell, H. Kim, U. Muecke and D. R. Sadoway, Nature, 2014, 514, 348–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. V. Kordesch and G. R. Simader, Fuel Cells: and Their Applications, VCH, Germany,  2006 Search PubMed .
E. D. Wachsman and K. T. Lee, Science, 2011, 334, 935–939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kulkarni and S. Giddey, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 16, 3123–3146 CrossRef CAS .
N. Q. Minh, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1993, 76, 563–588 CrossRef CAS .
J. Vetter, P. Novák, M. R. Wagner, C. Veit, K. C. Möller, J. O. Besenhard, M. Winter, M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, C. Vogler and A. Hammouche, J. Power Sources, 2005, 147, 269–281 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Abraham, E. P. Roth, R. Kostecki, K. McCarthy, S. MacLaren and D. H. Doughty, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161, 648–657 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Bandhauer, S. Garimella and T. F. Fuller, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, R1–R25 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303–4418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11503–11618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Tarascon and D. Guyomard, Solid State Ionics, 1994, 69, 293–305 CrossRef CAS .
N. Katayama, T. Kawamura, Y. Baba and J.-i. Yamaki, J. Power Sources, 2002, 109, 321–326 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawamura, A. Kimura, M. Egashira, S. Okada and J.-I. Yamaki, J. Power Sources, 2002, 104, 260–264 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawamura, S. Okada and J.-i. Yamaki, J. Power Sources, 2006, 156, 547–554 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hammami, N. Raymond and M. Armand, Science, 2003, 301, 1063 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Handel, G. Fauler, K. Kapper, M. Schmuck, C. Stangl, R. Fischer, F. Uhlig and S. Koller, J. Power Sources, 2014, 267, 255–259 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. MacNeil and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A21–A28 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yaakov, Y. Gofer, D. Aurbach and I. C. Halalay, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A1383–A1391 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nowak and M. Winter, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2500–A2508 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ping, Q. Wang, J. Sun, X. Feng and C. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 776–783 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shigematsu, S.-i. Kinoshita and M. Ue, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A2166–A2170 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shigematsu, M. Ue and J.-i. Yamaki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A176–A180 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Campion, W. Li and B. L. Lucht, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A2327–A2334 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, J. Sun, X. Yao and C. Chen, Thermochim. Acta, 2005, 437, 12–16 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Xiang, H. Wang, C. H. Chen, X. W. Ge, S. Guo, J. H. Sun and W. Q. Hu, J. Power Sources, 2009, 191, 575–581 CrossRef CAS .
V. Eshkenazi, E. Peled, L. Burstein and D. Golodnitsky, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 170, 83–91 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Sloop, J. K. Pugh, S. Wang, J. B. Kerr and K. Kinoshita, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, A42–A44 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pyschik, V. Kraft, S. Passerini, M. Winter and S. Nowak, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 130, 426–430 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Ryou, J.-N. Lee, D. J. Lee, W.-K. Kim, Y. K. Jeong, J. W. Choi, J.-K. Park and Y. M. Lee, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 83, 259–263 CrossRef CAS .
J. Foropoulos Jr. and D. D. DesMarteau, Inorg. Chem., 1984, 23, 3720–3723 CrossRef .
J. R. Dahn, U. v. Sacken, M. W. Juzkow and H. Al-Janaby, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 2207–2211 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Dominey, V. R. Koch and T. J. Blakley, Electrochim. Acta, 1992, 37, 1551–1554 CrossRef CAS .
V. Aravindan, J. Gnanaraj, S. Madhavi and H.-K. Liu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 14326–14346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mizushima, P. C. Jones, P. J. Wiseman and J. B. Goodenough, Mater. Res. Bull., 1980, 15, 783–789 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Baba, S. Okada and J.-i. Yamaki, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 148, 311–316 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Lee, H. H. Yong, S. K. Kim, J. Y. Kim and S. Ahn, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 732–735 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Huang, M. Yan and Z. Jiang, J. Power Sources, 2006, 156, 541–546 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gabrisch, M. Kombolias and D. Mohanty, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 71–78 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peng, Y. Sun and F. Jiang, Heat Mass Transfer, 2014, 50, 1405–1416 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Julien, A. Mauger, K. Zaghib and H. Groult, Inorganics, 2014, 2, 132–154 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. MacNeil, Z. Lu, Z. Chen and J. R. Dahn, J. Power Sources, 2002, 108, 8–14 CrossRef CAS .
I. Belharouak, Y. K. Sun, W. Lu and K. Amine, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A1083–A1087 CrossRef CAS .
H. Joachin, T. D. Kaun, K. Zaghib and J. Prakash, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A401–A406 CrossRef CAS .
K. Amine, J. Liu, S. Kang, I. Belharouak, Y. Hyung, D. Vissers and G. Henriksen, J. Power Sources, 2004, 129, 14–19 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1188–1194 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Chung, J. T. Bloking and Y.-M. Chiang, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 123–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Belharouak, W. Lu, J. Liu, D. Vissers and K. Amine, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 905–909 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Makimura, C. Okuda, T. Nonaka, Y. F. Nishimura, T. Sasaki and Y. Takeuchi, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2014, 3, A66–A68 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Piao, C.-k. Lin, Y. Qin, D. Zhou, Y. Ren, I. Bloom, Y. Wei, G. Chen and Z. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 273, 1250–1255 CrossRef CAS .
R. Venkatachalapathy, C. W. Lee, W. Lu and J. Prakash, Electrochem. Commun., 2000, 2, 104–107 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dominko, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 462–468 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zaghib, J. Dubé, A. Dallaire, K. Galoustov, A. Guerfi, M. Ramanathan, A. Benmayza, J. Prakash, A. Mauger and C. M. Julien, J. Power Sources, 2012, 219, 36–44 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, H. Bang, K. Amine and J. Prakash, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A73–A79 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Park, E.-S. Oh and S.-M. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 1191–1196 CrossRef CAS .
H. Maleki, G. Deng, I. Kerzhner-Haller, A. Anani and J. N. Howard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 4470–4475 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. MacNeila, D. Larcherb and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 3596–3602 CrossRef .
P. Verma, P. Maire and P. Novák, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 6332–6341 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Andersson and K. Edström, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A1100–A1109 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zheng, A. S. Gozdz and G. G. Amatucci, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 4014–4018 CrossRef CAS .
P. Arora, R. E. White and M. Doyle, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 3647–3667 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, M. S. Ding, K. Xu, J. Allen and T. R. Jow, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, A206–A208 CrossRef CAS .

          P. B. Balbuena and Y. Wang, Lithium-Ion Batteries: Solid-Electrolyte Interphase, World Scientific Publishing Company,  2004 Search PubMed .
P. Arora and Z. J. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4419–4462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2007, 164, 351–364 CrossRef CAS .
S. Augustin, V. D. Hennige, G. Horpel and C. Hying, Desalination, 2002, 146, 23 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Orendorff, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2012, 61–65 CAS .
D. V. Carvalho, N. Loeffler, G. T. Kim and S. Passerini, Membranes, 2015, 5, 632–645 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Zhang and T. R. Jow, J. Power Sources, 2002, 109, 422–426 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. Roth, D. H. Doughty and J. Franklin, J. Power Sources, 2004, 134, 222–234 CrossRef CAS .

          T. D. Kaun, M. C. Hash and D. R. Simon, Sulfide Ceramics in Molten Salt Electrolyte Batteries, Report American Ceramic meeting, 1995.
X. Feng, M. Fang, X. He, M. Ouyang, L. Lu, H. Wang and M. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 255, 294–301 CrossRef CAS .
L. Terborg, S. Weber, F. Blaske, S. Passerini, M. Winter, U. Karst and S. Nowak, J. Power Sources, 2013, 242, 832–837 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, S. I. Stoliarov, M. Denlinger, A. Masias and K. Snyder, J. Power Sources, 2015, 280, 516–525 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Lopez, J. A. Jeevarajan and P. P. Mukherjee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2163–A2173 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Lopez, J. A. Jeevarajan and P. P. Mukherjee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A1905–A1915 CrossRef CAS .
E. Mengeritsky, P. Dan, I. Weissman, A. Zaban and D. Aurbach, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 2110–2116 CrossRef CAS .
H. Maleki, G. Deng, A. Anani and J. Howard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 3224–3229 CrossRef CAS .
R. Spotnitza and J. Franklin, J. Power Sources, 2003, 113, 81–100 CrossRef .
E. V. Thomas, H. L. Case, D. H. Doughty, R. G. Jungst, G. Nagasubramanian and E. P. Roth, J. Power Sources, 2003, 124, 254–260 CrossRef CAS .
W. Meng, W. Chen, L. Zhao, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Y. Fu, F. Geng, J. Yu, X. Chen and C. Zhi, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 133–140 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ponrouch, E. Marchante, M. Courty, J.-M. Tarascon and M. R. Palacín, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8572–8583 CAS .
A. Ponrouch, C. Frontera, F. Barde and M. R. Palacin, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 169–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Lodge, Science, 2008, 321, 50–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gebresilassie Eshetu, M. Armand, B. Scrosati and S. Passerini, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13342–13359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. Wasserscheid and T. Welton, Ionic Liquids in Synthesis, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2003 Search PubMed .

          H. Ohno, Ionic Liquids: The Front and Future of Material Developments, CMC, Tokyo,  2003 Search PubMed .
T. Welton, Chem. Rev., 1999, 11, 2071–2084 CrossRef .
J. P. Hallett and T. Welton, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3508–3576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Rogers and K. R. Seddon, Science, 2003, 302, 792–793 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Wasserscheid and W. Keim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3772–3789 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Seddon, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 1999, 68, 351–356 CrossRef .
R. P. Swatloski, S. K. Spear, J. D. Holbrey and R. D. Rogers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 4974–4975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. Kirchner, Ionic Liquids, Springer, Berlin,  2009 Search PubMed .
J. S. Wilkes and M. J. Zaworotko, Chem. Commun., 1992, 965–967 RSC .
J. F. Wishart, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 956–961 CAS .
D. R. MacFarlane, M. Forsyth, P. C. Howlett, M. Kar, S. Passerini, J. M. Pringle, H. Ohno, M. Watanabe, F. Yan, W. Zheng, S. Zhang and J. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15005 CrossRef .
M. V. Fedorov and A. A. Kornyshev, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 2978–3036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Galiński, A. Lewandowski and I. Stępniak, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 5567–5580 CrossRef .
E. Quartarone and P. Mustarelli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2525–2540 RSC .
A. Lewandowski and A. Świderska-Mocek, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 601–609 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Ohno, Electrochemical Aspects of Ionic Liquids, John Wiley & Sons, New Jersey,  2005 Search PubMed .
M. Armand, F. Endres, D. R. MacFarlane, H. Ohno and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 621–629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, K. Korf, Y. Kambe, Z. Tu and L. A. Archer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 53, 488–492 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Paillard, Q. Zhou, W. A. Henderson, G. B. Appetecchi, M. Montanino and S. Passerini, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A891–A895 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sakaebe and H. Matsumoto, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 594–598 CrossRef CAS .
B. Garcia, S. Lavallée, G. Perron, C. Michot and M. Armand, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 4583–4588 CrossRef CAS .
H. Matsumoto, H. Sakaebe, K. Tatsumi, M. Kikuta, E. Ishiko and M. Kono, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 1308–1313 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wu, Q. Zhu, R. Chen, N. Chen, Y. Chen and L. Li, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 7274–7283 RSC .
J.-H. Shin, W. A. Henderson and S. Passerini, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 1016–1020 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Shin, W. A. Henderson, S. Scaccia, P. P. Prosini and S. Passerini, J. Power Sources, 2006, 156, 560–566 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wu, G. Tan, R. Chen, L. Li, J. Xiang and Y. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5081–5085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, E. Yasukawa and S. Mori, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2677–2684 CrossRef CAS .
B. Garcia and M. Armand, J. Power Sources, 2004, 132, 206–208 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nadherna, R. Dominko, D. Hanzel, J. Reiter and M. Gaberscek, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A619–A626 CrossRef CAS .
C. Peng, L. Yang, Z. Zhang, K. Tachibana and Y. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2007, 173, 510–517 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mun, Y. S. Jung, T. Yim, H. Y. Lee, H.-J. Kim, Y. G. Kim and S. M. Oh, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 1068–1074 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Lane, P. M. Bayley, B. R. Clare, A. S. Best, D. R. M. Forsyth and A. F. Hollenkamp, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21775–21785 CAS .
M. C. Kroon, W. Buijs, C. J. Peters and G.-J. Witkamp, Thermochim. Acta, 2007, 465, 40–47 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, R. Kavian, Y. Lu, Q. Hu, Y. Shao-Horn and M. W. Grinstaff, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 6601–6606 RSC .
K. Kalaga, M. T. Rodrigues, H. Gullapalli, G. Babu, L. M. Arava and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25777–25783 CAS .
E. Markevich, V. Baranchugov, G. Salitra, D. Aurbach and M. A. Schmidt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A132–A137 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ababtain, G. Babu, X. Lin, M.-T. F. Rodrigues, H. Gullapalli, P. M. Ajayan, M. W. Grinstaff and L. M. R. Arava, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15242–15249 CAS .
E. Markevich, G. Salitra, A. Rosenman, Y. Talyosef, D. Aurbach and A. Garsuch, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 48572–48575 RSC .

          K. Ababtain, G. Babu, M.-T. F. Rodrigues, X. Lin, H. Gullapalli, P. M. Ajayan, M. W. Grinstaff and L. M. R. Arava,  2016, submitted.
Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, Y. Liu, C. Luo and C. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 780–787 RSC .
N. Wongittharom, C.-H. Wang, Y.-C. Wang, C.-H. Yang and J.-K. Chang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17564–17570 CAS .
C.-Y. Chen, K. Matsumoto, T. Nohira and R. Hagiwara, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2093–A2098 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sato, G. Masuda and K. Takagi, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 3603–3611 CrossRef CAS .
A. Balducci, R. Dugas, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon, D. Plée, M. Mastragostino and S. Passerini, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 922–927 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lin, P.-L. Taberna, S. Fantini, V. Presser, C. R. Pérez, F. Malbosc, N. L. Rupesinghe, K. B. K. Teo, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2396–2401 CrossRef CAS .
C. Largeot, P. L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, A174–A176 CrossRef CAS .
C. Masarapu, H. F. Zeng, K. H. Hung and B. Wei, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2199–2206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Borges, A. L. M. Reddy, M.-T. F. Rodrigues, H. Gullapalli, K. Balakrishnan, G. G. Silva and P. M. Ajayan, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2572 Search PubMed .
D. E. Fenton, J. M. Parker and P. V. Wright, Polymer, 1973, 14, 589 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand, Solid State Ionics, 1983, 9–10, 745–754 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Meyer, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 439–448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Fergus, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4554–4569 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Song, Y. Y. Wang and C. C. Wan, J. Power Sources, 1999, 77, 183–197 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce and C. A. Vincent, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1993, 89, 3187–3203 RSC .
Q. Hu, S. Osswald, R. Daniel, Y. Zhu, S. Wesel, L. Ortiz and D. R. Sadoway, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5604–5610 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Sadoway, J. Power Sources, 2004, 129, 1–3 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bouchet, S. Maria, R. Meziane, A. Aboulaich, L. Lienafa, J.-P. Bonnet, T. N. T. Phan, D. Bertin, D. Gigmes, D. Devaux, R. Denoyel and M. Armand, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 452–457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Doyle, T. F. Fuller and J. Newman, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 2073–2081 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. C. Wong, J. L. Thelen, Y. Fu, D. Devaux, A. A. Pandya, V. S. Battaglia, N. P. Balsara and J. M. DeSimone, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 3327–3331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Konieczynska, X. Lin, H. Zhang and M. W. Grinstaff, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 533–537 CrossRef CAS .
R. Khurana, J. L. Schaefer, L. A. Archer and G. W. Coates, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7395–7402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kono, E. Hayashi and M. Watanabe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 1521–1527 CrossRef CAS .
F. Alloin, Y. Sanchez and M. Armand, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, 1915–1920 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Stone, S. A. Mullin, A. A. Teran, D. T. Hallinan, A. M. Minor, A. Hexemer and N. P. Balsara, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A222–A227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, Z. Tu and L. A. Archer, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 961–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rosso, T. Gobron, C. Brissot, J.-N. Chazalviela and S. Lascaudb, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 804–806 CrossRef CAS .
S.-K. Kim, H. J. Kim, J.-C. Lee, P. V. Braun and H. S. Park, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8569–8577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Hastak, P. Sivaraman, D. D. Potphode, K. Shashidhara and A. B. Samui, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 59, 296–303 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Bachman, S. Muy, A. Grimaud, H. H. Chang, N. Pour, S. F. Lux, O. Paschos, F. Maglia, S. Lupart, P. Lamp, L. Giordano and Y. Shao-Horn, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 140–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Knauth, Solid State Ionics, 2009, 180, 911–916 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Robertsona, A. R. Westa and A. G. Ritchie, Solid State Ionics, 1997, 104, 1–11 CrossRef .
H. Aono, N. Imanaka and G.-y. Adachi, Acc. Chem. Res., 1994, 27, 265–270 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Singh, D. Zhu, Y. Zhou and M. Singh, Design, Development, and Applications of Engineering Ceramics and Composites, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA,  2010 Search PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough, H. Y.-P. Hong and J. A. Kafalas, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 203–220 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Nanjundaswamy, A. K. Padhi, J. B. Goodenough, S. Okada, H. Ohtsuka, H. Arai and J. Yamaki, Solid State Ionics, 1996, 92, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
V. Palomares, P. Serras, I. Villaluenga, K. B. Hueso, J. Carretero-Gonzalez and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5884–5901 CAS .
F. Lalère, J. B. Leriche, M. Courty, S. Boulineau, V. Viallet, C. Masquelier and V. Seznec, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 975–980 CrossRef .
U. v. Alpen, A. Rabenau and G. H. Talat, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1977, 30, 621–623 CrossRef .

          R. D. Armstrong, International Symposium On Solid Ionic and Ionic-Electronic Conductors: Selected Papers from the Conference Held in Rome, September 1976, Elsevier Science, 2013.
R. Mercier, J.-P. Malugani, B. Fahys and G. Robert, Solid State Ionics, 1981, 5, 663–666 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wada, M. Menetrier, A. Levasseur and P. Hagenmuller, Mater. Res. Bull., 1983, 18, 189–193 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kondo, K. Takada and Y. Yamamura, Solid State Ionics, 1992, 53–56, 1183–1186 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kennedy, S. Sahami, S. W. Shea and Z. Zhang, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 18–19, 368–371 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mei, Q.-H. Jiang, Y.-H. Lin and C.-W. Nan, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 486, 871–875 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Schaefer, Y. Lu, S. S. Moganty, P. Agarwal, N. Jayaprakash and L. A. Archer, Appl. Nanosci., 2011, 2, 91–109 CrossRef .
N. Kamaya, K. Homma, Y. Yamakawa, M. Hirayama, R. Kanno, M. Yonemura, T. Kamiyama, Y. Kato, S. Hama, K. Kawamoto and A. Mitsui, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 682–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hibino, K. Kobayashi, M. Nagao and S. Kawasaki, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, S. S. Zhang, U. Lee, J. L. Allen and T. R. Jow, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 79–85 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 1423–1428 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Zhang, ECS Trans., 2007, 3, 59–68 CAS .
Z. Chen, J. Liu, A. N. Jansen, G. GirishKumar, B. Casteel and K. Amine, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A39–A42 CrossRef CAS .
C. Buhrmester, J. Chen, L. Moshurchak, J. Jiang, R. L. Wang and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A2390–A2399 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Leising, M. J. Palazzo, E. S. Takeuchi and K. J. Takeuchi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A838–A844 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, H. Yang and X. Ai, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 4033–4037 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Abraham, D. M. Pasquariello and E. B. Willstaedt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 1856–1857 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Ren, A. N. Jansen, C. K. Lin, W. Weng and K. Amine, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1513 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Muñoz-Rojas, J.-B. Leriche, C. Delacourt, P. Poizot, M. R. Palacín and J.-M. Tarascon, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 708–712 CrossRef .
C. Brissot, M. Rosso, J.-N. Chazalviel, P. Baudry and S. Lascaud, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 43, 1569–1574 CrossRef CAS .
C. Brissot, M. Rosso, J.-N. Chazalviel and S. Lascaud, J. Power Sources, 1999, 81–82, 925–929 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, S. Gamble, D. Ainsworth, A. M. Slawin, Y. G. Andreev and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 580–584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gadjourova, Y. G. Andreev, D. P. Tunstall and P. G. Bruce, Nature, 2001, 412, 520–523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Baranyai, G. B. Deacon, D. R. MacFarlane, J. M. Pringle and J. L. Scott, Aust. J. Chem., 2004, 57, 145–147 CrossRef CAS .
C. Maton, N. De Vos and C. V. Stevens, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5963–5977 RSC .
R. E. Del Sesto, T. M. McCleskey, C. Macomber, K. C. Ott, A. T. Koppisch, G. A. Baker and A. K. Burrell, Thermochim. Acta, 2009, 491, 118–120 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Wooster, K. M. Johanson, K. J. Fraser, D. R. MacFarlane and J. L. Scott, Green Chem., 2006, 8, 691–696 RSC .
M. Pyschik, C. Schultz, S. Passerini, M. Winter and S. Nowak, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 176, 1143–1152 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, S. Zhang, J. L. Allen and T. R. Jow, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1079–A1082 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, P.-C. Hsu, J. Lopez, Y. Li, J. W. F. To, N. Liu, C. Wang, S. C. Andrews, J. Liu, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15009 CrossRef .
C. L. Cheng, C. C. Wan, Y. Y. Wang and M. S. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2005, 144, 238–243 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xia, S.-L. Li, X.-P. Ai, H.-X. Yang and Y.-L. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2845–2848 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Xinrong Lin
	Dr Xinrong Lin received her BS in Chemistry from Wuhan University in 2008, and obtained her PhD from Boston University under the mentorship of Professor Grinstaff in 2014. Her PhD research focused on the synthesis and characterization of ionic supramolecular assemblies. She is currently a postdoctoral fellow in the Grinstaff Laboratory and is evaluating new ionic liquids and ionic liquid polymers as non-flammable electrolytes for high temperature electrical energy storage (EES) devices.

Maryam Salari
	Dr Maryam Salari completed her BSc in Materials Engineering at Tabriz University in 2005, and MSc in Materials Selection and Characterization at Amirkabir University of Technology in 2007. She obtained her PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from University of Wollongong, in 2013. After obtaining her PhD, she joined the Intelligent Polymer Research Institute (Australian Research Council (ARC) Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science (ACES)) as an associate research fellow to develop new materials for efficient and sustainable photoelectrochemical water splitting. She joined the Grinstaff Laboratory at Boston University in 2015 as a postdoctoral fellow. Her research interests include the synthesis of self-organized TiO2 nanotube arrays and inorganic materials for energy storage applications.

Leela Mohana Reddy Arava
	Professor Leela Mohana Reddy Arava is an Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering at Wayne State University. He completed his BSc and Msc at Sri Venkateswara University, and earned his PhD from the Indian Institute of Technology. Prior to his current position, he was a Research Scientist and a Postdoctoral Associate at Rice University, and a Postdoctoral Associate at the University of Pittsburgh. Leela has published more than 70 papers and his research interests include high energy and safe batteries for electric vehicles, micro-batteries to power micro-sensors, and flexible hybrid energy devices for wearable assistive technologies (http://blogs.wayne.edu/arava/).

Pulickel M. Ajayan
	Professor Pulickel M. Ajayan is the Benjamin M. and Mary Greenwood Anderson Professor in Engineering at Rice University. He is the founding chair of Rice University's Materials Science and NanoEngineering department and also holds joint appointments with the Department of Chemistry and Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering. Ajayan research interests include synthesis and structure–property relations of nanostructures and nanocomposites, materials science, and applications of nanomaterials, energy storage, and phase stability in nanoscale systems. He is one of the pioneers in the field of carbon nanotubes and was involved in the early work along with the NEC group. He has published more than 600 journal papers. Ajayan has received several awards including the Spiers Memorial Award by the Royal Society of Chemistry (UK), Senior Humboldt Prize, and MRS medal (http://ajayan.rice.edu/pulickel-ajayan/).

Mark W. Grinstaff
	Professor Mark W. Grinstaff is the Distinguished Professor of Translational Research and a Professor of Biomedical Engineering, Chemistry, Materials Science and Engineering, and Medicine at Boston University. Mark's inventive scientific contributions span biomedical engineering, biological engineering, biotechnology, applied chemistry, medicine, and energy producing transformational discoveries, technologies, and products unique to the convergence of these fields. His awards include the ACS Nobel Laureate Signature Award, NSF Career Award, Pew Scholar in the Biomedical Sciences, Camille Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar, Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship, the Edward M. Kennedy Award for Health Care Innovation, a Fellow of the American Academy of Nanomedicine, a Fellow of AIMBE, and a Charter Fellow of the National Academy of Inventors. Mark is an author or co-author on more than 240 peer-reviewed publications, an inventor on more than 200 patents and patent applications, and co-founder of five companies (http://people.bu.edu/mgrin/).

 	Fig. 1  The structure and compositions of a lithium-based battery.19 Adapted from ref. 19. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  Temperature dependent applications of energy storage devices.	 

Li–SOCl2	Non-rechargeable	3.5	500	−55 to 150
Li–SO2	Non-rechargeable	2.9	250	−55 to 70
Li–MnO2	Non-rechargeable	3.0	280	−30 to 60
Li–CuO	Non-rechargeable	1.5	300	−30 to 150
Li–FeS2	Non-rechargeable	1.5	300	400 to 500
Li–Cl2	Non-rechargeable	3.5	2180	>650
Na–S	Rechargeable	1.7	150	400 to 700
Na/NiCl2 (ZEBRA)	Rechargeable	2.6	90	270 to 350
Liquid–metal	Rechargeable	
	787	500 to 1000
Solid oxide fuel cell	Rechargeable	4.1	410	>500

Ethylene carbonate (EC)	

	88	36.4	248	1.90 (40 °C)	89.78	4.61	160	1.321
Propylene carbonate (PC)	

	102	−48.8	242	2.53	64.92	4.81	132	1.200
Dimethyl carbonate (DMC)	

	90	4.6	91	0.59 (20 °C)	3.107	0.76	18	1.063
Diethyl carbonate (DEC)	

	118	−74.3	126	0.75	2.805	0.96	31	0.969
Ethylmethyl carbonate (EMC)	

	104	−53	110	0.65	2.958	0.89	27	1.006
γ-Butyrolactone (GBL)	

	86	−43.5	204	1.73	39	4.23	97	1.199

 	Fig. 3  Decomposition mechanism of LiPF6.75,80 Adapted from ref. 75 and 80. Copyright 2005 The Electrochemical Society and 2015 Elsevier.	 

LiPF6	

	151.98	107	
10.7
EC:DMC = 1:1

LiAsF6	

	195.85	475	
11.1
EC:DMC = 1:1

LiBF4	

	94.02	320	
4.9
EC:DMC = 3:7

LiTFSI	

	286.93	
360
236 (melts)
	
9.4
EC:DMC = 1:1

LiFSI	

	187.06	
200
145 (melts)
	
9.7
EC:EMC = 3:7

LiBOB	

	193.98	306	
4.5
EC:EMC = 1:1


 	Fig. 4  (a) Electrochemical characteristics of three classes of insertion compounds; (b) crystal structures of three lithium-insertion compounds.92 Adapted from ref. 92. Copyright 2014 MDPI AG.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Analysis of DSC profiles (To: onset temperature; Tp: peak temperature; Pp: peak power; Htot: total evolved heat);93 (b) DSC profiles of LiMn2O4 charged to indicated voltages (solid lines). Duplicate scans are from a nominally identical sample, while dashed lines are from the LiCoO2 sample at the indicated voltage;93 (c) DSC spectra of over-charged layered, spinel and olivine cathodes with traces of 1.2 mol L−1 LiPF6 in EC–EMC (3:7) electrolyte at 10 °C min−1.104 Adapted from ref. 93 and 104. Copyright 2002 and 2012 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  DSC and TGA scans of anode (negative) graphite and cathode (positive) LiCoO2 after 100% charging. (PE: positive electrode; NE: negative electrode).129 Adapted from ref. 129. Copyright 1999 The Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) DSC heating curves up to 350 °C of solvent mixtures;133 (b) cyclic voltammograms (100 °C, 0.2 mV s−1) of a calcium deposit (grown by potentiostatic electrodeposition at −1.2 V versus Ca2+/Ca passivated, 5 h, 100 °C) in 0.45 M Ca(BF4)2 EC:PC electrolytes;134 (c) SEM micrographs of deposits obtained in 0.3 M Ca(BF4)2 EC:PC at −1.5 V versus Ca2+/Ca passivated at 100 °C for 200 h.134 Adapted from ref. 133 and 134. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry and 2016 Macmillan Publishers.	 

 	Fig. 8  Molecular structures of the mixture components: dimethyl sulphite (DMS), ethylene sulphite (ES), N-methoxyethyl-N-methyl-pyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)-imide (PYR1,2O1TFSI) and lithium difluoro(oxalate)borate (LiODFB); (b) Li/LiFePO4 cells containing LiODFB–PYR1,2O1TFSI/ES, LiODFB–PYR1,2O1TFSI/DMS, LiODFB–EC/DEC or LiPF6–EC/DEC electrolytes at various temperatures with a current density of 0.1 C.160 Adapted from ref. 160. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic representation of the PP14-TFSI + SO2 pore transporter and TEM image of mesoporous SiO2 matrices; (b) cycling performance of cells at 55 °C. Insets: Impedance spectra of cells discharged to 2.5 V after selected cycles at the two operating temperatures.163 Adapted from ref. 163. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (left) Cyclic voltammograms of the aluminum current collector in six different electrolytes. (a) PYR14-TFSI with LiTFSI, (b) PYR14-TFSI with LiPF6, (c) BMMI-TFSI with LiTFSI, (d) BMMI-TFSI with LiPF6, (e) 1 M LiPF6 in EC–DEC, and (f) 1 M LiTFSI in EC–DEC at 0.5 mV s−1 scan rate;166 (right) cyclic voltammograms for Al foil electrode in 1 M LiTFSI/BMI-TFSI at 25, 40 and 60 °C (sweep rate: 10.0 mV s−1).167 Adapted from ref. 166 and 167. Copyright 2009 The Electrochemical Society and 2007 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Structures of ionic liquids under investigation; (b) cyclic voltammograms for TiO2-B electrode in three different electrolytes, scan rate = 0.1 mV s−1 and T = 120 °C; (c) capacity loss at high-temperature (120 °C); (d) impedance spectra for TiO2-B/Li cell after 5 cycles at 120 °C. Measurements made at discharged state (1.2 V for TiO2-B electrode); (e) FE-SEM images of TiO2-B composite electrode surface at initial state (e1), after 20 cycles at 120 °C in 1.0 M Li-PYR13-TFSI (e2).168 Adapted from ref. 168. Copyright 2009 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Structures of N-methyl-N-butylmorphlinium and N-methyl-N-propylpiperidinium, and bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide; (b) C4mmor-FSI + 0.4 mol kg−1 at 0.2 mA cm−2, showing short circuit and possible welding behavior at 50 °C.169 Adapted from ref. 169. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Chemical structures of a series of phosphonium ionic liquids; (b) charge–discharge cycling for mono-(C6)3PC10-TFSI with 1.6 M LiTFSI, current rate at C/7; (c) demonstration of battery working only at high temperature and retain capacity at room temperature.171 Adapted from ref. 171. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Cyclic stability of LTO half cells cycled at 120 °C at C/3. (b) Rate capability of LTO half cells at 120 °C cycled at different C-rates using clay/PP13-(1 M) LiTFSI composite electrolyte.172 Adapted from ref. 172. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  SEM images of the cycled at 60 °C silicon electrodes (a) after about 700 cycles in 1 M LiPF6 in FEC/DMC 1:4 and;175 (b) after about 870 cycles in 0.5 M LiFSI in PYR13-FSI; (c) temperature-dependent performance of 3D Si electrodes with PP13-TFSI; (d) comparison of cycle life of 3D Si electrode at 100 °C with PP13-TFSI and 20% PC + PP13-TFSI electrolyte mixtures.176 Adapted from ref. 175 and 176. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry and 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Cyclic stability (measured at 0.3C) of Na/NaFePO4 cells with various kinds of electrolytes at 50 °C; (b) effects of temperature on discharge capacity at 0.05 C;178 (c) cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of the NVP/AB-8h electrodes at 298 and 363 K. Cut-off voltage: 2.5–4.2 V. Current density: 1C (145 mA g−1); (d) GITT evaluation of the NVP/AB-8h electrode at 298 K and 363 K. Conditions: 30 min charging/discharging segments at C/20 (7.25 mA g−1) followed by 12h relaxation.179 Adapted from ref. 178 and 179. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society and 2015 The Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) CV at temperatures from 50 °C to 100 °C at 100 mV s−1 for CNTs; (b) cyclic voltammograms of carbide-derived carbon electrodes (TiC-CDCs) with various pore sizes tested in the PYR14-TFSI electrolyte at 100 °C; potential scan rate: 5 mV s−1.182,183 Adapted from ref. 182 and 183. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society and 2011 The Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Displaying the ultralong cycling stability of the cell by running 246700 and 224000 cycles of charge–discharge with a current density of 20 A g−1 at 25 and 100 °C;184 (b) cyclic voltammograms for supercapacitor based on clay:RTIL electrolyte at 60 mV s−1. The capacitor exhibits a box-like shape using a potential window of 5 V at different temperatures: RT, 120 °C and 200 °C; (c) cycling stability of the capacitor RGO|Clay:RTIL|RGO at 200 °C with different voltage windows 2 V and 2.5 V; (d) free standing membrane based on TPU:Clay:RTIL working as electrolyte/separator for supercapacitor until 200 °C.185 Adapted from ref. 184 and 185. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society and 2013 Macmillan Publishers.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Charge and discharge curves of LiFePO4/GCE/Li at 120 °C. The current density used was 10 mA g−1; (b) FTIR spectra of unheated and heated (140 °C) graft copolymer. Chemical structure of the graft copolymer (inset). The graft copolymer shows discoloration after heating (inset).192 Adapted from ref. 192. Copyright 2011 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Chemical structure of the triblock copolymer P(STFSILi)-b-PEO-b-P(STFSILi); (b) plots of conductivity as a function of inverse temperature for several P(STFSILi)-PEO-P(STFSILi) A-BCEs. Inset: Isothermal conductivity at 60 °C according to the wt% of the P(STFSILi) block; (c) comparative tensile tests at 40 °C for the neutral copolymer PS–PEO–PS with 25 wt% PS loaded with LiTFSI at [EO]/[Li] = 30 (blue curve) and the copolymer P(STFSILi)-PEO-P(STFSILi) with 31 wt% P(STFSILi) (red curve); (d) cycle-life of the prototype with different temperatures and different C-rate.194 Adapted from ref. 194. Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Chemical reaction scheme describing the synthesis of PFPE-DMC from PFPE-diol; (b) transference number t+ (green △) and temperature-dependent conductivity (blue ■) of PFPE1000-DMC; (c) discharge profiles obtained at 30 °C at different rates from C/20 to C/8 for a typical prototype Li/PFPE1000-DMC-LiTFSI/LiNMC; (d) cycle performance of battery prototypes showing discharge (green □) and charge (blue △) capacities, as well as overall efficiencies (gray ●).196 Adapted from ref. 196. Copyright 2014 National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Reaction of glycidyl ether and CO2 to yield poly(ether 1,2-glycerol carbonate) (DNP = 2,4-dinitrophenoxy); (b) conductivity measurement of poly(butyl ether 1,2-glycerol carbonate) as a dependence of temperature by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy; (c) frequency sweep at 2% strain of poly(butyl ether 1,2-glycerol carbonate) at 25 °C.197 Adapted from ref. 197. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Polyethylene/poly(ethylene oxide) solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) synthesis; (b) plot of DC ionic conductivity as a function of temperature for 70PEOX electrolytes having different weight percent of PEG275 plasticizer. All films had [COE]:[1] ratio of 15:1 and [EO]:[Li] composition of 18:1; (c) galvanostatic polarization tests. Plot of short circuit time (tsc) as a function of current density at 90 °C for various 70PEOX electrolytes having different weight percent (wt%) of the plasticizer (PEG275).198 Adapted from ref. 198. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Schematic view of thermally activated, nanoscale-confined ionic transport at elevated temperatures; (b) long-term stability (3500 GCD cycles at 1 A g−1) of RGO-PBI SC under dynamic thermal stresses (temperature variations per 500 cycles);204 (c) ionic conductivity of ABPBI doped with 67% of phosphoric acid at different temperatures; (d) specific capacitance of supercapacitors at different temperatures.205 Adapted from ref. 204 and 205. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society and 2012 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 25  Ionic conductivity of ceramics, solid electrolytes, organic liquid electrolytes, polymer electrolytes, ionic liquids and gel electrolytes.223 Copyright 2011 Macmillan Publishers.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Crystal structure of Li10GeP2S12; (b) impedance plots of the conductivity data from low to high temperatures and Arrhenius conductivity plots of Li10GeP2S12. The plotted conductivity represents the sum of the grain boundary and bulk conductivities; (c) charge–discharge curves of an all-solid-state battery consisting of a LiCoO2 cathode, a Li10GeP2S12 electrolyte and an In metal anode. The current density is 14 mA g−1.223 Adapted from ref. 223. Copyright 2011 Macmillan Publishers.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Temperature dependence of proton conductivity for the SIPO, SAPO, and FTPO-PTFE composite membranes, and 85% and 105% H3PO4; (b) energy density as a function of cycle number measured at various temperatures with the current density set in the range of 4.5–6 A g−1.224 Adapted from ref. 224. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Structure of LiBOB and LiODFB; (b) TGA traces of LiBF4, LiODFB, and LiBOB, which were recorded during heating at a rate of 10 °C min−1 under a nitrogen flow; (c) Ahrrenius plots of the ionic conductivity of LiBF4, LiODFB, and LiBOB in a 1:1:3 (wt) PC/EC/EMC solvent mixture; (d) high temperature (60 °C) cycling performance of the Li-ion cell with a 1.0 M LiODFB 3:3:4 (wt) PC/EC/EMC electrolyte, which was recorded by charging and discharging at 0.5 mA between 2.5 V and 4.2 V with charging current tapered to 0.05 mA.226 Adapted from ref. 226. Copyright 2006 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Reversible redox reaction of B12F122− and B12F9H32− for overcharge protection of lithium-ion cells; (b) cyclic voltammograms of 10 mM Li2B12F9H3 and Li2B12F12 in 1.2 M LiPF6 in EC/EMC using a Pt/Li/Li three-electrode cell at a scanning rate of 10 mV s−1; (c) discharge capacity as a function of cycle number for graphite/Li1.1[Ni1/3Mn1/3Co1/3]0.9O2 lithium-ion cells cycled between 3.0 V and 4.1 V at a constant current of 0.5 mA (C/3) at 55 °C.233 Adapted from ref. 233. Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) High temperature customized Swagelok cell; (b) charge–discharge curves obtained at high temperature (230 and 250 °C) using molten LiTFSI as electrolyte and molten Li as negative electrode in a modified high temperature Swagelok-type modified cell using metallic grids of 500 and 25 μm. Inset: Charge–discharge curve for LiFePO4 at room temperature using LiPF6 in EC/DMC 1:1 as electrolyte.234 Adapted from ref. 234. Copyright 2007 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 31  
m/z-ratios of the decomposition products of PYR14+ (from the IL PYR14-TFSI) in the ESI-MS chromatogram (a) after storage at room temperature for 16 months with/without electrolyte salts and; (b) after storage at 95C for 16 months; (c) proposed decomposition mechanism of the cation PYR14+.243 Adapted from ref. 243. Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 
ACN	Acetonitrile
AC	Activated carbon
Al	Aluminum
A-BCE	Anionic block copolymer electrolyte
LiBOB	Bis(oxalato)borate
BMI-TFSI	1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis[(trifluoromethyl) sulfonyl]amide
BMMI-TFSI	1-Butyl-2,3-dimethylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide
CDC	Carbide-derived carbon
CAES	Compressed air energy storage
CV	Cyclic voltammetry
COE	Cyclooctene
DFT-B3LYP	Density functional theory, B3LYP hybrid functional
R2O	Dialkylethers
DEC	Diethyl carbonate
DEGDMA	Diethylene glycol dimethacrylate
DSC	Differential scanning calorimetry
DMC	Dimethyl carbonate
DMS	Dimethyl sulphite
EVs	Electric vehicles
EES	Electrical energy storage
EDL	Electrical double layer
EIS	Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
EDX	Energy-dispersive X-ray
EC	Ethylene carbonate
ES	Ethylene sulphite
EMC	Ethylmethyl carbonate
EV-ARC	Extended volume accelerating rate calorimetry
EMI-TFSI	1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide
FESEM	Field emission scanning electron microscopy
FEC	Fluoroethylene carbonate
OPF2OR, OPF(OR)2	Fluorophosphates
OPF2OH, OPF(OH)2	Fluorophosporic acid
FTIR	Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
GITT	Galvanostatic intermittent titration technique
GBL	Gamma-butyrolactone
GC-MS	Gas chromatography mass spectrometry
GPE	Gel polymer electrolyte

T
g
	Glass transition
GCE	Graft copolymer electrolyte
GPEs	Gel polymeric electrolytes
HP/HT	High pressure/high temperature
HR-ESI-MS	High resolution electrospray-ionization mass spectrometry
HTS	High temperature energy storage
HEVs	Hybrid electric vehicles
HF	Hydrogen fluoride
HPG	Hydroxypropyl guar gum
ICA	Incremental capacity analysis
IL	Ionic liquid
IC–MS	Ion chromatography/mass spectrometer
LiBOB	Lithium bisoxalatoborate
LiTFSI	Lithium bistrifluoromethane sulfonimide
Li–CuO	Lithium copper oxide
LiPF6	Lithium hexafluorophosphate
Li–MnO2	Lithium manganese dioxide
LiClO4	Lithium perchlorate
LiPON	Lithium phosphorus oxynitride
Li–FeS	Lithium–iron sulfide
LiFePO4	Lithium iron phosphate
LiNMC	Lithium nickel cobalt manganese oxide; LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2
Li–SO2	Lithium sulfur dioxide
Li–SOCl2	Lithium–thionyl chloride
LiF	Lithium fluoride
LTO	Lithium titanium oxide; Li4Ti5O12
LixC6	Lithiated graphite
LWD	Logging-while-drilling
LTP-HR-MS	Low temperature plasma ambient ionization high-resolution mass spectrometry
MWD	Measurement-while-drilling
PFPE-DMCs	Methyl carbonate-terminated perfluoropolyethers
DMSO2	Molten dimethyl sulfone
MCFC	Molten carbonate fuel cell
PP14-TFSI	
N-Butyl-N-methyl pyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide
PYR13-TFSI	
N-Methyl-N-propylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide
PYR14-TFSI	
N-Methyl-N-butylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide
C4mmor-FSI	
N-Methyl-N-butylmorpholinium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide
PP13-FSI	
N-Methyl-N-propylpiperdinium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide
NCV	Net calorific value
NMR	Nuclear magnetic resonance
PYR1,2O1-TFSI	
N-Methoxyethyl-N-methylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)-imide
DEME-BF4	
N,N-Diethyl-N-methyl-N-(2-methoxyethyl) ammonium tetrafluoroborate
Ni/NiCl	Nickel/nickel chloride
LiODFB	Oxalyldifluoroborate
PC	Propylene carbonate
PEM	Proton exchange membrane
PAFC	Phosphoric acid fuel cell
PAN	Polyacrylonitrile
ABPBI	Poly[2,5-benzimidazole]
PE	Polyethylene
PEO	Polyethylene oxide
PET	Polyethylene terephthalate
PP	Polypropylene
PBI	Poly-[2,20-m-phenylene-5,50-bibenzimidazole]
PS–PEO–PS	Polystyrene–polyethylene glycol–polystyrene
PTFE	Polytetrafluoroethylene
PTFE	Poly(tetrafluoroethylene)
PVDF	Poly(vinylidene fluoride)
PVC	Poly(vinyl chloride)
PFPTFBB	2-(Pentafluorophenyl)-tetrafluoro-1,3,2-benzodioxaborole
OPF3	Phosphorus oxyfluoride
PTPAN	Polytriphenylamine
POEM-g-PDMS	Poly(oxyethylene) methacrylate-g-poly(dimethyl siloxane)
P(STFSILi)-b-PEO-b-P(STFSILi)	Poly(ethylene glycol-co-lithium styrene trifluoromethanesulphonylimide)
H3PO4	Phosphoric acid
PF5	Phosphorus pentafluoride
PMC	Propylmethyl carbonate
PHS	Pump hydro storage
RF	Radio frequency
RGO	Reduced grapheme oxide
LED	Red light-emitting-diode
ROMP	Ring-opening metathesis polymerization
SWNT	Single-walled carbon nanotube
SPE	Solid polymer electrolyte
NaAlCl4	Sodium tetrachloroaluminate
NaFePO4	Sodium iron pyrophosphate
NaVOPO4	Sodium vanadyl(IV) orthophosphate
Na–S	Sodium–sulfur
SOFC	Solid oxide fuel cell
SEI	Solid–electrolyte interphase
SOC	State-of-charge
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
TEA-BF4	Tetraethylammoniumtetrafluoroborate
TPU	Thermoplastic poly (urethane)
XRD	X-ray diffraction
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
ZEBRA	Zeolite battery research Africa project

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
