Face-on orientation of fluorinated polymers conveyed by long alkyl chains: a prerequisite for high photovoltaic performances   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA04127J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA04127J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12038-12045Face-on orientation of fluorinated polymers conveyed by long alkyl chains: a prerequisite for high photovoltaic performances†

        
          
            Olzhas A. 
            Ibraikulov
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Chheng 
            Ngov
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Patricia 
            Chávez
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Ibrahim 
            Bulut
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Benoît 
            Heinrich
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Olivier 
            Boyron
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Kirill L. 
            Gerasimov
          
        
      fg, 
      
        
          
            Dimitri A. 
            Ivanov
          
        
      fgh, 
      
        
          
            Sufal 
            Swaraj
          
        
      hi, 
      
        
          
            Stéphane 
            Méry
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Nicolas 
            Leclerc
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Patrick 
            Lévêque
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Thomas 
            Heiser
          
        
      *a
aLaboratoire ICube, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, UMR 7357, 23 rue du Loess, Strasbourg, 67037, France. E-mail: patrick.leveque@unistra.fr; thomas.heiser@unistra.fr
bNational Laboratory Astana, Nazarbayev University, 53 Kabanbay Batyr Ave., Astana 010000, Kazakhstan
cInstitut de Chimie et Procédés pour l'Energie, l'Environnement et la Santé (ICPEES), Universitéde Strasbourg, CNRS, UMR 7515, 25 rue Becquerel, 67087 Strasbourg, Cedex 02, France. E-mail: leclercn@unistra.fr
dInstitut de Physique et Chimie des Matériaux de Strasbourg (IPCMS), Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, 23 rue du Loess, Strasbourg, 67034, France
eUniversité de Lyon, CPE Lyon, CNRS, UMR 5265, Laboratoire de Chimie Catalyse Polymères et Procédés (C2P2), Bat 308F, 43 Bd du 11 Novembre 1918, 69616 Villeurbanne, France
fMoscow Institute of Physics and Technology (State University), Institutskiy per. 9, Dolgoprudny 141700, Russian Federation
gFaculty of Fundamental Physical and Chemical Engineering, Lomonosov Moscow State University, GSP-1, Leninskie gory 1, Moscow 119991, Russian Federation
hInstitut de Sciences des Matériaux de Mulhouse, CNRS, UMR 7361, 15 rue Jean Starcky, BP 2488, Mulhouse, 68057, France
iSynchrotron SOLEIL, L'Orme des Merisiers, Saint-Aubin-BP 48, F-91192 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
Received 
      4th May 2018
    , Accepted 1st June 2018First published on 4th June 2018AbstractThe recently reported high power conversion efficiencies achieved in fluorinated polymer:fullerene solar cells have been accounted for by the presence of face-on oriented polymer backbones that enable charge transport towards the collecting electrodes. In this work, we demonstrate that, in contrast to the results of a number of reports, the face-on polymer orientation is due to the bulky side chains, rather than to aggregation in solution. This conclusion is supported by a comparative study of polymers having similar conjugated backbones but different number of fluorine atoms and different number and type of alkyl side chains. While the latter are primarily introduced to tune polymer solubility, the present in-depth thin-film morphology investigation shows that increasing the chain bulkiness favors formation of crystalline lamellae with face-on oriented backbones, independently of the degree of fluorination. By contrast, introduction of fluorine atoms is found to substantially enhance the π-stacking interactions that remain invariably strong upon blending of the polymer with fullerene. Our results demonstrate that, for the polymer family under investigation, fluorination and functionalization by bulky alkyl side chains are both needed for reaching power conversion efficiencies above 10%.
Introduction
The performances of organic solar cells have increased continuously over the last decade, making future economically-viable large-scale utilization of this technology ever more likely. The development of highly efficient photovoltaic materials based on fluorinated polymers has contributed significantly to this remarkable progress.1–3 Initially devoted to fine-tune the frontier molecular orbital energy levels of electron-donor polymers,4,5 fluorination of conjugated polymers turned out to yield, rather unexpectedly, additional positive effects. It has indeed been observed that fluorine atoms strengthen intermolecular π-stacking interactions and lead to highly crystalline materials and correspondingly higher charge carrier mobilities.6,7 Also, the domain purity in polymer:fullerene blends appeared to be enhanced upon fluorination, leading to longer charge carrier lifetimes.8 More surprisingly is the fact that fluorinated polymers were often found to self-assemble into crystalline lamellae with both, in-plane oriented (i.e. flat-lying lamellae with edge-on polymers) and/or out-of-plane oriented (i.e. standing lamellae with face-on oriented polymers) domains.3,9 Since charge transport occurs predominantly within the lamellae (either along the π-stacking direction or along the polymer backbones), such a mixed orientational configuration reduces the transport anisotropy and results in high out-of-plane hole mobilities.10 As a consequence, thick polymer layers can then be used to enhance photon harvesting with only minor impact on charge carrier collection, allowing power conversion efficiencies above 10% to be reached.11 Though these favorable properties have been observed so far for many fluorinated polymer systems, the underlying physical mechanisms are still uncertain.3 One lead consists in the temperature-dependent pre-aggregation in solution, which is often observed for fluorinated polymers and is presumably induced by the pronounced π-stacking interactions, as it correlates with the simultaneous occurrence of standing and flat-lying lamellae.11–13 However, the fluorinated polymers also have the particularity to be designed with long and bulky alkyl side chains for device processing, as they are intrinsically less soluble than their non-fluorinated counterparts. This characteristic necessarily influences the morphology and has not been fully addressed yet.
We therefore performed an in-depth study of the structural and opto-electronic properties of a couple of donor–acceptor alternating co-polymers that differ only by the number of fluorine atoms along their conjugated backbone and, in a second part, we compare the morphologies in the thin films of these two polymers with that obtained for other fluorinated and non-fluorinated polymers differing mainly by the solubilizing side chains. By this comprehensive study we aimed to further clarify the relative contributions of fluorine atoms and alkyl chains to the molecular self-assembling properties and to the resulting photovoltaic properties. The conjugated backbones of the investigated polymers are composed of benzo[2,1,3]thiadiazole (Bz) sandwiched between two thiophene (T2) units and a thieno[3,2-b]thiophene (TT) unit and are similar to the backbone of low band-gap polymers that we and others have reported previously (Table 1).14–16 As it will be shown below, the fluorination of the Bz units together with the introduction of bulky branched side chains on the T2 units lead to a dramatic increase in power conversion efficiency (from 3.7%, reported in ref. 15, up to 10.2% measured in the present work). Our results further suggest that the bulky alkyl chains contribute to the observed exceptional performance enhancement by driving the molecules into the mixed face-on/edge-on orientation. This conclusion is in line with previous results obtained on poly(3-alkylthiophene)s (P3AT) and on a series of non-fluorinated thiazolothiazole-based polymers showing an increase of the fraction of face-on orientation with the side chain length and bulkiness.17,18 Our results further reveal that pre-aggregation in solution is not necessary to achieve a mixed face-on/edge-on orientation, in contrast to previous reports on other fluorinated polymers.2,6,19–21 On the other hand, they corroborate earlier results showing that fluorination enhances the polymer face-to-face stacking cohesion and domain purity. Also the charge carrier dynamics are found to differ drastically between fluorinated and non-fluorinated polymers. All these findings demonstrate that both, bulky and long alkyl-chains and enhanced π-stacking interactions provided by the fluorine atom substitution, are essential features for achieving high photovoltaic performances.
Table 1 Molecular structure of the main polymers PF0 and PF2 together with their main chemical and physical properties

















a HOMO measured by cyclic voltammetry (Fig. S1).
b As determined by the absorption onset on UV-visible spectrum in solid-state.
c As determined from UV-visible spectra in solution as a function of the temperature.
d Maximum PCE and average in parenthesis.
e As determined from GIWAXS patterns.






M
w (kg mol−1); Đ
62; 1.4
63; 1.8


HOMO (eV)a
−5.2
−5.4



E
optg (eV)b
1.60
1.64


Aggregation in o-DCB solutionc
None
Below 95 °C


PCE (%)d
1.8 (1.7)
9.8 (9.5)



V
oc (mV)
700
772



J
sc (mA cm−2)
5.6
17.8


FF (%)
47
71


Device thickness (nm)
220 ± 10
265 ± 5


Pure polymers

μ
OFETh (cm2 V s−1)
(2.0 ± 1.0) × 10−4
(1.2 ± 0.2) × 10−2



μ
SCLCh (cm2 V s−1)
(2.7 ± 0.8) × 10−4
(8.5 ± 0.5) × 10−3


Polymer:PCBM blends (1:1.5)

μ
OFETh (cm2 V s−1)
(4.5 ± 2.0) × 10−5
(8.7 ± 1.3) × 10−3



μ
SCLCh (cm2 V s−1)
(5.7 ± 0.7) × 10−5
(3.2 ± 0.4) × 10−3


Polymer chain orientatione
Mixed (face-on + edge-on)




Results and discussion
The two main polymers under investigation in the present work have the chemical structure depicted in Table 1. Table 1 summarizes also their main chemical and physical parameters. Details on the polymer synthesis and on the polymer characterization procedures are described in the ESI.† One can notice that several batches of the fluorinated polymer (PF2) exhibiting variable molar mass have been synthesized (Table S1†), in order to evaluate the influence of this key parameter on the self-assembling properties and photovoltaic performances of fluorinated polymers. However, unless otherwise stated, PF2 refers to a fluorinated polymer exhibiting a weight average molar mass (Mw) of 63 kg mol−1 (Đ = 1.8), allowing a direct comparison with the non-fluorinated PF0 polymer exhibiting a weight average molar mass (Mw) of 62 kg mol−1 (Đ = 1.4). For the main polymers PF0 and PF2, their differences in optical properties as well as their respective propensity to form aggregates in solution are clearly seen from their UV-vis absorption profiles recorded in diluted o-DCB solutions at various temperatures (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Absorption spectra of PF0 (left) and PF2 (right) in thin films and in o-DCB solution (polymer concentration of 0.01 mg mL−1) vs. temperature (recorded during the heating up). 
At all temperatures, the PF0 spectra contain two broad absorption peaks at around 385 and 555 nm, which are most likely due to π–π* and intra-molecular charge transfer transitions, respectively as often observed in the literature for donor–acceptor alternating copolymers.22 Both bands exhibit a weak hypsochromic shift upon rising the temperature from 25 °C to 95 °C (≈15 and ≈ 30 nm for the high and low energy peaks, respectively), that can be attributed to conformational disorder increasing with temperature.23 The PF2 absorption spectrum in solution at 95 °C differs from the PF0 spectrum at the same temperature only by a minor 8 nm blue-shift. On the other hand, with decreasing temperature, three new absorption bands appear gradually, whereas the peaks observed at 95 °C decrease in amplitude. Note that the spectral evolution is reversible with temperature. The peak positions of the new absorption bands (440, 636 and 695 nm) at room temperature match almost perfectly the absorption peaks in thin films (green line in Fig. 1) and have been studied in details elsewhere.24 These results are in-line with previous reports on other fluorinated polymers, where this behavior was attributed to temperature-dependent aggregation in solution.2,6,19–21 The marked difference in the absorption spectra between PF0 and PF2 in room temperature solutions is preserved even at higher concentrations (above 10 mg mL−1) meaning that PF0 does not undergo aggregation in concentrated solutions used for the elaboration of bulk heterojunction solar cells, whereas PF2 forms aggregates from room temperature to 85 °C, which are dissociated at 95 °C.
The thin film UV-vis absorption spectra of both polymers are rather comparable except for the narrower and more structured low energy band of PF2 (see Fig. S2†). The corresponding optical band-gap equals approximately 1.60 eV and 1.64 eV for PF0 and PF2, respectively, close to the optimum value for the photovoltaic energy conversion.25,26 The better-defined vibronic features of PF2 could be explained by a more pronounced backbone planarity, which would then induce a more cohesive stacking in the solid state with respect to the non-fluorinated analogue.27 Accordingly, the reinforced cohesion of the self-assembling is evidenced by a substantial melting temperature rise revealed by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements with the melting transition of PF2 lying 84 °C above the one of PF0 (Fig. S4†).
Cyclic voltammetry has been used to evaluate frontier molecular orbitals energy (Fig. S1†). One notices that, in agreement with usual trends,3 the HOMO level of the fluorinated polymer PF2 is found to be 0.2 eV deeper than the one of its non-fluorinated counterpart, PF0. As the expected open-circuit voltage (Voc) in BHJ solar cells is proportional to the difference between the HOMO of the electron-donor and the LUMO of PC71BM minus an empirically determined 0.3 V, a higher Voc is expected from PF2:PC71BM-based blends.28
Both PF2 and PF0 polymers were blended with PC71BM electron acceptor (optimal mass polymer:PC71BM ratio of 1:1.5) to form the active layer of bulk heterojunction solar cells. The blends were processed from hot o-DCB solutions (≈100 °C, i.e. at a temperature at which none polymer solution shows aggregation) without additive and deposited by spin-coating on a substrate previously heated at the same temperature. No post-deposition treatment was applied. Details about the optimum processing conditions and device structure are given in the ESI.† The current density–voltage curves and external quantum efficiencies (EQE) of both devices are shown in Fig. 2. The corresponding photovoltaic parameters of solar cells are summarized in Table 1. For this comparative study, the active layer thickness was optimized for the fluorinated blend and kept similar for the PF0 device. Additional photovoltaic data obtained on non-fluorinated polymer devices after thickness optimization are given in the ESI (Table S2†). A maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 9.8% (average PCE of 9.5%) has been reached with PF2, with a high short-circuit current (Jsc) of 17.8 mA cm−2 and fill factor (FF) of ≈71%. The EQE value is close to 80% and constant over a broad range of wavelengths. Such high FF and Jsc values are signatures of highly efficient charge generation and transport. Interestingly, with a higher molar mass fluorinated polymer (Mw of 103 kg mol−1 and Đ of 2.3), a PCE of 10.2% was measured, with only a slightly higher Voc value (808 mV), all the other photovoltaic parameters being unchanged. On the other hand, the non-fluorinated polymer devices with similar thickness reached only a PCE of 1.8%, with a substantially lower Jsc (5.6 mA cm−2) and FF (≈47%). The 100 mV lower open-circuit voltage (Voc) is in line with the lower ionization potential of PF0.29 The non-fluorinated device exhibits a pronounced reverse bias dependence of the photocurrent suggesting that charge transport and charge collection are less efficient than in PF2 devices.
 Fig. 2  (a) (J–V) measurements for PF0 (triangles) and PF2 (circles) typical devices in the dark (closed symbols) and under standard AM1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination (open symbols) and (b) external quantum efficiency for PF0 (triangles) and PF2 (circles) devices. 
The impact of the fluorination on the OPV performances is remarkable and in complete agreement with previous studies using comparable conjugated backbones with or without fluorine atoms.
Following the recurrent statement that pre-aggregation of fluorinated-polymers is responsible for the beneficial mixed face-on/edge-on orientation, we investigated thin-film morphology and polymer orientation by using grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS). Thin films were obtained by spin-coating hot (≈100 °C) polymer solutions (5 mg mL−1) onto a heated substrate (≈100 °C). A silicon wafer was used as substrate and the organic layers were deposited on top of a thin (≈7 nm) polyethylenimine ethoxylated (PEIE) interfacial layer, following the same procedure as for solar cells elaboration. More details on the film preparation can be found in the ESI.† As illustrated in Fig. 3a and c, the 2D patterns obtained on PF0 and PF2 pristine films (radial profiles are depicted in Fig. S5†) display several (h00) reflections from a lamellar periodicity (d) that corresponds to (i) the alternation of layers of stacked polymer backbones and of aliphatic chains (d = 22.6 Å for PF2 and 23.0 Å for PF0), (ii) a broad and intense scattering ring from lateral distances between molten chains (maximum around 4.5 Å) and (iii) a half-broad scattering signal (hπ) from π–π stacking distances of polymer backbones (hπ = 3.53 Å for PF2 and 3.57 Å for PF0, correlation lengths from Scherrer formula: ξ = 4 nm for both patterns). The molecular organizations of non-fluorinated and fluorinated polymers appear thus very similar, the only significant difference between patterns being the more pronounced hπ scattering signal and the more numerous (h00) reflections in presence of fluorine. As a matter of fact, the geometry of the self-organization is mainly determined by the repeat unit shape and by the nanosegregation of backbones and aliphatic chains, which are hardly influenced by the presence of the substituents on the benzothiadiazole unit. The reference crystal structures30 and the comparison of melting temperatures however strongly suggest that fluorine substituents promote a cohesive face-to-face stacking (see above), which would explain the enhancement of the hπ scattering through the better superposition of backbones. As a corollary, the interfaces between layers of well-aligned backbones and aliphatic chains would become sharper and enhance the harmonics of the lamellar periodicity, in consistency with the additional (h00) reflections observed in the pattern. Importantly, for both PF0 and PF2, standing and in-plane lamellar orientations can be clearly distinguished, i.e. the polymers adopt mixed face-on/edge-on orientations independently of the presence of fluorine substituents. This important result corroborates well a previous study by Salammal et al. showing, in a P3AT series, that the proportion of face-on oriented nanocrystals increases with the number of carbon atoms in the side chain.17 Further, this mixed orientation does not depend on the weight average molar mass of PF2, as similar morphologies are obtained when using batches with different molar mass (see Fig. S6†), pointing out that the impact of molar mass on the pure polymer orientation is negligible in our case. This behavior is not surprising since the molecular lengths of PF2 are probably well beyond the polymer persistence length lp (for instance, for poly(3-hexylthiophene), lp has been estimated to about 8 repeat units).31
 Fig. 3  GIWAXS patterns of (a) pure PF0 and (b) PF0:PC71BM at (1:1.5) ratio. GIWAXS patterns of (c) pure PF2 and (d) PF2:PC71BM at (1:1.5) ratio. Two major populations of domain orientation can be distinguished, namely red (h00) and hπ spots for face-on, and blue (h00) and hπ spots for edge-on. 
At this stage of the study, we can clearly exclude the pre-aggregation behavior of the fluorinated polymer as the reason for a more favorable polymer chain face-on orientation in thin-films. Indeed, both polymers exhibit a similar mixed orientation while in dilute or dense solution, the non-fluorinated polymer shows no sign of pre-aggregation in solution but its fluorinated counterpart shows a strongly temperature dependent UV-visible spectrum. However, one can notice that the backbone fluorination induces a higher solid-state cohesion, probably due to weak halogen bonds.3,27,32
This higher cohesion probably affects the morphology of the blend with PC71BM, used for OPV devices. An eventual effect of the cohesion strength was hence addressed through GIWAXS measurements on PF0:PC71BM and PF2:PC71BM blends with a (1:1.5) weight ratio as illustrated in Fig. 3b and d (and (1:2) weight ratio in Fig. S7 and S8†). No preferential orientation change was observed, but the lamellar and π-stacking peaks of the PF0:PC71BM blends are rapidly broadened and become less aligned with increasing fullerene content, revealing enhanced structural disorder. On the opposite, the diffraction signals of PF2 lamellae, as shown in Fig. 3c and d are barely affected by the presence of PC71BM. These observations indicate a more cohesive π-stacking association for the fluorinated backbones and correlate well with UV-vis absorption and DSC.
The likely consequence is a lower miscibility of the fluorinated polymer with PC71BM, which could finally affect the charge transport and ultimately the OPV performances. In order to evaluate this difference in miscibility the thin film composition at the nanoscale for both polymers blended with PC71BM was investigated by using scanning transmission X-ray microscopy (STXM). The STXM data obtained on both, pure materials and blends are given in Fig. S10.† While the two pure polymer spectra show as expected very similar features, the behavior of the two polymers in blends are distinctly different. Singular value decomposition of STXM energy stacks obtained using the X-ray absorption spectra of the reference films show a significantly higher contrast for the fluorinated polymer in blend, pointing out a more pronounced phase separation in the case of PF2:PC71BM as compared to PF0:PC71BM. These results suggest a lower polymer:fullerene intermixing in PF2:PC71BM blends. It is likely that the stronger lamellar cohesion of the fluorinated polymers reduces the diffusivity and solubility of PC71BM in the polymer domains and that this specific behavior will lead to different recombination mechanisms for both blends.
Therefore, we investigated the charge carrier dynamics by measuring the solar cell's static and dynamic responses under various illumination conditions. The Jsc – light intensity (Pin) and Voc–Pin curves are given in Fig. S11.† The Jsc–Pin curves follow a power law dependence with a similar exponent close to 1 for both polymers, suggesting a weak contribution of bimolecular recombination in short circuit conditions.33 On the other hand, the Voc–Pin curves are markedly different for both polymers. For the fluorinated device, the Voc dependence as a function of light intensity follows the expected behavior when bimolecular recombination dominates over the whole light-intensity range.34 For the non-fluorinated device instead the bimolecular recombination dominates at the highest light intensity while trap-limited recombination dominates at light intensities lower than 10 mW cm−2. This difference in static response is confirmed by transient photo-voltage (TPV) and charge extraction (CE) measurements (see TPV-CE section in ESI†) highlighting, for the PF0 device, a change in the recombination mechanism with light intensity. The light-intensity onset for the change in recombination mechanism corresponds to a photo-generated charge concentration (N) of 1016 cm−3 in PF0:PC71BM blends. Therefore, for PF0, the recombination mechanism changes from trap-limited to bimolecular recombination when N becomes significantly larger than the trap density. If we further assume that the recombination centers are associated to residual PC71BM molecules in the polymer domains, we may estimate the latter concentration to be at least of the order of 1016 cm−3 in the non-fluorinated polymer domains. It is likely that the lower miscibility of the fluorinated polymer PF2, observed by STXM, prevents the trap-assisted recombination mechanism. Further and even more importantly, the charge-carrier lifetime is at least one order of magnitude lower in PF0 blends than in PF2 blends, in line with the much higher Jsc, FF and finally PCE measured for the fluorinated polymer solar-cells.
Charge transport has been reported to be highly efficient in fluorinated polymer solar cells.11,27,35 Investigating the hole mobility in PF2 and PF0 and in blends with PC71BM, allows us to probe the respective contributions of fluorine atoms and alkyl chains to this remarkable property. Since the polymer orientation at the substrate interface should have a dramatic impact on charge transport and in particular on its anisotropy, it is essential to investigate the hole mobility along both, in-plane and out-of-plane directions. This can be done by using organic field-effect transistors (OFET) for studying in-plane transport and space-charge limited current (SCLC) diodes for out-of-plane transport.10,36 Detailed output and transfer characteristics of OFETs and (J–V) curves measured on SCLC devices made of PF2 and PF0 polymers can be found in Fig. S13 and 14,† respectively. The average field-effect (μFET) and SCLC (μSCLC) mobility values are summarized in Table 1. Both methods show that in-plane and out-of-plane mobilities are more than an order of magnitude higher in the fluorinated polymer. This increase in charge-carrier mobility for PF2 is very likely an outcome of the more cohesive face-to-face stacking of PF2 compared to its non-fluorinated counterpart. However, one can notice that both polymers exhibit rather isotropic charge transport properties, in-line with the similar mixed face-on/edge-on orientation measured independently of the presence of fluorine substituents. On the other hand, when evaluating the hole transport in polymer:fullerene ((1:1.5) weight ratio) thin films, different tendencies could be observed for both polymers (Table 1 and Fig. S14†). While the hole mobility is barely affected when blended with PC71BM for PF2, it drops significantly for PF0 in the presence of PC71BM. This is in agreement with the GIWAXS patterns in blend, showing that the structural disorder of PF0 increases considerably upon blending, while it remains comparable for the fluorinated polymer.
To sum up comparative results on both polymers, we can say that they have a band-gap close to the optimal value for photoconversion. The fluorinated polymer presents, as expected, slightly deeper frontier energy levels. However, in blends with PC71BM, they exhibit very distinctive performances with a high PCE of approximately 10% recorded for PF2 against less than 2% using PF0 in identical conditions. We clearly demonstrated that the main difference between PF0 and PF2 polymers is the ability of the fluorinated polymer to create weak halogen bonds that strengthen the general solid-state cohesion. In particular, the PF2 π-stacking remains strong enough even after blending with PC71BM, while the structural disorder of PF0 rapidly increases in blends. Accordingly, the hole mobility for PF0 is significantly lower than for PF2 and it drops quickly after blending, while the hole mobility measured for the PF2 polymer with an equivalent molar mass stays comparable in the pure polymer and in the blend. Analysis by STXM along with measurements of the solar cell's static and dynamic responses under various illumination conditions, allowed us to demonstrate a higher degree of intermixing of the polymer and fullerene domains for PF0 than for PF2. The consequence is the observation of different charge recombination mechanism for both polymers and a much lower charge-carrier lifetime in the non-fluorinated polymer blend. All these results are in line with previously published studies on state-of-the-art fluorinated polymers.37
However, contrary to the generally admitted hypothesis, both non-fluorinated and fluorinated polymers we studied exhibit a similar mixed face-on/edge-on polymer chain orientation in thin-films, independently of pre-aggregation in solution. In consequence, in our series of polymers, the fluorination is not the source of the favorable mixed orientation responsible of the high out-of-plane charge transport properties. In recent papers, Salammal et al. and Osaka et al. clearly demonstrated that an increase in the side chain length in a P3AT polymer series and in a non-fluorinated moderate band-gap polymer series, respectively, causes an increase in the face-on oriented nanocrystals' density in the studied thin-films.17,18 Accordingly, we may formulate the hypothesis that one of the chemical parameters leading to a favorable mixed orientation in our series of fluorinated polymers is not the backbone fluorination, but rather the increase in the side chain length and bulkiness required to keep a sufficient solubility in order to process the polymer from solution.
In order to check experimentally the pertinence of this hypothesis, we studied the GIWAXS patterns and the absorption spectra in solution as a function of the temperature of several fluorinated and non-fluorinated polymers based on conjugated backbones similar to PF0 and PF2 (see Table 2).
Table 2 Molecular structure of the supplementary polymers studied in the present work together with their UV-visible spectra in solution as a function of temperature and their orientation in solid-state






UV-vis in o-DCB solutiona
Orientationb





a In o-DCB solution (polymer concentration of 0.01 mg mL−1) vs. temperature (recorded during the heating up), TAg. (inset) is the temperature where every signature of aggregation in solution disappears.
b As determined from GIWAXS patterns of pure polymer films.











Edge-on












Edge-on












Edge-on












Edge-on












Mixed face-on/edge-on




PF0-R8, already studied by our group a few years ago, is identical to PF0 except that it bears shorter 2-ethylhexyl side chains.14 PF0-T+R8, PF1-T+R8, PF2-T+R8 and PF2-T+L12R20, have all the same backbone, including four alkylated thiophenes in the repeating unit instead of only two in PF0 and PF2. They differ from each other either by the number of fluorinated atoms along the conjugated backbone and/or by the length and bulkiness of the side chains. Table 2 summarized briefly for each polymer the chemical structure, the UV-visible spectra in solution as a function of temperature (with as an inset the temperature (TAg.) above which no sign of pre-aggregation is seen in the spectra) and the polymer orientation on the substrate in solid-state, as determined on GIWAXS patterns.
In order to simplify reading of this manuscript, GIWAXS patterns and related analysis are reported in the ESI (Fig. S9†). Only the main message regarding the orientation of the polymer chain on the substrate plane has been reported in Table 2. The UV-visible spectra as function of the temperature, clearly demonstrate that pre-aggregation is visible in this series of polymers with or without fluorine atoms on the conjugated backbone. However, depending on the side-chains solvation ability and on the fluorine composition, the pre-aggregation holds in different temperature ranges. On the one hand, increasing the side-chains solvation ability (by increasing the number of alkyl groups or else their length and bulkiness) is found to decrease TAg.. On the other hand, increasing the number of fluorine atoms along the conjugated backbone in a series of polymers leads to a TAg. increase, probably due to the stronger cohesion due to the halogen bonds. However, the most interesting conclusion appears when comparing this pre-aggregation behavior with the polymer chain orientation as determined from the GIWAXS patterns. Indeed, independently on the fluorination degree and on the stability of the aggregates in solution, the use of short ethyl-hexyl side chains leads exclusively to a pure edge-on orientation of the polymer chains on the substrate. A mixed face-on/edge-on orientation is only observed for PF2-T+L12R20, bearing long chains, as both main polymers PF2 and PF0.
When compiling all these results, it appears that, for our polymer series, there is a threshold in the length and bulkiness of the grafted alkyl-chains in order to obtain a mixed edge-on/face-on, with a limited influence of the fluorination degree. Investigations are under way to check and understand if this phenomenon can be generalized to other types of conjugated polymers and alkyl side-chains.
Conclusions
The results described above give strong experimental evidence that the alkyl chains and the fluorine substituents are contributing in a complementary way to the high photovoltaic power conversion efficiencies of our fluorinated polymer devices. As a matter of fact, the GIWAXS data, collected from several conjugated polymers, suggest that, in our series of polymers, bulky alkyl chains are necessary and sufficient to induce the formation of standing crystalline lamellae (i.e. flat-on polymer backbone orientation), which assist out-of-plane charge transport, whatever the eventual presence of fluorine on the backbone and of pre-aggregation in solution. This unexpected effect of side-chain nature on morphology is confirmed, but not understood at the present stage; these aspects will be scrutinized in specifically dedicated work. The mixed lamellar morphology is however not enough to achieve high power conversion efficiencies as illustrated by the low performances of the devices based on our non-fluorinated polymers (PF0) with bulky side chains. Fluorination improves indeed dramatically the charge transport and collection in bulk heterojunctions. The UV-vis spectroscopy and GIWAXS data obtained on pure polymer films and on polymer:fullerene blends consistently point towards a superior face-to-face stacking cohesion in the presence of fluorine substituents. This in turn suggests that the correspondingly more resilient lamellae enhance intra-lamellar charge transport and give rise to the observed higher hole mobility in bulk heterojunction devices. Furthermore, the lower polymer:fullerene intermixing revealed by STXM on the fluorinated blend corroborates this conclusion. It is likely that the additional intermolecular coupling induced by the fluorine substituents lowers the PC71BM solubility and diffusivity in the polymer crystalline domains, and leads to the observed absence of trap-assisted charge recombination in the fluorinated devices. In brief, our results show that the fluorine substituents and alkyl chains of our polymers have a synergistic impact on the polymer:fullerene blend morphology which translates into improved electronic and photovoltaic properties.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work has received funding from INTERREG Upper Rhine (European Regional Development Fund) and the Ministries for Research of Baden-Württemberg, Rheinland-Pfalz and from the Region Grand Est in the framework of the Science Offensive Upper Rhine program and the PROOF project. We also acknowledge Total E&P Kazakhstan and National Laboratory Astana for partial financial support. We thank Pohang Accelerator Laboratory (PAL) for giving us the opportunity to perform the GIWAXS measurements, MEST and POSTECH for supporting these experiments, Dr Hyungju Ahn for adjustment and help, and other colleagues from the 9A USAXS beamline for assistance. GIWAXS measurements were supported by Leading Foreign Research Institute Recruitment Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (NRF-2010-00453). The authors acknowledge the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation (contract No 14.616.21.0072 from 28 July 2016 (RFMEFI61616X0072)) for financial support. The authors are grateful to O. Konovalov for excellent technical support during measurements at the ID10 beamline of the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF) in Grenoble (France). We acknowledge SOLEIL for the STXM measurements performed at the HERMES beamline. Dr L. Biniek is acknowledged for her help in UV-visible spectra measurements in solution as a function of temperature. Dr M. Brinkmann is acknowledged for his valuable comments on the manuscript.
Notes and references
J.-D. Chen, C. Cui, Y.-Q. Li, L. Zhou, Q.-D. Ou, C. Li, Y. Li and J.-X. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 27, 1035 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, K. Jiang, G. Yang, J. Y. L. Lai, T. Ma, J. Zhao, W. Ma and H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13094 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Leclerc, P. Chávez, O. Ibraikulov, T. Heiser and P. Lévêque, Polymers, 2016, 8, 11 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, D. Feng, Y. Wu, S.-T. Tsai, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7792 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, J. Zhao, Z. Li, C. Mu, W. Ma, H. Hu, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade and H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5293 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yang, J. R. Tumbleston, H. Zhou, H. Ade and W. You, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 316 Search PubMed .
A. C. Stuart, J. R. Tumbleston, H. Zhou, W. Li, S. Liu, H. Ade and W. You, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1806 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Jo, J. W. Jung, E. H. Jung, H. Ahn, T. J. Shin and W. H. Jo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2427 Search PubMed .
O. A. Ibraikulov, R. Bechara, P. Chávez, I. Bulut, D. Tastanbekov, N. Leclerc, A. Hebraud, B. Heinrich, S. Berson, N. Lemaitre, C. L. Chochos, P. Lévêque and T. Heiser, Org. Electron., 2015, 23, 171 CrossRef .
T. L. Nguyen, H. Choi, S. J. Ko, M. A. Uddin, B. Walker, S. Yum, J. E. Jeong, M. H. Yun, T. J. Shin, S. Hwang, J. Y. Kim and H. Y. Woo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3040 Search PubMed .
W. Li, S. Albrecht, L. Yang, S. Roland, J. R. Tumbleston, T. McAfee, L. Yan, M. A. Kelly, H. Ade, D. Neher and W. You, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15566 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Jung, F. Liu, T. P. Russell and W. H. Jo, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7462 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Biniek, S. Fall, C. L. Chochos, D. V. Anokhin, D. A. Ivanov, N. Leclerc, P. Lévêque and T. Heiser, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 9779 CrossRef .
L. Biniek, S. Fall, C. L. Chochos, N. Leclerc, P. Lévêque and T. Heiser, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 114 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, Y. Qin, M. A. Uddin, B. Jang, W. Zhao, D. Liu, H. Y. Woo and J. Hou, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 2993 CrossRef .
S. T. Salammal, E. Mikayelyan, S. Grigorian, U. Pietsch, N. Koenen, U. Scherf, N. Kayunkid and M. Brinkmann, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 5585 CrossRef .
I. Osaka, M. Saito, T. Koganezawa and K. Takimiya, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 331 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, P. Cai, J. Chen, X. Liu, L. Zhang, L. Lan, J. Peng, Y. Ma and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2586 CrossRef PubMed .
I.-B. Kim, S.-Y. Jang, Y.-A. Kim, R. Kang, I.-S. Kim, D.-K. Ko and D.-Y. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 24011 Search PubMed .
M. Li, C. An, T. Marszalek, M. Baumgarten, H. Yan, K. Müllen and W. Pisula, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9430 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Beljonne, G. Pourtois, C. Silva, E. Hennebicq, L. M. Herz, R. H. Friend, G. D. Scholes, S. Setayesh, K. Müllen and J. L. Bredas, PNAS, 2002, 99, 10982 CrossRef PubMed ; S. Roquet, A. Cravino, P. Leriche, O. Alévêque, P. Frère and J. Roncali, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3459 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Faied, M. Frechette, M. Ranger, L. Mazerolle, I. Levesque, M. Leclerc, T.-A. Chen and R. D. Rieke, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 1390 CrossRef .
Y. Zhong, L. Biniek, N. Leclerc, S. Férry and M. Brinkmann, Macromolecules, 2018 DOI:10.1021/acs.macromol.8b00378 .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510 CrossRef .
R. A. J. Janssen and J. Nelson, Adv. Mater., 2012, 25, 1847 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Fei, P. Boufflet, S. Wood, J. Wade, J. Moriarty, E. Gann, E. L. Ratcliff, C. R. McNeill, H. Sirringhaus, J.-S. Kim and M. Heeney, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6866 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789 CrossRef .
M. C. Scharber, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1994 CrossRef PubMed .
C. B. Nielsen, A. J. P. White and I. McCulloch, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 5045 CrossRef PubMed .
B. McCulloch, V. Ho, M. Hoarfrost, C. Stanley, C. Do, W. T. Heller and R. A. Segalman, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 1899 CrossRef .
G. Cavallo, P. Metrangolo, R. Milani, T. Pilati, A. Priimägi, G. Resnati and G. Terraneo, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 2478 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Proctor, M. Kuik and T.-Q. Nguyen, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1941 CrossRef .
L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi, R. Ramaker and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 123509 CrossRef .
M. A. Uddin, T. H. Lee, S. Xu, S. Y. Park, T. Kim, S. Song, T. L. Nguyen, S.-J. Ko, S. Hwang, J. Y. Kim and H. Y. Woo, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5997 CrossRef .
S. Fall, L. Biniek, Y. Odarchenko, D. V. Anokhin, G. de Tournadre, P. Lévêque, N. Leclerc, D. A. Ivanov, O. Simonetti, L. Giraudet and T. Heiser, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 286 RSC .
H. J. Son, W. Wang, T. Xu, Y. Liang, Y. Wu, G. Li and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1885 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthesis of the polymers, experimental techniques and characterization data cyclic voltammetry, UV-visible spectroscopy, differential scanning calorimetry, Grazing Incidence Wide Angle X-ray Scattering, Scanning Transmission X-ray Microscopy, solar cells elaboration and characterization, transient photovoltage and charge extraction, organic field-effect transistors and space-charge limited current devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta04127jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:



M
w (kg mol−1); Đ	62; 1.4	63; 1.8
HOMO (eV)a	−5.2	−5.4

E
optg (eV)b	1.60	1.64
Aggregation in o-DCB solutionc	None	Below 95 °C
PCE (%)d	1.8 (1.7)	9.8 (9.5)

V
oc (mV)	700	772

J
sc (mA cm−2)	5.6	17.8
FF (%)	47	71
Device thickness (nm)	220 ± 10	265 ± 5
Pure polymers	
μ
OFETh (cm2 V s−1)	(2.0 ± 1.0) × 10−4	(1.2 ± 0.2) × 10−2

μ
SCLCh (cm2 V s−1)	(2.7 ± 0.8) × 10−4	(8.5 ± 0.5) × 10−3
Polymer:PCBM blends (1:1.5)	
μ
OFETh (cm2 V s−1)	(4.5 ± 2.0) × 10−5	(8.7 ± 1.3) × 10−3

μ
SCLCh (cm2 V s−1)	(5.7 ± 0.7) × 10−5	(3.2 ± 0.4) × 10−3
Polymer chain orientatione	Mixed (face-on + edge-on)

 	Fig. 1  Absorption spectra of PF0 (left) and PF2 (right) in thin films and in o-DCB solution (polymer concentration of 0.01 mg mL−1) vs. temperature (recorded during the heating up).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) (J–V) measurements for PF0 (triangles) and PF2 (circles) typical devices in the dark (closed symbols) and under standard AM1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination (open symbols) and (b) external quantum efficiency for PF0 (triangles) and PF2 (circles) devices.	 

 	Fig. 3  GIWAXS patterns of (a) pure PF0 and (b) PF0:PC71BM at (1:1.5) ratio. GIWAXS patterns of (c) pure PF2 and (d) PF2:PC71BM at (1:1.5) ratio. Two major populations of domain orientation can be distinguished, namely red (h00) and hπ spots for face-on, and blue (h00) and hπ spots for edge-on.	 




	

	Edge-on




	

	Edge-on




	

	Edge-on




	

	Edge-on




	

	Mixed face-on/edge-on
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthesis of the polymers, experimental techniques and characterization data cyclic voltammetry, UV-visible spectroscopy, differential scanning calorimetry, Grazing Incidence Wide Angle X-ray Scattering, Scanning Transmission X-ray Microscopy, solar cells elaboration and characterization, transient photovoltage and charge extraction, organic field-effect transistors and space-charge limited current devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta04127j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
