Viologen-based electrochromic materials and devices  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC00416E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC00416E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 4622-4637Viologen-based electrochromic materials and devices

        
          
            Kanagaraj 
            Madasamy
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            David 
            Velayutham
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Vembu 
            Suryanarayanan
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Murugavel 
            Kathiresan
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Kuo-Chuan 
            Ho
          
          
        
      c
aCSIR – Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi – 630003, Tamil Nadu, India. E-mail: kathiresan@cecri.res.in
bAcSIR – Academy of Scientific & Innovative Research, India
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
Received 
      23rd January 2019
    , Accepted 21st March 2019First published on 21st March 2019AbstractConsiderable interest is raised by organic materials owing to their exceptional performance in electronic and optoelectronic applications. Among these, electrochromic materials (EC) that can be switched between a distinct color and a bleached state exhibiting high contrast, multicolor and improved long-term stability are attractive in the fabrication of electrochromic devices (ECDs). Ionic materials, in particular, have received persistent attention owing to their tunable optical and electronic properties. 4,4′-Bipyridinium salts, commonly called viologens (V2+), are a well-recognized class of electrochromic materials that exhibit three reversible redox states, namely, V2+ (dication, pale yellow colored/colorless) ↔ V+˙ (radical cation, violet/blue/green) ↔ V0 (neutral, colorless). The electrochromic properties of these materials can be modulated by varying the nitrogen substituents on the pyridyl ‘N’; also, besides this, varying the counter ions with specific functionalities has been shown to enhance the electrochromic behavior, such as switching time, cycling stability and device performance. Although ECDs based on viologens are well regarded for their low operational voltages, they exhibit certain disadvantages such as low cycle life and poor efficiency of the device in the long term. Extensive efforts have been made to fine tune the EC properties of viologens, either through alteration or by adding suitable electrochromic counter electrode materials, which includes the incorporation of conducting polymers in the device set-up and/or the addition of complementary redox species. Optimization of the device parameters has shown that the addition of such external agents has a positive effect on the overall device performance. This review describes recent developments in the synthesis of viologen-based electrochromes with co-redox species and their ECD performance.
Kanagaraj Madasamy
Kanagaraj Madasamy graduated from the University of Madras with both Bachelor's and Master's degrees, and is currently doing a PhD at CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi, India, under the guidance of Dr Velayutham and co-guidance of Dr M. Kathiresan. His research interests include the synthesis of organic compounds and metal organic frameworks, and supramolecular chemistry. He is currently working on viologen-based supramolecular self-assemblies.
David Velayutham
Dr David Velayutham graduated from Madurai Kamaraj University with both Bachelor's (1982) and Master's degrees (1984). He joined the CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute (CSIR-CECRI) as a Junior Scientist in 1987 and received his PhD from Alagappa University, Karaikudi, India, in 1993. He then moved to the University of Duisburg, Germany as a Post-Doctoral Fellow (1994) for 18 months, after which he resumed his duties at CSIR-CECRI. He is currently working as a Chief Scientist in the Electro Organic Division, CSIR-CECRI, Karaikudi, TamilNadu, India. His current research interests include electro-organic synthesis, electrochemical fluorination and the synthesis of ionic liquids for electrochemical applications, including super capacitors and lithium ion batteries.
Vembu Suryanarayanan
Dr Vembu Suryanarayanan, received his BSc and MSc degrees from the Department of Chemistry, Bharathidasan University, Trichy, India, in 1990 and 1992, respectively. He received his PhD (Electrochemical Fluorination) from Alagappa University, Karaikudi, India, in 1998. He completed his postdoctoral studies at the National Taiwan University, Taiwan, and Utsunomiya University, Japan, from 2003 to 2006. He has published about 78 papers in peer-reviewed journals and contributed a chapter to Diamond Electrochemistry (ed. A. Fujishima, et al., Elsevier, 2005). Currently, he is working as a Principal Scientist in the Electro Organic Division, CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi, India. His research interests include the synthesis of novel ionic liquids as well as their applications in various electrochemical devices, and nanomaterial composites for electrochemical sensing.
Murugavel Kathiresan
Dr Murugavel Kathiresan graduated from the University of Madras with both Bachelor's (2004) and Master's degrees (2006), and received his PhD from the University of Osnabrück, Germany, in 2010 under the guidance of Prof. Lorenz Walder. He then moved to the University of Basel, Switzerland, to conduct his postdoctoral research with Prof. Marcel Mayor. He was awarded the DST-INSPIRE Faculty award in December 2013. From March 2014 to April 2017, he worked as a DST-INSPIRE faculty member at the Electro Organic Division, CSIR-Central Electro Chemical Research Institute, Karaikudi, India. Since April 2017, he has been working as a Scientist in the same department. His current research interests include viologen-based supramolecular chemistry, along with the investigation of their applications towards photophysical and biological applications, electro-organic synthesis, electrochemical CO2 reduction and conversion to useful organics, metal organic frameworks and porous organic polymers for energy-related applications.
Kuo-Chuan Ho
Dr Kuo-Chuan Ho received his Bachelor's and Master's degrees from the Department of Chemical Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan, in 1978 and 1980, respectively. He received his PhD in Chemical Engineering from the University of Rochester, USA, in 1986. Currently, he is a Distinguished Professor jointly appointed by the Department of Chemical Engineering and Institute of Polymer Science and Engineering at the National Taiwan University. His research interests mainly encompass applications of chemically modified electrodes to sensing and electro-optical devices, including electrochromic devices and dye-sensitized solar cells.
1. Introduction
Materials that tend to change their color reversibly upon electrochemical stimulus are called electrochromic materials and this phenomenon is called electrochromism.1,2 These materials can be utilized in electrochromic devices (ECDs) that act as energy-saving smart windows, anti-glare rear-view mirrors or low power consumption displays.3,4 Electrochromic (EC) materials and their related applications have been investigated extensively.5–7 Very recently, EC materials have been employed for electrochromic supercapacitors (ECSs) and ECSs are emerging applications of ECDs.8,9 These materials can be broadly classified into two main categories, namely, inorganic and organic materials. Inorganic materials include transition metals and metal oxides, Prussian blue systems, and lanthanide coordination complexes, etc.4,10–12 Organic materials include viologen derivatives (1,1′-dialkyl 4,4′-bipyridinium dications),13–17 TTF (tetrathiafulvalene) derivatives,18,19 TCNQ (tetracyanoquinodimethane) derivatives,20,21 quinones,22 conducting polymers such as polythiophene (PTh),23,24 polyaniline (PANI),25,26 polypyrrole (PPy),27,28etc.29,30 The most important property of these materials is that they should be chemically/electrochemically stable under applied electrical potential and display color changes between their oxidized/reduced states at much lower potentials.14,31 Furthermore, the design of the chemical structure of EC materials plays a crucial role in determining their light absorption ability at different wavelengths, making them good candidates for low power chromic applications.15 Among these classes of material, the electrochromic properties of viologen have been studied extensively owing to their low driving voltage for visual color changes (exhibiting three primary colors), high contrast, switchable electrochromic property and easy cell construction.16 The characteristic ionic states of viologen salts can be classified as the dication (V2+), the radical cation (V+˙) and the neutral state (V0).32–34 The one electron-reduced state of viologen (V+˙) imparts an intensely blue color and exhibits intramolecular optical charge-transfer complexation with high molar absorption coefficient values.35 Moreover, the spectral and electrochemical response of viologen36 mainly depends on the type of organic groups (alkyl, benzyl, and aryl)35 at the pyridyl nitrogen, which has led to a plethora of synthetic efforts towards the synthesis of new viologens with different functional groups.37 The success of any electrochromic material in an ECD largely relies on its long-term stability, i.e., the optical intensity should be stable over a long period of time, which is usually measured as cycling stability (the color of the EC material should not fade over time during on and off cycles). However, some of the side reactions/processes during cycling, such as comproportionation,38–40 dimerization,41,42 and recrystallization would destroy the reversibility of viologens, giving rise to poor stability of the viologen-based ECDs.
Materials such as transparent conducting oxides (TCOs), indium-doped tin oxide (ITO), and fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) are the most significant substrate materials that are frequently employed in ECDs. In particular, ITO conducting glasses are commonly used as electrodes in ECDs. However, certain drawbacks of ITO, such as being expensive, fragile, sensitive to corrosion, and having a high refractive index, restricts their ECD applications. These drawbacks pave the way to choose alternative conductive materials like TCOs, FTO, etc., and these materials are in the form of conducting polymers, nanomaterials and/or thin coatings of metals. Recently, high-performance, transparent, spray-coated flexible electrodes based on Ag nanowire and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) were fabricated and successfully applied to viologen-based ECDs.43 In recent times, a wide range of such materials have been investigated as alternate electrode materials in the field of electrochromic applications.44 This review article will focus on the latest developments on viologen-based ECDs. A detailed discussion concerning the synthesis of appropriate viologen electrochromes and fabrication of viologen electrochromic gels for ECDs is discussed. To provide a better understanding, the discussions are divided into several sub-sections, i.e., synthesis of EC materials and discussion of the ECDs based on the nature of the materials (organic, inorganic, polymers, ionic liquids, and carbon materials (graphene/graphene oxide)) used for the construction.
2. Synthesis of viologen-based electrochromic (EC) materials
A significant contribution has been made in the synthesis of 4,4′-bipyridinium salts and on the evaluation of molecular designing principles.32 The ease of synthesis and, in particular, the electrochromic behavior of viologen at relatively lower potentials has attracted wide attention.
2.1. Selective and non-selective alkylation of 4,4′-bipyridine
The synthetic procedure for non-selective (double-sided) alkylation of 4,4′-bipyridine is usually carried out by nucleophilic substitution reactions between bipyridine and the respective alkyl halides in a polar aprotic solvent such as acetonitrile (CH3CN), dimethylformamide (DMF) in the presence of a large excess of the alkylating agent.45–47 Meanwhile, a selective alkylation reaction is carried out by taking a five-fold excess of 4,4′-bipyridine in solvent medium (usually CH3CN), and the alkylating agent (diluted in solvent) is added dropwise over several hours under dilute conditions (Scheme 1).31,47–49
 Scheme 1  Alkylation of viologens.47 Reaction conditions: CH3CN, 80 °C, 48 h. Anion exchange was carried out in deionized water using the respective salt. 
2.2. Arylation of 4,4′-bipyridine using the Zincke reaction
The aryl groups are covalently attached on both “N” atoms in 4,4′-bipyridine and this reaction is usually carried out by the well-known, two-step Zincke reaction (Scheme 2).48 The first step involves the formation of the Zincke salt, where 4,4′-bipyridine is reacted with 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene or its analogue to obtain the salt. In the next step, this Zincke salt is reacted with the aromatic amine (primary amine) of interest to obtain aryl-bipyridinium salts.
 Scheme 2  Zincke reaction conditions:50 (i) EtOH, 80 °C, 16 h; (ii) EtOH/H2O, 80 °C, 18 h. 
2.3. Synthesis of asymmetric viologens
Following the protocols shown in Schemes 1 and 2,51–53 Alesanco et al. selectively introduced aryl and alkyl groups on “N” atoms in a single bipyridine moiety (Scheme 3).50
 Scheme 3  Synthesis of aryl- and alkyl-substituted asymmetric viologens.50 Reaction conditions: (i) EtOH, 80 °C, 16 h; (ii) H2O, 80 °C, 48 h; (iii) CH3CN, 80 °C, 48 h. 
2.4. Viologen-based polyionic liquid (PIL) gels
Viologen-based polyionic liquid electrolytic (PIL) gels were synthesized by co-polymerization of N-isopropyl acrylamide (NIPAM) with diallyl viologen (DAV) (Scheme 4), as reported by Chen et al.54 In this polymerization route, the ionic liquid (IL) was used as a cross-linking agent and DAV was used as an electrochromic material. In addition to this, tetramethylethylenediamine (TEMED, 1.0 wt%) and ammonium persulfate ((NH4)2S2O8, 1.0 wt%) were used as initiator and cross-linking accelerators, respectively. The reaction was carried out in water at 20 °C for 0.5 h.
 Scheme 4  Synthesis of viologen-based polyionic liquid (PIL) gels.54 Reaction conditions: (i) 1.0 wt% (NH4)2S2O8, 1.0 wt% TEMED; (ii) N2, H2O, 20 °C, 0.5 h. 
2.5. Synthesis of viologen-based crossed-linked polymer
Kao et al. reported the synthesis of vinylbenzyl viologen (VBV) and poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA)-based electrochromic gel in which VBV is used as an electrochromic material.15 The polymerization was carried out between the vinyl group bearing viologen and methylmethacrylate (MMA) monomers in a thermal curing method at 90 °C in the presence of an azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN) initiator (Scheme 5). As a result of the thermal curing process, a VBV/PMMA polymer chain with a cross-linked network was obtained.
 Scheme 5  Synthesis of vinylbenzyl viologen (VBV) and methylmethacrylate (MMA)-based electrochromic gel.15 Reaction conditions: (i) thermal curing, AIBN, 90 °C, 40 min. 
2.6. Synthesis of viologen radical salt
Kao et al. reported on the synthesis of a viologen radical salt (VRS) for electrochromic applications.2 In this synthetic method, a mixture of 4-carboxy-TEMPO (TEMPO = 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyloxy) and 3-aminobenzenesulfonic acid were dissolved in dichloromethane and N,N′-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC) reagent was added and the mixture was stirred at room temperature for 3 days. After work up, VRS was obtained as a brown precipitate (Scheme 6).
 Scheme 6  Synthesis of phenyl viologen-based radical salt (VRS).2 Reaction conditions: (i) DCC, 4-dimethylaminopyridine (DMAP), CH2Cl2, 72 h, room temperature (RT); (ii) H2O, 24 h, RT. 
2.7. Synthesis of phosphaviologens
Reus et al. reported the N-arylation of phosphole using the Zincke reaction.55 Under typical Zincke reaction conditions, the authors were unable to achieve the desired phosphaviologens owing to the high electron-deficient nature of dinitrochlorobenzene (DNCB). The reaction did not proceed at all. To overcome this problem, the authors introduced a high nucleofuge group, such as iodine, and obtained diaryliodinium salts with PF6− or triflate (CF3SO3−, OTf−) non-coordinating counter ions. After this, N-arylation of phosphole was carried out using a modified Nesmeyanov protocol as shown in Scheme 7.
 Scheme 7  Synthesis of phosphaviologens.55 (a) Zincke reaction between phosphole and dinitrochlorobenzene (DNCB): (i) N-arylation of phosphole using different aryl substitutions. (b) Arylation of 4,4′-bipyridine: reaction conditions: (i) Cu(OAc)2·H2O (8 mol%), DMF, 40–100 °C, 4–36 h. 
2.8. Synthesis of triphenylamine-containing ambipolar compounds
Huang et al. proposed a synthetic route for the synthesis of target molecule TPA-Vio (1-(2-(4-(bis(4-methoxyphenyl)amino)phenoxy)ethyl)-10-ethyl-[4,4′-bipyridine]-1,10-diium-tetrafluoroborate).56 In the first step, selective alkylation of 4,4′-bipyridine was carried out using bromoethane as an alkylating agent. Conversely, 4-(2-bromoethoxy)-N,N-bis(4-methoxy phenyl)aniline (TPA-OBr) was synthesized by the selective alkoxylation of 4-(bis(4-methoxyphenyl)amino)phenol, as shown in Scheme 8. In the final step, TPA-OBr was reacted with 2-chloroanthraquinone and the selectively alkylated N-ethyl viologen salt to obtain the target compounds TPA-OQA and TPA-Vio, as shown in Scheme 8.
 Scheme 8  Synthesis of TPA-containing ambipolar compounds.56 Reaction conditions: (i) CH2Cl2, reflux, 48 h; (ii) DBU (1,8-diazabicyclo[5.4.0]undec-7-ene), CH2Cl2, RT, 20 min; (iii) toluene, Pd2(dba)3, p(t-Bu)3, NaOt-Bu, 100 °C, 15 h; (iv) TBAF (tetra-n-butylammonium fluoride), THF (tetrahydrofuran), RT, 30 min; (v) 1,2-dibromoethane, TBA·Br (tetrabutyl ammonium bromide), KOH(aq), 90 °C, 24 h; (vi) reflux, CH3CN, NaBF4(aq), 72 h; (vii) K2CO3, DMSO (dimethyl sulfoxide), 100 °C, 24 h. 
Jang and co-workers reported the synthesis of viologen-containing dual thermo- and redox-responsive poly(2-isopropyl-2-oxazoline) (PiPOx-V) via cationic ring-opening polymerization (Scheme 9) and evaluated the thermal and electrochromic behavior of the polymer as a function of voltage.57
 Scheme 9  Synthesis of PiPOx-V via cationic ring-opening polymerization of 2-isopropyl-2-oxazoline.57 Reaction conditions: CH3CN, 40 °C, N2 atmosphere, 4 days. 
3. Electrochromic device fabrication
An ECD entails an electrochromic material that undergoes visual color changes in a persistent but reversible manner when subjected to a redox reaction.58 The color intensity of EC materials is mainly determined by the passage of charge through the electrode.59 Further, the reversible redox process enables the molecule to switch between different colored states based on the redox states of the EC material. A few important resources are needed for ECDs construction. They are: (i) redox-active material; (ii) conductive electrolyte; (iii) conducting electrodes; and (iv) separator or spacer. The conductive electrolyte is typically separated by an electrochromic film/gel and a conductive electrode (ITO, FTO). The contact between the redox-active material and the electrode must be perfect in order to initiate and effective electron-transfer process. The electrochromic performance of any device is mainly centred on the selection of the electrolyte and device fabrication methods. The general operating modes which could be employed in ECDs are transmittance and reflectance. In transmittance mode, conductive electrodes are transparent and allow the light to permeate through the device. In addition, transparent and reflective counter electrodes are employed in reflectance mode, in which reflected light enters into the device, and the smart window is an example of a transparent ECD. A typical representation of an ECD comprising various components is given in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Illustration of an electrochromic device.58 
4. Viologen-based organic composite
Organic electrochromic materials are highly conjugated systems with lower band gap values (0.5 to 3.0 eV). These materials possess numerous advantages compared to inorganic materials, such as multiple colorations, reasonable stability, etc. However, these rigid aromatic systems exhibit reduced solubility in most solvents, which reduces their processability. These drawbacks can be avoided by the proper selection of suitable precursors or by incorporation of solubilizing substituents into the aromatic scaffolds.
Reus et al. reported the physical and electrochromic properties of π-extended phosphaviologens.55N,N′-Diarylated phosphaviologens are appropriate electron acceptor materials owing to their lower lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels compared with the parent dialkyl viologens (0.3 eV) and phosphaviologens (Scheme 7). The lowest energy gap of thienyl-substituted phosphaviologen displayed excellent electrochromism by switching between yellow and purple colors (Fig. 2). The thienyl-substituted phosphaviologen showed excellent electrochromic behavior in the visible wavelength at an operative potential range of 0.1–0.4 V. Moreover, the fully conjugated planar structure and the presence of donor moieties on the terminus enhanced the electrochromic behavior of the thienyl-phosphaviologen derivatives.
 Fig. 2  Reversible electrochromism of N-aryl (top) and N-alkyl-substituted (bottom) phosphaviologens. Adapted with permission from ref. 55 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Viologen (1-(9-hexyl-9H-carbazole)-1′-(propylphosphonic acid)-4,4′-bipyridinium dichloride) and triphenylamine ((4-(diphenylamino)phenyl)methylphosphonic acid)-based electrochromic materials were synthesized and used as cathodic and anodic electrochromic materials, respectively.60 Both these materials were anchored onto TiO2 electrodes using phosphonate linkers via chemisorption. Propylene carbonate, ethylene carbonate, and LiPF6 mixture were used as the electrolyte. An ECD constructed using these materials showed excellent electrochromic switching with high speed (<1 s), good electrochromic memory (15 h), and high transmittance change (63% at 670 nm) with a long lifetime of over 100000 switching cycles.
The viologen-based EC material was prepared by covalently linking viologen with a triphenylamine scaffold (TPA-Vio),56 where the viologen moiety acts as a charge-trapping layer which significantly reduces the driving voltage and switching time of the ECD compared with an ECD with TPA alone that was investigated separately. The viologen–TPA scaffold was used as an ambipolar EC material. Combination of the redox potentials of the anodic (TPA) and cathodic (viologen) part were shown to complement each other, resulting in an improved switching response, and enhanced the overall electrochemical stability as well as electrochromic performance of the device. Moreover, the ECD showed color transition from colorless to deep blue color as a result of the combination of TPA and viologen.
5. Viologen-based inorganic composite
Viologen–inorganic composites are often synthesized as the hybrid EC material, which imparts better coloration and exhibits long-term stability. Commonly used inorganic electrochromic materials are WO3, NiO, TiO2, V2O5 and Prussian blue. In particular, coloration/bleaching of these materials is mainly based on insertion/extraction of ions into or out of the EC materials.61 Furthermore, these hybrid materials improve the performance of viologen-based ECDs. In this segment, electrochromic properties of recently developed viologen–inorganic composites are discussed in detail.
Fan et al. used uniformly dispersed Prussian blue (wPB) in water as an electrochromic ink and spray-coated the ink on an ITO surface.62 This electrode was used as an anodic coloring electrode, while the cathodic coloring electrode was composed of a poly(butyl viologen) (PBV) thin film. Succinonitrile with 0.1 M potassium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide and SiO2 nanoparticles were used as the solid electrolyte. The resultant thin film exhibits high color contrast from blue violet to transparent. Good electrochromic performance of the device was achieved with high coloration efficiency, short switching time (10 s for bleaching and darkening), and long-term stability (up to 1000 cycles). Furthermore, they developed another ECD consisting of vinylbenzyl viologen (VBV) as a cathodic coloring material complementing the Prussian blue anodic coloring material.63 The device used ferrocene (Fc) as a redox mediator which provides an alternate path to electron transfer; as a result the ECD made of VBV–Fc displayed multicolor, in particular a turquoise color. Excellent electrochromic performance of the device was achieved with very short switching time (1.32 and 2.13 s) and good long-term stability (up to 10000 cycles). Sydam et al. employed a layer-by-layer technique to prepare a PBV and poly(peroxotungstate) assembly as a cathodic coloring material (Fig. 3).64 The anodic coloring unit contained ruthenium purple thin film, which was prepared by electrodeposition. The ECD showed good performance with short switching time (∼1 s) at a remarkably low operational voltage. In addition, the ECD showed high optical contrast (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 3  Layer-by-layer WO3–PBV/Ru purple film-based ECD. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
 Fig. 4  ECD with viologen-modified ZnO NT (or NR) arrays as the working electrode. Adapted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A methyl viologen-modified ZnO nanotube electrode was prepared for ECD fabrication by Wei and co-workers (Fig. 4).65 The electrode consists of an array of nanotubes (NTs)/nanorods (NRs) with large surface area, which allows the electrochromic methyl viologen molecules to absorb prominently.65 As a result of the high surface area, more viologen molecules are absorbed inside the ZnO nanotubes, resulting in a deep blue colour during switching. In addition, the porous structure of the ZnO nano arrays facilitated rapid electron transport, resulting in a fast EC response time and good durability.
A high-performance ECD was fabricated using slime-type EC system comprising of PVA (polyvinyl alcohol) and borax, with viologen as an EC material (Fig. 5).66 This ECD exhibits excellent wettability, transparency, high optical contrast, fast switching times (<5 s), and long-term stability (∼10000 cycles). Furthermore, the response time of the ECD was simply modulated by varying the concentrations of viologen and potassium ferro/ferricyanide salts.
 Fig. 5  (a) Synthesis and chemical structure of PVA–borax slime. (b) Photographs showing the physical aspects and texture of the slime. (c) Ferrocyanide/ferricyanide complementary redox species used for the viologen electrochromic reaction and the chemical structure of ethyl viologen in its oxidized state (left) and its reduced state (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 66 Copyright 2014, Wiley. 
In a different attempt, Liou and co-workers transferred silver nanowires (AgNW) into polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) using a hydrophobic substrate, to prepare a stretchable AgNW/PDMS electrode for ECD applications with high transparency and low resistance (Fig. 6).67 Using these stretchable electrodes, elastomeric heptyl viologen (HV) was used as an EC material to fabricate an ECD. Most of the above examples use ITO-based conductive electrodes for device fabrication; however, this particular work focused on the development of stretchable, wearable, and flexible electrodes for ECD fabrication. Even though the cycling studies were carried out for the first 100 cycles, optimization of electrochemical and optical parameters would offer better device performance.
 Fig. 6  Fabrication of AgNW/PDMS hybrid electrode and elastomeric HV ECDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2017, RSC. 
The highly durable and long-term stable solution phase ECD consisting of ethyl viologen and Ti-doped V2O5 electrochromic materials was reported by Li et al.68 Electrochromic performance of the device showed good optical properties in the UV-visible region, with transmittance of 70% and 8% between bleached and colored states at a wavelength of 600 nm. Remarkable stability of the ECD was experienced up to 250000 cycles at 60 °C. Excellent stability of the device was achieved by proper selection of matching state and durable Ti–V2O5 film, where it was shown that Ti provided excellent stability to the distorted V2O5 structure. Besides this. The optical performance of the device, such as color change and switching speed, was modulated by varying the viologen concentration.
6. Viologen-based polymer composite
Polymers/conducting polymers, including polyaniline (PANI) and polythiophene (PTh), are widely explored for their electrochromic behavior. Several ECDs have been fabricated using PANI and PTh-based materials owing to their ease of processability and cost-effective factors.69 Besides these, selection of appropriate complementary redox species with conducting polymeric material plays an important role in the enhancement of the optical properties of EC materials like viologens. Several composites consisting of polymer and viologen were prepared and their EC behaviors evaluated. In this section, recently developed viologen–polymer composite-based ECDs will be discussed in detail.
To overcome the shortage of liquid electrolytes in ECDs, Ho and co-workers proposed the use of succinonitrile-based solid polymer electrolyte composed of HV (heptyl viologen, electrochromic material), TMPD (N,N,N′,N′-tetramethyl-p-phenylenediamine), PVdF-HFP (poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene)), and ionic liquid (IL).70 The ionic conductivity of the solid polymer electrolyte varied with the concentration of ionic liquid, which served as a limiting factor for the redox reactions of the EC molecule. Best redox behavior of HV and TMPD was achieved with 5 wt% IL. The ECD exhibited a coloration efficiency value of 120.8 cm2 C−1 and excellent cycling stability over 2000 cycles of switching. A simple neutral-grey color ECD was fabricated in the combination of glass/TCO/EC gel/TCO/glass.50 The EC materials used were 1-ethyl-1′-(p-cyanophenyl)-4,4′-bipyridinium dibromide (Et-pCNVio) and 1-benzyl-1′-(p-cyanophenyl)-4,4′-bipyridinium dibromide (Bn-pCNVio) asymmetric viologens. The EC performance of asymmetric viologens and their symmetric counterparts were evaluated. Among these, (Et-pCNVio) offered excellent electrochromic performance with a grey color in very short switching time (≤15 s) and high cycling stability (∼15000 cycles). Better performance of the device was achieved by using a gel electrolyte, which is composed of 4% PVA, aqueous solution of viologen and a 1:1 mixture of potassium ferrocyanide and potassium ferricyanide and 4% borax solution.
An absorption-complementary method was used to fabricate an ECD consisting of electroactive polyamide-functionalized copolymers and heptyl viologen (HV).71 Electroactive polyamides with N,N,N′,N′,-tetraphenyl-p-phenylenediamine (TPPA) and tetraphenylbenzidine substituents were used. Use of heptyl viologen as a charge-trapping layer significantly reduced the working voltage and improved the overall performance of the ECD. Interestingly, the ECD displayed three different colors (green, blue, and red) while tuning the redox states and these colors combined into a black color.
In an independent study, Beneduci and co-workers evaluated the role of oxygen impurities on the electrochromic response of viologen-based thermoplastic polyacrylate matrix.72 The response time of these plastic ECDs was dependent on the oxygen content, which is shown to affect the electrochromic kinetics in a complex way. The electron-transfer process on the electrochromic film is controlled by the diffusion of reactive species, including viologen and oxygen. The oxygen in the inflexible, stiffer electrochromic film enhances the rate of optical responses, but a contrary response was observed in the flexible film. Reports described in the study by Beneduci and co-workers could improve the performance of viologen-based ECDs, provided the factors addressed in the study are crucially considered. Frisbie and co-workers used ion gels comprising polystyrene-block-poly(methylmethacrylate)-block-polystyrene, 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide, viologen, and ferrocene molecules.73 The EC gel was coated between two ITO glass slides, or over flexible plastic sheets, to fabricate an ECD.
PVA–borax-based electrolyte systems were used to develop easy-to-make viologen-based multichromic devices (Fig. 7).74 Moreover, combination of two different viologen electrochromes with different redox potentials offered five well-defined colorations, including colorless, green, pink-violet, orange, and purple, in a single EC layer sandwiched between two electrodes. In addition, the potential of this simple multi-ECD reached a low transmission in most of the visible wavelength range, which could effectively block the whole visible radiation in smart windows, paving the way for applications in the fields of display technologies, smart windows, climate-adaptive building shells, etc.
 Fig. 7  Photographs of a rainbow-like ECD containing blend gel. The multielectrochromic device is provided with zoning design and colors are observed in each row of the device while a suitable voltage is being applied. Adapted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Thermal-cured ECDs were assembled using VBV (vinylbenzyl viologen) by Kao et al.15 The presence of bulky substituents of VBV/PMMA (poly(methylmethacrylate)) in the cross-linked polymer reduces the possibility of agglomeration of viologens and viologen dimers, which is known to limit the cycling stability of ECDs. Furthermore, the dual role of VBV as an electrochromic material as well as a cross-linker offered excellent optical performances in ECDs, with easier fabrication steps. The combined VBV/PV (phenyl viologen)-based ECD also exhibited high transmittance change (ΔT) with good cycling stability. Ho and co-workers prepared UV-crosslinked ethoxylated trimethylolpropane triacrylate (ETPTA) and immobilized heptyl viologen (HV) and phenyl viologen (PV) onto it.75 The studies showed that PV exhibited attractive electrochromism; however, rapid aggregation occurred in liquid electrolyte owing to strong π–π stacking, which was subsequently overcome by employing a solid electrolyte. The two-cell configuration consisted of an ITO electrode, multicolor EC material (PV + HV), solid electrolyte (succinonitrile)-mediator (15 wt% ETPTA/FcMeOH), and ITO electrode. The ECD showed green, marine and grey-blue from transparent, with a fast switching time. Combination of two different viologen salts with different redox potentials and colors opens up a new avenue for color-tuning.
6.1. Viologen-based ionic liquids (ILs)/polyionic liquids (PILs)
Ionic liquids (ILs) play a dual role as ions and solvents, with exceptional properties such as high boiling point, wide operating potential window, non-flammability, good ionic conductivity, and compatibility with organic solvents.76,77 In addition, polymeric ionic liquids (PILs) consist of the properties of both polymer and ionic liquids.78 Moreover, the presence of PILs affords additional ions to the electrolyte, which enriches the ionic conductivity, and the PIL can immobilize electroactive species like viologen in the electrolyte solution, which slows down both the surface and recombination reactions.37 These properties may improve the electrochromic performance of PIL–viologen-based ECDs. Some of the recently published work utilizing this concept will be discussed in detail in this section.
Viologen-based ionic salts comprising mono- and di-alkyl bipyridinium cations, with anions such as I−, Br−, NTf2− were synthesized and used as stand-in electrochromic ionic liquids (ILs).35 Thermal and physico-electrochemical properties of these ILs were modified by varying the substituents so as to improve their optoelectronic performance. Among various alkyl-substituted viologens used in the study, 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide [EMIM][NTf2], was found to exhibit stable and efficient electrochromic properties. Although no ECD was fabricated, electrochromic performance of the viologen IL was briefly evaluated in this study. Similarly, a prototype ECD cell was constructed using bipolar viologen–ferrocene ([FcC11VC1][TFSI]2) redox-active ionic liquid (RAIL),79 where the non-volatile RAIL exhibited high durability up to 10000 potential cycles without degradation. In addition, use of a RAIL avoids the use of other additives such as solvents, supporting electrolytes, and/or any sacrificial agents displaying the multiple role of such ILs. Perhaps, such RAIL-based ILs will be interesting for EC applications provided they exhibit high durability, long-term stability, and high contrast at low operational voltages. Oxo-bipyridinium salts possessing symmetric and non-symmetric disubstituents on bipyridinium, with different anionic counterparts (I−, [NTf2]− and [AOT]− (docusate anion)), were synthesized for electrochromic applications.13 The existence of ether linkages in the bipyridinium scaffolds fine-tunes their physical properties, specifically, lowering the melting point and Tg (glass transition temperature). Thus, these salts are considered as ionic liquids and these electrochromic materials exhibit pale yellow and blue color at a potential cycle of −2.0 to 0.0 V. As a result, ECDs were fabricated using these IL-based electrochromic materials between two PET (polyethylene terephthalate)–ITO layers to yield an efficient and reversible ECD.
Ho and co-workers investigated the EC properties of heptyl, octyl and nonyl viologens (as BF4 salts).37 An ECD was fabricated using Fc/V with UV-cured polymer electrolyte consisting of polymer ionic liquid (poly(1-allyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide)) and ETPTA (ethoxylated trimethylolpropane triacrylate). Addition of a PIL substantially decreased the operating potential and improved the long-term stability, with increased coloration efficiency. Among various concentrations, 20 wt% PIL addition was shown to display better EC performance.
An ECD with self-bleaching ability comprising electroactive species such as ethyl viologen and ferrocene-based IL was reported by Rochefort and co-workers (Fig. 8).80 It has been demonstrated that O2 is least soluble in [BMIM][NTf2] (BMIM, 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium) and hence the use of this IL for ECD fabrication offers stability towards atmospheric oxygen and water, even during electrochemical oxidation and reduction. As a result, excellent optical properties and high stability in open atmosphere were obtained when an ECD was fabricated using this system. The ionic liquid electrolyte ([BMIM][NTf2]) makes the electroactive species insensible to atmosphere because of the low solubility of O2 in this solvent system.81 On the other hand, the high midpoint potential (1.06 V) difference between the two redox couples, such as [Fc(II)NTf]/[Fc(III)NTf] and [EV(II)/EV(I)] vs. Fc/Fc+ in the IL electrolyte enhances the homogenous electron transfer, which is crucial for the self-bleaching process.
 Fig. 8  Images of [FcNTf]/[EV]/IL ECD (50 mM/50 mM) in (A) the bleached state (0 V) and (B) the colored state (2 V). (C) ECD mechanism of [FcNTf] and [EV] in which the heterogeneous reactions (green) are non-spontaneous and the homogeneous reactions (red) are spontaneous. The potentials were determined on a Pt disk. Adapted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Ion gel-based ECDs were fabricated by mixing appropriate viologen electrochrome in the gel consisting of P(VDF-co-HFP) and [BMI][NTf2] using the “cut-and-stick” approach (Fig. 9).82 The optoelectronic properties of EC gels were then modulated either by controlling the chemical equilibrium between the viologen radical cation and radical dimer (V+˙ ↔ (V+˙)2) or by modifying the chemical structure of the EC viologens with suitable substituents, such as –CN, –CF3 and heptyl. As a result, a patterned, multicolored, flexible ECD on plastic was fabricated that is operational at lower potentials.
 Fig. 9  (a, d and g) Key components of an EC gel exhibiting electrochromism (anodic species, dmFc, is not shown). (b, e and h) Dependence of UV-visible spectra on the applied voltage for the ECD based on the gel used. (c, f and i) Photographs of ECDs with EC gels displaying colors as a function of applied potentials. Adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Dual-responsive (thermo and electro) polyionic liquid (PIL) was synthesized by the co-polymerization of N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAM) with diallyl viologen (DAV).54DAV was used both as a cross-linking agent and EC material and the PIL was used as an electrolyte. A smart window was designed using polyionic liquid (PIL) by Chen et al. The low critical solution temperature of the electrolytes (PIL) can be tuned by changing the weight ratio of IL/H2O or molar ratio of monomeric substances such as N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAM) and 3-butyl-1-vinyl-imidazolium bromide ([BVIm][Br]). The dual-responsive diallyl viologen (DAV) can perform simultaneously at thermal and electrical stimulus, which is incorporated into the polymer chain. The performance of the device was evaluated for only 100 cycles; however, the design of a dual-responsive ECD based on thermal and electrical stimulus seems very interesting for the areas of smart windows, temperature sensors, etc., provided these materials render excellent performance and long-term stability.
6.2. Various electrolytes and their impact in viologen-based ECDs
In a different approach, Cruz et al. utilized deep eutectic solvents (DESs) as green electrolytes (choline or lithium chloride with ethylene glycol and glycerol) for electrochromic applications, and tested the efficiency of these low-cost electrolytes with two different viologen derivatives, namely, 1,1′-(dimethyl)-4,4′-bipyridinium dichloride and 1,1′-[di-(methoxyethoxyethane)]-4,4′-bipyridinium diiodide as electrochromes.33 However, a major setback in this system is the application of high operational voltage. Apart from this, DESs proved to be a green and low-cost electrolyte with reduced viscosity compared with IL-based electrolytes showing excellent electrochromic switching between the colored to bleached states, and vice versa.
Ion gel-based ECDs were assembled by Moon and co-workers (Fig. 10).83 Ion gel patterns were printed using electrostatic-force-assisted dispensing printing, which has potential applications in printed electronics. Favorable electrostatic interactions between EC gel [(dimethyl ferrocene) comprising of copolymers (poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene)) and RTIL (1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide)] and substrate (diethyl viologen) induce the performance of the ECD, together with high coloration efficiency and transmittance contrast (82%) between the bleached to colored states. Furthermore, ECDs based on these ion gels were used to test the efficiency of diheptyl viologen (DHV) and monoheptyl viologen (MHV) as electrochromes.84 MHV displayed a magenta color upon application of voltage, whereas DHV displayed a blue color, while a conventional dialkyl viologen/monoalkyl viologen typically shows a blue/violet colored state during cycling. In contrast, when both MHV and DHV are combined, the device displayed different optical properties by displaying yellow and blue to maroon color with respect to the applied potentials.
 Fig. 10  A schematic illustration of the electrostatic force-assisted dispensing printing and printed EC gel composed of EV(PF6)2, dmFc, P(VDF-co-HFP), and [EMI][TFSI] with a weight ratio of 1:0.44:1:10. Adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Very recently, Moon and co-workers fabricated an ECD based on ion gels using the same viologen electrochromes and device fabrication approach, but instead of RTIL, EMI-Tf2 (1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide) IL was used.85 A systematic investigation showed that, the blue-colored state was obtained at low concentrations of the DHV electrochrome; however, at high concentration, a sequential transition from blue to magenta occurred. Irrespective of the concentration, MHV showed only a magenta-colored state. In relation to DHV, MHV showed high transmittance contrast, high color, and good cycling stability.
Chen et al. improved the repetitive stability of electrochromic cells comprising viologen derivatives as electrochromes by adding ferrocene, an electron donor, to the electrolyte solution.16 Ferrocene acted as a mediator and gave better switching properties. In the case of a multiviologen EC cell, with an increase in cathodic and anodic potential, the transmittance decreased and increased, respectively. These results are ascribed to the sharing of electrons between viologen molecules in the mixed viologen cell, which limits their electrochromic properties. This problem was tackled by preparing various EC cells by controlling viologens with 0.09 M of Fc and modifying the viologen molecules. Studies involving the long-term stability of viologen ECDs with ferrocene mediators would provide a better insight into such a system, as viologen-based ECDs suffer from internal charge-transfer complex formation (quenching), which limits their ECD performance.
In a typical study, gel-switchable ECDs comprising viologen electrochromes (alkylbipyridinium and oxo-bipyridinium) with iodide and NTf2 salts were developed.86 It is noteworthy that the anion has some influence on the color contrast and electrochromic reversibility, in addition to the substituent on the viologen. Three switching colors (yellow, blue, and red [alkylbipyridinium]/violet[oxo-bipyridinium]) were obtained for the viologen salt with iodide as a counter anion, whereas the same viologen salt with NTf2 as a counter anion gave only two reversible colors (transparent and blue), which is attributed to dimer formation in the case of the iodide salt. The NTf2 salt showed better optical performance in short transition time compared with the iodide salt, which suffers from intermolecular charge-transfer complexation (dimer formation). An eco-friendly gelatin-based electrolyte containing iodide/triiodide redox mediator was fabricated by Rougier and co-workers.87 The gel electrolyte was composed of LiI in 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (BMII) IL and biodegradable gelatin. A nano TiO2–viologen-based ECD was fabricated. Fast switching times with high cycling stability of up to 20000 cycles were achieved. Moreover, the gel electrolyte exhibited high ionic conductivity, transmittance, and electrochemical stability. Oh et al. synthesized cyanophenyl viologen (CNPhV2+) and 3-fluoro-4-(trifluoromethyl)phenyl viologen (TFMFPhV2+) derivatives and compared their EC performance in an ion gel consisting of PVDF-co-HFP and 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (EMI-TFSI) (Fig. 11).88 TFMFPhV2+ showed excellent transmittance contrast, coloration efficiency, cycling stability, and faster switching times compared with CNPhV2+. Despite the difference in their performance, both these compounds exhibited low operational potential compared with other viologen-based ECDs.
 Fig. 11  Viologen-based electrochromic ion gels showing a green colored state. (a) ECD configuration and molecular structures of components in the EC gels. Dependence of UV-visible spectra on the applied voltages and two representative photographs of the bleached and colored states for ECDs based on (b) CNPhV2+ and (c) TFMFPhV2+. Reproduced with permission from the ref. 88. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
Su et al. reported the fabrication of a sustainable and pro-environmental ECD made up of a composite film comprising of cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) as biological matrix, viologen as electrochromic material, and KCl.89 Alkyl- and benzyl-substituted viologens were used as EC materials. Among these, benzyl-substituted viologen-based ECDs showed good electrochromic performances at low operational voltage, whereas methyl viologen showed better switching in a short time compared with the ethyl viologen-based ECDs. Very recently, Alesanco et al. reported the fabrication of an ECD containing alkyl- and aryl-substituted symmetric viologens with phosphonate tails that were anchored onto nano-TiO2.90 The device was constructed using a PVA–borax gel electrolyte, which enhanced the neutral coloration. In an another study, the authors utilized 1-alkyl-1′-aryl asymmetric viologens with phosphonate tails as EC materials with a similar set-up and achieved a competitive device performance with excellent stability over 10000 cycles.91
7. Viologen-based graphene/graphene oxide composite
Graphene/graphene oxide work as an active material in EC applications due to their unusual physical properties, such as optical transparency, large theoretical specific surface area, and high charge carrier mobility at room temperature. Thus, they are employed as an electrode substrate due to their low sheet resistance, high transparency, and flexibility. Composites of graphene/graphene oxide were made with chromophores like viologens to enhance the electrochromic properties of viologens. This part of the review will focus on recent developments on graphene/graphene oxide–viologen composites and their ECD applications.
Hwang et al. assembled a prototype electrolyte-free ECD using methyl viologen–graphene quantum dot (MV2+–GQD) nanocomposites.92 The nanocomposite-based ECD exhibited good thermal stability, high durability and displayed a very stable switching performance. Strong electrostatic interactions between MV2+ and GQD were used for the construction of the ECD, in addition to electrostatic interactions; π–π and cation–π interactions also stabilized the nanocomposite, rendering a stable ECD performance (EC stability >3200 s) under mechanical and thermal stresses. This flexible device displayed a continuous reversible color change from colorless to purple at an applied potential range of −2.8 to 0.0 V (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  (top) Illustration of an electrolyte-free flexible ECD of MV2+–GQDs. (bottom) Photographs of the reversible performance of a flexible MV2+–GQD ECD (containing 100 mM MV2+ with 8 mg mL−1 GQD in polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)) with ITO-on-polyethylene terephthalate (PET) in: (a) bleached state and (b) colored state. (c) Photograph of various bent MV2+–GQD ECDs with ITO-on-PET. Adapted with permission from ref. 92 Copyright 2014 Wiley. 
In a different approach, Ruiz and co-workers electrodeposited reduced graphene oxide (RGO) from graphene oxide (GO) solution on ITO-coated polyethylene terephthalate (ITO–PET) and used the flexible transparent electrode to fabricate an ECD using ethyl viologen as the EC material.44 Later, the ECD performance of the ITO–PET electrode and the RGO-coated ITO–PET electrodes were compared. In the case of the RGO-coated ITO–PET electrode, it was observed that, upon continuous cycling at large voltages, the RGO film is oxidized and dispersed in the EC mixture. As a result the device contained a mixture of GO and RGO. Consequently, the redox couple GO/RGO in the electrochromic solution played the role of electrocatalyst and assisted the color switching process of the ECDs, with high color contrast at relatively lower potentials compared to the electrode without the RGO coating. Gadgil et al. reported the synthesis of a polyviologen–reduced graphene oxide (PV–RGO) composite film via electrocodeposition method.93 During the electropolymerization of the CNP monomer, GO was concurrently reduced. Furthermore, it was shown that the insulating PV redox matrix was non-covalently wrapped by RGO sheets, which amplified the redox activity of PV, affording better conducting properties and improved EC performance. Table 1 summarizes a partial list of the literature on the performance of viologen-based ECDs using different viologen electrochromes.
Table 1 A partial list of literature on the performance of viologen-based ECDs using a range of viologen electrochromes




EC material
ECD type
Solvent

λ
max (nm)

V
b/Vc (V)
ΔT (%)

t
b/tc (s)
Stability (cycles)
Ref.




Phosphaviologen (thienyl-substituted)
Solution
ACN/DMF
550
0.1/0.4
—
—
—

55



Viologen–carbazole
Solution
PC
670
0.31/−1.80
85
<1 s
100000

60



Viologen–triphenylamine
Solution
PC
727
0/−0.4, 0.8
96
9.5/1.7
1000

56



Vinylbenzyl viologen/Prussian blue
Thin film
PC
615
1.12/−0.80
86.5
1.3/2.1
10000

62



Methyl viologen
Hybrid
γ-Butyrolac tone
608
3.0/−3.0
70
3/6
500

65



Ethyl viologen/borax
Solution
PVA/water
550
0/−2.3
>65
4/5
10000

66



Heptyl viologen
Hybrid
EtOH
550
0/−0.65
83
43/32
100

67



Ethyl viologen/V2O5
Film
Isopropanol
600
1.2/−1.2
70
6/10
250000

68



Heptyl viologen/TMPD
Solid
—
615
0/0.9
60.1
5.2/2.1
2000

70




p-Cyanophenyl viologen
Hybrid
PVA/water
600
—
61
8/16
—

74



Vinylbenzyl viologen/TMPD
Hybrid
PC
615
0/0.5
60
—
10000

15



Ferrocene–viologen
—
—
600
0/1.0
—
—
10000

79



Ethyl viologen/FcNTf
Solution
—
610
0/2.0
95
5.5/9.5
1000

80



Heptyl viologen (HV), p-cyano phenyl (p-CN-PV) and p-trifluoromethylphenylviologen (CF3-PV)
Hybrid
[BMI][TFSI] or [BMI][BF4]
540, 595 and 605
0/−0.7, −0.80/−0/0.5 and 0/−0.5
95, 90 and 95
—
—

82



Diallyl viologen (DAV)/(PNIPAM)
Hybrid
[BVIm][Br]
≈600
—
>50
5/3
100

54



Methyl viologen/GQD
Solution
PVA/water
550
0/−2.8
90
—
—

92



Polyviologen/RGO
Film
Water
525
0/−0.6
90
9/6
—

93





Invention of novel EC materials has of profound significance in the development of new electronic devices. Interestingly, these materials show reversible colors with respect to an external stimulus which could be applied potential or thermal energy, etc. Often, such materials has been applied in various fields such as smart windows, sensors, glare attenuation in automobile rear-view mirrors, and solar cells.79 Viologens are inevitable cathodic EC materials in the field of electro-optics and they impart different colors depending on their oxidation states and substituents at the “N” atoms.31
8. Conclusions and future prospects
In summary, simple and accessible methods for the preparation of different viologen electrochromes were discussed in detail. Although considerable efforts have been made to achieve high-performance viologen-based EC materials, ECD performance still faces some limitations owing to the agglomeration of viologen radical cations on the electrode surface, which enhances radical–radical dimerization and/or aerial oxidation of the radical cation species. Viologen-based ECDs are attractive, as viologens exhibit different redox states and each redox state displays a different color. In addition, the redox switching of viologens occurs at very low potentials, making them ideal candidates to act as EC materials. Viologens also show photoelectrochromic behavior. The selection of suitable electrochromic materials, such as viologen, with complementary redox species and conducting substrates/polymeric materials is essential to produce multicolored ECDs, which remains a challenging task. These additional components might enhance the performance of the ECD or impart additional colors in addition to the characteristic blue/violet/green of viologens. Several attempts have been made to synthesize multichromic viologens, however it was very difficult to achieve a wide range of colors just by varying the ‘N’ substituent alone. To improve device performance, hybrid organic/inorganic or polymer composites have been synthesized. To overcome the shortages of liquid electrolyte, gel/IL-based electrolytes have been successfully employed. Even polymer-based ILs have been synthesized and successfully employed as electrolytes in ECDs. Although IL-based electrolytes (ILs and PILs) have been successfully employed, their intrinsic viscosity, air/moisture sensitivity and high cost hamper them from a commercialization viewpoint. In some cases, even viologen-based ILs have been synthesized and used as EC materials and electrolytes, showing better ECD performance. Although such studies are preliminary, previous studies have shown that in such systems, viologen would suffer from aerial oxidation and dimer formation. Such problems were recently addressed by Oh et al. and Alesanco et al. through the installation of higher electronegative substituents and bulkier functional groups, respectively.88,91 Hence, in these cases, optimization of fabrication conditions would deliver an ideal ECD with excellent long-term stability. New materials, rational design, and advanced synthetic approaches will offer solutions to these challenges, such as multichromic materials with better switching capability and overall long-term stability at low operational potentials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
M. Kanagaraj thanks DST-INSPIRE for his project assistantship; Dr M. K. thanks DST-INSPIRE for the faculty award and DST-SERB Start-up Research grant for research funding. Director and support staff of CSIR-CECRI are gratefully acknowledged for their constant encouragement and support.
References

          P. M. Monk, D. R. Rosseinsky and R. J. Mortimer, Electrochromic Materials and Devices Based on Viologens, in Electrochromic Materials and Devices, ed. R. J. Mortimer, D. R. Rosseinsky and P. M. Monk,  2015 Search PubMed .
S.-Y. Kao, Y. Kawahara, S. I. Nakatsuji and K.-C. Ho, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 3266–3272 RSC .
S.-h. Kim, N. Shim, H. Lee and B. Moon, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2012, 22, 13558–13563 RSC .
S. Santhosh, M. Mathankumar, S. Selva Chandrasekaran, A. K. Nanda Kumar, P. Murugan and B. Subramanian, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 19–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Mortimer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1997, 26, 147–156 RSC .
C. Li, H. Bai and G. Shi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2397–2409 RSC .
M. P. Duffy, W. Delaunay, P. A. Bouit and M. Hissler, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5296–5310 RSC .
T. Y. Yun, X. Li, S. H. Kim and H. C. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 43993–43999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cai, P. Darmawan, X. Cheng and P. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602598 CrossRef .
T.-H. Kuo, C.-Y. Hsu, K.-M. Lee and K.-C. Ho, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1755–1760 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, L. Gao, B. Liang, X. Wang, G. Chen, Z. Liu, J. Chao, D. Chen and G. Shen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19904–19910 RSC .
A. M. Shaikh, B. K. Sharma, S. Chacko and R. M. Kamble, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 60084–60093 RSC .
N. Jordão, H. Cruz, A. Branco, F. Pina and L. C. Branco, ChemPlusChem, 2015, 80, 202–208 CrossRef .
K. Madasamy, V. M. Shanmugam, D. Velayutham and M. Kathiresan, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1354 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-Y. Kao, H.-C. Lu, C.-W. Kung, H.-W. Chen, T.-H. Chang and K.-C. Ho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4175–4184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-Y. Chen, C.-S. Chen and T.-H. Yeh, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2014, 131, 40485–40490 Search PubMed .
V. Jain, H. Yochum, H. Wang, R. Montazami, M. A. V. Hurtado, A. Mendoza-Galván, H. W. Gibson and J. R. Heflin, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2008, 209, 150–157 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mishra, P. Yogi, S. K. Saxena, S. Roy, P. R. Sagdeo and R. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 9504–9512 RSC .
C. Wang, A. S. Batsanov and M. R. Bryce, Chem. Commun., 2004, 578–579 RSC .
A. Yasuda and J. e. Seto, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1992, 25, 257–268 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, X. Fu, J. Deng, X. Huang and Q. Miao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 579, 105–110 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xu, J. Zhao, C. Cui, Y. Hou and Y. Kong, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 112, 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ikeda and M. Higuchi, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 4184–4189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Alkan, C. A. Cutler and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 331–336 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kim and S. Jung, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6381–6387 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J.-P. Tu, D. Zhang, Y.-Q. Qiao, X.-H. Xia, X.-L. Wang and C.-D. Gu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17316–17324 RSC .
P. Camurlu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 55832–55845 RSC .
X. Liu, K. G. Neoh and E. T. Kang, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 9041–9047 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ling, C. Xiang and G. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 290–300 RSC .
W. Sharmoukh, K. C. Ko, J. H. Ko, H. J. Nam, D.-Y. Jung, C. Noh, J. Y. Lee and S. U. Son, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4408–4413 RSC .
K. Madasamy and M. Kathiresan, ChemistrySelect, 2016, 1, 354–359 CrossRef CAS .
K. Murugavel, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 5873–5884 RSC .
H. Cruz, N. Jordão and L. C. Branco, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 1653–1658 RSC .
N. Bodappa, P. Broekmann, Y.-C. Fu, J. Furrer, Y. Furue, T. Sagara, H. Siegenthaler, H. Tahara, S. Vesztergom, K. Zick and T. Wandlowski, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1067–1077 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jordão, L. Cabrita, F. Pina and L. C. Branco, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 3982–3988 CrossRef PubMed .
W. S. Baker, B. I. Lemon and R. M. Crooks, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8885–8894 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Lu, S.-Y. Kao, H.-F. Yu, T.-H. Chang, C.-W. Kung and K.-C. Ho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30351–30361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Cheng and A. E. Kaifer, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 2997–3002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Funston, J. P. Kirby, J. R. Miller, L. Pospíšil, J. Fiedler, M. Hromadová, M. Gál, J. Pecka, M. Valášek, Z. Zawada, P. Rempala and J. Michl, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 10862–10869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tarábek, V. Kolivoška, M. Gál, L. Pospíšil, M. Valášek, J. Kaminský and M. Hromadová, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18056–18065 CrossRef .
W. W. Porter and T. P. Vaid, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 5028–5035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-S. Guo, L.-H. Wang and Y. Liu, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 7775–7778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-W. Kim, S. B. Lee, S. H. Kim and H. C. Moon, Org. Electron., 2018, 62, 151–156 CrossRef CAS .
J. Palenzuela, A. Viñuales, I. Odriozola, G. Cabañero, H. J. Grande and V. Ruiz, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14562–14567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Moon and A. E. Kaifer, Org. Lett., 2004, 6, 185–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Evanko, S. J. Yoo, S.-E. Chun, X. Wang, X. Ji, S. W. Boettcher and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9373–9376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kathiresan, L. Walder, F. Ye and H. Reuter, Tetrahedron Lett., 2010, 51, 2188–2192 CrossRef CAS .
S. Asaftei, D. Huskens and D. Schols, J. Med. Chem., 2012, 55, 10405–10413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Möller, S. Asaftei, D. Corr, M. Ryan and L. Walder, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1558–1562 CrossRef .
Y. Alesanco, A. Viñuales, G. Cabañero, J. Rodriguez and R. Tena-Zaera, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 29619–29627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cheng, T. Cheng, H. Xiao, M. D. Krzyaniak, Y. Wang, P. R. McGonigal, M. Frasconi, J. C. Barnes, A. C. Fahrenbach, M. R. Wasielewski, W. A. Goddard and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8288–8300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kahlfuss, S. Denis-Quanquin, N. Calin, E. Dumont, M. Garavelli, G. Royal, S. Cobo, E. Saint-Aman and C. Bucher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15234–15242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Yamaguchi, N. Mizoguchi and M. Sato, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4416–4425 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, Y. Ren, J. Guo and F. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 1595–1598 RSC .
C. Reus, M. Stolar, J. Vanderkley, J. Nebauer and T. Baumgartner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11710–11717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-C. Huang, J.-T. Wu, Y.-Z. Fan and G.-S. Liou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 9370–9375 RSC .
J. Nam, Y. Jung, J. Joe and W.-D. Jang, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 3662–3666 RSC .
W. M. Kline, R. G. Lorenzini and G. A. Sotzing, Color. Technol., 2014, 130, 73–80 CAS .
L. Striepe and T. Baumgartner, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 16924–16940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Y. Wei, J. Zheng, D. Zhu and C. Xu, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 428–434 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Wang, X. W. Sun and Z. Jiao, Materials, 2010, 3, 5029–5053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Fan, S.-Y. Kao, T.-H. Chang, R. Vittal and K.-C. Ho, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 145, 35–41 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Lu, S.-Y. Kao, T.-H. Chang, C.-W. Kung and K.-C. Ho, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 147, 75–84 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sydam, M. Deepa, S. M. Shivaprasad and A. K. Srivastava, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 132, 148–161 CrossRef CAS .
S.-y. Li, Y. Wang, J.-G. Wu, L.-f. Guo, M. Ye, Y.-H. Shao, R. Wang, C.-e. Zhao and A. Wei, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 72037–72043 RSC .
Y. Alesanco, J. Palenzuela, A. Viñuales, G. Cabañero, H. J. Grande and I. Odriozola, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 218–223 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Liu, B.-C. Pan and G.-S. Liou, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2633–2639 RSC .
M. Li, D. Weng, Y. Wei, J. Zheng and C. Xu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 248, 206–214 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, N. S. Cho, S. Cho, K. Kim, S. Cheon, K. Kim, S.-Y. Kang, S. M. Cho, J.-I. Lee, J.-Y. Oh, Y.-H. Kim, H. Ryu, C.-S. Hwang, S. Kim, C. S. Ah and T.-Y. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 3944 CrossRef PubMed .
T.-H. Chang, C.-W. Hu, S.-Y. Kao, C.-W. Kung, H.-W. Chen and K.-C. Ho, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 143, 606–612 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Liu, B.-C. Pan, D.-C. Huang, Y.-R. Kung, C.-M. Leu and G.-S. Liou, NPG Asia Mater., 2017, 9, e388 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chidichimo, B. C. De Simone, D. Imbardelli, M. De Benedittis, M. Barberio, L. Ricciardi and A. Beneduci, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 13484–13492 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Moon, T. P. Lodge and C. D. Frisbie, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1420–1425 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Alesanco, A. Viñuales, J. Palenzuela, I. Odriozola, G. Cabañero, J. Rodriguez and R. Tena-Zaera, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14795–14801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-H. Chang, H.-C. Lu, M.-H. Lee, S.-Y. Kao and K.-C. Ho, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 177, 75–81 CrossRef CAS .
T. Welton, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 2071–2084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kathiresan and D. Velayutham, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 17499–17516 RSC .
Y.-S. Ye, J. Rick and B.-J. Hwang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2719–2743 RSC .
H. Tahara, R. Baba, K. Iwanaga, T. Sagara and H. Murakami, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 2455–2458 RSC .
B. Gélinas, D. Das and D. Rochefort, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 28726–28736 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Anthony, J. L. Anderson, E. J. Maginn and J. F. Brennecke, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 6366–6374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Moon, C.-H. Kim, T. P. Lodge and C. D. Frisbie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6252–6260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-W. Kim, H. Oh, J. H. Bae, H. Kim, H. C. Moon and S. H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18994–19000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Oh, D. G. Seo, T. Y. Yun, C. Y. Kim and H. C. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7658–7665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Yun and H. C. Moon, Org. Electron., 2018, 56, 178–185 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jordão, H. Cruz, A. Branco, C. Pinheiro, F. Pina and L. C. Branco, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 27867–27873 RSC .
A. Danine, L. Manceriu, A. Fargues and A. Rougier, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 258, 200–207 CrossRef CAS .
H. Oh, D. G. Seo, T. Y. Yun, S. B. Lee and H. C. Moon, Org. Electron., 2017, 51, 490–495 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Su, F. Yang, L. Zhou, Y. Geng, J. Zhang and M. Jiang, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 1407–1414 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Alesanco, A. Viñuales, J. Ugalde, E. Azaceta, G. Cabañero, J. Rodriguez and R. Tena-Zaera, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 177, 110–119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Alesanco, A. Viñuales, G. Cabañero, J. Rodriguez and R. Tena-Zaera, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1600989 CrossRef .
E. Hwang, S. Seo, S. Bak, H. Lee, M. Min and H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5129–5136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gadgil, P. Damlin, M. Heinonen and C. Kvarnström, Carbon, 2015, 89, 53–62 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Kanagaraj Madasamy
	Kanagaraj Madasamy graduated from the University of Madras with both Bachelor's and Master's degrees, and is currently doing a PhD at CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi, India, under the guidance of Dr Velayutham and co-guidance of Dr M. Kathiresan. His research interests include the synthesis of organic compounds and metal organic frameworks, and supramolecular chemistry. He is currently working on viologen-based supramolecular self-assemblies.

David Velayutham
	Dr David Velayutham graduated from Madurai Kamaraj University with both Bachelor's (1982) and Master's degrees (1984). He joined the CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute (CSIR-CECRI) as a Junior Scientist in 1987 and received his PhD from Alagappa University, Karaikudi, India, in 1993. He then moved to the University of Duisburg, Germany as a Post-Doctoral Fellow (1994) for 18 months, after which he resumed his duties at CSIR-CECRI. He is currently working as a Chief Scientist in the Electro Organic Division, CSIR-CECRI, Karaikudi, TamilNadu, India. His current research interests include electro-organic synthesis, electrochemical fluorination and the synthesis of ionic liquids for electrochemical applications, including super capacitors and lithium ion batteries.

Vembu Suryanarayanan
	Dr Vembu Suryanarayanan, received his BSc and MSc degrees from the Department of Chemistry, Bharathidasan University, Trichy, India, in 1990 and 1992, respectively. He received his PhD (Electrochemical Fluorination) from Alagappa University, Karaikudi, India, in 1998. He completed his postdoctoral studies at the National Taiwan University, Taiwan, and Utsunomiya University, Japan, from 2003 to 2006. He has published about 78 papers in peer-reviewed journals and contributed a chapter to Diamond Electrochemistry (ed. A. Fujishima, et al., Elsevier, 2005). Currently, he is working as a Principal Scientist in the Electro Organic Division, CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi, India. His research interests include the synthesis of novel ionic liquids as well as their applications in various electrochemical devices, and nanomaterial composites for electrochemical sensing.

Murugavel Kathiresan
	Dr Murugavel Kathiresan graduated from the University of Madras with both Bachelor's (2004) and Master's degrees (2006), and received his PhD from the University of Osnabrück, Germany, in 2010 under the guidance of Prof. Lorenz Walder. He then moved to the University of Basel, Switzerland, to conduct his postdoctoral research with Prof. Marcel Mayor. He was awarded the DST-INSPIRE Faculty award in December 2013. From March 2014 to April 2017, he worked as a DST-INSPIRE faculty member at the Electro Organic Division, CSIR-Central Electro Chemical Research Institute, Karaikudi, India. Since April 2017, he has been working as a Scientist in the same department. His current research interests include viologen-based supramolecular chemistry, along with the investigation of their applications towards photophysical and biological applications, electro-organic synthesis, electrochemical CO2 reduction and conversion to useful organics, metal organic frameworks and porous organic polymers for energy-related applications.

Kuo-Chuan Ho
	Dr Kuo-Chuan Ho received his Bachelor's and Master's degrees from the Department of Chemical Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan, in 1978 and 1980, respectively. He received his PhD in Chemical Engineering from the University of Rochester, USA, in 1986. Currently, he is a Distinguished Professor jointly appointed by the Department of Chemical Engineering and Institute of Polymer Science and Engineering at the National Taiwan University. His research interests mainly encompass applications of chemically modified electrodes to sensing and electro-optical devices, including electrochromic devices and dye-sensitized solar cells.

 	Scheme 1  Alkylation of viologens.47 Reaction conditions: CH3CN, 80 °C, 48 h. Anion exchange was carried out in deionized water using the respective salt.	 

 	Scheme 2  Zincke reaction conditions:50 (i) EtOH, 80 °C, 16 h; (ii) EtOH/H2O, 80 °C, 18 h.	 

 	Scheme 3  Synthesis of aryl- and alkyl-substituted asymmetric viologens.50 Reaction conditions: (i) EtOH, 80 °C, 16 h; (ii) H2O, 80 °C, 48 h; (iii) CH3CN, 80 °C, 48 h.	 

 	Scheme 4  Synthesis of viologen-based polyionic liquid (PIL) gels.54 Reaction conditions: (i) 1.0 wt% (NH4)2S2O8, 1.0 wt% TEMED; (ii) N2, H2O, 20 °C, 0.5 h.	 

 	Scheme 5  Synthesis of vinylbenzyl viologen (VBV) and methylmethacrylate (MMA)-based electrochromic gel.15 Reaction conditions: (i) thermal curing, AIBN, 90 °C, 40 min.	 

 	Scheme 6  Synthesis of phenyl viologen-based radical salt (VRS).2 Reaction conditions: (i) DCC, 4-dimethylaminopyridine (DMAP), CH2Cl2, 72 h, room temperature (RT); (ii) H2O, 24 h, RT.	 

 	Scheme 7  Synthesis of phosphaviologens.55 (a) Zincke reaction between phosphole and dinitrochlorobenzene (DNCB): (i) N-arylation of phosphole using different aryl substitutions. (b) Arylation of 4,4′-bipyridine: reaction conditions: (i) Cu(OAc)2·H2O (8 mol%), DMF, 40–100 °C, 4–36 h.	 

 	Scheme 8  Synthesis of TPA-containing ambipolar compounds.56 Reaction conditions: (i) CH2Cl2, reflux, 48 h; (ii) DBU (1,8-diazabicyclo[5.4.0]undec-7-ene), CH2Cl2, RT, 20 min; (iii) toluene, Pd2(dba)3, p(t-Bu)3, NaOt-Bu, 100 °C, 15 h; (iv) TBAF (tetra-n-butylammonium fluoride), THF (tetrahydrofuran), RT, 30 min; (v) 1,2-dibromoethane, TBA·Br (tetrabutyl ammonium bromide), KOH(aq), 90 °C, 24 h; (vi) reflux, CH3CN, NaBF4(aq), 72 h; (vii) K2CO3, DMSO (dimethyl sulfoxide), 100 °C, 24 h.	 

 	Scheme 9  Synthesis of PiPOx-V via cationic ring-opening polymerization of 2-isopropyl-2-oxazoline.57 Reaction conditions: CH3CN, 40 °C, N2 atmosphere, 4 days.	 

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of an electrochromic device.58	 

 	Fig. 2  Reversible electrochromism of N-aryl (top) and N-alkyl-substituted (bottom) phosphaviologens. Adapted with permission from ref. 55 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Layer-by-layer WO3–PBV/Ru purple film-based ECD. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  ECD with viologen-modified ZnO NT (or NR) arrays as the working electrode. Adapted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Synthesis and chemical structure of PVA–borax slime. (b) Photographs showing the physical aspects and texture of the slime. (c) Ferrocyanide/ferricyanide complementary redox species used for the viologen electrochromic reaction and the chemical structure of ethyl viologen in its oxidized state (left) and its reduced state (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 66 Copyright 2014, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 6  Fabrication of AgNW/PDMS hybrid electrode and elastomeric HV ECDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2017, RSC.	 

 	Fig. 7  Photographs of a rainbow-like ECD containing blend gel. The multielectrochromic device is provided with zoning design and colors are observed in each row of the device while a suitable voltage is being applied. Adapted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Images of [FcNTf]/[EV]/IL ECD (50 mM/50 mM) in (A) the bleached state (0 V) and (B) the colored state (2 V). (C) ECD mechanism of [FcNTf] and [EV] in which the heterogeneous reactions (green) are non-spontaneous and the homogeneous reactions (red) are spontaneous. The potentials were determined on a Pt disk. Adapted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a, d and g) Key components of an EC gel exhibiting electrochromism (anodic species, dmFc, is not shown). (b, e and h) Dependence of UV-visible spectra on the applied voltage for the ECD based on the gel used. (c, f and i) Photographs of ECDs with EC gels displaying colors as a function of applied potentials. Adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  A schematic illustration of the electrostatic force-assisted dispensing printing and printed EC gel composed of EV(PF6)2, dmFc, P(VDF-co-HFP), and [EMI][TFSI] with a weight ratio of 1:0.44:1:10. Adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Viologen-based electrochromic ion gels showing a green colored state. (a) ECD configuration and molecular structures of components in the EC gels. Dependence of UV-visible spectra on the applied voltages and two representative photographs of the bleached and colored states for ECDs based on (b) CNPhV2+ and (c) TFMFPhV2+. Reproduced with permission from the ref. 88. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (top) Illustration of an electrolyte-free flexible ECD of MV2+–GQDs. (bottom) Photographs of the reversible performance of a flexible MV2+–GQD ECD (containing 100 mM MV2+ with 8 mg mL−1 GQD in polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)) with ITO-on-polyethylene terephthalate (PET) in: (a) bleached state and (b) colored state. (c) Photograph of various bent MV2+–GQD ECDs with ITO-on-PET. Adapted with permission from ref. 92 Copyright 2014 Wiley.	 

Phosphaviologen (thienyl-substituted)	Solution	ACN/DMF	550	0.1/0.4	—	—	—	
55

Viologen–carbazole	Solution	PC	670	0.31/−1.80	85	<1 s	100000	
60

Viologen–triphenylamine	Solution	PC	727	0/−0.4, 0.8	96	9.5/1.7	1000	
56

Vinylbenzyl viologen/Prussian blue	Thin film	PC	615	1.12/−0.80	86.5	1.3/2.1	10000	
62

Methyl viologen	Hybrid	γ-Butyrolac tone	608	3.0/−3.0	70	3/6	500	
65

Ethyl viologen/borax	Solution	PVA/water	550	0/−2.3	>65	4/5	10000	
66

Heptyl viologen	Hybrid	EtOH	550	0/−0.65	83	43/32	100	
67

Ethyl viologen/V2O5	Film	Isopropanol	600	1.2/−1.2	70	6/10	250000	
68

Heptyl viologen/TMPD	Solid	—	615	0/0.9	60.1	5.2/2.1	2000	
70


p-Cyanophenyl viologen	Hybrid	PVA/water	600	—	61	8/16	—	
74

Vinylbenzyl viologen/TMPD	Hybrid	PC	615	0/0.5	60	—	10000	
15

Ferrocene–viologen	—	—	600	0/1.0	—	—	10000	
79

Ethyl viologen/FcNTf	Solution	—	610	0/2.0	95	5.5/9.5	1000	
80

Heptyl viologen (HV), p-cyano phenyl (p-CN-PV) and p-trifluoromethylphenylviologen (CF3-PV)	Hybrid	[BMI][TFSI] or [BMI][BF4]	540, 595 and 605	0/−0.7, −0.80/−0/0.5 and 0/−0.5	95, 90 and 95	—	—	
82

Diallyl viologen (DAV)/(PNIPAM)	Hybrid	[BVIm][Br]	≈600	—	>50	5/3	100	
54

Methyl viologen/GQD	Solution	PVA/water	550	0/−2.8	90	—	—	
92

Polyviologen/RGO	Film	Water	525	0/−0.6	90	9/6	—	
93


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
