Co-solvent enhanced zinc oxysulfide buffer layers in Kesterite copper zinc tin selenide solar cells   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CP01607J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CP01607J
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 15355-15364Co-solvent enhanced zinc oxysulfide buffer layers in Kesterite copper zinc tin selenide solar cells†

        
          
            K. Xerxes 
            Steirer
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Rebekah L. 
            Garris
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jian V. 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Michael J. 
            Dzara
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Paul F. 
            Ndione
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kannan 
            Ramanathan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ingrid 
            Repins
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Glenn 
            Teeter
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Craig L. 
            Perkins
          
        
      a
aNational Renewable Energy Laboratory, Chemical and Materials Science, 1617 Cole Blvd., Golden, Colorado 80401, USA. E-mail: Kenneth.Steirer@NREL.gov
bRochester Institute of Technology, Chemical Engineering Department, 1 Lomb Memorial Dr., Rochester, New York 14623, USA
Received 
      19th March 2015
    , Accepted 11th May 2015First published on 13th May 2015AbstractA co-solvent, dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), is added to the aqueous chemical “bath” deposition (CBD) process used to grow ZnOS buffer layers for thin film Cu2ZnSnSe4 (CZTSe) solar cells. Device performance improves markedly as fill factors increase from 0.17 to 0.51 upon the co-solvent addition. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analyses are presented for quasi-in situ CZTSe/CBD-ZnOS interfaces prepared under an inert atmosphere and yield valence band offsets equal to −1.0 eV for both ZnOS preparations. When combined with optical band gap data, conduction band offsets exceed 1 eV for the water and the water/DMSO solutions. XPS measurements show increased downward band bending in the CZTSe absorber layer when the ZnOS buffer layer is deposited from water only. Admittance spectroscopy data shows that the ZnOS deposited from water increases the built-in potential (Vbi) yet these solar cells perform poorly compared to those made with DMSO added. The band energy offsets imply an alternate form of transport through this junction. Possible mechanisms are discussed, which circumvent the otherwise large conduction band spike between CZTSe and ZnOS, and improve functionality with the low-band gap absorber, CZTSe (Eg = 0.96 eV).
1. Introduction
Band energy lineups across thin film junctions and the ability to adjust resulting offsets are critical to the performance and optimization of photovoltaic devices. The band edge discontinuities that form between absorber/emitter materials are particularly important functional parameters for the absorber/buffer interface.1 Yet, implementation of wide band gap buffer layers has proven difficult for junction formation with earth abundant absorbers. Kesterite Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 has been reported to have a large electron affinity and current blocking conduction band offsets (ΔEC) with wide band bap buffer materials such as zinc sulfide and zinc oxysulfide (ZnOxS1−x) herein ZnOS.2 Sakai et al. and Horoi et al. have reported on device performance for the pure sulfide, Cu2ZnSnS4 using a surface Sn enrichment procedure. This approach has led to improved PV devices. However, the CdS buffer layers outperform these alternate architectures.3,4 Another well known chalcogenide based PV technology has attained record high solar conversion efficiency, in part, through optimization of the Cu(In,Ga)Se2/CBD-ZnOS heterojunction.5 It is expected that the pure selenide Cu2ZnSnSe4, having a smaller Eg and higher electron affinity than Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS) is incompatible with ZnOS due to the large positive discontinuity or “spike” in the conduction band lineup.
Among the well-studied buffer materials such as ZnS, In2S3, ZnO and CdS, the ZnOS alloy has several advantages including: (i) large and controllable Eg;6,7 (ii) processing routes including scalable vapor phase and chemical solution depositions;8,9 (iii) elemental abundance with low cost and; (iv) low toxicity of precursors and end-product. However, ZnOS also exhibits some properties considered as detrimental to implementation in solar cells including: (i) low conductivity;10 (ii) insufficient control of electronically active defects and; (iii) low extrinsic doping efficiency.11 Yet, critical to window layer materials, ZnOS provides very high optical transmission. Hence, improved control of the electronic properties may allow for wider application to optoelectronics. If implemented through a CBD process, ZnOS could present a “drop in” replacement for smaller band gap CdS buffer layers.
High pH, aqueous CBD processes have led to high performance CIGS solar cells, in part because upon immersion into the CBD solution, alkaline cleaning of the absorber surface removes particles, surface oxides, and carbonaceous contamination, a process which has also been observed for CZTS.1,12 When compared to vacuum methods such as sputter deposition, CBD is considered “soft” meaning that incoming particles forming the interface are low energy and do not produce electronically active defects through ion impact. For some chalcogenides such as CIS and CIGS based PV devices, CBD-ZnOS has achieved superior performance in thin film solar cells.5,13 However, Barkhouse et al. reported a positive discontinuity or “spike” in the conduction band offset (CBO) between Cu2ZnSn(SxSe1−x)4 and ZnOS close to 1 eV that renders an impassible energy barrier for photogenerated electrons.14 This heterojunction property is a major hurdle to implementation of wide band gap ZnOS buffer layers in CZTS solar technologies.
The very thin, nearly insulating ZnOS buffer layer (N ∼ 1 × 1012–1 × 1014 cm−3) is physically positioned between p-type CZTSe (N ∼ 2.5 × 1016 cm−3) and n-type i-ZnO (N ∼ 1 × 1018 cm−3).15 Doping densities for the adjacent materials are larger and the absorber and window contact films are many times thicker in comparison, which renders the buffer layer strongly influenced by its neighbors. The layered structure depletes the buffer of charge and may populate or depopulate electronic defects in the buffer layer. For polycrystalline films, the optical, electronic and structural properties of the ZnOS alloy are well documented.6,16 Indeed, ordered ZnOS films exhibit Eg values that vary with the anion ratio from 3.2 for ZnO to 2.6 eV for ZnO0.6S0.4 and to 3.6 eV for ZnS. Several theoretical studies have examined the atomic and electronic band structure and band gap bowing versus the sulfur to oxygen ratio.7,17 Rozale et al. ascribe the band gap bowing effect to volume deformation, bond length deformation, and charge transfer due to the different electronegativities for oxygen and sulfur anions.17 However, CBD-ZnOS thin films are often characterized as amorphous or poorly crystalline.
Measured Eg values for CBD-ZnOS films are often large compared to binary ZnS and ZnO. The difficulty of depositing structurally ordered thin film ZnOS alloys by chemical solution deposition results from competing growth mechanisms guiding the film formation. Moreover, competition between differing nucleation and growth mechanisms in CBD can be quite sensitive to the details of the substrate surface roughness and chemical bonding mechanisms.18 The use of additives for CBD thin films has been proposed to aid film growth and final film properties with potential advantages for manufacturing scale-up.19 However, films grown on silicon based substrates of several varieties are not representative of those grown on absorber layers due to varying coverage and the apparent change to the growth mechanism from addition of the co-solvent dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO).20
A literature survey of optical band gap measurements for CBD-ZnOS is presented in Fig. 1. Reported optical band gaps vary widely, and do not appear to correlate with the solution anion or cation molarity. The average is 3.79 ± 0.16 eV. Separating results that reported the inclusion of hydrazine results in similar Eg = 3.81 eV and 3.78 eV for depositions with and without hydrazine respectively. With literature reports of optical band gaps ranging from 4.1 eV to as low as only 3.3 eV, we conclude that well controlled CBD-ZnOS stoichiometry and corresponding optical properties have not been demonstrated to date. These are well above the minimum Eg of 2.6 eV for [S]/[S + O] ∼ 0.4 using vapor deposition methods.6–8,16 Comparing these CBD reports with those for vapor deposited ZnOS, it seems likely that the most CBD-ZnOS films exhibit size quantization.18 The CBD method is still lacking for applications where bulk ZnOS properties are desired. Complete notes, references and values are given in the ESI,† Fig. S1.
 Fig. 1  Literature survey of optically measured Eg values obtained for ZnOS films plotted by solution concentrations for (a) zinc and (b) sulfur. (c) Histogram of CBD-ZnOS optical gap values. 
Devices with the configuration glass/Mo/CZTS(Se)/ZnOS/i-ZnO/Al:ZnO suffer severe performance loss due to the large, positive conduction band mismatch found at the CZTSe/ZnOS heterojunction. This “spike” in the conduction band lineup serves to block photocurrent as demonstrated by ultrafast UPS measurements reported by Barkhouse et al.14 Yet unoptimized CBD-ZnOS deposited with the co-solvent DMSO enables high short circuit current (Jsc) and power conversion efficiencies over 5%.21 In the present study, the effects of DMSO on ZnOS and the junction formed with CZTSe are compared using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy derived band diagrams, admittance spectroscopy, and temperature dependent JV measurements (JVT). The surprising result that an increase of built-in potential leads to worse performing solar cells is discussed in reference to Fermi level pinning and alternate charge transport mechanisms in the buffer layer.
2. Results
2.1 CZTSe/CBD-ZnOS characterization
Layer-by-layer growth of CBD-ZnOS on CZTSe was performed in a nitrogen-purged glove box interconnected with a UHV cluster tool. After each incremental deposition, the sample was rinsed in diluted NH4OH in water followed by pure DI water (2.5% v/v) to eliminate Zn(OH)2 precipitation onto the surface as described by Bär et al.22 Rapid transfer to UHV (∼2 min) without air exposure after growth steps ensured clean surfaces representative of each step during film growth.

2.1.1 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. 
XPS survey spectra for the CZTSe bare absorber and with ZnOS buffer layers of increasing thickness are presented in Fig. 2. The thickness of the ZnOS buffer layer was increased by repeated immersion in fresh solution as detailed in the Experimental section. Detected photoelectrons in spectrum (a) are emitted from elemental components of the bare absorber Cu, Zn, Sn and Se. Also observed is 1–2% adventitious oxygen on the CZTSe surface. The presence of oxygen on the CZTSe surface results after surface cleaning in dilute NH4OH, which removes carbon surface contaminants and most oxides formed post-deposition.
 Fig. 2  XPS survey spectra for layer-by-layer formation of ZnOS/CZTSe heterojunction. (a) Clean CZTSe surface. CBD-ZnOS deposition times (b) 54 s, (c) 109 s, (d) 163 s, (e) 272 s and (f) 35 min onto the CZTSe shown in (a). See text for detailed explanation. 
XPS performed on quaternary CZTSe exhibits multiple overlapping peaks with large spectral contributions from core levels and X-ray excited Se and Zn Auger photoelectrons. Ideally, XPS composition measurements utilize transitions with similar energy and probe depth. Therefore, Zn 3d, Cu 3p, Se 3d and Sn 4d core levels were used in the composition calculations, providing probe depths on the order of ∼10 nm.23 When compared to stoichiometric concentrations for Cu (25%), Zn (12.5%), Sn (12.5%) and Se (50%), Table 1 clearly shows a CZTSe surface that is rich in Zn and depleted of Cu and Sn. These films are terminated Zn rich during growth unlike the 1:1 Zn:Sn ratio reported by Sakai et al.4 Zn over pressures during the final stages of deposition are used in high efficiency CZTSe solar cells to aid in carrier type inversion near the surface and to push the electronic depletion region further into the absorber and away from the metallurgical junction with the buffer and window contact.24 The formal charges of +1 for Cu, +2 for Zn, +4 for Sn and −2 for Se, predict a net charge near zero for the measured surface composition of the Kesterite semiconductor. The observed Zn rich surface is likely to contain self-compensating 2ZnCu + ZnSn defect clusters as theoretically predicted by Chen et al.25 If this defect structure is entirely responsible for the Zn rich surface, the predicted Cu/Sn ratio should be 2. However, the observed Cu/Sn ratio is 1.2, which indicates a likely excess of ZnCu point defects.
Table 1 Elemental compositions of the CZTSe surface and the ZnOS buffer layers prepared with and without DMSO




Sample
Cu (%)
Zn (%)
Sn (%)
Se (%)




CZTSe
6
38
5
50






 
Zn
O
S




ZnOS water
50
13.5
36.5


ZnOS water + DMSO
50
14.0
36.0




Another point of view is that the surface composition is nearly ZnSe with heavy Cu and Sn doping. As such, the surface composition is intermediate between CZTSe and ZnSe. In a related report, Erslev et al. showed that the composition of low-temperature deposited films can vary widely, with controllable optical and electronic properties.26 Although the films studied here are deposited at 510 °C, it's possible that, to some extent a similar effect occurs under very Zn-rich conditions. While the exact nature of the CZTSe surface is still under debate, Zn enrichment preserves the Cu(I) and Sn(IV) dominant cation electronic character, minimizes Cu antisite defects and maintains predominant Kesterite semiconducting properties even as the stoichiometry evolves towards ZnSe. Further evidence for homogeneous CZTSe within the volume of the surface is given from Auger electron scanning microscopy down to the 100 nm length-scale (see Fig. S2, ESI†).


2.1.2 Buffer layer growth. 
Photoelectron intensity for the absorber elements Cu, Sn and Se attenuates as the thickness of the buffer layer increases with increasing CBD deposition time as shown in Fig. 2. A key difference between the current study and XPS studies reported for ZnOS buffer layers on CIS, CGS and CIGS is the highly Zn rich composition of the underlying CZTSe that obscures the Zn-containing buffer. Signal attenuation of Cu 2p3/2 (marked ** in Fig. 2) occurs with shorter CBD times than for Se 3d5/2 (marked * in Fig. 2) at 932 eV and 54 eV binding energy (BE) respectively and is indicative of the difference in photoelectron escape depths at different kinetic energies. As the buffer thickness increases, the Zn Auger signal changes shape (discussed in detail later) and the O 1s and S 2p signal intensities increase. Upon 35 minutes of CBD, small but measureable substrate signal arising from the absorber is observed for the Se 3d, which is the lowest BE peak (highest kinetic energy (KE)) with high photoemission efficiency. This is observed for samples taken directly from device processing in ambient and for those deposited in situ for surface analysis. Thickness measurements by other methods such as stylus profilometry and field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) give thicknesses of 20 ± 4 nm. However, uniform ZnOS films of this thickness should completely attenuate photoelectron intensity from the underlying CZTSe and must be explained within the XPS results.
Attenuation analysis is used to address the nonuniform ZnOS coverage. Calculations using the TPP-2 formula for electron effective attenuation lengths (EAL) and the resulting thicknesses assuming a dense ZnO1−xSx (x = 0.73) alloy were performed using the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) database. However, the experimental set-up for photoelectron detection in these studies used an acceptance angle of ±7° and an inherently rougher surface than is typically done for flat single crystal substrates. Hence, the assumptions that predict signal attenuation for over-layers in this instance are only semi-quantitative and should be viewed as analytical means to assess coverage rather than an absolute measure of thickness. Spectra from high, medium and low BE regions were chosen for analysis. Considering the longest deposition time of 35 minutes and the fact that this results in signal barely observable from the absorber at low BE while higher BE signals are completely attenuated, then using the NIST PES EAL database, the calculated thickness of the buffer layer is 7.4 nm assuming a ZnO0.27S0.73 over-layer with density of 5.47 g cm−3 for an ordered crystal. However, the density of CBD films is typically lower than that of ordered crystals. D. Lincot and coworkers measured 4.1 g cm−3 for the density of CBD-ZnOS deposited without hydrazine on a gold quartz crystal microbalance.9 Using this value for the buffer layer density as input into the NIST PES EAL database gives a thickness value of 10 nm. Compared to EAL calculations, the measured thickness discrepancy is a factor of 2 resulting from factors such as substrate roughness and variations in buffer layer thickness. Voids and pinholes are not likely as shunting and Voc loss is not observed in device studies. However, nonuniform thickness of CBD-ZnOS buffer layers is observed in FESEM studies for CBD films on CZTSe. Therefore, we conclude that thin areas of the buffer layer allow a fraction of photoelectrons to pass through yet averages 20 nm thick.
Close inspection of the Zn LMM line shapes was performed in order to aid the composition analysis for ZnOS deposited on CZTSe (see ESI,† Fig. S3). The Zn Auger parameter is a sensitive measure of the chemical state for Zn compounds and calculated for CZTSe and ZnOS at 2011.56 eV and 2010.76 eV respectively. The Auger parameter decreases by 0.8 eV due to the change in the chemical environment for Zn, commensurate with an abrupt shift in the surrounding composition. The Auger parameter for Zn in CZTSe has not yet been reported but the present measurement is very close to the reported value of 2011.5 eV for ZnSe.27 As expected, the measured Auger parameter for ZnOS is between the literature values for ZnO and ZnS.22 Note in Table 1 that the anion ratios for depositions with and without the co-solvent DMSO are nearly identical.
Further description of the ZnOS composition is made after close inspection of the O 1s spectral line shapes, shown in Fig. 3. The oxygen detected on bare CZTSe was removed in the ammonia containing CBD whether CZTSe samples were as-received or pre-rinsed in dilute NH4OH. For the 163 s ZnOS deposition, the BE values from high to low are assigned to Zn(OH)2 (532.75 eV), ZnOS alloy (531.67 eV). The initial layers of ZnOS on CZTSe appear rich in Zn(OH)2. Measured BE values are in agreement with literature values and indicate the dominant formation of alloyed ZnOS. Commensurate with the complex cluster growth mechanism, competition between zinc hydroxide and zinc ammonium complexes appears to initially favor the hydroxide.22 While after nucleation the ammonium complexes dictate film growth, as growth of the film continues, incomplete sulfurization leaves the film composition with significant oxygen content. Model fits to spectra measured after 35 min depositions were allowed to shift according to the measured substrate core level shifts. Upon completion of ZnOS deposition, a new peak assigned to ZnO (530.4 eV) is observed in both cases. From the XPS results, the mole fraction x of oxygen in the film was 0.27. Inclusion of DMSO in the bath has little effect on the composition leading to x = 0.28. However, the O 1s line shape analysis indicates that the entirety of oxygen present is not alloyed and may contain a fraction of Zn(OH)2 and ZnO. Additional spectra are available in Fig. S4 (ESI†).
 Fig. 3  O 1s spectral decompositions for CBD-ZnOS depositions with and without DMSO on CZTSe. Spectral contributions for O 1s surface contaminants were observed for surface oxygen on CZTSe cleaned with dilute NH4OH. 


2.1.3 Band energy offsets and band bending. 
XPS core level and valence band spectra were measured for each surface in the layer-by-layer growth of ZnOS on CZTSe. The valence band maximum was measured at 0.6 eV below EF and hence near midgap for the semiconductor. Upon growth of CBD-ZnOS onto CZTSe, the valence band maximum (VBM) signals superimpose until the substrate valence signal is attenuated and the VBM of ZnOS is revealed (see ESI,† Fig. S5). The valence band offset (ΔEV) is calculated using ΔEV = (ECZTSeCL − ECZTSeVBM) − (EZnOSCL − EZnOSVBM)thick − (ΔECZTSeCL + ΔEZnOSCL)thin(1) where, subscript CL represents a core level from either the CZTSe or ZnOS and subscripts thin and thick represent measurements taken from 163 s and 35 min depositions of ZnOS on CZTSe. Core level shifts occur as EF equilibrates across the junction during interface formation. This process is illustrated with spectra from the water only case in Fig. 4 where the CZTSe core level BE values increase with ZnOS thickness, indicating a shift of the CZTSe VBM away from the Fermi energy. Note that ca. 0.4 eV of surface band bending is already present in the CZTSe due to the growth conditions. Representative Zn 2p3/2, O 1s and S 2p3/2 core level shifts for both water and water + DMSO cases are shown in Fig. 5versus deposition times for CBD with and without DMSO. For the water only case, most of the band bending induced core level shifts occur during the first few minutes of junction formation. The inclusion of DMSO lowers the average BE shift of the CZTSe core levels from 0.25 eV to 0.10 eV and thus lowers the effect of interface band bending in the absorber. Core level shifts for O 1s and S 2p closely followed those of the substrate as shown in Fig. 5 indicating negligible (<0.05 eV) band bending in the ZnOS buffer. Reproducible measurements for ΔEV averaged for several different core levels of CZTSe (Cu 2p, Sn 4d, Se 3d) and ZnOS (O 1s, S 2p) result in the same ΔEV equal to 1.0 ± 0.2 eV for growth conditions with and without DMSO. The larger positive change in the CZTSe core levels found in the case of the water only bath may be an indicator of larger n-type carrier density of the buffer layer. Ideally, the resultant band bending is equal to the difference in EF before contact is made across the junction, however interface states or the presence of fixed charge may also contribute to the change in the observed band energy shifts.
 Fig. 4  Core level spectra from layer-by-layer growth of CBD-ZnOS on CZTSe using water solvent only. 
 Fig. 5  XPS measured changes to the BE for Se 3p3/2, O 1s and S 2p3/2, which relate to the amount of band bending in CZTSe/CBD-ZnOS heterojunctions for water only and water + DMSO bath preparations. Lines are simply guides to the eye. 
A calculation of the CBO completes the band diagram, which would include the 0.96 eV optical gap of CZTSe. However, when photoemission spectroscopy (PES) and inverse PES are used to measure the surface electronic gap, it is increased to 1.2 eV following the growth procedure described by Repins et al.24,28 The optical Eg of CBD-ZnOS is 3.8 eV as described above and also in our previous reports.29 Then calculation of the conduction band offsets (ΔEC) follow ΔEC = EZnOSg − ECZTSeg + ΔEV(2) The resulting ΔEC for the CZTSe/CBD-ZnOS heterojunctions are 1.6 eV (±0.4 eV) for CBD from water and water + DMSO. Clear differences in CZTSe band bending are present for the different bath conditions and the built in potential (Vbi) is expected to differ. However, this does not affect ΔEV and ΔEC in the present case. It is also important to note that the details of the buffer deposition vary significantly in literature. However, analyzing a large range of reported Eg for ZnOS (3.3−4.1 eV) the ΔEC is expected in all cases to be equal to or larger than previously reported theoretical and experimental values for ZnS and ZnOS on CZT(S,Se) of 1.1 eV and 1.3 eV respectively.14,30

2.2 Device characterization
Completed photovoltaic devices with the layered structure glass/Mo/CZTSe/CBD-ZnOS/i-ZnO/Al:ZnO were characterized to assess the expected blocking properties of the buffer layers in solar cells operating under simulated one-Sun conditions at 25 °C. The buffer effects on Vbi and JV versus temperature (JVT) were assessed to gain electronic information on the interface.

2.2.1 Solar cell performance. 
Devices with buffer layers (20 nm) that included DMSO in the ZnOS deposition reached over 5% power conversion efficiency (PCE) compared to CBD-ZnOS deposited from water only which gave PCE below 2%. Overly thick buffer layers (30 nm) were used to minimize the possibility for shunts or pinholes to affect the shapes of the JVs shown in Fig. 6. Except for the ZnOS, all depositions were performed in parallel to ensure identical material properties and robust trends. Note that the thick buffers lowered the performance metrics as compared to champion devices. Apparent in the light JV curve for the water only solvent is an inverted FF (<25) as a result of the inflected JV. Detailed discussion of how buffer layers can cause JV-curve inflection and low FF in chalcogenide devices can be found in the literature.31,32 For the buffer layers deposited with DMSO added, solar cell measurements show no inflected JV curves when varying the thickness between 5 and 44 nm indicating that the inflection does not result from an overly thick buffer layer.21 Including DMSO in the bath improves diode response and FF. Observed in the first quadrant of Fig. 6 are crossed dark and light JV curves for the water only case, which indicates a barrier to electron transport. In contrast, inclusion of DMSO results in dark and light JVs that are aligned under forward bias.
 Fig. 6  
JV curves for solar cells having thick buffer layers comparing bath preparations. 


2.2.2 Admittance spectroscopy and JVT. 
Admittance spectroscopy (AS) was performed on devices to assess the activation energies of dominant defects present. Data in Table 2 was acquired on the same samples used for JV measurements shown in Fig. 6. Deposition of CBD-ZnOS with the different bath conditions results in identical room temperature Voc values (0.336 V) and the nearly identical bulk EF–EV positions (0.167 to 0.170 eV) for CZTSe in the devices. As a reference, no dominant defect levels are observed when CdS is used as a buffer.33 Hence, peaks located near 140 K and 105 K shown in Fig. 7a and b respectively are electronic effects produced by inclusion of the CBD-ZnOS buffer layers. AS results differ slightly in the two samples, and the activation energy (Ea) is 60 meV larger for the CBD-ZnOS grown in the water only bath conditions. As a consequence of the sample and measurement, the Ea measured on these samples shown inset in Fig. 7, is a signature of conductivity freeze-out, which is the combined effect of freeze-out of majority-carrier population and mobility. Note also that Vbi for the devices is increased for the seemingly more n-type buffer deposited from the water only bath, which is expected when considering the increased band bending shown in Fig. 5 and Table 2.
Table 2 Calculated electronic properties from Voc(T), JVT, admittance spectroscopy and XPS




Sample

E
a,AS (eV)

N
cv@0 V, 300 K, 10 kHz (1 cm−3)

W
cv@0 V, 300 K, 10 kHz (μm)

V
bi band bend CZTS (V)

V
oc 300 K (V)

V
oc
T = 0 K 1 Sun (V)

E
F–EV bulk (eV)
ΔECL (eV) from XPS




Water
0.164
2.9 × 1016
0.17
0.471
0.336
0.664
0.167
0.25


Water + DMSO
0.104
2.5 × 1016
0.17
0.443
0.336
0.751
0.170
0.10




 Fig. 7  Admittance showing temperature dependent carrier and mobility freeze out (a) and (b). JV vs. T showing increased CBO between ZnOS/ZnO in forward bias (c) and (d). 
An assessment of the JVT measurements was performed under dark and illuminated conditions. Near 150 K carriers in CZTSe begin to freeze out and strongly affect the JV response. Hence, our Voc(T) analysis was performed on Voc(T > 150 K) providing analysis of the hole extraction barrier without the complication of temperature dependent collection efficiency. Hages et al. further modeled the effect of band edge potential fluctuations on Voc, which can lower Voc as the band positions become broadened.34 However, a simple addition of DMSO to the buffer layer leaves the absorber band edge energy levels and associated potential fluctuations unchanged. Hence, measured Voc(T = 0 K) values reported in Table 2 represent changes in the ZnOS buffer layer that alter the interface dominated loss of photovoltage. Sheer described this Fermi level pinning effect at the absorber–buffer junction arising from either a continuum of energy state density or a discrete defect level.35Fig. 7c and d show that the CBD-ZnOS made from the water only bath significantly lowers the low temperature photovoltage by 87 mV compared to that deposited from the water + DMSO bath conditions.

3. Discussion
Band energy diagrams are presented in Fig. 8, where the XPS derived band line-ups are shown with a slightly increased surface electronic gap of CZTSe as previously shown using inverse photoelectron spectroscopy on these films.28 Before contact is made to the buffer layer, thermally coevaporated CZTSe thin films grown using similar conditions exhibit a surface electronic gap of 1.2 eV as described above. Furthermore, the Fermi energy of the free surface is close to mid gap. After ZnOS deposition, with or without DMSO, the two CZTSe/ZnOS systems exhibit very large ΔEC. Charge blocking ΔEC for CIGS devices are known to result in inflected JV response and the crossing of dark and light JVs.36 Reports from Minemoto et al., Sharbati et al. and others regarding inorganic thin film solar cells have shown the maximum allowable conduction band discontinuity is near 0.5 eV. Larger than this and Jsc drops precipitously.37–39 A discontinuity for ΔEC greater than 0.5 eV is sufficiently large to block photogenerated charge transport across the CZTSe/buffer heterointerface. The same is also known for CZTS based solar cells.2 During JV measurement, as the negative bias is increased, the ΔEC prevents photocurrent transport across the buffer layer (Quadrant IV). As the negative bias is further increased, the carrier density increases to the point that the ΔEC is overcome and charge flows across the junction (Quadrant III). In Quadrant I, the crossing of dark and light JV curves arises when the illumination of the photovoltaic device modulates the ΔEC, even if slightly, to change the charge injection efficiency between light and dark conditions under forward bias. For the water only case, both of these characteristics manifest in the performance tests. However, when DMSO is included in the bath, neither of these blocking ΔEC effects are observed, indicating that the apparent ΔEC is adequate for electron collection.
 Fig. 8  Band diagrams for CZTSe/CBD-ZnOS heterojunctions formed using water or water + DMSO as solvents in the buffer deposition. 
Considering the large ΔEC for both CZTSe/CBD-ZnOS interfaces formed with and without DMSO and the apparent increase in n-type carrier density of the water only buffer deposition, one would expect nominally equal and poor device performance. One could argue that a slight improvement should be observed when the buffer layer induces higher band bending and Vbi is larger as in the water only case. However, the water + DMSO case exhibiting lower band bending and Vbi drastically improves device performance by removing the inflection of the JV response, increasing FF and eliminating dark/light crossing. From Voc(T) measurements, the extrapolated T = 0 K intercept is an indicator of the dominant recombination mechanism. In this case, the measured Voc(T = 0 K) is far below Eg for the absorber. While both samples show interface dominated recombination, the effect in the water-only case is enhanced and results in a lower extrapolated Voc at T = 0 K. From the above band line-up measurements, the compositional similarity, the differences in band bending and the device results, we hypothesize the existence of an alternate transport mechanism for which the severity or energy level can be changed by modifications to the CBD-ZnOS growth with the addition of DMSO.
High efficiencies for thin film CZTSe solar cells require optimal conduction band alignments with buffer materials. Sputter deposition of ZnOS demonstrated by Grimm et al. demonstrates that vapor growth methods allow for continuously variable anion alloying, x = [S]/[S + O] from 0 to 1 with commensurate control of Eg from 3.6 eV (x = 1) to 2.6 eV (x = 0.45). This property control has positive effects on CIGS solar cells.8 For CIGS absorbers, Eg is larger than that of CZTSe and control of ZnOS Eg through vapor deposition enabled high performance and systematic study of ΔEC. The reported device data supports Minemoto et al. as well as Sharbati and Sites' device modeling treatments of thin film energy level alignments and the optimal alignment of ΔEC.37,38 Yet for ZnOS, CBD does not provide facile control of Eg and other means are necessary to increase performance. Regarding the present case, the CZTSe/CBD-ZnOS compositional, spectroscopic and device studies point to charge transport that allows the buffer to act as a lower gap material with higher electron affinity as is shown schematically in Fig. 9. The specific mechanism is unclear but may consist of: (1) tunneling of electrons through thin areas of the buffer layer; (2) a defect band between 2.2 eV and 2.7 eV above the valence band maximum; (3) conducting ZnO filaments as shown by Hultqvist et al.40
 Fig. 9  Hypothesized alternate transport level (shown as discrete but may be continuous) that circumvents the large conduction band spike and allows the flow of negative photogenerated carriers across ZnOS/CZTSe heterojunction. 
In regards to electron tunneling, it is inefficient for length-scales beyond 3 nm, and would require much of the film to be thinner than the XPS attenuation analysis indicates. Moreover, the device studies used thicker CBD-ZnOS layers and identified that the effect is likely electronic and not purely morphological. Tunneling is therefore unlikely to contribute significantly to the present case.
Regarding defect mediated transport, no literature report has compared defect properties of ZnOS on thin film device performance, with most papers focusing on ZnOS growth, processing and efforts to tune Eg. However in a theoretical treatment, Varley et al. evaluated the electronic effects of point defects in ZnS and went so far as to study O, OH and H defects as well.41 Hydrogen interstitials formed in ZnS were predicted as amphoteric defects 2.45 eV above the VBM, which may be stable at CBD processing temperatures. When lattice oxygen is substituted for sulfur and bound with interstitial hydrogen, the transition energy level is pushed even further towards the CBM leading again to an amphoteric defect. It remains to be demonstrated if these defects extrapolate to ZnOS films grown by CBD. Yet, identification and understanding the properties of these defects are critical to the implementation of ZnOS since they may act as performance limiting Shockley–Read–Hall recombination centers, fixed charge centers or clusters, which can alter the heterojunction electronic properties. Although speculative, the present example is one plausible atomistic mechanism for the apparent sub-gap transport of charge in the CBD-ZnOS films.
The presence of ZnO filaments among the ZnOS buffer layer poses another interesting explanation. Regarding the energetics between ZnO and ZnS, Persson et al. reported theoretical ΔEC of 1.06 eV for the isolated ZnS and ZnO materials and 0.6 eV for ZnO0.25S0.75 compared to ZnS.42 Wei and Zunger calculated a larger ΔEC of 1.54 eV.43 This energetic offset could result in a significant DOS arising from ZnO that is far below the ZnOS CBM. Experimentally, the small ZnO related XPS O 1s spectral feature is observed for the ZnOS buffer layer deposited for 35 min. It is plausible that the right concentration of these conductive regions aids charge extraction and lowers the interface recombination.
Although other mechanisms may exist, either ZnOS point defects or ZnO secondary phases could form alternate charge conduction mechanisms. While DMSO is a dipolar, aprotic solvent and will not decompose in alkaline bath conditions, the present study demonstrates that manipulation of CBD-ZnOS electronic properties is possible by adding DMSO during film growth. The resulting changes to the buffer layer then facilitates high performance of an unlikely electronic junction partner such as ZnOS for applications limited by blocking ΔEC such as in the case for thin film CZTSe solar cells.
4. Conclusions
When DMSO is substituted for a fraction of the water during chemical deposition, thin film ZnOS buffer layers grown on CZTSe exhibit marked electronic differences as measured with XPS, Voc(T) and JV(T). Anion ratios for these ZnOS films are similar and both buffer layers result in exceedingly large ΔEC. However, the improved devices exhibit properties with an emitter having ΔEC small enough to allow charge transport across the CZTSe/ZnOS interface and to the subsequent window contact layers. These measurements imply the presence of an alternate transport mechanism across the ZnOS buffer layer that is formed upon CBD with the co-solvent DMSO. Similar additives may expand the scope of CBD to consider materials for optoelectronic applications not previously suitable.
5. Experimental
5.1 ZnOS deposition
Reagent grade zinc sulfate and thiourea (TU) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich and used to prepare aqueous solutions of concentrations 0.075 M and 1.5 M, respectively. Reagent grade dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and 28–30% ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH) were all used as received. Deposition of ZnOS was carried out in a nitrogen purged glovebox. A jacketed beaker maintained the bath temperature at 80 °C. Reagents were added into the vessel in the order of DI, zinc sulfate, thiourea, and optionally, dimethylsulfoxide followed by initial heating for 10 minutes. 4.3 mL of NH4OH was then added to the reaction solution and a sample was submerged. At the desired deposition time the sample was removed and immediately rinsed with a solution of 2.5% NH4OH followed by DI water. Samples were dried with compressed nitrogen.
5.2 Photoelectron spectroscopy
XPS measurements were performed under ultra-high vacuum (UHV) conditions (Pbase better than 5 × 10−10 Torr) within a Physical Instruments 5600 photoelectron spectrometer. X-ray excitation was generated with monochromatic Al Kα X-rays (hν = 1486.6 eV). Pass energy for XPS was 11.75 eV. Compositions were calculated from background subtracted peak areas and corrected for each core level's relative sensitivity factor using Multipak software values. Fermi-energy calibration was performed using a freshly sputter cleaned Mo foil. Binding energy calibration followed Seah for Au 4f7/2, Ag 3d5/2 and Cu 2p3/2 peak centriods.44
5.3 Profilometry
For thickness measurements, five small pieces of crystal bond were placed on the sample. The crystal bond was melted to formed small beads on the sample surface. Upon cooling to room temperature the samples were etched in a solution of 10% HCl for thirty seconds. The samples were then rinsed in DI and submerged in MEK for 20 minutes to dissolve the crystal bond, leaving isolated ZnOS spots to be measured using a Dektak profilometer.
5.4 Solar cells
Solar cells were grown on soda-lime glass with sputtered Mo back contacts. CZTSe was thermally coevaporated using methods described previously with the inclusion of NaF deposited on the Mo back contact.33 After CBD-ZnOS deposition onto the CZTSe, a sputtered bilayer i-ZnO/Al:ZnO top contact was followed by deposition of Ni/Al grids. Lithographic isolation defined device areas of 0.42 cm2. Solar cell measurements were performed with simulated AM1.5 illumination while substrate temperature was held at 25 °C.
5.5 Admittance spectroscopy and JVT
An Agilent 4294A impedance analyzer was used to conduct the capacitance–voltage (10 kHz, bias from −1.0 to +0.5 V) and admittance spectroscopy measurements (frequency from 1 to 1000 kHz; temperature from 70 to 310 K). The AC voltage modulation amplitude was kept at 55 mV peak to peak. We used an Agilent B2912A source-measurement unit for the current–voltage measurement with varying temperature (70 to 310 K) and light intensity (1 × 10−6 to 1 Sun), the latter controlled by a set of neutral-density filters with a Newport 96000 solar simulator. The dark current–voltage measurements were taken at the same temperatures with the light from the solar simulator blocked by an aluminum plate.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Laboratory Directed Research and Development (LDRD) Program at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory. MJD was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Workforce Development for Teachers and Scientists (WDTS) under the Science Undergraduate Laboratory Internship (SULI) program. NREL is a national laboratory of the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (Contract No. DE-AC36-08-GO28308) operated by the Alliance for Sustainable Energy, LLC.
Notes and references
J. Kessler, K. O. Velthaus, M. Ruckh, R. Laichinger, H. W. Schock, D. Lincot, R. Ortega and J. Vedel, PVSEC-6, 1992, 1005–1010 CAS .
R. Haight, A. Barkhouse, O. Gunawan, B. Shin, M. Copel, M. Hopstaken and D. B. Mitzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 253502 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Hiroi, N. Sakai, S. Muraoka, T. Katou and H. Sugimoto, 38th IEEE PVSC Proceedings, 2012, 001811 Search PubMed .
N. Sakai, H. Hiroi and H. Sugimoto, 36th IEEE PVSC Proceedings, 2011, 003654 Search PubMed .
Solar Frontier achieves record 20.9% cell efficiency on thin-film CIS, http://www.solar-frontier.com/eng/news/2014/C031367.html, 2014.
B. K. Meyer, A. Polity, B. Farangis, Y. He, D. Hasselkamp, T. Krämer and C. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 4929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Fan, Z. X. Shen, Y. M. Lu and J.-L. Kuo, New J. Phys., 2009, 11, 093008 CrossRef .
A. Grimm, D. Kieven, R. Klenk, I. Lauermann, A. Neisser, T. Niesen and J. Palm, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 520, 1330–1333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hubert, N. Naghavi, A. Etcheberry, O. Roussel, D. Hariskos, M. Powalla, O. Kerrec and D. Lincot, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2008, 205, 2335–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Dona, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, 205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grün, A. Storzum, M. Hetterich, A. Kamilli, W. Send, T. Walter and C. Klingshirn, J. Cryst. Growth, 1999, 201–202, 457–460 CrossRef .
K. Ramanathan, J. Mann, S. Glynn, S. Christensen, J. Pankow, J. Li, J. Scharf, L. Mansfield, M. Contreras and R. Noufi, 38th IEEE PVSC Proceedings, 2012, 001677 Search PubMed .
T. Nakada and M. Mizutani, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 41, L165–L167 CAS .
D. A. R. Barkhouse, R. Haight, N. Sakai, H. Hiroi, H. Sugimoto and D. B. Mitzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 193904 CrossRef PubMed .
T. M. Hsieh, S. J. Lue, J. Ao, Y. Sun, W. S. Feng and L. B. Chang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 443–448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Pandey, S. Pandey, A. C. Pandey and G. K. Mehrotra, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 233110 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Rozale, L. Beldi, B. Bouhafs and P. Ruterana, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2007, 244, 1560–1566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hodes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2181 RSC .
N. Naghavi, D. Abou-Ras, N. Allsop, N. Barreau, S. Bücheler, A. Ennaoui, C. H. Fischer, C. Guillen, D. Hariskos, J. Herrero, R. Klenk, K. Kushiya, D. Lincot, R. Menner, T. Nakada, C. Platzer-Björkman, S. Spiering, A. N. Tiwari and T. Törndahl, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2010, 18, 411–433 CAS .

          M. Reinisch, C. L. Perkins and K. X. Steirer, 2015, in preparation.
K. X. Steirer, R. L. Garris, C. Beall, A. Kanevce, K. Ramanathan, I. Repins, G. Teeter and C. L. Perkins, 40th IEEE PVSC Proceesings, 2014, 0847–0851 Search PubMed .
M. Bär, A. Ennaoui, J. Klaer, T. Kropp, R. Sáez-Araoz, N. Allsop, I. Lauermann, H. W. Schock and M. C. Lux-Steiner, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 123503 CrossRef PubMed .

          C. J. Powell and A. Jablonski, NIST Electron Effective-Attenuation-Length Database, v1.3, SRD 82, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD,  2011 Search PubMed .
I. Repins, C. Beall, N. Vora, C. DeHart, D. Kuciauskas, P. Dippo, B. To, J. Mann, W.-C. Hsu, A. Goodrich and R. Noufi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 154–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, A. Walsh, X.-G. Gong and S.-H. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1522–1539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. T. Erslev, M. R. Young, J. V. Li, S. C. Siah, R. Chakraborty, H. Du, R. J. Lad, T. Buonassisi and G. Teeter, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 129, 124–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Handbook of X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy, ed. J. F. Moulder, W. F. Stickle, P. E. Sobol, K. Bomben and J. Chastain, Perkin-Elmer Corporation, 2nd edn,  1992 Search PubMed .

          I. Repins and M. Baer, personal communication.
J. Li, S. Glynn, S. Christensen, J. Mann, B. To, K. Ramanathan, R. Noufi, T. E. Furtak and D. Levi, 38th IEEE PVSC Proceedings, 2012, 001580 Search PubMed .
A. Nagoya, R. Asahi and G. Kresse, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2011, 23, 404203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Buffière, G. Brammertz, S. Oueslati, H. E. Anzeery, J. Bekaert, K. B. Messaoud, C. Köble, S. Khelifi, M. Meuris and J. Poortmans, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2014, 47, 175101 CrossRef .
A. O. Pudov, A. Kanevce, H. A. Al-Thani, J. R. Sites and F. S. Hasoon, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 064901 CrossRef PubMed .
J. V. Li, D. Kuciauskas, M. R. Young and I. L. Repins, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 163905 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. Hages, N. J. Carter, R. Agrawal and T. Unold, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 234504 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Scheer, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 104505 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Rau and H. W. Schock, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1999, 69, 131–147 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minemoto, T. Matsui, H. Takakura, Y. Hamakawa, T. Negami, Y. Hashimoto, T. Uenoyama and M. Kitagawa, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 67, 83–88 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sharbati and J. Sites, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2014, 4, 697–702 CrossRef .
T. Unold and H. W. Schock, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2011, 41, 297–321 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hultqvist, C. Platzer-Björkman, E. Coronel and M. Edoff, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 497–503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Varley and V. Lordi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 102103 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Persson, C. Platzer-Björkman, J. Malmström, T. Törndahl and M. Edoff, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 146403 CrossRef .
A. Zunger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Seah, Surf. Interface Anal., 1989, 14, 488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp01607jThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Literature survey of optically measured Eg values obtained for ZnOS films plotted by solution concentrations for (a) zinc and (b) sulfur. (c) Histogram of CBD-ZnOS optical gap values.	 

 	Fig. 2  XPS survey spectra for layer-by-layer formation of ZnOS/CZTSe heterojunction. (a) Clean CZTSe surface. CBD-ZnOS deposition times (b) 54 s, (c) 109 s, (d) 163 s, (e) 272 s and (f) 35 min onto the CZTSe shown in (a). See text for detailed explanation.	 

CZTSe	6	38	5	50

ZnOS water	50	13.5	36.5
ZnOS water + DMSO	50	14.0	36.0

 	Fig. 3  O 1s spectral decompositions for CBD-ZnOS depositions with and without DMSO on CZTSe. Spectral contributions for O 1s surface contaminants were observed for surface oxygen on CZTSe cleaned with dilute NH4OH.	 
ΔEV = (ECZTSeCL − ECZTSeVBM) − (EZnOSCL − EZnOSVBM)thick − (ΔECZTSeCL + ΔEZnOSCL)thin	(1)

 	Fig. 4  Core level spectra from layer-by-layer growth of CBD-ZnOS on CZTSe using water solvent only.	 

 	Fig. 5  XPS measured changes to the BE for Se 3p3/2, O 1s and S 2p3/2, which relate to the amount of band bending in CZTSe/CBD-ZnOS heterojunctions for water only and water + DMSO bath preparations. Lines are simply guides to the eye.	 
ΔEC = EZnOSg − ECZTSeg + ΔEV	(2)

 	Fig. 6  
JV curves for solar cells having thick buffer layers comparing bath preparations.	 

Water	0.164	2.9 × 1016	0.17	0.471	0.336	0.664	0.167	0.25
Water + DMSO	0.104	2.5 × 1016	0.17	0.443	0.336	0.751	0.170	0.10

 	Fig. 7  Admittance showing temperature dependent carrier and mobility freeze out (a) and (b). JV vs. T showing increased CBO between ZnOS/ZnO in forward bias (c) and (d).	 

 	Fig. 8  Band diagrams for CZTSe/CBD-ZnOS heterojunctions formed using water or water + DMSO as solvents in the buffer deposition.	 

 	Fig. 9  Hypothesized alternate transport level (shown as discrete but may be continuous) that circumvents the large conduction band spike and allows the flow of negative photogenerated carriers across ZnOS/CZTSe heterojunction.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp01607j

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
