Recent progress in advanced electrode materials, separators and electrolytes for lithium batteries  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA05336G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA05336G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20564-20620Recent progress in advanced electrode materials, separators and electrolytes for lithium batteries

        
          
            Hailin 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hongbin 
            Zhao
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Muhammad Arif 
            Khan
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Wenwen 
            Zou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiaqiang 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Zhang
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Jiujun 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Sciences, Institute of Sustainable Energy, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China 200444. E-mail: hongbinzhao@shu.edu.cn; jiujun@shaw.ca
bNational Research Council Canada, 4250 Wesbrook Mall Vancouver, BC V6T 1W5, Canada
cSchool of Material Science and Engineering, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China 200444
Received 
      6th June 2018
    , Accepted 18th September 2018First published on 18th September 2018AbstractLithium-ion batteries (LIBs) possess several advantages over other types of viable practical batteries, including higher operating voltages, higher energy densities, longer cycle lives, lower rates of self-discharge and less environmental pollution. Therefore, LIBs have been widely and successfully applied in portable electronic devices and industrial fields. However, the rapidly increasing demands of new energy vehicles have also quickly increased the performance requirements of LIBs, including the need for higher power densities, greater capacity densities and better safety. As battery designs gradually standardize, improvements in LIB performances mainly depend on the technical progress in key electrode materials such as positive and negative electrode materials, separators and electrolytes. For LIB performances to meet the rising requirements, many studies on the structural characteristics and morphology modifications of electrode/separator/electrolyte materials with different synthesis methods have been conducted. In this review, recent progress of LIBs is reviewed with a focus on positive electrode materials, negative electrode materials, separators and electrolytes in terms of energy density, power density, life-cycle and safety. To accelerate the research and development and to overcome the challenges of LIB technology and application, several possible research directions are also discussed to further improve LIB performances.
1. Introduction
With increasing energy demands and rapid depletion of fossil fuels, the exploration of sustainable energy sources and the development of corresponding electrochemical energy storage/conversion technologies have increased in intensity in recent years. These technologies include rechargeable batteries, supercapacitors and fuel cells for applications in electric vehicles (EVs), portable electronic devices and stationary power plants. Among the several types of rechargeable batteries, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are the most promising because of their relatively high energy density, power density, and operating voltage, as well as their long cycle life, low rates of self-discharge and low environmental pollution. LIBs are also more flexible in terms of design for a wide range of applications in portable electronic devices, being able to be manufactured in varied sizes and shapes to efficiently fill available spaces. In recent years, however, the rapid rise of new energy vehicles, including hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs), plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs), and pure electric vehicles (EVs),1 has significantly increased LIB performance requirements.
However, the large-scale application and commercialization of LIBs in new energy vehicles are still hindered by several major technological barriers, including high costs, insufficient cycle lives, intrinsically poor safety characteristics, and poor performances at low temperature.2,3 In addition, to increase the mileage of new energy vehicles, battery system performance requirements have become more demanding, needing higher energy densities, better cycling performances, faster charging speeds, lower temperature operations, and better safety in harsh environments.4
Presently, as industrial battery designs become standardized, further LIB characteristic improvements will mainly depend on the technical progress of several key materials and their associated technologies. To accelerate the research and development of LIBs, this article will review the recent progress in LIBs with a focus on the materials of positive/negative electrodes, separators and electrolytes as well as their effects on improving energy density, power density, cycle-life and safety.
2. Positive materials in LIBs
One key component of LIBs is the positive electrode material (or called the cathode material). This material plays a vital role in determining battery energy/power density and cycle-life. With increasing demands for better LIB energy densities, power densities, cycle-life and safety in electric vehicles, positive materials with better performances need to be further developed. Currently, the development of high performance positive materials is one of the most important developmental directions in the field of LIBs.5–7 At present, there are three main types of positive materials as shown in Fig. 1: olivine materials (e.g. LiFePO4), spinel materials (e.g. LiMn2O4) and layered materials (e.g. LiNixCoyMnzO2), which are being widely applied in LIBs, particularly for new energy vehicles.5–12
 Fig. 1  Structures of (a) LiFePO4, (b) LiMn2O4, (c) Li Ni1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2, and (d) LiNi1−x−yCoxAlyO2 cathode materials. Reproduced from ref. 6–8 and 11. 
2.1 Layered LiNixCoyMnzO2 positive materials
To explore an alternative, the co-substitution of Ni and Mn at the Co sites in LiCoO2, LiNixCoyMnzO2 material was synthesized by using a high temperature solid phase synthesis method.5,6,8,13 This new type of layered positive material attracted an enormous amount of attention and was rapidly applied in the LIB field. The reason for this attention was the combination of nickel, manganese, and cobalt in this material, providing advantages such as higher capacities, lower costs, and better thermal stabilities compared with traditional layer-structured LiCoO2 and olivine-structured LiFePO4 positive materials. Subsequently, these materials have been widely applied in automotive power batteries in recent years.8–10
The three metal ions in the positive materials play separate roles determining the electrochemical properties of LiCoxNiyMnzO2 (NCM materials). Ni acts as an electron supplier, Co can sustain an ordering of the layered structure, and Mn can help in keeping a good chemical stability. Despite the extensive study, a single optimal composition has not yet been reached for the NCM materials. It is generally understood that increasing the Ni content will increase the initial discharge capacity but incurs severe capacity fading during cycling. Increasing the Co content considerably reduces the capacity loss during cycling at the expense of significantly increased material cost and reduction in capacity. The Mn content can particularly improve the thermal stability, but Mn doping substantially reduces the discharge capacity of NCM materials.8–11 In this paper, the layered LiNixCoyMnzO2 positive materials are divided into three categories according to the nickel and/or lithium content for further discussion: (I) conventional ternary layered materials LiNixCoyMnzO2 (where x < 0.5, x + y + z = 1): which include LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2, LiNi0.4Co0.2Mn0.4O2, LiNi0.4Co0.4Mn0.2O2, and LiNi0.5Co0.2Mn0.3O2; (II) lithium-rich layered positive materials; (III) nickel-rich layered positive materials, which include LiNi0.6Co0.2Mn0.2O2, LiNi0.75Co0.15Mn0.15O2, LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2, LiNi0.85Co0.075Mn0.075O2, and LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2.8–12 The detailed chemical parameters of the extensively studied layered LiNixCoyMnzO2 materials are summarized in Table 1. It is obvious that although they all have the same average voltage, their specific capacities are increased with increasing nickel content.
Table 1 Comparison of Layered LiNixCoyMnzO2 positive materials8–12




Sample
Chemical formula
Specific capacity (mA h g−1)
Avg. voltage (V)




NCM111
LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2
∼150
3.65


NCM442
LiNi0.4Co0.4Mn0.2O2
∼170
3.65


NCM523
LiNi0.5Co0.2Mn0.3O2
∼160
3.66


NCM622
LiNi0.6Co0.2Mn0.2O2
∼170
3.65


NCM811
LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2
∼190
3.65


NCA
LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2
∼190
3.65





2.1.1 Conventional ternary positive materials. 
To satisfy the performance requirements of LIBs, the cathode materials should exhibit the characteristics of high energy and power density, superior rate capability and satisfactory lifetime.1–3 During the development of high-performance cathode materials, layer-structured ternary LiNixCoyMn1−x−yO2 cathode materials have attracted much attention owing to their lower toxicity, larger capacity and higher energy density than layer-structured LiCoO2 and olivine-structured LiFePO4 materials.8–13 The first NCM material developed was Li[Ni0.33Co0.33Mn0.33]O2 (NCM111), which had an equivalent transition metal content. The most significant shortcoming of NCM111 was its low specific capacity (∼150 mA h g−1) which was not sufficient for dramatically enhancing the energy density of LIBs. Then, LiNi0.4Co0.4Mn0.2O2 (NCM442) and LiNi0.5Co0.2Mn0.3O2 (NCM523) cathode materials were developed mainly due to their relatively low cost, high energy density and high thermal stability, and showed specific capacities of 160–170 mA h g−1.8–16 However, these above materials possessed disadvantages as well, including relatively low electronic conductivities, which limited their rate capability and cycle performance, as well as poor structural stability which could lead to increased cell resistance, cell capacity fading, and even thermal runaway. These issues might be attributed to the cation mixing between Li+ and Ni2+, the relatively low conductivity, and the instability of layer structure during cycling processes, which were closely dependent on the physicochemical properties (such as the structure, morphology, grain-size distribution, surface area and tap density) of materials, while the physicochemical properties of materials could be largely affected by the synthesis methods.10–14 And because of the increase in the mileage requirements of new energy vehicles, energy densities of these materials must increase as well. Therefore, to further improve the energy density, power density, cycle life and safety of battery systems, further improvements in the capacity performance, rate performance, cycle performance and safety performance of these positive materials must be made.15 Persistent efforts have been devoted to tackling these issues and the general strategies can be classified into three categories: (1) doping with a small amount of other metal elements; (2) coating some metal oxides and metal fluorides on the surface; and (3) using different raw materials and optimizing the preparation method.9–16
(I) Doping. 
Doping is the simplest and most effective approach for enhancing the performance by maintaining the structural and thermal stabilities of LiNixCoyMnzO2 materials. A small amount of other metal elements such as Na,17 Al,18 Mg,19etc.20 has been introduced into the layered LiNixCoyMnzO2 positive materials. Researchers have also tried to increase electrode conductivity by adding highly conductive materials to enhance connectivity between active particles and conductive particles.21–23
The mechanisms of improving the cathode stability by doping were claimed to be closely related to: (1) the introduction of the electrochemically inactive elements into the host structure, (2) prevention of the undesired phase transition from the layered structure to the rock-salt like structure, and (3) promotion of the lithium ion transport due to the increased lithium slab distance by the dopants.17–22 Among many dopants, Na, Mg and Al were considered to be the most appealing elements due to their low cost. For example, Hua et al.17 demonstrated in their research that Na-doped NCM523 materials hold superior electrochemical performance because of the broadened lithium ion slab spacing, the decreased cation mixing, and the increased Li+ diffusion coefficient compared to the bare one. Al-doped NCM523 exhibited an improved electrochemical stability with a capacity fading of 0.02% per cycle when compared to that of undoped NCM523, which showed a high capacity fading of 0.07% per cycle. The Al was thermodynamically substituted with the nickel site over the cobalt and manganese sites in the host structure, providing high quality of the layered structure.18 Notably, after electrochemical cycling, the Al-doped NCM523 exhibited lower charge transfer resistance as well as lower activation energy for lithium ion insertion. These results were attributed to the suppressed side reactions with the electrolyte. In addition, the Al in the host structure could modify the surface structure of the cathode by reacting with the electrolyte. The surface was composed of lithium ion conducting nanosized compounds such as LiAlO2, AlF3, and LiAlF4, which could promote the ionic transport to the bulk structure. In terms of the structural stability, the incorporation of Al into the host structure effectively prevented the formation of oxygen vacancies during the delithiation process. The suppressed oxygen evolution from the host structure inhibited the nickel migration from the transition metal site to the lithium site, stabilizing the cathode structure.17–22
Another kind of doping is anion doping. Anion doping is one of the most widely adopted strategies to improve the electrochemical performance of cathode materials for Li-ion batteries. However, undesirable side effects are often observed together with enhanced electrochemical properties, leading to an unsatisfactory overall performance. To develop an anion doping strategy which enhances the positive effects and suppresses undesirable side effects, the understanding of their origin at the atomic scale is a crucial step. Fluorine (F) is a commonly used dopant. Fluorine doping by partial substitution of oxygen also stabilized the discharge voltage plateau by retarding the layered-to-spinel phase transition. Doping a small amount of fluorine could improve the stability of the structure of the NCM and achieve the purpose of improving the cycle performance. For example, Li1.2−xMn0.54Ni0.13Co0.13O2−xFx (x = 0.08) exhibited about 95% capacity retention as compared to 62% for Li1.2Mn0.54Ni0.13Co0.13O2 after 100 cycles.23
(II) Surface coating. 
Surface coating with some metal oxides and metal fluorides is a facile and feasible strategy to address the issues of layer-structured ternary LiNixCoyMn1−x−yO2 cathode materials. An ideal coating layer can prohibit those side reactions via acting as a physical protection barrier to avoid the direct contact of the positive material with the reactive electrolyte, leading to suppressed transition metal dissolution, oxygen loss, phase transformation and safety issues.14,16,24 The ionic/electronic conductivities and structural/thermal stabilities can be manipulated by careful selection of coating materials. Therefore, the surface coating of LiNixCoyMnzO2 materials from the perspectives of improving electronic or/and ionic conductivity seems very important and necessary. Three types of coating synthesis routes are core–shell structure coating, ultrathin film coating and rough coating, respectively. Their general preparation methods, advantages and dis-advantages are listed in Table 2.
Table 2 Summarization and comparison of core–shell coating, ultrathin film coating and rough coating24–34




Type
Method
Advantages
Disadvantages




Core–shell
Two-step, co-precipitation
Core: high capacity, shell: high stability
Thickness too high, complex preparation, structural mismatch, increased mechanical stress, formation of cracks


Ultrathin film
ALD, CVD
Uniform, continuous, nanoscale, tunable thickness, precise control
Limited sources, impeded conductivity


Rough
Co-precipitation, hydrothermal, solvothermal, spray drying, sol–gel, ball milling
Simple preparation, ease of scale up
Not continuous, not uniform




Metal oxides and metal fluorides such as Al2O3,25 ZrO2,26 Cr2O3,27 ZrFx,28 AlF3 (ref. 29) and SrF2 (ref. 30) have been used as surface coating materials for LiNixCoyMnzO2. These surface coating materials can protect positive materials from dissolving into the electrolyte and stabilize layered structures in electrochemical reactions. AlPO4 (ref. 31) is also a suitable coating material for layered positive materials because after coating, intrinsic lithium diffusion is prominently accelerated, leading to improved discharge capacities, rate capabilities and cycle stabilities.
Material volumetric changes during charge and discharge processes can lead to poor rate capabilities and poor cycle performances. However, to improve them along with low initial coulombic efficiency and poor performance, Kong et al.33 used Li2TiO3 as a novel coating material to modify Li(Li0.2Mn0.51Ni0.19Co0.10)O2 positive electrodes. They reported that the sample coated with 3 wt% Li2TiO3 exhibited the highest rate capability of 169.9 mA h g−1 at 2C and maintained good cycle performance simultaneously. The charge–discharge curves revealed that the Li-ion conductive Li2TiO3 coating layer was effective in stabilizing the host structure, protecting the electrode surface from F− ion attack and preventing undesired side reactions on the electrode surface. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy tests revealed that appropriate Li2TiO3 coating layers can effectively suppress the impedance of the host electrode. Therefore, choosing appropriate coating materials and methods is vital to enhance cathode material coulombic efficiencies, charge/discharge characteristics and cycle performances.
In fact, each method has its own advantages and disadvantages. From the view of material preparation, an ideal coating layer should be uniformly covered with appropriate coating thickness. With respect to this, atomic layer deposition (ALD) techniques for ultrathin film coating beat others without any doubt. However, considering the real application in industry, co-precipitation (rough coating) may turn out to be the best choice, appealing because of its ease of scaling up to industrial grade at low cost, which has significant implications for manufacturers. Therefore, the future coating synthesis method needs to combine the uniform and controllable properties from ALD techniques with the merits of low cost and ease of scaling-up from co-precipitation.10,24,34
With different purposes (to improve electron or/and ion conductivity), various coating materials have been selected. For instance, some researchers came up with the dual coating idea to improve both ionic/electronic conductivities and thermal stability.2,10,34 However, the more complex synthesis procedures and higher cost seem to be the challenges. Still, it remains tough and challenging to solve all the difficulties. Moreover, most of the surface coating samples were prepared on a laboratory scale. Considering the real applications, especially for electric vehicles, several problems remain to be solved. For electrochemical performance, a battery stack with surface modified NCM material as the cathode needs to last at least a few thousand cycles before reaching the end of life criteria (lower than 80% of capacity delivered compared with the initial capacity). Regarding the safety issue, the stack should work even encountering some stressful conditions or harsh environments, such as over-charge, over-discharge, high and/or low operating temperature, etc.10,16,24,34 From the perspective of material properties, the future work should be focusing on selecting an ideal coating layer which is highly ionic and electronic conductive, electrochemically inert and structurally stable (even at wide operating voltages and temperatures) with optimized electrochemical performance. Undoubtedly, efforts are in progress to overcome these problems, but more work is still needed to fulfil the requirements of the LIB market.10
(III) Optimizing the preparation method. 
Besides the above two methods, using different raw materials and optimizing the preparation method are often adopted to improve the properties of LiNixCoyMnzO2 positive materials. The structures and morphology are affected by many factors, such as electrochemical reaction processes and material syntheses.32–35 NCM materials can be synthesized by the co-precipitation method, sol–gel method, hydrothermal process, etc.33–36 The co-precipitation method is the widely used one, whereas the synthetic conditions (pH value, precipitant concentration, ammonia molar, stirring speed, and reaction time) are complex, which makes it difficult to obtain materials with a regular and consistent shape.32–36 In general, positive materials prepared using different raw materials possess different rate discharge characteristics. For example, Yang et al.36 demonstrated that the morphology, tap density and rate cycling performance of Li[Ni1/3Co1/3Mn1/3]O2 positive materials are strongly affected by the different Li raw materials used, such as LiOH·H2O, Li2CO3, CHCOOLi·2H2O and LiNO3. In their study, these researchers found that spherical Li[Ni1/3Co1/3Mn1/3]O2 synthesized using continuous carbonate co-precipitation maintained 97.5% and 92% of the initial capacity after 100 cycles under discharge cycling conditions at 1C and 5C respectively, in which LiOH·H2O was beneficial to enhancing the tap density (can reach 2.32 g cm−3) and Li2CO3 was beneficial to enhancing the rate performance. Therefore, materials with higher capacity and better rate characteristics can be obtained through the selection of different raw materials.
Calcination temperature is also one of the crucial factors affecting the performance of LiNixCoyMnzO2 positive materials. Quasi-spherical Li(Ni0.5Co0.2Mn0.3)O2 positive materials were prepared using a continuous hydroxide co-precipitation method by Kong et al.33 in which a mixture of precursors and Li2CO3 was calcined at 750 °C, 850 °C and 950 °C for 10 hours in air. The results indicated that the sample calcined at 850 °C demonstrated excellent electrochemical performance, delivering an initial discharge capacity of 193.4 mA h g−1 with a coulombic efficiency of 85.4% at a current density of 20 mA g−1 and also exhibited good rate capability and cycle performance. Therefore, the selection of suitable calcination temperatures is vital in the synthesis of positive materials. This can be attributed to the effect of calcined temperature on the size of positive materials.32
In general, nano-sized positive materials provide better electrochemical performances than ordinary micro-sized materials because the nano-/micro-hierarchical architectures can not only shorten the lithium ion diffusion path but also minimize the unwanted anti-site cation mixing, greatly improving the Li+ diffusion kinetics. Nano-sized LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 with a nanofiber morphology was synthesized using an electro-spinning method by Kang et al.37 and their material after being calcined in air produced a high charge and initial discharge capacity of 217.9 mA h g−1 and 172.8 mA h g−1. Chen et al.16 synthesized hierarchical nano-/microsphere LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 (PNM-NCM) with an extremely uniform size distribution and controlled morphology by a sacrificial template method. The sample exhibited a significantly improved electrochemical performance when compared to conventional bulk-NCM materials for advanced LIBs. The cell made of PNM-NCM microspheres could deliver a high specific reversible capacity of 207.7 (0.1C), 178.4 (0.5C), 163.6 (1C), 148.9 (2C) and 120.0 mA h g−1 (5C), respectively. The reversible capacity retention was as high as 90.3% after 50 cycles. Li et al.13 synthesized NCM nanoplates with exposed (010) active facets. The obtained discharge capacities were 207.6, 178.1, 169.8, 160.5 and 149.3 mA h g−1 at 0.1, 1, 2, 5 and 7C, respectively, between 2.5 and 4.5 V, and the capacity retention at 0.1C was 89.4% after 50 cycles.
Although nano-sized electrode materials are favorable in terms of kinetics and capacity, they suffer from low thermodynamic stability and high activity surface energy. However, hierarchical micro/nano-materials can circumvent these disadvantages and gain the advantages of both nano-sized building blocks and micro-sized assemblies. For example, hollow microspheres were fabricated via a facile in situ template-sacrificial route by Zhao et al.38 LiNi0.5Co0.2Mn0.3O2 material with a hollow microsphere structure was successfully synthesized utilizing Co0.4Mn0.6CO3 as the self-template, and a simple impregnation process was introduced to let the lithium and nickel ions penetrate the crystal structure, followed by a high-temperature solid state reaction to attain a well-ordered structure. The material displayed a high discharge capacity of 180.3 mA h g−1 at 0.2C rate, superior rate capability and better cycling stability. In addition, the material also exhibited good processability in commercial production due to its nano–micro-sphere structure and narrow grain-size distribution. The excellent electrochemical properties of such materials could be ascribed to the unique hollow microspherical structure.38
In summary, to improve the electrochemical performance (e.g. rate capability, cycling performance and thermal stability) of conventional ternary layered materials LiNixCoyMnzO2 (where x < 0.5, x + y + z = 1), such as LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2, LiNi0.4Co0.2Mn0.4O2, LiNi0.4Co0.4Mn0.2O2, and LiNi0.5Co0.2Mn0.3O2, intensive efforts have been devoted to doping, surface coating, and using different raw materials and optimizing the preparation method, and some remarkable progress has been made. However, these materials even with surface protection can't make contribution to the increase of LIB energy density because of the materials' relatively low specific capacities (∼150 mA h g−1). Therefore, it is necessary to develop new cathode materials with higher specific capacity.


2.1.2 Lithium-rich layered positive materials. 
Lithium-rich layered positive materials (denoted as xLi2MnO3·(1 − x)Li(Mn, Co, Ni)O2 or Li1+x(Mn, Ni, Co)1−xO2 (ref. 39–43)) generally possess more capacity in terms of LIB energy density, being able to provide capacities higher than 250 mA h g−1. The Li/M ratio and the transition metal distribution ratio are essential and effective factors in controlling the electrochemical performance of lithium-rich layered positive materials. However, for these lithium-rich layered positive materials, there are still several issues associated with high surface residual lithium, poor irreversible capacity loss and low electrochemical reaction kinetics.39–43 In this section, recent progress will be discussed.
(I) Surface residual lithium. 
Lithium-rich layered positive materials contain enormous amounts of residual lithium compounds such as LiOH and Li2CO3, which can deteriorate the stability of the positive electrode slurry during fabrication because of the gelation of polyvinylidene difluoride binders (PVDF). Moreover, these residual lithium compounds can generate gasses in the battery at high cell voltages and lower coulombic efficiency, causing cell swelling. These lithium impurities would also cause more side reactions between the electrode and electrolyte during cycles, which in turn increase the polarization and interfacial resistance in the cell and further damage the electrode surface structure. Therefore, much effort has been made during material synthesis in the preparation of positive electrode materials to use additives to reduce these residual lithium compounds.39–45
In one study, Aida et al.44 used spherical (Ni0.35Co0.35Mn0.30)(OH)2 (NCM) as a precursor to synthesize LIB positive materials using a co-precipitation method with Ammonium metatungstate ((NH4)6H2W12O40·xH2O, AMT) as an additive. Here, significant differences in the charge and discharge rate performances of bare NCM and AMT-modified NCM were observed in which AMT-modified NCM rate performances were significantly better especially at high discharge rates. Therefore, the addition of AMT to high Li/M ratio NCMs is a viable method to improve rate capabilities and reduce residual alkaline LiOH. The researchers suggest that the AMT modification contributes to the reduction of residual lithium compounds through the neutralization and stabilization of the positive electrode slurry. Furthermore, AMT modification can form an extremely thin W-rich layer on the surface of NCM particles, leading to improved rate capabilities.
Besides, BPO4,43 LiAlO2 (ref. 45) and H3PO4 (ref. 46) were also used as effective compounds to reduce residual lithium. For example, BPO4 was proposed to encapsulate Li1.16(Ni0.25Mn0.75)0.84O2 particles and to form a Li-doped LixBPO4+x/2 (LBP) nanolayer by taking advantage of residual Li2CO3 on the surface as the Li+ source, as shown in Fig. 2. The LBP layer removes the residual Li-containing alkaline substance on the surface. The potentiometric titration analysis revealed that Li2CO3 residual on the pristine material could be decreased by 1/3, and thus the surface structural stability of the electrode material was enhanced, significantly alleviating the capacity- and voltage-fade during cycling.43 The effects of the novel LBP coating layer on the electrochemical performance was studied in detail. 2-LBP@LNMO having 1.6 mol% of LBP delivered discharge capacities of 181 and 117 mA h g−1 at 2C and 5C respectively. The retention capability was reported to be 80.2% and 61.2% of the capacity at 0.5C. EIS analysis revealed a low resistance value for the solid electrolyte interface for the LBP modified surface compared to pristine LNMO. These results illustrate the effectiveness of LBP coating towards electrochemical performance.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the preparation process for LBP@LNMO material by use of residual Li2CO3. (b) Nyquist plots of the pristine LNMO and LBP@LNMO samples after 100 cycles. (c) Cycling performance of the pristine LNMO and LBP@LNMO samples at 2C and 55 °C. Reproduced from ref. 43. 
(II) Irreversible capacity loss. 
The second challenge for lithium-rich layered materials is to reduce the irreversible capacity loss. Although these Li-rich layered positive materials can provide higher capacities of more than 250 mA h g−1, an irreversible capacity loss of 40–100 mA h g−1 in the initial charge and discharge cycles along with a low discharge rate performance was observed.40,42,47 It was demonstrated that oxygen could be released from the layered lattice at the end of the initial charging, accompanied by the generation of oxygen vacancies, and then the transition metal ions were moved into the leaving vacancies due to the lithium-ion deintercalation from transition metal layers. The oxygen loss in Li-rich layered oxides could bring about a series of problems such as large initial irreversible capacity loss.41,47–49 To counteract this problem, many approaches, such as optimizing synthesis methods,41 surface modification,47 nano-coating35,48–51 and others, have been investigated.
Among the above-mentioned approaches, the surface modification by coating carbon materials has gain attention due to its effectivity, simplicity and applicability for Li-rich layered oxides. For example, Deng et al.47 attempted to improve the capacity and discharge rate performance of Li[Li0.2Mn0.54Ni0.13Co0.13]O2 by modifying the surface through a liquid phase method using PVP as the carbon source. Fig. 3 displays the morphologies and electrochemical performances of the pristine and modified samples. The electrochemical performance of LMNCO and C-LMNCO was investigated in a Li-half cell between 2 and 4.8 V. A discharge capacity of 293.2 mA h g−1 and 191.6 mA h g−1 at C/10 and 1C respectively was obtained. The retention rate after 70 cycles at 1C was approximately 86%. Here, the carbon surface-treated electrode exhibited better cycle numbers, lower irreversible capacity losses and acceptable rate discharge capacities. Therefore, carbon surface modification proved to be an effective method to improve Li-excess layered oxide electrode performances.
 Fig. 3  (a) Surface modification with a liquid phase method using PVP as the carbon source. (b) Discharge curves of the 5th, 30th, and 70th cycles. (c–e) Discharge profiles of pristine and carbon surfaces treated at various C rates; the bar diagram of their discharge capacity at various C rates. Reproduced from ref. 47. 
In one paper, a uniform thin Li2ZrO3 layer has been successfully coated on the surface of LNCMO via a novel synchronous lithiation method.35 In comparison to bare LNCMO, it shows a higher reversible capacity.35 Further research proves that the coating layer of Li+-conductive Li2ZrO3 alleviates the surface side reactions, suppresses the transition metal dissolution and enhances the Li-ion conductivity. Meanwhile, as shown in Fig. 4, the doping and incorporation of Zr4+ into the host structure accompanied by the Li2ZrO3 coating expand the interplanar spacing and decreases Li/Ni mixing which facilitates Li+ diffusion. In addition, the integration of the Li2ZrO3 coating and Zr4+ doping also further enhances the layered structure stability and mitigates the voltage fade during lithiation/delithiation cycles.48 Moreover, the proposed synchronous lithiation coating route avoids the duplicated high-temperature calcinations and can also be widely used to modify some other cathode materials.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis mechanism. (b) The rate performances of bare LMNO, syn-Li2ZrO3@LMNO and post-Li2ZrO3@LMNO. (c) The cycling performances of bare LMNO, syn-Li2ZrO3@LMNO and post-Li2ZrO3@LMNO. (d) Energy density of bare LMNO, syn-Li2ZrO3@LMNO and post-Li2ZrO3@LMNO at 1C. (e) The average discharge voltage of bare LMNO, post-Li2ZrO3@LMNO and syn-Li2ZrO3@LMNO. Reproduced from ref. 48. 
The corresponding capacity of the syn-Li2ZrO3@LMNO sample is largely increased to 239.8, 219.1, 190.3, 168.7, 140.2 and 84.5 mA h g−1, respectively. Compared to bare LMNO the capacity of syn-Li2ZrO3@LMNO at 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1 and 2C is increased by about 30 mA h g−1. At a high density of 5C the capacity of syn-Li2 ZrO3 @LMNO has been largely enhanced by about 50 mA h g−1.
Nano-coating has been applied to reduce the irreversible capacity loss. Wu et al.49 proposed a biomimetic design and versatile synthesis strategy of an ultrathin spinel membrane-encapsulated layered lithium-rich (USMLLR) cathode material modified by ultrathin nano-coating. As shown in Fig. 5, a homogeneous ultrathin coating layer (with interplanar spacings of ca. 0.204 nm and ca. 0.147 nm) can be observed. The USMLLR cathode yields a high reversible capacity (over 290 mA h g−1), and outstanding rate capability. The persistent drawbacks of the layered lithium-rich cathode such as voltage decay and thermal instability are also found to be relieved.
 Fig. 5  Structure of the ultrathin spinel membrane encapsulated-layered lithium-rich cathode (USMLLR) and rate performance comparison with pristine layered lithium-rich materials (PLLR). Reproduced from ref. 49. 
An AlF3 coating could be applied onto the Li-rich layered Li(Li0.17Ni0.25Mn0.58)O2 prepared by a chemical deposition method,50 in which an AlF3 layer with a thickness of 5–7 nm was coated on the surface of the Li(Li0.17Ni0.25Mn0.58)O2 grains. Compared with the as-prepared Li(Li0.17Ni0.25Mn0.58)O2, the AlF3 coating can not only make the Li-rich layered oxide maintain more active sites for lithium ion insertion/extraction, but also preactivate Li(Li0.17Ni0.25Mn0.58)O2 to accelerate the surface charge-transfer and lithium ion diffusion, contributing to the improvement in the high-rate capability.50 The electrode coulombic efficiency was improved from 76.4% to 89.5% during the first cycle, and the reversible capacity of the AlF3-coated sample was stable at above 104 mA h g−1 (at 5C rate) after 200 cycles, which was much higher than that of the as-prepared sample. The reasons for the improved electrochemical performances could be attributed to two aspects: one was that the AlF3 coating layer could suppress HF corrosion to Li-rich active materials during cycling, which was beneficial to improving the cycle stability; and the other was that the existence of the coating layer on Li-rich layered oxides could retain more oxygen vacancies generated in the initial charge process, which was responsible for more lithium ion insertion and the capacity increase during the subsequent discharge process.50,51
(III) Electro-chemical reaction kinetics. 
The third problem for lithium-rich layered positive materials is the poor electro-chemical reaction kinetics. Because of the 2D percolating network, lithium ions must diffuse along specific crystal planes, known as the classic 1-TM channel. The lithium rich component suffers from low electron conductivity and a poor lithium diffusion coefficient, leading to a large electrode polarization. Furthermore, interfacial resistance keeps increasing as side reactions proceed during cycling. Due to the sluggish kinetics, the practical capacity of Li-rich cathodes decreases rapidly at high current rates.42,50–53 The intrinsic charge transfer kinetics is complicated and different from those of conventional layered cathode materials. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and galvanostatic intermittent titration technique (GITT) studies previously reported that the Li+ diffusion coefficient DLi was 10−14 cm2 s−1 in the smoothly sloping voltage profile below 4.4 V during charging and then decreased dramatically to 10−19 cm2 s−1 at the voltage plateau above 4.4 V.42,43,52DLi during discharging was 10−14 cm2 s−1 in the first region between ∼4.4 V and 3.8 V and subsequently decreased to 10−16 cm2 s−1 in the second region between ∼3.0 V and 3.6 V.42,43,50–53
To overcome this issue, metal-ion doping of the lattice and surface modifications by coating have been adopted. Recently, Li+ conductors, which could allow fast Li+ diffusion during charge/discharge, such as Li2SiO3,42 AlF3,50,51 and Li2ZrO3,53 have been employed as the coating layers to enhance the electrochemical performance of Li-rich cathode materials. Among them, Li2SiO3 showed not only a similar crystal structure to well match the Li-rich electrode, but also a pathway with low energy barriers for the Li+ diffusion. In one study,42 a systematical investigation on the interactions between coated Li2SiO3 and Li[Li0.2Mn0.56Ni0.17Co0.07]O2 (LMNCO) was carried out. It was found that the superior electrochemical performance could be essentially ascribed to the introduced Li–Mn–Ni–Co–Si–O surface solid solution region after the Li2SiO3 coating, which could facilitate the surface kinetics behavior of the LMNCO electrode upon cycling, and thus benefit the structural and thermal stabilities. It was also found that the excessive Li2SiO3 could perturb the balance between the construction of surface solid solution in terms of protection and the exfoliation of metal ions from the electrode surface.42
Although chemical doping has been extensively employed to improve the electrochemical performance of Li-rich layered oxide cathodes for LIBs, the correlation between the electrochemical kinetics and local structure and chemistry of these materials after chemical doping is still not fully understood. A better understanding of both the local structure and chemistry of doped oxides is crucial, but a challenge, to elucidate the mechanism and behavior of chemical doping and the resulting rate performance of lithium-rich layered positive materials. Ding et al.54 demonstrated a gradient doping strategy, driven by concentration diffusion of dopants, aiming at enhancing the electrochemical kinetics of Li-rich layered oxide cathodes. To assess the importance of the dopant's physicochemical characteristics on Li+ diffusion kinetics, two types of cations (Si4+ and Sn4+) with significant differences in the ionic radius and electronegativity were employed. The atomic local structure and surface chemistry were determined using electron microscopy and spectroscopy techniques. The correlation of local structure-enhanced kinetics is clearly described in Fig. 6. The experimental results suggested that Si/Sn substitution could decrease the TMO2 slab thickness and enlarge the interslab spacing, and the concentration gradient of Si/Sn could affect the magnitude of these structural changes. The expanded interslab spacing should account for the enhanced Li+ diffusivity and rate performance observed in Si/Sn-doped materials. The achieved understanding of the local structure-enhanced kinetic relationship for doped Li-rich layered oxide cathodes demonstrates the potential for the design and development of other high-rate intercalated electrode materials.
 Fig. 6  Comparison of HAADF/ABF-STEM images of [001]-orientated pristine and doped LLOs. Gradient surface Si/Sn-doped LLOs with improved kinetics. Reproduced from ref. 54. 
Another approach to improve the reaction kinetics of lithium-rich layered positive materials is to focus on the fabrication of nanostructured cathode materials with well-defined morphologies, such as porous structures and hollow spheres.51,55,56 As is well known, the morphology and structure play vital roles in electrode reactions. Nanoparticles can greatly shorten the lithium ion diffusion length and make particles contact with the electrolyte well.51,55,56 The pore morphology is the decisive factor, which could offer more transport paths for Li+ and electrons and facilitate faster permeation of the electrolyte into the electrode,51 shortening the diffusion length of Li+ transport and then enhancing the kinetics. Furthermore, the electrode material could tolerate the volume expansion and contraction that might occur during Li intercalation/deintercalation processes. In a research study, hollow spherical particles from 1.2 to 2.5 mm were synthesized by co-precipitation followed by calcination, which were tuned by controlling the architecture of the precursor.55 As shown in Fig. 7, the agglomeration that randomly happened among conventional small particles can be proved clearly within broken white lines in Fig. 7(a). In other words, these small particles have a high possibility of forming larger particles with width ranging from 2.3 to 4.2 mm, even more large particles which cannot be observed in Fig. 7(a) and (b). The diffusion coefficients (D) of the lithium ion diffusing into the bulk electrode materials are calculated and recorded in Table 3. Notably, the sample H1 shows the lowest resistance for the lithium ion diffusion process owning to its shortest diffusion length. In addition, this hollow spherical structure has a greater influence on the lithium ion diffusion coefficient than charge transfer resistance. Specifically, the lithium ion diffusion coefficient of the conventional particles is 7.43 × 10−16, and the hollow spherical structure helps raise these lithium ion diffusion coefficients to (H1) 8.92 × 10−15, (H2) 4.16 × 10−15 and (H3) 3.70 × 10−16, respectively. Therefore, a surface modification combined with the design of a hollow spherical structure with an appropriate shell thickness can effectively enhance the electrochemical properties of lithium ion layered oxides.
 Fig. 7  Left: SEM images of (a and b) conventional particles: H0, hollow spherical particles: (c and d) H1, (e and f) H2 and (g and h) H3. Right: Cross sections of (a and b) conventional particles: H0, hollow spherical particles with different sizes: (c and d) H1, (e and f) H2 and (g and h) H3. Reproduced from ref. 55. 
Table 3 Impedance parameters of conventional hollow spherical particles55




Samples

R
s (Ω)

R
ct (Ω)

σ
ω (Ω cm2 s−0.5)

D (cm2 s−1)




H0
6.51
136.00
102.03
7.43 × 10−16


H1
3.36
87.0
29.43
8.92 × 10−15


H2
2.54
154.80
43.1
4.16 × 10−15


H3
3.61
330.2
144.5
3.70 × 10−16




A novel facile strategy to in situ generate an integrated hierarchical spinel layer on the surface of a layered cathode through a pH modulation induced a gradient change of the Mn ion valence in the precursor. The self-forming hierarchical spinel layer through this strategy is tightly integrated into the layered phase by atom-scale interfacial junctions, and a Ni gradient concentration from the outer to the inner has also formed, which strengthens the interface bonding, reduces the surface layer-host phase mismatch, alleviates the Li+/Ni2+ mixing, and substantially enhances the structure stability during charge–discharge cycles. They contribute to the significant improvement of the cycling stability, rate capability, and low-temperature performances.56
Recently, graphene and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have attracted much interest in material sciences fields, which have been claimed to increase the electronic conductivity, stabilize the electrode–electrolyte interface and accommodate the volume changes during the repeated lithiation/delithiation process.10,34,57 Researchers have found out that carbon can interact with layered cathodes and initiate spinel phase transformation under mild thermal treatment, and the distributions of spinels depend on that of the carbon-based layer. For example, Ma et al.57 successfully prepared an assembled microspherical Li-rich cathode material through a facile co-precipitation method, using graphene@CNTs as a framework template and the modified material. The as-prepared assembled microspheres were endowed with a nano–micropore structure and nanosized particles after heat treatment (Fig. 8a–c). The unique morphology and structure endowed the cathode material with excellent specific capacities (276.6 mA h g−1 at 0.1C), superior initial coulombic efficiency (80.3%), remarkable rate capability (60.5 mA h g−1 at 10C) and high Li+ diffusion coefficient (∼10−9 cm2 s−1). The excellent performance was attributed to the pore structure, small particle sizes, large specific surface area and enhanced electrical conductivity (Fig. 8d and e).
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation process of LMNCO/GC. (b and c) SEM images of the precursor and product. (d and e) Charge–discharge curves in the 1st cycle and in the 50th cycle. Reproduced from ref. 57. 
(IV) Voltage fading. 
The commercialization of Li-rich NMC is hindered by both voltage drop upon cycling and a limited power rate ascribed to the sluggish kinetics of the anionic redox species. It is well accepted that the voltage fade is largely related to the phase transition from the layered structure to the spinal phase, which is mainly caused by the migration of transition metal cations to Li-ion layers. During electrochemical activation lithium and oxygen are removed irreversibly from the Li2MnO3 component which inevitably leads to the formation of Li+ vacancies and the migration of transition metal cations. Therefore, the voltage decay of Li-rich Mn-based layered cathode materials is intrinsic and it is not easy to eliminate it at the same time as keeping other electrochemical performances well. To overcome these issues, scientists around the world have proposed numerous directions including concentration gradient, surface grafting, coatings and doping.41–46
In Fig. 9(A), the effect of precursor's concentration on the kinetics of the precipitation reaction is demonstrated, which provided clues to obtain spherically agglomerated NMC carbonates of varied sizes. A ratio of 1.35 was found to reproducibly give the best performance with namely a first discharge capacity of 269 mA h g−1 and a capacity retention of 89.6% after 100 cycles with nearly no voltage fade beyond 50 cycles. The results indirectly suggest that the voltage fade is linked to the anionic redox activity. Overall, electron microscopy results indicate that upon cycling the material suffers from Li/M intersite mixing with a formation of spinel-like nanodomains. The key finding is that once such a high degree of disorder has been reached, there is no longer any voltage fade and only very limited capacity fade. Practically it is therefore unfortunate that such a layered/spinel-like mixed state is associated with a large voltage drop, which reduces the overall energy density of the material.41 The establishment of a reliable relationship between the synthesis conditions and the electrochemical performances of Li-rich NMC is needed, and this calls for a complete understanding of each step involved in their synthesis process.
 Fig. 9  (A) The impact of the Li/M ratio (M, the transition metal cations) on the Li-rich NMC materials and their electrochemical performance. (B) The capacity retention and rate performance in the voltage range of 2.0–4.8 V at room temperature. (C) Initial charge/discharge curves of the pristine and Li2ZrO3-coated Li-rich electrodes in the voltage range of 2.0 × 104.8 V at room temperature. (A) Reproduced from ref. 41, (B) reproduced from ref. 42, and (C) reproduced from ref. 53. 
Doping is another way to the suppression of voltage fade. Firstly, a suitable coating layer could improve the Li+ transportation and alleviate the electrolyte corrosion, which enhances the rate performance and cycling stability. Secondly, migration and doping not only can decrease the energy barrier, which is favorable for quick insertion and extraction of Li+ due to the enlarged (003) interplanar spacing, but also can stabilize the layered structure. Thirdly, the reduced cation mixing due to the migration also plays a positive role towards the enhancement of rate capability. As displayed in Fig. 9(B), for the pristine LMNCO electrode, the specific discharge capacity fades from 201 to 134 mA h g−1 within 50 cycles, with a capacity retention of only 65%. After surface modification, the discharge capacities drop by about 35, 2 and 24 mA h g−1 for the 2, 3 and 4 wt% Li2SiO3-coated electrodes, with the capacity retentions of 83%, 99% and 88%, respectively, after 50 cycles. Among them, the 3 wt% Li2SiO3 modified LMNCO electrode shows the best cycling performance.42 Moreover, the structural transformation is likely to be suppressed by the Li2SiO3 coating layer along with repeated cycling as attested by the dQ/dV curves at ∼3.0 V. It is found that coating Li2ZrO3 on the surface of LMNO leads to a higher average voltage than that of bare LMNO and post-Li2ZrO3@LMNO which may be due to the stabilization of the Zr4+ doping on the layered structure and the lower barrier energy. In addition to the increase of the average voltage, the voltage fade of syn-Li2ZrO3@LMNO has also been mitigated, which is also largely related to the doping of Zr4+ benefiting from the synchronous lithiation coating route.48 The influence of the Li2ZrO3 coating layer on the capacity retention of Li-rich cells in the range of 2.0–4.8 V at 0.1C is shown in Fig. 9(C). Apparently, the pristine Li-rich electrode suffers fast capacity decay with cycling. It releases an initial discharge capacity of 203 mA h g−1, which sharply decreases to 129 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles, with a capacity retention of only 64%. As can be clearly observed in this figure, Li2ZrO3 surface modification greatly improves the cyclability. Comparatively, the 1 wt% Li2ZrO3 coating is the most effective in improving the cycling performance. The initial discharge capacity is about 223 mA h g−1, which remains 199 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles, with a much higher capacity retention of 89%. The improvement herein can be ascribed to the Li2ZrO3 modification layer, which not only avoids the direct contact between the electrode and electrolyte but also stabilizes the cathode structure by decreasing the loss of oxygen.53
In summary, lithium-rich layered positive materials are considered nowadays to be one of the most promising candidates for high energy density cathodes. However, the commercialization of lithium-rich layered positive materials is hindered by residual lithium compounds, irreversible capacity loss and a limited power rate ascribed to the sluggish kinetics of the anionic redox species. To circumvent these issues, scientists around the world have proposed numerous directions including concentration gradient, surface grafting, coatings, doping and so on. These studies have provided promising approaches to further improve the integrated properties of lithium-rich layered cathode materials and to accelerate their large-scale practical applications.


2.1.3 Nickel-rich positive materials. 
In recent years, the range of lithium ion battery applications has increased from small mobile devices to larger-scale uses such as electric vehicles and energy storage systems. This has driven the demand for lithium ion battery systems to have higher energy density/power density, a faster charge rate, greater safety and lower cost. With respect to this, nickel rich layered LiNixCoyMnzO2 (NCM, where x > 0.5, x + y + z = 1) have been explored as the most promising cathode materials for use in electric vehicles. Ni rich oxides have been intensively studied because of their high capacity (>200 mA h g−1) above a charge of 4.5 V, relatively low cost, and environmental benignancy.58–60 It should be noted that although the Ni-rich cathodes can deliver a 180–210 mA h g−1 capacity when 0.6 < x < 0.9, the capacity retention and thermal stability are sacrificed with increasing Ni content (Table 4). Poor capacity retention is believed to be associated with undesirable side reactions between the tetravalent transition metal ions, in particular Ni4+, and the electrolyte and phase transition from the layered to the rock-salt structure (NiO) at particle's surface, both of which cause a substantial decline in the lithiation kinetics at the electrode–electrolyte interphase.58–61 On the other hand, poor thermal stability can be caused by the release of oxygen from the crystal lattice at the highly delithiated state. Finding the most suitable composition to meet the industry demands for overall performance remains as a challenge to battery research.59–62
Table 4 Physical and electrochemical comparison of NCM523, NCM622, NCM811 and NCA51–55,58–62






NCM523
NCM622
NCM811
NCA




Washing process
No
No
Yes
Yes


pH
<10.8
<11.0
<11.8
<11.8


Moisture (ppm)
<300 ppm
<300 ppm
<600 ppm
<600 ppm


Available electrode density (g cm−3)
<3.6
<3.6
<3.3
<3.3


Reversible capacity (mA h g−1)
∼170
∼185
∼200
∼205


Volumetric capacity (mA h cm−3)
<612
<666
<680
<697




In this section, the underlying mechanism that is related to the complex surface chemistry of the particles and various modification strategies to enhance the surface stability are summarized, and the remaining challenges and the future research directions are also discussed.
(I) Surface residual lithium. 
Typically, during the synthesis of NCM cathode materials (especially for the nickel rich series), introducing an excess of lithium is quite a necessary approach for (1) compensating for the lithium source loss during the calcination step at high temperature, and (2) minimizing cation mixing (mainly about Ni2+/Li+ disorder) to form a well-defined layered structure. As discussed above, surface residual lithium can deteriorate the stability of lithium-rich layered positive materials. A similar effect also exists on nickel-rich layered oxides. Some contaminating alkaline species, such as Li2CO3, LiOH, NiO, etc., are usually found on their sensitive surface, resulting from the side reactions with air and moisture during storage in an ambient environment. The Ni3+ ions may be converted to Ni2+ when the Ni-rich materials are exposed to air for a long time. The results of erosion, including the formation of impurities such as Li2CO3 and LiOH, the degradation of layered structures and the disproportionation of trivalent nickel, would cause cation mixing and structural instability.60–62 At the same time, these surface residual species can react with the electrolyte forming insulating materials on the surface of the electrode. The generated Ni2+ ions would form an inert rock salt NiO phase or cation mixing layer on the surface of cathode materials.58–62 Thus, the nickel content in the Ni-rich materials becomes one of the important indicators in evaluating the degree of cation mixing in the layered structure. To avoid the degradation of Ni-rich layered materials, a constricted environment with low moisture and CO2 contents must be maintained which may raise the cost of their industrial applications (Table 4). It is of great significance to develop rational approaches to restore the inherently excellent characteristics of Ni-rich layered compounds to improve their electrochemical performance as cathodes for LIBs.60–63
In addition, highly reactive Ni4+ ions can accelerate electrolyte decomposition, leading to electrolyte depletion and a thick solid-state electrolyte interface (SEI) layer. In fact, the surface chemistry and side reactions have a decisive impact on the performance of Ni-rich cathode materials for LIBs. An effective and viable way of creating an artificial solid-electrolyte interphase layer on the cathode surface by a simple, one-step approach is shown in Fig. 10(A). It is found that the initial artificial SEI compounds on the cathode surface can electrochemically grow along grain boundaries by reacting with the by-products during battery cycling. Briefly, the residual lithium compounds react with cobalt phosphates, inducing the oxidation and migration of cobalt ions on the cathode surface, followed by artificial SEI compound formation. Notably, this SEI compound can rearrange along the grain boundary by reacting with by-products during the electrochemical process. As reported,60 the prepared cathode could satisfy the strictest industrial requirements, demonstrating high structural and thermal stability at over 60 °C even at an unprecedented electrode density of ≈3.3 g cm−3. Moreover, the cathodes could effectively eliminate the hydrolysis by-products such as HF and H2O upon cycling by creating a uniform protective layer along the grain boundaries.60 As a result, the work successfully resolved the long-lasting safety concern by a simple, one-step process.60–63
 Fig. 10  (A) Chemical and structural characteristics of the ASL-NCA. (a) Illustration of the ASL-NCA showing the detailed characteristics of each component. (b) A high angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image of cross sectioned ASL-NCA. (c) A magnified HADDF-STEM image of the ASL-NCA surface from the purple square area in (b) with its energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) mapping results. HAADF-STEM images of the (d) NCA and (e) ASL-NCA before the electrochemical test, including insets with the EELS analysis from the line scan. (f) HAADF-STEM images of the NCA after 200 cycles at 60 °C. HAADF-TEM images of ASL-NCA after (g) the formation cycles and (h) 200 cycles at 60 °C, showing a homogeneous ASL layer on the primary particle. (B) Synthetic approach used to restore degraded LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 microspheres. (A) Reproduced from ref. 60 and (B) reproduced from ref. 61. 
A method of solvothermal treatment followed by re-oxidation has been employed to restore the structure and electrochemical performance of NCA cathodes for LIBs.61 As displayed in Fig. 10(B), the solvothermal and re-oxidation treatments allow the reaction of residual lithium impurities, LiOH and Li2CO3, to form a stable, crystalline Li2TiO3 shell on the NCA surface. The restored TNCA electrode manifests a remarkably improved cycling stability both at room and elevated temperatures when compared with the DNCA counterpart. The revived NCA enables higher reversible capacity and longer cycle life than degraded NCA. Specifically, the restored NCA can retain 82% of the initial capacity after 200 cycles under 1C at room temperature, and 87% and 55% of the initial capacity after 100 and 500 cycles under 1C at 55 °C, respectively. These results demonstrate that the method of solvothermal treatment followed by reoxidation is an efficient approach to restore the electrochemical performance of degraded Ni-rich layered cathode materials.61
(II) Interfacial stability. 
Ni-rich layered compounds are expected to be very appealing in terms of high capacity and low cost. However, they have suffered from inherent structural and electrochemical degradation including severe capacity loss at high electrode loading density (>3.0 g cm−3), in high temperature cycling (>60 °C) and under high charge voltage (>4.5 V).60–64 Especially, the high charge voltage would lead to a severe reaction of the Ni-rich surface with the electrolyte, forming a thick solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer to increase the interfacial resistances of the electrode. The structural issues originate from the phase transition (from the layered to the rock-salt like structure) of the nickel-rich cathode upon electrochemical cycling. The ionic radii of lithium ions (0.76 Å) and divalent nickel ions (0.69 Å) are substantially similar, and thus divalent nickel ions can easily migrate into lithium slabs. This cation mixing layer consisted of an inactive NiO-like phase can deteriorate the lithium ion transport and cause various problems including capacity loss, structure deterioration, and surface side reactions that accelerate the capacity fade.59–65 More seriously, the continuous phase transition imposes high stress and strain inside the cathode particle, generating microcracks along the grain boundaries by an anisotropic volume change of the primary particle. These microcracks eventually cause an electrical contact loss and accelerate side reactions with the electrolyte inside the cathode particle.66 Irreversible metal dissolution leads to not only electrochemical fading of the NCM cathode through the loss of active metal species but also drastic capacity fading of the anode. Residual metal species in the electrolyte are easily reduced on the anode surface, destroying the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer that has originally developed on the anode.
Many efforts have been made to solve the poor interfacial stability. Electrode doping using MoO3, Al2O3, CeO2, ZrO2, etc., was shown as an effective method to stabilize the layered structure and suppress oxygen loss in Ni-rich positive electrodes as reported in previous studies.62–68 Designing a heterostructural shell surrounding the layered Ni-rich core was also intensively reported to increase the structural stability. The purpose of all the work mentioned above is to protect Ni-rich materials and reduce the level of Li+/Ni2+ mixing during cycling. Regarding this, an easy and scalable wet chemical approach was applied to achieve thin ZrO2 coatings on NCM811 cathode materials for lithium ion batteries.64 The coating was produced by an easy and scalable wet chemical approach followed by annealing the material at ≥700 °C under oxygen that resulted in Zr doping. It was established that some ZrO2 could remain even after annealing at ≥800 °C as a surface layer on NCM811. The main finding of this work was the enhanced cycling stability and lower impedance of the coated/doped NCM811 that could be attributed to the synergetic effect of the ZrO2 coating in combination with zirconium doping.64–67
A heterogeneous inactive Al3+-doped strategy has been proposed to produce an Al3+ rich surface with a low doping amount and to solve the currently identified shortcomings of inactive-ion doping in Ni-rich LIB cathodes.65 The heterogeneous inactive Al3+-doped Ni-rich electrode showed a high capacity of around 215 mA h g−1. In addition, this novel material also exhibited a long lifespan, enhanced safety and outstanding rate capability when compared with the undoped Ni-rich cathode. These improved electrochemical properties of the heterogeneous inactive Al3+-doped material were probably due to the enhanced structural stability and Li+ kinetics.66 This proposed approach also gives a new insight into methods for improving the electrochemical performance of other-type layered, spinel or olivine cathodes for advanced LIBs.
Bi-functionalized divinyl sulfone was applied to enhance the stabilization of the electrolyte–electrode interface.67 The divinyl sulfone could form a protective layer on the cathode surface by electrochemical oxidation reactions and this greatly decreased the internal pressure of the cell via stabilization of the Ni-rich cathode/electrolyte interface. The cell controlled by divinyl sulfone showed a remarkable cycling performance with 91.9% capacity retention at elevated temperature even after 100 cycles. Additional electrode analysis and first-principles calculations provided critical spectroscopic evidence to demonstrate the combined effects of the sulfone and vinyl functional groups. Once the divinyl sulfone was electrochemically oxidized, the vinyl functional groups could readily participate in further stabilization of sulfone-based solid electrolyte interphase intermediates and afforded a durable protective layer on the nickel-rich electrode surface.67,68
A surface coating of SiO2 was applied to a Ni rich LiNi0.6Co0.2Mn0.2O2 cathode material in a bid to improve its electrochemical and thermal properties.68 As shown in Fig. 11a and b, a uniform coating is achieved through a wet process using nano-sized SiO2 powder. Although the coated electrode was found to exhibit a reduced rate capability, its cycle performance at a high temperature of 60 °C was greatly enhanced. The SiO2 coating also demonstrated a good HF scavenging ability, producing a subsequent reduction in the degradation of the active core material. The thermal properties of LiNi0.6Co0.2Mn0.2O2 were also improved by the SiO2 coating due to a reduction in the direct contact between the electrode and electrolyte. Based on these results, SiO2 coating was considered a viable surface modification method for improving the electrochemical and thermal properties. As for as the electrochemical performance is concerned, S-NCM showed discharge capacities of 159.5, 158.3 and 156.8 mA h g−1 for 0.5, 1.0 and 30 wt% respectively Fig. 11c. SiO2 provided a scavenging effect for the hydrogen fluoride (HF) that was generated by a reaction between trace amounts of residual water in the electrolyte and LiPF6 salt. This was considered an important benefit, because the reaction between HF and the cathode surface typically could cause degradation of performance during cycling. In addition to this sacrificial protection, SiO2 also offered the benefit of being a very low-cost material. This study therefore explored the effect of SiO2 surface coating on the electrochemical and physicochemical characteristics of a NCM622 cathode.69,70
 Fig. 11  (a) FESEM results of P-NCM and S-NCM. (b and c) TEM results of P-NCM and cycle performance of P-NCM and S-NCM at a high temperature of 60 °C. Reproduced from ref. 68. 
(III) Issues of Ni-rich materials. 
One of the most significant issues of Ni-rich materials is their thermal instability that can cause severe safety problems during thermal runaway. A study showed that the onset temperature of oxygen release peaks was decreased from ∼250 °C (NCM 433 type) to ca. 150 °C (NCM 811 type). The release of oxygen could burn the flammable electrolyte, resulting in electrolyte venting, smoke, fire, or explosion, becoming a security hazard. Therefore, the thermal stability of NCM remains a safety issue.60–65
The triggering mechanism is related to the cathode structural instability, which results in oxygen release. Consequently, the heat generated from reactions between the de-lithiated cathode and the electrolytes may lead to very dangerous situations. These reactions will generate lots of gas and heat, and lead to a sharp inner temperature rise, and then increasing pressure, and finally explosion of the batteries. Particularly, the oxygen species released from the cathode framework are so reactive with the electrolytes that they contribute greatly to the thermal runaway. Therefore, the safety of lithium-ion batteries can be greatly improved by inhibiting the oxygen evolution, and thus decreasing the heat generation and delaying the time taken to reach the onset temperature of the exothermic reactions. The state of charge has a significant impact on both the phase transition and the oxygen evolution. The degree of de-lithiation increases with decreasing both the onset temperature of the structural change and the amount of oxygen evolution.70–73
The thermal stability of the active material is heavily dependent on the by-products from direct and indirect electrolyte oxidation, such as carboxylates. Those by-products can attach to the surfaces of the de-lithiated particles and accelerate the thermal decomposition reactions of the materials. The positive effect of the coating method on the thermal stability can be interpreted in two different ways: one is the suppression of electrolyte decomposition and the decrease of the amount of undesired by-products attached to the surface of the electrode surface, and the other is the formation of a more stable surface, which can reduce the formation of seeds for the cation mixing phase. Thus, surface coating can inhibit not only the formation of by-products from electrolyte decomposition reactions but also the spread of cation disordered-phases. Although intensive studies monitoring the structural changes and heat generation during thermal decomposition have resulted in great progress in this area, the detailed correlation between structural changes and oxygen evolution is still not clear. Accordingly, further understanding of the structural deterioration and doping/coating effect is needed.65–68,71–73
Another issue of Ni-rich materials is the microstrain and cracks of primary particles. The deterioration of the Ni-rich cathode has usually been assigned to the degradation of the layered structure, the rise of cell impedance, and the formation of a film on the cathode surface. In addition, it has also been emphasized recently that significant capacity loss is caused by numerous microcracks generated in the Ni-rich particles. Suppression of microstrain and preventing the failure of the primary particles are of critical importance in achieving prolonged cycling stability especially at high temperature. For example, the nanoscale surface pillar layer is found to be effective at suppressing primary particle fracture during cycling at 60 °C.5 Therefore, further engineering of the surface microstructure of the primary particles through coating or surface doping may be a valuable strategy to give excellent cycle life by reducing the volume expansion of grains and suppressing the generation of micro-cracks.
In summary, nickel-rich layered oxides have already become one of the most attractive candidates for the mainstream LIBs. The increase of nickel content gives rise to an increase in the specific capacity of the materials, but also brings about several issues. For example, poor calendar storage performance, high initial capacity loss, low cycle life, poor thermal stability and so on. Cation disordering between transition-metal sites and lithium sites gives rise to structural instability and sluggish Li+ diffusion. Surface side reactions usually happen both in air and electrolyte, causing considerable capacity and power loss. Structural instability in the highly de-lithiated state is always a safety concern, which may lead to oxygen release and thermal runaway. Furthermore, for practical applications, the volumetric energy density is also important, which needs to be further addressed to increase the useful energy density in the restricted space.
This section is focused on the preparation, microstructure, and electrochemical performances, and the modification including coating design as well as dopant selection is specially discussed in detail, which is essential to enhance the durability and energy density of lithium-ion batteries.


2.1.4 Summary of layered LiNixCoyMnzO2 positive materials. 
In Subsection 2.1, lithium and/or nickel-rich layered transition-metal oxides with large reversible capacity as well as high operating voltage are the most promising candidates for next-generation LIBs. As a result, lithium and/or nickel-rich layered positive materials have received extensive attention. However, for these layered positive materials, there are still several issues need to be solved.
For lithium-rich layered positive materials, a great amount of progress has been made toward understanding their mechanisms and identifying the cause of voltage fade. Unfortunately, such progress has been far from producing the most appealing materials cost-wise for applications. Implementing such learning to Li-rich NMC materials is presently being aggressively pursued. In parallel particle engineering involving core–shell, gradient-concentration approaches with a Li-rich NMC material surrounded by classical NMC ones are explored with some success. It appears that issues related to these materials can be overcome in the future. There is no doubt that significant work is needed before the practical application of Li-rich NMC materials.
Issues such as (i) the long-term stability of surface peroxo species in contact with the electrolyte and (ii) the interplay kinetics between cationic and anionic redox processes in the same material remain to be understood and then addressed. More intensive research is needed to deal with these burning issues, which could enable us to harvest the tremendous benefits of Li-rich NMC materials. It is believed that further studies will provide a promising approach to further improve the integrated properties of lithium-rich layered cathode materials and to accelerate their large-scale practical application.
Nickel-rich layered positive materials, undoubtedly, can deliver sustained capacities of >185 mA h g−1, which will certainly become stellar materials for applications, particularly in electric vehicles. Higher capacities up to 200 mA h g−1 can be obtained by increasing the Ni content, but their use requires coating with a Mn rich-NMC phase for stability purposes. As identified, the Ni-rich layered oxides can deliver a stable voltage profile with reasonable specific capacity but suffer from surface chemical instability. Surface side reactions usually occur both in air and electrolyte, and cause substantial capacity and power losses. Structural instability in the highly de-lithiated state is always a safety concern, which may lead to oxygen release and thermal runaway.

2.2 Olivine LiFePO4 positive materials
Olivine-type positive electrode materials such as LiFePO4 with lithium insertion/extraction reversibility have been intensively studied in the literature. It was first reported by Goodenough et al.74 in 1997 to be a suitable positive material for LIBs. Subsequently, LiFePO4 has been a widely applied material for LIBs in several important applications such as electronic devices, electric vehicles, and grids.75–77 As depicted in Table 5, the main advantages of LiFePO4 are its flat voltage profile, high cycling and thermal stability, low material cost, abundant material supply and better environmental compatibility compared to other cathode materials (Table 5).
Table 5 Comparison of the properties of different cathodes in 18650 cells77–82




Property
LiAl0.05Co0.15Ni0.8O2
LiCoO2
LiFePO4




Avg. voltage (V)
3.65
3.84
3.22


Theo. capacity (mA h g−1)
265
274
170


True density (g cm−3)
4.73
5.05
3.60


Conductivity (S cm−1)
—
10−3
10−9


Diffusivity (cm2 s−1)
10−8
10−8
10−13 to 10−16


Specific energy (W h kg−1)
219.8
193.3
162.9


Energy density (W h L−1)
598.9
557.8
415.0


Materials cost (US$)
1.628
1.824
1.219




However, this material also suffers from disadvantages such as relatively low electronic conductivity and difficult lithium ion diffusion, as well as low tap density. Moreover, the cycle performance, low-temperature characteristics and rate performance are not ideal, restricting large-scale applications in electric vehicle batteries and other power intensive devices. Poor electronic conductivity and low lithium ion diffusion rates directly affect capacity, and poor tap density affects volumetric energy density, which is significant for batteries. In recent years, various methods, such as surface coating, doping modification and synthesis optimization (i.e. controlling particle morphologies and preparing nanosized particles), have been introduced to improve the electronic conductivity and ionic conductivity of LiFePO4 cathode materials.77–79 The current subsection attempts to provide a brief overview of the major achievements and the remaining challenges related to EV applications.

2.2.1 Strategies for improving electronic conductivity. 
Surface coating, as one of the most important modification methods, has been widely studied for its ability to improve the dispersion and thermal stability of active material particles, increase the surface activity of the particles, isolate the electrolyte solution and cathode material to avoid interaction, and promote the physical, chemical, and mechanical properties of cathode materials.77–79
Carbon coating on LiFePO4 is a widely accepted method to improve the battery material's conductivity. Generally, the carbon-coating process involves mixing battery materials with various carbon precursors followed by high-temperature thermal treatment. This approach is simple, feasible and suitable for large-scale industrial production.82–84 With the selection of high quality inorganic carbon, such as carbon nanotubes and graphene, the entire LiFePO4 electrode can be composed of a 3D conductive network. Recently, graphene as a conductive agent was used in the LiFePO4 cathode. Compared to the conventional LiFePO4 electrodes with carbon black as a conductive agent, the graphene sheets can establish a more effective conductive framework due to their layered structure and excellent electronic conductivity, leading to better electrochemical rate performance (Fig. 12 a–f). The composite showed a highest discharge capacity of 163 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.2C compared to that of 143 mA h g−1 at 0.1C for LFPO.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram for the preparation of the LFPO/rGO composite. (b–d) SEM images. (e and f) Charge discharge and rate capability. Reproduced from ref. 85. 
Yang et al.83 constructed a nanoscale three-dimensional transition network by dispersing graphene in LiFePO4. Their study showed a specific capacity of approximate 170 mA h g−1 for a lithium ion battery with the composite cathode at 0.1C. This promotion in the specific capacity can be attributed to the three-dimensional transition network, which can enhance the conductivity of electrons among particles and restrict the growth of LiFePO4 crystalloids. Furthermore, the obverse of increasing graphene content is continued gains in the high-rate performance of the LiFePO4 electrodes. The electrodes with 30 wt% graphene show high capacities up to 103.1 mA h g−1 and 68 mA h g−1 during discharging with extremely high rates of 30C and 50C, respectively. The electrodes with 30 wt% graphene display a capacity retention higher than 80% after 1000 cycles at 30C. These results not only indicate that graphene could be a promising candidate as a conductive agent, but also provide a new insight into designing LiFePO4 electrodes with brilliant high-rate performance via a simple method.85
The other modification strategy for improving the electronic conductivity of LiFePO4 is doping with “supervalent” cations. Considering that the limiting factor for the rate performance is the poor lithium-ion diffusion, substitution of a small amount of Li+, Fe2+ or O2− by other ions is expected to enhance the charge/discharge properties at high current densities. For example, Chung et al.86 reported that low-level doping of LiFePO4 with a range of aliovalent ions (e.g., Mg2+, Al3+, Ti4+, Zr4+, and Nb5+) could increase the electronic conductivity by a factor of more than 108 (reaching values of greater than 10−2 S cm−1 at room temperature). They argued that doping of cation-deficient phases was charge-compensated by Fe3+, thereby introducing p-type conductivity, although they also acknowledged that the precise site occupancy (Li+vs. Fe2+) of specific dopants had yet to be established. Although the role of doping in LiFePO4 is still unclear and under debate, doped LiFePO4 indeed has exhibited improved electrochemical performance in numerous studies. Doped cations have at least two positive effects: one is that small ion doping on the Li-site can increase the width of the one-dimensional diffusion channels of lithium ions and decrease the charge transfer resistance, which in turn enhance the electrochemical performance of LiFePO4 cathodes, and the other is that these metal powders may act as nucleation sites for the growth of the LiFePO4 particles, helping in obtaining samples with low and uniform size, as well as enhancing their overall electronic conductivity.86–88


2.2.2 Strategies for improving lithium ion diffusivity. 
One challenge is related to the demands for fast-charging in EV's batteries. Compared to electronic conductivity, ionic conductivity or lithium-ion diffusion plays a dominate role in determining the electrochemical reaction kinetics. It is widely accepted that the electrochemical delithiation reaction proceeds via a two-phase process between the two end members of LiFePO4 and FePO4. The low lithium ion diffusion coefficient of LiFePO4 (10−10 to 10−16 cm2 s−1) leads to a decreased capacity at a high charging/discharging rate, which has inhibited its use in high-rate applications.89–92 Many efforts have been made to improve lithium ion diffusivity. In general, they can be divided into the following four methods:
The first method is to minimize the particle size. It is an effective way to improve the rate capability of LiFePO4 cathodes, which is mainly attributed to the shortened ion diffusion pathways inside the one-dimensional channels of LiFePO4.89 For example, Wang et al.93 studied carbon-coated and core-shelled LiFePO4 materials in which they synthesized carbon-coated and core-shelled LiFePO4 materials using a solid–liquid reaction milling process. Fig. 13 shows the SEM images of the synthesized LiFePO4/C samples with and without Tween 40. The samples prepared in the presence of Tween 40 were found to be composed of well defined spherical particles of uniform nano-sizes and were less agglomerated, whereas the samples synthesized without Tween 40 were found to be composed of agglomerated particles of a wide range of particle sizes. These obtained nano-sized LiFePO4 particles can not only increase electrical contact but can also shorten Li+ ion diffusion paths if used as the positive electrode material for LIBs. These properties are also considered to be critical factors for the rate performance improvements of LiFePO4/C composites in which the LiFePO4/C prepared with Tween 40 was observed to deliver an excellent specific discharge capacity of 121.6 mA h g−1 at 5C. By contrast, the sample prepared without Tween 40 only delivered 96.6 mA h g−1 under the same rate at 5C. This discharge capacity improvement can be mainly attributed to the increased lithium ion diffusion caused by the particle size refinement.
 Fig. 13  SEM images of LiFePO4/C samples, (a–c) in the presence of the Tween 40 surfactant at 680, 720, and 750 °C, respectively; (d–f) in the absence of Tween 40 at 680, 720, and 750 °C. Reproduced from ref. 93. 
The second method is to suppress the antisite defects. The iron occupancy on the M1 site is considered to be an antisite defect, which blocks the lithium-ion diffusion pathway through the one-dimensional channel along the (010) direction in the LiFePO4 crystal structure.89,90 Recently, it was found that the solvent played a key role in controlling the antisite defects.90 Some solvents with low dielectric constants (such as ethylene glycol and ethanol) can reduce the concentration of Fe–Li antisite defects. For example, using ethanol as the sole solvent via a solvothermal process produced LiFePO4/C that was highly crystalline and exhibited less than 1% antisite defects, and thus provides an alternative feasible route to limit the defects.91–94
As for the doping strategy, doping appropriate ions into LiFePO4 can increase the electronic and ionic conductivity of LiFePO4 and expand lithium ion diffusion channels in the structure, leading to a significant improvement of the rate capability and cycling performance. Various elements such as La, Cu, Y, V, Mn, Mg, Bi, Co, Pt, Pd, Ni, Zn, Mo and Cr have been previously used as dopant elements in the cation-sites (Fe-sites) of LiFePO4. Certain cation doping elements like Ni and Zn can remarkably enhance the electrochemical performance of LiFePO4.91–94 There are far fewer reports on anion doping at O-sites for LiFePO4. However, the O-site doping is expected to significantly enhance the conductivity of LiFePO4 rather than Fe-site doping as indicated by first-principles calculations. Indeed, evidently enhanced high rate capability and cycling performance have been reported for anion-doped (such as F and Cl) LiFePO4. Among considerable anion species, sulfur doping would be efficient to improve the electrochemical performance (rate capability and cycling performance) because easy Li+ intercalation and extraction are expected by an expansion of the lattice arising from larger anion doping and the lower bond dissociation energy of Li–S (312.5 kJ mol−1) than that of Li–O (340.5 kJ mol−1). The sulfur doping at O-sites also results in the suppression of FeLi antisite defects in lithium ion diffusion channels. Both the lattice expansion and the suppression of FeLi antisite defects by S-doping contribute to the enhancement of electrochemical properties due to the easy migration of Li in the diffusion channels without blockage.92–95
Thirdly, the orientation of LiFePO4 particles tailored by morphology control also plays a crucial role in improving the kinetics of the lithium-ion extraction/insertion process. The one-dimensional lithium diffusion pathways along the (010) direction suggest that the synthesis of thin and well-dispersed LiFePO4 nanostructures with a large (010) surface area would enhance its rate performance.88–90 Indeed, calculations based on the electronic structure of LiFePO4 indicated that the low energy surfaces could dominate in the equilibrium shape. Therefore, numerous efforts have been made to synthesize large surface area LiFePO4 materials along their b axes to favor lithium ion diffusion. Most conventional morphological control is based on a variety of nanostructures such as nanowires, nanoparticles, nanosheets and core–shell structures. In particular, the core–shell structured LiFePO4/carbon composite allows fast lithium ion and electron transportation, enabling high electrochemical performance.95 In recent years, some new concepts have been introduced showing potential for future LiFePO4 development. Quantum dots (QDs), tiny particles containing only a small number of atoms, have an extremely high surface-to-mass ratio. Because surface atoms generally possess a higher energy of delocalized electrons and are kinetically more active than interior atoms, QDs can generally exhibit superior properties.96
Finally, increasing operating temperature can also help increase lithium ion diffusivity. Takahashi et.al.97 evaluated the effect of cell temperature on the charge and discharge capacity of LiFePO4. Both the electron transfer activity and the lithium ion diffusion rate in the LiFePO4 electrode increased with increasing the operating temperature. The apparent activation energy for the lithium diffusion was more than twice that for charge transfer. This result supports the idea that the large discharge capacity of LiFePO4 at elevated temperatures is mainly caused by the high lithium diffusion rate in the LiFePO4 particles, which makes it possible to utilize more material near the center of the particles.


2.2.3 Strategies for improving low-temperature performance. 
The discharge rate performance of LiFePO4-based LIBs is relatively weak at low temperatures because of low electronic conductivity. To improve this, Li et al.98 investigated and in their study, a ferrous phosphate precursor and LiFePO4/C were prepared using liquid co-precipitation combined with a polyol process. Subsequently, their as-prepared LiFePO4/C produced acceptable low-temperature electrochemical properties, delivering 146.7, 128.7, and 109.2 mA h g−1 at 0.1C under 0, −10, and −20 °C respectively. Furthermore, less than 3% capacity fading after 50 cycles at 0.1C under 0 °C was achieved. The researchers attributed these good low temperature properties to the highly crystalline structured nano-sized LiFePO4/C particles and the uniform carbon coating. This study demonstrates that LiFePO4 material preparation conditions can be optimized to obtain relatively small particles, good uniform coating and good crystallinity to enhance the low temperature characteristics of LiFePO4 materials.
Ionic conductor (Li3PO4, CePO4etc.) co-coating allows faster lithium ion diffusion. Combined with a highly electronic conductivity carbon coating, this hybrid coating improves the rate performance and low temperature performance of LiFePO4. As demonstrated in Fig. 14a, a novel cerous phosphate and carbon hybrid coating LiFePO4 modified with CePO4via a liquid-phase precipitation reaction combined with the high temperature solid state method is successfully synthesized. The hybrid coating layer is favorable for fast electron and Li+ ion transport and a high rate, and the material shows a higher reversible specific capacity of 100.9 mA h g−1 under a lower discharging rate at −20 °C. However, the optimized ratio of the ionic/electronic conductor and the controlled hybrid coating method are still challenges for practical LiFePO4 production.99 The LiFePO4/C–CePO4 electrode has high capacity and cycling stability. The initial discharge capacity was 166.1, 161.4, 143.7 and 120.3 mA h g−1 at 1, 2, 5 and 10C rates, respectively. The retention capability after 650 cycles was 77.5%.
 Fig. 14  ) Schematic illustration of the “electronic and ionic hybrid coating layer” for the LiFePO4 electrode material during charge/discharge processes. (b–e) Typical galvanostatic curves of all electrodes in the 1st and 20th discharge/charge cycles at a rate of 1C, discharge/charge curves of all electrodes in the 20th cycle, and the average discharge capacity of all electrodes in 20 cycles at 1C rate. Reproduced from ref. 99. 


2.2.4 Strategies for enhancing tap density. 
In addition to the above fundamental issues, in practical applications, another big issue for lithium iron phosphate is related to the tap density. The large-scale industrial application of lithium-ion batteries in electric vehicles requires not only a high specific capacity, but also a high tap density of LiFePO4 which means a high volumetric energy density.83,84,95,100 Generally, the tap densities of LiFePO4 materials of commercial interest are low, reaching roughly 1.0 g cm−3 and are much lower than that of LiCoO2 (2.2 g cm−3). This means that the battery volume of LiFePO4 needs to be much larger than that of LiCoO2 to possess the same discharge capacity. Therefore, for large-scale commercial applications, electronic conductivity and lithium ion diffusion rates must be increased and tap densities must be improved to enhance the volumetric energy of LiFePO4.83,84,95,100
To meet the requirement of high tap density but to maintain all the merits of nanosized materials, porous LiFePO4 microspheres with interconnected open pores are advantageous, because this can reduce the diffusion length of lithium ions, facilitating fast lithium ion diffusion. Carbon-coated LiFePO4 microspheres with high tap densities can be synthesized by co-precipitation, hydrothermal and solvothermal methods. The tap densities of microsized LiFePO4 are in the range of 1.0–1.5 g cm−3. New synthesis approaches have been explored recently to increase the tap density by controlling the morphology and size distribution of LiFePO4 particles.83 For example,84 one important feature of the carbon-double-coated LiFePO4 electrode is its high tap density, 1.5 g cm−3. This value is much greater than those obtained for common (nano-sized) LiFePO4 electrode morphologies, which are limited to a maximum of 1.0 g cm−3. As is well known, a high tap density is a very welcome property for electrode materials in lithium batteries since it reflects high volumetric energy density. Indeed, based on the cathode tap density and the charge–discharge response, a volumetric energy density of 820 W h m−3 could be estimated for Li/LiFePO4 cells.84
Size reduction to the nanoscale is a common strategy to improve rate performance, the size reduction also adversely affects the tap density and volumetric energy density, and the high surface area increases the undesirable electrode/electrolyte reactions, which leads to a poor cycling performance. This is particularly important for LiFePO4, since the theoretical density (3.68 g cm−3) of LiFePO4 is much lower than those of many other cathodes (e.g. 5.1 g cm−3 for LiCoO2, 4.8 g cm−3 for LiNiO2 and 4.2 g cm−3 for LiMn2O4). As a result, the exploration of novel methods, not solely relying on the nano-route, is urgently needed to significantly enhance the rate performance, while keeping the tap density at an acceptable value (such as above 1.5 g cm−3). A high tap density of 1.8 g cm−3 was achieved for a LiFePO4/C composite containing 7 wt% carbon prepared by a two-step drying process.101 The composite showed a high specific capacity of 98 mA h g−1 and a high capacity density of 167 mA h cm−3 at 5C rate. A LiFePO4 material with a tap density of 1.3 g cm−3 exhibited a high specific capacity of about 100 mA h g−1 at 10C rate. The fundamental understanding of the seed nucleation, growth, precipitation and some other factors (e.g. chemical potential, the choice of solvent and surfactant addition), as well as the development of a simple, feasible and low-cost synthetic route, is still critical for the future of LiFePO4.
Besides, large LiFePO4 particles with high tap densities seem to exhibit a higher degree of electrochemical reversibility. As indicated in Table 6, some difference in the preparation method, morphology and tap density can be found. It is obvious that the material with a micro/nanospherical structure has high density. Based on the above discussion as well as the results from Table 6, it is critical to optimize the synthesis conditions to produce well-ordered LiFePO4 crystals with a suitable size (not solely focusing on nanosized crystals), high tap density, few defects and high reversibility.95,100
Table 6 Comparison between the tap densities of LiFePO4/C100




Method
Morphology
Tap density (g cm−3)




Co-precipitation
Spherical
1.0


Solvothermal
Flower-like
1.2


Hydrothermal
Microsphere
1.2


Carbothermal reduction
Micro/nanospherical
1.3






2.2.5 Summary of olivine LiFePO4 positive materials. 
LiFePO4 has been considered a promising battery material in electric vehicles in terms of safety, lifetime, cost and specific capacity, fast charging/discharging properties and high volumetric energy density. However, there are still several technical challenges to overcome in applications. In this Subsection 2.2, the rate capability, capacity density, cycle life and low-temperature performance of various LiFePO4 materials are described. The major factors affecting these properties which include particle size, doping, carbon coating, conductive carbon loading and synthesis techniques are discussed as follows:
(i) Various LiFePO4 modified materials have achieved increased electronic conductivity and ionic conductivity, promoted specific capacity and cycle performance for LIBs. Carbon coating on the LiFePO4 particle surface is one of the most important techniques used to improve its electronic conductivity between particles. Doping with cations and anions can greatly improve the intrinsic electronic conductivity of materials, although the mechanism and effect of doping on electronic conductivity are still in controversy. Both carbon coating and doping do not solve the problem of the low intrinsic ionic conductivity of LiFePO4, which could be addressed by downsizing the particles.
(ii) The essential breakthrough in finding high rate performance LiFePO4 needs an understanding of the underlying kinetics in the phase transformation mechanism that is responsible for fast charge/discharge. In addition, to meet the high volumetric energy density, the development of new synthesis routes to produce micron-scale LiFePO4 secondary structures, while maintaining its rate performance, is still expected. Current secondary-particle technology allows the tight packing of primary nanoparticles to increase tap densities, but further development is still needed. Understanding the surface chemistry and interface between carbon and LiFePO4 also plays a critical role in lithium intercalation kinetics and material stability. In addition, practical manufacturing processes of LiFePO4 may be accompanied by the formation of different impurities, such as the iron and phosphorus phases, depending on the preparation conditions.
(iii) The low temperature performance of LiFePO4 can probably be improved by developing novel electrolyte formulations. To meet the stringent technical requirements for EVs, more effort is required to increase the energy density and reduce the energy cost of LiFePO4 batteries.
For large-scale industrial production, a reliable, low cost, highly effective synthetic method for preparing LiFePO4 cathode materials with high rate performance is still highly desirable. With comprehensive research, we believe that LiFePO4 will be widely used for the Li-ion battery and practical application of EVs.

2.3 LiMn1−xFexPO4 positive materials
As reported in the literature,101–105 olivine LiFePO4 in orthorhombic systems, endowed with the low mobility of lithium ions, the low toxicity of ferrous ions, and the stability of rigid phosphate ions, is an alternative active material for positive electrodes in LIBs (theoretical capacity is 170 mA h g−1) which appears to outperform conventional layered LiM'O2 (M' = Ni, Co, Mn) and spinel LiMn2O4. However, the intrinsic voltages of these olivine LiFePO4 systems (about 3.5 V) are insufficient. Therefore, element-doped LiMnPO4 and LiMn1−xFexPO4 compounds, possessing 4 V voltage platforms, have been investigated for next generation batteries.106,107 To further improve energy density, the interest in olivine positive electrode materials has shifted to iso-structural LiMnPO4 (LMP) because of its higher redox potential (4.1 V vs. Li/Li+). At low current density, LiMn1−xFexPO4 batteries can achieve 171 mA h g−1 capacity. At higher current density however, the capacity is much lower and is a prominent drawback of this material.107 There are two main reasons for the low capacity of LMP under large currents: (1) the slow diffusivity of lithium ions in MnPO4 and (2) the misfit in the lattice parameters between the LiMnPO4 phase and the MnPO4 phase.108,109 Overall, LiMnPO4 possesses a theoretical capacity comparable to that of LiFePO4, but offers a higher voltage platform. Therefore, batteries comprised of positive LiMnPO4 electrode materials are more advantageous in terms of higher energy density. Nonetheless, LiMnPO4 still suffers from some drawbacks: (i) its inherent poor electric (10−11 to 10−8 S cm−1) and ionic conductivity (10−9 to 10−7 cm−2 s−1) which are the hurdles of its practical use; (ii) the Jahn–Teller effect originating from Mn2+/3+ is another issue in using LiMnPO4 as the cathode material for practical Li-ion batteries. This effect would lead to the meta-stability of the delithiated phase and the drastic capacity degradation compared with LiFePO4; (iii) a lower rate discharge capacity compared with batteries comprised of positive LiFePO4 electrode materials and further improvements in discharge characteristics are needed.110–114
A great deal of effort has been made to improve the electrochemical performance of LiMnPO4, such as carbon coating, cation doping, nanosizing and so on.110–113 The size reduction results in a reduced diffusion distance for electrons and Li ions which enhances the kinetics for Li-ion uptake and enables improved capacity retention and high rate cycling capability.110–113 Doping of two-valence cations such as Co2+, Mg2+, Fe2+, etc. has been explored to alleviate the Jahn–Teller distortion. In the following subsections, recent progress in carbon coated-, cation doped-, nanosized-LiMnPO4 is concluded and the critical issues for the present and future development of LiMn1−xFexPO4-based materials are discussed.

2.3.1 Carbon coating. 
The approach of coating conductive carbon is the most commonly used strategy to address the low electronic and ionic conductivity issues of LiMnPO4-based olivine structure materials. The carbon used in these composites can be divided into two types. One is pyrolyzed and amorphous carbon, which are usually derived from organic sources such as sucrose and polymers like polymethylmethacrylate and polyaniline. The other is graphitic carbon such as carbon nanotubes, vapor grown carbon fiber and graphene etc.110,111 By using pyrolyzed carbon, a uniform coating layer on the surface of nanoparticles is easy to achieve, which provides a lot of free access for Li ions. However, pyrolyzed carbon always shows less electronic conductivity compared to that of graphitic carbon. Graphene with a superior electronic conductivity has been used to modify olivine materials by the ball milling method or adding graphene oxide directly into solvothermal reactants.110–112,115–118
Oh et al.119 synthesized agglomerated LiMn0.85Fe0.15PO4/C nanoparticles using ultrasonic pyrolysis following ball milling, and the obtained composite exhibited a discharge capacity of 158.5 mA h g−1 at a rate of C/20. Yamada et al.120 reported a LiMn0.6Fe0.4PO4 solid solution system and verified that Fe-doped LiMnPO4 materials produced better electrochemical performances in comparison with LiMnPO4 because of improved kinetics during lithiation/delithiation. Saravanan et al.121 synthesized LiMn0.5Fe0.5PO4/C nano-plates using a simple solvothermal method, and the resulting material demonstrated excellent cycling performance.
Pyrolyzed carbon and reduced graphene oxide co-doped LiMn0.9Fe0.1PO4 (LMFP/C/rGO) was synthesized by a novel and facile amine-assisted coating strategy as shown in Fig. 15. The well-designed co-doped LiMn0.9Fe0.1PO4 nanoplate (LMFP/C/rGO, 150 nm in length and 20 nm in thickness) is proved to be the olivine phase with good crystallinity which is further compared with exclusively pyrolyzed carbon coated LiMn0.9Fe0.1PO4 (LMFP/C) from the structural and electrochemical points of view. LMFP/C/rGO exhibits superior electrochemical performances with a specific capacity of 158.0 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and 124.6 mA h g−1 at 20 °C. Moreover, after 140 cycles at 0.2C rate, around 95% of the initial capacity is still retained. Further analysis disclosing the outstanding electrochemical performances could be ascribed to the collaboration of the uniformly coated pyrolyzed carbon and closely connected rGO with an extraordinary electronic conductivity.111 The research shows that this effective synthesis strategy is imperative for the improvement of Li-ion battery performance and can be widely used for advanced energy storage.
 Fig. 15  (A) (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis process for LMFP/C/rGO; and (B) electrochemical test of (a) charge/discharge curves of the LMFP/C/rGO electrode at a current density of 0.1C, (b) rate performance of LMFP/C and LMFP/C/rGO from 0.1C to 20C and discharge curves of (c) LMFP/C and (d) LMFP/C/rGO at different current densities. Reproduced from ref. 111. 


2.3.2 Cation doping. 
The substitution of Mn2+ with Fe2+ by cation doping is the most conventional way to increase the electrochemical activity of LiMn1−xFexPO4. However, because of the low redox potential of Fe2+/Fe3+ (3.4 V vs. Li/Li+), too much substitution of Mn2+ with Fe2+ would severely decrease the energy density. Previous reports confirmed that with x increasing to around 0.2, the energy density was maximized with increasing rate capability.122,123
In one study, nickel-doped LiMn0.8Fe0.2PO4 nanosheets were prepared. After 200 charge/discharge cycles at 0.5C, the specific capacity of the LiMn0.8Fe0.2PO4 cathode was only slightly decreased to 148 mA h g−1, corresponding to a capacity retention of 94.1%. Even if increased to 10C and 20C, 75.7% and 65.2%, respectively, of the initial capacity at 0.1C could still be maintained. These results demonstrate that a suitable Ni2+ content and a rational synthesis route were helpful in improving the electronic conductivity and Li-ion mobility.113,122 In another study, multi-element doping compositions (i.e. LiMn0.938Mg0.024Co0.016Ni0.022PO4/C and LiMn0.962Co0.012Ni0.026PO4/C) at the Mn site of olivine-structured LiMnPO4 were synthesized. As displayed in Fig. 16, the doped LiMnPO4/C samples display higher rate capabilities, especially at a high rate of 2C. Additionally, the doped sample retained 71% of the initial capacity when the C-rate was increased 40-fold from C/20 to 2C. For the cycling stability, the doped samples could deliver a more than 22% increase in the initial capacity compared with the undoped LiMnPO4/C sample.123 The enhanced electrode performance could be explained in terms of improved kinetics via the element doping.123 The replacement of other elements by thermodynamically unstable Mn3+ during charging could mitigate lattice mismatches despite a minuscule number of dopants. In addition, substituted elements could be expected to effectively suppress side reactions that occur near the electrode surface. Antisite pair defects in LiMnPO4 tended to distribute randomly without aggregation in contrast with those in LiFePO4, which tended toward strong clustering pairs. In this regard, elemental doping in the Mn site could be strongly related to antisite pair distribution, which affected the facile Li ion diffusion. Thus, further studies are needed to deepen the understanding of the correlation between doping composition and defect behaviors.
 Fig. 16  (a) Cyclic voltammograms obtained at a scan rate of 0.01 mV s−1, (b) first charge–discharge voltage profiles recorded at the C/20 rate, (c) rate capability, and (d) capacity retention tests at the C/5 rate of pristine LiMnPO4, LiMnPO4/C, LiMn0.938Mg0.024Co0.016Ni0.022PO4/C, and LiMn0.962Co0.012Ni0.026PO4/C. Reproduced from ref. 123. 


2.3.3 Nanosizing of the LiMn1−xFexPO4 materials. 
Currently, solid phase,124 sol–gel,125,126 hydrothermal/solvothermal127,128 and co-precipitation129 are all methods that have been used for the synthesis of nano-LiMn1−xFexPO4. Among these methods, the hydrothermal method can be used to control the particle size and morphology, but requires operation at high temperatures and pressure and can be challenging from a manufacturing perspective. The synthesis conditions of the co-precipitation method are mild, but it is difficult for metal ions to precipitate in accordance with stoichiometric ratios. The solid phase method is easy to conduct, but results in large crystals being synthesized (greater than 70 nm), resulting in longer channels for lithium ion diffusion and hinders electrochemical performance.130 The soft chemistry and rheological phase method can guarantee the optimization of elements and particle size distributions in the liquid phase, effectively improving the mixing quality and obtaining a homogeneous carbon coating on cathode materials.131–133
For example, hierarchical LiMn0.5Fe0.5PO4/C nanorods prepared through the rheological phase method using PEG 4000 as a template produced PEG–LiMn0.5Fe0.5PO4/C composite particles with a nanorod morphology and a uniform carbon layer coated on the surface as shown in Fig. 17. Electrochemical measurements further demonstrated that this composite can produce acceptable performances, delivering discharge capacities of 162, 133, 108, 95, and 78 mA h g−1 at 0.1, 1, 5, 10, and 20C rates respectively. The improved performance of the LiMn0.5Fe0.5PO4/C material synthesized with PEG 4000 as a template can be attributed to the smaller crystal characteristic sizes, shortening lithium ion diffusion lengths and further improving electrochemical performances.134
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic drawing of the structure-templating mechanism. (b) Initial charge/discharge curves of PEG-LMFP/C and LMFP/C at 0.05C. (c) Discharge profiles of LMFP/C at different rates. (d) Discharge profiles of PEG-LMFP/C at different rates. (e) Rate capability of PEG-LMFP/C and LMFP/C at different rates. Reproduced from ref. 134. 


2.3.4 Summary of LiMn1−xFexPO4 positive materials. 
With the concerted efforts of worldwide researchers and industry, the application of LiMn1−xFexPO4 as cathode materials for high energy and power density LIBs has demonstrated some success even in practical application. However, the poor electronic conductivity and lithium ion diffusion coefficient of this kind of material limit their rate capability. As discussed in the above subsections, many useful strategies have been developed and some advancement has been achieved to overcome this issue. To realize the commercial application of LiMn1−xFexPO4 for LIBs on a large scale, however, researchers still need to overcome some significant challenges in terms of fundamental and technological investigations.
The electrochemical performance of LiMn1−xFexPO4 can be improved to some degree by cation/anion doping, carbon coating, doping and morphology control of particles and so on. The primary advancements in LiMn1−xFexPO4-based cathode materials for EVs, HEVs and large-scale storage systems will rely on improving their specific capacity, rate performance, long-life cycle performance and thermal stability using a low cost and green synthetic route. The fabrication of LiMn1−xFexPO4-based full batteries/stacks is also an important concern for this material to be feasible for large scale commercial applications.

2.4 Spinel LiMn2O4 positive materials
As a positive material for lithium-ion batteries, LiMn2O4 is inexpensive, usable with large currents, performs well at low temperature discharge, and is environmentally compatible.135–137 In terms of synthesis, ball milling has been shown to further improve the electrochemical performance of this material.138 Despite these qualities, capacity deterioration upon cycling at elevated temperatures above 55 °C is still an obstacle for practical application. The possible deterioration mechanisms of LiMn2O4 as proposed by researchers are:139–143 (1) Mn3+ dissolution in the electrolyte through the disproportionation reaction of 2Mn3+ → Mn2+ + Mn4+; (2) the electrolyte will produce thermal decomposition under high voltage; and (3) irreversible structural transformation induced by Jahn–Teller distortion.
To solve these deterioration issues, various technical improvements have been studied. One method is the doping of transition metals such as Al,144,145 Mg,146,147 Ni,148 Co,149,150 and Cr151 on LiMn2O4 to stabilize the LiMn2O4 structure and improve its performance at high temperatures. However, the amount of doping must be limited because doped ions are unable to take part in redox reactions and can lower capacity. Metal oxides such as Al2O3,152 Fe2O3,153 Y2O3,154 TiO2,155 and V2O5 (ref. 156) were also used as coating materials to reduce the electrochemically active surface area and prevent undesirable side reactions between the positive electrode material and the electrolyte. However, in this method, these metal oxides can hinder the intercalation/de-intercalation of Li ions. Therefore, it is necessary to find an ideal coating layer to enhance the interfacial stability of LiMn2O4 electrodes without affecting the transfer of Li ions between the electrode and the electrolyte. With respect to this, positive materials such as LiNi0.5Mn0.5O2,157 LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2,158 LiNixMn2−xO4,159 and LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 (ref. 160) have been studied as surface coating layers for LiMn2O4.
Surface coating is another method to solve the deterioration issue. Among the numerous manganese compounds, Li2MnO3 typically possesses a layered structure with a two-dimensional path for the intercalation/de-intercalation of lithium ions and is electrochemically inert if the cell voltage is less than 4.5 V.161 Based on these properties, Li2MnO3 can possibly act as a stabilizing coating layer on the surface of other positive electrode materials to protect them from being directly exposed to the electrolyte without hampering the intercalation/de-intercalation of Li+. Based on this, a simple method was reported by Peng et al.161 to synthesize LiMn2O4@Li2MnO3 composites with several different coating contents in which pristine LiMn2O4 was fabricated through a typical high-temperature solid-state method. Fig. 18 shows that a 3 wt% Li2MnO3-coated sample produced excellent electrochemical performances as compared with the pristine one, delivering a discharge capacity of 110 mA h g−1 at 1C with a capacity retention of 94.17% after 500 cycles at 25 °C and 89.75% after 200 cycles at 55 °C. Therefore, the Li2MnO3 layer, acting as a physical barrier, effectively decreased the direct contact between the active material and the electrolyte. In addition, through thermal treatment, a stable phase surface was developed to strengthen the bonding between the coating layer and the host material, suppressing the disproportionation reaction (2Mn3+ → Mn2+ + Mn4+) and preventing the dissolution of Mn3+ into the electrolyte. The electrochemical impedance was also reduced during the cycling process in the Li2MnO3-coated sample. These results confirm that the surface modification of Li2MnO3 is an effective method to improve the performance of LiMn2O4.161 Therefore, the selection of suitable coating materials and coating processes can improve the electrochemical performance of LiMn2O4.
 Fig. 18  TEM and HRTEM images of the pristine (a and b) and 3 wt% Li2MnO3-coated samples (c and d). Cycle performance of the pristine and Li2MnO3 coated samples at 1C between 3.0 and 4.3 V at 25 °C. Reproduced from ref. 161. 
Kinetic analysis is also important for restraining the deterioration and optimizing the performance of LiMn2O4. Indeed, much of the kinetic limitation in Li-ion batteries that causes slow charging comes from the slow solid-state diffusion of Li ions through the micron length scale powders making up the electrodes. However, if the electrodes were made from nano rather than micron-scale powders, diffusion path lengths would be shorter and charging times could be faster. In one study, four nanoporous LiMn2O4 powders were synthesized with crystallite sizes of 10, 20, 40, and 70 nm, respectively, and their charge/discharge kinetics were studied.162 As shown in Fig. 19, smaller crystallite sizes show lower capacity but faster charge/discharge speeds, longer cycle life, and higher capacitive contribution based on kinetic analysis, whereas larger crystallite sizes show the opposite trend. Kinetic analysis of the nanoporous powders showed that, in general, smaller crystallite size gave increased capacitive character. The capacitive character was similar for 10, 20, and 40 nm samples (70–85% capacitive) and differed from that of the 70 nm sample (∼50% capacitive). The large drop in the capacitive character at 70 nm could result from the suppression of Li-intercalation-induced phase changes below 70 nm domain sizes. This idea is supported by long-term cycling data for the 70 nm sample, which drops to 50% capacity retention before 500 cycles, while the 40 nm sample retains ∼75% of the capacity after 2000 cycles. Because the 40 nm sample has similar kinetics to the smaller crystallite sizes but has higher capacity, it is perhaps the most ideal of the crystallite sizes studied here for practical applications as a fast-charging pseudocapacitive cathode material. Importantly, there appears to be a critical size above which the charge/discharge kinetics and cycle life deteriorate significantly and materials with domain sizes just below this critical size show the best combination of electrochemical performance characteristics.162,163,165
 Fig. 19  Using nanoscale domain size to control charge storage kinetics in pseudocapacitive nanoporous LiMn2O4 powders. (A) Low- (top) and high- (bottom) resolution SEM images of nanoporous LiMn2O4 powders with different average crystallite sizes (shown in the image). The images show both the primary and secondary particle sizes. All larger domain size samples were made by thermal coarsening of the 10 nm material. (B) Galvanostatic capacity testing at 5, 10, and 20 °C for four sizes of nanoporous LiMn2O4 powders as slurry electrodes. Smaller samples have lower capacity due to an increased fraction of inactive surface atoms. Charge time versus normalized capacity for nanoporous LiMn2O4 powders with different crystallite sizes. Samples with domain sizes up to 40 nm show similar capacity loss at a higher rate, but the kinetics slow down appreciably for the 70 nm sample. Comparison of long-term galvanostatic rate testing at 10C for 40 and 70 nm LiMn2O4 samples. The 70 nm sample shows rapid capacity fade, while the 40 nm sample shows much more stable cycling. (C) Mechanism diagram on the effect of particle size on kinetics and capacity. Reproduced from ref. 165. 
To study the effects of ball-milling time on the kinetically controlled and diffusion limited steps of Li intercalation/de-intercalation in ball milled LiMn2O4, Crain et al.164 analyzed the electrochemical characteristics of positive electrodes prepared from a controlled mixture of nano- and micrometric LiMn2O4 particles. In their study, it was observed that the nanoparticles in the mixture can support the surface-localized insertion/extraction of Li and thus increase electrode charge/discharge rates and that LiMn2O4 micro-particles can promote electrode cyclability by stabilizing coexisting nanoparticles against segregation and strong electrolyte reactions. For a fundamental understanding, the underlying mechanisms of these effects were also studied using voltammetry, galvanostatic cycling, Ragone plot construction, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. The relative timescales of charge transfer and Li+ diffusion within the LiMn2O4 lattice were also determined by the researchers. In addition, the use of active substances in the process of fast charging and discharging was also studied.164–166 Despite these findings, one major factor that remains is that the stability of LiMn2O4 materials in high temperature environments must be further improved.
2.5 Summary of LIB positive materials
With the ever-increasing demand for longer lasting new energy devices, the specific energy requirements for LIBs continue to grow. Subsequently, the capacity requirements for positive electrode materials continue to grow as well. At present, LiNixCoyMnzO2 positive electrode materials are being widely applied and the composite use of a variety of positive materials is also widespread. However, the drawbacks become obvious if any positive electrode materials are used alone. For example, LiNixCoyMnzO2 materials are generally expensive, thermally unstable, and at high temperatures, their cycling specific capacity attenuation becomes problematic, especially at high discharge rates. As for LiFePO4-based materials, their energy densities are insufficient, especially for automotive applications, and their rate and low-temperature performances are not satisfactory. In addition, for LiMn2O4 materials, capacity fading is a severe problem during high temperature cycles. Better performances might be attenable if two or more types of different positive electrode materials were combined through either chemical or physical methods based on reasonable collocation ratios and compositions to achieve synergistic effects or circulation structures. In addition to the electrochemical properties of the component materials, the microstructure, particle size and composite interface of the component materials should be considered. Therefore, the selection of suitable materials and methods to prepare composite positive electrode materials through innovative approaches such as surface coating and forming a core–shell to take advantage of the desirable characteristics of the component materials is an important developmental direction for positive electrode materials for LIBs in the future.
3. Negative materials in LIBs
Negative electrode materials (or called anode materials) are another key component in LIBs. Graphite is commercially used as the negative material because of its high conductivity, good reversibility, and relatively low cost. But graphite has limited energy density, because every six carbon atoms can hold only one lithium atom.167–171 To improve the specific energy of LIBs, negative electrodes with high specific capacity should be used. In this paper, the latest achievements and applications of negative materials, mainly referring to silicon-based, tin-based and metal oxide negative materials, and their nano-composites in the negative materials of lithium ion batteries in recent years are reviewed, and the future progress of research and development of negative materials and their nano-composites is also discussed. Due to the length of this article, other P-based and Bi(Sb)-based anode materials will be skipped instead of being extensively discussed.
3.1 Silicon-based negative materials
Of all the negative electrode materials known, silicon (Si) has drawn much attention because of its low discharge potential and high theoretical capacity of 4200 mA h g−1.167–169 However, Si-based materials easily have a volume change of >400% during the charge and discharge process. The large volume change can lead to the pulverization of Si during the charge and discharge process and the damage of materials' structure, and this is harmful to the electrochemical properties, including cycle properties and rate properties.169–171 Another disadvantage is their poor electrical conductivity, leading to capacity loss or inefficient utilization of Si. In addition, the preparation process of silicon anodes can be quite complex with poor controllability, inevitably increasing cost.169–171 Therefore, an ideal Si-based anode should be elaborately designed and fabricated to possess a favorable morphology, an excellent conductivity, and an appropriate porous structure. Significant efforts have been made to produce various Si nanostructures because nanostructured materials show better capability to withstand stresses from volume changes than the corresponding bulk materials. In this section, the focus is on the challenges and recent progress in the development of Si-based anodes for lithium-ion batteries, including pulverization of Si and low initial coulombic efficiency.

3.1.1 Volume expansion/contraction. 
Silicon is an alloy anode and each silicon atom can host four lithium atoms. Lithiation is associated with massive volume changes due to their intake of enormous amounts of lithium. When transforming from Si to Li4.4Si, the volume expansion is about 420%.169–171 This large volume expansion/contraction during lithium insertion/extraction induces large stresses, which can cause cracking and pulverization of Si, leading to loss of electrical contact and capacity fading. The structural retention of Si materials during the charge and discharge process of LIBs is critical to their viability as a negative material. To solve the structural failure of Si electrodes, tremendous efforts have been made. The strategies developed include: (1) compositing with a stress-relief buffer matrix;172–188 (2) constructing a physical compartment to accommodate volume expansion;189–193 and (3) utilizing nanoscale silicon.194–199
The first effective method to solve the structural failure of Si electrodes is to disperse nano-sized Si into a conductive matrix.172–179 Several carbon materials such as graphite,174 graphene,180 carbon nanotubes,181 graphitized MCMB182 and so on have been studied and it was found that these carbon materials can not only keep the structure of Si electrodes relatively stable, but can also improve the overall electrochemical performance of LIBs because of the inherent conductivity of the carbon materials. The carbon materials mentioned above are ideal candidates as conductive matrices because of their high surface area, high electrical conductivity, small volume effect, good stability and low cost.
Graphene is the most commonly used buffer matrix. As shown in Fig. 20(A), Si and a reduced graphene oxide (Si/r-GO) composite were deposited on a three-dimensional (3D) carbon fiber (CF) current collector. The reversible capacity of the Si/r-GO/CF electrode is 41000 mA h g−1 at a rate of 0.1C. Moreover, the Si/r-GO/CF electrode exhibits an excellent rate performance of 280 mA h g−1 even at a rate of 10C due to the effective conductivity improvement and a capacitor-like behavior offered by the CF networks. The Si/r-GO/CF coin cell shows a low resistance in charge transfer. Finally, the CF skeleton serves as a solid scaffold, which inhibits the aggregation of the Si/r-GO composite during usage, and therefore leads to a capacity retention of more than 95% after 100 cycles.183 Besides, a catalytic growth of graphene cages on composite particles of magnesium oxide and silicon, which are made by the magnesiothermic reduction reaction of silica particles, is reported in Fig. 20(B). Catalyzed by the magnesium oxide, graphene cages can be conformably grown onto the composite particles, leading to the formation of hollow graphene encapsulated Si particles. Such materials exhibit excellent lithium storage properties in terms of high specific capacity, remarkable rate capability (890 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1), and good cycling retention over 200 cycles with consistently high coulombic efficiency at a current density of 1 A g−1. A full battery test using LiCoO2 as the cathode demonstrates a high energy density of 329 W h kg−1.184 A novel and facile fabrication approach is developed to synthesize high performance SiOx/C composites with a graphite like structure, as shown in Fig. 20(C). The multicomponent carbon materials are favorable for addressing the disadvantages of SiOx-based anodes, especially for the formation of a stable solid electrolyte interphase, maintaining the structural integrity of electrode materials and improving the electrical conductivity of the electrode. The resultant SiOx/C anodes demonstrate high reversible capacities (645 mA h g−1), excellent cycling stability (≈90% capacity retention for 500 cycles), and superior rate capabilities. Even at high pressing density, SiOx/C anodes still present superior cycling performance due to the high tap density and structural integrity of electrode materials. The proposed synthetic method can also be developed to improve other anode materials with inferior electronic conductivity and huge volume variation.185 Several studies have introduced core–shell composites into SiOx-based negative materials to enhance the electrochemical performance with carbon coating forming SiOx/C being particularly attractive because of their high conductivity, performance stability and ease of forming a stable SEI.186–188
 Fig. 20  Graphene act as the buffer matrix to suppress the expansion of silicon. (A): (a) capacity vs. number of cycles, and (b) charge–discharge curves in the cycle life test of the Si/r-GO/CF electrode. (B): (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of the Si@graphene cage composite: (c) SEM, (d) TEM with the inset SAED pattern, (e) HRTEM of porous Si particles, and (f) HRTEM of the graphene cage; (g) STEM image of the Si@graphene cage and the corresponding elemental mappings of Si, O, C, and N. Electrochemical performance of the Si@graphene cage composite in a half cell setup versus Li metal. (C): (a) schematic illustration showing the synthetic process of the SiOx/C hydrogel. SEM images of (b) artificial graphite, (c) artificial graphite after a sand milling process (FG), (d) SiOx particles, (e) SiOx/GO, (f) SiOx/GO/FG, and (g) SiOx/C. (A) Reproduced from ref. 183, (B) reproduced from ref. 184, and (C) reproduced from ref. 185. 
The selection of different adhesives and preparation methods has significant effects on the electrochemical performance of Si negative electrodes. In a study by Choi et al.,189 a Si alloy electrode was prepared using a PAI binder and its electrochemical properties and curing temperatures were investigated to assess the potential of PAI as a binder for LIBs. The Si alloy electrode that was used in the study was fabricated with polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) as a pore forming agent to produce a porous structure to alleviate volume expansion for improved cyclability (Fig. 21a–d). The distribution of the macropores on the PMMA-treated electrodes was found to vary with the diameter of the applied PMMA beads. Compared with the bare electrode, the 10 μm PMMA-treated electrode produced the best cycling stability, as shown in Fig. 21e and f, exhibiting a high specific capacity of 1135 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a current density of 750 mA h g−1. This micro-structurally controlled electrode can therefore relieve the mass stresses in the Si electrode and volume expansion can be effectively controlled.189 Lv et al.190 adopted a highly efficient route to enable the scalable and high yield synthesis of core–shell SiOx/C. This SiOx/C composite could deliver a stable reversible capacity of 820 mA h g−1 over 100 cycles, and showed an excellent rate capability. Other composites such as SiOx/CNF,191 SiOx/CNT,192 and SiOx/graphene193 have also been explored.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic diagram of the porous electrode fabrication process using polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) and associated electrochemical test results. (b–d) SEM images of PMMA powders with diameters of 5 μm, 10 μm, and 20 μm. (e and f) Cycling performance with various types of electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 189. 
Aside from composites, the preparation of nanoscale SiOx materials such as nanoparticles,194,195 nano-coralloids,196 nano-sheets,197 nano-wires,198 and nano-rods199 is another important method to increase performance by preventing the pulverization of SiOx and decreasing the Li diffusion lengths in the electrodes. A wide variety of Si nanostructures have been designed and fabricated using various synthetic techniques, including chemical vapor deposition (CVD), laser ablation, chemical-assisted thermal disproportionation, electro-spin and template techniques. Considerable progress has been made in improving the electrochemical performance of Si-based anodes through various strategies, including controlling the morphology and structures, using a buffer matrix such as Si-carbon composites, and fabricating Si nanoparticles, nanowires, porous Si materials, and core–shell structures.


3.1.2 Low initial coulombic efficiency. 
Coulombic efficiency refers to the ratio of discharge capacity and charge capacity, and is an important metric to evaluate the reversibility of battery reactions. When the potential of the anode is below 1 V during charging, the electrolyte decomposes on the interphase of the anode surface and electrolyte to form a solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI). The ideal SEI layer can permit lithium ion transport, prevent further electrolyte decomposition on the electrode surface, and increase the electrochemical cyclability and stability. However, the SEI was crushed due to the volume change of Si anodes during cycling. The exposed fresh electrode surface leads to a very thick SEI layer, resulting in low coulombic efficiency.170–173,183–185 The first-cycle coulombic efficiency of silicon anodes is typically in the range of 65–85%, far below that of commercial graphite anodes (90–94%). In recent years, research was focused on the initial cycle of silicon electrodes to investigate the formation mechanism at the very starting of battery operation, which can accelerate the understanding of the usually observed large irreversible capacity loss. Prelithiation is a very effective way to achieve high initial coulombic efficiency.
Prelithiation presents exciting opportunities for next-generation high-capacity anodes with an alternative lithium source for high initial coulombic efficiency, which prevents the lithium in the cathode from being consumed during side reactions of SEI formation. There are three main ways to prestore lithium in anodes. The first approach is to incorporate a temporary cell to realize electrochemical prelithiation by making lithium foil come into contact with electrolyte-wetted anodes. The second approach is to prelithiate silicon with microscale stabilized lithium metal powder through mechanical activation. The third one is to apply LixSi nanoparticles from chemical synthesis as a potential prelithiation reagent.200 Electrochemical prelithiation stores lithium in advance to form a SEI layer through electrochemical reactions.
Silicon anodes were in contact with a piece of Li metal foil in the liquid environment of the electrolyte through a temporary cell under an inert atmosphere. The potential difference between the two electrodes can enable spontaneous prelithiation for SEI formation, because of an external short circuit built between the lithium metal foil and C-SiOx electrode. Proper electrochemical prelithiation requires a delicate control, since insufficient lithiation cannot improve the initial coulombic efficiency enough due to remaining Li trapping sites, while overlithiation reduces the lithium ion accommodation in the real first lithiation process.200–203
A common issue in LIB anodes is the large consumption of lithium in the initial cycle because of the formation of a solid electrolyte interphase followed by gradual loss in subsequent cycles. So prelithiation is needed to compensate the loss. However, anode prelithiation faces the challenge of high chemical reactivity because of the low anode potential. Previous efforts have produced prelithiated Si nanoparticles with dry air stability, which cannot be stabilized under ambient air. Cui et al.201 developed a one-pot metallurgical process to synthesize LixSi/Li2O composites by using low-cost SiO or SiO2 as the starting material. As shown in Fig. 22, the resulting composites consist of homogeneously dispersed LixSi nanodomains embedded in a highly crystalline Li2O matrix, providing the composite with excellent stability even in ambient air with 40% relative humidity. The composites are readily mixed with various anode materials to achieve a high cycle coulombic efficiency (CE) of >100% or serve as an excellent anode material by itself with stable cyclability and consistently high CEs (99.81% in the seventh cycle and ∼99.87% for subsequent cycles). Therefore, LixSi/Li2O composites can achieve balanced reactivity and stability, promising a significant boost to LIBs. Nano-sized silicon has been effective in addressing the pulverization problem for long cycling performance, and the large surface area of nano-Si leads to low initial coulombic efficiencies due to the formation of a SEI, resulting in irreversible capacity loss. Fig. 3(c) presents the calculated surface area in contact with the electrolyte for secondary particles composed of 80 nm primary nanoparticles, with different sizes of secondary particles.202
 Fig. 22  Schematic diagrams and DFT simulation showing the advantages of the LixSi/Li2O composite. (A) Three approaches to stabilize reactive LixSi NPs. (B) The different behaviors of the LixSi/Li2O composite and LixSi/Li2O core–shell NPs under ambient conditions. (C) DFT simulation is performed by cleaving along the (001) plane of Li21Si5 and calculating the binding energy between O at different positions in Li2O and Li at the (001) plane of Li21Si5. (D) The table shows the binding energy of different bonds. Reproduced from ref. 201. 
The whole prelithiation process should be finished under an inert atmosphere because of the low potential and high chemical reactivity of lithium metal with H2O and O2. Yang and co-workers proposed an active material/polymer/lithium anode trilayer structure with uniform distribution of the lithium source, which is stable in ambient air. Lithium is deposited on Cu foil, and then lithium is coated with a protective polymer layer (polymethyl methacrylate, PMMA) to make it ambient-air-stable.203 Then, the anode materials, deposited on the top of the polymer layer, can be integrated with the electrolyte and conventional cathode materials to make up a real battery. As the polymer coating layer dissolves in the electrolyte, the anode materials come into contact with lithium directly. As a result of pressure inside the cell caused by the cell assembly process, lithium metal is activated and forms an in situ lithiated silicon anode. Through structure design and sacrificial lithium, the initial coulombic efficiency can reach or exceed the commercial level of state-of-the-art graphite anodes (90%) step by step. The prelithiation, such as LixSi nanoparticle mentioned above (in ref. 201), is compatible with the existing battery manufacturing process. The challenge of initial coulombic efficiency can be solved by combining the above method considering the scalable production and feasible operations.
In a word, silicon-based negative materials with high specific capacity are intensively pursued as one of the most promising anode materials for next-generation lithium-ion batteries. In the past decade, various nanostructures have been successfully demonstrated to address the major challenges for reversible Si anodes related to pulverization and solid-electrolyte interphase. However, the electrochemical performance is still limited by challenges that stem from the use of nanomaterials. In this section, the focus is on the challenges and recent progress in the development of Si anodes for lithium-ion batteries.

3.2 Tin-based negative materials
Sn-based materials have attracted much attention as anodes for lithium ion batteries (LIBs) due to their low cost, high theoretical capacities, and high energy density. Sn anodes show a higher volumetric capacity of about 2000 mA h cm−3 and gravitational capacity of 990 mA h g−1 than commercial graphite. Another significant advantage of Sn-based anodes over commercial graphite is that they avoid solvent intercalation, and improve the safety performance of LIBs. However, their practical applications are limited by the poor cycle ability originating from the huge volume changes (even up to 300%) and subsequent pulverization of the electrode during the lithiation/delithiation process.204–208 Thus, these problems have been regarded as the main obstacles hampering the practical application of Sn-based materials in LIBs. In this section, the progress made in solving these problems in recent years has been summarized.
One common and effective approach is to disperse nano-sized Sn-based materials onto a flexible and conductive support as a buffer matrix. This could significantly improve the electrochemical performance of Sn-based materials by buffering volume expansion and increasing electrical conductivity. The buffer matrix could be porous carbon, hollow carbon spheres, carbon nanotubes, graphene and so on.204–210 Graphene-containing nanomaterials have become an important candidate material for electrode materials of lithium ion batteries because of their unique physical properties.204–206 In these composites, GNSs always provide remarkable advantages for Sn-based anodes, which can be attributed to the unique structure and properties of graphene, such as high surface area, electrical conductivity, mechanical flexibility, and chemical functionality. Thus, as one excellent matrix, graphene plays a key role in the composites, drastically improving the lithium storage performance of Sn-based anodes. The significant effects of graphene on high performance Sn-based anodes can be summarized as follows:204–209 (1) its high flexibility makes graphene the perfect supporting matrix or coating layer for Sn-based materials, effectively relieving the main problem of Sn based anode volume expansion; (2) layered graphene inhibits the aggregation of Sn-based particles. Sn-based particles between graphene layers efficiently suppress the re-stacking of graphene. There is a beneficial synergistic effect between graphene and Sn nanoparticles; (3) the highly conductive graphene supplies 2D electronically conducting networks for Sn-based materials, which further provides a highly conductive medium for Li-ion electron transfer during charge/discharge processes; (4) the oxygen-rich functional groups on the surface of graphene or graphene oxide can enable good interfacial interactions for the growth of various Sn-based materials. Due to these properties, Sn/graphene-based composites exhibit excellent electrochemical performance as anode materials for LIBs.
A monolayer of graphite with outstanding mechanical flexibility and excellent electrical conductivity has recently become one of the most promising matrices for Sn-based materials. Materials investigated include Sn nanoparticles embedded in porous carbon, Sn nanoparticles encapsulated in hollow carbon spheres, carbon nanotubes, nanowires, or fibers, and Sn-graphene hybrids. Many reports have shown that the hybrids with various structures exhibit improved electrochemical performance for LIBs.211 For example, layer-by-layered SnS2/graphene hybrid nanosheets in Fig. 23(A) show a high initial reversible capacity of 696.27 mA h g−1 with an initial coulombic efficiency of 74.16% at 200 mA g−1, and negligible capacity fading over 180 cycles, as well as an excellent rate capability of 567.78 mA h g−1 at 2000 mA g−1. Benefiting from synergism between SnS2 nanoplates with high specific capacity and graphene, the graphene increases the conductivity of SnS2, buffers the volume change during lithiation/de-lithiation processes, and provides an effective physical barrier between the active materials and the electrolyte to suppress the shuttle effect of polysulfides formed during de-lithiation processes.212 It should be noted that the high surface area of graphene increased the contact area between the anode and the electrolyte, which results in more SEI formation in the first discharge. The atomically flat graphene layers with mesopores provide a high contact surface area for lithium ion adsorption and intercalation, while the open mesopores in the orthogonal direction on the nanosheets offer efficient transport pathways for ion diffusion toward the deep portions of the stacked graphene layers thus delivering excellent lithium ion storage capacity and cycling performance. Meanwhile, the specific functional groups can further enhance the reversible capacity of reduced graphene. The capacity at potentials greater than 1.5 V is predominantly attributed to phenol groups, while the capacity of the redox couple at 1.1 V results from cyclic edge ether groups.208–210
 Fig. 23  Novel Sn-based anode materials and their electrochemical properties. (A) Schematic illustration of the formation of LL-SnS2/G hybrid nanosheets and cycling performance. (B) (a) SEM images of ZnSnO3 nanocubes, (b and c) SEM images of the Sn/C hybrid (S800) with continuous carbon coating layers, and (d) TEM image of S800 showing the typically encapsulated Sn particles by carbon layers. (e) Voltage profiles of the Sn/C hybrid electrode (S800) at a current density of 0.2 Ag−1, (f) cycling performance of the Sn/C hybrid electrode at current densities of 0.2 Ag−1 and 1 Ag−1, (g) rate performance of the Sn/C hybrid electrode S800 (upper) and SRE (lower) at charge discharge rates from 0.1 to 2 Ag−1, and (h) Nyquist plots of fresh coin cells used 12 h after the assembly. (A) Reproduced from ref. 212 and (B) reproduced from ref. 218. 
Doping has attracted considerable attention for obtaining high performance anode materials for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) due to the synergistic effects of heteroatom dopants. Previous research found that nitrogen doped carbon nanotubes show straight, bamboo-like structures and the nano-oxide species are homogeneously dispersed on them without any surface pretreatment, and also the nanostructures thus constructed exhibit very high catalytic activity.210 Nitrogen and halogen (including Cl, Br, and S) dual-doped graphene is successfully synthesized by a general wet chemical method and the lithium storage performance of the doped graphene as an anode material for LIBs is investigated in detail. The doped heteroatoms introduce abundant defects and expand the interlayer spacing of graphene to benefit lithium insertion and extraction.213–216 A flexible free-standing nitrogen-doped graphene paper (N-GP) is fabricated via a facile hydrothermal approach with doping reactions occurring at the solid/gas interface of graphene oxide and ammonia vapor. The electrochemical properties of N-GP as an anode for lithium ion batteries (LIB) are evaluated and N-GP delivers almost doubled reversible discharge capacity compared to the undoped graphene paper (GP) as well as a good cycling stability and rate performance.217
The effect of the doping-site position on the electrocatalytic behaviors of the graphene anode in LIBs by both theoretical calculation and experimental validation was investigated. The results reveal that the doping position can directly affect the electron distribution, surface electrocatalytic activity and electronic conductivity, which play essential roles in Li-storage properties. As expected, center-iodinated graphene shows high capacity, superior cycling stability and high rate capability.216 The excellent performance mainly stems from the synergistic effect of structure modification and heteroatom doping.213
Similarly, as shown in Fig. 23(B), a novel and solvent-free synthesis of a superior performance Sn/C anode derived from binary metal oxides was established, which initiated the outward growth of ZIF-8 approach. The obtained anode has highly dispersed Sn nanoparticles wrapped in nitrogen-rich carbon with a 3D continuous conductive framework and a high Sn content of 82.3wt%. Consequently, the Sn/C anode presents an initial discharge capacity of 1321 mA h g−1 with a superior coulombic efficiency of 80.1% at 0.2 Ag−1. Reversible capacities of 901 mA h g−1 at 0.2 Ag−1 and 690 mA h g−1 at 1 Ag−1 are reserved after 150 cycles. Importantly, this designed synthesis suggests a novel approach to produce other materials such as MnO/C anodes exhibiting superior performance.218 Both nanostructures, which include free volume, facilitate fast Li+ diffusion and accommodate huge volume changes. It is suggested that hierarchical and/or nanoporous nanostructures will be one of the potential ways of enhancing the electrochemical performance of other anode materials for LIBs.
As the lithiation of Sn-based oxides such as SnO and SnO2 results in a composite structure of inactive lithium oxide and active Sn phases, the lithium oxide matrix helps to mitigate the large volume expansion. Generally, it is easier to synthesize the SnO2 phase than the SnO phase, because the latter is a metastable and low-temperature phase in the binary Sn–O system.
Doping Sn-based materials with various heteroatoms is another facile and effective approach to improve the electrochemical performance. It has been demonstrated that element doping can effectively enhance the electrical conductivity and improve the electrochemical reversibility of Sn-based materials. Various dopants, such as Fe, have been applied into Sn-based materials. Experimental results showed that Fe doping could reduce the nanocrystal size and enhance the electrical conductivity of SnO2-based materials, resulting in improved cycling capability and coulombic efficiency. An iron-doped SnO2/reduced graphene oxide (Fe–SnO2/rGO) composite has been facilely synthesized through a simple wet chemical method. It is shown that the Fe–SnO2 nanocrystals (∼8 nm) are homogeneously anchored onto rGO sheets with a content of 69.5 wt%. As an anode material for lithium-ion batteries, the as-prepared Fe–SnO2/rGO composite exhibits a reversible capacity of 1353 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles. The excellent electrochemical performance of the Fe–SnO2/rGO composite can be attributed to the Fe doping, which can enhance the interfacial interaction between Fe–SnO2 nanocrystals and rGO sheets, improve the electrical conductivity of the composite and more importantly, facilitate the conversion reaction between Li2O and SnO2 during cycling.219
3.3 Metal oxide negative materials
The increasing demand for high performance energy storage applications makes it urgent to develop new lithium ion batteries (LIBs) which possess enhanced capacity, cycling stability and rate capability. Metal oxides have been considered as prominent anode materials, due to their high theoretical specific capacity. Nevertheless, the practical application of these materials is limited by their undesirable rate capability and fast capacity fading, which are mainly ascribed to their intrinsic poor electronic conductivity, severe agglomeration and drastic volume expansion/contraction as well as material pulverization during the repeated charge/discharge process. Nowadays, numerous efforts have been made to overcome the above obstacles.220–223
One effective strategy to solve these problems is to design hierarchical hybrid carbonaceous nanocomposites with a flexible carbon matrix such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and carbon fiber, which can not only provide active sites but also accommodate the volume change during the charging/discharging process, and thus leads to higher capacity and cycling stability. Such a flexible carbon matrix serves as not only a conductive network to transfer the electrons/ions rapidly, but also a volume buffer to alleviate the internal stress generated by the repeated volume changes and thus to maintain the stable structure of the electrode materials upon cycling.
As an important two-dimensional carbon nanosheet, graphene or reduced graphene oxide (rGO) has been widely utilized as a superior carbon matrix to grow various nanosized negative materials with a unique morphology on its surface. As a result, the electrochemical performance of the hybrid composites has been highly improved by the flexible and conductive support. Graphene with high conductivity, excellent mechanical flexibility and ultra-high specific surface area (∼2360 m2 g−1) is envisioned as an excellent candidate for substrate materials. The unique structure as well as distinctive electrical and mechanical performance is favorable to endure the strain caused by volume changes and provide a continuous electron conducting network, and thus could greatly improve the electrochemical performance of active materials.
A self-supporting Co3O4/graphene hybrid film has been constructed via vacuum filtration of Co(OH)2 nanosheets and graphene, followed by a two-step thermal treatment. Within the hybrid film, Co3O4 nanoparticles with a size of 40–60 nm uniformly in situ grew on the surface of graphene, forming a novel porous and interleaved structure with strong interactions between Co3O4 nanoparticles and graphene, which is clearly displayed in Fig. 24(B). Such fascinating microstructures can greatly facilitate interfacial electron transportation and accommodate the volume changes upon Li ion insertion and extraction. The novel negative materials demonstrated extremely high reversible capacity (1287.7 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1) and excellent cycling stability and rate capability (1110 and 800 mA h g−1 at 0.5 and 1.0 A g−1, respectively).222
 Fig. 24  Metal oxide nanostructure dispersed onto GO. (A) (a) SEM and (b) TEM of Ni(OH)2@G and HRTEM of (c) graphene and (d) Ni(OH)2@G with Ni and C mapping. (B) Cross-sectional SEM images: (a and b) Co/GS film and (c and d) Co3O4/GS film. (C) (A) XRD pattern of the as-prepared Mn3O4@rGO precursor and MnO@rGO NO and (B and C) FESEM and (D) EDX-elemental mapping of the as-prepared MnO@rGO NO. (D) FE-SEM images of well dispersed TiO2/rGO: (a and b) nanoparticles and (c and d) nanorods. (A) Reproduced from ref. 220, (B) reproduced from ref. 222, (C) reproduced from ref. 223, and (D) reproduced from ref. 221. 
Similarly, a hierarchical hybrid sandwich-like nanostructure rGO sheet enwrapped MnO nanooctahedron (MnO@rGO NO) via a facile solution reflux process and a post carbothermal reduction treatment was developed, as shown in Fig. 24(C). Such a robust structure and excellent conductivity improved by the rGO support ensure the structural integrity of active electrode materials and enhance the electron/ion diffusion kinetics during the repeated electrochemical process. The MnO@rGO nanostructure presents excellent lithium storage capability with high reversible discharge capacity, long-term cycling stability and superb rate performance.223
Another effective strategy to solve the above problems is to design hollow micro/nanostructured materials with low density and large surface area. These hollow structures not only provide short diffusion pathways for lithium ions through the enlarged electrode–electrolyte contact area, but also provide extra voids to effectively accommodate the pronounced volume variation during the charging and discharging process. The general synthetic strategy of hollow structures is based on the Kirkendall effect. MnMoO4 hollow spheres were fabricated, which utilizes highly uniform Mn Moglycerate hybrid solid spheres as both the precursor and the self-sacrificing template. This step is followed by coating graphene onto the MnMoO4 hollow spheres. The composite shows a high capacity of 921 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 after 70 cycles and a reversible capacity of 513 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 4.0 A g−1.224 Hollow Co3V2O8 micro-pencils were synthesized through a facile hydrothermal method. They exhibited a high lithium storage capacity (1200 mA h g−1 at 1000 mAg−1), good cycling retention (650 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles) and an excellent rate performance.225
Spinel oxides with formula AB2O4, such as NiCo2O4, ZnCo2O4, MnCo2O4, CuCo2O4, and CoFe2O4, with higher capacity and low cost have been used as anodes for LIBs.226,227 However, the severe pulverization and particle aggregation, volumetric expansion/contraction, poor electrical conductivity, and detachment off the substrate induced by lithium insertion/extraction seriously limited their applications. Modification with some matrixes, such as graphene, carbon nanotubes, etc., is highly desired. Some synthetic methods have also been reported to prepare CoFe2O4/graphene nanosheet nanocomposites as anodes for LIBs. A binary metal oxide CoFe2O4 was derived from a bimetal–organic framework wrapped with graphene nanosheets. Benefiting from the synergistic effect of Co and Fe oxide and graphene nanosheets, as an anode for LIBs, the CoFe2O4/graphene nanosheet nanocomposites could be expected to deliver obviously enhanced reversible capacity, capacity retentions, and rate capabilities. A sandwich-like and porous NiCo2O4@reduced graphene oxide (rGO) nanocomposite was presented. Serving as an anode for lithium-ion batteries, the NiCo2O4@rGO composites exhibit an unprecedented capacity of 1566 mA h g−1 cycling at a current density of 1000 mA g−1 over 700 times, while a capacity of 886 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 over 100 cycles was achieved, which indicates promising potential for high energy density battery applications.227
Spinel Li4Ti5O12 is also a promising negative electrode material that possesses excellent cycling performances with negligible charge and discharge volume changes. Spinel Li4Ti5O12 also possesses good compatibility with electrolytes and has excellent thermal stability and safety.228,229 In addition, the potential of spinel Li4Ti5O12 above 1.55 V vs. Li/Li+ avoids the reduction of the electrolyte on the electrode surface and the formation of SEI layers, making it a promising alternative to graphite. However, Li4Ti5O12 possesses relatively low electrical conductivity (∼10−13 S cm−1) and a low lithium ion diffusion coefficient (10−9 to 10−16 cm2 s−1), limiting its electrochemical performance at high discharge rates.230 Therefore, much effort has been made to improve the electrical and ionic conductivities of Li4Ti5O12 to enhance its rate performance. Carbon coating is one method to improve Li4Ti5O12 conductivity231–233 and another is doping. For example, Zhou et al.233 synthesized N-doped Li4Ti5O12/C that produced a higher rate capability and better cycling performance than bare Li4Ti5O12. This composite material synthesized by Zhou et al. delivered a high capacity of 122 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles at a current density of 10C with a 102% capacity retention whereas the capacity retention of pure Li4Ti5O12 was only 50.5%. Various other doping elements have also been studied to modify the conductivity of Li4Ti5O12, including Na,234 K,235 Mg,236 Ca,237 Ni,238 Cu,239 and Al.240
3.4 Lithium metal negative materials
Lithium (Li) metal as an anode material for rechargeable Li batteries has attracted considerable attention due to its high theoretical specific capacity (3860 mA h g−1) and low negative electrode potential (−3.040 V vs. the standard hydrogen electrode). Li metal anodes are indispensable for Li–S and Li-air systems, both of which have being studied for next-generation energy-storage applications for decades. However, the growth of Li dendrites and the low coulombic efficiency (CE) during Li plating and stripping processes have limited its commercial applications.241–245 Similar to many other metals, Li tends to deposit in the dendritic form, which has been identified to be the main cause of thermal runaway and explosion hazards caused by internally shorting of the cells. Therefore, Li dendrite deposition needs to be avoided as much as possible. Recent research efforts have shed new light on the Li metal chemistry and provided possible approaches to modify Li anodes.
Currently, it has been widely accepted that the root cause of the Li metal issue comes from the inherent formation of highly porous structures (i.e. dendritic or mossy Li). The internal short circuit caused by Li dendrite penetration can result in safety issues, and the high surface area structure leads to accumulation of dead Li and depletion of the electrolyte. To resolve this issue, several strategies have been proposed to suppress the porous Li formation. One approach is to introduce strong and stable solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layers through electrolyte modification or artificial SEI formation; another is to confine Li metal growth in specially designed anode frameworks or use a solid state electrolyte. Due to the malleable nature of lithium, the presence of a mechanically strong and confined structure can suppress lithium dendrite growth. Therefore, a thorough understanding of Li deposition and dissolution during electrochemical cycling will provide insight into the Li metal issue. In this review, the progress of lithium metal anodes for rechargeable lithium batteries is summarized, and the challenges and potential opportunities of lithium metal anodes for practical applications are also discussed below.241–245

3.4.1 Minimizing volume changes by using stable hosts. 
Engineering a dendrite-free Li metal anode is critical for the development of long-life batteries. Yuan et al.246 used an artificial LiF host with a cuboid feature to construct a Li metal surface by a facile one-step reaction of ammonium hydrogen difluoride (NH4HF2) with bare Li metal. During cycling, Li grew continuously from the bottom gaps to the top of the LiF host and finally cover the surface of the modified anode. Particularly, with increasing cycling capacity, the Li metal tended to deposit into a scaly morphology which contributed to a dendrite-free anode. The as-obtained smooth Li anodes enabled stable cycling in working batteries with a low overpotential and a high coulombic efficiency (CE) of 98.5% at a current density of 1 mA cm−2. This work provides a facile approach to prepare LiF-rich Li anodes which paves the way to construct high-energy and safe lithium metal batteries.246
For the practical application of Li metal batteries, it is vital to resolve the intrinsic problems of Li metal anodes, i.e., the huge volume changes during cycling besides the formation of Li dendrites and interfacial instability. The utilization of solid-state electrolytes for Li metal anodes is a promising approach to address the issue. Multiple effective approaches have been reported to improve the Li anodes, such as constraining Li metal in porous materials, creating protective layers for stabilizing the Li–electrolyte interface, and modifying the organic electrolytes. However, because of the intrinsically high reactivity of Li metal and the dendrite-formation behavior of Li in liquid electrolytes, as well as the flammability and leakage of most organic electrolytes, the performance and safety of Li metal anodes still face great challenges. With respect to these issues, solid batteries are expected to fundamentally overcome the challenges.247 Solid-state electrolytes, especially nonflammable ceramic Li-ion conductors, show exceptional ability to inhibit the formation of Li dendrites and preclude the short circuit hazard. Yang et al.248 used a 3D garnet-type ion-conductive framework as a host for the Li metal anode and studied its plating and stripping behaviors within the solid ion-conductive host. It showed that with a solid-state ion-conductive framework and a planar current collector at the bottom, Li was plated from the bottom away from the separator layer without electrolyte penetration and short circuit during deposition. Owing to the solid-state deposition properties, Li grew smoothly in the pores of the garnet host without forming Li dendrites. The dendrite-free deposition and continuous rise/fall of Li metal during plating/stripping in the 3D ion-conductive host can create a safe and durable Li metal anode. The solid-state Li anode showed stable cycling at 0.5 mA cm−2 for 300 hours with a small overpotential, showing a significant improvement compared to those reported Li anodes with ceramic electrolytes. By fundamentally eliminating the dendrite issue, the solid Li metal anode shows great potential in building safe and reliable Li metal batteries (Fig. 25).248–250
 Fig. 25  Li deposition behavior in the 3D garnet host. (A) Voltage profile of Li plating within the porous garnet framework onto the bottom Cu layer at 0.5 mA cm−2. (B) Schematic of Li growth in the 3D garnet framework with the Cu current collector and transfer of Li ions and electrons. Cross-sectional SEM images of the 3D garnet host after deposition of Li metal in two regions indicated in (B); (C) near the dense separating layer, where the pores of the garnet host remain empty without Li deposition; and (D) bottom region with the Cu current collector, where the garnet host is deposited with Li metal. (E) Cross-sectional SEM image and (F) corresponding elemental distribution of La in the Li-deposited 3D garnet host. Reproduced from ref. 248. 


3.4.2 Engineering the SEI and other interfaces. 
High cyclability is mandatory for lithium metal anodes. Normally, low coulombic efficiency and the gradual increase of Li anode overpotential can lead to capacity fading during cycling. To deal with these issues, fundamental understanding of interfacial chemistries, Li deposition/dissolution, and diffusion behavior (such as pressure, temperature, and morphological evolution) and the correlations (including electrochemical behavior) among them is necessary.245–251
The study has found that the increase in Li capacity utilization in each cycle can cause variations in the morphology and composition, leading to degradation of the Li anode layer. Under high Li capacity utilization, the current density for charge (i.e., Li deposition) is identified to be a key factor controlling the corrosion of the Li metal anode. As shown in Fig. 26,252 under a low charge current density of 0.8 mA cm−2, most of the Li metal anode is still well maintained (Fig. 26(A)), exhibiting a corrosion depth of 20 mm with some small cracks on the surface. Under a medium charge current density of 1.3 mA cm−2, the corroded Li is largely increased to about 330 mm (Fig. 26(D)). Further increasing the charge current density to 2.0 mA cm−2 results in more serious corrosion of Li metal, propagating to a depth up to around 550 mm (Fig. 26(G)). It can be seen from Fig. 26A and D that even a slight increase in charging current density from 0.8 to 1.3 mA cm−2 can lead to a significantly accelerated degradation in capacity and a tremendous change in the corresponding Li metal anode with high capacity utilization. This reveals that the Li metal anode expands much more than the current density growth rate. As a result, a porous/loose Li layer is formed, causing a deep corrosion under a higher charge current density, seen by a rapid increase in cell resistance and eventual cell failure.
 Fig. 26  SEM images of the Li metal anodes after 200 charge/discharge cycles in Li||NMC coin cells with 3.5 mA h cm−2 NMC cathodes under different charge current densities (A–C) 0.8 mA cm−2, (D–F) 1.3 mA cm−2, and (G–I) 2.0 mA cm−2, in terms of (A, D, and G) cross-sectional and (B, C, E, F, H, and I) surface views. Reproduced from ref. 252. 
Although metallic lithium is regarded as an ideal anode material for high-energy-density batteries, the low cycling efficiency and safety issues hinder its practical application. In studies 253 and 254, a three-dimensional (3D) lithium composite anode was developed through infusing molten lithium inside the Cu foam anchored by ZnO nanoparticles. The introduced ZnO layer could provide the driving force for infusion, leading to a spontaneous wetting of molten lithium. Benefiting from well-confined preloaded lithium in the Cu network, the anode displayed ultralow internal resistance and stabilized interface. The fabricated anode for the symmetric cell showed extraordinarily low overpotential at high current densities. When paired with a Li4Ti5O12 electrode, the half-type cell demonstrated both superior rate capability and long-term cycling stability after 1000 cycles at an ultrahigh rate of 10C. This anode shows the lowest overpotential and the highest rate capacity ever reported for 3D design anodes, confirming their great potential as lithium metal anodes.
Recently, an artificial SEI has been explored to achieve stable Li metal anodes, since it can effectively regulate side reactions between Li and the electrolyte to improve the coulombic efficiency and generate uniform distributions of Li+ ions to suppress dendritic Li growth. Various inorganic materials show their advantages in lithium battery design, which also provide great opportunity for their application in metal anode protection. Another effective method is using graphitic-structured materials with high mechanical strength, such as sp2-carbon and hexagonal BN (h-BN) as surface protective materials of Li metal anodes. Carbonaceous materials are known to be both chemically and electrochemically stable in battery systems, making ideal candidates for anode protection. Recent studies have explored the possibility of graphene as an artificial SEI layer for Li metal anodes. However, due to its conductive nature, some Li can deposit directly on top of graphene instead of underneath it, resulting in limited improvement in CEs (<95%). Graphitic layers (GLs) can be applied as a promising artificial SEI and exhibit several advantages in terms of chemical stability, ideal interface structure, and strong binding interaction. However, the application of GLs as an artificial SEI still faces two significant obstructions. Firstly, the Li+ ion transport through the layer is very difficult due to the relatively small ring size of GLs. Even though topological defects can provide primary channels for Li+ ion tunneling, they can also significantly reduce the stability and the mechanical strength of GLs. Secondly, the chemical reactions at interfaces must be considered since the GLs are immersed in the electrolyte, particularly when the defects appear.255,256
Huang et al.257 reported a freestanding, highly flexible nanostructured carbon film, which could be easily transferred onto electrodes. It was shown that such mechanically robust carbon films could effectively suppress the growth of Li dendrites upon cycling at practical current densities (0.25–1.0 mA cm−2) with a significantly improved coulombic efficiency up to ∼99.5% for over hundreds of cycles and thousands of operating hours. Notably, this semi-tubular carbon film demonstrated instant, reliable protection to electrodes, which was not reactive to electrolytes and tolerance to ambient environment with high humidity, offering a practically feasible route toward dendrite-free lithium metal batteries.
The theoretical simulation can predict the distinctive morphological characteristics of Li growth caused by a pressure-induced deformation. As shown in Fig. 27, the anticipated wire-like growth of Li without pressure and the compact deposition with pressure can be observed experimentally in a step-by-step Li plating/stripping test. The more efficient Li stripping under pressure also leads to a less Li residue than the case without pressure. Such a microstructural variation can accumulate during the prolonged cycles, and consequently, generate a much thicker and more porous Li layer in the cell without pressure. The morphological changes of Li metal with and without pressure can bring about notable differences in their electrochemical performances in terms of coulombic efficiency and cycling life. The clear correlation between the structural changes and electrochemical performances of Li metal with/without mechanical pressure reveals the fundamental role of pressure in suppressing porous Li formation. It can help an effective design of Li anodes for high performance Li metal batteries in the future.258,259
 Fig. 27  Analysis of Li-metal growth with and without external pressure. (a) Simulated growth of Li metal under two conditions: (I) without pressure (with free top surface boundaries) and (II) with pressure (with constrained top surface boundaries). (b) Side-view SEM images of Li metal deposited on Cu foil under an external pressure of (I) 0 MPa and (II) 1.1 MPa. Scale bar: 1 μm. (c) EIS of the cells with a pressure of 0 MPa and 1.1 MPa. (d) Corrected potentiostatic current density (at −330 mV vs. Li/Li+) of the cells with a pressure of 0 MPa (I) and 1.1 MPa (II) and theoretical fitting curves with 2D (blue curves) and 3D (yellow curves) growth modes. (e) 2D growth charge density of the cell with a pressure of 0 MPa (I) and 1.1 MPa (II) calculated from (d). Reproduced from ref. 258. 


3.4.3 Optimizing the components of electrolytes. 
As discussed above, SEI films are effective in protecting Li metal anodes. Their structures and components largely depend on the electrolyte compositions. The additives are usually applied to optimize the formation of a SEI film on the anode surface. The structure of the SEI film is described as constituting two or more separate layers with different compositions and properties. By adopting an effective additive, the performance of Li metal batteries can be significantly improved with a compact, stable, flexible, and ionically conductive SEI film.260–262 According to the high activity nature of Li metal, it is very difficult to inhibit reactions between Li metal and liquid electrolytes. Therefore, liquid electrolytes are difficult to be replaced in a short period of time. Although inorganic solid electrolytes theoretically can keep high CEs for long-term cycling, the interface contact problem is still far from resolved. When using liquid electrolytes, a stable SEI film is of utmost importance to maintain a high CE. Normally, ether-based electrolytes can deliver a higher CE compared with carbonate-based electrolytes owing to their lower reduction potentials. Additives are an effective method to enhance the performance of Li metal anodes with low cost.260–263
Some electrolyte additives, such as LiF, fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) and CsPF6, have been used to help form a SEI film on Li electrodes. These additives can provide a high mechanical strength even after many cycles. Replacing the carbonaceous liquid electrolytes by more stable candidates such as ether-based electrolytes, quasi-solid-state or solid-state electrolytes is an effective way of optimizing the Li depositional behavior. However, it was found that Li+ tended to deposit on a lumped site to form dendrites, mainly because of the high surface diffusion energy barrier on Li anodes, and that the surface energy and diffusion energy of surface layers could significantly influence Li depositional behavior.260–263 The initial nucleation sites also play a significant role in the succeeding Li depositional morphology. Thus, more attention should be paid to the features and chemical compositions of the surface layer. In fact, the surface energy and diffusion barrier of many components have been calculated, including layered (LiOH), multivalent (Li2O and Li2CO3), and halide (LiF, LiCl, LiBr, and LiI) compounds. Joint density functional theoretical analysis shows that a lithium-halide SEI layer can give rise to better stability (higher surface energy) and faster diffusion over the surface layer. It is generally believed that new types of additives and their function mechanism are worth further studying.
Polymer solid electrolytes, which fill the gap between liquid electrolytes and inorganic solid electrolytes, may be largely applied in the near future. However, to some degree, polymer solid electrolytes cannot fundamentally solve the problems of Li metal. To further face the issue, some advanced thin-film fabrication techniques, which are capable of minimizing Li corrosion in air during processing and meeting the challenges associated with the low melting point of Li, are promising in terms of precise control over the coating thickness, uniformity, conformity and defect density. For example, stable Li electrodes have been fabricated by radio-frequency magnetron sputtering of a thin film of lithium phosphorus oxynitride solid electrolyte.263–265
In summary, Li metal is a promising anode material for rechargeable batteries owing to its low density, low potential and high specific capacity. However, low CE and Li dendrite growth can seriously limit its practical applications. Although scientists have made a great effort to solve these problems, more research on this issue is still necessary. With the development of advanced characterization methods, the mechanism of dendrite nucleation and growth has been further revealed in the past few years. It has been demonstrated that the suppression of dendrite growth can be achieved by several methods. However, low CE is a more serious issue. Even if a CE of 99.9% for Li plating and striping can be achieved, a threefold excess of Li is still needed to retain its initial capacity after 1000 cycles. In addition, the modified liquid electrolytes and composite Li anode are the most vital aspects for high performance Li metal batteries. There may not be an ideal solution for applications of Li metal anodes under all conditions, but different combinations of various approaches are needed to meet the demands for different applications.

3.5 Summary of LIB negative materials
Rechargeable lithium ion batteries have been widely used as energy sources for portable electronic devices. However, many critical challenges related to the improvement of LIB performance must still be addressed. Among them, the energy density of the anode should be improved to meet the increasing demand for LIBs with higher energy density and power density. Consequently, extensive studies have focused on developing new anode materials to take the place of graphite. Among various anode materials, Si-based, Sn-based and metal oxide based materials have been investigated as an alternative candidate due to their high theoretical capacity. Unfortunately, they show very poor cyclability due to deterioration of the anode caused by the huge volume expansion of Si- and/or Sn-based negative materials. Through a rational and careful design, these Si- and/or Sn-based nanostructures exhibited a remarkable improvement in electrochemical performance by addressing some existing issues. Despite the advancements, it is believed that more research is still required before the final goal of commercial Si- and/or Sn-based anodes can be accomplished, specifically, achieving competitive performance, lowering the total cost, and realizing large-scale production. This calls for more research effort and provides a bright prospect for the widespread applications of silicon anodes in future lithium-ion batteries
4. Separators in LIBs
With the continuous development of LIBs, the need for improvements to battery safety has become paramount and a vital component to this improvement is the battery separator and large enhancements are needed. Currently, the separators used in commercial LIBs consist of either microporous poly(ethylene) or poly(propylene) membranes or a combination of the two.266 Under normal conditions, the electrochemical performances of these porous membranes are affected by the distribution of liquid electrolytes. Therefore, the porosity and tortuosity of pores and the wettability of membranes are closely related.267,268 Under normal operating conditions, commercially available polyolefin membranes possess around only 40% porosity with reasonable mechanical integrity and chemical stability. In addition, these olefin membranes are prone to shrinking at higher temperature, leading to the short circuiting of electrodes during unexpected exothermic electrochemical reactions in the battery.
Therefore, to improve the overall performance of LIBs, the stability of the separators is vital. As recognized, separators with enhanced thermal stability and good wettability in organic liquid electrolytes are highly desirable to guarantee safe and reliable LIB system operations.269,270 Based on this, Syzdek et al.271 introduced a novel polymer-in-ceramic membrane that provided long term stability. To increase separator thermal stability, Jeong et al.272 coated Al2O3 on both sides of a porous polyethylene membrane and analyzed the cycling profile of the separator with promising results.273 Nunes-Pereira et al.274,275 and Lopes et al.276 studied the physical and electrochemical properties of montmorillonite (MMT)/P(VdF-TrFE) microporous membranes with different concentrations of MMT (montmorillonite) and concluded that a MMT/P (VdF-TrFE) porous membrane with 4% filler content was optimal for battery applications in terms of electrochemical stability and mechanical properties. Costa et al.277 also reviewed battery separators based on vinylidene fluoride (VDF) polymers and copolymers for LIB applications.
A stretchable and porous PU/PVdF membrane was prepared by electrospinning.278 As shown in Fig. 28, it is highly porous which could provide high Li-ion transport and good electrochemical performances. The rate capability of the cell using the PU/PVdF separator can discharge at various current rates from 0.2 to 2.0C and then to 0.2C for long cycles, indicating higher areal capacity and better long-cycle performance in comparison to the cell using the Celgard separator.279
 Fig. 28  Morphology and electrochemical performances of the coin cell using the PU/PVdF separator. (a) SEM image of the PVdF/PU separator. Scale bar: 10 μm. (b) Comparison of the discharge/charge voltage profiles of the LCO/graphite full cell using the PU/PVdF separator and the Celgard separator. (c) Rate capability of the LCO/graphite full cell using the Celgard separator and the PU/PVdF separator. Reproduced from ref. 279. 
Ceramic materials are brittle and easy to crack; however, if a ceramic material is placed in a permeable and continuous polymer matrix, its stability can be improved.280 In recent years, MMT nanoclay, a type of clay mineral called “smectites” or “smectite clays”, has gained attention due to its appealing properties such as high aspect ratios and unique intercalation/exfoliation characteristics.279,280 The overall negative charge of the clay can also be balanced by sodium and calcium ions that are solvated by water molecules in the interlayer.281 In the case in which polymer chains are confined and entangled by MMT particles, absorbed liquid electrolytes can move diagonally to influence conductivity, ion transference numbers, interfacial properties, mechanical integrity and thermal stability.282
The coating method using Al2O3 has proven to be effective for the improvement of separator performances.283 For example, an Al2O3/PET composite separator as shown in Fig. 29 can be successfully fabricated through a facile dip-coating process and exhibits higher porosity, enhanced electrolyte wettability, higher electrolyte up-take, and higher ionic conductivity compared with commercial Celgard 2500 as a separator. Furthermore, Al2O3/PET separators also produced superior dimensional thermal stability, significantly improving LIB safety.283
 Fig. 29  SEM images of the surfaces of (a) Celgard 2500, (b) bare non-woven PET, and (c and d) Al2O3/PET separators. Reproduced from ref. 283. 
5. Electrolytes in LIBs
The electrolyte is a key component of lithium-ion batteries, directly affecting their electrochemical performance, safety and long-term stability. Electrolyte solutions for LIBs must be polar enough to dissociate salts but remain electrochemically inert in a wide potential range (0–5.0 V vs. Li/Li+)284 at the same time. This requirement limits the choice of electrolytes and solvents to essentially only a few families of aprotic organic compounds. And because the various positive electrode materials gaining attention recently as promising candidates for improving LIB energy density operate at high voltages, the corresponding electrolyte systems also need to be stable at high cell voltages and several approaches have been explored to develop appropriate electrolyte systems that have adequate stability. For example, dinitrile solvents,285 ionic liquids286 and sulfone-based solvents287,288 with high stabilities under high voltages have been explored for usage in high voltage LIB systems to mitigate the undesirable oxidative decomposition of electrolytes at high voltages of greater than 4.4 V vs. Li/Li+. Unfortunately, these solvents all suffer from high intrinsic viscosities and severe reductive decomposition on carbonaceous negative electrode materials. Therefore, the formation of a stable SEI film on the negative electrode surface is an important prerequisite for maintaining the stability of LIB electrochemical performances. Recently, fluorination has been commonly used to modify electrolyte solvent structures in which the introduction of fluorine atoms into the electrolyte molecules can result in a drop in energy levels for the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO). A drop in energy levels for the HOMO can improve electrochemical and physical properties such as polarity, oxidation durability, liquid temperature ranges and nonflammability because fluoride can provide strong electronegativity and weak polarity. A drop in energy levels for the LUMO leads to weaker resistances against reduction, but can also produce better film-forming if the formation starts at a higher potential. The structure and components of the solid/electrolyte film modified by this film formation can subsequently improve LIB cycle performances.289
5.1 Polymer gel electrolytes
Fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) has also been successfully applied to commercial electrolytes in LIBs. Based on reduction mechanisms, FEC can form ethylene carbonate (VC) and LiF, obtaining more conductive and stable SEI films on the negative electrode surface of lithium-ion batteries.290,291 Zhu et al.292 synthesized a series of perfluoroalkyl-substituted ethylene carbonates as LIB electrolyte additives and found that small amounts of 4-(perfluorooctyl)-1,3-dioxolan-2-one (PFO-EC) as an additive were effective in lessening cell performance degradation during extended cycling and ascribed this to the formation of a double-layer passivation film through the decomposition of PEO-EC. Methyl-(2,2,2-trifluoroethyl) carbonate (FEMC) as an additive can also form a stable solid electrolyte interface layer that includes large amounts of metal fluorides and –CF– containing species. These species formed after the decomposition of the additive and the effective passivation of the positive electrode surface can suppress the dissolution of transition metal ions and lattice oxygen out of the structure and improve LIB cycles.292 Smart et al.293 synthesized a series of partially fluorinated acyclic carbonates and carbamates and used them to form ternary and quaternary electrolytes. Mixtures of these carbonates with ethylene carbonate (EC), dimethyl carbonate (DMC), and diethyl carbonate (DEC) were all found to possess benefits such as low temperature performance, high temperature resistance, high Li+ transport kinetics, and improved safety, possibly stemming from a better SEI on the negative electrodes.294
LIBs must be stable under high or low temperature conditions with the high temperature characteristics of LIBs being related to the composition and performance of the electrolyte. Therefore, researchers are exploring and testing new lithium salts and electrolyte additives that can improve battery performance. LiPF6 is one practical electrolyte that is being explored because of its well-balanced properties in terms of several requirements for LIB operations. However, in the production of LIBs, there is always residual water and this residual water will react with LiPF6 to form LiF, HF, and LixPOFy, affecting the high temperature and other properties of LIBs.295 Lithium bis(oxalate)borate (LiBOB) has also been shown to protect graphite from exfoliation in neat propylene carbonate and is beneficial for LIB performance.296 In addition, poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO)-based derivatives have been used as the host materials for preparing gel polymer electrolytes because their ether chains have strong interactions with lithium ions and electrolyte solvents. As displayed in Fig. 30, the fresh lithium anode shows a smooth and dense surface, while massive sharp dendrites are clearly observed on the surface of the Li anode obtained from the LiFePO4/separator–liquid-electrolyte/Li cell after 200 cycles at 0.3C and 150 cycles at 4C. In sharp contrast, for the 3D-GPE cell, there is a compact and smooth SEI layer on the surface of the lithium anode and no apparent dendrites or defects can be observed after 200 cycles at 0.3C and 150 cycles at 4C. These positive results indicate that the Li dendrite growth is effectively eliminated by the dense structure of the 3D-GPE membrane during charge–discharge cycles, which results in a stable, thin SEI layer with a low resistance upon cycling, thus leading to an improved cycling performance and a notable improvement in safety because of the lack of short circuits.297
 Fig. 30  Electrochemical performances of Li metal batteries. (a and b) The lithium deposition/stripping of Li/3D-GPE/Li and Li/separator–liquid-electrolyte/Li symmetrical cells at current densities of 0.5 and 2.5 mA cm−2. (c and d) Cycling performances of the LiFePO4/3D-GPE/Li and LiFePO4/separator–liquid electrolyte/Li cells at 0.3 and 4C. (e) Rate performances of the LiFePO4/3D-GPE/Li and LiFePO4/separator–liquid-electrolyte/Li cells. (f) EIS of the LiFePO4/3D-GPE/Li and LiFePO4/separator–liquid-electrolyte/Li cells after 1, 100, and 200 cycles at 0.3C. (g–i) FE-SEM images of the surface of (g) the Li electrode before galvanostatic cycling, (h) the Li electrode obtained from a LiFePO4/separator–liquid-electrolyte/Li cell, and (i) the Li electrode obtained from a LiFePO4/3DGPE/Li cell after 200 cycles at 0.3C. Reproduced from ref. 297. 
Han et al.298 suggested that lithium difluoro(bisoxalato) phosphate (LiDFBP) can be used as a novel lithium-salt-type additive for lithium-rich positive electrodes and confirmed that LiDFBP did indeed enhance the rate capability and cycling performance at both room temperature and 60 °C. Han et al. attributed these effects to the uniform and stable solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) formed on the electrode.
Other novel boron-based salts being cost-effective and chemically, electrochemically, and thermally stable have also been explored as electrolytes. These salts are based on boron chelate complex anions with aromatic or aliphatic diols or carboxylic acids such as lithium 4-pyridyl trimethyl borate (LPTB), lithium 2-fluorophenol trimethyl borate (LFPTB),299 lithium bis(2-fluoromalonato) borate (LiBFMB),300 and lithium catechol dimethyl borate (LiCDMB).301
The development of electrolyte additives has also focused on the formation of robust and stable artificial solid-electrolyte interphases (SEI) on negative electrodes. The SEI formed on carbon electrodes is well known to significantly affect LIB performances in terms of reversible capacity, long-term stability, storage life, cycle performance, and safety characteristics and these SEIs are thought to originate from electrolyte decomposition during the charging process.302
To improve battery performance and stability, organic-based additives, including vinyl ethylene carbonate (VEC),303 methylene methanedisulfonate (MMDS),304 vinyl ethylene sulfite (VES),305 succinic anhydride (SA),306 1,3-propanesultone (PS)307 and glutaric anhydride(GA)308 have also been explored for LIBs. These additives can play important roles in improving electrochemical performances, including cycle performance, power performance and stability. These compounds were also reported to reduce at about 2 V vs. Li/Li+ to form passivation layers, hindering PC co-intercalation into graphene layers and therefore stabilizing the surface structure of negative electrodes.
Most studies on the stabilization of the electrode–electrolyte interface have focused on the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) of negative electrodes and because of this, there is little information available on the positive electrode interface. To study the SEI of the positive electrode interface, Abe et al.309 decreased the concentration of polyphenyl compounds to 0.1–0.2% and found that the resultant polymeric film on spinel Li1.09Mn1.91O4 cathodes was beneficial to the enhancement of cycling stability. Here, the researchers believed that the formed electro-conducting membrane possessed higher HOMO energy levels (hence lower oxidation potentials) than the carbonate solvents, forming a passivation film that still allowed for electron conduction because of the conjugated structure of the polymer species.
Conventional electrolytes in LIBs are highly flammable and volatile, leading to catastrophic fires or explosions and serious safety issues. To address these safety issues, Wang et al.310 demonstrated a highly efficient approach to achieve both intrinsic non-flammability (no flash point and zero SET) and excellent carbonaceous electrode cyclability by simply increasing the salt concentration with a suitable salt/solvent combination.
5.2 Solid-state polymer electrolytes
The performances of classical LIBs with non-aqueous liquid electrolytes have made great advances in the past few years, but the intrinsic instability of liquid electrolytes results in safety issues, and the energy density of the state-of-the-art LIBs cannot satisfy the practical requirement. As a result, rechargeable lithium metal batteries (LMBs) have been intensively studied considering the high theoretical capacity of lithium metal and its low negative potential. However, the progress in the field of non-aqueous liquid electrolytes for LMBs has been sluggish, with several seemingly insurmountable barriers, including dendritic Li growth and rapid capacity fading.
In contrast to conventional organic liquid electrolytes that have leakage, flammability and chemical stability issues, solid electrolytes are widely considered to be promising candidates for the development of next-generation safe lithium-ion batteries. Solid polymer electrolytes are an interesting class of materials that offer significant technological applications in the development of solid state electrochemical devices. Special interest today is focused on polymer systems having high ionic conductivity at ambient temperatures, since they find unique applications as electrolyte materials in energy storage device applications including batteries, electrochromic windows, super capacitors, fuel cells etc. In solid polymer electrolytes that contain polymers and lithium salts, inorganic nanoparticles are often used as fillers to improve electrochemical performance, structural stability, and mechanical strength. However, such composite polymer electrolytes generally have low ionic conductivity. The main issue for the further development of these materials is increasing the ionic conductivity while retaining the beneficial mechanical and chemical stability. For example, Liu et al.311 reported that a composite polymer electrolyte with well-aligned inorganic Li+-conductive nanowires exhibited an ionic conductivity of 6.05 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 30 °C, which was one order of magnitude higher than that of previous polymer electrolytes with randomly aligned nanowires. The large conductivity enhancement is ascribed to a fast ion-conducting pathway without crossing junctions on the surfaces of the aligned nanowires (Fig. 31). Moreover, the long-term structural stability of the polymer electrolyte can also be improved by the use of nanowires.
 Fig. 31  Comparison of possible Li-ion conduction pathways. Li-ion conduction pathways in composite polymer electrolytes with nanoparticles (a), random nanowires (b) and aligned nanowires (c). Compared with isolated nanoparticles, random nanowires could supply a more continuous fast conduction pathway for Li ions. Compared with random nanowires, aligned nanowires are free of crossing junctions. (d) The surface region of inorganic nanoparticles (NPs) and nanowires (NWs) acts as an expressway for Li-ion conduction. Reproduced from ref. 311. 
To design a novel polymer electrolyte, emphasis is placed on increasing the amorphous content in the polymer matrix, which assists fast ion motion while maintaining its chemical strength. The percentage of the amorphous nature of the polymer matrix can be increased by the addition of alkali metal salts into the polymer matrix. It has been reported that the structural and electrical properties of polymers can be controlled/modified by dissolving appropriate salts into the polymer matrix. Studies on the electrical properties of polymer electrolytes have attracted much attention in view of their application in electronic devices and to understand the nature of the charge transport mechanism in these materials.312–315 Currently, several solid electrolytes including solid oxide-based electrolytes, solid sulfide-based electrolytes and solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs) have been extensively developed and successfully applied to all-solid-state LIBs.
Waterborne polyurethane (WPU) has attracted increasing attention recently and has been widely used as a binder, coating, ink and so on in the field of industrial applications. In one study, a waterborne polyurethane (WPU) material was synthesized as a polymer matrix for SPEs by polymerization of polyethylene glycol (PEG), hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI), diethylene glycol (DEG) and dimethylol propionic acid (DMPA).312 The SPEs were prepared by complexing the WPU with various concentrations of LiTFSI and used water as the solvent during the environmentally friendly fabrication. It was demonstrated that such WPU-based SPEs achieved a high ionic conductivity of around 10−4 and 10−3 S cm−1 at 60 and 80 °C. LiFePO4/SPE/Li all-solid-state batteries were assembled and characterized with the WPU-based SPEs. It was found that the WPU-based SPEs exhibited better discharge capacity and cycle performance than the pristine PEO electrolyte and other polymer electrolytes, as presented in Fig. 32(A). These results demonstrate that this new WPU-based solid polymer electrolyte is a promising environmentally friendly candidate for all-solid-state lithium ion batteries. Potassium ion conducting polymer electrolyte films were prepared based on poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) complexed with 5, 10 and 15 wt% potassium bromide (KBr) salt using a solution-casting technique.313 The conductivity of the polymer films was measured using impedance spectroscopy. Room temperature ionic conductivity was found to be a maximum (1.23 × 10−5 S cm−1) for the (PVA:KBr) (85:15) complexed film, whose K+ ion transport number was found to be 0.97. Electrochemical cells were fabricated in the configuration K/(PVA:KBr)/(I2 + C + electrolyte) and their discharge characteristics were studied under a constant load of 100 kΩ.313 Gel polymer electrolytes are prepared using a poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) polymer matrix and 1-propyl-3-methyleimidazolium bis(trifluromethylesulfonyl)-imide ionic liquid and also by adding a lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide salt and plasticizer mixture (ethylene carbonate: propylene carbonate in a 1:1 ratio). The thermal and electrical properties of these electrolytes are first investigated. The electrical conductivity of these electrolytes is analyzed over a wide frequency range using a universal power law coupled with modified Poisson–Nernst–Planck model for electrode polarization. As Fig. 32(B) shows, all electrolytes show excellent thermal stability up to 340 °C, high ionic conductivity and a wide potential window (∼4.0 V). A lithium ion coin cell is also fabricated using electrolytes containing a plasticizer mixture. At ambient temperature, the fabricated cell delivers high specific discharge capacity for the first discharge cycle at a constant current rate of C/12.314 In Fig. 32(C), a flame retardant, thermally stable polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) has been fabricated based on a crosslinkable polyurethane precursor, viz., polyethylene glycolbis-carbamate dimethacrylate (PEGBCDMA). This PEGBCDMA based PEM is solvent-free, transparent, bendable, and twistable, which makes it an ideal candidate for a fully flexible battery application with safety attributes. Moreover, the above PEM exhibits high ionic conductivity close to the superionic level (8 × 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature) and electrochemical stability in a large operating window of −0.5 V to 4.5 V. The PEM shows a specific capacity retention of over 80% up to 250 cycles tested in lithium iron phosphate (LiFePO4)/PEM/graphite full cells. The thermal stability and electrochemical performance including ion conductivity and capacity retention have been examined for the solid-state PEMs. More importantly, the feasibility of fabricating flexible, flame-retardant, all solid-state lithium ion batteries has been demonstrated.315
 Fig. 32  (A) Solid polymer electrolytes were prepared by blending waterborne polyurethane and LiTFSI and the all solid state battery based on WPU showed attractive electrochemical properties and discharge capacity. (B) (a) Conductivity spectra in the frequency range of 4 Hz-8 MHz are shown for the gel polymer electrolytes GPE-2 at several temperatures. (b) Schematic sketch of the equivalent electric circuit of complex conductivity with electrode polarization: (i) frequency independent double layer capacitance (PNP model) and (ii) frequency dependent CPE (empirical model). (c) Reciprocal temperature dependence of ionic conductivity is shown for all gel polymer electrolytes. (d) Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) for the electrochemical voltage window test of different gel polymer electrolytes under ambient conditions recorded at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (C). Cyclic voltammogram of 20/40/40 PEGBCDMA/EC/LiTFSI PEM and specific discharge capacities as a function of the number of cycles for the LiFePO4/PEM/Li half-cell at 22 °C versus at 60 °C. The current rate was C/3. (A) Reproduced from ref. 312, (B) reproduced from ref. 314, and (C) reproduced from ref. 315. 
In short, the development of inorganic/polymer materials has received significant interest due to the wide range of potential applications. Solid polymer electrolytes have attracted much attention due to their wide range of advantageous properties. Physically polymer electrolytes behave like solids; ionic conductivity behavior closely resembles the liquid state, i.e., free movement of ions in an electrolyte. The combination of an inorganic salt and polymer enhances the ionic conductivity and is related to the glass transition temperature as well as inter-linking of the polymer chain, having excellent properties like high ionic conductivity, good mechanical strength, and high thermal and electrical properties and an ability to form thin films easily. Flexibility, light weight, elasticity and high energy density make them suitable candidates for many electrochemical devices including solid-sate batteries, super capacitors, fuel cells, sensors, display devices, dye sensitized solar cells etc. Some fundamental problems and questions are still unsolved. Among them, low ionic conductivity, a low cation transference number at ambient temperature and the formation of resistive layers at the electrode–electrolyte interface is crucial. To overcome these problems, various modifications of polymer salt complexes have been explored. It is expected that the high-performance solid-state polymer electrolytes can be used in portable electrochemical devices, electric vehicles and grid energy storage.
Solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs) offer a perfect solution to these safety concerns and to the enhancement of energy density. Traditional SPEs are dual-ion conductors, in which both cations and anions are mobile and will cause a concentration polarization thus leading to poor performances of both LIBs and LMBs. Single lithium-ion (Li-ion) conducting solid polymer electrolytes (SLIC-SPEs), which have anions covalently bonded to the polymer, inorganic backbone, or immobilized by anion acceptors, are generally accepted to have advantages over conventional dual-ion conducting SPEs for application in LMBs. A high Li-ion transference number, the absence of the detrimental effect of anion polarization, and the low rate of Li dendrite growth are examples of benefits of SLIC-SPEs. To date, many types of SLIC-SPEs have been reported, including those based on organic polymers, organic–inorganic hybrid polymers and anion acceptors.316–319 In this section, a brief overview of synthetic strategies on how to realize SLIC-SPEs is given. The fundamental, physical and electrochemical properties of SLIC-SPEs are discussed and perspectives on the main challenges and focus on the future research are also presented.
The inhomogeneous Li electrodeposition of lithium metal electrodes has been a major impediment to the realization of rechargeable lithium metal batteries. Although single ion conducting ionomers can induce more homogeneous Li electrodeposition by preventing Li+ depletion at the Li surface, currently available materials do not allow room-temperature operation due to their low room temperature conductivities. Single-ion conducting polymer electrolytes were proposed to solve the issues of dual-ion movement. In this approach, the anions are covalently tethered onto a rigid polymer chain and the counter lithium ions are the only mobile species. By restricting the anionic movement, SIPEs displayed a lithium ion transference number approaching unity. So far, few solid-state SIPEs have showed satisfactory ionic conductivity and battery performance. The concept of single-ion conducting gel polymer electrolytes was recently proposed to enhance ionic conductivity at ambient temperature. Single-ion conducting gel polymer electrolytes can attain high ionic conductivity with the addition of plasticizers while in conventional solid-state SIPEs ion conduction is realized via a hopping mechanism. Single-ion conducting gel polymer electrolytes display both a high lithium transference number (approaching unity) and high ionic conductivity at ambient temperature.317
In Fig. 33(A), a new class of single-ion conducting polymer electrolytes (SIPEs) simultaneously exhibiting a high lithium transference number, high ionic conductivities at room temperature, and good mechanical robustness is presented. Such a unique combination of properties allowed their use as thin-film separators in lithium metal batteries operating at room temperature. Unlike previous reports, these materials showed a unique combination of a high lithium transference number (approaching unity) and high ionic conductivity at ambient temperature (σ ≈ 10−4 S cm−1). Among other striking advantages of the suggested SIPEs are (a) good mechanical robustness, (b) no PC leakage even after prolonged testing/aging, (c) low Tg values of around −70 °C, (d) sufficient thermal stability (Tonset = 100 °C), and (e) wide electrochemical stability window versus Li+/Li (5 V). The remarkable performance of lithium metal polymer cells (LiFePO4/SIPE3/Li) operating at room temperature suggests that these materials may represent a major step toward the development of the next generation of safe, cost-effective, and environmentally friendly lithium polymer batteries.318 Deng et al. presented a facile method to fabricate a network type sp3 boron-based single-ion conducting polymer electrolyte (SIPE) with high ionic conductivity and a lithium ion transference number approaching unity. The SIPE was synthesized by coupling of lithium bis(allylmalonato)borate (LiBAMB) and pentaerythritol tetrakis(2-mercaptoacetate) (PETMP) via a one-step photoinitiated in situ thiol-ene click reaction in plasticizers. The optimized electrolytes show both outstanding ionic conductivity (1.47 × 10−3 S cm−1 at 25 °C) and a high lithium transference number of 0.89. This ionic conductivity is among the highest ionic conductivity exhibited by SIPEs reported to date. Its electrochemical stability window is up to 5.2 V. More importantly, Li/LiFePO4 cells with the prepared single-ion conducting electrolytes as the electrolyte as well as the separator display highly reversible capacity and excellent rate capacity under room temperature. It also demonstrates excellent long-term stability and reliability as it maintains a capacity of 124 mA h g−1 at 1C rate even after 500 cycles without obvious decay.319
 Fig. 33  Recent progress in single-ion conducting polymer electrolytes. (A) (a) Schematic representation of the in situ polymerization process on the LiFePO4 electrode sheets and LiFePO4/SIPE3/Li cell assembly. (b) Discharge capacity of the cell according to the discharge rate compared at 25 and 70 °C. (c) Specific capacity of the cell against the cycle number at a constant 0.1C rate at 25 °C. (B) Categorized scheme of the ion conductors. (a) Configurations of the LE, NL/LE hybrid, and NPEM, (b) scheme of the dendritic Li growth resulting from Li+ depletion at the interface of LE (left), and for the prevention of dendritic Li due to a uniform Li+ concentration at the interface of the Nafion and Li metal for NL/LE and NPEM (right). (A) Reproduced from ref. 318 and (B) reproduced from ref. 320. 
One paper reported that a highly conductive ionomer/liquid electrolyte hybrid layer tightly laminated on a Li metal electrode can realize stable Li electrodeposition at high current densities up to 10 mA cm−2 and permit room-temperature operation of corresponding Li metal batteries with low polarizations as shown in Fig. 33(B). The hybrid layer is fabricated by laminating a few micron-thick Nafion layer on the Li metal electrode followed by soaking in 1 M LiPF6 EC/DEC electrolyte. The Li/Li symmetric cell with the hybrid layer stably operates at a high current density of 10 mA cm−2 for more than 2000 h, which corresponds to more than five-fold enhancement compared with the bare Li metal electrode. Also, the prototype Li/LiCoO2 battery with the hybrid layer offers cycling stability for more than 350 cycles. These results demonstrate that the hybrid strategy successfully combines the advantages of bi-ionic liquid electrolytes and single ionic ionomers.320
Briefly, in single-ion-conducting polymer electrolytes only the species involved in electrodic processes are mobile in the long-range charge transfer events, avoiding the development of concentration gradients and polarization phenomena in the cell. However, low ionic conductivity at medium temperature and the inferior interfacial properties of SLIC-SPEs are still key barriers for their application in large-scale batteries. Therefore, more research efforts are needed to improve these aspects. A fundamental and practical study of the chemical and electrochemical stability and compatibility of SLIC-SPEs towards lithium metal and other electrodes in batteries will assess the interfacial properties, which is essential for improving the performance of the batteries. The anion for instance should also participate in building a “friendly” SEI layer. We could anticipate that all these efforts will be helpful for improving the properties of SLIC-SPEs and making them an excellent choice of safe electrolyte materials for lithium batteries in the future.
5.3 Summary of electrolytes in LIBs
In conclusion, electrolytes are directly related to the electrochemical and safety performance of LIBs. Future research and development must make breakthroughs in terms of safety through the development of high performance and safe electrolytes and associated electrode materials. And even with the increasing demand for high density LIBs, improvements in energy density must be accompanied with improvements in operational safety.
6. Concluding remarks, challenges and possible research directions
LIB technologies have improved significantly from 20 years of accumulated development and production and are widely applied in different fields. However, as the technology matures, its application requirements grow as well, including the need for increased energy density, power density, cycle-life, and safety and lowered economic cost. This is especially true for applications in the field of electric vehicles.
In this review, recent progress of LIBs is reviewed with a focus on advanced positive electrode materials, negative electrode materials, separators and electrolytes in terms of their energy density, power density, cycle-life and safety. In the field of positive and negative electrode materials for LIBs, developing advanced materials with higher energy densities and improved electrochemical properties such as power density and cycle-life is emphasized. The reviewed materials include positive electrode materials such as LiNixCoyMnzO2, LiFePO4, LiMn1−xFexPO4 and LiMn2O4, as well as negative electrode materials such as silicon and Li4Ti5O12. For separator materials, developing new separators possessing high ion conductivity and enhanced safety is the major focus. With respect to this, several types of separators with protective coatings for improved safety performance under high temperatures or short circuit conditions have been developed and used in LIBs. In the field of electrolyte solutions, developing high ion-conductive and stable electrolytes and associated solvents is the main focus. The developed electrolyte solutions must be suitable for high rates of charge and discharge, low- and high-temperature operations, and be safe to use.
Although great progress has been made in recent years for LIB materials, challenges that still exist are as follows:
(1) Inadequate energy/power densities and cycle-life for LIB applications. For example, in the application of electric vehicles, high mileage endurance, high power density, fast charge discharge, good cycle-life, and low- and high-temperature operations are required for actual commercialization. To meet the above requirements, positive and negative electrode materials need to possess high energy/power densities, long cycle-life, and stability in both high and low temperature operations. For positive electrode materials with high energy densities such as Li–Ni–Mn–Co systems, stability during charge and discharge is also required. For negative electrode materials with high energy densities such as Si–C and metal-oxides, volume changes during charge and discharge must be controlled to improve LIB cycle-life. The materials developed at present can meet some requirements, but it is still challenging to obtain one material that satisfies all or most of the requirements. Therefore, further research and development of material synthesis and property modification is necessary. To improve LIB energy density, separators impregnated with electrolyte solutions must be thinner but remain robust. Therefore, innovative separators/electrolytes with both high mechanical/chemical/electrochemical stabilities and ion conductivities are required.
(2) Insufficient optimal combinations of electrode materials and electrolytes as well as their synergy for high LIB performance. In this aspect, positive electrode materials, negative electrode materials, and separator/electrolyte solutions are assembled together to form the core of LIBs. Their compatibility in terms of material properties, structures and shapes is critical for generating optimal combinations and synergetic effects for high performance.
(3) Lack of fundamental understanding of material properties and structural effects, and their correlation with LIB performance including energy/power densities, cycle-life and degradation modes. In this regard, theoretical modeling/calculations and experimental characterization/validations are recognized as the most efficient methods to understand battery performances and form developmental guides based on which new materials with desirable properties and structures should be down-selected and synthesized.
(4) Insufficient safety of electrode materials and electrolyte solutions for LIB operations. LIBs, especially operating at high current loads such as in automobile applications, can catch fire, resulting in safety concerns. Therefore, safety assessments of battery materials in the case of abnormal use or abuse are necessary. At present, the study of LIBs and battery materials in the case of abnormal use and abuse is still inadequate and insufficient.
To overcome these challenges, several possible research directions are suggested to facilitate further improvements in LIB performance as follows:
(1) More comprehensive exploration, synthesis and characterization of new electrode materials, separators and electrolytes. For automobile applications with high mileage endurance requirements, ternary materials (Li–Ni–C–Mn–O) with high Ni content should be the optimal positive electrode material because of their high energy densities. However, corresponding stabilities (cycle-life) during charge and discharge must be significantly improved. For negative electrode materials, Si–C, metal oxides or metal Li based materials should be further developed and modified to achieve practical applications in LIBs. Regarding separator/electrolyte solutions, robust (mechanically/chemically/electrochemically/thermally stable), high ion-conductive, and nonflammable materials should be further explored and fabricated to increase LIB performance in terms of energy/power density, cycle-life and safety.
(2) Material modification through coating and compositing to increase cycle-life and energy/power density. Carbon-coating, forming a core–shell and compositing electrode materials are effective approaches to improve the cycle-life of LIBs. However, these approaches need to be further developed and optimized to meet the requirements of long cycle-life for automobile applications and other endurance applications. In the cases of overcharged cycles, high-temperature operations or other more complex and exceptional operations, materials must be modified to mitigate degradation.
(3) Further fundamental understanding of the properties and structures of electrode materials and their correlation with LIB performance. Both theoretical modeling/calculations such as DFT calculations and experimental validation should be used to find the correlation between the material properties and performance in LIBs. This correlation can then allow for further material development. Furthermore, through modeling and experiments, failure analyses should be carried out to understand corresponding mechanisms, particularly in the cases of battery overcharge, short circuit and high-temperature operation or storage. In addition, through fundamental understanding, the evaluation and prediction of material characteristics in the case of more complex practical use conditions can be elucidated for further development.
(4) Further improvements in the safety of LIB applications by modifying and optimizing the properties of electrode/electrolyte materials. LIB safety is a critical concern, particularly in high-power demanding applications such as electric vehicles and cellphones. Safety issues such as catching fire and explosions are caused by many factors with the main factors being the heat produced during LIB electrochemical reactions, electrolyte shortages, high ion-transfer resistances of the electrolyte (I2R – I is the current and R is the electrolyte resistance), etc. To avoid these issues, optimal battery designs to ensure better heat management are necessary. Reducing the flammability of electrode materials and electrolytes through innovative approaches such as coating, doping, and other material modifications is another avenue that should be further developed. Furthermore, avoiding abnormal usage and abuse during operation is necessary.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFB0102900), the Shanghai Pujiang Program (17PJD016) and the PhD Program of Shanghai University.
References
X. D. Zhang and J. L. Li, Ionics, 2014, 20, 1651–1663 CrossRef .
C. P. Sandhya, B. John and C. Gouri, Ionics, 2014, 20, 601–620 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, X. Han, J. Li, J. Hua and M. Ouyang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 226, 272–288 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, Z. H. Wang and P. Lu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6701–6710 Search PubMed .
Y. Cho, P. Oh and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1145–1152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Ellis, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 691–714 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hantier, A. Jain, S. P. Ong, B. Kang, C. Moore, R. Doe and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3495–3508 CrossRef .
H. Xia, H. Wang, W. Xiao, L. Lu and M. O. Lai, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 480, 696–701 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ahn, D. Susanto, J.-K. Noh, G. Ali, B. W. Cho, K. Y. Chung, J. H. Kim and S. H. Oh, J. Power Sources, 2017, 360, 575–584 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, D. Chao, J. Lin and Z. Shen, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 96, 491–502 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, B. M. May, J. Serrano-Sevillano, M. Casas-Cabanas, J. Cabana, C. Wang and G. Zhou, Chem. Mater., 2016, 30, 692–699 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, K. Karki, Y. Huang, M. S. Whittingham, E. A. Stach and G. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 1421–1430 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, R. Yao and C. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 5075–5082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hagen, W. J. Cao, A. Shellikeri, D. Adams, X. J. Chen, W. Brandt, S. R. Yturriaga, Q. Wu, J. A. Read, T. R. Jow and J. P. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2018, 379, 212–218 CrossRef CAS .
R. Santhanam, P. Jones, A. Sumana and B. Rambabu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7391–7396 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, J. Wang, D. Chao, T. Baikie, L. Bai, S. Chen, Y. Zhao, T. C. Sum, J. Lin and Z. Shen, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 25771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hua, J. Zhang, Z. Zheng, W. Liu, X. Peng, X. D. Guo, B. Zhong, Y. J. Wang and X. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 14824–14832 RSC .
Y. Ding, P. Zhang, Z. Long, Y. Jiang and F. Xu, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 487, 507–510 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Huang, H. L. Chou, F. M. Wang, B. J. Hwang, S. C. Liao, T. N. Huang, C. H. Su and H. H. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 494–500 CrossRef .
M. Kageyama, D. C. Li, K. Kobayakawa, Y. Sato and Y. S. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 494–500 CrossRef .
X. Z. Liu, H. Q. Li, D. Li, M. Ishida and H. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 374–380 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Rao, A. L. M. Reddy, Y. Ishikawa and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2966–2972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, B. H. Song, Y. L. Chang, H. Xia, J. R. Yang, K. S. Lee and L. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 283, 162 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Shi, R. Qi, X. D. Zhang, P. F. Wang, W. G. Fu, Y. X. Yin, J. Xu, L. J. Wan and Y. G. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42829–42835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, H. S. Kim and S. W. Martin, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 1316–1322 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Hu, G. H. Cheng, M. Y. Cheng, B. J. Hwang and R. Santhanam, J. Power Sources, 2009, 188, 564–569 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Li, Y. Lin, Y. Li, H. Lai and Z. Huang, Rare Met., 2012, 31, 140–144 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Yun, K. S. Park and Y. J. Park, J. Power Sources, 2016, 195, 6108–6115 CrossRef .
B. C. Park, H. B. Kim, S. T. Myung, K. Amine, I. Belharouak, S. M. Lee and Y. K. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2008, 178, 826–831 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, L. Wang, Q. Zhang and X. He, J. Power Sources, 2009, 190, 149–153 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cho, H. Kim and B. Park, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151(10), A1707–A1711 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, R. Hu, O. Zhuo, B. Xu, L. Yang, Q. Wu, X. Wang, Y. Fan and Z. Hu, Acta Chim. Sin., 2014, 72, 1017 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Kong, C. Ren, Y. X. Jiang, F. Zhou and C. Yu, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2016, 20, 1435–1443 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schipper, P. Nayak, E. Erickson, S. Amalraj, O. Srur-Lavi, T. Penki, M. Talianker, J. Grinblat, H. Sclar, O. Breuer, C. Julien, N. Munichandraiah, D. Kovacheva, M. Dixit, D. Major, B. Markovsky and D. Aurbach, Inorganics, 2017, 5, 32 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, Z. Li, R. Gao, Z. Hu and X. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 20350 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, X. Wang, X. Yang, Z. Liu, Q. Wei and H. Shu, Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 16, 1229–1237 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Kang and J. T. Son, J. Electroceram., 2012, 29, 235–239 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, L. An, J. Sun and G. Liang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 810, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Armstrong, M. Holzapfel, P. Novak, C. S. Johnson, S. H. Kang, M. M. Thackeray and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8694–8698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, M. Sun, R. Qiao, S. E. Renfrew, L. Ma, T. Wu, S. Hwang, D. Nordlund, D. Su, K. Amine, J. Lu, B. D. McCloskey, W. Yang and W. Tong, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 947 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Pimenta, M. Sathiya, D. Batuk, A. M. Abakumov, D. Giaume, S. Cassaignon, D. Larcher and J.-M. Tarascon, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9923–9936 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, X. Zhang, R. Xiao, X. Lu, Y. Li, T. Xu, D. Pan, Y.-S. Hu and Y. Bai, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 265, 244–253 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, Y. Li, Z. Chen, F. Zhang, P. Ding, L. Mao and F. Lian, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 1443–1449 CrossRef CAS .
T. Aida, Y. Tsutsui, S. Kanada, J. Okada and K. Hayashi, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2017, 21, 2047–2054 CrossRef CAS .
Ch. Song, W. Wang, H. Peng, Y. Wang, Ch. Zhao, H. Zhang, Q. Tang, J. Lv, X. Du and Y. Dou, Appl. Sci., 2018, 8, 378 CrossRef .
C. H. Jo, D. H. Cho, H. J. Noh, H. Yashiro, Y. K. Sun and S. T. Myung, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 1464–1479 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, S. Liu and X. Liang, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2013, 17, 1067–1075 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Zhang, R. Gao, Z. Li, Z. Hu and X. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 13322 RSC .
F. Wu, N. Li, Y. Su, L. Zhang, L. Bao, J. Wang, L. Chen, Y. Zheng, L. Dai, J. Peng and S. Chen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3550–3555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Li, X. Feng, Y. Ding, S. H. Ye and X. P. Gao, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 78, 308–315 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, L. Z. Fan, J. Guo and X. H. Qu, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 63, 363–368 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, J. Li and T. Cao, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(37), 24594–24602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. P. Zhang, S. W. Sun, Q. Wu, N. Wan, D. Pan and Y. Bai, J. Power Sources, 2015, 282, 378–384 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Ding, M. Q. Xu, J. T. Liu, Q. Huang, L. B. Chen, P. Wang, D. G. Ivey and W. F. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20519–20526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. He, J. Ping, Z. J. Yi, C. Peng, C. S. Shen and J. S. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 708, 1038–1045 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Yang, R. Gao, L. Gu, Z. Hu and X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ma, X. Hou, Y. Li, Q. Ru, S. Hu and K.-h. Lam, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 28, 2705–2715 CrossRef .
H. Jia, W. Zhu, Z. Xu, X. Nie, T. Liu, L. Gao and J. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 266, 7–16 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, M. Hou, S. Haller, Y. Wang, C. Wang and Y. Xia, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 189, 101–110 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, J. Lee, H. Ma, H. Y. Jeong, H. Cha, H. Lee, Y. Yoo, M. Park and J. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(5), 1704309 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Wu, H. Wu, J.-K. Kim, X. Liu and Y. Zhang, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 78–83 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yim, S. H. Jang and Y. K. Han, J. Power Sources, 2017, 372, 24–30 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, R. Zhang, Y. Q. Gong, Y. F. Su, D. B. Xiang, L. Chen, Y. B. Chen, M. Luo and M. Chu, Solid State Ionics, 2017, 312, 53–60 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schipper, H. Bouzaglo, M. Dixit, E. M. Erickson, T. Weigel, M. Talianker, J. Grinblat, L. Burstein, M. Schmidt, J. Lampert, C. Erk, B. Markovsky, D. T. Major and D. Aurbach, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(4), 1701682 CrossRef .
W. Liu, X. F. Li, D. B. Xiong, Y. C. Hao, J. W. Li, H. R. Kou, B. Yan, D. J. Li, S. G. Lu, A. Koo, K. Adair and X. L. Sun, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 111–120 CrossRef CAS .
P. Y. Hou, F. Li, Y. Y. Sun, M. L. Pan, X. Wang, M. H. Shao and X. J. Xu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5653–5661 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yim, K. S. Kang, J. Mun, S. H. Lim, S.-G. Woo, K. J. Kim, M.-S. Park, W. Cho, J. H. Song, Y.-K. Han, J.-S. Yu and Y.-J. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2016, 302, 431–438 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cho, S.-M. Kim, J. H. Song, T. Yim, S.-G. Woo, K.-W. Lee, J.-S. Kim and Y.-J. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2015, 282, 45–50 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hwang, D. H. Kim, K. Y. Chung and W. Chang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 103901 CrossRef .
Y. Jiang, Y. J. Bi, M. Liu, Z. Peng, L. Y. Huai, P. Dong, J. G. Duan, Z. L. Chen, X. Li, D. Y. Wang and Y. J. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 268, 41–48 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Shi, R. Qi, X. D. Zhang, P. F. Wang, W. G. Fu, Y. X. Yin, J. Xu, L. J. Wan and Y. G. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42829–42835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, F. Omenya, M. S. Whittingham, C. Wang and G. Zhou, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2598–2606 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Yoon, H. H. Ryu, G. T. Park, J. H. Kim, K. H. Kim and Y. K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4126–4132 RSC .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 4, 1188–1194 CrossRef .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, S. C. Yin and L. F. Nazar, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, A170–A172 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Luo, J. Du and L. Guo, Ionics, 2016, 22, 333–340 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Lv, J. Su, Y. F. Long, X. Y. Lv and Y. X. Wen, Ionics, 2014, 20, 471–478 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xie, X. Zhang, J. Laakso, H. Wang and E. Levänen, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 2166–2168 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Howard and R. M. Spontnitz, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 887 CrossRef CAS .
R. Amin, P. Balaya and J. Maier, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, A13–A16 CrossRef CAS .
A. Varzi, D. Bresser, J. von Zamory, F. Muller and S. Passerini, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400054 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Yang, J. J. Wang, Y. J. Tang, D. N. Wang, X. F. Li, Y. H. Hu, R. Y. Li, G. X. Liang, T. K. Sham and X. L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1521 RSC .
S. W. Oh, S. T. Myung, S. M. Oh, K. H. Oh, K. Amine, B. Scrosati and Y. K. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4842–4845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Rosaiah, J. Zhu, O. M. Hussain, Z. Liu and Y. Qiu, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 811, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Chung, J. T. Bloking and Y.-M. Chiang, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 123–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gao, Z. Xu and S. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 739, 529–535 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wei, Y. Guan, X. Zheng, Q. Zhu, J. Shen, N. Qiao, S. Zhou and B. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 440, 748–754 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Huang, Y. C. Yao, F. Liang and Y. N. Dai, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 743, 763–772 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiao and G. Henkelman, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 844–851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Okada, I. Kimura and K. Machida, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 5848–5853 RSC .
E. Meng, M. Zhang, Y. Hu, F. Gong, L. Zhang and F. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 265, 160–165 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Wang, X. H. Zhang, F. H. Zheng, Y. G. Huang and Q. Y. Li, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2015, 19, 187–194 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lang, C. Dong, K. Cai, L. Li, Q. Zhang and H. Wu, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 739, 536–541 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Wang, R. W. Wang, L. J. Liu, S. Jiang, L. Ni, X. F. Bie, X. Yang, J. T. Hu, Z. Q. Wang, H. B. Chen, L. K. Zhu, D. L. Zhang, Y. J. Wei, Z. T. Zhang, S. L. Qiu and F. Pan, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 346–354 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, Y. Xie, T. Liu, H. Luo, B. Wang, C. H. Wang, L. Wang, D. L. Wang, S. X. Dou and Y. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2017, 42, 363–372 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takahashi, S. Tobishima, K. Takei and Y. Sakurai, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 148, 283–289 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, X. Liu, G. Liu, Y. Wan and H. Liu, Ionics, 2017, 23, 19–26 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Ma, G. J. Shao, X. J. Qin, Y. Q. Pan, G. L. Wang, J. J. Song and T. T. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 269, 194–202 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Wu, L. Zhou, G. Q. Xu, J. Huang, X. Fang, Y. Wang, Y. Jin and X. C. Tang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2018, 13, 2958–2968 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. Chang, H. J. Lv, H. W. Tang, H. J. Li, X. Z. Yuan and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 4595–4599 CrossRef CAS .
C. Masquelier and L. Croguennec, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 6552–6591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li and H. Zhou, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 451–463 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dominko, M. Bele, M. Gaberscek, M. Remskar, D. Hanzel, S. Pejovnik and J. Jamnik, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A607–A610 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Franco, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 13027–13058 RSC .
S. M. Oh, S. T. Myung, J. B. Park, B. Scrosati, K. Amine and Y. K. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1853–1856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Aravindan, J. Gnanaraj, Y. S. Lee and S. Madhavi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3518–3539 RSC .
A. Yamada, Y. Kudo and K. Y. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A747–A754 CrossRef CAS .
N. Meethong, H. Y. S. Huang, S. A. Speakman, W. C. Carter and Y. M. Chiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1115–1123 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wi, J. Park, S. Lee, J. Kang, T. Hwang, K.-S. Lee, H.-K. Lee, S. Nam, C. Kim, Y.-E. Sung and B. Park, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 495–503 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ma, X. Zhang, P. He, X. Zhang, P. Wang and H. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2017, 359, 408–414 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, Y. Xiao, H. Tang, H. Wang, Z. Wang, C. Liu, H. Zeng, Q. Huang, Y. Ren, C. Wang, W. Zhang and F. Pan, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4934–4940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Yang, C.-Y. Wu and J.-G. Duh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18674–18683 RSC .
Y. Mishima, C. Moriyoshi and Y. Kuroiwa, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2017, 17, 1–8 Search PubMed .
W. Liu, P. Gao, Y. Mi, J. Chen, H. Zhou and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 17, 2411–2417 RSC .
J. Ni, Y. Han, L. Gao and L. Lu, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 31, 84–87 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hong, F. Wang, X. Wang and J. Graetz, J. Power Sources, 2011, 1967, 3659–3663 CrossRef .
Q. Q. Zou, G. N. Zhu and Y. Y. Xia, J. Power Sources, 2012, 206, 222–229 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Oh, H. G. Jung, C. S. Yoon, S. T. Myung, Z. Chen, K. Amine and Y. K. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2011, 19616, 6924–6928 CrossRef .
A. Yamada, Y. Kudo and K. Y. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 1487, A747–A754 CrossRef .
K. Saravanan, V. Ramar, P. Balaya and J. J. Vittal, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 2138, 14925–14935 RSC .
K. Rajammal, D. Sivakumar, N. Duraisamy, K. Ramesh and S. Ramesh, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2017, 40, 171–175 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Jung, W. B. Park, M. Pyo, K.-S. Sohn and D. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8939–8945 RSC .
B. Zhang B, X. Wang, H. Li and X. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 19616, 6992–6996 CrossRef .
Y. Gan, C. Chen, J. Liu, P. Bian, H. Hao and A. Yu, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 620, 350–357 CrossRef CAS .
B. Z. Li, Y. Wang, L. Xue, X. P. Li and W. S. Li, J. Power Sources, 2013, 232, 12–16 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zuo, G. Cheng, L. Wang, Y. Ma, C. Du, X. Cheng, Z. Wang and G. Yin, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 872–879 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Huo, Y. T. Cui, D. Wang, Y. Dong and L. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 331–336 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Oh, S. T. Myung, Y. S. Choi, K. H. Oh and Y. K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 2148, 19368–19374 RSC .
P. F. Xiao, B. Ding, M. O. Lai and L. Lu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 1606, A918–A926 CrossRef .
Y. Li, L. Long, J. Sun, F. Wu and S. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 85, 110–115 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Qiao, X. L. Wang, J. P. Zhou, J. Zhang, C. D. Gu and J. P. Tu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 198, 287–293 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Tang, B. Zhong, H. Liu, Y. Zhong and X. Guo, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2014, 181, 215–221 CrossRef .
H. Shen, W. Xiang, X. Shi, B. Zhong and H. Liu, Ionics, 2016, 193–200 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Thackeray, C. S. Johnson, J. T. Vaughey, N. Li and S. A. Hackney, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2257–2267 RSC .
J. Cabana, T. Valdés-Solís, M. R. Palacín, J. Oró-Solé, A. Fuertes, G. Marbán and A. B. Fuertes, J. Power Sources, 2007, 166, 492–498 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, X. Q. Yang, M. Balasubramanian, J. McBreen, Y. Xia and T. Sakai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A842–A848 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Zheng, D. J. Crain and D. Roy, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 196, 48–58 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xu, Z. Liu, C. Zhang, G. Cui and L. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(8), 4092–4123 RSC .
M. J. Lee, S. Lee, P. Oh, Y. Kim and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2014, 14(2), 993–999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, M. Takahashi and B. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51(16), 3228–3234 CrossRef CAS .
G. Amatucci, A. P. Du, A. Blyr, T. Zheng and J. M. Tarascon, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 45(1), 255–271 CrossRef CAS .
F. T. Quinlan, K. Sano, T. Willey, R. Vidu, K. Tasaki and P. Stroeve, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13(11), 4207–4212 CrossRef CAS .
K. Amine, J. Liu, S. Kang, I. Belharouak, Y. Hyung, D. Vissers and G. Henriksen, J. Power Sources, 2004, 129(1), 14–19 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiao, Y. Zhao, Y. Yang, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 54(2), 545–550 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, O. Tanaike, M. Kodama and H. Hatori, J. Power Sources, 2007, 168(1), 282–287 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, F. Yang, Y. Guo, C. Peng, H. Bai, J. Peng and J. Guo, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41(8), 9662–9667 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhong, A. Bonakdarpour, M. Zhang, Y. Gao and J. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144(1), 205–213 CrossRef CAS .
J. Amarilla, K. Petrov, F. Pico, G. Avdeev, J. Rojo and R. Rojas, J. Power Sources, 2009, 191, 591–600 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Zhang, Y. Z. Wang, H. F. Jiu, Y. L. Wang, Y. X. Sun and Z. Li, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2014, 10, 439–444 CrossRef CAS .

          A. A. Uludag, A. Erdaş, S. Ozcan, D. Nalci, M. O. Güler, T. Cetinkaya, M. Uysal and H. Akbulut, Progress in Clean Energy, Springer,  2015, vol. 2, pp. 41–56 Search PubMed .
X. Luan, D. Guan and Y. Wang, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 12, 7113–7120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Şahan, F. K. Dokan, A. Ülgen and S. Patat, Ionics, 2014, 20, 323–333 CrossRef .
B. Ju, X. Wang, C. Wu, Q. Wei, X. Yang, H. Shu and Y. Bai, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2014, 18, 115–123 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lai, W. Ye, H. Liu and W. Wang, Ionics, 2009, 15, 389–392 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ming, Y. Yan, J. Ming, J. Adkins, X. Li, Q. Zhou and J. Zheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 120, 390–397 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lee, S. M. Park and H. J. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1101–1104 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, H. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Zhao, Y. Mi and B. Xia, Ionics, 2015, 21, 1835–1842 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Xu and C. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 5651–5655 CrossRef CAS .
T. Qiu, J. Wang, Y. Lu and W. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 147, 626–635 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peng, G. Wang, Y. Cao, Z. Zhang, K. Du and G. Hu, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2016, 20, 2865–2871 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tai, M. SubramaniyamChandrasekar, S. L. Chou, L. Chen, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700605 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zampardi, C. Batchelor-McAuley, E. Kätelhön and G. Compton Richard, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 56, 641–644 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Crain, J. Zheng, C. Sulyma, C. Goia, D. Goia and D. Roy, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 16, 2605–2615 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Lesel, J. B. Cook, Y. Yan, T. C. Lin and S. H. Tolbert, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2293–2298 CrossRef CAS .
M.-J. Lee, E. Lho, P. Bai, S. Chae, J. Li and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3744–3751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Hwang, Y. M. Lee, B. S. Kong, J. S. Seo and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Magasinski, P. Dixon, B. Hertzberg, A. Kvit, J. Ayala and G. Yushin, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Saint, M. Morcrette, D. Larcher, L. Laffont, S. Beattie, J. P. Peres, D. Talaga, M. Couzi and J. M. Tarascon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1765–1774 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Zhu, Y. Fang, W. Lv, F. Wang, Y. Liu and H. Liu, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 817, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Q. Wang, J. Miao, J. Zhang, D. Zhang, Y. Chen and H. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 444, 522–529 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, P. Yan, X. Xiao, J. H. Woo, C. Wang, J. Liu and J.-G. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1427–1434 RSC .
Y. S. Hu, R. D. Cakan, M. M. Titirici, J. O. Muller, R. Schlogl, M. Antonietti and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1645–1649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Holzapfel, H. Buqa, W. Scheifele, P. Novak and F. M. Petrat, Chem. Commun., 2005, 12, 1566–1568 RSC .
S. Yang, G. Li, Q. Zhu and Q. Pan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3420–3425 RSC .
H. Tao, L. Fan, Y. Mei and X. Qu, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1332–1335 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, G. E. Blomgren and P. N. Kumta, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, A157–A161 CrossRef .
X. M. He, W. Pu, J. G. Ren, L. Lang, C. Y. Jiang and C. Wan, Ionics, 2008, 14, 335–337 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Xiang, K. Zhang, G. Ji, J. Y. Lee, C. J. Zou, X. D. Chen and J. S. Wu, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1787–1796 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Chou, J. Z. Wang, M. Choucair, H. K. Liu, J. A. Stride and S. X. Dou, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 303–306 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, Y. Nuli, Y. S. He, J. Wang, A. I. Minett, J. Yang and J. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 9149–9151 RSC .
G. X. Wang, J. Yao, H. K. Liu, S. X. Dou and J. H. Ahn, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 50, 517–522 CrossRef .
C.-H. Hsu, H.-H. Lin, Y.-H. Liu and H.-P. Lin, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 9058–9064 RSC .
P. Nie, Z. Le, G. Chen, D. Liu, X. Liu, H. B. Wu, P. Xu, X. Li, F. Liu, L. Chang, X. Zhang and Y. Lu, Small, 2018, 14, 1800635 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Xu, J. K. Sun, Y. X. Yin and Y. G. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 28, 1705235 CrossRef .
W. He, Y. Liang, H. Tian, S. Zhang, Z. Meng and W.-Q. Han, Energy Storage Materials, 2017, 8, 119–126 CrossRef .
S. Goriparti, E. Miele, F. De Angelis, E. Di Fabrizio, R. P. Zaccaria and C. Capiglia, J. Power Sources, 2014, 257, 421–443 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cui, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2018, 13, 5474–5487 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, P. No, Y. J. Lee and J. H. Choi, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2017, 47, 1127–1136 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Lv, H. L. Zhao, C. H. Gao, T. H. Zhang and X. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 152, 345–351 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Si, K. Hanai, T. Ichikawa, M. B. Phillipps, A. Hirano, N. Imanishi, O. Yamamoto and Y. Takeda, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9774–9779 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Ren, J. N. Ding, N. Y. Yuan, S. Y. Jia, M. Z. Qu and Z. L. Yu, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 16, 1453–1460 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Yuan, H. X. Xin, X. Y. Qin, X. J. Li, Y. F. Liu and H. F. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 155, 251–256 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wei, H. H. Huang, J. Wang and Z. R. Shen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 422, 155–161 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, C. Zhang, Z. Liu, J. Zheng, Y. Zuo, C. Xue, C. Li and B. Cheng, J. Power Sources, 2017, 339, 86–92 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Zhuang, P. G. Song, G. R. Chen, L. Y. Shi, X. Y. Tao, Y. Wu, H. J. Liu and D. S. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 28464–28472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun, T. T. Su, L. Xu, M. P. Liu and H. B. Du, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4341–4344 RSC .
Q. Liu, Z. Cui, R. J. Zou, J. H. Zhang, K. B. Xu and J. Q. Hu, Small, 2017, 13 Search PubMed .
Y. R. Ren and M. Q. Li, J. Power Sources, 2016, 306, 459–466 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jin, B. Zhu, Z. Lu, N. Liu and J. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700715 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, H. W. Lee, J. Sun, K. Yan, Y. Liu, W. Liu, Z. Lu, D. Lin, G. Zhou and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 7408–7413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, Z. Lu, N. Liu, H. W. Lee, M. T. McDowell and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cao, P. Xu, H. Zhai, S. Du, J. Mandal, M. Dontigny, K. Zaghib and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ding, X. Qin, C. You, M. Wu, Y. He, F. Kang and B. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 270, 192–204 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, Z. Yuan, X. Wang, G. Jiang, J. Xiong and S. Yuan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 433, 125–132 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Penki, G. Valurouthu, S. Shivakumara, V. A. Sethuraman and N. Munichandraiah, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 5996–6004 RSC .
M. Zhu, H. Zhou, J. Shao, J. Feng and A. Yuan, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 749, 811–817 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, X. Li, B. Yan, D. Li, S. Lawes and X. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 869–884 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ye, Z. Chen, Q. Liu and C. Xu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 516, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, L. Yang, B. Xu, Q. Wu, D. Zhang, S. Yuan, Y. Zhai, X. Wang, Y. Fan and Z. Hu, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 613–621 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, G. Xia, D. Sun, F. Fang and X. Yu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3816–3824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xia, L. Liu, J. Xie, H. Yan, Y. Yuan, M. Chen, C. Huang, Y. Zhang, S. Nie and X. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 269, 452–461 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Tang, W. Zhao, W. Ding, J. Xu, C. Liang, Z. Zhang, T. Lin and F. Huang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701261 CrossRef .
B. Quan, A. Jin, S. H. Yu, S. M. Kang, J. Jeong, H. D. Abruna, L. Jin, Y. Piao and Y. E. Sung, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700880 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Qin, Y. Teng, J. Zhang, X. Xiao, Y. Li and Z. Li, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 694–700 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, M. W. Xu, J. Wu and C. M. Li, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9115–9122 RSC .
H. Wen, B. Guo, W. Kang and C. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 14032–14039 RSC .
F. Cheng, W.-C. Li, J.-N. Zhu, W.-P. Zhang and A.-H. Lu, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 486–494 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Wang, L. Wang, S. Zhang, S. Liang, X. Liang, H. Huang, W. Zhou and J. Guo, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 748, 1013–1021 CrossRef .
Y. Du, H. Ma, M. Guo, T. Gao and H. Li, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2018, 699, 167–170 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jamal, B.-S. Kang, H. Lee, J.-S. Yu and C.-S. Lee, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018, 64, 151–166 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Wang, R. Wang, J. Chang, N. Hu and C. Xu, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 3182 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lu, Y. Gao, Z. Li, B. Dong, T. Gao, S. Ding, Y. Bai and G. Gao, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 749, 424–432 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, J. Yang, Y. Zhang, Y. Qian and H. Geng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 524, 256–262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gong, D. Xia, C. Bi, J. Yang, W. Zeng, C. Chen, Y. Ding, Z. Xu, J. Liao and M. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 264, 358–366 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, K. Zhang, Y. Wang, C. Yan and S. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2018, 115, 317–321 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, X. Song, C. Gu, D. Liu, J. Liu and J. Huang, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 741, 223–230 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abouimrane, Y. Abu-Lebdeb, P. J. Alarco and M. Armand, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1028–A1031 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yi, H. P. Liu, Y. R. Zhu, L. Jiang, Y. Xie and R. S. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 215, 258–265 CrossRef .
E. Ferg, R. J. Gummow, A. Dekock and M. M. Thackeray, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, L147–L150 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Xu, P. X. Huang, W. Yang, Z. Q. Wang, M. S. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Zhou, M. Z. Qu, Z. L. Yu and Y. H. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 69–75 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. He, F. Ning, B. H. Li, Q. S. Song, W. Lv, H. D. Du, D. Y. Zhai, F. Y. Su, Q. H. Yang and F. Y. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 202, 253–261 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Zhou, X. J. Fan, W. Chen, F. Chen, X. F. Wei, A. Li and J. H. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 247, 132–138 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yi, S. Y. Yang, X. Y. Li, J. H. Yao, Y. R. Zhu and R. S. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 505–511 CrossRef .
X. Li, M. Z. Qu and Z. L. Yu, Chin. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 26, 233–239 Search PubMed .
Z. Ji, J. Y. Zhang, W. W. Wang, Y. Huang, Z. R. Feng, Z. T. Zhang and Z. L. Tang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 123, 510–515 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, C. L. Zhang, B. Li, S. F. Kang, X. Li and Y. G. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 98, 146–152 CrossRef .
F. Lin, B. Ding, Y. L. Xin, F. Q. Cheng, M. O. Lai, L. Lu and H. H. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 1034–1041 CrossRef .
L. Zhao, Y. Li, Z. M. Zhu, J. Lin, Z. H. Tian and R. L. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 7079–7083 CrossRef .
N. Obrovac and L. Christensen, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A93–A96 CrossRef .
K.-H. Chen, K. N. Wood, E. Kazyak, W. S. LePage, A. L. Davis, A. J. Sanchez and N. P. Dasgupta, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11671–11681 RSC .
M. Hu, Y. Yuan, M. Guo, Y. Pan and D. Long, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14910–14918 RSC .
Y.-G. Lee, S. Ryu, T. Sugimoto, T. Yu, W.-s. Chang, Y. Yang, C. Jung, J. Woo, S. G. Kang, H. N. Han, S.-G. Doo, Y. Hwang, H. Chang, J.-M. Lee and J.-Y. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5906–5914 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, Y. Yao, S. He, H. Xie, E. Hitz and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29 Search PubMed .
G. Yang, J. Chen, P. Xiao, P. O. Agboola, I. Shakir and Y. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9899–9905 RSC .
Y. Yuan, F. Wu, Y. Bai, Y. Li, G. Chen, Z. Wang and C. Wu, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 16, 411–418 CrossRef .
D. Lin, J. Zhao, J. Sun, H. Yao, Y. Liu, K. Yan and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 4613–4618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, L. Zhang, B. Liu, S. Xu, T. Hamann, D. McOwen, J. Dai, W. Luo, Y. Gong, E. D. Wachsman and L. Hu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 3770–3775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jiao, J. Zheng, Q. Li, X. Li, M. H. Engelhard, R. Cao, J.-G. Zhang and W. Xu, Joule, 2018, 2, 110–124 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, J. Park, A. Friesen, H. Lee, Y. M. Lee and M.-H. Ryou, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 282, 343–350 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, X. B. Cheng, Y. Tian, X. Chen, X. Q. Zhang, W. J. Li, J. Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1707629 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Jiao, J. Zheng, Q. Li, X. Li, M. H. Engelhard, R. Cao, J.-G. Zhang and W. Xu, Joule, 2018, 2, 110–124 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qin, H. Xu, D. Wang, J. Zhu, J. Chen, W. Zhang, P. Zhang, Y. Zhang, W. Tian and Z. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(33), 27764–27770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Zuo, Y. X. Yin, S. H. Wang, P. F. Wang, X. Yang, J. Liu, C. P. Yang and Y. G. Guo, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 297–301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, P. Li, X. Chen, D. Legut, Y. Fan, R. Zhang, Y. Lu, X. Cheng and Q. Zhang, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 16, 426–433 CrossRef .
R. Zhang, X. R. Chen, X. Chen, X. B. Cheng, X. Q. Zhang, C. Yan and Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem., 2017, 56, 7764–7768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Huang, L. Tang, H. S. Najafabadi, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 504–509 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yin, W. Tang, I. D. Jung, K. C. Phua, S. Adams, S. W. Lee and G. W. Zheng, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 659–664 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Cheng, R. Zhang, C. Z. Zhao and Q. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10403–10473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wu, Y.-X. Yuan, X.-B. Cheng, Y. Bai, Y. Li, C. Wu and Q. Zhang, Energy Storage Materials, 2018, 15, 148–170 CrossRef .
L. Wang, Z. Zhou, X. Yan, F. Hou, L. Wen, W. Luo, J. Liang and S. X. Dou, Energy Storage Materials, 2018, 14, 22–48 CrossRef .
C. Z. Zhao, X. Q. Zhang, X. B. Cheng, R. Zhang, R. Xu, P. Y. Chen, H. J. Peng, J. Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 11069–11074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lin, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 194–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, R. Guo, B. Zhan, B. Shi, Y. Li, H. Pei, Y. Wang, W. Shi, Z. Fu and J. Xie, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1674–1679 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, A. Pei, H. R. Lee, B. Kong, N. Liu, D. Lin, Y. Liu, C. Liu, P. C. Hsu, Z. Bao and Y. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4815–4820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Arora and Z. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4419–4462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manuel Stephan, Eur. Polym. J., 2006, 42, 21–42 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Shin and D. W. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2013, 226, 54–60 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Wu, P. Chiang, J. C. Lin and Y. S. Jan, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 1803–1812 CrossRef CAS .
I. Uchida, H. Ishikawa, M. Mohamed and M. Umeda, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 821–825 CrossRef CAS .
J. Syzdek, M. Armand, M. Gizowska, M. Marcinek, E. Sasim, M. Szafran and W. Wieczorek, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 66–72 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Jeong, D. W. Kim, Y. U. Jeong and S. Y. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6116–6121 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Lee, Y. B. Jeong and D. W. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6197–6201 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nunes-Pereira, A. C. Lopes, C. M. Costa, R. Leones, M. M. Silva and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Electroanalysis, 2012, 24, 2147–2156 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nunes-Pereira, A. C. Lopes, C. M. Costa, L. C. Rodrigues, M. M. Silva and S. Lanceros-Mendez, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2013, 689, 223–232 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Lopes, R. Goncalves, C. M. Costa, A. M. Fonseaca, G. Botelho, C. NevesI and S. Lanccros-Mendez, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 12, 1–7 CrossRef .
C. M. Costa, M. M. Silva and S. Lanceros-Mendez, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 11404–11417 RSC .
W. Liu, J. Chen, Z. Chen, K. Liu, G. Zhou, Y. Sun, M. S. Song, Z. Bao and Y. Cui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701076 CrossRef .
M. A. Osman, V. Mittal and H. R. Lusti, Rapid Commun., 2004, 25, 1145–1149 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pavlidou and C. D. Papaspyrides, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2008, 33, 1119–1198 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Cho and D. R. Paul, Polymer, 2001, 42, 1083–1094 CrossRef CAS .
E. Manias, A. Touny, L. Wu, K. Strawhecker, B. Lu and T. C. Chung, Chem. Mater., 2008, 13, 3516–3523 CrossRef .
W. Li, X. Li, A. Yuan, X. Xie and B. Xia, Ionics, 2016, 22, 2143–2149 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Yoo, E. Markevich, G. Salitra, D. Sharon and D. Aurbach, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 110–121 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Gmitter, I. Plitz and G. G. Amatucci, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A370 CrossRef CAS .
H. Duncan, N. Salem and Y. Abu-Lebdeh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A838–A848 CrossRef CAS .
R. Marom, S. F. Amalraj, N. Leifer, D. Jacob and D. Aurbach, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9938–9954 RSC .
Q. Wang, P. Pechy, S. M. Zakeeruddin, I. Exnar and M. J. Grätzel, Power Sources, 2005, 146, 813–816 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haregewoin, A. S. Wotango and B. J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1955–1988 RSC .
S. S. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 1379–1394 CrossRef CAS .
S. Takeuchi, S. Yano, T. Fukutsuka, K. Miyazaki and T. J. Abe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A2089–A2091 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, M. D. Casselman, Y. Li, A. Wei and D. P. Abraham, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 184–191 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Smart, B. V. Ratnakumar, V. S. Ryan-Mowrey, S. Surampudi, G. K. S. Prakash, J. Hu and I. Cheung, J. Power Sources, 2003, 359, 119–121 Search PubMed .
Z. C. Zhang, D. Sherlock, R. West, R. West, K. Amine and L. J. Lyons, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 9176–9180 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, S. P. Ding and T. R. Jow, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 4172–4178 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xu, N. Tsiouvaras, A. Garsuch, H. A. Gasteiger and B. L. Lucht, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 7363–7368 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, Y. B. He, Q. Yu, B. Li, Y. V. Kaneti, Y. Yao, F. Kang and Q. H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604460 CrossRef PubMed .
J. G. Han, I. Park, J. Cha, S. Park, S. Myeong, W. Cho, S. S. Kim, S. Y. Hong, J. Cho and N. S. Choi, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 56–65 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xu, L. Zhou, Y. Dong, Y. Chen, J. Demeaux, A. D. MacIntosh, A. Garsuch and B. L. Lucht, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1308–1319 RSC .
Y. Li, S. Wan, G. M. Veith, R. R. Unocic, M. P. Paranthaman, S. Dai and X. G. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601397 CrossRef .
Y. Dong, J. Demeaux, Y. Zhang, M. Xu, L. Zhou, A. D. MacIntosh and B. L. Lucht, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A128–A136 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, Y. Talyosef, B. Markovsky, E. Markevich, E. Zinigrad, L. Asraf, J. S. Gnanaraj and H. J. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 247–254 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, Y. Takazawa, K. Miyazaki and T. Abe, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11680–11685 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, M. Xu, B. Li, Y. Liu, L. Yang, W. Li and S. Hu, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 105, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Sirenko, A. V. Potapenko and V. D. Prisiazshnyi, J. Power Sources, 2008, 175, 581–585 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Y. Zhao, X. Shi, B. Li, X. Xu, W. Zhao and X. Cui, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 65, 221–227 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, M. Metzger, S. Solchenbach, M. Payne, S. Meini, H. A. Gasteiger, A. Garsuch and B. L. Lucht, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 11337–11348 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xing, L. Vatamanu, O. Borodin, G. D. Smith and D. J. Bedrov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 23871–23881 CrossRef CAS .
K. Abe, T. Hattori, K. Kawabe, Y. Ushigoe and H. Yoshitake, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A810–A814 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Yamada, K. Sodeyama, E. Watanabe, K. Takada, Y. Tateyama and A. Yamada, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3(1), 22 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, S. W. Lee, D. Lin, F. Shi, S. Wang, A. D. Sendek and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17035 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cong, Y. Song, N. Ren, G. Xie, C. Tao, Y. Huang, G. Xu and J. Bao, Mater. Des., 2018, 142, 221–228 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pavani, M. Ravi, S. Bhavani, R. S. Karthikeya and V. V. R. N. Rao, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 5518–5524 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pal and A. Ghosh, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 278, 137–148 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fu, M. D. Soucek and T. Kyu, Solid State Ionics, 2018, 320, 310–315 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Weber and M. K. Mahanthappa, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 7633–7643 RSC .
F. Bertasi, E. Negro, K. Vezzù, G. Nawn, G. Pagot and V. Di Noto, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 175, 113–123 CrossRef CAS .
L. Porcarelli, A. S. Shaplov, F. Bella, J. R. Nair, D. Mecerreyes and C. Gerbaldi, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 678–682 CrossRef CAS .
K. Deng, S. Wang, S. Ren, D. Han, M. Xiao and Y. Meng, J. Power Sources, 2017, 360, 98–105 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, H. Lee, M. J. Choo, J. K. Park and H. T. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Structures of (a) LiFePO4, (b) LiMn2O4, (c) Li Ni1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2, and (d) LiNi1−x−yCoxAlyO2 cathode materials. Reproduced from ref. 6–8 and 11.	 

NCM111	LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2	∼150	3.65
NCM442	LiNi0.4Co0.4Mn0.2O2	∼170	3.65
NCM523	LiNi0.5Co0.2Mn0.3O2	∼160	3.66
NCM622	LiNi0.6Co0.2Mn0.2O2	∼170	3.65
NCM811	LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2	∼190	3.65
NCA	LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2	∼190	3.65

Core–shell	Two-step, co-precipitation	Core: high capacity, shell: high stability	Thickness too high, complex preparation, structural mismatch, increased mechanical stress, formation of cracks
Ultrathin film	ALD, CVD	Uniform, continuous, nanoscale, tunable thickness, precise control	Limited sources, impeded conductivity
Rough	Co-precipitation, hydrothermal, solvothermal, spray drying, sol–gel, ball milling	Simple preparation, ease of scale up	Not continuous, not uniform

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the preparation process for LBP@LNMO material by use of residual Li2CO3. (b) Nyquist plots of the pristine LNMO and LBP@LNMO samples after 100 cycles. (c) Cycling performance of the pristine LNMO and LBP@LNMO samples at 2C and 55 °C. Reproduced from ref. 43.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Surface modification with a liquid phase method using PVP as the carbon source. (b) Discharge curves of the 5th, 30th, and 70th cycles. (c–e) Discharge profiles of pristine and carbon surfaces treated at various C rates; the bar diagram of their discharge capacity at various C rates. Reproduced from ref. 47.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis mechanism. (b) The rate performances of bare LMNO, syn-Li2ZrO3@LMNO and post-Li2ZrO3@LMNO. (c) The cycling performances of bare LMNO, syn-Li2ZrO3@LMNO and post-Li2ZrO3@LMNO. (d) Energy density of bare LMNO, syn-Li2ZrO3@LMNO and post-Li2ZrO3@LMNO at 1C. (e) The average discharge voltage of bare LMNO, post-Li2ZrO3@LMNO and syn-Li2ZrO3@LMNO. Reproduced from ref. 48.	 

 	Fig. 5  Structure of the ultrathin spinel membrane encapsulated-layered lithium-rich cathode (USMLLR) and rate performance comparison with pristine layered lithium-rich materials (PLLR). Reproduced from ref. 49.	 

 	Fig. 6  Comparison of HAADF/ABF-STEM images of [001]-orientated pristine and doped LLOs. Gradient surface Si/Sn-doped LLOs with improved kinetics. Reproduced from ref. 54.	 

 	Fig. 7  Left: SEM images of (a and b) conventional particles: H0, hollow spherical particles: (c and d) H1, (e and f) H2 and (g and h) H3. Right: Cross sections of (a and b) conventional particles: H0, hollow spherical particles with different sizes: (c and d) H1, (e and f) H2 and (g and h) H3. Reproduced from ref. 55.	 

H0	6.51	136.00	102.03	7.43 × 10−16
H1	3.36	87.0	29.43	8.92 × 10−15
H2	2.54	154.80	43.1	4.16 × 10−15
H3	3.61	330.2	144.5	3.70 × 10−16

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation process of LMNCO/GC. (b and c) SEM images of the precursor and product. (d and e) Charge–discharge curves in the 1st cycle and in the 50th cycle. Reproduced from ref. 57.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) The impact of the Li/M ratio (M, the transition metal cations) on the Li-rich NMC materials and their electrochemical performance. (B) The capacity retention and rate performance in the voltage range of 2.0–4.8 V at room temperature. (C) Initial charge/discharge curves of the pristine and Li2ZrO3-coated Li-rich electrodes in the voltage range of 2.0 × 104.8 V at room temperature. (A) Reproduced from ref. 41, (B) reproduced from ref. 42, and (C) reproduced from ref. 53.	 

Washing process	No	No	Yes	Yes
pH	<10.8	<11.0	<11.8	<11.8
Moisture (ppm)	<300 ppm	<300 ppm	<600 ppm	<600 ppm
Available electrode density (g cm−3)	<3.6	<3.6	<3.3	<3.3
Reversible capacity (mA h g−1)	∼170	∼185	∼200	∼205
Volumetric capacity (mA h cm−3)	<612	<666	<680	<697

 	Fig. 10  (A) Chemical and structural characteristics of the ASL-NCA. (a) Illustration of the ASL-NCA showing the detailed characteristics of each component. (b) A high angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image of cross sectioned ASL-NCA. (c) A magnified HADDF-STEM image of the ASL-NCA surface from the purple square area in (b) with its energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) mapping results. HAADF-STEM images of the (d) NCA and (e) ASL-NCA before the electrochemical test, including insets with the EELS analysis from the line scan. (f) HAADF-STEM images of the NCA after 200 cycles at 60 °C. HAADF-TEM images of ASL-NCA after (g) the formation cycles and (h) 200 cycles at 60 °C, showing a homogeneous ASL layer on the primary particle. (B) Synthetic approach used to restore degraded LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 microspheres. (A) Reproduced from ref. 60 and (B) reproduced from ref. 61.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) FESEM results of P-NCM and S-NCM. (b and c) TEM results of P-NCM and cycle performance of P-NCM and S-NCM at a high temperature of 60 °C. Reproduced from ref. 68.	 

Avg. voltage (V)	3.65	3.84	3.22
Theo. capacity (mA h g−1)	265	274	170
True density (g cm−3)	4.73	5.05	3.60
Conductivity (S cm−1)	—	10−3	10−9
Diffusivity (cm2 s−1)	10−8	10−8	10−13 to 10−16
Specific energy (W h kg−1)	219.8	193.3	162.9
Energy density (W h L−1)	598.9	557.8	415.0
Materials cost (US$)	1.628	1.824	1.219

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram for the preparation of the LFPO/rGO composite. (b–d) SEM images. (e and f) Charge discharge and rate capability. Reproduced from ref. 85.	 

 	Fig. 13  SEM images of LiFePO4/C samples, (a–c) in the presence of the Tween 40 surfactant at 680, 720, and 750 °C, respectively; (d–f) in the absence of Tween 40 at 680, 720, and 750 °C. Reproduced from ref. 93.	 

 	Fig. 14  ) Schematic illustration of the “electronic and ionic hybrid coating layer” for the LiFePO4 electrode material during charge/discharge processes. (b–e) Typical galvanostatic curves of all electrodes in the 1st and 20th discharge/charge cycles at a rate of 1C, discharge/charge curves of all electrodes in the 20th cycle, and the average discharge capacity of all electrodes in 20 cycles at 1C rate. Reproduced from ref. 99.	 

Co-precipitation	Spherical	1.0
Solvothermal	Flower-like	1.2
Hydrothermal	Microsphere	1.2
Carbothermal reduction	Micro/nanospherical	1.3

 	Fig. 15  (A) (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis process for LMFP/C/rGO; and (B) electrochemical test of (a) charge/discharge curves of the LMFP/C/rGO electrode at a current density of 0.1C, (b) rate performance of LMFP/C and LMFP/C/rGO from 0.1C to 20C and discharge curves of (c) LMFP/C and (d) LMFP/C/rGO at different current densities. Reproduced from ref. 111.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Cyclic voltammograms obtained at a scan rate of 0.01 mV s−1, (b) first charge–discharge voltage profiles recorded at the C/20 rate, (c) rate capability, and (d) capacity retention tests at the C/5 rate of pristine LiMnPO4, LiMnPO4/C, LiMn0.938Mg0.024Co0.016Ni0.022PO4/C, and LiMn0.962Co0.012Ni0.026PO4/C. Reproduced from ref. 123.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic drawing of the structure-templating mechanism. (b) Initial charge/discharge curves of PEG-LMFP/C and LMFP/C at 0.05C. (c) Discharge profiles of LMFP/C at different rates. (d) Discharge profiles of PEG-LMFP/C at different rates. (e) Rate capability of PEG-LMFP/C and LMFP/C at different rates. Reproduced from ref. 134.	 

 	Fig. 18  TEM and HRTEM images of the pristine (a and b) and 3 wt% Li2MnO3-coated samples (c and d). Cycle performance of the pristine and Li2MnO3 coated samples at 1C between 3.0 and 4.3 V at 25 °C. Reproduced from ref. 161.	 

 	Fig. 19  Using nanoscale domain size to control charge storage kinetics in pseudocapacitive nanoporous LiMn2O4 powders. (A) Low- (top) and high- (bottom) resolution SEM images of nanoporous LiMn2O4 powders with different average crystallite sizes (shown in the image). The images show both the primary and secondary particle sizes. All larger domain size samples were made by thermal coarsening of the 10 nm material. (B) Galvanostatic capacity testing at 5, 10, and 20 °C for four sizes of nanoporous LiMn2O4 powders as slurry electrodes. Smaller samples have lower capacity due to an increased fraction of inactive surface atoms. Charge time versus normalized capacity for nanoporous LiMn2O4 powders with different crystallite sizes. Samples with domain sizes up to 40 nm show similar capacity loss at a higher rate, but the kinetics slow down appreciably for the 70 nm sample. Comparison of long-term galvanostatic rate testing at 10C for 40 and 70 nm LiMn2O4 samples. The 70 nm sample shows rapid capacity fade, while the 40 nm sample shows much more stable cycling. (C) Mechanism diagram on the effect of particle size on kinetics and capacity. Reproduced from ref. 165.	 

 	Fig. 20  Graphene act as the buffer matrix to suppress the expansion of silicon. (A): (a) capacity vs. number of cycles, and (b) charge–discharge curves in the cycle life test of the Si/r-GO/CF electrode. (B): (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of the Si@graphene cage composite: (c) SEM, (d) TEM with the inset SAED pattern, (e) HRTEM of porous Si particles, and (f) HRTEM of the graphene cage; (g) STEM image of the Si@graphene cage and the corresponding elemental mappings of Si, O, C, and N. Electrochemical performance of the Si@graphene cage composite in a half cell setup versus Li metal. (C): (a) schematic illustration showing the synthetic process of the SiOx/C hydrogel. SEM images of (b) artificial graphite, (c) artificial graphite after a sand milling process (FG), (d) SiOx particles, (e) SiOx/GO, (f) SiOx/GO/FG, and (g) SiOx/C. (A) Reproduced from ref. 183, (B) reproduced from ref. 184, and (C) reproduced from ref. 185.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic diagram of the porous electrode fabrication process using polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) and associated electrochemical test results. (b–d) SEM images of PMMA powders with diameters of 5 μm, 10 μm, and 20 μm. (e and f) Cycling performance with various types of electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 189.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic diagrams and DFT simulation showing the advantages of the LixSi/Li2O composite. (A) Three approaches to stabilize reactive LixSi NPs. (B) The different behaviors of the LixSi/Li2O composite and LixSi/Li2O core–shell NPs under ambient conditions. (C) DFT simulation is performed by cleaving along the (001) plane of Li21Si5 and calculating the binding energy between O at different positions in Li2O and Li at the (001) plane of Li21Si5. (D) The table shows the binding energy of different bonds. Reproduced from ref. 201.	 

 	Fig. 23  Novel Sn-based anode materials and their electrochemical properties. (A) Schematic illustration of the formation of LL-SnS2/G hybrid nanosheets and cycling performance. (B) (a) SEM images of ZnSnO3 nanocubes, (b and c) SEM images of the Sn/C hybrid (S800) with continuous carbon coating layers, and (d) TEM image of S800 showing the typically encapsulated Sn particles by carbon layers. (e) Voltage profiles of the Sn/C hybrid electrode (S800) at a current density of 0.2 Ag−1, (f) cycling performance of the Sn/C hybrid electrode at current densities of 0.2 Ag−1 and 1 Ag−1, (g) rate performance of the Sn/C hybrid electrode S800 (upper) and SRE (lower) at charge discharge rates from 0.1 to 2 Ag−1, and (h) Nyquist plots of fresh coin cells used 12 h after the assembly. (A) Reproduced from ref. 212 and (B) reproduced from ref. 218.	 

 	Fig. 24  Metal oxide nanostructure dispersed onto GO. (A) (a) SEM and (b) TEM of Ni(OH)2@G and HRTEM of (c) graphene and (d) Ni(OH)2@G with Ni and C mapping. (B) Cross-sectional SEM images: (a and b) Co/GS film and (c and d) Co3O4/GS film. (C) (A) XRD pattern of the as-prepared Mn3O4@rGO precursor and MnO@rGO NO and (B and C) FESEM and (D) EDX-elemental mapping of the as-prepared MnO@rGO NO. (D) FE-SEM images of well dispersed TiO2/rGO: (a and b) nanoparticles and (c and d) nanorods. (A) Reproduced from ref. 220, (B) reproduced from ref. 222, (C) reproduced from ref. 223, and (D) reproduced from ref. 221.	 

 	Fig. 25  Li deposition behavior in the 3D garnet host. (A) Voltage profile of Li plating within the porous garnet framework onto the bottom Cu layer at 0.5 mA cm−2. (B) Schematic of Li growth in the 3D garnet framework with the Cu current collector and transfer of Li ions and electrons. Cross-sectional SEM images of the 3D garnet host after deposition of Li metal in two regions indicated in (B); (C) near the dense separating layer, where the pores of the garnet host remain empty without Li deposition; and (D) bottom region with the Cu current collector, where the garnet host is deposited with Li metal. (E) Cross-sectional SEM image and (F) corresponding elemental distribution of La in the Li-deposited 3D garnet host. Reproduced from ref. 248.	 

 	Fig. 26  SEM images of the Li metal anodes after 200 charge/discharge cycles in Li||NMC coin cells with 3.5 mA h cm−2 NMC cathodes under different charge current densities (A–C) 0.8 mA cm−2, (D–F) 1.3 mA cm−2, and (G–I) 2.0 mA cm−2, in terms of (A, D, and G) cross-sectional and (B, C, E, F, H, and I) surface views. Reproduced from ref. 252.	 

 	Fig. 27  Analysis of Li-metal growth with and without external pressure. (a) Simulated growth of Li metal under two conditions: (I) without pressure (with free top surface boundaries) and (II) with pressure (with constrained top surface boundaries). (b) Side-view SEM images of Li metal deposited on Cu foil under an external pressure of (I) 0 MPa and (II) 1.1 MPa. Scale bar: 1 μm. (c) EIS of the cells with a pressure of 0 MPa and 1.1 MPa. (d) Corrected potentiostatic current density (at −330 mV vs. Li/Li+) of the cells with a pressure of 0 MPa (I) and 1.1 MPa (II) and theoretical fitting curves with 2D (blue curves) and 3D (yellow curves) growth modes. (e) 2D growth charge density of the cell with a pressure of 0 MPa (I) and 1.1 MPa (II) calculated from (d). Reproduced from ref. 258.	 

 	Fig. 28  Morphology and electrochemical performances of the coin cell using the PU/PVdF separator. (a) SEM image of the PVdF/PU separator. Scale bar: 10 μm. (b) Comparison of the discharge/charge voltage profiles of the LCO/graphite full cell using the PU/PVdF separator and the Celgard separator. (c) Rate capability of the LCO/graphite full cell using the Celgard separator and the PU/PVdF separator. Reproduced from ref. 279.	 

 	Fig. 29  SEM images of the surfaces of (a) Celgard 2500, (b) bare non-woven PET, and (c and d) Al2O3/PET separators. Reproduced from ref. 283.	 

 	Fig. 30  Electrochemical performances of Li metal batteries. (a and b) The lithium deposition/stripping of Li/3D-GPE/Li and Li/separator–liquid-electrolyte/Li symmetrical cells at current densities of 0.5 and 2.5 mA cm−2. (c and d) Cycling performances of the LiFePO4/3D-GPE/Li and LiFePO4/separator–liquid electrolyte/Li cells at 0.3 and 4C. (e) Rate performances of the LiFePO4/3D-GPE/Li and LiFePO4/separator–liquid-electrolyte/Li cells. (f) EIS of the LiFePO4/3D-GPE/Li and LiFePO4/separator–liquid-electrolyte/Li cells after 1, 100, and 200 cycles at 0.3C. (g–i) FE-SEM images of the surface of (g) the Li electrode before galvanostatic cycling, (h) the Li electrode obtained from a LiFePO4/separator–liquid-electrolyte/Li cell, and (i) the Li electrode obtained from a LiFePO4/3DGPE/Li cell after 200 cycles at 0.3C. Reproduced from ref. 297.	 

 	Fig. 31  Comparison of possible Li-ion conduction pathways. Li-ion conduction pathways in composite polymer electrolytes with nanoparticles (a), random nanowires (b) and aligned nanowires (c). Compared with isolated nanoparticles, random nanowires could supply a more continuous fast conduction pathway for Li ions. Compared with random nanowires, aligned nanowires are free of crossing junctions. (d) The surface region of inorganic nanoparticles (NPs) and nanowires (NWs) acts as an expressway for Li-ion conduction. Reproduced from ref. 311.	 

 	Fig. 32  (A) Solid polymer electrolytes were prepared by blending waterborne polyurethane and LiTFSI and the all solid state battery based on WPU showed attractive electrochemical properties and discharge capacity. (B) (a) Conductivity spectra in the frequency range of 4 Hz-8 MHz are shown for the gel polymer electrolytes GPE-2 at several temperatures. (b) Schematic sketch of the equivalent electric circuit of complex conductivity with electrode polarization: (i) frequency independent double layer capacitance (PNP model) and (ii) frequency dependent CPE (empirical model). (c) Reciprocal temperature dependence of ionic conductivity is shown for all gel polymer electrolytes. (d) Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) for the electrochemical voltage window test of different gel polymer electrolytes under ambient conditions recorded at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (C). Cyclic voltammogram of 20/40/40 PEGBCDMA/EC/LiTFSI PEM and specific discharge capacities as a function of the number of cycles for the LiFePO4/PEM/Li half-cell at 22 °C versus at 60 °C. The current rate was C/3. (A) Reproduced from ref. 312, (B) reproduced from ref. 314, and (C) reproduced from ref. 315.	 

 	Fig. 33  Recent progress in single-ion conducting polymer electrolytes. (A) (a) Schematic representation of the in situ polymerization process on the LiFePO4 electrode sheets and LiFePO4/SIPE3/Li cell assembly. (b) Discharge capacity of the cell according to the discharge rate compared at 25 and 70 °C. (c) Specific capacity of the cell against the cycle number at a constant 0.1C rate at 25 °C. (B) Categorized scheme of the ion conductors. (a) Configurations of the LE, NL/LE hybrid, and NPEM, (b) scheme of the dendritic Li growth resulting from Li+ depletion at the interface of LE (left), and for the prevention of dendritic Li due to a uniform Li+ concentration at the interface of the Nafion and Li metal for NL/LE and NPEM (right). (A) Reproduced from ref. 318 and (B) reproduced from ref. 320.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
