Organic photosensitizers for antimicrobial phototherapy   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00647A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00647A
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 3324-3340Organic photosensitizers for antimicrobial phototherapy†

        
          
            Van-Nghia 
            Nguyen‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Zheng 
            Zhao‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Ben Zhong 
            Tang
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Juyoung 
            Yoon
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry and Nanoscience, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 03760, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jyoon@ewha.ac.kr
bSchool of Science and Engineering, Shenzhen Institute of Aggregate Science and Technology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518172, China. E-mail: tangbenz@cuhk.edu.cn
Received 
      28th January 2022
    First published on 4th April 2022AbstractMicrobial infectious diseases, especially those caused by new and antibiotic-resistant pathogenic microbes, have become a significant threat to global human health. As an antibiotic-free therapy, phototherapy is a promising approach to treat microbial infections due to its spatiotemporal selectivity, non-invasiveness, minimal side effects, and broad antimicrobial spectrum. Although organic photosensitizer-based antimicrobial phototherapy has been extensively studied over the last decade, there has been no specific review article on this topic yet. It is important and timely to summarize recent research progress in this field. This tutorial review highlights the concept and significance of phototherapy and summarizes innovative types of organic photosensitizers with design strategies to deal with microbial infections. In addition, examples of organic antimicrobial photosensitizers, including antibacterial photosensitizers, antiviral photosensitizers, and antifungal photosensitizers are discussed. Finally, current challenges and future directions of organic photosensitizer-based phototherapy for clinical antimicrobial applications are presented. We believe that this tutorial review will provide general guidance for the future development of efficient photosensitizers and encourage preclinical and clinical studies for phototherapy-mediated antimicrobial treatments.
Van-Nghia Nguyen
Van-Nghia Nguyen was born in Thanhhoa, Vietnam. He received his PhD in chemistry in 2017 from the University of Ulsan, Republic of Korea. After completing postdoctoral research at the University of Ulsan, he joined the Department of Chemistry and Nanoscience, Ewha Womans University in 2018, where he is currently a research professor. His current research interests include the design and development of luminescent probes, theranostic agents, and molecular functional materials.
Zheng Zhao
Zheng Zhao is an assistant professor at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen. He received his PhD from the Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Science in 2014. Since 2015, he has worked as a Postdoctoral Fellow in Prof. Ben Zhong Tang's group. He joined the School of Science and Engineering, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen in 2021. His research interests include luminescent functional materials, new luminescence processes and the bioapplications of luminescent materials.
Ben Zhong Tang
Ben Zhong Tang is a Distinguished Presidential Chair Professor at the school of science and engineering, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen. He received his PhD from Kyoto University in 1988 and conducted his postdoctoral research at the University of Toronto from 1989 to 1994. He joined HKUST in 1994 and was promoted to Chair Professor in 2008. He moved to the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen in 2021. He was elected as Academician of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in 2009. His research interests include the exploration of new advanced materials and new polymerization reactions.
Juyoung Yoon
Juyoung Yoon is a distinguished professor at the Department of Chemistry and Nanoscience, Ewha Womans University. He received his PhD (1994) from Ohio State University and conducted his postdoctoral work at UCLA and Scripps Research Institute. His research interests include investigations of fluorescent probes, activatable photosensitizers, molecular recognition, and organic functional materials. He has been a “Highly-Cited Researcher” of Clarivate Analytics/Thomson Reuters since 2014 with an h-index of 113.

Key learning points
(1) The significance of light in biomedical applications.
(2) The basic concept and significance of phototherapy.
(3) The advantages of organic photosensitizers over other classes of phototherapeutic agents.
(4) Innovative types of organic photosensitizers for antimicrobial phototherapy.
(5) Current challenges and the opportunities of organic agents for phototherapy of microbial infections.

1. Introduction
1.1. The significance of light in biomedical applications
Light plays a vital role in the universe and the life of all organisms. Light is both useful and mysterious to human beings. Light is one of the first three of God's creative acts as mentioned in Genesis 1.1 The light that we receive has been traveling for over 13 billion years according to the Big Bang theory. Perhaps the formation of the Sun and the solar system is more important to us, and the Earth has been illuminated by the Sun ever since.2 Motivated by the importance of natural light, humankind has learned to control light and has worked untiringly to develop artificial lighting technology. Although many scientists have taken up the challenge of improving our understanding of light during the long history of civilization, a full understanding of light remains elusive. In general, light is a part of the electromagnetic spectrum that involves gamma rays, X-rays, ultraviolet, visible light, infrared, microwaves, and radio waves. Light has the properties of both a wave and a particle; however, it should be mainly considered as a particle when investigating its photophysical and photochemical properties for biomedical applications.
The use of light as a non-invasive therapeutic tool for medical purposes is not new. In 1903, Niels Finsen, a father of modern phototherapy, was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for using concentrated light radiation to treat diseases, especially lupus vulgaris.3 Since 1960, the invention of the laser has opened new avenues in biomedical research. Consequently, many laser-based devices are currently utilized in preclinical and clinical studies.4 The widely investigated parts of light consist of the ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) region with wavelengths between 200 nm to 760 nm and the infrared (IR) region. Light with wavelengths in the UV-vis region is usually used to promote biological responses, while light with wavelengths in the red/IR regions is generally preferred for phototherapy.5 Within tissues, photons may interact with biological matter through scattering and/or absorption processes.5
The combination of light and a phototherapeutic agent has been demonstrated as a potential therapeutic modality, in which a photoactive agent is activated by absorbed photons to promote therapeutic outcomes. Using a Jablonski diagram, photophysical processes of photoactive drugs under light irradiation can be easily illustrated (Fig. 1).6 Photoactive drugs absorb energy from light at an appropriate wavelength to form the short-lived excited singlet (Sn) state with the same spin multiplicity, which subsequently relaxes to the lowest vibrational level of the excited state (S1) through internal conversion, followed by the longer-lived excited triplet (T1) state via the intersystem crossing (ISC) process, leading to a change in the electron spin orientation. The lowest vibrational excited singlet electron state can relax to the ground (S0) state through radiative decay, consequently converting its energy to fluorescence emission. In biological applications, fluorescence emission is mostly applied to imaging guidance such as monitoring, diagnostics, and drug delivery. The electron from the S1 can also go back to the ground state by non-radiative decay as heat for photothermal therapy (PTT)/photoacoustic (PA) imaging. The electron in the T1 state may transfer its energy to the ground state through phosphorescence emission. Since the triplet state can live long enough to induce chemical reactions, the triplet PS can also promote the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) for photodynamic therapy (PDT).7 Thus, a better understanding of the physical nature of light, light-molecule interactions, and the effects of light along with breakthroughs in light technology may improve health, advance medical science, and allow for the discovery of new biomedical applications of light.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of a Jablonski diagram. 
1.2. Microbial infections
Infectious diseases became a major global health concern and were the leading cause of mortality before the early 20th century, in which pneumonia and tuberculosis (TB) were two common infectious diseases in humans.8 Along with vaccination and prevention of the transmission, antibiotics have saved countless lives from being claimed by these diseases. The discovery of antibiotics is one of the major advances in medical science over the last century.9 However, due to the prolonged and repeated use of antibiotic treatments, infectious diseases by antibiotic-resistant pathogenic microbes have become a critical challenge once again, as indicated by the ongoing transmission and high mortality rates all over the world.10,11 In addition, bacteria can form protective biofilms, which may protect bacteria from harsh conditions or penetration of drugs.12 Furthermore, the continued global challenge of pathogens e.g., influenza, tuberculosis, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, as well as the emergence of novel pathogens, especially the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has outpaced efforts to contain and treat them.9 In the absence of urgent action, microbial-caused infectious diseases will likely become the biggest threat to human health. To address these issues as soon as possible, many efforts are being made by scientists in relevant fields to seek practical strategies for improving treatment of these infectious diseases.13
To effectively treat infections, the structure and function of these tiny pathogens should be clearly understood. There are three major types of microorganisms, including bacteria, viruses, and fungi, which exist almost everywhere on Earth. Some microorganisms are harmful, but most of them are helpful or harmless.8 Bacteria are a group of microscopic and single-celled prokaryotic microbes with a few micrometers (μm) in length that can reproduce on their own. Bacteria can be classified as Gram-positive (G(+)) and Gram-negative (G(−)) bacteria based on the differences in the organization of the cell envelope. Bacteria are transmitted to humans through air, water, food, or living vectors. Once microbial pathogens are present in susceptible interfaces, wounds, or even surgical incisions of the human body, they may lead to infections and diseases.8 Viruses are even smaller microbes that need living cells to survive and reproduce. Viruses usually enter our body through body openings, especially the nose and mouth. It is not easy to treat viral infections. Antibiotic drugs usually kill bacteria, but they do not fight viruses. Fungi are single-celled or very complex multicellular organisms, in which fungal infections usually cause mild symptoms.14 In this tutorial review, we highlight phototherapy as an innovative, cost-effective, and nonantibiotic therapy in this area with a focus on the treatment of bacterial, viral, and fungal infections.
1.3. Phototherapy and its mechanisms
Phototherapy, also called light therapy, is a type of medical treatment that involves the exposure of patients to light to treat various diseases. Currently, phototherapy usually refers to the combination of harmless low-intensity light and an exogenous light-activated agent (termed a photosensitizer, PS) to enhance the therapeutic effects of light, in which the PS plays a critical role.15,16 Phototherapy mainly includes photodynamic therapy (PDT) and photothermal therapy (PTT).7 Due to the efficient light-harvesting capability of PSs, this approach allows phototherapy using low-intensity light with high selectivity.15 In the case of PDT, a PS is activated by a suitable wavelength of light to induce localized chemical damage (including direct cytotoxic effects on infected cells, vascular damage, and immune response) in the presence of molecular oxygen (3O2) through the production of highly toxic reactive oxygen species (ROS).17 Photodynamic agents should be ideally activated by light in the therapeutic window of 650–900 nm because shorter wavelengths limit the penetration depth, and longer wavelengths are less effective in generating reactive oxygen species (ROS) due to a lack of sufficient energy. Photofrin was the first PS approved by the FDA for cancer treatment. PDT can be classified into two types depending on mechanisms of ROS production. For type I PDT, the triplet PS can participate in hydrogen and/or electron transfer to produce radicals (e.g., OH˙ and O2˙−). Type II PDT involves an oxygen-dependent photochemical pathway, in which cytotoxic singlet oxygen (1O2) is produced by directly transferring the energy of the triplet PS to triplet ground-state nearby oxygen due to the same electron spin multiplicity. The ROS produced by PS are short-lived (within the μs range) and highly reactive molecules with a short diffusion distance. Most of the existing PS work is based on oxygen-dependent type II mechanisms that limit the efficiency of PDT in hypoxic tumors, whereas a few type I PSs can function in hypoxic environments.18 In contrast to PDT, PTT converts light energy into heat by photothermal agents via the nonradiative relaxation of excited electrons to increase the temperature of the surrounding environment, resulting in localized thermal damage. The final temperature for successful PTT should be slightly above 42 °C (usually 42–46 °C). A high apparent temperature (>46 °C) may damage neighboring normal tissues due to heat transfer, leading to side effects and inhibiting the therapeutic accuracy of PTT. PTT kills cells through temperature-dependent necrosis, whereas PDT induces cell death via apoptosis. In general, PDT is more favorable for medical treatment than PTT because PDT is a lower-power modality.7,15
Over the past decades, phototherapy has attracted great attention as a safe and effective therapeutic modality for the treatment of various diseases (especially for oncology) due to its minimally noninvasive and localized nature. Phototherapy can be considered as the fourth-line anticancer modality following surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy.19 Phototherapy of microbial pathogens, including bacteria, viruses, and fungi, has recently received great attention due to the increase in antibiotic resistance and the appearance of new infections (e.g., Covid-19).12 Phototherapy for cancer and microbial infections has some similarities, but each has its own characteristics due to the different properties of solid tumors and microbes.19 While the phototherapy of cancer has shown rapid clinical acceptance, antimicrobial phototherapy is not widely appreciated. With the development of effective phototherapeutic drugs and advanced optical technologies, phototherapy is expected to be a promising treatment for microbial infections, especially infections caused by multidrug-resistant bacteria.
The major advantages of antimicrobial phototherapy include (1) non-invasive and low-cost modalities, (2) a broad spectrum of action (efficiently inactivate bacteria, viruses, and fungi), and (3) no resistance following multiple sessions of therapy.16 Despite these distinctive advantages, the main shortcomings of phototherapy are the short light penetration depths in biological tissues and the low delivery efficiency of PSs, which hinders clinical applications. Along with the careful molecular design of PSs with optimum excitation wavelengths for one-photon phototherapy, the development of two-photon PSs can be an efficient approach to overcome the penetration depths of traditional phototherapy.7 In addition, fiber-optic endoscopes that allow delivery of the light to the infected sites deep inside the body are of great interest. Nanotechnology offers advantages in improving the solubility of poorly water-soluble drugs, the circulation time in the bloodstream as well as minimizing the enzymatic degradation of the drug and the undesirable side effects for medical applications.16,20 More interestingly, the combination of phototherapy with other therapies can overcome the inherent drawbacks of phototherapy as well as maximize the advantages of each therapeutic modality.3,12 Thus, more research to achieve successful therapeutic agents for further translation to clinical practice is of great interest. Here, we discuss innovative organic PSs with examples to demonstrate phototherapy as an alternative treatment in antimicrobial therapy.
2. Innovative organic photosensitizers for antimicrobial phototherapy
Although scientists have always sought to enhance the phototherapy performance of microbial infections, further improvements are still required to reach clinical requirements. So far, much effort has been made to develop effective theragnostic agents to optimize pharmacokinetics, minimize side effects, and reduce the cost of phototherapy (Fig. 2).9,12,16,21 PSs are natural or synthetic compounds that can produce ROS or heat under light irradiation, killing microbes. PSs are nontoxic in the absence of light. Among PSs, synthetic organic PSs that have exhibited considerable antimicrobial therapeutic efficiency in preclinical models hold great promise for the development of successful clinical light-activated drugs. Organic PSs possess many advantages, including excellent photophysical and photochemical properties, good photostability, satisfactory biocompatibility and degradability, easy modulation to achieve specific functions, avoiding heavy metal accumulation, and rapid removal after treatment.21 In addition, organic PS-based phototherapy can be easily combined with other therapies such as chemotherapy, gas therapy, immunotherapy, and sonodynamic therapy for the effective treatment of microbial infections (Fig. 2).12,16
 Fig. 2  The major functions and design strategies of organic photosensitizers in antimicrobial phototherapy. 
In general, the design of targeted PSs for infected tissues and tumor tissues should follow some basic requirements due to similar characteristics such as a large number of enzymes with good vascular activity, acidic and hypoxic microenvironments, and an enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect.19 In addition, other factors should be considered to specifically accumulate PSs in the infected sites to achieve good therapeutic outcomes.19 For instance, cationic groups are usually introduced into PS structures to achieve high selectivity for bacteria due to the strong negative charge of the bacterial cell wall.22,23 In this section, we mainly discuss innovative organic scaffolds for constructing advanced smart-PSs for antimicrobial treatment.
2.1. Classical PSs
To date, there have been many reported organic PSs that have been widely explored for antimicrobial phototherapy. Among them, cyclic tetrapyrroles (e.g., porphyrins, chlorin, and phthalocyanines), phenothiazinium salts (e.g., methylene blue (MB) and toluidine blue O (TBO)), cyanine dyes, and boron–dipyrromethenes/aza-boron–dipyrromethenes (BODIPYs/aza-BODIPYs), are common classical PSs (Fig. 3a).16,21,24 Cyclic tetrapyrroles have been called the “pigments of life” due to their abundance in nature (e.g., in hemoglobin or chlorophyll). Cyclic tetrapyrroles consist of four pyrrole rings linked by methine bridges, which are sometimes associated with a centrally coordinated metal atom (e.g., Zn, Pd, Si, and Sn). In contrast to porphyrins, chlorins, bacteriochlorins, and phthalocyanines absorb light at longer wavelengths with higher absorption coefficients in the red/NIR region and thus allow a deeper penetration depth to biological tissues.25 Inspired by the high photoconversion efficiency and easy chemical modification, cyclic tetrapyrrole-based PSs are among the most potent PSs with activity against pathogenic microbes. Cyclic tetrapyrrole-based PSs are usually more effective for G(+) bacteria than G(−) bacteria. This is attributed to the electrostatic or hydrophobic interactions between the surface charge of cyclic tetrapyrroles and the negatively charged cell membranes. However, several disadvantages still need to be addressed for clinical applications. To improve the binding affinity, many researchers have modified native cyclic tetrapyrrole structures by incorporating functional groups (such as cationic groups and targeting peptides), making them advantageous as versatile disinfectants. For instance, Malik and co-workers indicated that photodynamic effects on bacterial growth of neutral porphyrin (THPP), cationic porphyrin (TMPyP), and anionic porphyrin (TPPS4) depended on the chemical structures (Fig. 3a). The cationic TMPyP showed a superior and marginal photoactivity toward G(+) bacteria and G(−) bacteria, respectively, and the photoactivity was ascribed to the strong electrostatic interactions between the positively charged TMPyP molecule and the negative charge membrane of the bacterial cells. In sharp contrast, the anionic TPPS4 and uncharged THPP exhibited no activity and weak activity, respectively, on either the G(+) bacterial cells or the G(−) bacterial cells due to the electrostatic repulsion induced by the charged PS and the negatively charged cell membrane.26 Many studies have been performed to integrate nanoparticles and cyclic tetrapyrroles into one system to improve theranostics for medical purposes.21
 Fig. 3  (a) Chemical structures of antimicrobial photosensitizers derived from representative organic platforms. (b) Typical examples of aggregation-induced emission scaffolds, tetraphenylethylene (TPE), cyclooctatetrathiophene (COTh), and 2-((4′-(2,2-bis(4-methoxyphenyl)-1-phenylvinyl)-[1,1′-biphenyl]-4-yl) (phenyl) methylene) malononitrile (TPEDC). 
Along with cyclic tetrapyrroles, phenothiazinium salts have great potential applications as organic PSs for the inactivation of a wide range of microbes. Motivated by the favorable photochemical and photophysical properties and their typical cationic nature, phenothiaziniums (especially MB and TBO) have been extensively studied in preclinical and clinical settings for many years.16 Phenothiaziniums exhibited high sterilization effects on pathogenic microbes, especially G(+) and G(−) bacteria under red/NIR light irradiation. MB and TBO have been immobilized in a wide range of polymers (such as polyurethane, polyethylene, cellulose acetate polymer, and silicone polymer) and successfully applied on hospital surfaces as efficient surface disinfectants.21 In addition, they have been identified for possible applications in the control and disinfection of contaminated water.21 Recently, new derivatives with high cationic charges such as dimethyl methylene blue have been developed to improve therapeutic outcomes. Cyanine dyes, particularly indocyanine green (ICG), have been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as NIR organic dyes for intraoperative optical imaging in clinics and dental imaging. Long-wavelength absorption of ICG derivatives and no toxicity in the absence of light are of great interest. Along with imaging applications, cyanine dyes are under investigation for image-guided phototherapy and were tried as PSs for synergistic PDT–PTT.27
2.2. Aggregation-induced emission PSs
PSs with luminescence properties cannot only generate ROS for PDT applications but also guide light irradiation locations via their luminescence signals.28 However, in physiological hydrophilic conditions, most of the traditional PSs (such as porphyrins and phenothiazinium salts) will aggregate, which results in an aggregation-caused quenching (ACQ) effect due to their strong intermolecular interactions in aggregates.28 This will lead to reduced luminescence signals as well as compromised ROS generation when PSs accumulate in diseased tissues.25 In contrast, aggregation-induced emission luminogens (AIEgens) can elegantly address the ACQ problem since they show enhanced emission in the aggregated state. Typical AIEgens are shown in Fig. 3b, which are generally featured by highly twisted structures and rich rotational and vibrational moieties.29 As compared with traditional PSs, AIE type PS (TPEDC) could simultaneously afford bright emission and an enhanced ROS generation capability, which has been referred to as aggregation-induced generation of ROS (AIG-ROS).30,31 The mechanism of AIG-ROS is shown in Fig. 4a. In the dilute solution state, the active non-radiative decay quenched both the singlet and triplet excited state, resulting in lower ROS generation. In the aggregated state, the non-radiative decay pathway was blocked, which enhanced the probability of both the single excited state and the following ISC process, enabling effective ROS generation (Fig. 4a). As an example, the AIG-ROS properties of an AIEgen TPANPF6 are shown in Fig. 4b. In a dilute dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) solution of TPANPF6, there was almost no ROS generation. Aggregates of TPANPF6 formed with the gradual addition of water into the DMSO solution. This was followed by a rapid increase in ROS generation (Fig. 4b).31
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the aggregation-induced generation of reactive oxygen species (AIG-ROS). (b) Molecular structure of TPANPF6 and decomposition of ABDA in the presence of TPANPF6 under light irradiation in dimethyl sulfoxide/water mixtures with different water fractions (fw). (c) Molecular structure of TPE-Bac and killing efficiency of TPE-Bac on E. coli and S. epiderimidis in the absence and presence of light irradiation for different times. (d) Schematic of the macrophage-mediated intracellular bacterial infection diagnosis and elimination and the molecular structure of PyTPE–CRP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2021, Wiley. 
Tang and Liu et al. have done pioneering work in applying AIE type PSs in bacterial imaging and elimination.32,33 For example, Tang's group developed TPE-Bac, and amphiphilic AIE type PS. TPE-Bac can stain both G(+) and G(−) bacteria without washing. Furthermore, TPE-Bac can serve as an efficient photosensitizer to induce ROS generation to kill both G(+) and G(−) bacteria (Fig. 4c).32 Based on the AIE PS platform, Liu and co-workers reported an AIE bioprobe that can detect bacterial infection and kill bacteria surviving inside macrophages through a dynamic process. The new AIE PS (PyTPE–CRP) contains two moieties, an AIE molecule (PyTPE) and an enzyme-responsive peptide linker. These are expected to act synergistically to achieve macrophage-mediated bacterial infection detection and intracellular bacteria elimination. The results indicate that the designed PyTPE–CRP could be specifically cleaved by casp-1 in the bacteria-infected macrophages. The resulting residues self-assemble into aggregates, which accumulate on the bacteria inside the macrophages with fluorescence turn-on in the cells. Further treatment with light irradiation induced much higher ROS generation in the bacterial phagosomes area than that in the cytoplasm, demonstrating an effective intracellular bacteria elimination with minimal cytotoxicity towards macrophages (Fig. 4d).14 Liu's strategy provides a new approach for selective and sensitive detection and eradication of intracellular bacterial infections.
The luminescence and PDT effect of AIEgens make them excellent candidates for simultaneously treating pathogenic infections and studying the therapeutic mechanism. Currently, AIEgens have been widely utilized as phototheranostic probes for the detection and killing of bacteria, viruses, and fungi with excellent performance.14 Moreover, these AIEgen-based theranostic platforms are compatible with other therapeutic strategies, and they may play a more significant role in the prevention and cure of pathogenic microbial infected diseases in the future.
2.3. Polymer-based PSs
Apart from small molecular PSs, polymers could also be employed as PSs with the advantages of stronger light-harvesting capability and versatile chemical modification.34 Polymer-based photosensitizers fall somewhere between small molecules and nanoparticles. Liu and Tang et al. have independently discovered the phenomenon of polymerization enhanced photosensitization.35,36 Their mechanistic study indicates that increasing the number of repeat units could eventually lead to dense energy-level distributions between singlet and triplet excited states, which benefits the intersystem crossing (ISC) process to facilitate 1O2 production (Fig. 5b). As shown in Fig. 5a and c, the compounds exhibited a gradually decreased fluorescence quantum yield (Φf) but enhanced 1O2 quantum yield (Φo) with increasing conjugation length of a donor–acceptor molecule from TB to TBTB to P1.
 Fig. 5  (a) Molecular structures of TB, TBTB and P1. (b) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of polymerization enhanced PDT effect. (c) 1O2 quantum yield (Φo) and fluorescence quantum yield (Φf) of TB, TBTB, and P1. (d) Schematic illustration of the bacteria-mediated polymer synthesis process. (e) Switching the antibacterial activity of PPV through regulating the supramolecular assembly of PPV with CB[7] mediated by 1-adamantanamine hydrochloride (AD). Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
In comparison with small molecular PSs, polymeric PSs can also selectively target and kill specific pathogenic bacteria through a special mechanism. For instance, Liu et al. have utilized bacteria as a template to synthesize polymer PSs that can self-selectively kill the bacteria that templates them without antimicrobial resistance (Fig. 5d).37 The bacteria-templated polymers were synthesized by copper-catalyzed atom transfer radical polymerization with weak fluorescence in aqueous media. However, the fluorescence is turned on when the bacteria served as the polymerization template even at a low concentration of 600 ng mL−1. The template polymer PS exhibited superior selectivity to the template bacterium, which endows the templated polymers with the ability to selectively kill bacteria. It is envisioned that the bacterium-templated method may work as a novel strategy for bacteria-specific diagnostics and therapeutics. In addition, Bradley et al. presented an effective strategy to improve the specificity and selectivity of an antimicrobial photodynamic agent by combining polymyxin B (a non-ribosomal cyclic lipopeptide antibiotic, PMX-B) with MB. The targeting ability of PMX-B allowed the methylene blue–polymyxin conjugate to kill Gram-negative bacteria specifically and selectively under 630 nm light irradiation.38
It is worth noting that polymeric PSs could also interact with cucurbit[7]uril (CB[7]) through host–guest interactions to reversibly turn-on and turn-off antibacterial activity on demand. As shown in Fig. 5e, Wang and co-workers demonstrated that the ROS generation of PPV was reduced during self-assembly with CB[7], which turned off the antibacterial capability. When using 1-adamantanamine hydrochloride (AD) to disassemble the PPV and CB[7] complex, the ROS generation of PPV recovers, and its antibacterial capability was turned on. This work offers a proof-of-concept to control antibacterial agent activity by simple supramolecular self-assembly regulation, which may enable effective and precise pathogen treatment to reduce the accumulation of the active antibiotic in the environment.39
2.4. Other organic PSs
A number of natural compounds derived from plants have been extensively explored as potential PSs due to their advantages of low cost, excellent photophysical and photochemical properties, and good biocompatibility. Hypericin and curcumin are the most well-known natural PSs (Fig. 3a).40 Hypericin is a polycyclic quinone with a maximum absorption wavelength of 591 nm. Hypericin-mediated phototherapy is known to be an effective modality for the treatment of various diseases. Curcumin with absorption wavelengths in the range of 405–435 nm is a polyphenolic compound isolated from turmeric, which has exhibited considerable antimicrobial abilities with/without light irradiation. In addition, erythrosine (ERY) and rose Bengal (RB), which belong to halogenated xanthenes with absorption peaks in the green wavelength range (480–550 nm), have been investigated for antimicrobial treatment. However, the attachment and uptake of these PSs by the bacterial cells are lower than cationic PSs such as MB. RB is usually incorporated into natural polymers (e.g., cellulose acetate and chitosan) to enhance the bacteria-killing efficiency.21
3. Antibacterial phototherapy
With the significant development of organic PSs in recent years, many organic PSs with excellent photophysical and photochemical properties have been applied in antibacterial phototherapy and have shown great potential in fighting bacterial infection without inducing resistance.41 In general, cationic antibacterial PSs exhibited a great potential to inhibit both G(+) and G(−) bacteria, whereas neutral or negatively charged antibacterial PSs were less effective. In addition, the effective treatment of the PSs for G(+) and G(−) bacteria are different due to differences in the organization of the outer membrane structures. This section provides representative examples of organic PSs with detailed descriptions of the preparation and antibacterial phototherapy.
3.1. Antibacterial photodynamic therapy
Since the negatively charged bacterial cell membrane provides a permeability barrier that hampers the penetration of neutral or negatively charged PSs, a functional group or cationic group is usually introduced to the PS structure to overcome this challenge. For example, Galstyan and co-workers reported an effective strategy to develop bacteria-targeted PS (AGA405) by introducing boronic acid to silicon(IV) phthalocyanine, in which boronic acid could bind with polysaccharides of the bacterial cell membrane and biofilm matrix via boronic acid–diol interactions to form boronic esters (Fig. 6).42 AGA405 exhibited significant PDT efficacy of bacterial infections under NIR light irradiation. Moreover, a corresponding PVA–AGA405 composite that was fabricated by incorporating AGA405 into a poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) matrix further improved the photo-bactericidal activity. Motivated by the significant antitumor photoactivity of brominated boron difluoride chelated tetraarylazadipyrromethene (aza-BODIPYBr), O’Shea et al. further synthesized a bis-cationic aza-BODIPY PS (aza-BODIPY–Br salt) by introducing cationic quaternary ammonium salt functional groups to the aza-BODIPY core for antimicrobial PDT (Fig. 7a). AzaBODIPYBr salt showed a rapid uptake into Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria and pathogenic fungal strains, and subsequently exhibited effective photodynamic effects. The results suggested a promising antimicrobial PS with potent broad-spectrum activity.43
 Fig. 6  The interaction between the photosensitizer and polysaccharides of the bacterial cell membrane and the biofilm matrix. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 7  Chemical structures of AzaBODIPY, PcN4–BA, and TriPE–NT. 
Another challenge of using photodynamic agents is the limited penetration depth of the excitation light source, which does not allow the treatment of deep-tissue lesions. As a result, many efforts have been made to develop long-wavelength absorbing PSs. For example, zinc(II) phthalocyanine with boronic acid functionalization (PcN4–BA) for direct NIR-promoted bacterial ablation was designed by Yoon et al.44 PcN4–BA showed an uncommon phenomenon, aggregation-enhanced ROS generation in water. Interestingly, PcN4–BA exhibited excellent PDT performances in antimicrobial treatment with minimal dark toxicity due to the formation of uniform nanostructured self-assemblies and boronic acid-induced targeting (Fig. 7b).
Although NIR light-responsive PSs with great penetration capability have been developed, their ROS generation efficiencies remain a great challenge. To overcome the limitation of an externally applied light source, Wang et al. developed an in situ lightactivated PS system for the treatment of bacterial infections in deep tissues, in which electrochemiluminescence (ECL) was used for the excitation of cationic oligo(p-phenylenevinylene) (OPV) PS.45 As shown in Fig. 8, H2O2 was oxidized to superoxide (O2˙−) and then reacted with the intermediate compound formed by the anodic oxidation of luminol to produce excited state 3-aminophthalate dianions, which go to the ground state with light emission. Subsequently, the ECL emission was absorbed by OPV PS for generating more cytotoxic ROS by transferring the absorbed energy to the surrounding oxygen. The generated ROS induced selective death of the pathogenic bacteria due to the high electrostatic and/or hydrophobic interactions between the cationic OPV with the negative membrane of the pathogenic bacteria. Finally, hydrogel devices were prepared by incorporating OPV into hydrogel matrices to slow down the chemical reaction, where the luminescence could last for more than 10 min after electrification. The results indicated that these persistent hydrogel devices were suitable for practical antibacterial applications.
 Fig. 8  Chemical structures and proposed mechanisms of the chemiluminescence-induced cationic PS OPV used for antibacterial phototherapy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Due to their intrinsic hydrophobicity, most organic PSs easily aggregate under physiological conditions, which induce aggregation-caused quenching (ACQ) and reduction of ROS generation, thereby limiting their clinical applications. In this regard, a unique class of organic PSs with AIE characteristics has been developed and widely exploited. For example, Tang et al. developed a bifunctional AIE PS (TriPE–NT) by connecting an AIE unit (triphenylethylene) with naphthalimide for image-guided PDT of antibiotic-resistant bacteria (Fig. 7c).46 In the aggregation states, TriPE–NT exhibited bright fluorescence emission and excellent ROS generating capability under light irradiation. More importantly, in vitro and in vivo experiments indicated that TriPE–NT was usable as both an antibiotic in darkness and as a photodynamic agent for monitoring and inhibition of antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
Motivated by the unique advantages of conjugated polymers (e.g., significant light-harvesting ability and optical signal amplification effects, good photochemical properties, and high bacterial affinity by multivalent binding sites), poly(p-phenylene vinylene)-based cationic multifunctional PSs (PPV-1) with polyethylene glycol (PEG) and quaternary ammonium (QA) at the side chains was designed and synthesized by Wang et al. for selective recognition, imaging, and treatment of bacteria (Fig. 9a).47 The cationic PPV-1 was highly selective toward bacteria in the mixture of bacteria and mammalian cells through the intrinsic electrostatic driving force, resulting in selective detection and imaging of bacteria. PPV-1 significantly inhibited both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria by ROS under white light irradiation but only killed Gram-positive bacteria without white light. The results indicated that PPV-1 could integrate diagnosis and therapeutics into a single system, providing a good reference for the molecular design of clinical PSs for antibacterial treatment. Taking advantage of the conjugated polymer and AIE characteristics, Tang et al. prepared AIE conjugated polymer PS (PTB–APFB) with a donor–π–acceptor structure by incorporating TPE-bearing ammonium units and APFB groups on its side chains (Fig. 9b).48 PTB–APFB exhibited a good ROS generation capability in the aggregate state under light irradiation, which was higher than a low-mass model compound and the well-known PS Chlorin E6. In vitro and in vivo experiments demonstrated that PTB–APFB was efficient at inhibiting the growth of bacteria.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic representation of PPV-1 for the selective recognition, imaging, and killing of bacteria over mammalian cells and the chemical structure of PPV-1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2011, Wiley. (b) Chemical structure of PTB–APFB and its selective antibacterial application. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
Considering nanotechnology and PSs with AIE characteristics, nanoagents with improved water solubility and targeting capability have been widely utilized to enhance the performance of phototherapy. As well as these, target-specific activatable PSs based on the unique surface properties of pathogenic bacteria can be employed for the detection and image-guided PDT of bacteria. For example, Liu et al. constructed responsive organic nanoparticles (33%IRTP NPs) through self-assembly of IR786S with an amphiphilic polymer (TBD–PEG) for image-guided photodynamic bacterial therapy based on an abnormal concentration of peroxynitrite (ONOO−) and hypochlorite (ClO−) at the bacterial infection sites (Fig. 10a).49 In the absence of ONOO−/ClO−, the fluorescence emission and 1O2 generation of TBD–PEG in 33%IRTP NPs IR786S were quenched due to Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) between a TBD–PEG and IR786S. However, IR786S was selectively decomposed by the overexpressed ONOO−/ClO− when 33%IRTP NPs accumulated at the bacterial infection site, subsequently recovering the bright red emission and 1O2 generation of TBD–PEG. The in vivo results demonstrated that the 33%IRTP NPs were promising in specific image-guided photodynamic antibacterial therapy. In continuing efforts in this area, Liu et al. proposed HClO-activatable theranostic nanoprobes, DTF–FFP NPs, for bacteria diagnosis and treatment. DTF–FFP NPs were fabricated by incorporating both HClO-responsive NIR dye (FFP) as an energy acceptor and AIE PS (DTF) as an energy donor into an amphiphilic Pluronic F127 matrix (Fig. 10c).50 In normal cells and tissues, the energy acceptor FFP quenched both fluorescence and generation of ROS of DTF through the FRET process. When DTF–FFP NPs were accumulated to the infection sites, the red emission and generation of ROS of DTF–FFP NPs were turned on by the HClO released from infected phagocytes, allowing the precise detection and ablation of bacteria.
 Fig. 10  (a, b) Chemical structure of TBD–PEG, nanoparticle preparation and working mechanism of IRTP NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) Nanoparticle preparation of DTF–FFP NPs. (d) The working mechanism of DTF–FFP NPs inside invaded phagocytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
To solve the challenges of the hypoxic microenvironment of infected tissues, type I PSs have been proposed to maximize the PDT efficiency by lowering the oxygen dependence. For example, Yoon et al. designed and synthesized a nanostructured phthalocyanine assembly, NanoPcA, which could efficiently generate ROS via type I photochemical reactions (Fig. 11).51 NanoPcA displayed excellent photodynamic antibacterial effects against both common and antibiotic-resistant bacterial strains.
 Fig. 11  (a and b) Formation of the self-assembled nanostructures and the growth process of NanoPcA in water. (c) Schematic illustration of the possible mechanisms of NanoPcA under light irradiation. (d) Photodynamic therapy of NanoPcA toward E. coli and S. aureus on a LB agar plate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
3.2. Antibacterial photothermal therapy
To date, many photothermal agents have been developed to cure bacterial infections, resulting in wound healing, promoting tissue regeneration, and so on.11,12,42,52 In particular, near-infrared (NIR) light-absorbing agents have received great interest for practical applications because the combination of a NIR light (700–1300 nm) source with NIR PSs could result in more extensive thermal damage with negligible light toxicity. For example, using a well-known NIR-absorbing dye, indocyanine green (ICG), Zhang et al. prepared pH-tunable ON/OFF nanotherapeutics (PANI–GCS NPs) for inhibition of antibiotic-resistant bacterial pneumonia.53 As depicted in Fig. 12, the shell of the nanotherapeutics consisted of heteromultivalent glycomimetics, which could selectively and tightly bind to bacteria and subsequently eliminate bacterial biofilms and relieve inflammatory responses. The core of the nanotherapeutic was composed of acid-responsive polymers that changed from hydrophobic to hydrophilic through protonation under an acidic microenvironment. Under physiological conditions, the hydrophobic core was in the “OFF” state and locks the photoresponsive agent in the cage. When reaching the infection site, the nanotherapeutics were in the “ON” state due to the acid condition, promoting the release of the phototherapeutic agent, which induced heat and ROS under NIR light illumination. This nanovehicle showed great potential to efficiently inhibit antibiotic-resistant P. aeruginosa-induced pneumonia, avoiding side effects on normal tissue and the occurrence of bacterial resistance.
 Fig. 12  (a) Chemical structures and preparation nanoparticles of PANI–GCS NPs. (b) The working mechanism of PANI–GCS NPs for phototherapy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Taking the excellent photothermal properties of photoactive agents based on donor–acceptor–donor (D–A–D) structures, Liu and co-workers designed and synthesized two conjugated oligoelectrolytes, WMG1 and WMG2, using electron-rich thiophene as the donor, electron-poor benzothiadiazole as an acceptor, and six cationic pendant groups as dual water-soluble and targeting groups for antibacterial PTT (Fig. 13).54 WMG1 and WMG2 had absorption bands around 800 nm in phosphate-buffered saline solution (PBS, pH 7.4). Importantly, WMG1 and WMG2 exhibited a relatively high photothermal conversion efficiency of up to 60% and 54%, respectively. WMG1 showed good photothermal killing efficiency toward both Gram-positive bacterium B. subtilis and Gram-negative E. coli with high levels of toxicity toward B. subtilis.
 Fig. 13  Chemical structure and photophysical and photothermal properties of WMG1 and WMG2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Sung et al. developed a pH-responsive amphiphilic polymer (PANI–GCS) for the specific and effective photothermal sterilization of pathogenic bacteria by covalently grafting hydrophobic PANI on pH-dependent hydrophilic GCS.55 The PANI–GCS NPs were prepared by self-assembly of PANI–GCS in an aqueous medium. Under acidic conditions, the surface of PANI–GCS NPs became positively charged, which facilitated the strong electrostatic interactions with negatively charged bacterial cell walls, causing direct heating of the aggregated bacteria under 808 nm irradiation. In sharp contrast, PANI–GCS NPs exhibited little photothermal damage toward healthy tissue because they had a poor affinity for host cells due to a net neutral charge under normal physiological conditions (Fig. 14a).
 Fig. 14  (a) Photothermal ablation of focal infections with PANI–GCS NP self-assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (b) Chemical structures of CB[7], CPPDI, and CPPDI radical anion and schematic illustration of photothermal therapy for CPPDI. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
To improve the selectivity of photothermal agents toward facultative anaerobic bacteria compared to aerobic bacteria in terms of their various reductive abilities, Zhang et al. developed a novel bacterial responsive supramolecular complex (CPPDI) using bulky cucurbit[7]uril (CB[7]) and a water-soluble perylene diimide (PDI) based on host–guest interactions.56 The introduction of bulky CB[7] could stabilize the PDI radical anion formed by a chemical reduction due to the reduction of the π–π stacking of PDI. In the presence of facultative anaerobic bacteria like E. coli, CPPDI was selectively reduced to form CPPDI radical anions in situ, which was used to raise the temperature to 65 °C under NIR (808 nm) irradiation, leading to rapid and selective death of E. coli. (Fig. 14b). In contrast, aerobic bacteria did not convert the PDI group in CPPDI to its radical anion and, as a result, no temperature increase occurred under NIR irradiation. Aerobic bacteria like B. subtilis could not promote the formation of CPPDI radical anions for photothermal therapy due to their weak reductive capability.
3.3. Synergistic antibacterial therapy
It is worth noting that bacteria are rapidly acquiring resistance due to the widespread overuse of antibiotics.52 Besides the various self-protection mechanisms like drug efflux pumps, penetration barriers and inactivating enzymes, bacteria can also utilize polysaccharides, proteins, and extracellular DNA to produce a biofilm to shelter themselves from the attack of the host immune system and obstruct the diffusion and permeation of antibacterial agents.57 Therefore, multimodal synergistic antibacterial strategies such as PTT and antibiotics, PTT and PDT, and gas and PDT have been developed to overcome the challenge resulting from more and more severe antibiotic resistance.12,16
Zhang and co-workers developed near-infrared light-triggered thermosensitive liposomes with a photothermal and antibiotic synergistic therapy capacity to eliminate Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm.58 Small and positively charged liposomes entered the biofilm microchannels and locally released antibiotics at the infection site. The liposomes remained stable at 37 °C but released about 80% of the antibiotics over 45 °C. Compared with the biofilm treated with antibiotics alone, the dispersion rate of the biofilm treated by thermal-responsive liposomes with the same antibiotic loading showed a 7-to 8-fold rise, indicating that the localized antibiotic release and photothermal therapy improved the antimicrobial efficiency. In vivo experiments showed that a P. aeruginosa-induced abscess treated by drug-loaded liposomes exhibited an outstanding therapeutic effect. Therefore, this synergistic photothermal and antibiotics therapy is promising for effectively killing pathogens and biofilm elimination.
Similarly, Liang and co-workers reported a triple-functional nanostructure referred to as Thermo-Responsive-Inspired Drug-Delivery Nano-Transporter (TRIDENT) for bacterial eradication (Fig. 15a).59 The three functions include: (1) IR780 luminogen enabled real-time monitoring of the amount of the complex at the infection site, guiding the choice of suitable irradiation time. (2) The photothermal effect of IR780 will both melt the thermo-responsive nanostructure and damage the cell membrane. (3) The photothermal effect also reduces the bacterial resistance to antibiotics and promotes the rapid diffusion of antibiotics into the cytoplasm to chemically interfere with bacterial cell wall synthesis. In vitro and in vivo evidence demonstrated that even low doses of imipenem-encapsulated TRIDENT could eradicate clinical methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, whereas imipenem alone had a limited effect. This multiple synergistic therapy mode may work as a universal antimicrobial platform to fight against multidrug-resistant or extremely drug-resistant bacteria.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of photothermal-sensitive drug-loaded liposomes to eliminate biofilms. (b) Schematic illustration of a near-infrared (NIR) light-triggered thermo-responsive-inspired drug-delivery nano-transporter (TRIDENT) for antibiotic-resistant bacteria killing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
By integrating a NIR-II fluorophore ZSY and TPE, Sun and Kim et al. synthesized a novel AIE-based dye (ZSY–TPE) and developed a multifunctional NIR-II phototheranostic platform used for single laser-activated imaging-guided combined photothermal and photodynamic therapies of pathogens.60 ZSY–TPE dots exhibited precise and superior NIR-II imaging-guided combination phototherapy against S. aureus-infected mice models without any noticeable side effects. These results demonstrate that ZSY–TPE is a powerful phototheranostic platform for precise NIR-II fluorescence/PA imaging and synergistic photodynamic/photothermal therapy of bacterial infections (Fig. 15b). Gas therapy that utilizes endogenous signaling molecules, such as carbon monoxide (CO), hydrogen sulfide (H2S), and nitric oxide (NO) for the treatment of diseases has aroused widespread research interest.61–63 Cai and co-workers have reported a novel synergistic antibacterial strategy based on PDT and NO gas therapy, in which a PDT-driven NO controllable generation system (Ce6@Arg–ADP) is developed with a amphiphilic dendritic peptide (Arg–ADP) as a carrier.64 The results indicate that the combination of 1O2 and NO gas offers notable synergistic antibacterial and biofilm eradication effects.
4. Antiviral phototherapy
COVID-19 has become a severe global public health crisis due to its high morbidity and mortality, and the pandemic has resulted in worldwide social and economic disruption. Many governments have used severe measures to mitigate SARS-CoV-2 propagation by imposing home lockdown and industrial production shutdown, making this the biggest crisis since the second world war. Apart from COVID-19, the spread of other viral epidemics, such as influenza A/H2N2, human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS), severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), middle east respiratory syndrome (MERS), and Ebola, have also been witnessed during contemporary history.65,66 Due to these facts, the development of smart viral treatment tools that enable efficient disinfection of surfaces, prevent viral spreading, and improve the survival of infected people are of interest. Obviously, more investments in antiviral research are expected in this decade. Although phototherapy has been widely and successfully applied in the treatment of cancer and bacteria, research on the photoinactivation of viral infections has rarely been reported and is slow in gaining acceptance for clinical applications due to the hydrophobicity and poor target capability of PSs, and limited tissue penetration depth. The studies on organic PSs are promising approaches to provide more effective therapeutic agents with wide-spectrum antiviral activity.
4.1. Phototherapy for coronaviruses
Along with vaccine- and drug-based antiviral strategies, alternative therapies are highly desirable to inactivate coronaviruses. Great efforts have been made to develop efficient surfaces and coating materials to kill the attachment of microbes in public places (e.g., hospitals, public transportations, and schools) because of the fast evaporation or deactivation of common disinfectants (ethanol and hypochlorite). Phototherapy may offer some advantages to fight viruses, both outside and inside the host. In 2020, Kipshidze and co-workers demonstrated the tremendous potential for photodynamic therapy to treat COVID-19.67 Chen et al. reported AIE-active membrane-targeting PS with NIR fluorescence (DTTPB), which used triphenylamine units and bithiophene as the electron donors (hydrophobic tails), the carbon–carbon double bond as the π-linker, and a pyridinium group as an electron acceptor (hydrophilic head) for PDT of human coronaviruses.68 DTTPB exhibited much better ROS generation than the well-known PS, Rose Bengal, under white-light irradiation. DTTPB could specifically target the membrane structure and interact with the envelope of human coronaviruses (e.g., HCoV–OC43 and HCoV–229E) in different host cells, subsequently inducing a significant decrease of virus RNA and proteins in host cells treated with white-light irradiation. Further testing indicated that DTTPB was effective in the PDI of virus on high-touch surfaces (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  Chemical structure of DTTPB and schematic illustration of the PDI process of coronaviruses. 
Recently, Tang et al. designed and developed multifunctional alveolar macrophage (AM)-like nanoparticles (TN@AM NPs) for COVID-19 treatment (Fig. 17).69 TN@AM NPs were fabricated by wrapping polymeric cores of poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA cores) with AM membranes (multiple cytokine and coronavirus receptors) and a highly efficient photothermal agent (2PTE–2NDTA) with AIE characteristics. These TN@AM NPs selectively bound with MHV–A59 to inhibit coronavirus from entering the host cell and exhibited efficient absorption of multiple proinflammatory cytokines, allowing combined antiviral and anti-inflammatory treatment. In addition, these NPs displayed significant virus photothermal disruption under NIR irradiation. The studies on a surrogate mouse model of COVID-19 caused by murine coronavirus indicated that TN@AM NPs could decrease the virus burden and cytokine levels, reduce lung damage, and ultimately confer a survival advantage to infected mice (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  (a) Chemical structure of 2TPE–2NDTA. (b) Schematic illustration of multifunctional alveolar macrophage-like nanoparticles for coronavirus cellular entry blockage, virus photothermal disruption, and inflammatory cytokines absorption. (c) Schematic diagram of the anti-SARS-CoV-2 therapeutic regimen through atomization inhalation of the TN@AM NPs followed by NIR irradiation of the respiratory tract. 
4.2. Phototherapy for other viruses
The appearance of influenza viruses (e.g., fatal H5N1 avian flu and H1N1 flu) and the emergence of drug-resistant influenza viruses have raised concerns about the potential for global influenza pandemics like COVID-19. Motivated by the advantageous properties of phototherapy using organic PSs, many efforts have been pursued to improve the therapeutics of anti-influenza agents. For example, Fang et al. developed new anti-influenza virus agents by introducing four tetravalent zanamivir moieties as the specific binders to the influenza virus on a porphyrin scaffold as a PS (Fig. 18).70 These agents were less effective than zanamivir in neuraminidase inhibition; however, they exhibited a high therapeutic effect in inactivating influenza viruses under light irradiation by highly generating ROS to kill attached viruses nearby without harming the host cells (Fig. 18).
 Fig. 18  Chemical structures of 4–6 and schematic illustration of their antivirus effects. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Na and co-workers developed a photosensitive multivalent ligand architecture involving a chitosan conjugated to Chlorin e6 (Ce6) and 6′-sialyllactose (SL) (SL–chitosan–Chlorin e6, SCC) for the inactivation of influenza virus (H1N1) (Fig. 19).71 Ce6 was used as a PS to induce virus damage. Multiple SL-conjugated chitosan was used to improve the biocompatibility and binding affinity. SCC exhibited a higher generation of ROS levels than that of free Ce6 in aqueous solution upon light irradiation. In vitro results indicated that SCC was able to bind to viral hemagglutinin with a higher affinity than that of the monomeric substance confirmed by immunofluorescence and transmission electron microscope imaging, and consequently blocked influenza virus attachment to the cell membrane. Under light irradiation, SCC caused viral membrane damage by lipid envelope oxidation through ROS generation and thus induced permanent inactivation of various types of influenza viruses, even in viruses with mutated surface proteins. The antiviral effects of SCC on influenza A and B were higher than that of a well-known antiviral drug. Importantly, in vivo results showed that SCC inhibited influenza infection in 100% of mice subjected to laser irradiation. Several nanotechnology-based platforms have already been successful in preclinical studies to counter several human viral pathogens such as HIV, human papilloma virus, herpes simplex, and respiratory viruses.
 Fig. 19  (a) Synthetic route of 6′-sialyllactose–chitosan–Ce6 (SCC). (b) Schematic illustration of influenza virus infection and antiviral agent activity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
5. Phototherapy of fungal infections
Fungal infections represent an underestimated but significant threat to human health. The development of novel and effective antifungal drugs or treatments thus is in urgently need since the limited set of antifungal drugs has critical constraints like adverse side effects and/or resistance development.72,73 Phototherapy is a promising means for treating pathogenic infections, whose application in antifungal drugs has been explored to a limited extent.73–75 Wang and co-workers developed a bioluminescence resonance energy transfer-based PDT system based on a cationic oligo (p-phenylene vinylene) (OPV) to generate ROS for killing C. albicans (Fig. 20a and b).74,75 This system holds the advantage of light irradiation independence since bioluminescence-based energy transfer was utilized for the excitation, meaning it did not suffer the limitation of light penetration depth. Tang and co-workers focused on the subcellular organelle targeting and developed a mitochondrial-targeting PDT system for antifungal therapy (Fig. 20c and d).76 As shown in Fig. 20c, three AIE PSs of IQTPE-2O, IQ-Cm, and IQ-TPA were designed, and these preferentially accumulate in the mitochondria of fungi over the mammalian cells. Upon light irradiation, these AIE-active PSs produced 1O2 efficiently, causing irreversible damage to fungal mitochondria, thus killing the fungi. IQ-TPA exhibited the best PDT efficiency against fungi and showed negligible toxicity toward mammalian cells, enabling its application for selectively and efficiently killing fungi. Moreover, a fungus-infected rabbit model (fungal keratitis) was tested to evaluate the clinical utility of this PDT strategy. C. albicans maintained more than 500 CFU in the groups treated by PBS and IQ-TPA/RB in the dark, whereas it was less than 100 CFU in groups of IQTPA or RB with light. The results indicated that the mitochondria-specific PDT of IQ-TPA could significantly alleviate fungal keratitis and presented better effects than clinically used RB, which demonstrated the great potential of the current strategy for clinical treatment of fungal infections (Fig. 20d). Compared to other microbial phototherapies, phototherapy cases of fungal infection are currently still limited. However, with the further advancement of these various phototherapy modes, we believe phototherapy or multimode phototherapy will play an important role in treating fungal-based diseases.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of the bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) system for antifungal photoactivity. (b) Plate photographs of C. albicans on the YTD agar plate treated with OPV in the absence and presence of the luminol luminescence system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (c and d) Chemical structures of IO-TPE-2O, IO-Cm, and IO-TPA and a schematic diagram to illustrate AIEgens for killing fungi through a mitochondria-specific PDT effect. 
6. Conclusions and future directions
This review focused on recent advances in the research of organic PSs for antimicrobial treatment including classical PSs, AIE-based PSs, conjugated polymer-based PSs, and other organic scaffold-based PSs. The design and development of organic phototherapeutic agents hold great potential in the phototherapy of microbial infectious diseases. However, the science of antimicrobial phototherapy is in its early stages. Thus, the clinical translation of this approach still requires much effort from chemists and biologists. The critical drawbacks of the current phototherapy agents are poor water solubility due to the hydrophobic features, poor biocompatibility, poor binding specificity to pathogens, and short absorption wavelength/poor absorbance in the phototherapeutic window. In addition, issues associated with PDT like the short diffusion distances, short triplet lifetime of ROS and oxygen-dependent nature of PSs should be overcome. In general, a successful PS for clinical applications should fulfill the following requirements: (1) minimal “dark toxicity” and side effects in the body, (2) strong absorbance in the phototherapeutic window (650–900 nm), (3) outstanding ROS generation efficiency for PDT or high photothermal conversion efficiency for PTT at low power densities, (4) good photostability and biocompatibility, (5) excellent targeting ability for the improved therapeutic outcome, and (6) rapid removal from the body. Along with these factors, facile synthesis and a nanotechnology-based approaches should be considered to reduce the cost of new PSs and to maximize therapeutic outcomes, respectively. Although the current number of organic PSs for phototherapy of microbial infections in clinical trials is low, we believe that it will expand at a rapid rate very soon, and organic PSs will be a focus of antimicrobial phototherapy for many years to come.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
J. Yoon thanks to the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. 2022R1A2C3005420 and 2021R1A6A1A10039823). B. Z. Tang thanks to the National Science Foundation of China (51620105009), the Innovation and Technology Commission (ITC-CNERC14SC01), and the Science and Technology Plan of Shenzhen (ZDSYS20211021111400001). The authors would like to thank Miss Tran-Thi My Duyen (Chung-Ang University) for helping us to edit the TOC in this manuscript.
References
J. Mei, N. L. C. Leung, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11718–11940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Nat. Chem. Biol.,  2014, vol. 10, p. 483 Search PubMed.
Z. Xie, T. Fan, J. An, W. Choi, Y. Duo, Y. Ge, B. Zhang, G. Nie, N. Xie, T. Zheng, Y. Chen, H. Zhang and J. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8065–8087 RSC .
S. H. Yun and S. J. J. Kwok, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2017, 1, 1–16 CrossRef .
T. C. Pham, V.-N. Nguyen, Y. Choi, S. Lee and J. Yoon, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 13454–13619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Feng, G. Q. Zhang and D. Ding, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8179–8234 RSC .
Q. Zheng, X. Liu, Y. Zheng, K. W. K. Yeung, Z. Cui, Y. Liang, Z. Li, S. Zhu, X. Wang and S. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 5086–5125 RSC .
F. F. Li, J. G. Collins and F. R. Keene, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2529–2542 RSC .
R. Yin, T. Agrawal, U. Khan, G. K. Gupta, V. Rai, Y. Y. Huang and M. R. Hamblin, Nanomedicine, 2015, 10, 2379–2404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hu, C. Owh, P. L. Chee, W. R. Leow, X. Liu, Y. L. Wu, P. Guo, X. J. Loh and X. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6917–6929 RSC .
P. C. Ray, S. A. Khan, A. K. Singh, D. Senapati and Z. Fan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3193–3209 RSC .
J. Huo, Q. Jia, H. Huang, J. Zhang, P. Li, X. Dong and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 8762–8789 RSC .
A. R. Kirtane, M. Verma, P. Karandikar, J. Furin, R. Langer and G. Traverso, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 369–384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, H. Han, Z. Tang, Q. Jin and J. Ji, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2021, 10, 2100736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. F. Lovell, J. Yoon and X. Chen, Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol., 2020, 17, 657–674 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Ran, Z. Wang, W. Cai, L. Ran, W. Xia, W. Liu and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 17891–17909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V.-N. Nguyen, Y. Yan, J. Zhao and J. Yoon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 207–220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, J. Liu, J. Fan, H. Chao and X. Peng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 4185–4219 RSC .
Q. Y. Jia, Q. Song, P. Li and W. Huang, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2019, 8, 1900608 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhou, J. Song, L. Nie and X. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6597–6626 RSC .
C. Spagnul, L. C. Turner and R. W. Boyle, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2015, 150, 11–30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Nederberg, Y. Zhang, J. P. Tan, K. Xu, H. Wang, C. Yang, S. Gao, X. D. Guo, K. Fukushima, L. Li, J. L. Hedrick and Y. Y. Yang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 409–414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yuan, Z. Liu, L. Liu, F. Lv, Y. Wang and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4333–4338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, H. T. Bai, Y. C. Yang, J. Yoon, S. Wang and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805092 Search PubMed .
R. Bonnett, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1995, 24, 19–33 RSC .
Y. Nitzan, R. Dror, H. Ladan, Z. Malik, S. Kimel and V. Gottfried, Photochem. Photobiol., 1995, 62, 342–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Bilici, S. Cetin, E. Aydindogan, H. Yagci Acar and S. Kolemen, Front. Chem., 2021, 9, 707876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dai, X. Wu, S. Ding, X. Lou, F. Xia, S. Wang and Y. Hong, J. Med. Chem., 2020, 63, 1996–2012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, X. Zheng, L. Du, Y. Xiong, W. He, X. Gao, C. Li, Y. Liu, B. Xu, J. Zhang, F. Song, Y. Yu, X. Zhao, Y. Cai, X. He, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam, X. Huang, D. Lee Phillips, H. Wang and B. Z. Tang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2952 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Gu, W. B. Wu, G. X. Xu, G. X. Feng, F. Yin, P. H. J. Chong, J. L. Qu, K. T. Yong and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701076 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, H. Zou, Z. Zhao, P. Zhang, G. G. Shan, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam, L. Zheng and B. Z. Tang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11283–11293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Zhao, Y. Chen, H. Wang, S. Chen, J. W. Lam, C. W. Leung, Y. Hong and B. Z. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7180–7188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. B. Qi, F. Hu, Kenry, L. L. Shi, M. Wu and B. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16229–16235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, W. Wu, P. Manghnani, S. Xu, Y. Wang, C. C. Goh, L. G. Ng and B. Liu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3095–3105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. B. Wu, D. Mao, S. D. Xu, Kenry, F. Hu, X. Q. Li, D. L. Kong and B. Liu, Chem, 2018, 4, 1937–1951 CAS .
S. Liu, H. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Liu, L. Du, M. Chen, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam, D. L. Phillips and B. Z. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15189–15193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. B. Qi, F. Hu, Kenry, K. C. Chong, M. Wu, Y. H. Gan and B. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001338 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ucuncu, B. Mills, S. Duncan, M. Staderini, K. Dhaliwal and M. Bradley, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 3757–3760 RSC .
H. Bai, H. Yuan, C. Nie, B. Wang, F. Lv, L. Liu and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13208–13213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Anas, J. Sobhanan, K. Sulfiya, C. Jasmin, P. Sreelakshmi and V. Biju, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2021, 100452 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Wei, G. Yang, Y. Wang, H. Z. Jiang, Y. Y. Fu, G. Yue and R. Ju, Theranostics, 2020, 10, 12241–12262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Galstyan, R. Schiller and U. Dobrindt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10362–10366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. O. Frimannsson, M. Grossi, J. Murtagh, F. Paradisi and D. F. O’Shea, J. Med. Chem., 2010, 53, 7337–7343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lee, X. Li, J. Oh, N. Kwon, G. Kim, D. Kim and J. Yoon, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 5735–5739 RSC .
S. S. Liu, H. X. Yuan, H. T. Bai, P. B. Zhang, F. T. Lv, L. B. Liu, Z. H. Dai, J. C. Bao and S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2284–2291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Zhao, J. J. Zhang, R. T. K. Kwok, S. Xie, R. B. Tang, Y. X. Jia, J. C. Yang, L. Wang, J. W. Y. Lam, W. F. Zheng, X. Y. Jiang and B. Z. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804632 CrossRef .
C. L. Zhu, Q. O. Yang, L. B. Liu, F. T. Lv, S. Y. Li, G. Q. Yang and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4805–4810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhou, R. Hu, L. Wang, Y. Qiu, G. Zhang, Q. Deng, H. Zhang, P. Yin, B. Situ, C. Zhan, A. Qin and B. Z. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9952–9956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. B. Wu, D. Mao, X. L. Cai, Y. K. Duan, F. Hu, D. L. Kong and B. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3867–3873 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, W. B. Wu, Y. K. Duan, X. G. Liu, M. Wang, C. U. Phan, G. B. Qi, G. P. Tang and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2005222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. S. Li, D. Y. Lee, J. D. Huang and J. Y. Yoon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9885–9890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, L. Li and Q. Hu, Biomater. Sci., 2021, 9, 1995–2008 RSC .
Y. Zhao, C. Yu, Y. Yu, X. Wei, X. Duan, X. Dai and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 39648–39661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, G. Feng, M. Seifrid, M. Wang, B. Liu and G. C. Bazan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16063–16066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Korupalli, C. C. Huang, W. C. Lin, W. Y. Pan, P. Y. Lin, W. L. Wan, M. J. Li, Y. Chang and H. W. Sung, Biomaterials, 2017, 116, 1–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, P. He, Y. Wang, H. Bai, S. Wang, J. F. Xu and X. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16239–16242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tan, J. Li, X. M. Liu, Z. D. Cui, X. J. Yang, S. L. Zhu, Z. Y. Li, X. B. Yuan, Y. F. Zheng, K. W. K. Yeung, H. B. Pan, X. B. Wang and S. L. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801808 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, X. M. Dai, X. S. Wei, Y. J. Yu, X. L. Chen, X. E. Zhang and C. X. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 14426–14437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Qing, X. Zhao, N. Gong, J. Chen, X. Li, Y. Gan, Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, W. Guo, Y. Luo and X. J. Liang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4336 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xu, Y. Zhang, J. Li, J. An, C. Li, S. Bai, A. Sharma, G. Deng, J. S. Kim and Y. Sun, Biomaterials, 2020, 259, 120315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, Z. Li, C. L. Organ, C. M. Park, C. T. Yang, A. Pacheco, D. Wang, D. J. Lefer and M. Xian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6336–6339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. He, D. O. Kiesewetter, Y. Qu, X. Fu, J. Fan, P. Huang, Y. Liu, G. Zhu, Y. Liu, Z. Qian and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6741–6746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, R. Liu, X. Jiang, Y. Qiu, X. Song, G. Huang, N. Fu, L. Lin, J. Song, X. Chen and H. Yang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2103–2113 CAS .
J. W. Zhu, J. Tian, C. Yang, J. P. Chen, L. H. Wu, M. N. Fan and X. J. Cai, Small, 2021, 17, 2101495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Reina, S. Peng, L. Jacquemin, A. F. Andrade and A. Bianco, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 9364–9388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wiehe, J. M. O’Brien and M. O. Senge, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2019, 18, 2565–2612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kipshidze, N. Yeo and N. Kipshidze, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 651–652 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Wu, M. Gu, J. K. Leung, X. Li, Y. Yuan, C. Shen, L. Wang, E. Zhao and S. Chen, Small, 2021, 17, 2101770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, W. Wang, W. F. Song, Z. Zhao, Q. Q. Tan, Z. Y. Zhao, L. T. Tang, T. C. Zhu, J. L. Yin, J. Bai, X. Dong, S. Y. Tan, Q. Y. Hu, B. Z. Tang and X. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2021, 2003556 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Wen, M. Lin, C. Y. Su, S. Y. Wang, Y. S. Cheng, J. M. Fang and C. H. Wong, J. Med. Chem., 2009, 52, 4903–4910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jeong, J. J. Lee, J. Lee and K. Na, Small, 2020, 16, 2000556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. V. S. Mani Chandrika and S. Sharma, Bioorg. Med. Chem., 2020, 28, 115398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Schaefer, T. T. P. Pham, S. Brunke, B. Hube, K. Jung, M. D. Lenardon and C. Boyer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 27430–27444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Yuan, H. T. Bai, L. B. Liu, F. T. Lv and S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 722–724 RSC .
H. X. Yuan, H. Chong, B. Wang, C. L. Zhu, L. B. Liu, Q. Yang, F. T. Lv and S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13184–13187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Zhou, C. Peng, C. Z. Shi, M. J. Jiang, J. H. C. Chau, Z. Y. Liu, H. T. Bai, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam, Y. X. Shi and B. Z. Tang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 12129–12139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cs00647a‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Van-Nghia Nguyen
	Van-Nghia Nguyen was born in Thanhhoa, Vietnam. He received his PhD in chemistry in 2017 from the University of Ulsan, Republic of Korea. After completing postdoctoral research at the University of Ulsan, he joined the Department of Chemistry and Nanoscience, Ewha Womans University in 2018, where he is currently a research professor. His current research interests include the design and development of luminescent probes, theranostic agents, and molecular functional materials.

Zheng Zhao
	Zheng Zhao is an assistant professor at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen. He received his PhD from the Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Science in 2014. Since 2015, he has worked as a Postdoctoral Fellow in Prof. Ben Zhong Tang's group. He joined the School of Science and Engineering, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen in 2021. His research interests include luminescent functional materials, new luminescence processes and the bioapplications of luminescent materials.

Ben Zhong Tang
	Ben Zhong Tang is a Distinguished Presidential Chair Professor at the school of science and engineering, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen. He received his PhD from Kyoto University in 1988 and conducted his postdoctoral research at the University of Toronto from 1989 to 1994. He joined HKUST in 1994 and was promoted to Chair Professor in 2008. He moved to the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen in 2021. He was elected as Academician of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in 2009. His research interests include the exploration of new advanced materials and new polymerization reactions.

Juyoung Yoon
	Juyoung Yoon is a distinguished professor at the Department of Chemistry and Nanoscience, Ewha Womans University. He received his PhD (1994) from Ohio State University and conducted his postdoctoral work at UCLA and Scripps Research Institute. His research interests include investigations of fluorescent probes, activatable photosensitizers, molecular recognition, and organic functional materials. He has been a “Highly-Cited Researcher” of Clarivate Analytics/Thomson Reuters since 2014 with an h-index of 113.

Key learning points
(1) The significance of light in biomedical applications.
(2) The basic concept and significance of phototherapy.
(3) The advantages of organic photosensitizers over other classes of phototherapeutic agents.
(4) Innovative types of organic photosensitizers for antimicrobial phototherapy.
(5) Current challenges and the opportunities of organic agents for phototherapy of microbial infections.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic of a Jablonski diagram.	 

 	Fig. 2  The major functions and design strategies of organic photosensitizers in antimicrobial phototherapy.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Chemical structures of antimicrobial photosensitizers derived from representative organic platforms. (b) Typical examples of aggregation-induced emission scaffolds, tetraphenylethylene (TPE), cyclooctatetrathiophene (COTh), and 2-((4′-(2,2-bis(4-methoxyphenyl)-1-phenylvinyl)-[1,1′-biphenyl]-4-yl) (phenyl) methylene) malononitrile (TPEDC).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the aggregation-induced generation of reactive oxygen species (AIG-ROS). (b) Molecular structure of TPANPF6 and decomposition of ABDA in the presence of TPANPF6 under light irradiation in dimethyl sulfoxide/water mixtures with different water fractions (fw). (c) Molecular structure of TPE-Bac and killing efficiency of TPE-Bac on E. coli and S. epiderimidis in the absence and presence of light irradiation for different times. (d) Schematic of the macrophage-mediated intracellular bacterial infection diagnosis and elimination and the molecular structure of PyTPE–CRP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2021, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Molecular structures of TB, TBTB and P1. (b) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of polymerization enhanced PDT effect. (c) 1O2 quantum yield (Φo) and fluorescence quantum yield (Φf) of TB, TBTB, and P1. (d) Schematic illustration of the bacteria-mediated polymer synthesis process. (e) Switching the antibacterial activity of PPV through regulating the supramolecular assembly of PPV with CB[7] mediated by 1-adamantanamine hydrochloride (AD). Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  The interaction between the photosensitizer and polysaccharides of the bacterial cell membrane and the biofilm matrix. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  Chemical structures of AzaBODIPY, PcN4–BA, and TriPE–NT.	 

 	Fig. 8  Chemical structures and proposed mechanisms of the chemiluminescence-induced cationic PS OPV used for antibacterial phototherapy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic representation of PPV-1 for the selective recognition, imaging, and killing of bacteria over mammalian cells and the chemical structure of PPV-1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2011, Wiley. (b) Chemical structure of PTB–APFB and its selective antibacterial application. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a, b) Chemical structure of TBD–PEG, nanoparticle preparation and working mechanism of IRTP NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) Nanoparticle preparation of DTF–FFP NPs. (d) The working mechanism of DTF–FFP NPs inside invaded phagocytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a and b) Formation of the self-assembled nanostructures and the growth process of NanoPcA in water. (c) Schematic illustration of the possible mechanisms of NanoPcA under light irradiation. (d) Photodynamic therapy of NanoPcA toward E. coli and S. aureus on a LB agar plate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Chemical structures and preparation nanoparticles of PANI–GCS NPs. (b) The working mechanism of PANI–GCS NPs for phototherapy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Chemical structure and photophysical and photothermal properties of WMG1 and WMG2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Photothermal ablation of focal infections with PANI–GCS NP self-assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (b) Chemical structures of CB[7], CPPDI, and CPPDI radical anion and schematic illustration of photothermal therapy for CPPDI. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of photothermal-sensitive drug-loaded liposomes to eliminate biofilms. (b) Schematic illustration of a near-infrared (NIR) light-triggered thermo-responsive-inspired drug-delivery nano-transporter (TRIDENT) for antibiotic-resistant bacteria killing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  Chemical structure of DTTPB and schematic illustration of the PDI process of coronaviruses.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Chemical structure of 2TPE–2NDTA. (b) Schematic illustration of multifunctional alveolar macrophage-like nanoparticles for coronavirus cellular entry blockage, virus photothermal disruption, and inflammatory cytokines absorption. (c) Schematic diagram of the anti-SARS-CoV-2 therapeutic regimen through atomization inhalation of the TN@AM NPs followed by NIR irradiation of the respiratory tract.	 

 	Fig. 18  Chemical structures of 4–6 and schematic illustration of their antivirus effects. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Synthetic route of 6′-sialyllactose–chitosan–Ce6 (SCC). (b) Schematic illustration of influenza virus infection and antiviral agent activity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of the bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) system for antifungal photoactivity. (b) Plate photographs of C. albicans on the YTD agar plate treated with OPV in the absence and presence of the luminol luminescence system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (c and d) Chemical structures of IO-TPE-2O, IO-Cm, and IO-TPA and a schematic diagram to illustrate AIEgens for killing fungi through a mitochondria-specific PDT effect.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cs00647a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
