A highly stable and scalable photosynthetic reaction center–graphene hybrid electrode system for biomimetic solar energy transduction   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA10458D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA10458D
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6038-6041A highly stable and scalable photosynthetic reaction center–graphene hybrid electrode system for biomimetic solar energy transduction†

        
          
            Haojie 
            Zhang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Anne-Marie 
            Carey‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Ki-Wan 
            Jeon
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Minghui 
            Liu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Travis D. 
            Murrell
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Joshua 
            Locsin
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Su 
            Lin
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hao 
            Yan
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Neal 
            Woodbury
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Dong-Kyun 
            Seo
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Molecular Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA. E-mail: DSeo@asu.edu
bCenter for Innovation in Medicine, Biodesign Institute and School of Molecular Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA. E-mail: NWoodbury@asu.edu
cCenter for Molecular Design and Biomimetics, Biodesign Institute and School of Molecular Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA
Received 
      5th December 2016
    , Accepted 3rd March 2017First published on 4th March 2017AbstractA photosynthetic reaction center (RC)-based electrode system is one of the most promising biomimetic approaches for solar energy transduction which is a renewable and environment-friendly source of energy. However, the instability of RCs in a non-cellular environment and the unfeasible scalability of electrode materials hamper the promising application of these systems. Herein, we report a highly stable and scalable RC-electrode system in which RCs are directly immobilized on a flexible and transparent mercapto reduced graphene oxide (mRGO) electrode. RCs immobilized on a mRGO film retain their photoactivity after twenty-week storage under darkness and even after 24 h continuous illumination at room temperature under aerobic conditions. The remarkable stability and mechanical flexibility of our system offer great potential for the development of a flexible RC-based biomimetic device for solar energy transduction.
Photosynthesis is the largest-scale solar energy conversion process on the planet and accompanied by the continual mass-production of the biochemical constituents, executed by the photosynthetic reaction centers (RCs) in green plants and certain bacteria.1,2 The success of photosynthesis prompts research on the natural process and spurs attempts to develop biomimetic photosynthetic systems in the laboratory. Biomimetic photosynthetic solar energy transduction is one of the great scientific challenges and would be a major step towards national and global energy security and environmental protection in this century.3 In the past few decades, an increased understanding of photosynthetic energy conversion and advances in chemical synthesis and instrumentation have made it possible to create biomimetic devices that carry out many of the functions of the natural process.4,5 One promising approach for biomimetic solar energy transduction is immobilization of purple bacterial RCs isolated from Rhodobacter (Rb.) sphaeroides on electrodes to transduce light energy into photocurrent in non-cellular environments.6–8 However, the development of RC/electrode biomimetic systems is hampered by the instability of immobilized RCs on the electrodes and unfeasible scalability of the electrode material. As a membrane protein, RCs are known to degrade rapidly in a non-cellular environment unless they are stabilized and stored in lipid/detergent micelles or liposomes.9,10 Unlike the micelle environment, the electrode surfaces do not provide a protective environment, and thus RCs may denature, especially under aerobic conditions, or desorb from the electrode surfaces. This can occur even in the presence of detergents in the dark within one week, resulting in a marked loss (65%) in photocurrent.11 Therefore, the generation of stable, active RC/electrode systems remains a challenge even in the dark, and certainly under active illumination.
Meanwhile, the material nature of the electrodes themselves plays a critical role in the utility of RC-based biomimetic devices. Gold, glassy carbon and indium tin oxide (ITO) electrode materials have been used in RC-based biomimetic devices for solar energy transduction.6–8 Further advances might come about with the development of new electrode materials with chemically modifiable surfaces while keeping mechanical light absorption compliances.12–14 Recently, graphene has been demonstrated to be a flexible and transparent electrode option for incorporation into scalable photoelectric devices, due to its low cost and excellent mechanical properties.15–17 However, it is still challenging to fabricate a flexible and transparent graphene electrode for RC immobilization through a scalable method.18
Here, we report the development of a highly stable and scalable RC-electrode system for biomimetic solar energy transduction in which RCs are immobilized on flexible transparent mRGO Langmuir Blodgett (LB) films. Using only a pipette, mRGO LB films can be first deposited on arbitrarily sized ITO coated polyethylene terephthalate (ITO/PET) substrates through a scalable equipment-free LB deposition method. After overnight incubation with RCs, the RC/mRGO electrode system is stable and remains photoactive under aerobic conditions in the absence of detergents, whether in darkness or light, for much longer than has been reported in previous studies.
The preparation of mRGO LB films on ITO-PET is shown in Fig. 1a. mRGO was synthesized by solvothermal reduction of graphene oxides (GOs) in pyridine in the presence of P4S10. The C:O:S ratios were 11:1:0.7 and more than 95% of the sulfur was present as thiols according to the XPS analysis (Fig. S1†). Pyridine was chosen as a solvent since both P4S10, a thiolation agent, and GOs can dissolve well in pyridine which enhances the thiolation of GOs into mRGO.19 Our equipment-free deposition method relies on the superior dispersibility of mRGO in ethanol in comparison to that in water. Despite the reduced nature of mRGO, the presence of thiol groups allows mRGO to stay dispersed in ethanol even after 3 min centrifugation at 3000 rpm. The ITO/PET substrate was placed in a perforated Petri dish, sitting in a larger Petri dish. After adding deionized water to the Petri dish, the mRGO ethanol dispersion was slowly pipetted onto the surface of the water in the small Petri dish. mRGO Langmuir films gradually formed on the water surface due to the differential dispersibility of mRGO in ethanol and water and self-assembly of the mRGO sheets. The films were then transferred onto the substrate by carefully draining the water from the larger Petri dish. This equipment-free LB deposition method is highly scalable, which allows mRGO LB films to be deposited onto virtually any substrate, regardless of its shape, size or flexibility. The resulting mRGO slide exhibited excellent flexibility and transparency (Fig. 1a).
 Fig. 1  (a) The preparation of mRGO LB films on ITO/PET; (b) schematic illustration of the electrochemical cell for RC/mRGO; (c) photocurrent of the mRGO slide with/without RCs in the presence of cytochrome c and UQ. 
Photocurrents were measured using the electrochemical set-up shown in Fig. 1b. The conversion of absorbed light into chemical redox energy is initiated in RCs by excitation of the primary electron donor, ‘P’, a coupled pair of bacteriochlorophylls. An electron transfer cascade is activated and continues down a redox gradient to a quinone molecule, ‘QA’, via intermediary cofactors (a monomeric bacteriochlorophyll, ‘BA’ and a bacteriopheophytin, ‘HA’). The electron then passes from QA to a second quinone, QB, forming the semiquinone anion. A second photon completes the reduction of QB, forming dihydroquinone which then diffuses to the counter electrode. Cytochrome c serves as an electron transfer mediator passing the electron from mRGO to P+, re-reducing the primary donor. It is noted that all the results shown were obtained by using oxidized cytochrome c, although the reduced form of cytochrome c would be suitable for the electron transfer mediation. Oxidized cytochrome c is more convenient in consideration of a complicated preparation procedure of reduced cytochrome c and yet it becomes reduced in operando by the electrode during the photocurrent generation. Indeed, the results were similar to the ones with reduced cytochrome c in our preliminary experiments (Fig. S2†). With this set-up and applying a potential of 0.125 V vs. the SHE, a photocurrent density up to 0.40 μA cm−2 is observed for the RC/mRGO system with 5.0 mW cm−2 illumination at 800 nm (Fig. 1c). No detectable photocurrent is observed for mRGO slides which have not been soaked in RCs. The negative photocurrent indicates that the RCs are preferentially oriented with the P-side facing the mRGO surface. A photocurrent density of 0.20 μA cm−2 can be achieved when only the open circuit potential (OCP) ∼0.230 V vs. the SHE is applied (Fig. S3†). The estimated overall solar conversion efficiency is about 0.01%, which is comparable to previously reported values based on other types of electrodes.11,20
It appears that cytochrome c mostly acts as a diffusible electron transfer mediator between the electrode and the RCs in this system (Fig. 2a). Washing out unbound cytochrome c after the photocurrent reached saturation (by rinsing the electrode with fresh buffer and replacing the electrolyte with cytochrome c-free electrolyte) dramatically decreases the photocurrent density from 0.20 to 0.04 μA cm−2. This photocurrent was recovered by injecting cytochrome c into the electrolyte, confirming that cytochrome c is mostly serving as a diffusible charge mediator in this system (Fig. S4†).
 Fig. 2  (a) Photocurrent of the RC/mRGO system with/without free cytochrome c in the electrolyte; (b) photocurrent of the RC/mRGO system with/without ubiquinone-0 (UQ) during incubation; (c) action spectrum of RC/mRGO (dotted line) and the absorption spectrum (red line) of RCs in solution before incubation; photocurrent of RC/mRGO after one-week storage under light at room temperature (d), twenty-week storage at 4 °C in the dark (e) and 24 h continuous illumination (f). 
The inclusion of a tenfold molar excess of ubiquinone-0 (UQ:RC = 10:1) during the overnight incubation with the RC solution significantly (threefold) improves the photocurrent (Fig. 2b). This is somewhat unexpected as ubiquinone-0 is included in the electrolyte buffer. As the terminal electron acceptor for the RC, the dihydroquinone formed by photochemical reduction is released and must therefore be exchanged with an oxidized quinone. It may be that the replacement of insoluble ubiquinone-10 in the QB pocket by the soluble ubiquinone-0 during incubation facilitates the quinone exchange.
To demonstrate that the observed current is due to photo-induced electron transfer in the RCs, an action spectrum of the photocurrent was collected (photocurrent as a function of illumination wavelength). A tunable continuous-wave Ti:sapphire laser was used as the light source and the excitation wavelength was tuned from 740 to 890 nm holding the output power constant (1.3 mW cm−2). The resulting spectral profile closely resembles that of the RC absorption spectrum, confirming that the RC is indeed responsible for the observed photocurrent (Fig. 2c). The immobilization of RCs on mRGO was confirmed by atomic force microscopy (AFM) as shown in Fig. S5† where RC molecules are observed as small particles in the size range from 7 to 15 nm on the mRGO films deposited on a Si wafer. The immobilization mechanism is not clear but may be due to electrostatic interactions between the proteins and the mRGO surface in the presence of cytochrome c and other chemical components in the buffer solution. Although not detailed here, the zeta potential of mRGO was measured to be about −40 mV at pH = 7–9. Such negatively charged surfaces of metal oxide electrodes have been utilized in our previous report for cytochrome c and RC immobilization but the elucidation of the exact immobilization and assembly mechanism is not trivial.21,22 It is also possible that there occurs disulfide bond formation between the thiols in mRGOs and the cysteine in RCs.
The stability of RCs on mRGO LB films was evaluated by measuring the photocurrent of the same slide over a period of time. The RC/mRGO slides showed no photocurrent degradation after one-week storage under ambient light at room temperature in air (Fig. 2d). Moreover, 50% of the RCs remained active after three-week storage under ambient light (Fig. S6†). The photocurrent from a RC/mRGO slide was monitored for 20 weeks, during which time the slide was stored in the electrolyte at 4 °C in the dark. After one-week storage, the RC/mRGO slide exhibited the same photocurrent as the freshly made slide (Fig. 2e). About 70% of the initial photocurrent remained even after twenty-week storage in air. Furthermore, even after 1 h continuous illumination with white light at high intensity (35 mW cm−2), the photocurrent decreased by only 5% (Fig. 2f), which is less than 15% reported previously.8 Even after 24 h of continuous illumination, 30% of the original photocurrent remained.
In summary, RCs isolated from Rb. sphaeroides have been successfully immobilized on flexible transparent mRGO LB films for biomimetic solar energy transduction. These RCs display a relatively high stability, retaining 70% of their activity after 20 weeks when stored in the dark at 4 °C, and 30% of their activity after 24 hours of continuous 35 mW cm−2 illumination. Photocurrent densities up to 0.4 μA cm−2 can be achieved using 5.0 mW cm−2 light intensity at 800 nm. The remarkable stability of RCs on mRGO LB films offers great potential for the development of a flexible biomimetic device. Why the RCs are particularly stable after immobilization on the mRGO electrode is unclear and further studies in terms of the surface properties including the presence of surface thiols, hydrophobicity and morphology are required. Further studies are required to examine the long-term stability of the mRGOs themselves and also the correlation between the quality of mRGOs and their electrode performance.
Experimental section
Preparation of mRGO Langmuir Blodgett films on ITO-PET
Graphene oxides (GOs) were prepared following a previous report.23 P4S10 (555 mg) was slowly added to GOs (100 mg) in pyridine (38 mL), then transferred to a Teflon-lined autoclave (45 mL) and heated at 180 °C for 9 h. The resultant solid product was collected via vacuum filtration and washed several times with deionized water and ethanol. The mRGOs in water were freeze-dried before use.
The mRGO sheet was dispersed in ethanol by sonication and centrifugation (3000 rpm, 3 min). The ITO-PET substrate (Sigma-Aldrich) was placed in a 2-inch diameter perforated Teflon Petri dish. This small Petri dish was then placed in a larger 5-inch diameter glass Petri dish with a solid base and was 1/3 filled with water. The mRGO dispersed in ethanol was slowly applied to the water surface by dropwise addition using a pipette. Small patches gradually appeared on the water surface and self-assembled to form a Langmuir film. The mRGO Langmuir film was then transferred onto the substrate by carefully removing the water contained in the larger Petri dish and the Langmuir Blodgett film was dried by gently blowing N2-stream.
Immobilization of RCs on mRGO Langmuir Blodgett films
RCs were isolated from cultures of Rb. sphaeroides 2.4.1 and purified as previously described.24–26 The mRGO Langmuir Blodgett film on the ITO-PET substrate was incubated overnight at 4 °C under darkness in 20 mM Tris buffer with 2.6 μM RCs, 0.1% N,N-dimethyldodecylamine N-oxide (LDAO) and 26.0 μM ubiquinone-0. The sample was washed with 0.1 M Tris buffer before characterization.
For atomic force microscopy (AFM), the mRGO Langmuir Blodgett film was deposited on a Si wafer instead of ITO-PET. AFM was performed in air using a tapping mode with ScanAsyst-air tips (Bruker).
Photoelectric measurements
Photoelectric measurements were performed on a CHI 650D electrochemical station (CHI Instrument Co., USA), with a three-electrode system incorporating a Ag/AgCl (CHI 111) reference electrode and a platinum wire counter electrode with the RC/mRGO slide set as the working electrode. The electrochemical cell was covered with black tape with a 1 cm2 window to allow illumination and the working electrode was inserted facing the cell window. RC/mRGO was illuminated using a Ti:sapphire laser pumped by a 5 W Millennia laser (Millennia pumped Tsunami, Spectra Physics). The light intensity was recorded with a FieldMate Laser Power Meter (Coherent) and adjusted using a neutral density filter. The electrolyte buffer was 0.1 M Tris buffer with 100 μM oxidized cytochrome c and 250 μM ubiquinone-0. A 20 W fiber optical lamp with an incident light intensity of 35 mW cm−2 was employed for the continuous illumination experiment. Preliminary experiments were carried out with varied cytochrome c and UQ concentrations for the optimization of photocurrents (Fig. S7†).
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the DOD MURI award W911NF-12-1-0420 and NSF grants MCB-0642260 and MCB-1157788. We gratefully acknowledge the use of facilities within the LeRoy Eyring Center for Solid State Science at Arizona State University.
Notes and references
R. J. Cogdell and A. W. Roszak, Nature, 2014, 508, 196–197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Lebedev, S. A. Trammell, A. Spano, E. Lukashev, I. Griva and J. Schnur, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12044–12045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Faunce, W. Lubitz, A. W. Rutherford, D. MacFarlane, G. F. Moore, P. Yang, D. G. Nocera, T. A. Moore, D. H. Gregory, S. Fukuzumi, K. B. Yoon, F. A. Armstrong, M. R. Wasielewski and S. Styring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 695–698 Search PubMed .
V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 26–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 40–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-J. den Hollander, J. G. Magis, P. Fuchsenberger, T. J. Aartsma, M. R. Jones and R. N. Frese, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 10282–10294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Trammell, A. Spano, R. Price and N. Lebedev, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2006, 21, 1023–1028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, M. Yuan, Y. Liu, B. Tu, C. Xu, B. Liu, D. Zhao and J. Kong, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 4071–4076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Seddon, P. Curnow and P. J. Booth, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2004, 1666, 105–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Odahara, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2004, 1660, 80–92 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yaghoubi, Z. Li, D. Jun, R. Saer, J. E. Slota, M. Beerbom, R. Schlaf, J. D. Madden, J. T. Beatty and A. Takshi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 24868–24877 CAS .
K. Nomura, H. Ohta, A. Takagi, T. Kamiya, M. Hirano and H. Hosono, Nature, 2004, 432, 488–492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Rathmell and B. J. Wiley, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4798–4803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J.-S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. Ri Kim, Y. I. Song, Y.-J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J.-H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-X. Ni, Y. Zheng, S. Bae, C. Y. Tan, O. Kahya, J. Wu, B. H. Hong, K. Yao and B. Özyilmaz, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3935–3942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pang, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2779–2795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gunther, G. LeBlanc, D. Prasai, J. R. Zhang, D. E. Cliffel, K. I. Bolotin and G. K. Jennings, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 4177–4180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, K.-W. Jeon and D.-K. Seo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21539–21544 CAS .
S. C. Tan, L. I. Crouch, M. R. Jones and M. Welland, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6667–6671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.-M. Carey, H. Zhang, D. Mieritz, A. Volosin, A. T. Gardiner, R. J. Cogdell, H. Yan, D.-K. Seo, S. Lin and N. W. Woodbury, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25104–25110 CAS .
P. Kwan, D. Schmitt, A. M. Volosin, C. L. McIntosh, D.-K. Seo and A. K. Jones, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12367–12369 RSC .
K.-W. Jeon and D.-K. Seo, Phosphorus, Sulfur Silicon Relat. Elem., 2014, 189, 721–737 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Dutta, S. Lin, A. Loskutov, S. Levenberg, D. Jun, R. Saer, J. T. Beatty, Y. Liu, H. Yan and N. W. Woodbury, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4599–4604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Dutta, S. Levenberg, A. Loskutov, D. Jun, R. Saer, J. T. Beatty, S. Lin, Y. Liu, N. W. Woodbury and H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16618–16625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. O. Goldsmith and S. G. Boxer, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 1996, 1276, 171–175 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XPS of mRGO, OCP, cytochrome c and storage under light influence on photocurrent of RC/mRGO, AFM and SEM of RC/mRGO on a Si wafer. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta10458d‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) The preparation of mRGO LB films on ITO/PET; (b) schematic illustration of the electrochemical cell for RC/mRGO; (c) photocurrent of the mRGO slide with/without RCs in the presence of cytochrome c and UQ.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Photocurrent of the RC/mRGO system with/without free cytochrome c in the electrolyte; (b) photocurrent of the RC/mRGO system with/without ubiquinone-0 (UQ) during incubation; (c) action spectrum of RC/mRGO (dotted line) and the absorption spectrum (red line) of RCs in solution before incubation; photocurrent of RC/mRGO after one-week storage under light at room temperature (d), twenty-week storage at 4 °C in the dark (e) and 24 h continuous illumination (f).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XPS of mRGO, OCP, cytochrome c and storage under light influence on photocurrent of RC/mRGO, AFM and SEM of RC/mRGO on a Si wafer. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta10458d
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
