Impedance analysis of perovskite solar cells: a case study   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA02808K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA02808K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12191-12200Impedance analysis of perovskite solar cells: a case study†

        
          
            Lidia 
            Contreras-Bernal‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Susana 
            Ramos-Terrón‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Antonio 
            Riquelme
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Pablo P 
            Boix
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jesús 
            Idígoras
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Iván 
            Mora-Seró
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Juan A. 
            Anta
          
        
      *a
aÁrea de Química Física, Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Seville, Spain. E-mail: jaidileo@upo.es; anta@upo.es
bInstitute of Advanced Materials (INAM), Universitat Jaume I, E-12006 Castelló, Spain. E-mail: sero@uji.es
cInstituto de Ciencia Molecular, Universidad de Valencia, C/J. Beltrán 2, Paterna, Spain
Received 
      14th March 2019
    , Accepted 9th April 2019First published on 10th April 2019AbstractMetal halide perovskites are mixed electronic–ionic semiconductors with an extraordinarily rich optoelectronic behavior and the capability to function very efficiently as active layers in solar cells, with a record efficiency surpassing 23% nowadays. In this work, we carry out an impedance spectroscopy analysis of two perovskite solar cells with quite distinct optical and electrical characteristics, i.e. MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3-based devices. The main aim of the analysis is to establish how, regardless of the inherent complexity of the impedance spectrum due to ionic effects, information like ideality factors, recombination losses and the collection efficiency can be qualitatively and quantitatively assessed from impedance experiments under operating conditions.
Introduction
Emerging technologies in photovoltaics such as dye-sensitized solar cells, organic solar cells and the more recent concept of halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been the object of a huge amount of research in the last few decades.1,2 These new types of solar cells bring the promise of cheaper synthesis and fabrication processes along with competitive efficiencies. As in any new concept, the state of the art is based on trial-and-error methods and empirical findings. However, a proper understanding of the fundamental processes that take place under operation is still required to further optimize the performance of solar cells. PSCs represent a typical “hot” topic example of this due to the impressive progress accomplished in less than ten years, with a current certified record efficiency of 23.7%.3
In spite of this progress, some drawbacks and open questions remain. Photovoltaic halide perovskites are ionic compounds with a substantial covalent character and the general structural formula ABX3, where A is an organic or inorganic cation, B is the metal center and X is a halide. In the most studied perovskite solar cells (those based on MAPbI3:CH3NH3PbI3), methylammonium (MA: CH3NH3+) is employed as a monovalent organic cation, whereas Pb2+ and I− are used as the metal and halide, respectively. This material behaves as a sort of “soft” semiconductor where electronic and ionic conduction are mixed.4–6 This feature appears to be related to the occurrence of different kinetic processes that take place in quite separated time scales: electronic transport and recombination in the ns to μs range,7–9 ionic redistribution and hysteresis in the ms to second range,10–13 and reversible and irreversible degradation processes for seconds, minutes and even in a longer time scale.14–16 In particular, it is generally accepted that recombination is especially slow and diffusion lengths are especially long in PSCs, leading to open-circuit photovoltages very close to the theoretical limits.7,17–19
In this context, advanced optoelectronic techniques such as Impedance Spectroscopy (IS)20,21 are particularly appealing to study solar cells, as they allow the characterization in a broad range of time scales. A typical impedance experiment consists of setting a small frequency-modulated (AC) signal (voltage perturbation) which is applied in addition to a stationary (DC) voltage. By registering the AC response in terms of current one can extract the complex frequency-dependent impedance and obtain information about internal processes of PSCs occurring at different time scales (μs to s). This makes it possible to distinguish processes of distinct kinetics, like those based on either pure electronic changes (supposed to be fast) or, indirectly, those based on ionic changes either in the bulk or at interfaces (supposed to be slow). Thus, IS can be theoretically used as a characterization method for PSCs and provide a basis to quantify transport rates, recombination losses, interfacial charge accumulation processes, characteristic geometric capacitances, ionic diffusion coefficients, etc., occurring in these time domains.
The main drawback of IS, especially as regards its exploitation to characterize PSCs, is that an interpretation of the spectra is still not well-established in the field yet, as it is for other systems such as dye-sensitized solar cells.21 Several factors contribute to this. First of all, the impedance experiment itself produces internal electrical fields that displace and reorganize the ions, altering the electrical features.22 Secondly, there is a large variety of equivalent circuits “in the market” to fit the spectra. Due to the existence of the afore-mentioned disparity of kinetics, different types of circuits happen to yield the same fitted parameters.23 As a consequence, the interpretation of the obtained fitted parameters is not univocally understood yet. Thus, the following questions can be formulated to establish IS as a useful tool to assess the performance of a perovskite solar cell: in spite of the ionic effects and inherent complexity of the spectrum, can we still quantify recombination, and charge collection under working conditions?
Herein, to provide a deeper electrical and phenomenological characterization with new insights in the physical processes that determine the photovoltaic response of PSCs under working conditions, we have chosen two configurations characterized by very different optical characteristics and band gaps and a quite distinct hysteretic behavior in the current density–voltage curve. In particular, we analyzed the electrical properties of MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 devices under illumination, being probably the most studied hybrid and inorganic perovskites, respectively. In order to understand the spectra, the impedance parameters (time constants, resistances and capacitances) are analyzed, for both configurations, as a function of three experimental variables: (1) illumination intensity and open-circuit voltage, (2) DC voltage and (3) temperature. From experiment (1) it will be shown how the ideality factor can be extracted, and how it can be qualitatively compared to the recombination rates of PSCs with different optical band gaps. From experiment (2) we can follow how the current–voltage curve can be traced down from the impedance response. From experiment (3) we can differentiate between electronic and ionic processes and extract activation energies.
With this purpose, perovskite solar cells based on MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 films were fabricated and characterized. MAPbI3 films were deposited under ambient conditions using a synthesis method where the proportion of PbI2 and DMSO was adjusted to the environmental relative humidity.24,25 For CsPbBr3 films, the deposition process was optimized by controlling the immersion time, temperature and perovskite solvent to avoid the presence of impurities such as CsPb2Br5 and Cs4PbBr6 in the solution.26 (see the “Experimental section” for details about the fabrication of the films and devices and their characterization by SEM, EDX, UV-Vis and IS). Using these materials as a case study we demonstrate how the recombination loss and the charge collection efficiency can be estimated for cells with different optical band gaps and distinct low frequency behavior, an analysis procedure which is missing so far in the impedance spectroscopy literature.
Results and discussion
After perovskite deposition, pinhole-free and crystalline perovskite layers with close to 400 nm thickness in both cases were formed and characterized for both configurations (Fig. S1†). As is well known, the use of different ions affects the morphological (Fig. S1A and S2†) and optical properties (Fig. S1B and C†).27,28 Optical band-gaps were extracted from the UV-Vis spectra of MAPbI3 (1.61 eV) and CsPbBr3 (2.33 eV), Fig. S1C.† A relatively long subgap tail is observed in the absorption spectra of CsPbBr3, extending to about 0.6–0.7 eV, in contrast to the tail of only 0.02 eV for MAPbI3 (Fig. S1B and C†).

Fig. 1A shows the current–potential (IV) curves obtained for the best performing MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 devices measured at 1 sun. Statistics of the photovoltaic parameters extracted from all fabricated devices is shown in Fig. S3.† Average Power Conversion Efficiencies (PCE) of 14.9% (short circuit current, JSC: 19.2 mA cm−2, open circuit potential, VOC: 1037 mV and Fill Factor, FF: 0.74) and 4.1% (JSC: 5.3 mA cm−2, VOC: 1254 mV and FF: 0.61) in a reverse scan of 100 mV s−1 were obtained for MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 solar cells respectively. The PCE of CsPbBr3 is substantially lower than the one obtained for MAPbI3. The lower JSC is due, on one hand, to a wider band gap, and on the other hand, to a lower Incident Photon-to-electron Conversion Efficiency (IPCE) recorded for the CsPbBr3 cell, Fig. 1B. The integrated photocurrents are in good agreement with the JSC obtained from IV curve measurements, Fig. 1B and S3.† After correction by the absorption coefficient, the Internal Quantum Efficiencies (IQE) under stationary conditions have also been measured at 465 and 630 nm and different light intensities. Values very close to 95% are obtained for the best MAPbI3 based devices whereas a lower IQE (around 80–90%) is obtained for CsPbBr3 devices.
 Fig. 1  Photovoltaic characterization of MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 solar cells: (A) density current–voltage characteristics of MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 based devices in the reverse scan under 1 sun – AM 1.5G illumination. A scan rate of 100 mV s−1 after poling for 20 s at 1.2 V and 1.4 V was employed for MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 based devices, respectively. (B) IPCE as a function of monochromatic wavelength and the corresponding AM 1.5G illumination integrated photocurrent. 

Fig. 2A and B show the variation of VOC with respect to illumination intensity and temperature. The VOC has a logarithmic dependence with respect to illumination intensity which follows the diode eqn (5), as discussed below. The slope determines the ideality factor (m) of the solar cells (eqn (5)), which lies between 1.7 and 2.2 for both configurations (Fig. 2A). The VOC decreases linearly with respect to absolute temperature, except at lower temperatures (Fig. 2B). The extrapolation to T → 0 K reproduces the optical band gap of each type of perovskite in good agreement with the optical characterization (Fig. S1C†).
 Fig. 2  (A) VOCvs. illumination intensity and (B) VOC as a function of the temperature at a light intensity of 14 mW cm−2 using a white-LED as the light source. The ideality factor “m” and the estimation of the band gap according to eqn (5) are shown in panels (A) and (B), respectively. 
Both kinds of solar devices were characterized by IS. Two types of IS experiments were performed: (1) at open circuit (OC) under varying illumination intensities (results plotted as a function of the resulting VOC) and (2) under non-open-circuit (NOC) conditions with varying DC potential (voltage) while light intensity is fixed at 1 sun.29 In this latter case the parameters are corrected for voltage drop due to the resulting DC current and the corresponding series resistance.21

Fig. 3 shows the representative Nyquist (Z′–Z′′) plots of impedance spectra for both studied configurations under illumination at different photopotentials at OC and different applied potentials under NOC conditions in the 106 to 10−2 Hz frequency range. The corresponding Bode plots are depicted in Fig. S4.† Under OC conditions, the Nyquist plots of MAPbI3 based devices (Fig. 3A) are characterized by the presence of two arcs and the corresponding frequency plots show two peaks at high and low frequencies accordingly (Fig. S4A†). The impedance spectra of CsPbBr3 based devices under OC conditions (Fig. 3B and S4B†) display a different behavior depending on illumination. At very high OC photovoltages (1.3–1.2 V) there are two signals in the high frequency region (104 to 106 Hz) that merge into a single one as the VOC is reduced.
 Fig. 3  Nyquist plots of impedance spectra obtained under white LED illumination in the vicinity of the 1 sun open-circuit potential for (A and C) MAPbI3 and (B and D) CsPbBr3 based devices. In (A) and (B) the measurements were carried out under varying illumination and open-circuit (OC) and in (C) and (D) the measurement was done under fixed 1 sun equivalent illumination and non-open-circuit (NOC) conditions. Insets: zoom in the high frequency region. 
Under NOC conditions (Fig. 3C and D), the Nyquist plots for MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 based devices were characterized by one complete and well-defined high-frequency arc and, depending on the applied DC potential, a second low frequency arc. The Bode plots display two peaks in the high and low frequency regions accordingly, Fig. S4C and D.†
Despite the presence of other minor features, the IS of perovskite solar cells are basically determined by the existence of two characteristic times, at high and low frequencies. Note that the characteristic times can be easily obtained from the reverse of the frequency at which a peak is observed in the Bode plot (Fig. S4†). The corresponding arc in the Nyquist representation can be described by a parallel association of a resistor and a capacitor, where the time constant is the product of both of them. In order to properly interpret these characteristic times and how a recombination rate or a collection efficiency can be inferred from them, we have performed additional experiments.
On one hand, the temperature dependence of IS under short circuit conditions for MAPbI3 based solar cells (i.e. 0 V DC bias under NOC conditions) has been measured, Fig. S5.† It can be easily appreciated that the high frequency signal is independent of temperature, T. In contrast, the low frequency part varies with T and the low frequency signal gets shifted towards higher frequencies when the sample is heated. An activation energy of 36.9 kJ mol−1 was extracted from these data, Fig. S5C,† in agreement with previous results.9,11 This finding suggests that it is in the low frequency region of the spectra where processes that are thermally activated (which could be ionic migrations and/or chemical reactions) are probed, whereas at high frequencies mainly pure electronic processes determine the response. On the other hand, Fig. S6† summarizes the impact of illumination under NOC conditions. We observe that for MAPbI3 based devices, the high frequency time constant shifts towards shorter time scales, whereas the low frequency one remains basically unaltered.
A proper interpretation or analysis of an impedance spectrum requires a suitable model based on rate (continuity) equations. From these equations, an equivalent circuit is derived, which is used to fit the experimental data. However, due to the complexity of the system with electronic and ionic conductivity, there is no broad consensus on the equations ruling perovskite devices. These can include different boundary conditions, such as extracting ones for electrons and blocking ones for ions. On the other hand, the possibility of interfacial reactions cannot be ruled out.30,31 The lack of a well-stablished model prevents taking full advantage of impedance characterization, which otherwise could allow the extraction of an important number of parameters. Nevertheless, here we show a semi-empirical approach that allows the extraction of important parameters. Ideality factors, recombination losses and the collection efficiency can be qualitative and quantitatively assessed under operating conditions.
The recombination rate in units of volume−1 and time−1 is given by a rate law of the type:32 (1)where n is the minority carrier concentration in the active layer (electrons for a p-type semiconductor), p0 is the majority carrier concentration, kT is a rate constant and γ is the recombination order. It is possible to relate the carrier concentration to the photopotential and the band gap32,33 (2)where NC and NV represent the density of states of the conduction band (CB) and the valence band (VB), respectively. Under intrinsic or high injection conditions, as expected from the inner properties of halide perovskites,34n = p, and the density parameter reduces to x = 2. Combining eqn (1) and (2) one finds for the recombination current (3)where d is the thickness of the active layer and J00 depends on the rate constant.
Under OC conditions the generation rate of photogenerated carriers G should exactly compensate the recombination rate Urec = G. Using eqn (3) the open-circuit photopotential should thus conform to the following equation (4)from which one obtains (5)where m, the ideality factor, is given by m = x/γ. Eqn (5) provides a simple description of the behavior found in Fig. 2A and B and how the ideality factor and the band gap can be extracted from open-circuit photopotential measurements.
The recombination resistance, Rrec, can be defined as the inverse of the voltage derivative of eqn (3). Consequently, we have (6)with R00 = (kBTJ00/αqγ)exp(γαEg/kBT) and β = 1/m. This equation predicts an exponential dependence on the high frequency component of the resistance.
The two features at high frequency (HF) and low frequency (LF) of the impedance spectra, Fig. 3, have been fitted using a simplified equivalent circuit depicted in the inset of Fig. 4B, and the obtained parameters are plotted in Fig. 4. This equivalent circuit yields essentially the same results as an alternative one in which the two RC elements (or R-CPE) are placed in series.23RS takes into account the series resistance induced by extracting contacts and wiring. CHF is associated with the geometrical capacitance,35 in line with the potential independent values obtained and in good agreement with previous studies.23,32,35–37 In contrast, the CLF capacitance shows an exponential trend at high potentials: (7)where C00 is a preexponential factor and α is a positive parameter. Although the actual choice of the equivalent circuit does not affect the resistance and capacitance values reported in Fig. 4, a configuration in which the high frequency capacitance is in parallel with the rest of the circuit elements is the choice with the most physical sense in view of the geometrical nature of this capacitance.
 Fig. 4  (A and B) Resistive and (C and D) capacitance elements as extracted from fittings of the impedance spectra obtained under (A and B) open-circuit (OC) and (C and D) non-open-circuit (NOC) conditions using the equivalent circuit model for (red) MAPbI3 and (blue) CsPbBr3 based devices. Under NOC conditions, parameters are plotted versus the series corrected potential Vd = Vappl − Vseries. 
Interestingly, the data show α = β (see Table 1) where β is obtained from the slope of the LF resistance, as also reported in the literature.36,38,39 In addition, the CLF becomes flat at the same Vd (Vd = Vappl − Vseries) at which the resistance reaches its saturation value. These facts point towards a coupled LF resistance and capacitance, with a corresponding characteristic time, τLF = RLFCLF, roughly voltage independent (Fig. S7†). The complementary behavior of the two circuit elements suggests that the same process that causes the LF capacitance to increase with illumination or DC applied voltage causes the LF resistance to decrease.
Table 1 
β and α parameter values extracted from the high frequency and low frequency resistances and capacitances fitted from impedance spectra for MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 based devices under open-circuit (OC) and non-open-circuit (NOC) conditions (for NOC conditions only the exponential region is used in the fittings to eqn (6) and (7))




Device
IS

β – RHF

β – RLF

α – CHF

α – CLF




MAPbI3
OC
0.56 – 0.5
0.81 – 0.75
Flat
0.80 – 0.77


NOC
0.15 – 0.13
0.51 – 0.46
Flat
0.46 – 0.42


CsPbBr3
OC
0.51 – 0.43
No signal
Flat
No signal


NOC
0.15 – 0.11
0.46 – 0.40
Flat
1.46 – 0.4




Analysis of Fig. 4 reveals exponential behavior for both resistances and for the HF capacitance in the high voltage region. The resistances in the OC experiment fit well to eqn (6). The values of the corresponding slope parameters are collected in Table 1.

R
HF obtained for MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3-based devices shows a similar β parameter value, under OC conditions, of around 0.5. This follows the expected dependence on a dominating recombination resistance, Rrec, considering the ideality factor measured in Fig. 2A. In contrast, values around 0.78 were found for the RLF of MAPbI3 devices at OC. It is worth mentioning that the voltage-dependence is different for the LF and HF resistances, which is not the case reported in previous studies.9,36 Considering the different nature of the low and high frequency signals described above, this behavior is not unexpected.
Under NOC conditions the behavior of the two resistances is quite different. Firstly, the exponential dependence is only observed at high DC potentials but becomes flat as the experiment approaches SC conditions, which suggests that the device is ruled by the shunt resistance at fixed light intensity and low applied bias. The transition between the two regimes occurs at voltages right below the maximum power point of the corresponding IV curves (Fig. 1A). Secondly, at high applied bias under NOC conditions the slope in good agreement with the ideality factor is that at LF. Note that in Fig. 4 NOC parameters are plotted as a function of the device potential, Vd = Vappl − Vseries, where the applied voltage, Vappl, is corrected by the subtraction of the voltage drop at the series resistance, Vseries. It is important to stress out that the series resistance correction does not change significantly the slope of neither the two resistances (Fig. S8†).
As previously discussed, there is no consensus on the interpretation of the elements producing the low frequency arc, but all the models point that ionic movement is related to the origin of this feature. This lack of consensus is mainly due to the difficulty of interpretation of the physical origin of each one of the parameters of the equivalent circuit. While in dye sensitized solar cells just one physical process can be assigned to each parameter, in the case of PSCs, different processes present similar characteristic times and it is difficult to decouple their effects. Consequently, different processes affect the same feature. For example, the HF arc has been previously ascribed to Rrec32 but it is also affected by selective contact or perovskite transport.35,40,41 Along the same line, Rrec has been related to the LF arc40 or to both,6,9,39,42 as it is not straightforward to decouple the recombination contribution from other contributions, such as transport or injection at the interfaces.
Since at OC the RHF slope is in good agreement with the ideality factor, indicating that this resistance is linearly proportional to Rrec as expected from eqn (5) and (6), the results are consistent with intrinsic or high injection (x = 2) conditions and a recombination reaction order of γ ∼1, a signature of Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination for both MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3.32,43Eqn (5) also predicts a linear dependence of VOCversus absolute temperature. This behavior is indeed reproduced in Fig. 2B and the fact that the optical band gap is recovered by extrapolation to T → 0 K strongly suggests that, at least under OC conditions, the recombination process represented by the rate law (eqn (1)) takes place in the bulk or it is determined by the perovskite layer only. This is consistent with previous findings using the ideality factor,43 different optical penetrations of the light in impedance experiments with different excitation wavelengths,32,44 and the comparison of devices made with alternative contact layers.45–47
The exponential dependence of RHF on voltage and its proportional connection to Rrec at OC allow for a direct comparison between MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 recombination behaviors. To do that, it is necessary to take into account both the thermodynamic effect (different band gaps) and the kinetic behavior (recombination rate), plotting the impedance parameters at the same value of the photogenerated charge density. Eqn (2) provides a means to do this. According to this expression, plotting versus Eg/q − VOC makes sure that we are comparing cells of different band gaps at the same value of the photogenerated charge density. The correction is analogous to an analysis commonly done in dye-sensitized solar cells,48,49 and would be valid if the n = p condition is fulfilled, i.e., under intrinsic or high injection conditions.
Once the effect of the band gap is corrected for (Fig. 5), it becomes evident that the recombination rate in CsPbBr3 based devices is substantially larger than in the MAPbI3 ones. This could be expected from the potential loss with respect to the band gaps, which is ∼1 V for CsPbBr3 (Eg/q − VOC = 2.34–1.3) versus ∼0.45 V for MAPbI3 (Eg/q − VOC = 1.55–1.1). The difference roughly coincides with the voltage separation between the two resistances in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  High frequency resistances under OC conditions corrected for the optical band gap of each perovskite. 
At NOC and high applied voltage, it is RLF that presents a slope concurring with the ideality factor, and consequently, proportional to Rrec. Thus, the same correction of thermodynamic effect can be applied with similar results to those in Fig. 5 (Fig. S9†).
The faster recombination in CsPbBr3 devices, which is derived from the analysis, is most probably related to their rougher morphology and longer tail of subgap states observed in the absorption spectra (Fig. S1†). A relatively long Urbach tail will lead to a substantial VOC loss with respect to the thermodynamic limit.19 In addition, more crystal defects will cause a more rapid recombination rate that may cause additional voltage loss. Thus, recombination is of the same type as in MAPbI3 cells, as indicated by a similar value of the ideality factor, but it is faster due to a higher concentration of defects (parameter p0 in eqn (1)). In a recent publication, a 300–400 mV voltage loss in bromine-based devices is attributed to surface recombination.50 However, contrary to our results, the reported activation energy at T → 0 is significantly lower than the optical band gap, and the authors do not detect any Urbach tail in their IPCE measurements, showing that in their case the main voltage loss arises from band misalignment and recombination mediated by interfacial effects. Consequently, the T analysis allows discriminating between surface and bulk recombination, while impedance comparison permits comparing the recombination rate when the thermodynamic effect is corrected for, as in Fig. 5.
As mentioned in the introduction, the main objective of this work is to establish an approach to quantify recombination losses and charge collection from the impedance spectrum. First of all, it is important to verify that the two resistances under NOC and steady-state conditions can be used to reconstruct the IV curve,21,29,42 taking into account all contributions related to recombination, transport, injection or series resistance: (8)with Rtot = RS + RHF + RLF (A is the active area of the device). In Fig. S10† it is shown that the experimental curves for both MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 based devices can be recovered, using eqn (8), from the impedance data under NOC conditions.
Following previous work,42 the charge collection efficiency, CCE, in a solar cell can be determined from the recombination resistance under OC and NOC conditions using the expression: (9)where Rrec is the recombination resistance as defined by eqn (6). Hence, at open-circuit CCE = 0 by definition and at short-circuit, for an optimal system with minimum recombination, Rrec (V = 0) → ∞ and CCE → 1.
The main challenge, thus, is how to define and extract Rrec from the impedance spectrum. As outlined before, several possibilities have been proposed in the literature. Since no definitive theoretical model for impedance is well established yet, we apply here an empirical approach. In the studied devices, the OC high frequency resistance is the feature which follows the same voltage dependence as the ideality factor, in line with eqn (5) and (6). However, under NOC conditions it is the low frequency resistance that has a slope closer to the ideality factor. Thus, in order to identify the recombination resistance, it is necessary to independently evaluate high and low frequency resistances, as well as the sum of the two. All three possibilities are tested in Fig. S11 in the ESI.† Due to the fact that RLF ≫ RHF (see Fig. 4C) under NOC conditions, only assuming Rrec ≈ RHF yields values significantly different from 100%. As a matter of fact, only this possibility makes it possible to discriminate between MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 cells, as observed in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Charge collection efficiency as predicted from eqn (9) if the Rrec is temptatively assumed to be equal to RHF. Inset: comparison between the prediction of eqn (9) at short-circuit with Rrec ≈ RHF and the stationary value of the IQE for a batch of MAPbI3 devices. 
The collection efficiency of photogenerated electrons in the perovskite film can be considered an approximation to the IQE (assuming that there are no charge losses in the injection of charges to the contacts). The variation of the collection efficiency in Fig. 6 with DC potential resembles the shape of the JV curve. The curve yields the collection efficiency under SC conditions (V = 0). Values of ∼0.9 and ∼0.8 are obtained for MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 based devices, respectively. These figures agree remarkably well with IQE values measured for both configurations, which confirms the larger recombination loss for CsPbBr3 cells.
Additional evidence that there is a substantial recombination loss in CsPbBr3 devices, even under SC conditions, is provided by the maximum theoretical photocurrents, as obtained from integration of the measured absorptance (Fig. S12†). Values of 24.9 and 10.8 mA cm−2 are obtained for MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 based devices, respectively. When compared with the actual experimental values, 20 ± 2 and 5 ± 1 mA cm−2, we infer that recombination losses (and possibly poorer injection too) affect critically the performance of the devices made with CsPbBr3 perovskite.
The prediction of the collection efficiencies evidences that the impedance response changes from a regime where recombination is dominant: V > Vmp, and both resistances show an exponential behavior (although with different slopes), and a regime where collection is dominant: V < Vmp and both resistances become flat. As the recombination resistance increases exponentially as the voltage decreases, at low voltages the impedance response is determined by the other elements in the equivalent circuit like shunting and transport resistances, which are effectively voltage independent. The previous results in terms of ideality factors and CCE point to a phenomenological determination of CCE using the high frequency component as the impedance element that basically contains information about recombination losses. However, the exponential behavior of RLF under NOC conditions implies that this identification is not so straightforward. To provide additional assurance we have measured the IQE at short-circuit of a batch of MAPbI3 based devices and plotted the results versus the predictions of eqn (9) at V = 0 using Rrec ≈ RHF in eqn (9) for the determination of IQE. In this respect, we have to bear in mind that CCE and IQE, although related, do not represent exactly the same thing and they can only be identified if there are not additional losses between photocarrier generation and carrier collection (like for instance poor injection of exciton dissociation).
The results in the inset of Fig. 6 reveal a clear correlation between both magnitudes. This demonstrates that the impedance of the high frequency signal provides a phenomenological way to evaluate IQE. However, impedance values do not exactly coincide with IQE stationary measurements, and the larger the difference larger the less efficient a particular cell is. For instance, for the most efficient specimen of the batch the prediction of eqn (9) is ∼0.83, whereas the stationary measurement gives ∼0.88. Assuming that there are no additional losses after photocarrier generation, this difference means that the RHF cannot be naïvely identified with the recombination resistance and probably includes other contributions such as transport, interfacial and ion-mediated dielectric relaxation mechanisms.51
Conclusions
MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 perovskite solar cells have been thoroughly studied by impedance spectroscopy under open-circuit and non-open-circuit conditions, under different illuminations and at different temperatures. Despite the difficulty of decoupling the different processes occurring in the photovoltaic device, a resistance linearly related to recombination resistance can be obtained by comparing the exponential slope with the ideality factor. We have shown that these resistances can be used to extract information, both qualitative and semi-quantitative, about the nature of recombination. Correction is needed if cells of different band gaps are compared. The use of this protocol allowed us to establish, as a case study, that MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 perovskite solar cells analyzed in this work have the same recombination mechanism (trap-limited in the bulk) but it is much faster in CsPbBr3 devices, possibly due to a larger concentration of subgap states.
High-frequency resistances measured under OC and NOC conditions are found to provide an estimation of the charge collection efficiency along the JV curve. However, both low and high frequency resistances probably include additional mechanisms such as transport and dielectric contributions. Further efforts are therefore required to develop a robust model to describe the impedance response of perovskite solar cells.
Experimental section
Fabrication of the perovskite solar cell devices
Perovskite solar devices were fabricated on FTO-coated glass (Pilkington-TEC15) patterned by laser etching. Before the deposition, the substrates were cleaned using Hellmanex® solution and rinsed with deionized water and ethanol. Thereupon, they were ultrasonicated in 2-propanol and dried by using compressed air. The TiO2 blocking layer was deposited onto the substrates by spray pyrolysis at 450 °C, using a titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) solution (75% in 2-propanol, Sigma Aldrich) diluted in ethanol (1:14, v/v), with oxygen as the carrier gas. The TiO2 compact layer was then kept at 450 °C for 30 min for the formation of the anatase phase. Once the samples achieve room temperature, a TiO2 mesoporous layer was deposited by spin coating at 2000 rpm for 10 s using a commercial TiO2 paste (Dyesol, 18NR-T) diluted in ethanol (1:5, weight ratio). After drying at 100 °C for 10 min, the TiO2 mesoporous layer was heated at 500 °C for 30 min and later cooled to room temperature. An additional doping treatment using Li+ ions (10.04 mg LiTFSI in 1 mL acetonitrile, 35 mM) was used for the TiO2 mesoporous layer prior to CsPbBr3 deposition.
For MAPbI3 based devices, a pure methylammonium lead iodide solution was prepared to be deposited by spin coating using a methodology previously reported:24,25 the perovskite precursor solution was adjusted to the relative humidity of the environment (42% R.H.) by the Pb/DMSO ratio. The perovskite precursor solution (50 μL) was spin-coated in a one-step setup at 4000 rpm for 50 s. During this step, DMF is selectively washed with non-polar diethyl ether just before the white solid begins to crystallize in the substrate. For CsPbBr3 based devices a two-step sequential deposition technique was employed. Firstly, a dissolution of PbBr2 in DMF (1 M) was prepared by heating at 75 °C for 20 min and filtered (pore size 0.45 μm). This solution was spin-coated (2500 rpm – 30 s) on a TiO2 mesoporous film. During the deposition process, the dissolution was kept at 75 °C. Afterward, the substrate was dried on a hot plate at 70 °C for 30 min. Subsequently, the substrates were dipped for 10 min in a solution of 17 mg mL−1 CsBr in methanol at 60 °C. Then, the substrates were annealed at 250 °C for 10 min.
For both the MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 based devices, Spiro-OMeTAD was deposited as a hole selective material by dissolving 72.3 mg in 1 mL of chlorobenzene as well as 17.5 μL of a lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide (LiTFSI) stock solution (520 mg of LiTFSI in 1 mL of acetonitrile), and 28.8 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP). The Spiro-OMeTAD was spin coated at 4000 rpm for 30 s. The solution was filtered with a 0.2 μm PTFE filter prior to its deposition. Finally, 60 nm of gold was deposited as a metallic contact by thermal evaporation under a vacuum level between 1 × 10−6 and 1 × 10−5 torr. All the deposition processes were carried out outside a glovebox under environmental conditions.
Characterization of the devices
Current–voltage characteristics of the devices were obtained using a solar simulator (ABET-Sun2000) under 100 mW cm−2 illumination with an AM 1.5G filter. The light intensity was recorded using a reference mono-crystalline silicon solar cell with temperature output (ORIEL, 91150). A metal mask was used to define an active area of 0.16 cm2. The current–voltage characteristics were determined by applying an external potential bias to the cell and measuring the photocurrent using an Autolab/PGSTAT302N potentiostat. The current–voltage characteristics were measured with a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 and a sweep delay of 20 s. Incident Photon-to-current Conversion Efficiency (IPCE or EQE) was measured using an Oriel Xenon lamp coupled to a McPherson monochromator. Light intensity was determined as a function of the wavelength using a calibrated silicon photodiode (PH-100 Si, GENTECE).
The illumination for the IS measurements was provided by a white LED over a wide range of DC light intensities. Two types of IS experiments were performed: (1) at open circuit (OC) under varying illumination intensities (parameters are extracted, analyzed and plotted as a function of the resulting open-circuit photopotential) and (2) under non open circuit (NOC) conditions with varying DC potential (voltage) while light intensity is fixed.29 In this latter case the parameters are corrected for voltage drop due to the resulting DC current and the corresponding series resistance.21 In this work, we will use the labels OC and NOC to refer to these two kinds of experiments. Under both OC and NOC conditions a 20 mV perturbation in the 106 to 10−2 Hz range was applied. A response analyzer module (PGSTAT302N/FRA2, Autolab) was utilized to analyze the frequency response of the devices.
IMPS measurements were carried out by coupling the PGSTAT302N/FRA2 module to the LED. IMPS measurements were performed at short-circuit with a light perturbation corresponding to 10% of the DC background illumination intensity. Due to limitations of the experimental set-up, the measurement was limited to the 105 to 10−1Hz frequency range. The NOVA 1.7 software was used to generate data. Z-view equivalent circuit modelling software (Scribner) was used to fit the spectra.
For the structural characterization, Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) images of the samples were obtained using a Zeiss GeminiSEM-300 microscope working at 2 keV. Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) was performed using a Silicon Drift Detector (Oxford Instruments). For optical characterization, UV-visible absorption spectra were recorded by using a Cary 100 UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Agilent) in the range of 400–800 nm. Steady state photoluminescence measurements were performed using a Hitachi, F-7000 Fluorescence spectrophotometer. Temperature-dependent experiments were carried out by means of a MHCS622CD Heating and Cooling Vacuum/gas tight Stage configured with a MTDC600 temperature controller (Microptik).
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
We thank Junta de Andalucía for financial support via grants FQM 1851 and FQM 2310. We thank Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad of Spain and Agencia Estatal de Investigación (AEI) and EU (FEDER) under grants MAT2013-47192-C3-3-R, MAT2016-76892-C3-2-R, MAT2016-79866-R and Red de Excelencia “Emerging photovoltaic Technologies” for financial support. We also thank Servicio de Microscopía Electrónica (Universidad Pablo de Olavide). I. M. S. thanks the European Research Council (ERC) via Consolidator Grant (724424 – No-LIMIT). P. P. B thanks the MINECO for his RyC contract and MAT2017-88821-R, and acknowledges the financial support from the Conselleria d'Educació, Investigació, Cultura i Esport Valenciana (SEJI2017/2017/012).
Notes and references
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .
S. Karazhanov and V. Kharton, Mater. Lett., 2018, 228, 450 CrossRef .

          NREL, NREL: National Center for Photovoltaics Home Page, http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/, (accessed 5 March 2015) Search PubMed.
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Kerner and B. P. Rand, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 132–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. Moia, I. Gelmetti, P. Calado, W. Fisher, M. Stringer, O. Game, Y. Hu, P. Docampo, D. Lidzey, E. Palomares, J. Nelson and P. R. F. Barnes, ArXiv:180506446 Cond-Mat Physicsphysics.
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, V. M. Burlakov, T. Leijtens, J. M. Ball, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2014, 2, 034007 CrossRef .
A. Pockett, G. E. Eperon, N. Sakai, H. J. Snaith, L. M. Peter and P. J. Cameron, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 5959–5970 RSC .
C. Li, S. Tscheuschner, F. Paulus, P. E. Hopkinson, J. Kießling, A. Köhler, Y. Vaynzof and S. Huettner, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2446–2454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Contreras, J. Idígoras, A. Todinova, M. Salado, S. Kazim, S. Ahmad and J. A. Anta, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 31033–31042 RSC .
G. Richardson, S. E. J. O'Kane, R. G. Niemann, T. A. Peltola, J. M. Foster, P. J. Cameron and A. B. Walker, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1476–1485 RSC .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T.-W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Niu, X. Guo and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 3, 8970–8980 RSC .
K. Domanski, B. Roose, T. Matsui, M. Saliba, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, J.-P. Correa-Baena, C. R. Carmona, G. Richardson, J. M. Foster, F. D. Angelis, J. M. Ball, A. Petrozza, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, W. Tress, M. Grätzel, U. Steiner, A. Hagfeldt and A. Abate, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 604–613 RSC .
M. Bag, L. A. Renna, R. Y. Adhikari, S. Karak, F. Liu, P. M. Lahti, T. P. Russell, M. T. Tuominen and D. Venkataraman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13130–13137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Manser, J. A. Christians and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116(21), 12956–13008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tress, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602358 CrossRef .

Impedance Spectroscopy: Theory, Experiment, and Applications, ed. E. Barsoukov and J. R. Macdonald, Wiley-Interscience, Hoboken, N.J, 2 edn,  2005 Search PubMed .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Seró and J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9083–9118 RSC .
D. Pitarch-Tena, T. T. Ngo, M. Vallés-Pelarda, T. Pauporté and I. Mora-Seró, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1044–1048 CrossRef CAS .
A. Todinova, L. Contreras-Bernal, M. Salado, S. Ahmad, N. Morillo, J. Idígoras and J. A. Anta, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 1–12 CrossRef .
C. Aranda, C. Cristobal, L. Shooshtari, C. Li, S. Huettner and A. Guerrero, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 540–547 RSC .
L. Contreras-Bernal, C. Aranda, M. Valles-Pelarda, T. T. Ngo, S. Ramos-Terrón, J. J. Gallardo, J. Navas, A. Guerrero, I. Mora-Seró, J. Idígoras and J. A. Anta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(10), 5341–5348 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, W. Wang, B. Xu, S. Liu, H. Dai, D. Bian, S. Chen, K. Wang and X. W. Sun, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 40–45 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613–617 RSC .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 RSC .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, M. Kulbak, A. Zohar, M. Vallés-Pelarda, G. Hodes, D. Cahen and I. Mora-Seró, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2007–2013 CrossRef CAS .
A. Guerrero, J. You, C. Aranda, Y. S. Kang, G. Garcia-Belmonte, H. Zhou, J. Bisquert and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(1), 218–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Bastiani, G. Dell'Erba, M. Gandini, V. D'Innocenzo, S. Neutzner, A. R. S. Kandada, G. Grancini, M. Binda, M. Prato, J. M. Ball, M. Caironi and A. Petrozza, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501453 CrossRef .
L. Contreras-Bernal, M. Salado, A. Todinova, L. Calio, S. Ahmad, J. Idígoras and J. A. Anta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 9705–9713 CrossRef CAS .

          S. M. Sze and K. K. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, John Wiley & Sons,  2006 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, H. T. Yi, X. Wu, R. Haroldson, Y. N. Gartstein, Y. I. Rodionov, K. S. Tikhonov, A. Zakhidov, X.-Y. Zhu and V. Podzorov, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Guerrero, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, Y. S. Kang, T. J. Jacobsson, J.-P. Correa-Baena and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 8023–8032 CrossRef CAS .
I. Zarazua, G. Han, P. P. Boix, S. Mhaisalkar, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Seró, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 5105–5113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pockett, G. E. Eperon, T. Peltola, H. J. Snaith, A. Walker, L. M. Peter and P. J. Cameron, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3456–3465 CrossRef CAS .
I. Zarazua, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 525–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zolfaghari, E. Hassanabadi, D. Pitarch-Tena, S. J. Yoon, Z. Shariatinia, J. van de Lagemaat, J. M. Luther and I. Mora-Seró, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 251–258 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, M. Wuβler, F. Fabregat-Santiago, K. Lakus-Wollny, E. Mankel, T. Mayer, W. Jaegermann and I. Mora-Sero, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 680–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Anaya, W. Zhang, B. C. Hames, Y. Li, F. Fabregat-Santiago, M. E. Calvo, H. J. Snaith, H. Míguez and I. Mora-Seró, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 634–644 RSC .
I. Zarazúa, S. Sidhik, T. Lopéz-Luke, D. Esparza, E. De la Rosa, J. Reyes-Gomez, I. Mora-Seró and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 6073–6079 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Tress, M. Yavari, K. Domanski, P. Yadav, B. Niesen, J. P. C. Baena, A. Hagfeldt and M. Graetzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 155–165 Search PubMed .
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano, J.-P. C. Baena, J.-D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501170 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Idígoras, L. Contreras-Bernal, J. M. Cave, N. E. Courtier, Á. Barranco, A. Borras, J. R. Sánchez-Valencia, J. A. Anta and A. B. Walker, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1801076 CrossRef .
S. Ravishankar, S. Gharibzadeh, C. Roldán-Carmona, G. Grancini, Y. Lee, M. Ralaiarisoa, A. M. Asiri, N. Koch, J. Bisquert and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Joule, 2018, 2, 788–798 CrossRef CAS .
K. Valadez-Villalobos, J. Idígoras, L. P. Delgado, D. Meneses-Rodríguez, J. A. Anta and G. Oskam, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 877–882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Raga, E. M. Barea and F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1629–1634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Idígoras, L. Pellejà, E. Palomares and J. A. Anta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 3878–3889 CrossRef .
A. Zohar, M. Kulbak, I. Levine, G. Hodes, A. Kahn and D. Cahen, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 1–7 Search PubMed .
J. Bisquert, L. Bertoluzzi, I. Mora-Sero and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 18983–18991 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Scanning electron microscopy images, UV-Vis and EDX spectra, characteristic photovoltaic parameters, Nyquist impedance spectra and impedance–frequency plots under different conditions, electron recombination resistances, HF time constant and collection efficiency versus potential. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta02808k‡ Lidia Contreras-Bernal and Susana Ramos-Terrón have equally contributed to the paper.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Photovoltaic characterization of MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 solar cells: (A) density current–voltage characteristics of MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 based devices in the reverse scan under 1 sun – AM 1.5G illumination. A scan rate of 100 mV s−1 after poling for 20 s at 1.2 V and 1.4 V was employed for MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 based devices, respectively. (B) IPCE as a function of monochromatic wavelength and the corresponding AM 1.5G illumination integrated photocurrent.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) VOCvs. illumination intensity and (B) VOC as a function of the temperature at a light intensity of 14 mW cm−2 using a white-LED as the light source. The ideality factor “m” and the estimation of the band gap according to eqn (5) are shown in panels (A) and (B), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Nyquist plots of impedance spectra obtained under white LED illumination in the vicinity of the 1 sun open-circuit potential for (A and C) MAPbI3 and (B and D) CsPbBr3 based devices. In (A) and (B) the measurements were carried out under varying illumination and open-circuit (OC) and in (C) and (D) the measurement was done under fixed 1 sun equivalent illumination and non-open-circuit (NOC) conditions. Insets: zoom in the high frequency region.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 4  (A and B) Resistive and (C and D) capacitance elements as extracted from fittings of the impedance spectra obtained under (A and B) open-circuit (OC) and (C and D) non-open-circuit (NOC) conditions using the equivalent circuit model for (red) MAPbI3 and (blue) CsPbBr3 based devices. Under NOC conditions, parameters are plotted versus the series corrected potential Vd = Vappl − Vseries.	 

MAPbI3	OC	0.56 – 0.5	0.81 – 0.75	Flat	0.80 – 0.77
NOC	0.15 – 0.13	0.51 – 0.46	Flat	0.46 – 0.42
CsPbBr3	OC	0.51 – 0.43	No signal	Flat	No signal
NOC	0.15 – 0.11	0.46 – 0.40	Flat	1.46 – 0.4

 	Fig. 5  High frequency resistances under OC conditions corrected for the optical band gap of each perovskite.	 
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 6  Charge collection efficiency as predicted from eqn (9) if the Rrec is temptatively assumed to be equal to RHF. Inset: comparison between the prediction of eqn (9) at short-circuit with Rrec ≈ RHF and the stationary value of the IQE for a batch of MAPbI3 devices.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Scanning electron microscopy images, UV-Vis and EDX spectra, characteristic photovoltaic parameters, Nyquist impedance spectra and impedance–frequency plots under different conditions, electron recombination resistances, HF time constant and collection efficiency versus potential. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta02808k
‡ Lidia Contreras-Bernal and Susana Ramos-Terrón have equally contributed to the paper.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
