Transition metal silicides: fundamentals, preparation and catalytic applications  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CY00533A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CY00533A
(Minireview)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 4785-4820Transition metal silicides: fundamentals, preparation and catalytic applications

        
          
            Xiao 
            Chen
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Changhai 
            Liang
          
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Laboratory of Advanced Materials and Catalytic Engineering, School of Chemical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China. E-mail: changhai@dlut.edu.cn
Received 
      18th March 2019
    , Accepted 30th July 2019First published on 2nd August 2019AbstractTransition metal silicides as typical intermetallic compounds are important in microelectronics and ceramics because of their good electrical conductivity, high chemical inertness and thermal stability. Recently, transition metal silicides have become indispensable constituents in catalytic systems for a variety of applications due to their specific crystal and electronic structures different from those of their component metals. In this review, an overview of recent development in transition metal silicide nanomaterials as catalysts is presented. The chemical and physical properties of metal silicides are briefly discussed. The properties of transition metal silicides depend to a large extent on the way that they were made or processed, this being a consequence of different structures. The synthetic strategies for transition metal silicides from traditional high-temperature methods to emerging technology for nanomaterials are also discussed. Then we will summarize the application of transition metal silicides as heterogeneous catalysts and explain their excellent selectivity to the intermediate product in hydrogenation reactions and high stability in the harsh environment of hydrotreatment reactions. Furthermore, CNT growth processes over metal silicides catalysts are presented. The use of transition metal silicides as photocatalysts and electrocatalysts is also discussed. Finally, some key challenges and issues which should not be ignored during the development of transition metal silicide catalysts are pointed out. These strategies and challenges of transition metal silicides promote the investigation of the surface catalytically active centers and confirm the structure–catalytic property relationships.Xiao ChenXiao Chen obtained his BSc in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Hunan University, China (2008) and his PhD from Dalian University of Technology, China (2013). He was a lecturer in chemical engineering at Dalian University of Technology (2013–2015) until he was promoted as an associate professor of chemical technology (2015). He then spent about 1 year at Technische Universität Chemnitz, Germany, as a postdoctoral fellow. His research focuses on the application of intermetallic compounds in catalysis.Changhai LiangChanghai Liang has been a professor in the School of Chemical Engineering at Dalian University of Technology, China since 2006. He earned his PhD in Physical Chemistry from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP), CAS in 2000. He successively became an assistant professor and associated professor at DICP in 2001 and 2003. He then spent about 3 years at the Ruhr University of Bochum, Germany, and ETH in Zurich, Switzerland, as an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow and postdoctoral fellow. His research interests include design of new catalytic materials and catalytic reaction kinetics for energy conversion, environmental protection, and fine chemicals synthesis.
1 Introduction
Transition metal silicides represent a rich variety of intermetallic compounds, and have specific crystal and electronic structures different from those of their component metals.1 To date, more than 100 binary metal silicides have been found.2 For metal elements, most of them (including transition metals, rare earth and actinide metals) may react with silicon to generate an intermetallic compound, while only a few metals (Hg and Tl) do not react with silicon, and some metals (such as Al, Ga, In, Zn, Sn, Cd, Sb, Ag, and Au) can react with silicon to form a low eutectic alloy. Transition metal silicides have received much attention because of their unique physical and chemical properties,3 such as high thermal stability, low electrical resistivity, low work function, and low density. Such metal silicide materials could meet the requirements of modern technological applications, including nanoelectronics, field emitters, spintronics, thermoelectrics, and catalysis.
As new catalytic materials, metal silicides as intermetallic compounds have received growing attention. Fig. 1 clearly shows the annual increase in the number of publications on intermetallic and silicide catalysts. Transition metal silicides not only present unique catalytic properties in traditional heterogeneous catalytic reactions, including hydrogenation, dehydrogenation, methanation, growth of carbon nanotubes and so on, but also emerge in new catalytic reactions (photocatalysis and electrocatalysis). However, most metal–silicon systems contain multiple phases, which could lead to the misunderstanding of the detailed growth mechanisms and confusion over the structure–catalytic property relationships. In addition, metal silicides derived from the microelectronic industry have low surface areas and are nonporous, which restrict the application of metal silicides in catalysis. Therefore, it is necessary to carry out systematic and in-depth research in the preparation and catalytic application of transition metal silicides as new catalytic materials for industrial application, which will further enrich and develop the content of catalysis science and technology. There are very few short reviews on the thermodynamics of metal silicides and their application in electronic components.1–3 Although metal silicides as promising inorganic catalyst materials have been mentioned in reviews of intermetallic compound catalysts,4,5 the literature based on the fundamentals, preparation, and catalytic properties of transition metal silicides as novel catalysts has not been covered yet and will be considered in this review. This will provide a summary of the interest in transition metal silicides as heterogeneous catalysts, paying particular attention to the chemical and physical properties, the preparation methods (especially chemical methods), and catalytic properties based on the catalytic reaction type. The review is written in a simple and elaborate way in order to attract the attention of chemists and engineers to metal silicides in catalysis and guide them to design innovative catalytic materials based on the reaction.
 Fig. 1  Annual increases in the number of publications which include topics such as “catalyst” and “intermetallic” or “silicide”, as determined by Web of Science searches. 
2 Chemical and physical properties of metal silicides
There is a complex phase behaviour and stoichiometry between metals and silicon in transition metal silicides, leading to various structures of the resulting compounds. For example, the bulk phase diagram of nickel and silicon (as shown in Fig. 2) is unusually complex with crystallographically distinct equilibrium phases: β-Ni3Si, Ni5Si2, σ-Ni2Si, Ni3Si2, NiSi, and NiSi2.6 The various crystal structures of metal silicides mainly include cubic (C1, L12, DO3, and B2), hexagonal, tetragonal, and complex structures.7Table 1 summarizes the typical crystal structures of transition metal silicides.8 It clearly shows that transition metal silicides have multiple structures, which are different from the corresponding metals, leading to confusion over the structure–property relationships to some extent.
 Fig. 2  Ni–Si phase diagrams. Reprinted with permission from ASM International.6 
Table 1 The typical crystal structures of transition metal silicides8




Crystal structure
Metal silicide




Orthorhombic
ZrSi2-type
TiSi2, ZrSi2


FeB-type
ZrSi



anti-PbCl2
Ca2Si


Hexagonal
CrSi2 type
CrSi2, VSi2, NbSi2, TaSi2


Mn5Si3 type
Ti5Si3, Zr5Si3


Cr5Si3 type
V5Si3, Cr5Si3, Mo5Si3, W5Si3


Ni3Sn type
Ta4.5Si


AlB2 type
YSi2


Tetragonal
CaC2 type
MoSi2, WSi2, ReSi2


U3Si2 type
Zr3Si2


Cr5B3 type
Nb5Si3, Ta5Si3


CuAl2 type
Zr2Si, Ta2Si


Cubic
FeSi type
CrSi


β-W
V3Si, Cr3Si, Mo3Si


β-Mn
Cu5Si


Fluorite type
Mg2Si, CoSi2, NiSi2


Random BCC
Mn3Si


Fe3Al
Fe3Si




When Si atoms in transition metal silicides inserts into the lattice of the transition metal, the d-atomic orbitals of the transition metal repel one another, a jumping level is reduced, and the d band is narrowed. The resonance energy shifts to higher binding energy, which causes the weakening of d-electron bonding strength and the loss of cohesive energy. In order to compensate for this loss, the energy states of Si and metal will inevitably couple, so that the formed state is closer than the original bonding states. These filled bonding orbitals lead to the strengthening of the bonds, which leads to the strong stability of metal silicides.9–11 Theoretical calculations and a large number of experimental data show that the strong interaction presents the tracks between the p-silicon and d-metal. Fig. 3 shows the electronic chart of metal silicides with different stoichiometries. Following the site isolation concept, the covalent interactions between the metal and silicon in metal silicides stabilize the isolated active metal sites on the catalyst surface, which may improve the selectivity and stability. In addition, the strong metal–silicon interactions offset the chemical shift scale, with the “positive shift” indicating a more atom-like ground state than that in the corresponding metal, like MoSi2, caused by the strongly altered electronic structure. However, certain metal silicides show semiconductive properties with a narrow bandgap, like FeSi or β-FeSi2, and the ability to achieve optimum doping levels typical of conventional thermoelectric materials.12,13 Recently, 3C-type-SiC and Mg2Si with a “floating electronic state”, Mn19Si33 nanowires with a Nowotny chimney ladder structure, CrSi2, etc. have opened new opportunities for enhancing thermoelectric properties.14–16
 Fig. 3  The electronic chart of metal silicides with different stoichiometries. Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 1981 IOP Publishing. 
Aside from the metal–silicon bonds in metal silicides which influence the electronic properties, the silicon–silicon bond is also very important in solid state silicides. The formation of this bond decreases the valence state of the Si ion, and gives us difficulty in determining the valence state of the Si ion. For example, there are two bonds for Si2− atoms with Si–Si distances of 0.25 nm in BaSi, while there is a Si46− unit with five Si–Si bonds in Ba3Si4.17 Therefore, it is very important to analyze the structure to understand the intrinsic characteristics of metal silicides.
Due to their special geometry and electronic structure, transition metal silicides present significantly different physical and chemical properties compared with their component metals, including the melting point, resistivity, and chemical stability. Transition metal silicides as typical intermetallic compounds generally have a high melting point.18 The melting point of refractory metal silicides is higher than 2000 °C. The melting point of silicon-rich silicides corresponds to the melting point of the metal, and increases with that of the metal. In addition, the melting point increases within the group as one goes from the lighter to heavier metal for refractory silicides, while there is no such trend among noble metal silicides. These correlations strongly support the notion that silicide characteristics are strongly influenced by the metal electronic structure. At the same time, metal silicides tend to have lower resistivity (generally below 100 μΩ cm), which is 10 times less than that of polysilicon,3 such as Pd2Si (30–35 μΩ cm), ZrSi2 (35–40 μΩ cm), TiSi2 (13.16 μΩ cm), TaSi2 (35–55 μΩ cm), VSi2 (50–55 μΩ cm), and WSi2 (30–70 μΩ cm). What is more, certain binary and ternary metal silicides present superconductivity, for example, CoSi2 (Tc ∼ 2 K), LaIr2Si2 (Tc ∼ 1.6 K), LaRhSi3 (Tc ∼ 2.3 K), and Lu2Fe3Si5 (Tc ∼ 6.1 K).19,20 In addition, metal silicides also have good high temperature stability and strong resistance to electromigration, which present great value in the electrical characteristics.1,3
Because most transition metal silicides have high silicon content, they have good resistance to oxidation and corrosion and good chemical stability, and they are generally insoluble in alkaline solutions and inorganic acids (except for hydrofluoric acid). It is worth mentioning that some metal silicides also have good resistance to sulfur. Searcy et al. reported the calculation of the stability of metal silicides in the presence of H2S as shown in the hypothetical equation below (eqn (1)).21,22 MnSi + (n/m)H2S → (n/m)MmS + (n/m)H2 + Si(1)
As shown in Table 2, the resulting Gibbs free energy change is positive, which indicates that metal silicides can tolerate a much higher H2S concentration than the corresponding carbides, nitrides, and phosphides. It can be speculated that the stability of transition metal silicides tends to increase on moving to the right of the periodic table. Thus, transition metal silicides present potential value for many reactions involving sulfur compounds.
Table 2 The specific enthalpy of reaction between metal silicides and H2S (ref. 21)




Compound
Reaction
ΔG700K° (kcal mol−1)




IV B
TiSi → TiS
−18 ± 4


TiSi → TiS2
−38 ± 4


VII B
MnSi → MnS
−12


MnSi → MnS2
−1


VIII
FeSi → FeS
9


FeSi → FeS2
6


OsSi → OsS
3 ± 5


OsSi → OsS2
8 ± 5


CoSi → CoS2
14


IrSi → Ir2S3
11 ± 5


IrSi → IrS2
12 ± 5


NiSi → NiS
12


PtSi → PtS
9 ± 5


PtSi → PtS2
16 ± 5




3 Preparation methods of metal silicides
3.1 Dual-source precursors to prepare metal silicides

3.1.1 Arc melting. 
Depending upon the involved elements, metal silicides can be synthesized by the use of an induction furnace, an arc-melter or by powder metallurgical methods. In all cases, the synthesis will start from high purity elements in an inert atmosphere (glovebox, O2 and H2O levels below 0.1 ppm) and involve an appropriate temperature treatment in sealed metal or quartz glass ampoules to achieve thermodynamic equilibrium. Binary phase diagrams guide the synthesis concerning the elemental composition and necessary heat treatment. As a result, homogeneous and single-phase samples in thermodynamic equilibrium are obtained, allowing for highly reproducible synthesis. To date, a large number of binary metal silicides, such as CoSi, ultrafine Cu3Si, Y5Si3, and Mn11Si19, have been synthesized.23–27 This method avoids any support materials and leads to well-defined single-phase model metal silicides, in which the influence of the crystal and electronic structures on the intrinsic catalytic properties can be evaluated. However, as the metal silicide prepared by arc melting usually has large grains, it should be crushed and screened before being used as a catalyst. In addition, some ternary or multiple metal silicides, for example the Co2FeSi Heusler alloy, LaFe11.6Si1.4, (Ru1−xCox)2FeSi alloy, orthorhombic ScRuSi, NbOsSi, TaOsSi, LaScSi, LaCu0.67Si1.33, LaCoSi, and LnNiSi (Ln = La–Nd), were successfully prepared by arc melting, and were applied to magnetic technologies, superconductors, thermoelectric technologies, and catalysis.26,28–35


3.1.2 Self-propagating high temperature synthesis. 
Self-propagating high temperature synthesis (SHS) is one of the simplest and most convenient methods for preparing metal silicides. Basically, the exothermicity of the chemical reaction (M + nSi → MSin) can sustain the propagation of a combustion wave through the sample. At the same time, synthesis and consolidation occur in a few seconds during the SHS process. The SHS process has been successfully applied to the synthesis of numerous transition metal silicides, such as MoSi2, Ti5Si3, ZrSi2, Ta5Si3, V5Si3, Nb5Si3, TiSi2, Mg2Si, NiSi, Ni2Si, FeSi2, and Cu3Si.36–43 Generally, the starting materials (metal and silicon) are carefully mixed together and pressed into specimens of cylindrical shape. Through controlling the charge composition and the initial temperature, metal silicides with a pure phase can be synthesized successfully. Table 3 shows the phase composition and combustion temperature of typical metal silicides. Recently, assisted SHS methods have been developed to synthesize silicides. Gras et al. used KNO3 as an additive to enhance the SHS type reactivity in the Fe–Si system, significantly promoting the formation of fine FeSi + α-FeSi2.42 The gas released by the decomposition of KNO3 not only acts as a transport agent but also creates numerous pores due to intensive out-gassing. Although the SHS method can manufacture metal silicides rapidly, it is still a challenge to achieve metal silicides with a pure phase. Therefore, there is great development space to couple the SHS process with other technologies to synthesize pure metal silicides.
Table 3 The phase composition and combustion temperature of typical metal silicides




Silicide
Si/Me at%

T
propagation/K

T
combustion/K
Ref.




MoSi2
2.0
—
1930

36



Ti5Si3
0.6
—
2190

36



ZrSi2
2.0
—
2090

36



NiSi
1
—
813

37



Ni2Si
0.5
—
893

37



Cu3Si
0.33
453
823

38



Ta5Si3
0.6
—
2238

39



V5Si3
0.6
373
1463

40



Nb5Si3
0.6
473
1873

40



TiSi2
2
473
1543

41



Mg2Si
0.5
873
—

42



FeSi + α-FeSi2
2 (additive KNO3)
773
2000

43







3.1.3 Mechanical alloying. 
Mechanical alloying (MA), a high energy ball milling process, has established itself as a viable solid state processing route for the synthesis of a variety of equilibrium and non-equilibrium phases and phase mixtures, in which elemental blends are milled to achieve alloying.44 Since MA can achieve atomic level alloying and the resulting material has the advantages of uniform composition, fine grain size, low cost, high volume, and simple processing, it is also an important method for the synthesis of transition metal silicide nanomaterials through the inter-diffusion or solid-state reaction between the metal and Si. To date, this technique has been successfully applied to the synthesis of metal silicides, such as Ni–Si,45 Fe–Si,46 Mo–Si,47,48 Cr–Si,49 and Ti–Si.49 The synthesis schematics of metal silicides by the mechanochemical process is shown in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  The synthesis schematics of metal silicides by the mechanochemical process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
Blair et al. synthesized nanocrystalline ZrSi2 ranging from 9–30 nm in size by mechanochemical metathesis reactions.50 The size was controlled through dilution with CaCl2. A linear relationship was found between the diluent concentration and crystallite size. Unlike typical self-propagating metathesis reactions, this reaction did not self-propagate, requiring the input of mechanical energy. In addition, Zamani et al. synthesized the nanocomposite of MoSi2–Mo5Si3 powder by mechanical alloying from a Mo and Si powder mixture at room temperature using ball milling.51 In the early stages of ball milling, β-MoSi2 was produced. However, with continued milling for 48 h, α-MoSi2 and Mo5Si3 phases were formed. Chen et al. synthesized a Mo5Si3–20%Al2O3 (mass fraction) nanocomposite by MA of a mixture of MoO3, Mo, Si, and Al powders.52 The spontaneous reaction of powders takes place in an explosive mode. With a longer milling time, the intensities of Mo5Si3 and Al2O3 peaks decreased and became broad due to the decrease in crystallite size. Recently, an Fe3Si–Al2O3 nanocomposite has been prepared by our group through mechanical alloying of an Fe3O4, Al, and Si powder mixture and heat treatment.53 The crystalline transformations occur from the raw materials to the Fe3Si–Al2O3 nanocomposite during mechanical alloying and annealing and from Fe to Fe3Si to a mixture of Fe3Si, Fe5Si3 and FeSi with the increase in the proportion of Si in the raw materials. Recently, the formation mechanism of metal silicides by MA has been clearly understood. On the one hand, elements with low solubility or that are immiscible were formed as supersaturated solid solutions by MA. On the other hand, MA promotes the rise of energy storage in the system, in which each component is activated, giving rise to a chemical reaction that requires high temperatures to prepare metal silicide materials.


3.1.4 Solid-state metathesis reactions. 
Solid-state metathesis (SSM) reactions have been found to be an effective synthetic route for the preparation of a large number of materials.54–57 These solid–solid reactions are extremely rapid (typically less than 1 second) and often can be initiated at or near room temperature. They are potentially useful for controlling the product particle size and preparing high quality cationic or anionic solid solutions. In 1992, Kaner et al. reported for the first time the SSM method which couples reactive solid metal halides with alkali metal-main group compounds rapidly via exothermic reactions leading to crystalline products and alkali halide salt by-products.54 These SSM reactions provide synthetic control over product crystallinity, homogeneity, and phase. Important compounds as diverse as metal oxides, phosphides, sulfides, nitrides, and silicides have been synthesized using SSM synthesis. A generalized reaction scheme is shown below: MXm + mAYn → MYz + mAX + [(m × n) − z]Y(2)where M represents a metal, X is a halide, A is an alkali metal, and Y is a nonmetal or metalloid.
According this rapid SSM reaction, they have synthesized MoSi2, as well as WSi2, TaSi2, and NbSi2 by the reaction between a high oxidation state metal halide and an alkaline earth silicide.57 These reactions take advantage of the large exothermic heat of formation of the alkaline earth halide and can reach temperatures as high as the melting point of the product silicides. Recently, this SSM reaction was also utilized to synthesize nanocrystalline ZrSi2 ranging from 9–30 nm in size by using ZrCl4 with CaSi. The size was controlled through dilution with CaCl2.50 A linear relationship was found between the diluent concentration and crystallite size. Unlike typical self-propagating SSM reactions, this reaction did not self-propagate, requiring the input of mechanical energy.
Given the relative refractory nature of metal silicides and their resistance to oxidation, Parkin et al. reported the metathesis of metal silicides utilising a metal oxide as a substrate.58–61 They found that reactions of transition metal oxides (V2O3, V2O5, Nb2O5, LiNbO3, Ta2O5, LiTaO3, MoO3, and Li2MoO4) with lithium silicide (Li2Si) and a calcium silicide–magnesium silicide mix (CaSi2, Mg2Si) could be initiated by grinding, flame, filament or bulk thermal methods to produce a range of single phase transition metal silicides (VSi2, NbSi2, TaSi2, and MoSi2) in good yields (approximately 90%). The reactions were carried out in an ampoule that was evacuated and sealed. The products were triturated with dilute HCl and rinsed with distilled water to achieve the metal silicides. A number of cases resulting in the bulk-produced single-phase metal silicides follow the reaction scheme: M2O5 + 2Mg2Si + CaSi2 → 2MSi2 + 4MgO + CaO (M = V, Nb, Ta)(3) Nb2O5 + 2Li2Si → 2NbSi2 + 4Li2O + 1/2O2(4)
Aside from using an alkaline earth silicide as a Si source in the SSM reaction, silicon powder can also be used as the reaction substrate. Buhro et al. reported that the reaction of MoCl3 and Si at 500 °C produced phase-pure MoSi2 powders in near-quantitative yields.62 The use of an inert diluent (LiCl or ZnCl2) enables the production of nanocrystalline powders. In addition, individual reactions of nanosize grains of group 6 metal carbides, M2C (M = Cr, Mo, and W), with 5 equivalents of silicon powder under relatively mild conditions of 1000 °C for 4 h gave nanosize grains of metal silicide–silicon carbide composite materials consisting of intermetallic silicide alloys CrSi2, MoSi2–Mo5Si3, and WSi2–W5Si3.63,64


3.1.5 Molten salt reaction technology. 
The use of molten salt reaction technology is a traditional solid-state chemistry synthesis technique. Recently, several classes of metal silicides have been synthesized using molten salt solvents. Its principle is that silicon-containing precursors are reduced to produce the metal silicide nanomaterials by using molten salts as an inorganic solvent and metal K, Na, or Mg as a reducing agent. The advantages of molten salt synthesis, as compared to a vapour phase process, include enhanced control of the solubility of the precursors, low vapour pressure at elevated temperatures, high electrochemical stability, and the promise of potential industrial scalability. In addition, molten salt syntheses allow better kinetic reaction control and afford particles with a smaller size, compared to classic solid-state reactions.
Recently, Liu et al. reviewed the progress in molten salt reactions of inorganic materials, including oxides, ceramic powders, semiconductors, and carbon nanostructures, especially metal silicides.65 Metal silicides have weaker covalent bonding strength compared to borides and carbides, and practically they can be accessed with much better crystallinity at mild temperatures lower than 1000 °C. Qian et al. successfully synthesized nano-crystalline metal silicides (VSi2, NbSi2, CrSi2, MoSi2, WSi2, FeSi, TiSi2, and YSi2) using metal chloride and silicon sources (Si, SiCl4, or Na2SiF6) as starting materials and K or Na as a strong reducing agent via a reduction–silication route at 650 °C in a molten salt solution of MgCl2 and NaCl in an autoclave.66–68 The particles as observed from an electron microscope are 20–60 nm in size and oxidation resistant. On the other hand, Mg2Si-reduction can also be applied in molten salt reaction technology to prepare Mn5Si3 with an interesting structure of nano-cages and bamboo-like nanotubes.69 Jin et al. reported a novel synthesis of Ti5Si3 NPs via the magnesio-reduction of TiO2 NPs and SiO2 in eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salts at 700 °C, as shown in Fig. 5.70 The Ti5Si3 particle size (ca. 25 nm) is confined to the nanoscale due to the partial dissolution of Mg and silica in the molten salts. The formation mechanism of Ti5Si3 occurs via the reduction of metal oxides by the electrons that come from dissolved Mg, solvated in the eutectic salt.
 Fig. 5  The reaction mechanism and SEM and TEM images of the Ti5Si3 NPs prepared with molten salts. Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.6 Microwave assisted synthesis. 
Microwave (MW) heating techniques have been known to offer faster, simpler, and more cost-effective processes, often affording high-yield, high-purity products. The fast synthesis is attributed to the nature of microwave volumetric heating and to the associated thermal runaway effect, which lead to smaller grain size and consequently to better mechanical properties and improved product uniformity.71 MW synthesis is not only commonplace in synthetic organic and solution-phase chemistry, but also in solid state chemistry.72 Recently, carbides, borides, halides, nitrides, and chalcogenides have all been prepared via solid-state microwave synthesis from precursors that included powdered metals, metal oxides, or metal halides.73–77 A logical extension of this work would be to synthesize metal silicides via the solid-state microwave synthetic method. As shown in Table 4, a variety of silicides have been synthesized through MW assisted technology by a number of different groups.
Table 4 Examples of some silicides successfully synthesized by MW methods




Silicide
Initial reactants
Power and duration of MW exposure
Ref.




Li21Si5
Li foil and Si powder
720–540 W, 5 min

78



Mg2Si
Mg powder and Si powder
2.45 GHz, 175 W, 2 min

79, 80


CoSi, CoSi2
Co powder and Si powder
2.45 GHz, 0–3 kW, 50–100 s

81



Mo5Si3
Mo powder and Si powder
2.45 GHz, 0–3 kW, 150 s

82



Pd2Si
H2 + Pd/Si substrate
2.45 GHz and 500 W

83



CoSi2
Co, Si, and C powder
2.45 GHz, 980 W, 9–15 min

84



WSi2
W, Si, and C powder
2.45 GHz, 980 W, 9–15 min

84



TiSi2
Ti, Si, and C powders
2.45 GHz, 980 W, 9–15 min

84



MoSi2
Mo, Si, and C powder
2.45 GHz, 980 W, 9–15 min

84



CoSix/CNTs
CoCl2, CNTs, Si powder
2.45 GHz, 800 W, 10–30 min

85



CoSix/CNTs
Co/CNTs + Cl2Si(CH3)2
2.45 GHz, 800 W, 10–30 min

86





Gedanken et al. synthesized a type of intermetallic lithium alloy (Li21Si5) for the first time using a microwave-assisted solid-state reaction.78 Gascoin et al. successfully synthesized Mg2Si nanoparticles (NPs) of less than 100 nm through the microwave irradiation of mixtures of elemental powders of Mg and Si prepared by high energy ball milling under dry conditions.79,80 Elemental silicon easily absorbs the microwave radiation and a fairly low power is enough to warm it up while it is not possible to heat magnesium powder pressed in a puck at such a low power; thus, the reaction between magnesium and silicon can be initiated by microwave irradiation through the heating of the silicon particles. This synthetic method was also employed in the synthesis of bulk CoSi and CoSi2 and single-phase Mo5Si3.81,82 In addition, Joshi et al. reported that vertically aligned Pd2Si nanowires (NWs) with Pd on tip have been grown using microwave plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition (CVD) via root growth through the VLS mechanism in a hydrogen atmosphere with a high degree of reproducibility, as shown in Fig. 6.83 When hydrogen acts as a catalyst, it reacts with Pd to form Pd–H, and with Si to form Si–H4 as intermediate states, making them available for Pd2Si formation as the temperature increases during the growth in the microwave environment.
 Fig. 6  Schematic representation of different stages of Pd2Si nanowire growth via the VLS mechanism using MPECVD growth. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
Taking into consideration that some reactants are not good microwave susceptors, Vaidhyanathan et al. employed a secondary heater (i.e., as an in situ inert heating source) in the microwave field to initiate the reaction, which made the synthesis of new phase compounds from the chemically inert microwave coupling material successful.84 As is known, carbon powder is also a good microwave susceptor and gets heated rapidly. Technologically important transition metal silicides such as MoSi2, WSi2, CoSi2, and TiSi2 have been thus prepared using amorphous carbon which acts both as a secondary heater and as a preventer of oxidation in a microwave assisted reaction.
Compared with amorphous carbon and SiC, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are also a good candidate microwave susceptor, which have been used as catalyst supports and showed an enhancement effect on the catalytic activity due to their unique mechanical, chemical and electrochemical properties. In our previous research, CoSix/CNT catalysts with different phases (CoSi and CoSi2) have been rapidly synthesized via a microwave-assisted route, in which the CNTs act as both the absorbing material and support.85 Accordingly, by tuning the microwave irradiation time and the mole ratio between CoCl2/Si, the formation mechanism of the cobalt silicide NPs could be expressed by the following reaction equation: 2CoCl2(s) + (2x + 1) Si(s) → 2CoSix(s) + SiCl4(g)(5)When the Si/Co ratio is increased, CoSi as a metastable phase will further react with silicon powder to form the CoSi2 phase. Solid-state microwave synthesis of cobalt silicide is not an isolated phenomenon for a few selected substances. So, the reaction between the metal and the added material as an absorber of microwave radiation may proceed to form alloys or intermetallic compounds. According to this hypothesis, other transition metal silicides, such as FeSi, Ni2Si, and Cu4Si, have been successfully synthesized by this novel methodology.
In addition, microwave synthesis has the advantages of rapid heating and low energy consumption, and can be combined with the CVD method to prepare metal silicides. In our previous research, using dimethyldichlorosilane substituted silicon powder as a Si source, carbon material supported CoSix catalysts have been rapidly synthesized via a microwave-assisted chemical vapour deposition method.86–88 This unique microwave-assisted CVD method provides the possibility of controlling the particle size and phase, which makes it a promising way to avoid particle agglomeration.


3.1.7 Chemical vapour deposition. 
3.1.7.1 Reactions of metal sources with silicon substrates. 
The application of metals or anhydrous metal halides as the transition metal source for the reaction with Si substrates has proven to be a general and popular method to synthesize silicides.89 Yu et al. fabricated TiSi2 NWs on a large scale by a simple vapour phase deposition method, using pure Ti metal powder as the titanium source.90 Park and co-workers reported this technique as a facile way to produce FeSi NWs using FeCl3.91 Li et al. successful synthesized various nanocrystals silicides (FeSi and CoSi) from metal chloride precursors via atmospheric pressure chemical vapour deposition (APCVD).92 Kim et al. further used a two zone furnace to gain better control of the metal halide vapour pressure.93 Typically, a halide precursor is vaporized in the upstream zone of a furnace, kept ca. 500 °C, and the substrate is held at 900 °C during the course of the reaction. Using this approach, NWs of MSix (M = Cr, Fe, V, Co, Ti, Mn, Ni, W, Ta, etc.) have been prepared by the reaction of a halide and silicon as a substrate.94–107 Although no convincing mechanism has been reported, vapour–solid (VS) mechanisms are usually proposed based largely on the delicate dependence of halide supersaturation on the resultant silicide morphology and phase. Fig. 7 shows the schematic illustration of the growth mechanism of Ni2Si NWs.104 At lower pressures, the halides become more volatile and metal-rich phases are preferred. Metal chlorides are well known to react with Si to produce SiCl4, MSix, and/or Cl2. SiCl4 likely provides vapor-phase Si that could decompose to form elemental silicon or silicide, releasing more Cl2 into the vapor phase.
 Fig. 7  The schematic illustration of the growth mechanism of Ni2Si NWs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104 licensee Springer 2013. 
3.1.7.2 Decomposition of silicon on metal materials. 
One of the approaches for producing silicide nanostructures as reported in the literature is the delivery of one of the components of the aforementioned material (MSix) in the form of vapour, liquid or solid to the other element as a substrate. This approach can be advantageous as fewer gas phase species simplify the experiments. Since silicon has a melting point of over 1400 °C, it would be impractical to deliver silicon as single element vapour. Instead the use of SiH4 and organic Si (SiCl4, (CH3)2SiCl2, etc.) has been reported to have successfully been employed for silicide synthesis at temperatures ranging from 320–600 °C.
At first, the decomposition of silicon on metal materials by CVD was used to modify the surface of the metal, which changed the nature of the coating and catalytic properties.108–111 And then, this method has been widely applied for the synthesis of metal silicides (Ni2Si, Ni3Si2, NiSi, NiSi2, Fe3Si, FeSi2, Ta5Si3, Pt–Si, Pd–Si, Ni1−xCoxSi2, and Ni1−xFexSi2).112–127 Xie et al. reported that a large amount of Ni2Si NWs sheathed with amorphous silicon oxide was generated from Ni substrates, for the first time, by thermal CVD using SiH4 gas at 500 °C.112 Yang et al. also achieved nickel silicide nanowire arrays by the decomposition of SiH4 on a Ni foil at 650°C.113 A Ni diffusion controlled mechanism is proposed to explain the formation of the nickel silicide NWs, as shown in Fig. 8. Generally, silane decomposes onto the Ni surface, leading to the growth and elongation of Ni2Si nanocrystals. These nanocrystals continue to elongate, decreasing the available area for Ni diffusion along the surface. Eventually the Ni incorporation rate through diffusion equals the rate of silane decomposition (or Si addition), resulting in the formation and propagation of thin, untampered Ni2Si NWs. In addition, through changing the temperature, they successfully synthesized dense single-crystalline Ni2Si, Ni3Si2, and NiSi NWs on a large-scale in the surface of a Ni foam via simple CVD of SiH4 at 450–600 °C.114 It is indicated that the reaction temperature and the flow rate of SiH4 play an important role in the control of phases and morphologies of nickel silicide nanostructures. Jo et al. have conducted a detailed investigation on the effect of the introduction of H2, O2, and N2 on the growth of nickel silicide.115,116 Under a H2 atmosphere, the deposition of only grains of NiSix and no NWs took place, while with N2 a mixture of both was produced, and with oxygen they successfully synthesized a large amount of Ni2Si NWs, which was the cause of NiOx formation on the surface. This oxide will give limited access for the diffusion of the Ni seeds underneath which ultimately results in the formation of nanostructures.
 Fig. 8  Preparation of Ni2Si NWs using a silane gas precursor and Ni foil. (a) The decomposition of SiH4 and the nucleation of Ni2Si; (b) Ni2Si grew one-dimensionally; (c) Ni2Si nanowires grew long; (d) the formation of Ni2Si tips. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2008 IOP Publishing. 
In our group, nickel silicides with different phases have been successfully synthesized by reduction and further SiH4/H2 silicification of high surface area nickel oxide NPs.117 Nickel silicide formation involves the following sequence as a function of increasing temperature: Ni (cubic) → Ni2Si (orthorhombic) → NiSi (orthorhombic) → NiSi2 (cubic). The insertion of Si atoms into the interstitial sites between Ni atoms resulted in a significant change in the unit cell lattice of nickel. Moreover, RANEY® Ni–Si catalysts were synthesized by treatment of RANEY® Ni with silane in a fluidized bed reactor.122 RANEY® Ni–Si catalysts were composed of a Ni core surrounded by nickel silicide intermetallic compounds, which transformed from Ni-rich silicide (Ni2Si) to Si-rich silicide (NiSi2) with increasing silicification temperature from 250 °C to 450 °C. Recently, the formation progress of nickel silicide thin films via a vapor–solid reaction by exposing thin (10 nm) Ni films to silane has been researched.118 The results indicate that the Si solubility governs the phase formation sequence, whereas the kinetics are determined by Ni diffusion and the reaction rate.
Using this direct silane silicification method, Fe@SiO2 and FeSi2@SiO2 NPs with a core@shell structure have successfully been synthesized.119 It was found that the amorphous SiO2 shell was formed to protect the core against oxidation when the reduced Fe2O3 NPs were silicified by silane. When the reduced Fe2O3 NPs were exposed to air, an Fe2O3 layer was formed. The structure of the core changed from cubic Fe to orthorhombic FeSi2 with increasing silicification temperature from 350 to 550 °C, due to the dissolution of Si atoms into the iron lattice. This novel methodology can be applied to synthesize Co@SiO2 and Ni@SiO2 with a core@shell structure. In addition, iron silicide NPs with various phases can be further controlled via thermal annealing of a core–shell structure Fe–FeSi2 sample at atmospheric pressure under Ar and H2 atmospheres.120
This silane CVD method can also be applied to synthesize ternary metal silicides and supported metal silicides (Si–Ni/SiO2).125–127 We reported the synthesis and characterization of ferromagnetic nickel-based ternary silicide (Ni1−xCoxSi2 and Ni1−xFexSi2) solid solution catalysts having large surface areas by the reaction of nickel-based oxide solid solutions with SiH4.126,127 The saturation magnetization of the Ni1−xCoxSi2 solid solutions with a fluorite structure can be controlled by changing the molar ratio of Ni to Co. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy provided further evidence that the valence electron concentration of Ni increased with increasing Co(Fe) substitution, enhancing the metal–silicon and metal–metal interactions. In addition, the Si sites in the silicides alter the metal coordination, leading to a strong modification of the electronic structure around the Fermi level of the metals. For supported silicides, we found that silicon–nickel intermetallic compounds (IMCs) supported on silica (Si–Ni/SiO2) can be prepared by direct silicification of Ni/SiO2 with silane at relatively low temperature in a fluidized bed reactor.125 TEM results indicated that uniform NiSix NPs with about 3–4 nm size are evenly dispersed on silica.
Aside from using SiH4 as a Si source for deposition on metal materials, organosilane precursors are also applied to synthesize metal silicides.124,128–131 For example, coatings of MoSi2–SiO2 with uniform thickness and excellent adhesion were successfully deposited onto the molybdenum substrate via CVD of SiCl4/H2 at relatively low temperatures.128 Single crystalline Ti5Si3 NWs with radially aligned architecture have been obtained on carbon micro fibers based on self-assembly growth by CVD of SiCl4 at atmospheric pressure.129 The growth mechanism of the NWs has been proposed as catalytic growth directed by gold particles based on the VLS mechanism. Lu et al. firstly synthesized branched nickel monosilicide (NiSi) NWs on Ni foams by laser-assisted CVD using disilane (Si2H6) precursor molecules.130 Studies indicated that 600°C was the threshold temperature for the growth of a large number of branched NiSi NWs with 100–500 nm long branches extending from the main stems. In our previous research, single phase Ni2Si NPs have been successfully synthesized by using the Rochow reverse reaction, namely CVD of organosilanes ((CH3)nSiCl4−n).131 The results demonstrated that the crystal size and phase of nickel silicide could be controlled through changing the organosilanes and reaction time. A formation mechanism of Ni2Si NPs has been proposed, as shown in Fig. 9. Organosilane requires catalytic reduction decomposition on the Ni surface to form Si atoms. H2 plays an important role in reducing NiO into metal Ni NPs and then metal Ni as a catalyst promotes the cleavage of Si–Cl and Si–CH3 bonds in a H2 atmosphere, producing molecules such as HCl, CH4, etc. The formed Si atoms isolated from the metal seed particle surface diffused into the crystal lattice of Ni NPs. The reaction temperature must be high enough to sustain the reverse Rochow reaction and keep the diffusion of Si atoms into the Ni NPs. However, the temperature cannot be so high that the agglomeration of NPs occurs to an appreciable extent.
 Fig. 9  The formation of Ni2Si NPs via the Rochow reverse reaction. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.1.7.3 Simultaneous metal and silicon deposition. 
CVD of silicon and metal gas phase sources is an effective way to prepare metal silicides, which can control the stoichiometry.132–134 Typically, polycrystalline cobalt silicide films have been prepared by CVD using Co2(CO)8 or HCo(CO)4 as the Co source and SiH4 or Si2H6 as the Si source.133 The Co:Si ratio of the films was controlled by changing the deposition temperature, and the CoSi2 stoichiometry was obtained at 300 °C using SiH4 or at 225 °C when Si2H6 was the Si precursor. Recently, Du et al. firstly used SiH4 and TiCl4 as precursors to prepare high-density single-crystalline orthorhombic TiSi nanorods and nanopins on a Ti5Si3 layer through CVD.135–137 The TiSi nanorods and nanopins grow along the [110] direction of the orthorhombic TiSi crystal from the bottom, with the tip being pushed upwards.
Hereafter, Wang et al. have successfully synthesized TiSi2 nanostructures with various complexities using the CVD method with SiH4 (10% diluted in He) and TiCl4 as precursors in a H2-rich environment at moderate temperatures (ca. 675 °C) without any catalyst.138–140 The surface energy differences between various crystal planes of orthorhombic TiSi2 (C54 and C49) play an important role in controlling the growth morphologies from one-dimensional (1D) NWs to two-dimensional (2D) nanonets and three-dimensional (3D) complexes, because of the specific atomic arrangements of Si and Ti on the surfaces. The growth mechanism of TiSi2 nanonets has been researched in depth, as shown in Fig. 10. The initiation of nanonet growth is dependent on the type of substrate used and the branch formation is driven by the reactions of the precursors at the growth tips. High-yield nanonets are only obtained on those exhibiting no or low reactivity with Si. The morphological complexity of the nanonet depends on the precursor concentrations but not on the growth duration. More TiCl4 results in nanonets with more complex structures. So far, the two-source CVD approach has not yet been shown to be general for other metal silicides, which is mainly attributed to the fact that it is hard to achieve independent control over Si and TM vapor pressures.
 Fig. 10  Schematics of the proposed mechanism governing the TiSi2 nanostructure growth. (a) The formation of nucleus; The elongation of C54 (b) and C49 (d) rods. (c and e) The branching is caused by the breaking of side passivations; (f) The produce of second-generation nanonets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 


3.1.8 Solution synthesis route. 
Metal silicides are typically synthesized using high-temperature methods. However, such methods do not produce nanostructures. For understanding the size- and dimension-dependent catalytic properties, lower-temperature synthetic methods are highly desirable because they can minimize sintering and grain growth while permitting control over the growth process and therefore the size and morphology of the product. In chemistry, solid-phase synthesis is a method in which molecules are bound on a bead and synthesized step-by-step in a reactant solution. Compared with normal synthesis in a liquid state, it is easier to remove the excess reactant or by-product from the product. In addition, solution-phase synthesis offers significantly lower production cost compared to gas-phase synthesis when considering relevant factors such as the throughput rate, equipment price, and process cost. A solvent-based environment provides versatile materials chemistry to produce a variety of high-quality NWs or complex structures. Therefore, the solution-phase synthesis method can tune the size, shape, composition of NPs through suitable control of the process conditions, which can be realized by the mesoscopic size control (chemical control and geometric control) of nanoparticles. To date, metal phosphides, carbides, and stannides have been synthesized widely by solution routes. However, it remains challenging to produce colloidal metal silicide NPs using all-solution, ambient-pressure routes.
Dahal et al. developed a high-temperature reduction method to prepare iron silicide NPs in solution phase.141 The synthesis involves a reaction of silicon tetrachloride with iron pentacarbonyl in the presence of 1,2-hexadecanediol to form iron silicide NPs. Under iron-rich synthetic conditions, superparamagnetic Fe3Si NPs form. The variation in mole ratios of reacting precursor molecules is the key to controlling the nanoparticle phase. TEM image presents that the as-prepared Fe3Si NPs have 4–7 nm. Schaak et al. reported a lower-temperature solution route to obtain colloidal metal silicide NPs.142 Colloidal metal NPs serve as reagents that transform into their corresponding metal silicides upon the injection of monophenylsilane into trioctylamine and squalane at 375 °C. TEM images of Pd2Si, Cu3Si, and Ni2Si products, along with the XRD patterns, are shown in Fig. 11. It indicates that the metal silicide particles are nanoscopic and discrete, with a mixture of pseudospherical and multifaceted morphologies that have diameters ranging from approximately 15 to 45 nm. Therefore, one advantage of solution-synthesized NPs is that they have high surface areas that maximize exposure of surface sites for heterogeneous catalysis.
 Fig. 11  Solution synthesis of metal silicide NPs: (a–c) Pd2Si; (d) Cu3Si; (e) Ni2Si. Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
In addition, high density arrays of Cu15Si4 NWs can be synthesized by using a high boiling point organic solvent-based method.143 The growth of Cu15Si4 NWs proceeds through the delivery of Si to the bulk copper foil using a simple glassware-based approach. The Si flux required for growth was formed by thermally decomposing phenylsilane (PS) in a high boiling point organic solvent (HBS) medium. Initially, a non-uniform thin film of Cu15Si4 is formed on the Cu surface consisting of large micrometer size crystalline grains. Once the metal surface is covered, the preferred Cu15Si4 crystal habit changes from large micrometer size grains to anisotropic NWs with diameters on the order of 100 nm. Single-crystalline Cu3Si nanowire arrays can also be synthesized in supercritical benzene, in which Cu3Si nanowire arrays were synthesized by thermal decomposition of monophenylsilane in the presence of copper films or copper substrates at 420 to 475 °C and 10.3 MPa.144 Solution-phase environments provide versatile materials chemistry as well as significantly lower production costs compared to gas-phase synthesis, which are adaptable for high-quality silicide nanowire growth and demonstrate their promise towards fabrication of metal silicides.
Since bulk metal silicides can be prepared by the solution route, it opens the road to prepare silicide colloids under mild conditions, which can be used as a versatile Ni precursor for more efficient supported catalysts. Thieuleux et al. reported that nickel-silicide colloids were obtained by bringing into contact a solution of Ni(COD)2 in THF with octylsilane under H2 (3 bar) at 55–65 °C.145 This protocol yields a deep black colloidal solution [NixSi–C8H17], presenting outstanding stability toward sedimentation (no evolution after 2 months under Ar). Since colloids can be easily dispersed on various oxides, the colloid has been supported on CeO2 (as shown in Fig. 12). The as-prepared catalyst displays high activity and stability in dry reforming compared to its analogues prepared using conventional approaches. In addition, a colloidal solution of Ni3Si2 nanoparticles can be synthesised by the same method, and has been studied as a promising alkene hydrosilylation catalyst.146 It is believed that improvement of solution synthesis can open the road to prepare single-phase and specific morphology metal silicide NPs that are environmentally friendly, cheaper, and technologically important.
 Fig. 12  Synthesis of nickel-silicide colloids and their conversion into supported Ni catalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 

3.2 Single-source precursor to prepare metal silicides

3.2.1 Metal organic chemical vapor deposition. 
Metal–organic precursors containing both transition metal and silicon atoms, as vapor phase source materials, are good candidates for synthesis of metal silicides. Single source precursors have been used in MOCVD to obtain metal silicide thin films, NWs, and highly dispersed supported catalysts in a controlled and reproducible manner to date. Compared with conventional multi-source CVD, MOCVD is an attractive and successful method, which allows simpler and safer experimental setups due to the elimination of highly hazardous liquid precursors, easier and precise control over stoichiometry, and higher quality material growth. By selecting simple inorganic molecules containing the metal and silicon that vaporize and decompose through well-known pathways, precise control of the stoichiometry of metal silicides can be achieved.
Transition metal–silicon compounds are thought to be precursors in metal silicide CVD processes.147 The main advantage compared with common precursors is the defined silicon to metal ratio. Aylett and Tannahill showed how CVD of appropriate volatile molecular compounds containing silicon–metal bonds can lead to silicide film formation on a variety of substrates. Thus pyrolysis of H3SiCo(CO)4, H3SiM(CO)5 (M = Mn, Re) and (H3Si)2Fe(CO)4 in a suitable flow system at 670–770 K produces CoSi, M5Si3 + MSix (x ≈ 1.25), and β-FeSi2, respectively.148 Given the availability of suitable volatile precursors with the required Si:M ratio, there is clearly potential for the formation of a wide range of silicide phases. It may be noted, however, that no really suitable precursors for metal silicides have yet been synthesized readily. Zybill et al. reported that (trichlorosilyl)metal carbonyls Co(CO)4SiCl3, Mn(CO)5SiCl3, and cis-Fe(CO)4(SiCl3)2 have been synthesized in high yields by reacting metal carbonyls with excess SiHCl3 in an inert atmosphere at 120 °C for 2 days,149 which readily decompose into metal silicides in the gas phase at elevated temperatures. Jin et al. have synthesized successfully a variety of metal silicide nanowires (FeSi, CoSi, and MnSi2−x (MnSi1.8)) on Si substrates with a thin (1–2 nm) silicon oxide layer by the MOCVD method using those single source precursors.150–154trans-Fe(CO)4(SiCl3)2 and Co(CO)4SiCl3 SSP mixtures can themselves form a liquid two-component single source precursor via melting point depression. This solution can be conveniently evaporated for vapour phase delivery resulting in the synthesis of Fe1−xCoxSi alloy NWs.155
In our previous research, metal silicide (CoSi, FeSi, and MnSi) NPs on silica have been firstly prepared by MOCVD of M(SiCl3)x(CO)y (M = Co, Fe, and Mn) as single source precursors at 400 °C and atmospheric pressure, respectively (as shown in Fig. 13).156–159 TEM images and high resolution TEM images revealed that metal silicide NPs with an average particle size of about 5 nm were evenly dispersed on the silica support. Such highly dispersed metal silicide NPs are particularly interesting for heterogeneous catalysis applications as discussed below.
 Fig. 13  Supported metal silicide NP catalysts prepared by metal organic chemical vapour deposition. 
The formation mechanism of metal silicide NPs on silica was investigated by in situ FTIR spectroscopy, as shown in Fig. 14.160 The results combined with relevant literature reports demonstrated that M(CO)x(SiCl3)y adsorbed on silica tended to lose one SiCl4 molecule firstly and transformed into M = SiCl2(CO)y, and metal silicide NPs formed finally through the elimination of carbonyl groups and dissociation of Si–Cl bonds with the promotion of H2. This result has been further confirmed by Chabal et al., who reported that an ALD process of the tBuAllylCo(CO)3 precursor using trisilane as a co-reactant is possible for the formation of CoSi2 thin films on oxide-free, H-terminated Si(111) surfaces.161 Therefore, as new developments occur in metal-silyl complexation chemistry, new single source precursors will be developed that allow other stoichiometries and new combinations of transition metals and silicon to be delivered via gas phase pyrolysis for the synthesis of metal silicides.
 Fig. 14  The formation mechanism of cobalt silicide on silica from Co(SiCl3)(CO)4 by in situ Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.2.2 Pyrolysis of metal-containing polysilane. 
Metal-containing polysilane as a single-source precursor is also a promising material for the synthesis of metal silicides, and offers a number of advantages over the conventional way. On the one hand, special functional groups enable further modification of the polymer to produce metal silicides with high purity and homogenous distribution of the elements. On the other hand, they allow for 3-dimensional cross-linking to an unmeltable polymer, which leads to the formation of metal silicides at relatively low temperatures (<1000 °C). However, this strategy was widely applied to the synthesis of non-oxide ceramics in the past decades. Recently published review articles summarize the interdisciplinary research devoted to polymer derived non-oxide ceramics modified with late transition metals and provide a guide towards earlier summaries and pioneering work in the field.162,163 In this review, we mainly focus on the synthesis of bulk and supported metal silicides through pyrolysis of single-source metal-containing polysilane.
In 1996, Manners prepared for the first time poly(ferrocenylsilanes) by thermal ring-opening polymerization of silicon-bridged ferrocenophanes (silaferrocenophanes), as shown in Fig. 15.164,165 Poly(ferrocenylsilanes) are a novel class of transition metal-containing macromolecules with a backbone that consists of alternating ferrocene and organosilane units. And then the synthesis of other metal-containing polysilane (Ni, Co, and Pd) has been reported successively. These metal-containing polysilane-derived metal silicides usually include metallopolymers and coordination compounds. For the metallopolymers, the metal atoms are already bonded to the monomer units before polymerisation, which can be pyrolyzed to obtain metal silicides. Meanwhile for the coordination compounds, metal transfer from the complex to the polymer chain can occur, giving rise to metal-modified precursors, which are cross-linked and pyrolyzed, yielding the metal silicides.166–171
 Fig. 15  Typically structural formulas of metal-containing polysilane: (a) poly(ferrocenylsilanes); (b) nickel-containing polycarbosilanes; (c) poly[{(diorganosilylene)diacetylene}-dicobalthexacarbonyls]. Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 1996 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Narisawa et al. used metal chlorides to modify a polymethylsilane precursor and got a mixture of SiC, Si, and MSix.168 Ishikawa et al. produced polyzirconocarbosilane using zirconium(IV) acetylacetonate and converted the polymer into Si–Zr–C–O fibers with some impurity of SiC, ZrC, and ZrSi.166,167 Using the same method, Si–C–N–Fe magnetoceramics were obtained by pyrolysis of iron-modified polysilazane (PFSZ) precursors which were synthesized by using PSZ and Fe(acac)3 as starting materials. In addition, pyrolysis of nickel-containing polycarbosilanes yielded ceramics with embedded Ni or Ni silicide NPs.169 By adjusting the pyrolysis temperature, it was possible to control the formation of either nickel (400 and 600 °C) or nickel silicide (Ni3Si and Ni31Si12) NPs (900 °C). The substituent group (phenyl or t-butyl), the clustering percentage and the pyrolysis time all influenced the yield and properties of metal silicide materials.170,171 Thermolysis of poly(ferrocenylsilane) at 1000 °C or poly[{(dimethylsilyl)ferrocenyl}diacetylene] at 850 °C resulted in ferromagnetic Fe3Si NPs, well distributed in a SiC/C matrix. The average size of the formed NPs, their size distribution and their agglomeration behaviour depend on the choice of polymer and the thermolysis conditions.
In our previous research, single-phase Ni2Si was synthesized by the temperature programmed pyrolysis method with polydimethylsilane–nickel acetylacetonate (PMS-Ni(acac)2) as a precursor in a H2/Ar mixture atmosphere at 600 °C.173 The structure and composition of nickel silicides can be tuned by changing the pyrolysis temperature and atmosphere. H2 can lower the temperature at which pure Ni2Si formed, while it can reduce Ni2Si to Ni at high temperature. For the catalytic applications of single-phase Ni2Si, see section 4.1.1. In addition, using the same method, Fe3Si NPs with a size of about 6–9 nm well dispersed on silica have been prepared by pyrolysis of ferrocene–polydimethylsilane composites at 600 °C.172 The average particle size increased with increasing pyrolysis temperature and a new phase, Fe5Si3, appeared when the pyrolysis temperature was above 800 °C.
Kong et al. reported that nickel silicide nanocrystals containing Si–Ni–C–N multiphase ceramics were synthesized by bulk pyrolysis of the mixture of polysilazane (PSZ) and nickelocene (NiCp2) at high temperature.174 The NiCp2 in polymeric precursors induced the formation of α-Si3N4, SiC, graphitic carbon, and Ni2Si at 1100 °C. In addition, they found a novel strategy to synthesize nanostructured iron silicide via direct bulk pyrolysis of hyperbranched polycarbosilanes without the assistance of nanoscaled templates.175 The regular architecture and quite higher silicide yield of polymeric precursors are superior in retaining iron and silicon that show a possibility to aggregate into regular nanocrystals during the bulk pyrolysis in comparison to their linear counterparts. Recently, a new and convenient phase separation assisted pyrolysis strategy for preparation of silicide microspheres has been reported.176,177 As shown in Fig. 16, with the assistance of centrifugal fractionation, Si–C–N–(Ni) microspheres with controlled morphology and uniform dimensions from the micro- to nanoscale were designed and prepared via the phase separation assisted pyrolysis strategy. The microspheres with a quaternary Si–C–N–Ni phase possessed dense structure, tuneable crystals, and ferromagnetic properties with an ultralow hysteresis loss. This convenient phase separation assisted pyrolysis strategy is expected to be useful as a general method for the design and synthesis of other functional silicide microspheres with well-controlled morphology.
 Fig. 16  The schematic illustration of the formation of Si–C–N–(M) PDC microspheres via phase separation assisted pyrolysis. Reprinted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2016 The American Ceramic Society. 
Aside from the research on transition metal silicides prepared by pyrolysis of metal-containing polysilane, noble metal silicides can also be synthesized by this strategy. Kempe et al. reported that Pd2Si NPs supported by a polymer derived SiCN matrix have been synthesized following a molecular approach using an aminopyridinato palladium complex.178 The complex cross-links the polysilazane via hydrogen evolution, increasing the ceramic yield. Moreover, it chemically modifies the precursor by the transfer of palladium to its amido nitrogen atoms. The metal modified polymer, upon its pyrolysis at 1100 °C, provides Pd2Si@SiCN. The size of the particles formed depends upon the solvent used and is independent of the amount of the loaded metal. The amount of the palladium complex added does not seem to affect the size of particles formed but does increase their population density.

4 Catalytic applications
Because of their good electrical conductivity, high chemical inertness, and thermal stability, transition-metal silicides are attractive and important in microelectronics as ohmic contacts and interconnections in complementary metal oxide (CMOS) transistors. However, to the best of our knowledge, few reports have been published on metal silicides as novel catalytic materials. Surface scientific research has shown silicide formation from metals supported on silica treated at high temperature due to the metal–support interaction, which has been shown to alter the catalytic activity and selectivity. For instance, it has been shown that Pd-silicide, formed during the high temperature reduction of Pd/SiO2, dramatically increases the selectivity for the isomerization of neopentane.179 CO-FTIR indicated the incipient formation of a palladium silicide during reduction of Pd/SiO2 at 600 °C. The inter-dispersed foreign atoms (Si) in the Pd surface lead to the isolation of surface Pd atoms. This surface and interface phenomenon is similar to that in Pt/SiO2, Cu/SiO2, and Co/SiO2 model catalytic systems.180–184 Recently, metal silicides as new catalytic materials have attracted increasing attention, and have been applied in selective hydrogenation, hydrotreatment, photocatalysis, and electrocatalysis. The goal of the present review is to provide the reader with a general and ample view of the catalysis application of metal silicides ranging from traditional heterogeneous catalytic reactions to those which have started to make tangible breakthroughs.
4.1 Heterogeneous catalytic reactions

4.1.1 Selective hydrogenation. 
Control of bond formation in reactions is the key to making chemical production more energy-efficient and product-specific in catalysis, thereby minimizing the formation of unwanted side products. It is also crucial to develop sustainable industrial processes for manufacturing fuels. Thus, in order to enhance the reaction selectivity, the nature of the surface sites must be carefully defined and controlled. Recently, advances in sample preparation have produced ultrafine intermetallic particles, which combine elemental carbon, nitrogen, gallium, or phosphorus with transition metals. These materials exhibit higher catalytic activity, greater selectivity, and improved stability compared to their monometallic counterparts. Transition metal silicides are formed from the dissolution of silicon atoms into metal lattices, and are thermally, mechanically, and chemically stable due to the lower electronegativity of silicon compared to carbon and the strong modification of the electronic structure around the Fermi level of transition metals. This suggests that transition metal silicides have potential as catalysts for selective hydrogenation reactions in a range of applications.
Moon et al. reported that Si-modified Pd catalysts show higher selectivity for ethylene and produce a lower amount of green oil than unmodified Pd catalysts in the acetylene hydrogenation reaction.110 IR and XPS analyses of the catalysts suggested that Si covered the Pd surface as Si or SiO2 patches and diluted the Pd surface. The improved performance of the Si-modified catalysts was derived mostly from geometric modification of the Pd surface by Si, which reduced the multiple adsorption sites for undesirable reaction intermediates, and possibly due to suppression of Pd hydride on the catalyst. Recently, Pd-on-Si catalysts have been prepared by the direct redox reaction (galvanic displacement) between Pd2+ and the Si substrate, which enabled the chemoselective hydrogenation of para-chloronitrobenzene with selectivity for para-chloroaniline higher than 99.9% at complete conversion of para-chloronitrobenzene.185 The excellent performance of Pd–Si catalysts was attributed to the formation of electron-deficient Pd entities due to the formation of Pd silicide.
Baiker et al. reported the catalytic properties of glassy Pd81Si19 in the semihydrogenation of propargylic alcohol (DIP) in “supercritical” CO2 as a solvent.186 As shown in Fig. 17, the glassy alloy Pd81Si19 exhibited a more than 50 times higher turnover frequency than a conventional Pd/SiO2 catalyst under similar conditions. The selectivity to isophytol was 100% at low conversion and declined to 77% at ca. 70% conversion due to overhydrogenation. Continuous semihydrogenation of phenylacetylene over the same Pd81Si19 catalyst in supercritical CO2 as a solvent has also been studied.187 High conversion and selectivity were achieved over this catalyst without chemical modification. The combined application of a glassy palladium–silicon alloy together with “supercritical” CO2 seems to be promising for this type of Lindlar reaction. Indeed, Panpranot et al. also found that Pd/SiO2 catalysts with Pd silicide formation exhibited superior performance to commercial SiO2 supported ones in liquid-phase semihydrogenation of phenylacetylene.188
 Fig. 17  (a) Comparison of the catalytic behavior of Pd81Si19 and Pd/SiO2 at increasing pressure. (b) Comparison of catalysts at different temperatures in the high hydrogen excess regime and at 127 bar. Reprinted with permission from ref. 186. 2001 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
In addition, Kempe et al. reported the properties of catalytic hydrogenation of ketones over single phase Pd2Si@SiCN.178Fig. 18 shows that Pd20-FC (8 wt% Pd) shows higher performance than other ceramics in the selective hydrogenation of ketones to alcoholic products. The conversion increased both with increasing catalyst amount and temperature but the selectivity remained the same. For the stability test, a slight increase in conversion was observed after the first run and no loss of activity was observed over six consecutive catalyst runs. Therefore, the recyclable Pd2Si@SiCN could be a suitable choice for catalytic transformations in a harsh chemical environment and at higher temperatures.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic representation of catalytic hydrogenation of ketones to different products; (b) hydrogenation of acetophenone (2 mmol) with 60 mg of catalyst at 75 °C under 20 bar hydrogen for 24 hours; (c) hydrogenation of acetophenone (2 mmol) using Pd20-FC (120 mg) under 20 bar hydrogen pressure for 24 hours; (d) hydrogenation of acetophenone (2 mmol) with the Pd20-FC catalyst (60 mg) under 20 bar hydrogen pressure at 75 °C for 24 hours. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In our previous research, CoSi particles on a silica support (SiO2 and SBA-15), synthesized by MOCVD, show high catalytic activity and selectivity in naphthalene hydrogenation.156,157 The hydrogenation of naphthalene over supported CoSi occurred in two steps: the conversion to tetralin, followed by the formation of decalin. The conversion of naphthalene increased with an increase in contact time from 0 to 6.6 min. Due to the size effect of the CoSi particles and the interactions between CoSi and the support, 13.5% CoSi/SiO2 showed the highest conversion. The hydrogenation of tetralin is the rate-controlling step over CoSi/SiO2. These results show that supported CoSi is a promising catalyst for semihydrogenation, which can be very important in the synthesis of fine chemicals.
Recently, cobalt silicide NPs embedded in N-doped carbon (CoxSi@C–N) catalysts have been firstly used for selective hydrogenation of cinnamaldehyde (CMA). Owing to the strong modification of the geometric structure and electronic properties by silicon, the particle size effect, and the Mott–Schottky effect at the metal–support interface, the as-synthesized CoxSi@C–N exhibits catalytic performance that is superior to its counterpart Co@C–N. In addition, this silicide catalyst sustains the robust stability in hydrogenation of CMA.86 Due to the inherent electronic properties of metallic active sites in metal silicides, the catalytic activity of Ni2Si@C was much higher than that of Co2Si@C and Fe2Si@C in the chemoselective hydrogenation of CMA. At total conversion of CMA, the Co2Si@C nanocatalyst was chemoselective for the hydrogenation of polar CO bonds (selectivity to cinnamyl alcohol of ∼60%), whereas the Ni2Si@C nanocatalyst was highly chemoselective for the hydrogenation of non-polar CC bonds (selectivity to hydrocinnamaldehyde of ∼90%). The doping of silicon atoms which are more electropositive into metal lattices in M–Si intermetallic compounds influenced the adsorption of substrate molecules on the catalyst surface, slightly leading to different reaction routes. This result provided guidance on the design of catalysts via tuning the polarization properties of the inter-atoms in the intermetallic compounds according to the target product.87
In addition, we also discovered that nickel-based silicides had excellent catalytic properties in the selective hydrogenation of unsaturated compounds.121–127,189 The as-prepared bulk silicide-modified nickel using SiH4/H2 silicification showed above 92% styrene selectivity in the hydrogenation of phenylacetylene under 0.41 MPa H2 at 50 °C for 5 h.121 As the silicification temperature is increased from 300 °C to 450 °C, the conversion of phenylacetylene first decreases, followed by a dramatic increase at the highest temperature (as shown in Fig. 19). This trend can perhaps be explained by the varying phases present in these catalysts. A previous study showed that the Ni2Si (3d8.74sp1.2) phase has a relatively strong Ni (3d94s1) metal-like character. As such, it is expected to have some similar chemical and catalytic properties to metal Ni. In contrast, the NiSi phase (3d8.64sp1.3) has electronic and crystal structures that are all significantly different from Ni, causing the decline in catalytic activity. Finally, when the silicification temperature reaches 450 °C, the catalyst particles with a high degree of crystallinity are partly agglomerated, which reduces the number of surface active sites to some extent. However, the NiSi2 (3d8.74sp1.5) phase prominent after this treatment has a similar crystal structure to metal Ni (cubic Fm3m 225). This may yield some similar chemical properties to Ni metal due to geometrical effects, causing the conversion of phenylacetylene to increase. These results indicated that these novel silicide-modified nickel catalysts are promising catalysts for the selective hydrogenation of unsaturated hydrocarbons. RANEY® Ni–Si catalysts were synthesized by treating RANEY® Ni with silane in a fluidized bed reactor and tested in the selective hydrogenation of 2-butyne-1,4-diol (BYD) at high concentration.122 The insertion of Si atoms into RANEY® Ni catalysts decreased the catalytic activity, but significantly improved the selectivity to 2-butene-1,4-diol (BED). The beneficial effect of Si on the selective hydrogenation of BYD may be caused by the presence of Si at Ni-defect sites and the formation of nickel silicide surface intermetallic compounds, which suppress the hydrogenation of BED. Compared with traditional Lindlar-type catalysts, RANEY® Ni–Si materials can be used extensively in organic synthesis for selective hydrogenation of alkynes, avoiding the associated hazards of toxic additives. Furthermore, nickel silicide particles presented much higher selectivity to the intermediate product (hydrocinnamaldehyde) than the monometallic nickel catalyst, which may be attributed to the repulsive force between the electronegative silicon atoms in the nickel silicides and oxygen atoms in the CO bond of CMA.123 However, not all phases of nickel silicides could act as selective hydrogenation catalysts. Recently, Ni3Si fine powders have been found to exhibit much higher activities than Ni for the hydrogenation of ethylene, acetylene, toluene, and benzene, but no semihydrogenation occurred, which may be attributed to the many Ni active sites exposed at the surface of Ni3Si particles.190
 Fig. 19  Results of liquid-phase hydrogenation of phenylacetylene over the as-prepared NiSix catalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Enhancing the dispersion degree of metal silicides and decreasing their particles size can significantly improve the hydrogenation activity due to exposure of more active sites. Metal silicide (Pd2Si, Ni2Si, CoSi, FexSi, and Cu6.69Si) catalysts supported by SBA-15 have been prepared by a CVD method. Of the SBA-15-supported metal silicide catalysts, Ni2Si/SBA-15 presented a modest activity, notable selectivity to styrene (>90%), and high stability with respect to the selective hydrogenation of phenylacetylene, which is attributed to the active-site isolation and electron transfer in the silicide (Fig. 20).124 Apart from the hydrogenation of phenylacetylene, the supported nickel silicide catalyst has been reported recently and used for hydrogenation of structurally diverse unsaturated compounds (>100 kinds), including nitroarenes, carbonyls, nitriles, N-containing heterocycles, and unsaturated carbon–carbon bonds. The presence of silicon as a secondary component in the nickel metal lattice plays a key role in its properties and is of crucial importance for improved catalytic activity. The wide application scope and high catalytic activity of this novel catalyst make it a nice alternative to known general hydrogenation catalysts, such as RANEY® nickel and noble metal-based catalysts.191 Transition metals incorporated in the specific lattice site that function as catalytically active centers have great potential for modulating the local structure and the electronic properties of active sites, and enhancing the catalytic activity and stability. Hosono et al. reported a new copper-based intermetallic electride catalyst (LaCu0.67Si1.33), which afforded selective hydrogenation of nitroarenes with above 40 times higher turnover frequencies (TOFs up to 5084 h−1) than well-studied metal-loaded catalysts, as shown in Fig. 21.192 The present efficient catalyst can further trigger the hydrogenation of other oxygen-containing functional groups such as aldehydes and ketones with high activities.
 Fig. 20  a) Catalytic conversion of PA and the corresponding selectivity to ST over different catalysts and the reaction details of CoSi/SBA-15, FexSi/SBA-15, and Cu6.69Si/SBA-15 (inset). Product yields over b) Ni/SBA-15 and c) Ni2Si-450 °C/SBA-15 (the reaction was performed at 40 °C, 1.0 MPa H2 with 100 mg catalyst). Reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 21  LaCuSi electride catalyst for chemoselective hydrogenation reactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
In order to improve the acid-resistance of Ni in sulfuric acid, Ding et al. inserted Si into the Ni crystal structure to form Ni-silicides. The as-prepared supported Ni-silicide NPs exhibit excellent acid-resistance and show high activity and selectivity for the hydrogenation of nitrobenzene (NB) to p-aminophenol (PAP) in sulfuric acid.193 As shown in Fig. 22, NiSi2 NPs supported on acid-treated active carbon are highly active and selective to convert NB to PAP in sulfuric acid. NB conversion firstly increases linearly with the reaction time and reaches total conversion in 2 h for 20Ni–Si/AC6. A little longer time is needed for the catalysts with lower nickel loadings to convert NB completely. The selectivity to PAP remains over 99%, indicating the low activity of the catalyst for excessive hydrogenation of PHA to form side products. It is very impressive that 20Ni–Si/AC6 possesses unchanged catalytic activity in 12 runs. The decreases in conversion in the 7th, 8th, and 9th uses are due to the increased polarity change of the support in acid and are overcome by adding ethanol as a co-solvent. The XPS measurements show that the Ni in the Ni-silicides donates electrons to silicon, but the Ni valence is still far lower than that of nickel oxide, which causes its stability in acids and the activity for hydrogen activation is partially preserved. Thus, the catalysts exhibit excellent stability in alloy structure, morphology, and catalytic performance in reuses, suggesting that Ni-silicides NPs are a promising substitute for precious metals for PAP manufacture.
 Fig. 22  Results of catalytic experiments. (A) Catalyst supported on Al2O3; the inset shows Ni–Si–C/Al2O3 with different carbon contents; (B) influence of the support on catalytic performance of 6Ni/support, 6Ni–Si/support, and Ni–Si–C/support; (C) catalytic activity of yNi–Si/AC6 at various reaction times; (D) recycle experiment results of 20Ni–Si/AC6. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193. 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 


4.1.2 CO methanation. 
Natural gas is often used for producing heat and power and applied as a fuel in the transport sector. CO methanation as an option for producing substitute natural gas (SNG) from coal or biomass has attracted much attention, due to its potential to replace oil products for transportation and other uses. CO methanation to SNG is the simplest reaction in Fischer–Tropsch synthesis. The methanation reaction has high calorific value, a single type of product and high conversion, along with having an excellent economic benefit, being environmentally friendly and exhibiting process simplicity. However, the catalysts in this reaction process are not only easily poisoned due to the high CO concentration, but also deactivate by carbon deposition at high temperatures (>400 °C). Therefore, the key for CO methanation is the development of catalysts with high activity at low temperature and high thermal stability at elevated temperature, while offering superior resistance to H2S and CO poisoning.
Due to their unique physical and chemical properties, including good electrical conductivity, high chemical inertness, thermal stability, and superior resistance to H2S poisoning, transition metal silicides may be particularly strong enough for the harsh environment of CO methanation. Imamura and Wallace designed a new method to prepare catalysts, though treating intermetallic compounds with syngas or O2 to achieve supported catalysts.194,195 The reaction formula is as follows: AxBy + O2 (CO/H2) → A/BO2, A = Ni, Co, Fe and B = Si, Th, Ti, Ge. They found that both untreated and oxidized alloys Ni2Si, Ni5Si2, and Co2Si exhibited high activity for methane formation. Regarding the untreated alloys, the catalytic activity of the catalysts progressively increased during the reaction. The catalytic activity of the oxidized alloys was essentially unchanged during the reaction. The oxidation treatment led to the transformation of alloys into transition metal-supported catalysts (confirmed by a series of surface and bulk characterization techniques196–199), which exhibited higher activity than conventional oxide-supported methanation catalysts. The turnover numbers of the new supported catalysts, especially oxidized Ni5Si2, were several times larger than those of Ni supported on silica formed by conventional catalyst techniques.
Recently, we designed silicon–nickel intermetallic compounds with ca. 3–4 nm size supported on silica (Si–Ni/SiO2) by direct silicification of Ni/SiO2 with silane at relatively low temperature in a fluidized bed reactor.125 The combined in situ FTIR and TPR-MS results suggested that the Si–Ni/SiO2 catalyst afforded high activity in CO methanation, promoting the formation of CH4 at ca. 240 °C. The catalytic hydrogenation of CO on Si–Ni/SiO2 was investigated in a fixed-bed reactor at a GHSV of 48000 mL h−1 g−1 under 1 atm in the temperature interval 200–600 °C. In the higher temperature reaction region (500–600 °C), it is notable that the Si–Ni/SiO2 catalyst presents high activity for CO methanation as compared to the Ni/SiO2 catalyst. Because the silicon binds strongly with and thermodynamically stabilizes the Ni active sites on the surface, Si–Ni/SiO2 presented excellent stability at higher temperatures, as shown in Fig. 23. The strong interaction between silicon and nickel atoms can destabilize the adsorption of carbon atoms and reduce the deposition of resilient carbon species. These Si–Ni/SiO2 materials therefore show promise as highly efficient Ni-based catalysts for syngas methanation.
 Fig. 23  CO methanation properties on the Si–Ni/SiO2-350 catalyst changing with time. Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.1.3 The Rochow process. 
The Rochow process has been industrially realized for decades and supplies the silicone industry with methylchlorosilanes, Sipowder + CH3Clgas → (CH3)xHySiClz(6)which are precursors for a huge diversity of silicone products. This process is the only gas–solid–solid catalytic reaction in the chemical industry. Before the reaction, the Si powder and the catalysts (copper powder or compounds) usually need to undergo the so-called “induction period”, during which the catalytic activity is developed, which has been confirmed by the kinetics of the reactions between CuCl and Si through thermogravimetry. The copper component converts into a catalytically active species (contact mass), fixed on the surface of the silicon grains. However, the mode of action of the contact mass has been poorly understood.200 The Cu–Si phase, η-Cu3Si, has frequently been found in contact masses and has been discussed as active sites. Falconer et al. firstly measured silane direct-synthesis on Cu3Si of known surface area and showed directly that Cu3Si provided an active surface for selective formation of (CH3)2SiCl2.201 The zinc promoter in Cu3Si further increased the (CH3)2SiCl2 selectivity to 95% without significantly changing the activity.202 On the other hand, the η-Cu3Si percentage and particle size have been tested in the Rochow process, and it is found that a certain contribution of dispersed η-Cu3Si to the activity cannot be excluded.203 The finer CuCl particle size presents a faster reaction rate in the reduction process because of the greater contact area between CuCl and silicon particles, indicating that the reaction is controlled by solid diffusion. Furthermore, the promoters (Zn, Sb, and Sn) investigated do not cause significant X-ray-observable changes in the η-Cu3Si phase percentage and particle size, but can cause dramatic changes in the catalytic properties. On the other hand, zinc may inhibit the transfer of chlorine from CuCl to surface silicon atoms, which has an effect on the activity of the Cu–Si alloy.204,205 The subsequent deactivation of CuSi and CuZnSnSi catalysts in the Rochow process has also been studied.206–208 Deactivation was mainly derived from the deposition of β-coke on the surface, thereby blocking sites that are active for silicon gasification. The promoter (Zn and Sn) decreased the amount of coke deposited to some extent, which is confirmed by the kinetics of methylchlorosilane formation on the Zn-promoted Cu3Si catalyst. In addition, incorporation of hydrogen into the feed stream suppressed coke formation and increased the stability of the samples for the direct reaction. Recently, for improving (CH3)2SiCl2 selectivity and Si conversion, Su et al. attempted to develop a Cu-based catalyst, and found that the ternary CuO–Cu2O–Cu catalyst displayed much improved (CH3)2SiCl2 selectivity and Si conversion than bare CuO and Cu particles, which can be attributed to the smaller copper particle size and the synergistic effect among the different components in the CuO–Cu2O–Cu catalyst.209,210 The possible Rochow reaction process in the presence of a Cu-based catalyst has been proposed (Fig. 24). First, Si is mixed with the reduced Cu particles in submicrometer size before the reaction. With diffusion of Cu into Si, the CuxSi alloy is gradually formed at the Cu catalyst and the Si interface at elevated temperatures; the alloy then further reacts with MeCl gas to form MSCs. As the reaction proceeds further, more elemental copper is produced while the Cu in the CuxSi alloy is reduced until deactivation of the catalyst occurs. At the same time, MeCl may be transformed into carbon depositions (C), initiated by the metallic Cu, leading to the deactivation of the contact mass. The presence of the multicomponent particle structure should enhance the gas diffusion into the Cu–Si contact area, resulting in the formation of much more active species.
 Fig. 24  Schematic illustration of the process of the Rochow reaction. Reproduced from ref. 209 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition, because of both the enormous production interest and complex reaction mechanism, intense investigations on the direct process have been carried out in the past few decades.211–214 Wright et al. used ultra-high vacuum UHV surface reaction techniques to uncover the mechanism of the direct synthesis of methylchlorosilanes from methyl chloride and silicon.214 Methyl monolayers in the absence of chlorine produced primarily trimethylsilane, and chlorine monolayers in the absence of methyl produced SiCl. However, mixed monolayers of methyl groups with chlorine atoms abandoned these separate pathways and instead reacted at similar temperatures on the surface to produce methylchlorosilanes with selectivity of 85% to Me2SiCl2 with Zn, Sn, and Al as promoters. Furthermore, Acker et al. studied the reaction system of the copper catalysed direct synthesis of methylchlorosilanes using a comprehensive thermodynamic model.215 The calculations are based on a broad database containing the elements in the Si–C–H–Cl system. The consequent suppression of the thermodynamically favored reaction products leads to the formation of dimethyldichlorosilane as the major reaction product. Cu plays no role in the reaction in thermodynamic terms, so that its known catalytic effect seems to be mainly of kinetic nature by opening a certain reaction pathway to the formation of the thermodynamically unfavored methylchlorosilanes.


4.1.4 Hydrodechlorination. 

Ca. 80% of the semiconductor-grade silicon produced throughout the world is obtained via the thermal decomposition of SiHCl3 at ca. 1350 K. However, only ca. 20–25% of SiHCl3 is converted to silicon, and the majority reacts to form SiCl4. The catalytic hydrodechlorination of SiCl4 to SiHCl3 appears to be a promising alternative to the established processes of SiCl4 conversion. Mörke et al. found that nickel supported on silicalite-1 was an efficient heterogeneous catalyst for SiCl4 hydrodechlorination, which at the same time enables one to maintain the high purity of the SiCl4 reactant.216 However, by ferromagnetic resonance-based Curie temperature measurements, it was determined that the formation of metal silicides starts at 723 K during the reaction. This means that the active sites are not metallic Ni, but nickel silicide, which not only acts as a catalyst, but also serves as the Si source. Bohmhammel et al. confirmed that transition metals in an H2–SiCl4 atmosphere in the temperature range 600–1200 K would react to form metal silicides through thermodynamic calculations in accordance with experimental investigations.217–220 With rising temperature, the stoichiometry will change in the direction of silicides with a higher silicon content. The silicides formed in situ act both as a catalyst and a silicon source for the hydrogenation reaction of SiCl4 to form silanes. A mechanism of transition metal silicide-catalysed hydrodehalogenation of silicon tetrachloride to trichlorosilane was proposed, as shown in Fig. 25. The overall reaction includes electron transfer steps from the metal silicide catalyst to adsorbed silicon tetrachloride molecules. A silylene species (SiCl2), which is formed from SiCl4 and the catalyst surface, was proposed. A hydrogen molecule injects electrons into the solid, whereby hydrogen chloride was generated on the surface. Trichlorosilane resulted from the oxidative addition of HCl to chemisorbed SiCl2. Recently, Xiao et al. researched the CuCl-catalyzed hydrogenation of SiCl4 in the presence of silicon and found that Cu–Si surface species acted both as a catalyst and a solid reactant and could be regenerated via Cu diffusion into the bulk silicon phase.221,222 Kinetic research indicated that the surface reaction between the adsorbed SiCl4 and gas phase H2 over the Cu3Si active sites was assumed to be the rate-determining step, which was also confirmed by both thermodynamic and experimental results. In addition, the silicide was formed at high reaction temperature in the system of hydrogenation of silicon and germanium tetrachlorides on the modified NiCl2.223 Therefore, the metal silicide plays a very important role in the hydrodechlorination of SiCl4.
 Fig. 25  Mechanism of hydrodehalogenation of silicon tetrachloride to trichlorosilane catalyzed by metal silicide catalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 219. Copyright 2002 American Chemical Society. 


4.1.5 Hydrodesulfurization. 
Sulfur in transportation fuels, such as diesel fuel, gasoline, and jet fuel, is a major source of air pollution. For the removal of sulfur from fuels by hydrodesulfurization (HDS), development of HDS catalysts with high catalytic activity as well as efficient resistance to sulfur incorporation which are different from classic supported metal sulfide catalysts is of great importance. Interestingly, Searcy et al. reported the calculation of the stability of metal silicides in the presence of H2S, which indicates that transition metal silicides can tolerate a much higher H2S concentration than the corresponding carbides, nitrides, and phosphides.18,22 In our previous research, density functional theory calculations have been performed in order to reveal the electronic structure and the origin of the efficient sulfur tolerance of nickel silicide surfaces. It is apparent that a strong covalent interaction between Si and Ni completely alters the electronic structure of the surface Ni layer from that of Ni (111). The DOS of Si-sp states overlap with Ni states in all energy ranges on NiSi2 (111).224 Due to this interaction with Si-sp states, all Ni states are downshifted. As indicated by the electronic structure analysis, the adsorption energies (Eads) of H2S, HS, S and H on Ni (111) are all higher than those on NiSi2 (111), as shown in Fig. 26. The Eads of these species decreases gradually with the downshift of the d band center. Resulting from this, the endothermicity of the reactions is also changed significantly, and the exothermal hydrogen scission reaction of HS on Ni (111) even becomes slightly endothermic on NiSi2 (111). According to the Brønsted–Evans–Polanyi relationship, the decrease in adsorption energies of these species involved in H2S dissociation suggests possible higher energy barriers for this dissociation reaction to take place. In this sense, the S-poisoning of the Ni surface reaction center on NiSi2 (111) would be prohibited or strongly slowed down. Thus, nickel silicide would be more sulfur tolerant for catalytic applications as compared with nickel.
 Fig. 26  a) DOS of surface atoms of Ni (111) and NiSi2 (111); b) energy diagram for H2S adsorption and dissociation on Ni (111) and NiSi2 (111) surfaces. Reproduced from ref. 224 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
To confirm this hypothesis, HDS of dibenzothiophene (DBT) was conducted with metallic Ni and Ni–Si intermetallics, respectively, in a continuous fixed bed reactor.224 The turnover frequencies (TOFs) of DBT during the HDS over the Ni–Si intermetallics increased with the increase in reaction temperature from 300 to 380 °C. The TOFs were 0.36, 0.66, and 0.83 min−1 at 340 °C for Ni2Si, NiSi, and NiSi2 intermetallics, respectively, which are much higher than that for metallic Ni (0.07 min−1). The increase in the Si/Ni atom ratio has a positive effect on the HDS catalytic activity, which likely arises from the structural and electronic variations in the material. The low activity of metallic Ni may be caused by the material being unstable with respect to the corresponding metal sulfide under HDS conditions. In addition, the HDS of DBT over Ni–Si intermetallic compound catalysts yields three main products: biphenyl through the direct desulfurization pathway (DDS), and tetrahydrodibenzothiophene and cyclohexylbenzene through the hydrogenation pathway (HYD). The selectivities to the DDS pathway exceeded 80% over Ni–Si intermetallics, which are higher than those over reported metal sulfide catalysts (the DDS selectivity for CoMo/γ-Al2O3 and NiMo/γ-Al2O3 is ca.70% and ca.75%, respectively). This may be due to the strong modification of the electronic structure around the Fermi level because of the interaction between nickel and silicon. In addition, the Ni–Si interaction induces an electron-deficiency of Ni, which decreases the bond strength with the electron acceptor (S), dramatically improving the sulfur resistance.
Taking into consideration the synergistic effect of sulfided NiMo and bimetallic phosphide catalysts (Co0.02Ni2P, FexNi2−xPy) in HDS, we might expect to observe a similar phenomenon in bimetallic silicides. In our work, nickel-based ternary silicide catalysts have been successfully synthesized by the temperature-programmed silicification method, where SiH4 is used as a silicon source. The catalytic properties of Ni1−xCoxSi2 and Ni1−xFexSi2 catalysts were investigated for HDS of DBT.126,127 The results showed that the substitution of the second metal (Co or Fe) for the Ni atoms in the nickel-based ternary silicides significantly improved the surface area, and changed the geometry and electronic structure of nickel silicide. The HDS activity of DBT over the nickel-based ternary silicides has the following order: Ni0.75Fe0.25Si2 > Ni0.75Co0.25Si2 > NiSi2 > CoSi2 > FeSi2 (as shown in Fig. 27). The nickel-rich ternary catalysts are much more active than monometallic silicides, and have significantly improved hydrogenation properties, proving the synergistic effect among the components. On comparing the fresh catalyst with the spent one, the signals of Ni 2p3/2, Co 2p3/2, and Fe 2p3/2 do not show significant changes, which means that the nickel-based ternary silicide catalysts can effectively and stably remove sulfur from sulfur-containing compounds. The doping Si into the transition metal lattice alters the coordination state, leading to a strong modification of the electronic structure around the Fermi level of the metals. This engenders a high activity for the HDS of DBT and weakens the metal–sulfur bonds, improving the sulfur tolerance.
 Fig. 27  HDS activity of DBT and product selectivities versus the nominal Ni metal fraction for Ni1−xCoxSi2 catalysts (a) and Ni1−xFexSi2 catalysts (b). Reprinted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
For enhancing the HDS activity, a supported noble metal silicide 3 wt%-Pd2Si/CNT catalyst has been synthesized by the CVD method, using Pd/CNTs as a precursor and (CH3)2SiCl2 as a Si source.225 As shown in Fig. 28, the HDS TOF of 3 wt%-Pd2Si/CNTs is three times larger than that of the commercial NiMoS/Al2O3 catalyst which indicates that it is significantly more active than other traditional metal silicide catalysts. The 3 wt%-Pd2Si/CNT catalyst shows excellent stability over an 80 h DBT HDS life test, indicating that it is more S-tolerant than the corresponding Pd/CNTs. The SiO2 overcoat on the surface of Pd2Si was also partially beneficial to the stability of 3 wt%-Pd2Si/CNTs. Therefore, 3 wt%-Pd2Si/CNTs is a promising catalyst with remarkable catalytic performance and durability, can be used as a novel HDS catalyst and opens up new ideas for development of HDS catalysts with high activity as well as efficient resistance to sulfur.
 Fig. 28  (a) DBT conversion and selectivity to the DDS/HYD pathway over 3 wt%-Pd2Si/CNTs. (b) HDS activity comparison between different metal silicide catalysts and a commercial NiMoS HDS catalyst. Life test for the HDS reaction over (c) 3 wt%-Pd2Si/CNTs and (d) 3 wt%-Pd/CNTs. Reaction conditions: 340 °C, 3 MPa, and H2/substrate = 300. Reprinted with permission from ref. 225. 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 


4.1.6 Hydrodeoxygenation. 
Hydrodeoxygenation (HDO) is a very important reaction in the biomass conversion and synthesis of fine chemicals, which needs catalysts with high resistance to acid poisoning and high catalytic activity. Metal silicides, due to their special structural and chemical properties, could be applied in this kind of reaction. However, to the best of our knowledge, few reports have been published on metal silicides as catalysts.
Recently, our group has developed cobalt silicide catalysts by a microwave-assisted route, which have been used in the selective HDO of phthalic anhydride to phthalide.85,88 The as-prepared CoSix/CNT catalyst could catalyze ca. 100% conversion of phthalic anhydride at 200 °C, while the Co/CNT catalyst only catalyzed about 80% conversion.85 Obviously, the addition of Si to Co/CNTs significantly promoted the rate of hydrogenation of phthalic anhydride. It is possible that the interaction between Co and Si atoms tuned the geometry and electronic structure, further affecting the catalytic activity and selectivity to phthalide. Additionally, the as-prepared CoSix/CNTs are more stable than the corresponding metal catalyst in the acidic environment caused by the substrate, which is due to the higher chemical and thermal stability of cobalt silicides. Taking into consideration the synergistic effect of bimetallic silicides, a series of intermetallic cobalt–nickel silicide catalysts embedded in a carbon matrix (CoxNi2−xSi@C (x = 2, 1.5, 1.0, 0.5, and 0)) are prepared by MWCVD. As shown in Fig. 29, the cobalt-rich Co1.5Ni0.5Si@C catalyst exhibits an excellent conversion of 97.7% and 91.8% selectivity to phthalide, which are much better than those of Ni2Si and Co2Si catalysts, and presents noble metal-like behaviors.226 The small addition of Ni modifies the geometric and electronic structures of Co2Si and further creates new sites, which enhance the adsorption of phthalic anhydride, promoting the hydrogenation activity. In addition, intermetallic Co–Ni silicide sustains the robust stability compared with the corresponding metal catalysts in this acid system, which is due to the formation of intermetallic metal silicides. Moreover, the silicon-modified carbon matrix with hydrophobization properties may prevent the produced water from coming into contact with the bimetal silicide surface and enhance the acid-resistance of the catalyst. These results arouse interest in designing intermetallic compounds as low-cost alternatives for noble metal catalysts in a harsh catalytic reaction system.
 Fig. 29  (a) Yield of phthalide versus nominal Ni metal fraction for CoxNi2−xSi@C catalysts and (b) selectivity to phthalide versus hydrogenation activity of phthalic anhydride over technical catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Towards the HDO of lignin-derived arylethers to renewable bio-oils, metal silicides also presented excellent catalytic activity and stability.227 In the catalytic HDO of diphenyl ether, Ni2Si with special geometric and electronic structures presented a higher BEN selectivity than the Ni catalyst. The formation of Si–O–Al improved the acidity of the Ni2Si/SiO2–Al2O3 catalyst, which is beneficial to the selectivity to O-free products. Moreover, the SiO2–Al2O3 supported single-phase Ni2Si catalyst significantly improved the stability during the 80 h on-stream test.


4.1.7 Dehydrogenation and hydrogenolysis. 
Since 1984, transition metal silicides as new catalytic materials have been proposed by L. Dubois and R. Nuzzo, who found that supported nickel silicides presented excellent catalytic properties in dehydration of cyclohexane.228–230 The related result from Science has highlighted that metal silicides and related intermetallic compounds with unusual properties are formed by exposing supported metals to volatile organometallics.231Ca. 15% of cyclohexane is converted to benzene over conventional Ni/SiO2 at 300 °C and ca. 26% undergoes hydrogenolysis to a mixture of hydrocarbons, predominantly n-hexane; the remaining 59% remains unreacted. When the catalyst is first treated with hexamethyldisilane, however, 64% of cyclohexane is converted to benzene and there is no hydrogenolysis. Dubois attributed this change in selectivity to the fact that nickel silicide surfaces do not readily chemisorb hydrogen; hydrogenolysis is therefore inhibited. Recently, Beller et al. also demonstrated that Ni–Si/NiO–SiO2@SiO2 could be a robust, reusable, and highly efficient nanocatalyst in acceptorless, reversible dehydrogenation and hydrogenation reactions of N-heterocycles, which made it attractive for hydrogen storage purposes.232
For understanding the surface chemical properties of metal silicides, Nuzzo et al. also studied the chemisorption of O2, CO, CO2, H2, N2, and CH3OH on the clean (111) surface of nickel disilicide (NiSi2) ultrahigh vacuum conditions.230 They found that O2, CO, and CO2 dissociate on NiSi2(l11) at 170 K. Adsorbed CH3OH yielded only a methoxide species, even at 300 K. There was no evidence for either molecular H2 or molecular N2 adsorption, although atomic hydrogen is strongly bound to the silicide surface. The implications of these unusual findings are respect to both heterogeneous catalysis by supported metal particles and strong metal–support interaction (SMSI). The interaction between Ni atoms and Si atoms on the surface leads to surface chemical properties significantly different from those of the bulk, which further resulted in the change of catalytic properties.
In addition, Somorjai et al. fabricated Pt nanoparticle model catalysts with 28 ± 2 nm diameters and 100 ± 2 nm square periodicity with electron beam lithography on silica substrates. The as-prepared catalyst has been tested for the dehydrogenation and hydrogenation of cyclohexene at 100 °C, as shown in Fig. 30.111 Compared to the reactivity of a Pt foil, the Pt/SiO2 model catalysts showed higher overall turnover and higher selectivity toward dehydrogenation, indicating that the dehydrogenation pathway may have been facilitated by the Pt–SiO2 interface. XPS revealed the presence of platinum silicide on the sputtered Pt film supported on silicon. Silane then was used to synthesize the silicide on a clean Pt foil, and AES studies showed that silicide formation was quite feasible under reaction conditions. Platinum silicide was a likely modifier of platinum catalyst activity and selectivity during hydrocarbon conversion in the presence of excess hydrogen. This experimental phenomenon has also been evidenced in the reduction of Pd/SiO2 catalysts in dihydrogen at temperatures as low as 450 and 500 °C.233 Palladium silicide in Pd/SiO2 catalysts during a prolonged reduction at 450 and 500 °C has a considerable effect on the catalytic properties in the reaction of 2,2-dimethylbutane with dihydrogen. Incorporation of silicon into palladium lowered the catalytic activity, decreased the activation energy, increased the selectivity toward isomerization (at the expense of hydrogenolysis), and also changed the type of 2,2-dimethylbutane interaction with the surface of the catalyst. The formation of the intermetallic compound or substitutional alloy over oxide-supported metal particle catalysts at very high temperatures upon reduction in hydrogen led to the change of electronic structure and composition, which explained the strong metal–support interaction to some extent.234
 Fig. 30  (a) Field emission scanning electron microscopy image of the catalyst. (b) 3-D presentation of the AFM image of the catalyst. Turnover numbers (mole/site) for (c) benzene and (d) cyclohexane produced from cyclohexene on the nanoparticle array and a Pt foil (0.06 cm2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2001 American Chemical Society. 


4.1.8 Oxidation. 
Catalytic oxidation reactions, including H2 oxidation, CO oxidation, and oxidation of volatile organic compounds, have attracted widespread attention, which promotes the development of new generation catalysts with excellent catalytic abilities and the discovery of the relationship between surface characteristics and catalytic performance. Due to the special properties of metal silicides (thermally, mechanically, and chemically stable), these materials have also been applied to catalytic oxidation reactions.
Vlasenko et al. reported that the catalytic activity of transition metal silicides in H2 oxidation is much higher compared to that of metal-like carbides, which can be due to the lower electronegativity of silicon compared to carbon.235,236 The specific catalytic activity at 423 K decreases in the sequence:WSi2 > HfSi2 > VSi2 > NbSi2 > MoSi2 > ZrSi2TaSi2 > TiSi2 > FeSi2 > CrSi2 > CoSi2
With a great excess of hydrogen in the reaction mixture, the process occurs via the dissociative chemisorption of hydrogen and further interaction of H atoms with O2. This mechanism is evidenced by the conformity observed between the catalytic activity of silicides in H2 oxidation and ortho-para-conversion. The latter involves surface dissociation of hydrogen molecules. H2 oxidation increases with diminishing electronegativity XL of a nonmetal L in MxLy compounds. It suggests a higher catalytic activity of silicides compared to carbides, according to the Pauling scale XSi = 1.9, whereas XC = 2.6. From this viewpoint, one might expect much higher activity of silicide catalysts in hydrogen oxidation compared to that in CO oxidation. For hydrogen oxidation, Pd-doped porous silicon films also show enhanced catalytic activity for hydrogen oxidation to water, which implies an increase of the reaction rate.237
For other oxidation reactions, Pt NPs supported on porous nanocrystalline silicon were shown to be stable to sintering at elevated temperatures up to 1000 °C and have good activity in CO oxidation.238 Sharp reaction light-off was observed at about 120 °C on the optimised catalysts. The reason for the excellent properties cannot completely exclude the formation of platinum silicide. Metal (Au, Ag, and Pt)/silicon hybrid dots were facilely prepared by a one-step reaction between Si quantum dots (SiQDs) and metal salts at room temperature without any templates and surfactants. The obtained Au/SiQDs were used for selective oxidation of cyclohexene.239 As shown in Fig. 31, by altering the composition of Au/SiQD catalysts, the selectivity to the main products can be tuned step-by-step. The unique alloy nature of Au silicide in Au/SiQD hybrids may change the activity of the catalytic sites, which would correspond to the tunable catalytic ability for cyclohexene selective oxidation. In addition, Pt in/on silica NPs was synthesized by flame spray pyrolysis followed by H2 reduction at different temperatures and tested in the complete benzene oxidation reaction.240 The catalytic activities increased with the increase in temperature until the Pt3Si species was observed at 1100 °C. The improved catalytic activities were attributed to the structural transformation induced by the elevated temperature. The rate of the Pt cluster diffusion to the surface and aggregation on the surface determined the Pt dispersion, which is the key mechanism in determining the catalytic activity.
 Fig. 31  Relationship between the M/SiQD catalyst composition and the selectivity for the main products. Reprinted with permission from ref. 239. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Combining the oxidation reaction with electrochemistry Zhang et al. researched the synergistic effect between cobalt silicide and noble metal nanoparticles as electrocatalysts in methanol oxidation.241 Pt/CoSi–graphene gives a 3.2 times higher peak current density than the commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst at the same Pt loading. In addition, Pt/CoSi–graphene shows superior activity and stability to commercial Pt/graphene for methanol oxidation in acidic media, which will in turn reduce the cost of the fuel cell electrocatalyst. Furthermore, CoSi benefitted the formation of smaller and highly dispersed noble metal particles. The novel multiple effects of noble metals (Pt and Pd) on CoSi make this material a highly active, durable and low-cost fuel cell electrocatalyst candidate.242


4.1.9 Carbon nanotube synthesis. 
Because of their outstanding structural, mechanical and electrical properties, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are considered as one of the most promising candidates to replace some of today's materials used in microelectronics manufacturing. Due to their widespread applications, reproducible and scalable batch production of CNT-based devices must be accomplished. CVD has been used for in situ growth of CNTs, in which CNTs are grown by decomposing a carbon-containing gas on catalytic NPs deposited on a substrate. Pristine Si depositing with metals are always used to grow the CNTs. However, the associated temperature of typical CNT growth processes reported produces a reaction between the Si substrate and the metal catalyst, typically Ni, Co, Fe, Cu. Thus, the as-prepared catalyst NPs change from pure metal to metal silicide, with an expected modification of the catalytic properties. Several of such CNT growth studies have been reported.243–256
For CoSix catalysts, Wen et al. reported the enhanced growth of CNTs through the root growth mechanism over cobalt films pretreated with H2 plasma at 600 °C.244 Cobalt silicides were formed due to the high processing temperature, and cobalt atoms tended to diffuse and stay on the silicon substrates. Carbon atoms were adsorbed on the islands of catalysts, and then diffused into the edge of the nanotubes. On the other hand, single-walled CNTs have been synthesized between pre-defined catalytic cobalt silicide source/drain pairs by CVD at 800–900 °C.245 Recently, Bayer et al. studied the growth of CNT forests on a conductive CoSi2 support by in situ X-ray photoemission spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction, as shown in Fig. 32.246 These cobalt silicide films are found to be stable against oxidation and carbide formation during growth and act as an excellent metallic support for growth of aligned nanotubes, resembling the growth on the insulating Fe/Al2O3 benchmark system. The good catalytic activity is attributed to interfacial reactions of the Fe catalyst particles with the underlying CoSi2 support.
 Fig. 32  Schematic of in situ silicidation from low conductivity CoSi to highly conductive CoSi2 during CNT growth. Reprinted with permission from ref. 246. Copyright 2011 American Institute of Physics. 
In the case of FeSix catalysts, the first observation of silicides occurred during CNT growth by thermal CVD on Fe-deposited Si substrates at 800 °C.247 Further evidence of silicides was shown when the deposition of a thin layer of dense titanium nitride between the silicon substrate and the iron catalyst effectively prevented the formation of the silicide phase and consequently improved the carbon nanotube growth.248 In the contrast, NPs of alloyed α-(Fe–Si) as well as ordered α2-(Fe2Si) and α1-(Fe2Si) were reported to be active for CNT nucleation and growth.249,250 Surprisingly, these metal compounds showed catalytic activity even at 900 °C. High growth temperatures resulted in a low CNT density and a base growth mechanism, whereas low temperatures showed the opposite behaviour. In addition, aligned carbon nanotubes have been grown using microwave plasma enhanced CVD.251 Iron silicide roots penetrated the silicon substrate at the interface of the catalyst particles and the substrate, thus providing strong adhesion of the carbon nanotubes onto the substrate, which played a role in the evolution of the catalyst particle morphology and resulting base growth mode of CNTs. Furthermore, Liu et al. provided a method to prepare high-purity DWNTs using iron disilicide (FeSi2) as a catalyst.252 Over 90% of CNTs in the sample were DWNTs with a narrow diameter distribution in the range of 4–5 nm. Such a narrow distribution of nanotube diameters arises from the properties of the unique catalyst, FeSi2, which has an orthorhombic crystal structure in which the iron and silicon atoms are distributed evenly.
By using plasma-enhanced CVD, vertically aligned multiwall CNTs have also been grown directly on a nickel-silicide layer.253–255 Nihei et al. firstly reported the diameter-controlled vertically aligned CNT growth on catalytic metal-silicide substrates.253 Compared to a nickel film catalyst, the nanotube diameter became smaller by using a nickel-silicide layer as a catalyst. On the other hand, a multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWNT) growth process is reported based on carbon incorporation in a nickel catalyst layer deposited via plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition (PEALD) on silicon NWs and silicon wafer substrates. MWNT growth relied on the formation of nickel silicide at the PEALD Ni/Si interface which increased the local carbon concentration in the Ni film sufficiently to promote carbon saturation/precipitation at Ni catalyst grains and facilitate MWNT growth. Esconjauregui et al. systematically reported the catalytic activity of metal silicides for carbon nanotube (CNT) nucleation and growth.254 As shown in Fig. 33, nickel silicide NPs formed at 600 °C and the same CNT growth temperature. Massive growth occurred by a tip growth mechanism. The catalysis is strongly related to topographical effects. Independent of chemical composition, metal silicides are highly active only when present in the nanoparticle form. Temperature is the key parameter to control the catalytic activity of metal silicides when Si is used as a substrate.
 Fig. 33  SEM images of CNTs grown for 5 min, at atmospheric pressure and in standard gas flows, on metal silicide NPs formed at 600 °C on 5 nm Ni deposited on pristine Si samples. (a) Catalytic nanoparticles at the tip of tubes at 600 °C. (b) Lower magnification SEM image of CNT film lifting off from the Si substrate. SEM images of individual CNTs grown at (c) 600 °C and (d) 900 °C, respectively. (e) Schematic diagram of metal silicide NPs on Si substrate during CNT growth at high temperatures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 254. Copyright 2011 IOP Publishing Ltd. 
Aside from reported silicides catalyzing the growth of CNTs, copper silicide (Cu3Si) has also been used as an active catalyst for CNT synthesis via CVD.256 Due to the unique geometry of these useful structures, CNT cantilevers were anchored firmly to Cu3Si nanobeams. The resulting CNT–Cu3Si structures may improve the accuracy and reliability of CNT applications in nanoelectromechanical systems. Although the catalytic activity of metal silicides is still under debate, the growth mechanism of CNTs over metal silicide catalysts can be determined with the development of in situ characterization methods. Understanding such a catalyst will enable its use to develop a CVD process for nanotube production with a high yield and high uniformity.


4.1.10 N2 activation. 
Ammonia synthesis is the “leading” reaction in the catalysis field, which sustains the global supply chain. The reaction mechanism or the development of catalysts has aroused great interest from chemists. N2 activation is widely regarded as the rate-determining step. The classic alkaline earth metal modified transition metals (iron, ruthenium and cobalt) are unable to overcome the limitation of N2 dissociation under mild reaction conditions. Therefore, it is still a challenge to develop a highly efficient catalyst for ammonia synthesis.
Y5Si3, as an air and water stable electride, supported Ru could achieve a 1.9 mmol g−1 h−1 ammonia synthesis rate under 0.1 MPa at 400 °C due to its strong electron-donating ability, which enhanced nitrogen dissociation and reduced the activation energy of the ammonia synthesis reaction.25 Based on the theory of electron-donation, Hosono et al. developed a Ru-loaded ternary LaScSi electride catalyst. The catalytic activity for ammonia synthesis showed an order of magnitude higher than that of the Ru/MgO catalyst. In addition, the reversible hydrogen storage ability of LaScSi prevented the hydrogen poisoning of Ru surfaces.33 Recently, they designed a ternary silicide (LaCoSi) and achieved the shifting of the reaction bottleneck from the sluggish N2 dissociation to NHx formation.34 As shown in Fig. 34, LaCoSi presented a superior activity (1250μmolg−1h−1), with a 60-fold increase over the activity of supported cobalt catalysts, which was better than that of commercial graphite-supported ruthenium and Fe–K2O–Al2O3 under mild reaction conditions (400°C, 0.1MPa). In addition, LaCoSi has shown excellent stability with constant activity over 100 h. Kinetic analysis confirmed that the apparent activation energy of LaCoSi was in accord with the reported formation of NHx (40–50 kJ mol−1). The N2 reaction order was measured to be 0.45 over LaCoSi, indicating that N2 dissociation is sufficiently fast so that the surface is continuously populated with activated nitrogen. Theoretical and experimental calculations also confirmed that LnNiSi (Ln = La–Nd) as zeolitic intermetallics had electrons in the crystallographic cavity space, which played a crucial role in NH3 synthesis.35 Therefore, the reported results showed that the rate-determining step of ammonia synthesis could be altered by a metal silicide.
 Fig. 34  Electride LaCoSi for direct ammonia synthesis. (a) Catalytic activity for ammonia synthesis over various cobalt catalysts; (b) time course of the ammonia synthesis rate over LaCoSi; (c) apparent activation energies of the selected catalysts for ammonia synthesis; (d) dependence of ammonia synthesis on the partial pressures of N2 and H2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 

4.2 Emerging new catalytic reactions

4.2.1 Photocatalysis. 
The technology of semiconductor-based photocatalytic water splitting to produce hydrogen and oxygen using solar energy has been considered as one of the most important approaches for solving the world energy crisis. However, a major drawback of most of the research in this field relates to the fact that appropriate semiconductors either are not readily accessible, absorb solar radiation inefficiently, or produce hydrogen in a sacrificial manner only (i.e. the catalyst is degraded). Therefore, seeking new materials and/or novel structures for efficient solar energy conversions has undergone considerable research.257
Semiconductor-based heteronanostructures have been reported to enhance the photocatalytic performance significantly.258 Wang and co-workers have synthesized a TiO2/TiSi2 core/shell heteronanostructure by combining CVD and ALD methods.259 The network structure of the TiSi2 nanonet provided a structural support with a high surface area to improve the photon absorption of TiO2. Its high conductance was explored to enhance charge transport. The combined advantages led to the high performance in photoelectro-chemical measurements, and a peak efficiency of 16.7% was achieved under monochromic UV illumination (as shown in Fig. 35). In this heteronanostructure, the TiSi2 nanonet acts as a dedicated charge transporter that improved the charge collection and thus has the potential to make solar water splitting practical. This design principle was later applied to WO3/TiSi2 and Fe2O3/TiSi2 heteronanostructures, and notable improvements compared with planar WO3 and Fe2O3, respectively, were achieved.260–263 Misra et al. synthesized TiSi2/TiO2 nanotubes (NTs) by coupling TiSi2 NPs and TiO2 NTs with a simple sintering method.264 This photocatalyst showed a 4-fold enhancement in the amount of hydrogen generated compared to only TiO2 NTs and 10-fold enhancement compared to P25 TiO2 NPs. In addition, graphene as a new two-dimensional nanomaterial can act as an excellent supporting matrix for semiconductors and as an electron acceptor due to its high specific surface area and superior electron mobility; therefore, it can effectively suppress the recombination of photoexcited electron–hole pairs and promote the photocatalytic activity. Recently, a RuO2/TiSi2/RGO composite as a photocatalyst for water splitting has been successfully synthesized.265 Incorporation of graphene and RuO2 into TiSi2 diversifies the electron transfer process, increases the H2 evolution active sites and reduces the probability of electron–hole recombination. Therefore, inexpensive, environmentally benign TiSi2-based heteronanostructures have great potential for clean energy conversion systems.
 Fig. 35  TiO2/TiSi2 heterostructures for high-efficiency photoelectrochemical H2O splitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 259. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Apart from titanium silicide-based heterostructures exhibiting efficient photoelectrochemical properties, other silicides have been also researched.266–269 Due to the metallic and conductive properties of metal silicides, they have been explored as protection layers for silicon photoelectrodes to improve their photocatalytic stability. For example, iridium silicide coated n-Si electrodes, n-Si(Ir), and RuO2-modified n-Si(Ir) electrodes can photogenerate I2, Br2, and Cl2 with high stability and efficiencies (>5%).267 The photooxidation of water on these electrodes was also feasible. Pt silicide-coated n-Si electrodes have been shown to give highly stable photoelectrochemical performance in aqueous solutions.268 The exceptional stability and performance of these photoelectrochemical cells might be due to the following: (1) fast interfacial charge transfer kinetics between the n-Si substrate and the platinum silicide and between the platinum silicide and solution redox species; (2) separation of the region of photocharge carrier generation from solution contamination; (3) good mechanical stability of the silicide on the silicon substrate; (4) reasonable chemical and electrochemical stability of the silicide. In addition, due to the potential of the β-iron silicide (β-FeSi2) conduction band bottom, β-FeSi2 may act as a H2-evolution photocatalyst to allow thermodynamically favorable H2 evolution in spite of its small band-gap of 0.80 eV. Recently, Irie et al. found that β-FeSi2 had an apparent quantum efficiency for H2 evolution of ∼24% up to 950 nm (near infrared light), in the presence of the dithionic acid ion (S2O62−) as a sacrificial agent, which was also sensitive to infrared light (>1300 nm) for H2 evolution.269 Although there are few reports of metal silicide as photocatalysts, metal silicides as typical semiconducting materials with fast interfacial charge transfer and excellently chemical stability have gradually attracted attention in the photoelectrochemical field.


4.2.2 Electrocatalysis. 
Electrocatalysis plays a key role in energy conversion processes central to several renewable energy technologies that have been developed to lessen our reliance on fossil fuels. Much research effort is currently being devoted to the study of materials suitable as electrodes in electrochemical devices such as fuel cells, electrolysers, batteries and photoelectrochemical cells. The best electrocatalysts for the processes of the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) often contain scarce and expensive noble metals, substantially limiting the potential for these technologies to compete with fossil fuels. The considerable challenge is to obtain abundant, inexpensive and non-polluting electrode surfaces that sustain high rates of electrochemical reactions and are electro-chemically stable, that is, exhibiting minimum corrosion, oxide formation, etc.270 Typically, transition metal silicides have nearly metallic properties in that they exhibit high electrical conductivity and metallic lustre. In general, they also possess high electrochemical stability and thus constitute attractive candidates as electrodes in electrochemical reactions.271
Vijh and co-workers systematically investigated the comparative electrocatalytic activities of metal silicides towards the HER.272–276 The transition metal silicides showed a range of activities towards the HER in sulphuric acid.273 The most active are silicides of Pt and Pd, followed by silicides of Cu, Cr, Ni and Fe. Moderate activity is observed on silicides of V and Co and the least activity on silicides of Ag, Ti, Zr, and Mn. No peaks for the chemisorption–desorption of hydrogen on the electrode surface were observed in the potentiodynamic profiles. It would appear that the initial discharge is the probable rate-determining step on these electrodes during the HER. At anodic potentials, a number of these silicides show visible corrosion during potentiodynamic scanning e.g. silicides of Cu and Cr. Not unexpectedly, the presence of traces of an electrodeposited noble metal such as Ru and, especially, Pt enhances the rate of the HER on typical silicides, for example, those of iron. In alkaline solutions, many transition metal silicides provide suitable surfaces for the cathodic evolution of hydrogen and the anodic evolution of oxygen.272,274 In general, clear oxidation–reduction peaks are not observed in the potentiodynamic profiles. All silicides examined here sustain high rates of the cathodic HER, albeit at high overpotentials. The excellent electrochemical stability of the electrodes is maintained under the conditions of the HER. Based on the delineate factors, properties and parameters of metal silicides, Vijh and co-workers found the possible trends in the electrocatalytic activities of silicides for the HER. As shown in Fig. 36, silicides that possessed high electrocatalytic activity tend to be associated with high work functions.276 In this respect, silicides behave very much like metals, in which high work function values herald high rates for the HER. In addition, silicides possessing high (exothermic) heats of formation (per metal atom) exhibited low electrocatalytic activity and vice versa. Finally, the HER rates for silicides, at a comparable electrode potential, tend to be higher in acidic solutions than those in alkaline solutions. This is expected due to the positive reaction order of the HER with respect to H3O+. Recently, based on the low energetic barrier for binding and dissociating molecular hydrogen, Schaak et al. have postulated a mechanistic commonality between the HDS and HER processes.142 Therefore, it speculated that Pd2Si, Cu3Si, and Ni2Si NPs could be used as electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction. Pd2Si and Ni2Si were identified as active catalysts that require overpotentials of −192 and −243 mV, respectively, to produce cathodic current densities of −10 mA cm−2. Mittermeier et al. also reported that transition metal silicides exhibited sufficient stability against dissolution in acidic medium in the relevant potential window and their HER activity was considerably lower compared to other Pt-group-metal-free HER catalysts.277
 Fig. 36  A plot of the rate of the HER at −998 mV for a number of metal silicides against their work function values, their (exothermic) heats of formation (per metal atom), and the exchange current densities for the HER on the corresponding metals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 276. Copyright 1995 Chapman & Hall. 
Although metal silicides as new kinds of electrocatalysts have been considered as attractive candidates in the HER, studies on the kinetics and mechanism of the HER on them are not numerous. Shein and co-workers have researched the effect of environmental and inherent factors and surface treatment on hydrogen cathodic evolution on metal silicides.278–281 Taking cobalt silicides as an example, after the anodic surface treatment of the silicides by their etching in both sulfate and alkaline electrolytes, the hydrogen evolution reaction after the subsequent cathodic polarization in acid electrolyte is somewhat accelerated.279 The acceleration of the cathodic process at the silicides after their anodic surface pretreatment is caused by the reorganization of the electrode surface layer and the change in its quantitative composition. In acid media, the surface area of the silicide increased, while the metal total content decreased. However, in alkaline media, the surface area increased too, but the total amount of the metal component increased. In addition, they found that atomic hydrogen adsorption on the surface of cobalt silicides was described by the Langmuir isotherm, and hydrogen evolution proceeds through the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism. The Heyrovsky reaction is probably the rate-determining step for Co2Si and CoSi2 in KOH solutions.
For the anodic hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR), it is reported that a series of transition metal silicides as catalysts in acid medium revealed extremely low overall levels of activity.282 This higher level of activity was attributed simply to the higher metallic content of the compound, while similar relative activity levels of the others were attributed to a similar, presumably silica-type, surface predominating in each case. Each of the compounds formed highly irreversible passive films when polarized anodically, making them quite stable in the acid electrolyte, but probably also bringing about the very low levels of hydrogen activity encountered. A reduction of the surface oxides of the compounds might bring about a change in the activity level, but this would no doubt involve high temperatures in a reducing atmosphere (such as hydrogen) in order to effect the reduction and keep the catalyst reduced. In this way, one could explain why silicides often work well for heterogeneous hydrogenation reactions where the reaction often takes place at temperatures above 600 °C in a hydrogen atmosphere. Unfortunately, catalysts which are only active at high temperatures are out of the question for most fuel cell applications where a reasonable level of activity is required even at low temperatures.
For the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), metal silicides have also been investigated due to their special properties. Wang and co-workers have successfully designed twinned Pt NPs on TiSi2 nanonets by atomic layer deposition, as shown in Fig. 37.283 On comparing Pt/TiSi2 heteronanostructures and commercially obtained Pt/C (46 wt% supported by Vulcan carbon, Tanaka Kikinzoku), Pt/TiSi2 presented a much higher ORR activity. In addition, the Pt/An–TiSi2Ox–NCNTs also showed better catalytic activity toward the ORR than Pt/NCNT catalysts, which can be attributed to the shape of Pt and the synergistic effect between Pt, SiOx, and TiO2 on the annealed TiSi2Ox layer.284 It indicated that metal silicides as non-carbon electrodes may be applicable for both fuel cells and metal–air batteries. In addition, metal silicides have also been applied in microsized microbial fuel cells and dye-sensitized solar cells due to their high electrical conductivity and high electrochemical stability.285,286
 Fig. 37  Schematics of Pt nanoparticle deposition on different TiSi2 nanostructures and ORR catalytic activities of Pt/TiSi2 and Pt/C in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. (a) Polarization curves of (a) Pt/TiSi2 and (b) Pt/C at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 at varying rotation rates; (c) cyclic voltammetry characteristics of Pt/TiSi2 and Pt/C catalysts when measured in O2-free environments. (d) Tafel plots of the specific ORR activity of Pt/TiSi2 and Pt/C catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 283. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 

5 Conclusion and outlook
In conclusion, we have summarized the preparation methods and the application development of transition metal silicides in catalysis. Depending on their constituent metals, stoichiometries, and crystal structures, metal silicides can exhibit special physical and chemical properties, i.e. high thermal stability, low electrical resistivity, low work function, and low density. Such metal silicide materials could meet the requirements of applications in catalysis. With the development of nanotechnology, some universal preparation methods (CVD, solution synthesis routes, and polymer-derived pyrolysis) for metal silicides have emerged to replace traditional high-temperature methods, which are useful for producing high-surface-area materials and controlling the size of metal silicide particles. Based on the isolation of the active sites in the crystal structure as well as the strong alteration of the electronic structure in comparison to elemental metal, the applications of metal silicides as typical intermetallic compounds have been boosted in catalysis. As traditional heterogeneous catalysts, metal silicides showed excellent selectivity to the intermediate product in hydrogenation reactions due to the strong modification of the geometric and electronic structures derived from the interaction of the metal and silicon. In addition, metal silicide catalysts were particularly strong enough for the harsh environment of hydrotreatment reactions (hydrodesulfurization, hydrodechlorination, hydrodeoxygenation, CO methanation, and N2 activation) and presented high stability. Furthermore, the catalytic effect of metal silicides should not be underestimated in CNT growth processes, which prevent the aggregation of the metal particles and enable nanotube production with a high yield and high uniformity. Recently, metal silicides as low-cost, earth-abundant inorganic materials have also exhibited catalytic activity and long-term stability in electrocatalysis and photocatalysis comparable to those of noble metals, which play a key role in the energy conversion process central to several renewable energy technologies.
The recent investigation of the catalytic properties of metal silicides has laid the foundation for the future development of intermetallic compound catalysts. But so far, breakthroughs in some basic science involved in chemical engineering and technical issues are still needed. Transition metal silicides with a variety phases present complex stoichiometry and structure. The conventional preparation methods for transition metal silicides are accompanied by a high temperature and complex process, which leads to an uncontrollable particle size and morphology and low specific surface area, limiting their application as catalytic materials. Therefore, it is necessary to expand the study of transition metal silicides as catalytic materials systematically and analyse the structural characteristics of the materials in-depth for achieving the controllable preparation of single phase and stoichiometric transition metal silicide nanomaterials. For these purposes, the lower-temperature solution synthetic method is highly desirable because it can minimize sintering and grain growth while permitting control over the growth process and therefore the size and morphology of the product.
Theoretical calculations are becoming more and more powerful in the design and prediction of the performance of new catalysts. With the assistance of theoretical calculations, the geometric and electronic structures and formation mechanism of transition metal silicides can be well understood. Enough basic knowledge will guide us to more effectively design and optimize transition metal silicide catalysts with high performance. Meanwhile, the combination of surface science and technology to study transition metal silicide surface chemical phenomena from the atomic and molecular level promotes the investigation of the surface catalytically active centers and confirm the structure–catalytic property relationships.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (20973029, 21373038, and 21403026).
Notes and references
M. E. Schlesinger, Thermodynamics of solid transition-metal silicides, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 607–628 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Schmitt, J. M. Higgins, J. R. Szczech and S. Jin, Synthesis and applications of metal silicide nanowires, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 223–235 RSC .
S. P. Murarka, Transition metal silicides, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1983, 13, 117–137 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Marakatti and S. C. Peter, Synthetically tuned electronic and geometrical properties of intermetallic compounds as effective heterogeneous catalysts, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2018, 52, 1–30 CrossRef CAS .
S. Furukawa and T. Komatsu, Intermetallic compounds: promising inorganic materials for well-structured and electronically modified reaction environments for efficient catalysis, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 735–765 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Okamoto, Desk handbook: phase diagrams for binary alloys, ASM International, Materials Park, OH,  2000 Search PubMed .
C. H. Dauben, Crystal structures of transition metal silicides, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1957, 104, 521–523 CrossRef CAS .

          A. F. Wells, Structural inorganic chemistry, Oxford,  1975 Search PubMed .
O. Bisi and C. Calandra, Transition metal silicides: aspects of the chemical bond and trends in the electronic structure, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1981, 14, 5479–5494 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Weaver, V. L. Moruzzi and F. A. Schmidt, Experimental and theoretical band-structure studies of refractory metal silicides, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1981, 23, 2916–2922 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Ho, G. W. Rubloff, J. E. Lewis, V. L. Moruzzi and A. R. Williams, Chemical bonding and electronic structure of Pd2Si, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1980, 22, 4784–4790 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Fedorov, Thermoelectric silicides: past, present and future, J. Thermoelectr., 2009, 51–60 CAS .

          C. B. Vining, Thermoelectric properties of silicides, in CRC Handbook of Thermoelectrics, ed. Rowe, D. M., CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,  1995, pp. 277–285 Search PubMed .
Y. Matsushita, S. Furuya and A. Oshiyama, Floating electron states in covalent semiconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 246404 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Mizoguchi, Y. Muraba, D. C. Fredrickson, S. Matsuishi, T. Kamiya and H. Hosono, The unique electronic structure of Mg2Si: shaping the conduction bands of semiconductors with multicenter bonding, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10135–10139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Szczech, J. M. Higgins and S. Jin, Enhancement of the thermoelectric properties in nanoscale and nanostructured materials, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4037–4055 RSC .

          T. A. Albright, J. K. Burdett and M.-H. Whangbo, Orbital Interactions in Chemistry, Wiley VCH, Weinheim, 2nd edn,  2013 Search PubMed .
L. Brewer, A. W. Searcy, D. H. Templeton and C. H. Dauben, High-Melting Silicides, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1950, 33, 291–294 CrossRef CAS .
B. T. Matthias and J. K. Hulm, Superconducting properties of cobalt disilicide, Phys. Rev., 1953, 89, 439–441 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. King, Topological aspects of the chemical bonding in superconducting transition-metal borides, silicides, and alloys, Inorg. Chem., 1990, 29, 2164–2170 CrossRef CAS .

          R. B. Levy, in Advanced Materials in Catalysis, ed. J. J. Burton and R. L. Garten, Academic Press, New York,  1977, pp. 101–127 Search PubMed .

          A. W. Searcy, in Chemical and Mechanical Behavior of Inorganic Materials, ed. A. W. Searcy, D. V. Ragone and U. Colombo, Wiley-Interscience, New York,  1970, pp. 57–79 Search PubMed .
S. W. Kim, Y. Mishima and D. C. Choi, Effect of process conditions on the thermoelectric properties of CoSi, Intermetallics, 2002, 10, 177–184 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Pak, K. N. Shatrova, N. E. Aktaev and A. S. Ivashutenko, Preparation of ultrafine Cu3Si in high-current pulsed arc discharge, Nanotechnol. Russ., 2016, 11, 9–10 Search PubMed .
Y. Lu, J. Li, T. Tada, Y. Toda, S. Ueda, T. Yokoyama, M. Kitano and H. Hosono, Water durable electride Y5Si3: electronic structure and catalytic activity for ammonia synthesis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3970–3973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, J. Li, T.-N. Ye, Y. Kobayashi, M. Sasase, M. Kitano and H. Hosono, Synthesis of rare-earth-based metallic electride nanoparticles and their catalytic applications to selective hydrogenation and ammonia synthesis, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 11054–11058 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kima, H. J. Rim, K. H. Lee, J. W. Roh and W. Le, Suppressed secondary phase generation in thermoelectric higher manganese silicide by fabrication process optimization, Ceram. Int., 2019 DOI:10.1016/j.ceramint.2019.06.104  , in press.
S. Wurmehl, G. H. Fecher, H. C. Kandpal, V. Ksenofontov, C. Felser, H.-J. Lin and J. Morais, Geometric, electronic, and magnetic structure of Co2FeSi: Curie temperature and magnetic moment measurements and calculations, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 184434 CrossRef .
T. Liu, Y. Chen, Y. Tang, S. Xiao, E. Zhang and J. Wang, Structure and magnetic properties of shortly high temperature annealing LaFe11.6Si1.4 compound, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 475, 672–675 CrossRef CAS .
B. Deka and A. Srinivasan, Magnetic and structural properties of (Ru1−xCox)2FeSi alloys, Phys. B, 2015, 476, 118–121 CrossRef CAS .
R.-D. Hoffmann, U. Ch. Rodewald, S. Haverkamp, C. Benndorf, H. Eckert, B. Heying and R. Pöttgen, The high-temperature modification of ScRuSi – Structure, 29Si and 45Sc solid state NMR spectroscopy, Solid State Sci., 2017, 72, 109–115 CrossRef CAS .
C. Benndorf, L. Heletta, G. Heymann, H. Huppertz, H. Eckert and R. Pöttgen, NbOsSi and TaOsSi – Two new superconducting ternary osmium silicides, Solid State Sci., 2017, 68, 32–38 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Y. Gong, T. Inoshita, D. C. Fredrickson, J. Wang, Y. Lu, M. Kitano and H. Hosono, Tiered electron anions in multiple voids of LaScSi and their applications to ammonia synthesis, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700924 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gong, J. Wu, M. Kitano, J. Wang, T.-N. Ye, J. Li, Y. Kobayashi, K. Kishida, H. Abe, Y. Niwa, H. Yang, T. Tada and H. Hosono, Ternary intermetallic LaCoSi as a catalyst for N2 activation, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 178–185 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mizoguchi, S.-W. Park, K. Kishida, M. Kitano, J. Kim, M. Sasase, T. Honda, K. Ikeda, T. Otomo and H. Hosono, Zeolitic intermetallics: LnNiSi (Ln = La−Nd), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3376–3379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Sarkisyan, S. K. Dolukhanyan and I. P. Borovinskaya, Self-propagating high-temperature synthesis of transition metal silicides, Powder Metall. Met. Ceram., 1978, 17, 424–427 CrossRef .
S. C. Deevia and N. N. Thadhani, Reaction synthesis of high-temperature silicides, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 1995, 192-193, 604–611 CrossRef .
F. Maglia, C. Milanese, U. Anselmi-Tamburini, S. Doppiu, G. Cocco and Z. A. Munir, Combustion synthesis of mechanically activated powders in the Ta–Si system, J. Alloys Compd., 2004, 385, 269–275 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Yeh and W. H. Chen, An experimental investigation on combustion synthesis of transition metal silicides V5Si3, Nb5Si3, and Ta5Si3, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 439, 59–66 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Yeh, W. H. Chen and C. C. Hsu, Formation of titanium silicides Ti5Si3 and TiSi2 by self-propagating combustion synthesis, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 432, 90–95 CrossRef CAS .
E. Godlewska, K. Mars, R. Mania and S. Zimowski, Combustion synthesis of Mg2Si, Intermetallics, 2011, 19, 1983–1988 CrossRef CAS .
Ch. Gras, N. Zink, F. Bernard and E. Gaffet, Assisted self-sustaining combustion reaction in the Fe–Si system: Mechanical and chemical activation, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2007, 456, 270–277 CrossRef .
F. Bernard, H. Souha and E. Gaffet, Enhancement of self-sustaining reaction Cu3Si phase formation starting from mechanically activated powders, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2000, 284, 301–306 CrossRef .
B. S. Murty and S. Ranganathan, Novel materials synthesis by mechanical alloying/milling, Int. Mater. Rev., 1998, 43, 101–141 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Lee, C. S. Byun, S. H. Lee and D. K. Kim, Effects of Si and Ni powder refining on the formation mechanism of nickel silicides induced by mechanical alloying, Metall. Mater. Trans. A, 2001, 32(13), 805–810 CrossRef .
M. Abdellaoui, T. Barradi and E. Gaffet, Mechanism of mechanical alloying phase formation and related magnetic and mechanical properties in the Fe-Si system, J. Alloys Compd., 1993, 198(1–2), 155–164 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Yen, T. Aizawa and J. Kihara, Synthesis and formation mechanisms of molybdenum silicides by mechanical alloying, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 1996, 220, 8–14 CrossRef .
A. J. Heron and G. B. Schaffer, Mechanical alloying of MoSi2 with ternary alloying elements. Part 1: experimental, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2003, 352(1–2), 105–111 CrossRef .
N. S. Stoloff, An overview of powder processing of silicides and their composites, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 1999, 261, 169–180 CrossRef .
D. Restrepo, S. M. Hick, C. Griebel, J. Alarcón, K. Giesler, Y. Chen, N. Orlovskaya and R. G. Blair, Size controlled mechanochemical synthesis of ZrSi2, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49(7), 707–709 RSC .
S. Zamani, H. R. Bakhsheshi-Rad, A. Shokuhfar, M. R. Vaezi, M. R. A. Kadir and M. R. M. Shafiee, Synthesis and characterization of MoSi2–Mo5Si3 nanocomposite by mechanical alloying and heat treatment, Int. J. Refract. Hard Met., 2012, 31, 236–241 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, Q. Ma and Q. Song, Rapid synthesis of Mo5Si3-Al2O3 nanocomposite powders by mechanochemical reduction method, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2011, 21(7), 1557–1562 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guan, X. Chen, L. Zhang, J. Wang and C. Liang, Rapid preparation and magnetic properties of Fe3Si–Al2O3 nanocomposite by mechanical alloying and heat treatment, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2016, 213, 1585–1591 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Wiley and R. B. Kaner, Rapid solid-state precursor synthesis of materials, Science, 1992, 255, 1093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Jacubinas and R. B. Kaner, Synthesis of high-temperature silicides via rapid solid-state metathesis, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1993, 322, 133 CrossRef .
R. E. Treece, E. G. Gillan and R. B. Kaner, Materials synthesis via solid-state metathesis reactions, Comments Inorg. Chem., 1995, 16, 313–337 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. Gillan and R. B. Kaner, Synthesis of refractory ceramics via rapid metathesis reactions between solid-state precursors, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 333–343 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Fitzmaurice, A. L. Hector, I. P. Parkin and A. T. Rowley, Synthesis of metal silicide powders by thermolysis of metal chlorides with magnesium silicide, Phosphorus, Sulfur Silicon Relat. Elem., 1995, 101, 47–55 CrossRef CAS .
I. P. Parkin, Solid state metathesis reaction for metal borides, silicides, pnictides and chalcogenides: ionic or elemental pathways, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1996, 25, 199–207 RSC .
A. M. Nartowski and I. P. Parkin, Solid state metathesis synthesis of metal silicides; reactions of calcium and magnesium silicide with metal oxides, Polyhedron, 2002, 21, 187–191 CrossRef CAS .
I. P. Parkin, Solvent free reactions in the solid state: solid state metathesis, Transition Met. Chem., 2002, 27, 569–573 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Trentler, R. S. Iyer, S. M. L. Sastry and W. E. Buhro, Preparation of nanocrystalline molybdenum disilicide (MoSi2) by a chlorine-transfer reaction, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3962–3968 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zeng, M. J. Hampden-Smith and L.-M. Wang, Synthesis and characterization of group 6 metal silicide-silicon carbide composites via solid-state displacement reactions of nanosize grains of M2C and silicon, J. Mater. Chem., 1993, 3, 321–322 RSC .
F. J. Narciso-Romero, A. Sepulveda-Escribano and F. Rodriguez-Reinoso, A new route for the synthesis of SiC-MoSi2 ceramic composite materials, Chem. Commun., 1996, 1667–1668 RSC .
X. Liu, N. Fechler and M. Antonietti, Salt melt synthesis of ceramics, semiconductors and carbon nanostructures, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8237–8265 RSC .
J. Ma, Y. Gu, L. Shi, L. Chen, Z. Yang and Y. Qian, Synthesis and thermal stability of nano-crystalline vanadium disilicide, J. Alloys Compd., 2004, 370, 281–284 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, Y. Gu, L. Shi, L. Chen, Z. Yang and Y. Qian, Co-reduction route to nanocrystalline titanium silicide by using different metal reductants, J. Alloys Compd., 2004, 381, 250–253 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, Y. Gu, L. Shi, L. Chen, Z. Yang and Y. Qian, Synthesis and thermal stability of nanocrystalline chromium disilicide, J. Alloys Compd., 2004, 376, 176–179 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Y. Gu, L. Chen, L. Shi, J. Ma and Y. Qian, Preparation of Mn5Si3 nanocages and nanotubes by molten salt flux, Solid State Commun., 2004, 130, 347–351 CrossRef CAS .
M. Estruga, S. N. Girard, Q. Ding, L. Chen, X. Li and S. Jin, Facile and scalable synthesis of Ti5Si3 nanoparticles in molten salts for metal-matrix nanocomposites, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1454–1457 RSC .
H. J. Kitchen, S. R. Vallance, J. L. Kennedy, N. Tapia-Ruiz, L. Carassiti, A. Harrison, A. G. Whittaker, T. D. Drysdale, S. W. Kingman and D. H. Gregory, Modern microwave methods in solid-state inorganic materials chemistry: from fundamentals to manufacturing, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114(2), 1170–1206 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Rao, B. Vaidhyanathan, M. Ganguli and P. A. Ramakrishnan, Synthesis of inorganic solids using microwaves, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 882–895 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lekse, T. J. Stagger and J. A. Aitken, Microwave metallurgy: synthesis of intermetallic compounds via microwave irradiation, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3601–3603 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pang, C. Li, L. Ding, J. Zhang, D. Su, W. Li and C. Liang, Microwave-assisted preparation of Mo2C/CNTs nanocomposites as efficient electrocatalyst supports for oxygen reduction reaction, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49(9), 4169–4174 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang, L. Ding, A. Wang, Z. Ma, J. Qiu and T. Zhang, Microwave-assisted preparation and hydrazine decomposition properties of nanostructured tungsten carbides on carbon nanotubes, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48(6), 3244–3248 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang, L. Ding, C. Li, M. Pang, D. Su, W. Li and Y. Wang, Nanostructured WCx/CNTs as highly efficient support of electrocatalysts with low Pt loading for oxygen reduction reaction, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1121–1127 RSC .
M. Pang, C. Liu, W. Xia, M. Muhler and C. Liang, Activated carbon supported molybdenum carbides as cheap and highly efficient catalyst in the selective hydrogenation of naphthalene to tetralin, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 1272–1276 RSC .
G.-T. Zhou, O. Palchik, I. Nowik, R. Herber, Y. Koltypin and A. Gedanken, Microwave-assisted selective preparation and characterization of Li21Si5 and Li17Sn4, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 3014–3020 CrossRef CAS .
E. Savary, F. Gascoin and S. Marinel, Fast synthesis of nanocrystalline Mg2Si by microwave heating: a new route to nano-structured thermoelectric materials, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 11074–11080 RSC .
D. Berthebaud and F. Gascoin, Microwaved assisted fast synthesis of n and p-doped Mg2Si, J. Solid State Chem., 2013, 202, 61–64 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Jokisaari, S. Bhaduri and S. B. Bhaduri, Microwave activated combustion synthesis of bulk cobalt silicides, J. Alloys Compd., 2005, 394, 160–167 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Jokisaari, S. Bhaduri and S. B. Bhaduri, Processing of single phase Mo5Si3 by microwave activated combustion synthesis, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2002, 323, 478–483 CrossRef .
R. K. Joshi, M. Yoshimura, K. Tanaka, K. Ueda, A. Kumar and N. Ramgir, Synthesis of vertically aligned Pd2Si nanowires in microwave plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition system, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13901–13904 CrossRef CAS .
B. Vaidhyanathan and K. J. Rao, Microwave assisted synthesis of technologically important transition metal silicides, J. Mater. Res., 1997, 12, 3225–3229 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Chen, S. Jin, J. Guan, C. T. Williams, Z. Peng and C. Liang, Rapid microwaves synthesis of CoSix/CNTs as novel catalytic materials for hydrogenation of phthalic anhydride, J. Solid State Chem., 2014, 217, 105–112 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Chen, C. Li, M. Armbruster, Z. J. Peng and C. H. Liang, Cobalt silicides nanoparticles embedded in N-doped carbon as highly efficient catalyst in selective hydrogenation of cinnamaldehyde, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 1658–1666 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Chen, Z. J. Peng and C. H. Liang, Chemoselective hydrogenation of cinnamaldehyde over MOFs-derived M2Si@C (M = Fe, Co, Ni) silicides catalysts, Mol. Catal., 2018, 449, 14–24 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Chen, S. Jin, X. Di, C. T. Williams, Z. Peng and C. Liang, Highly selective hydrogenation of phthalic anhydride to phthalide on a cost-effective and environmentally friendly CoSix/CNTs catalyst prepared by microwave-assisted chemical vapor deposition, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2016, 180, 89–96 CrossRef CAS .
R. Madar, N. Thomas and C. Bernard, Chemical vapour deposition precursors for metal silicides, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 1993, 17, 118–125 CrossRef .
B. Xiang, Q. X. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Z. Zhang, L. Q. Liu, J. Xu and D. P. Yu, Synthesis and field emission properties of TiSi2 nanowires, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 243103 CrossRef .
L. Ouyang, E. S. Thrall, M. M. Deshmukh and H. Park, Vapor-phase synthesis and characterization of ∈-FeSi nanowires, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1437–1440 CrossRef CAS .
H.-X. Zhang, J.-P. Ge, J. Wang and Y.-D. Li, Atmospheric pressure chemical vapour deposition synthesis of sulfides, oxides, silicides and metal nanowires with metal chloride precursors, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, S253–S261 CrossRef CAS .
K. Seo, K. S. K. Varadwaj, D. Cha, J. In, J. Kim, J. Park and B. Kim, Synthesis and electrical properties of single crystalline CrSi2 nanowires, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9072–9076 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. K. Varadwaj, K. Seo, J. In, P. Mohanty, J. Park and B. Kim, Phase-controlled growth of metastable Fe5Si3 nanowires by a vapor transport method, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8594–8599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Seo, K. S. K. Varadwaj, P. Mohanty, S. Lee, Y. Jo, M.-H. Jung, J. Kim and B. Kim, Magnetic properties of single-crystalline CoSi nanowires, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1240–1245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. In, K. S. K. Varadwaj, K. Seo, S. Lee, Y. Jo, M.-H. Jung, J. Kim and B. Kim, Single-crystalline ferromagnetic Fe1-xCoxSi nanowires, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4748–4752 CrossRef CAS .
J. In, K. Seo, S. Lee, H. Yoon, J. Park, G. Lee and B. Kim, Morphology-tuned synthesis of single-crystalline V5Si3 nanotubes and nanowires, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12996–13001 CrossRef CAS .
K. Seo, S. Lee, H. Yoon, J. In, K. S. K. Varadwaj, Y. Jo, M.-H. Jung, J. Kim and B. Kim, Composition-Tuned ConSi Nanowires: Location-selective simultaneous growth along temperature gradient, ACS Nano, 2009, 3(5), 1145–1150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-K. Lin, Y.-F. Tzeng, C.-H. Wang, N.-H. Tai, I. N. Lin, C.-Y. Lee and H.-T. Chiu, Ti5Si3 nanowire and its field emission property, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2429–2431 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tsai, P. Yeh, C. Wang, H. Wu, U. Chen, M. Lu, W. Wu, L. Chen and Z. Wan, Cobalt silicide nanostructures: synthesis, electron transport, and field emission properties, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 4514–4518 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Higgins, R. Ding, J. P. DeGrave and S. Jin, Signature of helimagnetic ordering in single-crystal MnSi nanowires, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1605–1610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yu, Y. Lv, X. Zhang and H. Wang, Application of in situ chloride-generated route to Ti5Si3 nanowires from and on Si substrate, Mater. Lett., 2012, 74, 46–49 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, Y.-C. Lin, L. Liao, L. Liu, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, N. O. Weiss, H. Zhou, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Domain wall motion in synthetic Co2Si nanowires, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1972–1976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-L. Chiu, C.-H. Chiu, J.-Y. Chen, C.-W. Huang, Y.-T. Huang, K.-C. Lu, C.-L. Hsin, P.-H. Yeh and W.-W. Wu, Single-crystalline δ-Ni2Si nanowires with excellent physical properties, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 290 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, E. Meng, T. Matsushita, S. Oda, D. Ishikawa, K. Nakane, J. Hu, S. Guan, A. Ishida and H. Tatsuoka, Syntheses and structural characterizations of CrSi2 nanostructures using Si substrates under CrCl2 vapor, J. Cryst. Growth, 2013, 365, 11–18 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Banis, X. Meng, Y. Zhang, M. Cai, R. Li and X. Sun, Spatially sequential growth of various WSi2 networked nanostructures and mechanisms, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117(37), 19189–19194 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Banis, Y. Zhang, Q. Xiao, M. Cai, R. Li and X. Sun, Tailoring of single-crystalline complex Ta5Si3 nanostructures: from networked nanowires to nanosheets, Cryst. Growth Des., 2014, 14, 436–441 CrossRef CAS .
C. Klam, J.-P. Millet, H. Mazille and J. M. Gras, Chemical vapour deposition of silicon onto iron: influence of silicon vapour phase source on the composition and nature of the coating, J. Mater. Sci., 1991, 26, 4945–4952 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. M. van der Werf, H. Li, V. Verlaan, C. J. Oliphant, R. Bakker, Z. S. Houweling and R. E. I. Schropp, Reversibility of silicidation of Ta filaments in HWCVD of thin film silicon, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 3431–3434 CrossRef CAS .
E. W. Shin, C. H. Choi, K. S. Chang, Y. H. Na and S. H. Moon, Properties of Si-modified Pd catalyst for selective hydrogenation of acetylene, Catal. Today, 1998, 44, 137–143 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu and G. A. Somorjai, Formation of platinum silicide on a platinum nanoparticle array model catalyst deposited on silica during chemical reaction, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 8–13 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Yan, H. J. Yuan, J. X. Wang, D. F. Liu, Z. P. Zhou, Y. Gao, L. Song, L. F. Liu, W. Y. Zhou and S. S. Xie, Synthesis and characterization of a large amount of branched Ni2Si nanowires, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2004, 79, 1853–1856 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, H. Zhang, L. Wang and D. Yang, Controlling the growth and field emission properties of silicide nanowire arrays by direct silicification of Ni foil, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 375602 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Fan, H. Zhang, N. Du and D. Yang, Phase-controlled synthesis of nickel silicide nanostructures, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 3797–3803 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kim, K. Kang, Y. S. Woo, K. Ryu, H. Moon, J. Kim, D. Zang and M. Jo, Spontaneous chemical vapor growth of NiSi nanowires and their metallic properties, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3637–3642 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kang, S. Kim, C. Kim and M. Jo, The role of NiOx overlayers on spontaneous growth of NiSix nanowires from Ni seed layers, Nano Lett., 2008, 8(2), 431–436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, B. Zhang, C. Li, Z. Shao, D. Su, C. T. Williams and C. Liang, Structural and electrochemical properties of nanostructured nickel silicides by reduction and silicification of high-surface-area nickel oxide, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 867–877 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Peter, J. Meersschaut, O. Richard, A. Moussa, J. Steenbergen, M. Schaekers, Z. Tőkei, S. V. Elshocht and C. Adelmann, Phase formation and morphology of nickel silicide thin films synthesized by catalyzed chemical vapor reaction of nickel with silane, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 245–254 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, X. Chen, J. Guan, X. Wang, J. Wang, C. T. Williams and C. Liang, A facile and novel approach to magnetic Fe@SiO2 and FeSi2@SiO2 nanoparticles, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 609–616 RSC .
M. Li, X. Chen, J. Guan, J. Wang and C. Liang, Thermally induced phase transition and magnetic properties of Fe–FeSi2 with core–shell structure, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2013, 210, 2710–2715 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, A. Zhao, Z. Shao, C. Li, C. T. Williams and C. Liang, Synthesis
and catalytic properties for phenylacetylene hydrogenation of silicide modified nickel catalysts, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16525–16533 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, M. Zhang, K. Yang, C. T. Williams and C. Liang, RANEY® Ni–Si Catalysts for selective hydrogenation of highly concentrated 2-Butyne-1,4-diol to 2-Butene-1,4-diol, Catal. Lett., 2014, 144, 1118–1126 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, M. Li, J. Guan, X. Wang, C. T. Williams and C. Liang, Nickel−silicon intermetallics with enhanced selectivity in hydrogenation reactions of cinnamaldehyde and phenylacetylene, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 3604–3611 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Yang, X. Chen, L. Wang, L. L. Zhang, S. H. Jin and C. H. Liang, SBA-15-supported metal silicides prepared by chemical vapor deposition as efficient catalysts towards the semihydrogenation of phenylacetylene, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 1337–1342 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, J. Jin, G. Sha, C. Li, B. Zhang, D. Su, C. T. Williams and C. Liang, Silicon–nickel intermetallic compounds supported on silica as a highly efficient catalyst for CO methanation, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 53–61 RSC .
X. Chen, X. Wang, J. Xiu, C. T. Williams and C. Liang, Synthesis and characterization of ferromagnetic nickel–cobalt silicide catalysts with good sulfur tolerance in hydrodesulfurization of dibenzothiophene, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 24968–24976 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, J. Wang, K. Yang, C. Meng, C. T. Williams and C. Liang, Structure investigation and dibenzothiophene hydrodesulfurization properties of Fe-substituted Ni−Si intermetallics, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 29052–29061 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. Nyutu, M. A. Kmetz and S. L. Suib, Formation of MoSi2–SiO2 coatings on molybdenum substrates by CVD/MOCVD, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2006, 200, 3980–3986 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, D. Geng, H. Liu, M. N. Banis, M. I. Ionescu, R. Li, M. Cai and X. Sun, Designed growth and characterization of radially aligned Ti5Si3 nanowire architectures, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115(32), 15885–15889 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, Y. S. Zhou, M. Qian, Z. Q. Xie, W. Xiong, H. F. Luo, L. Jiang and Y. F. Lu, Fast growth of branched nickel monosilicide nanowires by laser-assisted chemical vapor deposition, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 235602–235607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, J. Guan, G. Sha, Z. Gao, C. T. Williams and C. Liang, Preparation and magnetic properties of single phase Ni2Si by reverse Rochow reaction, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 653–659 RSC .
J. T. Hillman, W. M. Triggs and M. Aruga, Characterization of WSix films deposited by reacting WF6 with a mixture of SiH2Cl2 and Si2H6, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 3574–3578 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. West and K. W. Beeson, Chemical vapor deposition of cobalt silicide, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1988, 53, 740 CrossRef CAS .
K. Akiyama, S. Ohya and H. Funakubo, Preparation of h-FeSi2 thin film by metal organic chemical vapor deposition using iron-carbonyl and mono-silane, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 461, 40–43 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, P. Du, P. Hao, Y. Huang, Z. Ren, W. Weng, G. Han and G. Zhao, Self-induced preparation of TiSi nanopins by chemical vapor deposition, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 345605 CrossRef .
J. Du, P. Du, P. Hao, Y. Huang, Z. Ren, G. Han, W. Weng and G. Zhao, Growth mechanism of TiSi nanopins on Ti5Si3 by atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 10814–10817 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, Z. Ren, K. Tao, A. Hu, P. Hao, Y. Huang, G. Zhao, W. Weng, G. Han and P. Du, Self-induced preparation of assembled shrubbery TiSi nanowires by chemical vapor deposition, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 3543–3548 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhou, X. Liu, Y. Lin and D. Wang, Spontaneous growth of highly conductive two-dimensional single-crystalline TiSi2 nanonets, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7681–7684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou, X. Liu, Y. Lin and D. Wang, Rational Synthesis and Structural Characterizations of Complex TiSi2 Nanostructures, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1023–1027 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhou, J. Xie and D. Wang, Understanding the growth mechanism of titanium disilicide nanonets, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4205–4210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Dahal and V. Chikan, Phase-controlled synthesis of iron silicide (Fe3Si and FeSi2) nanoparticles in solution, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2892–2897 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. McEnaney and R. E. Schaak, Solution synthesis of metal silicide nanoparticles, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 707–709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Geaney, C. Dickinson, C. O'Dwyer, E. Mullane, A. Singh and K. M. Ryan, Growth of crystalline copper silicide nanowires in high yield within a high boiling point solvent system, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 4319–4325 CrossRef CAS .
F.-W. Yuan, C.-Y. Wang, G.-A. Li, S.-H. Chang, L.-W. Chu, L.-J. Chen and H.-Y. Tuan, Solution-phase synthesis of single-crystal Cu3Si nanowire arrays on diverse substrates with dual functions as high-performance field emitters and effcient anti-reflective layers, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9875–9881 RSC .
D. Baudouin, K. C. Szeto, P. Laurent, A. D. Mallmann, B. Fenet, L. Veyre, U. Rodemerck, C. Copéret and C. Thieuleux, Nickel–silicide colloid prepared under mild conditions as a versatile Ni precursor for more efficient CO2 reforming of CH4 catalysts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(51), 20624–20627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Galeandro-Diamant, I. Suleimanov, L. Veyre, M. Bousquié, V. Meille and C. Thieuleux, Alkene hydrosilylation with supported and unsupported Ni nanoparticles: strong influence of the Ni environment on activity and selectivity, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 1555–1558 RSC .

          E. Hengge, M. Eibl, B. E. Stadelmann, A. Zechmann and H. Siegl, Synthesis and characterization of new transition metal-silicon compounds, Organosilicon Chemistry, ed. Norbert Auner and Johann Weis,  1994 Search PubMed .
B. J. Aylett and A. A. Tannahill, Chemical vapour deposition of metal silicides from organometallic compounds with silicon-metal bonds, Vacuum, 1985, 35, 435–439 CrossRef CAS .
I. Novak, W. Huang, L. Luo, H. H. Huang, H. G. Ang and C. E. Zybill, UPS study of compounds with metal−silicon bonds: M(CO)nSiCl3 (M = Co, Mn; n = 4, 5) and Fe(CO)4(SiCl3)2, Organometallics, 1997, 16(8), 1567–1572 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Schmitt, M. J. Bierman, D. Schmeisser, F. J. Himpsel and S. Jin, Synthesis and properties of single-crystal FeSi nanowires, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1617–1621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Schmitt, L. Zhu, D. Schmeisser, F. J. Himpsel and S. Jin, Metallic single-crystal CoSi nanowires via chemical vapor deposition of single-source precursor, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 18142–18146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Schmitt and S. Jin, Selective patterned growth of silicide nanowires without the use of metal catalysts, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 126 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Schmitt, J. M. Higgins and S. Jin, Chemical synthesis and magnetotransport of magnetic semiconducting Fe1-xCoxSi alloy nanowires, Nano Lett., 2008, 8(3), 810–815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Higgins, A. L. Schmitt, I. A. Guzei and S. Jin, Higher manganese silicide nanowires of nowotny chimney ladder phase, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16086–16094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Higgins, P. Carmichael, A. L. Schmitt, S. Lee, J. P. Degrave and S. Jin, Mechanistic investigation of the growth of Fe1−xCoxSi (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) and Fe5(Si1−yGey)3 (0 ≤ y ≤ 0.33) ternary alloy nanowires, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3268–3277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liang, A. Zhao, X. Zhang, Z. Ma and R. Prins, CoSi particles on silica support as a highly active and selective catalyst for naphthalene hydrogenation, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2047–2049 RSC .
A. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Chen, J. Guan and C. Liang, Cobalt silicide nanoparticles in mesoporous silica as efficient naphthalene hydrogenation catalysts by chemical vapor deposition, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(9), 3962–3967 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guan, A. Zhao, X. Chen, M. Zhang and C. Liang, Chemical vapor deposition of Fe(CO)4(SiCl3)2 for the synthesis of hydrogenation catalyst made of highly dispersed iron silicide particles on silica, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2010, 175, 259–262 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guan, J. Jin, X. Chen, B. Zhang, D. Su and C. Liang, Preparation and formation mechanism of highly dispersed manganese silicide on silica by MOCVD of Mn(CO)5SiCl3, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2013, 19, 68–73 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhao, X. Chen, J. Guan, C. T. Williams and C. Liang, The formation mechanism of cobalt silicide on silica from Co(SiCl3)(CO)4 by in situFourier transform infrared spectroscopy, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9432–9438 RSC .
K. Bernal-Ramos, M. J. Saly, R. K. Kanjolia and Y. J. Chabal, Atomic layer deposition of cobalt silicide thin films studied by in Situ infrared spectroscopy, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27(14), 4943–4949 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ionescu, H.-J. Kleebe and R. Riedel, Silicon-containing polymer-derived ceramic nanocomposites (PDC-NCs): preparative approaches and properties, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5032–5052 RSC .
M. Zaheer, T. Schmalz, G. Motz and R. Kempe, Polymer derived non-oxide ceramics modified with late transition metals, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5102–5116 RSC .
I. Manners, Polymers and the periodic table: recent developments in inorganic polymer science, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1996, 35, 1602–1621 CrossRef .
I. Manners, Poly(ferrocenylsilanes): novel organometallic plastics, Chem. Commun., 1999, 857–865 RSC .
T. Ishikawa, Y. Kohtoku and K. Kumagawa, Production mechanism of polyzirconocarbo-silane using zirconium(IV)acetylacetonate and its conversion of the polymer into inorganic materials, J. Mater. Sci., 1998, 33, 161–166 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yamaoka, T. Ishikawa and K. Kumagawa, Excellent heat resistance of Si-Zr-C-O fibre, J. Mater. Sci., 1999, 34, 1333–1339 CrossRef CAS .
M. Narisawa, H. Tanno, M. Ikeda, T. Iseki, H. Mabuchi, K. Okamura, K. Oka, T. Dohmaru and D. P. Kim, Synthesis and ceramization of polymethylsilane precursors modified with metal chlorides, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2006, 114(6), 558–562 CrossRef CAS .
L. Friebe, K. Liu, B. Obermeier, S. Petrov, P. Dube and I. Manners, Pyrolysis of polycarbosilanes with pendant nickel clusters: synthesis and characterization of magnetic ceramics containing nickel and nickel silicide nanoparticles, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19(10), 2630–2640 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Du, A. Sidorenko, O. Bethge, S. Paschen, E. Bertagnolli and U. Schubert, Iron silicide nanoparticles in a SiC/C matrix from organometallic polymers: characterization and magnetic properties, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12232–12238 RSC .
C. Zhou, L. Yang, H. Geng, Q. Zheng, H. Min, Z. Yu and H. Xia, Preparation of Si–C–N–Fe magnetic ceramic derived from iron-modified polysilazane, Ceram. Int., 2012, 38, 6815–6822 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guan, X. Chen, K. Yang, A. Rykov, J. Wang and C. Liang, Preparation and size-dependent magnetism of highly dispersed iron silicide nanoparticles on silica, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 5292–5298 RSC .
K. Yang, X. Chen, J. Guan and C. Liang, Nickel silicides prepared from organometallic polymer as efficient catalyst towards hydrogenation of phenylacetylene, Catal. Today, 2015, 246, 176–183 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kong, T. Schmalz, G. Motz and A. H. E. Müller, Magnetoceramic nanocrystals from the bulk pyrolysis of novel hyperbranched polyferrocenyl(boro)-carbosilanes, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1507–1514 RSC .
J. Kong, M. M. Kong, X. F. Zhang, L. X. Chen and L. N. An, Magnetoceramics from the Bulk Pyrolysis of Polysilazane Cross-Linked by Polyferrocenylcarbosilanes with Hyperbranched Topology, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10367–10375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, L. Chen, L. Meng, F. Chen and J. Kong, Nickel silicide nanocrystal-containing magnetoceramics from the bulk pyrolysis of polysilazane and nickelocene, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 6937–6947 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Chen, C. Luo and J. Kong, Polymer-Derived Ceramic Microspheres with controlled morphology via novel phase separation-assisted pyrolysis, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2016, 99(5), 1485–1493 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zaheer, G. Motz and R. Kempe, The generation of palladium silicide nanoalloy particles in a SiCN matrix and their catalytic applications, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18825–18831 RSC .
L.-L. Sheu, Z. Karpinksi and W. M. H. Sachtler, Effects of palladium particle size and palladium silicide formation on fourier transform infrared spectra of CO adsorbed on Pd/SiO2 catalysts, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 4890–4894 CrossRef CAS .
W. Juszczyk, Z. Karpinski, D. Lomot, J. Pielaszek and J. W. Sobczak, Pd-Au/SiO2:characterization and catalytic activity, J. Catal., 1995, 151, 67–76 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hippe, R. Lamber, G. Schulz-Ekloff and U. Schubert, Influence of the strong metal-support interaction on the CO chemisorption at a Pt/SiO2 catalyst, Catal. Lett., 1997, 43, 195–199 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. A. van den Oetelaar, A. Partridge, S. L. G. Toussaint, C. F. J. Flipse and H. H. Brongersma, A Surface Science Study of Model Catalysts. 2. Metal - Support Interactions in Cu/SiO2 Model Catalysts, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 9541–9549 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Min, A. K. Santra and D. W. Goodman, Understanding silica-supported metal catalysts: Pd/silica as a case study, Catal. Today, 2003, 85, 113–124 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Jabłoński, J. Okal, D. Potoczna-Petru and L. Krajczyk, High temperature reduction with hydrogen, phase composition, and activity of cobalt/silica catalysts, J. Catal., 2003, 220, 146–160 CrossRef .
Q. Wei, Y.-S. Shi, K.-Q. Sun and B.-Q. Xu, Pd-on-Si catalysts prepared via galvanic displacement for the selective hydrogenation of para-chloronitrobenzene, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3026–3029 RSC .
R. Tschan, R. Wandeler, M. S. Schneider, M. M. Schubert and A. Baiker, Continuous semihydrogenation of phenylacetylene over amorphous Pd81Si19 alloy in “supercritical” carbon dioxide: relation between catalytic performance and phase behavior, J. Catal., 2001, 204, 219–229 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tschan, R. Wandeler, M. S. Schneider, M. Burgener, M. M. Schubert and A. Baiker, Semihydrogenation of a propargylic alcohol over highly active amorphous Pd81Si19 in “supercritical” carbon dioxide, Appl. Catal., A, 2002, 223, 173–185 CrossRef CAS .
J. Panpranot, K. Phandinthong, T. Sirikajorn, M. Arai and P. Praserthdam, Impact of palladium silicide formation on the catalytic properties of Pd/SiO2 catalysts in liquid-phase semihydrogenation of phenylacetylene, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2007, 261, 29–35 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, A. Zhao, Z. Shao, Z. Ma and C. Liang, A novel approach to synthesize highly selective nickel silicide catalysts for phenylacetylene semihydrogenation, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2010, 175, 77–84 CrossRef CAS .
H. Itahara, W. F. Simanullang, N. Takahashi, S. Kosaka and S. Furukawa, Na-melt synthesis of fine Ni3Si powders as a hydrogenation catalyst, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 5406–5409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ryabchuk, G. Agostini, M. M. Pohl, H. Lund, A. Agapova, H. Junge, K. Junge and M. Beller, Intermetallic nickel silicide nanocatalyst-A non-noble metal-based general hydrogenation catalyst, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat0761 CrossRef PubMed .
T.-N. Ye, Y. Lu, J. Li, T. Nakao, H. Yang, T. Tada, M. Kitano and H. Hosono, Copper-based intermetallic electride catalyst for chemoselective hydrogenation reactions, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17089–17097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Dong, T. Wang, J. Zhao, T. Fu, X. Guo, L. Peng, B. Zhao, N. Xue, W. Ding and Z. Xie, Ni-silicides nanoparticles as substitute for noble metals for hydrogenation of nitrobenzene to p-aminophenol in sulfuric acid, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 520, 151–156 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imamura and W. E. Wallace, Methanation by catalysts formed from intermetallic compounds, J. Phys. Chem., 1979, 83, 2009–2012 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imamura and W. E. Wallace, Methanation activity of catalysts formed by treating intermetallic compounds (Ni5Si2, Ni2Si, and Co2Si) with oxygen, J. Phys. Chem., 1979, 63, 3261–3264 CrossRef .
M. Houalla, C. L. Kibby, L. Petrakis and D. M. Hercules, Surface characterization of methanation catalysts formed by oxidation of nickel-silicon intermetallics, J. Phys. Chem., 1983, 87, 3689–3693 CrossRef CAS .
M. Houalla, T. A. Dang, C. L. Kibby, L. Petrakis and D. M. Hercules, The spectroscopic characterization of intermetallic synthesis gas conversion catalysts and the correlation of their activity with surface-structure, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1984, 19, 414–429 CrossRef CAS .
M. Houalla, T. A. Dang, E. L. Eddy, C. L. Kibby, L. Petrakis and D. M. Hercules, Surface characterization and methanation activity of catalysts derived from binary and ternary intermetallics, ACS Symp. Ser., 1985, 288, 305–316 CrossRef CAS .
T. Otowa, M. Houalla, D. M. Hercules, C. L. Kibby and L. Petrakis, Surface characterization and CO hydrogenation activity of silane-treated nickel/aluminas, Appl. Spectrosc., 1989, 43, 1082–1086 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lorey and G. Roewer, The direct synthesis of methylchlorosilanes: New aspects concerning its mechanism, Silicon Chem., 2002, 1, 299–308 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Frank, K. B. Kester and J. L. Falconer, Catalytic formation of silanes on copper-silicon alloys, J. Catal., 1985, 91, 44–53 CrossRef CAS .
H. Souha, G. Weber and B. Gillot, Comparative kinetic study of the reactions between CuCl and Si, Cu3Si or Cu5Si powders, Thermochim. Acta, 1990, 171, 215–221 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lieske, H. Fichtner, U. Kretzschmar and R. Zimmermann, η-Cu3Si percentage and particle size in various rochow contact masses, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 1995, 9, 657–666 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, G. Wang and J. Wang, Surface morphology and catalytic activity of the contact mass in organosiliane synthesis, Chem. Eng. Commun., 2006, 193, 754–763 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, G. Wang and J. Wang, Effect of CuCl particle size on the reduction reaction by silicon in preparation of contact mass used for methylchlorosilane synthesis, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2006, 45, 129–133 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Wessel and D. G. Rethwisch, Activation of CuSi and CuZnSnSi contact masses for the direct synthesis of methylchlorosilanes, React. Kinet. Catal. Lett., 1996, 58, 7–12 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Wessel and D. G. Rethwisch, Deactivation of CuSi and CuZnSnSi due to coke formation during the direct synthesis of methylchlorosilanes, J. Catal., 1996, 161, 861–866 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Agarwala and J. L. Falconer, Kinetics of methylchlorosilane formation on Zn-promoted Cu3Si, Int. J. Chem. Kinet., 1987, 19, 519–537 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhai, Y. Ji, G. Wang, Y. Zhu, H. Liu, Z. Zhong and F. Su, Controllable wet synthesis of multicomponent copper-based catalysts for Rochow reaction, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 73011–73019 RSC .
J. Li, Z. Zhang, Y. Ji, Z. Jin, S. Zou, Z. Zhong and F. Su, One-dimensional Cu-based catalysts with layered Cu–Cu2O–CuO walls for the Rochow reaction, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 1377–1392 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. H. Voorhoeve and J. C. Vlugter, Machanism and kinetics of the metal-catalyzed synthesis of methylchlorosilanes: II. The kinetics of the copper-catalyzed reaction of synthesis of methyl chloride and silicon, J. Catal., 1965, 4, 43–55 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. H. Voorhoeve and J. C. Vlugter, Machanism and kinetics of the metal-catalyzed synthesis of methylchlorosilanes: IV. The mechanism of the synthesis of dimethyldichlorosilane from silicon and methylchloride, J. Catal., 1965, 4, 220–228 CrossRef .
J. P. Kim and D. G. Rethwisch, The direct synthesis of methylchlorosilanes I. Steady-state and transient reaction kinetics, J. Catal., 1992, 134, 168–178 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Sun, B. E. Bent, A. P. Wright and B. M. Naasz, Chemistry of the direct synthesis of methylchlorosilanes. UHV study of the chemisorbed fragments methyl and chlorine on copper silicide and their desorption pathways, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 1998, 131, 169–183 CrossRef CAS .
J. Acker and K. Bohmhammel, Thermodynamic assessment of the copper catalyzed direct synthesis of methylchlorosilanes, J. Organomet. Chem., 2008, 693, 2483–2493 CrossRef CAS .
W. Mörke, F. Vogt and K.-P. Wendlandt, Catalytical conversion of silicon tetrachloride to trichlorosilane characterization of the nickel silicalite catalyst by ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1993, 89(7), 1085–1087 RSC .
K. Bohmhammel, G. Roewer and H. Walter, Hydrodehalogenation of chlorosilanes in the presence of metal silicides: experimental studies of gas and solid phase composition related to thermodynamic calculations, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1995, 91(21), 3879–3882 RSC .
H. Walter, G. Roewer and K. Bohmhammel, Mechanism of the silicide-catalysed hydrodehalogenation of silicon tetrachloride to trichlorosilane, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1996, 92(22), 4605–4608 RSC .
J. Acker and K. Bohmhammel, Reactivity of intermetallic compounds: a solid state approach to direct reactions of silicon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106(19), 5105–5117 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Acker, K. Bohmhammel and G. Roewer, Thermodynamics, kinetics and catalysis in the system Ni-Si-H-Cl: thermodynamic description of chlorine-containing silicides, in Organosilicon Chemistry Set: From Molecules to Materials, ed. N. Auner and J. Weis, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH, Weinheim, Germany,  2005 Search PubMed .
W. Ding, J. Yan and W. Xiao, Hydrogenation of silicon tetrachloride in the presence of silicon: thermodynamic and experimental investigation, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 10943–10953 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ding, Z. Wang, J. Yan and W. Xiao, CuCl-catalyzed hydrogenation of silicon tetrachloride in the presence of silicon: mechanism and kinetic modeling, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 16725–16735 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Vorotyntsev, A. N. Petukhov, I. V. Vorotyntsev, T. S. Sazanova, M. M. Trubyanov, I. Y. Kopersak, E. N. Razov and V. M. Vorotyntsev, Low-temperature catalytic hydrogenation of silicon and germanium tetrachlorides on the modified nickel chloride, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 198, 334–346 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, X. Liu, L. Wang, M. Li, C. T. Williams and C. Liang, High sulfur tolerance of Ni–Si intermetallics as hydrodesulfurization catalysts, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 1728–1731 RSC .
K. Yang, X. Chen, J. Qi, Z. Bai, L. Zhang and C. Liang, A highly efficient and sulfur-tolerant Pd2Si/CNTs catalyst for hydrodesulfurization of dibenzothiophenes, J. Catal., 2019, 369, 363–371 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Chen, Z. Peng and C. Liang, Acid-tolerant intermetallic cobalt–nickel silicides as noble metal-like catalysts for selective hydrogenation of phthalic anhydride to phthalide, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 1108–1116 RSC .
K. Yang, X. Chen, G. Lafaye, C. Especel, F. Epron and C. Liang, One-step Modification of Active Sites and Support in Ni/Al2O3 Catalyst for Hydrodeoxygenation of Lignin-derived Diphenyl Ether, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 11398–11405 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Dubois and R. G. Nuzzo, Small-molecule chemisorption in nickel disilicide: implications for heterogeneous catalysts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 365–369 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Nuzzo, L. H. Dubois, N. E. Bowles and M. A. Trecoske, Derivatized, high surface area, supported nickel catalysts, J. Catal., 1984, 85, 267–271 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Nuzzo and L. H. Dubois, The chemisorption and catalytic properties of nickel intermetallic compounds - studies of single crystalline and high surface-area, supported materials, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1984, 19, 407–413 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Maugh II, A new route to intermetallics metal silicides and related intermetallic compounds with unusual properties are formed by exposing supported metals to volatile organometallics, Science, 1984, 225, 403 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Ryabchuk, A. Agapova, C. Kreyenschulte, H. Lund, H. Junge, K. Junge and M. Beller, Heterogeneous nickel-catalysed reversible, acceptorless dehydrogenation of N-Heterocycles for hydrogen storage, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4969–4972 RSC .
W. Juszczyk, Z. Karpi'nski, D. Łomot, J. Pielaszek, Transformation of Pd/SiO2 into palladium silicide during reduction at 450 and 500 °C, J. Catal., 2003, 220, 299–308 CrossRef CAS .
S. Penner and M. Armbrüster, Formation of intermetallic compounds by reactive metal–support interaction: a frequently encountered phenomenon in catalysis, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 374–392 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Vlasenko and N. I. Ilchenko, Catalytic activity of transition metal silicides in hydrogen oxidation, React. Kinet. Catal. Lett., 1988, 36, 189–193 CrossRef CAS .
N. I. Il'chenko and N. V. Vlasenko, Kinetics and mechanism of oxidation of hydrogen on metal-like nitrides, borides, and silicides, Theor. Exp. Chem., 1988, 23, 694–698 CrossRef .
C. Tsamis, L. Tsoura, A. G. Nassiopoulou, A. Travlos, C. E. Salmas, K. S. Hatzilyberis and G. P. Androutsopoulos, Hydrogen catalytic oxidation reaction on Pd-doped porous silicon, IEEE Sens. J., 2002, 2, 89–95 CrossRef CAS .
S. Polisski, B. Goller, K. Wilson, D. Kovalev, V. Zaikowskii and A. Lapkin, In situ synthesis and catalytic activity in CO oxidation of metal nanoparticles supported on porous nanocrystalline silicon, J. Catal., 2010, 271, 59–66 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. Han, R. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Huang, J. Zhang, H. Yu and Z. Kang, Tunable metal/silicon hybrid dots catalysts for hydrocarbon selective oxidation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20363–20367 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, K. Yang, J. Li, W. Tang, J. Xu, H. Liu, R. Yue and Y. Chen, Surface diffusion of Pt clusters in/on SiO2 matrix at elevated temperatures and their improved catalytic activities in benzene oxidation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 22719–22729 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Z. Yan, Y. Li, J. Jing and J. Xie, Preparation of cobalt silicide on graphene as Pt electrocatalyst supports for highly efficient and stable methanol oxidation in acidic media, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 161, 48–54 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, D. Pan, Y. Li, Z. Yan, S. Meng and J. Xie, Formation of cobalt silicide nanoparticles on graphene with a synergistic effect and high stability for ethanol oxidation, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 30293–30300 RSC .
H. L. Chang, C. H. Lin and C. T. Kuo, Iron and cobalt silicide catalysts-assisted carbon nanostructures on the patterned Si substrates, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 420–421, 219–224 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Wen, K. Yang, K.-L. Ou, W.-F. Wu, R.-C. Luo and C.-P. Chou, Carbon nanotubes grown using cobalt silicide as catalyst and hydrogen pretreatment, Microelectron. Eng., 2005, 82, 221–227 CrossRef CAS .
W.-C. Yang, T.-Y. Yang and T.-R. Yew, Growth of self-aligned carbon nanotube for use as a field-effect transistor using cobalt silicide as a catalyst, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1679–1685 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Bayer, C. Zhang, R. Blume, F. Yan, M. Fouquet, C. T. Wirth, R. S. Weatherup, L. Lin, C. Baehtz, R. A. Oliver, A. Knop-Gericke, R. Schlögl, S. Hofmann and J. Robertson, In-situ study of growth of carbon nanotube forests on conductive CoSi2 support, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 114314 CrossRef .
J. I. Sohn, C.-J. Choi, S. Lee and T.-Y. Seong, Growth behavior of carbon nanotubes on Fe-deposited (001) Si substrates, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 3130 CrossRef CAS .
T. de los Arcos, F. Vonau, M. G. Garnier, V. Thommen, H.-G. Boyen, P. Oelhafen, M. Düggelin, D. Mathis and R. Guggenheim, Influence of iron–silicon interaction on the growth of carbon nanotubes produced by chemical vapor deposition, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 2383 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, L. K. L. Falk, R. E. Morjan, O. A. Nerushev and E. E. B. Campbell, Synthesis of carbon nanotube films by thermal CVD in the presence of supported catalyst particles. Part I: The silicon substrate/nanotube film interface, J. Mater. Sci., 2004, 15, 533–543 CAS .
Y. Yao, L. K. L. Falk, R. E. Morjan, O. A. Nerushev and E. E. B. Campbell, Synthesis of carbon nanotube films by thermal CVD in the presence of supported catalyst particles. Part II: the nanotube film, J. Mater. Sci., 2004, 15, 583–594 CAS .
J. F. AuBuchon, C. Daraio, L.-H. Chen, A. I. Gapin and S. Jin, Iron silicide root formation in carbon nanotubes grown by microwave PECVD, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 24215–24219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qi, C. Qian and J. Liu, Synthesis of uniform double-walled carbon nanotubes using iron disilicide as catalyst, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2417–2421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nihei, A. Kawabata and Y. Awano, Direct diameter-controlled growth of multiwall carbon nanotubes on nickel-silicide layer, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 42, L721–L723 CrossRef CAS .
S. Esconjauregui, C. M. Whelan and K. Maex, Carbon nanotube catalysis by metal silicide: resolving inhibition versus growth, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 015602 CrossRef .
J. H. Lee, I. N. Lund, E. T. Eisenbraun and R. E. Geer, Silicide-induced multi-wall carbon nanotube growth on silicon nanowires, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 085603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Parajuli, N. Kumar, D. Kipp and J. Hahm, Carbon nanotube cantilevers on self-aligned copper silicide nanobeams, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 173107 CrossRef .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Semiconductor-based photocatalytic hydrogen generation, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hannula, K. Lahtonen, H. Ali-Löytty, A. A. Zakharov, T. Isotalo, J. Saari and M. Valden, Fabrication of topographically microstructured titanium silicide interface for advanced photonic applications, Scr. Mater., 2016, 119, 76–81 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, S. Zhou, X. Liu, S. Sheehan and D. Wang, TiO2/TiSi2 Heterostructures for high-efficiency photoelectrochemical H2O splitting, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2772–2773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Y. Lin, S. Zhou, S. Sheehan and D. Wang, Complex nanostructures: synthesis and energetic applications, Energies, 2010, 3, 285–300 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, S. Zhou, S. W. Sheehan and D. Wang, Nanonet-based hematite heteronanostructures for efficient solar water splitting, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2398–2401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, Y. Lin, L.-Y. Chou, S. W. Sheehan, W. He, F. Zhang, H. J. M. Hou and D. Wang, Water splitting by tungsten oxide prepared by atomic layer deposition and decorated with an oxygen-evolving catalyst, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 519–522 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, G. Yuan, R. Liu, S. Zhou, S. W. Sheehan and D. Wang, Semiconductor nanostructure-based photoelectrochemical water splitting: A brief review, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 507, 209–215 CrossRef CAS .
S. Banerjee, S. K. Mohapatra and M. Misra, Water Photooxidation by TiSi2-TiO2 Nanotubes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12643–12649 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Mou, S. Yin, M. Zhu, Y. Du, X. Wang, P. Yang, J. Zheng and C. Lu, RuO2/TiSi2/graphene composite for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen generation under visible light irradiation, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2793–2799 RSC .
F. R. F. Fan, G. A. Hope and A. J. Bard, Semiconductor electrodes: XLVI. Stabilization of n-silicon electrodes in aqueous solution photoelectrochemical cells by formation of platinum silicide layers, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 1647–1649 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. F. Fan, R. Gerald Keil and A. J. Bard, Semiconductor electrodes. 48. Photooxidation of halides and water on n-silicon protected with silicide layers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 220–224 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xia, X. Zhou, J. Li and Y. Qu, Protection strategy for improved catalytic stability of silicon photoanodes for water oxidation, Sci. Bull., 2015, 60, 1395–1402 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoshimizu, R. Kobayashi, M. Saegusa, T. Takashima, H. Funakubo, K. Akiyama, Y. Matsumoto and H. Irie, Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution over β-iron silicide under infrared-light irradiation, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2818–2820 RSC .
M. S. Faber and S. Jin, Earth-abundant inorganic electrocatalysts and their nanostructures for energy conversion applications, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3519–3542 RSC .
K. Seto, J. Noël, J. Lipkowski, Z. Altounian and R. Reeves, Glassy metals as electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution and oxidation part I: electrocatalytic properties of amorphous Pt-Si alloy, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 1910–1914 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Vijh, G. Belanger and R. Jacques, Electrochemical reactions on iron silicide electrodes in alkaline solutions, Mater. Chem.
Phys., 1989, 21, 529–538 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Vijh, G. Belanger and R. Jacques, Electrochemical activity of silicides of some transition metals for the hydrogen evolution reaction in acidic solutions, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1990, 15, 789–794 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Vijh, G. Belanger and R. Jacques, Electrolysis of water on silicides of some transition metals in alkaline solutions, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1992, 17, 479–483 CrossRef .
A. K. Vijh, G. Belanger and R. Jacques, Discovery of some new stable electrocatalytic materials for the anodic oxidation of hydrazine, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 1993, 12, 113–115 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Vijh and G. Belanger, Some trends in the electrocatalytic activities of metal silicides for the hydrogen evolution reaction, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 1995, 14, 982–984 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mittermeier, P. Madkikar, X. D. Wang, H. A. Gasteiger and M. Piana, Probing transition-metal silicides as PGM-free catalysts for hydrogen oxidation and evolution in acidic medium, Materials, 2017, 10, 661 CrossRef PubMed .
V. S. Povroznik and A. B. Shein, Environmental and inherent factors that affect hydrogen cathodic evolution on silicides of the iron family metals, Prot. Met., 2007, 43, 203–207 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Povroznik, A. B. Shein and I. N. Mikova, Effect of anodic surface treatment of cobalt silicides on the hydrogen evolution reaction, Prot. Met., 2008, 44, 596–599 Search PubMed .
A. B. Shein, Corrosion-electrochemical behavior of iron family silicides in various electrolytes, Prot. Met. Phys. Chem. Surf., 2010, 46, 479–488 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Kichigin and A. B. Shein, Kinetics and mechanism of hydrogen evolution reaction on cobalt silicides in alkaline solutions, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 164, 260–266 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Fouchard and C. Gardner, Electrocatalysis studies of transition-metal silicides, Defence Research Establishment Ottawa,  1978 Search PubMed .
J. Xie, X. Yang, B. Han, Y. Shao-Horn and D. Wang, Site-selective deposition of twinned platinum nanoparticles on TiSi2 nanonets by atomic layer deposition and their oxygen reduction activities, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6337–6345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Banis, S. Sun, X. Meng, Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, R. Li, M. Cai, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, TiSi2Ox coated N-doped carbon nanotubes as Pt catalyst support for the oxygen reduction reaction in PEMFCs, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 15457–15467 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Mink, J. P. Rojas, B. E. Logan and M. M. Hussain, Vertically grown multiwalled carbon nanotube anode and nickel silicide integrated high performance microsized (1.25 μL) microbial fuel cell, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 791–795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, Y. Lin, H. Guo, T. Ma and A. Hagfeldt, Highly effective Pt/MoSi2 composite counter electrode catalyst for dye-sensitized solar cell, J. Power Sources, 2014, 263, 154–157 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Xiao Chen	Xiao Chen obtained his BSc in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Hunan University, China (2008) and his PhD from Dalian University of Technology, China (2013). He was a lecturer in chemical engineering at Dalian University of Technology (2013–2015) until he was promoted as an associate professor of chemical technology (2015). He then spent about 1 year at Technische Universität Chemnitz, Germany, as a postdoctoral fellow. His research focuses on the application of intermetallic compounds in catalysis.
Changhai Liang	Changhai Liang has been a professor in the School of Chemical Engineering at Dalian University of Technology, China since 2006. He earned his PhD in Physical Chemistry from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP), CAS in 2000. He successively became an assistant professor and associated professor at DICP in 2001 and 2003. He then spent about 3 years at the Ruhr University of Bochum, Germany, and ETH in Zurich, Switzerland, as an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow and postdoctoral fellow. His research interests include design of new catalytic materials and catalytic reaction kinetics for energy conversion, environmental protection, and fine chemicals synthesis.

 	Fig. 1  Annual increases in the number of publications which include topics such as “catalyst” and “intermetallic” or “silicide”, as determined by Web of Science searches.	 

 	Fig. 2  Ni–Si phase diagrams. Reprinted with permission from ASM International.6	 

Orthorhombic	ZrSi2-type	TiSi2, ZrSi2
FeB-type	ZrSi

anti-PbCl2	Ca2Si
Hexagonal	CrSi2 type	CrSi2, VSi2, NbSi2, TaSi2
Mn5Si3 type	Ti5Si3, Zr5Si3
Cr5Si3 type	V5Si3, Cr5Si3, Mo5Si3, W5Si3
Ni3Sn type	Ta4.5Si
AlB2 type	YSi2
Tetragonal	CaC2 type	MoSi2, WSi2, ReSi2
U3Si2 type	Zr3Si2
Cr5B3 type	Nb5Si3, Ta5Si3
CuAl2 type	Zr2Si, Ta2Si
Cubic	FeSi type	CrSi
β-W	V3Si, Cr3Si, Mo3Si
β-Mn	Cu5Si
Fluorite type	Mg2Si, CoSi2, NiSi2
Random BCC	Mn3Si
Fe3Al	Fe3Si

 	Fig. 3  The electronic chart of metal silicides with different stoichiometries. Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 1981 IOP Publishing.	 
MnSi + (n/m)H2S → (n/m)MmS + (n/m)H2 + Si	(1)

IV B	TiSi → TiS	−18 ± 4
TiSi → TiS2	−38 ± 4
VII B	MnSi → MnS	−12
MnSi → MnS2	−1
VIII	FeSi → FeS	9
FeSi → FeS2	6
OsSi → OsS	3 ± 5
OsSi → OsS2	8 ± 5
CoSi → CoS2	14
IrSi → Ir2S3	11 ± 5
IrSi → IrS2	12 ± 5
NiSi → NiS	12
PtSi → PtS	9 ± 5
PtSi → PtS2	16 ± 5

MoSi2	2.0	—	1930	
36

Ti5Si3	0.6	—	2190	
36

ZrSi2	2.0	—	2090	
36

NiSi	1	—	813	
37

Ni2Si	0.5	—	893	
37

Cu3Si	0.33	453	823	
38

Ta5Si3	0.6	—	2238	
39

V5Si3	0.6	373	1463	
40

Nb5Si3	0.6	473	1873	
40

TiSi2	2	473	1543	
41

Mg2Si	0.5	873	—	
42

FeSi + α-FeSi2	2 (additive KNO3)	773	2000	
43


 	Fig. 4  The synthesis schematics of metal silicides by the mechanochemical process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.	 
MXm + mAYn → MYz + mAX + [(m × n) − z]Y	(2)
M2O5 + 2Mg2Si + CaSi2 → 2MSi2 + 4MgO + CaO (M = V, Nb, Ta)	(3)
Nb2O5 + 2Li2Si → 2NbSi2 + 4Li2O + 1/2O2	(4)

 	Fig. 5  The reaction mechanism and SEM and TEM images of the Ti5Si3 NPs prepared with molten salts. Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Li21Si5	Li foil and Si powder	720–540 W, 5 min	
78

Mg2Si	Mg powder and Si powder	2.45 GHz, 175 W, 2 min	
79, 80
CoSi, CoSi2	Co powder and Si powder	2.45 GHz, 0–3 kW, 50–100 s	
81

Mo5Si3	Mo powder and Si powder	2.45 GHz, 0–3 kW, 150 s	
82

Pd2Si	H2 + Pd/Si substrate	2.45 GHz and 500 W	
83

CoSi2	Co, Si, and C powder	2.45 GHz, 980 W, 9–15 min	
84

WSi2	W, Si, and C powder	2.45 GHz, 980 W, 9–15 min	
84

TiSi2	Ti, Si, and C powders	2.45 GHz, 980 W, 9–15 min	
84

MoSi2	Mo, Si, and C powder	2.45 GHz, 980 W, 9–15 min	
84

CoSix/CNTs	CoCl2, CNTs, Si powder	2.45 GHz, 800 W, 10–30 min	
85

CoSix/CNTs	Co/CNTs + Cl2Si(CH3)2	2.45 GHz, 800 W, 10–30 min	
86


 	Fig. 6  Schematic representation of different stages of Pd2Si nanowire growth via the VLS mechanism using MPECVD growth. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 
2CoCl2(s) + (2x + 1) Si(s) → 2CoSix(s) + SiCl4(g)	(5)

 	Fig. 7  The schematic illustration of the growth mechanism of Ni2Si NWs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104 licensee Springer 2013.	 

 	Fig. 8  Preparation of Ni2Si NWs using a silane gas precursor and Ni foil. (a) The decomposition of SiH4 and the nucleation of Ni2Si; (b) Ni2Si grew one-dimensionally; (c) Ni2Si nanowires grew long; (d) the formation of Ni2Si tips. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2008 IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 9  The formation of Ni2Si NPs via the Rochow reverse reaction. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematics of the proposed mechanism governing the TiSi2 nanostructure growth. (a) The formation of nucleus; The elongation of C54 (b) and C49 (d) rods. (c and e) The branching is caused by the breaking of side passivations; (f) The produce of second-generation nanonets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Solution synthesis of metal silicide NPs: (a–c) Pd2Si; (d) Cu3Si; (e) Ni2Si. Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Synthesis of nickel-silicide colloids and their conversion into supported Ni catalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Supported metal silicide NP catalysts prepared by metal organic chemical vapour deposition.	 

 	Fig. 14  The formation mechanism of cobalt silicide on silica from Co(SiCl3)(CO)4 by in situ Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  Typically structural formulas of metal-containing polysilane: (a) poly(ferrocenylsilanes); (b) nickel-containing polycarbosilanes; (c) poly[{(diorganosilylene)diacetylene}-dicobalthexacarbonyls]. Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 1996 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 16  The schematic illustration of the formation of Si–C–N–(M) PDC microspheres via phase separation assisted pyrolysis. Reprinted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2016 The American Ceramic Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Comparison of the catalytic behavior of Pd81Si19 and Pd/SiO2 at increasing pressure. (b) Comparison of catalysts at different temperatures in the high hydrogen excess regime and at 127 bar. Reprinted with permission from ref. 186. 2001 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic representation of catalytic hydrogenation of ketones to different products; (b) hydrogenation of acetophenone (2 mmol) with 60 mg of catalyst at 75 °C under 20 bar hydrogen for 24 hours; (c) hydrogenation of acetophenone (2 mmol) using Pd20-FC (120 mg) under 20 bar hydrogen pressure for 24 hours; (d) hydrogenation of acetophenone (2 mmol) with the Pd20-FC catalyst (60 mg) under 20 bar hydrogen pressure at 75 °C for 24 hours. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  Results of liquid-phase hydrogenation of phenylacetylene over the as-prepared NiSix catalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  a) Catalytic conversion of PA and the corresponding selectivity to ST over different catalysts and the reaction details of CoSi/SBA-15, FexSi/SBA-15, and Cu6.69Si/SBA-15 (inset). Product yields over b) Ni/SBA-15 and c) Ni2Si-450 °C/SBA-15 (the reaction was performed at 40 °C, 1.0 MPa H2 with 100 mg catalyst). Reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 21  LaCuSi electride catalyst for chemoselective hydrogenation reactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Results of catalytic experiments. (A) Catalyst supported on Al2O3; the inset shows Ni–Si–C/Al2O3 with different carbon contents; (B) influence of the support on catalytic performance of 6Ni/support, 6Ni–Si/support, and Ni–Si–C/support; (C) catalytic activity of yNi–Si/AC6 at various reaction times; (D) recycle experiment results of 20Ni–Si/AC6. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193. 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 23  CO methanation properties on the Si–Ni/SiO2-350 catalyst changing with time. Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Sipowder + CH3Clgas → (CH3)xHySiClz	(6)

 	Fig. 24  Schematic illustration of the process of the Rochow reaction. Reproduced from ref. 209 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  Mechanism of hydrodehalogenation of silicon tetrachloride to trichlorosilane catalyzed by metal silicide catalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 219. Copyright 2002 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  a) DOS of surface atoms of Ni (111) and NiSi2 (111); b) energy diagram for H2S adsorption and dissociation on Ni (111) and NiSi2 (111) surfaces. Reproduced from ref. 224 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 27  HDS activity of DBT and product selectivities versus the nominal Ni metal fraction for Ni1−xCoxSi2 catalysts (a) and Ni1−xFexSi2 catalysts (b). Reprinted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) DBT conversion and selectivity to the DDS/HYD pathway over 3 wt%-Pd2Si/CNTs. (b) HDS activity comparison between different metal silicide catalysts and a commercial NiMoS HDS catalyst. Life test for the HDS reaction over (c) 3 wt%-Pd2Si/CNTs and (d) 3 wt%-Pd/CNTs. Reaction conditions: 340 °C, 3 MPa, and H2/substrate = 300. Reprinted with permission from ref. 225. 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Yield of phthalide versus nominal Ni metal fraction for CoxNi2−xSi@C catalysts and (b) selectivity to phthalide versus hydrogenation activity of phthalic anhydride over technical catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Field emission scanning electron microscopy image of the catalyst. (b) 3-D presentation of the AFM image of the catalyst. Turnover numbers (mole/site) for (c) benzene and (d) cyclohexane produced from cyclohexene on the nanoparticle array and a Pt foil (0.06 cm2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2001 American Chemical Society.	 
WSi2 > HfSi2 > VSi2 > NbSi2 > MoSi2 > ZrSi2
TaSi2 > TiSi2 > FeSi2 > CrSi2 > CoSi2

 	Fig. 31  Relationship between the M/SiQD catalyst composition and the selectivity for the main products. Reprinted with permission from ref. 239. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  Schematic of in situ silicidation from low conductivity CoSi to highly conductive CoSi2 during CNT growth. Reprinted with permission from ref. 246. Copyright 2011 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 33  SEM images of CNTs grown for 5 min, at atmospheric pressure and in standard gas flows, on metal silicide NPs formed at 600 °C on 5 nm Ni deposited on pristine Si samples. (a) Catalytic nanoparticles at the tip of tubes at 600 °C. (b) Lower magnification SEM image of CNT film lifting off from the Si substrate. SEM images of individual CNTs grown at (c) 600 °C and (d) 900 °C, respectively. (e) Schematic diagram of metal silicide NPs on Si substrate during CNT growth at high temperatures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 254. Copyright 2011 IOP Publishing Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 34  Electride LaCoSi for direct ammonia synthesis. (a) Catalytic activity for ammonia synthesis over various cobalt catalysts; (b) time course of the ammonia synthesis rate over LaCoSi; (c) apparent activation energies of the selected catalysts for ammonia synthesis; (d) dependence of ammonia synthesis on the partial pressures of N2 and H2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 35  TiO2/TiSi2 heterostructures for high-efficiency photoelectrochemical H2O splitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 259. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 36  A plot of the rate of the HER at −998 mV for a number of metal silicides against their work function values, their (exothermic) heats of formation (per metal atom), and the exchange current densities for the HER on the corresponding metals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 276. Copyright 1995 Chapman & Hall.	 

 	Fig. 37  Schematics of Pt nanoparticle deposition on different TiSi2 nanostructures and ORR catalytic activities of Pt/TiSi2 and Pt/C in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. (a) Polarization curves of (a) Pt/TiSi2 and (b) Pt/C at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 at varying rotation rates; (c) cyclic voltammetry characteristics of Pt/TiSi2 and Pt/C catalysts when measured in O2-free environments. (d) Tafel plots of the specific ORR activity of Pt/TiSi2 and Pt/C catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 283. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
