Functional inks and printing of two-dimensional materials  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00084K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00084K
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3265-3300Functional inks and printing of two-dimensional materials

        
          
            Guohua 
            Hu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Joohoon 
            Kang
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Leonard W. T. 
            Ng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoxi 
            Zhu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Richard C. T. 
            Howe
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Christopher G. 
            Jones
          
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Mark C. 
            Hersam
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Tawfique 
            Hasan
          
        
      *a
aCambridge Graphene Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0FA, UK. E-mail: th270@cam.ac.uk;   Tel: +44 (0)1223 7 48362
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA
cNovalia, Regent House, Impington, Cambridge CB24 9NP, UK
Received 
      29th January 2018
    First published on 18th April 2018AbstractGraphene and related two-dimensional materials provide an ideal platform for next generation disruptive technologies and applications. Exploiting these solution-processed two-dimensional materials in printing can accelerate this development by allowing additive patterning on both rigid and conformable substrates for flexible device design and large-scale, high-speed, cost-effective manufacturing. In this review, we summarise the current progress on ink formulation of two-dimensional materials and the printable applications enabled by them. We also present our perspectives on their research and technological future prospects.
From left to right: Guohua Hu, Leonard W. T. Ng, Xiaoxi Zhu, Richard C. T. Howe and Tawfique Hasan
The Hybrid Nanomaterials Engineering (HNE) Group, led by Tawfique Hasan, is based at the Cambridge Graphene Centre, Cambridge University Engineering Department. The group specialises in solution-processing and functional ink/composite formulation of one- and two-dimensional materials for applications in energy, sensing, (opto)electronics and photonics. (From left) Guohua Hu completed his PhD (2017) on printable (opto)electronics and photonics from the HNE group. He is now a postdoctoral researcher in the group, working on printable gas sensors for interconnected systems. He has a BEng from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (2013). Leonard Ng is a third year PhD student in the group and is working on high viscosity multifunctional inks. He received his MSc from the University of Leeds (2015). Xiaoxi Zhu is a second year PhD student in the group, working on printable devices for IoT applications. She completed her BEng from Imperial College London (2015). Richard Howe completed his PhD (2016) from the HNE group and was subsequently awarded a postdoctoral fellowship to support commercialisation of an invention from his PhD. He received his MSci from University of Bristol (2011). Tawfique Hasan completed his PhD from the University of Cambridge (2009) and is now a Reader in the Engineering Department, and a Fellow of Churchill College, Cambridge.
Joohoon Kang
Joohoon Kang received his PhD in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern University under the supervision of Professor Mark C. Hersam. He is currently a postdoctoral scholar in the Department of Chemistry at the University of California, Berkeley. He received his BS in Metallurgical System Engineering in 2009 and his MS in Materials Science and Engineering in 2011 from Yonsei University in Korea. His research interests include nanomaterials synthesis, post-synthetic processing, and optoelectronic applications.
Christopher G. Jones
Christopher G. Jones has over twenty-five years of print & packaging industry experience. He has held senior positions within leading ink companies in the UK, Central Europe & South America and has previously managed global packaging technical projects for a number of international brand owners. He has been involved with the development of conductive inks since 2000 and served as the Vice Chairman of the Plastic Electronics Leadership Group in the UK. He joined Novalia Limited in 2010 as the ink and print expert. Within Novalia he is responsible for R&D, identifying and leading conductive & functional ink evaluation/formulation, print production and process developments.
Mark C. Hersam
Mark C. Hersam is the Walter P. Murphy Professor of Materials Science and Engineering and Director of the Materials Research Center at Northwestern University. He also holds faculty appointments in the Departments of Chemistry, Applied Physics, Medicine, and Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. He earned a BS in Electrical Engineering from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) in 1996, MPhil in Physics from the University of Cambridge (UK) in 1997, and a PhD in Electrical Engineering from UIUC in 2000. His research interests include nanofabrication, scanning probe microscopy, semiconductor surfaces, and nanoelectronic materials.
1 Introduction
The unique and often complementary properties of graphene and related two-dimensional (2d) materials offer an abundance of opportunities for next generation applications and technologies.1,2 These 2d materials can be exfoliated from their parent layered materials in low-cost, mass production methods via solution processing.3 The exfoliated materials can be sorted in order of size and thickness to produce uniform dispersions with the potential for exploitation across a wide range of applications.4 While a number of deposition techniques exist for the solution-processed 2d materials, printing holds specific promise for high-volume, low-cost manufacturing.5
The range of printing processes, which include inkjet, screen, and roll-to-roll (R2R) gravure and flexographic printing, are widely used technologies to deliver additive patterning of ink pigments onto rigid, flexible and conformable surfaces. These processes enable the large-scale, ultra-low-cost production of packaging materials, everyday documents, magazines and newspapers. The adaptation of functional materials to perform as active pigments within ink formulations has gained an increasing interest over recent years. This approach takes advantage of well-established print production processes for functional device fabrication.5 The advent of solution-processed 2d materials has intensified this interest, offering the promise of economic and scalable manufacturing for an entirely new generation of technologies and applications.6
Printed 2d material applications were first reported in 2012, when graphene from liquid phase exfoliation (LPE; a solution processing approach) was inkjet-printed to fabricate field-effect transistors (FETs).7 This field of research has since witnessed rapid progress in ink formulation and device fabrication. As well as graphene, various other 2d materials have since been investigated as active pigments, such as transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), black phosphorus (BP) and hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN).8–13 While the first generation of 2d material inks (i.e. the LPE dispersions) were not optimised for the relevant printing processes, new 2d material functional ink formulations are now beginning to emerge. The viability of a range of organic solvents, solvent mixtures and aqueous dispersions for ink formulation has now been demonstrated.12,13 Polymers and surfactants widely used in conventional ink formulations as binders and additives have also been introduced.11,14 The adaptation and tailoring of formulations have allowed the fluidic properties, drying dynamics and interaction with substrates of the functional inks to be optimised not only for inkjet printing but also for screen, gravure and flexographic printing.15–21 Beyond electronics, a variety of printable 2d material applications have been demonstrated. Key applications include conductive inks, optoelectronics (e.g. photodetectors), photonics (e.g. non-linear optical devices), sensors, and energy storage (e.g. supercapacitors and batteries).8–25 Controlled additive patterning of the 2d materials has also enabled the fabrication of fully-printed heterostructures (i.e. stacks of multiple 2d materials) that exploit the complementary properties of 2d materials for unprecedented device performance.9–11
While there have been many advances in functional ink formulations and printable applications for 2d materials since the first demonstration of inkjet-printed graphene transistors in 2012, there remains a lack of comprehensive reviews (or indeed published literature in general) that provide guidelines on how graphics ink formulations and printing technologies could lend themselves to functional ink formulations and printing of 2d materials, a summary on the most recent progress in printable applications of 2d materials, and in particular the research and economic landscapes of 2d material inks and printing. With this in mind, to give a comprehensive review, we construct this article as follows: in the following two sections of this review we present a brief introduction to 2d materials and the recent developments in their solution processing and flake sorting strategies; in the fourth section, we discuss general composition, physical properties and processing principles of inks, and the demonstrated functional ink formulations of 2d materials for the most prevalently used printing processes; the fifth section covers the most recent progress in printable 2d material application development, drawing inspiration from published literature and industrial practices; finally, we present our views on the current trends, technology convergence, economic landscape and potential impact of 2d material inks and printing.
2 The 2d material family
Layered materials are structured as stacked atomically thin, planar layers with intralayer covalent bonds and interlayer van der Waals (vdW) forces.3,26 The significant distinction of these compounds is that they can be exfoliated or thinned via shear in the in-plane direction while the planar sheets remain intact, as the chemical bonds and the vdW forces differ substantially in mechanical strength.3,26 This allows the exfoliation of layered materials into few-layers (<10) or even monolayers, termed as 2d materials.3,26
Graphite is the most widely studied layered material that naturally occurs in metamorphic geology. It has a honeycomb hexagonal lattice structure. The use of graphite dates back to the Neolithic age when it was applied in ceramic decoration.27 It later found widespread use in refractories due to its physical stability,28 and as a lubricant as it was found to be particularly easy to delaminate into thin sheets.3 This gradually led to the establishment of fundamental understanding of the structure of graphite as a layered laminar material.3 The elemental and regular arrangement of the carbon atoms allowed early modelling29,30,31 of the likely material properties of monolayer graphite, i.e. graphene. The major concern was that such monolayers were thermodynamically unstable and could not physically exist independently against thermal fluctuations due to the generation of displacements of atoms or other crystal defects.32 Stable graphene was first conclusively demonstrated in 2004 by repeatedly cleaving graphite with adhesive tape (the so-called mechanical exfoliation technique),3 launching the 2d material research field.
Beyond graphite, there is a variety of layered materials with distinctly different properties. Among these, the most widely studied materials include naturally occurring TMDs,33 chemically synthesised h-BN34 and BP.35 TMDs are a group of ∼40 compounds that consist of a transition metal and a group VI element in a trigonal prismatic or octahedral lattice. This class of layered materials can be either metallic (e.g. NbSe2) or semiconducting (e.g. MoS2, WS2 and MoSe2), depending on the coordination and oxidation states of the transition metal atoms and the chemical structures.33 Research into the exfoliation of TMDs has shared a long history with graphene. The optical absorption features of exfoliated MoS2 were initially investigated by R. Frindt and A. Yoffe in 1963,36 and monolayer MoS2 was reported as early as in 1986.37 But interest in MoS2 or TMDs in general was resumed only in 2011 when Radisavljevic et al. demonstrated monolayer MoS2 based transistors38 with an ION/IOFF (i.e. the ratio of currents in the ON- and OFF-state of the transistors) exceeding 108. BP is a puckered hexagonal phosphorus allotrope transformed from other allotropes (e.g. white or red phosphorus).35 Although BP was first successfully synthesised in 1914,39 it took another 100 years before it was used as a 2d material in the demonstration of transistors with a mobility of 1000 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an ION/IOFF of 105.35 The application of BP, however, has been substantially limited due to its instability under ambient conditions.12,40–43 h-BN is hexagonal crystalline form of boron nitride with the boron and nitride atoms alternatively covalently bonded in-plane.44,45 With a layered structure similar to graphite, h-BN has been widely used as a lubricant, well known as the ‘white graphite’.44,45 However, unlike graphite, h-BN is an electrically insulating and thermally conductive material.45–47 h-BN exhibits better lubricating properties than graphite, especially when under extreme conditions (e.g. vacuum, high temperature, oxidising atmosphere).44,45 h-BN also experienced a renewed interest in the field of 2d material electronics, in particular, as a screening substrate for other 2d materials or as an atomically thin insulator.48
This broadening field has also created a renewed interest in a variety of other types of layered materials. Some examples are layered ternary carbides and nitrides (known as MAX phases), III–VI compounds, quintuple layered materials and mica. MAX phases (e.g. Ti3AlC2) are artificially produced ‘layered materials’, where the interlayer bonds between the metal atoms and the layers are too strong to allow direct exfoliation.49–52 However, by selectively etching away these interlayer metal atoms from the MAX phases, the bulk materials can be readily exfoliated into atomically thin sheets, widely termed as MXenes.49–52 The electronic properties of MXenes are of special interest, with theoretical studies suggesting that MXenes are either metallic or small bandgap semiconductors which can be engineered through chemical functionalisation.49–52 Quintuple layered materials (consisting of 5 atom layers along the z-direction) such as bismuth selenide (Bi2Se3) and antimony telluride (Sb2Te3) can also be exfoliated from their bulk.53 These 2d materials are attractive for various potential applications, in particular, for optoelectronics and thermoelectric power generation.54–56 Finally, group III–VI layered compounds such as indium selenide (e.g. InSe and In2Se3), gallium selenide and copper indium selenide have also recently emerged as another promising family of 2d materials for (opto)electronic applications.57–60
The above examples highlight the diversity of layered materials and the very broad spectrum of physical properties they represent. An even more important consideration is that their exfoliation into 2d materials can lead to radical performance improvements or exotic properties that do not exist in their bulk layered material forms.3,33 These properties may enable next generation disruptive applications and technologies, in particular, in the field of (opto)electronics and photonics.1 For graphene, the combination of atomic thickness, high transparency61 and good electrical conductivity62 shows promise for the fabrication of flexible transparent conductors, while its exceptionally high carrier mobility63 in addition to the zero-bandgap64 can be exploited in high-frequency applications. Due to quantum confinement as a result of the decrease in thickness, exfoliated semiconducting TMDs (e.g. MoS2, WS2 and MoSe2) and BP exhibit layer-dependent bandgaps.33,35 For example, MoS2 shifts significantly from an indirect bulk bandgap of ∼1.2 eV towards a direct monolayer bandgap of ∼1.8 eV, while BP transforms from direct 0.3 eV to direct 2.0 eV.35 Such bandgap ranges are promising for the fabrication of logic electronics (requiring a bandgap of >0.4 eV and an ION/IOFF of >10465).10,35,38 The indirect to direct bandgap transition leads to significantly enhanced photoluminescence (over 104 times enhancement observed in MoS266), making exfoliated semiconducting TMDs as well as direct bandgap BP and III–VI semiconductors appealing materials for optoelectronics such as photodetectors and light emitters.58,66–69 2d materials (e.g. graphene, MoS2 and BP) may also exhibit nonlinear optical absorption and ultrafast carrier dynamics, making them a promising material platform for saturable absorbers (SAs), which act as fast nonlinear optical switches to convert a low peak power continuous-wave signal to a train of high peak power ultrashort pulses.12,70,71 On the other hand, h-BN is a wide bandgap (∼6 eV) material. This, in combination with the atomically smooth surface and the absence of dangling bonds, makes h-BN an ideal dielectric substrate for other 2d materials in heterostructure device designs.48,72,73
Potential applications for 2d materials goes far beyond (opto)electronics and photonics. For instance, the use of graphene as a filler material by exploiting its high mechanical strength leads to high strength composites.74 Exfoliated h-BN, on the other hand, presents outstanding dielectric and thermal properties, enabling its use as a filler material for the development of polymer composites, in particular where improved thermal but not electrical conductivity is desired.75 The exposed large surface area of 2d materials (e.g. a theoretical value of 2630 m2 g−1 for graphene76) allows strong interaction with the ambient elements such as moisture, gas, chemicals and bioelements for sensing applications.1 This large specific surface area is also particularly-suited to the development of electrode systems for energy storage applications.51,77,78 It has been proposed that graphene electrodes may lead to a decrease in film thickness as well as an increase in electrode-to-electrolyte contact, which in combination with exceptional durability and electrical conductivity would offer better performance than current technologies.77 MXenes also exhibit attractive electrochemical properties for high performance electrodes in batteries and supercapacitors.51
3 Scalable production of 2d materials
In order to address scalable applications for 2d materials, a number of material production methods have been developed over the last decade. An important part of the research has been devoted to the development of cost-effective mass production methods. In general, the production methods can be classified either as top-down or bottom-up approaches: (1) top-down: bulk layered materials are directly exfoliated to yield mono- and few-layer flakes. The most common methods are mechanical exfoliation and solution processing;3,79 (2) bottom-up: individual flakes are grown or synthesised on substrates. The most commonly used method is chemical vapour deposition (CVD).80 As shown in Fig. 1, these production methods of graphene can profoundly differ in production yield and cost, and hence the target applications. We note that similar conclusion can be drawn for some other 2d materials, in particular, TMDs. Although mechanical exfoliation is very capable of producing high-quality materials, its application is limited by its extremely low and uncontrollable yield. CVD presents challenges in cost-effectiveness and scalability due to the demanding production conditions (e.g. high temperature, certain gases and precursors) and the expensive sacrificial growth substrates (Table 1).80
 Fig. 1  Key production methods of graphene, differing in production rate and cost. The most suitable applications associated with the production methods are also indicated. Adapted with permission.81 Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. 
Table 1 Common 2d materials, their structures, solution processing methods, and key applications




2d materials
Typical structures
Solution processing methods
Key applications





Graphene




Liquid phase exfoliation (via sonication,82 ball milling,83 high-shear mixing84 and microfluidisation18); Ion intercalation.85,86 Reduction of graphene oxide.87
Electronics;7,10,24 transparent conductors;6 functional inks;14,16,21,23,88,89 saturable absorbers;70,90 batteries;78 supercapacitors;91 thermoelectrics;92 sensors;93 composites.74







TMDs (MX2), e.g.: MoS2, WS2, MoSe2.



Liquid phase exfoliation (via sonication,94 ball milling95 and high-shear mixing96); ion intercalation.97,98
Electronics;10,11 photodetectors;8,9,11 functional inks;8–11,99 saturable absorbers;71,100–102 batteries;103 supercapacitors;104 sensors;105 composites.106







BP




Liquid phase exfoliation (via sonication12,40,43,107).
Functional inks;12 electronics;40,43,108 photodetectors;12 saturable absorbers;109 sensors;105 supercapacitors;110 batteries.111







h-BN




Liquid phase exfoliation (via sonication,94 ball milling112 and high-shear mixing96).
Dielectric composites;75 thermal composites;47 dielectric inks.10,11,24,113







MXenes
e.g.: M2X, M3X2, M4X3.



Exfoliation with hydrofluoric acid or other etchants.49
Batteries and supercapacitors;51,114,115 sensors;116 electronics;117 composites.118







Mica
e.g.: biotite, muscovite, phlogopite.



Liquid phase exfoliation (via sonication119); ion intercalation.120
Inks;121 composites;122,123 barriers;121,124 capacitors;121 catalysis.121




In contrast, top-down solution processing allows exfoliation of mono- and few-layer 2d material flakes from the bulk in a liquid medium in large quantities for a low setup and production cost (cost-effective equipment, raw materials and material processing).3,82 The exfoliated 2d materials are atomically thin and can be easily processed and adapted as active pigments for functional ink formulation, enabling the development of printable applications.6 This provides an exciting prospect for the manufacturing of low-cost, large-scale functional devices.5,125
Solution processing generally relies on exfoliation via ion intercalation, ion exchange, or pure shear forces (i.e. LPE).3 For the case of graphene, an alternative, widely exploited approach is through the reduction of graphene oxide, producing the so-called reduced graphene oxide (rGO).87 Unlike graphite, TMDs and other common layered materials, the exfoliation approach for the MAX phases using hydrofluoric acid or other etchants52 sits slightly outside of the scope of typical solution processing, and is not discussed in this review.
3.1 Exfoliation based on ion intercalation/exchange
Ion intercalation is one of the earliest solution processing approaches of 2d materials. It dates back to 1841 when Schaffautl et al. reported graphite intercalation compounds.126 Ion intercalation as a method of producing monolayer MoS2 was reported as early as in 1986.37 Subsequently, it was successfully exploited in obtaining monolayer graphene85,86 and other 2d materials.127 The ion intercalation process takes advantage of the layered structure of 2d materials: small molecules like ionic species (e.g. alkali metals Li+, Na+ and K+) can intercalate between the atomic layers; the intercalated small molecules effectively increase the interlayer distance, such that the interlayer vdW forces are weakened which facilitates the separation of the layers.3 The separated 2d material flakes can be then exfoliated into mono- and few-layers via agitation such as mild sonication or even stirring.
Ion intercalation allows production of relatively large flakes with a high yield of monolayer flakes.85,86,98,127 However, this approach may introduce defects, impurities and structural changes to the 2d material lattices, which can lead to an alteration of the material properties. For instance, Eda et al. showed that Li+ intercalation of MoS2 could lead to a lattice change from trigonal prismatic phase (semiconducting) to metastable octahedral phase (metallic).98 To make use of the optoelectronic properties of MoS2, the metallic phase then required a high temperature annealing to transform back to the semiconducting phase.98
Solution processing via ion exchange is another widely applied strategy. It is limited to the layered materials (e.g. layered oxides) that contain an interlayer of cations.3 For transition metal oxides, the layered planes tend to be negatively charged, but the alkali metal cations (e.g. K+, Rb+, Cs+) occupy the interlayer space to ensure charge neutrality. The cations can be ion exchanged with organic ions, leading to swelling and separation of the transition metal oxide layers.128 Mono- and few-layers can then be exfoliated from the bulk via agitation. Similar to ion intercalation, ion exchange can lead to alteration of the properties of the exfoliated 2d materials.
3.2 Liquid phase exfoliation
LPE is a solution processing technique that has been widely used in unbundling and dispersing carbon nanotubes (CNTs).129–132 It was first reported in graphene production by Hernandez et al. in 200882 where the authors recorded exfoliation of mono- and few-layer graphene flakes in organic solvents (e.g. N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP)) by ultrasound sonication. This approach starts with immersing graphite into a liquid medium. Under the effect of ultrasound waves, localised bubbles (commonly termed as ‘cavitation') are generated in the liquid. The bubbles then collapse and generate high shear forces, which overcome the interlayer vdW forces to yield exfoliated graphene flakes. This approach has since been successfully extended to a wide range of 2d materials, including TMDs, BP, h-BN and mica,12,94,119 as shown in Fig. 2(A and B).
 Fig. 2  Liquid phase exfoliation: photographs of (A) selected bulk materials before exfoliation, and (B) 2d material dispersions. The concentration of graphene dispersions with respect to (C) solvent surface tension and (D) HSPs with fitted curves. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (E) Concentration of graphene in stable aqueous dispersions using common surfactants. Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2011, Elsevier Ltd. (F) Surface tension of SDC solution with respect to the surfactant concentration at ambient, showing the surface tension is stabilised above CMC. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. The micrograph of bulk BP material is reproduced from Smart-Elements with permission. 
In addition to ultrasound assisted exfoliation, other commonly adopted methods for shear force generation include high-shear mixing,84 high-pressure mixing18 and ball milling.133 As with sonication, the bulk material is exfoliated by introducing sufficient shear forces to overcome the interlayer vdW forces. Each of these methods differs in the generation of the shear forces. For the case of high-shear/pressure mixing, the forces are generated by flowing the mixture through a meshed screen with high-speed rotating mixing blade (e.g. blenders or blade mixers),84 by forcing the mixture through narrow channels under high pressure (e.g. homogenisers),18 or by flowing the mixture through meshed screens (e.g. impeller mixing).84 Ball-milling performs in a slightly different way in using a cylindrical ‘jar’ containing a charge of small balls/beads (typically steel or zirconia). Under rotation, the balls/beads generate shear forces perpendicular to the walls of the jar for exfoliation.133
As LPE exploits shear forces to achieve exfoliation, the intermolecular interaction between the 2d materials and the liquid medium significantly defines the exfoliation process and the subsequent dispersion of the exfoliated 2d materials in the liquid.82,94,136 For the majority of the (opto)electronic applications, the preferable liquid medium is a pure solvent as this does not introduce impurities into the exfoliated 2d materials, and hence their subsequent deposition for device fabrication. The characteristics that define whether a pure solvent can perform a good intermolecular interaction are usually whether the solvent has a matched surface tension (to reduce the energy ‘cost' associated with exfoliation) and Hansen solubility parameters (HSPs; to favour stabilisation) to those empirically derived for 2d materials.94,137 As shown in Fig. 2(C), the concentration of graphene dispersions is maximised at a solvent surface tension of ∼38 mN m−1134 (converted from the solvent surface energy90). Therefore the empirically obtained optimal solvent surface tension for LPE of graphene is 38 mN m−1. A more refined approach uses optimal matching of respective dispersive, polar and hydrogen-bonding HSPs of the solvents with empirically derived HSPs of the 2d materials, as depicted for graphene in Fig. 2(D).134 In this context, the solvents with optimal surface tension and HSPs are typically high boiling point organic solvents, for instance NMP (∼204 °C) and dimethylformamide (DMF; ∼153 °C).138
Such high boiling point solvents present significant challenges in dispersion processing and deposition for device fabrication.139 For instance, the use of NMP as the primary solvent in 2d material inks results in particularly long drying/curing time and is impractical for the majority of printing technologies. It is therefore preferable to use LPE with low boiling point solvents, such as water and alcohols. However, both water and alcohols fail to meet the above solvent selection criteria with mismatched surface tension and HSPs.138,139 For these solvents, a strategy of using their mixtures with optimised surface tension and HSPs distance has emerged.140,141 For example, a mixture of water and alcohol has been successfully demonstrated as a viable liquid medium.140 However, this only supports comparatively low concentrations of 2d materials.140,141 Alternatively, as shown in Fig. 2(E), a range of ionic and non-ionic surfactants can be employed for electrostatic and/or steric stabilisation.136 Surfactants act by adsorbing onto the surface of 2d materials, promoting their stabilisation in the solvents. This strategy typically supports higher concentrations of stabilised (i.e. not sedimented) flakes in the liquid environment.
It has been demonstrated that some of the most effective ionic surfactants for the dispersion of 2d materials are facial amphiphiles (i.e. molecules with a quasi-flat molecular structure with hydrophobic and hydrophilic faces), for instance bile salts such as sodium cholate (SC) and sodium deoxycholate (SDC).71,90,142 When such ionic surfactants and 2d materials interact in water, the surfactant molecules are adsorbed onto the 2d surface of the flakes, generating temporary effective charge. This can balance the intralayer vdW forces, and hence aid the exfoliation process.143 The induced charge around the exfoliated 2d material flakes generates a Coulomb repulsion which further prevents reaggregation.90,144 The required concentration of an ionic surfactant for stabilisation can be estimated by surfactant critical micelle concentration (CMC), which is typically determined by the critical surface tension of its solution against concentration, as shown in Fig. 2(F).71 Below CMC, further addition of the surfactant causes a large change in the surface tension as the surfactant molecules assemble at the solution–air interface. Above CMC, the interface is saturated where the surfactant molecules spontaneously arrange into micelles, such that further addition of surfactant causes minimal changes.
Typical non-ionic surfactants include Triton-X, Tween and Brij series, and polymers such as sodium carboxymethylcellulose (Na-CMC), polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) and ethyl cellulose.129,135,145 The polymers can attach onto or encapsulate the 2d material flakes, and hence provide a physical separation between the flakes to allow enhanced exfoliation and stabilisation.146,147 Liang et al. demonstrated the addition of ethyl cellulose in ethanol for exfoliation and stabilisation of graphene flakes using this strategy.147 The authors suggested that the cellulose created a colloidal dispersion and prevented the graphene flakes from aggregation.147 Polymers are of particular interest for subsequent ink formulation as they can function not only as binders but also can be used to tune the physical properties of the inks for relevant printing technologies (Section 4.1.1).
Unlike ion intercalation or exchange, as a purely physical exfoliation approach, LPE does not induce alteration of the properties of the 2d materials.3 For example, Hernandez et al. demonstrated that the as-produced graphene flakes were pristine with minimal defects and chemical functionalisations.82 LPE therefore offers greater potential for the exploitation of the intrinsic material properties of 2d materials for printable applications when compared to ion intercalation or exchange.
3.3 Reduced graphene oxide
Another widely employed production method of graphene, more specifically rGO, is through reducing graphene oxide (GO).87,148 In general, GO can be produced through oxidation of graphite by exposure to acid in the presence of an oxidising agent, following the Hummers, Brodie or Staudenmaier methods.80,148 This oxidation process introduces functional groups such as hydroxyl and epoxide on the basal plane of graphite layers, and hence disrupts the interlayer forces and increases the interlayer spacing, allowing exfoliation into individual GO flakes.87,149,150
GO can be reduced to graphene, i.e. rGO, through thermal or chemical treatments.87,149,150 Chemical reduction typically makes use of hydrazine as the reductant, although a wide variety of other reducing agents or processes may also be used.80 One common approach is to use thermal reduction which requires heating GO samples to 200–1000 °C. These reduction processes can only partially restore the properties of graphene, and hence rGO remains a highly disordered, defective material with oxygen functional groups in contrast to the pristine graphene produced by other solution-processing methods.87,149,150 We note that, Voiry et al. demonstrated that by using microwave treatment, GO could be reduced to pristine graphene with the oxygen functional groups almost entirely removed.151
Compared to typical solution processing methods, however, the chemical oxidation and reduction processes of graphene can be complex and can significantly raise the production cost. Although promising for inks, this may prove to be an obstacle in developing simple and inexpensive printable applications.
3.4 Sorting of the exfoliated 2d material flakes
After solution processing, the exfoliated 2d materials are heterogeneous in lateral size and thickness.4,152 The physical properties of 2d materials, such as the electronic bandgap, are strongly layer dependent, especially at their atomically thin limit; therefore sorting of these flakes is essential to overcome the structural polydispersity. Centrifugation is a flake sorting technique to achieve structural homogeneity.4,152,153
Upon centrifugation, a dispersed flake is mainly subjected to two forces: the centrifugal force, and the friction force opposite to the centrifugal force. Sedimentation is driven by the imbalance between these two forces. As schematically illustrated in Fig. 3, centrifugation allows controlled separation of the flakes, and can be split into three major categories: (1) sedimentation-based separation or centrifugation (SBS) of 2d material flakes based on their mass; (2) sedimentation-based density gradient ultracentrifugation (sDGU), which also sediments 2d materials based on their mass, however, with controlled density gradients for precise lateral size separation; (3) isopycnic DGU (iDGU) for precise thickness separation of 2d material flakes based on their buoyant density.
 Fig. 3  Sorting of 2d material flakes: schematics showing (A) SBS, (D) sDGU and (F) iDGU. Reproduced with permission.155 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) BP size selection via SBS, and (C) the corresponding normalised scattering. The exponent of λ represents optical scattering exponent (n). Reproduced with permission.12 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (E) sDGU for precise size selection of BP. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2016, National Academy of Sciences. (G) Layer-by-layer iDGU selection of h-BN. Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (H) iDGU of high density MoS2 by using polymeric surfactants. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (I) iDGU of high density ReS2 by using density gradient medium mixture of iodixanol and CsCl. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
SBS is the simplest, most straightforward and most widely exploited sorting technique.80 It is practised in a uniform liquid medium with constant physical properties (e.g. density and viscosity), for instance pure solvents such as NMP. Upon centrifugation, polydispersed 2d material flakes sediment with different rates: larger and/or thicker flakes sediment more readily than smaller and/or thinner ones as a result of their larger mass to surface area ratio; flakes in general are more readily sedimented at higher larger centrifugation speeds. As presented in Fig. 3(B), an increased centrifugation speed led to an increased sedimentation of BP flakes in NMP, N-cyclohexyl-2-pyrrolidone (CHP) and isopropanol (IPA), and hence lower concentration (represented by the respective visual contrast). Besides the dispersion stability against sedimentation, the difference in the BP concentration among these three solvents also indicated a smaller flake size distribution in NMP.12 Indeed, the lower optical scattering exponent (n) from the BP flakes in NMP (1.9) compared to those in CHP (1.5) or IPA (0.5), as shown in Fig. 3(C), suggested smaller BP flake sizes.12 The SBS approach is usually used for simple sorting of the exfoliated flakes from the unexfoliated larger and/or thicker flakes.
The sedimentation rate can be controlled by using density gradients which provide gradient density and viscosity, avoiding subsequent cross contamination in the size of the 2d material flakes.4,154 Here the density gradient medium is required to be miscible with the 2d material dispersion. This is the so-called sDGU. In principle, a 2d material dispersion is initially placed on top of such a density gradient, such that the 2d material flakes can sediment with different sedimentation rates upon centrifugation. For instance, Backes et al. employed deuterium oxide (D2O) and water mixture as a density gradient for a water-based MoS2 dispersion to achieve separation of MoS2 flakes with different lateral size.154 Furthermore, sDGU with a linear density gradient can provide a narrower distribution in the flake lateral size. In Fig. 3(E), for example, lateral size separation of deoxygenated aqueous dispersion of BP flakes was achieved by performing sDGU in a linear iodixanol density gradient, allowing isolation of BP flakes with lateral size of >200 nm.40
While both SBS and sDGU are based on mass sedimentation, iDGU is solely based on buoyant density.4 In this process, 2d material flakes with surfactants (i.e. flake–surfactant complexes) sediment through the gradient until they arrive at their isopycnic points in the density gradient medium. Since buoyant density is strongly dependent on thickness and barely on lateral size of the flakes, this approach is promising to achieve layer-by-layer flake separation. iDGU was first exploited in the sorting of graphene flakes by Green et al.142 In this process, low molecular weight, planar structure SC was used to encapsulate the graphene flakes and form graphene-SC complexes, which separated into multiple bands based on the graphene layer thickness upon centrifugation.142 Later on, iDGU was extended to h-BN sorting due to a similar buoyant density (Fig. 3(G)).156 However, 2d materials such as TMDs that have a significantly higher buoyant density than the commonly used density gradient medium, iodixanol, may require modification of the surfactant chemistry to use iDGU, for instance by using bulkier co-polymeric surfactants with long hydrophilic chains to reduce the overall buoyant densities.157 As shown in Fig. 3(H), Kang et al. demonstrated iDGU sorting of MoS2 using Pluronic F68, where the MoS2–Pluronic F68 complex presented effective hydration layer for a reduced overall buoyant density.157 Alternatively, higher density gradient media can be used. For example, cesium chloride (CsCl) with a high density of up to ∼1.91 g cm−3 compared to that of iodixanol (1.32 g cm−3) is a viable choice. However, CsCl based density gradients are relatively unstable, due to significantly lower viscosity and higher diffusivity, preventing its practicality for 2d material sorting. In this context, a desirably stable gradient with enough viscosity and high buoyant density may be achieved concurrently by using iodixanol and CsCl mixtures, as demonstrated in Fig. 3(I) where sorting of heavy ReS2 was allowed in iodixanol and CsCl mixture.158
4 Functional 2d material inks
The as-produced dispersions of exfoliated and/or sorted 2d material flakes can be readily formulated into functional inks for printing. Common printing processes include digital inkjet printing, and ‘non-digital’ screen, gravure and flexographic printing processes. These processes differ significantly in achievable resolution and production speed (Fig. 4). Therefore, the printing process selection depends largely on the target printed feature size, fabrication throughput and the printed substrates.125 For instance, inkjet printing is a non-contact, high-resolution, mask-less patterning technology. This makes inkjet printing particularly interesting for lab-scale 2d material based device demonstrations, especially during the prototyping stage where minimal volume (1–2 mL) of low loading inks (e.g. even the as-produced LPE dispersions with <0.1 wt% 2d material concentration) are sufficient.7–13,24 In contrast, the flexographic process has a much higher printed throughput which translates into inexpensive, scalable and efficient device manufacturing.125 This in return requires large volume (typically >1 L) of high loading inks (typically >10 wt% 2d material concentration) for prototyping.5,125 Thus, it is important to select a specific printing process and ink to suit the target application. In this section, we discuss the basics of graphics and functional 2d material inks, providing a context for printable 2d material application development (Section 5).
 Fig. 4  Comparison of print throughput and best achievable resolution ranges of conventional print technologies for 2d materials. 
4.1 Basic principles of ink systems
The use of inks originates from ancient China when soot was mixed with gum resins to make painting paste. It would be around 3000 years later before hand-carved wooden images, the origin of printing, were developed to use inks for letter reproduction. The earliest printing press with replaceable/moveable wooden or metal letterpress was developed in 1436, laying the foundation for the modern printing technologies.159

4.1.1 Ink composition. 
The advances in printing over the last several hundred years also inspired ink development, with pigments evolving from soots, coloured earth and plants to organic/inorganic chemicals, along with various additives developed to tailor ink properties to suit the targeted printing processes.159 Typically, modern graphic and functional ink systems are composed of pigments, binders, additives and solvents.160–162
Pigments. 
The basic function of pigments is to give colour to the ink, just like the exploitation of soot, earth and plants in the early inks. More recent inks use chemical colouring pigments, for instance lithol (red), phthalocyanine (green) and indanthrene (blue). Pigments with special colouring functions may also be used. For example, extenders (e.g. CaCO3) are pigments that reduce the colour intensity of other pigments, while opacifiers (e.g. TiO2) make the print opaque to obscure any pigment underneath. There are also pigments that can provide gloss, abrasion resistance, and even protection against ambient conditions (e.g. light, heat, solvents and chemicals).
In the last twenty years, the use of printing for electronics has arisen, where functional materials are incorporated into the ink systems as active pigments.5,125 These inks are then used as a vehicle to deposit and pattern these materials onto a substrate for functional device fabrication.5,125 Common active pigments include various conducting, semiconducting and dielectric materials,5,125 for instance metallic nanoparticles,163 organics164 and carbon materials (e.g. carbon black, CNTs).165 More recently, there is a great interest in investigating the solution-processed 2d materials as functional pigments as a way to exploit their unique material properties.6,155
Binders. 
The binders are typically polymers, such as acrylics, alkyds, cellulose and rubber resins. They form an integral part of the prints, binding the pigment particles to each other and to the substrate. Binders may simply dry and solidify by solvent evaporation, or may require some form of curing (e.g. annealing or exposure to radiation, such as ultraviolet light) in order to cross-link. Binder selection can contribute specific physical properties to the printed films, such as gloss level, adhesion or resistance to certain ambient conditions. For instance, water insoluble polymers (e.g. cellulose) can provide resistance to moisture.
Additives. 
A <5 wt% of additives may be used to modify or tailor specific properties of ink systems. For instance, additives such as surfactants may be used to improve the wetting properties of either the pigments or the substrates, whereas defoamers may be used to reduce the surface tension of water-based inks to avoid bubble formation during the print process. Additives may also be selected to modify certain functionalities. For instance, alkalis can be incorporated into water-based inks to develop a mildly basic pH to dissolve polymeric binders (e.g. cellulose). The polymeric binders can then form an integral part of the dried printed films to aid moisture resistance.
Solvents. 
Solvents are the diluent to the other ink components (i.e. pigments, binders and additives). The primary function of solvents is to keep the ink in a fluid form such that the ink can be applied to the printing press (e.g. printing plate and cylinder) until it is transferred to the substrate.
Water or any of a broad range of organic solvents can be used, depending on the printing processes, the substrates, the drying conditions and the final purpose of the prints. For example, since high-speed processes such as gravure and flexographic printing require rapid ink drying, the solvents typically need to be volatile. Solvents commonly used for gravure and flexographic printing therefore include ethyl acetate, n-propyl acetate and IPA. Screen printing, however, requires slightly less volatile solvents with moderately low evaporative rates, such as aromatic distillates and butoxyethanol, to avoid clogging of the screen mesh associated with fast ink drying.


4.1.2 Ink viscosity. 
The precise composition of the ink components defines the physical properties of the inks (e.g. viscosity, surface tension, density and drying rate) that affect the printing process. Ink viscosity is a key consideration in suiting a particular printing process. Viscous inks are required for screen printing whilst highly fluent, low viscosity fluids are desired by inkjet printing. Table 2 presents the ink compositions and the static viscosities for common print technologies for 2d materials.
Table 2 Typical compositions and viscosities of inks for common printing technologies. The data is collected from ref. 160–162 and 169–176






Ink composition (wt%)
Viscosity (mPa s)


Pigment
Binder
Solvent
Additive




Inkjet
5–10
5–20
65–95
1–5
4–30


Screen
12–20
45–65
20–30
1–5
1k–10k


Gravure
12–17
20–35
60–65
1–2
100–1k


Flexo
12–17
40–45
25–45
1–5
1k–2k




Viscosity is a rheological description of a fluid with respect to the shear stress, the shear rate and the shear time:166–168 it is typically a measure of the resistance at a given time and is defined as the ratio of the shear stress to the shear rate; the measured viscosity is dependent on its prior exposure to the external stress. A higher viscosity means that the fluid is more difficult to flow and is more resistant to stress. Fig. 5(A) shows common rheological behaviours of fluids. A typical fluid can be categorised into Newtonian fluids or non-Newtonian fluids. A Newtonian fluid is an ideal fluid with a linear shear stress/shear rate relationship, i.e. a constant viscosity. In practice, however, a fluid usually shows some level of deviation from this Newtonian behaviour as pseudoplastic fluids, dilatant fluids, or Bingham fluids.166–168
 Fig. 5  Ink viscosity and processing: (A) schematic showing shear stress of different fluids with respect to shear rate. (B) Comparison between viscosities of graphene inks for inkjet, gravure and screen printing with a graphene loading of ∼1 wt%, ∼3 wt% and ∼8 wt%, respectively. Data collected from ref. 16, 21 and 23. (C) Common pigment processing techniques for ink formulation. 
A pseudoplastic fluid shows reduced shear stress under increased shear rate, observed as a drop in viscosity, meaning that the fluid requires less force to maintain flow at higher shear rates. The pseudoplastic behaviour is important for ink formulation, as in this case the ink pigments are more readily dispersed under stress. The pseudoplastic nature further suggests that the ink is easy to flow through the printing press by transferring from component to component and from roll to roll (high shear rate), but is prevented from overspreading once printed on to the substrates (low shear rate).160,161 As shown in Fig. 5(B), the graphene ink systems developed by a research group at the Northwestern University are all pseudoplastic fluids, with controlled viscosity and printability across different printing processes.16,21,23 Note the viscosity was designed by the selection of solvents, binders and loading of graphene flakes.
As opposed to pseudoplastic fluid, a dilatant fluid shows increased viscosity under shear. A dilatant fluid is usually highly concentrated suspensions in a colloidal form. On the other hand, Bingham fluids exhibit yield stress, such that the fluids need to overcome this finite stress to flow. A Bingham fluid may behave as Bingham plastic of which the viscosity is constant upon stress, or Bingham pseudoplastic of which the viscosity decreases under stress.


4.1.3 Ink processing. 
For the ink systems, the mixture of binders, solvents and additives is commonly termed as varnish.160,162 The ink is usually formulated in three steps: the first step is to develop a varnish; the second step is to disperse the pigments; the third step is let-down which is the final adjustment process of the physical properties of the ink by tuning its compositions.
The varnish is simply a liquid vehicle to carry the pigment portion of the ink onto the substrate. To produce the varnish, the binders and additives are dissolved directly into the solvents. The physical properties of the produced varnish define the wetting of the pigment particles, and significantly govern the properties of the formulated inks.160,162 Varnish development therefore requires a selection of binders and additives as well as the solvents to render physical properties that suit both the pigment themselves and the target printing process. Depending on the solvents, the varnish can be classified into two key types, i.e. water-based or organic solvent-based. A water-based varnish uses water as the primary solvent to dissolve the binders and additives. It is easy to apply as the varnish is easily solidified after the evaporation of water. There is a high demand to develop water-based ink formulations, as water is environmentally friendly. As opposed to this, organic solvent-based varnishes use organic solvents to dissolve the binders and additives. Solidifying the varnish usually takes place after the solvents are fully evaporated. In some situations, the varnish may require long drying times and even a curing process (e.g. annealing or exposure to ultraviolet radiation) to solidify.
Once the varnish is developed, the pigments are dispersed for ink formulation. The ‘raw’ pigments are usually available in the form of lumps and aggregates. A pigment dispersion process is required to break down such lumps and aggregates into primary acicular, cubic or spherical particles. A range of dispersion technologies can be selected depending on the viscosity and the desired particle size for the pigments, as shown in Fig. 5(C). Ball milling and agitation are suitable for low viscosity systems (e.g. inkjet inks), where ball milling uses grinding balls/beads to crush while agitation exploits impeller blades to shear the raw pigments.160,161 High-speed mixing uses meshed screens and high-speed rotating blades to break up the raw pigments.160,161 This technique is suitable for medium viscosity systems (e.g. gravure and flexographic inks). Three-roll milling is suitable for highly viscous systems (e.g. screen inks). It employs a set of cylindrical rolls with precisely controlled gaps to shear the passed through raw pigments.160,161


4.1.4 Ink spreading and drying. 
Once an ink is produced and printed, the subsequent ink spreading and drying define the morphologies of the printed patterns. The spreading of ink over a solid surface is defined by wetting, which can be explained by Young's equation:177 γs-v = γs-i + γi-vcosθ(1)where γs-v, γi-v and γs-i represent the respective interfacial tensions between the solid surface (s), the ink (i) and the vapour (v), and θ is the formed contact angle, as depicted in Fig. 6(A). A small contact angle (≪90°) suggests a good wetting, while a large contact angle (≫90°) indicates a poor wetting. For instance, 0° suggests perfect wetting and spreading, while 180° represents a perfect non-wetting scenario. A good wetting means that the ink is capable of spreading over and maintaining contact with the solid surface for a continuous feature, in which case γi-v < γs-v. Therefore, metals with high surface energies such as copper are easy to wet, while plastics such as polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) with a low surface energy are difficult to wet. A poor wetting means that the ink cannot remain in contact with the surface and as such the ink tends to retract and bead up, leading to a discontinuous material deposition.
 Fig. 6  Ink wetting and drying: (A) Different wetting behaviour of a droplet on substrates. (B) Typical cross section profiles of printed lines, showing low viscosity inks tend to form coffee ring. (C) Photograph of a dried coffee drop. Reproduced with permission.179 Copyright 1997, Nature Publishing Group. (D) Schematic of a typical evaporation profile in a drying droplet for coffee ring formation. In this case, due to higher evaporation rates at the droplet edge, an outward flow from the droplet centre is initiated. This carries the suspended particles to the droplet edges. 
Within the print industry, it is generally considered that if the surface tension of the ink is 7–10 mN m−1 lower than the surface energy of the substrate, appropriate wetting can be achieved.178 For functional printing, a good wetting is of critical importance as a continuous deposition of the functional materials is required for reliable device fabrication, especially with regard to conductive or dielectric formulations. Table 3 lists the surface tensions and surface energies of some solvents and substrates, respectively. As presented, to perform functional printing on substrates commonly used in electronics and optoelectronics, e.g. Si/SiO2, glass and plastics such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET), the ink surface tension should be sufficiently low (e.g. <30 mN m−1).12,22,25
Table 3 Surface tensions (at 20 °C) and energies of common solvents and substrates. Data collected from ref. 180–182




Solvent
(mN m−1)
Substrate
(mN m−1)




Water
72
Copper
1000


Glycerol
64
Aluminium
500


Ethylene glycol
48
Kapton (DuPont)
50


Epoxy resin
43
PET
48


NMP
40
Polyamide
46


CHO
34
Polycarbonate
46


Chlorobenzene
34
Polyurethane
40


Terpineol
33
Polyimide
40


Ethyl acetate
24
Si/SiO2
36


2-Butanol
23
Glass
36


IPA
23
Polystyrene
34


Ethanol
22
Silicone
21


Hexane
18
PTFE
18




Assuming reliable ink spreading, the morphology of the printed pattern is further defined by the ink viscosity. Fig. 6(B) schematically presents typical cross-sectional profiles for printed lines with inks of high, medium or low viscosities.125 High viscosity inks that contain high levels of pigments and binders, for instance screen inks and in some cases viscous gravure and flexographic inks, tend to form a rectangular shape. This represents a uniform deposition of ink, and hence a uniform distribution of material properties required for device fabrication. For medium viscosity gravure and flexographic inks and low viscosity inkjet inks, an ideal cross-sectional printed profile is usually a semi-circular arc due to lower binder and pigment content. However, a common profile for inkjet inks may be represented by an unwanted ‘coffee ring’ shape, where the deposited material dries to be concentrated on the periphery of the print, leaving a concave central area. Fig. 6(C) shows a typical example of ‘coffee ring’.
The coffee ring effect is a common and unwanted phenomenon related to ink drying.179 A widely accepted explanation, reported by Deegan et al., attributes this effect to a non-uniform solvent evaporation across the droplet during the ink drying process.179 As presented in Fig. 6(D), when a droplet is deposited onto a substrate, the evaporation rate is typically highest at the edge of the droplet–substrate interface (also known as the contact line) due to the highest surface area to volume ratio. During drying, the contact lines may pin the droplet, such that an outward convection flow would have to be induced from the droplet centre to the edges to replenish the evaporated solvents.179 This outward convection flow thereby deposits the dispersed material at the droplet edges, leaving little to no material at the droplet centre. This process is heavily dependent on the drying conditions and surrounding environment183 and has not been extensively studied for functional ink formulation.

4.2 Inkjet printing of 2d materials

4.2.1 Inkjet printing principles. 
Inkjet printing is a digital, non-contact printing technique where the ink droplets are jetted and deposited in a rapid succession onto the substrate to generate an image.170 The word ‘digital’ means that the printing pattern is designed electronically, and the deposition of the ink droplets is controlled by a computer. When 2d materials are adapted to inkjet printing, flexible and rapid device design and fabrication is possible, especially during the prototyping stage. This is because a physical mask is not required.184

Fig. 7(A–C) schematically presents the two prevalent droplet jetting mechanisms for inkjet: continuous inkjet (CIJ) and drop-on-demand inkjet (DoD). As shown, CIJ is a process where a stream of ink droplets is continuously generated and jetted; Fig. 7(A). The droplets charged by the electrode are subjected to an electrostatic field and selectively deflected to deposit onto the substrate. On the other hand, DoD is a process where the ink droplets are only generated when demanded through a piezoelectric or a thermal inkjet process. In a piezoelectric inkjet process (Fig. 7(B)), a voltage pulse is applied to the piezoelectric material to induce a change in the shape of the reservoir, and hence a pressure pulse on the ink that forces it out of the ink reservoir as ink droplets. In a thermal inkjet process (Fig. 7(C)), the ink is rapidly heated up to generate bubbles, which propel the ink out of the ink reservoir as ink droplets. Among these mechanisms, CIJ allows a higher jetting speed, and hence a higher printing efficiency. However, the complexities in controlling of the jetting, deflecting and recycling of the inks have limited the widespread application of CIJ. Due to its simpler operation, DoD has therefore emerged as the main inkjet printing technology.
 Fig. 7  Inkjet printing principles: schematics of (A) CIJ, and DoD inkjet printing with (B) piezoelectric and (C) thermal head. (D) The complete inkjet printing process, showing the droplet jetting, spreading and drying stages. Reproduced with permission.185 Copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V. Inset: Jetting with unwanted satellite droplets. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
In the DoD process, a key requirement is a stable jetting of single droplets under each electrical impulse without the formation of satellite droplets (i.e. secondary droplets). The satellite droplets can lead to ink deposition on untargeted areas and even deviation from the droplet jetting trajectory.170 This droplet jetting behaviour is determined by the ink fluidic properties, characterised by Z, a dimensionless inverse Ohnesorge (Oh) number:196,197 (2)where η, γ and ρ are the viscosity (mPa s), surface tension (mN m−1) and density (g cm−3) of the ink, respectively, and a is the diameter (μm) of the jetting nozzle. As a rule of thumb, a value of 1–14 for Z suggests stable ink jetting. A value of >14 indicates the formation of satellite droplets while <1 suggests elongated ligaments that may also break up into satellite droplets, or even prevent droplet formation from occurring at all.7,186,196 The ‘droplet jetting’ stage in Fig. 7(D) is a demonstration of stable droplet jetting with Z = 3.5,185 while the inset shows generation of satellite droplets with Z = 17.3.186
As presented in Fig. 7(D), immediately after jetting, the droplet impacts, spreads and dries on the substrate towards a designed printed image.185 Upon impact, the droplet undergoes a spreading stage where the inertial force dominates.196 This stage leads to a maximum droplet spreading until a capillary force driven spreading stage takes over.196 The capillary driven stage is further divided into two situations depending on wetting. For inks with sufficient wettability, the droplet continues a capillary spreading. For inks with insufficient wettability, the droplet retracts and beads up towards a discontinuous material deposition. Therefore, to ensure a continuous deposition, the ink surface tension has to be sufficiently low. Provided that the ink can wet the substrate, however, the drying of low viscosity inkjet inks may lead to coffee ring formation if they are not optimised, as illustrated in Fig. 7(D).


4.2.2 2d material inkjet inks. 
The as-produced LPE dispersions are the first generation and the most widely used 2d material inks for inkjet printing thus far. LPE dispersions have been demonstrated in a wide range of printable applications, including complex heterostructure devices (Table 4).7–11 Generally, LPE dispersions are characterised with a viscosity of <2 mPa s, allowing the dispersions to be readily deposited with low viscosity printing and coating technologies like inkjet printing.7,23 The lateral dimension of the dispersed flakes is typically <200 nm, fitting a general guideline of inkjet printing where the average particle size should be <1/50th of the nozzle diameter (e.g. 21 μm) to avoid nozzle clogging.7 The LPE dispersions are therefore usually printed directly without further ink formulation, for instance the NMP based dispersions of graphene, WS2 and h-BN as shown in Fig. 8(A).9 However, these dispersions usually deliver inefficient, time consuming printing due to low concentration of 2d materials (<1 g L−1) and the high boiling point of commonly used solvents such as NMP.11,82,94 Evolving from the NMP based dispersions, printing of LPE dispersions in low boiling point solvents (e.g. water and alcohols) emerged. For example, Fig. 8(B) shows an inkjet-printed image from water based graphene dispersion on paper (stabilised with 1-pyrenesulfonic acid sodium salt (PS1)).11
Table 4 Selected examples of the 2d material inks and their printable applications to date




2d materials
Solvents
Binders & additives
Substrates
Applications
Ref.





Inkjet inks



Graphene
NMP
—
Si/SiO2, glass
FETs

7



Graphene, MoS2
NMP
—
PET with coating
Photodetectors

8



Graphene, TMDs, h-BN
NMP
—
Si/SiO2
FETs, photodetectors

9



Graphene, TMDs, h-BN
NMP
—
PET with coating
FETs

10



Graphene
IPA
—
PET, Polyurethane
FETs

24



Graphene
Water/ethanol
—
PET
Conductive inks

187



Graphene
Water/ethanol
—
Si/SiO2
—

13



MoS2
Water/IPA
—
Si/SiO2
—

97



MoS2
Water/IPA/glycerol
—
Si/SiO2
Gas sensors

188



BP
IPA/2-butanol
—
Si/SiO2, glass, PET
Photodetectors, SAs

12



BP
Acetonitrile
—
Glass
Humidity sensors

189



Graphene
Water
SDBS, PANI
Carbon
Supercapacitors

190



Graphene
Water
PEDOT:PSS
Carbon
Gas sensors

191



Graphene, TMDs
Water
PS1
Si/SiO2
Photodetectors, memory

11



Graphene, MoS2
IPA, NMP, Terpineol/CHO
Ethyl cellulose
PET
Photodetectors

192



Graphene
IPA
PVP
Si3N4
Humidity sensors

22



Graphene
IPA
PVP
FTO glass
Solar cells

25



Graphene
IPA
PVP
Kapton, glass
Thermoelectrics

92



Graphene
IPA/n-butanol
Plasdone S-630
Paper
Conductive inks

193



Graphene
Terpineol/ethanol
Ethyl cellulose
Si/SiO2, glass
FETs

89



Graphene
Terpineol/CHO
Ethyl cellulose
Si/SiO2, Kapton
Conductive inks

14



Graphene
Terpineol/CHO
Ethyl cellulose
Glass, PET, PEN, PI
Conductive inks

88



Graphene
Ethyl lactate/octyl acetate/ethylene glycol diacetate
Nitrocellulose
Glass, Kapton
Conductive inks

23



Graphene
Diethylene glycol/ethanol
PEDOT:PSS
Polyurethane
Temperature sensors

194



MoS2
Terpineol/ethanol
Ethyl cellulose
Si/SiO2
FETs

99



h-BN
Water
Na-CMC
PET, Polyurethane
Dielectric inks

24








Flexographic inks



Graphene
Water/IPA
Na-CMC
ITO PET
Solar cells

19



Graphene/carbon ink
—
—
Glass, PET, paper
Conductive inks

20








Gravure inks



Graphene
Terpineol/ethanol
Ethyl cellulose
Kapton
Conductive inks

21








Screen inks



Graphene
Ethanol
PTFE, PANI
PET
Supercapacitors

15



Graphene
Terpineol/ethanol
Ethyl cellulose
Si/SiO2, Kapton
Conductive inks

16



Graphene
Dipropylene glycol
PVP/PVA
PET
Conductive inks

17



Graphene
Water
Na-CMC
Glass, paper
Conductive inks

18



MoS2/carbon–graphite ink
—
—
Paper
Oxygen reduction

195



h-BN
DMF
Polycarbonate
PET, copper foil
Dielectric inks

113





 Fig. 8  Inkjet printing of 2d materials: (A) photograph of representative NMP based 2d material inks. Reproduced with permission.9 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (B) Inkjet-printed graphene pattern on paper using water based inks. Reproduced with permission.11 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (C) Micrograph of inkjet-printed NMP based inks on Si/SiO2 substrates and paper. Reproduced with permission.7 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (D) Photograph of ethyl cellulose stabilised graphene ink, and (E) corresponding optical micrographs of inkjet-printed graphene lines onto different substrates, showing uniform pattern definition. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (F) Optical micrographs of inkjet-printed MoS2 on Si/SiO2. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (G) Schematic of droplet drying process of a binary alcohol-based BP ink, showing induced Marangoni suppresses coffee ring effect, and the corresponding (H) optical micrographs and (I) AFM images of the dried droplets. (G–I) Reproduced with permission.12 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 
However, LPE dispersions usually present challenges in achieving controlled patterning of 2d materials, as a result of unstable droplet jetting, poor wetting and the coffee ring effect. The reported Z values are usually >14, suggesting the possibility of satellite droplet formation, especially during long printing sessions.7,8,11,198 In addition, the LPE dispersions with higher surface tension (e.g. NMP and water based) present poor wetting of common substrates (Table 3), as shown in Fig. 8(C). These low viscosity dispersions may also be subjected to a strong coffee ring effect.7,11 Substrate surface treatment may help towards addressing the above challenges. Torrisi et al. showed that self-assembling of bis(trimethylsilyl)amine (HMDS) could lead to a more uniform distribution of graphene flakes; Fig. 8(C).7 The authors also showed that that O2-plasma treatment resulted in a poorer flake distribution. This was due to ink overspreading as a result of the increased substrate surface energy. Using absorbent substrates (e.g. paper and solid surfaces with porous coating) is an alternative approach,8,10 whereby the 2d material flakes are retained on the surface as the solvents ‘wick’ into the substrates, leading to an even material deposition.
To address these challenges, evolving from the LPE dispersions, ink formulations using polymeric binders have been developed.14,89,198 This is usually achieved by extracting the exfoliated 2d materials flakes from the dispersions via filtration, sedimentation, solvent exchange or solvent evaporation, and then redispersing the extracted flakes in selected solvents with polymers for highly concentrated ink formulation. Fig. 8(D) is a demonstration of such inks, where graphene produced in ethanol/ethyl cellulose was sedimentated and redispersed in terpineol/cyclohexanone (CHO) with ethyl cellulose.14,88,199 As shown, this ink formulation supported highly controlled patterning of graphene flakes with spatially uniform flake distribution on a wide range of substrates; Fig. 8(E). This binder ink strategy has also been extended to ink formulation of other 2d materials, for example MoS2; Fig. 8(F). For these inks, it may be necessary to remove the polymeric binders after printing since unlike solvents, the polymers form an integral part of the printed thin films. In the case of applications such as conductive inks, transistors and photodetectors, polymers in inks can significantly compromise the functionalities (e.g. electrical conductivity) of the 2d materials, and hence the intended device performance. The removal of the polymers may be achieved by high temperature annealing or intense pulsed light.14,88 These post-print treatments, although very effective, may prove too expensive or cumbersome and thereby risk limiting the development of printable flexible applications using polymeric substrates.
Alternatively, to avoid residual binders in printed thin films, a mixed solvent ink formulation approach can be considered. Hu et al. demonstrated a binder-free, stable BP ink formulation using a mixture of IPA/2-butanol solvents.12 The authors proposed that the alcohol mixture induced a recirculating Marangoni flow during ink drying, arising from a surface tension gradient from the generated composition/temperature gradients, as depicted in Fig. 8(G). This Marangoni flow suppressed the coffee ring effect, while the low surface tension ensured wetting of a variety of untreated substrates, enabling spatially uniform, low temperature printing of BP; Fig. 8(H and I).
The morphologies of the printed patterns are further defined by printing parameters such as the spacing between neighbouring droplets. An ideal situation is that the merging of the neighbouring droplets does not cause neither over- nor insufficient-spreading.12,200 A suboptimal print morphology results in a non-uniformity in the material properties across the patterns. Typically, when the spacing is small, an excessive merging of a track of droplets may lead to overspreading, forming lines with the so-called ‘stacked coins’ or ‘bulging’ morphologies. On the other hand, when the spacing is large, the merging is insufficient, forming ‘scalloped’ lines or even ‘isolated droplets’. Using geometric considerations, Hu et al. showed that for the mixed solvent ink a droplet spacing of ∼0.5–0.8 to the dried droplet size ensured optimal droplet merging,200 forming lines with ‘uniform edges’ to represent optimal printing.12 Similar printing parameters have also been defined previously for other types of ink formulations.200,201

4.3 Screen printing of 2d materials

4.3.1 Screen printing principles. 
Screen printing is a stencil process whereby ink is transferred on to the substrate through a stencil screen made of a fine, porous mesh of fabric, silk, synthetic fibres or metal threads. The pores of the mesh are closed in the non-printing areas by a photo-polymerised resin, while the remaining pores in the printing areas are left open to allow ink to flow through.160,202

Fig. 9(A) shows a schematic of a typical flat-bed screen printing process. During printing, the ink is first spread over the screen mesh. A squeegee is then drawn across it, forcing the ink through the open pores. At the same time, the substrate is held in contact with the screen to receive the ink. Many flat-bed screen printing systems still consist of a simple hand-operated unit, which can be particularly useful when printing on very thick or thin substrates that cannot be automatically fed, or where a test run of a new image is required. Flat-bed screen printing systems offer an additional advantage of being able to register precise prints directly on top of each other.203 This is important during functional printing where precisely registered contacts and overlapping layers of functional materials are required.204 Semiautomatic machines have the substrates fed and taken off by hand but utilise a mechanised squeegee blade. Fully automatic flat-bed presses are also available where the substrate is fed in and taken off by automatic feed and delivery systems.171
 Fig. 9  Screen printing: schematic figures showing (A) flat-bed and (B) R2R screen printing. (C–E) Schematics illustration of for screen printing principles. (F) Photograph of a graphene ink for screen printing. (G) SEM micrograph of an array of screen-printed graphene lines. (H) Screen-printed graphene pattern on PET. (F–H) Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Highly efficient cylinder presses can be employed for high-speed R2R printing. As shown in Fig. 9(B), in this setup, the presses and the squeegee remain stationary, while the screen, the cylinder and the substrate move in unison. This permits faster operation, since the substrate does not have to be brought to a halt and fed into a vacuum base as with flat-bed presses. Speeds of up to 80 m2 s−1 can be achieved with this process.
In screen printing, the volume of the ink deposited is governed by several factors: (1) the thread count of the screen (i.e. the number of threads per unit distance and thread diameter), which in turn defines the open area percentage of the screen; (2) the thread diameter which defines the thickness of the screen (D), and hence the depth of the ink column at each open hole in the mesh (Fig. 9(C)); (3) the pressure, the angle that in turn defines the area of the squeegee in contact with the screen, and the speed of the blade in respect to the screen during ink deposition.160,202,204,205
According to a model derived in 1990 by Owczarek and Howland,206 the thickness of the ink under the squeegee, Tink, can be expressed by the following equation with reference to Fig. 9(C–E): (3)where ΔTsq is the change in height of the squeegee as it is drawn across the screen, Toa is the equivalent open area, M is the mesh count per inch given by M = 1/m, and m is the distance between the centre lines of two parallel wires on the mesh. Note that Tink represents the wet ink thickness. The dry ink thickness typically depends on the solid content (e.g. pigment, binder) in the ink formulation. Because of their simplicity, screens can be produced cheaply, making screen printing a very attractive process for short-run work.


4.3.2 2d material screen inks. 
Unlike inkjet ink formulation, 2d material screen ink formulations started with polymeric binders due to the requirement in high ink viscosities. Prior to ink formulation of solution-processed, chemically pristine 2d materials, Zhang et al. first demonstrated a rGO ink by dispersing rGO in terpineol with ethyl cellulose as the ink binder.207 The authors used this ink to develop counter-electrodes for dye-sensitised solar cells (DSSCs).207 However, this rGO screen ink required a 400 °C treatment to effectively burn off the binder, adversely affecting the adhesion of rGO to the substrate.
Screen ink formulation of solution-processed pristine 2d materials are now beginning to emerge. Graphene has typically been the most investigated subject, although there also have been attempts to incorporate MoS2195 and h-BN.113 In addition to ethyl cellulose, other polymers have also been experimented with as screen ink binder systems. These include PVP/polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)17 and polyaniline (PANI).208Fig. 9(F) is a photograph of a graphene/PVP/PVA ink, followed by the screen printed patterns using the ink (Fig. 9(G and H)).17 This graphene screen ink exhibited high electrical conductivity (30 Ω sq−1 at 25 μm thickness) after drying at 100 °C, avoiding the need for high temperature annealing, doping or any other treatments. A graphene/PANI ink, on the other hand, was exploited for printing of supercapacitor electrodes, which could withstand ∼200 bending cycles.208 Ink formulation by blending graphene with existing carbon/graphite conductive ink formulations, already rheologically optimised for screen printing, has also been demonstrated.209
Ethyl cellulose has proved popular for 2d material screen ink formulation.207,210,211 Inherent issues with alternative polymers such as the graphene/PVP/PVA ink, which required highly controlled heating processes to achieve pseudoplasticity.17 The demonstrated pseudoplasticity, although eventually shear thinning, proved not ideal for screen printing due to the lack of flow (i.e. too high viscosity) when not under shear which therefore was prone to damaging the screens. Though surviving multiple (∼200) bend cycles, the graphene PANI ink required lamination between two plastic sheets in order to be mechanically robust.208 Ethyl cellulose ink formulations have shown appropriate rheological properties for screen printing and exhibited superior electrochemical responses when compared to other binders evaluated to date.195

4.4 Gravure and flexographic printing of 2d materials
Gravure and flexographic printing are two widely used high-speed R2R processes used in a number of packaging applications, such as labels, plastic and foil packaging. Both gravure and flexographic printing rely on large metal rolls (called the gravure roller and anilox roller, respectively) to meter and control the ink deposited on the surface. Gravure printing is a form of ‘direct’ printing upon which ink is carried directly from the ink trough to the substrate via the gravure roller which not only meters the wet ink application weight but also acts as the print image carrier. Flexographic printing, however, is a form of ‘indirect’ printing, which involves control of the wet ink application weight by the anilox roller, transferring the metered ink from the anilox to an image plate before the ink is deposited on to the substrate.
As a method of printing 2d materials, however, little work has been done thus far using these printing technologies. This is largely due to the high set up and prototyping cost of producing gravure rollers and printing plates and importantly, the large quantities of ink (>1 L) required to be able to achieve stable trial print runs. However, both these printing processes remain strong viable candidates for high-speed, low-cost manufacturing of 2d material printable applications due to their high throughput.

4.4.1 Gravure printing principles. 

Fig. 10(A and B) show typical schematics of gravure printing process.160,161,171–173 The printing unit of a gravure press consists of an ink trough in which a metal gravure roller rotates in a fluid ink, and a metal doctor blade which spans the width of the roller and scrapes excess ink from the roller surface.160,171–173,212 The desired pattern is directly engraved into the metal gravure roller in the form of cells which are designed to get filled with ink as the roller rotates in the ink.160,172,205,213 Ink transfer is achieved by passing the substrate between the gravure roller and an impression roller.
The ink used for gravure printing usually has a medium viscosity (100–1000 mPa s). Due to the inherent R2R feeding system, gravure printing can deliver a printing speed of up to 1000 m per minute. Hence, low boiling point solvents are usually required to allow rapid ink drying. As gravure printing use deep-etched engraved cells, it is capable of delivering dense layers, with a wet thickness of ∼7 μm. The printing resolution is typically 100 μm.
Nguyen et al. developed a model for the ink-transfer mechanism of gravure printing that would allow an effective control of the printing process for fine line prints.173,212 In this model, the gravure printing process can be divided into four distinct phases: (1) the inking phase at the ink trough; (2) the doctoring phase where the ink is metered by the doctor blade; (3) the printing phase where the substrate meets the gravure roller; and (4) the setting phase when ink is successfully released from the cylinder cell to complete the print.
A successful print during these four phases would mean that the gravure cells are filled with inks at the inking phase and become completely empty as the gravure roller meets the substrate. This is governed by the forces acting on the ink, given as: Fafs > Fafc > Fcf(4)where F represent three distinct forces acting on the ink: the cohesive force (Fcf), the adhesive forces on the cell surface (Fafc) and the adhesive force on the substrate (Fafs); Fig. 10(C). If Fafc > Fafs and Fcf > Fafs occur over the entire interface, no ink will transfer. If Fcf < Fafs and Fcf < Fafc, the ink will ideally be transferred. When Fafs > Fafc, most of the ink is transferred to the substrate without leaving pinholes or voids in the printed pattern.
 Fig. 10  Gravure printing: (A and B) schematics of gravure printing highlighting the different components. (C and D) Schematics for illustration of gravure printing principles. (E) Large-area SEM micrograph of gravure-printed graphene lines on Kapton substrate. (F–K) Optical microscope images of printed graphene lines using cell sizes of 15, 20, 25, 30, 35 and 50 μm, respectively. Lines printed without the specified cell size are shaded in grey. (E–K) Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The difference between Fafs and Fafc is termed as the ΔF, a dimensionless adhesion-force difference which acts as a unit of measure for the success of a gravure printing process. With reference to Fig. 10(D), it is hence derived by Nguyen et al. that: (5)where γink is the surface tension of the ink, θc is the contact angle of the ink on the cell surface, and θs is the contact angle of the ink on the substrate. Hence, the success of a gravure printing process is dependent largely on the surface tension of the ink γink and the viscosity of the ink which determines Fcf.


4.4.2 Flexographic printing principles. 

Fig. 11(A and B) show typical schematics of the flexographic printing process.160,161,171 Flexographic printing can be considered as a relief printing process in which the impression stands out of the printing cylinder in a relief as opposed to being ‘flat’ on a plate like in screen printing or recessed like in gravure printing.160,171,205,214,215
 Fig. 11  Flexographic printing: (A–C) schematic figures showing flexographic printing principles. (D) Photograph of graphene/carbon flexographic ink. Printing trials of the ink shown in (D) on (E) PET and (F) paper substrates using a commercial graphics printing press. Inset: Zoomed-in photographs of the printed fill profiles. 
When compared to gravure printing, flexographic printing uses a slightly more convoluted ink transfer process. As shown in the schematic figures, to form an image, soft and flexible relief printing plates are mounted and registered on a plate cylinder. Ink is first applied to the surface of a screened anilox roller, which is rolled through an ink trough to fill the cells with ink. The anilox roller is a hard cylinder with engraved cells.
Any excess ink is then screened off via a doctor blade, ensuring an even regulation of the ink on the anilox roller surface. The ink is then transferred to the relief printing plate mounted on a second cylinder before the ink is deposited onto the final substrate.
The ink used in the flexographic printing process is also usually of a medium viscosity (1000–2000 mPa s). Due to the R2R feeding system, flexographic printing delivers a printing speed of up to 500 m per minute, and hence low boiling point solvents are required in ink formulation to allow for rapid ink drying. As flexographic printing utilises a direct-contact relief process, it is incapable of depositing as dense a layer as gravure or screen printing. It typically deposits a wet film thickness of up to ∼3 μm. The normal printing resolution is between 100–200 μm.
Similar to gravure printing, the flexographic printing process begins with inking and doctoring of the anilox roller. However, unlike gravure printing, these cells are not the main image-forming region and are responsible purely for metering the amount of ink to ensure continuous patterns. In a pyramid cell structure, the amount of ink that a single cell (Vcell) can hold is given by (6)where h is the height of the cell, Aopen is the area of the opening of the cell and Abase is the area of the base of the cell; Fig. 11(C). The volume obtained, then, can be multiplied by the total number of cells on the roller to give the total volume of ink the roller can hold.
Besides the cell illustrated, there are also a variety of other cell structures which may be used.176,205 For instance, tri-helical cells, which are shaped as long, unbroken valley etched at a 45° angle, are useful for printing of high viscosity inks. Quadrangular cells, shaped like inverted pyramids with the point cut off, can also be specified. This shape tends to release ink better and also has less variability in the ink volume during printing cycles. However, it must be noted that the equations for deriving the volume of each anilox cell differ between cell structures.


4.4.3 2d material gravure and flexographic inks. 
Gravure printing of 2d materials was first reported by Secor et al. in 2014.21 The authors exchanged LPE graphene from ethyl cellulose/ethanol into ethyl cellulose/terpineol/ethanol for ink formulation, where the loading of graphene and ethyl cellulose was controlled to suit gravure printing.21 The small flake size of the LPE graphene flakes (∼50 nm × 50 nm with typical thickness of ∼2 nm) was critical for a high-resolution gravure printing process.21,172 As shown in Fig. 10(E–K), the authors demonstrated that the ink allowed high-resolution (printed line width down to ∼30 μm) patterning of graphene on Kapton.21 This ink was used to demonstrate continuous, electrically conductive printed stripes.
Flexographic printing of 2d materials was first reported by Baker et al. in 2014.19 The authors developed a graphene/sodium carboxymethylcellulose (Na-CMC) ink in water/IPA solutions, where the graphene/binder (i.e. Na-CMC) ratio was controlled to suit flexographic printing. The ink could be printed onto ITO substrates to fabricate counter-electrodes for photovoltaics.19
In 2015, a research group at the University of Cambridge developed a conductive carbon–graphene ink (Fig. 11(D)) and demonstrated a full-scale flexographic press (Nilpeter FA-4) run on both paper and PET in collaboration with Novalia, as shown in Fig. 11(E and F).20 The press run achieved a printing speed of ∼100 m per minute, allowing the printing of hundreds of electronic circuits for capacitive touchpads. The measured Rs was ∼16.5 kΩ sq−1 and ∼11.5 kΩ sq−1 for paper and PET, respectively, demonstrating a significant improvement from conventional carbon inks of which Rs is ∼40 kΩ sq−1.

5 Printable 2d material applications
Although there have been numerous demonstrations and device prototypes based on solution processed 2d materials over the last 10 years, applications based on printed 2d material inks, with optimised rheological properties specific to target applications, are only beginning to emerge. The key application areas include conductive inks, (opto)electronics and photonics, sensors and energy storage. We note that many of the ‘solution processed’ 2d material applications not included in this section may also potentially benefit from functional ink formulation when scalable device development is envisaged. Table 4 lists the demonstrated key applications to date (Table 5).
Table 5 State of the art performances of printed 2d materials in selected applications




Printable applications
Demonstrated performances
Features





Conductive inks

Inkjet inks

E.g.
ref. 23: electrical conductivity up to 40000 S m−1.
Mechanically and environmentally durable: withstanding rigorous bending cycles, adhesion testing and sonication.








Screen inks

E.g.
ref. 18: electrical conductivity up to 20000 S m−1.
Allowing multiple printing repetitions; printing scale over 29 × 29 cm2; line resolution ∼100 μm.








Gravure inks

E.g.
ref. 21: electrical conductivity up to 10000 S m−1.
Line resolution ∼30 μm; withstanding over 500 bending cycles of a strain of 3.1%.








Flexographic inks

E.g.
ref. 20: electrical conductivity up to 500 S m−1.
Requiring no overprint of silver for printed electrodes in capacitive touchpads; printing speed over 100 meters per minute.







(Opto)electronics

Transistors

E.g.
ref. 24: graphene channel based transistors with mobility of up to 204 cm2 V−1 s−1 and ION/IOFF limited to 2.5.
All-inkjet-printed; mechanically durable, and withstanding bending testing and washing.











E.g.
ref. 10: TMDs channel based transistors with ION/IOFF of up to ∼600 and mobility limited to 0.22 cm2 V−1 s−1.
All-inkjet-printed; flexible.








Photodetectors

E.g.
ref. 11: TMDs heterostructure devices with photosensitivity of up to 1 mA W−1 under 514 nm excitation.
All-inkjet-printed; flexible.











E.g.
ref. 12: BP integrated Schottky diodes with photosensitivity of up to 164 mA W−1 under 450 nm excitation, and 1.8 mA W−1 at 1550 nm under excitation.
High performance; long-term (>7 days) stability and device operation; near infrared light detection.











Photonics

Ultrafast lasers

E.g.
ref. 12: inkjet-printed BP SAs which allowed generation of femtosecond ultrashort pulses under 32.7 MW cm−2 irradiation.
Long-term (>30 days) stability and laser operation.







Sensors

Humidity

E.g.
ref. 22: CMOS devices integration of graphene with sensitivity of up to 0.3%/%RH.
Device-to-device consistent performances; long-term (>4 weeks) device operation stability; CMOS platform.








Gas

E.g.
ref. 216: gravure-printed rGO chemiresistive sensors with sensitivity of up to 45% and fast response (12 s) and recovery (20 s) times; high selectively to different chemicals.
High sensitivity and selectivity; all-printed; flexible.







Energy

Batteries

E.g.
ref. 217: 3D printed Li-ion batteries with discharge specific capacities of up to 40 mA h g−1.
High speed, highly efficient 3D printing; printing with commercial graphene/polymer composite filaments.








Supercapacitors

E.g.
ref. 218: inkjet-printed graphene micro-supercapacitors with an average specific capacitance of ∼221 ± 16 μF cm−2 at cyclic voltammetry scan rate of 100 mV s−1.
Large-scale all-inkjet-printed devices; device-to-device consistent performances; mechanically durable, withstanding over 1000 bending cycles.








Thermoelectrics

E.g.
ref. 92: inkjet-printed graphene thermoelectrics with a thermoelectric power factor of 18.7 μW m−1 K−2 at room temperature.
All-inkjet-printed; flexible; large-scale.




5.1 Conductive inks
Printable electronics hold a huge potential in the fields of logic circuits, sensors, photodetectors, flexible displays, RFID and portable energy storage.5,6,155 This requires conductive inks for the fabrication of electrodes and interconnects for circuits. Currently available commercial conductive inks for printing are predominantly carbon or metal (such as copper or silver) based. Although carbon inks are significantly cheaper, they offer insufficient electrical conductivity for a wide variety of applications. On the other hand, metal based inks are usually expensive and usually require demanding curing or sintering conditions.199 Due to cost-performance benefits, graphene inks are particularly promising for printed electronics,199 with its electrical conductivity lying between the traditional carbon and metal based inks. For example, Hyun et al. reported the use of screen-printed graphene as the source and drain contacts for flexible transistor fabrication on a Kapton substrate (channel material: poly(3-hexylthiophene)).16

Fig. 12 presents the evolution of graphene conductive inks. Investigation for this application started with the LPE dispersions.7 However, Torrisi et al. showed that the inkjet-printed graphene from NMP dispersions demonstrated a measured electrical conductivity of up to ∼100 S m−1,7 far below typical metal (>1 × 105 S m−1) and even carbon based inks (∼1000 S m−1219). This low electrical conductivity was probably due to the poor inter-flake percolation of the graphene flakes, arising from the spatially non-uniform deposition as a result of the coffee ring effect.
 Fig. 12  Electrical conductivity of selected graphene inks demonstrated to date. 
Recent advances suggest that a practical strategy would be to develop high loading graphene/binder inks devoid of the coffee ring effect, as demonstrated in ref. 14, 16 and 21, where the respective graphene loading in the graphene/ethyl cellulose inks was ∼0.34 wt%, ∼3 wt% and ∼8 wt% for inkjet, gravure and screen printing. These inks were shown to be capable of producing spatially uniform printed structures, ensuring a better inter-flake percolation, and hence a higher electrical conductivity. Indeed, the measured respective electrical conductivity after binder decomposition was ∼2.5 × 104 S m−1, ∼1 × 104 S m−1, and ∼2 × 104 S m−1. Recently, Secor et al. reported that by using nitrocellulose as the binder, an electrical conductivity of up to ∼4 × 104 S m−1 could be achieved after binder decomposition.23 Compared to the graphene/ethyl cellulose systems, this increase might arise from the improved inter-flake percolation, as the printed structures exhibited superior mechanical durability and withstood rigorous bending cycles, adhesion testing and sonication.23 However, for such inks, the binder decomposition process required high temperature annealing (>200 °C).14,16,21 The conductive inks are therefore mostly suitable for substrates that can withstand high temperature, such as Si/SiO2, glass and Kapton. Following this annealing strategy, the success of graphene/binder conductive inks lies in finding the ‘sweet spot’ temperature which will allow decomposition of binders to improve percolation, yet not cause damages to the substrates or the printed graphene.
To address the challenges caused by high temperature annealing, Secor et al. developed a rapid photonic annealing process, where a high intensity xenon lamp was employed to decompose the polymeric binders after printing.88,220 The authors showed that this strategy could effectively decompose ethyl cellulose without damaging polymeric substrates or the printed graphene, and retain a high electrical conductivity (∼2.5 × 104 S m−1).88 This method produced robust printed structures, with little change in the electrical conductivity even after 1000 bending cycles.
The good electrical properties and cost-performance advantages have garnered a general expectation by the research community that printed graphene has a huge potential in printed electronics. Nevertheless, the electrical conductivity of graphene inks to date still fall well short of that of the metal inks and therefore, will require further improvement. This may potentially be achieved by stable graphene doping and functionalisation to promote inter-flake percolation.6,155,199
5.2 Printed (opto)electronics and photonics
Although 2d materials from mechanical exfoliation and CVD have been widely reported in the demonstration of high performance (opto)electronics and photonics,62,63,69 their scalable device development towards real applications has been primarily restricted due to low yield and high production cost.1,3 In response, there have been efforts to develop printable 2d material (opto)electronics and photonics.7,10–12
The high carrier mobility of graphene has raised expectations within high-speed printed electronics applications. This was first demonstrated by Torrisi et al. in 2012.7 As schematically illustrated in Fig. 13(A), the authors inkjet-printed graphene as the channel for transistor fabrication. To avoid residual impurities in the devices, the graphene ink used was NMP based LPE dispersions. The authors showed that the fabricated transistors exhibited a carrier mobility of up to 95 cm2 V−1 s−1,7 which is far greater than that of typical printed organic transistors (usually <1 cm2 V−1 s−1).221 The ION/IOFF from the printed transistors, however, was limited to only 10 (compared to >105 for organic transistors) due to the lack of a bandgap in graphene.7 To address this low ION/IOFF, the authors then deposited poly[5,50-bis(3-dodecyl-2-thienyl)-2,20-bithiophene] (PQT-12) on top of graphene, as presented in Fig. 13(A). This strategy was demonstrated viable and indeed, increased the ION/IOFF to 4 × 105. The mobility, however, was decreased to 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1.
 Fig. 13  Printed (opto)electronics and photonics: (A) schematic of the first demonstration of inkjet-printed graphene transistors. Reproduced with permission.7 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (B) Photographs of all inkjet-printed 2d material transistors on textile, and (C) associated transfer characteristics. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (D) All inkjet-printed 2d material transistors. Reproduced with permission.10 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (E) Schematic all inkjet-printed read-only memory, (F) the corresponding circuit designs and (G) the electrical response. Reproduced with permission.11 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (H) Graphene/Si Schottky junction/inkjet-printed BP photodetector arrays across a silicon wafer, and (I) the corresponding measured response at 1550 nm light. (J) Schematic showing integration of inkjet-printed BP-SAs into a laser cavity to generate ultrafast lasers, and (K) the corresponding output laser spectrum across 30 days and (L) overlay of the spectrum acquired after 0, 174, 354, 534 and 714 h of operation, highlighting the stability of printed and encapsulated BP. Reproduced with permission.12 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 
There were few reports on printed graphene transistors after this demonstration until recently when Carey et al. reported inkjet-printed graphene based heterostructure transistors.24Fig. 13(B) are the photographs of the devices on textile, where the inkjet-printed graphene was exploited as the channel and contacts, while inkjet-printed h-BN was used as the dielectric layer.24 The authors showed that the devices exhibited a significantly increased carrier mobility of up to 204 cm2 V−1 s−1 (average mobility: ∼150 cm2 V−1 s−1 on PET and ∼91 cm2 V−1 s−1 on polyurethane textile).24 The authors also showed that the textile devices possessed a high mechanical durability, withstanding up to ∼4% strain and even more than 20 washing cycles.24 However, as shown in Fig. 13(C), the typical output characteristics of the textile devices exhibited an ION/IOFF of only ∼1.2.24
In contrast to graphene, semiconducting TMDs show great promise for the development of electronics with high ION/IOFF.38,69 Kelly et al. reported inkjet-printed heterostructure transistors employing WSe2 instead of graphene as the channel, as shown in Fig. 13(D).10 The transistors exhibited an ION/IOFF of up to ∼600, significantly higher than these aforementioned graphene transistors. However, the carrier mobility was limited to 0.22 cm2 V−1 s−1. An effective way to increase the ION/IOFF while retaining a high mobility, critical to any real-world applications, remains elusive so far.
Besides transistors, printed electronic circuits are also beginning to emerge. Fig. 13(E) shows a schematic of a printed read-only memory (ROM) based on 2d material junctions11 while Fig. 13(F) shows the printed ROM with the corresponding circuit design.11 As shown, in this ROM, the graphene/WS2/graphene junction with higher electrical resistance was interpreted as logic ‘0’, while the graphene/graphene junction was interpreted as logic ‘1’.11 This printed ROM output experimental results in a good agreement with simulation results; Fig. 13(G).11 For practical interest, the ROM could be used as RFID tags to store identification information or integrated with additional electronics for more complex circuits and functions.11
2d materials such as semiconducting TMDs and BP offer potential for optoelectronic applications, such as photodetectors.33,69 A printed 2d material photodetector was first reported by Finn et al. in 2014.8 In this work, the device was consisted of inkjet-printed interdigitated graphene electrodes with an inkjet-printed MoS2 active photodetection channel. The calculated photoresponsivity, however, is <1 μA W−1 (at 532 nm). Different from this planar structure, the aforementioned heterostructure graphene/WS2/graphene junction was also utilised for photodetection.11 This heterostructure device exhibited a photoresponsivity of >1 mA W−1 (at 514 nm). To further improve the photoresponsivity, Hu et al. proposed a hybrid photodetector structure where inkjet-printed BP was integrated with graphene/Si Schottky junction.12Fig. 13(H) shows a photograph of printed devices across a silicon wafer, while the inset schematically shows the structure of this hybrid device.12 Since BP tends to degrade due to oxidation under ambient conditions, the hybrid device was encapsulated with parylene-C.12 The device exhibited a photoresponsivity of up to 164 mA W−1 at 450 nm,12 significantly higher than those of the aforementioned photodetectors. More importantly, as presented in Fig. 13(I), due to the layer-dependent bandgap of BP (0.3–2.0 eV), the device responded to 1550 nm light with a photoresponsivity of 1.8 mA W−1, beyond the bandgap of Si (1.1 eV).12
Beyond (opto)electronics, the nonlinear optical absorption and ultrafast carrier dynamics of 2d materials (e.g. graphene, MoS2 and BP) make them attractive for nanomaterial based saturable absorber (SA) development.12,70,71 SAs may be used for ultrafast optical pulse generation and are an underpinning technology in a wide variety of applications, ranging from materials processing, time-resolved spectroscopy, industrial micromachining to biomedical imaging.70,222 One dominant, well-developed technology for 2d material based SA fabrication is through developing their polymer composites from solution-processed dispersions.71,100–102,223 However, it can be challenging to precisely control the optical parameters of the fabricated SA devices. The composite preparation can also be time consuming due to slow solvent evaporation, especially when high boiling point solvents (e.g. NMP) are used. To address these challenges, Hu et al. first employed inkjet-printed BP as SA devices to mode-lock ultrafast lasers; Fig. 13(J).12 The issue of BP degradation and operation stability was again addressed by encapsulation with parylene-C.12Fig. 13(K and L) show stable ultrafast pulse generation from the printed BP-SAs for over 30 days, far exceeding the performance of prior demonstrations using BP. Functional inks and inkjet printing therefore could therefore be a very attractive approach for both discrete as well as hybrid and integrated photonic and optoelectronic device applications enabled by 2d materials.
5.3 Printed sensors
Sensors are widely used in electronics, manufacturing, medicine, robotics, automobiles, as well as in aerospace applications. A major application potential of 2d materials lies in the field of sensors due to their unique (opto)electronic, photonic, optical, mechanical properties as well the large specific surface area.1,3,224 When exposed to ambient conditions (e.g. gas, moisture, stress or other environmental elements) through contact/non-contact chemical/physical reactions, 2d material-based sensing layers may respond to and convert the information into a signal that can be read out and interpreted. Indeed, high performance, proof-of-concept sensors based on 2d materials from mechanical exfoliation and CVD have been widely reported, for example sensors for individual gas molecules,225in vitro bacterial sensors,226 and even environmental sensors for internet of things (IoT) applications.227
As with printed (opto)electronics and photonics, printed 2d material sensors are now beginning to emerge as a promising route to meet the increasing demands for sensors in real-life applications. Resistive sensors, in particular, appear to be viable for printable 2d material sensor development due to their simple, flexible device design and easy read-out with basic electronic circuitry. Generally, fabrication of resistive sensors involves printing of 2d materials-based sensing materials over parallel, interdigitated or fractal electrodes.

5.3.1 Chemical sensors. 
Chemical sensors find widespread use in healthcare, environmental monitoring, industrial process, agriculture and smart buildings. 2d materials represent an attractive platform for this. For example, Yao et al. demonstrated inkjet-printed MoS2 sensors for NH3 detection.188 The sensors were fabricated by printing LPE MoS2 over microelectrodes. The sensors exhibited resistance changes when exposed to NH3, with a detection capability of down to 5 ppm.188 However, as noted by the authors, the sensors needed optimisation to reduce the recovery time. This might require better selection of the 2d materials, the underlying materials processing and engineering, and/or an optimised device design.
Besides semiconducting MoS2, Cho et al. showed that other 2d materials such as graphene and BP produced from LPE exhibited resistance changes to chemicals such as NO2, NH3, ethanol and acetaldehyde.105 When compared with MoS2 and graphene, the authors demonstrated that the sensitivity from BP was up to 20 times higher, and that the response time was ∼40 times faster. This suggested a strong potential of BP in sensing applications. However, the development of printable BP sensors for long term use could be significantly limited due to BP degradation in the ambient environment.
In spite of demonstrating good sensitivity, such sensors typically have poor selectivity (i.e. ability to uniquely respond to specific analytes). This has prompted the design of 2d material-based functionalised hybrid materials. Functionalisation of 2d materials via chemical doping or decoration with other functional materials (e.g. metal/metal oxide nanoparticles) has been demonstrated to be a viable strategy for enhancing sensing capabilities in sensitivity, response/recovery times and selectivity.228,229 For instance, functionalisation of graphene with groups such as O, –NH2, –OH, –F, –CH3 and –SO3H can significantly expand its sensing capabilities to a wide range of chemicals, including NO, NO2, Cl2, SO2, CHCl3, CH3OH and C6H14 (hexane).216,228,229Fig. 14(A) shows a chemiresistive sensor employing rGO–SO3H decorated with Ag nanoparticles.216 The sensors were fabricated by gravure printing of the functional ink over interdigitated metal contacts. As presented in Fig. 14(B and C), the sensors exhibited a fast response over NO2 and selectivity for NO2 and NH3 as well as linear response to humidity.216
 Fig. 14  Printed chemical sensors: (A) photograph of inkjet-printed rGO/Ag gas sensors, and (B) the corresponding response with respect to NO2 concentration and (C) selective response to various gases and humidity levels. Reproduced with permission.216 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (D) CMOS integration of inkjet-printed graphene/PVP polymer composites for humidity sensing, and (E) sensor response at different humidity (RH) levels. Inset: The microhotplate area with printed graphene/PVP polymer. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 

Fig. 14(D) shows a micrograph of a CMOS integrated graphene humidity sensor.22 The sensor was fabricated by inkjet printing a graphene–PVP sensing layer over the interdigitated electrode of the CMOS chip. The sensor exhibited resistance changes for relative humidity in 10–80%.22 The authors proposed that the response (i.e. resistance change) arose from the change in the graphene inter-flake percolative network in the swelling hygroscopic PVP upon exposure to humidity.22 This approach was the first to combine inkjet printing of 2d materials and the scalability of CMOS, foreseeing a prospect of seamless integration of printed 2d materials with existing silicon technologies for flexible and miniaturised 2d material based devices.


5.3.2 Temperature sensors. 
Temperature sensors are widely applied in research and industrial process monitoring, diagnostics, as well as in smart buildings, electrical or electronic products and thermal management.231,232 Recent research is experiencing a rapid growth in wearable temperature sensors that are capable of monitoring on-skin temperature which can provide insights into general wellbeing and physical activities.232,233 Composites of graphene and thermoelectrics, for instance, thermoelectric polymers (e.g. poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS))234,235 and 2d materials (e.g. Bi2Te3),236 are a promising material platform for printable temperature sensors.
However, to date, only limited developments have been seen in this field exploiting 2d materials. Fig. 15(A) is photograph of an inkjet-printed epidermal temperature sensor.194 The sensors were fabricated by inkjet printing graphene/PEDOT:PSS onto stretchable polyurethane substrate. As shown in Fig. 15(B), when in operation, the temperature sensors exhibited changes in resistance in the heating and cooling processes between 34–40 °C; the 90 percentile response time was 18 seconds, and the 90 percentile recovery time was 20 seconds.
 Fig. 15  Printed temperature and biosensors: (A) photograph of graphene/PEDOT:SS temperature sensors attached on to the skin, and (B) the corresponding response to temperature change. Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (C) Schematic of biosensors with SEM micrograph of the molecularly imprinted film (MIF) morphology on rGO-NH2 modified electrode, and (D) the corresponding device response. Reproduced with permission.230 Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


5.3.3 Biosensors. 
Biosensors can be described as integrated miniaturised devices employing biological recognition elements (e.g. enzymes, antibodies, oligonucleotides, receptor proteins, microorganisms or cells) as active sensing components.237 With an ever-increasing demand for miniaturised, smart healthcare systems, the field of biosensor technology demands advances in the underlying materials technology and engineering for high-level, novel biosensing performance.1,238 2d materials appear to be a promising carrier platform for the biological recognition elements, as pioneered by ref. 226 where CVD graphene carried antimicrobial peptides for in vitro bioselective detection of bacteria. The reports on printed 2d material biosensors, however, are very limited, with the majority of them are being based on rGO. This is due to the fact that rGO can be readily decorated with a wide variety of biological recognition elements.

Fig. 15(C) schematically shows a molecularly imprinted film (MIF) based biosensor for psychotropic compound detection, where MIF was synthesised by electro-polymerisation on rGO decorated electrodes.230 MIF is a widely applied process in biosensor fabrication where functional and cross-linking monomers are polymerised in the presence of a target imprint molecule that acts as a molecular template.239 This template can be then used to detect similar biological compounds.239 For sensor fabrication, rGO was functionalised with –NH2, and was subsequently dropcasted onto screen printed graphite electrodes. It was shown that the rGO–NH2 flakes were flat and that –NH2 were exposed, such that MIF could be synthesised on top. The inset shows the morphology of the synthesised MIF. As shown Fig. 15(D), the fabricated sensors based on methcathinone and cathinone MIFs exhibited a highly selective sensitivity for methcathinone and cathinone, respectively.230 Kong et al. later followed a similar strategy to demonstrate a blood glucose biosensor.240
Instead of making the use of biological recognition elements, hybrids of 2d materials and other functional materials (e.g. metals, metal oxides and quantum dots) are also emerging promising material platform.211,237,241 For instance, Zhang et al. demonstrated ultrasensitive non-enzymatic glucose sensors based on screen-printed rGO/copper oxide (CuO).211 The authors showed that the addition of rGO to CuO significantly improved the sensitivity to glucose.


5.3.4 Strain, pressure and touch sensors. 
Strain sensors, or strain gauges, are attractive for wide variety of applications, in particular, for stretchable, skin-mountable wearables.244,245 The strain sensors typically consist of a conductive pattern that is capable of producing a change in the electrical read-out upon geometric deformation.244,246,247 Although graphene has been widely reported in compact strain sensor fabrication as a standalone material248–250 or in form of composites (e.g. polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF)251 and nanocellulose252), reports on printed 2d material strain sensors remain scarce.
Casiraghi et al. recently reported an inkjet printed graphene strain sensor on paper.242 The schematic sensor configuration is in the inset of Fig. 16(A), showing that the sensors were composed of inkjet-printed conductive contacts and an active strain sensing line in between. As presented, the printed graphene strain sensors exhibited fast, prominent change in electrical resistance under tensile and compressive strains. The authors further employed the printed sensor in an electrical circuit as a variable resistance to tune the luminosity of an LED under tensile or compressive strains; Fig. 16(B–D).
 Fig. 16  Printed strain, pressure and touch sensors: (A) response of inkjet-printed graphene strain sensor (inset) upon tensile and compressive strains. (B) Schematic circuit employing the graphene strain sensor as a variable resistor under to (C) tensile and (D) compressive strains.242 (E) Haydale graphene pressure sensors demonstration, source – http://ieee.org.243 (F) Flexographic-printed graphene-based capacitive touchpads. 
Pressure and touch sensors can detect either physical pressure, physical contact or even proximity. They represent another interactive technology widely applied in consumer portable devices such as smart phones or touch pads. Pressure sensors can be created via structures where an active sensing layer is ‘sandwiched’ between contacts, or where the active sensing spots are connected to contacts, or a combination of both. Published reports on printed 2d material pressure and touch sensors are scarce. However, there have been a number of demonstrations of such devices by commercial entities. Fig. 16(E) shows a printed graphene thin film pressure sensing panel demonstrated by Haydale. In this panel design, printed graphene/binder composite was ‘sandwiched' between a printed electrode matrix, such that the matrix could detect resistance changes of the graphene/binder composite upon pressure and indicate the location of touch.
The flexographic-printed graphene based circuits as presented in Fig. 11(E and F) were designed for the demonstration of large scale production of capacitive touch surfaces for interactive devices. In the example shown in Fig. 16(F), the touch surface was attached to a PCB board programmed to process the received capacitive changes from the touch panel upon touch, and hence to trigger a sound output through a speaker. This technology works through by detecting capacitive changes, and therefore the active surface area (printed graphene) may also be laminated behind thin paper or plastic substrates, enabling the development of a wide variety of interactive surface applications ranging from wireless keyboards and pianos to educational posters.

5.4 Printed energy storage
The applications for energy storage technology range from portable electronic devices, industrial manufacturing, to next generation wearable electronics and vehicles.253,254 Batteries and supercapacitors are the most common forms of energy storage devices for such applications. A battery relies on electrochemical reactions at the electrodes to deliver energy.253,255 A supercapacitor (i.e. electric double-layer capacitor), however, utilises a double-layer effect on the electrodes to store electrical energy.77,256 Achieving highly efficient and dense energy storage therefore requires optimal underlying electrode materials technology and engineering.77,255–258
2d materials with high specific surface area are emerging as a promising material platform for novel, high performance electrode materials.3,33,52,77,259 It has been proposed that graphene electrodes can lead to a decrease in electrode thickness while an increase in electrode-to-electrolyte contact, which when combined with good electrical conductivity, offers better performance than current electrode material technologies.77,260 Indeed, there are already many successful demonstrations with solution-processed graphene78,261,262 and other 2d materials such as MoS2263,264 and in particular, MXenes.118,265–268 Although the current progress is mostly focused on printed supercapacitors, such solution based electrode fabrication for energy storage technologies can potentially be adapted to printing for high-speed, low-cost device manufacturing of both batteries and supercapacitors.
Inkjet printing has been used as a high-precision deposition method for the fabrication of such electrodes. For example, Le et al. reported graphene supercapacitors using inkjet-printed and subsequently thermally reduced GO electrodes.269 More recently, Hyun et al. demonstrated all-printed micro-supercapacitors that employed inkjet-printed graphene electrodes.218 As schematically shown in Fig. 17(A), the micro-supercapacitors were fabricated in three steps: an imprinted ink receiver was firstly prepared; a graphene/ethyl cellulose ink was then inkjet-printed to pattern the electrodes, followed by binder decomposition through photonic annealing; electrolyte was then deposited by inkjet printing. Fig. 17(B) shows a photograph of an array of the inkjet-printed micro-supercapacitors. As presented in Fig. 17(C), the average specific capacitance of this micro-supercapacitor array was ∼221 ± 16 μF cm−2 at a cyclic voltammetry scan rate of 100 mV s−1, demonstrating a device performance variation of <10%. In addition, this micro-supercapacitor array exhibited good mechanical durability, withstanding over 1000 bending cycles; Fig. 17(D). Although the amount of active materials that can be deposited using inkjet printing technology is limited due to ink formulation requirements, it is still a viable technology platform for the manufacturing of flexible, miniaturised, on-chip energy storage, in particular, for fully integrated and wearable devices.
 Fig. 17  Printed energy storage using 2d materials: (A) schematic of the fabrication process for inkjet-printed graphene supercapacitors. (B) Photograph of an array of graphene supercapacitors on PET, and the corresponding (C) histogram of the specific capacitance and (D) typical relative specific capacitance over 1000 charge/discharge cycles at a scan rate of 1000 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission.218 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Besides inkjet printing, there are also demonstrations of energy storage using other printing processes. For example, Hyun et al. reported supercapacitors based on screen-printed graphene/PANI electrodes.16 Abdelkader et al. demonstrated screen-printed graphene supercapacitors on textiles for wearable electronics applications.273
Beyond these conventional printing processes, recent advances on printable 2d material energy storage show 3D printing is a promising approach. Fig. 18(A) schematically illustrates a 3D printing process, whereby the ‘inks’ (typically in the form of plastic filaments such as polycarbonate (PC), acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) and polylactic acid (PLA)) are extruded and deposited layer-by-layer onto the build platform.
 Fig. 18  3D printing of 2d materials: (A) simplified schematic of 3D printing using fused deposition modelling. (B) Top-view (one layer) and side-view (three layer) photographs of 3D-printed graphene patterns, and the SEM micrographs of the printed graphene and printed graphene/CNTs hybrid for supercapacitors. Reproduced with permission.270 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (C) Schematic of the fabrication process of 3D-printed GO/graphene supercapacitors. Reproduced with permission.271 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (D) Photographs of 3D-printed graphene based batteries and supercapacitors from printed filaments. Reproduced with permission.217 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (E) 3D-printed graphene scaffolds for electronic and biomedical applications. Reproduced with permission.272 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
For 3D printing of 2d materials, however, this ‘direct-ink’ writing typically requires in situ formulation, gelation and curing of the inks, negating the relative throughput advantages that 3D printing brings. For example, García-Tuñon et al. developed an aqueous GO ink using a branched copolymer surfactant for 3D printing.274 This approach allowed the ink to form self-supporting 3D structures after deposition. The printed 3D structures were then frozen in liquid nitrogen and subsequently freeze-dried for thermal reduction of GO. Alternatively, instead of using surfactants, Lin et al. developed a graphene aerogel through room temperature freeze gelation of graphene dispersions in phenol (C6H6O) or camphene (C10H16).270 This approach allowed self-solidified structures at room temperature after jetting, as shown in Fig. 18(B). The 3D printed structures could be removed from the solvents through sublimation at room temperature. The authors demonstrated that the 3D printed structures could be employed as electrodes for supercapacitors, delivering a specific capacitance of ∼75 F g−1 at a current density of 100 A g−1.270 By using 3D printed graphene/CNTs, the authors showed that the specific capacitance could be improved to ∼100 F g−1.270 Zhu et al. also demonstrated 3D printing of a GO/graphene aerogel for the development of supercapacitor electrodes;271Fig. 18(C).
Besides supercapacitors, Sun et al. demonstrated 3D printed Li-ion batteries using lithium-based inks Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) and LiFePO4 (LFP) The authors jetted the ink from a syringe-like nozzle and subsequently cured it via annealing.275 Similarly, Fu et al. demonstrated 3D printed cathode and anode for batteries from GO/LTO and GO/LFP inks which were later converted to rGO by annealing.276
It was only recently in 2017 that Foster et al. first demonstrated 3D printed energy storage devices using commercial graphene/PLA filament.217 As shown in Fig. 18(D), the authors printed graphene/PLA discs from the filament, and demonstrated that the discs could be employed as the anode of Li-ion batteries and could sandwich solid electrolyte for solid-state supercapacitor fabrication.217 The authors also demonstrated that the 3D printed graphene/PLA could find uses in hydrogen evolution reaction and fuel cells. This 3D printing process of filaments required no additional treatment and as such, provided an effective proof-of-concept for a true 3D-printed, 2d material based energy application.
We note that in addition to energy storage, 3D printing of graphene is also of special interest for other application areas. For example, Jakus et al. demonstrated a graphene/polylactide-co-glycolide (PLG) ink that could be printed to develop robust, flexible graphene scaffolds;272Fig. 18(E). Through in vitro experiments, the authors demonstrated that the graphene scaffolds could support human mesenchymal stem cell adhesion, viability, proliferation, and neurogenic differentiation with significant upregulation of glial and neuronal genes.272 3D printing of graphene and other 2d materials therefore promises an attractive pathway towards miniaturised and customised device prototyping for energy, sensing and biomedical applications.272
Beyond the aforementioned conventional energy applications in supercapacitors and batteries, 2d materials are also promising for thermoelectric energy conversion. Recently, Juntunen et al. reported inkjet-printed large-scale graphene thermoelectric devices.92 The devices were intrinsically inkjet-printed disordered nanoporous all-graphene structures. The authors demonstrated a room-temperature thermoelectric power factor of 18.7 μW m−1 K−2, a three-fold improvement to previous solution-processed all-graphene structures. This potentially foresees future flexible, scalable and low-cost thermoelectric applications, such as harvesting energy from body heat in wearable applications.92
6 Conclusion and perspectives
6.1 Conclusion
This review summarises the current position of 2d material inks and printing. Since the first demonstration of printed graphene electronics, this field has witnessed four major advances: the functional material set has evolved from graphene alone to a wider range of available 2d materials; 2d material inks have advanced from simple solution-processed dispersions into formulated inks adapted for specific print processes; the exploitable printing technologies have expanded from inkjet printing to a broader printing platform (including screen, gravure and flexographic, as well as 3D printing) offering faster production speeds and more complex device structures; the investigated applications have extended to several major technology areas, including optoelectronics, photonics, sensors and energy storage. Taken together, these represent significant advances for the scope of 2d material inks, and associated printing, as a promising platform for a next generation of disruptive technologies.
Despite these advances, there are huge opportunities to improve the reliability and performance of the applications discussed above. It is necessary to scale-up from laboratory demonstrations to device manufacturing ready for real-world applications. Realising this requires significant improvements towards the development of application-specific ‘ideal inks’ through the underlying materials processing and engineering, and ink formulations. Though notable progress has been made in the past decade, there is still much to be done on solution processing to improve the exfoliation efficiency, to raise the production yield and reduce the production cost, and to better sort the exfoliated flakes.3 Indeed, it is important to achieve high production yield of mono-layers with mono-dispersed, precisely controlled flake size and thickness, to ensure the formulated ink delivers access to full-potential, mono-dispersed material properties of the 2d materials. On this basis, optimising the ink formulations to achieve ideal fluidic properties, drying dynamics and ink-substrate interactions, and fundamental research into binders, solvent and additive compatibility are of critical importance. In general, an ideal ink relies on an optimal selection of solvents, binders and additives, where the ink compositions (i.e. the 2d materials, the solvents, the binders and the additives) are formulated in a ‘sweet spot’ such that the ink renders optimal ink physical properties for the specific desired printing technology, that the ink can appropriately wet the targeted substrates, that the deposited 2d materials can adhere onto the substrates with high mechanical durability, and that the use of binders and the additives leads to minimal compromisation of the functionalities of the 2d materials for the applications. However, in some cases such as in (opto)electronics and heterostructure devices applications at the current development stages where such optimal ink composition selection and ‘sweet spot’ of the functional ink compositions have not been established, an ideal ink should be free from any impurities including the binders as the impurities can significantly degrade the device performance. Even with this ideal ink, to harness the full potential of 2d materials in applications, optimal device designs are also essential for high-level device performance, and expansion of the currently demonstrated applications. It will also be of a great interest to combine 2d material ink formulations with other functional materials, such as biomolecules, 0d and 2d perovskites and 1d nanowires/nanotubes such as CNTs, for more flexible material selection and device design.
6.2 Research landscape

6.2.1 Inkjet inks. 
In this review, we have shown that digital inkjet printing process has thus far been the most prevalently used method in printable 2d material devices and applications. However, the demonstrated 2d material inkjet inks commonly face mechanical failures. Flexibility in general is not a problem as the inks take the form of the substrates they are deposited on. Instead, adhesion to the substrates can pose a significant challenge, for instance when fabricating (opto)electronic devices. This is due to the inability to use polymeric binders in ink formulation as they limit the overall functionalities of the 2d materials. Therefore, a strong barrier to the widespread use of 2d material inks is the development of compatible binder systems for such applications, i.e. binders that do not significantly compromise the device performance. Despite this, the current binder-free inks can still find interesting applications in laboratory-scale device demonstrations.
It is also crucial to scale-up the printing, i.e. developing inks in a way that enables efficient, large-scale printing with excellent device-to-device uniformity. Though insights from printed organic transistors could be useful, the nature of ‘nanoparticle based’ 2d material inks may require a fundamentally different approach when such large-scale printability is envisaged. At present, this is perhaps the most important challenge in this field. A large part of this challenge is dependent on the ability to maintain stable jetting, deposition and drying phases of the inkjet inks throughout the entire process in an industrial printing environment. As discussed, strategies such as inducing controlled Marangoni flow, ensuring good wetting of the substrates and retaining a good viscosity control will need to be adopted in a comprehensive manner to enable this degree of process control.
Conductive inks offer a major opportunity for 2d material inkjet inks in the near future. However, such inks utilising graphene as the main functional material have not been able to achieve the electrical conductivity levels of the current incumbent, metal inks. This limits the full potential of graphene conductive inks. As already discussed, a key solution to overcome this is to improve the inter-flake percolation. Some work has been done in this regard, for instance by employing a photonic annealing process for binder decomposition,88 or by optimising binder selection in ink formulation.23 Nevertheless, the ultimate goal of graphene conductive inks is to be capable of replacing expensive metal inks fully in printed circuits. Metallic MXenes could be another potential alternative for the formulation of highly conductive inks.
For other applications such as optoelectronics, photonics, sensors and energy storage, as with conductive inks, large-scale printability, device-to-device repeatability, the inter-flake percolation and connectivity remain critical as these can result in poor or inconsistent device performance. Fabrication of inkjet-printed 2d material based miniaturised on-chip photonic devices on bulk semiconductors such as high speed modulators and photonic integrated circuits represents a potentially scalable and attractive functional device platform. However, for high-speed and ION/IOFF devices, such as those required for electronics and optoelectronics, it is unlikely that the current 2d material inkjet inks will be used in isolation for industrial scale manufacturing in the near future. It is more likely that the inks for these applications will be exploited with other functional materials (e.g. semiconducting polymers,194 perovskites, metal oxides and biomolecules230 for sensing applications), in hybrid/heterostructure devices (e.g. graphene–silicon Schottky devices12), or on bulk semiconductor based technology platform (e.g. for photonic integrated circuits or CMOS sensors22,277). Among other materials, in addition to conductive inks, MXenes can potentially be used for many of these applications, including in energy storage, optoelectronics and sensing.


6.2.2 Screen, gravure and flexographic inks. 
Compared to inkjet printing, screen, gravure and flexographic printing processes are not yet highly developed and widely reported. This is largely due to the high loading of 2d materials and the typical ink volume required during prototyping when compared with inkjet printing where minimal solution-processed dispersions can be used directly. As such, only graphene has been widely demonstrated in screen, gravure and flexographic inks; Table 4.
The primary goal for screen inks is to develop conductive inks that will be of lower cost than metal inks and yet offer higher electrical conductivity than carbon conductive inks. At present, graphene conductive screen inks have already surpassed the carbon inks by a great deal (up to ∼96% reduction in electrical resistance). However, as with inkjet, these inks are also behind the metal inks, limiting their full potential. This is especially true for applications requiring high electrical conductivity, for example, electrodes and interconnects in printed electronics where the electrical conductivity of state-of-the-art printed graphene is orders of magnitude below acceptable values. There have been a few approaches adopted to enhance the electrical conductivity, for example by passing the printed substrates between two high pressure rollers to force better percolation and higher packing density within the printed structures. Conventional sintering via high temperature annealing in polymeric binder decomposition, as proposed in inkjet printing, is unlikely to be an option due to the higher requirement for adhesion to the substrates. Alternatively, the electrical conductivity could be potentially further improved by using chemical dopants that can co-exist with the binder and other compositions in the screen printable ink system and can remain stable over prolonged period. However, such strategies are yet to be fully developed.
Though there are very limited 2d material inks demonstrated for gravure and flexographic printing processes due to the high prototyping costs, these methods offer significantly lower costs at volume production. At present, only graphene inks have been demonstrated on these systems with the highest reported conductivities at ∼10000 S m−1 and with printed resolutions as fine as ∼20 μm.21 However, we note that while this printed resolution has been demonstrated at the lab scale, such fine resolution is unlikely to be adopted in a commercial setting where the smallest consistent line widths printed over thousands and even millions of prints are ∼100 μm. Much work is therefore required for 2d material gravure and flexographic inks, in terms of ink formulation, electrical performance and the control of print parameters.
Compared to graphene, printing of other 2d materials such as h-BN, mica and MXenes is relatively nascent. Research in h-BN for screen printing113 is at a very early stage. It is unlikely to achieve a high dielectric value because of the inherently low dielectric constant of h-BN itself. However, h-BN can be combined with the current generation of polymeric binders to significantly increase their dielectric properties in devices that require capacitive structures (e.g. RFID applications). Such strategies could also improve thermal conductivity of the polymeric binders in the printed structures. Other 2d materials such as mica can be used to make printable dielectric inks, following a strategy similar to the h-BN inks.113


6.2.3 Future research directions. 
In the short and near term, the advantages offered by printing technologies, such as controlled additive patterning, thin-form factors and mechanical flexibility, may enable improved device performance and even new technologies and applications. Seamless integration of printed 2d materials with the existing CMOS electronics, optoelectronics and sensing technologies and even integrated circuits may also be possible. Early, rudimentary examples have been demonstrated. Such technologies may also involve incorporation of other functional materials such that multiple concurrent functions are realised, leading to the development of ‘multifunctional' inks.
In the longer term, this fusion of technologies, materials platform and functionality would lead to manufacturing flexibility, high-level integration and miniaturisation for 2d material based printable electronics, sensing and interactive devices. This will require precisely controlled, additive patterning of multiple 2d materials and other functional materials over large areas and/or for thousands of devices with tight manufacturing tolerance, and could potentially lead to the development of all-printed, complex device structures (e.g. heterostructures) for unprecedented new applications in light detection and imaging, energy storage, interactive touch surfaces, wearable sensors, RFID tags and even artificial skins.

6.3 Economic landscape

6.3.1 Functional printing industry. 
The printing industry is a market estimated to be worth USD $124 billion by 2020.278 Although still in the early stages of adoption when compared to the wider print industry, there is a growing interest in incorporating functional materials including the 2d materials as active pigments for functional ink formulation and printing. Demand for such functional printing has been driven by the increased miniaturisation, technological advancements and portability needs of electronic products in different sectors such as telecommunications, packaging, automotive and medicine.5,279
Examples of devices produced using printing include inkjet-printed smart packaging systems,280 gravure-printed wireless power transmitters281 and flexographic-printed paper-based chipless RFID tags.282 The prospective growth of cost efficient functional printing is hallmarked by the evolution of printing technologies from rigid to flexible substrates, printing from cm2 to m2 structures and gradually moving from sheet or batch printing to R2R production.283 These advances point to a growth in the functional printing market that is estimated to be worth USD $13.79 billion worldwide by 2020.284
Beyond printing, 2d material dispersions and the formulated inks can also be used for functional coating.285 For instance, Karim et al. reported graphene coated textiles, ‘E-textiles’, for wearable electronics;245 Zhang et al. demonstrated stamping of water-based MXene dispersions on paper for flexible, coplanar micro-supercapacitors.115 Functional coating represents a subset of coating that renders specific properties for applications.286,287 These properties may be diverse, with typical examples that are self-cleaning,288 easy to clean (anti-graffiti),289 anti-fouling,290 soft feel,291 antibacterial,292 or smart (e.g. responding to external stimuli). At present, functional coating is prevalent in home furniture, cars, laptops, mobile phones and solar panels, and in more advanced applications such as medical devices and orthopedic implants, invisible paints and even radars and satellites.293 More recently, there is a strong emphasis on the development of smart coating for corrosion protection in different technological applications, especially in infrastructure.293


6.3.2 2d material printing industry. 
Current research and market on 2d material functional inks have been firmly focussed on graphene. In 2015, the Global Market for Graphene report by Technavio conservatively estimated the market size for all graphene-related industries (including manufacturing and applications) to be worth USD $24.5 million. By 2020 the market is expected to be worth USD $126 million, with a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 66.4%.294 Note that these estimations may vary widely between market reports, depending on the market research methods employed by analysts. These projections point towards a highly bullish graphene market with a great expectation for growth, largely due to increasingly competitive research and development efforts from leading universities and large corporations as patents mature into end-user applications.
Of the many applications for graphene and its precursors for graphene inks, analysis from the Beige Group predicts that printing and coating are likely to offer the most significant growth; Fig. 19(A).295 These include applications in electronics and semiconductors, energy storage, healthcare, photovoltaics and filtration. This understandably has led to the projected trend seen in Fig. 19(B). The value of graphene in printing and coating applications has been estimated to be USD $4.2 million in 2015. By 2021, predictions point towards an increase to USD $34.6 million, growing at a CAGR of 47.1%. The growth of the graphene inks and printing industry is largely due to the discovery of new uses for graphene and related 2d materials as functional additives, such as the incorporation of graphene oxide into inks and coatings to add anti-corrosive and anti-scuff properties and in membranes for water filtration and desalination.294
 Fig. 19  (A) Projected growth of graphene inks, printing and coating in relation to other graphene applications through 2021. (B) Projected growth in graphene inks, printing and coating market through 2021. Data collected from ref. 295. 
Globally, the Asia-Pacific region is the largest and the fastest growing graphene market, and also the single-largest supplier of graphene nanoplatelets.294 The growth of the graphene industry in Europe at present is driven largely by research and development activities and funding for research. For instance, the European Union is funding Euro 1 billion over a span of 10 years since 2011 in the Graphene Flagship program, to understand and promote graphene and related 2d materials. Market analysis values show that the graphene market in North America was USD $8.75 million in 2016 with an ambitious prediction of USD $38.5 million by 2020, growing at a CAGR of 38.75%. Technavio also predicts that the market in North America will be mainly driven by the electrical and electronics industries. The market is led by research and development in graphene-related fields in the universities, spin-off companies from university and large national laboratories in the United States. It is likely that the other 2d materials will fuel this growth in the near future as the technologies and applications enabled by them are further developed and matured.


6.3.3 Development stages. 
To conclude this review, we present the various applications of 2d material inks according to their individual stages and, if successful, our conservatively estimated timeline for full-scale commercialisation; Fig. 20. The key applications range from functional coating (e.g. paints, barriers and filtration) to printable applications (e.g. (opto)electronics and photonics, sensors, and energy storage). The present extent of commercialisation varies widely across the stages with most of these technologies sitting at the proof-of-concept prototyping or early-stage commercial sale/semi-commercial trial stages. Promising applications that are likely to achieve early market penetration first are the fields of smart packaging, interconnects, sensors, RFID tags, composites, coating, and electromagnetic interference shielding. There is a growing increase in the global demand for electronic smart packaging devices (e-packaging). In early 2012, MeadWestvaco launched printable security tags by flexographic printing of graphene ink developed by Vorbeck. Companies such as Bemis Company, Thin Film Electronics ASA, as well as start-up company Mevia are developing printable packaging interconnects, RFID tags, sensors or a combination of these for various application fields. FADEL and Momodesign, through collaboration with research institutes and organisations, are also incorporating graphene based composites and coating into shoes and helmets.
 Fig. 20  Current stage of development of inks, solution processed coating and composites of 2d materials, and their estimated timeline for commercialisation. 
The European Graphene Flagship postulated that the current and near future market for 2d materials will be largely driven by production strategies for these materials.1 One of the main goals for the 2d material industry is therefore to achieve scalable, cost-effective material production. Indeed, products for research and development of 2d materials currently form the largest portion of the market in the industry. Companies such as Haydale, Perpetuus Advanced Materials, Graphitene, Graphenea, Cambridge Nanosystems, Talga Resources and Thomas Swan & Co. are typical examples that specialise in source material production of 2d materials (typically in the form of nanoplatelets and powders) and target towards academia and industrial R&D. Current progress is now approaching a point where the production cost is reasonably low and consistent. Commercialisation efforts have recently begun the shift to scaled-up production towards real-world applications. In particular, producers are waking up to the fact that one of the best ways to maximise their market share is to demonstrate and develop applications for their products, rather than relying on the market pull of graphene alone. Recent years have therefore seen increasing numbers of partnerships between producers and end users to deliver more practical applications for the materials. Printing remains a promising strategy for large-scale, low-cost manufacturing of application driven devices. Based on the level of interest in printable 2d material applications, the adaptation of 2d material printing technology to end-user applications will likely be pursued and refined over at least the next decade. Overall, the commercial prospects for this approach are extremely bright, representing one of the main ways, if not the key way to achieve mass-market, scalable and practical applications.

Author contributions
GH, JK, LWTN and XZ prepared the figures. All authors wrote and commented on the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The technology developed jointly by University of Cambridge and Novalia in ref. 20 is currently being commercialised by Cambridge Enterprise. Authors GH, LN, RCTH, CJ and TH declare commercial interest in this technology. One of the authors (CJ) is employed by Novalia and is affiliated with the Hybrid Nanomaterials Engineering Group at the Cambridge Graphene Centre. All other authors report no conflicts of interest relevant to this article.
Acknowledgements
We thank Z. Sun, Z. Yang, M. Zhang for useful discussions. RCTH acknowledges support from EP/G037221/1, XZ from EP/L016087/1, JK and MCH from the National Science Foundation (DMR-1505849), TH from Royal Academy of Engineering, and CJ from the Graphene Flagship.
References
A. C. Ferrari, F. Bonaccorso, V. Fal'ko, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roche, P. Bøggild, S. Borini, F. H. L. Koppens, V. Palermo, N. Pugno, J. A. Garrido, R. Sordan, A. Bianco, L. Ballerini, M. Prato, E. Lidorikis, J. Kivioja, C. Marinelli, T. Ryhänen, A. Morpurgo, J. N. Coleman, V. Nicolosi, L. Colombo, A. Fert, M. Garcia-Hernandez, A. Bachtold, G. F. Schneider, F. Guinea, C. Dekker, M. Barbone, Z. Sun, C. Galiotis, A. N. Grigorenko, G. Konstantatos, A. Kis, M. Katsnelson, L. Vandersypen, A. Loiseau, V. Morandi, D. Neumaier, E. Treossi, V. Pellegrini, M. Polini, A. Tredicucci, G. M. Williams, B. H. Hong, J.-H. Ahn, J. M. Kim, H. Zirath, B. J. van Wees, H. van der Zant, L. Occhipinti, A. Di Matteo, I. A. Kinloch, T. Seyller, E. Quesnel, X. Feng, K. Teo, N. Rupesinghe, P. Hakonen, S. R. T. Neil, Q. Tannock, T. Löfwander and J. Kinaret, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4598–4810 RSC .

          L. W. T. Ng, G. Hu, R. C. T. Howe, X. Zhu, Z. Yang, C. Jones and T. Hasan, Functional inks and printing of graphene and related 2D materials: Technology, formulation and applications, Springer, New York, US,  2018, in press Search PubMed .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1226419 CrossRef .
J. Kang, V. K. Sangwan, J. D. Wood and M. C. Hersam, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 943–951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Z. Cui, Printed electronics: Materials, technologies and applications, John Wiley & Sons Singapore Pte. Ltd, Singapore, 1st edn,  2016, p. 360 Search PubMed .
R. C. T. Howe, G. Hu, Z. Yang and T. Hasan, SPIE Nanosci. Eng., 2015, 95530R Search PubMed .
F. Torrisi, T. Hasan, W. Wu, Z. Sun, A. Lombardo, T. S. Kulmala, G.-W. Hsieh, S. Jung, F. Bonaccorso, P. J. Paul, D. Chu and A. C. Ferrari, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2992–3006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Finn, M. Lotya, G. Cunningham, R. J. Smith, D. McCloskey, J. F. Donegan and J. N. Coleman, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 925–932 RSC .
F. Withers, H. Yang, L. Britnell, A. P. Rooney, E. Lewis, A. Felten, C. R. Woods, V. Sanchez Romaguera, T. Georgiou, A. Eckmann, Y. J. Kim, S. G. Yeates, S. J. Haigh, A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov and C. Casiraghi, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3987–3992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Kelly, T. Hallam, C. Backes, A. Harvey, A. S. Esmaeily, I. Godwin, J. Coelho, V. Nicolosi, J. Lauth, A. Kulkarni, S. Kinge, L. D. A. Siebbeles, G. S. Duesberg and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2017, 356, 69–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. McManus, S. Vranic, F. Withers, V. Sanchez-Romaguera, M. Macucci, H. Yang, R. Sorrentino, K. Parvez, S.-K. Son, G. Iannaccone, K. Kostarelos, G. Fiori and C. Casiraghi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 343–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hu, T. Albrow-Owen, X. Jin, A. Ali, Y. Hu, R. C. T. Howe, K. Shehzad, Z. Yang, X. Zhu, R. I. Woodward, T.-C. Wu, H. Jussila, J.-B. Wu, P. Peng, P.-H. Tan, Z. Sun, E. J. R. Kelleher, M. Zhang, Y. Xu and T. Hasan, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 278 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Bianchi, T. Carey, L. Viti, L. Li, E. H. Linfield, A. G. Davies, A. Tredicucci, D. Yoon, P. G. Karagiannidis, L. Lombardi, F. Tomarchio, A. C. Ferrari, F. Torrisi and M. S. Vitiello, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. B. Secor, P. L. Prabhumirashi, K. Puntambekar, M. L. Geier and M. C. Hersam, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1347–1351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, M. G. Schwab, A. J. Strudwick, I. Hennig, X. Feng, Z. Wu and K. Müllen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1035–1040 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Hyun, E. B. Secor, M. C. Hersam, C. D. Frisbie and L. F. Francis, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 109–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Arapov, E. Rubingh, R. Abbel, J. Laven, G. de With and H. Friedrich, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 586–593 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Karagiannidis, S. A. Hodge, L. Lombardi, F. Tomarchio, N. Decorde, S. Milana, I. Goykhman, Y. Su, S. V. Mesite, D. N. Johnstone, R. K. Leary, P. A. Midgley, N. M. Pugno, F. Torrisi and A. C. Ferrari, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2742–2755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Baker, D. Deganello, D. T. Gethin and T. M. Watson, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2014, 18, 86–90 CrossRef CAS .

New graphene based inks for high-speed manufacturing of printed electronics
          , University of Cambridge. Available at: http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/new-graphene-based-inks-for-high-speed-manufacturing-of-printed-electronics (accessed: 19/10/2015).
E. B. Secor, S. Lim, H. Zhang, C. D. Frisbie, L. F. Francis and M. C. Hersam, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4533–4538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Santra, G. Hu, R. C. T. Howe, A. De Luca, S. Z. Ali, F. Udrea, J. W. Gardner, S. K. Ray, P. K. Guha and T. Hasan, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. B. Secor, T. Z. Gao, A. E. Islam, R. Rao, S. G. Wallace, J. Zhu, K. W. Putz, B. Maruyama and M. C. Hersam, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2332–2340 CrossRef CAS .
T. Carey, S. Cacovich, G. Divitini, J. Ren, A. Mansouri, J. M. Kim, C. Wang, C. Ducati, R. Sordan and F. Torrisi, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1202 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Dodoo-Arhin, R. C. T. Howe, G. Hu, Y. Zhang, P. Hiralal, A. Bello, G. Amaratunga and T. Hasan, Carbon, 2016, 105, 33–41 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Garašanin, in Cambridge Anc. Hist., ed. J. Boardman, I. E. S. Edwards, N. G. L. Hammond and E. Sollberger, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  1982, pp. 136–162 Search PubMed .
R. Mas-Ballesté, C. Gómez-Navarro, J. Gómez-Herrero and F. Zamora, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 20–30 RSC .
P. R. Wallace, Phys. Rev., 1947, 71, 622–634 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. McClure, Phys. Rev., 1956, 104, 666–671 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Slonczewski and P. R. Weiss, Phys. Rev., 1958, 109, 272–279 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Bodenmann and A. H. MacDonald, Phys. Today, 2007, 60, 35–41 CrossRef .
M. Xu, T. Liang, M. Shi and H. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3766–3798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lipp, K. Schwetz and K. Hunold, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 1989, 5, 3–9 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Frindt and A. D. Yoffe, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1963, 273, 69–83 CrossRef .
P. Joensen, R. Frindt and S. Morrison, Mater. Res. Bull., 1986, 21, 457–461 CrossRef CAS .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. W. Bridgman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1914, 36, 1344–1363 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kang, S. A. Wells, J. D. Wood, J.-H. Lee, X. Liu, C. R. Ryder, J. Zhu, J. R. Guest, C. A. Husko and M. C. Hersam, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 13, 11688–11693 CrossRef PubMed .
J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, D. Jariwala, K.-S. Chen, E. Cho, V. K. Sangwan, X. Liu, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6964–6970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Artel, Q. Guo, H. Cohen, R. Gasper, A. Ramasubramaniam, F. Xia and D. Naveh, NPJ 2D Mater. Appl., 2017, 1, 6 CrossRef .
J. Kang, J. Wood, S. Wells, J.-H. Lee, X. Liu, K.-S. Chen and M. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3596–3604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-F. Jiang, Q. Weng, X.-B. Wang, X. Li, J. Zhang, D. Golberg and Y. Bando, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2015, 31, 589–598 Search PubMed .
L. Liu, Y. P. Feng and Z. X. Shen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 104102 CrossRef .
I. Jo, M. T. Pettes, J. Kim, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, Z. Yao and L. Shi, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 550–554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liem and H. Choy, Solid State Commun., 2013, 163, 41–45 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim, K. L. Shepard and J. Hone, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, Y. Xie, M. Beidaghi, J. Lu, B. C. Hosler, L. Hultman, P. R. C. Kent, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9507–9516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
E. Carroll, D. Buckley, N. V. V. Mogili, D. McNulty, M. S. Moreno, C. Glynn, G. Collins, J. D. Holmes, K. M. Razeeb and C. O'Dwyer, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7390–7400 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zheng, T. Xie, Y. Zhou, Y. L. Chen, W. Jiang, S. Zhao, J. Wu, Y. Jing, Y. Wu, G. Chen, Y. Guo, J. Yin, S. Huang, H. Q. Xu, Z. Liu and H. Peng, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. D. Das and N. Soundararajan, J. Appl. Phys., 1989, 65, 2332–2341 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Mishra, S. Satpathy and O. Jepsen, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1997, 9, 461–470 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Jacobs-Gedrim, M. Shanmugam, N. Jain, C. A. Durcan, M. T. Murphy, T. M. Murray, R. J. Matyi, R. L. Moore and B. Yu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 514–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Bandurin, A. V. Tyurnina, G. L. Yu, A. Mishchenko, V. Zólyomi, S. V. Morozov, R. K. Kumar, R. V. Gorbachev, Z. R. Kudrynskyi, S. Pezzini, Z. D. Kovalyuk, U. Zeitler, K. S. Novoselov, A. Patanè, L. Eaves, I. V. Grigorieva, V. I. Fal'ko, A. K. Geim and Y. Cao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 223–227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghosh, P. D. Patil, M. Wasala, S. Lei, A. Nolander, P. Sivakumar, R. Vajtai, P. Ajayan and S. Talapatra, 2D Mater., 2017, 5, 015001 CrossRef .
J. O. Island, S. I. Blanter, M. Buscema, H. S. J. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7853–7858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611–622 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109–162 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schwierz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 487–496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Splendiani, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, T. Li, J. Kim, C.-Y. Chim, G. Galli and F. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1271–1275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Sundaram, M. Engel, A. Lombardo, R. Krupke, A. C. Ferrari, P. Avouris and M. Steiner, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1416–1421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Youngblood, C. Chen, S. J. Koester and M. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 247 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xia, H. Wang, D. Xiao, M. Dubey and A. Ramasubramaniam, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 899–907 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, T. Hasan, F. Torrisi, D. Popa, G. Privitera, F. Wang, F. Bonaccorso, D. M. Basko and A. C. Ferrari, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 803–810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. T. Howe, R. I. Woodward, G. Hu, Z. Yang, E. J. R. Kelleher and T. Hasan, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2016, 253, 911–917 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hui, C. Pan, Y. Shi, Y. Ji, E. Grustan-Gutierrez and M. Lanza, Microelectron. Eng., 2016, 163, 119–133 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Li, E. J. G. Santos, T. Xing, E. Cappelluti, R. Roldán, Y. Chen, K. Watanabe and T. Taniguchi, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 218–223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ramanathan, A. A. Abdala, S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, M. Herrera-Alonso, R. D. Piner, D. H. Adamson, H. C. Schniepp, X. Chen, R. S. Ruoff, S. T. Nguyen, I. A. Aksay, R. K. Prud'Homme and L. C. Brinson, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 327–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, L. Chen, M. R. Gadinski, S. Zhang, G. Zhang, H. Li, A. Haque, L.-Q. Chen, T. Jackson and Q. Wang, Nature, 2015, 523, 576–579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Peigney, C. Laurent, E. Flahaut, R. Bacsa and A. Rousset, Carbon, 2001, 39, 507–514 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, M. F. El-Kady, L. J. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Wang, M. F. Mousavi and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3639–3665 RSC .
T. Liu, M. Leskes, W. Yu, A. J. Moore, L. Zhou, P. M. Bayley, G. Kim and C. P. Grey, Science, 2015, 350, 530–533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, A. Lombardo, T. Hasan, Z. Sun, L. Colombo and A. C. Ferrari, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 564–589 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Fal'ko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'Ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, M. Fang, F. Wu, H. Wu, L. Wang and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5817 RSC .
K. R. Paton, E. Varrla, C. Backes, R. J. Smith, U. Khan, A. O'Neill, C. Boland, M. Lotya, O. M. Istrate, P. King, T. Higgins, S. Barwich, P. May, P. Puczkarski, I. Ahmed, M. Moebius, H. Pettersson, E. Long, J. Coelho, S. E. O'Brien, E. K. McGuire, B. M. Sanchez, G. S. Duesberg, N. McEvoy, T. J. Pennycook, C. Downing, A. Crossley, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 624–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, G. Zhang, X. Bai, X. Sun, X. Wang, E. Wang and H. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 538–542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Valles, C. Drummond, H. Saadaoui, C. A. Furtado, M. He, O. Roubeau, L. Ortolani, M. Monthioux and A. Penicaud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15802–15804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Secor, B. Y. Ahn, T. Z. Gao, J. A. Lewis and M. C. Hersam, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6683–6688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, F. Ye, S. Vaziri, M. Muhammed, M. C. Lemme and M. Östling, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3985–3992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hasan, F. Torrisi, Z. Sun, D. Popa, V. Nicolosi, G. Privitera, F. Bonaccorso and A. C. Ferrari, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2010, 247, 2953–2957 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Juntunen, H. Jussila, M. Ruoho, S. Liu, G. Hu, T. Albrow-Owen, L. W. T. Ng, R. C. T. Howe, T. Hasan, Z. Sun and I. Tittonen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201800480 .
S. Santra, S. Z. Ali, P. K. Guha, G. Zhong, J. Robertson, J. A. Covington, W. I. Milne, J. W. Gardner and F. Udrea, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 485301 CrossRef PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H.-Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, Z. Lin, Z. Li, X. Song, K.-S. Moon and C.-P. Wong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13494 RSC .
E. Varrla, C. Backes, K. R. Paton, A. Harvey, Z. Gholamvand, J. McCauley and J. N. Coleman, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1129–1139 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, H. Zhang, S. Dong, Y. Liu, C. T. Nai, H. S. Shin, H. Y. Jeong, B. Liu and K. P. Loh, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3905–3911 Search PubMed .
G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, M. M. Naiini, S. Vaziri, M. C. Lemme and M. Ostling, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6524–6531 CrossRef CAS .
R. I. Woodward, E. J. R. Kelleher, R. C. T. Howe, G. Hu, F. Torrisi, T. Hasan, S. V. Popov and J. R. Taylor, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 31113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, R. C. T. Howe, R. I. Woodward, E. J. R. Kelleher, F. Torrisi, G. Hu, S. V. Popov, J. R. Taylor and T. Hasan, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 1522–1534 CrossRef CAS .
R. I. Woodward, R. C. T. Howe, T. H. Runcorn, G. Hu, F. Torrisi, E. J. R. Kelleher and T. Hasan, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 20051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. George, A. J. Morris, M. H. Modarres and M. De Volder, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7304–7310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Acerce, D. Voiry and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 313–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Cho, Y. Lee, H.-J. Koh, H. Jung, J.-S. Kim, H.-W. Yoo, J. Kim and H.-T. Jung, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7020–7028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, W. Xing, X. Feng, B. Yu, L. Song, G. H. Yeoh and Y. Hu, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2016, 127, 142–148 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hanlon, C. Backes, E. Doherty, C. Cucinotta, N. Berner, C. Boland, K. Lee, A. Harvey, P. Lynch, Z. Gholamvand, S. Zhang, K. Wang, G. Moynihan, A. Pokle, Q. Ramasse, N. McEvoy, W. Blau, J. Wang, G. Abellan, F. Hauke, A. Hirsch, S. Sanvito, D. O'Regan, G. S. Duesberg, V. Nicolosi and J. Coleman, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yasaei, B. Kumar, T. Foroozan, C. Wang, M. Asadi, D. Tuschel, J. E. Indacochea, R. F. Klie and A. Salehi-Khojin, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1887–1892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sotor, G. Sobon, M. Kowalczyk, W. Macherzynski, P. Paletko and K. M. Abramski, Opt. Lett., 2015, 40, 3885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hao, B. Yang, F. Wen, J. Xiang, L. Li, W. Wang, Z. Zeng, B. Xu, Z. Zhao, Z. Liu and Y. Tian, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3194–3201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Del Rio Castillo, V. Pellegrini, H. Sun, J. Buha, D. A. Dinh, E. Lago, A. Ansaldo, A. Capasso, L. Manna and F. Bonaccorso, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 506–516 CrossRef .
L. H. Li, Y. Chen, G. Behan, H. Zhang, M. Petravic and A. M. Glushenkov, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11862 RSC .
A. M. Joseph, B. Nagendra, E. B. Gowd and K. P. Surendran, ACS Omega, 2016, 1, 1220–1228 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M.-Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Nature, 2014, 516, 78–81 CAS .
C. J. Zhang, M. P. Kremer, A. Seral-Ascaso, S.-H. Park, N. McEvoy, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi and V. Nicolosi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705506 CrossRef .
J. Chen, K. Chen, D. Tong, Y. Huang, J. Zhang, J. Xue, Q. Huang and T. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 314–317 RSC .
X. Li, Y. Dai, Y. Ma, Q. Liu and B. Huang, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 135703 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Ling, C. E. Ren, M.-Q. Zhao, J. Yang, J. M. Giammarco, J. Qiu, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 16676–16681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Harvey, J. B. Boland, I. Godwin, A. G. Kelly, B. M. Szydłowska, G. Murtaza, A. Thomas, D. J. Lewis, P. O'Brien and J. N. Coleman, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 025054 CrossRef .
T. J. Pinnavaia, Science, 1983, 220, 365–371 CAS .

          T. P. Dolley, 2008 minerals yearbook: Mica, National Minerals Information Center,  2008, p. 13 Search PubMed .
F. Annabi-Bergaya, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 107, 141–148 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, J. R. G. Evans, H. C. Greenwell, P. Boulet, P. V. Coveney, A. A. Bowden and A. Whiting, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 568–594 RSC .
A. Arora, V. Choudhary and D. K. Sharma, J. Polym. Res., 2011, 18, 843–857 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Suganuma, Introduction to printed electronics, Springer New York, New York, US, 1st edn,  2014, vol. 74, p. 132 Search PubMed .
M. Dresselhaus and G. Dresselhaus, Adv. Phys., 1981, 30, 139–326 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zeng, T. Sun, J. Zhu, X. Huang, Z. Yin, G. Lu, Z. Fan, Q. Yan, H. H. Hng and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9052–9056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5082–5104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hasan, Z. Sun, F. Wang, F. Bonaccorso, P. H. Tan, A. G. Rozhin and A. C. Ferrari, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3874–3899 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Ausman, R. Piner, O. Lourie, R. S. Ruoff and M. Korobov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8911–8915 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Bachilo, Science, 2002, 298, 2361–2366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Giordani, S. D. Bergin, V. Nicolosi, S. Lebedkin, M. M. Kappes, W. J. Blau and J. N. Coleman, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15708–15718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Ibrahem, T.-W. Lan, J. K. Huang, Y.-Y. Chen, K.-H. Wei, L.-J. Li and C. W. Chu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 13193 RSC .
J. N. Coleman, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 14–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Guardia, M. Fernandez-Merino, J. Paredes, P. Solis-Fernandez, S. Villar-Rodil, A. Martinez-Alonso and J. Tascon, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1653–1662 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ciesielski and P. Samor, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 381–398 RSC .
G. Cunningham, M. Lotya, C. S. Cucinotta, S. Sanvito, S. D. Bergin, R. Menzel, M. S. P. Shaffer and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3468–3480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hernandez, M. Lotya, D. Rickard, S. D. Bergin and J. N. Coleman, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3208–3213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lotya, Y. Hernandez, P. J. King, R. J. Smith, V. Nicolosi, L. S. Karlsson, F. M. Blighe, S. De, Z. Wang, I. T. McGovern, G. S. Duesberg and J. N. Coleman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3611–3620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-G. Zhou, N.-N. Mao, H.-X. Wang, Y. Peng and H.-L. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10839–10842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yi, Z. Shen, S. Ma and X. Zhang, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1003 CrossRef .
A. A. Green and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4031–4036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3680–3695 CrossRef CAS .
P. May, U. Khan, J. M. Hughes and J. N. Coleman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11393–11400 CAS .
T. Hasan, V. Scardaci, P. Tan, A. Rozhin, W. Milne and A. Ferrari, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12594–12602 CAS .
A. Ciesielski, S. Haar, M. El Gemayel, H. Yang, J. Clough, G. Melinte, M. Gobbi, E. Orgiu, M. V. Nardi, G. Ligorio, V. Palermo, N. Koch, O. Ersen, C. Casiraghi and P. Samorì, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10355–10361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Liang and M. C. Hersam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17661–17663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, E. J. Zimney, R. D. Piner, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2007, 448, 457–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, J. An, I. Jung, R. D. Piner, S. J. An, X. Li, A. Velamakanni and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1593–1597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, J. Yang, J. Kupferberg, R. Fullon, C. Lee, H. Y. Jeong, H. S. Shin and M. Chhowalla, Science, 2016, 353, 1413–1416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Khan, A. O'Neill, H. Porwal, P. May, K. Nawaz and J. N. Coleman, Carbon, 2012, 50, 470–475 CrossRef CAS .

          J. M. J. M. Graham, Biological centrifugation, CRC Press, Boca Raton, US, 1st edn,  2001, p. 224 Search PubMed .
C. Backes, R. J. Smith, N. McEvoy, N. C. Berner, D. McCloskey, H. C. Nerl, A. O'Neill, P. J. King, T. Higgins, D. Hanlon, N. Scheuschner, J. Maultzsch, L. Houben, G. S. Duesberg, J. F. Donegan, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4576 CAS .
F. Bonaccorso, A. Bartolotta, J. N. Coleman and C. Backes, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6136–6166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, J. Kang, J. Kang, D. Jariwala, J. D. Wood, J.-W. T. Seo, K.-S. Chen, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7029–7036 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kang, J.-W. T. Seo, D. Alducin, A. Ponce, M. J. Yacaman and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, V. K. Sangwan, J. D. Wood, X. Liu, I. Balla, D. Lam and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7216–7223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. N. Carvalho, Forty centuries of ink, BiblioLife, Charleston, US,  2008, p. 308 Search PubMed .

The printing ink manual, ed. R. H. Leach, R. J. Pierce, E. P. Hickman, M. J. Mackenzie and H. G. Smith, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, the Netherlands, 5th edn,  1993 Search PubMed .

          A. Goldschmidt, H.-J. Streitberger and A. Goldschmidt, BASF handbook on basics of coating technology, Vincentz Network, Hannover, Germany, 2nd edn,  2007, p. 792 Search PubMed .

          E. W. Flick, Printing ink and overprint varnish formulations, William Andrew, Norwich, US, 2nd edn,  1999, p. 127 Search PubMed .
H.-H. Lee, K.-S. Chou and K.-C. Huang, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2436–2441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-J. de Gans, P. C. Duineveld and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 203–213 CrossRef CAS .
P. Beecher, P. Servati, A. Rozhin, A. Colli, V. Scardaci, S. Pisana, T. Hasan, A. J. Flewitt, J. Robertson, G. W. Hsieh, F. M. Li, A. Nathan, A. C. Ferrari and W. I. Milne, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 043710 CrossRef .
G. Pangalos, J. M. Dealy and M. B. Lyne, J. Rheol., 1985, 29, 471–491 CrossRef CAS .
D. Doraiswamy, Rheol. Bull., 2002, 71, 1–9 Search PubMed .

          H. A. Barnes, J. F. J. F. Hutton and K. Walters, An introduction to rheology, Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1st edn,  1989, p. 199 Search PubMed .

          A. A. Tracton, Coatings technology handbook, CRC Press, Boca Raton, US, 3rd edn,  2005, p. 936 Search PubMed .

Inkjet technology for digital fabrication, ed. I. M. Hutchings and G. D. Martin, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK,  2012, p. 390 Search PubMed .
H. Lievens, Surf. Coat. Technol., 1995, 76–77, 744–753 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lahti, S. Leppävuori and V. Lantto, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1999, 142, 367–370 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. D. Nguyen, C. Lee, K.-H. Shin and D. Lee, IEEE Trans. Compon., Packag., Manuf. Technol., 2015, 5, 1516–1524 CrossRef CAS .
T. Smith, Pigm. Resin Technol., 1986, 15, 11–12 CrossRef .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .

Handbook of print media: Technologies and production methods, ed. H. Kipphan, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 1st edn,  2001, p. 1207 Search PubMed .

          W. A. Zisman, in Contact angle, wettability, and adhesion, ed. F. M. Fowkes, American Chemical Society, Washington, D. C., US, 1st edn,  1964, ch. 1, pp. 1–51 Search PubMed .

          G. L. Robertson, Food packaging: Principles and practice, CRC Press, Boca Raton, US, 3rd edn,  2012, p. 733 Search PubMed .
R. D. Deegan, O. Bakajin, T. F. Dupont, G. Huber, S. R. Nagel and T. A. Witten, Nature, 1997, 389, 827–829 CrossRef CAS .

          E. W. Flick, Industrial solvents handbook, William Andrew, Norwich, US, 5th edn,  1998, p. 994 Search PubMed .
D. Papakonstantinou, E. Amanatides, D. Mataras, V. Ioannidis and P. Nikolopoulos, Plasma Processes Polym., 2007, 4, S1057–S1062 CrossRef .

          S. Luo, T. Harris and C. Wong, Proc. Int. Symp. Adv. Packag. Mater. Process. Prop. Interfaces (IEEE Cat. No. 01TH8562), 2001.
R. G. Larson, AIChE J., 2014, 60, 1538–1571 CrossRef CAS .
M. Singh, H. M. Haverinen, P. Dhagat and G. E. Jabbour, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 673–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yoo and C. Kim, Colloids Surf., A, 2015, 468, 234–245 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jang, D. Kim and J. Moon, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 2629–2635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Capasso, A. Del Rio Castillo, H. Sun, A. Ansaldo, V. Pellegrini and F. Bonaccorso, Solid State Commun., 2015, 224, 53–63 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, L. Tolentino, Z. Yang, X. Song, W. Zhang, Y. Chen and C.-P. Wong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3577–3583 CrossRef CAS .
P. He, J. R. Brent, H. Ding, J. Yang, D. J. Lewis, P. O'Brien and B. Derby, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5599–5606 RSC .
Y. Xu, I. Hennig, D. Freyberg, A. J. Strudwick, M. G. Schwab, T. Weitz and K. C.-P. Cha, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 483–488 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sriprachuabwong, C. Karuwan, A. Wisitsorrat, D. Phokharatkul, T. Lomas, P. Sritongkham and A. Tuantranont, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5478 RSC .
R. F. Hossain, I. G. Deaguero, T. Boland and A. B. Kaul, NPJ 2D Mater. Appl., 2017, 1, 28 CrossRef .
K. Arapov, R. Abbel, G. de With and H. Friedrich, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 173, 323–336 RSC .
T. Vuorinen, J. Niittynen, T. Kankkunen, T. M. Kraft and M. Mäntysalo, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 35289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Rowley-Neale, G. C. Smith and C. E. Banks, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22539–22548 CAS .
B. Derby, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2010, 40, 395–414 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Fromm, IBM J. Res. Dev., 1984, 28, 322–333 CrossRef .
M. Michel, J. A. Desai, C. Biswas and A. B. Kaul, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 485602 CrossRef PubMed .

          E. B. Secor and M. C. Hersam, Graphene inks for printed electronics, Available at: http://www.sigmaaldrich.com/technical-documents/articles/technology-spotlights/graphene-inks-for-printed-electronics.html (accessed: 24/05/2015).
D. Soltman and V. Subramanian, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 2224–2231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Moon, H. Kang, S. H. Lee, K. Kang, Y. J. Cho, J. Y. Hwang and S. J. Moon, J. Mech. Sci. Technol., 2014, 28, 1441–1448 CrossRef .

          S. Scherp and S. J. D. Ericsson, Silkscreen Printing Machine, US4267773,  1981 Search PubMed .

          S. J. D. Ericsson, Method and apparatus for adjusting the position of a stencil relative to a printing table, US4226181,  1980 Search PubMed .
B. Kang, W. H. Lee and K. Cho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2302–2315 CAS .

          A. Goldschmidt and H.-J. Streitburger, BASF Handbook on Basics of Coating Technology, William Andrew, Hannover, Germany,  2003 Search PubMed .
J. A. Owczarek and F. L. Howland, IEEE Trans. Compon., Packag., Manuf. Technol., 1990, 13, 358–367 CrossRef .
D. Zhang, X. Li, H. Li, S. Chen, Z. Sun, X. Yin and S. Huang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 5382–5388 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, B. Xu, Y. Gu, Z. Xiong, J. Sun and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1388 CAS .
C. Karuwan, A. Wisitsoraat, P. Chaisuwan, D. Nacapricha, A. Tuantranont, W. C. Hooper, V. Vaccarino, R. W. Alexander, D. G. Harrison and A. A. Quyyumi, Anal. Methods, 2017, 9, 3689–3695 RSC .
W. J. Hyun, E. B. Secor, G. A. Rojas, M. C. Hersam, L. F. Francis and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7058–7064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, P. Pan, X. Liu, Z. Yang, J. Wei and Z. Wei, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2017, 187, 28–38 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. D. Nguyen, J. Lee, C. H. Kim, K.-H. Shin and D. Lee, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2013, 23, 095010 CrossRef .

          K. I. Bardin, Gravure printing method, US4003311,  1977 Search PubMed .

          J. A. Martens, Flexographic printing plate process, EP0468745 A2,  1992 Search PubMed .

          R. N. Fan, Laser ablatable photosensitive elements utilized to make flexographic printing plates, US5719009,  1990 Search PubMed .
L. Huang, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Pu, Y. Lin, S. Xu, L. Shen, Q. Chen and W. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7426–7433 CAS .
C. W. Foster, M. P. Down, Y. Zhang, X. Ji, S. J. Rowley-Neale, G. C. Smith, P. J. Kelly and C. E. Banks, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Hyun, E. B. Secor, C.-H. Kim, M. C. Hersam, L. F. Francis and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700285 CrossRef .
C. Phillips, A. Al-Ahmadi, S.-J. Potts, T. Claypole and D. Deganello, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 9520–9530 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Secor, T. Z. Gao, M. H. dos Santos, S. G. Wallace, K. W. Putz and M. C. Hersam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29418–29423 CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1319–1335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Keller, Nature, 2003, 424, 831–838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, G. Hu, G. Hu, R. C. T. Howe, L. Chen, Z. Zheng and T. Hasan, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yavari and N. Koratkar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1746–1753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 652–655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Mannoor, H. Tao, J. D. Clayton, A. Sengupta, D. L. Kaplan, R. R. Naik, N. Verma, F. G. Omenetto and M. C. McAlpine, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 763 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Shehzad, T. Shi, A. Qadir, X. Wan, H. Guo, A. Ali, W. Xuan, H. Xu, Z. Gu, X. Peng, J. Xie, L. Sun, Q. He, Z. Xu, C. Gao, Y.-S. Rim, Y. Dan, T. Hasan, P. Tan, E. Li, W. Yin, Z. Cheng, B. Yu, Y. Xu, J. Luo and X. Duan, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1600262 CrossRef .
V. Dua, S. P. Surwade, S. Ammu, S. R. Agnihotra, S. Jain, K. E. Roberts, S. Park, R. S. Ruoff and S. K. Manohar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2154–2157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Chung, D. H. Kim, H. M. Lee, T. Kim, J. H. Choi, D. K. Seo, J.-B. Yoo, S.-H. Hong, T. J. Kang and Y. H. Kim, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 166–167, 172–176 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zang, M. Yan, S. Ge, L. Ge and J. Yu, Analyst, 2013, 138, 2704 RSC .
B. W. Kennedy, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1969, 40, 1169–1172 CrossRef .
W.-H. Yeo, Y.-S. Kim, J. Lee, A. Ameen, L. Shi, M. Li, S. Wang, R. Ma, S. H. Jin, Z. Kang, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2773–2778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Son, J. Lee, S. Qiao, R. Ghaffari, J. Kim, J. E. Lee, C. Song, S. J. Kim, D. J. Lee, S. W. Jun, S. Yang, M. Park, J. Shin, K. Do, M. Lee, K. Kang, C. S. Hwang, N. Lu, T. Hyeon and D.-H. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 397–404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bali, A. Brandlmaier, A. Ganster, O. Raab, J. Zapf and A. Hübler, Mater. Today Proc., 2016, 3, 739–745 CrossRef .
S. Y. Hong, Y. H. Lee, H. Park, S. W. Jin, Y. R. Jeong, J. Yun, I. You, G. Zi and J. S. Ha, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 930–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Agarwal, V. Kaushik, D. Varandani, A. Dhar and B. Mehta, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 681, 394–401 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shavanova, Y. Bakakina, I. Burkova, I. Shtepliuk, R. Viter, A. Ubelis, V. Beni, N. Starodub, R. Yakimova and V. Khranovskyy, Sensors, 2016, 16, 1–23 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, F. Rossignol and J. Macdonald, Lab Chip, 2015, 15, 2538–2558 RSC .
K. Haupt Mosbach, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 2495–2504 CrossRef .
F.-Y. Kong, S.-X. Gu, W.-W. Li, T.-T. Chen, Q. Xu and W. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 56, 77–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ambrosi, C. K. Chua, A. Bonanni and M. Pumera, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7150–7188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Casiraghi, M. Macucci, K. Parvez, R. Worsley, Y. Shin, F. Bronte, C. Borri, M. Paggi and G. Fiori, Carbon, 2018, 129, 462–467 CrossRef CAS .

Piezoelectric graphene ink enables thin-film pressure sensors of any size
          , available at: https://spectrum.ieee.org/nanoclast/semiconductors/materials/piezoelectric-graphene-ink-enables-thin-film-pressure-sensors-of-any-size.
M. Amjadi, K. U. Kyung, I. Park and M. Sitti, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1678–1698 CrossRef CAS .
N. Karim, S. Afroj, S. Tan, P. He, A. Fernando, C. Carr and K. S. Novoselov, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12266–12275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. E. Simmons, Strain gauge, US2393714 A,  1946 Search PubMed .

          S. Beeby, G. Ensel, M. Kraft and N. White, MEMS mechanical sensors, Artech House, London, UK,  2004, p. 269 Search PubMed .
S.-H. Bae, Y. Lee, B. K. Sharma, H.-J. Lee, J.-H. Kim and J.-H. Ahn, Carbon, 2013, 51, 236–242 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, L. Wang, T. Yang, X. Li, X. Zang, M. Zhu, K. Wang, D. Wu and H. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4666–4670 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hempel, D. Nezich, J. Kong and M. Hofmann, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5714–5718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Eswaraiah, K. Balasubramaniam and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12626 RSC .
C. Yan, J. Wang, W. Kang, M. Cui, X. Wang, C. Y. Foo, K. J. Chee and P. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2022–2027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yilmaz and P. T. Krein, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., 2013, 28, 2151–2169 CrossRef .
L. Lu, X. Han, J. Li, J. Hua and M. Ouyang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 226, 272–288 CrossRef CAS .
R. Marom, S. F. Amalraj, N. Leifer, D. Jacob and D. Aurbach, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9938 RSC .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, A. V. Murugan, A. Sarkar and T. Muraliganth, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 621 CAS .
A. S. Aricò, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-M. Tarascon and W. van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Raccichini, A. Varzi, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2014, 14, 271–279 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Fisher, M. R. Watt, W. J. Ready, S. I. Cho, S. B. Lee, G. A. Snook, P. Kao, A. S. Best, G. Lota, K. Fic, E. Frackowiak, F. Béguin, M. D. Stoller, R. S. Ruoff, G. Arunabha, Y. Lee, O. Inganäs, S. Admassie, M. Vangari, T. Pryor, L. Jiang, J.-F. Lu, L. L. Wang, Q.-Y. Lai, H.-Y. Chu, Y. Zhao, G. Ćirić-Marjanovic, Y. Zhang, H. Feng, X. Wu, L. L. Wang, A. Zhang, T. Xia, H. Dong, X. Li, L. Zhang, T. H. Nguyen, A. Fraiwan, S. Choi, A. S. Aricò, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-m. Tarascon, W. V. A. N. Schalkwijk, U. D. Picardie, J. Verne, C. Umr, G. Yu, X. Xie, L. Pan, Z. Bao, Y. Cui, L. Dong, Z. Chen, D. Yang and H. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 3, 4889–4899 Search PubMed .
X. Yang, C. Cheng, Y. Wang, L. Qiu and D. Li, Science, 2013, 341, 534–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1475 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xiao, D. Choi, L. Cosimbescu, P. Koech, J. Liu and J. P. Lemmon, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4522–4524 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hwang, H. Kim and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4826–4830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dall'Agnese, P.-L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2305–2309 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zou, Z. Zhang, J. Guo, B. Liu, Q. Zhang, C. Fernandez and Q. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 22280–22286 CAS .
N. Kurra, B. Ahmed, Y. Gogotsi and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601372 CrossRef .
G. Li, F. W. R. Rivarola, N. J. L. K. Davis, S. Bai, T. C. Jellicoe, F. de la Peña, S. Hou, C. Ducati, F. Gao, R. H. Friend, N. C. Greenham and Z.-K. Tan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3528–3534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Le, M. H. Ervin, H. Qiu, B. E. Fuchs and W. Y. Lee, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 355–358 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, F. Liu, G. Casano, R. Bhavsar, I. A. Kinloch and B. Derby, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7993–8000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, T. Liu, F. Qian, T. Y.-J. Han, E. B. Duoss, J. D. Kuntz, C. M. Spadaccini, M. A. Worsley and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3448–3456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Jakus, E. B. Secor, A. L. Rutz, S. W. Jordan, M. C. Hersam and R. N. Shah, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4636–4648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Abdelkader, N. Karim, C. Vallés, S. Afroj, K. S. Novoselov and S. G. Yeates, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 35016 CrossRef .
E. García-Tuñon, S. Barg, J. Franco, R. Bell, S. Eslava, E. D'Elia, R. C. Maher, F. Guitian and E. Saiz, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1688–1693 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sun, T.-S. Wei, B. Y. Ahn, J. Y. Seo, S. J. Dillon and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4539–4543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fu, Y. Wang, C. Yan, Y. Yao, Y. Chen, J. Dai, S. Lacey, Y. Wang, J. Wan, T. Li, Z. Wang, Y. Xu and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2587–2594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Mortazavi Zanjani, M. Holt, M. M. Sadeghi, S. Rahimi and D. Akinwande, NPJ 2D Mater. Appl., 2017, 1, 36 CrossRef .
Technavio, Global printing inks market 2016–2020, Infiniti research limited technical report, 2017.
K. Fukuda and T. Someya, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602736 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Miettinen, V. Pekkanen, K. Kaija, P. Mansikkamäki, J. Mäntysalo, M. Mäntysalo, J. Niittynen, J. Pekkanen, T. Saviauk and R. Rönkkä, Microelectron. J., 2008, 39, 1740–1750 CrossRef .
H. Park, H. Kang, Y. Lee, Y. Park, J. Noh and G. Cho, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 344006 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Vena, E. Perret, S. Tedjini, G. E. P. Tourtollet, A. Delattre, F. Garet and Y. Boutant, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 2013, 61, 5868–5877 CrossRef .

          K. Spree, Introduction to Organic and Printed Electronics, Holst centre technical report, 2012.
Functional Printing Market by Materials (Substrate, Inks), Technology (Inkjet, Screen, Flexo, Gravure), Application (Sensors, Displays, Batteries, RFID, Lighting, PV, Medical), and Geography (North America, Europe, APAC, ROW) – Global Forecasts and Analysis, Markets and markets technical report, 2013.

          S. Nazarpour, in Thin Film. coatings Biol., ed. S. Nazarpour, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, the Netherlands,  2014, pp. 1–9 Search PubMed .

          V. Stenzel and N. Rehfeld, Functional coatings (European coatings tech files), Vincentz Network,  2011, p. 176 Search PubMed .
U. Riaz, C. Nwaoha and S. M. Ashraf, Prog. Org. Coat., 2014, 77, 743–756 CrossRef CAS .
I. P. Parkin and R. G. Palgrave, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 1689–1695 RSC .
M. Kuhr, S. Bauer, U. Rothhaar and D. Wolff, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 442, 107–116 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Chambers, K. R. Stokes, F. C. Walsh and R. J. K. Wood, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2006, 201, 3642–3652 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mathiazhagan and R. Joseph, Int. J. Chem. Eng. Appl., 2011, 2, 228–237 Search PubMed .
J. C. Tiller, C. J. Liao, K. Lewis and A. M. Klibanov, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2001, 98, 5981–5985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Montemor, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2014, 258, 17–37 CrossRef CAS .
Technavio, Global graphene market 2016-2020, Infiniti research limited technical report, 2017.
Beige Market Intelligence, Strategic assessment of worldwide graphene, composites market-till 2021, Beige group technical report, 2017.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

From left to right: Guohua Hu, Leonard W. T. Ng, Xiaoxi Zhu, Richard C. T. Howe and Tawfique Hasan
	The Hybrid Nanomaterials Engineering (HNE) Group, led by Tawfique Hasan, is based at the Cambridge Graphene Centre, Cambridge University Engineering Department. The group specialises in solution-processing and functional ink/composite formulation of one- and two-dimensional materials for applications in energy, sensing, (opto)electronics and photonics. (From left) Guohua Hu completed his PhD (2017) on printable (opto)electronics and photonics from the HNE group. He is now a postdoctoral researcher in the group, working on printable gas sensors for interconnected systems. He has a BEng from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (2013). Leonard Ng is a third year PhD student in the group and is working on high viscosity multifunctional inks. He received his MSc from the University of Leeds (2015). Xiaoxi Zhu is a second year PhD student in the group, working on printable devices for IoT applications. She completed her BEng from Imperial College London (2015). Richard Howe completed his PhD (2016) from the HNE group and was subsequently awarded a postdoctoral fellowship to support commercialisation of an invention from his PhD. He received his MSci from University of Bristol (2011). Tawfique Hasan completed his PhD from the University of Cambridge (2009) and is now a Reader in the Engineering Department, and a Fellow of Churchill College, Cambridge.

Joohoon Kang
	Joohoon Kang received his PhD in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern University under the supervision of Professor Mark C. Hersam. He is currently a postdoctoral scholar in the Department of Chemistry at the University of California, Berkeley. He received his BS in Metallurgical System Engineering in 2009 and his MS in Materials Science and Engineering in 2011 from Yonsei University in Korea. His research interests include nanomaterials synthesis, post-synthetic processing, and optoelectronic applications.

Christopher G. Jones
	Christopher G. Jones has over twenty-five years of print & packaging industry experience. He has held senior positions within leading ink companies in the UK, Central Europe & South America and has previously managed global packaging technical projects for a number of international brand owners. He has been involved with the development of conductive inks since 2000 and served as the Vice Chairman of the Plastic Electronics Leadership Group in the UK. He joined Novalia Limited in 2010 as the ink and print expert. Within Novalia he is responsible for R&D, identifying and leading conductive & functional ink evaluation/formulation, print production and process developments.

Mark C. Hersam
	Mark C. Hersam is the Walter P. Murphy Professor of Materials Science and Engineering and Director of the Materials Research Center at Northwestern University. He also holds faculty appointments in the Departments of Chemistry, Applied Physics, Medicine, and Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. He earned a BS in Electrical Engineering from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) in 1996, MPhil in Physics from the University of Cambridge (UK) in 1997, and a PhD in Electrical Engineering from UIUC in 2000. His research interests include nanofabrication, scanning probe microscopy, semiconductor surfaces, and nanoelectronic materials.

 	Fig. 1  Key production methods of graphene, differing in production rate and cost. The most suitable applications associated with the production methods are also indicated. Adapted with permission.81 Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group.	 


Graphene
	

	Liquid phase exfoliation (via sonication,82 ball milling,83 high-shear mixing84 and microfluidisation18); Ion intercalation.85,86 Reduction of graphene oxide.87	Electronics;7,10,24 transparent conductors;6 functional inks;14,16,21,23,88,89 saturable absorbers;70,90 batteries;78 supercapacitors;91 thermoelectrics;92 sensors;93 composites.74



TMDs (MX2), e.g.: MoS2, WS2, MoSe2.	

	Liquid phase exfoliation (via sonication,94 ball milling95 and high-shear mixing96); ion intercalation.97,98	Electronics;10,11 photodetectors;8,9,11 functional inks;8–11,99 saturable absorbers;71,100–102 batteries;103 supercapacitors;104 sensors;105 composites.106



BP
	

	Liquid phase exfoliation (via sonication12,40,43,107).	Functional inks;12 electronics;40,43,108 photodetectors;12 saturable absorbers;109 sensors;105 supercapacitors;110 batteries.111



h-BN
	

	Liquid phase exfoliation (via sonication,94 ball milling112 and high-shear mixing96).	Dielectric composites;75 thermal composites;47 dielectric inks.10,11,24,113



MXenes
e.g.: M2X, M3X2, M4X3.	

	Exfoliation with hydrofluoric acid or other etchants.49	Batteries and supercapacitors;51,114,115 sensors;116 electronics;117 composites.118



Mica
e.g.: biotite, muscovite, phlogopite.	

	Liquid phase exfoliation (via sonication119); ion intercalation.120	Inks;121 composites;122,123 barriers;121,124 capacitors;121 catalysis.121

 	Fig. 2  Liquid phase exfoliation: photographs of (A) selected bulk materials before exfoliation, and (B) 2d material dispersions. The concentration of graphene dispersions with respect to (C) solvent surface tension and (D) HSPs with fitted curves. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (E) Concentration of graphene in stable aqueous dispersions using common surfactants. Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2011, Elsevier Ltd. (F) Surface tension of SDC solution with respect to the surfactant concentration at ambient, showing the surface tension is stabilised above CMC. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. The micrograph of bulk BP material is reproduced from Smart-Elements with permission.	 

 	Fig. 3  Sorting of 2d material flakes: schematics showing (A) SBS, (D) sDGU and (F) iDGU. Reproduced with permission.155 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) BP size selection via SBS, and (C) the corresponding normalised scattering. The exponent of λ represents optical scattering exponent (n). Reproduced with permission.12 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (E) sDGU for precise size selection of BP. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2016, National Academy of Sciences. (G) Layer-by-layer iDGU selection of h-BN. Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (H) iDGU of high density MoS2 by using polymeric surfactants. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (I) iDGU of high density ReS2 by using density gradient medium mixture of iodixanol and CsCl. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of print throughput and best achievable resolution ranges of conventional print technologies for 2d materials.	 


Inkjet	5–10	5–20	65–95	1–5	4–30
Screen	12–20	45–65	20–30	1–5	1k–10k
Gravure	12–17	20–35	60–65	1–2	100–1k
Flexo	12–17	40–45	25–45	1–5	1k–2k

 	Fig. 5  Ink viscosity and processing: (A) schematic showing shear stress of different fluids with respect to shear rate. (B) Comparison between viscosities of graphene inks for inkjet, gravure and screen printing with a graphene loading of ∼1 wt%, ∼3 wt% and ∼8 wt%, respectively. Data collected from ref. 16, 21 and 23. (C) Common pigment processing techniques for ink formulation.	 
γs-v = γs-i + γi-vcosθ	(1)

 	Fig. 6  Ink wetting and drying: (A) Different wetting behaviour of a droplet on substrates. (B) Typical cross section profiles of printed lines, showing low viscosity inks tend to form coffee ring. (C) Photograph of a dried coffee drop. Reproduced with permission.179 Copyright 1997, Nature Publishing Group. (D) Schematic of a typical evaporation profile in a drying droplet for coffee ring formation. In this case, due to higher evaporation rates at the droplet edge, an outward flow from the droplet centre is initiated. This carries the suspended particles to the droplet edges.	 

Water	72	Copper	1000
Glycerol	64	Aluminium	500
Ethylene glycol	48	Kapton (DuPont)	50
Epoxy resin	43	PET	48
NMP	40	Polyamide	46
CHO	34	Polycarbonate	46
Chlorobenzene	34	Polyurethane	40
Terpineol	33	Polyimide	40
Ethyl acetate	24	Si/SiO2	36
2-Butanol	23	Glass	36
IPA	23	Polystyrene	34
Ethanol	22	Silicone	21
Hexane	18	PTFE	18

 	Fig. 7  Inkjet printing principles: schematics of (A) CIJ, and DoD inkjet printing with (B) piezoelectric and (C) thermal head. (D) The complete inkjet printing process, showing the droplet jetting, spreading and drying stages. Reproduced with permission.185 Copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V. Inset: Jetting with unwanted satellite droplets. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 
	(2)


Inkjet inks

Graphene	NMP	—	Si/SiO2, glass	FETs	
7

Graphene, MoS2	NMP	—	PET with coating	Photodetectors	
8

Graphene, TMDs, h-BN	NMP	—	Si/SiO2	FETs, photodetectors	
9

Graphene, TMDs, h-BN	NMP	—	PET with coating	FETs	
10

Graphene	IPA	—	PET, Polyurethane	FETs	
24

Graphene	Water/ethanol	—	PET	Conductive inks	
187

Graphene	Water/ethanol	—	Si/SiO2	—	
13

MoS2	Water/IPA	—	Si/SiO2	—	
97

MoS2	Water/IPA/glycerol	—	Si/SiO2	Gas sensors	
188

BP	IPA/2-butanol	—	Si/SiO2, glass, PET	Photodetectors, SAs	
12

BP	Acetonitrile	—	Glass	Humidity sensors	
189

Graphene	Water	SDBS, PANI	Carbon	Supercapacitors	
190

Graphene	Water	PEDOT:PSS	Carbon	Gas sensors	
191

Graphene, TMDs	Water	PS1	Si/SiO2	Photodetectors, memory	
11

Graphene, MoS2	IPA, NMP, Terpineol/CHO	Ethyl cellulose	PET	Photodetectors	
192

Graphene	IPA	PVP	Si3N4	Humidity sensors	
22

Graphene	IPA	PVP	FTO glass	Solar cells	
25

Graphene	IPA	PVP	Kapton, glass	Thermoelectrics	
92

Graphene	IPA/n-butanol	Plasdone S-630	Paper	Conductive inks	
193

Graphene	Terpineol/ethanol	Ethyl cellulose	Si/SiO2, glass	FETs	
89

Graphene	Terpineol/CHO	Ethyl cellulose	Si/SiO2, Kapton	Conductive inks	
14

Graphene	Terpineol/CHO	Ethyl cellulose	Glass, PET, PEN, PI	Conductive inks	
88

Graphene	Ethyl lactate/octyl acetate/ethylene glycol diacetate	Nitrocellulose	Glass, Kapton	Conductive inks	
23

Graphene	Diethylene glycol/ethanol	PEDOT:PSS	Polyurethane	Temperature sensors	
194

MoS2	Terpineol/ethanol	Ethyl cellulose	Si/SiO2	FETs	
99

h-BN	Water	Na-CMC	PET, Polyurethane	Dielectric inks	
24




Flexographic inks

Graphene	Water/IPA	Na-CMC	ITO PET	Solar cells	
19

Graphene/carbon ink	—	—	Glass, PET, paper	Conductive inks	
20




Gravure inks

Graphene	Terpineol/ethanol	Ethyl cellulose	Kapton	Conductive inks	
21




Screen inks

Graphene	Ethanol	PTFE, PANI	PET	Supercapacitors	
15

Graphene	Terpineol/ethanol	Ethyl cellulose	Si/SiO2, Kapton	Conductive inks	
16

Graphene	Dipropylene glycol	PVP/PVA	PET	Conductive inks	
17

Graphene	Water	Na-CMC	Glass, paper	Conductive inks	
18

MoS2/carbon–graphite ink	—	—	Paper	Oxygen reduction	
195

h-BN	DMF	Polycarbonate	PET, copper foil	Dielectric inks	
113


 	Fig. 8  Inkjet printing of 2d materials: (A) photograph of representative NMP based 2d material inks. Reproduced with permission.9 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (B) Inkjet-printed graphene pattern on paper using water based inks. Reproduced with permission.11 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (C) Micrograph of inkjet-printed NMP based inks on Si/SiO2 substrates and paper. Reproduced with permission.7 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (D) Photograph of ethyl cellulose stabilised graphene ink, and (E) corresponding optical micrographs of inkjet-printed graphene lines onto different substrates, showing uniform pattern definition. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (F) Optical micrographs of inkjet-printed MoS2 on Si/SiO2. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (G) Schematic of droplet drying process of a binary alcohol-based BP ink, showing induced Marangoni suppresses coffee ring effect, and the corresponding (H) optical micrographs and (I) AFM images of the dried droplets. (G–I) Reproduced with permission.12 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  Screen printing: schematic figures showing (A) flat-bed and (B) R2R screen printing. (C–E) Schematics illustration of for screen printing principles. (F) Photograph of a graphene ink for screen printing. (G) SEM micrograph of an array of screen-printed graphene lines. (H) Screen-printed graphene pattern on PET. (F–H) Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 
	(3)
Fafs > Fafc > Fcf	(4)

 	Fig. 10  Gravure printing: (A and B) schematics of gravure printing highlighting the different components. (C and D) Schematics for illustration of gravure printing principles. (E) Large-area SEM micrograph of gravure-printed graphene lines on Kapton substrate. (F–K) Optical microscope images of printed graphene lines using cell sizes of 15, 20, 25, 30, 35 and 50 μm, respectively. Lines printed without the specified cell size are shaded in grey. (E–K) Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 
	(5)

 	Fig. 11  Flexographic printing: (A–C) schematic figures showing flexographic printing principles. (D) Photograph of graphene/carbon flexographic ink. Printing trials of the ink shown in (D) on (E) PET and (F) paper substrates using a commercial graphics printing press. Inset: Zoomed-in photographs of the printed fill profiles.	 
	(6)


Conductive inks
	Inkjet inks	
E.g.
ref. 23: electrical conductivity up to 40000 S m−1.	Mechanically and environmentally durable: withstanding rigorous bending cycles, adhesion testing and sonication.



	Screen inks	
E.g.
ref. 18: electrical conductivity up to 20000 S m−1.	Allowing multiple printing repetitions; printing scale over 29 × 29 cm2; line resolution ∼100 μm.



	Gravure inks	
E.g.
ref. 21: electrical conductivity up to 10000 S m−1.	Line resolution ∼30 μm; withstanding over 500 bending cycles of a strain of 3.1%.



	Flexographic inks	
E.g.
ref. 20: electrical conductivity up to 500 S m−1.	Requiring no overprint of silver for printed electrodes in capacitive touchpads; printing speed over 100 meters per minute.



(Opto)electronics
	Transistors	
E.g.
ref. 24: graphene channel based transistors with mobility of up to 204 cm2 V−1 s−1 and ION/IOFF limited to 2.5.	All-inkjet-printed; mechanically durable, and withstanding bending testing and washing.



	
	
E.g.
ref. 10: TMDs channel based transistors with ION/IOFF of up to ∼600 and mobility limited to 0.22 cm2 V−1 s−1.	All-inkjet-printed; flexible.



	Photodetectors	
E.g.
ref. 11: TMDs heterostructure devices with photosensitivity of up to 1 mA W−1 under 514 nm excitation.	All-inkjet-printed; flexible.



	
	
E.g.
ref. 12: BP integrated Schottky diodes with photosensitivity of up to 164 mA W−1 under 450 nm excitation, and 1.8 mA W−1 at 1550 nm under excitation.	High performance; long-term (>7 days) stability and device operation; near infrared light detection.





Photonics
	Ultrafast lasers	
E.g.
ref. 12: inkjet-printed BP SAs which allowed generation of femtosecond ultrashort pulses under 32.7 MW cm−2 irradiation.	Long-term (>30 days) stability and laser operation.



Sensors
	Humidity	
E.g.
ref. 22: CMOS devices integration of graphene with sensitivity of up to 0.3%/%RH.	Device-to-device consistent performances; long-term (>4 weeks) device operation stability; CMOS platform.



	Gas	
E.g.
ref. 216: gravure-printed rGO chemiresistive sensors with sensitivity of up to 45% and fast response (12 s) and recovery (20 s) times; high selectively to different chemicals.	High sensitivity and selectivity; all-printed; flexible.



Energy
	Batteries	
E.g.
ref. 217: 3D printed Li-ion batteries with discharge specific capacities of up to 40 mA h g−1.	High speed, highly efficient 3D printing; printing with commercial graphene/polymer composite filaments.



	Supercapacitors	
E.g.
ref. 218: inkjet-printed graphene micro-supercapacitors with an average specific capacitance of ∼221 ± 16 μF cm−2 at cyclic voltammetry scan rate of 100 mV s−1.	Large-scale all-inkjet-printed devices; device-to-device consistent performances; mechanically durable, withstanding over 1000 bending cycles.



	Thermoelectrics	
E.g.
ref. 92: inkjet-printed graphene thermoelectrics with a thermoelectric power factor of 18.7 μW m−1 K−2 at room temperature.	All-inkjet-printed; flexible; large-scale.

 	Fig. 12  Electrical conductivity of selected graphene inks demonstrated to date.	 

 	Fig. 13  Printed (opto)electronics and photonics: (A) schematic of the first demonstration of inkjet-printed graphene transistors. Reproduced with permission.7 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (B) Photographs of all inkjet-printed 2d material transistors on textile, and (C) associated transfer characteristics. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (D) All inkjet-printed 2d material transistors. Reproduced with permission.10 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (E) Schematic all inkjet-printed read-only memory, (F) the corresponding circuit designs and (G) the electrical response. Reproduced with permission.11 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (H) Graphene/Si Schottky junction/inkjet-printed BP photodetector arrays across a silicon wafer, and (I) the corresponding measured response at 1550 nm light. (J) Schematic showing integration of inkjet-printed BP-SAs into a laser cavity to generate ultrafast lasers, and (K) the corresponding output laser spectrum across 30 days and (L) overlay of the spectrum acquired after 0, 174, 354, 534 and 714 h of operation, highlighting the stability of printed and encapsulated BP. Reproduced with permission.12 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 14  Printed chemical sensors: (A) photograph of inkjet-printed rGO/Ag gas sensors, and (B) the corresponding response with respect to NO2 concentration and (C) selective response to various gases and humidity levels. Reproduced with permission.216 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (D) CMOS integration of inkjet-printed graphene/PVP polymer composites for humidity sensing, and (E) sensor response at different humidity (RH) levels. Inset: The microhotplate area with printed graphene/PVP polymer. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 15  Printed temperature and biosensors: (A) photograph of graphene/PEDOT:SS temperature sensors attached on to the skin, and (B) the corresponding response to temperature change. Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (C) Schematic of biosensors with SEM micrograph of the molecularly imprinted film (MIF) morphology on rGO-NH2 modified electrode, and (D) the corresponding device response. Reproduced with permission.230 Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  Printed strain, pressure and touch sensors: (A) response of inkjet-printed graphene strain sensor (inset) upon tensile and compressive strains. (B) Schematic circuit employing the graphene strain sensor as a variable resistor under to (C) tensile and (D) compressive strains.242 (E) Haydale graphene pressure sensors demonstration, source – http://ieee.org.243 (F) Flexographic-printed graphene-based capacitive touchpads.	 

 	Fig. 17  Printed energy storage using 2d materials: (A) schematic of the fabrication process for inkjet-printed graphene supercapacitors. (B) Photograph of an array of graphene supercapacitors on PET, and the corresponding (C) histogram of the specific capacitance and (D) typical relative specific capacitance over 1000 charge/discharge cycles at a scan rate of 1000 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission.218 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 18  3D printing of 2d materials: (A) simplified schematic of 3D printing using fused deposition modelling. (B) Top-view (one layer) and side-view (three layer) photographs of 3D-printed graphene patterns, and the SEM micrographs of the printed graphene and printed graphene/CNTs hybrid for supercapacitors. Reproduced with permission.270 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (C) Schematic of the fabrication process of 3D-printed GO/graphene supercapacitors. Reproduced with permission.271 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (D) Photographs of 3D-printed graphene based batteries and supercapacitors from printed filaments. Reproduced with permission.217 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (E) 3D-printed graphene scaffolds for electronic and biomedical applications. Reproduced with permission.272 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) Projected growth of graphene inks, printing and coating in relation to other graphene applications through 2021. (B) Projected growth in graphene inks, printing and coating market through 2021. Data collected from ref. 295.	 

 	Fig. 20  Current stage of development of inks, solution processed coating and composites of 2d materials, and their estimated timeline for commercialisation.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
