A combustion synthesis route for magnetically separable graphene oxide–CuFe 2 O 4 –ZnO nanocomposites with enhanced solar light-mediated photocatalyti ...  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NJ02070H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NJ02070H
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 10568-10583A combustion synthesis route for magnetically separable graphene oxide–CuFe2O4–ZnO nanocomposites with enhanced solar light-mediated photocatalytic activity†

        
          
            Aniket 
            Kumar
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lipeeka 
            Rout
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            L. Satish K. 
            Achary
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sangram Keshari 
            Mohanty
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Priyabrat 
            Dash
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology, Rourkela, Odisha 769008, India. E-mail: dashp@nitrkl.ac.in
Received 
      12th June 2017
    , Accepted 8th August 2017First published on 9th August 2017AbstractA facile one-step combustion route is used for the synthesis of a magnetically separable GO–CuFe2O4–ZnO (GCZ) ternary nanocomposite photocatalyst with varying ZnO contents. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) observations show the exfoliation of graphene oxide sheets and decoration with well-dispersed ZnO and CuFe2O4 nanoparticles. The photocatalytic activity of the ternary nanocomposite was tested under solar light irradiation for the photodegradation of several dyes such as rhodamine-B (RhB), methylene blue (MB), methyl orange (MO), and neutral phenol. The evaluation results demonstrate that the ternary GCZ photocatalyst exhibits the best performance compared to GO–CuFe2O4 (GC), GO–ZnO (GZ), CuFe2O4, ZnO, and CuFe2O4–ZnO (CZ) photocatalysts towards the photocatalytic degradation of the dyes. Photoelectrochemical measurements were carried out to provide deep insights into the enhanced photocatalytic activity in the novel ternary nanocomposite. The improved photocatalytic activity of the ternary nanocomposite can be ascribed to the superior light assimilation, proficient charge transfer process, synergistic effects, high surface area, and superior durability of the composite. Furthermore, a possible reaction mechanism has been proposed. Our results have demonstrated that by precisely introducing GO with appropriate metal oxides, a highly efficient photocatalyst can be designed that would assimilate a wider range of visible light. Furthermore, CuFe2O4 nanoparticles themselves have excellent magnetic properties, which are largely maintained in the GCZ composite, and can be simply separated from the suspension system by applying a magnetic field.
Introduction
Over the past several years, water pollution has become a severe worldwide problem, resulting in a harmful influence on public health and the environment. It is found that around 10–15% of the industrial waste comprises organic waste which is discharged in an uncontrolled way into rivers and lakes.1–3 These organic pollutants are highly resistant, toxic, and have caused serious issues for ecosystems even at low concentrations. Various methods have been developed to remove these pollutants present in water, such as screening, centrifugation, sedimentation, coagulation, microbe filtration, activated carbon adsorption, ozone treatment, gravity and flotation methods, crystallization, distillation, evaporation, oxidation, solvent extraction, precipitation, electrodialysis, electrolysis, ion exchange and reverse osmosis, etc.4 However, most of these methods still undesirably give rise to numerous drawbacks, such as nonrecyclability, low adsorption capacity, and complex operations for recycling.
Photocatalytic degradation is considered as a promising and preferred methodology for wastewater treatment due to its biological and chemical inertness, strong capacity, cost effectiveness, and long-term stability against photo and chemical corrosion.5–9 To date, several semiconductor-based photocatalysts, such as oxynitrides,10,11 sulfides,12,13 and oxides14,15 have been examined for the degradation of toxic organic pollutants in wastewater. Among all the studied semiconductors, metal oxides have demonstrated the most encouraging activities for degradation because of their suitable band energies. Among various semiconductor photocatalysts, zinc oxide (ZnO), an n-type semiconductor has been broadly studied. It has key applications in the field of energy and environmental remediation processes because of its high photo reactivity, great photostability, exceptional stability, nontoxicity, and low cost. However, ZnO has some impediments. For example, it has a large band gap of 3.2 eV, which narrows its activity within the ultraviolet region, a region that occupies only around 4% of the entire solar spectrum, while 45% of the energy belongs to visible light. To overcome this problem, formation of a p–n heterojunction between two semiconductor materials of different band gaps has been found to be a novel methodology, which enhances the separation efficiency of photogenerated charge carriers. In this respect, many binary nanocomposites16–27 have been synthesized for a variety of photocatalytic applications. However, the problem of charge recombination and recyclability still exists in these types of systems.
Therefore, exploring a highly efficient ZnO-based photocatalyst through considerable design is required. In order to solve the above problems, modifications have also been attempted by coupling carbonaceous materials as superior supports. More recently, graphene oxide (GO), a carbonaceous material with large specific surface area, good solution-dispersibility, and better electronic conductivity under reduced condition, has shown great potential as a support material in the field of photocatalysis. It is a perfect platform to receive and transport photogenerated electrons from photocatalysts under light irradiation, thus enhancing the transfer efficiency and lifetime of photogenerated electrons of the photocatalyst.28–31 An extensive range of GO-based photocatalysts have recently been reported, such as Ag3PO4/GO,32 BiOBr/GO,33 CuO/GO,34 SnO2/GO,35 GO/TiO2,36 and GO–ZnO,37etc. However, recyclability is still found to be a major issue with these photocatalysts, leading to generation of secondary pollution.
In this regard, GO-based composites with magnetic materials have been found to be an efficient way to overcome this problem. This will not only increase the visible-light absorption capacity but also improve the separation process. In particular, spinel ferrites MFe2O4 (M = Co, Ni, Cu, Mn, and Zn), have received increasing consideration owing to their environmental compatibility and dependability, as well as their simple synthesis and low cost.38–41 By using spinel as the third component, the design of ternary nanocomposites is possible. In recent times, these ternary nanocomposites have been found to be a perfect arrangement in which the band-edge levels of each component in the segment have a stepwise structure which helps in accomplishing an efficient charge transfer process, resuting in enhanced photocatalytic performance.42 Morover, the problem of recyclability can be easily overcomed as the nanocomposites can be separated from the reaction mixture by a simple magnet. To date, ternary nanocomposites such as GO–TiO2–Fe3O443 and GO–CdS–CoFe2O444 have been exhibited as effective photocatalyst. Towards this direction, a ternary composite of GO, CuFe2O4, and ZnO should be a promising photocatalyst as the energy levels of these materials follow the order: ZnO (CB) > GO > CuFe2O4 (CB). Such a step-wise structure would help in exchanging photo-induced electrons from the ZnO CB via GO to CuFe2O4, which can competently separate the photo-induced electrons and suppress the charge recombination. Also, the design of such a composite would help in harvesting a wider portion of solar radiation, comprising visible light for an effective photodegradation process. Furthermore, the utilization of solar radiation as an energy source reduces costs and likewise is beneficial for the environment. To the best of our knowledge, a GO–CuFe2O4–ZnO ternary composite as an efficient photocatalyst has not been demonstrated in the literature.
The porosity of the nanocomposites plays an important role in their overall photocatalytic activity. To control the porosity, many methods have been reported in the literature: for example, co-precipitation,45 sol–gel,46 chemical vapor deposition,47 solvothermal synthesis,48 and microwave heating.49 However, most of these methods require long reaction times, special instrumentation, and high external temperatures. In this regard, the solution combustion synthesis (SCS) method has received intense interest due to its many advantages such as simple procedure, no requirement of surfactants or templates, low cost, short duration, ease of scale-up, time/energy efficiency, and generation of well-developed porosity. Furthermore, environmentally benign raw materials can be used in this method. Various metal oxide nanocomposite systems have been reported to be synthesized via the SCS method.50 Motivated by these advantages, we explored the synthesis of a GO–CuFe2O4–ZnO ternary nanocomposite via the SCS method.
Herein, we report for the first time a graphene oxide-based ternary graphene oxide–CuFe2O4–ZnO (GCZ) system via a one-step combustion route. The nanocomposite has been successfully used as an efficient photocatalyst for the degradation of rhodamine B (RhB), methyl orange (MO), methylene blue (MB), and phenol (Ph) under sunlight. The ternary GCZ nanocomposite showed an enhanced activity as compared to other binary nanocomposites such as GO–CuFe2O4 and GO–ZnO. This work will provide new insights into the design of other GO-based hybrid photocatalysts towards environmental applications.
Experimental
Reagents and materials
Graphite powder and zinc nitrate pentahydrate (Zn(NO3)2·5H2O) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Cu(NO3)2·3H2O, Fe(NO3)3·9H2O, H2O2 (30%), isopropanol, ethanol, NaNO3, H2SO4 (98%), HCl, KMnO4, and urea were purchased from Hi-Media. Dyes were purchased from Merck. All the above chemicals were used as received without further purification. 18 Milli-Ω millipore water was used throughout the synthesis.
Preparation of GO
GO was synthesized from natural graphite powder through a modified Hummers' method. In this synthesis, 1 g of graphite was added to 25 mL of concentrated H2SO4 (98% w/w), followed by stirring at room temperature for 24 h. After that, 100 mg of NaNO3 was added to the mixture and stirred for 30 min. Consequently, the reaction mixture was kept below 5 °C utilizing an ice bath and 3 g of KMnO4 was slowly added to the mixture and was stirred for 2 h in the ice-water bath. Around 250 mL of distilled water and 20 mL of H2O2 (30%) were added to dilute the solution at room temperature. The suspended solution was precipitated for 12 h and the upper supernatant was gathered and centrifuged. Successively, the GO powders were washed with 10% HCl and distilled water three times. The obtained GO was dispersed in distilled water to get a stable brown solution.
Preparation of a graphene oxide–CuFe2O4–ZnO (GCZ) nanocomposite
A typical experiment for the synthesis of a GCZ nanocomposite with 3 wt% ZnO nanoparticles was as follows: 80 mg of GO was dispersed into 40 mL of ethanol with sonication for 1 h. Then, a mixture of 0.0991 g Cu(NO3)2·6H2O and 0.2751 g Fe(NO3)3·9H2O was heated under combustion method to yield GC composite, followed by addition of 0.0048 g of zinc nitrate to GC composite. The above two systems were then mixed together, and stirred for another 60 min. Then, the solution was placed on an electric jacket at a temperature of 300 °C to remove the solvent, until a combustion reaction took place and black, fine GCZ was obtained. The reaction mixture was allowed to cool to room temperature and filtered, washed with distilled water five times, and calcined at 350 °C for 12 h as shown in Scheme 1. The product was labeled as GCZ.
 Scheme 1  Schematic diagram for the synthesis of the GCZ nanocomposite. 
The evaluation of photocatalytic activities
The photocatalytic activity was evaluated for the degradation of rhodamine B (RhB), methylene blue (MB), methyl orange (MO), and phenol (Ph) as organic pollutants under solar light. In a typical process, 20 mg of the photocatalyst was suspended in a 100 mL aqueous solution of RhB (40 mg L−1), MB (40 mg L−1), MO (40 mg L−1), and phenol (50 mg L−1). Before being exposed to any form of illumination, the suspensions were stirred in the dark for 1 hour to ensure that an adsorption/desorption equilibrium of the solution on the photocatalyst surface was established and the UV-vis absorption spectra of the suspensions were then taken in order to compare them with that of the original solution to note any changes in the absorbance value if any. Consequently, the suspension was illuminated with direct daylight. All experiments were conducted under similar climatic conditions on sunny days of April–June 2015 in Rourkela city (topographical area 24.25 North Latitude and 84.88 East Longitude), between 1000 hours and 1700 hours (surrounding temperature, 35–40 °C). At a fixed interval of irradiation, 3 mL of the suspension was pulled out, followed by magnetic separation to expel essentially all the catalyst. The UV-vis absorption spectrum of the supernatant was then measured utilizing the UV-visible spectrophotometer by measuring the absorbance of the dye solutions to monitor the photodegradation process.
Photoelectrochemical measurements
Photoelectrochemical measurements were performed in a three-electrode in-house developed Electrochemical Work station where Pt wire and Ag/AgCl were used as counter and reference electrodes, respectively. Thin films of the samples coated onto indium doped tin oxide (ITO) substrates were used as working electrodes. Typically, 15 mg of the sample was dissolved in 20 mL of methanol and ultra-sonicated for half an hour to allow the uniform dispersion of the sample. Then, the suspension was spin-coated onto ITO substrates which were placed onto a hot plate at 80 °C. A 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution was used as an electrolyte. The source of photons was a 150 W high-pressure mercury vapor lamp (λ = 400–450 nm), passed through a flat circular quartz window, equipped on the side of the three-electrode cell. The photo-induced current–voltage (I–V) curves were measured at an input voltage of 2.0 V. The gap between the switching on and turning off of the light was 50 s.
Characterization
The catalyst was analyzed by X-ray diffraction study using a PHILIPS PW 1830 X-ray diffractometer with a CuKα source. The FTIR spectra of the product were recorded using a Perkin-Elmer FTIR spectrophotometer using a NaCl support. The XPS analysis was carried out on a K-Alpha instrument supplied by Thermo-scientific, UK, equipped with an Al Kα (1486.6 eV) monochromatic X-ray source. The measurement was carried out in the range of 0–1350 eV and at extremely high vacuum of 10–9 mbar. Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) of the sample was recorded by Nova NanoSEM/FEI. The compositional information of the products was acquired using EDX (JEOL JSM-6480 LV). Transmission electron micrographs (TEM) of the sample were recorded using PHILIPS CM 200 equipment using carbon-coated copper grids. Nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms were obtained at 77 K using a Quantachrome Autosorb 3-B apparatus. The specific surface area and pore size distribution were acquired by emulating the BET equation and BJH method, respectively. Raman spectra were recorded using a BRUKER RFS 27 spectrometer with 1064 nm wavelength incident laser light. The UV-vis absorbance spectra were obtained using UV-2450, Agilent technologies. The dielectric parameters were measured using a computer-controlled impedance analyzer (HIOKI IMPEDANCE ANALYZER 1352) as a function of frequency (100 Hz to 1 MHz) at room temperature. The thermogravimetric (TG) measurement was carried out using a NETZSCH, STA409C, Germany thermal analyzer under a flow of N2 gas with a temperature ramp of 10 °C min−1 from room temperature to 800 °C.
Results and discussion
Structure and morphology characterization
In this study, the desired ternary compound GCZ nanocomposite contained two metal oxide semiconductors, i.e. CuFe2O4 and ZnO, which were incorporated onto the GO surface by the solution combustion method, which is both energy and time efficient. Moreover, it can easily afford porous materials during the combustion process, which is advantageous for the adsorption of organic pollutants on the nanocatalyst, resulting in effective degradation. During the synthesis, hydrated nitrates as metal salts were used as metal precursors due to the efficient oxidizing power of NO3− groups, their lower decomposition temperature, and their good solubility in water. Urea (CO(NH2)2) was used as a common fuel owing to its low cost, good availability, high exothermicity, and high coordination ability towards nitrates, which help in controlling the size of the nanoparticles.51 The samples obtained after the SCS synthesis were then characterized by various characterization techniques as outlined below.
The presence of various phases and chemical groups on GO, CuFe2O4, ZnO, GC and GCZ was characterized by XRD and FTIR spectroscopy. X-ray diffraction analysis was employed to determine the crystal phases of the synthesized samples, which are shown in Fig. 1. The X-ray diffraction peak of GO shows a sharp peak at 2θ = 10.5 which relates to the (002) reflection of the stacked GO sheets. The characteristic peaks at 2θ = 31.7, 34.4, 36.2, 47.5, 56.6, 62.8, 66.3, 67.9, and 69.1 relate to the diffraction peaks of (100), (110), (101), (200), (211), (310), and (301), which are attributable to the wurzite phase of ZnO (JCPDS: 36-1451).52 In the same way, the characteristic peaks at 2θ = 30.1, 35.6, 37.1, 43.0, 57.1, and 62.7 relate to the (220), (311), (511), (440), and (533) diffraction peaks (Fig. 1e), which are attributable to the cubic phase of CuFe2O4 (JCPDS: 25-0283).53 Finally, the XRD spectra of the GCZ nanocomposite in Fig. 1b showed the same peaks related to CuFe2O4 along with certain peaks related to the ZnO nanoparticles on the graphene oxide surface. The presence of all of these peaks in this diffractogram confirms the effective formation of the ternary nanocomposite. In all the binary and ternary nanocomposites, the absence of a GO peak implies the possible reduction of GO during the combustion process, in which supercritical (SC) solvent plays the role of a reducing agent. In addition, the insertion of the metal oxide nanoparticles such as ZnO and CuFe2O4 between the GO layers could lead to an increase in the interplanar distance, which possibly shifted the GO peak to a very low 2-theta value.54,55 Furthermore, the broad diffraction peaks of the nanocomposites imply the small crystallite size of the CuFe2O4 and ZnO nanoparticles.
 Fig. 1  X-ray diffraction patterns of the (a) GO, (b) GCZ, (c) GC, (d) ZnO, and (e) CuFe2O4 nanocomposites. 
To evaluate the presence of all the functional groups in GO and the synthesized binary and ternary nanocomposites, FTIR study was performed. Fig. 2(a–d) show the FTIR spectra of the GO, GC, CZ and GCZ nanocomposites. In the case of GO, the peaks at 1060 and 1706 cm−1 can be attributed to stretching of C–O and CO groups, while the peaks at 1570 and 1210 cm−1 are due to the stretching vibrations of phenolic C–OH groups and CC groups, respectively. Additionally, the broad peak at 3410 cm−1 is due to the stretching vibrations of the O–H stretching mode.56 The FTIR spectrum of CZ demonstrates O–H stretching vibrations at 3480 cm−1. In addition, a broad peak at 540–520 cm−1 is observed due to stretching vibration of tetrahedral Zn2+ and Fe2+ (Zn–O and Fe–O mode) of ZnO and CuFe2O4 in the CZ nanocomposite.57,58 In the case of GO–CuFe2O4, the presence of two absorption bands at 562 cm−1 and 480 cm−1 can be noticed. The absorption band at around 562 cm−1 belongs to the stretching vibration of Cu2+ in the octahedral site while the absorption band at around 480 cm−1 belongs to the stretching vibration of Fe3+ in the tetrahedral site of the CuFe2O4 nanoparticles.59 All these characteristic peaks of both GO and CuFe2O4 can be found in the spectrum of the GCZ nanocomposite along with a new characteristic peak of ZnO nanoparticles occurring at approximately 493 cm−1 due to the vibration of the Zn–O bond, further suggesting the successful incorporation of both CuFe2O4 and ZnO nanoparticles into the GO sheets. From the FTIR peak of GCZ, the intensity of the O–H stretching vibrations observed at 3410 cm−1 is reduced to some extent due to deoxygenation of –OH functional groups. Similarly, the intensity due to the carbonyl functional groups is lowered, suggesting the effective reduction of GO during the synthesis of the nanocomposite.60,61
 Fig. 2  Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of the (a) GO, (b) CZ, (c) GC, and (d) GCZ nanocomposites. 
Both the XRD pattern and FTIR spectrum confirmed the coexistence of CuFe2O4 and ZnO in the GCZ ternary nanocomposite. Later on, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed to ascertain the detailed compositions and the nature of the functional groups in the as-synthesized GO and GO–CuFe2O4–ZnO (GCZ) nanocomposite. Fig. 3(a and d) show the survey XPS spectra of GO and the GO–CuFe2O4–ZnO (GCZ) nanocomposite. The presence of the peaks in the XPS survey spectra, as shown in Fig. 3(a and d), indicates the existence of C and O elements in GO and Zn, Fe, Cu, O, and C elements in the GCZ sample. The XPS spectrum of C 1s of GO (Fig. 3b) represents four components that correspond to the carbon atoms in different functional groups, arising from the nonoxygenated ring C (CC/C–C, 284.5 eV), the C in C–O bonds (286.6 eV) of epoxy and alkoxy groups, carbonyl C (CO, 287.8 eV), and the carboxylate carbon (O–CO, 288.8 eV) groups. On comparing to GO, the respective peak intensities of the C 1s spectrum of the GO–CuFe2O4–ZnO nanocomposite (Fig. 3e) are reduced, which implies that during the synthesis of the ternary nanocomposite some of the hydroxyl and epoxide functional groups have been reduced by excessive heat. Similar observations were reported in other literature studies.62,63 The removal of these groups indicates the good electronic conductivity among its constituents, which might induce the GO sheet to serve as a conductive channel between the CuFe2O4 and ZnO nanoparticles groups.64,65 In Fig. 3(c and f), the O1s spectra of GO and GCZ are shown. The binding energy value at 532.9 eV is attributed to oxygen bonded to carbon atoms (C–O, the functional group present on graphene oxide). On comparing the O1s spectra of GCZ to GO, a shift in the peak position is observed, further indicating the reduction of oxygen functional groups. Fig. 4a presents the narrow scan XPS spectrum of the Zn2p core-level where two clear doublet peaks at 1021.9 eV and 1045 eV are visible, which correspond to Zn 2p3/2 and Zn 2p1/2 electronic states, respectively.66,67 The binding energy difference between the two lines is ∼23.2 eV, which is close to the standard reference value for that in ZnO. Clearly, the XPS spectrum of Zn2p confirms that Zn ions are in the 2+ oxidation state. In Fig. 4(b and c), we show the core-level spectra of Cu 2p and Fe 2p, respectively. The Fe 2p core-level spectrum shows typical strong peaks of Fe 2p1/2 and Fe 2p3/2 of oxidized Fe species, which can be deconvoluted into five peaks (Fig. 4c). The photoelectron peaks at 712.2 and 726.5 eV, are associated with Fe 2p3/2 and Fe 2p1/2 spin–orbit splitting, respectively. These are compared well with the Fe3+ octahedral species and the Fe3+ tetrahedral species, respectively.68 We also observed peaks at about 3 eV below the respective Fe 2p3/2 and Fe 2p1/2 core-level peaks, most probably due to the FeO. Additionally, the satellite structure between the four peaks at 719.7 eV is the fingerprint of the electronic structure, indicating the co-existence of Fe(III) and Fe(II) in the nanocomposite. Fig. 4b shows the XPS core level spectrum of Cu2p with two peaks at 934.6 eV and 954.9 eV corresponding to Cu 2p3/2 and Cu 2p1/2 peaks. The difference between these two peaks is found to be 20.3 eV, indicating the presence of the Cu2+ in the nanocomposite.69,70 Besides, two satellite peaks are observed at 943.1 and 963.6 eV for Cu 2p3/2 and Cu 2p1/2 with a difference of ∼8.1 eV. This further confirms the presence of CuO with the presence of an unfilled Cu 3d9.71 Overall, the XPS spectra of Cu 2p and Fe 2p show that Cu is in the 2+ and Fe is in the 3+ oxidation state in the nanocomposite, which is in good agreement with literature on CuFe2O4 particles.72 These results indicate successful incorporation of CuFe2O4 and ZnO nanoparticles on graphene oxide sheets.
 Fig. 3  (a) XPS survey spectrum of pure GO, (b) and (c) C 1s spectra and O 1s spectra of pure GO, (d) XPS survey spectrum of the GCZ nanocomposite, and (e) and (f) C 1s spectra and O 1s spectra of the GCZ nanocomposite. 
 Fig. 4  (a–c) XPS core level spectra of (a) Zn 2p, (b) Cu 2p, and (c) Fe 2p in the GCZ nanocomposite. 
In order to understand the morphologies of our prepared nanocomposites, FESEM analysis was performed. Fig. 5 shows the FESEM images of GO and the binary/ternary nanocomposites. The FESEM image of GO (Fig. 5a) shows the three-dimensional inter-linked structure where typical wrinkles and folds of the graphene oxide sheet can be clearly seen which were possibly formed due to the exfoliation and restacking process of GO. The GZ nanocomposite (Fig. 5b) shows that pure ZnO is composed of a large number of aggregated nanoball structures over the GO sheet. The surface of the GO sheet is uniformly anchored with ZnO nanoparticles with a homogeneous distribution of nanoparticles indicating the good affinity of the ZnO nanoparticles on the GO surface. In the case of the GC nanocomposite (Fig. 5c), it is clearly observed that the GO sheets are densely decorated by non-uniform CuFe2O4 nanoparticles. In both cases, the ZnO and CuFe2O4 nanoparticles are well-dispersed on the GO sheets and they possibly acted as a spacer.42,48,73 The ternary GCZ nanocomposite shows a rippled type of structure with uniform distribution of ZnO and CuFe2O4 nanoparticles on the graphene oxide surface (Fig. 5d). The EDX analysis of the GCZ nanocomposite (Fig. 5e) exhibits the presence of C, O, Cu, Fe, and Zn elements. The morphology and microstructure of GCZ nanocomposite were further investigated through transmission electron microscopy (TEM) as shown in Fig. 6. Fig. 6(a and b) shows that the CuFe2O4 and ZnO nanoparticles were distributed over the entire GO sheets revealing that nanoparticles are successfully decorated on the GO sheets without aggregation. The size of the metal oxide nanoparticles on GO are in the several nanometer range (40–50 nm). Because of the interaction of –OH and –COOH functional groups of GO with the surface of the metal oxide, the deposition of numerous CuFe2O4 and ZnO nanoparticles onto the graphene oxide sheets is facilitated (Fig. 6a–c). The coexistence and connection of CuFe2O4 and ZnO can be confirmed by the high-resolution TEM (Fig. 6d). Lattice fringes of 0.28 nm and 0.25 nm correspond to the (100) lattice plane of ZnO and (311) lattice plane of CuFe2O4 nanoparticles, respectively.40,74 The corresponding energy-dispersive spectrum (EDS) mapping results are shown in Fig. 6(f–k). The presence of O, Fe, Cu, Zn, and C elements in the GCZ nanocomposite confirms the successful decoration of both the metal oxide nanoparticles on the GO sheets. No traces of other impurity elements were observed in the spectra, implying that the synthesized samples are pure. The crystalline nature of the composite was further confirmed by SAED analysis which depicts a ring-like structure as shown in Fig. 6(l).
 Fig. 5  FESEM image of (a) GO, (b) GZ, (c) GC, and (d) the GCZ nanocomposite, and (e) EDX of the GCZ nanocomposite. 
 Fig. 6  (a–c) TEM image of the GCZ nanocomposite at different magnifications, (d) HRTEM image of the GCZ nanocomposite, (e–k) EDS elemental mapping of the GCZ nanocomposite, and (l) SAED pattern of the GCZ nanocomposite. 
To understand the efficient photocatalytic activity of the nanocomposite, high surface area and porous structure are two important parameters. These two parameters play an important role as they govern the diffusion of charge carriers which in turn enhance the photocatalytic activity by providing more active sites at the surface of the nanocomposite for the adsorption of reactant molecules. Further, from XRD analysis, it was found that metal oxide nanoparticles possibly act as a spacer during the nanocomposite synthesis as they help in avoiding restacking of the GO sheets and irreversible agglomeration due to van der Waals interactions.73,75 In reality, this should result in an increase in the surface area of the composite. To investigate this, nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherm measurement of pure ZnO, pure CuFe2O4, GZ, GC, and GCZ were carried out and are shown in Fig. 7. All the samples exhibit type IV isotherms with an associated H3-type hysteresis loop based on the IUPAC classification. The surface areas of pure ZnO and pure CuFe2O4 nanoparticles are found to be 22 m2 g−1 and 40 m2 g−1, respectively, as shown in Table 1.
 Fig. 7  N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm of GZ, ZnO, CuFe2O4, GC, and the GCZ nanocomposite. 
Table 1 BET surface areas, pore volumes, and average pore diameters of ZnO, CuFe2O4, GZ, GC, and GCZ




Samples

S
BET (m2 g−1)

V
p (cm3 g−1)

D
p (nm)




ZnO
22
0.06
5.4


CuFe2O4
40
0.10
6.8


GZ
70
0.16
7.2


GC
90
0.23
8.1


GCZ
130
0.34
9.8




The pore size distributions of the different synthesized photocatalysts are in a narrow range from 2 to 20 nm, indicating the mesoporous nature of the synthesized materials. The incorporation of pure ZnO and CuFe2O4 nanoparticles onto the GO surface causes an increase in the surface area to 70 m2 g−1 and 90 m2 g−1, respectively, as shown in Fig. 7. After the formation of the GCZ ternary nanocomposite, the surface area was significantly increased to 130 m2 g−1. The pore volume and pore size of the GCZ nanocomposite are 0.34 cm3 g−1 and 9.8 nm which is much higher than other synthesized systems as shown in Table 1. It is anticipated that this observed increase in the surface area could be one of the factors responsible for the enhanced photocatalytic activity of the GCZ nanocomposite towards organic pollutant degradation by providing efficient adsorption and transport of charge carriers. Moreover, the high surface area justifies the idea that the metal oxide nanoparticles possibly acted as a spacer during the nanocomposite synthesis as they help in avoiding restacking of the GO sheets and irreversible agglomeration due to van der Waals' interaction.76–78
Raman spectroscopy is one of the most sensitive and informative techniques to understand the characteristic changes that occur in sp2 carbon during the chemical processing from GO to the GCZ nanocomposite and to study the effect of attachment of nanoparticles on the GO layers. Therefore, the as-synthesized nanocomposite was further characterized by Raman spectroscopy. The peaks at 1347 cm−1 and 1589 cm−1 of GO are attributed to the D band and G band, respectively (Fig. 8).79,80 The former is due to the first-order scattering of the E2g phonon of sp2 C atoms and the latter is ascribed to a breathing mode of K-point photons of A1g symmetry. In comparison, the GCZ nanocomposite had a slight shift in peak positions.
 Fig. 8  Raman spectra of (a) GO, (b) GC, and (c) the GCZ nanocomposite. 
It was found that the D- and G-Raman bands of the ternary nanocomposites are positioned at a slightly lower value position at 1292 cm−1 and 1594 cm−1, respectively. The intensity ratio of the D- and G-bands (ID/IG) usually increases on depositing metal oxide nanoparticles on the surface of GO, which suggests the existence of electronic interaction between the nanoparticles and GO. In our case, the intensity ratio of the GCZ composite (ID/IG = 1.42) and GZ (ID/IG = 1.18) is found to be larger than that of the pure graphene oxide (ID/IG = 0.98). The increase in ID/IG value indicates the generation of defects in the conjugated sp2 hybridized carbon atoms of the GO sheets during ternary nanocomposite synthesis. Moreover, the peak position of the G-band was shifted to 1594 cm−1 in the GCZ composite as compared to 1589 cm−1 in pure GO. The observed shift in the GCZ sample can be attributed to the effective reduction of GO during synthesis. In addition, possible charge transfer between the metal oxides and GO surface could be another factor in the small red shift of the G-band.81–85
These Raman results indicate the presence of electronic interaction between CuFe2O4, ZnO, and GO in the nanocomposite, thus confirming the successful incorporation of the CuFe2O4 and ZnO nanoparticles onto the GO surface. Furthermore, these results are consistent with the XPS, TEM, and FESEM results.
The magnetic properties of the as-prepared GCZ, GC, and pure CuFe2O4 nanocomposite were then measured using the VSM technique at room temperature and the results are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). The magnetic hysteresis loops of GCZ, GC, and CuFe2O4 are an S-like curve that confirms the strong magnetic response to a varying magnetic field.86,87 The specific saturation magnetization (Ms) was found to be 8.0 emu g−1 for GCZ, 11.2 emu g−1 for GC, and 16.0 emu g−1 for CuFe2O4 revealing the superparamagnetic behavior of both samples. It should be pointed out that the saturation magnetization (Ms) values decreased after the loading of GO. When an external magnetic field was applied for 20 s, rapid aggregation of the catalysts can be observed from their homogeneous dispersion (as shown in the inset of Fig. S1, ESI†). This observation suggests that the GCZ nanocatalyst can be easily separated from the solution phase using an external magnet, which is an important parameter in practical applications.
Additionally, the thermal stablity of the ternary GCZ nanocomposite was studied to evaluate the impact of the incorporation of a third material into GO by TGA analysis under a nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. S2, ESI†). The initial study of the TGA plot suggests that the GCZ ternary nanocomposite has the maximum thermal stability compared to the GC nanocomposite followed by pure GO. Pure GO showed the thermal degradation minima at (i) 100 °C, (ii) 200–220 °C, and (iii) 600 °C. The first degradation temperature is more or less the same for all the materials, and it is due to the loss of moisture and impurities captured in the material. The second degradation of 31% mass loss is observed at around 200–222 °C, ascribed to the pyrolysis of the labile oxygen-containing groups in the forms of CO2, CO, and steam. The third degradation of 60% mass loss is found above 600 °C due to decomposition of the carbon chain. The total weight loss of the GC binary nanocomposite is around 41% at 400 °C, whereas it is 19% for the GCZ ternary nanocomposite. The enhancement in the thermal stablity of the ternary GCZ nanocomposite arises due to the incorporation of a third component where the motion of the metal oxide nanoparticles becomes restricted inside the pores of GO.
In order to have excellent photocatalytic activity, the designed nanophotocatalyst should exhibit high-intensity optical absorbance both in the UV and visible region. This type of optical absorbance is important to utilize the maximum portion of the solar spectrum. The absorbance spectra of the different photocatalysts such as ZnO, GZ, CuFe2O4, GC, and GCZ were recorded by UV-vis spectrophotometer over the range of 200–700 nm as depicted in Fig. 9a. For the ZnO nanoparticles, an intense absorbance was observed at 360–380 nm which lies in the ultraviolet region. The threshold wavelength of the CuFe2O4 nanoparticles has a strong absorption in both the UV and the visible regions, represented by a broad absorption band ranging from 250 to 600 nm in the spectrum. The bandgap energies of the photocatalysts were determined from the Tauc plot, a plot between (F(R)·hν)1/2versus hν. F(R) is the Kubelka–Munk function derived from the reflectance spectra F(R) = (1 − R2)/2R equation and hν is the photon energy.88 On comparing pure ZnO (3.2 eV) and CuFe2O4 (1.56 eV) with the binary GZ and GC nanocomposites, the absorption band of the binary nanocomposite shifts toward the visible and near infrared region (Fig. 9b).
 Fig. 9  (a) UV-vis spectra and (b) Tauc's plot of the synthesized nanocomposites. 
This may be attributed to: (i) an increase in the surface electric charge of the oxides in the GC and GZ nanocomposite, and (ii) an introduction of the black body properties typically due to graphite-like material, such as graphene oxide. From the UV study, it is clear that incorporation of GO is expected to improve the light harvesting capacity as it shows increased absorbance in the visible and NIR regions. This should result in enhanced photocatalytic performance of the synthesized nanocomposites compared with the pure ZnO and CuFe2O4 nanoparticles. The wavelength of the GCZ nanocomposite is estimated to be 460 nm, corresponding to the band gap of 1.8 eV. The GCZ nanocomposite shows the strongest absorption in the sunlight range because of the synergistic effects of the GO sheets, ZnO, and CuFe2O4 nanoparticles. Such strong enhancement of light absorption capacity can increase the number of photo-generated electrons and holes, thereby increasing the photocatalytic performance.
Photocatalytic activity
To investigate the potential applications of these metal oxide incorporated GO-based binary and ternary composite photocatalysts in the fields of environment remediation and solar energy conversion, we examine their photocatalytic effectiveness towards the degradation of organic pollutants such as rhodamine-B (RhB), methylene blue (MB), methyl orange (MO), and phenol (Ph). Phenol is among the most resistant class of potential contaminant in wastewater with strong toxicity and higher solubility. RhB, MO, and MB are generally utilized and released by paper printing, paint, textile dyeing, and leather industries. Initially, blank experiments performed without photocatalyst under sunlight demonstrate no perceptible degradation happens, indicating the degradation behavior is driven basically by a photocatalytic process. To have a superior assesment, the degradation efficiency behavior of pure CuFe2O4 and ZnO nanoparticles was additionally carried out. Fig. 10a demonstrates the photodegradation rate of RhB dye having a concentration of 40 mg L−1 in the presence of the GCZ photocatalyst under exposure to sunlight for different durations. With the increase of the illumination time, the absorption peak corresponding to RhB at 663 nm diminishes gradually, affirming the degradation of RhB. The photocatalytic degradation rate of RhB for CuFe2O4 and ZnO was 20% in 130 min and 80% in 130 min, respectively (Fig. 10e).
 Fig. 10  (a–d) Absorbance spectra of RhB, MB, MO, and phenol under sunlight in the presence of the GCZ nanocomposite and (e–h) comparison of the photocatalytic degradation curves of RhB, MB, MO, and phenol with CuFe2O4, ZnO, GC, GZ, and the GCZ nanocomposite. 
By contrast, the combination of pure metal oxide with graphene oxide in the GC and GZ nanocomposites led to an increase in the photocatalytic efficiency to 84% in 70 min and 82% in 110 min, respectively. These enhanced photocatalytic activities of the GO-based binary nanocomposites could be due to the increase in surface area after GO introduction, which could lead to more capability of adsorbing higher quantities of RhB dye and results in an improvement in the efficiency of the photodegradation process. In comparison, the ternary GCZ nanocomposite showed a dramatic increase in the degradation efficiency to 99% for RhB dye at 50 min (Fig. 10e). As shown in Fig. 10e, the GCZ ternary nanocomposite possesses a faster reaction rate than other nanocomposite systems. Furthermore, it can be seen that the degradation rate of the photocatalysts follows the order: GCZ > GZ > GC > ZnO > CuFe2O4. The enhanced degradation rate of GCZ is governed by various factors: (i) the synergistic effect between CuFe2O4 and ZnO with GO, (ii) shifting of the absorption end to the visible light range, resulting in efficient electron transfer, and (iii) the high surface area of the GCZ nanocomposite. The incorporation of CuFe2O4 and ZnO on the GO surface helps to reduce the agglomeration of metal oxide on the graphene oxide sheets. Moreover, during the photocatalysis process the interlink between CuFe2O4, ZnO, and GO permits easy stepwise electron transfer, which can significantly enhance the charge carrier separation and suppress the charge recombination to a large extent. All the above processes help to improve the photocatalytic activity.
Considering the good performance of GCZ on dye treatment, photocatalytic degradation activities of other organic pollutants such as MB, MO, and phenol were also additionally examined for 40 mg L−1, 40 mg L−1, and 50 mg L−1 solutions. For MB dye, Fig. 10b shows the UV-vis absorption spectra of the dye in the presence of GCZ and Fig. 10f shows the degradation efficiency of MB in the presence of GCZ, GC, GZ, CuFe2O4, and ZnO under sunlight at different time intervals. It can be seen that MB was hardly degrading even after exposure for 120 min to sunlight in the absence of photocatalyst. When the catalyst was used, the main peaks at 498 nm decreased continuously with the increase of irradiation time, indicating that the dyes were decomposed. It was also noted that the GCZ composite exhibited better photocatalytic performance than the binary nanocomposite and pure metal oxide nanoparticles with a degradation efficiency of 100% in 40 min. A similar pattern of photodegradation of MO dye was obtained for the as-synthesized GCZ photocatalyst. For MO dye, Fig. 10c displays the UV-vis absorption spectra of the dye in the presence of GCZ and Fig. 10g shows the degradation efficiency of MO in the presence of GCZ, GC, GZ, CuFe2O4, and ZnO under sunlight at different time intervals. The degradation rate of the photocatalysts follows the order: GCZ > GZ > GC > ZnO > CuFe2O4 under sunlight.
Further for phenol, the photocatalytic activity of the GCZ nanocomposite under sunlight was explored and compared with the GC, GZ, CuFe2O4, and ZnO photocatalysts. The photodegradation of phenol utilizing GCZ was measured from the characteristic UV spectrum positioned at 273 nm (Fig. 10d). Around 88% phenol degradation was accomplished after 180 min in the presence of the GCZ nanocomposite. Phenol displays an absorption peak at 273 nm which gradually diminishes as the reaction mixture is exposed to natural sunlight irradiation. The degradation of phenol happens by means of the initial formation of quinones followed by aromatic ring opening and subsequent formation of aliphatic acids and later on carbon dioxide and water. Upon sunlight irradiation, as the absorbance peak at 273 nm diminishes, few different peaks tends to form, corresponding to catechol (280 nm), hydroquinone (289 nm), and p-benzoquinone (249 nm). Through these intermediates, phenol might be further changed over into aliphatic compounds, for example, oxalic acid and formic acid. A comparison curve for all the catalysts in phenol degradation is shown in Fig. 10h which follows the same trend as that of other dyes.
To have a better understanding of the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants, the kinetics of the photocatalytic reaction was measured. The experimental data were plotted and simplified as pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order kinetic models. A linear fitting between a pseudo-first-order kinetic model and the experimental data indicated that the photocatalytic degradation of RhB, MB, MO, and phenol follows a pseudo-first order model. Its kinetics can be expressed using ln(Ct/C0) = kapp·t, where kapp is the apparent reaction rate constant, C0 is the initial concentration of organic dye, t is the reaction time, and Ct is the concentration of dye at reaction time t. The apparent constant values can be deduced from the linear fitting of ln(Ct/C0) vs. irradiation time and the calculated values are presented in Fig. S3(a–d) (ESI†). The calculated k (min−1) constants for all the synthesized nanocomposites are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†) and the same order was found as the degradation ability: GCZ > GZ > GC > ZnO > CuFe2O4. The degradation rate constant for the GCZ nanocomposite (k = 0.0789 min−1) was higher than that of the binary nanocomposites such as GC (k = 0.06509 min−1) and GZ (k = 0.0334 min−1) for RhB dye. Similarly, the pure CuFe2O4 (k = 0.0156 min−1) and ZnO (0.0015 min−1) have lower value of rate constant than the ternary nanocomposite. The order of the rate constants follows the same trend for MB, MO, and phenol which further validates that the GCZ nanocomposite is the best photocatalyst. The GCZ nanocomposite shows the highest photocatalytic rate constant value of 0.0994 min−1, 0.1382 min−1, and 0.01108 min−1 for MB, MO and phenol, respectively. In order to further interpret the reasons behind the effective photocatalytic performance of the ternary nanocomposite over other binary and pure photocatalysts, characterizations including PL, electrochemical analysis, and nitrogen adsorption–desorption were carried out. To understand the electron transfer mechanism of the photon-induced electron transfer in the nanocomposite, a photoluminescence (PL) study was done to analyze the fluorescence decay of the nanocomposite. Fig. S4 (ESI†) shows the PL spectra of the nanocomposites which are used to analyze the efficiency of the charge carrier trapping and the lifetime of electron/hole pair recombination. The samples were scanned by incident light of wavelength ranging from 380 to 480 nm at room temperature. Distinct peaks were obtained at 382 nm, 406 nm, and 444 nm for pure ZnO as a result of electron–hole pair recombination.89 All these emission bands can be assigned to the free exciton emission of ZnO. For the GZ sample, the visible and UV emission were suppressed which may be due to the charge transfer from the trapped states and conduction band of ZnO to GO. Specifically, the GCZ ternary composite shows the weakest PL intensity among the three samples, indicating the longest lifetime and the most efficient separation efficiency of electron–hole pairs.90 This phenomenon suggests that the incorporation of GO with CuFe2O4 and ZnO can improve the separation of the photoinduced electrons and holes. It can be inferred that GCZ should possess the best photocatalytic properties which is consistent with the results of the photocatalytic activity.
To further confirm the separation capability of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs and prolongation of the lifetime of the carriers, photocurrent measurements were carried out as shown in Fig. 11a. During repeated on–off illumination cycles, prompt and reproducible current responses were observed for each electrode. The dark currents and photo-excited currents under vertical light beam illumination are measured using a standard two-probe technique. Fig. 11(a and b) illustrate the photoresponse switching behavior of the different nanocomposites such as GCZ, GC, and GZ. A slight photocurrent response (0.42 μA cm−2) was observed on the GZ electrode, while for the GC electrode, the photocurrent density reached 0.6 μA cm−2, which was about 0.4 times as large as that of the GZ electrode. Upon illumination, the photocurrent rapidly increased to a stable value of approximately 1.2 μA for the GCZ nanocomposite, and then drastically decreased to its initial level when the light was turned off, indicating the p–n junction of the CuFe2O4–ZnO hybrid. Fig. 11b shows the response time and recovery time of our device, which were found to be around 28 s and 31 s, respectively. In comparison with other GO-based nanocomposite photodetector devices, our results reveal that the GCZ photodetector exhibited an increment of 3 s in the photoresponse characteristic. It was clearly observed that the photocurrent of the GCZ composite is enhanced significantly, demonstrating the longer life span and more efficient charge separation of the ternary composite in comparison to others.
 Fig. 11  (a) The photocurrent-response of the GCZ nanocomposite, the GC nanocomposite, and the GZ nanocomposite at an applied potential of 0.5 V, (b) the rise time (tr) and the decay time (td) of different nanocomposites, and (c) impedance spectra of the synthesized ZnO, CuFe2O4, GZ, GC, and GCZ nanocomposites. 
In order to demonstrate the advantage of the ternary GCZ nanocomposite over the binary GC and GZ nanocomposites, we have also performed electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) Nyquist plots, a powerful tool to elucidate charge transfer processes at an electrode interface. Fig. 11c shows the Nyquist plots of the GCZ, GC, and GZ electrode materials under visible-light irradiation obtained in 0.2 M Na2SO4 electrolyte solution. As can be seen from the figure, the GCZ ternary nanocomposite exhibits the smallest impedance arc radius among all the samples. Since a high-frequency arc in the Nyquist plots is related to the charge-transfer limiting process and ascribed to the double-layer capacitance (Cdl) in parallel with the charge transfer resistance (Rct) at the contact interface between the electrode and electrolyte solution, the smallest impedance arc of the ternary GCZ heterostructures suggests the presence of a lower charge transfer resistance than that in the binary nanocomposites. This in turn should contribute to the better separation efficiency of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs and enhanced photoactivity of the ternary GCZ nanocomposite.
Mott–Schottky (MS) measurements reveal the electrical properties of the Schottky barrier formed between the semiconductor material and the electrolyte. As demonstrated in Fig. S5 (ESI†), the ZnO electrode (Fig. S5c, ESI†) exhibits a positive slope, indicating an n-type semiconductor character, while the negative slope of CuFe2O4 (Fig. S5d, ESI†) suggests a p-type semiconductor.91,92 The flat band potentials of ZnO and CuFe2O4 are −0.2 eV vs. RHE and 2.1 eV vs. RHE, respectively. The Tauc plots (Fig. S5a and b, ESI†) show that the optical band gaps are 3.2 for ZnO and 1.56 eV for CuFe2O4. Since the flat band potential of semiconductors may be approximately considered as the conduction band edge for n-type semiconductors and as the valence band edge for p-type semiconductors,93 the valence band edge for ZnO is found to be −0.2 V vs. RHE and the conduction band edge of CuFe2O4 is found to be 2.1 V vs. RHE (Fig. S5e, ESI†). These data are very close to the values reported in the literature.94–97
The recyclability of the photocatalyst was tested by separating the photocatalyst magnetically and then performing photocatalytic reactions for multiple cycles (Fig. S6(a–d), ESI†). Each run is carried out at an identical concentration of 20.0 mg L−1 of dye solution, with an irradiation time of 60 min, and at room temperature. A small and gradual decrease in the activity of the photocatalyst was observed which is around 2–5% after 5 cycles. These results can be attributed to two reasons: (1) mass loss of the photocatalyst during washing through external magnetism and (2) mass loss of the photocatalyst during centrifugation. The XRD measurements show that the crystalline phase structure of GCZ does not exhibit a difference before and after the photocatalytic recycling (Fig. S7, ESI†), confirming the good photostability and anti-photocorrosion property of the nanocomposite. The rapid transfer of electron and high separation efficiency of electron–hole pairs are the main reasons for the substantially enhanced photoactivity and entirely inhibited photocorrosion. Therefore, application of the GCZ nanocomposite for degradation of organic pollutants will not cause secondary pollution. Moreover, as ferrite nanoparticles themselves have a strong magnetic property, the GCZ nanocomposite can be easily separated from the heterogeneous reaction system by a magnet after photocatalysis (see the insets of Fig. S1, ESI†).
To have better understanding of the photocatalytic reaction mechanism of the GCZ ternary composite, it is necessary to determine the reactive species such as holes (h+), electrons (e−), hydroxyl radicals (˙OH), and superoxide radicals (˙O2−) which are responsible for the degradation of organic dyes. In this regard, different scavengers were employed to trace these active species that are generated in the photodegradation process. In our case, AgNO3, isopropanol (IPA), chloroform, and EDTA served as the electron (e−) scavenger, hydroxyl (˙OH) scavenger, superoxide (˙O2−) scavenger, and hole (h+) scavenger, respectively. The impact of different scavengers on the solar light photocatalytic efficiency of the GCZ nanocomposite toward organic pollutants (RhB) is shown in Fig. 12. As it can be seen, without scavengers, the degradation rate of rhodamine B is hardly inhibited. After the addition of AgNO3 and CHCl3, a minute change was observed in the degradation efficiency of the reaction system. In contrast, the photocatalytic efficiency of the GCZ nanocomposite greatly decreased by the addition of isopropanol and EDTA. These results indicate that OH˙, O2−˙ and holes (h+), are main active species responsible for the degradation of rhodamine B dye. Similar observations were also found for MB, MO, and phenol molecules.
 Fig. 12  Photocatalytic mechanism supported by a scavenger study for the GCZ nanocomposite under sunlight. 
Photocatalysis reaction mechanism
From the photocatalytic results, the photocatalytic efficiency of the different synthesized nanocomposites is found to be in the order of: GCZ > GC > GZ > CuFe2O4 > ZnO. This behavior can be ascribed to the accompanying reasons. Sunlight contains 4% of UV light and 40–50% of visible light, and the remaining constitutes IR. From UV-vis studies, it was revealed that pure spinel CuFe2O4 nanoparticles are a narrow band gap semiconductor and pure ZnO nanoparticles are a wide band gap semiconductor material which is consistent with the available literatures.98,99 Therefore, pure CuFe2O4 and ZnO nanoparticles absorb only visible and UV light and do not show maximum efficiency for photocatalytic degradation of dyes under solar irradiation. When graphene oxide was incorporated with both CuFe2O4 and ZnO nanoparticles to synthesize a GCZ nanocomposite, absorption in the UV and visible region could be well noticed. Attributable to this, the GCZ nanocomposite most likely generates more free charge carriers to induce surface chemical reactions under sunlight irradiation.
Based on the above analyses, a possible photocatalytic mechanism of the ternary GCZ nanocomposite has been proposed and shown in Fig. 13. To have a thorough understanding, a schematic of the band alignment has been drawn between the three components with regard to their energy band values. The conduction band (CB) edges of CuFe2O4 and ZnO are found to be 0.56 eV and −0.2 eV versus vacuum, respectively. The calculated work function of the reduced graphene oxide sheet is 0 eV vs. vacuum. Under the irradiation of sunlight, UV light present in solar radiation excites the electrons (e−) from the valence band (VB) of ZnO to the conduction band (CB) leaving h+ in the VB. This leads to the formation of e−–h+ pairs in the ZnO nanoparticles. In addition, visible light from sunlight can excite e− from the VB of CuFe2O4 to the CB and as a result h+ is generated in the VB of CuFe2O4. As the fermi level energy of ZnO is higher than that of CuFe2O4, the photoexcited e− from the CB of ZnO moves to the CB of CuFe2O4 through the GO layers and hence the e−–h+ pair recombination is inhibited.
 Fig. 13  Photocatalytic mechanism for the degradation of the GCZ nanocomposite under sunlight. 
This was evident by the PL studies which showed the lowest luminescence intensity for the GCZ nanocomposite (Fig. S4, ESI†). Immediately, the photogenerated electrons transfer from the CB of ZnO to GO, in which GO serves as an electron collector and transporter. The excited electrons were trapped by the adsorbed molecular oxygen on the CuFe2O4 surface to produce superoxide anion (O2−) radicals. The h+ present in the VB of both ZnO and CuFe2O4 reacts with H2O in the reaction medium and generates ˙OH radicals. These superoxide radicals and hydroxyl radicals generated from the GCZ nanocomposite can cause the oxidative decomposition of organic dyes (RhB, MB, MO, and Ph) to CO2, H2O, and other mineralization products. The close interfacial contact among individual components may also play an important role in the significantly enhanced photoactivity over the ternary nanocomposite. Besides, because of the adsorption driven by the π–π conjugation between the dye and aromatic reduced graphene oxide, more organic molecules are adsorbed on the catalyst surface resulting in a greater probability of photocatalytic reaction.
Comparison with other reported systems
Later on, to check the effectiveness of our photocatalyst, the degradation efficiency of the present framework was compared with earlier reports as presented in Table S1 (ESI†). It ought to be noticed that the earlier studies have utilized high power xenon and mercury lights for the degradation of a low concentration of dyes with a higher quantity of photocatalyst. Yet, from Table S1 (ESI†), it can be seen that our catalyst showed higher degradation efficiency for high concentrations of dye, less amount of photocatalyst, less time, and mild condition in solar light when compared with the other reported frameworks. These results affirmed that our ternary GCZ photocatalyst is superior and better than the photocatalysts observed in the previous reports.42,64,100–105
Conclusions
We have successfully constructed a new type of GO–CuFe2O4–ZnO nanocomposite photocatalyst by a simple one-pot method using a combustion method. Magnetic measurements revealed that the synthesized ternary GCZ nanocomposite has excellent magnetic properties. The degradation results indicated the enhanced solar light driven photocatalytic performance of the ternary nanocomposite. The separation ratio of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs had been greatly enhanced due to the formation of a p–n junction between CuFe2O4 and ZnO, where graphene oxide acted as an outstanding electron transporter and support material. GO–CuFe2O4–ZnO could be easily separated from aqueous solutions using a magnet. The recycling measurements of the photocatalyst revealed that the photocatalyst exhibited acceptable photocatalytic stability. In view of the high activity and recyclable magnetic separation of the GO–CuFe2O4–ZnO hybrid, it has possible potential applications in the photocatalytic degradation of various other organic pollutants in wastewater.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors are thankful to the Department of Science & Technology (DST), Govt. of India, for funding and the Sophisticated Analytical Instrument Facility, IIT Madras for providing the FT-RAMAN facility.
References
M. A. Al-Ghouti, M. A. M. Khraisheh, S. J. Allen and M. N. Ahmad, J. Environ. Manage., 2003, 69, 229–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, H. Zhang, H. Sun, S. Liu, M. O. Tade, S. Wang and W. Jin, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 7002–7023 CAS .
V. K. Gupta, I. Ali, T. A. Saleh, A. Nayak and S. Agarwal, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 6380–6388 RSC .
K. Lv, J. Yu, K. Deng, J. Sun, Y. Zhao, D. Du and M. Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 173, 539–543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Yu, S. W. Liu and H. G. Yu, J. Catal., 2007, 249, 59–66 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Yu, S. W. Liu and M. H. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 2050–2057 CAS .
J. Yu, W. Wang, B. Cheng and B. L. Su, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6743–6750 CAS .
U. G. Akpan and B. H. Hameed, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 170, 520–529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Shankar, S. Nelieu, L. Kerhoas and J. Einhorn, Chemosphere, 2007, 66, 767–774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shi, M. A. Gondal, A. A. Al-Saadi, J. K. R. Fajgar, K. S. X. Chang, Q. Xu and Z. S. Seddig, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 416, 212–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Peng, L. Li, Y. Wu, L. Jia, L. L. Tian, M. Srinivasan, S. Ramakrishn, Q. Yan and S. G. Mhaisalkar, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 1922–1930 RSC .
M. Muruganandham, R. Amutha, E. Repo, M. Sillanpaa, Y. Kusumotoc and M. A.-A. Mamun, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 216, 133–141 CrossRef CAS .
G. Madhusudanaa, P. S. Kumar, D. P. Kumar, V. V. S. S. Srikanth and M. V. Shankar, Mater. Lett., 2014, 128, 183–186 CrossRef .
D. P. Kumar, M. V. Shankar, M. M. Kumari, G. Sadanandam, B. Srinivas and V. Durgakumar, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9443–9445 RSC .
C. Cheng, A. Amini, C. Zhu, Z. Xu, H. Song and N. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4181–4185 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Baiaa, E. Orbánc, S. Fodorc, B. Hampelc, E. Z. Kedvesc, K. Saszetc, I. Székelyc and É. K. B. Rétif, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2016, 42, 66–71 CrossRef .
F. Kiantazh and A. H. Yangjeh, Solid State Sci., 2015, 49, 68–77 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Vaishnav, S. S. Arbuj, S. B. Ranea and D. P. Amalnerkar, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 47637–47642 RSC .
A. Hamrouni, N. Moussaa, F. Parrino, A. D. Paola, A. Houas and L. Palmisano, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2014, 390, 133–141 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Zhang, Z. N. Du, K. W. Li, M. Zhang and D. D. Dionysiou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1528–1537 CAS .
A. Kar, S. Kundu and A. Patra, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 10222–10230 RSC .
M. Basu, N. Garg and A. K. Ganguli, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7517–7525 CAS .
R. Saravanan, S. Karthikeyan, V. K. Gupta, G. Sekaran, V. Narayanan and A. Stephen, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2013, 33, 91–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, Z. Zhou, Y. Lian, Y. Hao, X. Liu, M. Li and Y. Wei, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 12519–12524 CrossRef CAS .
V. Štengl, S. Bakardjieva, N. Murafa, V. Houšková and K. Lang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 110, 370–378 CrossRef .
A. Sadollahkhani, I. Kazeminezhad, J. Lu, O. Nur, L. Hultman and M. Willander, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 36940–36950 RSC .
Y. Li, Z. Zhang, L. Pei, X. Li, T. Fan, J. Ji, J. Shen and M. Ye, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 190, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang and Y. J. Xu, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 24–37 RSC .
N. Zhang, M. Q. Yang, S. Q. Liu, Y. G. Sun and Y. J. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10307–10377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Q. Yang and Y. J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 8240–8254 RSC .
G. Chen, M. Sun, Q. Wei, Y. Zhanga, B. Zhua and B. Du, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 244–245, 86–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Vadivel, M. Vanitha, A. Muthukrishnaraj and N. Balasubramanian, J. Water. Proc. Eng., 2014, 1, 17–26 CrossRef .
J. Choi, H. Oh, S.-W. Han, S. Ahn and J. Noh, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2017, 17, 137–145 CrossRef .
H. Seema, K. C. Kemp, V. Chandra and K. S. Kim, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 355705 CrossRef PubMed .
L.-L. Tan, W.-J. Ong, S.-P. Chai and A. R. Mohamed, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 465–474 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Rokhsat and O. Akhavan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 371, 590–595 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jing, J. Li and Q. Liu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 284, 163–170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, M. Li and D. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6742–6749 CAS .
A. Kumar, L. Rout, L. S. K. Achary, R. S. Dhaka and P. Dash, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 42975–42993 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 6949–6985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar, L. Rout, L. S. K. Achary, A. Mohanty, R. S. Dhaka and P. Dash, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 32074–32088 RSC .
W. D. Qu, H. M. Bao, L. Y. Zhang and G. Chen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 15746–15752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Singh and N. Khare, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 96562–96572 RSC .
D. Moitra, M. Chandel, B. K. Ghosh, R. K. Jani, M. K. Patra, S. R. Vadera and N. N. Ghosh, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 76759–76772 RSC .
M. Azarang, A. Shuhaimi, R. Yousefi and S. P. Jahromi, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 21888–21896 RSC .
Y. Zhang, L. Zhang and C. Zhou, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2329–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar, L. Rout, R. S. Dhaka, S. L. Samal and P. Dash, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 39193–39204 RSC .
N. Garino, A. Sacco, M. Castellino, J. A. M. Tabares, A. Chiodoni, V. Agostino, V. Margaria, M. Gerosa, G. Massaglia and M. Quaglio, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4633–4643 CAS .
A. Varma, A. S. Mukasyan, A. S. Rogachev and K. V. Manukyan, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14493–14586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-t. Li, J. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17590–17610 RSC .
M. J. Akhtar, H. A. Alhadlaq, A. Alshamsan, M. A. M. Khan and M. Ahamed, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13876–13892 CrossRef PubMed .
B. K. Chatterjee, K. Bhattacharjee, A. Dey, C. K. Ghosh and K. K. Chattopadhyay, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 7930–7944 RSC .
H. Wang, J. T. Robinson, X. Li and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 29, 9910–9911 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Carbon, 2012, 50, 3210–3228 CrossRef CAS .
N. Shang, C. Feng, H. Zhang, S. Gao, R. Tang, C. Wang and Z. Wang, Catal. Commun., 2013, 40, 111–115 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Mahmoodi, Desalination, 2011, 279, 332–337 CrossRef CAS .
X.-M. Li, H.-L. Liu, X. Liu, N. Fang, X.-H. Wang and J.-H. Wu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Tasca, A. Ponzinibbio, G. Diaz, R. D. Bravo, A. Lavat and M. G. González, Top. Catal., 2010, 53, 1087–1090 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhoua, J. Huanga, J. Wang, Z. Yang, S. Liu, Z. Wang and S. Yang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 91802–91812 RSC .
Y.-l. Dong, X.-f. Zhang, X.-l. Cheng, Y.-m. Xu, S. Gao, H. Zhao and L.-h. Huo, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 57493–57500 RSC .
Y. Gao, X. Pu, D. Zhang, G. Ding, X. Shao and J. Ma, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4093–4101 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Carbon, 2012, 50, 3210–3228 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dutta, R. Sahoo, C. Ray, S. Sarkar, J. Jana, Y. Negishib and T. Pal, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 193–201 RSC .
J. Ma, X. Wang, Y. Liu, T. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. Guo, R. Li, X. Sun, F. Wu, C. Li and J. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2192–2201 CAS .
S. Mukhopadhyay, I. Mondal, U. Pal and P. S. Devi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 20407–20415 RSC .
S. Mukhopadhyay, D. Maiti, S. Chatterjee, P. S. Devi and G. S. Kumar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 31622–31633 RSC .
I. Bilecka, M. Kubli, E. Amstad and M. Niederberger, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2011, 57, 313–322 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bilecka, M. Kubli, E. Amstad and M. Niederberger, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2011, 57, 313–322 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, D. Meng, C. Wang and G. Diao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6030–6037 CAS .
O. Akhavan, R. Azimirad, S. Safa and E. Hasani, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9634–9640 RSC .
M. Zhu, D. Meng, C. Wang and G. Diao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6030–6037 CAS .
H. Song, L. Zhang, C. He, Y. Qu, Y. Tian and T. Lv, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5972–5977 RSC .
V. Sahu, S. Goel, R. K. Sharma and G. Singh, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 20642–20651 RSC .
X. S. Zhou, L. J. Wan and Y. G. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2152–2157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rajendran, L. K. Shrestha, K. M. M. Subramanian, R. Jayavel and K. Ariga, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18480–18487 CAS .
R. Saravanan, M. M. Khan, V. K. Gupta, E. Mosquera, F. Gracia, V. Narayanan and A. Stephen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 452, 126–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Saravanan, M. M. Khan, V. K. Gupta, E. Mosquera, F. Gracia, V. Narayanan and A. Stephen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 34645–34651 RSC .
Q. Guo and X. Qin, ECS Solid State Lett., 2013, M41–M43 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cherusseri and K. K. Kar, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 34335–34341 RSC .
N. Jiang, Z. Xiu, Z. Xie, H. Li, G. Zhao, W. Wang, Y. Wu and X. Hao, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 4312–4320 RSC .
S. D. Perera, R. G. Mariano, K. Vu, N. Nour, O. Seitz, Y. Chabal and K. J. Balkus, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 949–956 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, Y. Gao, Z. Sun, D. Chang, G. Gao and A. Dong, Molecules, 2017, 22, 12–27 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Rajendran, L. K. Shrestha, K. Minami, M. Subramanian, R. Jayavel and K. Ariga, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18480–18487 CAS .
Z. Ji, X. Shen, M. Li, H. Zhou, G. Zhu and K. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 115603 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yang, W. Chen, J. Huang, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhu and C. Li, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10632–10642 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Ji, X. Shen, X. Yue, H. Zhou, J. Yang, Y. Wang, L. Ma and K. Chen, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 459, 79–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Rout, P. Rengasamy, B. Ekka, A. Kumar and P. Dash, Nanoscale, 2015, 4, 1550059 Search PubMed .
F. Vietmeyer, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2935–2940 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, J. Zheng, H. Zhai, X. Yang, L. Yang, Y. Liu, J. Lang and M. Gao, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 489, 51–55 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fedailaine, B. Bellal, S. Berkani, M. Trari and A. Abdi, Environ. Processes, 2016, 3, 387–396 CrossRef CAS .
A. Henni, A. Merrouche, L. Telli and A. Karar, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2016, 763, 149–154 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hwang, J. Kim, T. Park and J. Lee, Catal. Lett., 2002, 80, 53–57 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Li, H.-Y. Cheng, Y.-H. Chiu and Y.-J. Hsu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15720–15729 RSC .
W. He, H.-K. Kim, W. G. Wamer, D. Melka, J. H. Callahan and J.-J. Yin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 750–757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hussain, S. Hussain, A. Waleed, M. M. Tavakoli, Z. Wang, S. Yang, Z. Fan and M. A. Nadeem, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 35315–35322 CAS .
Y. Liu, H. He, J. Li, W. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Lic and Q. Chena, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 99378–99384 RSC .
H. Yang, J. Yana, Z. Lu, X. Cheng and Y. Tanga, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 476, 715–719 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, S. Ai, Z. Liang and F. Wei, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 3692–3696 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, Z. Geng, H. Cai, L. Ma, J. Chen, J. Zeng, N. Pan and X. Wang, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2012, 4439–4444 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, K. Zhou, B. Wang, S. Jiang, X. Qian, Z. Gui, R. K. K. Yuen and Y. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 535–544 CAS .
J. Sun, Y. Fu, P. Xiong, X. Sun, B. Xuc and X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 22490–22497 RSC .
F. T. Johra and W.-G. Jung, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 491, 52–57 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Almeida, M. A. Melo, J. Bettini, J. E. Benedetti and A. F. Nogueira, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 324, 419–431 CrossRef CAS .
F. Deng, X. Lu, X. Pei, X. Luo, S. Luo and D. D. Dionysiou, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 332, 149–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nj02070hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2017
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic diagram for the synthesis of the GCZ nanocomposite.	 

 	Fig. 1  X-ray diffraction patterns of the (a) GO, (b) GCZ, (c) GC, (d) ZnO, and (e) CuFe2O4 nanocomposites.	 

 	Fig. 2  Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of the (a) GO, (b) CZ, (c) GC, and (d) GCZ nanocomposites.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) XPS survey spectrum of pure GO, (b) and (c) C 1s spectra and O 1s spectra of pure GO, (d) XPS survey spectrum of the GCZ nanocomposite, and (e) and (f) C 1s spectra and O 1s spectra of the GCZ nanocomposite.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a–c) XPS core level spectra of (a) Zn 2p, (b) Cu 2p, and (c) Fe 2p in the GCZ nanocomposite.	 

 	Fig. 5  FESEM image of (a) GO, (b) GZ, (c) GC, and (d) the GCZ nanocomposite, and (e) EDX of the GCZ nanocomposite.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a–c) TEM image of the GCZ nanocomposite at different magnifications, (d) HRTEM image of the GCZ nanocomposite, (e–k) EDS elemental mapping of the GCZ nanocomposite, and (l) SAED pattern of the GCZ nanocomposite.	 

 	Fig. 7  N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm of GZ, ZnO, CuFe2O4, GC, and the GCZ nanocomposite.	 

ZnO	22	0.06	5.4
CuFe2O4	40	0.10	6.8
GZ	70	0.16	7.2
GC	90	0.23	8.1
GCZ	130	0.34	9.8

 	Fig. 8  Raman spectra of (a) GO, (b) GC, and (c) the GCZ nanocomposite.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) UV-vis spectra and (b) Tauc's plot of the synthesized nanocomposites.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a–d) Absorbance spectra of RhB, MB, MO, and phenol under sunlight in the presence of the GCZ nanocomposite and (e–h) comparison of the photocatalytic degradation curves of RhB, MB, MO, and phenol with CuFe2O4, ZnO, GC, GZ, and the GCZ nanocomposite.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The photocurrent-response of the GCZ nanocomposite, the GC nanocomposite, and the GZ nanocomposite at an applied potential of 0.5 V, (b) the rise time (tr) and the decay time (td) of different nanocomposites, and (c) impedance spectra of the synthesized ZnO, CuFe2O4, GZ, GC, and GCZ nanocomposites.	 

 	Fig. 12  Photocatalytic mechanism supported by a scavenger study for the GCZ nanocomposite under sunlight.	 

 	Fig. 13  Photocatalytic mechanism for the degradation of the GCZ nanocomposite under sunlight.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nj02070h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2017
