Optoelectronic functional fibers: materials, fabrication, and application for smart textiles   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC03983G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC03983G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 439-455Optoelectronic functional fibers: materials, fabrication, and application for smart textiles†

        
          
            Yi 
            Xing
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yiman 
            Xu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qilin 
            Wu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gang 
            Wang
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Meifang 
            Zhu
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, China. E-mail: gwf8707@dhu.edu.cn; zhumf@dhu.edu.cn
Received 
      21st August 2020
    , Accepted 8th December 2020First published on 17th December 2020AbstractIn recent years, great progress has been made in integration of optoelectronic materials and fabrication technologies to improve the performance and simplify the device architecture. For next-generation optoelectronic applications, fibers are promising candidates for constructing diverse flexible and miniature electronics/optoelectronics. Recent advances of flexible fibers in integrating the functional materials with diverse optoelectronic properties open up the potential for advanced optical probes, functional surfaces, and smart textiles. In this paper, we highlight the recent advances of optoelectronic functional fibers in material selection, especially of organic materials, fabrication approaches, as well as their applications in energy conversion, photoelectric sensing, and logical response. We conclude by pointing out the challenges and future research direction in this area.
1 Introduction
Optoelectronics is the study and application of electronic devices and systems that emit, detect and control light, usually considered a sub-field of photonics.1 From the discovery of the photovoltaic effect in 1839 by Alexandre Becquerel to the disclosure of the photoelectric effect in 1905 by Albert Einstein, and then from the invention of light-emitting devices (LEDs) in 1907 to the development of laser diodes in 1962, optoelectronics play an important scientific role. Millions of optoelectronic devices, related to various technological fields, including energy, communication, computing, entertainment, lighting, and healthcare, have been developed.2,3 Silicon-based optoelectronics has changed our lives ever since. For decades, people have been working on the preparation of optoelectronic devices on both flat and rigid substrates with complex semiconductor epitaxy, novel device design, and efficient microfabrication technologies.4,5
Moreover, miniaturization and integration are central to the development of modern electronicdevices.6,7 Wearable electronics contacting closely with the human body demand properties including lightweight, small size, flexibility, great specific surface area, and breathability to be mounted on the fabrics.8 However, traditional electronic devices cannot satisfy such demands due to their rigid features.9,10 For improved comfort and user acceptance, it is ideal to integrate flexible devices in a textile structure by weaving. Therefore, one-dimensional fiber-shaped optoelectronic devices, including energy conversion/storage devices (e.g. solar cells), LEDs, sensors (e.g. photodetectors), and transistors, overcome these challenges due to their small diameter, lightweight, flexibility, and easy integration into soft textile electronic products.11,12
To construct fiber-shaped soft optoelectronic devices, traditional inorganic optoelectronic devices cannot meet these requirements due to their poor flexibility and bulk nature. In contrast, organic semiconductors, especially conjugated polymers, possessing semiconducting properties and mechanical properties simultaneously, are good candidates for electronic and optoelectronic flexible components.13,14 Moreover, due to the features of solubility and roll-to-roll processing, organic materials are considered to be promising candidates for flexible substrates.15
Up to now, most reports on flexible optoelectronic devices have been based on two-dimensional planar structures, which are difficult to be integrated with traditional fibers and to meet the application requirements of optoelectronic textiles. In recent years, scientists have begun to explore new ways to design materials and structures of optical fibers, hoping to bring new functionality.16,17 Fink et al. embedded optoelectronic semiconductor devices (LED and photodetectors) in fibers to make a soft washable fabric communication system, which initially realized “intelligent” fabrics that can conduct heart-rate measurements with the diodes.18 This work indicates the potential of implementing physiological-status monitoring systems in all-fabric electronics. By introducing optoelectronic functional materials into the fiber platform, it brings new possibilities for the development of next-generation fiber-shaped optoelectronic devices in terms of device structure design and integration. In other words, if we can fabricate organic semiconductors with desirable properties into the one-dimensional fibrous structure, it will greatly boost the development of optoelectronic devices in the future. These long, thin, and flexible optoelectronic fibers can efficiently accommodate complex deformations (bending, twisting, and stretching in any direction) and be sewn, woven, or embroidered into soft, breathable, and comfortable electronic fabrics by mature textile manufacturing processes. Consequently, optoelectronic fibers are ideal for large-area wearable energy harvesting and storage systems. They are also considered to be the next-generation optical probes implanted into the human body to detect signals from organs such as the brain and to treat various diseases.19,20 Moreover, they can also form 1D, 2D, and 3D networks such as those integrated into robotics and flexible electronics for health monitoring.21
In this review, as illustrated in Fig. 1, we start with the basic operation principles of three types of organic optoelectronics devices (energy conversion, sensing, and logical response) and then discuss organic optoelectronic materials (small molecules, polymers, and organic–inorganic hybrid materials). In Section 4, we focus on the fabrication process for fiber-shaped optoelectronic devices (surface coating, thermal drawing technology, and electrospinning). We further discuss the potential applications of these fiber-shaped optoelectronic devices in Section 5. At the end of this review, challenges and opportunities are presented to promote the further development of optoelectronic fibers and smart textiles in fiber-shaped optoelectronic devices.
 Fig. 1  Overview of optoelectronic materials and technological requirements for applications. 
2 Advantages and basic operation principles of optoelectronic devices
The photoelectric effect, as shown in Fig. 2, is an important phenomenon in physics, where under the irradiation of light, electrons in certain substances will be excited by photons to form an electric current, that is, photoelectricity.22,23 In particular, when struck by a light beam, the photoelectric material will absorb photon energy. When the intensity of the incident light is high enough, the crystal will absorb enough photons, which in turn excite some electrons to form the covalent bond. These excited electrons get enough energy to migrate from the valence band to the conduction band. Therefore, they generate evacuated electron positions called holes. These electrons are called free electrons that can move freely in the optoelectronic materials.1
 Fig. 2  Photoelectric effect and basic operation principle of three major optoelectronic devices (energy conversion, sensing, and logical response). 
Optoelectronic devices are primarily transducers, where they can produce light by expending electrical energy and/or transform light signals into electrical signals. Typical optoelectronic devices include field-effect transistors (FETs), electroluminescent diodes, solar cells, photodetectors, etc. As shown in Fig. 2, according to the working principle, we categorize these optoelectronic devices into energy conversion devices, sensors, and logical circuits.
The conversion of light energy into electrical energy is based on the photovoltaic effect. Photovoltaic devices, such as solar cells, can directly convert solar energy into electricity (Fig. 2a). When a solar cell is illuminated by the sun, photons hit the active materials such as silicon atoms. The active materials transfer their energy and lose electrons. Then, these high-energy electrons flow to an external circuit, thus realizing energy conversion and storage.24 This is the mechanism why photovoltaic effect produces electricity.
Optoelectronic sensors monitor changes in photons after interacting with the analyst to detect objects, changes in surface conditions, and other targets. As shown in Fig. 2b, a photoelectric sensor primarily consists of an emitter to emit light and a receiver to receive light. When the emitted light is interrupted/reflected/modulated by the sensing object, which changes the properties of light arriving at the receiver, an electrical signal is generated as output.25
As typical devices for logical responses, FETs consist of a semiconducting channel through which electrons or holes flow from the source to the drain electrodes, as shown in Fig. 2c.26 In particular, the electrical conductivity in FETs is determined by the carrier concentration in semiconductor materials. Lighting can activate the electron and enable it to overcome the shackles of atoms. When the releasing is faster than the recombination, a free electron–hole pair is formed within the semiconductor.27 Therefore, light can change the carrier concentration, and thus the conductivity of the semiconductor. Nowadays many transistors are organic thin film transistors (OTFTs) where the materials used for the semiconductor layer are two-dimensional due to the linear and rigid plane structures of most organic semiconductors (OSCs).
For optoelectronic fiber-shaped devices and applications for energy conversion, sensing detection, and logical response, a detailed discussion will be presented in Section 5.
3 Optoelectronic materials
Optoelectronic materials have been known for nearly a century. The emergence of these materials is attributed to the discovery of electroluminescence in molecular crystals and conducting polymers.3,28 The first report of their optical and electronic properties was in the 1910s.14 With the development of material design and purification, optoelectronic materials have exhibited great potential for wearable electronics and human–machine interfaces.15 Small molecules, polymers, and oligomers, due to the combined properties of semiconductors and plastics, are promising candidates for developing electronic and optoelectronic flexible components. Compared with inorganic semiconductors, organic semiconductors have unique features:
(1) Novel organic semiconductor film-forming technologies were developed, such as vacuum evaporation, solution film spinning, Langmtrir–Blodgett (LB) technology, and molecular self-assembly technology, contributing to simple, diverse, and low-cost manufacturing processes. Using large-scale organic thin-film fabrication technology, large-area devices can be fabricated.
(2) The smaller size (molecular scale) and higher integration of the devices have resulted in decreased power consumption and increased operation speed.
(3) To obtain desirable performances of organic field-effect devices, appropriate modifications of the organic molecular structures are necessary (e.g. connecting or cutting off appropriate atoms and groups on the molecular chain). At the same time, through chemical or electrochemical doping, the electrical conductivity of the organic polymer can be largely improved. The above-mentioned techniques are conducive to the development of conductive polymers.
(4) The obtainable organic materials and facile fabrication of organic field effect devices, without stringent control of air contamination and strict purity standards, can effectively reduce the costs.
(5) The field-effect devices entirely made of organic materials exhibit high flexibility and light weight.
(6) Moreover, the flexibility, structural tunability, and solution processability of organic optoelectronic materials enable as preparation of fiber-shaped optoelectronic devices. Therefore, we selected the organic materials for discussion.
Organic semiconductor-based electronic devices mainly include solar cells, electroluminescent diodes, photoconductors, laser devices, photodetectors, optical waveguides, optical switches, modulators, and FETs.23,29 In particular, tremendous progress has been made in organic FETs (OFETs) and organic solar cells recently.30,31 As shown in Fig. 3, we will focus on organic small molecules, conjugated polymers, and organic–inorganic hybrid materials.
 Fig. 3  Different types of optoelectronic materials (small molecules, polymers, and organic–inorganic hybrid materials) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2019 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers; Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society; Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
3.1 Organic small molecules
Small molecule-based semiconductors used in optoelectronic materials can mainly be divided into p-type, n-type, and ambipolar materials. We listed representative small molecules of each type in Fig. 4. As a typical p-type small molecule, pentacene is widely used for polycrystalline thin films due to its unique planar structure formed by five benzene rings connected in parallel, which is easy to crystallize and yield a large grain size (Fig. 5a).32,33 Studies have shown that the performance of OFETs using pentacene as an active layer is comparable to that based on silicon. In recent years, researchers have proposed optoelectronics integrating the molecular design of “anthracene-expanded pentacene analogs” and developed a series of organic semiconducting material systems with high mobility and luminescent properties. For instance, high-mobility electroluminescent organic semiconductor materials, 2,6-diphenylanthracene (DPA), and 2,6-di(2-naphthyl)anthracene (dNaAnt) with five benzene rings (Fig. 5a), have been utilized as active layers to construct single-component organic light-emitting transistors (OLET).34 The results showed that both DPA- and dNaAnt-based OLETs exhibited stable and strong channel characteristics. Other p-type small molecule optoelectronic materials include perylene-based,35 thienoacene-based,36 tetrathiafulvalene,37 phthalocyanine,38etc.
 Fig. 4  Different types (p-type, n-type, and ambipolar) of optoelectronic materials of organic small molecules. 
 Fig. 5  Optoelectronic properties of organic small molecules. (a) Chemical structure of pentacene and pentacene analogs for OLETs (Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (b) Chemical structure and application of N-type NDI small molecules (Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (c) Chemical structure and application of Fm-rubrene, an ambipolar optoelectronic material (Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
Additionally, in recent years, n-type small molecular materials have been widely studied for the development of organic optoelectronic devices. Nowadays, most reported n-type small molecules with high carrier mobility and electron affinity are based on naphthalene diimide (NDI) (Fig. 5b). Compared to the ullerene derivative acceptor, NDI exhibits better thermal/mechanical properties and light absorption performance. The optical properties, electronic structure, crystallinity, solubility, and charge transport of NDI-based materials can be flexibly adjusted.39 Additionally, acene-based, perylenediimide (PDI)-based, and diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP)-based small molecules are also common-used n-type optoelectronic materials (Fig. 4).40,41
Ambipolar optoelectronic materials, transporting electrons and holes simultaneously, simplify the fabrication of complementary logic circuits by using a single transport component. Due to the restricted requirement of energy levels, the stock of ambipolar small-molecule optoelectronic materials is relatively limited and their performance is relatively unfavourable. As for ambipolar small molecules, Douglas et al. used alkyl and fluoroalkyl substituents to control the crystal packing structures and obtained rubrene derivative 2 (Fig. 5c). They further fabricated field-effect devices based on a single crystal of rubrene derivative 2 (Fig. 4).42 Using gold as the source/drain electrode and PMMA as the dielectric layer, hole and electron mobility reached 1.54 and 0.28 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. Small molecule compounds 1,43 3,44 and 445 in Fig. 4 also belong to the ambipolar optoelectronic materials.
3.2 Conjugated polymers
Compared with traditional silicon-based and inorganic materials, conjugated polymers have become the most important materials for building flexible and fibrous semiconductor devices due to their intrinsic flexibility and solubility.46,47 On the other hand, polymers have potential applications in large-area devices. They have enabled not only high-performance single-component devices, but also multi-component ones, such as bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells and polymer-based FETs.28 Recent advances in polymer design, synthesis, and processing have significantly improved the performance of polymer-based devices.
As shown in Fig. 6a, Jung et al. proposed a device architecture for highly efficient perovskite solar cells by using poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) as a hole-transport material without any dopants.48 They extended the platform to large-area solar cell modules (24.97 cm2), where P3HT was deposited using a scalable bar-coating method, achieving a power conversion efficiency of 16.0%. Cao et al. also designed a new imide-benzotriazole wide-bandgap polymer PTzBI-Si containing siloxane functional side chains (Fig. 6b).49 This polymer was used as an electron donor in all-polymer solar cells, combining with the classical polymer N2200 as an electron acceptor. Moreover, the solar cell was processed with a green solvent 2-methyltetrahydrofuran and exhibited a power conversion efficiency of 10.1%. Additionally, as shown in Fig. 6c, Li et al. synthesized a new polymer semiconductor, poly(2-pyridinyl-diketopyrrolopyrrole-alt-bithiophene) (PDBPyBT). High ambipolar charge transport performance with an unprecedented high electron mobility (6.30 cm2 V−1 s−1) was achieved in PDBPyBT-based OFETs.50
 Fig. 6  Organic conjugated polymers for optoelectronic devices. (a) Perovskite solar cells that use P3HT as a hole-transport material (Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2019 Nature Publishing Group). (b) N-type conjugated polymer N2200 for all-polymer solar cells (all-PSCs) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (c) A new ambipolar semiconductor polymer PDBPyBT (Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) Ladder-type polymers BBL for OECTs (Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (e) BBL/DPP polymer ground-state electron transfer in all-polymer donor–acceptor heterojunctions (Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2020 Nature Publishing Group). (f) Conjugated polymer fibers possessing intrinsic structures produced by thermal stretching (Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
Recently, ladder-type polymers have received widespread attention in organic electrochemical transistor (OECTs) applications. As shown in Fig. 6d, Fabiano et al. reported accumulation mode poly(benzimidazobenzophenanthroline) (BBL)-based transistors with high transconductance.51 Owing to the high electron conductivity and electron affinity of BBL, the reported OECT devices can work at a high current level and operate in an aqueous medium. A higher stability in pulse measurement for more than 1 h of continuous operation was demonstrated. In addition, these devices can be easily manufactured by a simple spray-coating technique, which is compatible with large-area printing processes. In their following work (Fig. 6e), they reported ground-state electron transfer in all-polymer donor–acceptor heterojunctions.52 Combining low-ionization-energy polymers (bithiophene–thiophene (P(g42T-T)) or bithiophene–thienothiophene (P(g42T-TT)) copolymers) with BBL featuring high electron affinity, the conductive interface resistivity is 5 to 6 orders of magnitude lower than that of a single polymer-based device. This theory can be potentially applied to electro-active composites such as thermoelectric devices and wearable electronics. If the semiconductor polymer can be directly spun into semiconductor fibers, it will be beneficial to the further development of smart textiles with logic functions. Recently, Mei et al. had prepared intrinsically structured conjugated polymer fibers by thermal stretching and applied them to OFETs (Fig. 6f).53 This research established the relationship among the electrical, mechanical, and morphological properties of semiconductor fibers and clarified the relationship between the electrical properties and morphological changes of semiconductor fibers and mechanical strain.
3.3 Organic–inorganic hybrid materials
Optoelectronic porous organic materials, which mainly include metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), covalent organic frameworks (COFs), and hydrogen-bonded frameworks (HOFs), have been widely investigated due to their wide applications ranging from chemical sensing and biological imaging to lighting and 3D optical storage.54
Due to the unique properties of MOFs, the performance and stability of photovoltaic devices have been largely improved. Therefore, many functionalized MOFs have been developed and applied in the field of photovoltaics in recent years.55 Photoactive MOFs are of great importance in developing photovoltaic devices, converting photon energy into electrical energy.56 We can tune the semiconductor properties of MOFs by adjusting their components, the constituent metal ions and organic linkers, which determine the bandgap (Eg).57 Basically, the light-harvesting window of a material is primarily determined by the E of the reported MOFs, which are compared in Fig. 7a. Therefore, three strategies can be adopted to effectively reduce the Eg for the development of photovoltaic applications: (i) selecting electron-rich metal nodes and conjugated organic molecules, (ii) enhancing the conjugation of organic linkers, and (iii) functionalizing organic linkages with electron-donating groups, such as hydroxyl and amino groups (Fig. 7a). Zhang et al. reported a narrow line width single-frequency fiber laser using a new type of two-dimensional MOF.58 The output power fluctuation of this fiber laser is less than 1.3% and the center wavelength is 1549.9 nm. Considering the diversity of MOFs, this research opens up a new horizon for the application of MOF-based nonlinear optical materials in fiber lasers (Fig. 7a).
 Fig. 7  Optoelectronic properties of organic networks. (a) MOFs for optoelectronic devices and a comparison of bandgaps of the reported MOFs (Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry; Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) A microporous porphyrin COF for spectroscopic detection devices (Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society; Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (c) HOFs for optoelectronic devices (Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Additionally, because of the introduction of photo/electroactive units such as porphyrins, pyridines, thiophenes, and phthalocyanines, COFs have shown great potential as active semiconductor layers for optoelectronic applications. Huang et al. designed and developed a microporous porphyrin COF with 5,10,15,20-tetra(4-aminophenyl)porphyrin (TAPP) and 5,10,15,20-tetra(4-formylphenyl)porphyrin (TFPP) as building blocks under solvothermal conditions.59 The COF film was transferred to the SiO2/Si substrate as the active material and the spectral detection device was successfully prepared, which exhibited full-color photoconductivity and high sensitivity at 700 nm, as well as an unprecedented high on–off ratio. Moreover, Xu and co-workers synthesized a new fully conjugated COF (g-C34N6-COF) nanofiber and studied the photoelectric properties by ultraviolet/visible absorption spectroscopy.60 It showed a wider absorption band than the model compound, indicating the extension of the conjugated absorption system in COFs. In addition, compared with the model compound, the fluorescence spectrum of the COF showed the largest red-shifted emission (Fig. 7b). Recently, a new family of materials called HOFs emerged, which are composed of only organic molecules by non-covalent hydrogen bonds and π–π interactions. Douhal et al. reported the spectral and dynamical characterization of a HOF (T12-apo), its parent compound (T12), and its estermethylated derivative (T12-ester) in the solid-state (Fig. 7c).61 They suggested combining the HOF with a blue-LED to build a white-LED, which provides new information for the optical behavior of the HOF at the single crystal level and may expand its application in optoelectronic devices. Unfortunately, there are almost no reports about HOF used for optoelectronic fibers.
4 Fabrication of optoelectronic functional fiber-shaped devices
Besides the new material design and synthesis, neotype fabrication strategies enable the emergence of diverse optoelectrical functional fiber-shaped devices and broaden the applications in wearable electronic textiles. To achieve the desirable optoelectronic performance, as well as flexible and washable properties, several strategies have been developed. In this chapter, we will mainly focus on three typical methods, including surface coating, thermal drawing of multi-function/multi-component fibers and electrospinning technology.
4.1 Fiber surface coating
Based on the production technologies of the traditional functional fibers (antibacterial fiber, graphene composite fiber, fire-resistant fiber, etc.), coating is a promising strategy to incorporate optoelectronic functional materials into textile structures. Great progress for this method has been made over the past few years, contributing to a wide application prospect, such as textile integrated energy storage, sensing, and FETs.62,63
Yan et al. reported the fabrication of OECTs based on poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) channels coated on nylon fibers (Fig. 8a).64 Highly conductive multilayer films of Cr/Au/PEDOT:PSS were coated on the fibers. The devices showed good bending stability and have been successfully applied to various sensing fields with high sensitivity and selectivity. Someya et al. reported washable organic photovoltaic materials, coated with elastic materials on both sides, achieving ductility and stability in water while maintaining a high power conversion efficiency of 7.9% (Fig. 8b).63 The efficiency of the double-side-coated devices decreased only 5.4% after immersion in water for 120min. Furthermore, the power conversion efficiency remained above 80% of the initial value even after 52% compressive strain for 20 cycles and water exposure for 100min. Moreover, as illustrated in Fig. 8c, Kim et al. proposed a facile strategy to fabricate metal–polymer insulator–organic semiconductor (MIS) coaxial microfibers for wearable fiber-shaped OFETs.65 To achieve a desirable interfacial adhesion of the coating layer, the surface modification of the metal microfibers was adopted to improve the wettability of the polymer solution. Fiber-shaped transistors based on MIS coaxial microfibers possess good electrical properties, which are comparable to those of typical devices based on flat substrates. The concept of forming a multilayer structure on functional fibers can be extended to other fiber-shaped electronic devices such as solar cells and LEDs.
 Fig. 8  Surface coated optoelectronic functional fiber for textiles. (a) OECTs based on PEDOT:PSS channels coated on Nylon fibers (Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (b) Washable organic photovoltaics coated with elastomers on both sides (Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group). (c) A simple strategy for the fabrication of metal–polymer insulator–organic semiconductor (MIS) coaxial microfibers (Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
4.2 Thermal drawing technology
Thermal drawing technology, traditionally employed to produce optical fibers, is another fiber processing technique worthwhile to highlight. Thermal drawing is the process of heating and drawing a preformed macrostructured material into ultra-long microstructured fibers.
Generally, pulling a macroscopic preform composed of silicon cladding and doped silicon core above its softening temperature can result in hundreds of kilometers long, highly uniform, and low-loss optical fiber.66 This method usually starts with the preparation of a multi-material macro preform, in which a large number of materials are arranged in an elaborate microstructure, as shown in Fig. 9a.67
 Fig. 9  Optoelectronic fiber materials based on the thermal drawing process: (a) preparation of a multimaterial macroscopic preform (Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim; Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society; Reproduced with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group). (b) Thermal drawing process of optoelectronic fiber-shaped devices (Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited; Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim; Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
The resulting preform is then sent to a furnace where all the constituent materials are soften or melt. Then the preform is drawn into the fiber by applying an external force through the winch. The diameter of the fiber can be adjusted by controlling the drawing temperature, the sample feeding speed, and the drawing speed. By using simple and cost-effective thermal drawing techniques, Sorin et al. demonstrated the fabrication of meter-long, lightweight, and flexible fibers, integrating up to eight optical detectors with feature sizes down to 100 nm.68 Finally, a wavelength-sensitive single-plane fiber optic grid was assembled and used to demonstrate lensless imaging with multicolor illumination. Rein et al. demonstrated the retractable hot-drawing process for electrically connecting the diode fiber. By placing discrete diodes alongside hollow channels, through which copper or tungsten wires were fed, they built a macroscopic preform.18 When the preform is thermally drawn, the wires approach the diodes until they make electrical contact, leading to hundreds of diodes to be connected in parallel within a fiber. The potential application of this method was further demonstrated by two types of fiber-based devices (LED and photodetectors for heart-rate measurements). As the thermal drawing technology matures, more and more optoelectronic devices have been developed. As shown in Fig. 9b, Duncan Graham-Rowe reported novel advanced optical fibers using exotic glass. With carefully designed microstructures and hollow, fluid, semiconductor or piezoelectric fiber cores, fibers were tailored to be multi-functional.69 Additionally, Maayani et al. introduced a nitrogen-vacancy (NV)-based fiber magnetometer composed of hollow silicon core fibers. The magnetometer is made of functional cladding, which contains the electrons needed for optical detection magnetic resonance (ODMR).70 Yan et al. combined the thermal drawing process with a simple sonochemical nanowire growth mechanism applied to the amorphous selenium (Se) domain. For the first time, they demonstrated the robust and scalable nanowire-based optoelectronic device based on a high-quality single crystal semiconductor.71 The resulting nanowire-based photodetector exhibited an unprecedented combination of excellent optical and optoelectronic properties in light absorption, responsivity, sensitivity, and response speed.
4.3 Electrospinning
Electrospinning is a method to make the diameter of polymer fibers reach the micro–nano scale by stretching the polymer fluid under an electrostatic field. The ideal system of electrospinning can quickly and massively prepare polymer nanofibers with high porosity and large specific surface area. Currently, it is an effective and important route to prepare one-dimensional polymeric optoelectronic devices.72
As shown in Fig. 10a, electroluminescence F8BT nanofibers, obtained by annealing the poly[(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-alt-co-(1,4-benzo-{2,1′,3}-thiadiazole)] (F8BT)/PEO blend, were successfully fabricated by Botta et al. The corresponding electrical connection was achieved by incorporating the F8BT fibers into a single-layer OLEDs.73 Jeong et al. employed electrospun semiconducting P3HT nanofibers to fabricate high-performance OFETs, based on a polyelectrolyte gate dielectric and a flexible polymer substrate, as shown in Fig. 10b.74 The average field-effect mobility is ∼2 cm2 V−1 s−1and on/off ratio is 105. Aili and co-workers successfully developed and thoroughly characterized a fibrous and biocompatible scaffold based on the luminescent low bandgap polymer poly [2,3-bis-(3-octyloxyphenyl)quinoxaline-5,8-diyl-alt-thiophene-2,5-diyl] (TQ1) (Fig. 10c). The results showed that TQ1 fibers displayed near-infrared emission and can be used in non-invasive tissues using fluorescence imaging.75 Moreover, as shown in Fig. 10d, the N2200 polymer had been successfully electrospun to be homogeneous fibers by Bertarelli et al.76 The performance of N2200 fiber-shaped OFET devices is the same or even better than that of N2200 thin film-based devices.
 Fig. 10  Optoelectronic fiber-shaped materials based on thermal electrospinning methods. (a) F8BT nanofibers for OLEDs (Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society). (b) P3HT nanofibers for OFETs (Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (c) Near-infrared emitting conjugated polymer nanofiber scaffolds for optical biomaterial tracking (Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) N2200 nanofibers transistors (Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). 
5 Fiber-shaped optoelectronic devices and applications toward smart textile
Nowadays, with the emergence of various portable devices and wearable technologies, smart textiles based on functional fibers have attracted tremendous interest in academia and industry, and optoelectronic materials are no exception.12 Currently, however, most studies show that the realization of smart textiles still relies on external optoelectronic device terminals or circuit boards to simply load on the fabric, which greatly affects the comfort of smart fabrics.77 Therefore, to satisfy the requirements of wearable optoelectronic devices in energy conversion, sensing, and logical response, we should develop next-generation fibrous optoelectronic devices, where fibers can be integrated with other materials directly to be multi-functional.
5.1 Energy conversion and photovoltaic devices
With excellent mechanical performance and high power conversion efficiency, photovoltaic devices can meet the needs of green, cheap, and portable power resources, making them ideal alternatives to traditional batteries.78 Moreover, due to the rapid development of wearable devices, flexible-wearable photovoltaic platforms can be easily adapted with any device/substrate and supply required energy to diverse kinds of electronic devices via harvesting solar energy. The majority of researchers focus on the polymer photovoltaics due to the properties of flexible, less expensive, easy functionalized, transparency, stretchability, and color/shape controllability.79
As shown in Fig. 11a, fiber-shaped solar cells have been developed rapidly in recent years. A new type of coaxial fiber perovskite solar cell with high flexibility and low cost has been developed by Qiu et al.80 In a typical manufacturing process, a tight barrier layer of stainless steel fiber is used as the anode and a perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 sensitizer was then coated onto the fiber anode. A hole transport material was coated onto the as-prepared fiber, followed by a transparent carbon nanotube (CNT) sheet as a cathode. The energy conversion efficiency of this all-solid fibrous solar cell is 3.3%. Further demonstration of integration was through weaving the flexible perovskite solar cell textile. Jeong et al. developed an encapsulation barrier by introducing a SiO2–polymer composite cover layer, which can prevent moisture penetration even during washing.81 To verify the effect, they fabricated polymer solar cells (PSCs) on the textile and resulted in excellent stability. Even after the harsh washing process (20 washing cycles with 10 minutes per cycle), the textile did not lose its mechanical flexibility. Zhang et al. proposed a solution to power wearable electronic devices by manufacturing all-solid-state optoelectronic textiles.82 To prepare a linear photoanode, a layer of ZnO nanoarray was grown on the lightweight and low-cost manganese-plated polymer wire, then CuI was deposited on the ZnO nanoarray as a hole transfer material. Each string in the textile is a new type of linear solar cell, which is composed of two twisted fiber electrodes.
 Fig. 11  Optoelectronic fiber-shaped materials applied in the energy field: (a) fiber-shaped solar cell and integrated textile (Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim; Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry; Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (b) Fiber-shaped hybrid optoelectronic conversion and energy storage devices (Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim; Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry; Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group). 
Additionally, other types of optoelectronic conversion and storage devices were also reported, as illustrated in Fig. 11b. Chen et al. developed an integrated energy wire combining the functions of optoelectronic conversion and energy storage with high efficiency.83
The surface of the titanium wire was modified with oriented titanium nanotubes. The neatly aligned carbon nanotube (CNT) fibers were finally entangled with modified titanium wires. The as-prepared devices possess an outstanding overall photoelectronic conversion and storage efficiency of 1.5%. By incorporating dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and supercapacitors, Fu and co-workers fabricated a new type of integrated power fiber, which can be used for energy conversation and storage.84 The optoelectronic conversion efficiency of PANI-based FDSSCs can reach up to 5.41%, comparable to that of sputtered Pt-based fiber dye-sensitized solar cells (FDSSCs). More importantly, they successfully used FDSSCs to charge the fiber supercapacitors (FSCs) in the integrated power fiber under sunlight and the total energy conversion of the integrated power fiber was as high as 2.1%. Zhang et al. reported a novel fiber-shaped polymer light-emitting electrochemical cell (PLEC) using all solution-based processes.85 The fibrous PLEC has a coaxial structure, where an electroluminescent polymer layer is sandwiched between a modified metal wire cathode and a conductive aligned carbon nanotube flat anode. As expected, the fibrous PLEC is lightweight, flexible, and soft. In addition, it can also be woven into luminous textiles that can be applied for large-scale production.
5.2 Sensing applications
A photoelectric sensor is a sensor that adopts optoelectrical materials as the detection element. It first converts the measured changes into optical signals, and then into electrical signals by virtue of the optoelectrical elements.86,87
Lee and co-workers demonstrated an organic photoelectric sensory artificial synapse based on a retractable organic nanowire synaptic transistor (s-ONWST) to sense and transmit the light sensory input, generate information synaptic responses, and produce informative synaptic output.88 Specifically, as shown in Fig. 12a, this sensorimotor synapse combined with a photodetector can convert patterned optical stimuli into potentiated synaptic responses through the s-ONWST. Consequently, wireless communication of light fidelity was conducted and formed an artificial neuromuscular junction to activate an artificial muscle actuator with a biomimetic muscular contraction mechanism. There are other photo-responsive shape-changing polymers mimicking the function of biological muscles that can work in response to specific stimuli.89 As shown in Fig. 12b, by coating the as-prepared fibers with micron-thick conductive silver nanowires (AgNWs), Lu et al. successfully fabricated a flexible and stretchable probe that combines light stimulation and electrophysiological recording, which can be implanted into the spinal cord of mice.90 They described the electrical impedance and light transmission properties of these probes when the rodent's spinal cord deforms, thereby illustrating the elasticity of the polymer fiber core and concentric mesh electrodes. Canales et al. presented a type of neural probe fabricated from the polymer, metal, and composite materials by a thermal drawing process, as shown in Fig. 12c.20 They successfully used fiber probes to simultaneously perform optical gene stimulation, neural recording, and drug delivery in freely moving mice. In addition, the histological evaluation of the tissue response revealed that their fiber probe possesses a stable multifunctional interface with the brain. As shown in Fig. 12d, Fink et al. reported the preparation and characterization of an all-optical fiber sensor for detecting trace hydrogen peroxide vapor down to 10 ppb.91 The sensing principle is based on the Se97S3 light guide structure embedded in the optical fiber, which flanks a hollow core. It can detect chemiluminescence (CL) from the reaction of the sensing material and the peroxide vapor flowing through the hollow core. These photodetection structures can extend hundreds of meters, endowing potential applications for remote and distributed sensing.
 Fig. 12  Optoelectronic fiber-shaped materials in sensing applications. (a) An organic optoelectronic sensorimotor artificial synapse (Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2018 American Association for the Advancement of Science). (b) Flexible and stretchable probes that combine optical stimulation with electrophysiological (Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2017 American Association for the Advancement of Science). (c) Fiber probes that possess stable multifunctional interfaces with the brain (Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group). (d) A fiber-shaped optoelectronic sensor for the detection of trace hydrogen peroxide vapor (Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
5.3 Smart optoelectronic fibers toward logic calculation applications
Exposed to troves of data, important health insights would be revealed if only fabrics could compute: sense, store, analyze, infer, alert, and act while retaining their traditional qualities.92 However, to achieve the goal of “smart clothing”, the logical operation function of fabric is essential. For the application of wearable devices such as individual equipment, special protection, sports medicine, and consumer electronics, it is critical to develop new fiber-shaped semiconductor devices that integrate logic circuits directly with fabrics, achieving the aim of truly smart clothing.
Hamedi et al. reported a novel approach for the construction of wire electrochemical transistor (WECT) devices (Fig. 13a). To produce microscale WECTs on the monofilament, they coated the textile monofilament (filament diameter, 10–100 μm) with a continuous conductive PEDOT:PSS film.93 They also demonstrated that inverters and multiplexers for digital logic and large-scale circuits can be directly designed and integrated into the three-dimensional structure of woven fibers. As shown in Fig. 13b, based on SPICE simulation, a complementary SWCNT field-effect transistor circuit was designed by Heo et al. With selective passivation and n-doping technology, they further prepared a SWCNT complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) inverter circuit on a fiber substrate.94 Based on the results, they improved the performance of the circuit by adjusting the threshold voltage between p-type and n-type FETs, reducing the source–drain contact resistance and turn-off current levels, and maintaining low output capacitance of FETs. Moreover, as illustrated in Fig. 13c, they also demonstrated a fiber-shaped organic electrolyte-gated FET based on P3HT and imidazolium ionic liquids.62 The fiber FETs worked in both field effect and electrochemical operation modes, so it exhibited large current or the high speed at low voltage. The transistor was further presented as a design scheme compatible with the textile production method, thus enabling all the design of weaving logic, and finally all weaving electronic textiles. As shown in Fig. 13d, Danto et al. demonstrated the principle of phase-change switching inside a composite fiber.95 To realize the electrical modulation of the semiconductor electronic structure, the high Te-content glass and the metal electrode were drawn simultaneously, resulting in a drastic and reversible change in device resistance. The successful development of fiber-shaped ovonic memory switch devices provides new cooperation possibilities for two previously unrelated fields of amorphous semiconductor data storage and optical fiber technologies.
 Fig. 13  Optoelectronic fiber-shaped materials toward logic computing applications. (a) Microscale WECTs on single fibers; inverters and multiplexers integrated directly into the three-dimensional structure of woven fibres. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group). (b) SWCNTs CMOS inverter circuits on fiber substrates (Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2018 Molecular Diversity Preservation International). (c) A fiber-shaped organic electrolyte-gated thin-film transistor (EGTFT) based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) A fiber-shaped organic memory switching device (Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
6 Prospects & conclusions
As shown in Fig. 14, from the discovery of polyacetylene by Alan G. MacDiarmid, Hideki Shirakawa, and Alan J. Heeger in 1977, a series of conducting polymers, such as polypyrrole (PPy), polyaniline (PANI), and polythiophene (PTh), were reported from the end of the 1970s to the beginning of the 1980s, which greatly promoted the research on conducting polymers.96 Subsequently, conducting conjugated polymers play an indispensable role in building flexible semiconductor devices such as thin-film OLEDs (1986), first polymer FETs (1986), polymer thin-film OLEDs (1990) and polymer photovoltaic devices (1995) due to their intrinsic flexibility, solubility, and semiconducting properties. We can foresee in the future, with successful development of woven organic logic electronic fibers by Linkoping University (2007) and semiconductor smart clothes by Massachusetts Institute of Technology (2018), people will focus on the logical and intelligent design of fibrous devices, which can be achieved through methods such as 3D printing, industrial weaving, material synergy,97 and device integration.92 Flexible fibers and textiles with the photoelectric function will play key roles in the development of organic optoelectronic and electronic devices.
 Fig. 14  History of optoelectronic fiber-shaped materials and textile and their future development (Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group; Reproduced with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group; Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim; Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2000 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
In this article, we mainly introduced the materials and methods for the realization of optoelectronic fibers and discussed the application of optoelectronic fiber devices from three aspects: energy conversion, sensing, and logical response. If a single fiber can perform sensory, data storage, power conversion/supply, and processing functions, the collection of these fibers, that is, a fabric can become an integrated computer.92 Through the processor in the fabric computer, programs and software can be executed to activate the functionality of fibers. At present, the only way to achieve this goal to integrate complex electronic and optoelectronic functions within fibers is thermal drawing technology.67,98
With no doubt, in the near future, optoelectronic fibers will be promising candidates that have already enabled an integrated information industry and benefitted numerous fields, such as medical, communications, aerospace, and defence. However, in spite of the fascinating features of optoelectronic fiber devices, their performance cannot match with that of conventional flat devices. We list the key advantages and disadvantages of optoelectronic fibers in Table 1.
Table 1 A comparison including advantages and disadvantages of optoelectronic fibers




Category
Advantages
Disadvantages




Optical fiber
Facile fabrication
Bulky in size


Large area application
Signal attenuation due to bending


Long lifespan
Deficient power


Immune to electromagnetic interference
Device are temperature sensitive


Higher carrying capacity




Energy conversion
Long, thin, and flexible optoelectronic fibers can efficiently accommodate complex deformation
Performance cannot match with that of conventional flat devices


Lightweight, small size, flexibility, great specific surface area, and breathability




Seamless attachment to various surfaces




Durability and stability to mechanical deformation




Sensing detection
Flexibility and durability
Bulky in size


Immunity to electromagnetic interference
Signal attenuation due to bending


Logical response
Good electrical characteristics for various e-textile applications
High operation voltages


Complex manufacturing process


Poor stability under mechanical stress


Significant dielectric leakage and poor reliability




As we discussed earlier, several strategies (surface coating, thermal drawing, and electrospinning technology) have been developed to functionalize the textile optoelectronic fibers or deposit addictive directly onto textiles. However, there are still great challenges associated with from the perspective of engineering and products remaining to be resolved. On the one hand, functional textiles must go through multiple washing and drying cycles, thus washing resistance and stability are the first issues that must be considered.99 For the fabrication of wearable devices, optoelectronic fibers have to be woven with traditional fibers, thus comfort and breathability are essential, which deserve more attention.100 Another challenge is related to the integrated function of power or optical connection, due to the difficulties related to energy storage and service life. Besides, the integration of fabric must be simple and effective to ensure the low production cost. On the other hand, the design of next-generation smart fibers and clothing, as well as adoption of optoelectronic fibers for biomaterials to explore their applications in implantable electronic devices and medical equipments, is an important trend in future.101
Finally, how to achieve effective integration of the fiber and textile industry in terms of data science/industrial manufacturing is also a imperative problem that must be solved in this field. Industrial and academic communities predict a bright future for research in optoelectronic fibers and smart textile technology.17 With the development of interdisciplinary technology in the future, in particular the development of optoelectronic functional fibers, fantasy smart fibers or textiles appearing in the movie Iron Man or Black Panther will become a reality.
Authorship contributions
Conception of the review: Yi Xing and Gang Wang. Drafting of the manuscript: Yi Xing. Revising the manuscript critically: Yi Xing, Yiman Xu, and Gang Wang. Supervision: Qilin Wu, Gang Wang, and Meifang Zhu. Approval of the version of the manuscript to be published: Yi Xing, Yiman Xu, Qilin Wu, Gang Wang, and Meifang Zhu.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for financial support from the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, the Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program by CAST, the National Advanced Functional Fiber Innovation Center (2020-fx010034), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NO. 52003049), the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (19ZR1470900, 20JC1414900, 20JC1414901).
Notes and references

          S. J. Sweeney and J. Mukherjee, Springer Handbook of Electronic and Photonic Materials,  2017 DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-48933-9 .
X. Wang, Y. Cui, T. Li, M. Lei, J. Li and Z. Wei, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 7, 1801274 CrossRef .
F. Yang, S. Cheng, X. Zhang, X. Ren, R. Li, H. Dong and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1870012 CrossRef .
H. C. Ko, M. P. Stoykovich, J. Song, V. Malyarchuk, W. M. Choi, C. J. Yu, J. B. Geddes III, J. Xiao, S. Wang, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nature, 2008, 454, 748–753 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cai, Z. Han, F. Wang, K. Zheng, Y. Cao, Y. Ma and X. Feng, Sci. China-Inf. Sci., 2018, 61, 1–27 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, X. Fu, J. He, X. Shi, T. Chen, P. Chen, B. Wang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 2070033 CrossRef .
W. Weng, J. Yang, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, S. Yang, L. Zhu and M. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1902301 CrossRef .
J. Yang, X.-L. Li, J.-W. Zhou, B. Wang and J.-L. Cheng, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2020, 38, 403–422 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, S. Xie, Y. Zhang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13643–13653 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shi, J. Sun, C. Hou, Y. Li, Q. Zhang and H. Wang, Adv. Fiber Mater., 2019, 1, 3–31 CrossRef .
J. Shi, S. Liu, L. Zhang, B. Yang, L. Shu, Y. Yang, M. Ren, Y. Wang, J. Chen, W. Chen, Y. Chai and X. Tao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1901958 CrossRef .
E. Ismar, S. Kurşun Bahadir, F. Kalaoglu and V. Koncar, Global Challenges, 2020, 4, 1900092 CrossRef .
J. Rivnay, R. M. Owens and G. G. Malliaras, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 679–685 CrossRef .
S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 923–925 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fahlman, S. Fabiano, V. Gueskine, D. Simon, M. Berggren and X. Crispin, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 627–650 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Abouraddy, M. Bayindir, G. Benoit, S. D. Hart, K. Kuriki, N. Orf, O. Shapira, F. Sorin, B. Temelkuran and Y. Fink, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 336–347 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yan, C. Dong, Y. Xiang, S. Jiang, A. Leber, G. Loke, W. Xu, C. Hou, S. Zhou, M. Chen, R. Hu, P. P. Shum, L. Wei, X. Jia, F. Sorin, X. Tao and G. Tao, Mater. Today, 2020, 35, 168–194 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rein, V. D. Favrod, C. Hou, T. Khudiyev, A. Stolyarov, J. Cox, C. C. Chung, C. Chhav, M. Ellis, J. Joannopoulos and Y. Fink, Nature, 2018, 560, 214–218 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Sun and H. Peng, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17023 CrossRef CAS .
A. Canales, X. Jia, U. P. Froriep, R. A. Koppes, C. M. Tringides, J. Selvidge, C. Lu, C. Hou, L. Wei, Y. Fink and P. Anikeeva, Nat. Biotechnol., 2015, 33, 277–284 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Y. Zhang, S. Cai, Z. Han, X. Liu, F. Wang, Y. Cao, Z. Wang, H. Li, Y. Chen and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1902062 CrossRef .
F. Laquai, Y. S. Park, J. J. Kim and T. Basche, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 1203–1231 CrossRef CAS .
O. Ostroverkhova, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 13279–13412 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fakharuddin, U. Shabbir, W. Qiu, T. Iqbal, M. Sultan, P. Heremans and L. Schmidt-Mende, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807095 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, Z. Liu, X. Xie, X. Ouyang and G. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6104–6110 RSC .
H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1319–1335 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ren, Q. Xu, H. Xia, X. Luo, F. Zhao, L. Sun, Y. Li, W. Lv, L. Du, Y. Peng and Z. Zhao, Org. Electron., 2017, 51, 142–148 CrossRef CAS .
H. Friend, Pure Appl. Chem., 2001, 73, 425–430 Search PubMed .
J. Clark and G. Lanzani, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 438–446 CrossRef CAS .
H. Klauk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2643–2666 RSC .
T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736–6767 CrossRef CAS .
H. U. Khan, M. E. Roberts, W. Knoll and Z. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1946–1953 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hinderhofer, U. Heinemeyer, A. Gerlach, S. Kowarik, R. M. Jacobs, Y. Sakamoto, T. Suzuki and F. Schreiber, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 194705 CrossRef .
Z. Qin, H. Gao, J. Liu, K. Zhou, J. Li, Y. Dang, L. Huang, H. Deng, X. Zhang, H. Dong and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903175 CrossRef .
N. Steinbrück and G. Kickelbick, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2019, 57, 1062–1073 CrossRef .
J. H. Gao, R. J. Li, L. Q. Li, Q. Meng, H. Jiang, H. X. Li and W. P. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3008–3011 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, Y. Li, H. Hu, Y. Sun, J. Wang, C. Wang, C. Wang, G. Zhang, B. Wang, W. Xu and D. Zhang, Chemistry, 2014, 20, 14614–14618 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bao, A. J. Lovinger and A. Dodahalapur, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 42–44 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, D. B. Shaikh, P. S. Rao, R. S. Bhosale, A. A. Said, A. M. Mak, Z. Wang, M. Zhao, W. Gao, B. Chen, Y. M. Lam, W. Fan, S. V. Bhosale, S. V. Bhosale and Q. Zhang, Chem. – Asian J., 2020, 15, 112–121 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kanimozhi, N. Yaacobi-Gross, K. W. Chou, A. Amassian, T. D. Anthopoulos and S. Patil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16532–16535 CrossRef CAS .
A. Giovannitti, C. B. Nielsen, D. T. Sbircea, S. Inal, M. Donahue, M. R. Niazi, D. A. Hanifi, A. Amassian, G. G. Malliaras, J. Rivnay and I. McCulloch, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13066 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. McGarry, W. Xie, C. Sutton, C. Risko, Y. Wu, V. G. Young, J.-L. Brédas, C. D. Frisbie and C. J. Douglas, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2254–2263 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Tang, A. D. Reichardt, N. Miyaki, R. M. Stoltenberg and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6064–6065 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lin, Y. Qin, J. Zhang, Y.-S. Guan, H. Xu, W. Xu and D. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 4470–4477 RSC .
M.-H. Yoon, S. A. DiBenedetto, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1348–1349 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bronstein, C. B. Nielsen, B. C. Schroeder and I. McCulloch, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2020, 4, 66–77 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fratini, M. Nikolka, A. Salleo, G. Schweicher and H. Sirringhaus, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 491–502 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, E. Y. Park, C. S. Moon, T. J. Shin, T. Y. Yang, J. H. Noh and J. Seo, Nature, 2019, 567, 511–515 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fan, L. Ying, P. Zhu, F. Pan, F. Liu, J. Chen, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703906 CrossRef .
B. Sun, W. Hong, Z. Yan, H. Aziz and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2636–2642 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, M. Vagin, S. Wang, X. Crispin, R. Forchheimer, M. Berggren and S. Fabiano, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704916 CrossRef .
K. Xu, H. Sun, T. P. Ruoko, G. Wang, R. Kroon, N. B. Kolhe, Y. Puttisong, X. Liu, D. Fazzi, K. Shibata, C. Y. Yang, N. Sun, G. Persson, A. B. Yankovich, E. Olsson, H. Yoshida, W. M. Chen, M. Fahlman, M. Kemerink, S. A. Jenekhe, C. Muller, M. Berggren and S. Fabiano, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 738–744 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, A. Gumyusenge, J. He, G. Qu, W. W. McNutt, Y. Long, H. Zhang, L. Huang, Y. Diao and J. Mei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705584 CrossRef .
A. K. Mandal, J. Mahmood and J.-B. Baek, ChemNanoMat, 2017, 3, 373–391 CrossRef CAS .
V. Stavila, A. A. Talin and M. D. Allendorf, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5994–6010 RSC .
O. Shekhah, J. Liu, R. A. Fischer and C. Woll, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1081–1106 RSC .
C.-C. Chueh, C.-I. Chen, Y.-A. Su, H. Konnerth, Y.-J. Gu, C.-W. Kung and K. C. W. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17079–17095 RSC .
Z. Sun, X. Jiang, Q. Wen, W. Li and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 4662–4666 RSC .
X. Xu, S. Wang, Y. Yue and N. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 37427–37434 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Y. He, S. Bi, M. Wang, P. Yang, D. Wu, J. Wang and F. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12065–12069 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gomez, M. Gutiérrez, B. Cohen, I. Hisaki and A. Douhal, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 6929–6939 RSC .
M. Hamedi, L. Herlogsson, X. Crispin, R. Marcilla, M. Berggren and O. Inganas, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 573–577 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jinno, K. Fukuda, X. Xu, S. Park, Y. Suzuki, M. Koizumi, T. Yokota, I. Osaka, K. Takimiya and T. Someya, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 780–785 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yang, Y. Li, C. Yang, Y. Fu, N. Wang, L. Li and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800051 CrossRef .
H. M. Kim, H. W. Kang, D. K. Hwang, H. S. Lim, B.-K. Ju and J. A. Lim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2706–2714 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bayindir, A. F. Abouraddy, O. Shapira, J. Viens, D. S. Hinczewski, F. Sorin, J. Arnold, J. D. Joannopoulos and Y. Fink, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2006, 12, 1202–1213 CAS .
W. Yan, A. Page, T. Nguyen-Dang, Y. Qu, F. Sordo, L. Wei and F. Sorin, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802348 CrossRef .
F. Sorin, O. Shapira, A. F. Abouraddy, M. Spencer, N. D. Orf, J. D. Joannopoulos and Y. Fink, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2630–2635 CrossRef CAS .
D. Graham-Rowe, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 66–67 CrossRef CAS .
S. Maayani, C. Foy, D. Englund and Y. Fink, Laser Photonics Rev., 2019, 13, 1900075 CrossRef .
W. Yan, Y. Qu, T. D. Gupta, A. Darga, D. T. Nguyen, A. G. Page, M. Rossi, M. Ceriotti and F. Sorin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700681 CrossRef .
L. Persano, A. Camposeo and D. Pisignano, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 43, 48–95 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vohra, U. Giovanella, R. Tubino, H. Murata and C. Botta, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5572–5578 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Lee, H. J. Lee, J. H. Choi, W. G. Koh, J. M. Myoung, J. H. Hur, J. J. Park, J. H. Cho and U. Jeong, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 347–351 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wickham, D. Sjölander, G. Bergström, E. Wang, V. Rajendran, C. Hildesjö, K. Skoglund, K. P. R. Nilsson and D. Aili, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4274–4281 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Canesi, A. Luzio, B. Saglio, A. Bianco, M. Caironi and C. Bertarelli, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 366–369 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Lim, H. S. Kim, R. Qazi, Y. T. Kwon, J. W. Jeong and W. H. Yeo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1901924 CrossRef .
L. Li, Z. Wu, S. Yuan and X.-B. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2101–2122 RSC .
S. A. Hashemi, S. Ramakrishna and A. G. Aberle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 685–743 RSC .
L. Qiu, J. Deng, X. Lu, Z. Yang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10425–10428 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. Jeong, Y. Jeon, S. H. Cho and K. C. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1878–1889 RSC .
N. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Huang, W. Guo, J. Yang, J. Du, X. Fan and C. Tao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 263–269 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, L. Qiu, Z. Yang, Z. Cai, J. Ren, H. Li, H. Lin, X. Sun and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11977–11980 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, H. Wu, S. Ye, X. Cai, X. Yu, S. Hou, H. Kafafy and D. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 805–812 RSC .
Z. Zhang, K. Guo, Y. Li, X. Li, G. Guan, H. Li, Y. Luo, F. Zhao, Q. Zhang, B. Wei, Q. Pei and H. Peng, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 233–238 CrossRef CAS .

          Z. Du, Intelligence Computation and Evolutionary Computation, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2013 DOI:10.1007/978-3-642-31656-2 .
Y. Qu, T. N. Dang, A. G. Page, W. Yan, T. D. Gupta, G. M. Rotaru, R. M. Rossi, V. D. Favrod, N. Bartolomei and F. Sorin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707251 CrossRef .
Y. Lee, J. Y. Oh, W. Xu, O. Kim, T. R. Kim, J. Kang, Y. Kim, D. Son, J. B.-H. Tok, M. J. Park, Z. Bao and T.-W. Lee, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, 7387 CrossRef .
D. Martella, S. Nocentini, C. Parmeggiani and D. S. Wiersma, Faraday Discuss., 2020, 223, 216–232 RSC .
C. Lu, S. Park, T. J. Richner, A. Derry, I. Brown, C. Hou, S. Rao, J. Kang, C. T. Mortiz, Y. Fink and P. Anikeeva, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 1600955 CrossRef .
A. Gumennik, A. M. Stolyarov, B. R. Schell, C. Hou, G. Lestoquoy, F. Sorin, W. McDaniel, A. Rose, J. D. Joannopoulos and Y. Fink, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6005–6009 CrossRef CAS .
G. Loke, J. Alain, W. Yan, T. Khudiyev, G. Noel, R. Yuan, A. Missakian and Y. Fink, Matter, 2020, 2, 786–788 CrossRef .
M. Hamedi, R. Forchheimer and O. Inganas, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 357–362 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Heo, K. T. Kim, S. G. Ban, Y. J. Kim, D. Kim, T. Kim, Y. Hong, I. S. Kim and S. K. Park, Materials, 2018, 11, 1878 CrossRef .
S. Danto, Z. Ruff, Z. Wang, J. D. Joannopoulos and Y. Fink, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1095–1101 CrossRef CAS .
F. Huang, Z. Bo, Y. Geng, X. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Ma, J. Hou, W. Hu, J. Pei, H. Dong, S. Wang, Z. Li, Z. Shuai, Y. Li and Y. Cao, Acta Polym. Sin., 2019, 50, 988–1046 Search PubMed .
M. Alexander Schmidt, A. Argyros and F. Sorin, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 4, 13–36 CrossRef .
G. Loke, W. Yan, T. Khudiyev, G. Noel and Y. Fink, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1904911 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, T. Kikutani, T. Liu, S. Ramakrishna and G. Tao, Adv. Fiber Mater., 2019, 1, 1–2 CrossRef .
T. Huang, Y. Zhu, J. Zhu, H. Yu, Q. Zhang and M. Zhu, Adv. Fiber Mater., 2020, 2, 338–347 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, Z. Hu, F. Zabihi, Z. Chen and M. Zhu, Adv. Fiber Mater., 2020, 2, 123–139 CrossRef .
J. S. Miller, ChemPhysChem, 2000, 1, 229–230 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† This review is dedicated to Prof. Tobin J Marks on his 75th birthday.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Overview of optoelectronic materials and technological requirements for applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  Photoelectric effect and basic operation principle of three major optoelectronic devices (energy conversion, sensing, and logical response).	 

 	Fig. 3  Different types of optoelectronic materials (small molecules, polymers, and organic–inorganic hybrid materials) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2019 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers; Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society; Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 4  Different types (p-type, n-type, and ambipolar) of optoelectronic materials of organic small molecules.	 

 	Fig. 5  Optoelectronic properties of organic small molecules. (a) Chemical structure of pentacene and pentacene analogs for OLETs (Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (b) Chemical structure and application of N-type NDI small molecules (Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (c) Chemical structure and application of Fm-rubrene, an ambipolar optoelectronic material (Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 6  Organic conjugated polymers for optoelectronic devices. (a) Perovskite solar cells that use P3HT as a hole-transport material (Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2019 Nature Publishing Group). (b) N-type conjugated polymer N2200 for all-polymer solar cells (all-PSCs) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (c) A new ambipolar semiconductor polymer PDBPyBT (Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) Ladder-type polymers BBL for OECTs (Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (e) BBL/DPP polymer ground-state electron transfer in all-polymer donor–acceptor heterojunctions (Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2020 Nature Publishing Group). (f) Conjugated polymer fibers possessing intrinsic structures produced by thermal stretching (Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 7  Optoelectronic properties of organic networks. (a) MOFs for optoelectronic devices and a comparison of bandgaps of the reported MOFs (Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry; Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) A microporous porphyrin COF for spectroscopic detection devices (Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society; Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (c) HOFs for optoelectronic devices (Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 8  Surface coated optoelectronic functional fiber for textiles. (a) OECTs based on PEDOT:PSS channels coated on Nylon fibers (Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (b) Washable organic photovoltaics coated with elastomers on both sides (Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group). (c) A simple strategy for the fabrication of metal–polymer insulator–organic semiconductor (MIS) coaxial microfibers (Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 9  Optoelectronic fiber materials based on the thermal drawing process: (a) preparation of a multimaterial macroscopic preform (Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim; Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society; Reproduced with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group). (b) Thermal drawing process of optoelectronic fiber-shaped devices (Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited; Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim; Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 10  Optoelectronic fiber-shaped materials based on thermal electrospinning methods. (a) F8BT nanofibers for OLEDs (Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society). (b) P3HT nanofibers for OFETs (Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (c) Near-infrared emitting conjugated polymer nanofiber scaffolds for optical biomaterial tracking (Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) N2200 nanofibers transistors (Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 11  Optoelectronic fiber-shaped materials applied in the energy field: (a) fiber-shaped solar cell and integrated textile (Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim; Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry; Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (b) Fiber-shaped hybrid optoelectronic conversion and energy storage devices (Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim; Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry; Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 12  Optoelectronic fiber-shaped materials in sensing applications. (a) An organic optoelectronic sensorimotor artificial synapse (Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2018 American Association for the Advancement of Science). (b) Flexible and stretchable probes that combine optical stimulation with electrophysiological (Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2017 American Association for the Advancement of Science). (c) Fiber probes that possess stable multifunctional interfaces with the brain (Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group). (d) A fiber-shaped optoelectronic sensor for the detection of trace hydrogen peroxide vapor (Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 13  Optoelectronic fiber-shaped materials toward logic computing applications. (a) Microscale WECTs on single fibers; inverters and multiplexers integrated directly into the three-dimensional structure of woven fibres. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group). (b) SWCNTs CMOS inverter circuits on fiber substrates (Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2018 Molecular Diversity Preservation International). (c) A fiber-shaped organic electrolyte-gated thin-film transistor (EGTFT) based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) A fiber-shaped organic memory switching device (Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 14  History of optoelectronic fiber-shaped materials and textile and their future development (Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group; Reproduced with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group; Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim; Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2000 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

Optical fiber	Facile fabrication	Bulky in size
Large area application	Signal attenuation due to bending
Long lifespan	Deficient power
Immune to electromagnetic interference	Device are temperature sensitive
Higher carrying capacity	

Energy conversion	Long, thin, and flexible optoelectronic fibers can efficiently accommodate complex deformation	Performance cannot match with that of conventional flat devices
Lightweight, small size, flexibility, great specific surface area, and breathability	

Seamless attachment to various surfaces	

Durability and stability to mechanical deformation	

Sensing detection	Flexibility and durability	Bulky in size
Immunity to electromagnetic interference	Signal attenuation due to bending
Logical response	Good electrical characteristics for various e-textile applications	High operation voltages
Complex manufacturing process
Poor stability under mechanical stress
Significant dielectric leakage and poor reliability
Footnote
† This review is dedicated to Prof. Tobin J Marks on his 75th birthday.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
