Graphene quantum dot-porphyrin/phthalocyanine multifunctional hybrid systems: from interfacial dialogue to application  - Biomaterials Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2BM00016D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2BM00016D
(Review Article)
Biomater. Sci., 2022, 10, 1647-1679Graphene quantum dot-porphyrin/phthalocyanine multifunctional hybrid systems: from interfacial dialogue to application

        
          
            Sujata 
            Sangam
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Simran 
            Jindal
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Aakanksha 
            Agarwal
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Basu Dev 
            Banerjee
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Puja 
            Prasad
          
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Monalisa 
            Mukherjee
          
          
        
      *ab
aMolecular Science and Engineering Laboratory, Amity Institute of Click Chemistry Research and Studies, Amity University Uttar Pradesh, Noida – 201313, India. E-mail: mmukherjee@amity.edu;   Tel: +91(0)-120-4392194
bAmity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Uttar Pradesh, Noida – 201313, India
cEnvironmental Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry, University College of Medical Sciences & GTB Hospital, University of Delhi, Delhi 110095, India
dDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi 110016, India. E-mail: pujaprasadiisc@gmail.com
Received 
      5th January 2022
    , Accepted 23rd February 2022First published on 3rd March 2022AbstractEngineered well-ordered hybrid nanomaterials are symbolically at a pivotal point, just ahead of the long-anticipated transformation of the human race. Incorporating newer carbon nanomaterials like graphene quantum dots (GQDs) with tetrapyrrolic porphyrins (Pp) and phthalocyanines (Pc) is crucial for achieving exquisite molecular nanoarchitectures that are superior to their individual components. The outcomes of this, particularly in the case of graphene quantum dot-porphyrin/phthalocyanine (GQD-Pp/Pc) hybrids, remain comprehensively unexplored to date. Interestingly, GQD-Pp/Pc hybrids provide a modern strategy to regulate matter by utilising intramolecular and organisational properties to create well-defined nanocomposites via a synergistic enhancement effect. The high molar absorption coefficient and enhanced energy transfer, hole and electron transfer abilities capabilities allow Pp and Pc to exhibit a wide spectrum of photophysical and photochemical features. However, their low biostability, non-specific tumor-targeting properties, hydrophobicity, and low cellular internalisation efficiency limit their extensive biomedical utility. Conjugating Pp/Pc to nanocarriers such as GQDs improves their targeted delivery, immunological tolerance, and longevity. Due to the zero-order release kinetics of GQDs, they can assist in maintaining a steady rate of photosensitiser (PS) delivery at the desired site. To completely rationalise the functionalization of GQD-Pp/Pc species at interfaces, we investigate the current prominence and future potential of porphyrin-related graphene nanosystems, especially GQDs, for the development of various applications. This encouraging report demonstrates how GQD-Pp/Pc species can be used to examine new phenomena at the multidisciplinary level. Notably, a customised hybrid system optimises amendable and diverse functional properties, yielding a ray of hope in the fields of photodynamic therapy (PDT), photocatalysis, solar cells, sensing, and beyond via various photo-physicochemical approaches such as electron transfer, catalytic transformation, light-harvesting, and axial/peripheral ligation of adducts. Gratifyingly, the covalent and non-covalent coupling of functional molecular units at interfaces enable new properties to be generated in hybrid systems.Sujata SangamSujata Sangam received her M.Sc. (Biotechnology) and M.Tech. (Environmental Engg. & Management) from SHUATS, Allahabad and IIT Kanpur, UP, respectively. Then, she joined Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University (Noida), U.P., India, to pursue her Ph.D. She is currently involved with the Amity Institute of Click Chemistry Research and Studies (AICCRS). She is a recipient of the GATE and CSIR-UGC JRF Fellowship. Her current research interest focuses on the interfaces of molecular chemistry, nanotechnology, biotechnology, environmental engg. and studies based on biomimetic smart carbon-nanomaterials, hydrogels, nanocomposites and their biomedical applications.Simran JindalSimran Jindal is currently pursuing her M.Sc. in Molecular Chemistry from the Amity Institute of Click Chemistry Research and Studies, Amity University (Noida), U.P., India, after receiving her undergraduate degree from Delhi University, India. Her research interests include green chemistry, nanocomposites, and their relevance in biological application.Aakanksha AgarwalAakanksha Agarwal received her Master's Degree from the State University of Uttarakhand, India. Currently, she is pursuing her PhD in Molecular Sciences and Engineering from the Amity Institute of Click Chemistry Research and Studies (AICCRS), Amity University, Noida, India. Her current research focuses on the synthesis and characterization of polymer nanocomposites, carbon-based nanomaterials and recent advances towards the sustainable production of biomass, lipids, proteins and bioactive components from microalgae using heterogeneous nanomaterials.Basu Dev BanerjeeProfessor Banerjee is an eminent Indian toxicologist and is ranked among the top 2% of global scientists from India, as stated by a Stanford University study (Updated science-wide author databases, Plos Biology, 2020). Dr B. D. Banerjee is currently working as a Professor of Biochemistry at the Department of Biochemistry, University College of Medical Sciences, since November 2000. He is actively involved in the areas of biochemistry, toxicology/toxicogenomics, immunotoxicology, environmental health and biology. Specifically, he has developed expertise in one of the thrust areas of ‘xenobiotic-induced immunomodulation and neurotoxicity’ during his career and contributed immensely to this subject in the last 38 years. His research concentrates on the identification of xenobiotic exposure/environmental stressors in microwave-induced genotoxicity and neurotoxicity in rat models as well.Puja PrasadPuja Prasad obtained her BSc and MSc from Calcutta University and IISc Bangalore, respectively. She received her Ph.D. in 2014 from IISc Bangalore under the supervision of Prof. Akhil R. Chakravarty, where she worked on the design and synthesis of metal-based anticancer agents. She then joined the group of Prof. Patrick J. Sinko, Rutgers University, USA, for her postdoctoral research from 2014 to 2015. Currently, she is working as a CSIR-Senior Research Associate in the Department of Chemical Engineering, IIT Delhi, India. Her research interests include the development of nano-bio conjugated systems and metal-based complexes for combatting antimicrobial resistance.Monalisa MukherjeeProf. Monalisa Mukherjee completed her Bachelor's and Master's Degrees from the University of North Bengal, India. She received her Ph.D. from CBME, IIT Delhi, in 2006. Presently, she is serving as the Director of the Amity Institute of Click Chemistry Research and Studies (AICCRS) & Professor at the Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Noida, India. She is also a recipient of the UK-India Distinguished Visiting Scientist Award. She was admitted as a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC), London, UK, in 2021. During the past 5 years, Dr Mukherjee has made exemplary contributions to the field of materials science. Her research is not only reinforced by her translational and potential work but also her remarkable publications and patents.
1 Introduction
The exploration and elucidation of structurally well-ordered nanocomposites by combining GQDs with optically active porphyrins (Pp)/phthalocyanines (Pc) affords new or enhanced functionalities aided by the synergistic conjugation of multi-components, culminating in myriad applications at the forefront of rapidly expanding domains.1–10 Substantial effort has been devoted to illuminating the innate properties of natural tetrapyrroles, i.e., porphyrins (Pp), also called the “pigments of life”, and their synthetic analogues, i.e., phthalocyanines (Pc), depicting transformative milestones in biomimetic systems.3,5,11–15 Due to their extensive delocalized π-electrons, Pp are vital molecules widely present in nature in the form of enzyme active sites and visible light absorption units, which offer a convenient opportunity to control matter at the nanoscale with impressive potential.16,17 Pp and artificial Pc usually present surface and interface-related properties for various industrial and scientific applications.11–13 However, the hydrophobic properties of Pp/Pc and their lack of biodistribution due to their aggregation via the stacking of their planar molecules has shifted the focus of research to porphyrin–nanomaterial conjugated systems.6,18
Differentcarbon nanomaterials19 elegantly integrated within the tetrapyrrole ligand are crucial for accomplishing various vital processes by constructing conjugates.20–24 The analysis of new forms of carbon25,26 has transmuted the horizon of nanostructures and opened new avenues for exploration.10,27,28 In the graphene family, GQDs with a unique structure have become the focus owing to their huge potential in a variety of applications.29–35 GQDs are zero-dimensional, sp2-hybridized, fluorescent, semiconductor, carbon nanocrystals (typical size range of 3–30 nm), with the graphene lattices arranged in a honeycomb structure and joined via functional chemical groups on the edge/surface.26,36–39 The interactions in GQDs-Pp/Pc40 system provide new opportunities to achieve several synchronized adsorption conformations, with a change in substrate binding, electronic level alignment, charge-transfer,29 axial/peripheral ligation (chemical), and magnetic features.15,41,42 In the pursuit of new applications, the advantage of the systematically tuned functionalization of porphyrinic43-GQD complexes also offers customized and intricate supramolecular association44,45 for the establishment of unique optical, geometrical, and electronic properties in biomimetic systems.29 Therefore, Pp/Pc-based GQD nanohybrids, depending on the kinetics, environment, and other factors, show structure–function relationships. Nowadays, theoretical modeling, including principal component analysis (PCA), can rapidly reveal the distinctive signatures of the responses from nanohybrid systems and their components.15,52 Unquestionably, the emergence of pragmatically designed, bio-inspired, semi-synthetic GQD-Pp/Pc derivatives will have a wide impact in the field of medical53 treatment including drug development. Particularly, in PDT,54 the optical properties and photosensitizer55 can be enhanced to improve its efficacy with site-localized properties through curtailing the dose-limit side effects.29,36,37,41,51,56 This will also avoid or abate chemical degradation in the physiological system.57
This review focuses on the challenges associated with GQDs and Pp/Pc58 individually, providing insight into the development of GQD-Pp/Pc hybrid systems, which will exhibit advantages and unique features in many field, including energy (light-harvesting process),59 catalysis, optical devices, sensors,33 and therapeutics (Fig. 5).13,60 The achievements in these domains have not yet been accessed comprehensively in a single study, particularly for GQD37-Pp/Pc system,21 and thus we present examples and theoretical predictions. Gratifyingly, this outlook can inspire new paradigms and strategies in the application of GQD-Pp/Pc hybrids,61 leading to their widespread advancement compared to their separate components. The impetus for the current work was based on the need for robust conjugation to achieve the synergistic enhancement of several features.62–68
Finally, we envisage the key issues to be overcome, future research directions, and perspectives to show a full picture of these hybrids, which will enable the scientific community to appreciate the versatile application and properties exhibited by GQD-Pp/Pc hybrid systems and further encourage work in this field to unveil the unexplored path.
1.1 Graphene quantum dots (GQDs)
Several nanoparticles have raised concerns about their difficult fabrication, unfavourable biodistribution, and limited ability to control the release of their payload. Furthermore, significant background noise and the lack of an amplification approach to boost the signal output of the target are important roadblocks in the advancement of nanoparticle imaging.69 In contrast, the impressive progress achieved in graphene70,71 chemistry has made GQDs the “golden targets” for future studies due to their cutting-edge properties.72–79 GQDs have the fascinating characteristics of both two-dimensional (2D) graphene and the exceptional physicochemical properties of QDs, namely, quantum confinement effect, non-zero bandgap, and edge effects.34,80–83 Graphene-based quantum dots (GQDs) have been comprehensively explored due to their desirable attributes such as facile, eco-friendly synthesis, low cost, non-toxicity, good biocompatibility,36,84,85 high stability, controllable chemical functionality, water dispersibility, surface grafting, stable photoluminescence,73 robust chemical inertness,26 excellent electrical, and optical properties, abundant functional groups (e.g., hydroxyl, amino, and carboxyl), electron mobility, and huge surface area, endowing them immense potential applications in the optical,86 energy,87 electronic, and biomedical fields.88,89–96
Owing to their quantum confinement and special edge effects, GQDs show distinct fluorescent properties and physical and chemical properties.32,33,97–100 The size of their π-conjugated regions and their surface/edge structures regulate their optical properties, while maintaining their anisotropic nature, i.e., lateral dimensions greater than their height.26,101 Interestingly, GQDs are superior to get engineered at bio-interfaces. Besides being dimensionally wise compatible with the redox active sites within tunneling distance of cofactors, they considerably decrease the oxygen adsorption and the electron transfer barrier,23 providing enhanced electron transfer, electronic conduction abilities, and electrocatalytic activity for the redox reaction (ORR) due to the increased contribution of electro-catalytically active edge sites.15,36,102,103 Some of these properties have spurred a wide range of potential applications104 of GQDs in photodetectors, fluorescent agents,73,91 solar cells, bioimaging,91 sensors,105 batteries, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), electro-/photo-catalysis, drug delivery,106etc.36,37,77,78,86,107–111
Not geometrically, but functionally, GQD can be compared with graphene oxide (GO), whose surfaces/edges are usually decorated with carbonyl, hydroxyl, carboxyl, and/or epoxide groups.24,27,43,112–115 With these functional groups, GQDs display amphiphilicity, wherein their core is hydrophobic, while their periphery tends to be hydrophilic, resulting in excellent interfacial activity for dispersing agents or producing Pickering emulsions.116–118 Usually, graphene-based oxides are toxic and poorly fluorescent, and thus GQDs can be used to solve these problems due to their excellent physicochemical properties.119
1.2 Porphyrin/phthalocyanine
Porphyrins, together with the artificial phthalocyanines, have numerous scientific and technological applications,120,121 which often involve surface/interface-related features because of their size, complexity, remarkable stability, specific ligand functionality, and planar structures of their parent macrocycles.3,11,12,15,21 The planar arrangement of Pp and Pc is beneficial for adsorption via substantial van der Waals interactions, given that it brings other atoms into adjacent proximity to the substrate.15 Pp has distinctive photophysical properties and is extremely stable, with a sharp Soret band and enormous extinction coefficient, together with another characteristic absorption (550 to 700 nm) extending from the ultraviolet (UV) to near-infrared (NIR) region122,123 (Fig. 1a). These attributes make porphyrins valuable for the creation of functional nanostructures with donor–acceptor assembly for photocatalysis, PDT, solar energy conversion, and molecular electronics.124
 Fig. 1  (a) Porphyrin (Pp) and phthalocyanine (Pc).11 © Copyright, Advances in Natural Sciences: Nanoscience and Nanotechnology 2014. (b) Core and peripheral functionalization of macrocycles (Pp/Pc) with GQDs. 
Primordial bioinspired molecules, i.e., porphyrinic macrocyclic tetrapyrrolic arrangements joined by methine units, remain ubiquitous and invaluable in nature, acting as good photosensitizers.15 Phthalocyanines consist of four isoindole units linked by nitrogen atoms, similar to the structure of porphyrin, but different due to the presence of nitrogen in place of carbon in the methylene linker.2,14,15 Subsequently, the absorption spectrum of Pp and Pc differs in the near-infrared region. Pp and Pc porphyrinoids13,60 with graphene-based carbon nanomaterials are prominent in the scientific frontier.125,126 Pp and its synthetic analogs, Pc,127,128 are thermo-chemically stable compounds with rich redox chemistry, which can be simply tailored by careful selection of the metal atom in the macrocyclic cavity and/or by placing appropriate substituents at the peripheral and/or axial positions of the macrocycle10,21,71,124,129–131 (Fig. 1b). The nitrogen atoms in the interior form an anionic center in the central pocket, which are ideally positioned to coordinate unsaturated units for charge transfer and ligation of adducts, with reversible changes in their electronic configuration, for example, oxidation or spin states.15 In surface science, Pp with robust functionalities exhibit suitable reactivity, electronic, and magnetic properties.10 The properties of Pp can be governed by (i) the insertion of a carbene into the metal–nitrogen bond of a metalloporphyrin (MP), (ii) substitution at the meso- and α/β (peripheral)-positions, central transition metal ions, and metal ion axial ligands, and (iii) insertion of a carbene in a free-base ring to form an N,N′vinyl-bridged porphyrin16,27 (Fig. 1b). These efforts culminated in seminal explorations of porphyrins to improve their use in energy, PDT, biomimetic catalysis, photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, sensing, semiconductor, sensor, electrophotography, supramolecular chemistry, and biomedical55,132 applications8,10,15,46,55,71,133–138,139–143 (Fig. 5). The presence and type of central metal ion with axial ligands, the peripheral decoration, and the ring microenvironment all influence the optical, catalytic, electrochemical, and photochemical properties of porphyrins.144 For both PDT and solar cell applications, it is essential that electron promotion to the lowest excited state be achieved by the absorption of red light.6,145 In the case of energy, chirality is also interesting because of the chiral-induced spin selectivity (CISS) effect.146
1.3 Why porphine-based GQD nanocomposites?
Notably, pure GQD suffers from problems related to poor conductivity, difficult assembly into films, low quantum yield (ϕ), etc.29,104,147 Given that quick electron–hole recombination turns electronic energy into thermal energy, the photoluminescence (PL) quantum yield of GQDs is often reduced. Alternatively, the functionalization of GQDs can minimise their vibrational relaxation and increase their PL, ϕ.148 GQD composites also enhance the efficiency of the device.2,36,74 Porphine, sometimes known as porphin, is the simplest of the tetrapyrroles, which is made up of four pyrrole-like rings connected by four methine groups to form a bigger macrocycle ring.149 Although Pp-based derivatives are unquestionably the most suitable ligands for biological applications,3,43,143,150 they have a number of disadvantages such as insolubility in water, skin photosensitivity, dark toxicity, reduced depth of tumor necrosis, excruciating pain during photo-irradiation, and multistep synthesis for some photosensitizer formulations.5,8,151,136 The most promising application of porphyrinic compounds is PDT due to their low cytotoxicity and efficient generation of ROS.3,137,138 Besides, Pp/Pc are also well-known for their photocatalytic properties because of their homogeneous nature in solution, but they suffer from problems related to poor recovery and reusability, etc.71,152–154 These problems can be easily circumvented by constructing a hybrid system of GQDs-Pp/Pc via interface engineering, overcoming the inherent problems associated with porphyrinic compounds and enhancing the efficacy of GQDs for various applications.131,155–158,193
The functionalization of GQDs is an efficient strategy to enhance the basic properties of nanocomposites, resulting in several additional optico-physicochemical properties for wider applications.1,42,43,85,103,159,160 Currently, porphyrins are applied in optics and medicine, such as nonlinear absorbers or PDT, which increasingly require the use of far-red absorbing dyes.136,161 Accordingly the porphyrin framework can be modified to achieve this, including conjugation of the porphyrin π-system, which results in a bathochromic shift in the absorption spectrum.27,161,162 Thus, the conjugated porphyrin framework has extensive applications. If the inherent properties of porphyrin macrocycles, that is, metal centres capable of axial ligation of adducts, are preserved upon coupling with graphene, further options for the functionalization of graphene-based nanostructures, namely, GQDs, emerge.15,163 These nanostructures are crucial in various prosthetic groups, carrying out vital functions for bioenergetic pathways.164 The favorable findings have been attributed to the ability to conjugate graphene nanomaterials with Pp/Pc to overcome the barriers to both pharmacologic and molecular mechanisms.22,51,107,109 These hybrids also mediate intricate catalytic conversions and the transport or storage of respiratory gases. Furthermore, they exhibit strong optical91,165 absorption in the red/near-infrared (NIR) region of the solar spectrum, resulting in near-perfect light-harvesting units,67 which are ideal components for PDT166 and photoelectronic devices.38,136
Consequently, GQD-Pp/Pc hybrid-based materials as functional molecular units are usually applied in homogeneous systems. The heterogeneity of these moieties in crystalline frameworks with long-range-ordered structures will help facilitate their recyclability, and more importantly, understand their structure–property relationships.15,123,167–171
2 Construction of GQD-porphyrin/phthalocyanine hybrid systems
Recently, porphyrins stemmed from investigations as components of functional nanomaterial assemblies, highlighting the structural-functional correlation of a nanocrystal, wherein the interparticle spacing and orientation of building blocks can provide new function.24,43,68,172,173
Given that the interaction of the extended π-electron network of porphyrins with graphene results in interesting optoelectronic properties, the covalent and non-covalent chemistry of porphyrins with graphene-based nanomaterials has been widely investigated.27,64,110,112,163 However, there are major obstacles in obtaining nanocrystals with structural-compositional complexity,174 which require conserving the desired monodispersed property, without hampering accessibility to the innate properties of the Pp/Pc building blocks for their use. The covalent functionalization of porphyrin-nanotube conjugates can be accomplished through linkages such as carboxylic acid-induced esterification, Suzuki coupling, azide–alkyne Huisgen cycloaddition (1,3-dipolar cycloaddition), and diazonium chemistry on a pre-functionalized nanotube surface.46,53,144 This implies that Pp/Pc can be conjugated to GQDs via covalent bonds using common organic reactions such as amide coupling, click chemistry, and Michael addition reactions (Fig. 2a and b).
 Fig. 2  (a) Types of interactions between the tetrapyrrole ring and GQDs. (b) Click reaction of a macrocycle with GQDs. 
Additionally, iridium- or palladium-catalyzed direct C–H functionalization of Pp is emerging as an efficient way to introduce various functional groups in porphyrins. Furthermore, the copper-mediated Huisgen cycloaddition reaction has become a common approach to incorporate porphyrin units into functional graphene sheets. Now, these techniques, together with the traditional porphyrin synthesis, can help to construct a wide range of highly elaborate and complex Pp architectures. Based on their photophysical and electrochemical properties, GQDs and tetrapyrrole rings have been considered for active research, especially to understand the electron transfer and energy transfer processes in photosynthesis. The Cu(I)-catalyzed azide–alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC) reaction may significantly simplify the preparative paths to Pp/Pc molecules, although the assembly of covalently conjugated Pp/Pc58 usually requires complex synthetic procedures. Click chemistry175 is a powerful tool to access Pp architectures. Furthermore, the mechanism of the photoinduced electron transfer may be investigated using a diverse range of Pp-GQD conjugates. Click chemistry can be used to functionalize GQDs with diverse organic compounds, allowing the creation of a high molecular weight material in a single step (Fig. 2b).
The functional groups on the peripheries of Pp are important in the combination mode of Pp/Pc and GQDs. Multifunctional nanometer-scale architectures for optical/optoelectronic applications and catalysis have been explored, which combine the properties of the solution-dispersible form of graphene (graphene oxide) and porphyrins.56,176,177 The achieved photophysical properties reveal a remarkable optical limiting effect, i.e., high transmittance of low-intensity light and attenuation of intense optical beams.53,110,178,179 Due to the limited potency and various side effects associated with most non-porphyrinoid PS, the application of tetrapyrrole in PS is highly necessary. Covalent interaction provides thermodynamic stability to the structure. However, bond formation disturbs the electronic configuration of the material.43,68,115,163 In the covalent approach, GQDs are first activated to obtain the required functional groups such as –COOH or –NH2 on the surface of GQDs, and then reacted with Pp/Pc to obtain a stable bond (Scheme 1a). Alternatively, carboxylic acid-functionalized metallophthalocyanine (MPc) can be activated and conjugated to amine-functionalized GQDs to form an amide linkage.180 In their pioneering work, Wang et al. studied the chemical functionalization of carbon-nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene for real-world applications.21
 Scheme 1  (a) Covalent linkage of GQDs and ZnTAPc via amide coupling.180 (b) Schematic diagram depicting π–π stacking between Pc and GQDs.302 (c) Non-covalent interactions of GQDs and ZnTCPPc/ZnTmPyPc via π–π stacking and ionic interaction.180 © Copyright 2016 and 2019, Elsevier. 
In the covalent approach, the π-delocalized linkage in graphene/CNTs is perturbed, resulting in the formation of defects, diminishing their stability and conductivity, and improving their solubility and optoelectronic applications. Additionally, the functionalization of graphene moieties via free radical addition promotes the opening of the bandgap and tweaks the solubility of graphene.21 On the contrary, non-covalent functionalization of CNTs with porphyrins results in the introduction of various Pp/Pc without disturbing the aromatic character and electronic configuration of the graphene framework170,182 (Scheme 1b and c). Menilli et al. discovered that cationic porphyrins are more easily internalised than their non-cationic counterparts and their positively charged structures allow non-covalent bonding with both GQDs and GO at physiological pH. The absorbance of porphyrins was typically red-shifted when they were titrated with GO using spectrophotometric and spectrofluorometric methods, and the original fluorescence was quenched. The incredible features of GQD-Pp/Pc are based on biomimetic organization principles via non-covalent interactions such as metal-mediated complexation, hydrogen bonding, electrostatic interaction, π–π stacking, and van der Waals. These non-covalent interactions can govern the stability and geometry of nanohybrids, and also significant in controlling their structure and electron transfer properties24,43,44,123,143,183 (Fig. 2 and Scheme 1b, c) However, these nanohybrids have stability issues given that they suffer from weak interactions between the GQDs and porphyrin units, often leading to the loss of their porphyrin units. According to Pallikkara et al., covalent functionalization is a difficult and low-yielding technique, whereas non-covalent functionalization is simple and versatile.184
He et al. investigated the controlled modification of surface-anchored nanographene and graphene nanoribbons via decoration with porphine, which is anticipated to play a significant role in diverse fields.163,185 The size of a nanoparticle is perhaps its most basic attribute, besides its components.186 The size of these hybrid GQDs is comparable with that of biomolecules, thereby providing an ideal platform to study biomolecules such as proteins, cells, and viruses.24,187,188
2.1 Methods to construct GQD-Pp/Pc hybrid systems
The methods for the synthesis of GQDs can currently be divided into the top-down and bottom-up approaches. To produce nano-quantum dots, bulk carbon materials such as graphene and carbon black are typically cracked via chemical/electrochemical exfoliation, hydrothermal/solvothermal treatment, and microwave/ultrasonic treatment in the top-down synthesis method, whereas in the bottom-up synthetic approaches, chemical reactions such as step-by-step organic synthesis are used to convert organic small molecules (such as citric acid (CA), fullerenes, and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons) or organic precursors into high-quality quantum dots.85 One approach to build functional multi-component systems involves the lateral anchoring of organic heteromolecules to graphene.163,189,190 This process enables the combination of graphene nanostructures with porphyrin to create hybrid systems with desirable and tunable functionalities at their interfaces.15,27,43,163,191 In the study by Magaela et al., propanoic acid was heated to 120 °C and refluxed with 2-(4-morpholinyl) benzaldehyde in the presence of 4-(4-morpholinyl) benzaldehyde. The mixture was then added to pyrrole and refluxed, and cooled to precipitate the porphyrin, giving a yield of 78%192 (Scheme 2a). Santos et al. employed two distinct synthetic approaches to covalently functionalize GQDs with aminoporphyrin 1. Using the thionyl chloride (SOCl2) and 1-ethyl-3-(3′-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide (EDAC) coupling methods, GQDs were coupled with an aminoporphyrin via an amide linkage. The carboxylic groups at the edges of the GQDs were transformed into acid chlorides using SOCl2 before being coupled with porphyrin 1 to create the necessary amide group via A. The GQDs were first treated with chloroacetic acid to provide extra carboxylic functions, followed by conjugation with porphyrin 1, utilising EDAC as the carboxyl activating agent via B. The EDAC process (via B, 63%) gave a greater reaction yield than the SOCl2 procedure (via A, 43% yield). However, the SOCl2 technique resulted in a better porphyrin loading based on structural characterization (Fourier transform infrared and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy)18 (Scheme 2b).
 Scheme 2  (a) Synthetic pathway of porphyrin complex 1.192 Copyright 2015, Wiley-V.V. (b) Illustration of the two synthetic routes (via A and B) investigated for the preparation of two different types of GQD hybrids, namely GQD-1A and GQD-1B.18 Copyright 2021, ACS.18 
2.2 Characterization of GQD-based porphyrin hybrid systems
Pp/Pc, GQDs, and their hybrids present multiple options to govern their optical, electronic, and magnetic properties via easy and well-established synthetic methods.39 UV/Vis spectroscopy, electrospray ionization (ESI) and MALTI-TOF mass spectrometry, Raman spectroscopy, elemental analysis, Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), 1H NMR spectroscopy, transmission electron spectroscopy (TEM), and dynamic light scattering (DLS) are used to characterize GQD-Pp/Pc nanohybrid systems.119 DLS equipment can measure the size and size distribution of nanoporphyrin (NPs).194 Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) were used to analyze the surface morphologies, lateral dimensions, and height distribution of a GQD-Pp/Pc hybrid system.194 The functional groups or conjugation in porphyrins can be characterized via FTIR spectroscopy. The photophysical methods include UV-visible spectroscopy, fluorescence emission spectroscopy, and time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC). Furthermore, the electron transfer dynamics can be obtained from TCSPC.184 The zeta potential measures the charges in GQDs and GQD-Pp/Pc hybrid systems and helps to confirm the conjugation between GQDs and Pp/Pc. X-ray diffraction (XRD) is used to measure the disorder and defects in hybrid systems. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is used to investigate the chemical composition of hybrid systems. Fluorescence spectrometry can be used to measure fluorescence signals and the absorbance of NPs.194 Nene et al. reported that GQDs are monodispersed in their pristine form and tend to cluster when conjugated to Pc (TEM images). The average size for the non-conjugated GQDs determined from TEM imaging was ∼9 nm, which increased upon conjugation to about ∼19 nm for the GQD-Pc hybrid. The increase in size could be due to aggregation.181 GQDs display diagnostic Raman bands namely, G and D bands, arising from the E2g tangential vibrational mode of the sp2-bonded carbons and disordered A1g breathing vibrational mode of the aromatic sp2 carbon rings, respectively. A shift in the G and D bands is generally considered a good factor for the characterization of the mode of binding of Pp/Pc with GQDs. There is minimal or no shift in the G and D band in the case of non-covalent bonding through π–π stacking of Pp/Pc and GQDs, whereas there is a large shift in the case of a covalently bound hybrid system.41,131,195
Recently, Menilli et al. reported that the inner filter effect (IFE) of Pp on GQDs produces significant fluorescence quenching in GQDs upon conjugation because the Pp absorption bands are close to the emission bands of GQDs at the given excitation wavelength (Fig. 3a and b). The conjugation of GQDs with Pp increased the particle average size slightly (28.5 ± 4.4 nm) in the TMPyP@GQD hybrid (Fig. 3c). The Raman spectrum of the TMPyP@GQD hybrid exhibited features of both GQDs and 5,10,15,20-tetramethyl(4-pyridyl)porphyrin (TMPyP) (Fig. 3d). These findings imply non-covalent interactions between the TMPyP molecules and GQDs. All three hybrids provided Raman results that could be similarly interpreted.119 According to Managa et al., DLS data demonstrated that GQD nanoconjugates are larger than GQDs alone, indicating the creation of supramolecular assemblies of GQDs and porphyrins.196
 Fig. 3  Normalized fluorescence spectra of TMPyP@GQDs in aqueous solution at 330 nm with 10 min intervals. The spectra were produced by adding the porphyrin solution (42 M) to a 0.1 μg mL−1 GQD solution. (b) Porphyrins quench the GQD fluorescence (λexc = 330 nm). Under a 366 nm lamp, GQDs lose their fluorescence. (c) STEM images of TMPyP@GQDs. The red dotted lines represent the microscopically detected TMPyP@GQDs hybrid. (d) Raman spectra of free GQDs (blue), TMPyP (green), and TMPyP@GQDs (red line).119 Copyright 2021, MDPI. 
3 Effect on photophysical properties due to GQD-Pp/Pc hybrid nanocomposites
Broad knowledge on the complex multicomponent architectures of GQD-Pp/Pc hybrids remains unclear in terms of photophysical behavior including electron transfer dynamics.5,130,142,167,168,197 Porphyrins can easily govern their conformation to comply with their local environment via reorientations of their axial/peripheral ligands and macrocycle deformations, which are usually induced by molecule–substrate interactions.163,169,198 The center-oxidized configurations of GQDs cause a larger perturbation in their conjugated π-system, reducing their band gap, and causing a redshift in their absorption spectrum. For some center-oxidized configurations, the addition of solvent causes red shifts in their absorption spectrum and increased intensities. In the absorption spectrum of edge-oxidized configurations, only red-shifts occur. The placement of the hydroxyl group in the basal plane of GQDs accelerates non-radiative decay, whereas that at the edges suppresses non-radiative decay. The current observation sheds light on the relationship between the surface chemistry and photoluminescence efficacy of GQDs.148 Depending on the modes of interaction and bonding, two types of bonding interactions, i.e., covalent and non-covalent, arise in GQD/Pp composites, especially in their absorption and fluorescence spectrum studies.27,52,71,82,131,133,142,199–202 For instance, Xue et al. chosen three porphyrins with different functionalities to understand the interaction and bonding modes between GQDs and Pp.1 Consequently, the red-shift in the Soret band and the new broad Q-band suggest that the edge and the surface of GQDs play an important role in the π–π interaction of Pp and GQDs. The fluorescence of GQDs is quenched by Pp, and simultaneously the emission properties of Pp are efficiently enhanced due to Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) or non-radiative dipole–dipole coupling.124 Similar findings were reported by Achadu et al., where GQDs were bound to ZnPc covalently (amide coupling) or non-covalently (π–π or electrostatic) to check their fluorescence behavior.203 The FRET efficiency is dominant for covalent bonding compared to non-covalent conjugates given that the former mode of bonding results in closer proximity or stronger bonding between two molecules.180 Thus, these synergistic properties of GQD and porphyrins/Pcs provide insight into their host–guest molecular assembly and have application in various fields.37,204 The potential applications of GQD-porphyrin/Pc hybrid systems in PDT and photocatalysis depend on the high quantum yield (ϕ) of 1O2.66,205–207 For this, the effective transfer of energy from the T1 state of these systems to the S0 state of molecular oxygen is important for efficiently generating 1O2. The updated Jablonski figure (Fig. 4) shows the main photochemical reactions prevailing in PDT. Photosensitizers can be excited from the ground state (S0) to the excited singlet state (S1) by an appropriate wavelength of light.207 Among the three factors in PDT (photosensitizer, light, and oxygen molecules), the photosensitizer is the most important, given that it has a direct impact on the PDT efficiency. Intersystem crossover can either relax the excited photosensitizer back to the S0 state with fluorescence photon emission or change it to an excited triplet state (T1). A phosphorescent photon can relax the energy of a photosensitizer in the T1 state or transfer it to ambient molecules via photochemical reactions of type I and II. By interacting with water or oxygen molecules, hydroxyl radicals (OH˙) or superoxide anions (˙O2−) are produced. Notably, type-I PDT can occur in hypoxic conditions, particularly in deep-seated tumor microenvironments. The toxic singlet oxygen (1O2) is formed when well-oxygenated photosensitizers in the T1 state participate in an energy-transfer process with localised 3O2. The PDT process is considered to be dominated by the type II path. However, high photosensitizer concentrations and hypoxia can favour the type I PDT pathway. Due to its non-invasiveness and spatiotemporal control, PDT is a promising anticancer approach151 (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Updated Jablonski diagram depicting reactive oxygen radical formation in type I and type II PDT.151 
Pallikkara et al. revealed that in GQD/Pp system, the HOMO and LUMO levels of Pp are above the energy levels of GQDs. Hence in the hybrid system, GQDs act as electron acceptors, whereas Pp as electron donors.184 Notably, the mode of conjugation of porphyrin or phthalocyanine plays a vital role in the generation of quantum yield.148,208 Nyokong et al. reported a detailed study on the type of linkage efficiency between covalent bonding and non-covalent bonding to GQDs.209,210 This was demonstrated by designing a nano-construct of GQD/Pc supports in a photoactive membrane, where Pc is conjugated to GQD via covalent bonding ((c)Pc-GQD) and π–π stacking ((π)Pc-GQD). The results showed that the triplet quantum yield (ϕT) for (π)Pc-GQD is higher than that for (c)Pc-GQD due to the intramolecular rotational flexibility of Pc in the covalent conjugate. However, despite the higher ϕT of (π)Pc-GQD compared to (c)Pc-GQD, its singlet oxygen quantum yield (ϕΔ) is lower due to the screening effect caused by the GQDs, which prevents the interaction of the excited triplet state of conjugates with the ground state of molecular oxygen.209 Thus, covalent linkage to GQDs is beneficial and may even be the most profitable way to use conjugates in PDT or photocatalysis.
4 Applications of GQD-Pp/Pc conjugates
Pp/Pc-based GQD nanohybrids can be implemented in a myriad of applications based on photosensitizers (PSs) for PDT,46,47 photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and sensing48,49 due to the biomimetic photophysical, electrochemical,50 and bioactive characteristics of Pp with improved efficacy2,51 (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Various applications of GQD-Pp/Pc conjugates. 
4.1 Sensing
GQDs as sensors have been used for the quantitation of biomolecules, metal ions, and organic molecules but usually lack greater selectivity and sensitivity than other reported probes, mainly due to their low affinity and low quenching efficiency because of their poor induction by the analyte of interest.1,10,211 In contrast, based on specific molecular recognition, GQD-Pp2 nanocomposites with surface modification display enhanced selectivity in imaging, anticounterfeiting, data security, and sensing using a combined multi-technology approach26 (Table 1).
Table 1 Summary of the different types of GQD-Pp/Pc conjugate-based sensors




Sl. no.
Nanocomposite
Type of sensor
Target analytes
Phenomenon
Linear range
LOD

R
2

Sample
Ref.




1.
NGQD/TMPyP
Fluorescence probe
Cd2+
Inner filter effect
0.5–8 μM
88.0 nM
—
Water

212





UV-vis


Absorption
0.1–10 μM
90.0 nM
—






2.
NGQD/TMPyP/Mn2+
Fluorescence probe
Hg2+
Inner Filter effect
0–100 nM
0.18 nM
—
Water

213



3.
GQD/FeTMPyP
Fluorescence Probe
H2O2
Inhibition of Inner Filter effect
2–300 μM
0.30 μM
0.993
Water

135



GQD/FeTMPyP/GOx


Glucose


3–100 μM
0.50 μM
0.992
PBS/Water




4.
M-GQD/TAPP
Fluorescence Probe
GSH
Switching OFF FRET (“turn ON”)
0.67–130 nM
0.23 nM
0.999
PBS

1







Cys


3.33–100 nM
1.30 nM
0.997






5
M-GQD/ZnPc
Fluorescence Probe
Cys
Switching OFF FRET (“turn ON”)
2–120 nM
0.85 nM
0.994
DMSO (25%)/PBS

214







Hcys


1.5–120 nM
1.42 nM
—










GSH


5.0–150 nM
3.20 nM
—






6.
GQD-T-ZnPc
Fluorescence Probe
Hg2+
Fluorescence “turn ON”
0.1–20 nM
0.05 nM
—
DMF (25%)/PBS

203



T-GQD-T-ZnPc






5.0–50 nM
24.7 nM
—






7.
PEI-GQDs-Pc-Au@Ag
Fluorescence Probe
Hg2+
Fluorescence “turn ON”
0.5–25.0 nM
0.25 nM
0.997
PBS

215



PEI-GQDs/Pc-Au@Ag-Hg2+


Cys
Fluorescence “turn OFF”
1.0–50 nM
0.72 nM
0.989










Hcys




0.87 nM












GSH




1.05 nM








8.
CoPc-GQD
Gas Sensor
NO2
Current Response
—
50 ppb
—
Air

216



9.
CoPc-HFIP-GQD
Gas Sensor
DMMP
Current Response
—
500 ppb


Air

217



CoPc–6FBPA–GQD


















10.
GQD@CoPc-COOH
Electrochemical or photoelectrochemical
Hydrazine
Electrocatalytic
—
8 μM
—
0.1 M NaOH

218



GQD@CoPc-NH2






—
43 μM
—






11
GCE-GQD-CoPc (π–π)-aptamer
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)
Prostate specific antigen
Impedance
1.2–2.0 pM
3.66 pM


PBS

111





Differential pulse voltammetry






0.66 pM











4.1.1 Sensing of heavy metals. 
The success of the MPp collection culminated in the development of GQD-Pp/Pc hybrid systems as sensor arrays mostly based on the “turn-OF” principle, involving fluorescence quenching due to the inner filter effect (IFE) and FRET.1,133,224,225 Field-effect transistor (FET)/IFE analysis is widely used to understand the sensing mechanism of GQD/porphyrin hybrid systems. IFE originates from the overlap of the absorption band of GQDs with the fluorescence excitation or emission spectrum of porphyrin. IFE is an effective tool in converting analytical absorption signals to fluorescence signals and provides better sensitivity and selectivity in complex biological conditions compared to other fluorescence quenching mechanisms such as photoinduced electron transfer (PET) and FRET. Another advantage of IEF-based sensors is that they do not require any covalent linkage between the receptor and fluorophore or surface modification of GQDs, thus providing simplicity and flexibility in the construction of probes. Zhang et al., for the first time, demonstrated the catalytic effect of nitrogen-doped GQDs (N-GQDs) in the synthesis of MP-hybrids for the rapid sensing of Cd2+ ions, resulting in the fluorescence quenching of NGQDs due to the IFE of porphyrin on the assembled NGQDs.212 Peng et al. demonstrated the rapid detection of Hg2+ ions due to the IFE of porphyrin on NGQDs. They reported that incorporation of Mn2+ ions in TMPyP was significantly faster in the presence of a trace amount of NGQDs and Hg2+. The heavy metal Hg2+ deforms the structure of Pp, which facilitates the incorporation of the small divalent metal Mn2+ carried by the NGQDs (Fig. 6a). The formation of the metalloporphyrin resulted in a red shift in the absorption of the porphyrin and a quenching of its fluorescence due to the weakening of IFE.213 This phenomenon was further used to monitor intracellular Hg2+ ions in lung cancer cells (A549) (Fig. 6b). Confocal imaging showed that TMPyP and NGQDs were cell permeable and individually gave red and blue fluorescence, respectively. However, when both TMPyP and NGQD were treated together, there was a quenching of the blue fluorescence, indicating that IFE can efficiently exist in the biological environment. Simultaneous treatment of TMPyP, Mn2+, Hg2+, and NGQDs showed quenching of the red fluorescence and remarkable enhancement in the blue fluorescence due to the formation of the MnIII(TMPyP) complex under the synergistic effect of Hg2+.226 To date, the IFE of porphyrin in GQD/porphyrin conjugates has been exploited to detect heavy metal ions such as cadmium (Cd2+) and mercury (Hg2+) via the fluorescence “turn-OFF” approach. However, this approach suffers from low sensitivity and specificity, and interference from a variety of ligand or solvents may occur, leading to false signals.


4.1.2 Biosensing. 
A N-GQD-porphyrin hybrid was studied by Zhang et al. for sensing cadmium(II), which is one example of the use of this type hybrid of as a biosensor for fast and sensitive metal ion sensing.212 The preferential recovery of fluorescence was observed by Monteiro et al. during the titration of a GO-Pp composite with guanine-quadruplexes (G-Q), which mimics a judicious “turn-off-on” biosensor for the detection of G-Q, presenting an opportunity for a better class of chemotherapeutics. Raman mapping was used for the first time to provide insight into stacking and electrostatic interactions.219 Another in vivo application of GQD-Pp hybrids was proposed by Kamal et al. as an immunosensor for the detection of antigens of Salmonella typhi in human serum. Here, the structural assessment of the bio-mimetic Fe-porphyrin-GQD hybrid showed its bioimaging activity. This bioconjugated hybrid works as a prominent transfer system in the fluorescence system owing to its bio-conjugation sites and rich oxygen-containing surface.220 A modified porphyrin and rGO hybrid was fabricated by Wang et al., functioning as a biosensor for the rapid and selective DNA detection of M. tuberculosis and its resistant strands. As a result of its electrical and morphological characteristics, broad surface area, high electron transferability, and high loading efficiency for bioreceptors (covalently bonded) offered by its carboxyl functional groups, the biosensor exhibited excellent sensitivity towards the hybridization of DNA. Measurements using several independent biosensors were used to assess the reproducibility of this DNA hybridization platform.221 Various studies using rGO-porphyrin and GQD-Pp composite have been reported for the electrochemical sensing of serotonin, dopamine, and glucose sensing, demonstrating enhanced selectivity and sensitivity towards these analytes.222,223
Zhang et al. developed a “turn-ON” fluorescence sensor via optical sensing for the detection of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and glucose using a GQD/FeTMPyP hybrid system (Fig. 6c). The absorption band of metalloporphyrin (FeTMPyP) has a complementary overlap with the emission band of GQDs, leading to fluorescence quenching of GQDs due to IFE. The reversibility of the fluorescence of GQD via the hindrance of IFE permits the detection of glucose and H2O2. Thus, designed MPs exhibit potential to be highly inventive for other desirable analytes.135 Similarly, Xue et al. developed rapid, sensitive, and selective “turn-ON” fluorescent probes for the detection of biothiol (GSH or cystine) in a FRET system via the Michael addition reaction between maleimide-functionalized GQDs (M-GQDs) and tetrakis(4-aminophenyl) porphyrin (TAPP). The hybrid system is formed via stacking and electrostatic interactions between the negatively charged GQDs (due to the presence of carboxylate group on their surface) and positively charged porphyrin (due to the presence of amine group on its surface), which results in fluorescence quenching of M-GQDs by porphyrin due to FRET. In contrast to the single component detection system, the hybrid-based FRET system exhibited rapid, selective, and sensitive detection302 in a wider range without interference from other biomolecules in the quantitative spotting of biothiol.1 This hybrid system was used for detection of biothiol (GSH) in blood serum and fruits, with detection recoveries ranging from 95% to 106% and an relative standard deviation (RSD) less than 2%. Similarly, Achadu et al. reported the detection of biothiol using an M-GQD and zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc) hybrid system.214 Another interesting report by Achadu et al. demonstrated a novel supramolecular hybrid system consisting of polyethylenimine (PEI)-GQD and mercaptopyridine-substituted zinc phthalocyanine (Pc)-Au@Ag nano-alloys using “OFF–ON–OFF” fluorescence for the detection of Hg2+ and biothiol in an aqueous medium. This strategy is based on turning “ON” the quenched fluorescence of the PEI-GQD-Pc-Au@Ag hybrid system in the presence of Hg2+ and switching “OFF” the fluorescence in the presence of biothiol due to the stronger affinity between Hg2+ and biothiols and the formation of a strong Hg–S bond. These nanoprobes were target selective and highly stable in the presence of other molecules, exhibiting their successful application.215
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic showing the synergistic mechanism of NGQDs and Hg2+ in the co-ordination of Mg2+ with TMPyP. (b) Confocal microscopy images of lung carcinoma cells (A549). First column shows images obtained through the red channel, second column is the green channel, third column is the bright field, and the fourth column is the merged image. Panel (a–d) cells treated with TMPyP; panel (e–h) cells treated with NGQDs; panel (i–l) cells treated with TMPyP and NGQDs; and panel (m–p) cells treated with TMPyP, NGQDs, Hg2+ and Mg2+. Reprinted with permission from ref. 226 Copyright 2018, ACS. (c) Schematic showing the sensing of H2O2 and glucose through the inhibition of IFE between GQDs and TMPyP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 227 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic diagram showing the adsorption and desorption of NO2 on MPc/GQDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 216 Copyright 2021, RSC. 


4.1.3 Gas sensing by GQD-Pc conjugates. 
Presently, GQD-Pp/Pc conjugates provide an ideal avenue for the fabrication of wearable sensors. In 2021, Jiang et al. described how the surface of metal phthalocyanine (CoPc) nanofibers was anchored by GQDs for sensing NO2. The gas sensitivity performance was greatly enhanced due to the formation of charge transfer conjugates at room temperature compared to the individual material. The introduction of GQDs provides good conductivity to CoPc, and thus fastens the response of the hybrid material. The authors suggested the mechanism of NO2 sensing by the conjugate, wherein NO2 accepts an electron from the conjugate and transforms into NO2−. The holes formed in the hybrid system change the conductivity of the sensor, with a lower detection limit. Thus, the reproducibility, selectivity, and stability of the hybrid materials are greatly improved (Fig. 6d).216 Due to the unique features of reproducibility, selectivity, and stability of the MPc/GQD hybrid system as a gas sensor, the same group used a similar system for the detection of dimethyl methylphosphonate (DMMP). The hybrid system showed a good gas response for the detection of DMMP due to the presence of a strong hydrogen bond between hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP) and hexafluorbisphenol A (6FBPA) conjugated to MPc and DMMP. The presence of GQDs in the hybrid system increased the conductivity of the Pc derivative, and thereby fastened its sensing response.217


4.1.4 Electrochemical sensing by GQD-Pc conjugates. 
The literature shows that GQDs are a great platform for the specific and sensitive recognition of biomarkers, which are highly synergistic with electrochemical sensors.303 Recently Nxele et al. developed an aptasensor for the electrochemical detection of the prostate specific antigen (PSA) using different combinations of aptamer, CoPc, and GQD modified on a glass carbon electrode (GCS). The best efficacy was obtained by the GCE-GQD-CoPc (π–π)-aptamer with an LOD of 3.66 pM determined by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and 0.66 pM by differential pulse voltammetry (DPV). The LOD is much lower than the cut off value of PSA, i.e., 13.3 nM, for a patient with prostate cancer. The electrode showed specificity towards PSA even in the presence of interfering biological molecules such as BSA, glucose and L-cysteine. The aptasensor showed good stability, reproducibility, and repeatability.228 Centane et al. explored the electrochemical properties of Pc conjugated with electron-withdrawing groups (–COOH) and electron-donating group (–NH2) when non-covalently anchored to π-electron-rich graphene quantum dots. The incorporation of GQDs in amino conjugated Pc (GQD@Pc-NH2) resulted in a lower potential compared to only Pc-NH2. In contrast, when GQDs were conjugated to Pc functionalized with an electron-withdrawing group such as carboxy (GQD@Pc-COOH), the hybrid demonstrated a higher hydrazine oxidation potential than Pc-COOH. Nevertheless, GQD@Pc-COOH showed a better catalytic current than GQD@Pc-NH2. The good catalytic activity is governed by both the decrease in potential and increase in current. Hence, the catalytic current for GQD@Pc-COOH dramatically increased compared to that of Pc-COOH and GQD@Pc-NH2, resulting in a better LOD for the detection of hydrazine compared to GQD@Pc-NH2.218

4.2 Energy conversion

4.2.1 Light-harvesting antenna (LHA). 
Various challenges are involved in designing artificial LHAs that work well in aqueous solution through a regular combination of multi-donor and single acceptor structures with efficient energy transfer capability. The hybrids of GQDs and porphyrin provide an excellent electron donor and acceptor pair, whereas porphyrin and its derivatives also behave as natural or artificial LHAs. However, the absorption spectrum of porphyrin only covers a limited portion of the visible region, which is the biggest hurdle for light harvesting. As mentioned earlier, GQDs have a broad absorption spectrum with a high extinction coefficient, and thus the light-harvesting property of porphyrin can be easily enhanced by using GQDs as donors. Accordingly, Liu et al. reported novel aqueous LHAs with the srikaya-like structure of multiple GQDs as donors and a single porphyrin unimolecular micelle as an acceptor. This construct overcame the problems related to the insolubility of porphyrin, minimized the electron transfer, and maximized the energy transfer efficacy from the GQD donor to the porphyrin acceptor by up to 93.6% with an antenna effect of 7.3 in aqueous solution233 (Fig. 7a).
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram showing the light harvesting antenna (LHA) nanosystem with multiple GQD donors and a single porphyrin unimolecular micelle as the acceptor formed through electrostatic self-assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 229 Copyright 2016, RSC. (b) Diagram showing the schematic energy transfer mechanism of the GQD@ZnO@TCPPZn nanocomposite in the fabricated porphyrin sensitized solar cell (PSSC). Reprinted with permission from ref. 230 Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V. (c) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) of GQD-FePc. Reprinted with permission from ref. 231 Copyright 2017, RSC. (d) Effect of no scavenger, tert-butyl alcohol, iodide ion, EDTA and NBT on the degradation of methylene blue by the GQD–Zn porphyrin under xenon lamp irradiation. (Right) Schematic of the photocatalytic process for the GQD–Zn porphyrin under visible light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 232 Copyright 2015, RSC. 


4.2.2 Solar cells. 
Solar cells or photovoltaic cells have the ability to transform light energy into electricity due to the photoelectric effect. GQDs due to their large Bohr exciton radius and 0D quantum confinement effect, can be used to tune the HOMO–LUMO gap over a wide spectrum range (ultraviolet to visible to infrared wavelength) by varying their size, having implications in solar cells. However, the low photoluminescence quantum yield (below 20%) of pristine GQDs and their absorbance band in the UV region hinder their effective utilization as a photosensitizer in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Accordingly, doping GQDs with heteroatoms (S, F, B, and N) provides them with tunable photoluminescence and band gap energy in the visible region for better application in solar cells. Compared to GQDs, N-doped carbon quantum dots (NCQDs) show relatively better performance with TiO2, exhibiting an efficiency of 0.13%.234 This efficiency is further enhanced in the presence of conventional dyes such as N3 and N719 as a co-sensitizer, e.g., (NGQDs-N719)/TiO2 and NFS-GQDs-TiO2-N719 having a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.49% and 11.7%, respectively (Table 2). In DSSCs, N719, which is a ruthenium compound, is widely used as a photosensitizer, but it suffers from several disadvantages such as multi-step synthesis, problems in purification and use of expensive material.235 Thus, to overcome this, a metal-free organic photosensitizer, i.e., porphyrin, has emerged as an alternative due to its to high visible extinction coefficient, 2D π-electron framework, excellent light-harvesting properties (mimicking natural photosynthesis) and tunable functional molecule for optoelectric applications, especially in DSSC.236,237 Furthermore, the poor performance of porphyrin238 due to aggregation can be overcome by synthesizing nanohybrids, wherein porphyrin is co-sensitized with GQDs. The presence of GQDs improves the electron movement and reduces the charge recombination, increasing the performance of solar cells.239 Mandal et al. demonstrated that smaller-size GQD/porphyrin nanohybrids showed type-II band energy alignment, where their LUMO (on GQD) and HOMO (porphyrin) had larger spatial charge separation, resulting in the low recombination of electron–hole pairs to increase the photovoltaic cell efficacy. In contrast, larger-size GQDs in the nanocomposite showed type-I band energy alignment, where the HOMO and LUMO were located on the GQDs, resulting in less charge separation. However, larger nanohybrids can be converted to type-II band alignment by functionalizing Pp with an electron-donating group such as –NH2 or –OCH3. Another interesting feature was evident from the density of state (DOS) studies on nanocomposites, where the energy gap between the LUMO of GQDs and Pp controls the rate of electron transfer from the photoexcited Pp to GQDs, which increases with an increase in the size of GQDs.42,57,240,241 Furthermore, Sehgal et al. fabricated a porphyrin sensitized solar cell (PSSC), GQD@ZnO/TCCPPZn, where GQD@ZnO acted as the photoanode and zinc tetrakis(4-carboxy phenyl) porphyrin (TCPPZn) as a sensitizer (Fig. 7b). The enhancement in the photovoltaic properties was due to the ability of GQDs to emit multiple excitons from a single photon242 and transfer them into the conduction band (CB) of ZnO and the mechanism of electron transfer occurred through electron injection from GQDs to ZnO. Therefore, this type of hybrid composite device holds great potential for application in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) and PSSCs at an economical low cost.230
Table 2 
J–V characteristics of GQDs, doped GQDs and GQD-MPc/MPp as photoanodes




SL. no.
 
Photocurrent density at short circuit voltage (Jsc) (mA cm−2)
Open circuit voltage (Voc) (V)
Fill factor (FF)
Efficiency η (%)
Ref.




1.
NGQDs/ZnO nanorods
0.92
0.34
—
0.121

243



2.
ZnO nanowires-GQDs
0.45
0.8
0.5
0.2

244



3
SNGQD/C-ZnO NT
3.4
0.45
—
0.59

245



4
ZnTCPP (12 h)/N719 (a ruthenium complex)
18.9
0.61
0.55
6.35

246



5
NGQD/TiO2
1.49
0.48
0.53
0.37

247



N719/TiO2
12.61
0.71
0.64
5.7


(NGQDs-N719)/TiO2
17.65
0.72
0.59
7.49


6.
NFS-GQD-TiO2
0.35
0.51
0.53
0.71

248



NFS-GQDs-TiO2-N719 dye
22.6
0.79
0.7
11.7


7
DNA-ZnO Nano flower + B-GQDs/N719
—
—
—
3.7

249



8
ZnO@TCPPZn
7.2
0.37
0.307
0.817

230



GQD@ZnO@TCPPZn (30%)
8.9
0.47
0.400
1.67


GQD@ZnO@TCPPZn (40%)
10.1
0.48
0.507
2.45


GQD@ZnO@TCPPZn (50%)
9.8
0.48
0.4377
2.05





4.3 GQD/Pp and GQD/Pc as catalysts

4.3.1 Electrocatalysis. 
GQDs can serve as an efficient alternatives to platinum-based electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) given that GQD can lower the oxygen adsorption barrier and first electron transfer barrier, thereby providing enhanced electrocatalytic activity for the ORR due to the increase in electrocatalytically active edge sites. Doping of GQDs with nitrogen (N-GQDs) is highly beneficial for the enhancement of their electrocatalytic activity for the ORR. N-GQDs increase the charge density of graphene, which results in the better affinity of oxygen with graphene, and thus weakens the O–O bonding on the surface of the catalyst, indicating reduced overpotential and better electrocatalytic activity for the ORR250,251 (Table 3). However, some hurdles associated with GQD, such as low limiting current density and onset potential, still exist. Metallophthalocyanine (MPc) and metalloporphyrin (MPp) are known for their electrocatalytic properties, but their use is limited due to their low conductivity, which affects their electron transfer and electrochemical activity.252,253 Therefore, the catalytic activity of FePc supported on muti-walled carbon nanotubes (FePc/MWCNT) has been studied for the oxygen reduction reaction, which was found to be comparable to that of the commonly used Pt/C catalyst with similar current densities and a very low overpotential (60 mV).254
Table 3 Electrochemical parameters for the catalytic oxygen reduction reaction (ORR)




SL. no.
Type of electrode
ORR onset potential (V)
Limiting current (mA cm−2)
No. of electrons followed for ORR
Ref.




1
N-Colloidal GQD
−0.1
—
4-Electron pathway

251



2
N-GQD/graphene (N/C atomic ratio of 4.3%)
−0.16
—
4-Electron pathway

250



3
N-GQDs-35-10/graphene
−0.11
—
4-Electron pathway

256



4.
FePc/MWCNTs
−0.09
−4.5
4-Electron pathway

254



Pt/C
−0.03
−4.7
4-Electron pathway


5.
(G-dye-Fe-Porphyrin)n MOF
−0.087
—
4-Electron pathway

257



6
GQDs
−0.13
−4.68
2-Electron pathway

231



GQD–FePc
−0.04
−1.65
4-Electron pathway




Therefore, conjugating MPc/porphyrin with N-GQDs will be a potential candidate for a synergistic effect in electrochemical reactions. The functionalization of MPc/porphyrin with N-GQDs containing pyrrolic nitrogen atoms provides additional nitrogen atoms to GQDs, modifying the bandgap, leading to faster charge transfer and synergistically enhancing the electrocatalytic activity performance of GQDs, while averting the aggregation of FePc (Fig. 7c). The results demonstrated an amended onset potential, remarkable methanol tolerance, a higher limiting current density compared to Pt/C, and electrochemical stability without CO poisoning for the hybrid system, which may have further commercial application in fuel cells.94,103 Pham et al. studied the thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of FePc and FePc-GQD and their catalytic activities, and concomitantly their tolerance toward CO through density functional theory (DFT) calculations. They showed that the four-electron pathway is the most energetically favourable for the ORR in both cases. FePc-GQD showed high catalytic ORR activity, with a limiting potential of 0.70 V, which is comparable to that of Pt/C (0.79 V). FePc-GQD showed high CO tolerance due to its positive CO adsorption energy of 2.39 eV, unlike the FePc system. Thus, all these characteristics make FePc-GQD an efficient electrocatalyst for the ORR, which can be used for commercial application in fuel cells.255 Reduced GQDs (rGQD) show better electrocatalytic activity than amino-functionalized GQDs given that the reduction process involves the elimination of carboxyl, epoxy, and hydroxy groups on the surface of GQDs, which results in narrowing of the energy band gap of GQDs, thus enhancing electron transfer properties.252 Centane et al. conjugated rGQD covalently and non-covalently with cobalt phthalocyanine (CoPc), where CoPc has three tert-butyl substituents, acting as electron donating groups (push), and a single COOH as an electron-withdrawing group (pull). These push–pull substituents enhance the electron delocalization, which leads to facile electron transfer properties in CoPc. The rGQD-CoPc conjugates were used for the electrocatalysis of hydrazine oxidation on a glassy carbon electrode and improved catalytic behavior was obtained in the non-covalently (π stacking) conjugated CoPc compared to the covalently conjugated CoPc, giving an LOD of 2.1 μM and 4.4 μM, respectively.252


4.3.2 Photocatalysis. 
The synergistic and cooperative effects between macrocycles and GQDs in close proximity have tremendous influence in governing their physicochemical properties via bond activation, catalysis, reactivity, etc.258,304 Metalloporphyrin or porphyrin derivatives have a high extinction coefficient in visible light and can generate a good quantum yield of singlet oxygen upon photoexcitation. This property has applications in various photocatalytic processes, especially in oxidation reactions.143 However, homogeneous catalysis has various disadvantages such as difficult recovery and reuse of the catalyst, and additionally the catalyst suffers from intermolecular self-oxidation, dimerization and decomposition during the reaction, together with high preparation cost. These problems can be easily overcome by immobilizing porphyrin on a solid surface. GQDs can provide good support given that they have a large surface area for loading, excellent electrical and optical properties, uniform dispersion in water, and photostability.259 Lu et al. demonstrated the photocatalytic degradation of an organic pollutant under visible-light irradiation using zinc porphyrin-functionalized GQDs (GQDs/ZnP) (Fig. 7d). The mechanistic investigation suggested that the superoxide radical (˙O2−) and holes (hVB+) were involved in the photocatalytic reaction. Doping of GQDs with electron-rich atoms such as N and S lower their bandgap, resulting in a broad absorbance band in the visible region. Therefore, S, N: GQDs as photocatalytic carriers improve the energy conversion of solar light for aerobic oxidation reactions due to their broad visible light absorption.232
Mahyari et al. synthesized efficient, green and visible-light recoverable photocatalysts using anionic Fe(III)tetra(4-sulfonatophenyl) porphyrins (FeTSPP) supported on S, N: GQDs for the selective aerobic oxidation of alcohols to the corresponding carbonyl compounds.260 The same group synthesized cobalt porphyrin-supported nitrogen and phosphorus co-doped graphene quantum dots/graphene for the aerobic oxidation of alcohol with a much higher conversion (∼92%) and selectivity (∼86%) than most of the reported photocatalysts. The high photocatalytic activity under mild conditions, reusability, and selectivity of CoTSPP@N,P:GQDs/G make them potential materials for using solar light for energy conversion and environmental therapy.261 Notably, the doping of GQDs with nitrogen induces ionic interactions between the active sites of porphyrin (TSPP) and the support, which increases the hydrophilic character of the catalyst, and consequently increases the dispersion and stability of the catalyst in aqueous solution.262

4.4 Therapeutic applications of GQD and Pp/Pc hybrid systems
Porphyrin, due to its abundant presence in nature and its physiological properties, has become an attractive candidate in the field of therapeutics. This is a crucial topic because porphyrin-based nanostructures can help to identify cancer and other degenerative diseases that are difficult to detect or cure in the early stage. This review sheds light on GQD Pp/Pc hybrid systems, their interactions, and applications spanning the theragnostic role of Pp/Pc in biomimetic systems. Porphyrins and their analogous macrocycles display fascinating, photochemical, and luminescence properties besides disease diagnosis, sensing, therapy, and biomedical applications, indicating their high prospects in the treatment of numerous diseases.252,261,263 Various Pp derivatives serve as a chemical basis for many drugs that are in preclinical and clinical trials.264
For instance, the application of PDT and antimicrobial/antiparasitic PDT is of prime importance.3,265 Carbon nanomaterials offer competent schemes to augment the bioavailability and integrate targeted delivery features in traditional pharmaceuticals, enhancing their efficiency and reducing their toxicity, thus improving the therapeutic effect. The previously mentioned hurdles can be overcome as follows: (1) amalgamation of hydrophilic groups in the porphyrin ring, while governing the interaction with living systems and (2) integration into nanovehicles and delivery nanosystems. Unquestionably, nanohybrid systems are the current choice to expand the transport and tumor targeting efficacy. Furthermore, formulations that embrace the viewpoint of combined therapy and image guidance are valuable to improve the clinical outcome. Currently, the “one-for-all” concept is gaining support in the field of photonanomedicines, where it overcomes the limitations concerning multistep fabrication and low reagent loading of traditional delivery systems based on various nanoparticles.266
In 2015, Su et al. first synthesized porphyrin-functionalized graphene oxide for the photothermal ablation of the glioblastoma cell line U87-MG using 808 nm irradiation.267 The findings pave the way for the therapeutic use of graphene nanosheets in cancer treatment, particularly for deep-seated tumors. In continuation of this research, in 2016 the same group synthesized L-arginyl-glycyl-L-aspartic (RGD) conjugated Pp immobilized nano-graphene oxide (PNG) to selectively target brain cancer cells with improved clinical effectiveness and no discernible side effects. The proficient photothermal transformation of PNG-RGD, as well as its ligand-targeting activities inhibited tumor development in mice upon laser irradiation, whereas tumour recurrence was observed in the case of graphene oxide (GO). Thus, PNG-RGD can be a potential photothermal therapy (PTT) agent for the therapy of brain tumors, with active photo-to-thermal transfer and a high penetration depth in tissues.259 In 2018, Santos et al. synthesized nano-GO covalently linked to glycol porphyrins and studied the biocompatibility of the hybrid system with human Saos-2 osteoblasts. Their proliferation, viability, and ROS generation findings showed that the graphene-based hybrid nanomaterials exhibited excellent biocompatibility, making them very promising for use in biomedicine, especially in cancer therapy.24 However, despite these recent advancements, GO still has some limitations and challenges, including the lack of reproducibility in its synthesis, which may weaken its final physicochemical properties and workability.27 Thus, to overcome a few of the aforementioned challenges, Xu and colleagues were the first to develop an organic-solution-processable functionalized-graphene (SPFgraphene) hybrid material with Pp with rich photophysical properties, together with optical-limiting properties, which is largely due to greater photoinduced electron- and/or energy-transfer processes.165 Given that graphene is a good electron acceptor, the energy/electron transfer can be easily modulated by non-covalently or covalently conjugating electron-donating organic moieties such as Pp/Pc.268 Suhag et al. synthesized Pp-functionalized nitrogen-doped graphene nanosheets (PFNGS) for the detection of nitric oxide (NO) released from macrophage cells. PFNGS were biocompatible, facile, highly sensitive, and possessed exceptional electrocatalytic properties, together with reproducibility and stability. The in vitro studies of PFNGS in murine macrophage cells showed that they were cytocompatible with 96% cell viability. Furthermore, the blood compatibility studies demonstrated that PFNGS were hemocompatible.269
Due to their versatile properties, GQDs can be extensively used in a variety of biological applications such as nanomedicine (e.g., drug delivery), bio-sensing, and bio-imaging. However, it is important to determine the cellular uptake, circulation, and cytotoxicity of unmodified GQDs, functionalized GQDs, and doped GQDs before their use as conjugating materials. Various parameters such as concentration, chemical doping, methods of synthesis, particle size, and surface functionalization govern the uptake mechanism of GQDs inside cells and their toxicity.266,270,271 GQDs can be internalized through caveolae-mediated endocytosis and are partially involved in the energy-dependent endocytosis pathway in human gastric cancer (MGC-803) and breast cancer (MCF-7) cells. In addition, it has been reported that nanometer-sized GQDs are less toxic compared to micrometer-sized graphene oxide (GO) based on different biological studies such as intracellular ROS level, cell viability, mitochondrial membrane potential, and cell cycles. The toxicity of GO is a consequence of the change in the cell membrane integrity, resulting in the hemolysis of cells, which is not the case with GQDs.266
GQD-Pp/Pc-based hybrid systems with more favorable photophysical properties can serve as third-generation PSs. GQD-porphyrin/Pcs hybrid systems can generate a high quantum yield of ROS, mainly singlet oxygen, upon light irradiation, exhibiting great potential for enhanced PDT and PTT combined therapy in both in vitro and in vivo models.272,273 The suitable design of GQD-Pp/Pc hybrid systems can solve problems related to their synthesis, including the size mismatch problem between GQDs and porphyrin and the insolubility of porphyrin in water, and also increase their light absorption range, increasing the energy transfer efficiency from GQD donors to porphyrin acceptors and their potential tumor targeting ability by grafting certain tumor-targeting groups.140 According to Gao et al., the fluorescence efficiency of Pp increased when titrated with varying concentrations of GQDs. The fluorescence emission of Pp was efficiently improved by the GQDs due to FRET, which is an advantage in biosensing and bioimaging. These studies also shed light on GQD and porphyrin host–guest nanoensembles, which are important for exploiting the synergistic properties of Pp/Pc and GQDs in drug delivery, bioimaging, and developing novel PDT agents that outperform other traditional agents in terms of water dispersibility, singlet oxygen generation, and biocompatibility.124,274,275

4.4.1 Photodynamic cancer therapy. 
Pp-based derivatives have been extensively used as PSs for PDT in cancer treatment, being noninvasive276 in nature. PDT leads to the production of ROS in the tissue, which offers a promising modality for tumor destruction.296 PSs play a central role in PDT, which produce cytotoxic ROS to abolish tumor cells via apoptosis/necrosis upon exposure to an appropriate wavelength of light.151,277 An ideal PS for PDT should have low dark toxicity, solubility in bodily fluids, photochemical reactivity with high triplet state yields, and a long triplet state lifetime.119 Given that Pp/Pc molecules possess multiple intrinsic theragnostic features, these molecules have enormous virtues for cancer treatment. Porphyrin molecules absorb light energy to transform it into potent therapeutic properties, where light energy interacts with surrounding oxygen to generate ROS. Pp/Pc endow excellent PDT effects, being highly energized and toxic in nature. Besides, these molecules have the ability to generate hyperthermia using photon energy released as molecular vibration, which culminates in a photothermal therapeutic (PTT) effect55,278–280 (Fig. 8a).
 Fig. 8  (a) PDT for innovative cancer therapy (b and c) Cellular uptake of NGQDs, SnPp, and SnPp-B-NGQD in MCF-7 cells at various concentrations over 24 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 192 Copyright 2021, Elsevier Ltd. 
PTT uses nanoporphyrins as multiphase nanotransducers to convert light to heat inside tumors, while PDT uses nanoporphyrins to convert light to singlet oxygen.69 Several Pp derivatives and molecular PS were investigated with the aim to overcome significant problems such as reduced aqueous solubility, dark toxicity, restricted structural stability, and short excitation wavelength arising due to scattering or absorption by tissues. Tetrapyrrole-based derivatives are the most commonly applied PS in the PDT domain due to their structural characteristics, low toxicity, and ability to generate a high quantum yield of superoxide anion, singlet oxygen, hydroxyl radicals, and hydrogen peroxide.281 Generally, the features of these chromophores include a relatively long lifetime and high triplet quantum yield, which promote the creation of 1O2 in high quantum yield, intense absorption within the optical therapeutic window ranging from 650 nm to 850 nm with better penetration depth and minimum absorption and scattering, together with the absence of dark toxicity.187,282–284
A recent strategy to tackle important issues consists of mimicking nature using biologically inspired hybrids, namely porphyrinoid-based photosensitizes (PSs),305 which have been classified into three groups. First-generation Pp PSs include hematoporphyrin derivatives and Photofrin, which have been used for the treatment of skin cancer and colorectal cancer. However, their use is restricted owing to their chemical impurity, poor extinction coefficient and low water solubility, prolonged skin photosensitization, short circulation time in the blood, and suboptimal tissue penetration. Porphyrin-based derivatives have developed into second-generation PS for PDT in cancer treatment. Second-generation porphyrin PSs (e.g., Lutrin) alleviate the problems of first-generation PSs but have high toxicity, low cellular uptake, and poor light penetration. Eventually, third-generation porphyrin PSs refer to modifications of second-generation PSs such as porphyrin or its derivatives conjugated to site-specific delivery agents and/or formulated with nanocarriers (e.g., modified porphyrin with GQDs)305 or targeting antibodies or nanoparticles to increase their cellular uptake at the target site via improved characteristics, such as less aggregation, better solubility in physiological media and selective accumulation in the targeted tissue.13,60,125,126 Menilli et al. discovered that cationic porphyrins are more easily internalized than their non-cationic counterparts, and their positively charged structures allow non-covalent bonding with both GQDs and GO at physiological pH.119
Most organic PS systems, including third-generation PS and porphyrin derivatives, are hydrophobic in nature, resulting in limited biocompatibility and unspecific tissue accumulation, especially when not appropriately adorned with immunosuppressing moieties and targeting labels. Consequently, they are more prone to aggregation, which compromises the therapeutic efficacy of the drug, leading to lower singlet oxygen generation and poor fluorescence in the aggregated state. Besides, nonselective activation or nonspecific drug leakage during blood circulation can lead to unwanted side effects such as toxicity and drug resistance.8,151,285,286
Unfortunately, most tetrapyrrole-based PSs are hydrophobic, creating masses in aqueous solutions, which prevent their biodistribution and even cause fluorescence self-quenching, prompting researchers to focus their efforts on Pp-nanomaterial-coupled systems.18 GQD-porphyrin/Pc-based hybrid systems with more favourable photophysical properties can serve as third-generation PSs. The introduction of GQDs with Pp derivatives is an operative strategy to produce hydrophilic porphyrins, which are imperative for biomedical applications, including PDT.
In addition, GQD-Pp/Pc hybrid systems can generate a high quantum yield of ROS, mainly singlet oxygen, upon light irradiation, exhibiting great potential for improved PDT and PTT combined therapy in both in vitro and in vivo models.273,289 Therefore, Cao et al. synthesized a multifunctional theranostic platform coupling polyethylene glycol (PEG)ylated and aptamer-functionalized GQDs loaded with porphyrin derivatives (GQD-PEG-P). Most importantly, GQD-PEG-P exhibited a PTT conversion efficiency of 28.58% and a high ϕΔ of 1.08, which enabled it to show a combined PTT and PDT effect for treating cancer. The in vitro MTT assay performed on non-small cell lung cancer (A549) cells showed significant cell death when irradiated simultaneously with a 635 nm and 980 nm laser. The GQD-PEG-P theranostic platform has significant biomedical potential because it combines therapeutics with effective cancer cell diagnostics276 (Fig. 9a and b). Under white light, the novel hybrids GQD_1A and GQD_1B were tested by Santos et al. as phototherapeutic agents in a high-intensity breast cancer cell line (T-47D), and a significant photocytotoxic effect was seen at 10 nM. When compared to non-immobilized porphyrin, the coupling of GQDs to aminoporphyrin improved their effective cellular uptake in T-47D cells18 (Fig. 9c). Magaela et al. studied the PDT effect of an Sn(IV) porphyrin linked with biotin-decorated nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dot nanohybrid, (SnPp/B-NGQD). Consequently, ϕΔ of 0.59 and 0.79 were achieved for SnPp and the SnPp-B-NGQDs, respectively, in DMSO. Studies showed that SnPp-B-NGQDs had greater cellular uptake, which correlates with its PDT activity against MCF-7 cells. SnPp-B-NGQDs showed high phototoxicity with an IC50 value of 10.4 μg mL−1 compared to SnPp alone with an IC50 value of 11.2 μg mL−1, which implies that the biotin-decorated nitrogen-doped graphene quantum enhanced the activity of SnPp192 (Fig. 8b and c). Managa et al. studied the PDT effect of a GQD/porphyrin nanocomposite in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. The nanoconjugates did not show any dark toxicity even at a high concentration of 120 μg mL−1 but showed a PDT effect upon photoexcitation.196 Nwahara et al. constructed a hybrid system, BODIPY@GQD/ZnPc, consisting of three PDT agents to increase the PDT effect. The hybrid system gave a higher ϕΔ due to the increase in triplet state population compared to the individual ZnPc and GQD/ZnPc moieties.290
 Fig. 9  Showing PDT and PTT effect of GQD-Pp/Pc conjugates (a) Schematic showing the theranostic application of GQD-PEG-P for the detection of intracellular miRNA and combined PTT/PDT effect. (b(A)) Confocal imaging of A549 treated with GQD-PEG-P with laser irradiation and treated with calcein-AM (live: green) and PI (dead: red). Scale bar: 40 μm. (b(B)) Cell viability of A549 when treated with GQD-PEG-P in dark and upon laser irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 276 Copyright 2016, ACS. (c) Viability of T-47D cells treated with porphyrin 1, GQDs, GQD_1A, and GQD_1B at different concentrations, nonirradiated (“Dark”) and irradiated (“PDT”) with white light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18 Copyright 2021, ACS. (d(A)) Phototoxicity studies: S. Aureus in the presence of ZnPc (3), quaternized derivative ZnPc (4), 3@N,S-GQD and 4@N,S-GQD with light and in the dark. (d(B)) Agar plates depicting S. Aureus colonies after treatment with 5% DMSO in PBS as the control (B(i)) and 3@N,S-GQD (B(ii)) after 80 min irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 287 Copyright 2021, Elsevier B.V. 


4.4.2 Photodynamic antimicrobial chemotherapy. 
There is a pressing need to broaden the horizons of antibiotic research and development.4,291–293 Interestingly, various micro-organisms and parasites can be inactivated by light, and based on this phenomenon, Pc can exhibit high photochemical activity and act as a potential photosensitizer (due to its high triplet quantum yield).293 Feng et al. reported that with the introduction of porphyrin in carbon (CDs) they exhibited high antibacterial action by producing singlet oxygen under red light irradiation. Laser Scanning Confocal Microscopy (LSCM) imaging showed that the carbon dots (CDs) stick to the bacteria and generate ROS when exposed to red light to kill them. In vitro pigskin tests also revealed the antibacterial efficacy of CDs when exposed to a 638 nm laser.294 This family of compounds had better photostability and absorption in the red area, allowing deeper ROS species production in tissues for longer.108,168,301 Recently, Mei et al. demonstrated the antimicrobial properties of chitosan oligosaccharide-functionalized GQDs (GQDs-COS) based on the synergistic combination of PDT, PTT, and chemotherapy against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.160 The results indicated that photodynamic antimicrobial chemotherapy (PACT) can be a potential strategy to develop novel antibiotics to combat antimicrobial resistance. Using similar principles, GQD-Pp/Pc hybrid systems can be explored to develop a new era of PACT via ROS generation. ROS causes random oxidation of DNA, RNA, and/or lipid, leading to bacterial destruction, and thus preventing the development of specific resistance mechanisms in bacteria.295,297
Sen et al. recently reported the antibacterial activity of novel ZnPcs (3,4)-containing octa-imines and their nanoconjugates (3@N,S-GQDs and 4@N,S-GQDs) in S. aureus. As the singlet oxygen production increased for 3@N,S-GQDs and 4@N,S-GQDs compared to ZnPcs (3,4) alone, photoactivity resulted in complete cell destruction. Fig. 9d (A) and (B) and Table 4 show the existence of the bacteria colonies before and after treatment, respectively. This implies that the nanoconjugate has better activity than that of the unconjugated Pc alone. The enhanced activities of 3@N,S-GQDs and 4@N,S-GQDs compared to Pcs alone (3,4) could be due to the high ability of GQDs to bind to the cellular membranes. GQDs may disrupt the membrane and cause a canal large enough to allow PS to enter the cytoplasm. After entering the cell, they may prevent protein synthesis and DNA replication in addition to generating singlet oxygen.287 Openda et al. reported that in comparison to other Pcs and conjugates, indium phthalocyanines (InPc) conjugated with GQDs demonstrated greater photo-antibacterial action. In comparison to only Pc, conjugate InPc@GQDs and ZnPc@GQDs were found to be highly effective, causing a 9.68 and 3.77 log reduction of bacteria at 10 μM, respectively288 (Table 4).
Table 4 Comparison of the phototherapeutic effect of porphyrin (Pp), GQDs, and the GQD-Pp hybrid system




Sl. no.
 
Singlet quantum yield (ϕΔ)
Cell viability (Conc.)
Wavelength of laser and duration of irradiation
Cytotoxicity studied in cancer/bacterial cells
Ref.




1
GQD-PEG-P
1.08
14% (100 μg mL−1)
635 nm and 980 nm for 10 min
A549 lung cancer cells

276



61.3% (100 μg mL−1)
635 nm for 10 min


30.5% (100 μg mL−1)
980 nm for 10 min


2
NGQDs
—
50% (14.2 μg mL−1)
625 nm for 30 min
MCF-7 breast cancer cells

192



B-NGQDs
—
50% (14.4) μg mL−1)


SnPp
0.59
50% (11.2 μg mL−1)


SnPp-B-NGQDs
0.79
50% (10.4 μg mL−1)


3
Porphyrin 1
0.47
50% (10–100 nM)
White light for 90 s
T-47D breast cancer cells

18



GQD
0.07
—


GQD_1A
0.51
25% (10 nM)


GQD_1B
0.25
25% (10 nM)


4.
ZnPc (3)
0.23
0.09% (10 μM)
680 nm for 80 min

S. aureus (Gram positive bacteria)

288



quaternized derivative ZnPc (4)
0.31
0% (0.5 μM)
680 nm for 40 min


3@N,S-GQD
0.32
0% (10 μM)
680 nm for 80 min


4@N,S-GQD
0.42
0% (0.5 μM)
680 nm for 20 min


5
Pc
0.22
24% (10 μM)
670 nm for 120 min

S. aureus (Gram positive bacteria)

287



ZnPc
0.72
0.23% (10 μM)


InPc
0.75
0.14% (10 μM)


Pc@GQD
0.2
75% (10 μM)


ZnPc @GQD
0.77
0.12% (10 μM)


InPc@GQD
0.79
0% (10 μM)






4.4.3 Bioimaging. 
Monodisperse nanoparticles made of biocompatible building block conjugates can be useful in developing multipurpose new optical imaging systems and enhancing the therapeutic index.6,298 In the case of near-infrared fluorescence imaging (NIRFI), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography (PET), and dual modal PET-MRI, nanoporphyrins can be employed as amplifiable multimodality nanoprobes. Nanoporphyrins considerably improve the imaging sensitivity for tumour identification by suppressing the background in the blood and preferentially accumulating and amplifying signals in tumours.69 Biocompatible porphysomes can also be functionalized with receptor ligands to target nanoparticles or chelated with paramagnetic metal ions to serve as contrast agents in PET, MRI, and in vivo fluorescence imaging.298 In the case of PDT, bioimaging of compounds is important for deciding the PDT dosimetry. Bioimaging helps to decide various matrices, such as the amount of PS at the site of treatment before and after PDT. However, metalloporphyrin/MPc-nanoparticle conjugates suffer from low fluorescence, which becomes a limitation in imaging. Thus, to overcome the reduced fluorescence of Pc, Nwahara et al. synthesized an assembly of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) on functional GQD-Pcs conjugates, where imaging could be done through Raman spectroscopy of GQDs. The surface-enhanced Raman scattering of GQDs increased by 32-fold due to the chemisorbed AuNPs. Another important feature for PDT of this hybrid is that it had an increased singlet oxygen quantum yield. The composite system showed a high triple quantum yield due to the heavy atom effect of Au, which translated to a high singlet quantum yield as high as 87%. These remarkable features make the composite system a unique Raman-based PDT dosimetric agent.299
Santos et al. studied the cellular distribution of GQDs, GQD-Pp nanohybrids (GQD_1A and GQD_1B) and Pp in T-47D cells (Fig. 10a). Confocal imaging of porphyrin showed red fluorescence, which appeared as large bright aggregates preferentially at the periphery of the plasma membrane and as single spots in the cytoplasm. GQDs without porphyrin appeared green with some bright spots due to vesicular accumulation. GQD-Pp showed a red staining pattern, which encompassed manly bright spots in the cytoplasm, similar to porphyrin 1. The fluorescence of the GQD-Pp nanohybrid inside the cells was visible at low concentration of 10 nM similar to that of porphyrin 1 at a higher concentration of 1 mM. This indicates the better internalization of the GQD-Pp hybrid system than porphyrin alone.18 Cao et al. showed that GQD-PEG-P could discriminate cancer cells (A549) from somatic cells (HDF cells) due to the intrinsic fluorescence of GQD (Fig. 10b). The GQD-PEG-P-loaded molecular beacon (MB) facilitated gene delivery for the detection of cancer-associated microRNA (miRNA), as visible from the green color in A549 cells.276
 Fig. 10  (a) Confocal images of the cellular distribution of porphyrin, GQDs and GQD-Pp in T-47D cells. Cells were not exposed to any compound (control, A) or were exposed to porphyrin 1 (B), GQD (C), or the hybrids GQD-1A and GQD_1B (E). F-actin is labeled in green in panels A, B, D, and E and the nuclei marker (DAPI) is shown in blue. Scale bar is 20 mm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18 Copyright 2021, ACS. (b) Confocal microscopy images of A549 cells transfected by GQD-PEG-P. Scale bar: 20 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 276 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. Intracellular localization of TMPyP (c) and Zn-TMPyP (d) in the free form (top) and hybridized with GO (center) and GQDs (bottom). 
Menilli et al. used LysoTracker Green DND-26, an acidic organelle marker, to visualise the intrinsic fluorescence of GO-Pp and GQD-Pp hybrids to determine the intracellular distribution of these Pp complexes in T24 human bladder cancer cells (porphyrin channel). TMPyP and ZnTMPyP in the free form were mainly carried to the lysosomes, as evidenced by the high co-localization (yellow) of the porphyrin red fluorescence with the green fluorescence of LysoTracker. The GO and GQD hybrids showed similar behaviour. It is worth noting that substantial aggregates of GO hybrids could be seen outside the cells, indicating that it was difficult for these hybrids to be fully internalised. This study suggests that the GO-complex required a very high concentration to have any photosensitizing effect119 (Fig. 10c and d).


4.4.4 Drug delivery. 
Nanovehicles are used to deliver photosensitizers for photodynamic treatment (PDT) because of their enhanced penetration and retention effect; however, there are still drawbacks such as premature leakage and non-selective release of the photosensitizer.300 Nanoporphyrins can also be used as programmable nanocarriers for the delivery of medications or therapeutic radio-metals into tumours. Nanoparticle-based medication delivery systems encounter blood as the initial biological barrier. Interactions with blood proteins and lipoproteins can induce the dissociation of nanoparticles, resulting in premature drug release. To improve the structural stability of GQDs in the blood circulation, GQDs based on porphyrin conjugates may be helpful.69 Porphyrins and related compounds, particularly their derivatives, accumulate in cancerous tissues such as sarcomas and mammary carcinomas, and thus can be employed as drug transporters. Except for haematological malignancies, the accumulation of these substances in lymph nodes may reduce their therapeutic efficacy against practically all cancers.298
A novel multicomponent coordination self-assembly strategy based on the combination of histidine-containing short peptides, photosensitizers (Pp), and metal ions to design and engineer metallo-nanodrugs for antitumor therapy is based on the cooperative coordination of histidine residues and porphyrin derivatives (Fig. 11a). Zinc ion-coordinated multicomponent self-assembly with a photosensitizer yields spherical metallo-nanodrugs quickly (Fig. 11b and c). Surprisingly, metallo-nanodrugs exhibit both colloidal stability and burst release behaviour in the tumour microenvironment, complying with pH and glutathione (GSH) level variations. The robustness and flexibility of various coordination interactions with short peptides and photosensitizers underpin these behaviors. The constructed metallo-nanodrugs exhibited improved tumor accumulation, extended blood circulation, and tumor ablation301 (Fig. 11d and e).
 Fig. 11  Schematic diagram of (a) metalloporphyrin coordination for effective anticancer PDT. (b) Metalloporphyrin nanodrugs are formed by the cooperative coordination of short peptides and photosensitizers in the presence of zinc ions. (c) Pattern of metal-binding peptide and Zn2+ molecular organisation. (d) The EPR effect causes an accumulation of cancers. (e) Cellular internalisation of metalloporphyrin nanoparticles and efficient PDT.153 Copyright 2018, ACS. 

5. Current challenges, future perspectives, and conclusion
GQD-based porphyrin nanocomposites can allow specific targeting, extended tissue lifetime, drug delivery, immune tolerance, photophysical, electrochemical, and bioactive properties, healing and repair of damaged organs, biomimetic function, improved hydrophilicity, and cancer theranostics, depending on their kinetics, structure–function relationships, etc.6,298 The tendency of nanohybrids to undergo intersystem crossing to an excited triplet state allows their use in therapeutic applications such as PDT and PTT. Surface modifications of Pp/Pc have helped to regulate their physicochemical, fluorescence, and pharmacological properties, which can permit their use for both diagnostic and therapeutic effects in fluorescence-guided tumor dissection and imaging. However, it is critical to study the pharmacokinetics and biodistribution of GQD-Pp/Pc conjugates before using them as nanoprobes for in vivo imaging. There are various challenges in designing GQD-porphyrin/Pc nanocomposites due to (i) the “uncertainty” of functionalization on the surface of GQDs will alter the conjugation of porphyrin or Pc, which will hamper the reproducibility, (ii) challenge of getting a high-quality single layer of GQDs with a narrow size distribution and high yield for their large-scale industrial and cost-effective production, and (iii) achieving nanocomposites with compositional and structural complexity, while preserving the monodispersity to create uniform and well-defined nanoparticles of various elemental compositions, sizes, and shapes as well as facet control via interface engineering. Fascinatingly, we envision meeting these challenges by integrating the special topographies of these single components into efficient and robust nanohybrid structures, which will result in novel and amplified features. Both Pp/Pc and GQDs present multiple options to govern their optical, magnetic, and electronic properties via easy and well-established synthetic methods. The multifunctional hybrid systems of GQD-Pp/Pc have been developed as promising novel materials for sensing, organic electronics, catalysis, various types of light-harvesting systems, and therapeutic applications, whereas in the arena of ecological, bio-analysis, and energy-related areas more studies need to be conducted together with chemical yield. GQDs-Pp/Pc hybrids as electrode materials may satisfy many needs of future power sources, such as high power densities and energy, improved cyclic stability in electrodes, electrical conductivity, long lifetime, safety, and environmental benignity. This facet of the challenges provides more prospects for scientists working in the field of materials-based research, and it is strongly believed that GQDs can meet the higher expectations in future applications. The investigation of the physical and medical properties of GQDs is still in progress with natural substitutes. Maybe this will be an eye-opening material for drug or gene delivery and beyond. As suitable, dictating their arrangement in specific environments, this hybrid system can show improved medicinal and site-localizing properties. To achieve this goal, new design concepts for functional GQD-Pp/Pc are strongly necessary. This study inspires us to elucidate opportunities associated with newer analogues of Pp and their derivatives as full-fledged therapeutic agents as the basis for preparing drug conjugates, which is required to further to employ their appropriate status in contemporary medicine. The result is considered a sign of even more impressive microbial eradication efforts that are still to come. From a conceptual viewpoint, Pp/Pc can be observed as essential for the development of GQD-Pp/Pc (GPP) conjugates.
In this contribution, we focused on the recent examples reported in the literature illustrating the integration of carbon nanomaterials (i.e., graphene quantum dots) and Pp/Pc in disclosing structure–property trends to guide experimentalists towards a more rational design of nanohybrid systems. These hybrids have become a treasure trove in which promising photochemical energy harvesting and therapeutic applications are emerging with novel examples of molecular organization. In summary, the field of biohybrid materials has been merging in the last few decades with that of PS, enabling the implementation of several biomedical technologies with enormous future impact. Accordingly, photosensitizing biohybrid materials represent a new generation of PS systems with improved features regarding their behavior in biological media. Importantly, the wide variety of biomolecular structures available in nature makes this approach versatile, allowing tuning of the type of biohybrid depending on the intended application or the target tissue. Supramolecular chemistry of these novel systems using weak to fairly strong binding motifs is emerging and should furnish future avenues for integration into nanoscience and nanotechnology developments. Thus, the intrinsic physicochemical properties of GQD-Pp/Pc will depend on the accuracy of controlling their shape and size. Because of the inherent synthetic control available for the design of GQD-based materials, the optical sensing approach has potential to be highly versatile for various target analytes. Consequently, the large range of possible bond orders of GQD-Pp/Pc hybrid systems offers fertile ground for chemical modification. The preparation of hybrids with high bond orders is usually challenging because their moieties are highly reactive. Undoubtedly, this reactivity can be used in catalytic activities. GQD-Pp/Pc hybrid systems exhibit multiple bonding features at one extreme, while favoring definite conformations, resulting in various physical properties such as photoluminescence and magnetism. Increasing evidence implies that the conjugation of GQD-Pp/Pc hybrid systems can be employed in catalytic processes, which has proven to be popular because these preorganized structures have many tunable features, such as bond order, polarity, and complementarity, facilitating multisite activation-reactivity unattainable with truly monomolecular species. These nanohybrids can also be advantageous in dye-sensitised solar cells, photodynamic therapy, and photocatalysis as analogous uniformly arranged similar structures operate as photosensitizers and electron transmission medium.184 If the intrinsic properties of porphyrin macrocycles, that is, the incorporation of metal centers capable of axial ligation of adducts, are preserved upon coupling with graphene, further options for the functionalization of graphene nanostructures will emerge. This immense interest stems from their ability to serve as ligands for a variety of metals to catalyze many reactions and absorb and convert light into other forms of energy. Also, we addressed the exemplary developments regarding the fabrication, control, and functionality of hybrid and bio-inspired nanosystems and architectures. As fully synthetic, and often privileged, macrocycles, Pp analogs have a rich future in the design of drug conjugates.
This review addressed the efforts to improve the delivery and uptake of porphyrinoid-based compounds in a myriad of applications. The premiere biomedical application of porphyrinoids is as photosensitizers in PDT. Their synthetic versatility, long-range order, and rich host–guest chemistry make these nanohybrids an ideal platform for identifying design features for advanced functional materials. We anticipate that with this review, new archetypes and strategies in the application of Pp and its derivatives will progressively flourish and lead to unprecedented chemical and structural tunability. To enhance their stabilization, porphyrin-containing polymers have been developed. To develop new PSs, various properties such as biocompatibility, biodegradability, and tumor selectivity must also be considered.
The highly polar nature of these compounds is also problematic in separating the products from the unwanted by-products. In this regard, the late-stage introduction of GQD moieties with Pp/Pc is desirable, and click chemistry is ideal for this purpose. Consequently, high reactivity is required for surface modification reactions. Because of its high efficiency, click chemistry enables efficient surface modification. Using the CuAAC reaction, various surfaces can be efficiently functionalized with porphyrin units.
Consequently, porphyrin chemists can now focus on exploring the properties and functions of sophisticated porphyrins without much synthetic effort. The important goal for chemists is to achieve intriguing and useful properties and functions of materials, not just their synthesis. Continued work in these emerging fields is of great value to understand their functions. The emergence of hybrid-Pp/Pc opens up new opportunities in different branches of science and technology primarily because of their conducive biocompatibility, tunable bandgaps, and unique optoelectronic properties, namely, photoluminescence and fluorescence.
Author contributions
Sujata Sangam has finalized the entire manuscript. Puja Prasad has contributed in writing, making figures, and tables along with Sujata Sangam. Simran Jindal collated papers related to the application in catalysis and biosensing. Aakanksha Agarwal has collated the papers related to energy conversion and future prospects. Basu Dev Banerjee has worked on the references. Monalisa Mukherjee has conceptualized, supervised, and proposed the title.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Sujata Sangam is grateful to Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR)–University Grants Commission (UGC) for providing financial support and AICCRS/AIB, Noida. Puja Prasad thanks IITD and CSIR for SRA position (pool no. 9031-892A). Monalisa Mukherjee thanks the Department of Science and Technology (DST) and Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) (EMR/2016/00561) for funding and Amity University Uttar Pradesh (AUUP, Noida) for providing research infrastructure and library facility.
References
G. Xue, S. Yu, Z. Qiang, L. Xiuying, T. Lijun and L. Jiangrong, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2020, 1108, 46–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Paolesse, S. Nardis, D. Monti, M. Stefanelli and C. di Natale, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 2517–2583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Deda, B. A. Iglesias, E. Alves, K. Araki and C. R. S. Garcia, Molecules, 2020, 25, 2080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, C. R. R. Gan, J. Gao and X. J. Loh, Small, 2016, 12, 3609–3644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Imran, M. Ramzan, A. K. Qureshi, M. A. Khan and M. Tariq, Biosensors, 2018, 8, 1–17 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Rabiee, M. T. Yaraki, S. M. Garakani, S. M. Garakani, S. Ahmadi, A. Lajevardi, M. Bagherzadeh, M. Rabiee, L. Tayebi, M. Tahriri and M. R. Hamblin, Biomaterials, 2020, 232, 119707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, X. Li, M. Chen, C. Wang, T. Wei, H. Zhang and S. Fan, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 259, 355–364 CrossRef CAS .
H. Montaseri, C. A. Kruger and H. Abrahamse, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2020, 21, 3358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Zhong, X. Wang, W. Yang, F. Bai, B. Zhang, L. Alarid, K. Bian and H. Fan, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6916–6921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Magna, F. Mandoj, M. Stefanelli, G. Pomarico, D. Monti, C. Di Natale, R. Paolesse and S. Nardis, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 1–21 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Mondal and S. Bera, Adv. Nat. Sci.: Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2014, 5, 033002 CAS .
J. M. Gottfried, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2015, 70, 259–379 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aggarwal, D. Samaroo, I. R. Jovanovic, S. Singh, M. P. Tuz and M. R. Mackiewicz, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2019, 23, 729–765 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Sorokin, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 8152–8191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Auwärter, D. Écija, F. Klappenberger and J. V. Barth, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 105–120 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, M. C. Wasson, M. Shayan, E. K. Berdichevsky, J. Ricardo-Noordberg, Z. Singh, E. K. Papazyan, A. J. Castro, P. Marino, Z. Ajoyan, Z. Chen, T. Islamoglu, A. J. Howarth, Y. Liu, M. B. Majewski, M. J. Katz, J. E. Mondloch and O. K. Farha, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 429, 213615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhong, J. Liu, X. Xu, A. Cao, Z. Tao, W. You and L. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 2404–2413 RSC .
C. I. M. Santos, L. Rodríguez-Pérez, G. Gonçalves, C. J. Dias, F. Monteiro, M. do A. F. Faustino, S. I. Vieira, L. A. Helguero, M. Á. Herranz, N. Martín, M. G. P. M. S. Neves, J. M. G. Martinho and E. M. S. Maçôas, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 13079–13089 CrossRef CAS .

          L. B. Kong, W. Que, K. Zhou, S. Li and T. Zhang, in Advanced Structured Materials, Springer Verlag,  2017, vol. 83, pp. 177–243 Search PubMed .
M. Zhang, B. Yuan, S. Z. Kang, L. Qin, G. Li and X. Li, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 42063–42068 RSC .
A. Wang, J. Ye, M. G. Humphrey and C. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705704 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Mondal, S. Bera, L. C. Nene, M. E. Managa, D. O. Oluwole, D. M. Mafukidze, Y. R. Kumar, K. Deshmukh, S. K. K. Pasha, Z. Bing, Z. Qiang, T. Yiwei, L. Xiuying, L. Jianrong, D. M. Mafukidze, T. Nyokong, O. J. Achadu, I. Uddin and T. Nyokong, J. Mol. Struct., 2016, 317, 12–25 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, S. Li, K. Li, Y. Zheng, M. Zhang, C. Cai, C. Yu, Y. Zhou and D. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9394–9397 RSC .
C. I. M. Santos, G. Gonçalves, M. Cicuéndez, I. Mariz, V. S. Silva, H. Oliveira, F. Campos, S. I. Vieira, P. A. A. P. Marques, E. M. S. Maçôas, M. G. P. M. S. Neves and J. M. G. Martinho, Carbon, 2018, 135, 202–214 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Delgado, M. A. Herranz and N. Martin, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1417–1426 RSC .
J. Liu, R. Li and B. Yang, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 2179–2195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. I. Kharisov, O. V. Kharissova, A. V. Dimas, I. G. D. L. Fuente and P. Y. Mendez, J. Coord. Chem., 2016, 69, 1125–1151 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 132–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tian, L. Tang, K. S. Teng and S. P. Lau, Mater. Today Chem., 2018, 10, 221–258 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, G. Lv, W. Hu, D. Li, S. Chen and Z. Dai, Nanotechnol. Rev., 2018, 7, 157–185 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, N. Gao, K. Dong, J. Ren and X. Qu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6202–6210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, M. Rong, F. Luo, D. Chen, Y. Wang and X. Chen, Trends Analyt. Chem., 2014, 54, 83–102 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. M. Facure, R. Schneider, J. B. S. Lima, L. A. Mercante and D. S. Correa, Electrochem, 2021, 2, 490–519 CrossRef .
M. C. Biswas, M. T. Islam, P. K. Nandy and M. M. Hossain, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3, 889–911 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Power, B. Gorey, S. Chandra and J. Chapman, Nanotechnol. Rev., 2018, 7, 19–41 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ghosh, K. Sarkar, P. Devi, K. H. Kim and P. Kumar, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 135, 110391 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kadian, S. K. Sethi and G. Manik, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 627–658 RSC .
X. Li, M. Rui, J. Song, Z. Shen and H. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4929–4947 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sun, Y. Zhang, R. Yan, Y. Jiang and Y. Zhao, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2021, 38, 2000261 CrossRef CAS .
N. Rabiee, M. Bagherzadeh, A. M. Ghadiri, Y. Fatahi, N. Baheiraei, M. Safarkhani, A. Aldhaher and R. Dinarvand, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 1–15 CrossRef PubMed .
L. M. Mateo, Q. Sun, S. X. Liu, J. J. Bergkamp, K. Eimre, C. A. Pignedoli, P. Ruffieux, S. Decurtins, G. Bottari, R. Fasel and T. Torres, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1334–1339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mandal, S. Sarkar and P. Sarkar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3400–3407 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Monteiro, M. G. P. M. S. Neves and T. Trindade, ChemPlusChem, 2020, 85, 1857–1880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ariga, V. Malgras, Q. Ji, M. B. Zakaria and Y. Yamauchi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 320–321, 139–152 CrossRef CAS .

          E. Prigorchenko, L. Ustrnul, V. Borovkov and R. Aav, Porphyrin Science By Women (In 3 Volumes),  2020, pp. 816–833 Search PubMed .
V. Almeida-Marrero, E. Van De Winckel, E. Anaya-Plaza, T. Torres and A. De La Escosura, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7369–7400 RSC .
C. Zhang, W. Chen, T. Zhang, X. Jiang and Y. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 4726–4737 RSC .
Z. Yang, L. Fan, X. Fan, M. Hou, Z. Cao, Y. Ding and W. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2020, 92, 6727–6733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Hwang, H. M. Hwang, Y. Shin, Y. Yoon, H. Lee, J. Yang, S. Bak and H. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
J. N. Tiwari, V. Vij, K. C. Kemp and K. S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 46–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Arambula and J. L. Sessler, Chem, 2020, 6, 1634–1651 CAS .
M. D. Shirsat, T. Sarkar, J. Kakoullis, N. V. Myung, B. Konnanath, A. Spanias and A. Mulchandani, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 3845–3850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nekoueian, M. Amiri, M. Sillanpää, F. Marken, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4281–4316 RSC .
K. Lagos, H. Buzzá, V. Bagnato and M. Romero, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2022, 23, 22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Zheng, X. Zhang, S. Liu, Q. Pei, M. Zheng and Z. Xie, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2017, 6, 1–6 CAS .
N. Karousis, A. S. D. Sandanakaya, T. Hasobe, S. P. Economopoulos, E. Sarantopoulou and J. Tagmatarchis, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 109–117 RSC .
L. J. Chen, S. Chen, Y. Qin, L. Xu, G. Q. Yin, J. L. Zhu, F. F. Zhu, W. Zheng, X. Li and H. B. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5049–5052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lv, X. He, L. Lu, L. Wu and T. Liu, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2012, 16, 77–84 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mondal and S. Bera, Adv. Nat. Sci.: Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2014, 5, 033002 CAS .
D. Samaroo, E. Perez, A. Aggarwal, A. Wills and N. O′Connor, Ther. Delivery, 2014, 5, 859–872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Mateo, Q. Sun, S. Liu, J. J. Bergkamp, K. Eimre, C. A. Pignedoli, P. Ruffieux, S. Decurtins, G. Bottari, R. Fasel and T. Torres, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 1350–1355 CrossRef .
X. Fen, B. D. Phebus, L. Li and S. Chen, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2015, 7, 1990–2010 CrossRef .
G. Singh, H. Kaur, A. Sharma, J. Singh, H. K. Alajangi, S. Kumar, N. Singla, I. P. Kaur and R. P. Barnwal, Front. Chem., 2021, 9, 1–12 Search PubMed .

          A. Wang and W. Zhao, in Chemical Reactions in Inorganic Chemistry, UK, InTechOpen,  2018, pp. 9–29 Search PubMed .
J. Xie, Y. Wang, W. Choi, P. Jangili, Y. Ge, Y. Xu, J. Kang, L. Liu, B. Zhang, Z. Xie, J. He, N. Xie, G. Nie, H. Zhang and J. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 9152–9201 RSC .
J. Ge, M. Lan, B. Zhou, W. Liu, L. Guo, H. Wang, Q. Jia, G. Niu, X. Huang, H. Zhou, X. Meng, P. Wang, C. S. Lee, W. Zhang and X. Han, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–8 Search PubMed .
G. Botari, O. Trukhina, M. Ince and T Torres, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 2453–2477 CrossRef .
S. Supriya, V. S. Shetti and G. Hegde, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 12328–12348 RSC .
L. Wei, H. Chen, R. Liu, S. Wang, T. Liu, Z. Hu, W. Lan, Y. Hu, Y. She and H. Fu, J. Sci. Food Agric., 2021, 101, 6193–6201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cárdenas-Jirón, Y. Figueroa, N. Kumar and J. M. Seminario, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 2013–2026 CrossRef .
R. Bera, S. Mandal, B. Mondal, B. Jana, S. K. Nayak and A. Patra, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 1562–1568 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, N. Xu, J. Fan, W. Sun and X. Peng, Small, 2019, 15, 1805087 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Jin, P. Owour, S. Lei and L. Ge, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 20, 439–453 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kole and D. S. Ang, AIP Adv., 2018, 8, 085009 CrossRef .
S. Wu, Q. He, C. Tan, Y. Wang and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 1160–1172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. B. Drissi, H. Ouarrad, F. Z. Ramadan and W. Fritzsche, RSC Adv., 2019, 10, 801–811 RSC .

          T. A. Tabish and S. Zhang, in Comprehensive Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Elsevier,  2019, 1–5, 171–192 Search PubMed .
B. Z. Ristic, M. M. Milenkovic, I. R. Dakic, B. M. Todorovic-markovic, M. S. Milosavljevic, M. D. Budimir, V. G. Paunovic, M. D. Dramicanin, Z. M. Markovic and V. S. Trajkovic, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 4428–4435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bacon, S. J. Bradley and T. Nann, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2013, 31, 415–428 CrossRef .
B. M. Min, S. Sakri, G. A. Saenz and A. B. Kaul, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 5379–5389 CrossRef PubMed .

          X. Zhao, W. Gao, H. Zhang, X. Qiu and Y. Luo, Graphene quantum dots in biomedical applications: Recent advances and future challenges, Elsevier Inc.,  2019, pp. 493–505 Search PubMed .

          P. N. Joshi, S. Kundu, S. K. Sanghi and D. Sarkar, in Smart Drug Delivery Syst., ed. A. Sezer, IntechOpen, London, UK,  2016, pp. 159–197 Search PubMed .
J. Shen, W. Chen, Z. Yang, G. Lv, J. Cao, D. Li and X. Liu, Nano, 2021, 16, 2130001 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bressi, A. Ferlazzo, D. Iannazzo and C. Espro, Nanomaterials, 2011, 11, 1120 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sangam, A. Gupta, A. Shakeel, R. Bhattacharya, A. K. Sharma, D. Suhag, S. Chakrabarti, S. K. Garg, S. Chattopadhyay, B. Basu, V. Kumar, S. K. Rajput, M. K. Dutta and M. Mukherjee, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 4245–4259 RSC .
V. K. Sagar, A. v. Veluthandath and P. B. Bisht, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2020, 400, 112614 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Prabhu, V. Kavithayeni, R. Suganthy and K. Geetha, Carbon Lett., 2021, 31, 1–12 CrossRef .
H. Chen, Z. Wang, S. Zong, P. Chen, D. Zhu, L. Wu and Y. Cui, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15477–15486 RSC .
H. Zhao, R. Ding, X. Zhao, Y. Li, L. Qu, H. Pei, L. Yildirimer, Z. Wu and W. Zhang, Drug Discovery Today, 2017, 22, 1302–1317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Paternò, Goudappagouda, Q. Chen, G. Lanzani, F. Scotognella and A. Narita, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2100508 CrossRef .
H. Lu, W. Li, H. Dong and M. Wei, Small, 2019, 15, 1902136 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Iannazzo, A. Pistone, C. Celesti, C. Triolo, S. Patane, S. V. Giofre, R. Romeo, I. Ziccarelli, R. Mancuso, B. Gabriele, G. Visalli, A. Facciola and A. D. Pietro, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Kumawat, M. Thakur, R. B. Gurung and R. Srivastava, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, S. Zhang and L. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18932–18935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mili, A. Jaiswal, V. Hada, S. S. Sagiri, K. Pal, R. Chowdhary, R. Malik, R. S. Gupta, M. K. Gupta, J. P. Chourasia, S. Hashmi, S. K. S. Rathore, A. K. Srivastava and S. Verma, ChemistrySelect, 2021, 6, 9990–10001 CrossRef CAS .
D. Iannazzo, A. Pistone, M. Salamo, S. Galvagno, R. Romeo, S. Giofre, C. Branca, G. Visalli and A. Pietro, Int. J. Pharm., 2017, 518, 185–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, S. P. Lau, L. Tang, R. Ji and P. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 7308–7313 RSC .
S. Veeresh, H. Ganesh, Y. S. Nagaraju, M. Vandana, S. P. Ashokkumar, H. Vijeth, M. V. N. A. Prasad and H. Devendrappa, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2021, 114, 108289 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qu, M. Zheng, J. Li, Z. Xie and Z. Sun, Light: Sci. Appl., 2015, 4, e364 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qu, M. Zheng, L. Zhang, H. Zhao, Z. Xie, X. Jing, R. E. Haddad, H. Fan and Z. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 1–9 Search PubMed .
B. Wagner, N. Dehnhardt, M. Schmid, B. P. Klein, L. Ruppenthal, P. Müller, M. Zugermeier, J. M. Gottfried, S. Lippert, M. U. Halbich, A. Rahimi-Iman and J. Heine, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 28363–28373 CrossRef CAS .
J. Campos, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2020, 4, 696–702 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Koh, S. H. Noh, T. H. Kim, W. J. Lee, S. C. Yi and T. H. Han, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 26113–26119 RSC .
S. Dhar, T. Majumder, S. P. Mondal, M. R. Younis, G. He, J. Lin, P. Huang, P. Tian, L. Tang, K. S. Teng, S. P. Lau, M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung, R. B. Kaner, N. W. Street, M. Pereira, D. Lucas, M. J. F. Calvete, C. Lan, J. Zhao, L. Zhang, C. Wen, Y. Huang, S. Zhao, D. M. Tobaldi, D. Dvoranová, L. Lajaunie, N. Rozman, B. Figueiredo, M. P. Seabra, Y. Ding, W. Zhu, Y. Xie, X. Bu, S. Yang, Y. Bu, P. He, Y. Yang, G. Wang, T. Wu, X. Wang, A. Emrehan, J. Fan, Y. Min, Q. Xu, S. Sun, V. A. Online, J. Dong, L. Sun, H. Chen, Y. Wang, C. Wang, L. Dong, J. Hwan, S. Choi, Y. Jung, J. Sung, N. Sung, S. Cho, B. Walker, D. Soo, J. Shin, J. Hwa, A. B. Sorokin, D. Mondal, S. Bera, Y. Zhao, C. Hu, Y. Hu, H. Cheng, G. Shi and L. Qu, Mater. Today Chem., 2018, 10, 221–258 CrossRef .
T. van Tam, S. H. Hur, J. S. Chung and W. M. Choi, Sens. Actuators, A, 2015, 233, 368–373 CrossRef .
J. Chen, W. Wu, F. Zhang, J. Zhang, H. Liu, J. Zheng, S. Guo and J. Zhang, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 4961–4967 RSC .
Y. R. Kumar, K. Deshmukh and S. K. K. Pasha, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 23861–23898 RSC .
S. Sakthinathan, S. Kubendhiran, S. M. Chen, M. Govindasamy, F. M. A. Al-Hemaid, M. Ajmal Ali, P. Tamizhdurai and S. Sivasanker, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2017, 31, 1–10 CrossRef .
C. Kong, G. Zhang, Y. Li, D. W. Lei and Y. T. Long, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 3503–3507 RSC .
V. Georgakilas, M. Otyepka, A. B. Bourlinos, V. Chandra, N. Kim, K. C. Kemp, P. Hobza, R. Zboril and K. S. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 6156–6214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, L. Hu, H. Ma, G. Wang and Q. Wei, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Tang and J. J. Gooding, J. Mater. Chem, 2012, 22, 12435–12452 RSC .
X. F. Zhang and X. Shao, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2014, 278, 69–74 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ma, R. Wang, T. Jiao, J. Zhou, L. Zhang, J. Li, Z. Bai and Q. Peng, Colloids Surf., A, 2020, 584, 124023 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yamuna, S. Ramakrishnan, K. Dhara, R. Devi, N. K. Kothurkar, E. Kirubha and P. K. Palanisamy, J. Nanopart. Res., 2013, 15, 1399 CrossRef .
S. Tajik, Z. Dourandish, K. Zhang, H. Beitollahi, Q. Van Le, H. W. Jang and M. Shokouhimehr, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 15406–15429 RSC .
S. Khoee and A. Sadeghi, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 39780–39792 RSC .
P. Guo, P. Chen and M. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5336–5345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Menilli, A. R. Monteiro, S. Lazzarotto, F. M. P. Morais, A. T. P. C. Gomes, N. M. M. Moura, S. Fateixa, M. A. F. Faustino, M. G. P. M. S. Neves, T. Trindade and G. Miolo, Pharmaceutics, 2021, 13, 1512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Rajora, J. W. H. Lou and G. Zheng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6433–6469 RSC .
J. Touzeau, F. Barbault, F. Maurel and M. Seydou, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2018, 713, 172–179 CrossRef CAS .
D. Larowska, A. Wojcik, M. Mazurkiewicz-Pawlicka, A. Malolepszy, L. Stobiński, B. Marciniak and A. Lewandowska-Andralojc, ChemPhysChem, 2019, 20, 1054–1066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Cheng, J. Zhu and A. Adronov, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3188–3194 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, B. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Y. Tang, X. Liu and J. Li, Colloids Surf., B, 2018, 172, 207–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xue, A. Lindstrom and Y. Li, Bioconjugate Chem., 2019, 30, 1585–1603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. P. C. Gomes, M. G. P. M. S. Neves and J. A. S. Cavaleiro, An. Acad. Bras. Cienc., 2018, 90, 993–1026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. de Zheng, J. Ye, Y. Y. Huang and M. T. Xiao, Biomater. Sci., 2021, 9, 7811–7825 RSC .
E. Park, D. Oh, S. Park, W. Kim and C. Kim, APL Bioeng., 2021, 5, 31510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hasani, J. N. Gavgani, R. M. Pashki, S. Baseghi, A. Salehi, D. Heo, S. Y. Kim and M. Mahyari, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2017, 9, 1616–1625 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wang, J. Song, D. Jia, W. Yu, L. Long, Y. Song, M. P. Cifuentes, M. G. Humphrey, L. Zhang, J. Shao and C. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 296–305 RSC .
S. M. Aly, M. R. Parida, E. Alarousu and O. F. Mohammed, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10452–10455 RSC .
H. G. Jeong and M. S. Choi, Isr. J. Chem., 2016, 56, 110–118 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xue, M. Zhiying, L. Xiuying, T. Lijun and L. Jianrong, J. Fluoresc., 2020, 30, 1463–1468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zheng, X. Li, S. Huangfu, K. Xia, R. Yue, H. Wu and W. Song, Biomater. Sci., 2021, 9, 4630–4638 RSC .
L. Zhang, D. Peng, R.-P. Liang and J.-D. Qiu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 9343–9348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bhaumik, A. K. Mittal, A. Banerjee, Y. Chisti and U. C. Banerjee, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 1373–1394 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, X. Liang and Z. Dai, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 12394–12405 RSC .
M. Overchuk, M. Zheng, M. A. Rajora, D. M. Charron, J. Chen and G. Zheng, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 4560–4571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Aratani, D. Kim and A. Osuka, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1922–1934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, X. Guan, J. Xu, Y. Zhang, Q. Liu, Y. Tian, S. Li, X. Qin, H. Yang and Y. Liu, Biomaterials, 2019, 205, 106–119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Arcudi, V. Strauss, L. Đorđević, A. Cadranel, D. M. Guldi and M. Prato, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12097–12101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Managa, O. J. Achadu and T. Nyokong, Dyes Pigm., 2018, 148, 405–415 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, M. A. Bork, K. J. Riedy, D. R. McMillin and J. H. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 11612–11619 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hiroto, Y. Miyake and H. Shinokubo, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 2910–3043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ouyang, X. Wang, H. Kraatz, S. Ahmad, J. Gao, Y. Lv, X. Sun and Y. Huang, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 1160–1170 RSC .

          D. M. Lopes, J. C. Araujo-Chaves, L. R. Menezes and I. L. Nantes-Cardoso, in Solid State Physics, IntechOpen,  2019, pp. 1–20 Search PubMed .
M. R. Younis, G. He, J. Lin and P. Huang, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 1–25 Search PubMed .
P. Cui and Y. Xue, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2022, 33, 5024–5036 CrossRef CAS .
M. O. Senge and M. Davis, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2010, 14, 557–567 CrossRef CAS .
B. Academy, A. N. A. T. P. C. Gomes, M. G. P. M. S. Neves, C. Qu and P. Naturais, An. Acad. Bras. Cienc., 2018, 90, 993–1026 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Tian, B. Huang, M. H. Nawaz and W. Zhang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 420, 213410 CrossRef CAS .
D. Larowska, J. M. O'Brien, M. O. Senge, G. Burdzinski, B. Marciniak and A. Lewandowska-Andralojc, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 15769–15780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qu, M. Zhang, P. Du, Y. Zhou, L. Zhang, D. Li, H. Tan, Z. Zhao, Z. Xie and Z. Sun, Nanoscale, 2015, 5, 12272–12277 RSC .
F. D'Souza and O. Ito, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4913–4928 RSC .
O. Penon, M. J. Marín, D. A. Russell and L. Pérez-García, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 496, 100–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Chang, J. Bu, L. Ding, J. W. H. Lou, M. S. Valic, M. H. Y. Cheng, V. Rosilio, J. Chen and G. Zheng, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2021, 19, 1–15 CrossRef PubMed .
B. K. Walther, C. Z. Dinu, D. M. Guldi, V. G. Sergeyev, S. E. Creager, J. P. Cooke and A. Guiseppi-Elie, Mater. Today, 2020, 39, 23–46 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, L. Niu, J. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Huang, S. Xie, L. Huang, Q. Xu, Y. Wang and L. A. Belfiore, Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 2014, 34, 186–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mahyari, Y. Bide and J. N. Gavgani, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 517, 100–109 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mei, X. Gao, Y. Shi, C. Cheng, Z. Shi, M. Jiao, F. Cao, Z. Xu, X. Li and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 40153–40162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ryan, A. Gehrold, R. Perusitti, M. Pintea, M. Fazekas, O. B. Locos, F. Blaikie and M. O. Senge, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2011, 5817–5844 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chitta and F. D'Souza, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1440–1471 RSC .
Y. He, M. Garnica, F. Bischoff, J. Ducke, M. L. Bocquet, M. Batzill, W. Auwärter and J. v. Barth, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 33–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Otsuki, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6710–6753 RSC .
Y. Xu, Z. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Tian, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1275–1279 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. J. G. J. Dolmans, D. Fukumura and R. K. Jain, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2003, 3, 380–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Baek, T. Umeyama, S. Mizuno, N. v. Tkachenko and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 13285–13293 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nwahara, R. Nkhahle, B. P. Ngoy and J. Mack, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 6051–6061 RSC .
F. Sedona, M. di Marino, M. Sambi, T. Carofiglio, E. Lubian, M. Casarin and E. Tondello, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5147–5154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Nene, M. Managa and T. Nyokong, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 165, 488–498 CrossRef CAS .
S. Moxon, M. Cooke, S. Cox, M. Snow, L. Jeys, S. Jones, A. Smith and L. Grover, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1727–1731 CrossRef .
M. Jokazi, L. S. Mpeta and T. Nyokong, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2021, 901, 115748 CrossRef CAS .
S. Campuzano, P. Yáñez-Sedeño and J. M. Pingarrón, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 1–18 Search PubMed .
C. H. Hendon, A. J. Rieth, M. D. Korzyński and M. Dincǎ, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 554–563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Schneider, M. H. M. Facure, P. A. M. Chagas, R. S. Andre, D. M. dos Santos and D. S. Correa, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 2100430 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Lewandowska, N. Rosiak, A. Bogucki, J. Cielecka-Piontek, M. Mizera, W. Bednarski, M. Suchecki and K. Szaciłowski, Molecules,  2019, 24, 688 Search PubMed .
A. Siklitskaya, E. Gacka, D. Larowska, M. Mazurkiewicz-Pawlicka, A. Malolepszy, L. Stobiński, B. Marciniak, A. Lewandowska-Andrałojć and A. Kubas, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 1–14 CrossRef PubMed .
R. M. Meudtner, M. Ostermeier, R. Goddard, C. Limberg and S. Hecht, Chem. – Eur. J., 2007, 13, 9834–9840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ladomenou, V. Nikolaou, G. Charalambidis and A. G. Coutsolelos, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 306, 1–42 CrossRef CAS .
O. J. Achadu, I. Uddin and T. Nyokong, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2016, 317, 12–25 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Nene, M. E. Managa, D. O. Oluwole, D. M. Mafukidze, A. Sindelo and T. Nyokong, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2019, 488, 304–311 CrossRef CAS .
A. Satake, Y. Miyajima and Y. Kobuke, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 716–724 CrossRef CAS .
S. Su, J. Wang, J. Qiu, R. Martinez-Zaguilan, S. R. Sennoune and S. Wang, Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 2020, 107, 110313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pallikkara, D. Sebastian and K. Ramakrishnan, ChemistrySelect, 2021, 6, 12224–12232 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wojcik and P. v. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6697–6706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Sperling and W. J. Parak, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2010, 368, 1333–1383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Tabish, C. J. Scotton, D. C. J. Ferguson, L. Lin, A. Van Der Veen, S. Lowry, M. Ali, F. Jabeen, P. G. Winyard and S. Zhang, Nanomedicine, 2018, 13, 1923–1937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Iannazzo, C. Celesti and C. Espro, Biotechnol. J., 2021, 16, 1900422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zeng, K. Q. Chen and Y. X. Tong, Carbon, 2018, 127, 611–617 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, E. Ashalley, X. Niu, L. Dai, P. Yu, W. Chen, Z. Qin, L. Zhang and Z. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 114, 073101 CrossRef .
C. Hu, J. Qu, Y. Xiao, S. Zhao, H. Chen and L. Dai, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 389–408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. B. Magaela, R. Matshitse, B. Babu, M. Managa, E. Prinsloo and T. Nyokong, Polyhedron, 2022, 213, 115624 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chundu, E. Dube, N. Zinyama, M. Moyo and M. Shumba, 
            et al.
          , Front. Chem., 2021, 9, 633547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, T. Y. Lin, Y. Luo, Q. Liu, W. Xiao, W. Guo, D. Lac, H. Zhang, C. Feng, S. Wachsmann-Hogiu, J. H. Walton, S. R. Cherry, D. J. Rowland, D. Kukis, C. Pan and K. S. Lam, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–15 CAS .
O. J. Achadu, M. Managa and T. Nyokong, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2017, 333, 174–185 CrossRef CAS .
M. Managa, B. P. Ngoy and T. Nyokong, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 4518–4524 RSC .
R. Matshitse, B. Ngoy, M. Managa, J. Mack and T. Nyokong, Photodiagn. Photodyn. Ther., 2019, 26, 101–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bathon, P. Sessi, K. A. Kokh, O. E. Tereshchenko and M. Bode, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2442–2447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, L. Niu, Z. Y. Qiao, D. B. Cheng, J. Wang, Y. Zhong, F. Bai, H. Wang and H. Fan, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3796–3803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, S. Zhou, Y. Li, X. Li, J. Zhu, L. Fan and S. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22332–22341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, A. U. Shaikh, E. Y. Tsui and T. M. Swager, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3234–3241 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chandra, S. Deshpande, D. B. Shinde, V. K. Pillai and N. Singh, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 1064–1068 CrossRef CAS .
O. J. Achadu and T. Nyokong, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 1447–1458 RSC .
A. Srivatsan, J. R. Missert, S. K. Upadhyay and R. K. Pandey, J. Porphyr. Phthalocyanines, 2015, 19, 109–134 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yan, Y. N. Chang, W. Yin, G. Tian, L. Zhou, X. Liu, G. Xing, L. Zhao, Z. Gu and Y. Zhao, Biomater. Sci., 2014, 2, 1412–1418 RSC .
N. Nwahara, J. Britton and T. Nyokong, J. Coord. Chem., 2017, 70, 1601–1616 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nwahara, O. J. Achadu, T. Nyokong, R. Nkhahle, B. P. Ngoy, J. Mack, S. Li, S. Zhou, Y. Li, X. Li, J. Zhu, L. Fan, S. Yang, T. Gualberto, B. De Souza, M. Gonçalves, J. Ge, M. Lan, B. Zhou, W. Liu, L. Guo, H. Wang, Q. Jia, G. Niu, X. Huang, H. Zhou, X. Meng, P. Wang, C. Lee, Y. Xuan, R. Zhang, X. X. Zhang, J. An, K. Cheng, Y. Cao, H. Dong, Z. Yang, X. Zhong, Y. Chen, W. Dai, X. X. Zhang, M. Managa, B. P. Ngoy and T. Nyokong, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2016, 43, 6051–6061 Search PubMed .
C. Y. Lee, O. K. Farha, B. J. Hong, A. A. Sarjeant, S. T. Nguyen and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15858–15861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Mafukidze and T. Nyokong, J. Mol. Struct., 2019, 1180, 307–317 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Nene and T. Nyokong, Photodiagn. Photodyn. Ther., 2021, 36, 102573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang and N. Wu, Chem. Asian J., 2017, 12, 2343–2353 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, D. Peng, R. P. Liang and J. D. Qiu, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 10894–10901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Peng, L. Zhang, R. Liang and J. Qiu, ACS Sens., 2018, 3, 1040–1047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. J. Achadu and T. Nyokong, Talanta, 2017, 166, 15–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. J. Achadu and T. Nyokong, Dyes Pigm., 2017, 145, 189–201 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, X. Chen, T. Wang, B. Li, M. Zeng, J. Yang, N. Hu, Y. Su, Z. Zhou and Z. Yang, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 5618–5628 RSC .
W. Jiang, M. Jiang, T. Wang, X. Chen, M. Zeng, J. Yang, Z. Zhou, N. Hu, Y. Su and Z. Yang, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 14805–14813 RSC .
S. Centane, O. J. Achadu and T. Nyokong, Electroanalysis, 2017, 29, 2470–2482 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Monteiro, C. I. V. Ramos, S. Fateixa, N. M. M. Moura, M. G. P. M. S. Neves and T. Trindade, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 11184–11191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Kamal, M. Z. Ghobadi, S. M. Mohseni and H. Ghourchian, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2021, 188, 113334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Hsine, H. Sauriat-Dorizon, R. Mlika and H. Korri-Youssoufi, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 357, 136852 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Han, H. K. Lee, J. M. You, H. Jeong and S. Jeon, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 190, 886–895 CrossRef CAS .
O. Adeniyi, N. Nwahara, D. Mwanza, T. Nyokong and P. Mashazi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 348, 130723 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, W. Gao, F. Yan, H. Ji and H. Ju, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 5511–5517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. J. Achadu and T. Nyokong, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 160, 328–335 CrossRef CAS .
D. Peng, L. Zhang, R.-P. Liang, J. Qiu, V. A. Online, O. J. Achadu, T. Nyokong, L. Zhang, D. Peng, R.-P. Liang, J. Qiu, O. J. Achadu, T. Nyokong, G. Xue, S. Yu, Z. Qiang, L. Xiuying, L. Jiangrong, O. J. Achadu, T. Nyokong, L. Zhang, D. Peng, R.-P. Liang and J. Qiu, Dyes Pigm., 2017, 166, 15–26 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, D. Peng, R. P. Liang and J. D. Qiu, Chemistry, 2015, 21, 9343–9348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Nxele and T. Nyokong, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2021, 221, 111462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, S. Li, K. Li, Y. Zheng, M. Zhang, C. Cai, C. Yu, Y. Zhou and D. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9394–9397 RSC .
P. Sehgal and A. K. Narula, Opt. Mater., 2018, 79, 435–445 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Koh, S. H. Noh, T. H. Kim, W. J. Lee, S. C. Yi and T. H. Han, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 26113–26119 RSC .
Q. Lu, Y. Zhang and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8552–8558 RSC .
Y. Liu, S. Li, K. Li, Y. Zheng, M. Zhang, C. Cai, C. Yu, Y. Zhou and D. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9394–9397 RSC .
Y. Q. Zhang, D. K. Ma, Y. G. Zhang, W. Chen and S. M. Huang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 545–552 CrossRef CAS .
I. Althagafi and N. El-Metwaly, Arabian J. Chem., 2021, 14, 103080 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ekrami, G. Magna, Z. Emam-Djomeh, M. S. Yarmand, R. Paolesse and C. Di Natale, Sensors, 2018, 18, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Chen, C. Guo, Q. Zhang, Y. Lei, J. Xie, S. Ee, G. Guai, Q. Song and C. Li, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2047–2052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Li and E. W. G. Diau, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 291–304 RSC .
T. Kuila, S. Bose, A. K. Mishra, P. Khanra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2012, 57, 1061–1105 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, T. Li, Y. Duan and H. Li, Mater. Des., 2020, 189, 108487 CrossRef CAS .
P. Arpacay, P. Maity, A. El-Zohry, A. Meindl, S. Akca, S. Plunkett, M. O. Senge, W. J. Blau and O. F. Mohammed, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 14283–14291 CrossRef CAS .
F. Paquin, J. Rivnay, A. Salleo, N. Stingelin and C. Silva, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10715–10722 RSC .
T. Majumder, S. Dhar, P. Chakraborty, K. Debnath and S. P. Mondal, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 813, 92–101 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dutta, S. Sarkar, T. Ghosh and D. Basak, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20127–20131 CrossRef CAS .
T. Majumder, S. Dhar, P. Chakraborty, K. Debnath and S. P. Mondal, Nano, 2019, 14, 1950012 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mojiri-Foroushani, H. Dehghani and N. Salehi-Vanani, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 92, 315–322 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jahantigh, S. M. B. Ghorashi and S. Mozaffari, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2020, 24, 883–889 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kundu, P. Sarojinijeeva, R. Karthick, G. Anantharaj, G. Saritha, R. Bera, S. Anandan, A. Patra, P. Ragupathy, M. Selvaraj, D. Jeyakumar and K. V. Pillai, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 242, 337–343 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Vijaya, M. P. Kumar, C. Takahashi, S. Kundu, T. N. Narayanan and D. K. Pattanayak, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 14313–14319 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Shi, L. Dai and L. Qu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, S. Zhang, L. Dai and L. S. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18932–18935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Centane, E. K. Sekhosana, R. Matshitse and T. Nyokong, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 820, 146–160 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. T. Pham, J. S. Park, H.-T. Kim, H.-J. Kim, Y.-A. Son, S. G. Kang and S. G. Lee, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 348–355 RSC .
A. Morozan, S. Campidelli, A. Filoramo, B. Jousselme and S. Palacin, Carbon, 2011, 49, 4839–4847 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. T. Pham, S. G. Kang, Y. A. Son, S. Y. Lee, H. J. Kim and S. G. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 27483–27491 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu and P. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3362–3369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jahan, Q. Bao and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6707–6713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumar, R. K. Yadav, K. Ram, A. Aguiar, J. Koh and A. J. F. N. Sobral, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 27, 107–114 CrossRef CAS .
S. Su, J. Wang, E. Vargas, J. Wei, R. Martínez-Zaguilán, S. R. Sennoune, M. L. Pantoya, S. Wang, J. Chaudhuri and J. Qiu, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2016, 2, 1357–1366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mahyari, Y. Bide and J. N. Gavgani, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 517, 100–109 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mahyari and J. Nasrollah Gavgani, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2018, 44, 3641–3657 CrossRef CAS .
X. Weng, H. Ye, W. Xie, M. Ying, H. Pan and M. Du, Nanoscale Adv., 2021, 3, 3900–3908 RSC .
D. Kim, J. Byun, J. Park, Y. Lee, G. Shim and Y. K. Oh, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 1106–1116 RSC .
Y. Luo, J. Liu, Y. Liu and Y. Lyu, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2017, 55, 2594–2600 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Lannes, B. Leal, J. S. Novais, V. Lione, G. C. T. S. Monteiro, A. L. Lourenço, P. C. Sathler, A. K. Jordão, C. R. Rodrigues, L. M. Cabral, A. C. Cunha, V. Campos, V. F. Ferreira, M. C. B. V. De Souza, D. O. Santos and H. C. Castro, Curr. Microbiol., 2014, 69, 357–364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Paramio, T. Torres and G. de la Torre, ChemMedChem, 2021, 16, 2441–2451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Su, J. Wang, J. Wei, R. Martínez-Zaguilán, J. Q. and S. W., New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 5743–5749 RSC .
B. Kulyk, K. Waszkowska, A. Busseau, C. Villegas, P. Hudhomme, S. Dabos-Seignone, A. Zawadzka, S. Legoupy and B. Sahraoui, Appl. Surf. Sci, 2020, 533, 147468 CrossRef CAS .
D. Suhag, A. K. Sharma, P. Patni, S. K. Garg, S. K. Rajput, S. Chakrabarti and M. Mukherjee, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 4780–4789 RSC .
S. Wang, I. S. Cole and Q. Li, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 89867–89878 RSC .
M. Chen and Q. Chen, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 5846–5858 RSC .
T. A. Tabish, S. Zhang and P. G. Winyard, Redox Biol., 2018, 15, 34–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Fan, X. H. Yu, K. Wang, Y. J. Yin, Y. J. Tang, Y. L. Tang and X. H. Liang, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2019, 182, 111620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. D'Souza, S. K. Das, M. E. Zandler, A. S. D. Sandanayaka and O. Ito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19922–19930 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Wang, R. Cao, J. Wang, F. Bai and H. Fan, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 560–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, H. Dong, Z. Yang, X. Zhong, Y. Chen, W. Dai and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 159–166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. P. C. Gomes, R. Fernandes, C. F. Ribeiro, J. P. C. Tomé, M. G. P. M. S. Neves, F. de C. da Silva, V. F. Ferreira and J. A. S. Cavaleiro, Molecules, 2020, 25, 1607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang and Y. Qian, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 830–836 RSC .
Y. Zhang, N. Qiu, Y. Zhang, H. Yan, J. Ji, Y. Xi, X. Yang, X. Zhao and G. Zhai, Biomater. Sci., 2021, 9, 3989–4004 RSC .
B. Yang, K. Wang, D. Zhang, B. Sun, B. Ji, L. Wei, Z. Li, M. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, Q. Kan, C. Luo, Y. Wang, Z. He and J. Sun, Biomater. Sci., 2018, 6, 2965–2975 RSC .
X. Li, Physiol. Behav., 2016, 176, 139–148 Search PubMed .
M. D'Ambrosio, A. C. Santos, A. Alejo-Armijo, A. J. Parola and P. M. Costa, Mar. Drugs, 2020, 18, 1–14 Search PubMed .
Z. G. Wang, R. Zhou, D. Jiang, J. E. Song, Q. Xu, J. Si, Y. P. Chen, X. Zhou, L. Gan, J. Z. Li, H. Zhang and B. Liu, Biomed. Environ. Sci., 2015, 28, 341–351 Search PubMed .
H. M. Wang, J. Q. Jiang, J. H. Xiao, R. L. Gao, F. Y. Lin and X. Y. Liu, Chem.-Biol. Interact., 2008, 172, 154–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Park, S. Cho, J. Han, H. Shin, K. Na, B. Lee and D.-H. Kim, Biomater. Sci., 2018, 6, 79–90 RSC .
M. Saeed, W. Ren and A. Wu, Biomater. Sci., 2018, 6, 708–725 RSC .
P. Sen and T. Nyokong, Photodiagn. Photodyn. Ther., 2021, 14, 102300 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. I. Openda, P. Sen, M. Managa and T. Nyokong, Photodiagn. Photodyn. Ther., 2020, 29, 101607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. O'Connor, W. M. Gallagher and A. T. Byrne, Photochem. Photobiol., 2009, 85, 1053–1074 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Nwahara, R. Nkhahle, B. P. Ngoy, J. Mack and T. Nyokong, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 6051–6061 RSC .

          D. M. Lopes, J. C. Araujo-Chaves, L. R. Menezes and I. L. Nantes-Cardoso, Solid State Physics Metastable, Spintronics Materials and Mechanics of Deformable Bodies: Recent Progress, IntechOpen, UK,  2019,  DOI:10.5772/intechopen.78485 .
M. Steenhuis, F. Corona, C. M. T. Hagen-Jongman, W. Vollmer, D. Lambin, P. Selhorst, H. Klaassen, M. Versele, P. Chaltin and J. Luirink, ACS Infect. Dis., 2017, 8, 2250–2263 Search PubMed .
S. Kirar, N. S. Thakur, J. K. Laha and U. C. Banerjee, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2, 4202–4212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Feng, Y. L. Yu and J. H. Wang, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 18225–18232 RSC .
J. Oyim, C. A. Omolo and E. K. Amuhaya, Front. Chem., 2021, 9, 1–15 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Cui, K. Song, T. Liu, L. Zhou, B. Bao, R. Wang and L. Wang, Biomater. Sci., 2021, 9, 2115–2123 RSC .
Y. Zhang, J. Ma, D. Wang, C. Xu, S. Sheng, J. Cheng, C. Bao, Y. Li and H. Tian, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 6526–6532 RSC .
M. Qindeel, S. Sargazi, S. M. Hosseinikhah, A. Rahdar, M. Barani, V. K. Thakur, S. Pandey and R. Mirsafaei, ChemistrySelect, 2021, 6, 14082–14099 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nwahara, O. J. Achadu and T. Nyokong, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 359, 131–144 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, T. Cao, Y. Xue, M. Li, M. Wu, J. W. Engle, Q. He, W. Cai, M. Lan and W. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 3711–3717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, Q. Zou, Y. Li, C. Yuan, R. Xing and X. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10794–10802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Zenkevich, T. Blaudeck, V. Sheinin, O. Kulikova, O. Selyshchev, V. Dzhagan, O. Koifman, C. V. Borczyskowski and D. R. T. Zahn, J. Mol. Struct., 2021, 1244, 131239 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Nxele and T. Nyokong, Dyes Pigm., 2021, 192, 109407 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Mafukizde and T. Nyokong, J. Coord. Chem., 2017, 70, 3598–3618 CrossRef .
F. Wu, L. Yue, H. Su, K. Wang, L. Yang and X. Zhu, Nano Express, 2018, 13, 1–10 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Sujata Sangam	Sujata Sangam received her M.Sc. (Biotechnology) and M.Tech. (Environmental Engg. & Management) from SHUATS, Allahabad and IIT Kanpur, UP, respectively. Then, she joined Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University (Noida), U.P., India, to pursue her Ph.D. She is currently involved with the Amity Institute of Click Chemistry Research and Studies (AICCRS). She is a recipient of the GATE and CSIR-UGC JRF Fellowship. Her current research interest focuses on the interfaces of molecular chemistry, nanotechnology, biotechnology, environmental engg. and studies based on biomimetic smart carbon-nanomaterials, hydrogels, nanocomposites and their biomedical applications.
Simran Jindal	Simran Jindal is currently pursuing her M.Sc. in Molecular Chemistry from the Amity Institute of Click Chemistry Research and Studies, Amity University (Noida), U.P., India, after receiving her undergraduate degree from Delhi University, India. Her research interests include green chemistry, nanocomposites, and their relevance in biological application.
Aakanksha Agarwal	Aakanksha Agarwal received her Master's Degree from the State University of Uttarakhand, India. Currently, she is pursuing her PhD in Molecular Sciences and Engineering from the Amity Institute of Click Chemistry Research and Studies (AICCRS), Amity University, Noida, India. Her current research focuses on the synthesis and characterization of polymer nanocomposites, carbon-based nanomaterials and recent advances towards the sustainable production of biomass, lipids, proteins and bioactive components from microalgae using heterogeneous nanomaterials.
Basu Dev Banerjee	Professor Banerjee is an eminent Indian toxicologist and is ranked among the top 2% of global scientists from India, as stated by a Stanford University study (Updated science-wide author databases, Plos Biology, 2020). Dr B. D. Banerjee is currently working as a Professor of Biochemistry at the Department of Biochemistry, University College of Medical Sciences, since November 2000. He is actively involved in the areas of biochemistry, toxicology/toxicogenomics, immunotoxicology, environmental health and biology. Specifically, he has developed expertise in one of the thrust areas of ‘xenobiotic-induced immunomodulation and neurotoxicity’ during his career and contributed immensely to this subject in the last 38 years. His research concentrates on the identification of xenobiotic exposure/environmental stressors in microwave-induced genotoxicity and neurotoxicity in rat models as well.
Puja Prasad	Puja Prasad obtained her BSc and MSc from Calcutta University and IISc Bangalore, respectively. She received her Ph.D. in 2014 from IISc Bangalore under the supervision of Prof. Akhil R. Chakravarty, where she worked on the design and synthesis of metal-based anticancer agents. She then joined the group of Prof. Patrick J. Sinko, Rutgers University, USA, for her postdoctoral research from 2014 to 2015. Currently, she is working as a CSIR-Senior Research Associate in the Department of Chemical Engineering, IIT Delhi, India. Her research interests include the development of nano-bio conjugated systems and metal-based complexes for combatting antimicrobial resistance.
Monalisa Mukherjee	Prof. Monalisa Mukherjee completed her Bachelor's and Master's Degrees from the University of North Bengal, India. She received her Ph.D. from CBME, IIT Delhi, in 2006. Presently, she is serving as the Director of the Amity Institute of Click Chemistry Research and Studies (AICCRS) & Professor at the Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Noida, India. She is also a recipient of the UK-India Distinguished Visiting Scientist Award. She was admitted as a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC), London, UK, in 2021. During the past 5 years, Dr Mukherjee has made exemplary contributions to the field of materials science. Her research is not only reinforced by her translational and potential work but also her remarkable publications and patents.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Porphyrin (Pp) and phthalocyanine (Pc).11 © Copyright, Advances in Natural Sciences: Nanoscience and Nanotechnology 2014. (b) Core and peripheral functionalization of macrocycles (Pp/Pc) with GQDs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Types of interactions between the tetrapyrrole ring and GQDs. (b) Click reaction of a macrocycle with GQDs.	 

 	Scheme 1  (a) Covalent linkage of GQDs and ZnTAPc via amide coupling.180 (b) Schematic diagram depicting π–π stacking between Pc and GQDs.302 (c) Non-covalent interactions of GQDs and ZnTCPPc/ZnTmPyPc via π–π stacking and ionic interaction.180 © Copyright 2016 and 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Scheme 2  (a) Synthetic pathway of porphyrin complex 1.192 Copyright 2015, Wiley-V.V. (b) Illustration of the two synthetic routes (via A and B) investigated for the preparation of two different types of GQD hybrids, namely GQD-1A and GQD-1B.18 Copyright 2021, ACS.18	 

 	Fig. 3  Normalized fluorescence spectra of TMPyP@GQDs in aqueous solution at 330 nm with 10 min intervals. The spectra were produced by adding the porphyrin solution (42 M) to a 0.1 μg mL−1 GQD solution. (b) Porphyrins quench the GQD fluorescence (λexc = 330 nm). Under a 366 nm lamp, GQDs lose their fluorescence. (c) STEM images of TMPyP@GQDs. The red dotted lines represent the microscopically detected TMPyP@GQDs hybrid. (d) Raman spectra of free GQDs (blue), TMPyP (green), and TMPyP@GQDs (red line).119 Copyright 2021, MDPI.	 

 	Fig. 4  Updated Jablonski diagram depicting reactive oxygen radical formation in type I and type II PDT.151	 

 	Fig. 5  Various applications of GQD-Pp/Pc conjugates.	 

1.	NGQD/TMPyP	Fluorescence probe	Cd2+	Inner filter effect	0.5–8 μM	88.0 nM	—	Water	
212


	UV-vis	
	Absorption	0.1–10 μM	90.0 nM	—	
	

2.	NGQD/TMPyP/Mn2+	Fluorescence probe	Hg2+	Inner Filter effect	0–100 nM	0.18 nM	—	Water	
213

3.	GQD/FeTMPyP	Fluorescence Probe	H2O2	Inhibition of Inner Filter effect	2–300 μM	0.30 μM	0.993	Water	
135

GQD/FeTMPyP/GOx	
	Glucose	
	3–100 μM	0.50 μM	0.992	PBS/Water	

4.	M-GQD/TAPP	Fluorescence Probe	GSH	Switching OFF FRET (“turn ON”)	0.67–130 nM	0.23 nM	0.999	PBS	
1


	
	Cys	
	3.33–100 nM	1.30 nM	0.997	
	

5	M-GQD/ZnPc	Fluorescence Probe	Cys	Switching OFF FRET (“turn ON”)	2–120 nM	0.85 nM	0.994	DMSO (25%)/PBS	
214


	
	Hcys	
	1.5–120 nM	1.42 nM	—	
	


	
	GSH	
	5.0–150 nM	3.20 nM	—	
	

6.	GQD-T-ZnPc	Fluorescence Probe	Hg2+	Fluorescence “turn ON”	0.1–20 nM	0.05 nM	—	DMF (25%)/PBS	
203

T-GQD-T-ZnPc	
	
	
	5.0–50 nM	24.7 nM	—	
	

7.	PEI-GQDs-Pc-Au@Ag	Fluorescence Probe	Hg2+	Fluorescence “turn ON”	0.5–25.0 nM	0.25 nM	0.997	PBS	
215

PEI-GQDs/Pc-Au@Ag-Hg2+	
	Cys	Fluorescence “turn OFF”	1.0–50 nM	0.72 nM	0.989	
	


	
	Hcys	
	
	0.87 nM	
	
	


	
	GSH	
	
	1.05 nM	
	
	

8.	CoPc-GQD	Gas Sensor	NO2	Current Response	—	50 ppb	—	Air	
216

9.	CoPc-HFIP-GQD	Gas Sensor	DMMP	Current Response	—	500 ppb	
	Air	
217

CoPc–6FBPA–GQD	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	

10.	GQD@CoPc-COOH	Electrochemical or photoelectrochemical	Hydrazine	Electrocatalytic	—	8 μM	—	0.1 M NaOH	
218

GQD@CoPc-NH2	
	
	
	—	43 μM	—	
	

11	GCE-GQD-CoPc (π–π)-aptamer	Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)	Prostate specific antigen	Impedance	1.2–2.0 pM	3.66 pM	
	PBS	
111


	Differential pulse voltammetry	
	
	
	0.66 pM	
	
	


 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic showing the synergistic mechanism of NGQDs and Hg2+ in the co-ordination of Mg2+ with TMPyP. (b) Confocal microscopy images of lung carcinoma cells (A549). First column shows images obtained through the red channel, second column is the green channel, third column is the bright field, and the fourth column is the merged image. Panel (a–d) cells treated with TMPyP; panel (e–h) cells treated with NGQDs; panel (i–l) cells treated with TMPyP and NGQDs; and panel (m–p) cells treated with TMPyP, NGQDs, Hg2+ and Mg2+. Reprinted with permission from ref. 226 Copyright 2018, ACS. (c) Schematic showing the sensing of H2O2 and glucose through the inhibition of IFE between GQDs and TMPyP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 227 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic diagram showing the adsorption and desorption of NO2 on MPc/GQDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 216 Copyright 2021, RSC.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram showing the light harvesting antenna (LHA) nanosystem with multiple GQD donors and a single porphyrin unimolecular micelle as the acceptor formed through electrostatic self-assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 229 Copyright 2016, RSC. (b) Diagram showing the schematic energy transfer mechanism of the GQD@ZnO@TCPPZn nanocomposite in the fabricated porphyrin sensitized solar cell (PSSC). Reprinted with permission from ref. 230 Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V. (c) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) of GQD-FePc. Reprinted with permission from ref. 231 Copyright 2017, RSC. (d) Effect of no scavenger, tert-butyl alcohol, iodide ion, EDTA and NBT on the degradation of methylene blue by the GQD–Zn porphyrin under xenon lamp irradiation. (Right) Schematic of the photocatalytic process for the GQD–Zn porphyrin under visible light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 232 Copyright 2015, RSC.	 

1.	NGQDs/ZnO nanorods	0.92	0.34	—	0.121	
243

2.	ZnO nanowires-GQDs	0.45	0.8	0.5	0.2	
244

3	SNGQD/C-ZnO NT	3.4	0.45	—	0.59	
245

4	ZnTCPP (12 h)/N719 (a ruthenium complex)	18.9	0.61	0.55	6.35	
246

5	NGQD/TiO2	1.49	0.48	0.53	0.37	
247

N719/TiO2	12.61	0.71	0.64	5.7
(NGQDs-N719)/TiO2	17.65	0.72	0.59	7.49
6.	NFS-GQD-TiO2	0.35	0.51	0.53	0.71	
248

NFS-GQDs-TiO2-N719 dye	22.6	0.79	0.7	11.7
7	DNA-ZnO Nano flower + B-GQDs/N719	—	—	—	3.7	
249

8	ZnO@TCPPZn	7.2	0.37	0.307	0.817	
230

GQD@ZnO@TCPPZn (30%)	8.9	0.47	0.400	1.67
GQD@ZnO@TCPPZn (40%)	10.1	0.48	0.507	2.45
GQD@ZnO@TCPPZn (50%)	9.8	0.48	0.4377	2.05

1	N-Colloidal GQD	−0.1	—	4-Electron pathway	
251

2	N-GQD/graphene (N/C atomic ratio of 4.3%)	−0.16	—	4-Electron pathway	
250

3	N-GQDs-35-10/graphene	−0.11	—	4-Electron pathway	
256

4.	FePc/MWCNTs	−0.09	−4.5	4-Electron pathway	
254

Pt/C	−0.03	−4.7	4-Electron pathway
5.	(G-dye-Fe-Porphyrin)n MOF	−0.087	—	4-Electron pathway	
257

6	GQDs	−0.13	−4.68	2-Electron pathway	
231

GQD–FePc	−0.04	−1.65	4-Electron pathway

 	Fig. 8  (a) PDT for innovative cancer therapy (b and c) Cellular uptake of NGQDs, SnPp, and SnPp-B-NGQD in MCF-7 cells at various concentrations over 24 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 192 Copyright 2021, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 9  Showing PDT and PTT effect of GQD-Pp/Pc conjugates (a) Schematic showing the theranostic application of GQD-PEG-P for the detection of intracellular miRNA and combined PTT/PDT effect. (b(A)) Confocal imaging of A549 treated with GQD-PEG-P with laser irradiation and treated with calcein-AM (live: green) and PI (dead: red). Scale bar: 40 μm. (b(B)) Cell viability of A549 when treated with GQD-PEG-P in dark and upon laser irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 276 Copyright 2016, ACS. (c) Viability of T-47D cells treated with porphyrin 1, GQDs, GQD_1A, and GQD_1B at different concentrations, nonirradiated (“Dark”) and irradiated (“PDT”) with white light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18 Copyright 2021, ACS. (d(A)) Phototoxicity studies: S. Aureus in the presence of ZnPc (3), quaternized derivative ZnPc (4), 3@N,S-GQD and 4@N,S-GQD with light and in the dark. (d(B)) Agar plates depicting S. Aureus colonies after treatment with 5% DMSO in PBS as the control (B(i)) and 3@N,S-GQD (B(ii)) after 80 min irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 287 Copyright 2021, Elsevier B.V.	 

1	GQD-PEG-P	1.08	14% (100 μg mL−1)	635 nm and 980 nm for 10 min	A549 lung cancer cells	
276

61.3% (100 μg mL−1)	635 nm for 10 min
30.5% (100 μg mL−1)	980 nm for 10 min
2	NGQDs	—	50% (14.2 μg mL−1)	625 nm for 30 min	MCF-7 breast cancer cells	
192

B-NGQDs	—	50% (14.4) μg mL−1)
SnPp	0.59	50% (11.2 μg mL−1)
SnPp-B-NGQDs	0.79	50% (10.4 μg mL−1)
3	Porphyrin 1	0.47	50% (10–100 nM)	White light for 90 s	T-47D breast cancer cells	
18

GQD	0.07	—
GQD_1A	0.51	25% (10 nM)
GQD_1B	0.25	25% (10 nM)
4.	ZnPc (3)	0.23	0.09% (10 μM)	680 nm for 80 min	
S. aureus (Gram positive bacteria)	
288

quaternized derivative ZnPc (4)	0.31	0% (0.5 μM)	680 nm for 40 min
3@N,S-GQD	0.32	0% (10 μM)	680 nm for 80 min
4@N,S-GQD	0.42	0% (0.5 μM)	680 nm for 20 min
5	Pc	0.22	24% (10 μM)	670 nm for 120 min	
S. aureus (Gram positive bacteria)	
287

ZnPc	0.72	0.23% (10 μM)
InPc	0.75	0.14% (10 μM)
Pc@GQD	0.2	75% (10 μM)
ZnPc @GQD	0.77	0.12% (10 μM)
InPc@GQD	0.79	0% (10 μM)

 	Fig. 10  (a) Confocal images of the cellular distribution of porphyrin, GQDs and GQD-Pp in T-47D cells. Cells were not exposed to any compound (control, A) or were exposed to porphyrin 1 (B), GQD (C), or the hybrids GQD-1A and GQD_1B (E). F-actin is labeled in green in panels A, B, D, and E and the nuclei marker (DAPI) is shown in blue. Scale bar is 20 mm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18 Copyright 2021, ACS. (b) Confocal microscopy images of A549 cells transfected by GQD-PEG-P. Scale bar: 20 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 276 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. Intracellular localization of TMPyP (c) and Zn-TMPyP (d) in the free form (top) and hybridized with GO (center) and GQDs (bottom).	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic diagram of (a) metalloporphyrin coordination for effective anticancer PDT. (b) Metalloporphyrin nanodrugs are formed by the cooperative coordination of short peptides and photosensitizers in the presence of zinc ions. (c) Pattern of metal-binding peptide and Zn2+ molecular organisation. (d) The EPR effect causes an accumulation of cancers. (e) Cellular internalisation of metalloporphyrin nanoparticles and efficient PDT.153 Copyright 2018, ACS.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
