Double-cable polymers for fullerene based organic optoelectronic applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B201558G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B201558G
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 1931-1943Double-cable polymers for fullerene based organic optoelectronic applicationsAntonio Cravino* and Niyazi Serdar SariciftciLinz Institute for Organic Solar Cells (LIOS), Physical Chemistry, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Altenbergerstrasse 69, A-4040, Linz, Austria. E-mail: antonio.cravino@jku.at;  Fax: +43-732-2468-8770;   Tel: +43-732-2468-8767Received 12th February 2002, Accepted 24th April 2002First published on 16th May 2002AbstractConjugated polymers are used increasingly for the fabrication of electronic and optoelectronic devices like light emitting diodes (LEDs) and photovoltaic (PV) elements. A breakthrough in realising a promisingly efficient conversion of solar energy into electrical energy has been achieved by using blends of soluble electron-donor type conjugated polymers with fullerenes as electron-acceptor, transporting component. This “bulk heterojunction” approach suggests the preparation of intrinsically bipolar materials as a way to control both electronic and morphological properties at once. On these bases, the covalent grafting of fullerene moieties to conjugated backbones seems promising for the preparation of intrinsically bipolar polymeric materials (double-cable polymers) alternative to conjugated polymer/fullerene composites. The recent developments on the design, the characterisation and the application of this novel class of
fullerene functional materials are reviewed.1 IntroductionDuring the last twenty years, the attention of many researchers has been increasingly devoted to the synthesis and the understanding of molecules with extended, delocalised π-electron systems. In addition to the development of new exciting concepts, this work has opened a viable way to the use of organic materials like fullerenes1–8 and conjugated polymers9–12 in application fields traditionally reserved to inorganic semiconductors and metals. For instance, after a period of academic research, polymeric displays and LEDs are nowadays entering the display market.13–16 Furthermore, since the discovery of a photoinduced electron transfer from non-degenerate ground-state conjugated polymers to fullerenes,17,18 these materials are considered for the cost effective fabrication
of flexible large-area solar cells and photodetectors.19,20Organic solar cells of the first generation were p/n-heterojunction diodes, consisting of an electron-donor molecule (p-type component) thin film and an acceptor molecule (n-type component) thin film sandwiched between metal contacts. The flat heterojunction of two organic thin films gives rise to rectification behaviour as well as photocurrent and PV effects.21–27 However, in this type of device, the effective interaction between the electron-donor and the electron-acceptor components is limited to the flat geometrical interface. As such, rather low short circuit photocurrent density (JSC) values were obtained. A breakthrough has been achieved by direct mixing of a soluble p-type conjugated polymer and C60, or other fullerene derivatives, as n-type component (Fig. 1).27,28 Effective interaction between the donor and the acceptor components within these “bulk-heterojunction” solar cells can take place in the entire device's volume. Therefore, a more efficient charge generation results in dramatically enhanced short circuit JSC values and in turn in much more efficient PV devices. However, the performance of “bulk-heterojunction” solar cells is still affected by critical factors:• The compatibility between the conjugated polymer and the fullerene components plays a crucial role in determining the final morphology of the blend. Phase separation and clustering of fullerene can occur, reducing the effective donor/acceptor interfacial area as compared to the ideal value.29• Moreover, in this device architecture, a balanced transport of both photogenerated electrons and holes would be highly important. For an efficient transport of holes through the donor polymer matrix and of electrons through the acceptor fullerene phase, a truly bicontinuous interpenetrating network is required. Clustering effects, leading to a “void” between p- as well as n-type domains, obviously dramatically affect the transport of charges.29 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a “bulk-heterojunction” photovoltaic device. (Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission of WILEY-VCH.) Therefore, it is indeed intriguing to think of single materials with intrinsic donor–acceptor properties as well as the capability of both electron and hole transport (p/n-type material).An elegant way towards such a target is offered by the design and the synthesis of p-type conjugated backbones (donor-cable) bearing directly grafted or tethered acceptor groups such as fullerene moieties (acceptor-cable). In this way, the secondary structure of the macromolecule might possibly be dictated by its primary structure (double-cable polymer). The effective donor/acceptor interfacial area will be maximised, and phase separation and clustering phenomena should be prevented as well. In addition, the interaction between the donor conjugated backbone and the acceptor moieties may be tuned by varying the chemical structure (nature and length) of their connecting fragment.30 Basically, the realisation of effective double-cable polymers will bring the p/n-heterojunction at the molecular level. In this paper, after a brief description of the
photophysical properties of conjugated polymer/fullerene composites and of the “bulk-heterojunction” solar cells fabricated using them, the recent progresses on the design, the characterisation and the preliminary application of double-cables consisting of a conjugated backbone bearing fullerene moieties are reviewed. Even though the search for other alternative electron accepting components to fullerenes has been pursued,31–36 the results so far obtained indicate fullerenes to be specially interesting functional materials.27,29,37,382 Ultrafast photoinduced electron transfer from conjugated polymers onto fullerenesMost of non-degenerate ground-state conjugated polymers in their photoexcited states (electrons promoted to the antibonding π* band) are electron donors. The stability of quasi-particles on conjugated polymers (e.g. radical-ions such as polarons)39,40 suggested their use in combination with electron acceptor molecules. In 1992, Sariciftci et al. and Morita et al. independently reported the spectroscopic and photophysical properties of blends composed of poly[(2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethylhexoxy)-p-phenylene) vinylene] or poly(3-octylthiophene)
(MEH-PPV and P3OT, respectively, see Chart) and C60.17,18 While no ground-state interaction between the two components was observed, a strong quenching of the MEH-PPV luminescence indicated the existence of a sub-picosecond photoinduced
electron transfer.41 The same behaviour was observed later in a number of conjugate polymer/fullerene composites. Very recently, the transfer of electrons from photoexcited conjugated polymers onto 1-(3-methoxycarbonyl)-propyl-1-1-phenyl-(6,6)C61
(PCBM, see Chart) has been studied by pump-probe measurements with the unprecedented time resolution of 10 fs.42 The experimental set-up allowed to time-resolve the photoinduced electron transfer time with about 40 fs after an initial Kasha relaxation.42 This high rate results in a very efficient electron transfer, with a quantum yield that approaches unity. Time-resolved photocurrent studies on MEH-PPV/C60 composites with different C60 percentage contents showed that the fullerene not only enhances the number of the charge carriers photogenerated
in the host polymeric matrix, but also stabilises them preventing their recombination.43 Finally, a direct and definitive evidence for an electron transfer from photoexcited conjugated polymers onto fullerenes, leading to long-lived charged states, was obtained by steady-state light induced electron spin resonance (LESR) experiments. As an example, Fig. 2 displays the integrated LESR signal recorded upon illumination of MDMO-PPV/PCBM composites (MDMO-PPV stands for poly[(2-methoxy-5-(3,7-dimethyloctyloxy)-p-phenylene) vinylene], see Chart).44,45 Two light induced electron spin resonance signals can be resolved: one at g
= 2.0026, assigned to radical-cations (positive polarons) on the conjugated backbone and one at g
= 1.9997, assigned to PCBM˙- radical-anions.44,45 Chart 1  Fig. 2  Integrated LESR spectrum of a MDMO-PPV/PCBM composite upon successive illumination with 2.41 eV argon ion laser. (Reproduced from ref. 45 with the permission of the American Physical Society.) The long-lived nature of the charge carriers photogenerated within conjugated polymer/fullerene composites allows their collection at electrodes via diffusion as well as field induced migration and their use to provide electrical power to an external circuit. As such, these materials are rather attractive for PV solar energy conversion, and have been used for the fabrication of plastic solar cells as described in the next section.3 “Bulk-heterojunction” plastic solar cellsIn this section, we introduce plastic solar cells based on the “bulk-heterojunction” approach with the aim of elucidating the relationship between the morphology of the photoactive layer and the device's performance. Ref. 27 gives a general and updated overview on organic, plastic PV. A discussion on the working principle of conjugated polymer/fullerene “bulk-heterojunction” solar cells, and specifically on the origin of their open circuit voltage (VOC), can be found in refs. 37 and 46.Extensive literature exists on the realisation of bilayer photovoltaic elements based on small organic molecules, conjugated polymers and fullerene.21–26,47,48 Although, as mentioned above, the internal quantum efficiency of photoinduced charge separation is approaching unity for a donor–acceptor pair, the power conversion efficiency of these devices is limited by interconnected factors:• charge separation occurs only at the flat geometrical interface, within the exciton diffusion length. Photoexcitations created far away from the heterojunction undergo recombination prior to reaching the electrodes;• only a small fraction of incident photons is absorbed near the heterojunction interface.To overcome these problems, “bulk-heterojunction” solar cells, whose photoactive layer consists of a conjugated polymer/fullerene blend, have been designed.27,28 The cross-section of this type of device as well as the distribution of the conjugated polymer chains and fullerene molecules within the “bulk-heterojunction” are sketched schematically in Fig. 1.Besides small-area testing devices, technologically more interesting scaled-up large-area (15 cm × 10 cm) PV elements on flexible plastic substrates were produced as well.27 A large-area solar cell is shown in Fig. 3 while its current voltage (I/V) characteristics are plotted in Fig. 4. For these devices the “bulk-heterojunction” approach introduced above was used, by mixing MDMO-PPV and PCBM (Fig. 1).27 The comparison of these devices with the small-area solar cells on rigid substrate clearly showed that scaling-up to large-area flexible devices is possible, giving routinely efficiencies as high as 2.5% under AM1.5 illumination. Fig. 3  Picture of a large area flexible plastic solar cell. (Reproduced with permission of WILEY-VCH.)  Fig. 4  I/V behaviour of a 15 cm × 10 cm MDMO-PPV/PCBM “bulk-heterojunction” solar cell, with active area of 50 cm2 under light (black squares) and in the dark (open squares). Illumination was provided by a white-light fluorescence tube with intensity of 6 mW cm−2. (Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission of WILEY-VCH.) 3.1 Improving the efficiency of “bulk-heterojunction” solar cellsRecently, it has been demonstrated that the efficiency of “bulk-heterojunction” plastic solar cells can be improved by manipulating the morphology within the photoactive blend.29 The sketch given by Fig. 1 is by far not realistic in any actual composite. Composites are indeed juxtapositions of domains with different composition. Fig. 5 shows images of the surfaces of MDMO-PPV/PCBM blends spin-coated from toluene solution (a) and chlorobenzene solutions (b), respectively, obtained by atomic force microscopy (AFM). The images show that a more homogenous mixing of the two components is obtained when chlorobenzene is used as processing solvent. Very recent morphological studies, done by comparing AFM surface images and cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images, clearly confirm this observation.49
The impact of these two highly different morphologies to the PV device performance was studied fabricating solar cells under identical conditions except for the choice of the solvent. The open circuit photovoltages for the two types of devices are almost identical while the device cast from chlorobenzene solution exhibits more than a twofold enhancement in the JSC as compared to the device fabricated from toluene solution (5.25 versus 2.33 mA cm−2). This high JSC value, combined with a fill factor (FF) as high as 0.61, results in a power efficiency η
of 2.5% under AM1.5 illumination.50 This is the highest efficiency so far reported for plastic solar cells. The optical absorption spectra of the active layer are nearly identical in the two cases, while the incident current to photon efficiency (IPCE, also called external quantum efficiency, EQE) of the device
made from chlorobenzene is higher all over the absorption spectrum. As such, the difference in the device efficiencies must be related to the different morphologies shown by Fig. 5. Shrinking each of the interpenetrating two phases' domain size leads to a larger donor–acceptor interfacial area and decreases the spatial separation between fullerene domains. Indeed, the increase in efficiency relies also on the increased mobility of the charge carriers of both signs, as indicated by field-effect measurements on the single components as well as on the composite, spun-cast from different solvents.51 Fig. 5  AFM images showing the surface morphology of MDMO-PPV/PCBM (1∶4 w/w) blend films with thickness of ca. 100 nm and the corresponding cross-section. a) Film spun-cast from solution in toluene. b) Film spun-cast from solution in chlorobenzene. The images show the first derivative of the actual surface heights. The cross sections of the true surface heights were taken horizontally from the points indicated by the dotted lines. (Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission of VILEY-VCH.) Different strategies to improve the processability of fullerenes and/or to achieve their intimate mixing with conjugated polymers have been proposed. To control the morphology within the photoactive layer and to obtain a predetermined nanoscopic phase-separated network, systems as diblock-copolymers (conjugated donor block plus fullerene-bearing block)52 and conjugated oligomer–fullerene dyads have been prepared.53–61 Peeters et al. used an oligo(p-phenylene vinylene)-fulleropyrrolidine dyad to fabricate solar cells with efficiencies comparable to those of other previously reported “bulk-heterojunction” solar cells.60 However, for several donor–acceptor dyads it was found that depending on a number of factors (e.g. environment, conjugation length of the donor
unit, etc.) photoinduced energy transfer can compete with photoinduced electron transfer.59–62 Conjugated oligomer–fullerene dyads, containing donor moieties with different conjugation lengths, have also been tested as embedded components in a MDMO-PPV matrix. By comparing the performance of the obtained PV devices, it seems that dyads capable of intramolecular electron transfer (those with longer conjugated oligomer moieties) also enhance geminate carrier recombination.63,64 This appears plausible, since on dyads separated charges can escape recombination only by intermolecular hopping. On the contrary, in system with a long conjugated donor backbone bearing a number of acceptor fullerene moieties—such as double-cable polymers—it can be expected that holes migrate away from electrons by a very fast intrachain diffusion process, preventing recombination.
Therefore, double-cable polymers appear very interesting as materials that may retain the favourable electronic and photophysical properties of conjugated polymer/fullerene composites but in which phase separation and clustering phenomena cannot occur.4 Towards “molecular heterojunction”: the donor–acceptor double-cable polymersA “bulk-heterojunction”
(a)
(where the occurrence of fullerene clustering is emphasized for clarity), an ordered ideal double-cable polymer chain (b), and a picture in which the continuous pathway for the transport of electrons is given by the contacts between fullerene moieties on different polymer chains (c) are schematically depicted in Fig. 6. Besides other aspects like the relative positioning of the polymer chain and the fullerene moieties, as well as the positioning of a fullerene moiety with respect to its neighbours (and chain to chain), a double-cable polymer for PV application must meet the following requirements:• mutually independent ground-state electronic properties of the donor backbone and of the fullerene acceptor moieties (“the cables must not short”);• a photoinduced electron transfer from the electron-donating backbone onto the electron-accepting fullerene moiety, leading to metastable long-lived charged states, as a prerequisite for photogeneration of free charge carriers. Fig. 6  a) Schematic representation of a “bulk-heterojunction”. Clustering of the fullerene component is emphasised. b) An ideal, ordered double-cable polymer and c) a more realistic picture where interchain interactions are considered. In addition, solubility in common organic solvents is also a determinant factor, since the easy and cost-effective preparation of thin film devices involves processing from solutions.A route towards the preparation of conjugated polymers is electropolymerisation of suitable aromatic monomers. Electropolymerisation generally proceeds via electrogeneration of radical-cations as reactive species and their subsequent coupling followed by rearomatisation steps.65,66 Several attempts at the preparation of novel and exotic conjugated polymers, some of them carrying electroactive moieties,67 have been made synthesising molecules specifically designed as substrates for electropolymerisation.66 Moreover, electropolymerisation allows the growth of polymeric thin films onto transparent electrodes suitable for most spectroscopic techniques. This is a clear advantage when solubility of a novel conjugated polymer cannot be obtained. As already mentioned, it has been observed that in molecular donor–acceptor dyads photoinduced energy transfer can take place competing
with intramolecular charge transfer, and geminate recombination may also be enhanced. Similar effects could occur even in double-cable polymers. Therefore, for the design of polymers and supramolecular structures for photovoltaic materials,68 the electrochemical approach has been selected as a first step towards double-cable polymers as well as for the study of their electronic and photophysical behaviour. However, as explained above, solubility is a desired requirement for practical applications. Based on the positive results obtained with insoluble electropolymerised double-cable polymers, the chemical preparation of soluble double-cables is proceeding worldwide.4.1 Electropolymerised double-cable polymers.The first conjugated polymeric material bearing fullerene side groups was reported in 1996 by Benincori et al.69 They described the direct grafting of C60 at the bridging carbon of cyclopentadithiophene (Scheme 1), leading to compound 1 which was suitable for electropolymerisation. The stable cyclopentadithiophene diazo-derivative a was obtained by “diazo-group transfer”. Its treatment with one equivalent of C60 in toluene solution at room temperature for 12 h gave 1. Due to its low solubility in mixtures containing acetonitrile, the anodic electropolymerisation of 1 was possible only in chlorobenzene. After dedoping, poly-1 showed an absorption spectrum with maximum
at λ
= 440 nm (onset above 600 nm). This λmax value, which is considerably blue-shifted (about 100 nm) as compared to that of electropolymerised unsubstituted cyclopentadithiophene, was explained as consequence of the poor solubility mentioned above, leading to relatively short chains (and, therefore, to a short effective conjugation length). The electrochemical behaviour of poly-1 films was studied by cyclic voltammetry in monomer-free conditions. One anodic reversible wave corresponding to the electrochemical oxidation/rereduction (p-doping/dedoping) of the polyconjugated chain was observed at a potential 0.55 V more positive than that of the corresponding process in polycyclopentadithiophene. This result was explained as due to the electron withdrawing effect of the fullerene moieties. By scanning negative potential, three reversible waves,
assigned to the multiple fullerene substituent reduction/reoxidation steps,70 were observed. Scheme 1 One year later, Ferraris et al. reported the synthesis (Scheme 2) and the electrochemical polymerisation of a bithiophene carrying a fullerene group through a flexible alkyl chain spacer (2).71,72 The choice of 2 was motivated by the lower oxidation potential of bithiophenes as compared to thiophenes, generally leading to easier and superior electropolymerisability.65,66 Moreover, the flexible alkyl spacer was introduced to impart solubility to the monomer as well as to reduce the electron withdrawing effect of the fullerene moiety. Monomer 2 was prepared as follows (Scheme 2): 2-bromo-3-(6-bromohexyl)thiophene (a) was
obtained by bromination of 3-(6-bromohexyl)thiophene with NBS in chloroform–acetic acid solution. 3′-(6-Bromohexyl)-2,2′-bithienyl (b) was prepared by coupling the Grignard's reagent obtained from 2-bromothiophene and 2-bromo-3-(6-bromohexyl)thiophene. The reaction of the bithienyl derivative b with sodium azide in DMSO afforded the desired azide c in quantitative yield. Treatment of c with C60 in refluxing chlorobenzene gave the monoadduct 2, which was purified by column chromatography. In contrast to C60 and 1, monomer 2 was indeed soluble in several organic solvents like chloroform, dichloromethane and THF. These
improved characteristics resulted in an electropolymerised material that showed, in its neutral state, an absorption maximum at λ
= 480 nm. This value is comparable to that of most polythiophenes, indicating almost no electronic or steric perturbation of the conjugated chain. Similarly, electrochemical and in situ UV-Vis spectroelectrochemical measurements revealed that the polymeric chain in poly-2 behaves as common polythiophenes do. In the cathodic region of the cyclic voltammogram (CV) of poly-2, four fullerene reduction/reoxidation waves were observed.70 These results indicated that in double-cable polymers both the donor polyconjugated chain and the fullerene acceptor moieties can retain, with different extents, their individual electronic and electrochemical properties. In particular, by using flexible spacers of
the proper length, the donor and acceptor moieties can be electronically “isolated” in order to prevent ground-state interactions. As such, these early works already showed that double-cable polymers could meet the first requirement for PV applications. Scheme 2 Polythiophene P3OT in combination with C60 or PCBM has been also used for fabricating promising “bulk-heterojunction” solar cells,73,74 suggesting polythiophene-fullerene based double-cables for further studies on PV applications. The preparation of bithiophene–fulleropyrrolidine dyad 3 was reported recently (Scheme 3).75,76 Reaction between commercially available 4-hydroxybenzaldehyde and 2-[2-(iodoethoxy)ethoxy]ethane in the presence of K2CO3 in refluxing acetone afforded the monosubstituted product a in 20% yield. Palladium-catalysed coupling of 4-bromophenol with 3-thiopheneboronic acid followed by bromination with NBS gave the reactive 2-bromo-3-(p-hydroxyphenyl)thiophene b that was coupled directly with 2-thiopheneboronic acid to afford the desired bis-thiophene phenol 4. Reaction of a with the potassium salt of bis-thiophene phenol 4 gave the functionalised bithiophene d used for the Prato's reaction to obtain 3 in 49% isolated yield. According to the criteria already exploited by Ferraris et al.,66,72 bithiophene 3 was found appropriate for relatively facile anodic electropolymerisation. Both dichloromethane and toluene–acetonitrile mixtures were suitable as solvents. As a major result, the obtained poly-3 films allowed the first observation of a photoinduced electron transfer
from the polythiophene backbone to the pendant fullerene moieties within a double-cable polymer, as discussed in the following. Scheme 3 The cyclic voltammogram of 3, recorded during potential cycling between 0 and 1.6 V, (Ag/AgCl wire as quasi-reference electrode, −0.44 V vs. ferrocene) is illustrated in Fig. 7
(Pt as working electrode). The first scan shows one irreversible wave peaking at ca. +1.3 V, corresponding to the oxidation of 3. Recurrent potential scanning leads to the development of a new redox wave around +0.8 V, related to the p-doping/dedoping of a freshly formed poly-3 film. Analogous results were obtained using different solvents (toluene–acetonitrile mixtures) and ITO coated transparent electrodes. Poly-4 was also prepared as a reference material following the same electrochemical procedure.38,75
The CV of a poly-3 film in monomer-free electrolyte solution is depicted in Fig. 8(a). In the positive region, one reversible redox process, corresponding to p-doping/dedoping of a polythiophene backbone, was observed by the wave at about +0.75 V. The relationship between the maximum current peak and the scan rate (varied from 25 to 200 mV s−1 was found to be linear (Fig. 8(b)). A linear relationship is typical of a redox-active polymer attached to the electrode and exemplifies the stability of poly-3 films towards p-doping.65 Scanning negative potentials up to −2.0 V shows several redox waves mainly related to the multiple reduction of the fullerene moiety.70 The irreversible peak at −0.74 V,
of unknown origin, was seen only during the first scans (Fig. 8(a)).75 Similar to the results found by Ferraris et al.,71,72 these results confirmed that both the polythiophene backbone and the pendant fullerene moieties can substantially retain their individual electrochemical properties. Films of neutral poly-3 were insoluble, yellow-brownish and not photoluminescent. Their UV-Vis absorption spectra showed a broad feature ranging from about 600 nm to the ITO-glass cut-off, with a shoulder at about 460 nm. As in the case of poly-1, this value is significantly blue-shifted as compared to λmax of reference poly-4, seen at 530 nm.75 Again, this has been explained as an effect of the
relatively low solubility of monomer 3
(and its oligomer intermediates involved in the electrochemical polymerisation process), leading to a lower molecular weight for the corresponding polymer. According to the electrochemical characterisation, no hints for ground-state donor–acceptor interactions were observed. Fig. 7  Anodic cyclic voltammogram of 3
(0.1 M Bu4NPF6in CH2Cl2). Working electrode: Pt foil; quasi-reference electrode: Ag/AgCl wire (−0.44 V vs. ferrocene). Scan rate: 100 mV s−1. (Reproduced from ref. 76 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.)  Fig. 8  a) Anodic (right) and cathodic (left) cyclic voltammogram of a poly-3 film (0.1 M Bu4NPF6 in acetonitrile), conditions as in Fig. 7. b) Anodic cyclic voltammogram of poly-3 at a scan rate of 25, 50, 100 and 200 mV s−1. The nature of the photoexcitations in poly-3 solid films was investigated by means of photoinduced absorption (PIA) in the Vis-NIR. The PIA spectrum, taken with excitation at 476 nm, is shown in Fig. 9. Two electronic bands are observed, one with maximum at 1.48 eV and one peaking below 0.6 eV. Both these absorption features compare well with PIA spectra of long oligothiophenes, and were assigned to positive polarons on a thiophene based conjugated backbone.41,77 Such an assignment was corroborated by comparing these features with those observed by means of PIA-FTIR measurements and in situ FTIR spectroelectrochemistry.75 To shed light on the relaxation kinetics of the photoexcitations, intensity and modulation frequency of the pump beam were varied.78,79 The polaronic features, evaluated
by the signal at 1.38 and 0.62 eV, showed a square root excitation intensity dependence. This indicates non-geminate bimolecular recombination of the photoinduced charges, suggesting the migration of charge carriers with opposite sign to different sites within the films. From the modulation frequency dependence, a broad distribution of charged state lifetimes was observed in the range from 0.8 to 10 ms. While these results prove the photoinduced generation of metastable, positively charged states on the polythiophene backbone, a definitive evidence of a photoinduced electron transfer to the pendant fullerene moieties was obtained by steady-state LESR spectroscopy. The LESR spectrum, calculated by subtracting the “light-off” signal from the “light-on” signal, shows the photogeneration of two paramagnetic species (Fig. 10). The positive polarons on the conjugated backbone were seen by the signal at a g-factor of 2.0022,
while the signal observed at lower g-factor, 2.0004, is typical of fullerene radical-anions.44,45 As such, it was concluded that in double-cable polymers a photoinduced electron transfer from the conjugated backbone to the pendant fullerene moieties can lead to long-lived and mobile charge separated states, as observed earlier in conjugated polymer/fullerene composites. Fig. 9  Photoinduced Vis-NIR absorption of poly-3 films. Excitation at 476 nm (40 mW on a 4 mm diameter spot). T
= 100 K. (Reproduced from ref. 75 with the permission of the American Chemical Society.)  Fig. 10  Integrated LESR (light-on minus light-off) spectrum of poly-3 on ITO coated plastic foils. Excitation at 488 nm (20 mW cm−2). T
= 77 K. (Reproduced from ref. 76 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.) 4.2 Chemically synthesised soluble double-cable polymersAs already discussed, soluble double-cable polymers are required specifically for PV or other electronic applications in thin film devices. The attachment of fullerene moieties to conjugated backbones, which are generally not very soluble, decreases the solubility even more. The design of soluble double-cables loaded with an adequate number of fullerene moieties is therefore a very challenging task from the synthetic chemist's point of view. Processable double-cables have been prepared following two different approaches:• the direct reaction of C60 with specifically functionalised soluble conjugated polymers;• the copolymerisation of two monomers, one carrying the fullerene moiety and one designed to improve solubility.The first approach has been reported by Ferraris et al., in parallel with the preparation of poly-2.72 In this work, head-to-tail co-polyalkylthiophenes containing functionalities as azido- or primary amino-groups were prepared at first (Scheme 4). After treatment with C60, soluble double-cables bearing hydrofullerene (5) and azafulleroid (6a,b) moieties were obtained and isolated by extraction. Copolymers 5 and 6b showed, in solution, absorption spectra peaking at about 438 nm. This value is in rather good agreement with that of standard polythiophenes, and again no absorption at longer wavelengths were observed. In
situ spectroelectrochemistry measurements upon reduction of 6b showed the spectroscopic features of the fullerene moiety radical-anions and, at more negative potential, of dianions, according to the results previously reported for fullerenes and azafulleroids.70,80 At even more negative potentials, the behaviour of copolymer 6b was similar to that reported for poly-2. In the anodic region, the polymer showed the typical p-doping/dedoping wave of polythiophenes. As already observed with poly-2 and poly-3, no hints for a ground-state interaction between the donor and the acceptor moieties were found. Scheme 4 The second approach has been used by Marcos Ramos et al., who have recently reported the preparation of the first solar cell based on a novel double-cable polymer.81,82 They have synthesised a conjugated backbone, hybrid of poly(p-phenylene vinylene) and poly(p-phenylene ethynylene), with covalently linked methanofullerene moieties (7). The synthetic strategy toward 7 is outlined in Scheme 5. The polymer was synthesised under an inert atmosphere in o-dichlorobenzene/triethylamine (7∶3 v/v)
via a palladium-catalysed cross-coupling of diiodobenzene a, bearing a pendant methanofullerene, and oligo(p-phenylene vinylene)
b, end-capped
with reactive ethynylenes. A polymer similar to 7 but lacking the methanofullerene moieties, was used as reference for spectroscopic investigations. The effective conjugation length of the two materials was found to be nearly identical: the λmax of the double-cable polymer, found at 468 nm, was 6 nm shifted to blue as compared to that of the reference polymer. The molecular weight of 7 was estimated by size-exclusion chromatography as MW
= 16200 (PDI = 2.82). However, there was an indication that this value could be underestimated. Spectroscopic investigations of 7 were done both in solution and in thin solid films. The photoluminescence of 7 in toluene solution was quenched by two orders of magnitude as compared to that of the reference polymer. The quenching
of the photoluminescence in apolar solvent involves a singlet–singlet energy transfer from the photoexcited conjugated backbone to the fullerene moieties, as known from studies on oligo(p-phenylene vinylene)–fulleropyrrolidine dyads.60 Photoluminescence quenching was observed also in thin solid films. However, in this case, the quenching mechanism is the photoinduced electron transfer as discussed before. Accordingly, the photoinduced Vis-NIR absorption spectrum of 7 in the solid state exhibits the band typical of methanofullerene radical-anions at about 1.2 eV (this fullerene radical-anion feature was not seen in the poly-3 spectrum due to the concomitant onset of the broad and much more intense polaron absorption band of the polymer) accompanied by two broad bands, seen at 0.62 and 1.53 eV, characteristic of positive polarons on a
conjugated chain (Fig. 11). As reported for poly-3, the photoinduced charge recombination was found to follow non-geminate bimolecular kinetics. The lifetime of the photogenerated charges in 7 also extends to the millisecond time domain. Fig. 11  Photoinduced Vis-NIR absorption spectra of 7
(solid line) and of the reference polymer without fullerene moieties (dashed line) on quartz. T
= 80 K. (Reproduced from ref. 81 with the permission of the American Chemical Society.)  Scheme 5 Photovoltaic elements were prepared by spin-coating 7 from chloroform solution.81 The current voltage (I/V) curves of the device recorded in the dark and under white-light illumination (100 mW cm−2) revealed a JSC value of 0.42 mA cm−2, a VOC of 830 mV, and a (FF) of 0.29 (Fig. 12). The IPCE showed an onset at 550 nm and a maximum of 6% at 480 nm. It is worthy of note that the performance of this first example of double-cable based solar cells, which were not optimised, is already competitive to that of devices prepared following the p/n-heterojunction as well as the “bulk-heterojunction” approaches.27,83,84 Moreover, this performance is given by a double-cable
with a fullerene loading of 31.5 wt%, a value considerably smaller than that used commonly in “bulk-heterojunction” solar cells (about 75 wt%). Fig. 12  Current voltage characteristics of an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/7/Al device in the dark (dashed line) and under white-light illumination (solid line). (Reproduced from ref. 81 with the permission of the American Chemical Society.) Another interesting family of soluble double-cable copolythiophenes carrying fulleropyrrolidine moieties as well as solubilising chains (8a,b) has been reported recently by Zhang et al.85 These random copolymers were prepared by chemical oxidative coupling, adding a slurry of FeCl3 in chloroform to the monomers dissolved in the same solvent. Two differently fullerene-loaded copolymers were prepared by using two different solubilising- monomer (b)/fullerene-bearing monomer (a, prepared via the Prato's reaction) ratios in the feed (see Scheme 6). After dedoping and removal of low molecular weight fractions and byproducts, the copolymers were found to contain 7 mol% (corresponding
to 14.5 wt%, 8a) and 14 mol% (corresponding to 24.2 wt%, 8b) of fullerene monomer, respectively. Size exclusion chromatography in chloroform gave the following molecular weights: MW
= 48000, MN
= 28000 for 8a, MW
= 39000, MN
= 26000 for 8b. When higher percentages of fullerene monomer were placed in the feed, an insoluble material was obtained. The solubilising monomer used in excess in this preparation leads, when used alone, to a polythiophene known as PEOPT (see Chart). PEOPT spin-coated from chloroform solution leads to an orange-phase. This phase can be converted to a more ordered blue-phase by thermal annealing or by chloroform vapours exposure.47,86 Although the presence of
the bulky fullerene moieties, also 8a and 8b retain such a property. Both copolymers undergo colour change from orange to blue upon exposure to chloroform vapours at room temperature. In this blue-phase, both copolymers display a broad electronic absorption band covering a wide range of the solar spectrum, which is in itself an interesting property for PV materials. Scheme 6 The solubility of 8a and 8b allowed the fabrication of photodiodes.85 In these devices, the thickness of the photoactive layer was 70 nm and the active area was 4 mm2. The devices based on the more fullerene loaded double-cable8b showed an IPCE more than twofold higher as compared to that of the devices prepared with 8a
(Fig. 13). A significant improvement of the IPCE was obtained in both cases after treating the photoactive films with chloroform just before evaporation of the Al electrode. This effect reflects the change in the absorption spectra while going from the orange- to the blue-phase of the copolymers. The devices prepared using 8b where characterised under monochromatic
light (λ= 505 nm) illumination with an intensity of 0.1 mW cm−2. The FF was 0.25 and the power conversion efficiency was 0.6%.50 The diodes not treated with chloroform vapour gave the highest photovoltages, VOC
= 750 mV. This value is higher than that reported for PEOPT/C60
“bulk-heterojunction” solar cells.47 After treatment with chloroform vapours, the VOC of the device dropped to 450 mV. This behaviour is a consequence of the altered energy levels between the orange- and the blue-phases.37,46,85 Fig. 13  External quantum efficiency (IPCE) of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/8a or 8b/Al photodiodes under monochromatic light illumination, prior to, and after, conversion from the orange- to the blue-phase. (Reproduced from ref. 85 with the permission of WILEY-VCH.) Another class of soluble double-cables has been described by Xiao et al.87 and by Wang et al.88 Based on the well established photoconducting as well as electrochemical properties of carbazole, they synthesised a soluble regular copolymer containing p-phenylene vinylene and carbazole units, the latter bearing a pendant azido functionality. The reaction with C60 in chlorobenzene gave a soluble fraction (CCl4) with a fullerene percentage estimated spectroscopically as 19.9 wt%. (9). In a similar way, they synthesised a double-cable containing also triphenylamine moieties (10). In this case, the fullerene content was about 21 wt%. The weight-average MW values were determined by means of gel permeation chromatography as 3810
for 9 and 5051 for 10. Based on these values, it is clear that these double-cables consist of only few repeating units. A highly fullerene loaded double-cable has been prepared by the same group (11).88 In this latter material, the fullerene percentage has been estimated as high as 68.8 wt%. This value seems to be overestimated, since based on the repeating unit the calculated maximum fullerene loading is ca. 57 wt%. Nevertheless, this is a high fullerene loading, approaching that of conjugated polymer/fullerene composites used for the fabrication of “bulk-heterojunction” solar cells with improved efficiency. By means of thermal gravimetric analysis, these copolymers have been found to be stable up to about 350 °C, and moderate weight losses occurred just within
the range 380–460 °C. Spectroscopic and electrochemical studies allowed the authors to conclude that the electronic properties of the fullerene moieties were substantially preserved in all cases. Photoinduced electron transfer has been claimed to occur due to photoluminescence quenching observed in chloroform solutions. These double-cable polymers are currently tested as material for plastic PV energy conversion.88    5 Conclusions and perspectivesPreparation and properties of a novel class of fullerene functional materials such as double-cable polymers have been reviewed. These materials consist of a hole conducting, conjugated backbone (p-cable) with covalently bound fullerene moieties (n-cable). By the choice of the proper covalent linkage, the donor and the acceptor moieties can be electronically “isolated” to exclude ground-state interactions. As such, double-cable polymers are attractive for all organic electronic applications in which bipolar transport is required. Photoexcitation spectroscopic investigations have shown that double-cables in their solid state undergo photoinduced electron transfer, leading to long-lived, mobile charge carriers as observed earlier in conjugated polymer/fullerene composites. Since in double-cable polymers phase separation cannot occur, these materials are indeed appealing as a way to control both electronic
and morphological properties within the photoactive layer of plastic solar cells. The very important technological issue is processability, which is certainly the major challenge towards practical application of double-cables polymers in thin film devices. With the few soluble double-cable polymers prepared so far, the fabrication of prototype photodiodes and solar cells has been demonstrated. However, in the double-cable approach a compromise between the fullerene loading (for the transport of electrons) and solubility has been made. With this respect:• improving the design of the synthesis may allow the preparation of processable materials with acceptably high fullerene moieties percentage as well as acceptable solubility;• fullerene loading as high as 14 mol% (24.2 wt%, 8b) has been obtained in a soluble random copolymer, and a loading of 31.5 wt% has been already obtained even in a polymer with well-defined backbone (7);• Balberg et al. have reported bipolar transport in a poly(3-hexylthiophene)/C60 composite with a fullerene fraction of 10 mol%.89 Indeed, it can be considered that the volume fraction occupied by the fullerene moieties of a double-cable could be enhanced if the volume occupied by the solubilising but electrically inactive chains would be minimised;• the double-cable concept may lead to bipolar transport properties even in guest–host systems where the double-cable polymer is embedded within processable polymers as matrices;• synthetic strategies toward fullerene derivatives able to self-assemble with suitably designed conjugated polymers should be considered as an alternative to covalently bound double-cables, too. To this end, self-assembly strategies based on electrostatically driven or other key–lock interactions should be possible.90–92Finally, we would like to mention self-organization also as an interesting possibility to control the morphology of the photoactive film. In this respect, covalently linked double-cable polymers could be further functionalised, for example with amphiphilic substituents, to gain additional control of the final morphology by their tertiary structure.90–93AcknowledgementsWe thank C. J. Brabec, H. Neugebauer and G. Zerza for many helpful discussions. Studies on the double-cable polymers in Linz have been carried out within the JOULE III Project “Molecular Plastic Solar Cells”, funded by the European Commission, Contract No. JOR3CT980206. We gratefully acknowledge our collaboration partners within this consortium: M. R. Andersson and M. Svensson (Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden), E. Ehrenfreund (Technion, Israel), D. Fainman (Ben Gurion University of Negev, Israel), E. Glötzl (QSEL, Austria), J. C. “Kees” Hummelen (University of Groningen, The Netherlands), O. Inganäs (Linköping University, Sweden), R. A. J. Janssen (TU Eindhoven, The Netherlands), M. Maggini, S. Bucella (University of Padova, Italy), N. Martín, R. Gómez and J. L. Segura (Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain),
M. Prato (University of Trieste, Italy).ReferencesH. W. Kroto, J. R. Heath, S. C. O'Brien, R. F. Curl and R. E. Smalley, Nature, 1985, 318, 162 CrossRef CAS .W. Krätschmer, L. D. Lamb, K. Fostiropoulos and D. R. Hufman, Nature, 1990, 347, 354 CrossRef .M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus and P. C. Eklund, Science of Fullerenes and Carbon Nanotubes, Academic Press, San Diego,  1996 Search PubMed .F. Diederich and C. Thilgen, Science, 1996, 271, 317 CAS .A. Hirsch, in Fullerenes and Related Structures, Topics in Current Chemistry, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  1999,Vol. 199 Search PubMed .J. L. Segura and N. Martín, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 2403 RSC  , and references therein.M. Prato, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 1097 RSC  , and references therein.K. Kadish and R. Ruoff, Eds., Fullerenes: Chemistry, Physics and Technology, Wiley Interscience,  2000 Search PubMed .A. J. Heeger, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8475 CrossRef CAS .H. S. Nalwa, Ed., Handbook of Conductive Molecules and Polymers,Wiley, Chichester,  1997, Vol. 1–4 Search PubMed .T. A. Skotheim, R. L. Elsenbaumer and J. R. Reynolds, Eds., Handbook of Conducting Polymers, 2nd edition, Marcel Dekker, New York,  1998 Search PubMed .G. Hadziioannu and P. F. van Hutten, Eds., Semiconducting Polymers, Chemistry Physics and Engineering,Wiley, Weinheim,  2000 Search PubMed .J. H. Burroughs, D. D. C. Bradley, A. B. Brown, R. N. Marks, K. Mackay, R. H. Friend, P. L. Burn and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1990, 347, 539 CrossRef CAS .G. Gustafsson, Y. Cao, G. M. Treacy, F. Klavetter, N. Colaneri and A. J. Heeger, Nature (London), 1992, 357, 477 CrossRef CAS .G. Grem, G. Leditzky, B. Ulrich and G. Leising, Adv. Mater., 1992, 4, 36 CrossRef CAS .A. Kraft, A. C. Grimsdale and A. B. Holmes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 402 CrossRef .N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474 CAS .S. Morita, A. A. Zakhidov and K. Yoshino, Solid State Commun., 1992, 82, 249 CrossRef CAS .N. S. Sariciftci, D. Braun, C. Zhang, V. I. Srdanov, A. J. Heeger, G. Stucky and F. Wudl, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 62, 585 CrossRef CAS .G. Yu, J. Wang, J. McElvain and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 1431 CrossRef CAS .H. Meier, Organic Semiconductors, Verlag-Chemie, Weinheim,  1974 Search PubMed .C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183 CrossRef CAS .J. Simon and J.-J. André, Molecular Semiconductors, Springer, Berlin,  1985 Search PubMed .M. Kaneko, in, Handbook of Conductive Molecules and Polymers, Ed. H. S. Nalwa, Wiley, Chichester,  1997, Vol. 4, p. 661 Search PubMed .J. Rostalski and D. Meissner, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 61, 87 CrossRef CAS .T. Tsuzuki, Y. Shirota, J. Rostalski and D. Meissner, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 61, 1 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CAS .S. E. Shaheen, C. J. Brabec, F. Padinger, T. Fromherz, J. C. Hummelen and N. S. Sariciftci, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 841 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang and A. Suna, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 5627 CrossRef CAS .J. J. M. Halls, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 270, 1789 .G. Yu and A. J. Heeger, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 78, 4510 CrossRef CAS .G. Zerza, M. C. Scharber, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, R. Gómez, J. L. Segura, N. Martín and V. I. Srdanov, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 8315 CrossRef CAS .T. Yohannes, H. Neugebauer, S. A. Jenekhe and N. S. Sariciftci, Synth. Met., 2001, 116, 241 CrossRef CAS .G. Zerza, A. Cravino, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci, R. Gómez, J. L. Segura, N. Martín, M. Svensson and M. R. Andersson, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 4172 CrossRef CAS .P. J. Skabara, I. Serebrykov, I. Perepichka, N. S. Sariciftci, H. Neugebauer and A. Cravino, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 2232 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Brabec, A. Cravino, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, T. Fromherz, M. T. Rispens, L. Sanchez and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 374 CrossRef CAS .H. Neugebauer, C. J. Brabec, J. C. Hummelen and N. S. Sariciftci, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 61, 35 CrossRef CAS .N. S. Sariciftci, Ed. Primary Photoexcitations in Conjugated Polymers: Molecular Exciton versus Semiconductor Band Model,World Scientific, Singapore,  1997 Search PubMed .See,
for instance,   R. Menon, C. O. Yoon, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, in Handbook of Conductive Molecules and Polymers, Ed. H. S. Nalwa, Wiley, Chichester,  1997, Vol. 1, ch. 2, and references therein Search PubMed .L. Smilowitz, N. S. Sariciftci, R. Wu, C. Gettinger, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1993, 47, 13835 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Brabec, G. Zerza, G. Cerullo, S. De Silvestri, S. Luzzati, J. C. Hummelen and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 340, 232 CrossRef CAS .C. H. Lee, G. Yu, N. S. Sariciftci, D. Moses, K. Pakbaz, C. Zhang, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Phys. Rev. B, 1993, 48, 15425 CrossRef CAS .P. M. Allemand, G. Srdanov, A. Koch, K. Khemeni, F. Wudl, Y. Rubin, F. N. Diederich, M. M. Alvarez, S. J. Anz and R. L. Whetten, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 2780 CrossRef CAS .V. Dyakonov, G. Zoriniants, M. C. Scharber, C. J. Brabec, R. A. J. Janssen, J. C. Hummelen and N. S. Sariciftci, Phys. Rev. B, 1999, 59, 8019 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Brabec, A. Cravino, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, M. T. Rispens, L. Sanchez, J. C. Hummelen and T. Fromherz, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 403–404, 368 CrossRef CAS .L. S. Roman, W. Mammo, L. A. A. Petersson, M. R. Andersson and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 774 CrossRef CAS .J. J. M. Halls and R. H. Friend, Synth. Met., 1997, 85, 1307 CrossRef CAS .T. Martens, J. D'Haen, T. Munters, L. Goris, Z. Beelen, J. Manca, M. D'Olieslaeger, D. Vanderzande, L. De Schepper and R. Andriessen, MRS Proc. Search PubMed  , in press.The fill factor (FF) of a solar cell is determined as
FF =
ImppVmpp/ISCVOC, where Impp and Vmpp are the current and the voltage at the maximum power point in the fourth quadrant of the I/V curve. The power-in to power-out conversion efficiency η is given by η
=
ISCVOCFF/Ilight, where Ilight is the intensity of the incident light. AM1.5 illumination conditions correspond to the global sunlight spectrum, with Ilight
= 860 W m−2. An interesting discussion on the usefulness of different kinds of given efficiency values can be found in ref. 25 .W. Geens, S. E. Shaeen, C. J. Brabec, J. Poortmans and N. S. Sariciftci, in Electronic Properties of Novel Materials, Eds., H. Kuzmany, J. Fink, M. Mehring and S. Roth, IOP, Bristol, Vol. 544,  2000, 516 Search PubMed .U. Stalmach, B. de Boer, C. Videlot, P. F. van Hutten and G. Hadziioannou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 5464 CrossRef CAS .N. Martín, L. Sanchez, B. Mescas and I. Pérez, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 2527 CrossRef CAS .S.-G. Liu, L. Shu, J. Rivera, H. Liu, J.-M. Raimundo, J. Roncali, A. Gorgues and L. Echegoyen, J. Org. Chem., 1999, 64, 4884 CrossRef CAS .S. Knorr, A. Grupp, M. Mehring, G. Grube and F. Effenberger, J. Chem. Phys. A, 1999, 110, 3502 Search PubMed .T. Yamashiro, Y. Aso, T. Otsubo, H. Tang, Y. Harima and K. Yamashita, Chem. Lett., 1999, 443 CrossRef CAS .J.-F. Nierengarten, J.-F. Eckert, J.-F. Nicoud, L. Ouali, V. V. Krasnikov and G. Hadziioannou, Chem. Commun., 1999, 617 RSC .P. A. van Hal, J. Knol, B. M. W. Langeveld-Voss, S. C. J. Meskers, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 5974 CrossRef CAS .N. Armaroli, F. Barigelletti, P. Ceroni, J.-F. Eckert, J.-F. Nicoud and J.-F. Nierengarten, Chem. Commun., 2000, 599 RSC .E. Peeters, P. A. van Hal, J. Knol, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 10174 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Segura, R. Gómez, N. Martín, C. Luo and D. M. Guldi, Chem. Commun., 2000, 701 RSC .I. B. Martini, B. Ma, T. Da Ros, R. Helgeson, F. Wudl and B. Schwartz, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 327, 253 CrossRef CAS .A. Cravino, C. J. Brabec, A. Y. Andreev, R. Rittberger, N. S. Sariciftci, E. Peeters, R. A. J. Janssen, J. Knol and J. C. Hummelen, presented at MRS 2000 Fall Meeting, Cluster 8: Organic and Biomaterials; Symposium JJ: Organic Electronic and Photonic Materials and Devices. Boston, 27th Nov.–1st Dec.,  2000 .C. J. Brabec, et al., manuscript in preparation .J. Simonet and J. Rault Berthelot, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1991, 21, 1 CrossRef CAS .J. Roncali, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 1875 RSC  , and references therein.J. Roncali, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, p. 1888 Search PubMed .European Commision, Joule III program for Molecular
Plastic Solar Cells, Contract No. JOR3CT980206 .T. Benincori, E. Brenna, F. Sannicoló, L. Trimarco and G. Zotti, Angew. Chem., 1996, 108, 718 .L. Echegoyen and L. E. Echegoyen, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 593 CrossRef CAS .A. Yassar, M. Hmyene, D.
C. Loveday and J. P. Ferraris, Synth. Met., 1997, 84, 231 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Ferraris, A. Yassar, D. Loveday and M. Hmyene, Optical Materials (Amsterdam), 1998, 9, 34 Search PubMed .D. Gebeheyu, F. Padinger, T. Fromherz, J. C. Hummelen and N. S. Sariciftci, Int. J. Photoenergy, 1999, 1, 95 Search PubMed .D. Gebeheyu, F. Padinger, T. Fromherz, J. C. Hummelen and N. S. Sariciftci, Bull. Chem. Soc. Ethiop., 2000, 14, 57 Search PubMed .A. Cravino, G. Zerza, H. Neugebauer, M. Maggini, S. Bucella, E. Menna, M. Svensson, M. R. Andersson, C. J. Brabec and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 70 CrossRef CAS .A. Cravino, G. Zerza, M. Maggini, S. Bucella, M. Svensson, M. R. Andersson, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Commun., 2000, 2487 RSC .R. A. J. Janssen, D. Moses and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Chem. Phys., 1996, 101, 9519 CrossRef CAS .G. Dellepiane, C. Cuniberti, D. Comoretto, G. F. Musso, G. Figari, A. Piaggi and A. Borghesi, Phys. Rev. B, 1993, 48, 7850 CrossRef CAS .C. Botta, S. Luzzati, R. Tubino, D. D. C. Bradley and R. H. Friend, Phys. Rev. B, 1993, 48, 14809 CrossRef CAS .M. K. Mazen, R. T. Carlin, P. C. Trulove, G. R. Eaton and S. S. Eaton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 3465 CrossRef CAS .A. Marcos Ramos, M. T. Rispens, J. K. J. van Duren, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6714 CrossRef CAS .A. Marcos Ramos, M. T. Rispens, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, Synth. Met., 2001, 119, 171 CrossRef .L. S. Roman, M. R. Andersson, T. Yohannes and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 1164 CrossRef CAS .H. Matoussi, M. F. Rubner, F. Zhou, J. Kumar, S. K. Tripathy and L. Y. Chiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 1540 CrossRef .F. Zhang, M. Svensson, M. R. Andersson, M. Maggini, S. Bucella, E. Menna and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 171 .C. J. Brabec, C. Winder, M. C. Scharber, N. S. Sariciftci, J. C. Hummelen, M. Svensson and M. R. Andersson, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 7235 CrossRef CAS .S. Xiao, S. Wang, H. Fang, Y. Li, Z. Shi, C. Du and D. Zhu, Macromol. Rapid. Commun., 2001, 22, 1313 CrossRef CAS .S. Wang, S. Xiao, Y. Li, Z. Shi, C. Du, H. Fang and D. Zhu, Polymer, 2002, 43, 2049 CrossRef CAS .I. Balberg, R. Naidis, M.-K. Lee, J. Shinar and L. F. Fonseca, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 197 CrossRef CAS .M. T. Rispens, L. Sánchez, J. Knool and J. C. Hummelen, Chem. Commun., 2001, 161 RSC .J. J. González, S. González, E. M. Prego, C. Luo, D. M. Guldi, J. de Mendoza and N. Martín, Chem. Commun., 2001, 163 RSC .S. Mizyed, P. E. Georghiou, M. Barcu, B. Cuadra, A. K. Rai, P. Cheng and L. T. Scott, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 12770 CrossRef CAS .S. A. Jenekhe and X. L. Chen, Science, 1998, 279, 1903 CrossRef CAS .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2002
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a “bulk-heterojunction” photovoltaic device. (Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission of WILEY-VCH.)	 

 	Chart 1	 

 	Fig. 2  Integrated LESR spectrum of a MDMO-PPV/PCBM composite upon successive illumination with 2.41 eV argon ion laser. (Reproduced from ref. 45 with the permission of the American Physical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 3  Picture of a large area flexible plastic solar cell. (Reproduced with permission of WILEY-VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 4  I/V behaviour of a 15 cm × 10 cm MDMO-PPV/PCBM “bulk-heterojunction” solar cell, with active area of 50 cm2 under light (black squares) and in the dark (open squares). Illumination was provided by a white-light fluorescence tube with intensity of 6 mW cm−2. (Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission of WILEY-VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 5  AFM images showing the surface morphology of MDMO-PPV/PCBM (1∶4 w/w) blend films with thickness of ca. 100 nm and the corresponding cross-section. a) Film spun-cast from solution in toluene. b) Film spun-cast from solution in chlorobenzene. The images show the first derivative of the actual surface heights. The cross sections of the true surface heights were taken horizontally from the points indicated by the dotted lines. (Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission of VILEY-VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 6  a) Schematic representation of a “bulk-heterojunction”. Clustering of the fullerene component is emphasised. b) An ideal, ordered double-cable polymer and c) a more realistic picture where interchain interactions are considered.	 

 	Scheme 1	 

 	Scheme 2	 

 	Scheme 3	 

 	Fig. 7  Anodic cyclic voltammogram of 3
(0.1 M Bu4NPF6in CH2Cl2). Working electrode: Pt foil; quasi-reference electrode: Ag/AgCl wire (−0.44 V vs. ferrocene). Scan rate: 100 mV s−1. (Reproduced from ref. 76 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 8  a) Anodic (right) and cathodic (left) cyclic voltammogram of a poly-3 film (0.1 M Bu4NPF6 in acetonitrile), conditions as in Fig. 7. b) Anodic cyclic voltammogram of poly-3 at a scan rate of 25, 50, 100 and 200 mV s−1.	 

 	Fig. 9  Photoinduced Vis-NIR absorption of poly-3 films. Excitation at 476 nm (40 mW on a 4 mm diameter spot). T
= 100 K. (Reproduced from ref. 75 with the permission of the American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 10  Integrated LESR (light-on minus light-off) spectrum of poly-3 on ITO coated plastic foils. Excitation at 488 nm (20 mW cm−2). T
= 77 K. (Reproduced from ref. 76 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Scheme 4	 

 	Fig. 11  Photoinduced Vis-NIR absorption spectra of 7
(solid line) and of the reference polymer without fullerene moieties (dashed line) on quartz. T
= 80 K. (Reproduced from ref. 81 with the permission of the American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Scheme 5	 

 	Fig. 12  Current voltage characteristics of an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/7/Al device in the dark (dashed line) and under white-light illumination (solid line). (Reproduced from ref. 81 with the permission of the American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Scheme 6	 

 	Fig. 13  External quantum efficiency (IPCE) of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/8a or 8b/Al photodiodes under monochromatic light illumination, prior to, and after, conversion from the orange- to the blue-phase. (Reproduced from ref. 85 with the permission of WILEY-VCH.)	 

 		 

 		 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2002
