Multifunctional layered hybrid perovskites  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC01533H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC01533H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 11428-11443Multifunctional layered hybrid perovskites

        
          
            Jovana V. 
            Milić
          
          
        
      
Adolphe Merkle Institute, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland. E-mail: jovana.milic@unifr.ch
Received 
      2nd April 2021
    , Accepted 2nd June 2021First published on 22nd June 2021AbstractLayered hybrid perovskites (LHPs) have recently emerged as attractive materials in optoelectronics, particularly due to higher environmental and operational stabilities as compared to their three-dimensional metal-halide perovskite analogues. These materials are based on hybrid halide perovskite layers templated by organic moieties that connect adjacent perovskite slabs. Since the organic systems applied have so far been primarily electronically insulating, LHPs feature charge confinement within the inorganic slabs and, consquently, they behave as quantum wells with unique optoelectronic properties that can be tailored by gradually changing the number of perovskite layers. While such versatile structures have been advantageous, they also render the functionality of LHPs highly dependent on their orientation and thus challenging to control, often compromising their performances. There has been an effort to overcome this challenge by developing LHPs with enhanced functionality through the introduction of semiconductive organic moieties that are responsive to various stimuli, such as electric charge, light, or pressure, as well as by incorporating chiral moieties that further alter their properties. This has set the basis for an emerging class of multifunctional LHPs and this article provides an overview of their developments with a perspective on the use in various technologies in the future.
Jovana V. Milić
Dr Jovana V. Milić is Assistant Professor and Group Leader at the Adolphe Merkle Institute of the University of Fribourg in Switzerland. She obtained her PhD in the Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences of ETH Zurich in 2017 and, since then, she has worked as a scientist in the Laboratory of Photonics and Interfaces at EPFL in Switzerland. Her research is focused on the development of functional (supra)molecular materials for energy conversion and smart nanotechnologies, with a particular interest in photovoltaics.
1 Introduction
Hybrid organic–inorganic halide perovskite materials have become one of the leading semiconductors in various optoelectronic applications.1–5 They are based on the AMX3 composition defining a corner-sharing {MX6} octahedral framework (Fig. 1 and 2a) comprised of divalent metal (M) cations (generally Pb2+ and Sn2+) and X halide (I−, Br−, Cl−) anions, hosting central (A) monovalent cations, which can be either organic (e.g. methylammonium (MA), formamidinium (FA), etc.) or inorganic (e.g. Cs+).1 These soft mixed ionic-electronic conductors feature excellent light absorption, long lifetimes and diffusion lengths of photogenerated charge carriers, as well as exceptional defect tolerance, even in solution-processed thin films, resulting in remarkable performances in optoelectronic devices, such as solar cells, photodetectors, and light-emitting diodes.1,4 However, their limited stability against oxygen and moisture as well as under device operating conditions of bias, light, and temperature changes1,6–8 present critical obstacles to their large scale application. This is particularly due to the accelerated ion migration in response to voltage and light, which is pronounced at the interface with selective charge-transport layers in optoelectronic devices and can be detrimental to their performance and long-term stability.8–11 This instability has stimulated the use of various molecular modulators at the interface with perovskite materials (Fig. 1 and 2b).6,8,12–15 Furthermore, the incorporation of larger organic cations between hybrid perovskite slabs that template the formation of low-dimensional or layered (2D) perovskite architectures provided enhanced resilience to external environmental factors and internal ion migration.16–18
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the evolution of hybrid perovskites, from their molecular modulation and the formation of layered perovskite analogues to multifunctional layered perovskites with enhanced functionality in the spacer layer. Structural details associated with the materials are outlined in Fig. 2 and 3. 
 Fig. 2  Schematic of (a) hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites represented by a cubic crystal structure based on the AMX3 composition, (b) their molecularly-modulated, and (c–e) layered hybrid perovskite (LHP) phases. (c) Schematic phase space diagram indicating the typical categories of LHPs based on Ruddlesden–Popper (RP), Dion–Jacobson (DJ), and Alternating-Cation (AC) phases with boundaries defined by the RP, DJ, and AC phases and coordinates indicating relative shifts between consecutive perovskite layers along a and b axes based on ref. 35. (d) Structural schematic of the (d) RP and (e) DJ phases with green rods representing spacer moieties. (f) Type I and Type II quantum-well (QW) electronic structures based on the energy level alignments of conduction band minima (CBM), valence band maxima (VBM), highest occupied (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied (LUMO) frontier molecular orbitals, and the resulting bandgap (Eg). 3D hybrid perovskites and LHPs typically feature Type IA behaviour, while electroactive spacers can form Type IB and Type II QW structures. 
Layered hybrid perovskite materials (LHPs) emerged before hybrid perovskites received global attention, especially through the seminal work of Mitzi and co-workers in the 1990s, revived in the last decade with more interest over the past few years.19–24 These materials are mostly based on SxAn−1MnX3n+1 compositions comprising organic (primarily ammonium-terminated) cations, which are either mono- (x = 2) or bifunctional (x = 1) and act as spacers (S) between hybrid perovskite layers (Fig. 2c and d).25–37 While such systems are commonly referred to as perovskites, they do not strictly correspond to the 3D perovskite structure and are often more appropriately denoted as perovskite-related structures.38 The plethora of spacer cations of various lengths that can be incorporated contribute to a high structural diversity of LHPs as opposed to the limited compositional space for their 3D perovskite analogues.27,28
Their structural phase space (broadly classified into 〈100〉, 〈110〉 and 〈111〉-oriented perovskites) is often defined by shifting the central perovskite layer of the reference 3D structure by half the length of the unit cell vector along the in-plane (a- or b-axis) directions (Fig. 2c).35 As a result, the archetypical Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) phases feature adjacent perovskite layers displaced by half a crystal unit cell along both in-plane directions, which commonly involves monofunctional organic bilayers,25–28 whereas Dion–Jacobson (DJ) phases are defined by no relative in-plane displacement between the adjacent perovskite layers that are mostly based on bifunctional organic layers (Fig. 2d and e).29–34 The intermediary case involving a displacement by half a crystal unit cell along one of the in-plane directions results in the formation of the less common Alternating Cation (AC) systems based on two organic cations.27,35–37 These phases can be further classified based on the number of {MX6} slabs in the layer (n),27,28 which also determines their phase stability and optoelectronic properties.39–46 Corrugated 2D phases are also possible, yet their higher (n) homologues have not been described.47 In general, the optoelectronic properties of hybrid perovskites are primarily defined by the orbital interactions between the metal centre and the halide, whereas the organic components, which have so far been mostly electronically insulating, contribute to the optoelectronic properties indirectly by templating (i.e. directing) the perovskite structure (Fig. 2d–f, Type IA).27,28,35 In that regard, the structural features of the spacer determine the resulting phase stability.39–42 This has proven relevant for accessing hybrid perovskite phases that are not always thermodynamically stable, such as the FAPbI3 hybrid perovskites that are highly desirable for their optoelectronic properties yet do not form the perovskite α-FAPbI3 phase at ambient temperature.48–58 However, some of the archetypical organic spacers, such as n-butylammonium (BA) or 2-phenylethylammonium (PEA), were shown to form FAPbI3-based layered perovskites, along with a number of other spacer moieties emerging over the past few years (Fig. 3a),52–58 such as 5-ammonium valeric acid (AVA),52 2-(perfluorophenyl)ethylammonium (FEA),37,54 1-adamantylmethanammonium (ADAM),43,51,55 and 1,4-phenylenedimethanammonium (PDMA).30,44 As a result, the emergent LHP structures offered an enhanced functionality as compared to the corresponding 3D perovskite analogues.
 Fig. 3  Structures of representative organic spacers used in layered hybrid perovskites (LHPs) of conventional (a) and enhanced (b–d) functionality. (a) Typical (grey panels) monofunctional (left) and bifunctional (right) spacers shown to form either Rudlesdden–Popper (RP, left panel) or Dion–Jacobson (DJ, right panel) phases, respectively, including selected spacers shown to stabilize the α-FAPbI3 perovskite phase (i.e. BA, PEA, AVA, IBA, BN, and PDMA). BA = n-butylammonium; PEA = 2-phenylethylammonium; AVA = 5-ammonium valeric acid; IBA = iso-butylammonium; BN = benzylammonium; ADAM = 1-adamantylmethanammonium; 4AMP = 4-(aminomethyl)piperidinium; 4AMPY = 4-(aminomethyl)pyridinium; PDMA = 1,4- phenylenedimethanammonium. (b) Representative examples of semiconductive (electroactive) moieties used in LHPs (green panels) based on monofunctional (left) and bifunctional (right) spacer moieties: 2T = 2-([2,2′-bithiophen]-5-yl)ethylammonium; 4T = 2-([2,2′:5′,2′′:5′′,2′′′-quaterthiophen]-5-yl)ethylammonium; PREA = 1-pyrenylmethylammonium; PROEA = pyrene-O-ethylammonium; NIEA = 2-(1,3-dioxo-1H-benzo[de]isoquinolin-2(3H)-yl)ethylammonium; CBZBA = 4-(9H-carbazol-9-yl)butylammonium; PEOEA = perylene-O-ethylammonium; AE2T = 2,2′-([2,2′-bithiophene]-5,5′-diyl)bis(ethylammonium); AE4T = 2,2′-([2,2′:5′,2′′:5′′,2′′′-quaterthiophene]-5,5′′′-diyl)bis(ethylammonium); NDIEA = 2,2′-[naphthalene-1,8:4,5-bis(dicarboximide)-N,N′-diyl]bis(ethylammonium); PDIEA = 2,2′-(1,3,8,10-tetraoxo-1,3,8,10-tetrahydroanthra[2,1,9-def:6,5,10-d′e′f′]diisoquinoline-2,9-diyl)bis(ethylammonium). (c) Representative examples of photoactive moieties employed in layered perovskite architectures (yellow panel) which either photopolymerize (left) or act as photoswitches (right): VBA = 4-vinylbenzylammonium; DDA = deca-2,4-diyn-1-ammonium; CDA = 5-carboxypenta-2,4-dien-1-ammonium; AzoCnA = azobenzene-alkylammonium derivatives (n = 1–5). (d) Selected examples of other functional organic spacers, such as those based on chiral moieties (blue panel) and those employed in early mechanochromic (cyan panel) LHPs: MBA = 1-methylbenzylammonium; HOEA = 2-hydroxyethylammonium; GABA = γ-ammoniumbutanoic acid. These and other representative examples are detailed in subsequent sections. 
Apart from this unique structural versatility, the characteristics of the spacer moieties have a more profound influence on the resulting optoelectronic properties, such as by affecting metal halide connectivity and orientation.27,28,35 Typical LHPs behave as natural quantum wells (QWs) with charges confined to the inorganic framework (Fig. 2f, Type IA),27,28,35,53 due to the insulating nature of the organic spacers. This results in a gradual change of optoelectronic properties with the increasing number of layers (n), i.e. reducing the bandgap and approaching the characteristics of the 3D phase.59–61 While such versatility has been advantageous in accessing a range of optoelectronic properties, it also renders the functionality of LHPs dependent on their orientation and thus challenging to control, often compromising their performances, whereas controlling the phase purity for n > 1 compositions amplifies this challenge.43,44,51,59,62–65 However, tailoring their electronic properties enables direct interactions between the components, altering the QW structures (Fig. 2f; Type IA and Type II),53,59–61 setting the stage for their multifunctionality (Fig. 3) and broadening the scope of possible applications.
This article provides an overview on the recent developments of multifunctional LHPs, which enhance their properties through the functionality of the organic component and the corresponding electro- and photoactivity, as well as other unique features, such as chirality and mechanoresponsive behaviour. The representative examples and ongoing challenges are outlined along with the future perspectives of this emerging category of hybrid materials.
2 Electroactive spacers in layered hybrid perovskites
While layered hybrid perovskites (LHPs) demonstrated enhanced operational stabilities, their performances in optoelectronic devices remain inferior compared to their 3D analogues.25,28,29 One of the underlying reasons is the electronically insulating character of organic moieties employed to date. This impediment can be addressed by introducing semiconducting moieties as spacer units (Fig. 3 and 4). The rich compositional space of hybrid organic–inorganic materials offers a unique platform for designing materials with the desired properties by purposefully controlling their structure and optoelectronic properties, in particular the distribution and type of charge carriers, as well as their optical excitation.65,66 To conceptually understand their optoelectronic properties, the analogy to quantum well structures (QWs) is useful by comparing four different QW behaviours with various confinement barriers (Fig. 2f). This involves low energy charge carriers localized either on the same component (Type I) or different (i.e. organic or inorganic) components (Type II).65,66 The tunability of organic components conveniently enables tailoring of the underlying charge separation and recombination to access various QW behaviours (Type IA, Type IB, Type IIA or Type IIB, Fig. 2f). This could be achieved, for instance, by altering the π-conjugation lengths of semiconductive organic spacer moieties incorporated into LHPs and introducing other functional groups into their backbone (Fig. 3).
Despite some interest in such semiconducting-spacer-based systems since 1990s, their use in LHPs has been scarce so far (Fig. 3b and c).20,65–70 The incorporation of semiconducting spacers into hybrid perovskite materials relates to the pioneering work of Mitzi and co-workers, which primarily relied on the templating role of oligothiophenes (Fig. 4).20,65–68 These early studies indicate the possibility of templating the perovskite framework through the use of oligothiophenes71 as well as other aromatic moieties,22,72 hence tailoring their electronic structure and consequently optoelectronic properties.73 This has stimulated the development of a number of other multifunctional hybrid systems over the past few years,69–88 such as those based on functionalized thiophenes,82,83 carbazoles,84 perylenediimides,75,76 naphthalenediimides,77 pyrenes,78,79 napthalimides,80 and other aromatic spacer derivatives.69–88
 Fig. 4  Representative LHPs with semiconductive spacers based on oligothiophenes and their properties. (a) The structure of bis-ethylammonium-terminated oligothiophenes (AEnT) and the crystal structure of the corresponding AEnTPbX4 perovskites (n = 4 and n = 2, highlighting the head-to-tail orientation of the spacer groups in AE2TPbX4 systems). Adapted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) Calculated Frontier energy levels at the Γ point in the series of AEnTPbBr4 (n = 1–5). Stars and diamonds indicate the energy levels of syn–anti–syn AE4TPbBr4 perovskites. Adapted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2018 American Physical Society. (c) The relative energy level alignments of organic (green lines) and inorganic (grey lines) layers within the LHPs based on (2T)2PbI4, (4Tm)2PbI4, (4TCNm)2PbI4, and (BTm)2PbI4 compositions based on ref. 83. VBM = valence band maximum; CBM = conduction band minimum; HOMO = highest occupied molecular orbital; LUMO = lowest unoccupied molecular orbital; 2T = 2-([2,2′-bithiophen]-5-yl)ethylammonium; 4Tm = 2-(3′′′,4′-dimethyl-[2,2′:5′,2′′:5′′,2′′′-quaterthiophen]-5-yl)ethylammonium; 4TCN = 2-(3′′,4′′-dicyano-3′′′,4′-dimethyl-[2,2′:5′,2′′:5′′,2′′′-quaterthiophen]-5-yl)ethylammonium; BTm = 2-(4′-methyl-5′-(7-(3-methylthiophen-2-yl)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazol-4-yl)-[2,2′-bithiophen]-5-yl)ethylammonium. (d) The corresponding PL images of the LHP crystals under UV excitation. The PL for the 4Tm and 4TCNm are quenched and weak signals are observed due to charge separation at the interface, in line with Type II QW behaviour. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright Nature Publishing Group. 
The early work of Mitzi and co-workers has shown that bis-ethylammonium-terminated oligothiophenes (AEnT) inside the AEnTPbX4 perovskite scaffold permit changing their QW behaviour and gradually tuning the electronic structures (Fig. 4a and b).66,67 For instance, the electronic band structure analysis reveals direct bandgaps for all conjugation lengths of AEnTPbBr4 with the overall bandgap decreasing with an increasing n from 2.66 eV (for n = 1) to 1.63 eV (n = 4; Fig. 4b).66,67 It is worth noting that while the quaterthiophene system AEnTPbBr4 adopts a syn–anti–syn configuration with respect to the successive S atoms on alternating sides, this varies for other AEnT oligothiophenes (Fig. 4a) and could further affect their structural and electronic properties (Fig. 4b). Nonetheless, most of the predicted AEnTPbBr4 compounds (n = 2–5) yield Type IIB alignments, apart from the n = 1 compound, which reveals typical Type IA behaviour.66–68 This is consistent with other LHPs with smaller organic cations where carriers are primarily funnelled into the inorganic slabs.66 Moreover, the approach remains relevant across different material classes, such as the emerging category of layered double perovskites.88 Similarly, Gao et al. demonstrated the modulation of the electronic structure and optoelectronic properties of LHPs by incorporating monofunctional thiophene-based moieties between the layers of hybrid perovskites through solution processing (Fig. 4c, top).82,83 The shortest conjugated spacer used was based on a bithiophene (2T) unit and further extension of the conjugation led to the preparation of a tetrathiophene spacer (4T), which featured strong intermolecular π–π interactions and hence poor solubility.83 The authors incorporated two methyl groups to form a new spacer (4Tm) that suppresses intermolecular self-aggregation. To further fine-tune the electronic properties and band alignments, two strongly electron-withdrawing CN groups were also introduced along with a 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole unit to form 4TCNm and BTm, respectively (Fig. 4c).82,83 Upon their incorporation, the inorganic framework was distorted from the ideal octahedra as the Pb ion displaced from the central position of the octahedron towards one of the apical iodine atoms. The energy and charge transfers between adjacent organic and inorganic layers were nonetheless efficient in these hybrid materials.83 The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels of 4Tm, 4TCNm and BTm were found to be −5.28, −6.07 and −5.58 eV by both UV photoelectron spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry, whereas the conduction band minimum (CBM) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital energy levels (LUMO) were estimated on the basis of optical bandgaps (Fig. 4c). Furthermore, the electronic structures and frontier orbitals of the isolated organic molecules were calculated and the predicted energy levels were in agreement with the experimental values, revealing changes in the electronic structure (Fig. 4c, bottom). While 4Tm- and 4TCNm-based system featured a Type II QW behaviour, the 4TCNm and BTm ones were found to exhibit an inverted Type IB QW structure as compared to 4T.83 These changes in the optoelectronic properties could be visualised by PL images of the crystals under UV irradiation (Fig. 4d), which have shown that (2T)2PbI4 exhibits a green colour, (BTm)2PbI4 shows a red colour, while (4Tm)2PbI4 and (4TCNm)2PbI4 display no PL. The PL results of (2T)2PbI4 and (BTm)2PbI4 are consistent with Type IA and IB QW behaviours, respectively, with energy transferred efficiently to the lowest energy emitter, whereas for (4Tm)2PbI4 and (4TCNm)2PbI4 emissions from both layers are quenched, suggesting efficient charge separation at the interface. Importantly, these LHPs were also shown to be stable due to protection given by the bulky hydrophobic organic groups.82,83
Such sterically large groups may be used within the LHP scaffold, yet the overall width of the spacer should not exceed the perovskite lattice parameters.82,83 However, the incorporation of larger organic spacers into the inorganic framework was found to be challenging.82,83 For instance, the use of functionalized 1,8-naphthalimide- (NI) and naphthalenediimide (NDI)-based electron-accepting materials was less effective,77,80 resulting in the formation of low-dimensional perovskite phases for NDI-based systems with a higher level of disorder in mixed MA,FA-based LHPs and 1D perovskitoid structures in MA-based systems.77 While Proppe et al. demonstrated rapid (∼700 fs) and efficient charge transfer in these systems with fully quenched photoluminescence (Fig. 5a),77 their lower-dimensional structures and higher level of disorder may interfere with future optoelectronic applications. On the contrary, the use of pyrene-based organic spacers was found to be an effective way to stabilize perovskite materials while enhancing their performances in perovskite solar cells (Fig. 5b and e).78,79 Xue et al. reported a series of pyrene-containing spacer cations of various lengths that electronically contribute to the surface band edges and influence the carrier dynamics of LHP materials (Fig. 5b and c).79 The structures of 1-pyrenyl spacers featured different lengths of the alkylammonium groups (Fig. 5b), i.e. 1-pyrenylammonium (PRA), 1-pyrenylmethylammonium (PRMA), and 1-pyrenylethylammonium (PREA). The alkyl chain length directly affected the electronic interaction between the organic and inorganic components. Specifically, first-principles calculations of the partial density of states for electronic states near the surface band edges suggested that the elongation of the alkyl chain of the ammonium linker was associated with the valence band moving to a higher energy level.79 Accordingly, the electronic states of PRA were 0.34 eV below the valence band maximum (VBM), whereas both PRMA and PREA had electronic states near the VBM (Fig. 5c, right).79 Furthermore, the distribution of the electronic states of the organic moieties with respect to the inorganic band structure implied that the orbitals of PRMA and PREA overlapped closely with the inorganic VBM in (PRMA)PbI4 and (PREA)PbI4 compositions, whereas the band structure of (PRA)PbI4 resembled that of typical LHPs comprised of electronically insulating spacers with the VBM consisting of I 5p and Pb 6s orbitals (Fig. 5c, left). This effect of the alkyl chain was ascribed to the elongated chains enabling more flexibility with lower steric hindrance and thus more effective intercalation of PREA into the inorganic slabs.79 As a result, the hole mobility was more substantially affected for PREA-based LHPs, while electron mobilities remained almost unchanged across all compositions. Such an enhancement benefited the carrier collection in perovskite photovoltaics and it was reflected in an increase of the short-circuit currents and fill factors, leading to the improvements of the power conversion efficiency with PREA from 20% for control 3D perovskite-based devices to 23% for 2D/3D perovskite compositions, accompanied by enhanced operational stabilities.79
 Fig. 5  Representative LHPs based on more sterically demanding semiconducting organic moieties. (a) Transient absorption spectra for the thin films based on 2,2′-[naphthalene-1,8:4,5-bis(dicarboximide)-N,N′-diyl]-bis(diethylammonium) (NDIEA) spacers in FA/MA-based (blue) and MA-based n = 5 (red) thin film compositions. The bleach peak positions, dynamics, and distribution are similar to other reported LHP cases. Image used with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (b) Structures of pyrene-based organic spacers with various lengths of alkylammonium-linker, namely PRA = 1-pyrenylammonium, PRMA = 1-pyrenylmethylammonium, and PREA = 1-pyrenylethylammonium based on ref. 79. (c) Surface band-edge structures with the electronic contribution from pyrene spacers. Calculated partial density of states (left) and band diagrams (right) of LHPs based on PRA, PRMA, and PREA. Dashed lines highlight the electronic states near surface band edges. CB = conduction band; VB = valence band. Adapted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2021 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Schematic of LHPs of n = 1 composition showing alternating organic and inorganic layers that align parallel to the substrate, highlighting the modular design of the spacers consisting of an aromatic core connected by an ether bond to an alkyl linker of variable length. The characteristic noncovalent interactions defining the supramolecular structures are further highlighted in red, i.e. intramolecular hydrogen bonding, dN–I distances, and interlayer π interactions. Adapted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (e) Energy levels of typical LHPs of n = 1 composition (gray) with values for (BA)2PbI4 in comparison to the conjugated organic spacers based on perylene-O-ethyl-, pyrene-O-propyl-, and naphthalene-O-propyl ammonium moieties. The inset highlights edge-to-face orientation of pyrene spacers in the structure. HTL = hole transport layer; ETL = electron transport layers. Adapted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Such benefits of using modular pyrene-based systems in photovoltaics were originally revealed by Passarelli et al. in a series of LHPs with O-alkylammonium (i.e. ethyl, propyl, or butyl) iodide linkers based on naphthalene-, pyrene-, or perylene-moieties in (aromatic-O-linker-NH3)2PbI4 (n = 1) compositions (Fig. 5d).78 In general, while n = 1 compositions are considerably more stable than other n > 1 LHPs, they feature a wider bandgap and preferentially parallel orientation with respect to their substrates, which leads to considerably lower performances in perovskite solar cells. The use of pyrene-based systems in this study provided an important strategy for improving the conduction of charge carriers perpendicular (out-of-plane) to the inorganic layers.78 These systems demonstrated enhanced conductivity perpendicular to the inorganic layer due to better energy alignments between the organic and the inorganic components (Fig. 5e). As a result, the enhanced conductivity and light absorption led to the power conversion efficiency of 1.38% for n = 1 LHP compositions as absorber materials in perovskite solar cells, which is the highest value reported for n = 1 LHPs to date and it is an order of magnitude higher than any other LHP oriented parallel to the substrate.78
This strategy was found to be closely related to the supramolecular structure of the organic layer.78 Specifically, in most of these LHPs, the alkyl linker adopted an extended conformation within the spacer layer. However, (pyrene-O-propyl-NH3)2PbI4 featured an intramolecular hydrogen bond between the ammonium cation and the ether linker (Fig. 5d, inset). This intramolecular hydrogen bond also affected the average nitrogen-to-peripheral-iodide distance (dN–I), which in turn defined the electrostatic interaction between the ammonium group and negatively charged inorganic lattice, affecting the octahedral distortion and, consequently the energy of the characteristic S1 exciton peak (ES1).78 The LHPs commonly have large exciton binding energies in the range of 250–500 meV due to the 2D dielectric confinement of the inorganic layer.35 Since precise determination of their bandgap can be difficult from the absorption spectra at room temperature, the ES1 transition can be used as an indication of the bandgap energy,77,87 especially as this absorption has been shown to produce photocurrent and is thus important in photovoltaics. The presence of intramolecular hydrogen bonding in (pyrene-O-propyl-NH3)2PbI4 resulted in the longest observed dN–I in the investigated series and thus the lowest ES1, which thereby reduced the optical bandgap, demonstrating a structural role of the organic cation in the optical properties. This is further reflected in the relative out-of-plane conductivity in single crystals, suggesting that LHPs containing aliphatic cations have the lowest conductivity, followed by the naphthalene-based LHPs.78 The LHPs with pyrene and perylene cations have substantially higher conductivity, in accordance with the better alignment of their energy levels with the inorganic lattice (Fig. 5e). Interestingly, however, pyrene-based LHPs revealed another trend as (pyrene-O-ethyl-NH3)2PbI4 and (pyrene-O-butyl-NH3)2PbI4 have the same conductivity (4 × 10−5 S m−1), while the conductivity of (pyrene-O-propyl-NH3)2PbI4 is considerably lower (2 × 10−6 S m−1), which indicates that there is an additional aspect more significant than the space between the inorganic slabs and the aromatic core.39 Assuming that LHPs with the same aromatic moiety have comparable carrier concentrations, the differences in conductivity were likely due to mobility differences, which can be caused by structural conformations.78 Remarkably, the more conductive (pyrene-O-ethyl-NH3)2PbI4 and (pyrene-O-butyl-NH3)2PbI4 systems exhibit edge-to-face type π-interactions in the spacer layer, whereas the less conductive (pyrene-O-propyl-NH3)2PbI4 features an edge-to-edge interactions in the structure (Fig. 5e, inset). These results suggest that both the electronic character of the spacer and their structural arrangement within the organic layer play a role in the out-of-plane conductivity.39,40 Moreover, edge-to-face π interactions yield enhanced conductivity as compared to edge-to-edge interactions, which is likely due to the better orbital overlap in the out-of-plane direction, hence facilitating more efficient charge transport.78 This example reveals that intramolecular hydrogen bonding within the organic cations and their supramolecular π-interactions can provide the basis for superior optoelectronic properties of hybrid materials, which further highlights the importance of both molecular and supramolecular structure design in hybrid materials.
Supramolecular assemblies within LHPs also have the potential to enable accessing structures that are otherwise too sterically demanding. These geometric constraints limit the choice of semiconductive units with extended π-conjugated systems of desired optoelectronic properties,39–42 which can be potentially overcome through intercalation.22,72 This refers to intercalating organic components between the assembled spacer layers through various noncovalent interactions, which enable tailoring the resulting optoelectronic properties. The early examples of this approach have been demonstrated by Mitzi and co-workers through the use of arene-fluoroarene π-interactions,22,72 which has been applied to donor–acceptor charge-transfer (CT) complexes.85–87 They are formed by combining electron-donating and electron-accepting units, which form a complex with optical and electronic properties differing from the individual components. A combination of different moieties with donor and acceptor roles can be used, where only one has an anchoring group. In such a way, new optoelectronic properties can be accessed, which are otherwise available only through extended π-conjugation, thereby bypassing structural constraints.85 For example, Passarelli et al. used the intercalation of tetrachloro-1,2-benzoquinone (TCBQ) in naphthalene-based LHPs to tailor their optoelectronic properties and exciton binding energy in particular (Fig. 6).87 The effect of the intercalation on the excitonic properties was analysed by monitoring the optical absorption and changes in energy of the lowest-energy 1s excitonic transition (ΔE1s) as well as changes in the exciton binding energy (Eb; Fig. 6). The exciton binding energy, i.e. the energy binding of an electron–hole pair through electrostatic Coulomb forces, is an important parameter in optoelectronics.35 The intercalation of TCBQ into naphthalene-based LHPs of n = 1 composition (Fig. 6a) enabled the tuning of the S1s exciton binding energy (E1s, Fig. 6b). This was ascribed to the naphthalene–TCBQ donor–acceptor interactions in the organic layer, which contributed to changing the dielectric environment in the organic layer, rendering it more polarizable, and thus increasing the electrostatic screening of the exciton within the inorganic layer, consequently lowering its binding energy.87 Similarly, Van Gompel et al. demonstrated the use of such self-assemblies of organic CT complexes in the organic layer of LHPs to access exceptional optoelectronic properties.85,86 For instance, a combination of pyrene-butylammonium (PRBA) donor molecule and a strong acceptor molecules, such as tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) or tetracyanobenzene (TCNB), were found to form a 1:1 charge-transfer complexes through self-assembly from solution containing all the components in stoichiometric ratios followed by the subsequent annealing.85 The formation of the complexes was revealed through minor changes in the diffraction patterns of thin films with a similar series of (001) reflections shifted towards lower diffraction angles, indicating an increased interplanar spacing due to intercalation of additional acceptor molecules.85 A particular indication of interaction was the formation of CT absorption bands, typically in the visible region (at around 870 nm and between 450 nm and 700 nm). Furthermore, significant changes in the absorption and emission spectra were apparent, with both the excitonic absorption peak (from 490 nm to 532 nm) and the excitonic emission peak shifting (from 499 to 540 nm). Therefore, in contrast to the intercalated arene-fluoroarene systems,22,72 where minor changes in the visible spectral range were observed, CT complexes show a significant effect on the optoelectronics.85,86
 Fig. 6  Representative donor–acceptor assemblies in LHPs. (a) Schematic of a LHPs (left) upon intercalating (right) tetrachloro-1,2-benzoquinone (TCBQ). C, O, N, Pb and I are presented in grey, red, blue, black, and purple, respectively. The intercalation results in donor–acceptor interactions in the organic layer and electron–hole interactions of the exciton (beige) within the inorganic layer (arrows) are screened more effectively. Consequently, the exciton binding energy is lowered (dashed arrows). (b) Absorption spectra of the system with x = 0, 0.5 and 1 eq. TCBQ indicating changes in the S1 exciton energy peak (ES1) and the binding energy (Eb). Schematic representation and data are adapted based on ref. 87. Copyright Nature Publishing Group. 
This demonstrates that the intercalation can be an important strategy for tuning the optoelectronics in LHPs, although the absolute atomic-level understanding of the structural effects upon intercalation is rather limited and requires further investigations. Importantly, the donor–acceptor interactions must be designed to feature intermediate strengths, since very strong interactions would favour the formation of donor–acceptor aggregates over the assembly of the LHPs, whereas very weak interactions would prevent intercalation.87 Such structural considerations could provide a powerful platform for further enriching the library of LHPs and their optoelectronic properties through tailoring the functionality of electroactive organic components. The use of electron-accepting and electron-donating organic moieties, as well as their supramolecular assemblies, may offer a perspective to LHPs to act as charge-selective extraction layers, serving a more functional role in the future as opposed to acting as ‘passive’ stabilizing agents in optoelectronic devices.
3 Photoactive spacers in layered perovskites
Hybrid perovskites are mostly utilized in optoelectronic devices under illumination and it would thus be of interest to enable tailoring their properties in response to light. The versatility of organic components that can be incorporated into LHPs provides a rich platform for achieving this goal, although there have so far been very few cases where this has been successfully achieved (Fig. 7).89–94 The efforts were based on either olefine and acetylene-based photopolymerisation89–92 or utilizing photoswitching azobenzene moieties.93,94
 Fig. 7  Representative LHPs based on photoactive organic spacers. (a) Schematic structural representation of diacetylene-based LHPs (left) and their (photo)polymerized polydiacetylene derivatives (right) with the corresponding energy levels and bandgaps (Eg). (b) X-ray crystal structure of deca-3,5-diyn-1-ammonium-based (DDA) DDA2PbBr4 LHPs at ambient temperature and (c) average values with standard uncertainties for in-plane conductivity at 423 K of reference n-octylammonium (OA) OA2PbBr4 LHPs and DDA2PbBr4 LHPs (1-as), as well as their polydiacetylenic derivatives prepared by annealing at 160 °C for 24 h under inert nitrogen atmosphere (1-N2), upon exposure to air (1-O2), and upon exposure to iodine (1-I2) for generating stable radicals, as well as upon exposure to iodine after preparation in an inert nitrogen atmosphere (1-N2/I2). Images (a–c) adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Schematic representation of a photopolymerisation of 4-vinylbenzylammonium-based 2D/3D perovskite composites upon irradiation at 254 nm at 70 °C (left) with the energy level diagram of the 2D/3D interface (right). Adapted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic of LHPs based on azobenzene spacer layers (left) and their 2D/3D phases containing azobenzene spacers only on the surface (right). While LHPs do not change their properties upon irradiation at 313 nm, this is the case for surface-bound azobenzene moieties. Images adapted from ref. 94 under CC-BY licence. (f) Photoswitching of the functionalized azobenzene units (top) and the corresponding changes in the UV-vis absorption spectra upon UV irradiation (from grey in the initial state towards black). Images adapted from ref. 94 under CC-BY licence. 
The seminal work by Day and Tieke et al. revealed that the irradiation of layered perovskites with unsaturated organic spacers resulted in photochemical polymerization with retention of their structure.91,92 However, most of these studies focused on the use of cadmium chloride perovskites and diene monomers, which feature large band gaps unsuitable for optoelectronics.92 Following this early work, Ortiz-Cervantes et al. demonstrated the incorporation of conjugated diynes in LHPs (Fig. 7a–c).89 This has been based on dialkynylammonium salts of deca-3,5-diyn-1-ammonium (DDA) spacers, which were incorporated into LHPs with (DDA)2PbBr4 compositions (denoted as 1-as; Fig. 7a–c). These materials were characterized by IR and UV/Vis absorption spectroscopy, as well as single-crystal and powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD), confirming the formation LHPs with an optical band gap of 3.0 eV. Their polymerization was attempted by irradiating the samples with UV light (at 250 and 354 nm), which did not result in any measurable changes.89 This lack of reactivity could be rationalized by high absorption coefficients of lead bromide layers, especially in the UV region, which may prevent UV light from reaching the organic layer and thus inhibit their polymerization. The materials were thus heated to 160 °C for 24 h under an inert nitrogen atmosphere to form highly crystalline yellow materials (1-N2, Fig. 7c). When such samples were heated in air, however, the corresponding crystals became black, forming a crystalline material (1-O2, Fig. 7c) with a similar PXRD pattern and IR spectrum, yet an additional absorption into the near-IR region with an optical band gap of 1.4 eV.89 The structural similarity accompanied with colour changes suggested that this process could have been the result of partial oxidation of polydiacetylene moieties that would lead to the generation of free carriers and subsequent narrowing of the bandgap. The formation of stable free radicals was evidenced by EPR spectroscopy. Moreover, the thermal treatment of the precursor LHPs under an oxidizing iodine (I2) atmosphere, commonly employed in conducting polymers, resulted in almost identical PXRD patterns and light absorption properties to those in oxygen atmosphere (1-I2, Fig. 7c). Alternatively, when the material annealed in nitrogen atmosphere was exposed to iodine vapours at room temperature (1-N2/I2, Fig. 7c), a comparable effect was observed without any evidence of additional reactivity.89 Single crystal in-plane conductivity measurements of these materials revealed that the precursor (DDA)2PbBr4 features an order of a magnitude higher conductivity than the control LHP of comparable organic spacer lengths without acetylene moieties (i.e. octylammonium (OA)-based, (OA)2PbBr4). However, this conductivity was also identical to the one upon annealing in nitrogen atmosphere, suggesting that the presence of polydiacetylenic fragments does not necessarily result in further conductivity increase (Fig. 7c). On the contrary, the presence of organic radicals upon oxidation had a significant effect on the conductivity, which increased by two orders of magnitude with respect to the LHP precursor and three orders of magnitude with respect to the control.89 This provided one of the examples with the highest reported conductivities of a LHP with n = 1 composition, which stimulates further investigations.
A comparable approach was reported by Proppe et al. who demonstrated that 4-vinylbenzylammonium (VBA) can be used to form well-ordered n = 1 and n = 2 LHPs over highly efficient 3D active layers to form a 2D/3D heterostructure (Fig. 7d).90 For this purpose, VBA spacers were selected due to their ability to cross-link through direct photoexcitation with UV light, while maintaining the geometry of the perovskite scaffold. Specifically, by irradiating the top surface of the 2D/3D perovskite by 254 nm UV light, the terminal vinyl groups can be activated to photochemically cross-link within the LHP phase, which was evidenced by UV-vis absorption and IR spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, and 1H NMR measurements, as well as by comparing the results to (VBA)PbI4 LHP control materials.90 Moreover, Type II band alignment was confirmed by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy. The cross-linked LHPs resulted in the increase of the performance and lifetimes of their photovoltaic devices as compared to the control 3D perovskites, which have also been shown to perform better than precursor 2D/3D devices. This highlights the potential of photochemical reactivity of LHPs in controlling 2D/3D perovskite photovoltaics.
In addition to such photochemical reactivity that is based on covalent cross-linking within the organic spacer layer, there have been very few attempts to control this process in LHPs by using photoinduced conformational changes through functionalized photoswitches, such as prototypical azobenzene ones (Fig. 7e).93,94 These systems undergo trans-to-cis isomerization upon irradiation by UV light (around 300–400 nm), which can be reverted upon irradiation with visible light (often light of wavelengths above 400 nm).95 Such a photoswitching process is rather challenging in the solid state due to the limited free volume for conformational changes.95 Nonetheless, there have been two attempts of azobenzene incorporation into LHPs to date. Sasai et al. reported for the first time the preparation of azobenzene-based lead bromide LHP powders with azobenzene-O-alkylammonium derivatives by precipitation.93 When irradiated with UV light at 350 nm, the absorption band from the trans-azobenzene spacers around 350 nm decreased, while the absorption band from the cis-azobenzene around 450 nm increased (Fig. 7e, right). Nevertheless, the PL intensity varied, which was ascribed to the photoisomerization in the hybrid material.93 While these results potentially indicate that azobenzene spacers exhibit reversible photoisomerization in LHPs, Fillafer et al. evidenced that the structural hindrance of azobenzene-alkylammonium spacers in LHPs prohibits their photo-switching (Fig. 7e, left).94 On the contrary, the azobenzene-alkylammonium spacers of different alkyl group lengths bound to the surfaces of 3D perovskite particles dispersed in various solvents show observable photochromism (Fig. 7e, right). The resulting photochromism was strongly distance-dependent and more effective for shorter alkyl chains, which was associated with the energy transfer between the perovskite surface and spacer moieties, facilitating the overall process.94 These somewhat conflicting observations in the early studies on photoswitching moieties are in accordance with the complexity of such photoactive systems in LHPs, which once addressed, could open an entirely new avenue for multifunctional hybrid materials.
4 Other functional layered hybrid perovskites
The use of electro- and photoactive organic moieties in LHPs opened a unique platform for advanced materials. Their interaction with light and the magnetic field provided another gauge for controlling their properties, such as by introducing chirality.96–105 Chiral materials can be defined by being distinguishable from their mirror image without being superimposable onto it (Fig. 8a).
 Fig. 8  Chirality in representative LHPs. (a) Schematic representation of chirality. (b) Electron dispersion in the presence of the chirality-induced spin–orbit coupling (SOC): an achiral material features a parabolic shape of CB energy vs. momentum kz with energy minimum at kz = 0, whereas the chirality-induced SOC shifts the parabolic dispersion along +k and −k directions based on the electron spin and helicity. Adapted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (c) Representative chiral spacers used for chiral LHPs: MBA = methylbenzylammonium, CHEA = 1-cyclohexylethylammonium, MPEA = 2-methylphenethylammonium, 3APD = 3-aminopiperidinium, NEA = 1-((1-naphthyl)ethylammonium), DACH = 1,2-diammoniumcyclohexane, 2OA = 2-octylammonium, 3AQ = 3-ammonioquinuclidinium, 3AP = 3-ammoniopyrrolidinium, 3-FP = 3-fluoropyrrolidinium, and CMBA = 1-(4-chlorophenyl)-ethylammonium based on ref. 96. The asterisk indicates the chiral centre. (d) X-ray structures of LHPs based on chiral R-MBA and S-MBA (left) (CCDC numbers 607740 and 607741).100 (e) Circular dichroism spectra of chiral spacers (R-MBABr and S-MBABr in red and blue, respectively) and their racemic mixture (in black) based on ref. 102. Copyright Nature Publishing Group. 
Chirality is ubiquitous in nature and it has been utilized in various applications, such as asymmetric catalysis.96 Moreover, chiral materials exhibit optical rotation and circular dichroism, as well as second-harmonic generation, ferroelectricity, and topological quantum properties, which have stimulated applications in chiroptoelectronics and spintronics.96 Chiral LHPs have been considered for spintronics applications due to large spin–orbit couplings and controllable Rashba splitting (Fig. 8b) combined with the ease of solution-processability and structural versatility.96,98 The incorporation of various chiral organic moieties (Fig. 8c) could thus enable chiral LHPs that induce chirality transfer, through either ionic or other supramolecular interactions, in the inorganic band edge states.97 Since the first demonstration of chirality in 1D hybrid perovskites in 200399 and LHPs in 2006,100 the investigations of chiral perovskites have been revived in 2017,101 with a number of reports ever since.102–105 Various chiral moieties were utilized over the past few years (Fig. 8c)96 and most of the reports are based on 1-methylbenzylammonium (MBA) spacers in chiral (R-MBA)2PbX4 and (S-MBA)2PbX4 films (Fig. 8d and e, X = I, Br).97,102–105 There is a particular interest in using these systems for chiral-induced spin selectivity (CISS), where the chirality of the transporting medium selects one of the two spin states for transport whereas blocking the other. While monolayers of chiral organic molecules already demonstrated CISS, they are limited by the requirement of a monolayer to preserve spin selectivity.96,97 Lu et al. reported CISS in an LHP system that integrates a chiral organic sublattice using magnetic conductive-probe atomic force microscopy, which was further confirmed by magnetoresistance studies in spin-valve devices evidencing the occurrence of spin-dependent charge transport.97 Specifically, electron transport through the perovskite films was found to depend on the magnetization of the probe tip as well as the helicity of the chiral molecule. As a result, spin polarization of charge transport through the chiral LHP shows that the injected current is preferred for one of the spin states and it depends on the chiral organic molecules, thereby the hybrid system acts as a spin filter.97 This behaviour is relevant in spintronic devices taking the advantage of spin degrees of freedom for the next generation of technologies, with particular significance in quantum computing.96,97 Furthermore, chiral materials are of general interest in various chiroptoelectronic devices, such as circularly polarized light photodetectors, light-emitting diodes, and non-volatile memory elements.96 For their successful applications, however, the design of chiral perovskites must advance, particularly with respect to the film quality, as chiral single crystals exhibit stronger chirality due to their periodic nature as compared to polycrystalline thin films.97
The control of these hybrid materials through the incorporation of such a wide variety of organic species within LHPs has in part been enabled by their soft lattice and defect tolerance, which has also provided space for responsiveness to mechanical stress.106–109 In particular, it has been shown that pressure-induced changes could enable tailoring the optoelectronic properties of hybrid perovskites without any compositional change, which provides the opportunity for systematic tailoring of their properties through lattice compression.107 Hybrid perovskites have soft lattices that exhibit a substantial pressure response with respect to their electronic landscapes, excited-state dynamics, and accessing new structures which are otherwise not available through conventional syntheses in optoelectronic applications.107 There has been a number of demonstrations of mechanochromism in hybrid perovskites over the past years106 as well as tailoring their optoelectronic properties by compression.107–109 Upon compression, the inorganic perovskite lattice relaxes through two main processes, namely octahedral tilting or bond contraction (Fig. 9a, left).107 These effects can already occur at lower pressures (below 5 GPa) where octahedral tilting (i.e. deviation of the Pb–X–Pb angles from 180°) tends to dominate, whereas higher pressure ranges (above 5 GPa) tend to be coupled to the changes in metal-halide bond lengths. In the case of LHPs, compression could enhance interlayer communication and change dielectric constants of the organic layers (Fig. 9a, right), which influences the quantum confinement and thereby the resulting photophysical properties (Fig. 9b).107,108 These effects compete in different pressure regimes: while octahedral tilting disturbs the orbital overlaps and leads to an increase in the bandgap, the compression of bond lengths strengthens orbital interactions and reduces bandgaps, which is reflected in optoelectronic properties (Fig. 9c). As a result, hybrid perovskites often lighten in colour up to∼5 GPa as their bandgap increases, followed by darkening above ∼10 GPa since the bandgap decreases.107 Moreover, at higher pressures, phase transition and even amorphization can take place.107,108
 Fig. 9  Mechanoresponsive LHP representatives. (a) Structural effects of lattice compression in hybrid perovskites under higher (HP, left), moderate (∼5 GPa), and lower pressure (LP, right): octahedral tilting (top left), bond compression (bottom left), and changes in the interlayer distances (right). Cyan and purple spheres represent metal and halide ions, respectively, dashed lines indicate original atom positions (left), and the springs represents organic spacers (right). Adapted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society and ref. 108 under CC BY-NC 4.0 licence. (b) Lattice compression in LHPs is followed by changes in the QW structure due to charge confinement of electrons and holes. Adapted from ref. 108 under CC BY-NC 4.0 licence. (c) Variable-pressure conductivity (σ) of archetypical 3D perovskite, MAPbI3, and its (d) temperature dependence under high pressure. Adapted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (e and f) Evolution of photoluminescence of LHPs as function of pressure in the example of (e) Ruddlesden–Popper (PEA)2PbI4 LHP excited by 473 nm and (f) Dion–Jacobson (3AMP)PbI4 (n = 1) composition in the pressure range between 1 atm to 9.7 GPa; 3-AMP = 3-(aminomethyl)piperidinium. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108 under CC BY-NC 4.0 licence and ref. 109. Copyright 2019 National Academy of Sciences. 
All these changes collectively correlate with the optoelectronic properties, in particular optical absorption and photoluminescence, as well as electronic conductivity. For instance, the conductivities of MAPbI3 increase with compression up to ∼5 GPa followed by a plateau, subsequently increasing above ∼30 GPa (Fig. 9c), which culminates in a metallic transition at pressures above ∼60 GPa (Fig. 9d).107 In general, the compressibility is inversely proportional to the bulk modulus of the material, and molecular size and configuration play an important role in controlling the lattice and band structures under mechanical stress. The bulk modulus of typical Ruddlesden–Popper (PEA)2PbI4 LHP is estimated to 26.8 GPa, which is greater as compared to its 3D analogues, e.g. 13.6 GPa of MAPbI3 and 11.0 GPa of FAPbI3.108 Therefore, the compressibility of (PEA)2PbI4 LHP is smaller than that of 3D perovskites, i.e. it is stiffer and more resistant to compression, leading to smaller volume changes as a function of pressure. This may appear counter-intuitive considering longer-chain spacers that leave sufficient space for volume changes.108
Liu et al. have also shown that the hydrostatic compression of (PEA)2PbI4 is anisotropic under moderate pressures.108 Specifically, their analysis shows that changes in the lattice constants of (PEA)2PbI4 under pressure are dominated by the out-of-plane c deformation, five times greater than in-plane a and b. Moreover, such a quasi-uniaxial compression was found to preserve the octahedral geometry and maintain Pb–I bonds until a certain moderate pressure (above ∼4 GPa), after which the anisotropy decreases and the octahedral structure distorts. Under these conditions, the irreversible and nonradiative region occurs, similarly to 3D perovskites at lower pressures (Fig. 9e). However, at moderate pressures within ∼3.5 GPa, the photoluminescence continuously red-shifts, exhibiting a broad energy tunability up to 320 meV in the visible spectrum, which is substantially broader in the lower pressure range than MAPbX3 (∼80 meV) or FAPbX3 (∼120 meV higher).108 During this process, the organic layer is more compressible under pressure than the octahedra, which results in the barrier of the QW becoming thinner (Fig. 9b), decreasing the barrier potential and weakening the quantum confinement, while changing the dielectric constants and the resulting exciton binding energy. This contributes to most of the LHP bandgap shifts in this pressure range. This process was found to be fully reversible in the low-to-moderate 0–3.5 GPa pressure range, which is easier to achieve and device-friendly, of interest to potential applications. However, above 3.5 GPa the fluorescence quenches rapidly and the process loses its reversibility.108
The reversibility of these effects can be advantageous, such as in memory storage technologies, as well as pressure sensors.107 However, Kong et al. reported an irreversible high-pressure investigation on a series of Dion–Jacobson perovskites based on 3-(aminomethyl)piperidinium (3AMP) and methylammonium (MA) in various (3AMP)MAn−1PbnI3n+1 compositions (Fig. 9f).109 Their study demonstrated an irreversible behavior of these systems under pressure, suggesting that pressure or strain engineering could improve light-absorbing material properties. Specifically, the photoluminescence intensities were shown to be enhanced by one order of magnitude at milder pressures (up to 10 GPa). Moreover, higher pressures (∼75–130 GPa) significantly changed the corresponding lattices, leading to the semiconductor–metal transitions similar to those observed at higher pressures in 3D perovskites.109 Nonetheless, upon decompression at ambient conditions a permanent recrystallization from LHP to 3D structure occurred with dramatic changes in optoelectronic properties. The resulting properties upon compression-decompression cycles were found to be dependent on the pressure applied. These reports demonstrate a remarkable potential of mechanical stress or pressure as a gauge for tuning the properties of LHPs, stimulating further efforts to render these pressure ranges technologically accessible and utilize templating effects to tailor the materials for manipulating their optoelectronic characteristics.107 Moreover, a better understanding of the process may enable accessing the corresponding pressure regimes through chemical modifications, such as tailored lattice mismatches, which may mimic the effects of mechanical compression in the future.
5 Summary and perspectives
The research and developments on LHPs have considerably intensified over the past decade, which has been particularly stimulated by their role in stabilizing hybrid perovskite optoelectronic devices. However, their hybrid organic–inorganic structure has so far been primarily based on electronically insulating organic spacers templating the hybrid perovskite scaffold, which has substantially limited the performances of the corresponding materials and devices. This is because their optoelectronic properties are defined by the inorganic framework, which is indirectly affected by the structure-directing role of the organic components. Furthermore, their anisotropic structure makes their performances in optoelectronic devices dependent on the orientation and phase purity, both of which remain challenging to control via solution-processing in thin films.
The versatile structure of these hybrid materials has nonetheless provided a rich platform for altering their properties by introducing organic spacers with enhanced functionalities, such as those that are semiconducting and responsive to electrical or electromagnetic stimuli, as well as featuring chirality and the propensity for tailoring their properties in response to pressure or strain, among others (Fig. 10). This has led to the emergence of a plethora of functionalized electron-donating or electron-accepting organic compounds that meet the geometric constraints for their incorporation into the perovskite framework. Furthermore, the supramolecular assemblies of donor–acceptor moieties were used for accessing optoelectronics properties that are otherwise attainable only for extended conjugated π-systems. In addition, there is an increasing interest in photoactive components, such as photopolymerizable and photoswitchable units, which remain to be exploited and controlled. Finally, introducing chiral moieties has opened a pertinent path towards spintronics and chiroptoelectronics, while the mechanoresponsive behaviour across pressure ranges provides a powerful gauge for controlling material properties without compositional changes.
 Fig. 10  Multifunctional LHPs. Schematic representation summarising the multifunctionality of layered hybrid perovskites evolving around different functions of organic spacers, ranging from their structure-directing (i.e. templating) roles, through electro- and photoactivity, to chirality and mechanoresponsive behaviour, opening new perspectives for these hybrid materials in the future of smart nanotechnologies. 
These developments set the stage for advanced layered hybrid materials. However, a number of ongoing challenges hamper further applications, such as the limited understanding of structure–property relationships that would benefit from theoretical analysis and local structure investigations, including solid-state NMR and total scattering techniques,13,55–57,110–112 which remain nontrivial for such complex materials and require further developments. This is critical for new stimuli-responsive multifunctional materials where an interplay between organic and inorganic components determines the emergent behaviour. Furthermore, controlling the spacer geometry, orientation, and phase purity of hybrid materials, especially in thin films, remains an important challenge. This progress is still focused on lead-based materials that are not environmentally friendly and finding sustainable alternatives is a pressing issue,88,113 which stimulates ongoing research efforts.
While most of the applications of LHPs were so far focused on solar energy harvesting in photovoltaics and light-emitting diodes,17,18 overcoming some of the challenges would enhance their performance, while extending the utility of this highly versatile platform towards other materials, such as functionalized nanoparticles,76 as well as advanced functions. This may involve post-synthetic transformations,114 energy storage,115–117 non-volatile memory elements and spintronics,18,115 as well as other applications within the emerging field of optoionics.115 The current developments suggest that these layered hybrid materials will play an increasingly important role in the future of smart nanotechnologies and this overview hopefully encourages more efforts towards realizing their potential.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
J. V. M. acknowledges the Swiss National Science Foundation PRIMA grant no. 193174. She is grateful to Dr Dominik Kubicki (University of Cambridge, UK) and Dr Amita Ummadisingu (SNSF Fellow, Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, UK), as well as Dr Efrain Ochoa-Martínez (Adolphe Merkle Institute, University of Fribourg, Switzerland) for proofreading the manuscript and providing their valuable inputs. She further expresses her gratitude to the authors of some of the work reported for their creative contributions to the field, as well as the Editor for the invitation that stimulated the preparation of this overview on the topic, which hopefully provides more insights on this emerging generation of hybrid materials.
Notes and references
A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3036–3103 CrossRef CAS.
M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 838–842 CrossRef.
M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 487–491 CrossRef.
Y. Rong, Y. Hu, A. Mei, H. Tan, M. I. Saidaminov, S. I. Seok, M. D. McGehee, E. H. Sargent and H. Han, Science, 2018, 361, eaat8235 CrossRef.
M. Graetzel and J. V. Milić, Substantia, 2019, 3, 27–43 Search PubMed.
R. Wang, M. Mujahid, Y. Duan, Z.-K. Wang, J. Xue and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1808843 CrossRef CAS.
M. V. Khenkin, E. A. Katz, A. Abate, G. Bardizza, J. J. Berry, C. Brabec, F. Brunetti, V. Bulović, Q. Burlingame, A. Di Carlo, R. Cheacharoen, Y.-B. Cheng, A. Colsmann, S. Cros, K. Domanski, M. Dusza, C. J. Fell, S. R. Forrest, Y. Galagan, D. Di Girolamo, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt, E. Hauff, H. Hoppe, J. Kettle, H. Köbler, M. S. Leite, S. F. Liu, Y.-L. Loo, J. M. Luther, C.-Q. Ma, M. Madsen, M. Manceau, M. Matheron, M. McGehee, R. Meitzner, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. F. Nogueira, Ç. Odabaşı, A. Osherov, N.-G. Park, M. O. Reese, F. De Rossi, M. Saliba, U. S. Schubert, H. J. Snaith, S. D. Stranks, W. Tress, P. A. Troshin, V. Turkovic, S. Veenstra, I. Visoly-Fisher, A. Walsh, T. Watson, H. Xie, R. Yıldırım, S. M. Zakeeruddin, K. Zhu and M. Lira-Cantu, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 35–49 CrossRef.
J. Wei, Q. Wang, J. Huo, F. Gao, Z. Gan, Q. Zhao and H. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 77, 2002326 Search PubMed.
K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6306–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. Domanski, B. Roose, T. Matsui, M. Saliba, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, J.-P. Correa-Baena, C. R. Carmona, G. Richardson, J. M. Foster, F. De Angelis, J. M. Ball, A. Petrozza, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, W. Tress, M. Grätzel, U. Steiner, A. Hagfeldt and A. Abate, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 604–613 RSC.
K. Domanski, E. A. Alharbi, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and W. Tress, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 61–67 CrossRef CAS.
J. V. Milić, N. Arora, M. I. Dar, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 356, 1800416 CrossRef.
J. V. Milić, D. J. Kubicki, L. Emsley and M. Grätzel, Chimia, 2019, 73, 317–323 CrossRef.
S. Shao and M. A. Loi, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 7, 1901469 CrossRef.
S. Y. Kim, S. J. Cho, S. E. Byeon, X. He and H. J. Yoon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 131, 2002606 CrossRef.
Y. Lin, Y. Bai, Y. Fang, Q. Wang, Y. Deng and J. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1571–1572 CrossRef CAS.
W. Tress, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 3106–3114 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. H. Futscher and J. V. Milić, Front. Energy Res., 2021, 9, 629074 CrossRef.
D. B. Mitzi, J. Solid State Chem., 1999, 145, 694–704 CrossRef CAS.
D. B. Mitzi, Inorg. Chem., 2000, 39, 6107–6113 CrossRef CAS.
D. B. Mitzi, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 2001, 1–12 RSC.
Z. Xu and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3632–3637 CrossRef CAS.
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11232–11235 CrossRef CAS.
K.-Z. Du, Q. Tu, X. Zhang, Q. Han, J. Liu, S. Zauscher and D. B. Mitzi, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 9291–9302 CrossRef CAS.
C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, D. J. Clark, J. Young, J. M. Rondinelli, J. I. Jang, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2852–2867 CrossRef CAS.
Y. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Peng, J. Tang, K. Zheng and Z. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 131, 1703487 Search PubMed.
L. Mao, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1171–1190 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
G. Grancini and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 4–22 CrossRef CAS.
L. Mao, W. Ke, L. Pedesseau, Y. Wu, C. Katan, J. Even, M. R. Wasielewski, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3775–3783 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Li, J. V. Milić, A. Ummadisingu, J.-Y. Seo, J.-H. Im, H.-S. Kim, Y. Liu, M. I. Dar, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2018, 19, 150–157 CrossRef.
X. Li, W. Ke, B. Traore, P. Guo, I. Hadar, M. Kepenekian, J. Even, C. Katan, C. C. Stoumpos, R. D. Schaller and M. G. Kanatzidis, Sol. RRL, 2019, 141, 12880–12890 CAS.
Z. Xu, M. Chen and S. F. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 3670–3675 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Zheng, T. Niu, J. Qiu, L. Chao, B. Li, Y. Yang, Q. Li, C. Lin, X. Gao, C. Zhang, Y. Xia, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900090 CrossRef.
P. Huang, S. Kazim, M. Wang and S. Ahmad, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2960–2974 CrossRef CAS.
J.-C. Blancon, J. Even, C. C. Stoumpos, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 969–985 CrossRef PubMed.
L. Mao, P. Guo, M. Kepenekian, I. Spanopoulos, Y. He, C. Katan, J. Even, R. D. Schaller, R. Seshadri, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 8342–8351 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. A. Hope, T. Nakamura, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, M. Cordova, F. Jahanbakhshi, M. Mladenović, R. Runjhun, L. Merten, A. Hinderhofer, B. I. Carlsen, D. J. Kubicki, R. Gershoni-Poranne, T. Schneeberger, L. C. Carbone, Y. Liu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. Lewiński, A. Hagfeldt, F. Schreiber, U. Rothlisberger, M. Grätzel, J. V. Milić and L. Emsley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 1529–1538 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
N. Mercier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 17912–17917 CrossRef CAS.
M. E. Kamminga, H.-H. Fang, M. R. Filip, F. Giustino, J. Baas, G. R. Blake, M. A. Loi and T. T. M. Palstra, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4554–4562 CrossRef CAS.
M. Kepenekian, B. Traore, J.-C. Blancon, L. Pedesseau, H. Tsai, W. Nie, C. C. Stoumpos, M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Even, A. D. Mohite, S. Tretiak and C. Katan, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 5603–5609 CrossRef CAS.
W. Paritmongkol, N. S. Dahod, A. Stollmann, N. Mao, C. Settens, S.-L. Zheng and W. A. Tisdale, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 5592–5607 CrossRef CAS.
X. Li, J. M. Hoffman and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 2230–2291 CrossRef CAS.
F. Jahanbakhshi, M. Mladenović, E. Kneschaurek, L. Merten, M. C. Gélvez-Rueda, P. Ahlawat, Y. Li, A. Dučinskas, A. Hinderhofer, M. I. Dar, W. Tress, B. Carlsen, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, F. Schreiber, F. C. Grozema, U. Rothlisberger, J. V. Milić and M. Graetzel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 17732–17740 RSC.
M. C. Gélvez-Rueda, P. Ahlawat, L. Merten, F. Jahanbakhshi, M. Mladenović, A. Hinderhofer, M. I. Dar, Y. Li, A. Dučinskas, B. Carlsen, W. Tress, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, F. Schreiber, A. Hagfeldt, U. Rothlisberger, F. C. Grozema, J. V. Milić and M. Graetzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003428 CrossRef.
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982 RSC.
Z. Yang, C.-C. Chueh, P.-W. Liang, M. Crump, F. Lin, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 328–337 CrossRef CAS.
L. Mao, Y. Wu, C. C. Stoumpos, M. R. Wasielewski and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5210–5215 CrossRef CAS.
G. Li, T. Zhang, N. Guo, F. Xu, X. Qian and Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13460–13464 CrossRef CAS.
J. Yan, W. Fu, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Yang, W. Qiu, G. Wu, F. Liu, P. Heremans and H. Chen, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 2, 121–128 RSC.
H. Zheng, G. Liu, L. Zhu, J. Ye, X. Zhang, A. Alsaedi, T. Hayat, X. Pan and S. Dai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 136, 1800051 CrossRef.
J. V. Milić, J.-H. Im, D. J. Kubicki, A. Ummadisingu, J.-Y. Seo, Y. Li, M. A. Ruiz-Preciado, M. I. Dar, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 131, 1900284 CrossRef.
A. Q. Alanazi, D. J. Kubicki, D. Prochowicz, E. A. Alharbi, M. E. F. Bouduban, F. Jahanbakhshi, M. Mladenović, J. V. Milić, F. Giordano, D. Ren, A. Y. Alyamani, H. Albrithen, A. Albadri, M. H. Alotaibi, J.-E. Moser, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Rothlisberger, L. Emsley and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17659–17669 CrossRef CAS.
B. Saparov and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 4558–4596 CrossRef CAS.
Y. Liu, S. Akin, L. Pan, R. Uchida, N. Arora, J. V. Milić, A. Hinderhofer, F. Schreiber, A. R. Uhl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. I. Dar and M. Grätzel, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw2543 CrossRef CAS.
M. M. Tavakoli, W. Tress, J. V. Milić, D. Kubicki, L. Emsley and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3310–3320 RSC.
M. A. Ruiz-Preciado, D. J. Kubicki, A. Hofstetter, L. McGovern, M. H. Futscher, A. Ummadisingu, R. Gershoni-Poranne, S. M. Zakeeruddin, B. Ehrler, L. Emsley, J. V. Milić and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1645–1654 CrossRef CAS.
D. Bi, X. Li, J. V. Milić, D. J. Kubicki, N. Pellet, J. Luo, T. LaGrange, P. Mettraux, L. Emsley, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4482 CrossRef PubMed.
J. V. Milić, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 2729–2740 CrossRef PubMed.
J. Liu, J. Leng, K. Wu, J. Zhang and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1432–1435 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
W. Peng, J. Yin, K.-T. Ho, O. Ouellette, M. De Bastiani, B. Murali, O. El Tall, C. Shen, X. Miao, J. Pan, E. Alarousu, J.-H. He, B. S. Ooi, O. F. Mohammed, E. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4759–4767 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. C. Blancon, H. Tsai, W. Nie, C. C. Stoumpos, L. Pedesseau, C. Katan, M. Kepenekian, C. M. M. Soe, K. Appavoo, M. Y. Sfeir, S. Tretiak, P. M. Ajayan, M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Even, J. J. Crochet and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2017, 355, 1288–1292 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
L. N. Quan, M. Yuan, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, E. M. Beauregard, S. Hoogland, A. Buin, A. R. Kirmani, K. Zhao, A. Amassian, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2649–2655 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. Quintero-Bermudez, A. Gold-Parker, A. H. Proppe, R. Munir, Z. Yang, S. O. Kelley, A. Amassian, M. F. Toney and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 900–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Q. Li, Y. Zhao, W. Zhou, Z. Han, R. Fu, F. Lin, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 131, 1902239 CrossRef.
C. Liu, W. Huhn, K.-Z. Du, A. Vazquez-Mayagoitia, D. Dirkes, W. You, Y. Kanai, D. B. Mitzi and V. Blum, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2018, 121, 146401 CrossRef CAS.
W. A. Dunlap-Shohl, E. T. Barraza, A. Barrette, S. Dovletgeldi, G. Findik, D. J. Dirkes, C. Liu, M. K. Jana, V. Blum, W. You, K. Gundogdu, A. D. Stiff-Roberts and D. B. Mitzi, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1707–1716 RSC.
M. K. Jana, C. Liu, S. Lidin, D. J. Dirkes, W. You, V. Blum and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 8523–8532 CrossRef CAS.
J. Leveillee, C. Katan, J. Even, D. Ghosh, W. Nie, A. D. Mohite, S. Tretiak, A. Schleife and A. J. Neukirch, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 8732–8740 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Gao, Z. Wei, S.-N. Hsu, B. W. Boudouris and L. Dou, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 3400–3418 RSC.
J. L. Knutson, J. D. Martin and D. B. Mitzi, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 4699–4705 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
D. B. Mitzi, D. R. Medeiros and P. R. L. Malenfant, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 2134–2145 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. C. Gélvez-Rueda, E. M. Hutter, D. H. Cao, N. Renaud, C. C. Stoumpos, J. T. Hupp, T. J. Savenije, M. G. Kanatzidis and F. C. Grozema, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 26566–26574 CrossRef PubMed.
C. Ni, Y. Huang, T. Zeng, D. Chen, H. Chen, M. Wei, A. Johnston, A. Proppe, Z. Ning, E. Sargent, P. Hu and Z. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 13977–13983 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. Maheshwari, T. J. Savenije, N. Renaud and F. C. Grozema, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 17118–17122 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. C. Gélvez-Rueda, M. B. Fridriksson, R. K. Dubey, W. F. Jager, W. van der Stam and F. C. Grozema, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1901 CrossRef PubMed.
A. H. Proppe, M.-H. Tremblay, Y. Zhang, Z. Yang, R. Quintero-Bermudez, S. O. Kelley, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder and E. H. Sargent, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 24379–24390 CrossRef CAS.
J. V. Passarelli, D. J. Fairfield, N. A. Sather, M. P. Hendricks, H. Sai, C. L. Stern and S. I. Stupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7313–7323 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Xue, R. Wang, X. Chen, C. Yao, X. Jin, K.-L. Wang, W. Huang, T. Huang, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhai, D. Meng, S. Tan, R. Liu, Z.-K. Wang, C. Zhu, K. Zhu, M. C. Beard, Y. Yan and Y. Yang, Science, 2021, 371, 636–640 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. Yang, D. Wu, W. Gong, Q. Huang, H. Zhen, Q. Ling and Z. Lin, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 8975–8981 RSC.
H. Kim, M. Pei, Y. Lee, A. A. Sutanto, S. Paek, V. I. E. Queloz, A. J. Huckaba, K. T. Cho, H. J. Yun, H. Yang and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910620 CrossRef CAS.
Y. Gao, Z. Wei, P. Yoo, E. Shi, M. Zeller, C. Zhu, P. Liao and L. Dou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 15577–15585 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Gao, E. Shi, S. Deng, S. B. Shiring, J. M. Snaider, C. Liang, B. Yuan, R. Song, S. M. Janke, A. Liebman-Peláez, P. Yoo, M. Zeller, B. W. Boudouris, P. Liao, C. Zhu, V. Blum, Y. Yu, B. M. Savoie, L. Huang and L. Dou, Nat. Chem., 2019, 11, 1151–1157 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. Herckens, W. T. M. Van Gompel, W. Song, M. C. Gélvez-Rueda, A. Maufort, B. Ruttens, J. D'Haen, F. C. Grozema, T. Aernouts, L. Lutsen and D. Vanderzande, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22899–22908 RSC.
W. T. M. Van Gompel, R. Herckens, K. Van Hecke, B. Ruttens, J. D'Haen, L. Lutsen and D. Vanderzande, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 2481–2484 RSC.
N. Marchal, W. Van Gompel, M. C. Gélvez-Rueda, K. Vandewal, K. Van Hecke, H.-G. Boyen, B. Conings, R. Herckens, S. Maheshwari, L. Lutsen, C. Quarti, F. C. Grozema, D. Vanderzande and D. Beljonne, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 6880–6888 CrossRef CAS.
J. V. Passarelli, C. M. Mauck, S. W. Winslow, C. F. Perkinson, J. C. Bard, H. Sai, K. W. Williams, A. Narayanan, D. J. Fairfield, M. P. Hendricks, W. A. Tisdale and S. I. Stupp, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 672–682 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. K. Jana, S. M. Janke, D. J. Dirkes, S. Dovletgeldi, C. Liu, X. Qin, K. Gundogdu, W. You, V. Blum and D. B. Mitzi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7955–7964 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
C. Ortiz-Cervantes, P. I. Román-Román, J. Vazquez-Chavez, M. Hernández-Rodríguez and D. Solis-Ibarra, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13882–13886 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. H. Proppe, M. Wei, B. Chen, R. Quintero-Bermudez, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14180–14189 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. C. Ledsham and P. Day, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1981, 921–922 RSC.
B. Tieke, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 1983, 93, 119–145 CrossRef CAS.
R. Sasai and H. Shinomura, J. Solid State Chem., 2013, 198, 452–458 CrossRef CAS.
N. Fillafer, T. Seewald, L. Schmidt-Mende and S. Polarz, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2020, 11, 466–479 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
W. Szymański, J. M. Beierle, H. A. V. Kistemaker, W. A. Velema and B. L. Feringa, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 6114–6178 CrossRef PubMed.
G. Long, R. Sabatini, M. I. Saidaminov, G. Lakhwani, A. Rasmita, X. Liu, E. H. Sargent and W. Gao, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 423–429 CrossRef.
H. Lu, J. Wang, C. Xiao, X. Pan, X. Chen, R. Brunecky, J. J. Berry, K. Zhu, M. C. Beard and Z. V. Vardeny, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaay0571 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Z.-G. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 8638–8646 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
D. G. Billing and A. Lemmerer, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. E: Struct. Rep. Online, 2003, 59, m381–m383 CrossRef CAS.
D. G. Billing and A. Lemmerer, CrystEngComm, 2006, 8, 686–695 RSC.
J. Ahn, E. Lee, J. Tan, W. Yang, B. Kim and J. Moon, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 851–856 RSC.
G. Long, C. Jiang, R. Sabatini, Z. Yang, M. Wei, L. N. Quan, Q. Liang, A. Rasmita, M. Askerka, G. Walters, X. Gong, J. Xing, X. Wen, R. Quintero-Bermudez, H. Yuan, G. Xing, X. R. Wang, D. Song, O. Voznyy, M. Zhang, S. Hoogland, W. Gao, Q. Xiong and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 528–533 CrossRef CAS.
M. K. Jana, R. Song, H. Liu, D. R. Khanal, S. M. Janke, R. Zhao, C. Liu, Z. V. Vardeny, V. Blum and D. B. Mitzi, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4699 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
H. Lu, C. Xiao, R. Song, T. Li, A. E. Maughan, A. Levin, R. Brunecky, J. J. Berry, D. B. Mitzi, V. Blum and M. C. Beard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 13030–13040 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. H. Kim, Y. Zhai, H. Lu, X. Pan, C. Xiao, E. A. Gaulding, S. P. Harvey, J. J. Berry, Z. V. Vardeny, J. M. Luther and M. C. Beard, Science, 2021, 371, 1129–1133 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
N. Mercier, M. Ben Haj Salah, J. Dittmer, N. Zouari and C. Botta, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 60, 834–839 Search PubMed.
A. Jaffe, Y. Lin and H. I. Karunadasa, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1549–1555 CrossRef CAS.
S. Liu, S. Sun, C. K. Gan, A. G. del Aguila, Y. Fang, J. Xing, T. T. H. Do, T. J. White, H. Li, W. Huang and Q. Xiong, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav9554 Search PubMed.
L. Kong, G. Liu, J. Gong, L. Mao, M. Chen, Q. Hu, X. Lu, W. Yang, M. G. Kanatzidis and H.-K. Mao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 16121–16126 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Lee, W. Lee, K. Kang, T. Lee and S. K. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 370–377 CrossRef CAS.
C. J. Dahlman, R. M. Kennard, P. Paluch, N. R. Venkatesan, M. L. Chabinyc and G. N. M. Reddy, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 642–656 CrossRef CAS.
L. Piveteau, V. Morad and M. V. Kovalenko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 19413–19437 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
F. Cao and L. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 4, 2008275 Search PubMed.
I. C. Smith, M. D. Smith, A. Jaffe, Y. Lin and H. I. Karunadasa, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1868–1884 CrossRef CAS.
A. Senocrate, E. Kotomin and J. Maier, Helv. Chim. Acta, 2020, 103, e2000073 CrossRef CAS.
D. Ramirez, Y. Suto, N. C. Rosero-Navarro, A. Miura, K. Tadanaga and F. Jaramillo, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 4181–4188 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. Tathavadekar, S. Krishnamurthy, A. Banerjee, S. Nagane, Y. Gawli, A. Suryawanshi, S. Bhat, D. Puthusseri, A. D. Mohite and S. Ogale, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18634–18642 RSC.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Jovana V. Milić
	Dr Jovana V. Milić is Assistant Professor and Group Leader at the Adolphe Merkle Institute of the University of Fribourg in Switzerland. She obtained her PhD in the Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences of ETH Zurich in 2017 and, since then, she has worked as a scientist in the Laboratory of Photonics and Interfaces at EPFL in Switzerland. Her research is focused on the development of functional (supra)molecular materials for energy conversion and smart nanotechnologies, with a particular interest in photovoltaics.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the evolution of hybrid perovskites, from their molecular modulation and the formation of layered perovskite analogues to multifunctional layered perovskites with enhanced functionality in the spacer layer. Structural details associated with the materials are outlined in Fig. 2 and 3.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of (a) hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites represented by a cubic crystal structure based on the AMX3 composition, (b) their molecularly-modulated, and (c–e) layered hybrid perovskite (LHP) phases. (c) Schematic phase space diagram indicating the typical categories of LHPs based on Ruddlesden–Popper (RP), Dion–Jacobson (DJ), and Alternating-Cation (AC) phases with boundaries defined by the RP, DJ, and AC phases and coordinates indicating relative shifts between consecutive perovskite layers along a and b axes based on ref. 35. (d) Structural schematic of the (d) RP and (e) DJ phases with green rods representing spacer moieties. (f) Type I and Type II quantum-well (QW) electronic structures based on the energy level alignments of conduction band minima (CBM), valence band maxima (VBM), highest occupied (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied (LUMO) frontier molecular orbitals, and the resulting bandgap (Eg). 3D hybrid perovskites and LHPs typically feature Type IA behaviour, while electroactive spacers can form Type IB and Type II QW structures.	 

 	Fig. 3  Structures of representative organic spacers used in layered hybrid perovskites (LHPs) of conventional (a) and enhanced (b–d) functionality. (a) Typical (grey panels) monofunctional (left) and bifunctional (right) spacers shown to form either Rudlesdden–Popper (RP, left panel) or Dion–Jacobson (DJ, right panel) phases, respectively, including selected spacers shown to stabilize the α-FAPbI3 perovskite phase (i.e. BA, PEA, AVA, IBA, BN, and PDMA). BA = n-butylammonium; PEA = 2-phenylethylammonium; AVA = 5-ammonium valeric acid; IBA = iso-butylammonium; BN = benzylammonium; ADAM = 1-adamantylmethanammonium; 4AMP = 4-(aminomethyl)piperidinium; 4AMPY = 4-(aminomethyl)pyridinium; PDMA = 1,4- phenylenedimethanammonium. (b) Representative examples of semiconductive (electroactive) moieties used in LHPs (green panels) based on monofunctional (left) and bifunctional (right) spacer moieties: 2T = 2-([2,2′-bithiophen]-5-yl)ethylammonium; 4T = 2-([2,2′:5′,2′′:5′′,2′′′-quaterthiophen]-5-yl)ethylammonium; PREA = 1-pyrenylmethylammonium; PROEA = pyrene-O-ethylammonium; NIEA = 2-(1,3-dioxo-1H-benzo[de]isoquinolin-2(3H)-yl)ethylammonium; CBZBA = 4-(9H-carbazol-9-yl)butylammonium; PEOEA = perylene-O-ethylammonium; AE2T = 2,2′-([2,2′-bithiophene]-5,5′-diyl)bis(ethylammonium); AE4T = 2,2′-([2,2′:5′,2′′:5′′,2′′′-quaterthiophene]-5,5′′′-diyl)bis(ethylammonium); NDIEA = 2,2′-[naphthalene-1,8:4,5-bis(dicarboximide)-N,N′-diyl]bis(ethylammonium); PDIEA = 2,2′-(1,3,8,10-tetraoxo-1,3,8,10-tetrahydroanthra[2,1,9-def:6,5,10-d′e′f′]diisoquinoline-2,9-diyl)bis(ethylammonium). (c) Representative examples of photoactive moieties employed in layered perovskite architectures (yellow panel) which either photopolymerize (left) or act as photoswitches (right): VBA = 4-vinylbenzylammonium; DDA = deca-2,4-diyn-1-ammonium; CDA = 5-carboxypenta-2,4-dien-1-ammonium; AzoCnA = azobenzene-alkylammonium derivatives (n = 1–5). (d) Selected examples of other functional organic spacers, such as those based on chiral moieties (blue panel) and those employed in early mechanochromic (cyan panel) LHPs: MBA = 1-methylbenzylammonium; HOEA = 2-hydroxyethylammonium; GABA = γ-ammoniumbutanoic acid. These and other representative examples are detailed in subsequent sections.	 

 	Fig. 4  Representative LHPs with semiconductive spacers based on oligothiophenes and their properties. (a) The structure of bis-ethylammonium-terminated oligothiophenes (AEnT) and the crystal structure of the corresponding AEnTPbX4 perovskites (n = 4 and n = 2, highlighting the head-to-tail orientation of the spacer groups in AE2TPbX4 systems). Adapted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) Calculated Frontier energy levels at the Γ point in the series of AEnTPbBr4 (n = 1–5). Stars and diamonds indicate the energy levels of syn–anti–syn AE4TPbBr4 perovskites. Adapted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2018 American Physical Society. (c) The relative energy level alignments of organic (green lines) and inorganic (grey lines) layers within the LHPs based on (2T)2PbI4, (4Tm)2PbI4, (4TCNm)2PbI4, and (BTm)2PbI4 compositions based on ref. 83. VBM = valence band maximum; CBM = conduction band minimum; HOMO = highest occupied molecular orbital; LUMO = lowest unoccupied molecular orbital; 2T = 2-([2,2′-bithiophen]-5-yl)ethylammonium; 4Tm = 2-(3′′′,4′-dimethyl-[2,2′:5′,2′′:5′′,2′′′-quaterthiophen]-5-yl)ethylammonium; 4TCN = 2-(3′′,4′′-dicyano-3′′′,4′-dimethyl-[2,2′:5′,2′′:5′′,2′′′-quaterthiophen]-5-yl)ethylammonium; BTm = 2-(4′-methyl-5′-(7-(3-methylthiophen-2-yl)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazol-4-yl)-[2,2′-bithiophen]-5-yl)ethylammonium. (d) The corresponding PL images of the LHP crystals under UV excitation. The PL for the 4Tm and 4TCNm are quenched and weak signals are observed due to charge separation at the interface, in line with Type II QW behaviour. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  Representative LHPs based on more sterically demanding semiconducting organic moieties. (a) Transient absorption spectra for the thin films based on 2,2′-[naphthalene-1,8:4,5-bis(dicarboximide)-N,N′-diyl]-bis(diethylammonium) (NDIEA) spacers in FA/MA-based (blue) and MA-based n = 5 (red) thin film compositions. The bleach peak positions, dynamics, and distribution are similar to other reported LHP cases. Image used with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (b) Structures of pyrene-based organic spacers with various lengths of alkylammonium-linker, namely PRA = 1-pyrenylammonium, PRMA = 1-pyrenylmethylammonium, and PREA = 1-pyrenylethylammonium based on ref. 79. (c) Surface band-edge structures with the electronic contribution from pyrene spacers. Calculated partial density of states (left) and band diagrams (right) of LHPs based on PRA, PRMA, and PREA. Dashed lines highlight the electronic states near surface band edges. CB = conduction band; VB = valence band. Adapted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2021 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Schematic of LHPs of n = 1 composition showing alternating organic and inorganic layers that align parallel to the substrate, highlighting the modular design of the spacers consisting of an aromatic core connected by an ether bond to an alkyl linker of variable length. The characteristic noncovalent interactions defining the supramolecular structures are further highlighted in red, i.e. intramolecular hydrogen bonding, dN–I distances, and interlayer π interactions. Adapted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (e) Energy levels of typical LHPs of n = 1 composition (gray) with values for (BA)2PbI4 in comparison to the conjugated organic spacers based on perylene-O-ethyl-, pyrene-O-propyl-, and naphthalene-O-propyl ammonium moieties. The inset highlights edge-to-face orientation of pyrene spacers in the structure. HTL = hole transport layer; ETL = electron transport layers. Adapted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Representative donor–acceptor assemblies in LHPs. (a) Schematic of a LHPs (left) upon intercalating (right) tetrachloro-1,2-benzoquinone (TCBQ). C, O, N, Pb and I are presented in grey, red, blue, black, and purple, respectively. The intercalation results in donor–acceptor interactions in the organic layer and electron–hole interactions of the exciton (beige) within the inorganic layer (arrows) are screened more effectively. Consequently, the exciton binding energy is lowered (dashed arrows). (b) Absorption spectra of the system with x = 0, 0.5 and 1 eq. TCBQ indicating changes in the S1 exciton energy peak (ES1) and the binding energy (Eb). Schematic representation and data are adapted based on ref. 87. Copyright Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  Representative LHPs based on photoactive organic spacers. (a) Schematic structural representation of diacetylene-based LHPs (left) and their (photo)polymerized polydiacetylene derivatives (right) with the corresponding energy levels and bandgaps (Eg). (b) X-ray crystal structure of deca-3,5-diyn-1-ammonium-based (DDA) DDA2PbBr4 LHPs at ambient temperature and (c) average values with standard uncertainties for in-plane conductivity at 423 K of reference n-octylammonium (OA) OA2PbBr4 LHPs and DDA2PbBr4 LHPs (1-as), as well as their polydiacetylenic derivatives prepared by annealing at 160 °C for 24 h under inert nitrogen atmosphere (1-N2), upon exposure to air (1-O2), and upon exposure to iodine (1-I2) for generating stable radicals, as well as upon exposure to iodine after preparation in an inert nitrogen atmosphere (1-N2/I2). Images (a–c) adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Schematic representation of a photopolymerisation of 4-vinylbenzylammonium-based 2D/3D perovskite composites upon irradiation at 254 nm at 70 °C (left) with the energy level diagram of the 2D/3D interface (right). Adapted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic of LHPs based on azobenzene spacer layers (left) and their 2D/3D phases containing azobenzene spacers only on the surface (right). While LHPs do not change their properties upon irradiation at 313 nm, this is the case for surface-bound azobenzene moieties. Images adapted from ref. 94 under CC-BY licence. (f) Photoswitching of the functionalized azobenzene units (top) and the corresponding changes in the UV-vis absorption spectra upon UV irradiation (from grey in the initial state towards black). Images adapted from ref. 94 under CC-BY licence.	 

 	Fig. 8  Chirality in representative LHPs. (a) Schematic representation of chirality. (b) Electron dispersion in the presence of the chirality-induced spin–orbit coupling (SOC): an achiral material features a parabolic shape of CB energy vs. momentum kz with energy minimum at kz = 0, whereas the chirality-induced SOC shifts the parabolic dispersion along +k and −k directions based on the electron spin and helicity. Adapted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (c) Representative chiral spacers used for chiral LHPs: MBA = methylbenzylammonium, CHEA = 1-cyclohexylethylammonium, MPEA = 2-methylphenethylammonium, 3APD = 3-aminopiperidinium, NEA = 1-((1-naphthyl)ethylammonium), DACH = 1,2-diammoniumcyclohexane, 2OA = 2-octylammonium, 3AQ = 3-ammonioquinuclidinium, 3AP = 3-ammoniopyrrolidinium, 3-FP = 3-fluoropyrrolidinium, and CMBA = 1-(4-chlorophenyl)-ethylammonium based on ref. 96. The asterisk indicates the chiral centre. (d) X-ray structures of LHPs based on chiral R-MBA and S-MBA (left) (CCDC numbers 607740 and 607741).100 (e) Circular dichroism spectra of chiral spacers (R-MBABr and S-MBABr in red and blue, respectively) and their racemic mixture (in black) based on ref. 102. Copyright Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  Mechanoresponsive LHP representatives. (a) Structural effects of lattice compression in hybrid perovskites under higher (HP, left), moderate (∼5 GPa), and lower pressure (LP, right): octahedral tilting (top left), bond compression (bottom left), and changes in the interlayer distances (right). Cyan and purple spheres represent metal and halide ions, respectively, dashed lines indicate original atom positions (left), and the springs represents organic spacers (right). Adapted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society and ref. 108 under CC BY-NC 4.0 licence. (b) Lattice compression in LHPs is followed by changes in the QW structure due to charge confinement of electrons and holes. Adapted from ref. 108 under CC BY-NC 4.0 licence. (c) Variable-pressure conductivity (σ) of archetypical 3D perovskite, MAPbI3, and its (d) temperature dependence under high pressure. Adapted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (e and f) Evolution of photoluminescence of LHPs as function of pressure in the example of (e) Ruddlesden–Popper (PEA)2PbI4 LHP excited by 473 nm and (f) Dion–Jacobson (3AMP)PbI4 (n = 1) composition in the pressure range between 1 atm to 9.7 GPa; 3-AMP = 3-(aminomethyl)piperidinium. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108 under CC BY-NC 4.0 licence and ref. 109. Copyright 2019 National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 10  Multifunctional LHPs. Schematic representation summarising the multifunctionality of layered hybrid perovskites evolving around different functions of organic spacers, ranging from their structure-directing (i.e. templating) roles, through electro- and photoactivity, to chirality and mechanoresponsive behaviour, opening new perspectives for these hybrid materials in the future of smart nanotechnologies.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
