A recent update on the multifaceted health benefits associated with ginger and its bioactive components  - Food & Function (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0FO02834G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0FO02834G
(Review Article)
Food Funct., 2021, 12, 519-542A recent update on the multifaceted health benefits associated with ginger and its bioactive components

        
          
            Run-Hui 
            Ma
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhi-Jing 
            Ni
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yun-Yang 
            Zhu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Kiran 
            Thakur
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Fan 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuan-Yuan 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fei 
            Hu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jian-Guo 
            Zhang
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Zhao-Jun 
            Wei
          
        
      *abc
aSchool of Biological Science and Engineering, Collaborative Innovation Center for Food Production and Safety, North Minzu University, Yinchuan 750021, People's Republic of China. E-mail: 1120355093@qq.com; lovebear@vip.163.com; 2396259605@qq.com; kumarikiran@hfut.edu.cn; zffs2012@mail.ahnu.edu.cn; 1217461863@qq.com; hufei@hfut.edu.cn; zhangjianguo@hfut.edu.cn; zjwei@hfut.edu.cn
bSchool of Food and Biological Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei 230009, People's Republic of China
cCollege of Biological Science and Technology, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, 350108, People's Republic of China
Received 
      29th October 2020
    , Accepted 3rd December 2020First published on 8th December 2020AbstractDue to recent lifestyle shifts and health discernments among consumers, synthetic drugs are facing the challenge of controlling disease development and progression. Various medicinal plants and their constituents are recognized for their imminent role in disease management via modulation of biological activities. At present, research scholars have diverted their attention on natural bioactive entities with health-boosting perception to combat the lifestyle-related disarrays. In particular, Zingiber officinale is a medicinal herb that has been commonly used in food and pharmaceutical products. Its detailed chemical composition and high value-added active components have been extensively studied. In this review, we have summarized the pharmacological potential of this well-endowed chemo preventive agent. It was revealed that its functionalities are attributed to several inherent chemical constituents, including 6-gingerol, 8-gingerol, 10-gingerol, 6-shogaol, 6-hydroshogaol, and oleoresin, which were established through many studies (in vitro, in vivo, and cell lines). In this review, we also focused on the therapeutic effects of ginger and its constituents for their effective antioxidant properties. Their consumption may reduce or delay the progression of related diseases, such as cancer, diabetes, and obesity, via modulation of genetic and metabolic activities. The updated data could elucidate the relationship of the extraction processes with the constituents and biological manifestations. We have collated the current knowledge (including the latest clinical data) about the bioactive compounds and bioactivities of ginger. Their detailed mechanisms, which can lay foundation for their food and medical applications are also discussed.
1. Introduction
Since time immemorial, plants have been recognized as nature's factories, supplying all the necessities of human life and promoting health. In recent years, much focus has shifted to most of their metabolites due to the medicinal value and nutritional properties.1 These plants are the reservoirs of different constituents, including polyphenols, carotenoids, organosulfur compounds, and nitrogen-containing compounds2 endowed with diverse structural and functional attributes. With the development of innovative biotechnological interventions, many plants, bacteria, or mammals have been harnessed to obtain phytochemicals and derivatives as promising options to treat different types of diseases, including cancer, neurodegenerative diseases, diabetes mellitus, inflammation, and cardiovascular disease.3–11 With the progress in the application of anti-cancer drugs, researchers and medical experts are shifting their focus from conventional drugs with single targets and strong toxicity to novel natural compounds with multitargets, multidirectional regulation, and less toxicity. The latter is reported to increase the treatment efficacy for various diseases. In the past years, the anti-cancer potential of several phytochemicals has been described, and gingerols extracted from ginger have recently attracted increased attention.12
Ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe, Zingiberaceae), as a dietary ingredient in traditional herbal medicine with an irregular lumpy rhizome, is widely cultivated in South East Asia. Throughout history, ginger is not only considered as a spice for flavor, nutrition improvement and food preservation, but it has also been applied for alleviating multiple ailments, including flu, asthma, indigestion, and gastrointestinal disturbances.13 After the in vivo and in vitro confirmation of the pharmacological properties of ginger, it has emerged as an important raw material, attracting a significant amount of attention from doctors, scientists, and industries worldwide. Increasing evidence has shown that the efficacy of ginger's bioactivities depends on the composition of ginger (fresh and dry), extraction conditions, and molecular target of the different ginger compounds and their metabolism.14 As previously reported, more than 400 bioactive compounds have been detected from ginger. The major therapeutic and nutritive value of ginger largely depends on its main bioactive substances, including shogaols, curcumin, paradols, terpenoids, and especially gingerols. The latter constitutes the major pungent constituent in fresh ginger, and comprises a series of homologue differences in the length of their alkyl chains.15 Gingerols are divided into 4-gingerol, 6-gingerol, 8-gingerol, and 10-gingerol, according to their different carbon numbers on the side chain structures.13
In recent years, cancer is considered a major public health concern with a significant global impact on both developed and developing nations.16,17 According to the latest data of 2020, there are 1806590 new cases. Furthermore, approximately 606520 death cases from cancer are expected in the United States. This means that more than 4950 people are diagnosed daily with cancer, which indicates a mortality rate of 1.1 people per min. However, the cancer mortality rate has been consistently lower since 2017. This is because the occurrence and mortality rate of lung, breast, prostate, colorectal, brain cancers and other cancers have been decreased due to the advancement of cancer research and improved efficacy of clinical treatment. However, there are many other types of cancers with the highest mortality rate, especially cancer of the lung, prostate, and colorectum in males, and lung, breast, and colorectum in females.18 On the other hand, the existing available options for cancer treatment and primarily available chemotherapeutic agents have disadvantages due to the recurrence of cancer, drug resistance, and toxic effects on non-targeted tissues, which impair the patient's quality of life.19 The natural product chemistry occupies a prominent role in the search of novel promising cancer agents with better efficacy by contributing a plethora of chemical structures that may potentially yield novel bioactive compounds.
According to suggestions from the World Cancer Research Fund, a healthy diet plays a significant role in various cancer therapeutics as the main part of the recent consumer trends.20 Besides, ginger has been considered as ‘generally recognized as safe’ in the United State from the Food and Drug Administration. Therefore, the safety of gingerols has been affirmed through in vivo and in vitro studies by inhibiting cell proliferation via promoting death signaling pathways, migration, and invasion or induction of apoptosis.21–23 Recently, studies have reported the association of gingerol with human health and diseases, illustrated its composition, bioactivity, molecular target, and different metabolic activities.24,25 Although many researchers have precisely focused on 6-gingerol, there are many other kinds of gingerol, like 8-gingerol and 10-gingerol, which have also been studied on numerous cancers.26–28 Therefore, it is imperative to systemically review some of the recent advancements in the field of gingerol confined to several cancers, which can offer some promising therapeutic methods for clinical applications.
So far, there has not been any comprehensive review of the different kinds of gingerols in cancer management, except for very few studies of limited scope. These include a 2017 publication summarizing the anti-cancerous effect of 10-gingerol,29 two general reviews stressing the biological activities of gingerols4,7 and lastly, a recent review highlighting the relationship between the different compositions, bioactivities, molecular targets, and metabolic pathways of gingerols and shogaols.14 In particular, we aimed to collate the in vitro, in vivo, and clinical data on the anti-cancerous effects and other health benefits in general, and the underlying mechanisms of gingerols. In this review, we emphasized their extraction, separation, and purification processes, which were followed by a discussion of their anti-oxidant properties. Furthermore, their comprehensive anti-inflammatory, anti-cancer, anti-microbial, and protective effects on the metabolic syndrome were presented. In addition, this review can unlock the novel possibilities for the enhanced food and industrial application of gingerols with a widespread future perspective.
2. Composition and preparation
2.1 Composition
Ginger (Zingiber officinale) as a promising natural plant with yellow flowers and pungent scented roots contains 78.89 g of water, 1.82 g of protein, 17.77 g of carbohydrate, 2 g of fiber, 1.7 g of sugars, 0.77 g of ash, 0.75 g of total lipid of per 100 g, and other various trace elements, like calcium, magnesium, potassium, sodium, and phosphorus.25 However, in the case of dissimilar ginger growth cycles or regions, new compounds are generated or synthesized, such as during ginger storage periods. In addition, the different times, temperatures, and humidity always influence the normal components of ginger. Previous studies have reported over a hundred of pharmacologically active compounds in ginger, which are generally divided into three classes: volatile oils, gingerol, and diarylheptanoids.8 The yields of volatile oils vary from 1% to 3%. Gingerols “pungent principles” (4–7.5%) represent a homologous series of phenols differentiated by the length of their unbranched alkyl chains, with 6-gingerol being the most abundant, followed by 8- and 10-gingerol in the fresh rhizome.14 Due to the instability of gingerols during heating or drying treatment and the storage process, the OH group at the C-5 position in gingerols is eliminated. This results in the formation of a double bond between the C-4 and C-5 positions, and then shogaols are generated from the dehydration of the thermally unstable β-hydroxyl ketone skeleton of gingerols and gingerdiones to an α,β-unsaturated ketone.30–34 Previous studies have suggested that shogaols are likely to form when gingerols undergo thermal processing under acidic conditions.35,36 The amount of 6-gingerol is lowered, while the amount of 6-shogaol is increased during the dehydration process.37 Interestingly, it has been revealed that 6-shogaol may be more biologically active than 6-gingerol.38–41 Furthermore, if shogaols are used by microbial metabolism, paradol is eventually produced. In addition, zingerone is produced by gingerols when fresh ginger is heated, and when using the method of reverse aldolization procedure.42
To date, several analytical methods have been reported for characterizing and analyzing the gingerols and related compounds in fresh ginger and dried ginger.43–45 Among them, high-performance liquid chromatographic (HPLC) methods are considered as the best tools to determine and analyze the ginger extracts. Cho et al. (2015) reported the highest 6-gingerol content in the methanol extract of Z. officinale root (17.09 mg g−1 extract) and ginger powder (15.92 mg g−1 extract) under a reverse phase system comprising acetonitrile and water.46 In the past years, different types of processed ginger (dried, stir-fried, and carbonized ginger) with entirely different uses were produced. While revealing the differences in their chemical composition, one study reported the diminished concentration of gingerols and the improved levels of shogaols after processing.47 Several studies have been carried out to emphasize the importance of selecting the optimal extraction methods for the bioactive profile of ginger. It was suggested that after using hydrodistillation or steam distillation of ginger rhizomes, it was easier to extract mostly volatile constituents, like monoterpenes and sesquiterpenes.48 One study analyzed the chemical composition of the steam-distilled extract of ginger, indicating that the previously identified bioactive phenolic compounds presented a very low concentration.49 Another study showed that citral (a mixture of two terpenoid isomers, neral and geranial) was one of the key bioactive components obtained from steam distilled ginger extract.48 It was easier to extract non-volatile compounds in ginger though organic solvent methods, like phenolic and diarylheptanoids.50–52 In addition, other kinds of ginger substances, like aromatic compounds or essential oil components, were extracted using supercritical CO2 extraction, the enzymolysis approach, or solid-phase microextraction.53,54 These compounds (gingerols and shogaols) extracted from fresh and mature gingers have the same chemical structures, but their concentrations vary in their relative content largely due to various heating and processing methods.14 These compounds are bestowed with different pharmacological properties, and the site of action targeting different metabolic pathways, indicating the significance of obtaining the optimal oral ginger composition for a specific disorder. In this perspective, studies have highlighted the differences in the composition between fresh ginger and dry ginger. Li et al. found that different phenolic components (zingerone, 6-gingerol, 8-gingerol, 10-gingerol, and 6-shogaol) existed with obvious differences in fresh, dried, stir-frying, and carbonized ginger. Compared with the other three kinds of ginger, the phenolic substances of dried ginger were more than two folds higher.47 Consequently, whether using different extraction or treatment methods, these approaches can produce the activated substances in different types of gingers with the relative content of each component related to the pharmacological or epidemiology activities.
2.2 Preparation
Gingerol is the main ingredient in fresh ginger, and often serves as the quality standard. Previous studies have reported its extraction by organic solvent extraction, followed by separation and purification based on column chromatography, thin layer chromatography, and finally using HPLC.55,56 All of these reported methods are complex, irreversible, and multi-step with low extraction efficiency, besides the loss of some volatile compounds. With the advancement in technology, many researchers have acquired better quality extracts and superior yields by exploring simple, rapid, and solvent-free methods for improved extraction procedures (headspace solid-phase microextraction and microwave-assisted extraction for the isolation of volatile and active compounds). Zhan et al. used high-speed countercurrent chromatography as the novel method to purify gingerols from ginger. They found that the two-phase solvent system is easy for separating and purifying 6-, 8-, and 10-gingerol from a raw rhizome of ginger within one step with higher purification efficiency of 99.9%, 99.9%, and 99.2%, respectively.57 The microwave-assisted extraction (MAE) used by Teng and coworker revealed less 6-gingerol content in steamed ginger samples, but higher 6-shogaol, as compared with other methods in a fresh ginger sample.58 Their results suggested that the heating interval is an important factor to increase the extraction yield during the ginger extraction process of MAE. However, there is an associated risk of degradation of thermally sensitive components, which can lead to poor extraction. In addition, Ko et al. found subcritical water extraction (without the use of organic solvents) as an eco-friendly method to extract 6-gingerol from the ginger pulp at the extraction conditions of 130 °C/25 min.59 It was reported that the content of 6-shogaol was directly proportional to the rising extraction temperature and extraction time based on thermal cracking. The increasing demand for new variants of pharmaceutical and physiological importance presents a continuous challenge to researchers for improving the contents of natural plants via eco-friendly and economic routes. In recent years, 6-gingerol has become high in demand due to its low toxicity and high medicinal value. Magdy and coworkers reported that the 6-gingerol content was enhanced by using gamma radiation in their breeding periods.60 Eventually, the extraction of gingerol was improved continuously, which could gradually meet people's demands for the high quality and yield of gingerol.
Besides the natural synthesis, several other approaches for gingerol synthesis have been applied over the years since the first report of the synthetic production of 6-gingerol in 1926. Sabitha and coworkers reported on gingerol and its derivate synthesis from hexanal, including some major methods, like the Keck allylation, Crimmins aldol, aldehyde coupling with acetylene, as well as chelation reductions.61 In addition, eugenol was reported as the eco-friendly raw material for the synthesis of 6-gingerol and its congeners, 7- and 9-gingerols.62 Some active ingredients in ginger have been known to be altered by different treatment methods, as shown in Fig. 1. The compositional differences analysis, determination and optimization of the composition of gingerols and related components are the mandatory steps before the assessment of their potential health benefits related to anti-inflammatory, anti-cancer, anti-microbial actions, as well as metabolic syndromes and others various diseases.
 Fig. 1  The main chemical constituents of ginger and their transformation process. 
3. Biological activities
After emphasizing their extraction, separation, and purification processes, various studies have illustrated the anti-oxidant properties of gingerols and their relationship with different bioactivities of ginger and its components (Fig. 2 and 3, Tables 1 and 2), including anti-inflammatory, anti-cancer, anti-microbial, as well as effects on metabolic syndrome.
 Fig. 2  The underlying molecular mechanisms of gingerols (including anti-inflammatory, invasion, metastasis, apoptosis, cell cycle arrest, autophagy, pyroptosis, and ferroptosis). 
Table 1 Compilation of the comprehensive studies related to different kinds of gingerols and their bioactivities




Food function
Ginger compound
Description
Ref.




Anti-oxidative ability
6-Gingerol
Eliminate DPPH˙ and reduce Fe3+ to Fe2+ in FRAP assay

78



6-Gingerol
Antioxidant activity scavenging capacity for DPPH˙ and ABTS˙+

81



6-Gingerol
Enhance the activity of SOD, GPx and GSH

82



6-Gingerol
Regulate lipogenesis, fatty acid oxidation, oxidative stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction

24



8-Gingerol
Decrease ROS levels in B16F10 and B16F1 cells

83



10-Gingerol
Enhance SOD activity and MDA concentration in a concentration-dependent manner

84



 


Anti-inflammatory activity
6-Gingerol
Decrease the levels of inflammatory factors, and inducible NO synthase

95



10-Gingerol
Inhibit IL-1b, IL-6, and TNF-α significantly

97



6-Gingerol
Downregulate the key proteins of NF-κB/MAPK signaling pathways

98



6-Gingerol
Inhibit the expression of GFAP and TNF-α in the rat brain

99



6-Gingerol
Downregulate the expression of TNF-α, IL-1β, INOS, and COX-2

21



Ginger
Reduction of TNF-α and IL-1β expression with ulcerative colitis patients

191



Ginger
Reduction of IL-1β expression with cardiovascular disease patients

192



6-Gingerol
Constrain Mycobacterium tuberculosis

158



Anti-microbial potential
12-Gingerol
Constrain oral pathogens

159



10-Gingerol
Constrain vancomycin-resistant enterococci

160



10-Gingerol
Constrain Acinetobacter baumannii

161



Gingerol
Reduce the microbial load of the camel meat and edible offal

167



 


Anti-obesity
6-Gingerol
Promote the adipocytes browning through an AMPK-dependent pathway

174



6-Gingerol
Promote fat browning and regulation of lipid metabolism

175



 


Anti-diabetic
6-Gingerol
Inhibited the increase of fasting blood glucose level and enhanced the glucose intolerance in db/db mice

179



Gingerol
Increase glucose level in muscle cells by intaking Ca2+ Signaling pathways

180



Gingerol
Increase inflammatory factors and levels of reactive oxygen systems

182



6-Gingerol
Upregulation of LKB1/AMPKα/Sirt1-associated pathway

183



6-Gingerol
Inhibit TLR4/MAPKs/NF-kappa B signaling pathways

184



Gingerol
Inhibit L-type Ca2+ current and contractile force in rat cardiomyocytes

185



Ginger
Reduction of blood glucose, total cholesterol with diabetic patients

193



Neurodegenerative diseases
Gingerol
Suppress astrocyte overactivation and contribute to improving cognitive ability

99



Gingerol
Improve the neurological symptoms and pathological conditions neurological

187



 


Liver injury
Gingerol
Impede pyroptosis through the Nrf2 pathway

126



Nephrotoxic conditions
Gingerol
Restoring the level of renal function biomarkers

189





Table 2 
In vitro and in vivo anti-cancerous activity of gingerol




Ginger compound
Cell/animal types
Molecular targets
Promote/Inhibit cell death way
Ref.




10-Gingerol
Human triple-negative breast cancer cells
Not target on caspase family
Promote apoptosis independent of caspase

22



6-Gingerol
Human cervical adenocarcinoma cells
Induction of cleaved PRPP
Promote apoptosis and arrest of G0/G1 phase

111



6-Gingerol
Human gastric cancer cells
Reduction of pro-caspase-3 and pro-caspase-9
Promote apoptosis and arrest of G2/M phase

112



10-Gingerol
Human HCT116 human colon cancer cells
Induction of cleaved-caspase-9
Promote mitochondria related apoptosis

113



10-Gingerol
Human triple-negative breast cancer cells
Induction of cleaved caspase 3 and reduction of Cdk-6 cyclin
Promote apoptosis and arrest of G0/G1 phase

114



6-Gingerol/6-shogaol
Human pancreatic cancer cells
Induction of ratio of LC3-II/LC3-I in cytoplasm and reduction of SQSTM1/p62 and mTOR
Promote ROS-mediated autophagy

119



Gingerol
Huamn A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells
Reduction of autophagy flux
Reduce autophagy

120



6-Gingerol
Human HeLa cells
Induction of cleaved-caspase-3
Promote caspase-mediated apoptosis and autophagy

121



Gingerol
Human T lymphoma Jurkat cells
Induction of ratio of LC3-II/LC3-I in cytoplasm
Promote autophagy

122



Gingerol analogue
Human MDA-MB-231 cells
Not target on caspase family
Promote caspase-independent apoptosis and autophagy

123



6-Gingerol
Human endothelial cells/B16F10 melanoma cells
Reduction VEGF- and bFGF-induced proliferation
Reduce angiogenes in vitro and in vivo

134



8-Gingerol
Human colorectal cancer cells
Induction of EGFR/STAT/ERK signaling pathways
Reduce epidermal growth and promote apoptosis

135



6-Gingerol
Hepatoma cell line PLC/PRF/5 and breast cancer cell line MCF-7
Stabilization of p-VEGFR2/VE-cadherin/β-catenin/actin complex
Inhibit tumor progression

136



6-Gingerol
Human gastric cancer (AGS) cells
Induction of ROS and reduction mitochondrial membrane potential
Promote ROS-mediated apoptosis

137



6-Gingerol
Human oral SCC4/cervical HeLa cell lines
Induction of pro-caspase-3 and arrest of G2-phase in HeLa cells and S-phase in SCC4 cells
Promote apoptosis and cell phase arrest

138



6-Gingerol
Human glioblastoma cells U118-MG
Reduction of pro-caspase-3 and induction of cleaved-caspase-3
Promote apoptosis

139



6-Gingerol
Human colorectal cancer cells
Induction of mitochondrial injury
Inhibit cell survival pathways

140



6-Gingerol
HT-29 colorectal cancer cells
Induction of cytotoxicity
Promote apoptosis

141



6-Gingerol
C57BL/6 mice models
Reduction of MAPK expression
Reduce macrophage pyroptosis

125



Ginger
Patients with tumor
Reduction of acute phase nausea in patients



148



Ginger
Patients with cancer
Reduction of fatty acid synthase



194





 Fig. 3  The bioactive potential of gingerol in different diseases, and its potential health benefits. 
3.1 Anti-oxidative ability
When the anti-oxidant defense mechanism is compromised, it predominantly leads to the overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and causes oxidative stress. To restore the normal free radical level and oxidative state, several natural anti-oxidants have been studied for the neutralization of free radicals and combat the oxidative stress in preventing the onset of diseases.63 Free radicals constitute one or more unpaired electrons in atomic or molecular orbitals, including ROS, along with reactive nitrogen species (RNS). Oxygen-free radicals are produced in living systems, and they are regarded as the regular products of cell metabolism. Salutary effects of ROS at low concentrations have been reported against some infectious factors or to promote the mitogenic progress.64 However, once the formation rate of oxygen radicals is higher than the scavenging rate, the accumulation of oxygen free radicals leads to some injurious effect, causing potential biological damage, which is responsible for inducing a series of pathological reactions of diseases in the body. The normal ROS level in living organisms can be maintained or restored through the use of anti-oxidants, which provide electrons or hydrogen atoms to free radicals to block some pathways related to ROS formation and transform these free radicals into thermodynamically stable products or anti-oxidant lipid complexes. Also, the initial stage of oxidation can be impeded through a metal complexing reaction, ultraviolet radiation absorption, or singlet oxygen inactivation.65 In the last few years, natural plants based research has become more and more popular and advantageous, possibly due to their bioactive ingredients, lower toxicity, and production costs.66 Various studies have shown the anti-oxidant activity of natural plants and their products.67,68 Therefore, the consumption of foods after careful consideration of their active ingredients, like alkaloids, carotenoids, polyphenol, and terpenes, can delay the oxidation reactions.69–71
Ginger is a medicinal plant containing active compounds, such as gingerols, that have been receiving increasing attention due to their excellent anti-oxidative properties exerted via different anti-oxidative mechanisms. Ginger-active substances are endowed with appreciable anti-oxidant properties, which make a great contribution to eliminating reactive oxygen species, free radicals, and others harmful oxidants.72 Ginger and its active compounds have shown prominence to exerting strong anti-oxidant activities in vitro and in vivo.73–75 Interestingly, these potencies vary among fresh and dried ginger. In one recent study, the anti-oxidant ability of ginger leaves, flowers, as well as rhizome extracts was evaluated through HPLC. It was reported that ginger leaves exhibited the highest anti-oxidant activity compared to ginger flowers and ginger rhizome.76 In another study, it was shown that ginger rhizomes have better scavenging activity against some free radicals, like 2,2′-azinobis-(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS˙+) and 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH˙), due to the presence of polyphenolic compounds, including various gingerols and shogaols, paradols, as well as gingerdions.77 While comparing the ginger rhizome and its commercial powder, Tinello et al. reported that ginger peels have shown a remarkable ability to eliminate DPPH˙ and reduce Fe3+ to Fe2+ in ferric-reducing anti-oxidant power (FRAP) assay due to the presence of phenolic compounds, especially 6-gingerol.78 It has been reported that several factors, such as various extraction methods, and the corresponding composition influence the anti-oxidation properties of ginger and its components. Compared to the water extract of ginger, the ethanol extract had shown better anti-oxidant activity (DPPH˙ and ABTS˙+ free radical scavenging activity) due to the higher content of polyphenols and flavonoids.73,79 In one recent study, an ethanol extract of ginger showed higher antioxidation ability, as compared to methanol and water methods. While comparing the various extraction solvents of ginger, Nile et al. found that ethyl acetate extract and an aqueous extract had higher anti-oxidant properties than n-butanol extracts, ethanol, and diethyl ether.80
6-Gingerol, as the significant phenolic component, was reported to exhibit higher in vitro anti-oxidant activity scavenging capacity, which was 88.93 ± 0.03% for DPPH˙ and 88.23 ± 0.98% for ABTS˙+.81 Similarly, the supplementation of 6-gingerol in mice could enhance the activity of super oxide dismutase (SOD), catalase, glutathione peroxidase (GPx), and GSH. This ultimately lowered the oxidative stress and increased the blood glucose level, and also ameliorated the insulin signaling in mice.82 Meanwhile, in another study, 6-gingerol regulated lipogenesis, fatty acid oxidation, oxidative stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction of aging rats in order to improve the age-related hepatic steatosis.24 In addition to 6-gingerols, other kinds of gingerols have shown improved anti-oxidant properties. Huang et al. found that 8-gingerol could effectively decrease ROS levels in B16F10 and B16F1 cells. Furthermore, it could inhibit melanogenesis in murine melanoma cells, mainly through its anti-oxidant properties.83 10-Gingerol has also enhanced the SOD activity and MDA concentration in a concentration-dependent manner.84 Some evidence showed that the difference in the anti-oxidant activity of these compounds is due to their side-chain structure. Markedly, the existence of the 5-OH decreases their formal hydrogen transfer and electron-donating capacities. However, an increase in their DNA damage and lipid peroxidation protecting properties can improve the anti-oxidant potential of gingerols. In addition, Dugasani et al. reported that the anti-oxidant activity is also dependent on the length of the carbon chain compounds. While comparing the anti-oxidant effects of different kinds of gingerol and 6-shogaol, their scavenging activities were reported at IC50 values of 4.05, 2.5, 1.68, and 0.85 μM against the superoxide radical, and at 26.3, 19.47, 10.47, and 8.05 μM against the DPPH˙ radical, and at 4.62, 1.97, 1.35, and 0.72 μM against the hydroxyl radical, respectively.41 According to the IC50 data, 10-gingerol was shown as the most effective constituent among all of the gingerols due to its carbon chain length. On the contrary, Guo et al. found that 6-gingerol and 6-shogaol exhibited stronger in vitro anti-oxidant effects on DPPH˙, ABTS˙+, and FRAP assays than the other four longer carbon chain compounds.85 Li et al. reported that different kinds of gingers have diverse tendencies for the anti-oxidative activity, such as dried ginger > stir-fried ginger > carbonized ginger > fresh ginger, mainly due to the difference in the polyphenolic contents.47,74 It was anticipated that the anti-oxidant activity decreased with further heating because of the conversion of gingerols into shogaols.
Shogaols, as the phenolic active substances of ginger, are also known for their abundance in ginger rhizomes. Their higher anti-oxidant activities in DPPH˙ and ABTS˙+ assays were reported as 90.2 ± 0.11% and 89.81 ± 0.6%, respectively.81 Dugasani and coworkers reported the highest anti-oxidant potential of 6-shogaol compared to other phenolic substances due to the presence of the special structure of the α,β-unsaturated carbonyl functional group, which can easily eliminate glutathione.41 Moreover, the anti-oxidant potential of shogaol depends on the length of its alkyl chain. Guo et al. reported the higher anti-oxidant ability of 6-shogaol compared to 8- and 10-shogaol in terms of stronger DPPH˙ scavenging and Fe3+-to-Fe2 reduction capability.85 However, in some different experimental systems, compared with 6-gingerol, 12-shogaol exhibited higher anti-oxidant potency for DPPH˙ scavenging ability.41 Abraham and coworkers summarized that curcumin (another bioactive compound in ginger) could protect against lipid and protein oxidation with a reduction in the levels of malondialdehyde, protein carbonyls, thiols, and nitrotyrosines in diverse cellular and animal models.86 Sweet ginger essential oil constitutes beta-pinene, 1,8-cineole, p-cymene, camphene, myrcene, and pseudolimonene. Dong et al. reported the anti-oxidant and scavenging radical activities of these extracts from sweet ginger essential oil against DPPH˙, ABTS˙+, and OH free radicals.87 From the above-mentioned studies on the anti-oxidant potential of ginger, ginger and its components can be regarded as natural preservatives for the preservation of healthy foods and other industrial applications. In addition, one recent study showed that candied mango added with gingerols could enhance the shelf-life of candied mango by inhibiting browning and other quality parameters during its storage periods.88 Thus, the infusion of gingerols into different food products can be considered as a green method for food preservation due to the presence of natural anti-oxidant components. Moreover, gingerol-rich extracts (GE) could improve the growth performance, meat quality, and anti-oxidant activity of heat-stressed broilers.89 On the aspect of food preservation and fat oxidation inhibition, ginger extraction and their constituents showed anti-oxidant properties at high temperatures. Therefore, ginger is regarded as the promising natural anti-oxidant in lipid-containing foods.90 In packaging applications, solid-cyclodextrin is generally used during food processing to extend the shelf life and food flavor. Pais et al. found that yogurt developed with the infusion of gingerols into solid-cyclodextrin exhibited appreciable anti-oxidant activity, which also offers a promising role for gingerol in the nutraceutical industry.91 In medical applications, gingers are used as dietary supplements in cancer treatment. In one study, all the patients were randomly assigned to two different groups, named ginger group and control group. In the ginger-fed group, anti-oxidant activity factors, like SOD, CAT, GPx, and GSH/GSSG, showed significant improvements in anti-oxidation compared with the control group. Besides, no adverse effects were reported after the consumption of ginger extraction.92 Anti-oxidant activity is a basic mechanism used by natural drugs or functional compounds for the management of different diseases, such as for their anti-cancerous, anti-inflammatory, and anti-microbial attributes.
3.2 Anti-inflammatory activity
Inflammation is a pathological phenomenon induced chiefly by different factors, including physical, chemical, biological, and others. Originally, the purpose of inflammation is to abolish cellular damage, remove and absorb necrotic cells and tissues, restore the balance and stability of the intracellular environment, which is beneficial to host cells.93 However, when cells suffer chronic inflammation, many mononuclear immune cells are directly infiltrated, which induces the generation of inflammatory cytokines, interleukins, and tumor necrosis factors as two main cytokines, including pro-inflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), IL-1β (Interleukin-1β), and IL-6 (Interleukin-6), which play a significant role in inflammation pathways. A systematic review by Morvaridzadeh et al. emphasized the anti-inflammatory properties of gingers because ginger intake could significantly reduce TNF-α serum levels, while having little influence on IL-6.94 In another study, researchers found that the pathway of Akt-mTOR-STAT3 was downregulated by 6-gingerol. The levels of inflammatory factors and inducible NO synthase were lowered after 6-gingerol treatment when compared with the control group. Therefore, it was revealed that 6-gingerol has the potential to combat a cerebral ischemia injury by some neuroinflammatory factors.95 NF-kappaB (NF-κB) as the vital transcription factor is activated by inflammatory cytokines, which ought to play an important role in inflammation and immune responses.96 Ho et al. used a lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-triggered BV2 microglia culture model, and appraised the effects of different fresh ginger extracts on neuro-inflammation. It was shown that various ginger fractions could inhibit IL-1b, IL-6, and TNF-α significantly, except for zingerone and 6-gingerol. The increase in the length of the alkyl chain improved the anti-neuroinflammatory ability of gingerols.10-Gingerol showed greater anti-neuroinflammatory capacity in fresh ginger compared with other compounds.97
Zahoor and coworkers used RAW264.7/PMECs as a cell model and mice to evaluate the effect of 6-gingerol in inhibiting hepatobiliary inflammation. Their results depicted that 6-gingerol could significantly downregulate the key proteins of the NF-κB/MAPK signaling pathways, and lower the production of inflammatory cytokines. At the same time, it also helped to format the extracellular matrix and protected mammary gland cells from pathogen damage.98
In contrast, Zhang et al. examined the effect of 6-gingerol, and also focused on neuroprotective effects in vitro and in vivo in LPS-induced disorder models. It was found that 6-gingerol inhibited the expression of GFAP and TNF-α in the rat brain, and also improved their memory. At the same time, 6-gingerol could significantly decrease the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, as well as increase the expression of intercellular ROS, NO, and iNOS. Therefore, 6-gingerol could suppress the astrocyte overactivation as a potent drug, and could control some neurodegenerative diseases via improved cognitive ability.99 It was suggested that the inhibition of NF-κB activation is directly or indirectly regarded as a potential mechanism for constraining proinflammatory gene expression. MAPK pathways, as one signaling upstream of NF-κB, contain three mitogen-activated protein kinases, including extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2), c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38-MAPK). It was illustrated that different kinds of shogaols had more effective anti-neuroinflammatory ability via the MAPK signaling pathways than gingerols. Ha et al. reported that 6-shogaol wielded its anti-inflammatory effects via inhibiting IL-1β and TNF-α, while at the same time, downregulating p38 MAPK and NF-κB expression.100
In addition, nuclear factor erythroid-2 related factor 2 (Nrf2) regulates some of the genes involved in the oxidation pathway, and protects the cells by their anti-inflammatory effects. In the cytoplasm, Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1), which is regarded as an inhibitor of Nrf2, restrains its transfer to the nucleus. However, some proteins like PI3K (phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase), JNKs (c-Jun N-terminal kinases), ERKs (extracellular signal-regulated kinases), and protein kinase C (PKC) can covalently adjust the cysteine residues of KEAP1; therefore, phosphorylated Nrf2 translocates to the nucleus and finally generates an anti-oxidant effect. Sukumaran et al. reported that the intake of a certain amount of ginger in the daily diet increased the mRNA expression of Nrf2. Ginger exhibited anti-inflammatory effects by upregulating IL-10 and TGF-b gene expression, as well as downregulating TNF-α and IL-1b. Therefore, it can be concluded that the regular intake of ginger in the diet can regulate immune factors and promote the growth of fish.101 Some studies showed that HO-1 and its metabolites interceded by Nrf2 are also associated with vital anti-inflammatory effects. HO-1 is an inducible profile-limiting enzyme that catalyzes the degradation of heme to carbon monoxide, free iron, and biliverdin to bilirubin. These are important degradation products that play a significant role in the protective effects of HO-1. Vipin and coworkers found that Aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) triggered hepatotoxicity in HepG2 cells. After treatment with phenolics of ginger (mainly gingerol and shogaol), Nrf2/HO-1 pathway activation could significantly decrease the AFB1-induced poisonousness of liver damage. Therefore, the phenolic compounds in ginger have been proved to inhibit AFB1-induced hepatotoxicity.102
In benzo[a]pyrene and dextran sulphate sodium-triggered colorectal cancer in BALB/c mice, Farombi et al. found that the expression of adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) was increased after 6-gingerol treatment, which inhibited angiogenesis by reducing the concentration of VEGF, and decreased the expression of inflammatory markers, such as TNF-α, IL-1β, INOS, and COX-2. Besides, the same study also reported that other tumor formation markers like cell cycle and apoptosis-related factors, including Ki-67, Cyclin D1, and caspase 3, Bcl-2, and p53 were significantly changed in 6-gingerol pre-exposed mice. These studies indicate the close connection between anti-inflammatory, anti-proliferative, and apoptotic mechanisms during 6-gingerol treatment.21 Naggar et al. compared 6-gingerol with some positive control drugs, and reported the Leukotriene A4 hydrolase (LTA4H) (proinflammatory enzyme) inhibitory ability. Ginger as a natural plant is recognized as a potential therapeutic agent for the treatment of colorectal cancer via inhibiting the expression of LTA4H.14,28
3.3 Anti-tumor effects
Oxidative stress responses lead to some events like genotoxic damage and cell transformation, which change the course of a tumor's initiation, promotion, and progression at various levels, including cellular, genetic, and epigenetic points.103 Meanwhile, acute inflammation is also induced by oxidative stress to eliminate cell damage, which is regarded as beneficial to the host cell. When exogenous stimuli last too long, acute inflammation fails to balance the external stimuli; therefore, chronic inflammation is developed as the common feature of many chronic diseases and complications, as well as playing vital roles in carcinogenesis. All the major stages of cancer formation have a close relationship with chronic inflammation, including cancer initiation, promotion, progression, and drug resistance.104

3.3.1 Inhibitory effects on cancer initiation. 
When cells undergo different chemical and physical carcinogenesis, DNA damage is eventually induced, which leads to the primary step of tumor initiation. In some cases, DNA damage can be repaired by nucleotide excision repair and mismatch repair mechanisms. If damaged DNA is not fixed in time, it will remain un-repaired and exist in the genome, which can lead to genotoxic impairment and cellular toxicity.105 These mechanisms are closely associated with phase I and phase II enzymes. Gingerols, as the potential anti-oxidant phytochemicals in gingers, affect phase I and phase II enzyme activities. Different studies showed that a large number of carcinogens were activated by the superfamily of enzymes, especially cytochrome P450 (CYP450). CYP450 is coded by a host of CYP genes, like CYP2C9, CYP3A4, CYP2C19, and CYP2D6. Li and coworkers used P450 assay kits to depict the relationship between different gingerols and cytochrome P450 enzyme metabolism. The inhibitory effects of 8-gingerol on CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP3A4, and CYP2D6 were reported with IC50 values of 6.8, 12.5, 8.7 and 42.7 mol L−1, respectively. 8- and 10-Gingerols significantly suppressed the expression of CYP3A4. As a whole, 6-, 8-, and 10-gingerol could block the activation of carcinogens.106 In addition, the phase II enzyme plays a vital role in cellular stress, which protects the cell by repairing and regulating the activity of some enzymes to remove the excessive free radical damage cell components, and also influence some transcription factors of defensive proteins. As one of the basic mechanisms of phase II enzyme induction, Nrf2 is an elementary transcription factor that contains a helix-loop-helix structural form, which belongs to the leucine-zipper family. It is easily stirred by ROS and stimuli factors, resulting in translocation into the nucleus, followed by binding to anti-oxidant reaction elements (ARE). Furthermore, it activates cell protective genes, as well as contributes to the anti-inflammatory process.107 In recent years, a novel approach has been adopted, including more and more natural plant compounds as molecular targets, and focusing on oncogenic transcription factors in cancer therapy.104
In rat adrenal pheochromocytoma PC12 cell, 6-shogaol (as one of the compounds in ginger) upregulated a battery of phase II anti-oxidant molecules, which as a potent natural product, inhibited the PC12 cell proliferation. On the other hand, 6-gingerol failed to shelter the PC12 cells from oxidative stress due to lack of α,β-unsaturated ketone unit, which indicates the significance of the α,β-unsaturated ketone unit for the cytoprotection.108 Therefore, shogaols endowed with these structural units are always considered as Nrf2 activators. In different human colon cancer cell lines (HT-116 and HT-29), Wang et al. found that 6-shogaol with an IC50 value of 17.7 and 17.5 μM could exert strong cell cytotoxicity for human colon cancer cells. The molecular target of 6-shogaol had been confirmed as Nrf2 in colon epithelial cells in vitro and in vivo. Also, the glucuronidated metabolite of 6-shogaol did not show obvious inhibiting effects on the proliferation of colon epithelial cells and its Nrf2-inducing activity.109


3.3.2 Inhibitory effects on cancer promotion. 
If initiated cells are stimulated to grow, they enter the second phase of cancer formation, carcinogenesis signal transduction, and cell fate decision, like cell inhibition, cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, autophagy, and other death mechanisms. Different from the initiation stage of a tumor, these processes are comparatively prolonged and have evolved over time.
3.3.2.1 Apoptosis induction. 
Cell apoptosis (programmed death) was initially defined by John Kerr in the 1970s.110 It is represented by different morphological characteristics, including cell shrinkage and plasma membrane blistering, as well as chromosome shrinkage, nuclear fragmentation, and DNA fragmentation. Compared with necrocytosis, the inflammatory response does not occur in apoptosis retort. To further understand the mechanism of apoptosis, activation of cysteine-containing aspartate-specific proteases (caspase) triggers an apoptosis response via extrinsic and intrinsic pathways. Extrinsic apoptosis is started by the tumor necrosis factors binding of death receptors, which induces the death domain configuration changes, then results in the construction of the death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) and recruits many cytoplasmic proteins for binding purpose. Finally, the release of active caspase 8 as the consequence, followed by the cleavage of downstream substrates, leads to cell apoptosis. Therefore, the expression of active caspase 8 and other death receptor factors as the marker proteins are examined to evaluate the apoptosis.111 In many intracellular death signals, like DNA damage, ER stress or oncogene activation can change the permeability of the mitochondrial membrane by some pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members, including Bax or Bad. Then, the release of cytochrome c can easily combine with apoptotic protease activating factor-1 (Apaf-1). Furthermore, caspase-9 is activated and it finally induces the caspase-3 activation and cell apoptosis.
Luo et al. recognized the role of 6-gingerol as a vigorous key phenolic compound in gastric cancer cells. It could first work as a radiosensitizer in these cells, which decreased the pro-caspase-9 (47 kDa) and pro-caspase-3 (35 kDa) activation, and distinctly increased the cleaved-caspase-9 (37 kDa/35 kDa) and cleaved-caspase-3 (17/19 kDa). In addition, 6-gingerol could enhance the ionizing radiation-induced inhibition at the G2/M phase through the arrest of G2/M checkpoints.112 In human cervical adenocarcinoma cells, 6-gingerol significantly increased the Bax/Bcl-2 ratio, release of cytochrome c, cleavage of caspase-3 and caspase-9, as well as increased the expression of cleaved PRPP in a treated cell for 48 h (60 μM, 100 μM, and 140 μM). Besides, it could significantly inhibit the G0/G1-phase.111 Furthermore, 10-gingerol showed its inhibition against HCT116 human colon cancer cells by inducing mitochondrial apoptosis through the alteration of some hallmark proteins involved in apoptosis.113 In triple-negative breast cancer cells, Bernard and coworkers compared 6-gingerol, 8-gingerol, and 10-gingerol for their inhibition ability of mouse and human breast cancer cells. The study demonstrated that compared with 6-gingerol and 8-gingerol, 10-gingerol had a better effect on the growth inhibition of these cells. However, western blotting results indicated that 10-gingerol was not influenced by zVAD-fmk or N-acetylcysteine, pan-caspase inhibitor or anti-oxidants. Therefore, these results indicated that caspase activation was not essential for 10-gingerol-induced apoptosis.22 In addition, in triple negative breast cancer models, 10-gingerol improved the anti-cancer effect of doxorubicin drug, besides decreasing its side effects by increasing the expression levels of cleaved caspase 3 and γH2AX and decreasing the expression of Cdk-6 cyclin in vitro. The same effect also showed that 10-gingerol, in combination with doxorubicin, could reduce volumes of primary tumors, as well as decrease some number of circulating tumor cells.114 Shogaol has also been studied for blocking the apoptosis of cancer cells. In human endometrial carcinoma Ishikawa cells, 6-shogaol mediated the generation of ROS, and then activated the endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondrial pathways by increasing the expression of Chop and caspase-9, further inducing cell apoptosis.115 In addition, 6-shogaol showed its effect on the human breast adenocarcinoma cell line by adjusting the notch signaling pathway (6-shogaol could decrease Hes1 and CyclinD1 genes) and inducing cell apoptosis. It is intriguing to state that 6-shogaol induced the cell death by attenuating autophagy and forcing breast cancer cells to apoptosis and/or necrosis, which showed improved effects against cancer promotion.116
3.3.2.2 Autophagy induction. 
The term “autophagy” originated from the Greek words, combining “auto” and “phagein”, which means self and phagotrophy, also “eating of self”, which includes vesicle nucleation, elongation, fusion with lysosomes, and finally leads to the degradation of engulfed substrates.117 In recent years, various phytochemicals from different natural plants (as potent modulators of autophagy) have been used in cancer therapy.118 In a human pancreatic cancer cell, 6-gingerol and 6-shogaol as the important extracts from gingers showed significantly improved vacuolization of the cytoplasm and the ratio of LC3-II/LC3-I, a decrease in the SQSTM1/p62 protein, and inhibition of mTOR. These extracts also promoted the generation of ROS when the anti-oxidant N-acetylcystein (NAC) was used and cell death was declined. These features indicate that the main extracts of ginger can induce ROS-mediated autophagy.119 In A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells, Nazim et al. explored the sensitizing effect of gingerol by inhibiting the autophagy flux. They found that inhibition of the autophagy flux by gingerol could improve the tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis.120 In HeLa cells, 6-gingerol activated caspase-mediated apoptosis and induced autophagy.121 In human T lymphoma Jurkat cells, fenugreek extract (which contains 4.82% gingerol) showed distinct morphological changes, membrane disintegration, and increased expression of LC3 transcripts, which led to the induction of autophagy.122
Furthermore, in triple negative breast cancer cells, a 6-gingerol analogue induced caspase-independent apoptosis without caspase-3 alteration. In addition, they used siRNA to knock down LC3B prior to 6-gingerol analogue treatment, and it was found that the LC3B knockout by siRNA could reduce the number of apoptotic cells after treatment. The IC50 of 6-gingerol in different triple negative breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-231, MCF-10A, MCF-7, and SKBR3) were 404.5, 599.4, 985.8, and 316.2 μM, respectively. However, in the 6-gingerol analogue treatment, these IC50 values showed an obvious downward trend up to 20–30 μM. These results indicated that autophagy plays a vital role in 6-gingerol analogue treatment-induced caspase-independent apoptosis in the MDA-MB-231 cell line. Therefore, structural modification of natural compounds can be an interesting approach for the development of anti-tumor drugs with unique mechanisms of action.123
3.3.2.3 Pyroptosis induction. 
Different from the morphological characteristics of autophagy and apoptosis, pyroptosis is featured by cell swelling and initial breaching of plasma membrane integrity, which leads to extracellular spilling of the intracellular contents. Pyroptosis, as the inflammatory form of cell death, is almost encouraged by the inflammatory caspase family, like caspase-1,4,5, and 11, as well as the maturation of proinflammatory cytokines, like interleukin-1b (IL-1b), IL-18, and some NLR family members, known as NALP3, CIAS1, and cryopyrin, or PYPAF1.124 The two different pathways involved in pyroptosis processes are inflammatory caspase-1 dependent and independent, which is also named non-canonical caspase-11 (caspase-4/5 in humans). In cancer surgery, sepsis could lead to multiple organ dysfunction and increased postoperative mortality. Therefore, effective treatment of sepsis after cancer also serves as a useful tool in cancer complications. In the latest study, gingerol was used for the treatment of sepsis in C57BL/6 mice models. It was revealed that 6-gingerol could reduce macrophage pyroptosis in septic mice by blocking MAPK activation.125 Hong et al. reported that 6-gingerol treatment enhanced the Nrf2 and HO-1 expression, but reduced the IL-1β and caspase-1 expression, which indicates the suitability of 6-gingerol in sepsis control.126
3.3.2.4 Ferroptosis induction. 
There are other different cell signaling pathways that are closely associated with cancer formation and its progression. Among them, ferroptosis is characterized by smaller mitochondria and increased mitochondrial membrane densities than the normal cell.127 Under the normal health conditions, glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) as the vital enzyme can reduce the lipid peroxides and ultimately inhibit the accumulation of lipidic peroxides. However, during the exposure of internal or external stimulating factors, cell homeostasis is disturbed negatively, affecting the GPX4 activity. Consequently, the decline in GPX4 can trigger different mechanisms to increase the accumulation of lipidic ROS-induced ferroptosis. In recent years, several studies found that different types of therapy-resistant cancer cells are more susceptible to ferroptosis. Therefore, as a monotherapy and as a component of combination therapies, ferroptosis has always stood as the promising treatment method for cancer.128 In general, ferroptosis is known as a p53-mediated activity, which suppresses tumor formation.129 p53 as the vital tumor suppressor factor is important for defensive actions against carcinogenesis and the regulation of cross-talk with other major pathways. In cervical cancer cells, Rastogi et al. found that 6-gingerol could induce the reactivation of p53 and p21, and improve the expression levels of the p53-associated apoptotic marker.130 However, more research should be conducted to highlight the relationship between ginger and ferroptosis.


3.3.3 Inhibitory effects on cancer progression. 
The progression of cancer is concluded by the last stage of neoplastic transformation, where cell growth is rapidly accompanied by other characteristics, including regulating invasion, metastasis, angiogenesis, as well as inflammation. Cancer invasion allows cancer cells to invade it near tissues and then migrates distant sites, mostly focusing on the process of cell remodeling. When these cells spread, they must break down the surrounding extracellular matrix and enter the circulatory system. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are the major enzymes to take up this responsibility.131 Until now, 26 MMPs have been recognized, which can be roughly divided into six classes including collagenase, gelatinase, matrilysins, stromelysins, membrane type MMPs, and other different types of MMPs. Among all the MMPs, the aberrant activity of MMP-2 and MMP-9 is thought to contribute to cancer progression. Malmir et al. found that HCT-116 cell line treated with 300 μg ml−1 ginger extract for 16 h showed decreased expressions of KRAS and MMP-2.26 In hepatocellular carcinoma cells, 6-shogaol and 6-gingerol were proved to inhibit invasion and metastasis by various methods, including suppression of the MAPK and PI3K/Akt pathways or NF-κB and STAT3 activities, which restrain the expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9.132 During the metastasis of tumor cells, new blood vessel formation requires oxygen and nutrients. In malignant tumors, hypoxia and nutrient constraint surroundings stimulate the expression of pro-angiogenic factors, which recruit new and existing vascular systems, so excessive angiogenesis can provide nutrients to diseased tissue during tumorigenesis. The vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), as the vital control switch, helps in maintaining the balance between proangiogenic and antiangiogenic molecules.133 6-Gingerol has been proved to block the capillary-like tube formation by endothelial cells in response to VEGF, and powerfully repress the emergence of endothelial cells in the rat aorta and formation of a new blood vessel in the mouse cornea. 6-Gingerol is reported to inhibit in vitro and in vivo angiogenesis, which holds a promising role in the treatment of tumors.134 In a colorectal cancer cell, 8-gingerol also showed significant inhibition ability on cell proliferation by inhibiting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) by EGFR/STAT/ERK signaling pathways, promoting cell cycle arrest, and increasing the apoptosis rate.135
Metastasis is one of the characteristics of a malignant tumor that is defined by the migration of cancer cells via blood or lymph vessels to the other different parts of the body. Therefore, metastasis is regarded as an intricate and continuous series of processes, including epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT), invasion, angiogenesis, transport through vessels, and other mechanisms of action. Zhong et al. reported the stabilization of p-VEGFR2/VE-cadherin/β-catenin/actin complex after 6-gingerol treatment, which could inhibit tumor progression by promoting microvessel normalization.136 Previous studies suggested that gingerols have shown different anti-cancer effects via intervening in the different steps of cancer initiation, promotion, and progression. In human gastric cancer (AGS) cells, 6-gingerol was shown to trigger the increase in reactive oxygen species generation, which decreased the mitochondrial membrane potential and induced apoptosis.137 In human oral SCC4, KB cells, and cervical HeLa cell lines, 6-gingerol inhibited cancer cell proliferation by causing G2-phase arrest in HeLa cells and S-phase arrest in SCC4 cells. At the same time, the activity of caspase-3 was significantly increased in the treated cells.138 In glioblastoma cells U118-MG, three different natural compounds (lycopene, 6-gingerol, and silymarin) could reduce and promote the occurrence of apoptosis.139 In colorectal cancer cells, the effects of 6-gingerol therapy were observed mainly via mitochondrial injury to inhibit cell survival pathways.140 In HT-29 colorectal cancer cells, the combined treatment of γ-tocotrienol (γ-T3) and 6-gingerol increased the cytotoxicity and apoptosis in cancer cells.141 In BALB/cAJcl-nu/nu nude mice and Sprague Dawley rats, when focused on cholangiocarcinoma treatment, Plengsuriyakarn et al. reported that Zingiber officinale Roscoe was nontoxic in the acute and subacute toxicity testing with a significant inhibitory effect on cholangiocarcinoma therapy.142 In N-nitroso N-methyl urea-induced gastric cancer in albino Wistar rats, Singh et al. found that levels of gastric cancer specific markers and pro-inflammatory markers were reduced after supplementation with an aqueous extract of ginger. To summarize, gingerol can be used as a potential dietary intervention in a series of tumor treatment strategies.143 To understand the metabolism of gingerols, when focused on H-1299 cells, the toxic effects of these two metabolites were observed on cancer cells.144,145 In another study, two potential 10-gingerol metabolites (3S,5S)-10-gingerdiol and (3R,5S)-10-gingerdiol were obtained from the urine samples of healthy human subjects who were given ginger tea.146 In Sprague-Dawley rats, 3R/5S-6-gingerdiol (M1) and 3S/5S-6-gingerdiol (M2) as the main metabolites of 6-gingerol were obtained through the enzymatic reduction of the ketone by carbonyl reductase. Compared with gingerol, shogaols as important metabolites were preferably metabolized by various pathways, including the redox pathway and mercapturic acid pathway in colon epithelial cells. Nrf2, also known as the molecular target of 6-shogaol metabolite M2 has proved itself for an extended period even after being quickly metabolized.147 Woźniak et al. reported that 6-shogaol improved the anti-cancer effect of 5-fluorouracil and other chemotherapy drugs via increasing apoptosis and autophagy in hypoxic/glycemic conditions in colon cancer cells.148
Furthermore, in a random survey of 47 participants, the effect of ginger as a standard prophylactic drug showed lowering of acute phase nausea in patients treated with carboplatin and paclitaxel.149

3.4 Anti-microbial potential
In recent years, chemical anti-microbials in food preservatives and disease therapies have been replaced gradually by natural preservatives obtained from microorganisms, plants, and animals. Since then, natural plant products have been studied with potential anti-microbial properties due to their multitarget, multidirectional regulation, less toxicity, and drug resistance. Different studies have focused on the anti-bacterial activity of plant-derived metabolites in the past decades.150 Some researchers have emphasized the multiple secondary metabolites existing in botanical materials, including polyphenol, tannins, saponins, alkaloids, sesquiterpenes, terpenoids, and flavonoids. Compared with a common anti-bacterial agent, they not only kill the pathogenic microbes by their unique construction, but also affect the intracellular key toxic pathways. In addition, they can adjust some reactions in exerting diverse combinatorial effects.151 Several studies have illustrated that different kinds of ginger extracts are capable of inhibiting the growth of spoilage bacteria and fungi.152,153 Wang et al. reported the anti-bacterial activity and associated mechanism of ginger essential oil against food-borne pathogenic bacteria Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli. Their results showed the bactericidal action of ginger essential oil for destroying the activity of the cell membrane mainly due to some macromolecular substances (like nucleic acids and proteins), which further interfered with energy metabolism.154 The combination of ginger and thyme essential oil was effective against Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis infections. However, ginger essential oil alone did not show any anti-microbial effect.155 On the contrary, compared with the standard levels of antibiotics, Sasidharan et al. reported that fresh oil had the same effect against Aspergillus niger, Candida and Pseudomonas, Aeruginosa. Later, weaker anti-bacterial activity against Saccharomyces cerevisiae was reported and no inhibition was observed against Bacillus subtilis, Trichoderma spp., and Pencillium spp. In comparison, dry oil had different bacteriostatic activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa.156 The other active ingredients in ginger are also reported to exhibit anti-bacterial properties. In one study, the antimicrobial activity of ginger oleoresin was evaluated, and the anti-bacterial effects against some foodborne pathogens showed that minimum inhibitory concentration for different bacteria and fungi was 200–300 ppm, including E. coli, P. aeruginosa, Y. enterocolitica as well as B. subtilis. As major contributors to bacteriostatic activity of ginger oleoresin, gingerols play an important role.157 Bhaskar et al. reported that 6-gingerol could constrain mycobacterial growth inside the spleen, lungs, and liver of mice infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis. At the same time, 6-gingerol increased the expression of the proinflammatory factors in mice by increasing Th1/Th17 responses. Therefore, 6-gingerol can be studied further as a natural alternative drug to confirm its anti-mycobacterial and immunomodulatory effects.158 The anti-bacterial activities of 10-gingerol and 12-gingerol were significantly proved against oral pathogens. Park et al. found that their minimum inhibitory concentration range was 6–30 μg mL−1.159 In some of the earlier studies, Nagoshi et al. illustrated that 10-gingerol combined with aminoglycosides could decrease the minimum inhibitory concentrations against vancomycin-resistant enterococci. It was summarized that 10-gingerol could promote the influx of aminoglycosides into enterococcal cells, which can be used as a promising treatment for infections associated with multidrug resistant different enterococci.160 Besides, four main compounds in ginger, 6-gingerol, 10-gingerol, 6-dehydro-gingerdione, and 6-shogaol exhibited anti-bacterial effects against drug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii. These authors also established the fact that there is a close relationship between anti-oxidant and anti-bacterial properties. When the anti-oxidant properties were blocked, the anti-bacterial properties were also repressed.161 However, when different processing methods were, the anti-oxidant and anti-bacterial properties of ginger were significantly changed. Ghasemzadeh and coworkers used a series of methods, including solar tunnel drying, hot air drying, and open sun drying. Furthermore, they found that all of the resulting ginger extracts showed improved anti-microbial activity against Gram positive bacteria in comparison to Gram negative bacteria strains. The highest formation of shogaol was observed in hot air drying. Compared with solar tunnel and open sun drying, the method of hot air drying exhibited potent activities against six strains, including Candida albicans, Aspergillus flavus, Scopulariopsis brevicaulis, Trichophyton rubrum, Fusarium oxysporum, and Geotrichum candidum.162 With the increase in storage temperature from 5 to 15 °C and duration time enhancement from 4 to 8 months, the anti-oxidant and anti-microbial properties of two different ginger varieties (Halia bentong and Halia bara) were gradually weakened.163 In different extraction methods of ginger, Gao et al. reported that all of the different kinds of organic solvents (ethanol extraction, acetone extraction, methanol extraction, hexane extraction, and chloroform extraction) in ginger extraction showed anti-bacterial activity against Gram-positive bacteria and Gram-negative bacteria when compared with aqueous extract methods. However, no significant bacteriostatic activity of various ginger extracts was reported.164 In recent years, different active substances from ginger have been used as food preservatives in a variety of food products.165,166 With the changing life styles, ready-to-eat foods have become a vital part of our daily dietary habits. Therefore, more attention has to be paid to these foods to better protect them from foodborne pathogens (Salmonella enteritidis, Campylobacter jejuni, and Listeria monocytogenes) during their preparation, processing, and treatment. Tang et al. used camel muscle as a food matrix in order to explore the anti-bacterial effect of gingerol, nisin, and their combination. Both nisin and gingerol showed noteworthy anti-microbial ability in a concentration-dependent manner. Furthermore, enhancing the microbiological quality of the camel meat after the application of nisin and gingerol, and their combination was regarded as an effective eco-friendly approach.167 Moreover, the dried root of gingers as a raw material has shown potential bioreduction ability, which can be used for the synthesis of silver nanoparticles, resulting in a significant inhibitory effect on Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, including Bacillus cereus, Enterococcus sp., Micrococcus luteus, and Staphylococcus aureus. These green synthetic silver nanoparticles synthesized from ginger roots have a promising role in drug delivery systems and disinfections.168 In recent studies, gingerols were also used in the synthesis of iron nanoparticles endowed with significant anti-bacterial and anti-oxidant properties. Turakhia et al. reported their anti-bacterial ability against different Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.169 Furthermore, iron-nanocoated surgical cotton was produced using ginger as an eco-friend approach, which also showed significant anti-microbial properties.
3.5 Protective effects on metabolic syndrome
Metabolic syndrome as a complex process refers to the pathological state of the metabolic disorder of protein, fat, carbohydrate, and other substances in the human body. Obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease are the hallmarks of resulting dysbiosis, which further leads to a series of complications. In recent years, studies have highlighted the role of natural plants as protective approaches to make a significant effect on metabolic syndromes.170–172 Among different natural compounds, ginger and its bioactive components as functional foods have been extensively explored for their broad spectrum of metabolic activities.

3.5.1 Anti-obesity effects. 
Obesity remains a growing concern all over the world, and mainly results from an imbalance in energy metabolism. According to function and form, adipose tissue is divided into two forms. White adipose tissue is responsible for energy storage, and brown adipose tissue takes part in improved metabolism and energy expenditure. Some studies highlighted that the conversion of white fat to brown fat is considered as a new strategy to treat obesity. In 3T3-L1 adipocytes, Wang et al. found that 6-gingerol could promote the cell browning through an AMPK-dependent pathway. In addition, it could improve the expression of some mitochondrial biogenesis markers related to mitochondrial respiration and energy metabolism, the level of mitochondrial mass, mtDNA copy number, and ATP production.173,174 Saravanan and coworkers fed the obese mice with different doses of 6-gingerol (25, 50, and 75 mg kg−1) once daily for 30 days. Compared with the normal control group, they found that rats treated with gingerol showed a significant decrease in body weight and tissue lipids, as well as levels of glucose, leptin, amylase, and insulin.175 In a randomized experiment of overweight and obese subjects, Maharlouei et al. studied the effects of ginger on weight loss and metabolic status. They found that the weight and fasting glucose were decreased and HDL-cholesterol level was increased after ginger intake. However, the level of insulin, triglycerides, total- and LDL-cholesterol showed no significant change.176 From the several studies, it can be stated that ginger can be used to moderate obesity through different potential mechanisms, including increasing thermogenesis, lipolysis, at the same time, suppressing lipogenesis, controlling intestinal absorption, and appetite.177 As a consequence, the consumption of ginger can be a promising adjunct therapy to combat obesity progression and related complications.


3.5.2 Anti-diabetic and anti-cardiovascular effects. 
Obesity is a chronic metabolic disease that leads to multiple complications, such as diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and cardiovascular diseases. Several studies have shown the anti-hyperglycemic effects of polyphenol compounds connected with the AMPK signaling pathway, which indirectly exhibits a valuable effect on glucose regulation.178 One study reported that 6-gingerol could promote glucose transporter 4 translocation via activation of AMPK. In addition, 6-gingerol inhibited the increase of the fasting blood glucose level and enhanced the glucose intolerance in db/db mice. Furthermore, another study showed the increased glucose level in muscle cells by intaking Ca2+ signaling pathways, which were activated by gingerols.179,180 In the latest randomized, single-blind, and placebo-controlled clinical trial, ginger supplementation has valuable effects on insulin resistance, lipid profile, and promoting weight loss, which illustrates its significant potential in the treatment of type 2 diabetes.
On the aspect of anti-diabetic cardiomyopathy, gingerol also showed its protective effect on cardiovascular diseases.181 One study divided the experimental rats into three groups (Normal control, DM control, DM combined with gingerol), and measured their myocardial profile, oxidative stress ability, as well as metabolic enzymatic activity. They found that the inflammatory factors and levels of reactive oxygen systems significantly increased when these rats suffered from diabetic cardiomyopathy. Thus, gingerol has the potential function of refining the anti-oxidant defense system in cardiomyopathy.182 Furthermore, Wen et al. found that higenamine combined with 6-gingerol could significantly affect the doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity by upregulating the LKB1/AMPKα/Sirt1-associated pathway and downregulating the RAAS pathway, which protects against chronic heart failure.183 6-Gingerol also improved ISO-induced myocardial fibrosis by inhibiting the TLR4/MAPKs/NF-kappa B signaling pathways, which regulate inflammation and apoptosis.184 In addition, the protective effect of gingerol on cardio-protectiveness reflected the decreasing trend of intracellular Ca2+via inhibition of L-type Ca2+ current and contractility in rat cardiomyocytes.185 To summarize, daily dietary intake of ginger is regarded as an eco-friendly option, which can be beneficial for weight loss/maintenance, enhance glycemic control, lipid profile and vascular health, reduce blood pressure, and inflammation, and ultimately, all of these can improve cardiovascular health.


3.5.3 Miscellaneous effects. 
Among neurodegenerative diseases, Alzheimer's disease is characterized by dementia, leading to the impairment of memory and other dysfunctions of cognitive competence in elderly people. Iranshahi et al. reported the anti-amyloidogenic properties of ginger and its compounds. Ginger treatment could decrease the cerebral plaques and Aβ-species. In addition, it blocked the cerebral inflammation, altered the tau protein, and suppressed the Aβ-induced apoptosis through different approaches. Thus, gingerol, shogaol, and other activated ingredients have been found to possess stronger anti-Alzheimer's disease activities.186 Choi et al. showed that ginger and its compounds, including 6-gingerol, 6-paradol, 6-shogaol, zingerone, as well as dehydrozingerone could improve the neurological symptoms and pathological conditions of age-related neurological disorders by adjusting the cell death or survival signaling molecules.187 Zhang et al. executed a study to evaluate whether 6-gingerol decreased astrocyte activation or attenuated cognitive impairment. They used C6 rat astroglioma cells and adult male Sprague-Dawley rats to prove that 6-gingerol can suppress astrocyte over activation. Furthermore, it can contribute to improving cognitive ability.99 Subsequently, 6-gingerol was proved to alleviated sepsis-induced liver injury by impeding pyroptosis through the Nrf2 pathway, which is associated with liver inflammation.126 Leal et al. suggested that ginger supplementation can alleviate liver damage, which focused on alleviating excessive adiposity, oxidative stress, and hepatic injury.188 In nephrotoxic conditions induced by various toxicants, gingerol showed an important role in protecting kidney function via restoring the level of renal function biomarkers, and the ability of tricarboxylic acid cycle by free radical scavenging and regenerative mechanisms.189 In addition, Bodagh et al. reported that a daily dosage of 1500 mg ginger can be beneficial for nausea relief. Their study indicated that ginger can be used as a gastroprotective agent with antiemetic and antidiarrhoeal effects.190 In consideration of the above studies, the multifaceted effects of ginger and its components as a safe food ingredient and herb need to be expanded further to gain a better understanding of ginger as a therapeutic agent for the treatment of different diseases.

3.6 Clinical data of ginger bioactivities
To ensure the safety of ginger consumption at higher doses, several clinical studies are highlighted (Table 3). Morvaridzadeh et al. conducted a study from 2013 to 2020, which focused on the relationship between ginger consumption and associated lower risk of immunological diseases. They collected 1010 participants (age ranging from 31 to 59 years), and divided them into different groups with the addition of ginger into their diets (1000 to 3000 mg day−1). After 28 days to 84 days, it was found that some key inflammatory factors, including C-reactive protein, high sensitivity C-reactive protein, and TNF-α serum, were significantly reduced in the ginger intake group. However, the number of people involved in this clinical trial was limited. Therefore, the large-scaled trials would be beneficial for clinical advantages.94 In another study, the beneficial effects of ginger against ulcerative colitis were reported. For this, 44 patients’ participants (age range between 18 and 50) insensitive to ginger consumption were selected. For this study, 22 patients were included into the ginger group, and the other 22 were considered as placebo group for 48 days. The clinical data revealed that the ginger group patients significantly influenced the expression of inflammatory factors, which showed promising results in experimental models of ulcerative colitis.191 Park et al. conducted a 12-week, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial to determine the effects of Steamed ginger ethanolic extract (SGE) on weight and body fat loss of 80 healthy obese participants (SGE and placebo groups). In consideration to indicators of efficacy biomarkers and safety, the mean body weight, body mass index, and body fat level were significantly lower in the SGE group than in the placebo group without significant side effects.192
Table 3 Clinical data of ginger bioactivities




Ginger compound
Dose of ginger
Clinical type/description
Ref.




Ginger
1000 to 3000 mg day−1
Reduction of TNF-α and IL-1β expression with ulcerative colitis patients

94



Ginger
2000 mg day−1
Reduction of acute phase nausea in patients

149



Ginger capsule
1000 mg day−1
Reduction of TNF-α and IL-1β expression with ulcerative colitis patients

191



Steamed ginger
100 mg steamed ginger day−1
Body weight and its mass index were significantly lower with Steamed ginger

192



Mixture spices
6000 mg day−1
Ginger supplementations modulate the expression of inflammatory factors

193



Ginger powder
3000 mg day−1
Ginger powder can alleviate diabetes and hypercholesterolemia

194



Ginger
100 mg, 300 mg and 500 mg day−1
Ginger can alleviate glucose and lipids in patients with diabetes

195



Ginger extract
167 μg mL−1
Ginger reduces the fatty acid synthase activity

196



Ginger
From 250 mg to 4000 mg
Ginger as a safe and effective pain reliever

197



Ginger
500 mg per capsule
Ginger can relieve the severity of distention and improved eating ability

198



Ginger powder
400 mg day−1
Ginger's effect of periodontal pain relief was comparable to that of ibuprofen

199



Ginger extract
500 mg day−1
Ginger extract can cause nasal symptoms

200





The elevation of immune marker factors is associated with an increased risk of metabolic syndromes in the human population. One study reported the postprandial effect of 6 g mixture spices (turmeric and ginger were the highest proportion) in a high-saturated-fat, high-carbohydrate diet on inflammatory cytokine. For this, nonsmoking, overweight/obese men aging from 40–65 years were recruited. It was observed that ginger supplementation could modulate the expression of inflammatory factors indirectly, which can be beneficial for cardiovascular disease treatment.193 In addition, ginger and its activated compounds were studied for their anti-diabetic function under clinical settings. The diabetic and hypercholesterolemic human subjects were selected on the basis of the same socioeconomic background, including 32 diabetic and 32 hypercholesterolemic male subjects (age: 40 to 60 years weighing 50 to 70 kg), and were supplemented with ginger at a dose of 3 g day−1 for a period of 30 days. Their blood samples and dietary habits before and after treatment were recorded. It was found that the ginger powder intake group could significantly reduce some of the markers for diabetes and hypercholesterolemia, such as blood glucose, total cholesterol, triglycerides, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol.194 Numerous meta-analyses based on mainly randomized controlled clinical trials have shown the profitable effects of ginger consumption on glucose and lipid metabolism in patients with diabetes and other risk populations.195
In clinical studies related to tumors, many drug targets have focused on fatty acid anabolism in recent years. This is because fatty acid anabolism is considered to be characteristic of several malignancies, also including acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Ghaeidamini et al. collected 65 clinical samples, including 40 newly diagnosed children with ALL and 22 non-cancer control cases. The primary cells from these patients were cultured and treated with an extraction of ginger. It was revealed that some phytochemicals of ginger, including gingerol, shogaol, paradol, and zingerone, could impede fatty acid synthase activity. The authors speculated that ginger can induce the susceptibility to dexamethasone, then ultimately reduces the fatty acid synthase activity.196 Although there are very few direct studies to count on this aspect, however ginger has been studied extensively as an adjuvant treatment method after confirmation in tumor cells and mice models. Several in vitro and in animal models demonstrated the active role of ginger in lowering chronic pain or inflammatory disease symptoms. One recent review summarized the last 10 years of randomized controlled trials, in which ginger was traditionally used as a pain reliever for dysmenorrhea and migraine. It was concluded that the application of ginger for its pain lowering effect is safe and promising. However, more studies are required to optimize the dose of ginger useful for long-term therapy.197 Another study reported that ginger could not decrease the incidence of abdominal distention. However, it was more effective than the placebo in relieving the severity of distention on the fourth day after operation and improved the participants’ ability to eat.198 Menon et al. recruited ten systemically healthy individuals with chronic generalized periodontitis. After opening the flap debridement, they were allocated to receive either Ibuprofen (400 mg) or capsules of ginger powder (400 mg) randomly for three consecutive days (three times for a day). At the end of the study, ginger's effect of periodontal pain relief was comparable to that of ibuprofen.199 In allergic rhinitis, the effectiveness of the drug is mainly evaluated through clinical examination, including total nasal symptom scores, cross-sectional area of the nasal cavity with acoustic rhinometry, and a rhinoconjunctivitis quality of life questionnaire. Yamprasert et al. recruited allergic rhinitis patients for a randomized and double-blind trial, and fed them with ginger extract and loratadine for 500 mg and 10 mg, respectively for 21–42 days. After assessing the criteria for allergic rhinitis patients, and it was concluded that the ginger extract could exert the same effect as of loratadine for improving nasal symptoms.200
Compared with the in vivo and in vitro studies, the clinical data on the health benefits of ginger is inadequate (small populations and unstandardized evaluation systems). Further studies with adequate designs, an appropriate number of patients and with standardized ginger formulations are warranted to validate the reported pharmacological effects of ginger with respect to its suitability, optimal health benefits, and safety. In recent years, several systematic reviews have been published to confirm the reported health benefits of ginger and related compounds. However, limitations regarding the reporting quality still persist. Additional clinical data including heterogeneous population, more stringent criteria, adequate quality assessment, and consistent results need to be generated to draw the valid conclusions. More importantly, meta-analysis studies with a comprehensive review based on critical scrutiny and comparison of the quality of the evidence derived from various randomized controlled data need to be conducted to confirm the efficacy of oral ginger in human health and diseases. Moreover, a systematic research study with clear methodology and an adequate pool of participants is crucial for the success of future clinical trials to extend the functional attributes of ginger and its components.
4. Concluding remarks and perspectives
In recent times, clear evidence by several researchers has shown the renewed importance of medicinal plants, such as ginger due to their fastidious characteristics compared to conventional medicine. The current review provides valuable insights on the recent studies emphasizing the pharmacological activities of ginger and its corresponding derivatives, such as gingerols, shogaols, and paradols, which are regarded as the adjunct therapeutics for combating various health disorders. The gingerols and shogaols are accountable for the respective biological activities, improved chemical natures, and mode of action, which lead to their usage and novel applications in the human health and functional food market. Apart from their nutritional role, ginger can be used as an important ingredient for functional foods or nutraceuticals that could be available for the management and prevention of several diseases, such as cancer, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes mellitus, obesity, and neurodegenerative diseases. Moreover, the wide distinction in the chemical profile of various chemical constituents of fresh, dried, stir-frying and carbonized ginger implies a vast multiplicity in the mechanisms of actions and molecular targets in disease management that warrants further investigation. From the current status of ginger related research, it can be stated that future studies should focus more on the isolation, identification, and characterization of bioactive compounds in ginger, and their biological activities should be studied extensively using suitable in vitro and in vivo models. To date, much attention is paid on the rhizome part of ginger, however, emerging reports have highlighted the potential of ginger flowers and leaves. It was reported that the gingerol present in ginger leaves did not decompose into shogaol after heat treatment. The direct application of ginger can be proposed in diseases to restore the balance between free radicals and antioxidant imbalance. Studies have illustrated the improved antioxidant activities of dried ginger and stir-frying ginger, which were enriched in phenolic compounds. This revealed that changing of gingerols to shogaols and zingerone can reduce the antioxidant potential. Therefore, according to the precise requirement of a particular bioactive component, different sections of ginger can be utilized for research and industrial purpose. Furthermore, the extraction methods have a significant impact on the bioactivity of the resulting components. Studies have concluded that ethanol can be used as an ideal solvent with its strongest ability to retain the bioactive ingredients in comparison to other commonly used solvents, such as methanol and water. In the recent era of changing dietary preferences and inclination to healthy lifestyles, it is pertinent to develop novel food products by including ginger as a whole and its rhizome, flowers, and leaves, or in synergy with other medicinal plants or other proven drugs. It is anticipated that this review may provide useful information for the future utilization of ginger processing and clinical application, such as anti-cancer, anti-obesity, anti-inflammatory, and cardiovascular disease, as well as the promotion of human health. In continuation of the existing research data, human studies should be conducted to validate the aptness of ginger as a therapeutic drug or as a useful resource for functional components. For the food application perspective, it can be concluded that ginger holds a promising role as a synergistic preservative for flavor enhancement, as well as extending the shelf-life of various food products.
Abbreviations

ABTS˙+2,2′-Azinobis-(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid)
ALLAcute lymphoblastic leukemia
Apaf-1Apoptotic protease activating factor-1
APCAdenomatous polyposis coli
AREAntioxidant reaction elements
CaspaseCysteine-containing aspartate-specific proteases
DISCDeath-inducing signaling complex
DPPH˙2,2-Diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl
EGFREpidermal growth factor receptor
EMTEpithelial–mesenchymal transition
ERK1/2Extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2
ERKsExtracellular signal-regulated kinases
FRAPFerric-reducing antioxidant power
GPxGlutathione peroxidase
GPX4Glutathione peroxidase 4
HPLCHigh-performance liquid chromatographic
IL-1βInterleukin-1β
IL-6Interleukin-6
JNKc-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)
Keap1Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1
LPSLipopolysaccharide
MAEMicrowave assisted extraction
MMPsMatrix metalloproteinases
NAC
N-Acetylcystein
NF-κBNF-kappaB
Nrf2Nuclear factor erythroid-2 related factor 2
p38-MAPKp38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
PI3KPhosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase
PKCProtein kinase C
RNSReactive nitrogen species
ROSReactive oxygen species
SODSuper oxide dismutase
TNF-αTumor necrosis factor α
VEGFVascular endothelial growth factor

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (31850410476), and the Major Projects of Science and Technology in Anhui Province (18030701142, 18030701144, 18030701161, 18030701158, 201903a06020021, 1804h07020147, and 201904a06020008).
References
L. M. Reyes-Fermín, O. E. Aparicio-Trejo, S. H. Avila-Rojas, T. Gómez-Sierra, E. Martínez-Klimova and J. Pedraza-Chaverri, Natural antioxidants’ effects on endoplasmic reticulum stress-related Diseases, Food Chem. Toxicol., 2020, 138, 111229 CrossRef .
F. Bosch-Morell, V. Villagrasa, T. Ortega, N. Acero, D. Muñoz-Mingarro, M. E. González-Rosende, E. Castillo, M. A. Sanahuja, P. Soriano and I. Martínez-Solís, Medicinal plants and natural products as neuroprotective agents in age-related macular degeneration, Neural Regener. Res., 2020, 15, 2207–2216 CrossRef .
M. Bagherniya, V. Nobili, C. N. Blesso and A. Sahebkar, Medicinal plants and bioactive natural compounds in the treatment of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: A clinical review, Pharmacol. Res., 2018, 130, 213–240 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Chen and R. H. Liu, Potential Mechanisms of Action of Dietary Phytochemicals for Cancer Prevention by Targeting Cellular Signaling Transduction Pathways, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2018, 66, 3260–3276 CrossRef CAS .
B. Karthikeyan, L. Harini, V. Krishnakumar, V. R. Kannan, K. Sundar and T. Kathiresan, Insights on the Involvement of (-)-Epigallocatechin Gallate in ER Stress-Mediated Apoptosis in Age-Related Macular Degeneration, Apoptosis, 2017, 22, 72–85 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Sun, K. Thakur, F. Hu, J. G. Zhang and Z. J. Wei, Icariside II Inhibits Tumorigenesis via Inhibiting AKT/Cyclin E/ CDK 2 Pathway and Activating Mitochondria-Dependent Pathway, Pharmacol. Res., 2020, 152, 104616 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. Mao, X. Y. Xu, S. Y. Cao, R. Y. Gan, H. Corke, T. Beta and H. B. Li, Bioactive Compounds and Bioactivities of Ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe), Foods, 2019, 8, 185 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. C. Liu and Y. Q. Zhang, Research Progress on Chemical Constituents of Zingiber officinale, Roscoe, BioMed. Res. Int., 2019, 2019, 5370823 Search PubMed .
J. A. Beutler, Natural Products as a Foundation for Drug Discovery, Curr. Protoc. Pharmacol., 2019, 86, e67 Search PubMed .
F. Zhang, Y. Y. Zhang, Y. S. Sun, R. H. Ma, K. Thakur, J. G. Zhang and Z. J. Wei, Asparanin A from Asparagus officinalis, L. Induces G0/G1 Cell Cycle Arrest and Apoptosis in Human Endometrial Carcinoma Ishikawa Cells via Mitochondrial and PI3K/AKT Signaling Pathways, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2020, 68, 213–224 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Zhang, F. Zhang, Y. S. Zhang, K. Thakur, J. G. Zhang, Y. Liu, H. Kan and Z. J. Wei, Mechanism of Juglone-Induced Cell Cycle Arrest and Apoptosis in Ishikawa Human Endometrial Cancer Cells, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2019, 67, 7378–7389 CrossRef CAS .
J. Poltronieri, A. B. Becceneri, A. M. Fuzer, J. C. Cesar, A. C. Martin, P. C. Vieira, N. Pouliot and M. R. Cominetti, [6]-gingerol as a cancer chemopreventive agent: A review of its activity on different steps of the metastatic process, Mini-Rev. Med. Chem., 2014, 14, 313–321 CrossRef CAS .
K. Srinivasan, Ginger rhizomes (Zingiber officinale): A spice with multiple health beneficial potentials, PharmaNutrition, 2017, 5, 18–28 CrossRef .
S. M. Sang, H. D. Snook, F. S. Tareq and Y. Fasina, Precision Research on Ginger: The Type of Ginger Matters, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2020, 68, 8517–8523 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Semwal, D. K. Semwal, S. Combrinck and A. M. Viljoen, Gingerols and shogaols: Important nutraceutical principles from ginger, Phytochemistry, 2015, 117, 554–568 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Zheng, K. Y. Sun, S. W. Zhang, H. M. Zeng, X. N. Zou, R. Chen, X. Y. Gu, W. Q. Wei and J. Hao, Analysis on the prevalence of malignant tumors in China in 2015, Chin. J. Oncol., 2019, 41, 19–28 CrossRef .
L. Rebecca, K. D. Siegel and A. J. Miller, Cancer statistics, 2019, Ca-Cancer J. Clin., 2019, 69, 7–34 CrossRef .
L. S. Rebecce, D. M. Kimberly and J. Ahmedin, Cancer Statistics, 2020, Ca-Cancer J. Clin., 2020, 70, 7–30 CrossRef .
A. S. Choudhari, P. C. Mandave, M. Deshpande, P. Ranjekar and O. Prakash, Phytochemicals in Cancer Treatment: From Preclinical Studies to Clinical Practice, Front. Pharmacol., 2020, 10, 1614 CrossRef .

          WCRF. Wholegrains, vegetables and fruit and the risk of cancer, https://www.wcrf.org/dietandcancer/exposures/wholegrains-veg-fruit.
E. O. Farombi, B. O. Ajayi and I. A. Adedara, 6-Gingerol delays tumorigenesis in benzo[a]pyrene and dextran sulphate sodium-induced colorectal cancer in mice, Food Chem. Toxicol., 2020, 142, 111483 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Bernard, J. R. McConnery and D. W. Hoskin, [10]-Gingerol, a major phenolic constituent of ginger root, induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in triple-negative breast cancer cells, Exp. Mol. Pathol., 2017, 102, 370–376 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Li, Y. Z. Wang, M. L. Gao, W. H. Cui, M. N. Zeng, Y. X. Cheng and J. Li, Nine New Gingerols from the Rhizoma of Zingiber officinale and Their Cytotoxic Activities, Molecules, 2018, 23, 315 CrossRef .
J. X. Li, S. Wang, L. Yao, P. Ma, Z. W. Chen, T. L. Han, C. L. Yuan, J. Zhang, L. R. Jiang, L. Liu, D. Z. Ke, C. L. Li, J. Yamahara, Y. H. Li and J. W. Wang, 6-gingerol ameliorates age-related hepatic steatosis: Association with regulating lipogenesis, fatty acid oxidation, oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol., 2019, 362, 125–135 CrossRef CAS .
U.S. Department of Agriculture Nutrient Database, https://fdc.nal.usda.gov/fdc-app.html#/food-details/169231/nutrients:from.
S. Malmir, A. Ebrahimi and F. Mahjoubi, Effect of ginger extracts on colorectal cancer HCT-116 cell line in the expression of MMP-2 and KRAS, Gene Rep., 2020, 100824 CrossRef .
P. C. Shieh, Y. O. Chen, D. H. Kuo, F. A. Chen, M. L. Tsai, I. S. Chang, H. Wu, S. M. Sang, C. T. Ho and M. H. Pan, Induction of apoptosis by [8]-shogaol via reactive oxygen species generation, glutathione depletion, and caspase activation in human leukemia cells, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2010, 58, 3847–3854 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. El-Naggar, A. Mira, F. M. Abdel Bar, K. Shimizu, M.M. Amer and F.A. Badria, Synthesis, docking, cytotoxicity, and LTA4H inhibitory activity of new gingerol derivatives as potential colorectal cancer therapy, Bioorg. Med. Chem., 2017, 25, 1277–1285 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, K. Thakur, F. Hu, J. G. Zhang and Z. J. Wei, Cross-talk between 10-gingerol and its anticancerous potential: a recent update, Food Funct., 2017, 8, 2635–2649 RSC .
H. Jiang, A. M. Solyom, B. N. Timmermann and D. R. Gang, Characterization of gingerol-related compounds in ginger rhizome (Zingiber officinale Rosc.) byhigh-performance liquid chromatography/electrospray ionization massspectrometry, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 19, 2957–2964 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Schwertner and D. C. Rios, High-performance liquid chromatographicanalysis of 6-gingerol, 8-gingerol, 10-gingerol, and 6-shogaol inginger-containing dietary supplements, spices, teas, and beverages, J. Chromatogr. B: Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci., 2007, 856, 41–47 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, Z. Xie, H. J. Koo, S. P. McLaughlin, B. N. Timmermann and D. R. Gang, Metabolic profiling and phylogenetic analysis of medicinal Zingiber species: tools for authentication of ginger (Zingiber officinale Rosc.), Phytochemistry, 2006, 67, 1673–1685 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, T. Huang, B. Yang, X. Liu and G. Duan, Development of gaschromatography–mass spectrometry with microwave distillation andsimultaneous solid-phase microextraction for rapid determination of volatileconstituents in ginger, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 2007, 43, 24–31 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wohlmuth, D. N. Leach, M. K. Smith and S. P. Myers, Gingerol content of diploidand tetraploid clones of ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe), J. Agric. Food Chem., 2005, 53, 5772–5778 CrossRef CAS .
X. R. Kou, X. Q. Wang, R. Y. Ji, L. Liu, Y. N. Qiao, Z. X. Lou, C. Y. Ma, S. M. Li, H. X. Wang and C. T. Ho, Occurrence, biological activity and metabolism of 6-shogaol, Food Funct., 2018, 9, 1310–1327 RSC .
X. R. Kou, X. Z. Li, M. R. T. Rahman, M. M. Yan, H. H. Huang, H. X. Wang and Y. H. Su, Efficient dehydration of 6-gingerol to 6-shogaol catalyzed by an acidic ionic liquid under ultrasound irradiation, Food Chem., 2017, 15, 193–199 CrossRef .
S. C. Ho and M. S. Su, Optimized Heat Treatment Enhances the AntiInflammatory Capacity of Ginger, Int. J. Food Prop., 2016, 19, 1884–1898 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Weng, C. F. Wu, H. W. Huang, C. T. Ho and G. C. Yen, Anti-invasion effects of 6-shogaol and 6-gingerol, two active components in ginger, on human hepatocarcinoma cells, Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 2010, 54, 1618–1627 CrossRef CAS .
F. Peng, Q. Tao, X. M. Wu, H. Dou, S. Spencer, C. Y. Mang, L. Xu, L. L. Sun, Y. Zhao, H. B. Li, S. Zeng, G. M. Liu and X. J. Hao, Cytotoxic, cytoprotective and antioxidant effects of isolated phenolic compounds from fresh ginger, Fitoterapia, 2012, 83, 568–585 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, M. C. Hsieh, C. Y. Lo, C. B. Liu, S. Sang, C. T. Ho and M. H. Pan, 6-Shogaol is more effective than 6-gingerol and curcumin in inhibiting 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate-induced tumor promotion in mice, Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 2010, 54, 1296–1306 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dugasani, M. R. Pichika, V. D. Nadarajah, M. K. Balijepalli, S. Tandra and J. N. Korlakunta, Comparative antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects of [6]-gingerol, [8]-gingerol, [10]-gingerol and [6]-shogaol, J. Ethnopharmacol., 2010, 127, 515–520 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jafarzadeh and M. Nemati, Therapeutic potentials of ginger for treatment of Multiple sclerosis: A review with emphasis on its immunomodulatory, anti-inflammatory and antioxidative properties, J. Neuroimmunol., 2018, 324, 54–75 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, B. N. Timmermann and D. R. Gang, Characterization and identification of diarylheptanoids in ginger (Zingiber officinale Rosc.) using high-performanceliquid chromatography/electrospray ionization mass spectrometry, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2007, 21, 509–518 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Park and M. Y. Jung, Development of high-performance liquidchromatography-time-of-flight mass spectrometry for the simultaneouscharacterization and quantitative analysis of gingerol-related compounds inginger products, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2012, 60, 10015–10026 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tao, W. Li, W. Liang and R. B. Van Breemen, Identification and quantification of gingerols and related compounds in ginger dietary supplements usinghigh-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2009, 57, 10014–10021 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Cho, D. G. Lee, S. Lee, S. Chae and S. Lee, Analysis of the 6-gingerol Content in Zingiber spp. and their Commercial Foods using HPLC, J. Biol. Chem., 2015, 58, 377–381 Search PubMed .
Y. X. Li, Y. Hong, Y. Q. Han, Y. Z. Wang and L. Z. Xia, Chemical characterization and antioxidant activities comparison in fresh, dried, stir-frying and carbonized ginger, J. Chromatogr. B: Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci., 2016, 1011, 223–232 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, R. J. Whelan, B. R. Pattnaik, K. Ludwig, E. Subudhi, H. Rowland, N. Claussen, N. Zucker, S. Uppal, D. M. Kushner, M. Felder, M. S. Patankar and A. Kapur, Terpenoids from Zingiber officinale (Ginger) induce apoptosis in endometrial cancer cells through the activation of p53, PLoS One, 2012, 7, e53178 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wohlmuth, M. K. Smith, L. O. Brooks, S. P. Myers and D. N. Leach, Essential oil composition of diploid and tetraploid clones of ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe) grown in Australia, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2006, 54, 1414–1419 CrossRef CAS .
R. Taebi, M. R. Mirzaiey, M. Mahmoodi, A. Khoshdel, M. A. Fahmidehkar, M. Mohammad-Sadeghipour and M. R. Hajizadeh, The effect of Curcuma longa extract and its active component (curcumin) on gene expression profiles of lipid metabolism pathway in liver cancer cell line (HepG2), Gene Rep., 2019, 100581 Search PubMed .
M. J. Bak, S. Ok, M. Jun and W. S. Jeong, 6-Shogaol-Rich Extract from Ginger Up-Regulates the Antioxidant Defense Systems in Cells and Mice, Molecules, 2012, 17, 8037–8055 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Lee, J. H. Lim, M. S. Kim, J. K. Jeong, G. Y. Song, W. S. Lee and M. C. Rho, Phenolic compounds isolated from Zingiber officinale roots inhibit cell adhesion, Food Chem., 2011, 128, 778–782 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Sowbhagya and V. N. Chitra, Enzyme-Assisted Extraction of Flavorings and Colorants from Plant Materials, Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr., 2010, 50, 146–161 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Yu, T. M. Huang, B. Yang, X. Liu and G. L. Duan, Development of gas chromatography–mass spectrometry with microwave distillation and simultaneous solid-phase microextraction for rapid determination of volatile constituents in ginger, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 2007, 43, 24–31 CrossRef CAS .
M. Agarwal, S. Walia, S. Dhingra and B. P. Khambay, Insect growth inhibition, antifeedant and antifungal activity of compounds isolated/derived from Zingiber of cinale Roscoe (ginger) rhizomes, Pest Manage. Sci., 2001, 57, 289–300 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Bakht, M. F. Alajmi, P. Alam, A. Alam, P. Alam and T. M. Aljarba, Theoretical and experimental study on lipophilicity and wound healing activity of ginger compounds, Asian Pac. J. Trop. Biomed., 2014, 4, 329–333 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Zhan, K. Xu and H. Z. Yin, Preparative separation and purification of gingerols from ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe) by high-speed counter-current chromatography, Food Chem., 2011, 126, 1959–1963 CrossRef CAS .
H. Teng, K. T. Seuseu, W. Y. Lee and L. Chen, Comparing the effects of microwave radiation on 6-gingerol and 6-shogaol from ginger rhizomes (Zingiber officinale Rosc), PLoS One, 2019, 14, e0214893 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Ko, H. H. Nam and M. S. Chung, Conversion of 6-gingerol to 6-shogaol in ginger (Zingiber officinale) pulp and peel during subcritical water extraction, Food Chem., 2019, 270, 149–155 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Magdy, E. M. Fahmy, A. E. M. F. Al-Ansary and G. Awad, Improvement of 6-gingerol production in ginger rhizomes (Zingiber officinale Roscoe) plants by mutation breeding using gamma irradiation, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2020, 162, 109193 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sabitha, C. Srinivas, T. R. Reddy, K. Yadagiri and J. S. Yadav, Synthesis of gingerol and diarylheptanoids, Tetrahedron: Asymmetry, 2011, 22, 2124–2133 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Kumar, P. Srinivas and B. K. Bettadaiah, New scalable and eco-friendly synthesis of gingerols, Tetrahedron Lett., 2012, 53, 2993–2995 CrossRef .
T. W. Jang, J. S. Choi and J. H. Park, Protective and inhibitory effects of acteoside from Abeliophyllum distichum Nakai against oxidative DNA damage, Mol. Med. Rep., 2020, 22, 2076–2084 CrossRef CAS .
M. Valko, D. Leibfritz, J. Moncol, M. T. D. Cronin, M. Mazur and J. Telser, Free radicals and antioxidants in normal physiological functions and human
disease, Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol., 2007, 39, 44–84 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. M. Sousa, H. R. Silva, G. M. Vieira-Jr, M. C. C. Ayres, C. L. S. Costa, D. S. Araújo, L. C. D. Cavalcante, E. D. S. Barros, P. B. M. Araújo and M. S. B. M. H. Chaves, Fenóis totais e atividade antioxidante de cinco plantas medicinais, Quim. Nova, 2007, 30, 351–355 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. S. Yehya, M. Asif, Y. J. Tan, S. Sasidharan, A. M. S. A. Majid and C. E. Oon, Broad spectrum targeting of tumor vasculature by medicinal plants: An updated review, J. Herb. Med., 2017, 9, 1–13 CrossRef .
Y. Kumar, V. Kumar and K. Sangeeta, Comparative antioxidant capacity of plant leaves and herbs with their antioxidative potential in meat system under accelerated oxidation conditions, J. Food Meas. Charact., 2020 DOI:10.1007/s11694-020-00571-5 .
A. M. C. Paquim, T. A. Enache, E. D. S. Gil and A. M. O. Brett, Natural phenolic antioxidants electrochemistry: Towards a new food science methodology, Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf., 2020, 2020, 1–47 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Zhang, Z. W. Luo, D. M. Wang, F. Y. He and D. W. Li, Phytochemical profiles and antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of the leaves of Zanthoxylum bungeanum, Sci. World J., 2014, 2014, 181072 Search PubMed .
D. Ribeiro, M. Freitas, A. M. S. Silva, F. Carvalho and E. Fernandes, Antioxidant and pro-oxidant activities of carotenoids and their oxidation products, Food Chem. Toxicol., 2018, 120, 681–699 CrossRef CAS .
F. He, W. Wang, M. Wu, Y. Fang, S. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Chen and F. Xiang, Antioxidant and antibacterial activities of essential oil from Atractylodeslancea rhizomes, Ind. Crops Prod., 2020, 153, 112552 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ahmad, M. U. Rehman, I. Amin, A. Arif, S. Rasool, S. A. Bhat, I. Afzal, I. Hussain, S. Bilal and M. R. Mir, A Review on Pharmacological Properties of Zingerone (4-(4-Hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)-2-butanone), Sci. World J., 2015, 2015, 816364 Search PubMed .
H. Tohma, İ. Gülçin, E. Bursal, A. C. Gören, S. H. Alwasel and E. Köksal, Antioxidant activity and phenolic compounds of ginger (Zingiber officinale Rosc.) determined by HPLC-MS/MS, J. Food Meas. Charact., 2016, 11, 556–566 CrossRef .
K. Sakulnarmrat, G. Srzednicki and I. Konczak, Antioxidant, enzyme inhibitory and antiproliferative activity of polyphenolic-rich fraction of commercial dry ginger powder, Int. J. Food Sci. Technol., 2015, 50, 2229–2235 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jelled, Â. Fernandes, L. Barros, H. Chahdoura, L. Achour, I. C. F. R. Ferreira and H. B. Cheikh, Chemical and antioxidant parameters of dried forms of ginger rhizomes, Ind. Crops Prod., 2015, 77, 30–35 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tanweer, T. Mehmood, S. Zainab, Z. Ahmad and A. Shehzad, Comparison and HPLC quantification of antioxidant profiling of ginger rhizome, leaves and flower extracts, Clin. Phytosci., 2020, 6, 12 CrossRef .
S. Mošovskáa, D. Novákováa and M. Kaliňákb, Antioxidant activity of ginger extract and identification of its active components, Acta Chim. Slovaca, 2015, 8, 115–119 Search PubMed .
F. Tinello and A. Lante, Valorisation of Ginger and Turmeric Peels as Source of Natural Antioxidants, Plant Foods Hum. Nutr., 2019, 74, 443–445 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Kim, B. Kim, E. G. Mun, S. Y. Jeong and Y.-S. Cha, The antioxidant activity of steamed ginger and its protective effects on obesity induced by high-fat diet in C57BL/6J mice, Nutr. Res. Pract., 2018, 12, 503–511 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Nile and S. W. Park, Chromatographic analysis, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory,
and xanthine oxidase inhibitory activities of ginger extracts and its reference compounds, Ind. Crops Prod., 2015, 70, 238–244 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. A. Ali, M. E. M. EI-Nour and S. M. Yagi, Total phenolic and flavonoid contents and antioxidant activity of ginger (Zingiber officinale Rosc.) rhizome, callus and callus treated with some elicitors, J. Genet. Eng. Biotechnol., 2018, 16, 677–682 CrossRef .
D. Chakraborty, A. Mukherjee, S. Sikdar, A. Paul, S. Ghosh and A. R. K. Bukhsh, [6]-Gingerol isolated from ginger attenuates sodium arsenite induced oxidative stress and plays a corrective role in improving insulin signaling in mice, Toxicol. Lett., 2012, 210, 34–43 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Huang, Y. C. Chou, C. Y. Wu and T. M. Chang, [8]-Gingerol inhibits melanogenesis in murine melanoma cells through down-regulation of the MAPK and PKA signal pathways, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2013, 438, 375–381 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kiptiyah, W. Widodo, G. Ciptadi, A. Aulanni'am, M. A. Widodo and S. B. Sumitro, 10-Gingerol as an inducer of apoptosis through HTR1A in cumulus cells: In-vitro and in-silico studies, J. Taibah Univ. Med. Sci., 2017, 12, 397–406 Search PubMed .
J. Guo, H. Wu, L. Du, W. Zhang and J. Yang, Comparative Antioxidant Properties of Some Gingerols and Shogaols, and the Relationship of Their Contents with the Antioxidant Potencies of Fresh and Dried Ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe), J. Agric. Sci. Technol., 2014, 16, 1063–1072 Search PubMed .
S. Abrahams, W. L. Haylett, G. Johnson, J. A. Carr and S. Bardien, Antioxidant effects of curcumin in models of neurodegeneration, aging, oxidative and nitrosative stress: A review, Neuroscience, 2019, 406, 1–21 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Dong, R. Li, Y. Wang, J. Tan, S. H. Tang and Z. T. Jiang, Antioxidant compound screening and chemical composition of sweet ginger (Alpinia coriandriodora D. Fang) essential oil and the mechanism of scavenging radicals, J. Food Biochem., 2020, 44, e13293 CAS .
A. Shukla, C. Das and V. V. Goud, Infusion of gingerols into candied mango enhances shelf-life by inhibiting browning and associated quality parameters during storage, Food Chem., 2020, 316, 126354 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wen, Y. Liu, Y. W. Ye, Z. G. Tao, Z. J. Cheng, T. Wang and Y. M. Zhou, Effects of gingerols-rich extract of ginger on growth performance, serum metabolites, meat quality and antioxidant activity of heat-stressed broilers, J. Therm. Biol., 2020, 89, 102544 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Si, Y. P. Chen, J. H. Zhang, Z. Y. Chen and H. Y. Chung, Antioxidant activities of ginger extract and its constituents toward lipids, Food Chem., 2018, 239, 1117–1125 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Pais, B. Pereira, F. A. A. Paz, S. M. Cardoso and S. S. Braga, Solid γ-Cyclodextrin Inclusion Compound with Gingerols, a Multi-Component Guest: Preparation, Properties and Application in Yogurt, Biomolecules, 2020, 10, 344 CrossRef CAS .
K. Danwilai, J. Konmun, B. O. Sripanidkulchai and S. Subongkot, Antioxidant activity of ginger extract as a daily supplement in cancer patients receiving adjuvant chemotherapy: a pilot study, Cancer Manag. Res., 2017, 9, 11–18 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. U. Ahmed, L. Luo, A. Namani, X. J. Wang and X. W. Tang, Nrf2 signaling pathway: Pivotal roles in inflammation, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Mol. Basis Dis., 2017, 1863, 585–597 CrossRef CAS .
M. Morvaridzadeh, S. Fazelian, S. Agah, M. Khazdouz, M. Rahimlou, F. Agh, E. Potter, S. Heshmati and J. Heshmati, Effect of ginger (Zingiber officinale) on inflammatory markers: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials, Cytokine, 2020, 135, 155224 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. J. Deng, Z. Zhang, Y. Gu, S. N. Xia, X. Y. Bao, X. Cao and Y. Xu, 6-Gingerol attenuates microglia-mediated neuroinflammation and ischemic brain injuries through Akt-mTOR-STAT3
signaling pathway, Eur. J. Pharmacol., 2020, 883, 173294 CrossRef CAS .
P. Q. Gu, L. Zhu, Y. J. Liu, L. Zhang, J. L. Liu and H. Shen, Protective effects of paeoniflorin on TNBS-induced ulcerative colitis through inhibiting NF-kappaB pathway and apoptosis in mice, Int. Immunopharmacol., 2017, 50, 152–160 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Ho, K. S. Chang and C. C. Lin, Anti-neuroinflammatory capacity of fresh ginger is attributed mainly to 10-gingerol, Food Chem., 2013, 141, 3183–3191 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zahoor, C. Yang, Y. P. Yang, Y. F. Guo, T. Zhang, K. F. Jiang, S. Guo and G. Z. Deng, 6-Gingerol exerts anti-inflammatory effects and protective properties on LTA-induced mastitis, Phytomedicine, 2020, 76, 153248 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, J. G. Zhang, W. Yang, P. Xu, Y. L. Xiao and H. T. Zhang, 6-Gingerol attenuates LPS-induced neuroinflammation and cognitive impairment partially via suppressing astrocyte overactivation, Biomed. Pharmacother., 2018, 107, 1523–1529 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ha, E. J. Moon, M. S. Ju, D. H. Kim, J. H. Ryu, M. S. Oh and S. Y. Kim, 6-Shogaol, a ginger product, modulates neuroinflammation: A new approach to neuroprotection, Neuropharmacology, 2012, 63, 211–223 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sukumaran, S. C. Park and S. S. Giri, Role of dietary ginger Zingiber officinale in improving growth performances and immune functions of Labeo rohita fingerlings, Fish Shellfish Immunol., 2016, 57, 362–370 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Vipin, R. K. Raksha, K. K. Nawneet, A. K. A. Anu and G. Venkateswaran, Protective effects of phenolics rich extract of ginger against Aflatoxin B1-induced oxidative stress and hepatotoxicity, Biomed. Pharmacother., 2017, 91, 415–424 CrossRef .
J. C. Barrett, Mechanisms of multistep carcinogenesis and carcinogen risk assessment, Environ. Health Perspect., 1993, 100, 9–20 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rajagopal, M. B. Lankadasari, J. M. Aranjani and K. B. Harikumar, Targeting oncogenic transcription factors by polyphenols: A novel approach for cancer therapy, Pharmacol. Res., 2018, 130, 273–291 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Jeggo, L. H. Pearl and A. M. Carr, DNA repair, genome stability and cancer: a historical perspective, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2016, 16, 35–42 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, P. Z. Chen, Q. X. Yue, J. Q. Li, R. Chu, W. Zhang and H. Wang, Pungent ginger components modulates human cytochrome P450 enzymes in vitro, Acta Pharmacol. Sin., 2013, 34, 1237–1242 CrossRef CAS .
K. Itoh, T. Chiba, S. Takahashi, T. Ishii, K. Igarashi, Y. Katoh, T. Oyake, N. Hayashi, K. Satoh, I. Hatayama, M. Yamamoto and Y. Nabeshima, An Nrf2/small Maf heterodimer mediates the induction of phase II detoxifying enzyme genes through antioxidant response elements, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 1997, 236, 313–322 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Peng, J. Yao, Y. P. Liu, D. Z. Duan, X. L. Zhang and J. G. Fang, Activation of Nrf2 target enzymes conferring protection against oxidative stress in PC12 cells by ginger principal constituent 6-shogaol, Food Funct., 2015, 6, 2813–2823 RSC .
P. Wang, Y. T. Zhao, Y. D. Zhu and S. M. Sang, Glucuronidation and its impact on the bioactivity of [6]-shogaol, Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 2017, 61, 1700023 CrossRef .
J. F. R. Kerr, C. M. Winterford, A. D. A. Biol and B. V. Harmon, Apoptosis. Its significance in cancer and cancer Therapy, Cancer, 1994, 73, 2013–2026 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, J. G. Zhang, J. Qu, Q. Zhang, C. Prasad and Z. J. Wei, Assessment of anti-cancerous potential of 6-gingerol (Tongling White
Ginger) and its synergy with drugs on human cervical adenocarcinoma cells, Food Chem. Toxicol., 2017, 109, 910–922 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Luo, X. Chen, L. M. Luo, Q. Zhang, C. X. Gao, X. B. Zhuang, S. J. Yuan and T. K. Qiao, [6]-Gingerol enhances the radiosensitivity of gastric cancer via G2/M phase arrest and apoptosis induction, Oncol. Rep., 2018, 39, 2252–2260 CAS .
M. J. Ryu and H. S. Chung, [10]-Gingerol induces mitochondrial apoptosis through activation of MAPK pathway in HCT116 human colon cancer cells, In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol.: Anim., 2015, 51, 92–101 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Baptista Moreno Martin, R. Tomasin, L. Luna-Dulcey, A. E. Graminha, M. Araújo Naves, R. H. G. Teles, V. D. da Silva, J. A. da Silva, P. C. Vieira, B. Annabi and M. R. Cominetti, [10]-Gingerol improves doxorubicin anticancer activity and decreases its side effects in triple negative breast cancer models, Cell. Oncol., 2020, 43(5), 915–929 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Ma, Z. J. Ni, F. Zhang, Y. Y. Zhang, M. M. Liu, K. Thakur, J. G. Zhang, S. Y. Wang and Z. J. Wei, 6-Shogaol mediated ROS production and apoptosis via endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondrial pathways in human endometrial carcinoma Ishikawa cells, J. Funct. Foods, 2020, 74, 104178 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Bawadood, F. A. A. Abbasi, F. Anwar, A. M. E. Halawany and A. M. A. Abd, 6-Shogaol suppresses the growth of breast cancer cells by inducing apoptosis and suppressing autophagy via targeting notch signaling pathway, Biomed. Pharmacother., 2020, 128, 110302 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Deter and C. D. Duve, Influence of glucagon, an inducer of cellular autophagy, on some physical properties of rat liver lysosomes, J. Cell Biol., 1967, 33, 437–449 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Moosavi, A. Haghi, M. Rahmati, H. Taniguchi, A. Mocan, J. Echeverría, V. K. Gupta, N. T. Tzvetkov and A. G. Atanasov, Phytochemicals as potent modulators of autophagy for cancer therapy, Cancer Lett., 2018, 424, 46–69 CrossRef CAS .
M. Akimoto, M. Iizuka, R. Kanematsu, M. Yoshida and K. Takenaga, Anticancer Effect of Ginger Extract against Pancreatic Cancer Cells Mainly through Reactive Oxygen Species-Mediated Autotic Cell Death, PLoS One, 2015, 10, e0126605 CrossRef .
U. M. Nazim, J. K. Jeong, J. W. Seol, J. Hur, S. K. Eo, J. H. Lee and S. Y. Park, Inhibition of the autophagy flux by gingerol enhances TRAIL-induced tumor cell death, Oncol. Rep., 2015, 33, 2331–2336 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chakraborty, K. Bishayee, S. Ghosh, R. Biswas, S. K. Mandal and A.R. K. Bukhsh, [6]-Gingerol induces caspase 3 dependent apoptosis and autophagy in cancer cells: Drug–DNA interaction and expression of certain signal genes in HeLa cells, Eur. J. Pharmacol., 2012, 694, 20–29 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. A. Daghri, M. S. Alokail, K. M. Alkharfy, A. K. Mohammed, S. H. A. Alrahman, S. M. Yakout, O. E. Amer and S. Krishnaswamy, Fenugreek extract as an inducer of cellular death via autophagy in human T lymphoma Jurkat cells, BMC Complementary Altern. Med., 2012, 12, 202 CrossRef .
L. L. Dulcey, R. Tomasin, M. A. Naves, J. A. Silva and M. R. Cominetti, Autophagy-dependent apoptosis is triggered by a semi-synthetic [6]-gingerol analogue in triple negative breast cancer cells, Oncotarget, 2018, 9, 30787–30804 CrossRef .
J. J. Shi, W. Q. Gao and F. Shao, Pyroptosis: Gasdermin-Mediated Programmed Necrotic Cell Death, Trends Biochem. Sci., 2017, 42, 245–254 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Zhang, B. W. Zhou, Z. Z. Yan, J. Zhao, B. C. Zhao, W. F. Liu, C. Li and K. X. Liu, 6-Gingerol attenuates macrophages pyroptosis via the inhibition of MAPK signaling pathways and predicts a
good prognosis in sepsis, Cytokine, 2020, 125, 154854 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Hong, L. L. Hu, Y. X. Zhang, Y. L. Xu, X. Y. Liu, P. K. He and Y. H. Jia, 6-Gingerol ameliorates sepsis-induced liver injury through the Nrf2 pathway, Int. Immunopharmacol., 2020, 80, 106196 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, J. B. Li, R. Kang, D. J. Klionsky and D. L. Tang, Ferroptosis: machinery and regulation, Autophagy, 2020, 26, 1–28 Search PubMed .
B. R. Stockwell, X. J. Jiang and W. Gu, Emerging Mechanisms and Disease Relevance of Ferroptosis, Trends Cell Biol., 2020, 30, 478–490 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kang, G. D. Kroemer and D. L. Tang, The tumor suppressor protein p53 and the ferroptosis network, Free Radicals Biol. Med., 2019, 133, 162–168 CrossRef CAS .
N. Rastogi, S. Duggal, S. K. Singh, K. Porwal, V. K. Srivastava, R. Maurya, M.L.B Bhatt and D.P. Mishra, Proteasome inhibition mediates p53 reactivation and anticancer activity of 6-Gingerol in cervical cancer cells, Oncotarget, 2015, 6, 43310–43325 CrossRef .
P. Friedl and S. Alexander, Cancer Invasion and the Microenvironment: Plasticity and Reciprocity, Cell, 2011, 147, 992–1009 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Weng, C. P. Chou, C. T. Ho and G. C. Yen, Molecular mechanism inhibiting human hepatocarcinoma cell invasion by 6-shogaol and 6-gingerol, Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 2012, 56, 1304–1314 CrossRef CAS .
R. Valtola, P. Salven, P. Heikkilä, J. Taipale, H. Joensuu, M. Rehn, T. Pihlajaniemi, H. Weich, R. deWaal and K. Alitalo, VEGFR-3 and Its Ligand VEGF-C Are Associated with Angiogenesis in Breast Cancer, Am. J. Pathol., 1999, 154, 1381–1390 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Kim, J. K. Min, T. Y. Kim, S. J. Lee, H. O. Yang, S. Han, Y. M. Kim and Y. G. Kwon, [6]-Gingerol, a pungent ingredient of ginger, inhibits angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2005, 335, 300–308 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Hu, X. H. Yao, Y. H. Hao, A. H. Pan and X. W. Zhou, 8-Gingerol regulates colorectal cancer cell proliferation and migration through the EGFR/STAT/ERK pathway, Int. J. Oncol., 2020, 56, 390–397 CAS .
W. L. Zhong, W. D. Yang, Y. Qin, W. G. Gu, Y. Y. Xue, Y. H. Tang, H. W. Xu, H. Z. Wang, C. Zhang, C. H. Wang, B. Sun and Y. R. Liu, H,J, Liu, H.G. Zhou, S. Chen, T. Sun and C. Yang, 6-Gingerol stabilized the p-VEGFR2/VEcadherin/β-catenin/actin complex promotes microvessel normalization and suppresses tumor progression, J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res., 2019, 38, 285 CrossRef .
D. P. Mansingh, S. O J, V. K. Sali and H. R. Vasanthi, [6]–Gingerol–induced cell cycle arrest, reactive oxygen species generation, and disruption of mitochondrial membrane potential are associated with apoptosis in human gastric cancer (AGS) cells, J. Biochem. Mol. Toxicol., 2018, 32, e22206 CrossRef .
V. Kapoor, S. Aggarwal and S. N. Das, 6-Gingerol Mediates its Anti Tumor Activities in Human Oral and Cervical Cancer Cell Lines through Apoptosis and Cell Cycle Arrest, Phytother. Res., 2016, 30, 588–595 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Kwaśniak, K. Kwaśniak, P. Kwasek, E. Świerzowska, A. Strojewska and J. Tabarkiewicz, The Influence of Lycopene, [6]-Gingerol, and Silymarin on the Apoptosis on U-118MG Glioblastoma Cells In VitroModel, Nutrients, 2019, 12, 96 CrossRef .
S. H. Lee, M. Cekanova and S. J. Baek, Multiple Mechanisms Are Involved in 6-Gingerol-Induced Cell Growth Arrest and Apoptosis in Human Colorectal Cancer Cells, Mol. Carcinog., 2008, 47, 197–208 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Yusof, S. Makpol, R. Jamal, R. Harun, N. Mokhtar and W. Z. W. Ngah, γ-Tocotrienol and 6-Gingerol in Combination Synergistically Induce Cytotoxicity and Apoptosis in HT-29 and SW837 Human Colorectal Cancer Cells, Molecules, 2015, 20, 10280–10297 CrossRef CAS .
T. Plengsuriyakarn and K. N. Bangchang, Preclinical Toxicology and Anticholangiocarcinoma Activity of Oral Formulation of Standardized Extract of Zingiber Officinale, Planta Med., 2020, 86, 104–112 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Mansingh, S. Pradhan, D. Biswas, R. Barathidasan and H. R. Vasanthi, Palliative Role of Aqueous Ginger Extract on NNitroso-N-Methylurea-Induced Gastric Cancer, Nutr. Cancer, 2020, 72, 157–169 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Lv, H. D. Chen, D. Soroka, X. X. Chen, T. C. Leung and S. M. Sang, 6-Gingerdiols as the Major Metabolites of 6-Gingerol in Cancer Cells and in Mice and Their Cytotoxic Effects on Human Cancer Cells, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2012, 60, 11372–11377 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Surh and S. S. Lee, Enzymic reduction of [6]-gingerol, a major pungent principle of ginger, in the cell-free preparation of rat liver, Life Sci., 1994, 54, PL321–PL326 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Chen, D. N. Soroka, J. Haider, K. F. F. Lagneau, T. C. Leung and S. M. Sang, [10]-Gingerdiols as the Major Metabolites of [10]-Gingerol in Zebrafish Embryos and in Humans and Their Hematopoietic Effects in Zebrafish Embryos, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2013, 61, 5353–5360 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Chen, J. S. Fu, H. Chen, Y. H. Hu, D. N. Soroka, J. R. Prigge, E. E. Schmidt, F. Yan, M. B. Major, X. X. Chen and S. M. Sang, Ginger Compound [6]-Shogaol and Its Cysteine-Conjugated Metabolite (M2) Activate Nrf2 in Colon Epithelial Cells in Vitro and in Vivo, Chem. Res. Toxicol., 2014, 27, 1575–1585 Search PubMed .
M. Woźniak, S. Makuch, K. Winograd, J. Wiśniewski, P. Ziółkowski and S. Agrawal, 6-Shogaol enhances the anticancer effect of 5-fluorouracil, oxaliplatin, and irinotecan via increase of apoptosis and autophagy in colon cancer cells in hypoxic/aglycemic conditions, BMC Complementary Med. Ther., 2020, 20, 141 Search PubMed .
A. Uthaipaisanwong, S. Oranratanaphan and N. Musigavong, Effects of ginger adjunct to the standard prophylaxis on reducing carboplatin and paclitaxel-induced nausea vomiting: a randomized controlled study, Support Care Cancer, 2020, 28, 3831–3838 Search PubMed .
J. L. Rios and M. C. Recio, Medicinal plants and antimicrobial activity, J. Ethnopharmacol., 2005, 100, 80–84 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wink, Evolutionary Advantage and Molecular Modes of Action of Multi-Component Mixtures, Curr. Drug Metab., 2009, 9, 996–1009 CrossRef .
S. Munda, S. Dutta, S. Haldar and M. Lal, Chemical Analysis and Therapeutic Uses of Ginger (Zingiber officinale Rosc.) Essential Oil: A Review, J. Essent. Oil-Bear. Plants, 2018, 21, 994–1002 CrossRef CAS .
T. Juwita, I. M. Puspitasari and J. Levita, Review Article Torch Ginger (Etlingera elatior): A Review on its Botanical Aspects, Phytoconstituents and Pharmacological Activities, Pak. J. Agric. Sci., 2018, 21(4), 151–165 CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Shen, K. Thakur, J. Z. Han, J. G. Zhang, F. He and Z. J. Wei, Antibacterial Activity and Mechanism of Ginger Essential Oil against Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus, Molecules, 2020, 25, 3955 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dilek and A. Ozgur, Antimicrobial Effects of Thymus vulgaris, Cinnamomum zeylanicum and Zingiber officinale Essential Oils on Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis Infections, Vet. Sci., 2020, 26, 413–417 Search PubMed .
I. Sasidharan and A. N. Menon, Comparative Chemical Composition and Antimicrobial Activity Fresh & Dry Ginger Oils (Zingiber officinale roscoe), Int. J. Curr. Pharm. Res., 2010, 2, 40–43 CAS .
P. S. Murthy, R. Gautam and J. P. Naik, Ginger Oleoresin Chemical Composition, Bioactivity and Application as Bio-Preservative, J. Food Process. Preserv., 2015, 39, 1905–1912 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bhaskar, A. Kumari, M. Singh, S. Kumar, S. Kumar, A. Dabla, S. Chaturvedi, V. Yadav, D. Chattopadhyay and V. P. Dwivedi, [6]-Gingerol exhibits potent anti-mycobacterial and immunomodulatory activity against tuberculosis, Int. Immunopharmacol., 2020, 87, 106809 CrossRef CAS .
M. Park, J. Bae and D. S. Lee, Antibacterial Activity of Gingerol isolated from Ginger Rhizome Against Periodontal Bacteria, Phytother. Res., 2008, 22, 1446–1449 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nagoshi, S. Shiota, T. Kuroda, T. Hatano, T. Yoshida, R. Kariyama and T. Tsuchiya, Synergistic Effect of [10]-Gingerol and Aminoglycosides against Vancomycin-Resistant Enterococci (VRE), Biol. Pharm. Bull., 2006, 29, 443–447 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Wang, C. Y. Chen, H. A. Chen, W. C. Huang, W. R. Lin, T. C. Chen, C. Y. Lin, H. J. Chien, P. L. Lu, C. M. Lin and Y. H. Chen, Zingiber offi cinale (Ginger) Compounds Have Tetracycline-resistance Modifying Effects Against Clinical Extensively Drug-Resistant Acinetobacter baumannii, Phytother. Res., 2010, 24, 1825–1830 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghasemzadeh, H. Z. E. Jaafar, A. Baghdadi and A. T. Meigooni, Formation of 6-, 8- and 10-Shogaol in Ginger through Application of Different Drying Methods: Altered Antioxidant and Antimicrobial Activity, Molecules, 2018, 23, 1646 CrossRef .
A. Ghasemzadeh, H. Z. E. Jaafar and A. Rahmat, Changes in antioxidant and antibacterial activities as well as phytochemical constituents associated with ginger storage and polyphenol oxidase activity, BMC Complementary Altern. Med., 2016, 16, 382 CrossRef .
D. Gao and Y. Y. Zhang, Comparative antibacterial activities of extracts of dried ginger and processed ginger, Pharmacogn. J., 2010, 2, 41–44 CrossRef .
A. Draszanowska, M. K. Tymoszczyk and M. A. Olszewska, The effect of ginger rhizome and refrigerated storage time on the quality of pasteurized canned meat, Food Sci. Technol. Int., 2020, 26, 300–310 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. C. Beristain-Bauza, P. Hernández-Carranza, T. S. Cid-Pérez, R. Ávila-Sosa, I. I. Ruiz-López and C. E. Ochoa-Velasco, Antimicrobial Activity of Ginger (Zingiber Officinale) and Its Application in Food Products, Food Rev. Int., 2019, 1–20 Search PubMed .
H. Tang, W. S. Darwish, W. R. E. Ghareeb, N. A. A. Humam, L. Chen, R. M. Zhong, Z. J. Xiao and J. K. Ma, Microbial quality and formation of biogenic amines in the meat and edible offal of Camelus dromedaries, with a protection trial using gingerol and nisin, Food Sci. Nutr., 2020, 8, 2094–2101 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Vijaya, N. Jayaprakash, K. Kombaiah, K. Kaviyarasu, L. J. Kennedy, R. J. Ramalingam, H. A. A. Lohedan, M. A. VM and M. Maaza, Bioreduction potentials of dried root of Zingiber officinale for a simple green synthesis of silver nanoparticles: Antibacterial studies, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2017, 177, 62–68 CrossRef .
B. Turakhia, S. Chikkala and S. Shah, Novelty of Bioengineered Iron Nanoparticles in Nanocoated Surgical Cotton: A Green Chemistry, Adv. Pharmacol. Sci., 2019, 2019, 9825969 Search PubMed .
O. S. Oladeji and A. K. Oyebamiji, Phenolic compounds and plant extracts as potential natural anti-obesity substances, Heliyon, 2020, 6, e04150 CrossRef .
D. K. Patel, R. Kumar, D. Laloo and S. Hemalatha, Natural medicines from plant source used for therapy of diabetes mellitus: An overview of its pharmacological aspects, Asian Pac. J. Trop. Med., 2012, 2, 239–250 CrossRef .
A. Satija and F. B. Hu, Plant-based diets and cardiovascular health, Trends Cardiovasc. Med., 2018, 28, 437–441 CrossRef .
X. H. Deng, S. W. Zhang, J. Z. Wu, X. J. Sun, Z. Y. Shen, J. C. Dong and J. H. Huang, Promotion of Mitochondrial Biogenesis via Activation of AMPK-PGC1α Signaling Pathway by Ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe) Extract, and Its Major Active Component 6-Gingerol, J. Food Sci., 2019, 84, 2101–2111 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Zhang, L. Dong, X. S. Hu, F. Q. Feng and F. Chen, 6-Gingerol, a Functional Polyphenol of Ginger, Promotes Browning through an AMPK-Dependent Pathway in 3T3-L1 Adipocytes, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2019, 67, 14056–14065 CrossRef CAS .
G. Saravanan, P. Ponmurugan, M. A. Deepa and B. Senthilkumar, Anti-obesity action of gingerol: effect on lipid profile, insulin, leptin, amylase and lipase in male obese rats induced by a high-fat diet, J. Sci. Food Agric., 2014, 94, 2972–2977 CrossRef CAS .
N. Maharlouei, R. Tabrizi, K. B. Lankarani, A. Rezaianzadeh, M. Akbari, F. Kolahdooz, M. Rahimi, F. Keneshlou and Z. Asemi, The effects of ginger intake on weight loss and metabolic profiles among overweight and obese subjects: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials, Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr., 2019, 59, 1753–1766 CrossRef CAS .
V. E. Attari, A. M. Mahdavi, Z. Javadivala, S. Mahluji, S. Z. Vahed and A. Ostadrahimi, A systematic review of the anti–obesity and weight lowering effect of ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe) and its mechanisms of action, Phytother. Res., 2018, 32, 577–585 CrossRef .
S. Momtaz, A. S. Maghsoudi, A. H. Abdolghaffari, E. Jasemi, S. Rezazadeh, S. Hassani, M. Ziaee, M. Abdollahi, S. Behzad and S. M. Nabavi, Polyphenols targeting diabetes via the AMP activated protein kinase pathway; future approach to drug discovery, Crit. Rev. Clin. Lab. Sci., 2019, 56, 472–492 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Son, Y. Miura and K. Yagasaki, Mechanisms for antidiabetic effect of gingerol in cultured cells and obese diabetic model mice, Cytotechnology, 2015, 67, 641–652 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Roufogalis, 
            Zingiber officinale, (Ginger): A Future Outlook on Its Potential in Prevention and Treatment of Diabetes and Prediabetic States, New J. Sci., 2014, 2014, 674684 Search PubMed .
M. H. Gayar, M. M. M. Aboromia, N. AliIbrahim and M. H. Hafiz, Effects of ginger powder supplementation on glycemic status and lipid profile in newly diagnosed obese patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, Obesity, 2019, 14, 100094 Search PubMed .
L. Y. Yu, W. L. Shi and X. G. Guo, Cardio-Protective Role of Gingerol along with Prominent Anti-Diabetic Cardiomyopathy Action in A Streptozotocin-Induced Diabetes Mellitus Rat Model, Cell J., 2017, 19, 469–475 Search PubMed .
J. X. Wen, L. Zhang, J. Wang, J. B. Wang, L. F. Wang, R. L. Wang, R. S. Li, H. H. Liu, S. Z. Wei, H. T. Li, W. J. Zou and Y. L. Zhao, Therapeutic effects of higenamine combined with [6]-gingerol on chronic heart failure induced by doxorubicin via ameliorating mitochondrial function, J. Cell. Mol. Med., 2020, 24, 4036–4050 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hana, P. P. Liua, M. M. Liu, Z. H. Wei, S. Fan, X. T. Wang, S. J. Sun and Li Chua, [6]-Gingerol Ameliorates ISO-Induced Myocardial Fibrosis by Reducing Oxidative Stress, Inflammation, and Apoptosis through Inhibition of TLR4/MAPKs/NF-κB Pathway, Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 2020, 2000003 CrossRef .
X. Han, Y. Y. Zhang, Y. R. Liang, J. P. Zhang, M. Y. Li, Z. F. Zhao, X. Zhang, Y. R. Xue, Y. Zhang, J. K. Xiao and L. Chu, 6−Gingerol, an active pungent component of ginger, inhibits Ltype Ca2+ current, contractility, and Ca2+ transients in isolated rat ventricular myocytes, Food Sci. Nutr., 2019, 7, 1344–1352 CrossRef CAS .
M. Iranshahy and B. Javadi, Diet therapy for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease in view of traditional Persian medicine: A review, Iran. J. Basic Med. Sci., 2019, 22, 1102–1117 Search PubMed .
J. G. Choi, S. Y. Kim, M. S. Jeong and M. S. Oh, Pharmacotherapeutic potential of ginger and its compounds in age-related neurological disorders, Pharmacol. Ther., 2018, 182, 56–69 CrossRef CAS .
D.
T. Leal, G. G. Fontes, J. K. D. Villa, R. B. Freitas, M. G. Campos, C. A. Carvalho, V. R. Pizziolo and M. A. N. Diaz, 
            Zingiber officinale formulation reduces hepatic injury and weight gain in rats fed an unhealthy diet, An. Acad. Bras. Cienc., 2019, 91, e20180975 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Gabr, A. H. Alghadir and G. A. Ghoniem, Biological activities of ginger against cadmium-induced renal toxicity, Saudi J. Biol. Sci., 2019, 26, 382–389 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Bodagh, I. Maleki and A. Hekmatdoost, Ginger in gastrointestinal disorders: A systematic review of clinical trials, Food Sci. Nutr., 2018, 7, 96–108 CrossRef .
F. Shayesteh, F. Haidari, A. A. Shayesteh, J. Mohammadi-Asl and K. Ahmadi-Angali, Ginger in patients with active ulcerative colitis: a study protocol for a randomized controlled trial, Trials, 2020, 21, 278 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, S. J. Jung, E. K. Choi, K. C. Ha, H. I. Baek, Y. K. Park, K. H. Han, S. Y. Jeong, J. H. Oh, Y. S. Cha, B. H. Park and S. W. Chae, The effects of steamed ginger ethanolic extract on weight and body fat loss: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial, Food Sci. Biotechnol., 2019, 29, 265–273 CrossRef .
E. S. Oh, K. S. Petersen, P. M. Kris-Etherton and C. J. Rogers, Spices in a High-Saturated-Fat, High-Carbohydrate Meal Reduce Postprandial Proinflammatory Cytokine Secretion in Men with Overweight or Obesity: A 3-Period, Crossover, Randomized Controlled Trial, J. Nutr., 2020, 150, 1600–1609 CrossRef .
B. Andallu, B. Radhika and V. Suryakantham, Effect of aswagandha, ginger and mulberry on hyperglycemia and hyperlipidemia, Plant Foods Hum. Nutr., 2003, 58, 1–7 CrossRef .
I. Lindstedt, Ginger and diabetes: A mini-review, Arch. Gen. Intern. Med., 2018, 2, 29–33 Search PubMed .
M. Ghaeidamini Harouni, S. Rahgozar, S. Rahimi Babasheikhali, A. Safavi and E. S. Ghodousi, Fatty acid synthase, a novel poor prognostic factor for acute lymphoblastic leukemia which can be targeted by ginger extract, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 14072 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rondanelli, F. Fossari, V. Vecchio, C. Gasparri, G. Peroni, D. Spadaccini, A. Riva, G. Petrangolini, G. Iannello, M. Nichetti, V. Infantino and S. Perna, Clinical trials on pain lowering effect of ginger: A narrative review, Phytother. Res., 2020, 1–14 Search PubMed .
W. Tianthong and V. Phupong, A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial on the efficacy of ginger in the prevention of abdominal distention in post cesarean section patients, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 6835 CrossRef .
P. Menon, J. Perayil, A. Fenol, M. R. Peter, P. Lakshmi and R. Suresh, Effectiveness of ginger on pain following periodontal surgery - A randomized cross over clinical trial, J. Ayurveda Integr. Med., 2020, 18, S0975–S9476 Search PubMed .
R. Yamprasert, W. Chanvimalueng, N. Mukkasombut and A. Itharat, Ginger extract versus Loratadine in the treatment of allergic rhinitis: a randomized controlled trial, BMC Complementary Med. Ther., 2020, 20, 119 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The main chemical constituents of ginger and their transformation process.	 

 	Fig. 2  The underlying molecular mechanisms of gingerols (including anti-inflammatory, invasion, metastasis, apoptosis, cell cycle arrest, autophagy, pyroptosis, and ferroptosis).	 

Anti-oxidative ability	6-Gingerol	Eliminate DPPH˙ and reduce Fe3+ to Fe2+ in FRAP assay	
78

6-Gingerol	Antioxidant activity scavenging capacity for DPPH˙ and ABTS˙+	
81

6-Gingerol	Enhance the activity of SOD, GPx and GSH	
82

6-Gingerol	Regulate lipogenesis, fatty acid oxidation, oxidative stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction	
24

8-Gingerol	Decrease ROS levels in B16F10 and B16F1 cells	
83

10-Gingerol	Enhance SOD activity and MDA concentration in a concentration-dependent manner	
84

 
Anti-inflammatory activity	6-Gingerol	Decrease the levels of inflammatory factors, and inducible NO synthase	
95

10-Gingerol	Inhibit IL-1b, IL-6, and TNF-α significantly	
97

6-Gingerol	Downregulate the key proteins of NF-κB/MAPK signaling pathways	
98

6-Gingerol	Inhibit the expression of GFAP and TNF-α in the rat brain	
99

6-Gingerol	Downregulate the expression of TNF-α, IL-1β, INOS, and COX-2	
21

Ginger	Reduction of TNF-α and IL-1β expression with ulcerative colitis patients	
191

Ginger	Reduction of IL-1β expression with cardiovascular disease patients	
192

6-Gingerol	Constrain Mycobacterium tuberculosis	
158

Anti-microbial potential	12-Gingerol	Constrain oral pathogens	
159

10-Gingerol	Constrain vancomycin-resistant enterococci	
160

10-Gingerol	Constrain Acinetobacter baumannii	
161

Gingerol	Reduce the microbial load of the camel meat and edible offal	
167

 
Anti-obesity	6-Gingerol	Promote the adipocytes browning through an AMPK-dependent pathway	
174

6-Gingerol	Promote fat browning and regulation of lipid metabolism	
175

 
Anti-diabetic	6-Gingerol	Inhibited the increase of fasting blood glucose level and enhanced the glucose intolerance in db/db mice	
179

Gingerol	Increase glucose level in muscle cells by intaking Ca2+ Signaling pathways	
180

Gingerol	Increase inflammatory factors and levels of reactive oxygen systems	
182

6-Gingerol	Upregulation of LKB1/AMPKα/Sirt1-associated pathway	
183

6-Gingerol	Inhibit TLR4/MAPKs/NF-kappa B signaling pathways	
184

Gingerol	Inhibit L-type Ca2+ current and contractile force in rat cardiomyocytes	
185

Ginger	Reduction of blood glucose, total cholesterol with diabetic patients	
193

Neurodegenerative diseases	Gingerol	Suppress astrocyte overactivation and contribute to improving cognitive ability	
99

Gingerol	Improve the neurological symptoms and pathological conditions neurological	
187

 
Liver injury	Gingerol	Impede pyroptosis through the Nrf2 pathway	
126

Nephrotoxic conditions	Gingerol	Restoring the level of renal function biomarkers	
189


10-Gingerol	Human triple-negative breast cancer cells	Not target on caspase family	Promote apoptosis independent of caspase	
22

6-Gingerol	Human cervical adenocarcinoma cells	Induction of cleaved PRPP	Promote apoptosis and arrest of G0/G1 phase	
111

6-Gingerol	Human gastric cancer cells	Reduction of pro-caspase-3 and pro-caspase-9	Promote apoptosis and arrest of G2/M phase	
112

10-Gingerol	Human HCT116 human colon cancer cells	Induction of cleaved-caspase-9	Promote mitochondria related apoptosis	
113

10-Gingerol	Human triple-negative breast cancer cells	Induction of cleaved caspase 3 and reduction of Cdk-6 cyclin	Promote apoptosis and arrest of G0/G1 phase	
114

6-Gingerol/6-shogaol	Human pancreatic cancer cells	Induction of ratio of LC3-II/LC3-I in cytoplasm and reduction of SQSTM1/p62 and mTOR	Promote ROS-mediated autophagy	
119

Gingerol	Huamn A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells	Reduction of autophagy flux	Reduce autophagy	
120

6-Gingerol	Human HeLa cells	Induction of cleaved-caspase-3	Promote caspase-mediated apoptosis and autophagy	
121

Gingerol	Human T lymphoma Jurkat cells	Induction of ratio of LC3-II/LC3-I in cytoplasm	Promote autophagy	
122

Gingerol analogue	Human MDA-MB-231 cells	Not target on caspase family	Promote caspase-independent apoptosis and autophagy	
123

6-Gingerol	Human endothelial cells/B16F10 melanoma cells	Reduction VEGF- and bFGF-induced proliferation	Reduce angiogenes in vitro and in vivo	
134

8-Gingerol	Human colorectal cancer cells	Induction of EGFR/STAT/ERK signaling pathways	Reduce epidermal growth and promote apoptosis	
135

6-Gingerol	Hepatoma cell line PLC/PRF/5 and breast cancer cell line MCF-7	Stabilization of p-VEGFR2/VE-cadherin/β-catenin/actin complex	Inhibit tumor progression	
136

6-Gingerol	Human gastric cancer (AGS) cells	Induction of ROS and reduction mitochondrial membrane potential	Promote ROS-mediated apoptosis	
137

6-Gingerol	Human oral SCC4/cervical HeLa cell lines	Induction of pro-caspase-3 and arrest of G2-phase in HeLa cells and S-phase in SCC4 cells	Promote apoptosis and cell phase arrest	
138

6-Gingerol	Human glioblastoma cells U118-MG	Reduction of pro-caspase-3 and induction of cleaved-caspase-3	Promote apoptosis	
139

6-Gingerol	Human colorectal cancer cells	Induction of mitochondrial injury	Inhibit cell survival pathways	
140

6-Gingerol	HT-29 colorectal cancer cells	Induction of cytotoxicity	Promote apoptosis	
141

6-Gingerol	C57BL/6 mice models	Reduction of MAPK expression	Reduce macrophage pyroptosis	
125

Ginger	Patients with tumor	Reduction of acute phase nausea in patients	
	
148

Ginger	Patients with cancer	Reduction of fatty acid synthase	
	
194


 	Fig. 3  The bioactive potential of gingerol in different diseases, and its potential health benefits.	 

Ginger	1000 to 3000 mg day−1	Reduction of TNF-α and IL-1β expression with ulcerative colitis patients	
94

Ginger	2000 mg day−1	Reduction of acute phase nausea in patients	
149

Ginger capsule	1000 mg day−1	Reduction of TNF-α and IL-1β expression with ulcerative colitis patients	
191

Steamed ginger	100 mg steamed ginger day−1	Body weight and its mass index were significantly lower with Steamed ginger	
192

Mixture spices	6000 mg day−1	Ginger supplementations modulate the expression of inflammatory factors	
193

Ginger powder	3000 mg day−1	Ginger powder can alleviate diabetes and hypercholesterolemia	
194

Ginger	100 mg, 300 mg and 500 mg day−1	Ginger can alleviate glucose and lipids in patients with diabetes	
195

Ginger extract	167 μg mL−1	Ginger reduces the fatty acid synthase activity	
196

Ginger	From 250 mg to 4000 mg	Ginger as a safe and effective pain reliever	
197

Ginger	500 mg per capsule	Ginger can relieve the severity of distention and improved eating ability	
198

Ginger powder	400 mg day−1	Ginger's effect of periodontal pain relief was comparable to that of ibuprofen	
199

Ginger extract	500 mg day−1	Ginger extract can cause nasal symptoms	
200

ABTS˙+	2,2′-Azinobis-(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid)
ALL	Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Apaf-1	Apoptotic protease activating factor-1
APC	Adenomatous polyposis coli
ARE	Antioxidant reaction elements
Caspase	Cysteine-containing aspartate-specific proteases
DISC	Death-inducing signaling complex
DPPH˙	2,2-Diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl
EGFR	Epidermal growth factor receptor
EMT	Epithelial–mesenchymal transition
ERK1/2	Extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2
ERKs	Extracellular signal-regulated kinases
FRAP	Ferric-reducing antioxidant power
GPx	Glutathione peroxidase
GPX4	Glutathione peroxidase 4
HPLC	High-performance liquid chromatographic
IL-1β	Interleukin-1β
IL-6	Interleukin-6
JNK	c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)
Keap1	Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1
LPS	Lipopolysaccharide
MAE	Microwave assisted extraction
MMPs	Matrix metalloproteinases
NAC	
N-Acetylcystein
NF-κB	NF-kappaB
Nrf2	Nuclear factor erythroid-2 related factor 2
p38-MAPK	p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
PI3K	Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase
PKC	Protein kinase C
RNS	Reactive nitrogen species
ROS	Reactive oxygen species
SOD	Super oxide dismutase
TNF-α	Tumor necrosis factor α
VEGF	Vascular endothelial growth factor

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
