Kinetic and material properties of interfaces governing slow response and long timescale phenomena in perovskite solar cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE00802K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE00802K
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2054-2079Kinetic and material properties of interfaces governing slow response and long timescale phenomena in perovskite solar cells

        
          
            Hongxia 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Antonio 
            Guerrero
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Agustín 
            Bou
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Abdullah M. 
            Al-Mayouf
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Juan 
            Bisquert
          
          
        
      *b
aSchool of Chemistry, Physics and Mechanical Engineering, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD 4001, Australia. E-mail: hx.wang@qut.edu.au
bInstitute of Advanced Materials, Universitat Jaume I, 12006, Castello, Spain. E-mail: aguerrer@uji.es; bisquert@uji.es
cElectrochemical Sciences Research Chair (ESRC), Department of Chemistry, Science College, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Received 
      11th March 2019
    , Accepted 1st May 2019First published on 1st May 2019AbstractThe last decade has witnessed the skyrocketing progress of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with their current world record energy conversion efficiency reaching over 24%. Nevertheless, the unsatisfactory device stability and current–voltage hysteresis normally observed with most PSCs under operational conditions are the bottlenecks that restrict the application of this photovoltaic technology in practice. It is known that interface properties are at the heart of an electronic device's performance. Understanding the interactions occurring at the interfaces is important to design and develop effective strategies to address these issues associated with PSCs. In this review, we summarize the most recent advancement in understanding the interfaces in PSCs, in particular the interfaces of perovskite/electron transport layer (ETL) and perovskite/hole transport layer (HTL). Our main interest is to provide guidance on the immense complexity of dynamic behaviours of PSCs, particularly concerning the slowest time scale measurements that have a maximum impact on the actual operation of the solar cell. Therefore we address the separation of phenomena such as ion migration, interfacial charge accumulation, and surface electrochemical reactions. We provide an analysis of electrooptical small perturbation methods, including impedance spectroscopy (IS), and a description of negative capacitance, as well as spatially resolved techniques. The impact of different contacts with variable morphology and composition on the perovskite/ETL and perovskite/HTL interface properties reflected by the kinetics of charge transport and chemical reactions is discussed to provide deep insights into the operational mechanism of PSCs. We reach the conclusion that a number of measurements observed in the time frame of 0.1 to 10 s are due to the slow response of the ionic double layer, and we identify the asymmetric surface charge and discharge processes responsible for such kinetic effects. We also suggest the research direction regarding new approaches to understanding interfacial reactions of PSCs to achieve high device performance in the future.
Hongxia Wang
Assoc. Prof. Hongxia Wang is currently leading a research group at Queensland University of Technology (QUT) dedicated to development of new routes to enhance the performance and stability of next generation solar cells, in particular perovskite solar cells and energy storage devices such as supercapacitors through innovative material engineering and device engineering. She has published over 100 peer-reviewed research papers and some of her papers are selected ESI high impact papers. She was the recipient of the “Australian Research Council (ARC) Future Fellowship”, and “Solar Energy Best Paper Award for 2016 in the topic of Photovoltaics” from the International Solar Energy Society.
Antonio Guerrero
Antonio Guerrero (PhD, University of East Anglia, UK) is contracted as a Ramon y Cajal fellow at the Institute of Advanced materials (INAM) in Castelló (Spain). He is specialized in the synthesis and characterization of semiconducting materials for their implementation in a variety of electrical devices. Over the last 5 years, his work has been mainly focused on three different lines of research: 1 – perovskite solar cells, 2 – organic photovoltaics and 3 – (photo)electrochemical cells. Overall, he is the author of more than 70 research articles, one book, one book chapter and he is the inventor of two patents.
Agustín Bou
Agustín Bou graduated in Physics from Universitat de València, Spain, in 2016 and joined the Institute of Advanced Materials of the Universitat Jaume I in Castellón, Spain, in 2017. His main topic of interest is the characterization and modeling of energy devices. His research has focused particularly on perovskite solar cells, focusing on impedance spectroscopy characterization and potential distribution and charge distribution modeling, including interface analysis.
Abdullah M. Al-Mayouf
Abdullah M. Al-Mayouf is professor of physical chemistry at King Saud University, Saudi Arabia and the director of the Electrochemical Sciences Research Chair (ESRC). His research interests focus on porous and nanomaterials, electrochemical methods, electrocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis and surface modification. Currently, he is the editor-in-chief for Journal of Saudi Chemical Society.
Juan Bisquert
Juan Bisquert is a professor of applied physics at Universitat Jaume I de Castelló and the director of the Institute of Advanced materials (INAM). His main topics of interest are perovskite solar cells and solar fuel production. He has developed the application of measurement techniques and physical modeling that relate the device operation with the elementary steps that take place at the nanoscale dimension. He authored several books including Physics of Solar Cells: Perovskites, Organics, and Photovoltaics Fundamentals (CRC Press).

Broader context
While metal halide perovskite materials have shown outstanding properties for applications in photovoltaics and optoelectronics, the operation of the devices is hindered by a number of phenomena that occur with extremely low frequencies and long times, and have proved very difficult to characterize systematically. Based on an extensive overview of contact phenomena we show that the interface of the perovskite material with organic or inorganic contacts is a site where a combination of ionic and electronic phenomena conspire to produce effects that severely modify the expectations received from traditional solar cell operation. Our analysis has three main aspects: the charge accumulation phenomena, the dynamic phenomena, and the physico-chemical features of the interface. From a review of a very broad range of methods and materials, we propose a general interpretation of the main factors dominating the response. In summary one can observe totally reversible phenomena of charge accumulation, a partial ionic binding that retards the response, and intense chemical interactions that perturb and invalidate the devices. Sorting out these phenomena is a key objective for ensuring stable performance and endurance in future technologies of metal halide perovskites.

1. Introduction
Semiconductor materials based on metal halide perovskites have received enormous attention owing to their exceptional opto-electronic properties, which open applications in areas such as solar cells, light emitting diodes, X-ray detectors, etc. The chemical formula of the perovskite can be described as ABX3 where A = monovalent cations such as methylammonium (MA), formamidinium (FA), and cesium (Cs), B = divalent cations such as lead (Pb), and tin (Sn) and X = halide anions including chloride (Cl), bromide (Br), and iodide (I). MAPbX3 was first synthesized by Weber in 1978.1 The first attempt of applying methylammonium lead halide (bromide, iodide) (MAPbBr3, MAPbI3) in solar cells was reported by Kojima et al. in 2009, who employed the perovskite nanocrystals as light absorbers in a conventional sensitized solar cell using iodide/triiodide based liquid electrolyte.2 The past ten years have witnessed the skyrocketing progress of the power conversion efficiency of perovskite solar cells thanks to advancement in material engineering and interface optimization. The current certified record efficiency of PSCs is 24% for single junction solar cells, which is comparable to crystalline silicon solar cells and even surpasses the efficiency of thin film CIGS and CdTe solar cells. Compared to the solar cells based on light absorbers such as silicon, CIGS and CdTe, the most attractive features of PSCs include low temperature solution processing methods and high efficiency achieved with very thin layers (<500 nm), as well as the abundance of raw materials. These make them viable for large-scale production of light weight, flexible PSC devices using cost-effective methods such as roll-to-roll, screen-printing or slot-die, achieving low cost solar electricity in the future.
It has been well established that in addition to the excellent bulk photovoltaic (PV) characteristics, the interface properties determine to a large extent the performance of a hybrid perovskite solar cell (PSC) device. A typical PSC device architecture is composed of fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/electron transport layer (ETL)/perovskite/hole transport layer (HTL)/gold, which contains four interfaces. Different interface materials used in PSCs have been shown in recent reviews.3–6 Moreover, it is often assumed that slow dynamic effects such as hysteresis in j–V curves are associated with ionic motion effects. However, a deterministic connection between the ionic displacement and the observed kinetic variations of the outer electronic current has not been established yet. In this review we will discuss the recent advances of understanding of the dynamic properties of PSC devices on the time scales associated with actual operation of the solar cell. We argue that the actuation of ions on the contact interface is a predominant cause of different types of slow kinetic effects. We further connect these dynamic effects with the chemical reactivity at the interfaces, which ultimately influences the device stability.
2. Timescales of ionic/electronic phenomena in PSCs
The first question we ask is about the transport rates in a PSC. And not only electronic transport, as it has been well established that a significant amount of ionic displacement influences the characteristics of measurement and operation of PSCs.7,8 We are used to solar cells that are predominantly governed by electronic transport. For example, in silicon solar cells carrier transport is rather fast so that it is not likely to influence ordinary experimental observations, compared to recombination events.9 This is why we can rely on energy diagrams that are determined with respect to a fixed background of ionic density.10 On the other hand, in solar cells made of nanostructured metal oxide the electron transport is considerably slower and the transport resistance can be unambiguously determined.11 In dye-sensitized solar cells diffusion of ions in the electrolyte often forms a prominent feature, but it can be neatly separated from electron transport components by measurement protocols.12,13
In a PSC, it has been found that many slow phenomena appear in physical measurements, the prominent representative being the hysteresis of current–voltage (j–V) curves.14–17 Slow ionic transport is one possible reason for such a sluggish response.18 However, a clear connection between the rate of transport and the time response of PV properties has not been achieved, yet.
Recent work enables the quantification of ionic diffusion rates for lead halide perovskite materials, especially at room temperature. Methods such as the galvanostatic measurement,19 impedance spectroscopy (IS), using the classical transmission line method,20 and suppression of luminescence in laterally contacted electrodes,21 have provided quantitative values of the diffusion coefficient of halide defects, which is on the order of DVI = 1 × 10−8 cm2 s−1 for methylammonium lead trihalide perovskites (i.e. MAPbI3 or MAPbBr3). In addition, cation transport has also been measured for extrinsic Li+ and MA+. Alternatively, a variety of techniques operating in a wide array of frequency ranges have provided values of electronic mobility in metal halide perovskites.22 While there is a scattering of values depending on many factors such as the specific composition and preparation methods of the perovskite materials, it is safe to take some representative values, which are indicated in Table 1.
Table 1 Some characteristic kinetic coefficients in PSCs based on MAPbI3 or MAPbBr3, at room temperature




Type
Diffusion coefficient D (cm2 s−1)
Carrier mobility μ (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Measurementsa





a Representative techniques used to determine the mobility value: i.e. THzC: optical-pump-THz-probe photoconductivity, MWC: microwave conductivity, PLQ: PL quenching method, SCLC: space-charge limited current, IS: impedance spectroscopy.





Electron transport
0.3
∼1–100
Several methods like THzC, MWC, PLQ or SCLC22


Extrinsic Li+
1 × 10−7
4 × 10−6
IS23


Halide vacancy transport (VI+)
1 × 10−8
4 × 10−7
Galvanostatic voltage measurement,19 IS,20 PL suppresion21




The carrier conductivity (associated with the transport resistance) is the crucial quantity controlling possible power losses and determining which species govern carrier redistribution upon application of an external perturbation. A figure of merit that shows which current (either ionic or electronic) will be dominant in each situation is the quotient of conductivities. Considering electronic density n and ionic density c we expect that (1)
This result indicates that in any typical situation the current is mostly driven by electronic current, unless the density of mobile ions becomes many orders of magnitude larger than the electronic density. The latter may be expected in the dark in extremely low doped samples.
Starting from the previous general considerations, we may now compute several time constants that describe characteristic phenomena in hybrid perovskite materials. In order to establish the relative significance of transport phenomena on the kinetic timescale, it is necessary to choose a characteristic distance. A good point to start our analysis is to consider the kinetics of transport of ionic carriers across a region with a thickness of d = 100 nm. The transit time for each carrier to diffuse across such a distance is (2)
The results for a typical solar cell layer with a thickness on the order of hundreds of nanometers are shown in Table 2 and summarized in Fig. 1. For ionic transport, this will be the time needed for ionic carriers consisting of halide vacancies to cancel a new composition gradient that occurs under external variations, and it takes the value τ = 10−2 s.
Table 2 Some characteristic timescales of kinetic phenomena in PSCs MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3, at room temperature




Type
Time




Electronic transport across d = 100 nm





Halide vacancy diffusion over a distance d = 100 nm





The response of ions accumulated at the perovskite surface

τ = 100–102 s


Cation vacancy diffusion over a distance d = 100 nm

τ = 103 s




 Fig. 1  Representative characteristic times for ionic phenomena in a typical perovskite solar cell. 
It is quite frequently found in PSC a much lower time scale for changes of variables like photovoltage or photocurrent.16 Here this kinetic phenomenon with τ = 100–102 s is attributed to ionic double layer kinetics, as it will be discussed later on. Finally, another type of migration occurs on the time scale of many hours (τ > 103 s), which can be associated with the much less mobile cation species (i.e. MA+).
3. Fast ionic transport in the bulk of the PSC
Ionic transport has emerged as a key player in perovskite research but its precise role in the slow response observed during electrical measurements and its relationship with degradation dynamics is under debate. On the one hand, there is strong evidence pointing to fast ionic transport in lead halide perovskites. An alternative measurement to the solar cell diode is a planar configuration with lateral contacts that provides a transport distance of hundreds of μm. In such a system the analysis of the PL by excitation at 35 mW cm−2 under an applied bias reveals the formation of a dark front that advances with time (Fig. 2).21 Note that the applied voltage is similar to those at the maximum power point in working PSCs. In addition, it is observed that the material becomes resistive as the dark front advances, indicating that doping is reduced in the dark area. Therefore, it is clear that techniques with spatial resolution are required to unambiguously correlate electrical measurements with the electronic/ionic response.
 Fig. 2  (a–c) Time dependent PL images of a perovskite film CH3NH3PbI3−xClx measured under an external electric field of ∼2 × 104 V m−1, interdigitated configuration with a channel width of ∼150 μm. (d) 1/I2 monitored as a function of time during the measurement of experiment (a). Adapted with permission from ref. 21. 
On the other hand, a careful analysis of the timescale of the ionic movement in the bulk of the perovskite layer highlights that ionic transport towards the interface cannot be the main reason that is responsible for the slow electrical response observed in PSCs (i.e. hysteresis). In particular, simultaneous analysis of the measured current during the previous PL experiment allows the calculation of the diffusion coefficient of the migrating iodine vacancies.21 A value of D = 1 × 10−7 cm2 s−1 leads to ionic transit times through a perovskite layer of 100 nm on the order of miliseconds. This ionic migration timescale has also been confirmed by another spatially resolved technique, transient Kelvin probe force microscopy (Tr-KPFM).24 Alternatively, j–V measurements are carried out at scan rates that typically take several seconds. Therefore, it is clear that activated ionic transport in the bulk of the perovskite layer is only one requirement to observe hysteresis but not the main reason. Indeed, all evidence points to the chemical and physical interactions of these migrating ions with the external interfaces as the main reason for hysteresis observation. For example, a thin layer of PCBM placed on the top of TiO2 is able to completely suppress the measured hysteresis in the j–V response of devices with activated ion migration in the bulk of materials like MAPbI3.25 In the next section, we will describe the evidence for ionic accumulation at the surface of the PSC, and later we discuss the methods of observation of the kinetics of the surface charge.
4. Ionic effects at the interface
Under an applied bias ions rapidly reach the external interfaces with formation of an electrical double layer as it is well known in solid state electrochemistry. The combination of ionic and electronic phenomena such as space charge, interfacial electron transfer and ionic reactivity leads to several possible types of physical and chemical interactions at the interfaces. There are different time resolved electrical techniques that can be used to decouple ionic and electronic responses, such as impedance spectroscopy, which has been widely used in PSCs. For example, a pure ionic contribution with the classical transmission line for ion migration is observed during the measurements of MAPbBr3 monocrystals (Fig. 3a). This technique measures the electrical response in the frequency domain separating resistive and capacitive contributions (or charge accumulation). A useful method to represent the impedance data is the complex impedance plot where the x-axis (Z′) is related to resistive elements and the y-axis (−Z′′) to capacitive elements. A resistive element connected in parallel to a capacitor (RC) leads to an arc in the complex impedance plot. The most common feature in the impedance spectra of a PSC is the appearance of two arcs as shown in Fig. 3b. The data can be fitted to the equivalent circuit shown. Both resistances R1 and R2 correspond to losses from both bulk and interfacial recombination.19 Moreover, both have the same trends as a function of photovoltage or light intensity, indicating that they have a common origin. In contrast, the source of capacitances is clearly different. The capacitance–frequency (C–f) plot of the IS data is very useful to understand the capacitive contributions and correlate the charge accumulation with the characteristic time of the physical process. It has been established that there are two plateaus indicating well-differentiated capacitances in the C–f plot of PSCs, Fig. 3b. The high frequency capacitance Cg is the dielectric capacitance,26 related to the bulk polarization, and the low frequency capacitance Cs corresponds to surface accumulation processes.21 The fact that Cs changes when different contacts configurations are used is strong evidence for the existence of a surface capacitance. A similar behaviour is observed in perovskite quantum dot films.27
 Fig. 3  Summary of equivalent circuits used for the analysis of impedance spectra of perovskite solar cells with examples of representative spectra for each circuit. Here, we use the following notation for capacitances: Cg is the geometrical capacitance, C1 is the low frequency capacitance usually associated with accumulation, and C2 is the intermediate frequency capacitance; and for resistances: RS is the series resistance, and R1, R2 and R3 are always ordered from the lowest frequency resistance to the highest, starting from 1. (a) Transmission line showing the impedance of ion diffusion in a finite layer used for ionic transport quantification in perovskites, highlighted in red. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. (b) Equivalent circuit used for two arc spectra. Here we show capacitance spectra depending on light intensity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. (c) Equivalent circuit used for three arc spectra and intermediate frequency loops; here, resistances appear in series. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. (d) Equivalent circuit used for spectra with two arcs that vary in concordance which have exotic features such as inductive loops or negative capacitances; here, resistances appear in parallel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. (e) Equivalent circuit obtained from the analysis of both IS and IMPS data together; here we have resistances in parallel as well as in series. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. 
The features of low frequency capacitance in metal halide PSCs have been broadly studied and a general characteristic picture has emerged. The fact that ions migrate across the bulk under a voltage bias or light soaking is well known. When ions arrive at the interfaces, they accumulate there. A main component of the double layer is the Helmholtz layer, formed by the ions in contact with the electrode surface, which provides a capacitance of the order of 10 μF cm−2. However, there also is a diffuse double layer, which contains a surface charge29 (3)
This charge is distributed on the typical distance of a Debye length for the electrode surface, (4)
In eqn (3) and (4) the standard symbols have their usual meaning.30 Δφ is the potential drop across the double layer, and N is the net underlying ion density in the bulk.
Zarazua et al.28,31,32 showed by analysis of the evolution of Cs with Voc that the surface capacitance Cs is actually an accumulation capacitance, however, it depends on the accumulation of both ionic and electronic carriers and is highly dependent on the specific binding of the perovskite to the contact surface. In this line, direct evidence for the intimate connection between surface capacitance and hysteresis emerged by comparing normal and inverted versions of PSCs as indicated in Fig. 4a.33 The cells with a PCBM electron contact display a much lower low frequency capacitance than those with a TiO2 contact. And correspondingly, j–V cycling hysteresis is significantly reduced in the inverted cell. Further evidence for this strong correlation has been obtained by measuring dark currents at different scan rates as shown in Fig. 4b and c.34 By modification of the device configuration it is possible to suppress the capacitive contribution of the current. The square-like response is removed in a configuration that avoids the use of a metal oxide based ETL (Fig. 4c). This is further confirmation that the surface capacitance is a composition of ionic and electronic carriers accumulated at the interface and highly depends on the contact interfaces of the perovskite/charge extraction layer.
 Fig. 4  (a) Capacitance–frequency plot under one sun illumination under short-circuit conditions (bias voltage = 0 V). The normal and the inverted structures represent cp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-MeOTAD and PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. (b and c) Dark j–V curves measured at different scan rates with corresponding structures sketched in the insets. The positive currents are the forward bias direction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. 
The rise of capacitance at low frequency has been interpreted in many cases as the manifestation of bulk traps. However a recent study35 using the analysis of low frequency noise has found that the capacitance does not scale with thickness, in agreement with the previous scaling properties obtained by impedance spectroscopy.36
Metal oxide based ETLs typically lead to large surface capacitances and hysteresis as shown above. The impact of the TiO2 compact layer thickness on the hysteresis behavior of carbon based HTM-free PSCs was confirmed by Han et al.37 By tuning the thickness of the spray-deposited TiO2 layer over a few nanometers, the hysteresis behavior of the perovskite was switched from inverted to hysteresis-free and then to normal (Fig. 5). The combined effects of the dynamics of charge accumulation and charge recombination are believed to be responsible for the observed behavior.
 Fig. 5  Dependence of the hysteresis effect index on (a) c-TiO2 layer spray deposition cycles and (b) scanning rates for hysteresis-normal, hysteresis-free and hysteresis-inverted devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. 
The dependence of capacitance on frequency in organo-metal halide perovskites shows a range of features as discussed before, but it has been concluded that the low frequency domain is mainly associated with the surface capacitance. It is therefore expected that slow kinetic changes of the surface will provide measurable evolution of the capacitance value. Garcia-Belmonte and coworkers have been able to identify the surface depletion layer capacitance and the subsequent Mott–Schottky plot.38 However, they have found that the surface depletion layer capacitance is affected by a large extent of hysteresis when the applied voltage undergoes a scan cycle (Fig. 6). These results are important as they reveal the electrical response in proximity to the contact, and this is a manifestation of surface attached species, i.e., a change of surface charge that occurs on a much longer scale than the measurement of the capacitances.39
 Fig. 6  (a) Capacitance–voltage curve and (b) respective Mott–Schottky plot of a CH3NH3PbI3-based PSC with a mesoporous TiO2 matrix for a larger DC bias window at different scan rates, as indicated. Inset in (a): the corresponding capacitance absolute difference between scan directions ΔC. The inset in (b) is the typical Mott–Schottky plot region, shown inside the dashed gray square. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. 
In summary, once the ions complete the accumulation, their responses to the small perturbation are slow, with characteristic times related to the low frequency capacitance. In a later section we argue that this surface polarization takes longer to be discharged than the time it takes for charging, a phenomena connected to surface attachment and electrochemical surface reactions.
Due to the complexity of the surface phenomena it is important to adopt complementary measurement techniques that may validate specific assumptions. Photoluminescence (PL) measurements of more simple configurations containing only one perovskite/contact interface can also unveil information on the properties of the perovskite/external contact interfaces. In early work, it was found a large drift of PL intensity that persists over 20 s.16 Measurements by Lundt et al.40 revealed dramatic modifications of PL depending on the treatment of the exposed perovskite surface (Fig. 7). Significant PL quenching occurs with the deposition of 1 nm C60, which could be interpreted as passivation of surface traps. However, a similar effect occurs when using an amorphous thin organic buffer layer between the perovskite and the C60 but not when the thin layer is used without C60. Therefore, the PL quenching is attributed to the formation of space charge, which is associated with electron capture in C60 and compensating ions on the perovskite side.
 Fig. 7  Time-resolved fluorescence microscopy images of perovskite films with (a) bare perovskite, (b) a 1.5 nm amorphous buffer layer spacer with 20 nm C60, and (c) a 7.5 nm buffer layer spacer with 20 nm C60. The buffer layer-only coated perovskite film is provided in each panel for reference. The time scale is 0 s (left), 30 s (middle), and 60 s (right) for each figure; the brightening of the PL with time stems from space-charge accumulation, which increases radiation recombination rates. The dashed line is used as a guide to the eye to indicate the interface position. The scale bar is 100 μm for all figures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. 
Recently, the critical effect of ions present at the ETL/perovskite interface has been highlighted for a wide band gap perovskite based on MAPbBr3.41 The ETL was treated with additives containing Li+ to reduce undesired interfacial recombination processes at the MAPbBr3/TiO2 interface. An emission peak at 670 nm (Fig. 8) was identified with interfacial recombination from the TiO2 to the perovskite layer, which could be suppressed by doping the TiO2 with a salt containing Li+. It was proposed that the presence of Li+ ions at the ETL increases the cation density at the hole accumulation zone, thus increasing the size of the space charge layer. Therefore, the surface density of electronic holes at the critical zone of the surface of the TiO2 layer is reduced, as indicated by the decrease of charge-transfer radiative recombination observed at 670 nm and the simultaneous increase in the band-to-band emission of the perovskite. Reduced recombination was confirmed by IS and electroluminescent measurements.
 Fig. 8  Photoluminescence measurements focused on both the TiO2 and perovskite showing the enhancement of perovskite emission and suppression of the interfacial emission. PL spectra obtained under continuous wave (CW) excitation (λexc = 380 nm, Iexc = 10 mW cm−2) of devices with (black) and without (red) lithium treatment at the metal oxide contact. The inset plot shows the quenching of the second feature when lithium is present at the metal oxide contact. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. 
5. Electronic effects at the interface
Although ionic effects have grabbed attention in the perovskite community because of their peculiarity, electronic phenomena remain key for improving device performance. While bulk electronic phenomena such as carrier diffusion or bulk recombination are well established advantages of perovskite materials,42 interfacial phenomena such as traps, surface recombination and charge extraction remain a big issue to completely achieve high and stable performance.43 Thus, choosing adequate materials as extraction layers is a crucial issue.
When selecting a material for extracting carriers, energy level alignment provides a dominant criterion to produce a good selective contact.44,45 In the case of perovskites, this is not an easy question, since the energy level of the perovskite itself is strongly dependent on the composition (i.e. different halides or cations), surface termination,46 the surface state charging,47 and even on the preparation method.48 Actually, perovskite energy levels may change depending on the substrate on which they are prepared, as shown by Miller et al. using photoemission spectroscopy.49 In fact, substrates may change doping densities and may turn the perovskites from n-type to p-type. Both for the ETL and the HTL, there are some materials that have been widely used because of their suitable properties, Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  WF, IE, and EA values for various perovskites reported by different groups, which are prepared either on different underneath layers and/or by different methods. The listed materials on the bars are the substrates, and the types of perovskite materials are listed on top. WF and IE are derived from UPS measurements, while EA values are derived from the transport gap or optical bandgap. The star symbols (*) represent that the work used the same preparation method and the same substrate material but reported in different literature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. 
On the one hand, for the ETL there are two main options, metal oxides (such as TiO2, SnO2 or ZnO) and organic layers (such as C60 or PCBM). In the case of metal oxides, TiO2 is the one that has been more widely used, giving high efficiencies both in planar and mesoporous layers. However, the TiO2–perovskite interface has given substantial problems like charge accumulation32 and hysteresis.14 Despite a good energy level alignment, charge extraction problems, surface non-radiative recombination and charge accumulation have been found to limit the device performance. Partial solutions to those problems have been found via TiO2 doping with different materials. Liu et al. reported hysteresis free PSCs by doping TiO2 with lithium, reducing the density of electron traps and increasing the conductivity.50 Tan et al. proposed contact passivation by using a chlorine capped TiO2 colloidal nanocrystal film, reducing interfacial recombination.51 In general, contact modification of TiO2 is needed to suppress undesired interfacial processes via doping or passivation.52–54 The ETL–perovskite band alignment is really sensitive to all the electronic processes that occur at the interface, and may change the interface capacitance by some orders of magnitude.55 Extended information about the chemical modifications of the contact is provided in Section 9.
The hypothesis of surface electronic traps causing hysteresis43 is difficult to distinguish from ionic binding or surface polarization and relaxation effects, since surface capacitances would be high as well in the case of surface electron traps. However, some changes of ionic species affect strongly the capacitance onset over the Helmholtz layer, and it seems unlikely to invoke a passivation of traps to explain such an effect.41 The predominance of an electrostatic effect caused by the ion distribution has been explicitly shown using ultrathin buffer layers in PL experiments, as shown in Fig. 7.
On the other hand, two main materials are used for the HTL side generally: spiro-OMeTAD and PEDOT:PSS, although there is ongoing research into finding suitable materials, which are usually organic. As commented on before, the perovskite energy levels change with the perovskite composition. These changes are significant in the perovskite valence band, but the conduction band changes are smaller. It is then important to change the HTL characteristics to get good band alignment.56 One of the reasons why spiro-OMeTAD is widely used is the fact that it allows energy level changes by oxidation, thus being a versatile option.57 Gelmetti et al. recently analyzed the behaviour of different organic HTLs with chemical structures similar to those of spiro-OMeTAD but different energy levels, and demonstrated that the HOMO energy values differ significantly when depositing on top of the perovskite layer, having an impact on the Voc, which justifies the difficulties in finding an appropriate HTL material.58 Nevertheless, problems with the perovskite–HTL interface also relate to reactivity and degradation in addition to energy level alignment, and this is discussed further in a later section.
A classical question about PV operation mechanisms is whether the work function difference between the electron and hole contact materials correlates with the open circuit voltage. Energy alignment at the contact is important to produce a good selective contact, but once this is achieved, the local adaptation in the contact region makes Voc quite independent of the overall built-in voltage. A striking demonstration59 is presented in Fig. 10, where cells with widely different work functions at the ESL show very similar PV characteristics, mainly differing in the FF.
 Fig. 10  (A) Current–voltage (j–V) curves measured under 1 sun illumination and (B) external quantum efficiency (EQE) of representative perovskite solar cells containing meso-TiO2, c-TiO2 and ETL-free architectures. (C) Summary of device parameters obtained for more than 40 cells measured under AM1.5G sun illumination, room temperature and air conditions. (D) The open circuit voltage in comparison to the work function of the different contact layers are also indicated for comparison (right panel). Reproduced by permission from ref. 59. 
6. Dynamic effects and time constants
In Section 4 we have outlined several phenomena that point to the strong experimental manifestation of accumulation of ionic and electronic charge in the contacts of the device. The interface of the perovskite with the contact appears to be a critical site controlling these phenomena. In order to classify and understand these interfacial phenomena it is important to attribute an interpretation to kinetic constants that describe the changes of the surface conditions, in the context of a variety of phenomena indicated in Table 2.
A brief light soaking treatment produces drastic changes in the open circuit voltage decay (OCVD) as shown in Fig. 11.60 In these experiments the Voc of the device is monitored after the light is turned off for different pre-treatment light soaking times (Δt). The effect of light seems to be similar to that observed under a voltage bias stimulus. The OCVD is slow for a device that has not been light soaked previously and as expected for a solar cell the devices are able to obtain a null Voc in the dark. Alternatively, a device that has been light soaked shows a fast Voc decay, but a persistent potential remains in the device, indicating that migrating ions interact with the external contacts to create an electrostatic potential. The construction of an additional voltage that persists on a long time scale is attributed to the partial attachment of cations to the surface during the short treatment of pre-illumination.
 Fig. 11  Top row: open circuit voltage decay (OCVD) data for a PSC with a TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx interface. (A and B) Changes in the decay rate appear in the light-soaking stage (A) and slowly revert back during the dark recovery stage (B). (C) An exemplary comparison of three OCVD measurements that show the two photo-induced changes in the decay rate and the buildup of an electrostatic potential, Velec. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. 
The energy diagram at the TiO2/perovskite contact at four different stages of the illumination condition shown in Fig. 12 indicates a microscopic interpretation of the changes occurring at the interface and the associated observation of the cell voltage. For fresh devices measured in the dark and for light soaking experiments using short times (Δt = 1 s) band bending is related to a depletion layer at the perovskite region close to the TiO2, leading to flat bands under open circuit conditions under illumination. Under light soaking conditions, migration of positive cations and iodine vacancies is induced, generating an accumulation regime at the interface. The combination of the ionic charge and hole concentration at the perovskite side of the interface forms an electrostatic potential as a result of the electric field across the interface. This potential is added to the built-in potential, and persists for a considerable time when the illumination is suppressed due to ions remaining in the double layer region. The structure of surface polarization considering a combination of electronic and ionic mobile species can be established by a proper numerical analysis.61 The role of ions in the formation of accumulation layers needs to be quantified to know the structure of the energy diagrams across the PSC. A study with different HTL shows that a good alignment not only suppresses the hysteresis, avoiding charge accumulation at the interfaces, but also degradation of the hole transport layer is reduced.62
 Fig. 12  The energy diagram at the TiO2/perovskite contact at four different stages. (A) In the dark. (B) At a very short illumination time of Δt = 1 s. (C) At an illumination time close to 1 min. (D) After a substantial illumination time of Δt > 1 min. This potential is added to the built-in potential. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. 
An electrical model that relates the surface polarization and the electrical response during the j–V measurements has been developed.63 The scan from forward to reverse voltage produces a bump in the current due to the slow release of the surface attached charge. This is described by an equation of the type (5)
Here Vbi is the built-in potential across the initial barrier, Vs is a surface voltage related to the internal surface charge (ions and holes), and τr is the relaxation time associated with the equilibration of the interface to the external voltage, which is mainly regulated by the ion kinetics as already described in relation to the open circuit voltage decay above. A similar approach has been used to account for the observation of impedance loops in the IS spectra, and it is shown in Fig. 3d.64 The simulations with this circuit generate impedance spectra typical for PSCs, two arcs and accumulation capacitance Cs, and new exotic features: inductive loops and negative capacitances which are related to the sluggish ion movement that retards the surface polarization response. This is due to autonomous relaxation of the internal voltage, eqn (5), that generates the inductive dynamics. The results of both surface polarization model fitting of j–V curves and equivalent circuit analysis by the model in Fig. 3d show a very good agreement that establishes τr on the order of 20 s for measurements of different types of PSC at room temperature.
It was previously reported that negative capacitance effects are rather sensitive to the surface conditions,65 and a very large inductive effect was obtained in composite interfaces.66 Recently other studies have also stressed the connection of ionic–electronic accumulation at the surface, and its possible influence on electron transfer and recombination rates, in order to explain large capacitance and inductive behaviour.67–69 In the same spirit it was previously suggested that recombination is affected by ions.70 Concerning the complexity of the impedance spectroscopy response of perovskite solar cells, these approaches are focused in the right direction in providing explanations combining ionic and electronic features; however, the models remain at a fuzzy stage, therefore important physical details cannot be verified yet. One study has provided a confirmation of negative capacitance68 using older arguments for the inductive response in the time domain.71 It is worthwhile to mention that earlier approaches based on charge collection and modification of the built-in electrical field in the bulk appeared to be abandoned in favor of the predominance of charging and reaction effects at the interface. Nevertheless, it must be remarked that capacitive features have to be explained in the frequency domain, as we need models that fit the IS data and produce quantitative conclusions. Indeed the recognized power of IS consists of the ability to use the spectra to separate features that cannot be well distinguished in the time domain. Therefore we need more spectral analysis, rather than less.
The topic of negative capacitance is an important part of the behaviour of many solar cell devices analyzed in the frequency domain.72 “Negative capacitance” and “inductive behaviour” are widely accepted synonyms of a type of spectral behaviour, but the main effect associated with it, not so frequently noted, is that the resistance becomes smaller as the frequency decreases, causing the famous loops in the impedance spectra. This effect most often goes in the direction of decreasing the solar cell performance, particularly in perovskite solar cells,73 and needs to be explained even on practical grounds.
However, this research topic is plagued by a basic problem. It is relatively easy to make some models that produce negative capacitance. There are some basic resources, which basically consist of introducing a cross-dependence in any regular electrochemical or semiconductor device model.74,75 To implement the method you make a rate constant depend on voltage, or you make one element in a circuit depend on the current elsewhere (there are endless possible variations), and in the small perturbation model you obtain a dephasing of the ac current and voltage in which the model cannot be described by regular capacitors and resistors. In fact in such a model the “capacitance” (as defined by the imaginary part of the impedance Z) can become very large, or negative, the resistance decreases at low frequency, and several things can happen, while causality holds. The reason is that such tricks, which represent very real phenomena in far from equilibrium situations, abandon the central diktat of detailed balance: the rule that the transition rates in nonequilibrium should be the same as those of equilibrium.76 The cross-correlations introduced in the physical model violate this rule, thus thermodynamic quantities such as the capacitance lose their ordinary meaning in the out-of-equilibrium situation. This is one reason why it is so easy to find “explanations” of the negative capacitance, and at the same time it is rather demanding to demonstrate experimentally a given coupling mechanism in such complex systems.
One promising approach is to combine different frequency modulation methods such as IS and IMPS, as these should give complementary spectral information that may reveal specific mechanisms.77 For normal models obeying detailed balance, it was shown by Bertoluzzi and Bisquert that all these methods reduce to a common model that describes the different spectral responses.78 In principle it appears that one method only should confirm the result of the other. However, a recent study by Ravishankar et al.79 reveals an interesting outcome of this approach, see Fig. 3e. It was shown that the spectral coupling of resistances and capacitances is rather different in the separate IS and IMPS spectra. Therefore, IMPS can reveal three physical processes in cases where IS only shows two, due to the overlap of the effects of the separate contacts. This route will enable one to obtain further information about the meaning of the low frequency resistances, in combination with complementary techniques.35
Nevertheless, the previous characterization methods suffer from the limitation that all the information is obtained from the physical measurement at the external contacts, without real internal spatial resolution. Thus it is important to adopt complementary methods. One important study by Weber and coworkers80 of the distribution of charge carriers by Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KPFM) provided a direct demonstration of the strong ionic–electronic accumulation at the perovskite/TiO2 contact, so that this is a fact that cannot be denied anymore. This was followed by a detailed time transient study indicated in Fig. 13.24 They measured the time scale that is needed for charge redistribution of PSCs under operational conditions and have found that the formation of localized interfacial charge occurred in a short time of 10 ms under illumination. However, after the light is switched off, the interfacial charge can stay over 500 ms, which creates a slow response of the photocurrent transient. A further detailed analysis of the contribution of ions and electronic charge shows that the role of slow mobile ions in the j–V hysteresis is quite small. Instead, the hysteresis is mainly caused by formation and desorption of interfacial charges.24 Another important result of this paper is the explanation of a potential gradient related to the electrical field as shown in Fig. 13b. Weber et al. showed that such a potential distribution corresponds quantitatively to the tail of the double layer, as shown in eqn (3), extended into the bulk due to a Debye length on the order of 200 nm, corresponding to a background charge density of 1015 cm−3, in excellent agreement with previous results of transient charging current.29 The potential distribution along the bulk is an equilibrium feature, and the dominant kinetics is that of charging the interface.
 Fig. 13  Time resolved KPFM results with pulsed illumination. (a) ΔCPD map 2.5 ms after the switching, where a strong potential gradient is present inside the perovskite. (b) Averaged ΔCPD sections from the rectangular area marked in (a). (c) Map of ΔCPD measured 6 ms after switching off the voltage. The interfaces of the perovskite layer are marked with dotted lines. (d) Averaged section graphs obtained from the region indicated by the red box in (c) at different times after the switching. Adapted with permission from ref. 24. 
It should be mentioned that the very strong, well-recognized transient current associated with surface charging can affect the interpretation of galvanostatic techniques to separate ionic and electronic current contributions in planar samples with lateral contacts. This is why it is recommended to check the size of capacitances and to measure resistance instead of current in order to avoid gross misinterpretation, as remarked by Zhao et al.81,82
Abate and coworkers have analyzed the long time behavior of PSCs under cycles of dark and illuminated states (Fig. 14). In consonance with the evidence discussed above there is a transient behaviour that occurs between 10−1 and 102 s, which is associated with halide migration and accumulation at the electrode surface. In addition a much longer timescale phenomenon on the order of 103 s is attributed to cation migration, which eventually leads to contact degradation. This result shows an extreme case in which slow migration does become important to control the kinetics of the PSC, in the case of the MA+ cation redistribution,83 as indicated in Table 2.
 Fig. 14  Maximum power output tracking for 3 identically prepared perovskite solar cells (device A, B and C) measured under UV-filtered 1 sun equivalent light. Devices were continuously kept at the maximum power point using the standard “perturb and observe” method. Devices A and B were continuously tracked for over 100 hours. Device C was cyclically tracked 4 times for 5 hours and it was left in the dark at open circuit in between the consecutive measurements. Experimental data were fitted to an exponential decay (single or double). Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. 
In summary, there is a large component of capacitive current often observed but additional kinetic phenomena actuate at the same time and they need to be characterized. These additional phenomena have been described in the very low frequency domain (<1 Hz). We believe it is mandatory to obtain a full understanding of these effects even for technological reasons. In fact, many claims of “suppressed hysteresis” may denote a successful slowing down of these effects to long times that are imperceptible in the typical range of laboratory measurements, but will nevertheless occur for real operation and practical times as in the example of Fig. 14.
Here we suggest that frequent observation of slow phenomena (<1 Hz) may be interpreted in many cases, beyond the charging-capacitive contribution. The chemical interactions of ions in the perovskite, which introduces a weak bond with the material at the contact, as suggested by Raman analysis for MAPbI3–TiO2 samples, play an important role.84 These detailed chemical interactions at interfaces are shown later in Section 9 on the perovskite/contact interface. Generally speaking the chemical interactions are material dependent and they lead to an additional delay in the time to release the ions, being longer than the time for the surface polarization to build-up. In consequence, the surface polarization process introduces not just a capacitive element but also a resistance, and both may be directly related not just by the charging of the double layer but also by surface absorption/reaction processes. In this regard, it has been shown the remarkable result that the time constant in the range of 1 s is independent of the illumination intensity and slightly dependent on the cell thickness as shown in Fig. 15, and hence it is barely affected by the bulk electron concentrations. In order to explain these results, we need to adopt a more general point of view that embraces the dynamic phenomena observed both in solar cells ca. 100 nm thick and in much larger samples over 100 μm as described in the pioneering study by Almora, Guerrero and Garcia-Belmonte.29
 Fig. 15  Response time calculated from the RC product for the low-frequency arc (solid line) and high-frequency arc (dashed line), respectively. (a) Short-circuit and (b) open-circuit conditions for MAPbI3-based planar solar cells and (c) short-circuit and (d) open-circuit conditions for FAPbI3−xClx-based planar solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. 
The kinetic process that is characterized in the results of Fig. 15 is clearly related to the slow time constant in the 1 s domain that has been associated with a predominantly surface process related to ionic interaction with the surface. Nevertheless, the process presents a mixture of interfacial and bulk characteristics. This indicates that charging the double layer involves transport of ions. Therefore the framework of separate time constants for transport and surface complexation suggested in Table 2 needs to be extended. Garcia-Belmonte et al. suggested29 that the ion charging dynamics is composed of an average time for bulk transport in the thickness d and double layer charging as follows (6)
This approach is well established for liquid electrolytes and colloids.85 In the case that LD ≈ 200 nm, for a distance d ≈ 400 nm the τchar in eqn (6) does not differ significantly from bulk diffusion as calculated in Table 2. However, eqn (6) introduces a thickness-dependence of the time constant, as indicated by the solid line in Fig. 16, in agreement with the variations of the time constant noted in Fig. 15. When the layer becomes much larger, in the range of tens of μm, the effective time constants take values that cannot be explained by bulk diffusion, while the dependence in eqn (6) is in accord with transient current results.29 When we include the experimental results of Fig. 15 in the graph of Fig. 16, it is obvious that the experimental time constants become much larger than expected by simple double layer charging by diffusion as eqn (6). This leads us to the previous conclusion that the τchar time is not explained simply by electrostatics and diffusion. The slow time constant contains these features but, in addition, a significant component of surface binding, related to ionic relaxation suggested in eqn (5), slows down the system, sets the value in the 1 s and longer domain, and eventually produces out-of-phase components leading to inductive behaviour in the frequency domain and a resistance that decreases at low frequency.
 Fig. 16  Representation of the ionic charging time for diffusion coefficient D = 1 × 10−8 cm2 s−1 and Debye length LD = 200 nm as a function of layer thickness. The points correspond to the data of Fig. 15 for MAPbI3 (red) and FAPbI3−xClx (green). 
Summarizing, we can provide a general perspective of kinetic studies discussed so far in PSCs, based on Fig. 3. Several general circuits have been provided; in most cases there are two basic processes, as in model b, at low and high frequency, which have been normally interpreted in terms of a bulk dielectric capacitance coupled with some resistance and a slow low frequency process fundamentally related to the interface. Nevertheless, sometimes by special experimental procedures three neat processes have been revealed, as in model c and e, which we believe correspond to a decoupling of the separate contacts. In addition it is often observed that the different resistances show correlated variations.
The low frequency process shows in many cases a constant kinetic time, as shown in Fig. 15, independent of current and voltage. Since the constant is the product RC, the low frequency capacitance and resistance are correlated, which is very frequent in trapping models, and in silicon recombination, for example, in which the reciprocal dependence gives a fairly constant τ. However, the additional complexity in PSCs is that the low frequency features have combined properties of electronic and ionic processes, then one can assume that the capacitance is proportional to the carrier densities Cs ∝ nc, while for the resistance, which is inversely proportional to current, one has R1 ∝ j−1 ∝ (nc)−1. However, the specific coupling is rather uncertain, and complicates the understanding of the voltage distribution in PSCs (from the separation of Fermi levels at the contacts). This is reflected by the uncertainty of models between series and parallel connection that becomes apparent when we combine the main models in Fig. 3. This limitation of the present understanding may be due to additional complexity that is starting to be revealed, as better and more robust samples become widely available, in comparison with early studies, where many random effects introduced by the experimental itself. For example the hypothesis of a charging process along the bulk is well described in eqn (6), but such a process should correspond to more complicated bulk diffusion with the kinetics indicated in model a of Fig. 3. Models for two or more carriers are not simply composed of series and parallel, so that circuits with two parallel lines or with lumped elements are oversimplifications. Clearly there is a lot of room for careful experimental analysis and interpretation before a more complete picture can be established.
7. Mechanism of charging and discharging of the interfaces
There have been intensive efforts to use simulation techniques to predict the properties of the complete device stack as it is widely accepted that surface defects are a source of charge carrier trapping and will affect the extraction properties in photovoltaic devices.86–88 Comprehensive reviews are available in the literature and detailed analysis is beyond the scope of this work.89 From the atomistic point of view the different kinetics for charging and discharging are difficult to predict due to the large number of variables to take into account at the interface. Using the 3D periodic boundary condition, the surfaces can be modelled by a slab of a supercell, which consists of atomic layers and a vacuum layer. The interface of the perovskite with the contact is very rich as there can be different terminations; see for example three possible terminations in Fig. 17a. In addition to these terminations the twelve intrinsic point defects (vacancies, interstitials and antisites) present in the bulk of the perovskite would also need to be taken into account at the interface.90 For example, intrinsic point defects such as vacancies (VI, VMA, VPb), interstitials (Ii, Pbi) and antisites (PbI, PbMA) were identified to be formed on each terminated surface (Fig. 17b), and their formation energies have been calculated for I-rich, moderate and Pb-rich conditions.91 In addition, analysis of the different crystallization indices also leads to different results. Therefore, predicting the actual chemical reactions taking place at the interface is a very difficult task.
 Fig. 17  (a) Examples of perovskite termination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. (b) Location of VI and VMA in the ground state with the VB edge localized on the perovskite and (c) in the charge separated state in which one electron has been promoted from the perovskite to the TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. 
De Angelis et al. have intensively studied the TiO2/MAPbI3 interfaces using SOC-DFT calculations.92,93 It was revealed that through interactions of the perovskite with TiO2 the interface adopts an electronic structure with strong coupling between the Ti 3d and Pb 6p conduction band states and upshifts the TiO2 conduction band energy.93 Defects at the interfaces (vacancies VI and VMA) were studied under working conditions and it was shown that vacancies VI diffuse towards the HTL and VMA towards the ETL side.92 When compared with the non-defective interface, the outermost valence band states of the perovskite interfere with the band gap of the TiO2, while the conduction band states are found inside the conduction states of the oxide. Overall, it was shown that defects at interfaces modify the band alignment, cause the bending of the perovskite bands close to the TiO2 surface, and create the trap states.92
Due to the complexity of the system, the precise species formed at the interfaces during charging and discharging are difficult to predict. However, interfacial defects and migrating ions piling up at the contacts will lead to measurable double layer capacitances, both Helmholtz and diffuse layer. The sign and magnitude of the applied bias will modify the capacitance with time due to ion migration and to the chemical reactivity of migrating ions with the external contacts as it will be discussed below.84Fig. 18 shows a simplistic view that highlights the direction of migration for only one ion as detected by capacitive current measurements in the dark. Due to the rich chemistry of iodine and to the presence of oxidative conditions, once ions reach the external contacts these can react with the contact material, as described below, further modifying the capacitance. The kinetics of this type of reactions will be slower than that of ion migration since the availability of ions will be a requirement for the chemical reaction to take place. Therefore, chemical reactivity will be observed at long timescales (Fig. 1) and low frequencies during impedance measurements.
 Fig. 18  Diagrams representing iodide migration and the chemical species present at the interfaces that lead to a modification in the capacitance. (a) At positive bias iodine ions are forced to migrate towards the hole selective contact where the chemical reaction with spiro-OMeTAD+ occurs. An iodine defective layer is formed at the TiO2/MAPbI3 interface. (b) At zero bias the neutral case appears. (c) At negative bias spiro-OMeTAD only partially returns to its oxidized, conductive state. Iodine ions accumulate at the TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. 
8. Ferroelectric effects
There have been over the years different speculations on the influence of a ferroelectric property on the PV behaviour of perovskite solar cells. Obtaining a permanent, switchable polarization in electrical insulators is relatively easy to determine by electrical methods. However, in the case of a metal halide perovskite semiconductor with contacts (necessary for PV application), there are intrinsic leakage currents and an ionic polarization component so the true polar domain orientation is rather challenging to confirm.94,95 Recently the observation of ferroelectric polarization in metal halide perovskites has been reported by different methods.95–98 However, it is rather unclear that such a property has any significance for the PV properties. The use of ferroelectric materials in solar energy conversion has been reviewed elsewhere.99 The application of an electrically polarized material as a solar cell aims to benefit from charge separation by the electrical field. Most of the materials reported in the literature are wide bandgap extreme insulators,99 they provide a tiny photocurrent, the polarization is always affected by a depolarising field, and the PV mechanism is rather uncertain in most cases: since electrical contacts normally shield the internal field, most observed characteristics are believed to be associated with the contact properties. For example migration of defects can modify the contact Schottky barriers by poling and produce a switchable characteristic of the photocurrent.100,101 In addition, charge separation is not a real issue in the metal halide perovskites that enjoy excellent semiconductor properties. Therefore the role of ferroelectrics in PV behaviour should be rather minor.
Another potentially useful pathway to exploit the ferroelectric property is to build active thin switchable layers that improve the operation of contacts, or facilitate some type of memory device. In principle one can change the built-in voltage according to the state of the surface ferroelectric layer.102 However, for low conductivity or depletion in the semiconductor the surface charge in the thin ferroelectric layer cannot be cancelled at the active material side. This situation leads to a large uncompensated field in the ferroelectric layer that will remove the polarization charge.103 Recently this approach was realized for obtaining a switchable response in perovskite solar cells,104 but issues of charge compensation and ionic polarization make the interpretation of results rather difficult.
9. Perovskite/contact interface: chemical, structural and energetic properties
So far we have focused on the physical implications of ionic migration on material and device performance. In the following part, we consider the main types of chemical interactions at the perovskite/contact interface. Specifically we cover some morphological and chemical aspects that relate to the kinetic charge distribution and thus require some attention to design a PSC stack with increased stability and without hysteresis.
It is well known that the properties of interfaces are a dominant aspect of electronic devices such as solar cells. Therefore, lots of efforts have been devoted to develop the contacts in order to obtain high quality interfaces with desirable properties for high performance devices. The variety of contacts used as the ETL and HTL in PSCs is almost endless and several recent reviews cover these aspects in detail.3–5 In general, ETLs include metal oxides (i.e. TiO2, SnO2 or ZnO) or organic molecules (i.e. fullerenes). Similarly, materials used as HTLs also embrace metal oxides (i.e. NiOx), CuSCN, CuI and organic compounds such as spiro-OMeTAD, PEDOT:PSS or conductive carbon.5,105 We anticipate that chemically robust contacts are required to withstand the highly reactive perovskite interface, enabling efficient extraction of carriers. In general, electron/hole accumulation at the interfaces in the presence of migrating ions may lead to their degradation.
Morphology of contacts
Apart from all the chemical interactions, the roughness of the FTO substrate can also affect the hysteresis of PSCs as reported by Cojocaru et al.106 Compared to the FTO with higher roughness, better device efficiency and relatively smaller hysteresis were obtained with the FTO with a flat surface. Because of the different roughness of the FTO contact, the effect of surface treatment by TiCl4 solution differs significantly, where TiCl4 treatment showed effectiveness on a rough FTO surface compared to a flat one. This is ascribed to the different surface contact degree with the perovskite, as the flat FTO surface has better contact with the perovskite, which ultimately leads to homogeneous accumulation of carriers at the interfaces.106 Nanometer-scale in situ current–voltage measurements used to detect the current flow at the interface of TiO2/perovskite showed a tunneling current at the TiO2/perovskite interface when TiO2 with a rough surface was used, while such a leak current was not observed with the TiO2 with a smooth surface (Fig. 19). The tunneling current was believed to be caused by the local-heavy doping due to the electrostatic dipole at a rough TiO2/perovskite interface, which triggers a chain reaction of charge accumulation, in turn causing more severe hysteresis in the j–V plot.107
 Fig. 19  EBIC results showing the electron density map at apexes (black A), valleys (white V) and the flat interface (blue) F on a cross-sectional SEM image of a PSC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. 
Metal/perovskite contacts
There are several metals that have been used as the current collector layer in the device configuration, such as Ca, Al, Ag, Au or Cr (Fig. 20).108 These contacts formed between the metal and perovskite provide simple devices for mechanistic study. Perovskites have been proved to oxidize the metals, generating their corresponding halides (i.e. CaI2, AlI3 or AgI). For example, oxidation of Ag to form AgI has been widely studied by a range of techniques like XRD or XPS.109
 Fig. 20  Current density–voltage curves of devices fabricated with different metal contacts measured at 1 sun light illumination. (a) Metals providing S-shape curves after degradation. (b) The contact containing Cr2O2/Cr does not show an S-shape after degradation. Degraded devices are shown as broken lines. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. 
A mechanism such as that shown in Fig. 21 has been proposed in the presence of ambient water, in which water reacts with the perovskite layer leading to formation of PbI2 and subsequent iodine migration and surface diffusion form AgI. Even noble metals such as Au also lead to corrosion at the interface level under oxidative stress.110 When used as a current collector with a buffer layer (i.e. perovskite/ETL/metal), a small area or pinhole not covered by the buffer layer is sufficient to lead to corrosion of the metal. In addition, due to the soft nature of the perovskite, metal diffusion through the perovskite has also been observed by analytical techniques like TOF-SIMMS.111
 Fig. 21  Proposed AgI formation mechanism in the presence of ambient water. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. 
A thin buffer layer of chromium (Cr/Cr2O3) has proved to be very useful for stopping corrosion of the current collector.108,112 Tisdale et al. investigated the contact formed by MAPbBr3 single crystals and metal Cr or Au. They have found that the contact between the perovskite and Cr is ohmic while when using Au to replace Cr, the contact property is switched to non-ohmic. Because of the different contact property, the perovskite/Cr showed a higher interfacial charge transfer resistance (Rct) of 1.79 × 109 Ω compared to perovskite/Au (Rct = 1.32 × 107 Ω).113 This is in contrast to the general understanding that the contact between the perovskite and Au is ohmic.114 Clearly more work is needed to understand the contact property of perovskite/contact for current collector materials such as metal, carbon etc., which is particularly important for HTL-free PSCs. Since Cr is very stable in the presence of iodine, it thus could be a promising electrical contact for PSCs to be considered in the future. The study on a MAPbBr3 single crystal in direct contact with ITO (or TiO2) and a Au based electrical contact (device structure: ITO/perovskite/Au or FTO/TiO2/perovskite/Au) shows that, compared to a TiO2 based ETL, the ITO based PSC showed an even higher Jsc (7.4 mA cm−2vs. 7.0 mA cm−2), but a smaller Voc (1.25 V vs. 1.36 V) and FF (0.59 vs. 0.69) in the reverse scan. In the forward scan, the ITO based device showed much poorer performance, leading to very large hysteresis compared to the TiO2 counterpart. The poor charge extraction at the interface of ITO/perovskite was blamed for this phenomenon.
ETL/perovskite interface and reactivity
TiO2 is one of the most widely used electron transport material in PSCs, and some of its modifications were already commented on in Section 5. Research has shown that TiO2 is actually not an ideal ETL material in terms of energetic level matching with the adjacent perovskite and stability under UV-light. Mesoporous TiO2 was reported to have a higher conduction band edge (Ecb) relative to that of perovskite MAPbI3, causing inefficient interfacial charge injection. The periodic table has been scrutinized with several types of dopants for the TiO2 layer. The general aim has been to improve the conductivity whilst not modifying greatly the band edges of TiO2. The overall effect has been to improve the extraction properties of the contact and reduce recombination pathways. For example, TiO2 has been doped with a wide variety of ions such as Li,115 Ru,116 Fe,117 Co,118 Y,119 Cd,120 La,121 Sm,122 Nb,123 Er,124 Ta,125 Pt,126 Zn,127 Ga,128 In,129 or Sn.130 Doping TiO2 with an alkaline cation such as lithium has been reported to improve its electronic properties such as a reduced trap density, thus enhancing the dynamics of interfacial charge transfer.131 Similarly, introduction of potassium cations (K+) into the perovskite film has also been demonstrated as an effective way to eliminate j–V hysteresis of PSCs. The location of K+ in the perovskite crystal lattice is still under debate, but concrete experimental results show the conduction band edge of the perovskite is shifted downward, leading to a more favourable energy alignment with SnO2 for charge transfer.132 Surface treatment of TiO2 film with fluorine (CF4)-based plasma was found to enhance the interface adhesion between the perovskite and the TiO2.133 The fluorine doped TiO2 was also found to offer a more favourable energy alignment with the adjacent perovskite material. Consequently, a dramatically improved device efficiency and reduced hysteresis in the j–V plot were achieved.
The metal oxide SnO2 has a lower conduction band and larger band gap (3.5–3.6 eV) than TiO2, therefore it is normally considered that the charge transfer at SnO2/perovskite is more efficient compared to TiO2/perovskite. The pioneering work of Correa-Baena et al.134 demonstrated the excellent properties of SnO2 for planar contacts in PSCs in comparison to planar TiO2, hence tin oxide has henceforth become a popular ETL in planar cells. The subsequent study by impedance spectroscopy of the same cells31 revealed an enormous difference of dynamic properties and marked the standard models for IS in the literature, which is presented here in Fig. 3c. The material properties of the interface of SnOx with halide perovskites were characterized by Riedl, Olthof and coworkers,135 who showed the spontaneous formation of a PbI2 interfacial layer. An ETL based on a bilayer of compact crystalline-TiO2/amorphous-SnO2 was reported to enhance the charge extraction of PSCs and reduce hysteresis at the same time as a result of improved interface band alignment with triple cation (Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.85Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3).136
The chemistry at the interfaces of PSCs is responsible for many of the phenomena observed in the device. Limited research has indicated chemical reactions occurring at the interface of TiO2/perovskite and perovskite/HTL. The Raman spectrum of a symmetrical cell of FTO/TiO2/perovskite/TiO2/FTO has confirmed the formation of Ti–I–Pb bonds, which are able to accommodate accumulated charge, leading to a capacitive current.84 The highly reversible current–voltage plot indicates that the process associated with charge storage of Ti–I–Pb is reversible. Generation of this type of chemical bonds is compatible with reactivity with Ti3+ defects present in the TiO2 layer (Fig. 22). Prevalent Ti3+ defects are present in TiO2 in the tail of the conduction band and these defects are known to control the electronic response of some PV devices.137 The dynamic response of the interface in light soaking experiments in organic PVs clearly highlights that these defects are highly reactive and can interact with molecular oxygen.138,139
 Fig. 22  Schematic representation of the defect energy levels in the band gap of bulk anatase TiO2 as derived from B3LYP calculations for the following Ti3+ species: (1) 6-fold-coordinated Ti6c3+; (2) Ti6c3+-OH species; (3) Ti5c3+ species associated with oxygen vacancies; and (4) interstitial Ti5c3+ species. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. 
The reversible chemical reactions at TiO2/perovskite interfaces have also been proposed based on indirect evidence of a reversible response showing chemical adsorption/desorption of TiO2/iodine gas and MAPbI3/iodine gas which occurs on the time scale of seconds to minutes.140 If the same reaction applies to the TiO2/perovskite solid–solid interface, the proposed reversible reaction is:e−(TiO2) + I−ads(MAPbI3) ⇔ I−ads(TiO2) + e−(MAPbI3) + trap0(MAPbI3)
These charge transfer reactions explain the large reversible capacitance observed with PSCs. Clearly the different surface defect property of TiO2 can affect its reaction with I− of MAPbI3, thus the device performance and hysteresis. Therefore, apart from increasing the conductivity of the ETL, other aspects like avoiding the reactivity of migrating ions with defects are required in order to control the j–V response and stability.
Different methods have been reported to passivate the surface defects of TiO2 by using small molecules such as PCBA, PCBM and C60.141 The surface modifier did not lead to a change of the morphology, crystallinity and bulk defect density of the perovskite layer that was deposited above the TiO2 layer coated with the modifier. However, more efficient charge extraction and recombination dynamics were observed at the interface of perovskite/TiO2-C60 compared to bare TiO2, leading to much better performance and reduced hysteresis. An attempt to eliminate the current–voltage hysteresis of PSCs through tuning the interfacial chemical composition of perovskite/ETL by using a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) was also reported.142 It was found that the PSCs had a thin layer of a several-angstrom thick MAI-rich (Pb-poor) interface between the perovskite and the metal oxide, which caused formation of a large capacitance and thus j–V hysteresis. By applying a self-assembled monolayer consisting of a 6-octyl phosphonic acid (C6-PA)–C60–C6-PA mixture above the TiO2 based ETL, the interfacial composition is switched from Pb-poor to Pb-rich while the property of the perovskite bulk was not affected. The chemical reactivity with TiO2 is avoided in the SAM modified PSCs. This is explained by the capability of the Pb-rich interface to compensate the ionic accumulated charge, therefore suppressing the net charge at the interface and the capacitance, leading to elimination of the j–V hysteresis.
The important influence of interfacial chemical interactions on both the performance and hysteresis of PSCs is also shown by Zou et al.143 Using a series of SAMs containing different functional groups, they have found that the chemical interaction between the SAM and perovskite dominates the device performance instead of the energy position.144 A polymer fullerene film (PMMA–PCBM) was found to effectively passivate defects at or near to the perovskite/TiO2 interface, thus dramatically suppressing interfacial recombination. The interfacial passivation layer not only enhanced the Voc of the cell up to 80 mV, but also removed the j–V hysteresis.145 Patel et al. have found that different interface contacts can affect the morphology of the perovskite layers, which in turn affected the device performance and hysteresis. The study of vapor-deposited MAPbI3 on four different ETL contact layers including compact TiO2, C60, compact TiO2/PCBM and poly-TPD showed regions of amorphous MAPbI3 close to the TiO2 layer, which was attributed to the lattice mismatch between them. The amorphous MAPbI3 at the interface led to poor charge collection and severe charge recombination, thus device hysteresis occurs via the electrical capacitive effect.146 This finding tells us that the morphology change of the perovskite in the presence of different contacts should not be ignored when studying the hysteresis of PSCs.
Besides surface passivation, the interface property of ETL/perovskite can also be modified by tailoring the composition of the ETL. Recent work has shown that the j–V hysteresis of PSCs using SnO2 as the ETL could be related to the density of oxygen vacancies in the SnOx film. By increasing the density of oxygen vacancies of the SnO2 thin film made by sputtering deposition through increasing the annealing temperature, the efficiency of PSCs was improved owing to the significantly enhanced Voc. At the same time, the j–V hysteresis was substantially reduced.147 An inorganic salt such as KCl was used to passivate the interface defects of SnO2, which leads to a fast photocurrent response and an elongated lifetime. As a result, the efficiency of the device was enhanced while the hysteresis was suppressed.143
HTL/perovskite interface and reactivity
Similar to the ETL, the kinetics in the reactivity at the HTL/perovskite interface can determine the electrical response and stability of the device.105 The nanoporous carbon electrodes developed by Han and coworkers are one of the most successful HTLs with the first report to show promising device stability exceeding 1000 h under full sun illumination.148 The results indicated that the HTL material was compatible with the oxidative conditions generated in the perovskite layer and interface. In this process a stack containing mesoporous layers of different materials is filled with the perovskite precursor solution. Once the solvent is evaporated the perovskite forms inside the pores, whilst the interfacial chemistry will depend very much on the preparation method of the carbon ink. Hysteresis has been suppressed by controlling the thickness of the TiO2 underlayer. It indicates that the carbon must have a small concentration of functional groups which can chemically interact with the migrating ions.37
Alternatively, if an organic HTL is deposited by solution processes on the top of the perovskite a thick layer of hundreds of nanometers will be required to avoid the exposure of the perovskite to the metal based current collector electrode. Due to the relatively low conductivity of the current organic HTLs the use of additives is usually needed, which, however, gives rise to some issues. On the one hand, lithium derivatives are used to stabilize oxidized species generated during light soaking of the spiro-OMeTAD, which increases the conductivity.149,150 On the other hand, bases like tert-butyl pyridine (tBP) as an additive are usually used in spiro-OMeTAD to tune the electronic properties of the layer. Unfortunately, both type of additives will interact with the perovskite, with Li+ being able to migrate through the perovskite and the basic pyridine coordinating to the lead atoms of the perovskite.23,151 For example, using time of flight secondary-ion mass spectroscopy (TOF-SIMS), a technique able to probe the chemical reactions at the interfaces of PSCs, phase segregation and migration of extrinsic small cations like Li+ were confirmed.152 A gradient of A-site inorganic cations is observed in the perovskite film, where it is rich at the back contact.153 Meanwhile, degradation of the perovskite due to the impact of tBP has been reported in the literature.154 It is believed that the perovskite can react with tBP, resulting in formation of the PbI2–tBP intermediate and MAI product.
Very importantly, migrating ions in the perovskite layer will be able to react or diffuse into the HTL, leading to different responses. For example, the oxidized form of the widely used organic hole transport molecule spiro-OMeTAD will lead to formation of the neutral iodine derivative spiro-OMeTAD-I.84 Of course, other side products will be generated, which could in turn have their own impact. The reaction would be irreversible, therefore causing permanent change/damage to the device performance including the efficiency and stability.Spiro-OMeTAD+ + I− → Spiro-OMeTAD-I
Stabilization of the cation leads to devices with increased stability in comparison with spiro-OMeTAD as shown by Schloemer et al.155 However, degradation is still severe under operation conditions. To avoid this type of reactivity, dopant-free HTLs have been designed by different groups. Brabec et al. have designed some conjugated polymers and have shown that the PDCBT derivative is a successful candidate able to withstand oxidative conditions generated by I−/I3− (Fig. 25).62,156
In addition, the use of metal oxides between the organic HTL and the current collector has been adopted with the aim to act as a physical barrier to stop ambient water diffusing into the device and the migration of iodine to the current collector.156,157 With this purpose MoOx and Ta-WOx have been used successfully. The reactivity of iodine with the current collector is reduced by having this additional layer as can be observed in Fig. 23 and the stability under ambient conditions is enhanced.157 However, an organic layer is needed at the interface between the perovskite and the metal oxide as otherwise there is a chemical reaction that forms MoO2, which reduces the ability of the system to extract charge.158
 Fig. 23  (a) Optical images of devices containing different current collectors after 24 h of constant operation under ambient conditions. (b) Normalized PCE of similarly fabricated cells measured in three different RH conditions. All of the devices had the same electrode configuration of 15 nm of MoOx/200 nm of Al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157. 
By careful alignment of the conduction band of the perovskite and the HOMO level of the hole extraction layer, charge accumulation at the interfaces is avoided, thus reducing hysteresis and increasing the stability of the whole stack dramatically.35 In the design of the HTL it is important to tune the energy levels to withstand oxidizing agents like I2 that can be generated in situ by the migrating iodide ions and a significant presence of holes (Fig. 24).
 Fig. 24  (a) Device configuration where the HTL is the only parameter that has been modified. (b) Chemical structure of different HTLs. (c–e) j–V curves of PSCs with different HTLs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. 
Identification of chemical reactions in complete PSCs during their lifetime
Perovskite solar cells are notorious for their unsatisfactory stability due to the ease of degradation in the presence of water, oxygen, UV-light, external electrical bias, high temperature etc.159 In this final section, we would like to highlight that during the lifetime of PSCs several physical processes and chemical reactions will be occurring simultaneously, each on their own timescale. Therefore, direct detection of the reaction product is a big challenge in practice and advanced analytical techniques are required to envisage the whole picture of the degradation processes. One representative example is provided by Sultana et al. who investigated degradation at the interface level under ambient conditions with the design configuration ITO/ZnO/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag.160 Identification of the degradation products from the reaction at the interfaces of PSCs has been achieved using laser desorption/ionization mass spectroscopy (LDI-MS). These authors found that after two weeks, the perovskite decomposed to PbI2. Meanwhile other products such as ZnI2, PbO and AgI were also detected in the stability testing process. It is believed that the formation of PbO is caused by oxygen-mediated photo-reduction (eqn (7a)–(7c)). Besides PbO, another product in the degradation reaction is iodine (I2). The formation of MA, HI and PbI2 is a consequence of degradation of MAPbI3 caused by water and oxygen (eqn (7e) and (7f)).87,160 PbI2 + hν → e−cb(PbI2) + h+vb(PbI2)(7a) e−cb(PbI2) + O2 → O2−˙ + PbI2(7b) (x + y)PbI2 + y/2O2−˙ → (PbI2)x(PbO)y + yI2(7c) 2CH3NH3PbI3 + 1/2O2−˙ → 2PbI2 + 2CH3NH2 + H2O + I2(7d) (7e) (7f)
Diffusion of HI to the ZnO based ETL in the cell architecture leads to the formation of ZnI2 (ZnO + HI → ZnI2 + H2O). Meanwhile ZnI2 can also be formed by reaction with MAI, which is the product of the decomposition of MAPbI3. Due to the presence of high concentrations of electrons and holes and the reactivity of some of the reagents present in devices (i.e. oxygen, iodide), the redox chemistry also needs to be considered. Indeed, the oxidant iodine (I2) has been reported to form in the device. It is responsible for formation of AgI (2Ag + I2 = 2AgI). The redox chemistry can be predicted by taking into account the position of the energy levels as shown in Fig. 25a. For example, Ag with a band full of electrons at −4.7 eV will favour the redox reaction with the oxidant system I−/I2 at ∼−5.0 eV. Similarly, reactivity with the oxidant iodine can also be a problem with the HTL. The reactivity of I−/I3− with a series of three different HTLs is monitored by the color change of the HTL layers (Fig. 25b and c).
 Fig. 25  (a) Energy level diagram of the material employed (black) and formed (blue) in the studied PSCs as well as the potential of side redox reactions (red) occurring in the PSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. (b and c) Redox reactivity of different HTLs with I−/I3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. 
Overall, understanding all the chemical processes occurring in a complete solar cell is a very challenging task. Not only acid–base chemistry needs to be considered in relation to the migrating ions but also redox and radical chemistry. Comprehensive analysis of the product as a result of the interfacial reactions of a complete PSC cell with different contacts can provide important information on the cause of the device stability and j–V hysteresis. To date, such research is very limited. In the future, more work is clearly needed in this direction, in particular understanding the interface reactions of carbon based HTM-free perovskites may provide new insights into their working mechanism.
10. Conclusion and outlook
We have summarized the evidence for surface charge and discharge phenomena at the contacts of perovskite solar cells. Surface charge and discharge processes seem to follow markedly different kinetics, as in asymmetric trapping–detrapping associated with surface binding effects. On the one hand, the supply of ions from the bulk of the perovskite material is fast under the effect of an electrical field or light. Ions will be transported to the contacts on the timescale of milliseconds for a typical semiconductor thickness of 100–200 nm. These ions will interact physically or chemically with the contacts, generating an electrostatic potential. Depending on the nature of these interactions the release of the ions will be favoured (i.e. PCBM) or impeded (i.e. metal oxides). Ions present at the interface are detected by impedance spectroscopy as a very large surface capacitance that appears in the very low frequency domain. This capacitance clearly correlates with the observed hysteresis during the j–V measurements. There are different approaches to reduce this charged surface such as the use of interfacial layers at the perovskite/extraction layer or the use of additives in the perovskite formulation. In general, the use of additives in the perovskite composition may show incorporation into the crystal lattice but the dynamic electrical properties seem to be related to the interfaces.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We are thankful for financial support from the Australian Research Council (ARC) through a discovery project (ARC DP 190102252) and Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y Universidades of Spain under project (MAT2016-76892-C3-1-R). A. G. would like to thank MICINN for a Ramón y Cajal Fellowship (RYC-201416809). Universitat Jaume I is also acknowledged for financial support (UJI-B2017-32).
References
D. Weber, Z. Naturforsch., B: Anorg. Chem., Org. Chem., 1978, 33, 1443–1445 Search PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fakharuddin, L. Schmidt-Mende, G. Garcia-Belmonte, R. Jose and I. Mora-Sero, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700623 CrossRef .
B. Roose, Q. Wang and A. Abate, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803140 Search PubMed .
W. Zhou, Z. Wen and P. Gao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702512 CrossRef .
P. Schulz, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1287–1293 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Azpiroz, E. Mosconi, J. Bisquert and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2118–2127 RSC .
T.-Y. Yang, G. Gregori, N. Pellet, M. Grätzel and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7905–7910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Mora-Seró, G. Garcia-Belmonte, P. P. Boix, M. A. Vázquez and J. Bisquert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 678–686 RSC .

          T. Kirchartz and U. Rau, in Advanced Characterization Techniques for Thin Film Solar Cells, ed. D. Abou-Ras, T. Kirchartz and U. Rau, Wiley, Berlin,  2011, p. 14 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, S. Ito, M. Grätzel, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Seró, J. Bisquert, T. Bessho and H. Imai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 19406–19411 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, E. Palomares, L. Otero, D. Kuang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6550–6560 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18125–18133 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T.-W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2927–2934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Sanchez, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, J.-W. Lee, N.-G. Park, Y. S. Kang, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2357–2363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. T. Tiong, N. D. Pham, T. Wang, T. X. Zhu, X. L. Zhao, Y. H. Zhang, Q. Shen, J. Bell, L. H. Hu, S. Y. Dai and H. X. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 14 CrossRef .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O’Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Senocrate, I. Moudrakovski, G. Y. Kim, T.-Y. Yang, G. Gregori, M. Grätzel and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7755–7759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Peng, C. Aranda, O. M. Bakr, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Bisquert and A. Guerrero, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1477–1481 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, A. Guerrero, S. Hüttner and J. Bisquert, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5113 CrossRef PubMed .
L. M. Herz, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1539–1548 CrossRef CAS .
N. Vicente and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700710 CrossRef .
S. A. L. Weber, I. M. Hermes, S. H. Turren-Cruz, C. Gort, V. W. Bergmann, L. Gilson, A. Hagfeldt, M. Graetzel, W. Tress and R. Berger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2404–2413 RSC .
F. Fu, T. Feurer, T. Jäger, E. Avancini, B. Bissig, S. Yoon, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Almora, C. Aranda and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 13450–13454 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zolfaghari, E. Hassanabadi, D. Pitarch-Tena, S. J. Yoon, Z. Shariatinia, J. van de Lagemaat, J. M. Luther and I. Mora-Seró, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 251–258 CrossRef CAS .
I. Zarazua, G. Han, P. P. Boix, S. Mhaisalkar, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Seró, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 5105–5113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Almora, A. Guerrero and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 043903 CrossRef .

          J. Bisquert, Nanostructured Energy Devices: Equilibrium Concepts and Kinetics, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  2014 Search PubMed .
A. Guerrero, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, Y. S. Kang, T. J. Jacobsson, J.-P. Correa-Baena and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 8023–8032 CrossRef CAS .
I. Zarazua, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 525–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, I.-H. Jang, N. Ahn, M. Choi, A. Guerrero, J. Bisquert and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4633–4639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Almora, C. Aranda, I. Zarazua, A. Guerrero and G. Garcia-Belmonte, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 209–215 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Sangwan, M. Zhu, S. Clark, K. A. Luck, T. J. Marks, M. G. Kanatzidis and M. C. Hersam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 14166–14174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Almora, I. Zarazua, E. Mas-Marza, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1645–1652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Rong, Y. Hu, S. Ravishankar, H. W. Liu, X. M. Hou, Y. S. Sheng, A. Y. Mei, Q. F. Wang, D. Y. Li, M. Xu, J. Bisquert and H. W. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2383–2391 RSC .
A. Guerrero, E. J. Juarez-Perez, J. Bisquert, I. Mora-Sero and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 133902 CrossRef .
O. Almora, C. Aranda, E. Mas-Marzá and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 173903 CrossRef .
D. Liu, Q. Wang, C. J. Traverse, C. Yang, M. Young, P. S. Kuttipillai, S. Y. Lunt, T. W. Hamann and R. R. Lunt, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 876–883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Aranda, A. Guerrero and J. Bisquert, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 741–746 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Ponseca, T. J. Savenije, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, A. Yartsev, T. Pascher, T. Harlang, P. Chabera, T. Pullerits, A. Stepanov, J.-P. Wolf and V. Sundström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5189–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. van Reenen, M. Kemerink and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3808–3814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Schulz, E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, G. Hodes, D. Cahen and A. Kahn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1377–1381 RSC .
G. Yang, C. Wang, H. Lei, X. Zheng, P. Qin, L. Xiong, X. Zhao, Y. Yan and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1658–1666 RSC .
C. Quarti, F. De Angelis and D. Beljonne, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 958–968 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zu, P. Amsalem, M. Ralaiarisoa, T. Schultz, R. Schlesinger and N. Koch, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41546–41552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, T. Sakurai, W. Wen and Y. Qi, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800260 CrossRef .
E. M. Miller, Y. Zhao, C. C. Mercado, S. K. Saha, J. M. Luther, K. Zhu, V. Stevanović, C. L. Perkins and J. van de Lagemaat, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 22122–22130 RSC .
D. Liu, S. Li, P. Zhang, Y. Wang, R. Zhang, H. Sarvari, F. Wang, J. Wu, Z. Wang and Z. D. Chen, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 462–468 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tan, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, F. P. García de Arquer, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Yuan, B. Zhang, Y. Zhao, F. Fan, P. Li, L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, Z.-H. Lu, Z. Yang, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2017, 355, 722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Giordano, A. Abate, J. P. Correa Baena, M. Saliba, T. Matsui, S. H. Im, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Graetzel, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, M. Qin, H. Tao, W. Ke, Z. Chen, J. Wan, P. Qin, L. Xiong, H. Lei, H. Yu and G. Fang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 121104 CrossRef .
J.-Y. Seo, R. Uchida, H.-S. Kim, Y. Saygili, J. Luo, C. Moore, J. Kerrod, A. Wagstaff, M. Eklund, R. McIntyre, N. Pellet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705763 CrossRef .
N. D. Pham, C. Zhang, V. T. Tiong, S. Zhang, G. Will, A. Bou, J. Bisquert, P. E. Shaw, A. Du, G. J. Wilson and H. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806479 CrossRef .
C. H. Ng, T. S. Ripolles, K. Hamada, S. H. Teo, H. N. Lim, J. Bisquert and S. Hayase, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 2482 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Fantacci, F. De Angelis, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23126–23133 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gelmetti, N. F. Montcada, A. Pérez-Rodríguez, E. Barrena, C. Ocal, I. García-Benito, A. Molina-Ontoria, N. Martín, A. Vidal-Ferran and E. Palomares, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1309 RSC .
S. Ravishankar, S. Gharibzadeh, C. Roldán-Carmona, G. Grancini, Y. Lee, M. Ralaiarisoa, A. M. Asiri, N. Koch, J. Bisquert and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Joule, 2018, 2, 788–798 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gottesman, P. Lopez-Varo, L. Gouda, J. A. Jimenez-Tejada, J. Hu, S. Tirosh, A. Zaban and J. Bisquert, Chem, 2016, 1, 776–789 CAS .
M. García-Rosell, A. Bou, J. A. Jiménez-Tejada, J. Bisquert and P. Lopez-Varo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 13920–13925 CrossRef .
A. Guerrero, A. Bou, G. Matt, O. Almora, T. Heumüller, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Bisquert, Y. Hou and C. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703376 CrossRef .
S. Ravishankar, O. Almora, C. Echeverría-Arrondo, E. Ghahremanirad, C. Aranda, A. Guerrero, F. Fabregat-Santiago, A. Zaban, G. Garcia-Belmonte and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 915–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ghahremanirad, A. Bou, S. Olyaee and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1402–1406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zohar, N. Kedem, I. Levine, D. Zohar, A. Vilan, D. Ehre, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 191–197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Anaya, W. Zhang, B. C. Hames, Y. Li, F. Fabregat-Santiago, M. E. Calvo, H. J. Snaith, H. Miguez and I. Mora-Sero, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 634–644 RSC .
D. Moia, I. Gelmetti, P. Calado, W. Fisher, M. Stringer, O. Game, Y. Hu, P. Docampo, D. Lidzey, E. Palomares, J. Nelson and P. R. F. Barnes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1296 RSC .
F. Ebadi, N. Taghavinia, R. Mohammadpour, A. Hagfeldt and W. Tress, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1574 CrossRef PubMed .
D. A. Jacobs, H. Shen, F. Pfeffer, J. Peng, T. P. White, F. J. Beck and K. R. Catchpole, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 124, 225702 CrossRef .
A. Pockett and M. J. Carnie, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1683–1689 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ershov, H. C. Liu, L. Li, M. Buchanan, Z. R. Wasilevski and A. K. Jonsher, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1998, 48, 2196 CrossRef .
I. Mora-Seró, J. Bisquert, F. Fabregat-Santiago, G. Garcia-Belmonte, G. Zoppi, K. Durose, Y. Y. Proskuryakov, I. Oja, A. Belaidi, T. Dittrich, R. Tena-Zaera, A. Katty, C. Lévy-Clement, V. Barrioz and S. J. C. Irvine, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 640–650 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, M. Kulbak, A. Zohar, M. Vallés-Pelarda, G. Hodes, D. Cahen and I. Mora-Seró, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2007–2013 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, A. Pitarch and H. Bolink, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 422, 184–191 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4679–4685 RSC .
R. M. L. Evans, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 150601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pockett, G. E. Eperon, T. Peltola, H. J. Snaith, A. B. Walker, L. M. Peter and P. J. Cameron, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3456–3465 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bertoluzzi and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 172–180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ravishankar, C. Aranda, S. Sanchez, J. Bisquert, M. Saliba and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 6444–6449 CrossRef CAS .
V. W. Bergmann, Y. Guo, H. Tanaka, I. M. Hermes, D. Li, A. Klasen, S. A. Bretschneider, E. Nakamura, R. Berger and S. A. L. Weber, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 19402–19409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, Y. Zhao, X. Zhou, R. Fu, Q. Li, Y. Zhao, K. Liu, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4122–4128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Feng, Y. Zhao, W.-K. Zhou, Q. Li, W. A. Saidi, Q. Zhao and X.-Z. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 6536–6543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Domanski, B. Roose, T. Matsui, M. Saliba, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, J.-P. Correa-Baena, C. R. Carmona, G. Richardson, J. M. Foster, F. De Angelis, J. M. Ball, A. Petrozza, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, W. Tress, M. Grätzel, U. Steiner, A. Hagfeldt and A. Abate, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 604–613 RSC .
J. Carrillo, A. Guerrero, S. Rahimnejad, O. Almora, I. Zarazua, E. Mas-Marza, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502246 CrossRef .
M. Z. Bazant, K. Thornton and A. Ajdari, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2004, 70, 021506 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584–2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Umari, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4467 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-J. Yu, J. Phys.: Energy, 2019, 1, 022001 Search PubMed .
D. Meggiolaro, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 447–451 CrossRef CAS .
H. Uratani and K. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 742–746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Azpiroz, E. Mosconi, J. Bisquert and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2118–2127 RSC .
E. Mosconi, E. Ronca and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2619–2625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Coll, A. Gomez, E. Mas-Marza, O. Almora, G. Garcia-Belmonte, M. Campoy-Quiles and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1408–1413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Rakita, O. Bar-Elli, E. Meirzadeh, H. Kaslasi, Y. Peleg, G. Hodes, I. Lubomirsky, D. Oron, D. Ehre and D. Cahen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, E5504–E5512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Garten, D. T. Moore, S. U. Nanayakkara, S. Dwaraknath, P. Schulz, J. Wands, A. Rockett, B. Newell, K. A. Persson, S. Trolier-McKinstry and D. S. Ginley, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaas9311 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Röhm, T. Leonhard, M. J. Hoffmann and A. Colsmann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 950–955 RSC .
Q. Zhang, A. Solanki, K. Parida, D. Giovanni, M. Li, T. L. C. Jansen, M. S. Pshenichnikov and T. C. Sum, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 13523–13532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lopez-Varo, L. Bertoluzzi, J. Bisquert, M. Alexe, M. Coll, J. Huang, J. A. Jimenez-Tejada, T. Kirchartz, R. Nechache, F. Rosei and Y. Yuan, Phys. Rep., 2016, 653, 1–40 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Yang, S. J. Lee, S. Yi, B. G. Chae, S. H. Lee, H. J. Joo and M. S. Jang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 774–776 CrossRef CAS .
G.-L. Yuan and J. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 252904 CrossRef .
Y. Yuan, T. J. Reece, P. Sharma, S. Poddar, S. Ducharme, A. Gruverman, Y. Yang and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 296–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Asadi, P. de Bruyn, P. W. M. Blom and D. M. de Leeuw, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 183301 CrossRef .
A. Pérez-Tomas, H. Xie, Z. Wang, H.-S. Kim, I. Shirley, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, A. Morales-Melgares, B. Saliba, D. Tanenbaum, M. Saliba, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Gratzel, A. Hagfeldt and M. Lira-Cantu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 382–389 RSC .
Y. Yang, N. D. Pham, D. S. Yao, H. Y. Zhu, P. Yarlagadda and H. X. Wang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2018, 29, 1242–1250 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cojocaru, S. Uchida, P. V. V. Jayaweera, S. Kaneko, H. B. Wang, J. Nakazaki, T. Kubo and H. Segawa, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 1762–1766 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Kim, M. Kim, L. Cojocaru, S. Uchida and H. Segawa, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2743–2749 CrossRef CAS .
A. Guerrero, J. You, C. Aranda, Y. S. Kang, G. Garcia-Belmonte, H. Zhou, J. Bisquert and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 218–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kato, L. K. Ono, M. V. Lee, S. Wang, S. R. Raga and Y. Qi, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500195 CrossRef .
V. Verdingovas, L. Müller, M. S. Jellesen, F. B. Grumsen and R. Ambat, Corros. Sci., 2015, 97, 161–171 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6306–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kaltenbrunner, G. Adam, E. D. Glowacki, M. Drack, R. Schwodiauer, L. Leonat, D. H. Apaydin, H. Groiss, M. C. Scharber, M. S. White, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1032–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Tisdale, E. Muckley, M. Ahmadi, T. Smith, C. Seal, E. Lukosi, I. N. Ivanov and B. Hu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 7 Search PubMed .
W. Peng, L. F. Wang, B. Murali, K. T. Ho, A. Bera, N. Cho, C. F. Kang, V. M. Burlakov, J. Pan, L. Sinatra, C. Ma, W. Xu, D. Shi, E. Alarousu, A. Goriely, H. He, O. F. Mohammed, T. Wu and O. M. Bakr, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3383–3390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, M. S. You, M. H. Chang, W. Yin, T. K. Ahn, S.-J. Lee, S.-J. Sung, D. H. Kim and S. H. Im, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 530–539 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, B. Liu, Y. Zhu, Z. Ma, B. Liu, X. Miao, R. Ma and C. Wang, Sol. Energy, 2018, 169, 335–342 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gu, Y. Wang, T. Zhang, D. Liu, R. Zhang, P. Zhang, J. Wu, Z. D. Chen and S. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 10754–10760 RSC .
J. K. Kim, S. U. Chai, Y. Ji, B. Levy-Wendt, S. H. Kim, Y. Yi, T. F. Heinz, J. K. Nørskov, J. H. Park and X. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801717 CrossRef .
M. Li, Y. Huan, X. Yan, Z. Kang, Y. Guo, Y. Li, X. Liao, R. Zhang and Y. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 171–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Guo, Y. Li and X. Zhou, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 200, 29–36 CrossRef CAS .
X.-X. Gao, Q.-Q. Ge, D.-J. Xue, J. Ding, J.-Y. Ma, Y.-X. Chen, B. Zhang, Y. Feng, L.-J. Wan and J.-S. Hu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16881–16885 RSC .
Y. Xiang, Z. Ma, J. Zhuang, H. Lu, C. Jia, J. Luo, H. Li and X. Cheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 20150–20157 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang, P. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Gu, Q. Cai, X. Liu, J. Wang, H. Wen and G. Shao, J. Power Sources, 2017, 372, 235–244 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ren, J. Wu, N. Wang and X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15348–15358 RSC .
R. Ranjan, A. Prakash, A. Singh, A. Singh, A. Garg and R. K. Gupta, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1037–1047 RSC .

          L.-L. Jiang, Z.-K. Wang, M. Li, C.-H. Li, P.-F. Fang and L.-S. Liao, Sol. RRL,  2018, 1800149 Search PubMed.
H.-H. Wang, Q. Chen, H. Zhou, L. Song, Z. S. Louis, N. D. Marco, Y. Fang, P. Sun, T.-B. Song, H. Chen and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9108–9115 RSC .
H. Liu, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Cai, Y. Zhou, Q. Qin, X. Lu, X. Gao, L. Shui, S. Wu and J.-M. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 272, 68–76 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng, T. Duong, X. Zhou, H. Shen, Y. Wu, H. K. Mulmudi, Y. Wan, D. Zhong, J. Li, T. Tsuzuki, K. J. Weber, K. R. Catchpole and T. P. White, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601768 CrossRef .
Q. Cai, Y. Zhang, C. Liang, P. Li, H. Gu, X. Liu, J. Wang, Z. Shentu, J. Fan and G. Shao, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 261, 227–235 CrossRef CAS .
F. Giordano, A. Abate, J. P. C. Baena, M. Saliba, T. Matsui, S. H. Im, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Graetzel, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Yao, C. M. Zhang, N. D. Pham, Y. H. Zhang, V. T. Tiong, A. J. Du, Q. Shen, G. J. Wilson and H. X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 2113–2120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Zardetto, F. di Giacomo, H. Lifka, M. A. Verheijen, C. H. L. Weijtens, L. E. Black, S. Veenstra, W. M. M. Kessels, R. Andriessen and M. Creatore, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 6 Search PubMed .
J. P. Correa-Baena, L. Steier, W. Tress, M. Saliba, S. Neutzner, T. Matsui, F. Giordano, T. J. Jacobsson, A. R. Srimath Kandada, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Petrozza, A. Abate, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2928–2934 RSC .
T. Hu, T. Becker, N. Pourdavoud, J. Zhao, K. O. Brinkmann, R. Heiderhoff, T. Gahlmann, Z. Huang, S. Olthof, K. Meerholz, D. Többens, B. Cheng, Y. Chen and T. Riedl, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606656 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Tavakoli, P. Yadav, R. Tavakoli and J. Kong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 9 Search PubMed .
C. Di Valentin, G. Pacchioni and A. Selloni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20543–20552 CrossRef CAS .
H. Schmidt, K. Zilberberg, S. Schmale, H. Flügge, T. Riedl and W. Kowalsky, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 243305 CrossRef .
A. Guerrero, S. Chambon, L. Hirsch and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6234–6240 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Kerner and B. P. Rand, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2298–2303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Wong, A. Fakharuddin, P. Ehrenreich, T. Deckert, M. Abdi-Jalebi, R. H. Friend and L. Schmidt-Mende, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 10691–10698 CrossRef CAS .
J. Will, Y. Hou, S. Scheiner, U. Pinkert, I. M. Hermes, S. A. L. Weber, A. Hirsch, M. Halik, C. Brabec and T. Unruh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 5511–5518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Y. F. Zhang, L. Shi, Z. H. Liu, J. L. Huang, J. S. Yun, Y. Y. Zeng, A. B. Pu, K. W. Sun, Z. Hameiri, J. A. Stride, J. Seidel, M. A. Green and X. J. Hao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800138 CrossRef .
L. J. Zuo, Q. Chen, N. De Marco, Y. T. Hsieh, H. J. Chen, P. Y. Sun, S. Y. Chang, H. X. Zhao, S. Q. Dong and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 269–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, Y. Wu, W. Ye, D. A. Jacobs, H. Shen, X. Fu, Y. Wan, T. Duong, N. Wu, C. Barugkin, H. T. Nguyen, D. Zhong, J. Li, T. Lu, Y. Liu, M. N. Lockrey, K. J. Weber, K. R. Catchpolea and T. P. White, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1792–1800 RSC .
J. B. Patel, J. Wong-Leung, S. Van Reenen, N. Sakai, J. T. W. Wang, E. S. Parrott, M. Z. Liu, H. J. Snaith, L. M. Herz and M. B. Johnston, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 6 Search PubMed .
F. Ali, N. D. Pham, H. J. Bradford, N. Khoshsirat, K. Ostrikov, J. M. Bell, H. Wang and T. Tesfamichael, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3096–3103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. B. Cappel, T. Daeneke and U. Bach, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4925–4931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Sanchez and E. Mas-Marza, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 158, 189–194 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, C. Xiao, Y. Yang, S. P. Harvey, D. H. Kim, J. A. Christians, M. Yang, P. Schulz, S. U. Nanayakkara, C.-S. Jiang, J. M. Luther, J. J. Berry, M. C. Beard, M. M. Al-Jassim and K. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1234–1242 RSC .
Z. Li, C. X. Xiao, Y. Yang, S. P. Harvey, D. H. Kim, J. A. Christians, M. J. Yang, P. Schulz, S. U. Nanayakkara, C. S. Jiang, J. M. Luther, J. J. Berry, M. C. Beard, M. M. Al-Jassim and K. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1234–1242 RSC .
S. P. Harvey, Z. Li, J. A. Christians, K. Zhu, J. M. Luther and J. J. Berry, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28541–28552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Yue, N. Salim, Y. Z. Wu, X. D. Yang, A. Islam, W. Chen, J. Liu, E. B. Bi, F. X. Xie, M. L. Cai and L. Y. Han, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Schloemer, T. S. Gehan, J. A. Christians, D. G. Mitchell, A. Dixon, Z. Li, K. Zhu, J. J. Berry, J. M. Luther and A. Sellinger, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 473–482 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, X. Du, S. Scheiner, D. P. McMeekin, Z. Wang, N. Li, M. S. Killian, H. Chen, M. Richter, I. Levchuk, N. Schrenker, E. Spiecker, T. Stubhan, N. A. Luechinger, A. Hirsch, P. Schmuki, H.-P. Steinrück, R. H. Fink, M. Halik, H. J. Snaith and C. J. Brabec, Science, 2017, 358, 1192–1197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Sanehira, B. J. Tremolet de Villers, P. Schulz, M. O. Reese, S. Ferrere, K. Zhu, L. Y. Lin, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 38–45 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schulz, J. O. Tiepelt, J. A. Christians, I. Levine, E. Edri, E. M. Sanehira, G. Hodes, D. Cahen and A. Kahn, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31491–31499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shahbazi and H. X. Wang, Sol. Energy, 2016, 123, 74–87 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sultana, N. J. Demarais, D. Shevchenko and P. J. Derrick, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 9 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Hongxia Wang
	Assoc. Prof. Hongxia Wang is currently leading a research group at Queensland University of Technology (QUT) dedicated to development of new routes to enhance the performance and stability of next generation solar cells, in particular perovskite solar cells and energy storage devices such as supercapacitors through innovative material engineering and device engineering. She has published over 100 peer-reviewed research papers and some of her papers are selected ESI high impact papers. She was the recipient of the “Australian Research Council (ARC) Future Fellowship”, and “Solar Energy Best Paper Award for 2016 in the topic of Photovoltaics” from the International Solar Energy Society.

Antonio Guerrero
	Antonio Guerrero (PhD, University of East Anglia, UK) is contracted as a Ramon y Cajal fellow at the Institute of Advanced materials (INAM) in Castelló (Spain). He is specialized in the synthesis and characterization of semiconducting materials for their implementation in a variety of electrical devices. Over the last 5 years, his work has been mainly focused on three different lines of research: 1 – perovskite solar cells, 2 – organic photovoltaics and 3 – (photo)electrochemical cells. Overall, he is the author of more than 70 research articles, one book, one book chapter and he is the inventor of two patents.

Agustín Bou
	Agustín Bou graduated in Physics from Universitat de València, Spain, in 2016 and joined the Institute of Advanced Materials of the Universitat Jaume I in Castellón, Spain, in 2017. His main topic of interest is the characterization and modeling of energy devices. His research has focused particularly on perovskite solar cells, focusing on impedance spectroscopy characterization and potential distribution and charge distribution modeling, including interface analysis.

Abdullah M. Al-Mayouf
	Abdullah M. Al-Mayouf is professor of physical chemistry at King Saud University, Saudi Arabia and the director of the Electrochemical Sciences Research Chair (ESRC). His research interests focus on porous and nanomaterials, electrochemical methods, electrocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis and surface modification. Currently, he is the editor-in-chief for Journal of Saudi Chemical Society.

Juan Bisquert
	Juan Bisquert is a professor of applied physics at Universitat Jaume I de Castelló and the director of the Institute of Advanced materials (INAM). His main topics of interest are perovskite solar cells and solar fuel production. He has developed the application of measurement techniques and physical modeling that relate the device operation with the elementary steps that take place at the nanoscale dimension. He authored several books including Physics of Solar Cells: Perovskites, Organics, and Photovoltaics Fundamentals (CRC Press).

Broader context
While metal halide perovskite materials have shown outstanding properties for applications in photovoltaics and optoelectronics, the operation of the devices is hindered by a number of phenomena that occur with extremely low frequencies and long times, and have proved very difficult to characterize systematically. Based on an extensive overview of contact phenomena we show that the interface of the perovskite material with organic or inorganic contacts is a site where a combination of ionic and electronic phenomena conspire to produce effects that severely modify the expectations received from traditional solar cell operation. Our analysis has three main aspects: the charge accumulation phenomena, the dynamic phenomena, and the physico-chemical features of the interface. From a review of a very broad range of methods and materials, we propose a general interpretation of the main factors dominating the response. In summary one can observe totally reversible phenomena of charge accumulation, a partial ionic binding that retards the response, and intense chemical interactions that perturb and invalidate the devices. Sorting out these phenomena is a key objective for ensuring stable performance and endurance in future technologies of metal halide perovskites.



Electron transport	0.3	∼1–100	Several methods like THzC, MWC, PLQ or SCLC22
Extrinsic Li+	1 × 10−7	4 × 10−6	IS23
Halide vacancy transport (VI+)	1 × 10−8	4 × 10−7	Galvanostatic voltage measurement,19 IS,20 PL suppresion21
	(1)
	(2)

Electronic transport across d = 100 nm	


Halide vacancy diffusion over a distance d = 100 nm	


The response of ions accumulated at the perovskite surface	
τ = 100–102 s
Cation vacancy diffusion over a distance d = 100 nm	
τ = 103 s

 	Fig. 1  Representative characteristic times for ionic phenomena in a typical perovskite solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a–c) Time dependent PL images of a perovskite film CH3NH3PbI3−xClx measured under an external electric field of ∼2 × 104 V m−1, interdigitated configuration with a channel width of ∼150 μm. (d) 1/I2 monitored as a function of time during the measurement of experiment (a). Adapted with permission from ref. 21.	 

 	Fig. 3  Summary of equivalent circuits used for the analysis of impedance spectra of perovskite solar cells with examples of representative spectra for each circuit. Here, we use the following notation for capacitances: Cg is the geometrical capacitance, C1 is the low frequency capacitance usually associated with accumulation, and C2 is the intermediate frequency capacitance; and for resistances: RS is the series resistance, and R1, R2 and R3 are always ordered from the lowest frequency resistance to the highest, starting from 1. (a) Transmission line showing the impedance of ion diffusion in a finite layer used for ionic transport quantification in perovskites, highlighted in red. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. (b) Equivalent circuit used for two arc spectra. Here we show capacitance spectra depending on light intensity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. (c) Equivalent circuit used for three arc spectra and intermediate frequency loops; here, resistances appear in series. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. (d) Equivalent circuit used for spectra with two arcs that vary in concordance which have exotic features such as inductive loops or negative capacitances; here, resistances appear in parallel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. (e) Equivalent circuit obtained from the analysis of both IS and IMPS data together; here we have resistances in parallel as well as in series. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79.	 
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Capacitance–frequency plot under one sun illumination under short-circuit conditions (bias voltage = 0 V). The normal and the inverted structures represent cp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-MeOTAD and PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. (b and c) Dark j–V curves measured at different scan rates with corresponding structures sketched in the insets. The positive currents are the forward bias direction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34.	 

 	Fig. 5  Dependence of the hysteresis effect index on (a) c-TiO2 layer spray deposition cycles and (b) scanning rates for hysteresis-normal, hysteresis-free and hysteresis-inverted devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Capacitance–voltage curve and (b) respective Mott–Schottky plot of a CH3NH3PbI3-based PSC with a mesoporous TiO2 matrix for a larger DC bias window at different scan rates, as indicated. Inset in (a): the corresponding capacitance absolute difference between scan directions ΔC. The inset in (b) is the typical Mott–Schottky plot region, shown inside the dashed gray square. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39.	 

 	Fig. 7  Time-resolved fluorescence microscopy images of perovskite films with (a) bare perovskite, (b) a 1.5 nm amorphous buffer layer spacer with 20 nm C60, and (c) a 7.5 nm buffer layer spacer with 20 nm C60. The buffer layer-only coated perovskite film is provided in each panel for reference. The time scale is 0 s (left), 30 s (middle), and 60 s (right) for each figure; the brightening of the PL with time stems from space-charge accumulation, which increases radiation recombination rates. The dashed line is used as a guide to the eye to indicate the interface position. The scale bar is 100 μm for all figures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40.	 

 	Fig. 8  Photoluminescence measurements focused on both the TiO2 and perovskite showing the enhancement of perovskite emission and suppression of the interfacial emission. PL spectra obtained under continuous wave (CW) excitation (λexc = 380 nm, Iexc = 10 mW cm−2) of devices with (black) and without (red) lithium treatment at the metal oxide contact. The inset plot shows the quenching of the second feature when lithium is present at the metal oxide contact. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41.	 

 	Fig. 9  WF, IE, and EA values for various perovskites reported by different groups, which are prepared either on different underneath layers and/or by different methods. The listed materials on the bars are the substrates, and the types of perovskite materials are listed on top. WF and IE are derived from UPS measurements, while EA values are derived from the transport gap or optical bandgap. The star symbols (*) represent that the work used the same preparation method and the same substrate material but reported in different literature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Current–voltage (j–V) curves measured under 1 sun illumination and (B) external quantum efficiency (EQE) of representative perovskite solar cells containing meso-TiO2, c-TiO2 and ETL-free architectures. (C) Summary of device parameters obtained for more than 40 cells measured under AM1.5G sun illumination, room temperature and air conditions. (D) The open circuit voltage in comparison to the work function of the different contact layers are also indicated for comparison (right panel). Reproduced by permission from ref. 59.	 

 	Fig. 11  Top row: open circuit voltage decay (OCVD) data for a PSC with a TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx interface. (A and B) Changes in the decay rate appear in the light-soaking stage (A) and slowly revert back during the dark recovery stage (B). (C) An exemplary comparison of three OCVD measurements that show the two photo-induced changes in the decay rate and the buildup of an electrostatic potential, Velec. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60.	 

 	Fig. 12  The energy diagram at the TiO2/perovskite contact at four different stages. (A) In the dark. (B) At a very short illumination time of Δt = 1 s. (C) At an illumination time close to 1 min. (D) After a substantial illumination time of Δt > 1 min. This potential is added to the built-in potential. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60.	 
	(5)

 	Fig. 13  Time resolved KPFM results with pulsed illumination. (a) ΔCPD map 2.5 ms after the switching, where a strong potential gradient is present inside the perovskite. (b) Averaged ΔCPD sections from the rectangular area marked in (a). (c) Map of ΔCPD measured 6 ms after switching off the voltage. The interfaces of the perovskite layer are marked with dotted lines. (d) Averaged section graphs obtained from the region indicated by the red box in (c) at different times after the switching. Adapted with permission from ref. 24.	 

 	Fig. 14  Maximum power output tracking for 3 identically prepared perovskite solar cells (device A, B and C) measured under UV-filtered 1 sun equivalent light. Devices were continuously kept at the maximum power point using the standard “perturb and observe” method. Devices A and B were continuously tracked for over 100 hours. Device C was cyclically tracked 4 times for 5 hours and it was left in the dark at open circuit in between the consecutive measurements. Experimental data were fitted to an exponential decay (single or double). Reproduced with permission from ref. 83.	 

 	Fig. 15  Response time calculated from the RC product for the low-frequency arc (solid line) and high-frequency arc (dashed line), respectively. (a) Short-circuit and (b) open-circuit conditions for MAPbI3-based planar solar cells and (c) short-circuit and (d) open-circuit conditions for FAPbI3−xClx-based planar solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28.	 
	(6)

 	Fig. 16  Representation of the ionic charging time for diffusion coefficient D = 1 × 10−8 cm2 s−1 and Debye length LD = 200 nm as a function of layer thickness. The points correspond to the data of Fig. 15 for MAPbI3 (red) and FAPbI3−xClx (green).	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Examples of perovskite termination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. (b) Location of VI and VMA in the ground state with the VB edge localized on the perovskite and (c) in the charge separated state in which one electron has been promoted from the perovskite to the TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92.	 

 	Fig. 18  Diagrams representing iodide migration and the chemical species present at the interfaces that lead to a modification in the capacitance. (a) At positive bias iodine ions are forced to migrate towards the hole selective contact where the chemical reaction with spiro-OMeTAD+ occurs. An iodine defective layer is formed at the TiO2/MAPbI3 interface. (b) At zero bias the neutral case appears. (c) At negative bias spiro-OMeTAD only partially returns to its oxidized, conductive state. Iodine ions accumulate at the TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84.	 

 	Fig. 19  EBIC results showing the electron density map at apexes (black A), valleys (white V) and the flat interface (blue) F on a cross-sectional SEM image of a PSC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107.	 

 	Fig. 20  Current density–voltage curves of devices fabricated with different metal contacts measured at 1 sun light illumination. (a) Metals providing S-shape curves after degradation. (b) The contact containing Cr2O2/Cr does not show an S-shape after degradation. Degraded devices are shown as broken lines. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108.	 

 	Fig. 21  Proposed AgI formation mechanism in the presence of ambient water. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic representation of the defect energy levels in the band gap of bulk anatase TiO2 as derived from B3LYP calculations for the following Ti3+ species: (1) 6-fold-coordinated Ti6c3+; (2) Ti6c3+-OH species; (3) Ti5c3+ species associated with oxygen vacancies; and (4) interstitial Ti5c3+ species. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137.	 
e−(TiO2) + I−ads(MAPbI3) ⇔ I−ads(TiO2) + e−(MAPbI3) + trap0(MAPbI3)
Spiro-OMeTAD+ + I− → Spiro-OMeTAD-I

 	Fig. 23  (a) Optical images of devices containing different current collectors after 24 h of constant operation under ambient conditions. (b) Normalized PCE of similarly fabricated cells measured in three different RH conditions. All of the devices had the same electrode configuration of 15 nm of MoOx/200 nm of Al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Device configuration where the HTL is the only parameter that has been modified. (b) Chemical structure of different HTLs. (c–e) j–V curves of PSCs with different HTLs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35.	 
PbI2 + hν → e−cb(PbI2) + h+vb(PbI2)	(7a)
e−cb(PbI2) + O2 → O2−˙ + PbI2	(7b)
(x + y)PbI2 + y/2O2−˙ → (PbI2)x(PbO)y + yI2	(7c)
2CH3NH3PbI3 + 1/2O2−˙ → 2PbI2 + 2CH3NH2 + H2O + I2	(7d)
	(7e)
	(7f)

 	Fig. 25  (a) Energy level diagram of the material employed (black) and formed (blue) in the studied PSCs as well as the potential of side redox reactions (red) occurring in the PSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. (b and c) Redox reactivity of different HTLs with I−/I3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
