Recent advances in direct air capture by adsorption  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00970B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00970B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 6574-6651Recent advances in direct air capture by adsorption

        
          
            Xuancan 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenwen 
            Xie
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Junye 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yihe 
            Miao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Chengjie 
            Xiang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chunping 
            Chen
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Bingyao 
            Ge
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhuozhen 
            Gan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fan 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Man 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dermot 
            O'Hare
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Jia 
            Li
          
          
        
      cef, 
      
        
          
            Tianshu 
            Ge
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Ruzhu 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a
aResearch Center of Solar Power & Refrigeration, School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, 200240, China. E-mail: baby_wo@sjtu.edu.cn; rzwang@sjtu.edu.cn
bInstitute of Technical Thermodynamics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76131, Germany
cChina-UK Low Carbon College, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, No. 3 Yinlian Road, Shanghai 201306, China
dChemistry Research Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, 12 Mansfield Road, Oxford OX1 3TA, UK
eJiangmen Laboratory for Carbon and Climate Science and Technology, No. 29 Jinzhou Road, Jiangmen, 529100, China
fThe Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), No. 2 Huan Shi Road South, Nansha, Guangzhou 511458, China
Received 
      1st April 2022
    First published on 11th July 2022AbstractSignificant progress has been made in direct air capture (DAC) in recent years. Evidence suggests that the large-scale deployment of DAC by adsorption would be technically feasible for gigatons of CO2 capture annually. However, great efforts in adsorption-based DAC technologies are still required. This review provides an exhaustive description of materials development, adsorbent shaping, in situ characterization, adsorption mechanism simulation, process design, system integration, and techno-economic analysis of adsorption-based DAC over the past five years; and in terms of adsorbent development, affordable DAC adsorbents such as amine-containing porous materials with large CO2 adsorption capacities, fast kinetics, high selectivity, and long-term stability under ultra-low CO2 concentration and humid conditions. It is also critically important to develop efficient DAC adsorptive processes. Research and development in structured adsorbents that operate at low-temperature with excellent CO2 adsorption capacities and kinetics, novel gas–solid contactors with low heat and mass transfer resistances, and energy-efficient regeneration methods using heat, vacuum, and steam purge is needed to commercialize adsorption-based DAC. The synergy between DAC and carbon capture technologies for point sources can help in mitigating climate change effects in the long-term. Further investigations into DAC applications in the aviation, agriculture, energy, and chemical industries are required as well. This work benefits researchers concerned about global energy and environmental issues, and delivers perspective views for further deployment of negative-emission technologies.
Xuancan Zhu
Xuancan Zhu is an Assistant Professor at Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. He obtained his PhD in 2019 from Tsinghua University. Prof. Zhu engaged in theoretical and applied research studies on novel adsorbent synthesis, CO2 capture and conversion, and gas purification separation. He has published ∼40 papers so far related to CO2 adsorptive separation. He was awarded by the Excellent Innovation Achievement for Postdoctoral Program (2020), Shanghai Excellent Postdoctoral Fellow (2019), Tsinghua Excellent Doctoral Dissertation (2019), National Scholarship for Graduate Students (2017), and Future Researchers Scholarship (2014).
Wenwen Xie
Wenwen Xie is a postdoctoral researcher at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany. She obtained her PhD in 2020 from Tsinghua University. Her research focuses on the computational fluid dynamics of reacting flows towards clean and efficient combustion and chemical energy storage through high-temperature pathways.
Chunping Chen
Chunping Chen received her PhD from Nanyang Technological University in Singapore in 2013. Since then, she has been in Professor Dermot O’Hare's research group in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Oxford. Currently, she is an SCG Research Fellow in the Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, and a Programme Manager for functional materials within the SCG–Oxford Centre of Excellence in Chemistry (CoE). Her research interests include the design of 2D layered functional materials for sustainable chemistry, green energy and CO2 capture and utilization.
Dermot O'Hare
Dermot O’Hare is Professor of Organometallic and Materials Chemistry in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Oxford. In addition, he is currently the Director of the SCG–Oxford Centre of Excellence for Chemistry and Associate Head for Business & Innovation in the Mathematics, Physical and Life Sciences Division. He leads a multidisciplinary research team that works across broad areas of catalysis and nanomaterials. His research is specifically targeted at finding solutions to global issues related to energy, zero carbon and the circular economy. He has been awarded numerous awards and prizes for his creative and ground-breaking work in Inorganic Chemistry, including the Royal Society Chemistry's Sir Edward Frankland Fellowship, the Ludwig Mond Prize, the Tilden Medal and Academia–Industry Prize and the Exxon European Chemical and Engineering Prize.
Jia Li
Jia Li graduated from Imperial College London, and now is an associate professor at The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou). She is also the Senior Advisor on Clean Energy for the Shanghai Environment and Energy Exchange (Chinese National Carbon Market).
Tianshu Ge
Tianshu Ge is Professor at Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU), China. She holds a PhD in Refrigeration and Cryogenics, and her major expertise is research of solid desiccant (adsorption) dehumidification and cooling, including material synthesis, desiccant wheel fabrication, system construction and application demonstration. Research interests include ambient water vapor adsorption for dehumidification or water harvesting, CO2 adsorption in flue gas and direct air capture.
Ruzhu Wang
Ruzhu Wang obtained his bachelor's, master's and PhD degrees from Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU) in 1984, 1987 and 1990 respectively. He was promoted as associate professor in 1992, and full professor in 1994 at SJTU. Now he is a university chair professor of SJTU. He's a leading scientist in heat pumps, solar heating and cooling, green building energy systems, and the energy–water–air nexus. He won Chinese National Research Awards in 2010 and 2014 respectively. Prof. Wang received the J&E Hall International Gold Medal from the Institute of Refrigeration (UK) in 2013, the Asia Refrigeration Academic Award in 2017, the Nukiyama Memorial Award from the Japanese Society of Heat Transfer in 2018, the IIR-Gustav Lorentzen Medal from the International Institute of Refrigeration in 2019, the Peter Ritter von Rittinger International Heat Pump Award from the International Energy Agency (IEA) in 2021, and the Georg Alefeld Memorial Award from the International Sorption Heat Pump Committee (ISHPC) in 2021.
1. Introduction
1.1. The urgency of developing DAC

1.1.1. CO2 that needs to be captured. 
Fossil fuels are still the main energy sources of the world. Emissions from these sources lead to the total CO2 emissions approaching 40 Gt year−1.1 Although facing several limitations, integrated assessment models (IAMs),2 the most effective tool for predicting the CO2 emission change in response to temperature rise target, suggested that the CO2 capture rate should reach 8–50 Gt year−1 by 2100 to ensure the global average temperature rise within 2 °C.3 Negative emission technologies (NETs) with a cumulative CO2 capture of 450–1000 Gt between 2010 and 2100 are required to achieve the more stringent 1.5 °C temperature rise target.4 A recent study even claimed that more negative CO2 emissions than previously expected are required to compensate for the asymmetric climate-carbon cycle.5 Most IAMs prefer bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS) and afforestation as options to achieve negative emissions due to their perceived low costs and ability to generate energy.6 However, the water and land-use marginal costs may be more expensive than estimated.7,8 The lack of underlying data also makes the large-scale deployment of biological CO2 removal highly uncertain.9,10 In contrast, direct air capture (DAC) occupies much less land (e.g., 0.003 ha per ton CO2 captured per year) and requires 10–1000 times lower water utilization.11 Thus, DAC can be a complementary technology to reduce the risk of negative emissions. Furthermore, deploying efficient DAC may delay the decommissioning of fossil fuel-based power plants.12
While several previous IAMs included DAC,13–16 Realmonte et al.17 made the first inter-model comparison of different DAC technology options utilizing two IAM studies under several techno-economic assumptions. The results confirmed the potential of applying DAC to reduce the mitigation cost by more than 60%, and the large-scale deployment of DAC in the next half century with a fast DAC scale-up rate (e.g., 1.5 Gt year−1) should be considered. In the meantime, the authors also warned that the failure to achieve this scaling-up design of DAC as planned may cause a temperature overshoot of up to 0.8 °C. While preventive mitigation was previously recognized to be less expensive than deploying NETs in the business-as-usual scenario,18 a recent modeling work by Bistline et al.19 indicated that DAC is irreplaceable for achieving deep decarbonization in the electric power sector. Even in a high DAC deployment scenario, DAC accounts for less than 5% of the total electricity consumption and is much more cost-efficient than electrification and energy storage without NETs. Deep decarbonization in the industry and transport sectors also relies on the investment on a basket of NETs including DAC.20 Chatterjee and Huang21 held the opposite view, suggesting that it is unrealistic to achieve deep CO2 mitigation of 30 Gt year−1 with the massive production of adsorbents and electricity and heat consumption required for DAC. Their analysis indicated that replacing the current energy sources with renewables is more efficient at reducing the overall emissions. Furthermore, the at-scale deployment of NETs to reduce emissions has not yet been widely accepted by the public.22 Nonetheless, it is still encouraging that technological advancements could significantly reduce the energy requirements of DAC, making it a promising long-term mitigation strategy.23 In fact, recent studies advocated the near-term emergency deployment of DAC plants even under the current energy supply system to gain knowledge about lowering the operating costs.24,25 They suggested that large amounts of CO2 can be removed by DAC, totaling 2.2–2.3, 13–20, and 17–27 Gt year−1 in the years 2050, 2075, and 2100, respectively. It is highly encouraged that the carbon price trajectory is high initially with a moderate rise to avoid excessive carbon removal; but still retaining substantial NET requirements (e.g., 4 Gt year−1 in 2050 and >10 Gt year−1 in 2100).26
According to a recent International Energy Agency (IEA) report,27 the global CO2 capture rate should increase from 1.6 Gt year−1 by 2030 to 7.6 Gt year−1 by 2050. Most of the captured CO2 is stored geologically and 5% is used for carbon-based fuel synthesis. This report suggested that 2.4 Gt of CO2 is removed directly from the atmosphere through BECCS and DAC technologies, where 1.9 Gt of CO2 is permanently stored, and the rest is used for synthetic fuels in applications such as aviation. The estimation that DAC captures several Gt year−1 of CO2 in 2050 fits well with optimized IAM scenarios considering constraints such as capacities, mitigation costs, and energy, water, and land use.28 The Chinese Academy of Environmental Planning evaluated the target for CO2 capture in China, concluding that the BECCS and DAC require annual reductions of 0.3–0.6 Gt and 0.2–0.3 Gt of CO2, respectively, by 2060.29 In addition, an IAM study suggested the necessity of applying NETs with a scaled-up CO2 removal rate of 2.3–3.1 Mt year−1 to achieve net-zero emissions by 2070 in Japan.30 Depending on various quota principles, the European Union is responsible for removing 33–325 Gt of CO2 by 2100 through NETs.31 This huge quota cannot be realized without cross-border cooperation. For countries with limited biomass resources, such as the United Kingdom (7.1 Gt versus 11.9 Gt), it is necessary to deploy DAC to remove additional CO2. IAM studies revealed that such a fast near-term deployment of NETs would benefit the long-term gross domestic product (GDP) and avoid temperature overshoot in most scenarios.32 In particular, the Gulf countries face the most severe welfare loss risk due to the “unburnable oil” to meet the temperature rise target; DAC is central to reducing 26% discounted GDP loss and allowing additional emission permits from international market exchange.33


1.1.2. Feasibility of large-scale DAC deployment. 
DAC is claimed to be already capable of achieving the goal of capturing 1% of annual global CO2 emissions.34 DAC coupled with hydrocarbon synthesis is also appealing as net-zero emission energy systems.35 It is vital to comprehensively explore the net effects of this newly developed thermodynamic energy system on the atmosphere. Life cycle assessment (LCA) is an effective multi-step method to evaluate the feasibility of large-scale DAC deployment by considering the thermodynamic system efficiencies and environmental impact of the technology.36–50
While DAC has been previously considered as an energy-consuming process to capture CO2 directly from air at ultra-low CO2 concentrations (∼400 ppm), a recent LCA analysis conducted by van der Giesen et al.36 illustrated that under specific conditions a humidity-swing-based DAC (HS-DAC) could be largely passive, and its parasitic load (33–46 kJ mol−1) was less than twice that of monoethanolamine-based post-combustion capture (MEA-PCC) (60–72 kJ mol−1). Considering environmental impacts as a function of net greenhouse gas mitigation, powering distributed HS-DAC with photovoltaics increased nine environmental impacts by 18% compared to the value of 31% for MEA-PCC. Madhu et al.47 adopted a fully transparent LCA to quantify the comparative life-cycle impacts of DAC technologies and found that the gigaton-scale deployment of DAC is not limited by input requirements such as land, water, chemical materials, and energy. Temperature swing adsorption DAC (TSA-DAC) outperforms high-temperature aqueous solution DAC by a factor of 1.3–10 in all studied environmental impact categories and exhibits a higher net carbon removal ratio of 86%. Creutzig et al.38 compared the performance of BECCS and direct air carbon capture and storage (DACCS), showing that the DACCS displayed a higher sequestration efficiency of 75–100% over the entire life cycle than BECCS (50–90% or less). Such a difference was mainly ascribed to the low land requirement of the DACCS (two orders of magnitude less than that of the BECCS). The authors also argued that although the current CO2 removal costs of the DACCS are higher than those of the BECCS, the modularity and granularity help the DACCS foster technological learning to less than $100 tCO2−1.
Considering that the results of LCA highly depend on the original data adopted, the following metrics should be carefully evaluated for adsorption-based DAC: (1) the raw materials used to fabricate adsorbent materials, (2) the types of energy used to power the operation, (3) whether renewable energy was adopted as the power source, and (4) the raw material and equipment installation for such renewable energy. After comprehensively comparing a set of NETs using LCA, Terlouw et al.50 pointed out that avoided emissions due to the substitution of certain processes can be easily misinterpreted as negative emissions. It is recommended that available LCA results be interpreted more carefully and transparently to fully understand the environmental impacts and trade-offs between NETs before large-scale deployment. Note that because DAC technology is still in its early stages, the corresponding data are limited and lack transparency.47,48,50 Using estimated and public data from practical operation systems is inevitable, even for much more recent studies. Consequently, controversial voices that speak of social cost and climate and health impacts appear. For instance, Jacobson39 held a negative attitude towards DAC and other carbon capture, utilization, and storage technologies. His analysis of a DAC plant using aqueous KOH sorbent driven by natural gas51 concluded that only 10.5% and 20–31% of the removed CO2 directly from the air can be achieved over 20 and 100 years, respectively. DAC plants increase air pollution and total social costs relative to no capture. However, according to the LCA analysis of commercial adsorption-based DAC plants located in Hinwil and Hellisheidi,34 both systems can achieve negative emissions with capture efficiencies of 85.4 and 93.1%, respectively. The climatic benefits of DAC largely depend on the energy supply, adsorbent material, and plant construction. Other environmental impacts will increase by up to 0.057% when using wind power and 0.30% for the global electricity mix for 2050. Clearly, the obtained LCA results vary with the different capture technologies, system regeneration energy sources, and other criteria such as climate and environmental effects, air pollution, and social cost adopted. Overall, the LCA analysis shows the potential for deploying DAC as a climate-mitigation strategy.


1.1.3. DAC facility operation. 
DAC technology was originally developed for air pre-purification in air separation units52 and for trace CO2 removal in confined spaces.53 The technology is now a research hotspot due to the threat of global climate change. The severe climate change problems and huge carbon emission actuality stress the indispensableness of DAC as an effective NET (Fig. 1).54–56 Compared with conventional CO2 capture technologies that separate CO2 from existing large point source emissions, DAC systems capture CO2 from any point or distributed sources. The DAC process can avoid the degradation of adsorbents caused by direct exposure to high concentrations of flue gas pollutants, such as SOx, NOx, and heavy metal ions. Through the combination of DAC and BECCS, the demands for land can be reduced to achieve affordable negative emissions targets.
 Fig. 1  Working principles of different NETs (reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016). 
Early commercial DAC systems extracted CO2 through causticization or alternative causticization by using alkali/alkaline earth metal hydroxide absorbents.57,58 However, high energy consumption during the thermal regeneration process above 800 °C, high water loss, and the use of pure oxygen have limited the widespread application of this absorption process. At present, only Carbon Engineering operates absorption-based DAC pilot plants.51 Oak Ridge National Laboratory recently proposed a multistage absorption-based DAC cycle based on amino acids and organic salts, achieving regeneration at much lower temperatures.59–62 However, this technology needs further pilot-scale study. In contrast, adsorption-based processes selectively separate CO2 from air and then regenerate it at 80–120 °C. In spite of the common understanding about the high minimum work required,63 the actual energy consumption of pilot-scale DAC systems is currently only two to three times higher than that of capturing CO2 from flue gas.64,65 There are other DAC processes by using membranes, electrochemical regeneration, or condensation/sublimation but with much lower technology readiness levels.66
Electricity is required for DAC components including air blowers, switch valves, vacuum pumps, and control systems. Heat is also needed for optional steam production during thermal regeneration and heating sorbents and gas–solid contactors. Using electricity from a coal-fired power plant to operate DAC systems may not be prudent because the plant produces extra CO2.67 A better way is to use low-carbon fuels or renewable energy sources (e.g., wind, photovoltaic, solar-thermal, and geothermal energy, and biofuels). Similarly, heat can also be obtained from vapor condensation heat and low-temperature waste heat from power plants and industries.68–71 For instance, Carbon Engineering estimated that its absorption-based DAC plant requires either 8.81 GJ of natural gas or 5.25 GJ of gas and 366 kWh of electricity to capture and convert one ton of CO2 from air to a compressed liquid at 15 MPa.51 Another pilot-scale DAC system built by Climeworks in Iceland is powered by geothermal energy, in which the geothermal fluid flows into a double-flash plant to co-generate electricity and steam at 120 °C.72 Modularized DAC facilities could also be established in cities and driven by industrial waste heat. Coupling high temperature heat pumps using green electricity further cuts down the energy consumption of DAC systems.
DAC technologies inevitably require the movement of a large amount of air for sufficient contact with adsorbents. A forced draft, usually electronically driven, is required to overcome the pressure drop in gas–solid contactors. The direct use of renewable energy can be explored to provide airflow and save electricity. For example, a solar updraft tower with large thermal reservoirs in the base was applied to provide continuous airflow in a DAC system.73 Recent progress in dual-function materials, which are active for both CO2 capture and utilization, offers a new perspective on system design.74–76 DAC and reduction take place in sequence so that regeneration can be avoided. In practice, the sorbent particle size, packing surface area, and height/diameter ratios of contactors, among others, should be assessed. Also, periodic weather changes are sometimes important.


1.1.4. Policy roadmap. 
As BECCS, DACCS, and afforestation/reforestation (AR) are the three commonly featured NETs in low-carbon-emission scenarios induced by IAMs, Grant et al.77 conducted an expert survey on the feasibility of the three technologies, accounting for only non-technical and societal/governance constraints. A comparison of the feasible carbon-emission-reduction potential between the results of their expert survey and the IAMs concludes that AR is the largest NET before 2050; however, the long-term potential of AR is low, owing to the land availability, sink saturation, and institutional challenges. The DACCS shows the greatest long-term potential and the largest cumulative potential among the three NETs, although the DACCS has limited potential before 2050 owing to its high cost and low technology readiness. In addition, public opinion is essential for the deployment of DAC.78–82 As most people are unfamiliar, DAC should be described and promoted in a cautious manner to avoid excessive concerns about its risks.78,80
The high capital cost is considered to be an obstacle to the development of DAC.54,77,82–84 Therefore, generalized models for the cost analysis of DAC are necessary to determine the important parameters impacting the cost.54 Azarabadi and Lackner83 proposed a techno-economic model of a net-present value equation to evaluate the maximum affordable budget (MAB) of a sorbent for any DAC system by using widely understood parameters. The model inputs are three material-based parameters (C0: initial CO2 capture capacity of the sorbent, tcycle: duration of one loading/unloading cycle, and ft or fcycle: exponential rate of degradation), two system-based parameters (nO&M: operating and maintenance (O&M) cost per unit time per unit mass of sorbent and VBoP: capital cost per unit mass of sorbent), and two market-based inputs (P: unit mass price of CO2 and r: discount rate). The MAB and sorbent lifetime (tlife) are two important model outputs. As the P and r of CO2 are two exogenous parameters, the effects of the three material-based parameters on the feasibility of DAC systems were discussed. The MAB estimation of existing DAC sorbents selected in previous studies indicates that the high capacity, short cycle duration, and high resistance to degradation of each sorbent are the three dominant factors for realizing the economic feasibility of DAC systems. This is also the information for policymakers to provide research funding for achieving a trade-off between the cost and excellent performance of DAC sorbents. As the focus of current research is mainly on new DAC sorbents, the study of the kinetics and stability of DAC sorbents is highly recommended by Azarabadi and Lackner; this is reviewed and discussed, based on existing work, in the following sections.
Although the CO2 price is an exogenous parameter for determining the final cost of DAC, it plays an important role in determining the feasibility of DAC deployment. Table 1 lists the estimated CO2 prices by the IEA among different countries over different periods for net-zero-emission (NZE) scenarios.27 According to the results reported by Azarabadi and Lackner,83 if a CO2 price of $75 t−1 is assumed, DAC will become commercially feasible after 2030 in most advanced economies. In addition, a low discount rate would be necessary to realize the feasibility of DAC in the early stage. In the study conducted by Azarabadi and Lackner, the discount rate was fixed at 5%; however, policymakers should provide stronger financial support, such as green loans for DAC, to reduce the discount rate and promote the development of DAC. Herein, we propose that a discount rate of 1–2% is reasonable for future studies.
Table 1 CO2 prices for electricity, industry, and energy production in NZE scenarios (reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from the International Energy Agency, copyright 2021)




USD (2019) per tonne of CO2
2025
2030
2040
2050





a Include China, Russia, Brazil, and South Africa.





Advanced economies
75
130
205
250


Selected emerging market and developing economiesa
45
90
160
200


Other emerging market and developing economies
3
15
35
55




The importance of DAC in achieving net-zero emissions is becoming indisputable; however, a market to advance DAC remains elusive; this can be ascribed to the current high cost and limited market demands of the primary product of DAC, that is, CO2. These challenges require effective policies to promote DAC development from several perspectives, as discussed earlier. Recently, Meckling and Biber suggested a policy formula, “financial incentives + deployment or performance mandates,” based on electric vehicles and renewables. Mandating DAC mainly includes upstream regulation (regulation of the extraction of fossil fuels from the ground) and downstream regulation (regulation of the sale of fossil fuels for consumption by end-users). In particular, California's Low Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS) is a successful example of downstream regulation. Downstream regulation allows players from outside the oil and gas industry to drive the DAC business, and policymakers can use “financial incentives + deployment or performance mandates” to level up fuel standards step-by-step from low-carbon to carbon-neutral and, finally, to carbon-negative scenarios, as shown in Fig. 2, before gradually increasing the public demand for climatic actions. In addition, Meckling and Biber reported a series of lessons learnt from failure of the current carbon capture and storage (CCS) policies. First, deploying CCS on power plants or industrial emission sources requires very high initial investments and long time-frames, especially for the construction of an entirely new source. Therefore, financial support from the government can only permit very limited projects. Subsequently, entrants into the CCS industry are rare, and the benefits of repeated experimentation and failure begin to decrease. Second, CCS is geographically restricted to locations where point-emission sources are located because of the cost limitations of CO2 transportation. In addition, the pathway to net-zero emissions through electrification and 100% renewable electricity will strongly promote the development of DAC.84,85
 Fig. 2  Policy sequence for climate leaders to develop DAC technology. Climate leaders, in particular those with an existing LCFS, could start market development for DAC through an “incentive + mandate” policy mix. Over time, they could intensify the stringency of the mandates, while reducing incentives as the cost decreases and the political support broadens (reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2021). 
The European Union (EU), the United Kingdom (UK), Japan, and the United States (US) have pledged to achieve net-zero emissions before 2050. Germany, as the dominant economy in the EU, is committed to realizing net-zero emissions before 2045. In particular, China, as the largest developing country, promised to reach its maximum carbon emissions before 2030 and become carbon-neutral by 2060. Undoubtedly, these political pledges are accelerating NET-promotion policies and investments, especially for DAC. The EU has delivered innovation funding of EUR 15 million, through the “Horizon Europe Work Programme” for 2021–2022, to establish the technological feasibility of DACCS.87 Recently, the UK committed to delivering £100 million innovation funding for DACCS.88 During the net-zero transition, DACCS is envisaged to be on a commercial scale in the UK by 2030, owing to the efforts in demonstration and piloting during the 2020s, with the support from the UK government.88 A consensus study conducted by the US National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine in 2018 highlighted the absence of an economic driver that restricts the rapid testing and deployment of DAC.89 This report suggested staggering funding from policymakers, as depicted in Fig. 3, to construct a pipeline of DAC technology from basic and applied research through the deployment of DAC systems. The funding over 15 years should focus on research and development that transitions to demonstration and deployment projects.
 Fig. 3  Recommended annual U.S. federal funding allocations for basic and applied research, demonstration, development, and deployment of DAC technology (reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from National Academies Press, copyright 2019). 
“The Long-Term Strategy of the United States: Pathways to Net-Zero Greenhouse Gas Emissions by 2050,” published in 2021 by the U.S. Department of State, also emphasized that the difficulties of determining the cost of DAC and the adverse impact of DAC on a large scale would hinder the future development of DAC.90 In November 2021, the U.S. Department of Energy's (DOE's) third Energy Earthshots, “Carbon Negative Shot,” became the U.S. government's first major effort in NET and set a new goal to remove gigatons of CO2 from air and durably store it for less than $100 t−1 of CO2-equivalent (CO2e). In 2021, the DOE announced two special funding schemes to incentivize the development of DAC, each worth $12 and $14.5 million. As China has not reached its peak in terms of carbon emissions, three government research institutions in China reported that DAC would achieve demonstration scale by 2035 in China and that the period leading up to 2035 is crucial for lab- and pilot-scale development work.29 According to a special report on China from the IEA, DAC would significantly contribute to emission reduction from 2040, and most DAC plants would be located in the western provinces, which are the areas with the most suitable solar and wind resources and with high potential CO2 storage capacity.91 To the best of our knowledge, the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality first announced a local technology innovation fund of ca. RMB 1.5 million in 2021, aiming at developing a DAC prototype to capture one ton of CO2 per day.92 We appraise that DAC would attract considerable research attention during the 2020s and achieve deployment at demonstration and pilot scales in many countries during the 2030s.

1.2. Overview of adsorption-based DAC technologies
Several reviews have been published about DAC.93–100 In early 2016, Sanz-Pérez et al.94 provided a historical overview of DAC, describing the use of basic solvents, supported amine and ammonium materials, and metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) in DAC, as well as techno-economic analyses on DAC. Later, Shi et al.98 categorized the major types of DAC sorbents as physisorbents (activated carbon, zeolites, MOFs, and novel materials), amine-modified sorbents, and moisture swing sorbents. Notably, the concept of DAC is now being widely recognized as a necessary NET to achieve a stringent 1.5 °C temperature target. Hundreds of papers sharing new ideas about materials and processes for DAC have been published during the past five years (Fig. 4). Among them, amine-functionalized porous materials are the most widely studied DAC adsorbents due to their high tolerance to moisture, low energy requirement for regeneration, and amine groups having strong affinity towards CO2.101,102 Reliable shaping methods such as pelleting, hollow fibering, granulation, extrusion, 3D printing, and electrostatic spinning have been tested to fabricate structured DAC adsorbents with reduced mass transfer resistance.103 Understanding the influence of water on CO2 adsorption under ultradilute conditions is now clearer thanks to the development of in situ characterization techniques and material simulation tools.104 The thermal, hydrothermal, and chemical stabilities of DAC adsorbents upon exposure to high temperatures, oxygen, dry CO2, and steam are largely improved.105 Adsorption-based DAC has been coupled with many carbon storage and utilization technologies.106–109 Providing a comprehensive review of recent advances in adsorption-based DAC from the molecular to process scale is timely, considering that the technology is an irreplaceable solution to avoid catastrophic climate change.
 Fig. 4  Number of publications during 2011–2021 on the Web of Science database with the keywords: (a) air capture and (b) air capture and adsorption. 

1.2.1. Amine-functionalized adsorbents. 
Amine-functionalized porous materials have great potential for commercial-scale DAC applications because of their low cost, high amine density, suitable heat of adsorption, easy preparation, and relatively large CO2 adsorption capacity under ultradilute conditions. Branched polyethyleneimine (PEI) with a low degree of polymerization and rich primary amines is commonly used for preparing polyamine-impregnated adsorbents because small amine molecules lead to significant amine leakage and high-molecular-weight PEI impedes the diffusion of CO2 through porous substrates. Previous work has also verified the feasibility of other polyamines such as polyallylamine (PAA), tetraethylenepentamine (TEPA), and poly(propylene guanidine) (PPG) for DAC. The supported polyamine leads to low amine efficiencies (CO2/N atomic mole ratios), mainly because of the disordered stacking of amines blocking the active sites and slowing down the diffusion rate of CO2. In addition, the stability of aminopolymer-impregnated adsorbents under thermal regeneration and oxygen-containing conditions is a concern owing to the weak interaction between amines and supports. Therefore, researchers are simultaneously developing amine-grafted adsorbents that graft small amines onto supports through covalent chemical bonds. While grafted amines achieve high thermal stability, their replenishing from substrates after deactivation may not be as easy as impregnated amines. From 2017 to 2022, the research activities mainly included the following five aspects: (1) synergetic enhancement between amines and supports, (2) oxidative degradation avoidance, (3) H2O and CO2 cooperative adsorption, (4) mechanistic studies, and (5) novel amine-functionalized adsorbents.
While amine loading is considered as the main factor determining the CO2 adsorption capacity of amine-functionalized porous materials under ultradilute conditions, the morphology of amine molecules in the support and the gas–solid interaction change between the texture and surface microstructure of the support can also significantly affect the overall CO2 capture efficiency. Most recently, a better understanding of the synergetic enhancement between amines and supports has been elucidated.110–129 Extensive studies have been conducted to increase the hybrid capacity to chemisorb CO2 and the adsorption efficiency through high amine grafting density. It is now clear that the hybrid properties can be correlated with solvent polarity, more specifically, with the interaction between the inorganic matrix surface and the solvent during grafting. Methods for multiple and multilayer amine grafting have been proposed, and the clumping and agglomeration of the support under wet grafting conditions due to interparticle polymerization of amines have been solved. The CO2 uptake and thermal/oxidative stabilities of linear and branched aminosilanes were evaluated. The use of supercritical CO2 grafting further enhanced the amine grafting efficiency. Studies have also suggested that chemisorbed CO2 species formed on supported and hindered amines are weakly bound, leading to reduced energy costs associated with regeneration if such materials are deployed in a practical separation process.
Prototypical PEI degrades oxidatively at elevated temperatures. In particular, primary and tertiary amines appeared to be stable against oxidation, whereas secondary amines were degraded via imine and amide formation. Recently, several breakthroughs have been achieved in proving the oxidative stability of supported PEI or finding alternative amine polymers.105,130–134 The chemical kinetics of the oxidation of PEI have also been well illustrated to quantitatively estimate the material lifetime.135
Considering that water vapor is a ubiquitous component of air, understanding its impact on CO2 adsorption is critical. In the presence of amine-containing adsorbents, water is an excellent promoter of CO2 adsorption; it increases the rate of CO2 capture and is even necessary for long-term stability. Recent work has discussed the effect of humidity on CO2 uptake and adsorption kinetics.104,136–139 Novel mechanistic co-adsorption isotherm models have been introduced accordingly.140 The effect of water on the regeneration heat has also been discussed.141
Although porous aminopolymers are widely recognized as the most promising DAC adsorbents, the existence of chemisorbed CO2 species on the aminopolymer surface is still under debate and requires new experimental proof of assignment. Recent studies combining in situ spectroscopy and theoretical approaches have provided a molecular-level understanding of chemisorbed CO2 species in amine-functionalized adsorbents.142–144 In particular, the hydrated bicarbonate formation by chemisorption of CO2, which has not been detected by solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), CP/MAS 13C-NMR, has been experimentally identified.145 The deactivation mechanism by CO2 and O2 has also been elaborated.146,147
Several novel amine-functionalized adsorbents exhibiting a promising CO2 capture ability from air sources have recently been developed. The M2(dobpdc) series (M = Mg, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Zn; dobpdc4− = 4,4-dioxido-3,3-biphenyldicarboxylate), expanded analogs of the MOF-74 structure type, have high-density open metal sites that are postmodified with diamines. Such functionalization enables exceptional CO2 capacities under dilute and ultradilute conditions, with adjustable adsorption and desorption characteristics. Recent work has overcome two challenges of diamine-tethered MOFs to achieve stable uptake under humid conditions and low regeneration temperatures for energy savings.148–157 The enhancement mechanism of diamine functionalization on gas adsorption was illustrated. The working capacities and low-pressure adsorption amounts were found to correlate with the number of alkyl substituents and the alkyl chain length. In addition, a new cooperative mechanism for CO2 adsorption was observed in alcoholamine- and alkoxyalkylamine-functionalized Mg2(dobpdc), a key to achieving cooperative CO2 adsorption.
Quaternary ammonium-based anion exchange resin can effectively adsorb CO2 from dry air and release it when wet. Such moisture-swing adsorbents offer a new approach for regenerating CO2 sorbents. Recent work revealed the working mechanism of moisture swing adsorbents as free energy change of the chemical reaction.158–167 The influence of pore size, cation spacing, and surface hydrophobicity of the adsorbent on the CO2 capture efficiency was elucidated. Potential supports for moisture-driven sorbents have also been extended to covalent organic frameworks (COFs), zeolites, silica, graphene oxides, functionalized carbon black, and MOFs.
Although the presence of water enhances the CO2 adsorption capacities and avoids CO2 deactivation of amine-functionalized adsorbents, it leads to several drawbacks, such as amine leaching, increased regeneration energy, and structural degradation. Recently, several novel amine-based adsorbents with hydrophobic character have been synthesized, either through hydrophobic supports or hydrophobic organic moieties.168–170


1.2.2. Cyclic processes. 
Rapid scaling-up design of efficient adsorption-based DAC processes has been witnessed in recent years, such as temperature concentration swing adsorption (TCSA) using an inert gas purge or a CO2 purge,171,172 temperature vacuum swing adsorption (TVSA),65,173–179 steam-assisted TCSA (S-TCSA),64,180,181 and steam-assisted temperature vacuum swing adsorption (S-TVSA).180,182 By applying the hybrid desorption process combined with vacuum, heating, and steam purge, steam can be supplied to S-TVSA at low temperatures using solar energy or waste heat. In addition, the sweeping effect of the steam purge provides a larger driving force for desorption at lower CO2 partial pressures than that in TVSA. A techno-economic assessment was conducted to assess the feasibility of large-scale deployment of an adsorption-based DAC process.54,183–186
Novel adsorbent shaping technologies and gas–solid contactors with enhanced heat and mass transfer are also critical to meeting the cost requirements of the DAC process for commercialization. Naturally-powdered DAC adsorbents can be shaped through pelleting, granulation, extrusion, hollow fiber formation, 3D printing, coating on monoliths, and electrostatic spinning.103,110,139,187–193 Hydrophobic polymer coatings improve the hydrolytic stability and gas sorption performance of adsorbents under humid conditions. Progress has been made in the development of monolithic adsorbents via 3D printing, which allows 80–90 wt% adsorbent loading and makes materials easily tuned to fit any column.
On this basis, the adsorption of CO2 under ultradilute conditions relevant to DAC using packed bed breakthrough systems was comprehensively investigated to examine the effects of the flow rate, temperature, and CO2 concentration on the observed breakthrough profiles, isotherm shape, mass transfer resistance, and adsorption/desorption kinetics.137,194–199 Overall, the system performance (i.e., rate of CO2 extraction, CO2 capture fraction, and breakthrough curve types) for different feed concentrations of CO2 was identified. A thermodynamic tool was introduced to determine the energy requirements for CO2 capture using amine-functionalized adsorbents.200 Several other novel gas–solid contactors such as rotating columns, moving beds, and radial flow contactors have also been proposed for DAC.201,202


1.2.3. Industrial applications. 
DAC facilities are found worldwide.61,203–206 Existing DAC companies include Carbon Engineering (Canada), Climeworks (Switzerland), Global Thermostat (USA), Infinitree (USA), Antecy (Netherlands), Skytree (Netherlands), Carbon Collect (Ireland), and Hydrocell (Finland). A detailed technical and economic analysis of existing DAC devices has been reported in the latest literature.207 Among all commercial DAC companies, Global Thermostat reported the lowest operating energy requirements (150–260 kW hel t−1 and 1170–1410 kW hth t−1). The total cost of CO2 capture using a solvent absorption DAC demonstration unit based on high-temperature regeneration is estimated to be $94–232 t−151 and is expected to drop below $60 t−1 by 2040. Because the heat of desorption of the adsorbents is lower than the heat of the CO2 absorption process, the use of solid adsorbents to capture CO2 will further reduce the cost. Depending on the application, the lowest total cost of adsorption-based DAC ranges from $29 to 91 t−1.83
Because a DAC facility can provide on-site CO2 generation anywhere, its application is advantageous in addition to its environmental benefits. Recently, the potential application of adsorption-based DAC in indoor air removal,115,191,193,208,209 CO2 fertilization,178,210 biomass production,211–215 fuel production (CH4,68,70,75,216–222 methanol,71,223–226 aviation fuel,73,227–232 hydrocarbons233), chemicals (Fischer–Tropsch process,234,235 carbon nanotubes,236 dimethyl carbonate,237 syngas238,239), mineralization,240–244 storage,245,246 enhanced oil recovery (EOR),247 and cogeneration in power plants or chemical industries69,248–250 has been reported.

1.3. Content summary
This review is organized as follows. In the introduction section (Section 1), the urgency of the development of DAC, including the exact amount of CO2 we need to capture, the feasibility of large-scale DAC deployment, DAC facility operation, and the policy roadmap, is illustrated mainly from the results of IAM predictions, LCAs, and policy studies. Following the introduction, recent advances in DAC adsorbents, processes, and systems are briefly summarized to provide an overview of adsorption-based DAC technologies. The concepts are elaborated in the subsequent sections.
In particular, we focus on amine-functionalized porous materials as the most effective DAC adsorbents, such as silicas, activated carbons, zeolites, MOFs, aluminum oxide, cellulose, resin, and layered double hydroxides (LDHs) through amine impregnation, surface silylation, in situ polymerization, and other synthetic strategies. In Section 2, amine types, supports, and additives, and the synergetic enhancement between amines and supports are discussed. The designs of DAC adsorbents with suitable morphologies, strong affinities for polyamines, good thermal stabilities, and hydrothermal stabilities are also illustrated. Section 3 discusses recent breakthroughs in improving the oxidative stability of supported PEI and finding alternative amine polymers, such as using dendritic structures that consist of only primary and tertiary amines, epoxidation of primary and secondary amines, and addition of additives. In Section 4, recent advances in the effect of humidity on CO2 uptake and kinetics and co-adsorption isotherm modeling are discussed. Section 5 reviews recent work on understanding the chemisorbed CO2 species of amine-functionalized adsorbents through experimental identification methods and theoretical approaches. Section 6 reviews the recent breakthroughs in three novel amine-functionalized adsorbents for potential application in DAC: diamine-tethered MOFs, moisture swing adsorbents, and hydrophobic amine-containing adsorbents.
In Section 7, shaping methods for naturally-powdered DAC adsorbents are reviewed, emphasizing material selection and optimization, geometric structuring, and industrial scale-up. Subsequently, the adsorption of CO2 under ultradilute conditions relevant to DAC using packed bed breakthrough systems is reviewed. The system performance is determined for different feed concentrations of CO2. Several other novel gas–solid contactors, such as rotating columns, moving beds, and radial flow contactors, are also described for DAC. The operating efficiency and energy consumption of the adsorption–desorption processes for DAC are evaluated using techno-economic analysis. Finally, the potential application of adsorption-based DAC in indoor air removal, greenhouses, biomass production, and fuel production is presented.
In the last section, major challenges of and perspectives on adsorbents, shaping methods, adsorber contactors, and separation systems for DAC are summarized. DAC fundamental studies and pilot-scale separation development are also explained.
2. Synergetic enhancement between amines and supports
Supported amines exhibit higher CO2 capacity than the supports or amines alone, indicating that there is a synergistic enhancement between amines and supports. A plausible explanation is that the supports provide sufficient spaces for the amine dispersion, and thus increase the available CO2 adsorption sites. The amine properties, support structure, and additive utilization affect the interaction strength and change the adsorption capacity, kinetics, and amine efficiency. A deep understanding of their roles in the synergetic enhancement is instructive for optimizing the material design.
2.1. Effect of amines

2.1.1. Aminopolymer-impregnated adsorbents. 
Aminopolymer-impregnated adsorbents rely on physical impregnation into the available pore window of a mesoporous solid support by stirring the support with the desired amine in the organic dispersant. They typically have large capacities because of their high amine contents. The prominent advantages of easy preparation and relatively desirable performance make aminopolymer-impregnated materials more widely investigated than other adsorbents. However, shortcomings such as the lack of stability due to the leaching of amines over adsorption/desorption cycles and limited transport of CO2 to active support sites due to hindered diffusion pose challenges to application of these materials.
The selection of the amine type is a key factor affecting the performance of amine-impregnated adsorbents. The properties of the synthesized supported amines can differ according to the characterization of the amines themselves. In most cases, short chain aminopolymers have been adopted for impregnation. The molecular formulas of aminopolymers and small amines used for DAC are shown in Fig. 5. Among the various amines, PEI has been the most investigated because of its high amine content, stability, convenient customization, and availability. Several researchers have utilized PEI-modified adsorbents.98,251,252 They exhibited good performance, but there is still room for improvement. In recent years, an increasing number of studies have been conducted on the development of other aminopolymers for adsorbent synthesis. Similar to PEI, poly(propylene imine) (PPI) is a type of aminopolymer that can form linear, branched, or dendritic shapes and contains three methylene groups on the monomer. PPI showed enhanced oxidation resistance compared to PEI. However, a relatively complex monomer synthesis and time-consuming polymerization limit its development. Pang et al.130,132 compared PPI- and PEI-modified sorbents in DAC. Regardless of the amine loading or aminopolymer architecture, PPI-based sorbents were found to be more efficient for CO2 capture than PEI-based sorbents. The effect of acid initiators on branched PPI synthesis and CO2 sorption performance was investigated.118 Sorbents with 30 wt% polymers synthesized using HBr and HClO4 exhibited higher CO2 capacities than those prepared with HCl or CH3SO3H. The effect of extended aging (1.5–2 years) on linear PPI (LPPI) was tested.133 Aged LPPI-based sorbents preserved their ability with moderately decreased CO2 uptake lower than 20% compared to the fresh polymers, indicating their long-term usability.
 Fig. 5  Molecular formulae of the main types of amines used for DAC. 
A PPG-based oligomer/polymer was also synthesized by poly-condensation of 1,3-diaminopropane and guanidine hydrochloride impregnated into SBA-15.253 Such sorbents exhibited lower pseudo-equilibrium capacities but faster kinetics than PEI based sorbents under 400 ppm CO2. PAA is another type of aminopolymer which consists of dense primary amines. It also shows enhanced oxidative and thermal resistance,254 which makes it a potential material for CO2 capture. Studies have been performed to impregnate PAA into mesocellular siliceous foams (MCFs) and fumed silica for DAC.255,256 PAA was further reacted with short fluoroalkyl chains and cross-linked with C60.257 The incorporation of fluoroalkyl chains generates free volume elements that act as intramolecular diffusion pathways, resulting in increased trace CO2 capture efficiencies. Poly(glycidyl amine) (PGA) is a polymer that contains both ethylene oxide and amine groups in each repeat unit. PGA consists of only primary amines, so it has the potential to achieve better CO2 capture than PEI. Sujan et al.119 synthesized PGA-impregnated SBA-15 to capture CO2 from flue gas and air. The PGA-modified adsorbent showed approximately 0.6 mmol g−1 capacity in simulated air and less oxidative degradation than that modified with PEI on a relative basis. PGA has been demonstrated as a candidate polymer for amine/oxide hybrid CO2 sorbents.
The development of smaller amines for aminopolymer-impregnated adsorbent synthesis also facilitates research on DAC. Several studies have suggested that TEPA-impregnated sorbents show a high capacity for DAC, although they suffer from obvious cycling stability problems.131,258,259 Pentaethylenehexamine (PEHA) contains one more amine group than TEPA, and has been verified to exhibit promising capacities and stabilities for DAC.131 Tris(2-aminoethyl)amine (TREN) is a small amine with a high density of primary amines; thus, it has great potential for excellent uptake. Darunte et al.260 used TREN to impregnate MIL-101(Cr), and the results showed higher capacity than PEI, although a significant loss of amines was observed. In a recent study by Kumar et al.,117 alkyl–aryl amine-rich small molecules (Ph-X-YY) were prepared by one-step nucleophilic substitution of tri- (X = 3) and hexa-bromine-substituted (X = 6) aromatic cores with two different aliphatic diamines, ethylenediamine (YY = ED) and propylenediamine (YY = PD). The Ph-X-YY impregnated solid sorbents showed capacities of 1.6–1.9 mmol g−1 in 400 ppm CO2, along with good thermal stability. Overall, smaller amines result in decreased diffusion resistance and high amine loading. Lower regeneration temperature is required to alleviate their thermal volatility problems.116
One significant advantage of aminopolymers is their structural tunability; that is, their molecular weight and chain type can be regulated by varying their synthesis conditions. Aminopolymers with larger molecular weights have lower volatility; thus, their thermal stability is enhanced. However, larger aminopolymers can have a negative effect on CO2 diffusion because of their higher viscosity and tendency to cause pore blockage, which deteriorates their adsorption capacity and kinetics. In contrast, shorter chains may exhibit an advantage of higher capacity, but cycling stability can lead to a shorter service life. To achieve a compromise between the two extremes, for instance, the molecular weight of PEI is typically controlled at 400–25000 g mol−1.261 By regulating the chain shape of the aminopolymer, the primary, secondary, and tertiary amine contents can be altered. Linear PEI mostly consists of secondary amines, whereas branched PEI contains more primary amines at the ends of its backbones. Tertiary amines are formed at the branched points of the chain, typically in dendrimer chains. Primary and secondary amines are typically preferred owing to their ability to capture CO2 under both dry and humid conditions. Some studies have pointed out that primary amines have faster kinetics and higher oxidative resistance.262,263 This is possibly because the primary amine preferentially bonded to CO2 through the formation of intermolecular ammonium carbamates, whereas CO2 was predominantly stabilized as carbamic acid when interacting with secondary amines.263 Tertiary amines react with CO2 to form ammonium bicarbonates on solid-supported amines, but the slow reaction rates make them be poor CO2 sorbents.264,265 To increase the amine efficiency of the supported amines, both the molecular weight and amine-type ratio should be properly controlled.
Another issue affecting the performance of supported amines is the amine distribution inside the pores. The amine distribution pattern is closely related to the accessibility of amines to CO2, which plays a key role in determining amine efficiency. Xu et al.266 pointed out that at low temperatures PEI exists in the channels of silica like nanosized particles. In this case, the adsorption of CO2 is kinetically (diffusion) controlled. Only the CO2 affinity sites on the surfaces of the particles can readily react with CO2. At high temperatures, PEI disperses better in the support, allowing internal adsorption sites to be accessible to CO2. According to Holewinski et al.,267 PEI first forms a thin conformal coating on the pore walls, and additional polymer aggregates into plugs that grow along the pore axis. The PEI plugs increase the CO2 diffusion barriers, and reduce the performance. Rother et al.268 held the view that the physical properties of CO2-adsorbing polymers are altered by their interactions with supports, which in turn impacts their capture properties (Fig. 6a–c). After dispersing aminopolymer films in nanoporous silica and carbon, strong densification is only found for polymers imbibed in mesoporous carbon. These distinct amine distribution patterns result in different adsorption performances of carbon and silica (Fig. 6d and e).
 Fig. 6  Interactions of PEI with nanoporous silica and carbon. (a) Amine distribution in the pores of the supports. (b) Bead spring model of the branched PEI; the gold, magenta, and cyan beads represent primary, secondary, and tertiary amines, respectively. (c) Cylindrical pore impregnated with PEI that shows attractive beads and green repulsive support beads. (d) Mean pore densities of PEI inside nanopores of the three substrates for different filling degrees and temperatures. (e) CO2 capture capacity (CC) of PEI/controlled pore glass (CPG), PEI/SBA, and PEI/carbon (C) (reproduced from ref. 268 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021). 
When the amine was impregnated into the support, the amine loading amount had a significant influence on the adsorbent performance. Theoretically, a higher amine loading gives more amine groups in the support, resulting in more adsorption sites. However, excess amine can lead to greater diffusion resistance and limit CO2 adsorption, which decreases the amine efficiency. Therefore, there is an optimal loading that is determined by the pore structure of supports. The theoretical maximum amine loading can be estimated by multiplying the amine density by the cumulative pore volume, assuming that all amines are filled inside the pores of the support.269 However, the actual optimal loading is typically not equal to the maximum loading, possibly because the amines cannot completely enter the pores and deposit on the surface as bulk polymers. Most studies reported that the optimal amine loading is between 30 and 70 wt%. As shown in Fig. 7a, Cogswell et al.270 stated that the optimal amine loading is determined in the loading regime before pore blocking occurs. They suggested developing a new sort of support structure that allows decoupling the amine loading from increasing resistance. For instance, a 3-dimensional silica mesoporous framework was loaded with large or small amine-containing molecules.271 The obtained adsorbents demonstrated fast sorption kinetics while maintaining high amine efficiencies (Fig. 7b and c), which indicates that using a support with interconnected but distinctly sized pore channels can overcome the trade-off between amine loading and diffusion resistance. The authors later verified this strategy again by synthesizing a hierarchical supramolecular porous material with tailorable porosity (Fig. 7d and e).272
 Fig. 7  Strategy decoupling the amine loading from increasing diffusion resistance. (a) Amine efficiency of PEI-impregnated MCM-36 versus amine weight percentage loaded (reproduced from ref. 270 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015). (b) Density functional theory pore size distribution analysis of 3dd-silica, 3dd-TEPA, and 3dd-PEI.271 (c and d) Capture capacity and amine efficiency of 3dd-PEI and NEU-1c adsorbent; the blue line marked the maximum theoretical amine efficiency of 0.5. (e) Scanning electron microscopy images and atomic-force micrographs of Zn(BPDI)(Py)2 and NEU-1 (reproduced from ref. 272 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020). 


2.1.2. Amine-grafted adsorbents. 
The effective amine efficiency of physically impregnated polyamines is much lower than the theoretical maximum of 0.5, which is mainly due to the disordered stacking of amines that blocks the active site and slows down the CO2 diffusion. In addition, the weak interaction between amines and supports leads to the stability problem of polyamine-based adsorbents during thermal regeneration under humid and oxygen-containing conditions.105 Alternatively, researchers are developing amine-grafted adsorbents via covalent chemical bonds, either by silylation reactions between aminosilanes and hydroxyl groups or, in rare cases, by cross-coupling reactions.98
So far, various aminosilanes including aminomethyl- (C1),273 2-aminoethyl- (C2),273 3-aminopropyl- (APS),120,125,126,134,273–287 4-aminobutyl- (C4),273 5-aminoamyl- (C5),273N-methylaminopropyl- (MAPS),274N-butylaminopropyl- (NBAPS),288,289 3-amino-3-methylbutyl- (AMBS),127tert-butylaminopropyl- (TBAPS),127N-cyclohexylaminopropyl- (CHAPS),127N-phenylaminopropyl- (PHAPS),288N,N-dimethylaminopropyl- (DMAPS),274 3-(2-aminoethylamino)propyl- (DI),134,287,290–292 3-(2-aminopropylamino)propylsilane (L-propyl),134N,N′-bis(3-trimethoxysilpropyl)urea (UREA),275 3-[2-(2-aminoethylamino)ethylamino]propyl- (TRI),114,120,128,129,287,293–295 3-(2-aminoethylamino)methylsilane (CH2DETA),296 bis(2-aminoethyl)amine (B-ethyl),134,296 bis(2-aminopropyl)amine (B-propyl),134 and TREN,121,134,260 have been tested for their ability to capture CO2 from ultradilute concentrations of gas mixtures. In general, primary amines have higher amine efficiencies than secondary and tertiary amines due to the entropy effect,274,288 which has led to the widespread use of APS for capturing CO2 under ultradilute conditions. The propyl linker of APS was found to be sufficiently flexible to trap CO2 molecules through two adjacent amines, whereas longer linkers provided no additional benefit.273 However, the low N content of APS-grafted adsorbents (usually less than 5 mmol g−1) limits their overall CO2 adsorption capacity.
Aminosilanes containing multiple amine groups on the linker have been extensively studied to achieve high amine loadings. For example, the monolayer grafted TRI on SBA-15 and pore-expanded MCM-41 (PE-MCM-41) reached an amine loading of 6.0122 and 6.2 mmol g−1.297 A supported triamine with moderate-to-high loadings has both acceptable CO2 capacities and fast kinetics under DAC conditions, and enhanced performance in the presence of moisture.287 In comparison, the performance of diamines is insufficient, probably due to the unavailable secondary amine moieties that are either sterically hindered by chemisorbed CO2 species or hydrogen-bonded with surface silanols (Fig. 8a and b). Recently, an array of branched and linear aminosilanes linked by either ethyl or propyl spacers was explored (Fig. 8c).134 Branched silane-grafted adsorbents (B-ethyl, B-propyl) containing two primary amines showed amine efficiencies similar to those of APS, which were higher than those of linear silanes (DI and L-propyl). However, the linear silanes can be densely grafted with silane loadings higher than 1.7 mmol Si g−1 under anhydrous conditions, whereas the loading of the branched silanes cannot exceed 1.3 mmol Si g−1 (Fig. 8d and e). All grafted adsorbents exhibited good thermal stability, and the adjacent amines connected by a propyl spacer achieved higher oxidative stability.
 Fig. 8  (a) Possibly formed species from the adsorbed CO2 in the presence of water of supported APS, DI, and TRI. (b) CO2 adsorption isotherms of RAW–SBA (raw SBA-15), S-P-2.6 (supported APS at an amine loading of 2.6 mmol g−1), S-D-2.8 (supported DI at an amine loading of 2.78 mmol g−1), S-T-3.5 (supported TRI at an amine loading of 3.52 mmol g−1), and S-T-4.6 (supported TRI at an amine loading of 4.66 mmol g−1) at 25 °C (reproduced from ref. 287 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021). (c) Structures of various aminosilanes containing multiple amine groups, and CO2 uptake as a function of (d) silane loading and (e) active amine loading at 25 °C and 400 ppm of CO2 (reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020). 
Multilayer amine grafting in the presence of water is another approach to increase amine loading by breaking the availability limitation of the surface hydroxyl groups of supports. This process involves the hydration of porous supports by adding water to the toluene solution, followed by the surface polymerization of aminosilanes under heating. Belmabkhout et al.293 previously reported an impressive CO2 capacity of 0.98 mmol g−1 of wet-grafted TRI on PE-MCM-41 with an enhanced amine loading of 7.9 mmol g−1 at 400 ppm and 25 °C. The material was hydrothermally stable during steam purge regeneration tests.275,293 Since then, the concept of wet grafting has been widely applied to other mesoporous supports such as SBA-15,123,128,281,295,298 Al2O3,280 KIT-6,299 and hierarchical bimodal mesoporous silica (HBS).295 An unexpected finding is that the wet grafted silica gel, which is commercially available and once believed to be poor in adsorbing CO2 from air,290 can equally achieve promising capacities of 0.773 and 1.098 mmol g−1 under dry and wet conditions, respectively (Fig. 9).129 Such high amine loadings cannot be explained by the expected silylation reaction happening between the hydrolyzed alkoxy of amine molecules and the surface hydroxyl of porous supports to produce monolayer grafting. In fact, surface water enhances the hydrolysis of unreacted alkoxy groups and provides additional hydroxyl groups for the multilayer coating of aminosilanes through Si–O–Si bridges. The presence of water also significantly shortens the grafting time (e.g., less than 30 min), probably because of the formation of highly reactive silanol groups from aminosilane alkoxy groups.298 While wet grafting undoubtedly increases the CO2 capacity, the interparticle polymerization of amines may lead to the agglomeration of supports.
 Fig. 9  CO2 (filled symbols) and N2 (open symbols) adsorption isotherms for dry-grafted silica gel (●) and wet-grafted silica gel (▲) at 25 °C (reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020). 
Ammonium carbamates are preferentially formed as chemisorbed CO2 species on supported primary and secondary amines; they require two amines to bind one CO2 molecule. Ammonium bicarbonates with CO2 binding on a single nitrogen atom can avoid such cross-linking behavior that may otherwise increase the CO2 diffusional limitation. Forming bicarbonates also reduces the energy for regeneration, as they are less thermally stable than carbamate species. Spectroscopic studies have identified the existence of bicarbonates in all types of amines.145 Compared with primary and secondary amines, tertiary amines that exclusively form bicarbonates may achieve higher amine efficiencies. Unfortunately, the use of supported tertiary amines is not practical due to their poor kinetics, even in the presence of moisture.265 Recently, three sterically-hindered primary (AMBS) and secondary (CHAPS and TBAPS) were tested for DAC (Fig. 10).127 They are prone to form weakly bound bicarbonates under wet conditions while maintaining a fast CO2 adsorption rate. Furthermore, AMBS with a hindered primary amine remained stable after an accelerated oxidation experiment. However, the overall CO2 capacities of supported hindered amines were much lower than those in aqueous solution,300 and this discrepancy may be better understood by further exploring the effect of solvation and hydrogen bonding on chemisorbed CO2.
 Fig. 10  Structures of hindered aminosilanes: AMBS, TBAPS, and CHAPS (reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). 
To date, toluene has been the most commonly used solvent for aminosilane grafting. Recent work has shown that solvent properties greatly affect the surface configuration of organic–inorganic hybrids. A typical example is alkylamine-tethered MIL-101(Cr), which does not exhibit impressively high CO2 adsorption capacities despite its structural advantages of an ultraporous framework and extraordinary stability under harsh conditions. By simply changing the grafting solvent from dichloromethane to cyclohexane, the TREN-modified MIL-101(Cr) achieved more than twice the CO2 uptake and promising CO2/N2 selectivity.121 The improvement was ascribed to the use of a less polar solvent that weakens its attraction towards amine molecules, allowing more efficient loading (Fig. 11a). A later study explored three nonpolar, two dipolar-aprotic, and three polar-protic solvents for amine grafting, confirming the high correlation between the solvent polarity and hybrid properties.285 More specifically, the CO2 capacities and efficiency of grafted amines depend on the interactions between the support matrix and solvents (Fig. 11b). Cyclohexane is superior to other nonpolar solvents (hexane and toluene), being the most promising solvent for grafting, with a high N loading of 5.21% and a stable surface configuration with C/N = 4.34. These findings suggest the possibility of solvent-driven surface design for amine-grafted adsorbents.
 Fig. 11  (a) Interface between an alkylamine solution and MIL-101(Cr).121 (b) Possible linkage configurations for amine grafting using non-polar, dipolar-aprotic, and polar-protic solvents, and their CO2 capacity abilities (reproduced from ref. 285 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021). 
Adopting the conventional grafting process in organic solvents in industrial-scale material synthesis may lead to significant solvent wastage and oligomerization side reactions. Supercritical CO2 (scCO2) can be a sustainable alternative, allowing fast transfer and surface functionalization of amine precursors.301–303 The scCO2 approach typically occurs at 40–60 °C and at 12.5–20.0 MPa with reaction times of 2–3 h, in which the CO2 fluid is recovered after the reaction by reducing the pressure. Because the scCO2 solvent could react with primary and secondary amines to form carbamates, the addition of alcohols facilitates the solubilization of the aminoalkylcarbamate salts. In a recent work, a DI-grafted SBA-15 was prepared by scCO2 in 10% ethanol or ethanol at 50 °C and 12.5 MPa, and exhibited amine efficiencies up to 0.4 at 25 °C.292 The CO2 diffusion of the functionalized DI was not hindered until the amine loading reached 3 mmol N g−1. In contrast, the amine efficiency of the reference sample from the traditional process using toluene was less than 0.1, which was attributed to the mesopore filling of SBA-15 with vertical polymeric depositions.

2.2. Effects of supports

2.2.1. Aminopolymer-impregnated adsorbents. 
To overcome the weakness of aminopolymer-impregnated materials, there are other paths of improvement. Various types of supports create great opportunities to develop desirable adsorbents. Several requirements are summarized to achieve aminopolymer-impregnated adsorbents with better performance: (a) the support should have a larger pore volume to retain higher amine loading; (b) the amine should be well dispersed in the support; (c) a stronger bond between the support and the amine should be formed to strengthen the thermal stability; (d) the support should not degrade in a moist atmosphere, so as to be applied in humid air and steam stripping regeneration; and (e) the production cost of the support can be affordable to facilitate scale-up. Owing to the synergistic effect between the amine and support, the textural characteristics and surface microstructure of the support were strongly related to the amine morphology. When the interaction between the support and amine is altered, the capture performance can vary. As such, many studies have developed customized supports to illustrate this synergistic effect. A variety of porous materials have been used as supports for amine impregnation, including siliceous materials, carbonaceous materials, alumina, aluminosilicates, organic polymers, MOFs, and LDHs. The DAC adsorption properties of amine-impregnated materials mentioned in this section are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Adsorption properties of amine-impregnated supports for DAC




Support
Amine
Loading
Capacity (mmol g−1)
Adsorption conditions
Desorption conditions
Stability
Ref.




SBA-15
PEI
50 wt%
1.55
30 °C, 400 ppm, dry
110 °C, He
N/A

267



SBA-15
PEI
75 wt%
1.12
25 °C, 400 ppm, dry
110 °C, N2 purge
5.5% loss after 10 cycles

116



SBA-15
PPI
45 wt%
1.35
35 °C, 400 ppm, dry
70 °C, N2 purge
Stable after 4 cycles

130



SBA-15
PPI
50 wt%
1.0
35 °C, 400 ppm, dry
110 °C, He purge
Nearly no loss after 20 cycles

133



SBA-15
PPI
14 mmol N gSiO2−1
1.25
25 °C, 400 ppm, dry
110 °C, N2 purge
Nearly no loss after 50 cycles

132



SBA-15
PGA
15–45 wt%
0.6
25 °C, 400 ppm, dry
110 °C, N2 purge
10.9% loss after 20 cycles

119



SBA-15
PPG
50 wt%
0.6
30 °C, 400 ppm, dry
120 °C, He purge
54.5% loss after 5 cycles

253



SBA-15
Ph-3-ED
60 wt%
1.4
25 °C, 400 ppm, 30% RH
110 °C, He purge
Stable after 25 cycles

117



SBA-15
PEI
30 wt%
0.19
25 °C, 400 ppm, dry
110 °C, Ar purge
41.2% loss after 4 cycles

304



Al-SBA-15
PEI
34 wt%
0.29
25 °C, 400 ppm, dry
110 °C, Ar purge
N/A

304



Ti-SBA-15
PEI
32 wt%
0.64
25 °C, 400 ppm, dry
110 °C, Ar purge
6% loss after 4 cycles

304



Ce-SBA-15
PEI
33 wt%
0.68
25 °C, 400 ppm, dry
110 °C, Ar purge
N/A

304



Zr-SBA-15
PEI
35 wt%
0.85
25 °C, 400 ppm, dry
110 °C, Ar purge
Stable after 4 cycles

304



Zr-SBA-15
PEI
50 wt%
1.05
30 °C, 400 ppm, dry
110 °C, N2 purge
N/A

305



EtSNTs
PEI
33 wt%
1.0
25 °C, 400 ppm, dry
100 °C, N2 purge
Stable after 8 cycles

306



SBA-15
TEPA
50 wt%
2.3
25 °C, 400 ppm, dry
110 °C, N2 purge
2.8% loss after 10 cycles

116



MCF pellets
PEI
68 wt%
1.94
46 °C, 420 ppm, dry
81 °C, N2 purge
N/A

139



MCF pellets
PEI
68 wt%
2.52
46 °C, 420 ppm, 2 vol% H2O
81 °C, N2 purge
N/A

139



Hierarchical silica
PEI
2.62 g gSiO2−1
2.6
30 °C, 400 ppm, dry
110 °C, He purge
Stable after 5 cycles

112



Hierarchical silica
PEI
2.62 g gSiO2−1
3.36
30 °C, 400 ppm, 19% RH
110 °C, He purge
18.15% loss after 5 cycles

112



AHTSA
PEI
10 wt%
1.64
25 °C, 400 ppm
130 °C, N2 purge
Stable after 15 cycles

283



Fumed silica
PO-PEHA
50 wt%
2.25
25 °C, 1000 ppm, 50% RH
50 °C, 400 ppm CO2 purge
Stable after 5 cycles

131



Fumed silica
PO-TEPA
50 wt%
2.0
25 °C, 1000 ppm, 50% RH
50 °C, 400 ppm CO2 purge
Stable after 45 cycles

131



Fumed silica
HBPG
50 wt%
0.80
25 °C, 420 ppm, 35% RH
100 °C, N2 purge
N/A

307



Mesoporous carbon
PEI
60 wt%
2.25
25 °C, 400 ppm, dry
110 °C, N2 purge
Stable after 10 cycles

308



Carbon nanotubes
PEI
10 wt%
1.07
25 °C, 3500 ppm, dry
80 °C, vacuum
N/A

309



γ-Alumina
PEI
48 wt%
1.74
25 °C, 400 ppm, dry
110 °C, steam stripping
Stable after 3 cycles

310



γ-Alumina
PEI
7.95 g N gAl2O3−1
1.96
30 °C, 400 ppm, dry
110 °C, steam stripping
N/A

311



Alumina monolith
PEI
0.44 g gAl2O3−1
0.9
30 °C, 400 ppm, dry
110 °C, steam stripping
14% loss after 5 cycles

312



Halloysite nanotubes
PEI
40 wt%
1.25
25 °C, 400 ppm, dry
80 °C, vacuum
3.28% loss after 50 cycles

313



Zeolite Y
TEPA
10 wt%
1.12
25 °C, 5000 ppm
100 °C, N2 purge
Stable after 5 cycles

258



NPEI-SIPs
PEI
49 wt%
1.7
50 °C, 400 ppm, dry
120 °C, N2 purge
7.8% loss after 20 cycles

110



Resin HP2MGL
PEI
50 wt%
2.13
25 °C, 5000 ppm, dry
100 °C, N2 purge
Stable after 5 cycles

314



Resin HP2MGL
PEI
50 wt%
3.04
25 °C, 5000 ppm, 40% RH
100 °C, N2 purge
Stable after 5 cycles

314



Resin HP20
PEI
50 wt%
2.26
25 °C, 400 ppm, dry
100 °C, N2 purge
Almost no loss after 5 cycles

315



Resin MR10
PEI
50 wt%
2.64
25 °C, 1000 ppm, dry
70 °C, N2 purge
10.6% loss after 3 cycles

115



Resin MR10
PEI
50 wt%
2.92
25 °C, 1000 ppm, 50% RH
70 °C, N2 purge
N/A

115



Resin KBS
PEI
20 wt%
1.59
20 °C, 4000 ppm, 1.56 vol% H2O
50 °C, N2 purge
N/A

316



MIL-101(Cr)
PEI
60 wt%
1.04
25 °C, 400 ppm, dry
110 °C, He purge
4.6% loss after 3 cycles

260



MIL-101(Cr)
PEI
50 wt%
1.17
−20 °C, 400 ppm, dry
60 °C, He purge
Stable after 15 cycles

317



MIL-101(Cr)
TREN
45 wt%
2.76
25 °C, 400 ppm, dry
110 °C, He purge
15.1% loss after 3 cycles

260



MIL-101(Cr)
TEPA
30 wt%
0.72
−20 °C, 400 ppm, dry
25 °C, He purge
30% loss after 15 cycles

317



PEI–Mg0.55Al–O
PEI
67 wt%
1.66
25 °C, 400 ppm, dry
120 °C, N2 purge
N/A

111



PEI–Mg0.55Al–O
PEI
67 wt%
2.27
25 °C, 400 ppm, humid
120 °C, N2 purge
2.7% loss after 20 cycles

111



TEPA–Mg0.55Al–O
TEPA
67 wt%
3.0
25 °C, 400 ppm, dry
120 °C, N2 purge
Maintain ∼90% after 80 cycles

318





Among them, siliceous materials have been the most studied owing to their tunable pore structure, high availability, and desirable amine-containing capability. Conventional silicas, such as the SBA, MCM, and KIT series, have been found to have outstanding textural structures and high solvent thermal stabilities.319–324 SBA-15 has highly ordered hexagonal pores with narrow pore size distribution within 4–30 nm, thicker pore walls and larger pore volumes. These characteristics provide an excellent support for amine functionalization. Recent studies utilized SBA-15 as a support to investigate amine effects, adsorption heats, oxidative stability, and adsorption temperature, demonstrating its applicability and compatibility under various conditions.117,119,130,132,133,253,324,325
Modifying the synthetic process enhances the adsorption properties. For instance, Jones et al.304 incorporated a series of metal atoms (Al, Zr, Ti, and Ce) into SBA-15. By creating more acid/base sites on the silica surface, the metal atoms result in improved uptake, kinetics, and thermal stability. Such an enhancement is also closely related to the textural and morphological nature of SBA-15.305 Kleitz et al.326 impregnated amines and phosphines on the surface of metalated SBA-15 to generate air-stable solid-supported Lewis acid–base pairs. The synergistic effect between Zr atoms and the amine/phosphine Lewis bases was reported to enhance the CO2 adsorption. Liu et al.306 added 1,2-bis(trimethoxysilyl)ethane and KCl to the SBA-15 synthesis solvent and synthesized ethane-bridged SBA-15 (EtSBA-15) and ethane-bridged organosilica nanotubes (EtSNTs). Compared with SBA-15, the ethane-bridged samples had larger specific surface areas and pore diameters. In particular, for the EtSNTs with both tubular channels and intervoid spaces, PEI is highly dispersed in the pores, and thus, a higher capacity and fast equilibrium time under ultradilute conditions were achieved.
Silica with a three-dimensional pore channel is considered to exhibit enhanced kinetics.327,328 MCF is an interconnected cellular nanostructured silica with larger pore volumes than SBA-15.329–331 It comprises uniform spherical cells with a narrow size distribution, which could have potential as a good CO2 adsorbent. A recent study verified its DAC capability in the temperature range of 33 to 81 °C.139 In 420 ppm CO2, the highest capacity of PEI-impregnated MCF was 1.94 mmol g−1 and 2.52 mmol g−1 under dry and humid conditions, respectively. The uptake at 81 °C is negligible, indicating a relatively low regeneration temperature. Kwon et al.112 recently prepared a hierarchical silica support with bimodal meso/macroporosities, which has a pore size distribution of 70–700 nm. The maximum sorption capacity of PEI-impregnated silica was 2.6 mmol g−1 at 400 ppm CO2, and increased to 3.4 mmol g−1 in the presence of water. This is partially due to the large pore volume from the macropores.
Despite their appreciable properties, the above siliceous supports face the problems of relatively complex synthesis and higher affordability, which limits their large-scale application. To this end, cost-effective supports have raised the interest of the community. Aerogels are nanoporous materials with three-dimensional networks consisting of nanoparticles and nanopores, leading to unique properties such as low density, high specific surface area, pore volume, and porosity. Aerogels have been produced on an industrial scale with lower capital cost.332 Many studies have reported the application of amino aerogels for carbon capture, including post-combustion conditions333,334 and ultradilute concentrations.335–337 Kong et al.282–284,286,338,339 carried out a series of studies on amine-modified aerogels. A recent study proposed a simple, cost-effective, and environmentally-friendly route for the synthesis of an amine hybrid titania/silsesquioxane composite aerogel (AHTSA).283 The effects of amine loading and CO2 concentration on the pore structure and CO2 adsorption performance of the AHTSA were investigated. The study reported that AHTSA has a capacity of 1.64 mmol g−1 at dry 400 ppm CO2, a short adsorption halftime, and high amine efficiency, revealing potential applications in DAC (Fig. 12a–c). The fumed silica has large surface areas and pore sizes between 5 and 50 nm. It is readily available and inexpensive. Recent studies utilized fumed silica to support epoxide-modified polyamines and amine-containing hyperbranched polyglycerols (HBPGs), demonstrating desirable capacities to capture CO2 from air (Fig. 12d–e).131,307
 Fig. 12  (a) Scanning electron microscopy image and digital photo (inset) of AHTSA. (b) CO2 adsorption uptake of AHTSA versus adsorption time under different CO2 concentrations. (c) Cycle adsorption capacity of AHTSA in dry air (blue), 1% (red), and 10% (black) CO2 stream (reproduced from ref. 283 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016). (d) Cyclic adsorption capacity of PEHA-PO-fumed silica and TEPA-PO-fumed silica from 400 ppm CO2 in air (reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2019). (e) Adsorption breakthrough curves of HBPG/fumed silica adsorbents (25 °C, 35% relative humidity) and typical desorption curve of HBPG-L25-am 1/3 sample at 100 °C; 1/3, 1/2, and 1/1 mean that the adsorbent contains 1 weight part of polymer HBPG-L25-am and 1, 2, and 3 weight parts of fumed silica, respectively (reproduced from ref. 307 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018). 
Carbonaceous materials are considered to have potential for carbon capture. In addition to their desirable properties, sub-categories such as activated carbon and biochar can be synthesized from biomass, which brings benefits such as cost reduction and environmental protection.340,341 There have been systematic reviews about carbonaceous materials for CO2 capture. However, their applications in terms of DAC are limited. One example is Wang et al.308 utilized a type of mesoporous carbon for PEI impregnation. The diffusion kinetics of this mesoporous carbon with high pore volume was enhanced by employing a diffusion additive and the capacities are 3.34 mmol g−1 for 5000 ppm and 2.25 mmol g−1 for 400 ppm.
In another study, carbon nanotubes were utilized to support PEI, and a CO2 uptake of 1.068 mmol g−1 under a CO2 pressure of 0.0035 bar was reached.309 Other studies focusing on carbon-based materials for DAC include the use of biochar342 and activated carbons,343 though they are not used as amine supports. Considering their excellent channel structure, high tunability, and wide range of sources, there is a large possibility for them to be applied in DAC.
Alumina is a popular support owing to its unique stability in steam flow. Considering the industrial utilization of CO2 adsorbents, practical regeneration methods should be developed, including temperature-vacuum swing, CO2 flow stripping, and steam flow stripping. The latter is more favorable for avoiding excess energy consumption and amine degradation under the premise that the support is resistant to steam stripping. Alumina-supported amines are particularly suitable for ultradilute CO2 capture and have high stability in a vapor atmosphere.310 A series of subsequent studies have analyzed the viability of their practical applications.254,311,312,344,345 These amine-modified alumina materials exhibited capacities of 0.8–1.3 mmol g−1 for DAC, and the capital cost calculation suggested that the use of alumina is economical.312
Aluminosilicate materials, such as zeolites and clays, have attracted attention for CO2 capture because of their potential for surface modification and outstanding hydrothermal stability. They are mostly microporous materials comprising stable and highly porous networks. They can be derived from waste materials or natural resources; therefore, the production cost is greatly reduced.346 Recently, amine-loaded zeolites and clays have been reported to be capable of capturing CO2 from the ambient air. Thakkar et al.258 developed zeolites ZSM-5, zeolite Y, and SAPO-34 from kaolin clay for carbon capture from air. Zeolites exhibited a bimodal pore network consisting of micropores and mesopores. Zeolite Y with 10 wt% TEPA loading exhibited a capacity of 1.12 mmol g−1 in 5000 ppm CO2. The higher capacity over the other zeolites was due to the larger mesopore volume of zeolite Y. Cai et al.313 synthesized halloysite nanotubes impregnated with PEI. The optimal capacity reached 1.25 mmol g−1 in air, and the adsorbent exhibited a mild regeneration at 80 °C as well as high cycling stability.
Organic polymers, including organic hybrid nanoparticle materials and resins, have been explored as support materials for amine-based CO2 adsorbents. They afford a high degree of chemical tunability, as well as potential capacity, owing to their large surface area and pore volume. Rim et al.110 reported novel solvent-impregnated polymers (SIPs) loaded with liquid-like nanoparticle organic hybrid materials (NOHMs) for DAC (Fig. 13a). The CO2 capture kinetics of NOHM-SIPs shows a 50-fold increase compared to that of neat NOHMs functionalized with PEI (NOHM-I-PEI) because of the large increase in the NOHMs–CO2 interfacial surface area provided by the SIP design (Fig. 13b and c). The effects of amine loading and temperature on their adsorption properties were investigated (Fig. 13d–g). Their high capacity of 1.7 mmol g−1 and their high thermal stability suggest that they can effectively capture CO2 from air.
 Fig. 13  (a) Interior structure of the SIPs. (b) CO2 uptake of NOHM loaded SIPs and neat PEI-functionalized NOHMs. (c) Schematic illustration of the synergistic effect between PEI-functionalized NOHMs and the CO2 permeable polymers. (d and e) Effects of PEI-functionalized NOHM and PEI loading on the adsorption kinetics, capacity, and amine efficiency. (f and g) Effects of temperature on adsorption kinetics, the initial capture rate, and capacity (reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2021). 
The first study on PEI-impregnated resin to capture CO2 from air was reported by Chen et al.315 In this study, commercialized resin HP20 was loaded with PEI in a range of 30–55 wt%. The highest capacity was 2.26 mmol g−1, but the kinetics seemed to be relatively slow. Wang et al.115 prepared PEI-impregnated resin PEI-MR10 for indoor CO2 capture. It was found that PEI loading narrowed the pore size distribution but increased the average pore size of PEI-MR10. Under variable indoor conditions, the adsorbed amounts of CO2 maintained high values from 2.05 to 3.09 mmol g−1. The resin also showed a faster adsorption rate and mild regeneration at approximately 70 °C. Si et al.316 fabricated a PEI-impregnated porous polymer resin and found increased CO2 adsorption capacity with the assistance of H2O in a humid 4000 ppm CO2 gas stream. Owing to their particularly high mesopore volume, amine-loaded resins typically exhibit a higher capacity. The typical drawbacks are their kinetic limitations and stability problems, which should be primarily solved to facilitate their applications.
MOFs are a class of crystalline porous materials constructed from inorganic ions or clusters joined by multitopic organic ligands. They are attractive adsorbents owing to their high degree of control over the pore size, shape, and surface chemistry through synthesis modification. Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of MOFs, and thus far, amine-modified MOFs have been investigated for DAC.347,348 In a study by Darunte et al.,260 MIL-101(Cr) was impregnated with PEI or TREN and used to capture CO2 from air. MIL-101(Cr)-TREN showed high CO2 capacities for high loadings of TREN, but a significant loss of amines was observed in multicycle TSA experiments. In contrast, MIL-101(Cr)-PEI-800 showed a capacity of 1–1.3 mmol g−1 and stable cycling performance. Rim et al.317 impregnated TEPA or PEI on MIL-101(Cr) and measured the adsorption behavior in both the presence and absence of humidity in the temperature range of −25 to 25 °C (Fig. 14a). The effects of amine loading and adsorption temperature on the adsorption/desorption behaviors were investigated (Fig. 14b–e). The adsorbents show promising a working capacity of 0.72 mmol g−1 at an ultralow regeneration temperature (e.g., sorption at −20 °C and desorption at 25 °C), which can be further enhanced under humid conditions (Fig. 14f).
 Fig. 14  (a) Scheme of the TEPA-impregnated MIL-101(Cr). (b) Effect of amine loading on the adsorption capacity at 25 °C. (c) Effect of temperature on the adsorption behavior of amine-impregnated MIL-101(Cr). (d) Adsorption kinetics at different temperatures. (e) Desorption behavior after adsorption at different temperatures. (f) Working capacity of TEPA-MIL-101(Cr) over small temperature swing cycles (reproduced from ref. 317 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022). 
LDHs are two-dimensional layered materials comprising brucite-like layers separated by charge-compensating anions and interlayered water with a general formula of [M1−x2+Mx3+(OH)2]x+(An−)x/n·yH2O (M2+ and M3+ are divalent and trivalent cations, respectively; x is the ratio of divalent to trivalent metal cations; An− is the interlayer anion). By aqueous miscible organic solvent treatment (AMOST), stacked bulk LDHs can be exfoliated into small plates with large specific surface areas and tunable metal cations.349 Further, they form mixed metal oxides (MMOs) with abundant surface defects after undergoing thermal treatment under mild conditions (400–600 °C).350 These unique characteristics make them rather attractive for synthesizing customized adsorbents for CO2 capture. Recently, attempts to impregnate amines into MMOs have successfully demonstrated the viability of adopting LDHs as DAC adsorbents. Zhu et al.111 synthesized an aminopolymer-impregnated adsorbent by loading 67 wt% branched PEI onto Mg0.55Al–O MMOs, which exhibited large CO2 uptakes (2.27 mmol g−1), fast kinetics (1.1 mmol g−1 h−1), and high stability over 20 cycles at 25 °C under 0.4 mbar CO2 (Fig. 15a and b). The ultrahigh thermal stability of the amine-impregnated oxide was achieved that was ascribed to the strong electrostatic interactions between the MMO layers and amines (Fig. 15c–e).
 Fig. 15  (a) Scanning electron microscopy images of MMOs impregnated with 0, 33, 50, and 67 wt% PEI. (b) Schematic diagram of the PEI/MMO structure. (c) Thermally-induced weight change rate of the PEI/MMO and PEI/SBA-15 that characterizes the thermal stability of adsorbents. (d) CO2 uptake of PEI/MMO and PEI/SBA-15 in 2 h at 400 ppm CO2 and 25 °C after desorption at different temperatures. (e) Working capacity of PEI67/Mg0.55Al–O over 20 cycles under dry and wet conditions (adsorption: 400 ppm CO2, 25 °C; desorption: N2 purge, 120 °C).111 
Later, Zhao et al.318 loaded TEPA onto MMOs for DAC. The optimal Mg0.55Al–O–TEPA67% demonstrates another high CO2 uptake of 3.0 mmol g−1 and excellent regenerability, maintaining ∼90% of the initial adsorption amount after 80 adsorption/desorption cycles. Through density functional theory (DFT) calculations, the stronger bonding between the Mg0.55Al–O support and the amine was revealed to be caused by the abundance of oxygen defects on the MMOs, which was confirmed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and electron spin resonance analysis. These studies demonstrate the prominent advantages of MMO-based amino solids in terms of capacity, kinetics, and stability compared to common silica-based materials. Furthermore, LDHs synthesized from inexpensive raw materials via a scalable approach can facilitate industrial carbon capture applications.351


2.2.2. Amine-grafted adsorbents. 
The efficient assembly of amine-grafted adsorbents relies on supports with a high specific surface area, adjustable pore structure, and rich surface hydroxyl groups. Most amine-grafted CO2 adsorbents use ordered mesoporous silicas as supports, such as MCM-41,124,297 pore-expanded MCM-41,124,275,277,293 MCM-48,352 SBA-15,122,123,125,127,128,134,145,265,273,276,281,285,287,292,300 KIT-6,298,299 and MCF.274 Understanding the effect of the pore structure of siliceous supports on amine grafting and CO2 adsorptive performance is essential. It is well known that the large pore size and pore volume of pore-expanded MCM-41 enhance the CO2 capacities and kinetics of grafted amines under ultradilute conditions.124,293 Recently, the same trend was also observed for SBA-15, especially under wet grafting conditions, in which small pores cause significant pore blockage and poor amine accessibility.123 Anyanwu et al.128 reported that the clumping and agglomeration of TRI molecules on wet-grafted SBA-15 was ascribed to interparticle amine polymerization. After expanding the pore size of SBA-15 from 8 to 12.3 nm by adding mesitylene during the synthesis, agglomeration was not observed. As a result, wet-grafted pore-expanded SBA-15 achieved higher CO2 capacities than wet-grafted conventional SBA-15 even at similar amine loadings. Unfortunately, wet-grafted pore-expanded SBA-15 showed breakthrough CO2 capacities of less than 0.15 mmol g−1 for DAC under high gas hourly space velocities, indicating significant diffusion resistance.
Compared with 2-dimensional structured silicas with long straight channels, 3-dimensional materials, which consist of interconnected mesopores, potentially allow better surface amine functionalization and boost CO2 diffusion during adsorption. Pioneering works conducted by Chaffee and co-workers showed that aminosilane grafted onto hexagonal mesoporous silica (HMS) with a “wormhole structure” achieved high amine efficiencies (e.g., 0.69) for post-combustion CO2 capture.353,354 Recently, functionalized HMS materials with different textural properties were tested for adsorption of atmospheric CO2.114 Using dodecylamine with a chain length of C12 as a structure-directing agent and subsequently removing it by calcination created an optimal pore structure of HMS for amine grafting without hindering the CO2 diffusion at a loading of 5.4 mmol g−1. Overall, the small pore size (2.5–2.9 nm) of HMS materials limits multilayer amine grafting to achieve higher loadings. In another work, an HBS containing two interconnected cylindrical pores around 9.1 and 33.8 nm was identified as an effective support, allowing deep aminosilane accessibility to pore channels and excellent amine dispersion (Fig. 16).295 Wet-grafted HBS retains significant mesopores at high amine loadings and is less kinetically limited compared to wet grafted SBA-15. Under a dry air feed with a GHSV of 3000 h−1, the novel adsorbent achieved high breakthrough CO2 capacities of up to 1.04 mmol g−1.
 Fig. 16  CO2 (filled symbols) and N2 (open symbols) adsorption isotherms for wet-grafted HBS (●) and SBA-15 (■) at 25 °C (reproduced from ref. 295 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022). 
Ordered mesoporous silicas are formed by polymerizing silica precursors around organic templates as structure-directing agents, which are subsequently removed to create the desired porosity. Air calcination at high temperatures is commonly used for template removal, but a long heating time may cause dehydroxylation, which reduces the silanol density for amine grafting. Although several alternative template removal methods working under mild conditions have been proposed, such as solvent extraction355 and glow discharge,356 they are costly, time-consuming, or unable to remove most of the organic temples. Recently, ionic liquids (ILs) were successfully applied for removing the P123 template from as-synthesized SBA-15 at a temperature of 120 °C (Fig. 17).125 The IL-treated SBA-15 maintained a silanol number of more than 5.1 OH nm−2, much higher than that of 3.0 OH nm−2 in calcined SBA-15. Furthermore, both the organic template and the IL can be recovered/reused from the process, showing great feasibility for commercial applications. After grafting the amine, the IL-treated SBA-15 showed 51% more amine loading and nearly triple CO2 capacity for DAC compared to the conventionally treated one. The underlying mechanism of the IL treatment is the breakage of hydrogen bonding between the surface silanol groups and the EO moiety in the P123 template, similar to the well-known cellulose dissolution by ILs. Hopefully, the combination of appropriate pore design, template removal methods, and wet grafting would further enhance the CO2 adsorption of ordered mesoporous silica under ultradilute conditions.
 Fig. 17  Concept of template removal by IL treatment for amine grafting (reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020). 
Currently, the mass production of ordered mesoporous silicas is still inefficient and costly, prompting the search for alternative supports for amine grafting. Naturally available nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC) consisting of rich hydroxyl groups in a cellulose backbone is one potential choice.278,291,357 It was reported that the CO2 working capacity of DI-grafted NFC reached a stable value of 0.695 mmol g−1 in 20 DAC cycles,291 and decreased by 5% after 100 DAC cycles under wet conditions.357 Mesoporous γ-alumina is another feasible host for amine grafting, which exhibits superior hydrothermal stability to silica and thus enables the maintenance of porosity and structure during long-term steam purging. After wet-grafting APS at a loading of 2.92 mmol g−1, γ-alumina achieved a high capacity of 0.79 mmol g−1 at 25 °C with 400 ppm CO2.280 Basic alumina potentially participates in the CO2 adsorption. However, under ultradilute conditions and high amine loadings, amine-grafted alumina showed a similar CO2 adsorption mechanism to silica-supported materials, which was confirmed by in situ Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy.126
Considering that each metal cation in LDH-derived nanosheets is coordinated by six edge-sharing hydroxyl groups,358 exfoliated LDHs offer great potential for high-density amine grafting. Preliminary studies have reported several examples of LDH silylation.359,360 While the addition of water greatly increases the amine loading on the support,123,124,129,361 the formation of cross-linked siloxane networks by wet grafting blocks the mesopores of the supports and affects the adsorption kinetics. Recently, monolayer primary amine- and triamine-grafted, organic solvent-treated LDHs have been reported to efficiently and rapidly capture CO2 from ambient air (Fig. 18).120 The size and thickness of the LDH nanosheets and their stacking morphology mainly determine the maximum amine loading. For example, bulk-phase Mg2Al-LDH prepared by the urea hydrothermal method could barely graft amines, while acetone-washed Mg0.55Al-LDH (Mg0.55Al-a) with extremely fine (20 nm) and thin (2.5 nm) nanosheets and flower-like morphology had an amine loading of 6.399 mmol g−1. Consequently, TRI-Mg0.55Al-a reached a CO2 adsorption capacity of 1.05 mmol g−1 at 25 °C and 400 ppm CO2, which is 30% higher than that of TRI-modified SBA-15. APS-grafted Mg0.55Al-a containing only the primary amine had an even higher amine efficiency of 0.212. Monolayer amine grafting significantly reduced the pore blockage of the amine and preserved the high specific surface area (162 m2 g−1) and pore volume (0.553 cm3 g−1) of the support. These ideal CO2 diffusion channels could ensure rapid adsorption kinetics, in which over 70% CO2 uptake was achieved within 30 min. Furthermore, the strong chemical bond between amines and LDHs resulted in almost no performance degradation over 50 adsorption/desorption cycles.
 Fig. 18  (a) Fabrication process of amine-monolayer-grafted bulk and ultrafine MgAl-LDHs, (b) silylation of AMOST-treated LDHs, and (c) structures of grafted amines (reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021). 
Kong et al.282–284,286,339,362,363 prepared a series of amine hybrid aerogels through a one-pot sol–gel process, followed by supercritical drying for low-concentration CO2 capture. Spherical amine hybrid aerogels were also developed by a ball drop method (Fig. 19).284 Benefiting from the unique properties of aerogels with high surface areas and large inter-connected mesopores, significant porosity remained after in situ polymerization at high amine loadings (e.g., 7.64 mmol g−1).282,362,363 As a result, amine hybrid silica aerogels exhibited surprisingly high capacities up to 5.55 mmol g−1 at 25 °C and under a humid 1% CO2 flow stream.339 Replacing the silica source (TEOS) with a transition metal-based precursor (tetra-n-butyl titanate) during sol–gel synthesis formed a hybrid titania/silsesquioxane aerogel with an equally high CO2 capacity (1.64 mmol g−1@400 ppm CO2).283 Cellulose aerogels were not as effective as silica aerogels for CO2 capture, probably because of the low quantity of surface hydroxyl groups and fibrous structure in cellulose aerogels that restrict amine loading (1.56 mmol g−1).286 While amine hybrid aerogels are attractive for DAC, a further in-depth study is still required to understand the polymerization process of aminosilanes inside the porous network of these aerogel-based adsorbents during the sol–gel process, as well as its effect on the CO2 adsorption kinetics and stability under ultradilute conditions. The application of alternative chemicals and drying methods is also necessary to solve the cost and environmental issues.
 Fig. 19  Synthesis process of spherical amine silica aerogels.284 

2.3. Effect of additives
The incorporation of additives in the amine-functionalization process has been widely investigated to improve the carbon capture efficiency of amino solids. These additives are typically CO2-neutral molecules or polymers. The possible reasons for the improvement could be that they increase the amine site accessibility, reduce the CO2 diffusion resistance, and change the amine speciation. Furthermore, the additives may lead to hydrogen bond formation between amines and additives. These influences jointly cause changes in the adsorption capacity, rate, heat, and stability. The investigation of the additive type, the amine addition ratio, and application conditions could assist in revealing the influence mechanism of additives to provide a guide for improved adsorbent design and applications.
Several studies have explored the role of additives in carbon capture, and most of them were performed under post-combustion conditions.364–369 Accordingly, the main types of effective additives are surfactants (poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG),300,370–373 glycerol, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), cetyltrimethylammonium chloride (CTAC), Pluronic P123, and sorbitan monooleate (Span80), silanes,374,375 sulfur-containing compounds, antioxidants,376 ionic liquids,377 and potassium carbonate.378 PEG has been investigated most frequently and showed positive effects on adsorption properties, possibly because of its rich hydroxyl groups that can facilitate better amine dispersion and attract more water molecules. Wang et al.379 previously suggested that surfactants are beneficial to the adsorption performance improvement owing to the deeper diffusion of CO2 into the PEI films. Later, they investigated the effects of additives on the DAC performance of amino solids.314 A commercially available polymethacrylate-based resin, HP2MGL, was impregnated with PEI with CTAB, Span80, and PEG used as additives. The surfactants improve the amine efficiency by breaking the bulk amine films and their adsorption product. CTAB was observed to be the most effective promoter by increasing 9.6% CO2 capacity (from 1.96 to 2.15 mmol g−1). In another study, a mesoporous carbon was impregnated with PEI with Span80 as the additive.308 Similarly, the adsorption capacity of additive-containing adsorbents was increased up to 30.5% under 5000 ppm CO2 compared to that of additive-free adsorbents.
Sakwa-Novak et al.345 provided a deeper insight into the efficacy of additive incorporation on the adsorption performance of PEI-impregnated oxides upon exposure to 400 ppm CO2. Three additives (CTAB, PEG200, PEG1000) were compared and PEG was observed to perform best by increasing the amine efficiency to 0.16 from 0.10. Qi et al.259 investigated the role of the brush-like additive, CTAC, in enhancing amine efficiency. CTAC was used as a template to synthesize micro-mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MMSNs) that were later impregnated with TEPA. MMSN-30/TEPA-50 with an appropriate amount of CTAC exhibited higher CO2 adsorption capacity (3.68 mmol g−1 under simulated dry air conditions) than adsorbents with no or a lower amount of additives. FTIR confirmed that the adsorption product was converted from carbamate to carbamic acid, which explains the increase in amine efficiency.
In addition to their enhanced capacity and kinetics, additives were found to be effective in improving oxidation resistance. While such an enhancement was commonly ascribed to hydrogen bond formation between additives and amines,380,381 a recent study by Vu et al.376 proposed a different idea. They selected sulfur-containing compounds and traditional antioxidants as additives to study the oxidative degradation of TEPA- and PEI-impregnated MCFs. Results showed that traditional antioxidants catalyzed oxidative degradation. In contrast, sulfur-containing additives, which are effective in free radical scavenging and peroxide decomposition, decrease the oxidation rate.
There is still lack of research on the additive functions under DAC conditions. In fact, the influence of additives becomes more obvious under ultradilute conditions because of eliminated physical adsorption. PEG has been mostly applied for promotion because of its effect on hydrogen bond formation, kinetic enhancement, and production conversion, while other materials act in different ways. It has been shown that all of these enhancements are more likely to be kinetic rather than thermodynamic; however, a more fundamental description of what gives rise to these phenomena still must be elucidated. Comprehensive characterization studies and systematic theory also need to be explored. More types of additives and a wider range of application scenarios should be examined to achieve a general promotion strategy.
3. Avoidance of oxidative degradation
3.1. Pathway of oxidative degradation
Oxidative stability is a dominant factor that determines the lifetime of amine-functionalized adsorbents. The oxidative degradation of amine-loaded adsorbents principally results in the chemical instability of loaded amines,105 producing new characteristic bonds including carbonyl (CO),134,254,382–385 aliphatic CC,382 heterocyclic CN,134,382–384 and aromatic CC382 owing to the formation of acid, amide, imide, and/or urea linkages.134,254,382–38613C cross-polarization magic-angle spinning (CP-MAS) solid state NMR,254,381–386 XPS,382 diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform (DRIFT) spectroscopy,254,381,383–385,387,388 and FT-Raman spectroscopy254 are usually employed to examine the effect of oxidative treatments on solid adsorbents. However, the exact pathway of this oxidation process remains unclear. Furthermore, some specific species, such as amides and imines, cannot simply be identified through IR spectra because of their similar vibration locations. Sayari et al. proposed a solvent extraction method to remove the species generated by the oxidative degradation of amine-grafted389 and amine-impregnated390 mesoporous silicas. Based on 1D and 2D NMR analyses, two chemical structures produced from air-deactivated trimethoxy[3-(methylamino)propyl]silane (sMono)-grafted PE-MCM-41 and four chemical compounds of air-deactivated TRI-grafted PE-MCM-41 were determined (Fig. 20a and b). Air-deactivated species containing –HCO and –HCN– units were also identified in linear PEI (Mw ∼2500) and branched PEI (Mn ∼600)-impregnated mesoporous SBA-15 silicas (Fig. 20c).
 Fig. 20  Possible structures of –HCO and –HCN– units identified for air-deactivated (a) sMono, (b) TRI (right) (reproduced from ref. 389 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2013), and (c) PEI (linear and branched).390 All six fragments were detected in deactivated branched PEI, but only the first three were identified in linear PEI. 
On the other hand, oxidation kinetics are strongly associated with transient changes in the adsorbents. Therefore, the quantitative estimation of sorbent lifetimes requires an insightful investigation of oxidative degradation rates. Sakwa-Novak et al.135 recently proposed an experimental framework to identify the oxidative kinetics of PEI-impregnated γ-Al2O3 in simulated ambient air. The extent of oxidation over time was expressed in terms of the oxidation reaction heat from DSC testing. The variations in the C/N and H/(C + N) molar ratios in PEI during oxidative degradation provided two important pieces of information (Fig. 21). First, the species lost during oxidation are not simply caused by cleavage or evaporation of low molecular weight polymer fractions, which agrees with the formation of hydroxylamine and ammonia. Second, the H species were lost at a highly disproportionate rate relative to the repeat units of PEI. This is consistent with the supposition of the formation of non-volatile oxidation products, such as amides and imines, which contain double bonds.
 Fig. 21  (A–C) C/N and (D–F) H/(C + N) molar ratios of the oxidized sorbents normalized with the ratios of a fresh PEI sorbent over the extent of PEI oxidation. Green error bars indicate the sample-to-sample reproducibility and orange error bars show the run-to-run reproducibility of a chosen number of elemental analyses (reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021). 
The effective oxidation rate of the suite of oxidative reactions is represented by eqn (1), which means that the parameters extracted from the equation are not specific to a given reaction and are effective in nature. It is interesting to note that there is a perfect overlap in the activation energy among the O2 concentrations of 5%, 17%, and 30% at the extent of oxidation below 20%. This phenomenon suggests that at the early stages of oxidation, there is a similar set of oxidative reactions occurring in the adsorbents for these different O2 concentrations. The reaction rate keeps increasing until the extent of oxidation arrives at 50%, then the reaction order gradually decays to zero. The rate of the reaction is likely to be controlled by the limited number of active reaction sites remaining on PEI. (1)
3.2. Alternative amine polymers
Accelerated oxidative treatment by exposing sorbent samples to an oxygen atmosphere is usually deployed to simulate the oxidative processes in actual applications for amine-loaded adsorbents.119,130,132–135,254,382–386,391 The variation in CO2 capacity or amine efficiency before and after accelerated oxidative treatment is used to determine the oxidative stability of the samples. This variation commonly results from the O2-induced deactivation.130
Several early studies suggested that monoamine-grafted adsorbents showed better oxidative resistance than diamine- and triamine-grafted adsorbents, where primary amines are better than secondary amines.382,384,392 However, the elusive interactions of these findings have not been discussed and provided. Jones and coworkers investigated the effect of the alkyl linker length of grafted primary amines on oxidative stability.386 Compared to supported methyl, supported ethyl and propyl exhibited more favorable oxidative resistance. The authors proposed a mechanism of amine interactions with the surface and adjacent amines, which can occur based on the alkyl linker length (Fig. 22). It was assumed that methyl and ethyl linker materials will only interact with adjacent amines, whereas amines with propyl linkers are able to interact with surface silanols as well as neighboring amines. The stability tests also indicated that aminomethyl-functionalized adsorbents suffered from severe degradation at high operating temperatures (135 °C) compared to their ethyl and propyl counterparts.
 Fig. 22  Proposed amine interactions with the surface and neighboring amines that can occur based on alkyl chain length. Amines with short alkyl chains have no ability (methyl) or a very limited ability (ethyl) to interact with the silanols on the surface (reproduced from ref. 386 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014). 
Another study investigated the effect of alkyl spacer length as well as branched (B-ethyl, B-propyl) and linear (L-ethyl, L-propyl) structures on the oxidative stability of amine-grafted adsorbents under DAC conditions (Table 3).134 All grafted adsorbents showed favorable thermal stability following the stability trend of APS > L-propyl > B-propyl > B-ethyl > L-ethyl. The oxidation resistance of these grafted adsorbents showed the same decreasing trend as the thermal stability, but the value varied significantly. In addition, after oxidation, the C/N molar ratios of the four samples changed slightly; however, the variation in the C/(H + N) molar ratios of the four samples was significant and showed the same decreasing trend as the oxidative stability.
Table 3 Summary of accelerated oxidative degradation data under the DAC condition on amine-grafted SBA-15




Amine loading
Oxidative treatment conditions
Adsorption conditions
Desorption conditions
CO2 capacity loss (%)
Ref.




APS
110 °C in simulated air (21% O2/79% N2) for 12 h
25 °C in 400 ppm CO2/He for 3 h
110 °C in He for 3 h
1

134



L-ethyl
110 °C in simulated air (21% O2/79% N2) for 12 h
25 °C in 400 ppm CO2/He for 3 h
110 °C in He for 3 h
45

134



L-propyl
110 °C in simulated air (21% O2/79% N2) for 12 h
25 °C in 400 ppm CO2/He for 3 h
110 °C in He for 3 h
5

134



B-ethyl
110 °C in simulated air (21% O2/79% N2) for 12 h
25 °C in 400 ppm CO2/He for 3 h
110 °C in He for 3 h
28

134



B-propyl
110 °C in simulated air (21% O2/79% N2) for 12 h
25 °C in 400 ppm CO2/He for 3 h
110 °C in He for 3 h
11

134





The L-propyl-grafted SBA-15 showed strong resistance to oxidation even though L-propyl contains secondary amines, which indicates that the propyl spacer between the secondary amine and the neighboring primary amine may enhance oxidative resistance. This hypothesis was later supported by the analysis of the αC–H bond dissociation energy near the primary amine, which increased as the alkyl chain length increased. The oxidative stability of B-ethyl was better than that of L-ethyl owing to the absence of secondary amines. The formation of oxidized species on both branched and linear amino silanes was explored by in situ IR spectroscopy (Fig. 23). The stretching peak of the carbonyl group (1633 or 1670 cm−1, CO) was observed for the L-ethyl-grafted adsorbent, and the N–H (1600 cm−1) bond was possibly derived from the amide or imine (1633 or 1670 cm−1, CN) species owing to the formation of a possibly oxidized species, –NH–CO.
 Fig. 23  
In situ IR spectra for CO2 adsorbents of (a) L-ethyl, (b) L-propyl, (c) B-ethyl, and (d) B-propyl, respectively, during the oxidation under a simulated air atmosphere (21% O2/N2) at 110 °C for 150 min (reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020). 
Hallenbeck et al.393 examined the stability of Lewatit VP OC 1065, a commercialized primary amine-functionalized ion-exchange resin, by exposing the resin to a simulated flue gas stream containing 12% CO2, 4% O2, and 84% N2. The cycling capacities were stable after 17 continuous adsorption–desorption cycles via a thermal swing between 50 and 127 °C. However, the capacity of the treated resin was reduced by 79% compared to fresh adsorbents after 7 days of continuous exposure to air at 120 °C. Later, Yu et al.394 claimed that although Lewatit VP OC 1065 is thermally and hydrothermally stable at high temperatures (e.g., 100–150 °C), the oxidative degradation can occur at moderate temperatures (above 70 °C) for adsorbents treated with air as well as flue gas with 12% O2. Nevertheless, a comprehensive investigation of the oxidative stability of Lewatit VP OC 1065 under DAC conditions is lacking.
PEI is considered as one of the most promising commercially supported amines for both fuel gas capture and DAC. The oxidative stability of PEI-functionalized adsorbents has attracted much research attention.130,132,254,383,385,390,391,395 Oxidative degradation depends on the operating temperature in addition to the oxygen partial pressure. For example, 55 wt% PEI/SBA-15, as the first PEI-modified adsorbent being reported focusing on the oxidative stability according to our best knowledge, lost 22% and 70% of CO2 uptake after accelerated oxidative treatment under carbon-free air flow at 90 °C and 100 °C, respectively.385 The combination of material loss by amine evaporation and oxidative reactions caused the loss of CO2 capacity. Yuan et al.391 recently showed that PEI-modified silica was oxidatively stable upon exposure to air at mild temperatures, but the oxidative degradation would indeed occur at more harsh temperatures (above 90 °C). PEI/SiO2 would be significantly degraded under O2-containing flue gas at 105 °C, due to the oxidation of the available amine sites. Linear PEI (Mn ≈ 2500)/SBA-15 shows better oxidative resistance than branched PEI (Mn ≈ 600)/SBA-15, though fresh linear PEI/SBA-15 exhibits lower CO2 uptake.390
Compared to supported PEI, PAA-impregnated mesoporous γ-alumina containing only primary amines showed significantly improved oxidative resistance but lower initial CO2 capacity (Fig. 24a and b).254 Supported PGA was reported for CO2 capture from flue gas and air.119 Upon exposure to simulated air (21% O2/N2) for 24 h at 110 °C, PGA-50 impregnated SBA-15 used for capturing CO2 from simulated flue gas lost 50% of its CO2 capacity. In comparison, 50% branched PEI-modified SBA-15 lost 90% of its CO2 capacity when used for capturing CO2 from simulated air (400 ppm CO2 in He) after the same oxidative treatment. Oxidized PGA/SBA-15 showed a prominent peak at 1660 cm−1 as PEI/SBA-15 (Fig. 24c). Compared to more oxidatively stable PAA, it is likely that the presence of oxygen in the backbone of PGA accelerates or enables the oxidation reaction to occur.
 Fig. 24  FTIR spectra of fresh (a) PEI-impregnated γ-alumina and oxidized sorbent (ALPEI_21_110) treated with 21% oxygen at 110 °C for 20 h as well as (b) PAA-impregnated γ-alumina (ALPAA fresh & ALPEI_21_110) (reproduced from ref. 254 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2013). (c) IR spectra of fresh and oxidized PGA-impregnated SBA-15 (reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). 
The oxidative stability of branched PEI-impregnated silica was also investigated under DAC conditions.383 After 24 hours of pure O2 flow treatment at 90 °C, a mild reduction of organic content can be observed (Fig. 25). A further decrease occurred at 110 °C, due to the evaporation, leaching, and/or cracking of the aminopolymer. An increase in the organic content of the oxidized samples treated from 110 to 130 °C is likely due to the oxygen addition to the aminopolymers or fragments by forming amide or other oxygen-containing species above 110 °C. The CO2 uptake of PEI/SBA-15 decreased by 29% after the oxidation at 90 °C, but the loss of organic content was only 15%.
 Fig. 25  (a) Thermogravimetric analysis to assess the organic content of PEI-impregnated SBA-15 (PEI-SBA) after oxidative treatment at the specified temperatures. (b) Variation in CO2 uptake of the PEI-SBA series as a function of oxidation treatment temperature for both 10 vol% and 400 ppm of CO2 in He, compared to the bare SBA-15 support (reproduced from ref. 383 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). 
Given this disparity, it is assumed that the lost or degraded aminopolymer was the most effective species for adsorbing 400 ppm of CO2. To conclude, a dramatic decrease in CO2 uptake of PEI/SBA-15 occurred when the treatment temperature increased from 90 to 110 °C, which is ascribed not only to the aminopolymer evaporation, leaching, and/or cracking, but also to the oxidative reaction of the amine species into amides and heterocycles, which has been indicated by the results of the 13C solid state NMR. PEI-SBA oxidized at 130 °C showed the same uptake as the bare SBA-15, suggesting that it has been completely oxidized and cannot chemisorb CO2. It is interesting to note that PEI-impregnated SBA-15 exhibited different variations between flue gas capture and DAC after the same oxidative treatments, which requires further investigation.
Jones et al.118,130,132,133 systematically explored the relationship between the length of the alkyl spacer separating the functional amine groups of polymers and amine oxidative degradation. They found that PEI with an ethyl spacer is more susceptible to oxidation than PPI with a propyl spacer, despite the small linear molecules of PPI, tripropylenetetramine (TPTA), containing secondary amines (Fig. 26a). The small molecules of PPI, TPTA, and N1,N1,N3,N3-tetrakis(3-aminopropyl)propane-1,3-diamine (PI-den) impregnated SBA-15 showed a more efficient CO2 capacity than the corresponding triethylenetetramine (TETA)- and N1,N1,N3,N3-tetrakis(2-aminoethyl)propane-1,3-diamine (EI-den) modified adsorbents (Fig. 26b), which might be ascribed to the increased basicity as well as the decreased extent of nearest-neighbor interactions with the increased length of the alkyl spacer.
 Fig. 26  (a) Structures of linear and dendritic PEI (TETA and EI-den) and PPI (TPTA and PI-den). (b) CO2 capacity and (c) amine efficiencies of aminopolymers impregnated in SBA-15 at 400 ppm of CO2/N2 and 35 °C over a range of amine loadings. Amine efficiencies were normalized to the number of amines that are active for CO2 capture under dry conditions (1° and 2° only). Open symbols indicate samples exposed to oxidative treatment at the listed temperature. (d) FTIR spectra for samples with fresh aminopolymers (black) and aminopolymers oxidatively treated at 110 °C for 24 h (red). Spectra were acquired under vacuum and normalized to the Si–O–Si framework bending mode at 460 cm−1 (reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017). 
In addition, there is no significant branching dependence in the adsorption capability of small-molecule modified adsorbents. After accelerated oxygen treatment at 110 °C for 24 h, the CO2 capacity and amine efficiency of oxidized TETA and EI-den modified adsorbents containing secondary amines showed a significant loss (Fig. 26c). Although TPTA also contains secondary amines, the CO2 capacity and amine efficiency of oxidized TPTA loaded SBA-15 only decreased around 20%. Furthermore, the oxidized PI-den impregnated adsorbent showed around 50% loss in CO2 capacity and amine efficiency, exhibiting higher oxidative resistance than EI-den with over a 90% loss. Therefore, although exceptions exist,117 polyamines with propylene linkers are usually more resistant to oxidative degradation than those with ethylene linkers. After oxidative treatment, an intense peak at 1665 cm−1, which is attributed to the stretching mode of the CO or CN groups, can be observed in the FTIR spectra of the SBA-15-supported samples with TETA and EI-den (Fig. 26d). Combining additional results from 1H and 13C NMR spectra and electrospray ionization mass spectrometry, the authors concluded that the observed deactivation of TPTA was more likely to be a thermal rearrangement reaction assisted by oxygen, contributing to intramolecular cyclization and/or alkylamine chain transfer reactions.
The same group also elaborately investigated oxidatively stable linear PPI-containing adsorbents with different molecular weights.132 The adsorbent modified with linear PPI with a molecular weight of 1000 g mol−1 showed the best performance with 0.16 mmol CO2 mmol−1 N amine efficiency and 1.25 mmol g−1 CO2 capacity (Fig. 27a). After exposure to a flow of simulated air at 110 °C for 24 h, linear PPI modified samples with high molecular weights retained most of the CO2 capture capability and over 83% amine efficiency (Fig. 27a and b). FTIR spectra showed that the major bonds in linear PPI-impregnated SBA-15 samples (N–H stretching at 3240 cm−1 and CH2 stretching at 2940, 2873, and 2815 cm−1) basically remained the same after the accelerated oxidative treatment (Fig. 27c). However, a significant band at 1670 cm−1, referring to CN or CO groups, was observed for PEI/SBA-15. The significant reduction in the intensity of the N–H and CH2 stretches of PEI/SBA-15 suggests more severe oxidative degradation than that of PPI/SBA-15. The oxidative resistance of linear PPI confined in SBA-15 subjected to extended aging (∼2 years) was also studied, and the aged adsorbents also exhibited desirable stability after 24 hour exposure at 110 °C under 21% O2/He flow.133
 Fig. 27  (a) CO2 capacities of linear PPI and PEI-impregnated in SBA-15 (adsorption in 400 ppm CO2/N2 at 35 °C, 18 h) over a range of amine loadings. Open symbols indicate samples exposed to oxidative treatment (21% O2/N2 at 110 °C, 24 h) prior to CO2 adsorption. Error bars indicate the standard deviation of three separate adsorption experiments on three different powder samples. (b) CO2 adsorption isotherms for the 50 wt% linear PPI (1000 g mol−1)/SBA-15 sample, where open symbols indicate repeated isotherm measurements after acquiring all other isotherms to ensure that no degradation or loss of aminopolymer had occurred due to thermal treatment under vacuum, and cross symbols indicate the isotherm obtained for a sample that had first been exposed to the oxidative treatment. (c) FTIR spectra of linear PPI and PEI-impregnated in SBA-15 before (black) and after exposure to oxidative treatment (21% O2/N2 at 110 °C, 24 h) (red). Spectra were acquired under a flow of UHP N2 and normalized to the Si–O–Si framework bending mode at 460 cm−1 (reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2018). 
Branched PPI is another promising alternative to commonly used branched PEI.118 As shown in Fig. 28, PPI made with HClO4 and HBr initiators showed higher CO2 capacity, amine efficiency, and oxidative resistance (∼80%) after exposure to air at 110 °C for 12 h. In comparison, branched PEI only retained 40% of CO2 capacity. The performances of these aminopolymer-impregnated adsorbents after oxidative treatments for DAC are listed in Table 4 in detail.
 Fig. 28  (a) CO2 capacity (mmol CO2 g−1 SiO2; black) and amine efficiency (mmol CO2 mmol−1 N; gray) measured under a 0.04% CO2 stream at 35 °C for polymers made with various acid initiators. All sorbents were approximately 30% weight polymer in SBA-15. (b) CO2 capacity, amine efficiency, and oxidative resistance measured under a 0.04% CO2 stream at 35 °C for polymers made with hydrobromic acid at various loadings in SBA-15. Oxidative resistances are shown by data points under 0.04% CO2 conditions and are calculated as the ratio of the uptake capacities before and after 12 h oxidation in air at 110 °C (or for 24 h in the case of the sorbent with the highest polymer loading) (reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). 
Table 4 Summary of accelerated oxidative degradation data under DAC conditions on amine-impregnated SBA-15




Amine loading
Oxidative treatment conditions
Adsorption conditions
Desorption conditions
CO2 capacity loss (%)
Ref.




∼30% branched PEI (Mw ∼800)
90/110 °C in air for 24 h
35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/He for 6 h
110 °C in pure N2 for 2 h
29 (90 °C) > 95 (110 °C)

383



40% TETA
110 °C in air for 24 h
35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 3 h
70 °C in pure N2 for 2 h
∼90

130



40% TPTA
110 °C in air for 24 h
35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 3 h
70 °C in pure N2 for 2 h
∼20

130



45% EI-den
110 °C in air for 24 h
35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 3 h
70 °C in pure N2 for 2 h
∼90

130



45% PI-den
110 °C in air for 24 h
35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 3 h
70 °C in pure N2 for 2 h
∼50

130



50% Linear PEI (2500 g mol−1)
110 °C in air for 24 h
35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 18 h
110 °C in pure N2 for 2 h
>80

132



50% Linear PEI (25000 g mol−1)
110 °C in air for 24 h
35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 18 h
110 °C in pure N2 for 2 h
60–75

132



50% Linear PPI (700 g mol−1)
110 °C in air for 24 h
35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 18 h
110 °C in pure N2 for 2 h
∼35

132



50% Linear PPI (1000 g mol−1)
110 °C in air for 24 h
35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 18 h
110 °C in pure N2 for 2 h
∼35

132



50% Linear PPI (6700 g mol−1)
110 °C in air for 24 h
35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 18 h
110 °C in pure N2 for 2 h
<17

132



50% Linear PPI (36000 g mol−1)
110 °C in air for 24 h
35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 18 h
110 °C in pure N2 for 2 h
<17

132



40% Branched PEI
110 °C in air for 12 h
35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 12 h
110 °C in pure N2 for 3 h
60

118



30% Branched PPI made with HClO4
110 °C in air for 12 h
35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 12 h
110 °C in pure N2 for 3 h
17

118



30% Branched PPI made with HBr
110 °C in air for 12 h
35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 12 h
110 °C in pure N2 for 3 h
24

118



30% Branched PPI made with HCl
110 °C in air for 12 h
35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 12 h
110 °C in pure N2 for 3 h
31

118



30% Branched PPI made with CH3SO3H
110 °C in air for 12 h
35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 12 h
110 °C in pure N2 for 3 h
31

118



50% Branched PEI (Mw ∼800)
110 °C in air for 24 h
35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 18 h
110 °C in pure N2 for 2 h
90

119





Although TEPA is also a popular and inexpensive amine for amine-impregnated adsorbents, it suffers from unfavorable thermal stability and chemical stability compared with PEI and other polymer amines.105,381 The effects of oxidation duration time, treatment temperature, oxygen concentration, and TEPA loading on silica adsorbents were comprehensively studied by Yogo et al.396 It is interesting to note that after oxidative treatment at a moderately high temperature of 80 °C for 18 h, the oxidative resistance of samples increased when the TEPA loading increased from 30% to 60%. Under these treatment conditions, the oxidation rate depended on the rate of O2 diffusion into the amine molecules. The O2 diffusion rate decreased with increasing amine loading owing to the agglomeration of amine molecules in the pores of the mesoporous silica (Fig. 29). However, when the TEPA loading increased to 70%, the surface of the silica was almost completely covered by TEPA molecules. Therefore, O2 reacted more easily with amines, causing a decrease in oxidative resistance.
 Fig. 29  (a) Agglomeration of amine molecules in the pores and on the surface of silica with amine loadings in the range of 10–70 wt%. (b) Elemental content and CO2 uptake retention of sorbents after degradation in pure O2 at 100 °C over 18 h. (c) FTIR spectra of TEPA70/MF before and after exposure to O2/N2 at 100 °C for different durations (reproduced from ref. 396 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). 
When the oxidation temperature is lower than 100 °C, the slow rate of O2 diffusion into amine molecules leads to favorable oxidative stability of different TEPA loading adsorbents. According to the elemental analysis, the change in functional groups rather than the evaporation of amine molecules mainly caused the observed reduction in the CO2 capacity after the oxidation treatment. In addition, the results of gas chromatography revealed that 1-(2-aminoethyl)-4-[[(2-aminoethyl)amino]ethyl]piperazine showed higher oxidative stability than the other three main components of TEPA (1,4,7,10,13-pentaazatridecane, 4-(2-aminoethyl)-N-(2-aminoethyl)-N-[2-[(2-aminoethyl)amino]ethyl]-1,2-ethanediamine, and 1-[2-[[2-[(2-aminoethyl)amino]ethyl]amino]ethyl]-piperazine). However, the effects of oxygen on TEPA-functionalized adsorbents in DAC systems have been rarely reported.
3.3. Alternative supports
Porous cross-linked poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) was reported to support PEI for CO2 capture (15% CO2/air) by the Chuang group with enhanced degradation resistance compared to PEI/SiO2.397 After oxidative treatment by exposing PEI/SiO2 or PEI/PVA to 15% CO2/air at 130 °C, PEI/PVA exhibited higher oxidative degradation resistance than PEI/SiO2, owing to the formation of hydrogen bonds between hydroxyl (−OH) groups of PVA and secondary amines (–NH) of PEI. In contrast, it is harder for the SiO2 surface to interact with the secondary amines of PEI. The decreased intensity of –NH2/–NH at 3297 cm−1 in the IR absorption spectra compared to that of –NH2 at 3365 cm−1 on PEI/SiO2 strongly supports this conclusion (Fig. 30). However, hydrogen bonding is more likely to facilitate polymer chain entanglement between PEI and PVA, thus limiting the amine efficiency and CO2 capacity of PEI/PVA. In addition, most studies on the oxidative performance of amine-modified adsorbents for DAC are mainly based on the silica support SBA-15. Therefore, the effect of alternative supports on the oxidative stability of amine-modified adsorbents for DAC is a promising research topic.
 Fig. 30  (a) 3D color map of the IR spectra of adsorbed CO2 on (a) PEI/SiO2 and (b) PEI/PVA obtained only from the adsorption process of 12-cycle adsorption/degradation. Degraded species obtained following degradation at 130 °C and cooling to 40 °C on (c) PEI/SiO2 and (d) PEI/PVA. IR spectral intensities of the degraded species on (e) PEI/SiO2 at 1675 cm−1 (amide) and (f) PEI/PVA at 1660 cm−1 (urea) (reproduced from ref. 397 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017). 
3.4. Epoxidation of primary and secondary amines
To resolve the stability puzzle of PEI-modified adsorbents and further improve their oxidative resistance, Choi et al.388 first utilized 1,2-epoxybutane (EB) to suppress the oxidative degradation and urea formation of PEI (Fig. 31a) for post-combustion CO2 capture. Liquid-phase 13C NMR analysis suggested that functionalization with EB selectively converted primary amines to secondary amines as well as tertiary amines (Fig. 31b). After the oxidative treatment conducted in synthetic air (20% O2/N2) for 24 h, the PEI/SiO2 with EB showed enhanced oxidative stability. FTIR spectra suggest that no new infrared peak of the CO species appears on PEI/SiO2 with EB after oxidative aging (Fig. 31c).
 Fig. 31  (a) Schematic of the scalable synthesis of the CO2 adsorbent. (b) Amine state distributions of PEI and functionalized PEIs analyzed by 13C NMR. PEI was functionalized with EB, which generated tethered 2-hydroxybutyl groups. (c) FTIR spectra of the adsorbents that were measured after pre-treatment in synthetic air (20% O2 in N2) at 120 °C over 24 h in an in situ IR cell. Dashed lines indicate the spectra of the fresh samples, while solid lines indicate those of the pre-treated samples (reproduced from ref. 388 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016). 
The enhanced stability of PEI/SiO2 with EB might be attributed to the better primary:secondary:tertiary amine ratio in the EB-PEI/SiO2 compound or the formation of hydrogen bonds between the generated hydroxyl (–OH) groups (Fig. 32a).398 Furthermore, polymeric amines usually contain ppm-level metal impurities, such as Fe and Cu, which possibly catalyze amine oxidation.398 Adding a small amount of chelators (<2 wt%) into the silica support before the impregnation of PEI avoids the negative influence of metal impurities. After 30 day oxidative aging under 3% O2, 15% CO2, and 10% H2O in a N2 balance at 110 °C, EB-PEI/SiO2 with Na3PO4 (trisodium phosphate, TSP) still retained 91.5% of the initial capture capacity because of its lower polarity (Fig. 32a and b).398
 Fig. 32  (a) Retained CO2 working capacity (%) of PEI/SiO2 and EB-PEI/SiO2 prepared with and without 2 wt% TSP after aging under 3% O2, 15% CO2, 10% H2O, and 72% N2 at 110 °C. The trend lines were obtained by fitting the first-order deactivation model. (b) FTIR spectra of PEI/SiO2 without TSP and EB-PEI/SiO2 with 2 wt% TSP, before and after 30 days of aging (reproduced from ref. 398 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018). (c) First-order deactivation rate constants (indicated with bars) and predicted remaining CO2 adsorption capacity (in %) after 1 year contact with flue gas at 110 °C (indicated with solid lines) (reproduced from ref. 399 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021). 
The Choi group further investigated the amine-stabilization effects of monocationic phosphate salts containing cations of different charge densities, such as Li+, Na+, tetramethylammonium (TMA+), and tetraethylammonium (TEA+).399 According to the long-term oxidative stability test (Fig. 32c), the adsorbent with organophilic TEAH2PO4 showed the highest stability with a very minor decrease in CO2 capacity (<3.5%) even after 1 month of aging in O2-containing flue gas (15% CO2, 3% O2, and 10% H2O in N2 balance) at 110 °C. Organophilic phosphates are believed to be better dispersed and loosely associated with the ion pair within organic amine polymers, which is beneficial for binding with metal impurities (Fe and Cu).
Although supported TEPA and PEHA usually exhibit high CO2 capture capacity and low manufacturing cost, they always encounter vitalization and leaching problems owing to their low molecular weight, and therefore suffer from stability problems. Goeppert et al.131 proposed the modification of low molecular weight amines, such as TEPA and PEHA, with the epoxide of propylene oxide (PO). The reaction between the modified low molecular weight amines and PO during the synthesis process is shown in Fig. 33a, and the intramolecular addition of OH groups can be observed. After 20 hour treatment in air, the PO-modified TEPA- and PEHA-based silicas exhibited excellent oxidative resistance compared to adsorbents without PO modification.
 Fig. 33  (a) Examples of reaction products of PEHA with two molar equivalents of PO (reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2019). (b) Schematic of the preparation process of PG–TEPA–PO (reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020). 
In addition, Guo et al.169 reported epoxide functionalization of grafted TEPA on the framework of an acrylate copolymer (PG-TEPA-PO) with improved oxidative degradation resistance (Fig. 33b). Epoxide functionalization adjusted the ratio of primary, secondary, and tertiary amines, which contributed to the improved anti-oxidation performance, although it was inevitable to sacrifice the adsorption capacity to some degree.
Epoxidation improved the oxidative stability by sacrificing some uptakes for CO2 capture from flue gas. However, the effect of epoxidation on the performance of adsorbents for DAC remains unknown. Thus, achieving a balance between decreased CO2 uptake and enhanced oxidative stress via epoxide introduction for DAC will be an interesting research topic.
3.5. Additive incorporation
Chuang et al.380,381,387,397 also attempted to improve the performance of supported TEPA (TEPA/SiO2), especially in terms of oxidative stability, by modifying TEPA with PEG. Comprehensive spectroscopic investigations were carried out to identify the mechanism of the enhanced oxidative resistance by PEG during the 12 hour treatment under air flow at 100 °C. The authors proposed that the hydrogen bonds, which were formed by the OH groups from PEG interacting with the NH2/NH of TEPA, are beneficial for the dispersion of TEPA on SiO2 and block O2 from accessing TEPA for oxidation.
To the best of our knowledge, most recent studies have focused on the effect of additives on improving the oxidative resistance of adsorbents under high CO2 concentration conditions, and there are few reports on DAC conditions. Given that the performance of amine-functionalized adsorbents after oxidation under fuel gas and DAC conditions is varied,118,133 the effect of additives on the oxidative stability of adsorbents to capture CO2 at ultralow concentrations requires further comprehensive investigation.
4. Cooperative adsorption of H2O and CO2
Porous solid sorbents not only capture CO2 selectively but also adsorb significant amounts of H2O from air. Because ambient air contains more H2O than CO2, the co-adsorption of H2O and CO2 is non-negligible. H2O may promote or inhibit the CO2 capture ability depending on the type of adsorbent and may even affect the long-term stability of the adsorbents. The co-adsorption of H2O also leads to an increase in energy consumption for regeneration.136,400 Consequently, understanding the effect of H2O on CO2 adsorption and exploring the co-adsorption mechanism of H2O and CO2 are critical for the screening of adsorption materials, design of adsorption cycles, and optimization of the DAC system.
Over the past several years, much research has been conducted on the effects of H2O co-adsorption on amine-functionalized sorbents. Previous studies have indicated that H2O affects the adsorption of CO2, but the presence of CO2 does not significantly affect the adsorption of H2O.112,278,400,563 While several studies on the development of new adsorbent materials have explored their adsorption properties in the presence of H2O, little is known about the detailed mechanism of the interaction between H2O and CO2.
In an early study, Gebald et al.278 explored the single and binary CO2/H2O adsorption of amine-functionalized NFC under DAC conditions, modeled the adsorption isotherm, and calculated the corresponding adsorption heats. However, the total mass loss in the TGA caused by the desorption of H2O or CO2 was indistinguishable. To determine the influence of H2O and CO2, Smal et al.401 proposed a method based on a coupled TG-FTIR analysis system to characterize the adsorption capacity of adsorbents for H2O and CO2. Such a simple method can be used for preliminary comparison and screening of laboratory-scale adsorbents (10–20 mg).
In terms of adsorbent materials, Madden et al.402 evaluated the CO2 capture capacity of ten physical sorbents, including four hybrid ultramicroporous materials, five MOFs, and an ultramicroporous MOF. They found that the presence of H2O inhibited the adsorption performance of the physical sorbents, which could be alleviated by controlling the pore size and pore chemistry. In contrast, the presence of H2O leads to the enhanced CO2 adsorption performance of amine-functionalized adsorbents.112,117,187 In addition, Kwon et al.112 investigated the effect of H2O on the CO2 adsorption of aminopolymer-impregnated hierarchical silica adsorbent and found that the CO2 adsorption capacity increased with increasing adsorption temperature under dry conditions and decreased with increasing adsorption temperature under wet conditions. They explained that the presence of H2O alleviated the kinetic constraints of the aminopolymer sediments. Sujan et al.187 reported that the presence of H2O increased the pseudoequilibrium CO2 capacity of a PEI-CA-SiO2 fiber adsorbent from 0.59 mmol gfiber−1 under dry conditions to 1.6 mmol gfiber−1 under humid conditions at 35 °C. The CO2 breakthrough and equilibrium capacities remained largely unchanged after multiple humid breakthrough cycles. The authors demonstrated that the presence of H2O leads to the release of additional free amine groups, resulting in the formation of more carbamate ions and bicarbonates. Kumar et al.117 measured the adsorption properties of 60 wt% alkyl–aryl polyamine impregnated SBA-15 under dry and 30% relative humidity conditions and found that the equilibrium CO2 capacity increased from 1.6 mmol gSiO2−1 to 2.9 mmol gSiO2−1, which was equivalent to an 81% increase.
The various effects of moisture on the adsorption performance of amine-functionalized materials under different temperature conditions and moisture levels may suggest a change in the binding force of CO2 to the amine sites or the generation of new species.139 Recent work discussed the methods to investigate the effect of H2O on CO2 adsorption, including thermogravimetric analysis, the dynamic column-breakthrough technique, and static multicomponent equilibrium adsorption.104 The effects of H2O on CO2 adsorption of various materials, such as physical adsorbents, amine-functionalized adsorbents, and reactive adsorbents, were comprehensively summarized. On this basis, Bitan Ray et al.403 reviewed the materials and innovative strategies for capturing CO2 under humid conditions and concluded that the stability and CO2 adsorption capacity of materials could be improved by adjusting their overall properties, such as hydrophobicity, porosity, and amine modifications.
Qualitative analysis of the influence of H2O is not sufficient for the optimization of the DAC process and reduces energy consumption. As mentioned earlier, most studies have shown that H2O can increase the equilibrium adsorption capacity of amine-functionalized sorbents to CO2. However, mathematical descriptions of the enhanced CO2 and H2O co-adsorption are poorly understood, leading to inaccurate modeling. In the past five years, quantitative studies have been conducted on the co-adsorption of H2O and CO2 from molecular models,404 adsorption equilibrium,140,180,278,405,406 and adsorption kinetics.138,407 Buijs et al.404 studied the molecular modeling of Lewatit R VP OC 1065 and concluded that carbamic acid is mainly formed by amine or amine–H2O catalytic reactions in the presence of CO2 and H2O. Wurzbacher et al.406 used a temperature-dependent Toth model to describe the CO2 adsorption isotherm under dry conditions and combined it with an enhancement factor to express the effect of humidity. Nevertheless, this enhancement factor was obtained through four measurements of bilinear interpolation; therefore, this model cannot accurately describe the co-adsorption of H2O and CO2. Similarly, Stampi-Bombelli et al.180 described the adsorption equilibrium on NFC by proposing empirical adjustments to the pure Toth model and introducing two parameters describing the adsorption equilibrium based on Wurzbacher's model. In contrast to most of the previous studies being empirical models, Young et al.140,405 recently developed two novel approaches to modeling the co-adsorption of CO2 and H2O onto chemical adsorbents: the mechanistic co-adsorption model and weighted-average dual-site Toth (WADST) co-adsorption model, and accurately predicted the co-adsorption performance on the Lewatit R VP OC 1065 (Fig. 34). The former considers the variation in amine efficiency, change in adsorption heat, and effect of amine site blocking by adsorbed H2O molecules, while the latter is a more general empirical model.
 Fig. 34  (a–c) Three governing mechanisms: (a) species that adsorb CO2 as on amine-functionalized sorbents in the absence of water, including ammonium carbamate and paired carbamic acid; (b) additional species that adsorb CO2 as on amine-functionalized sorbents in the presence of water, including ammonium bicarbonate and water-stabilized carbamic acid; and (c) hydrogen bonding between water and the supported amine groups. (d) Experimental CO2 adsorption isotherms (markers), at various temperatures (T) and relative humidities (RH), fitted to an empirical literature co-adsorption model.140 
Amine-functionalized solid adsorbents require additional energy consumption during regeneration to desorb H2O and separate it from CO2via condensation. Therefore, the DAC system design requires a detailed understanding of both the co-adsorption equilibrium and the kinetics of CO2 and H2O to determine the parameters driving the process under the given conditions. Although these data can be acquired using packed-beds, TGA systems, and volumetric adsorption systems, Ng et al.138 suggested that measurements of the co-adsorption kinetics of CO2 and H2O are influenced by external heat and mass transfer effects. Therefore, they developed a closed-loop experimental setup to investigate the co-adsorption kinetics of amine-functionalized NFC under DAC conditions without external heat and mass transfer interference using a gas-mixing tank and a differential sorbent bed placed outside it. Later, Elfving et al.407 proposed a kinetic model for CO2 adsorption from air using amine-functionalized resins under dry and humid conditions, which is based on a different CO2 adsorption mechanism from other amine-functionalized adsorbents. Their work filled the gaps between mechanistic theory and kinetic data of the co-adsorption of CO2 and H2O on amine-functionalized sorbents.
Studies have also been conducted on the effect of co-adsorption on energy consumption and economic analysis of the entire DAC process. The pioneering DAC process modeling work conducted by Sinha et al.64 considered contactors coated with two amine-based adsorbents which were operated using steam as the stripping agent. Additional analysis is required to consider the co-adsorption of H2O and CO2. Subsequent researchers considered co-adsorption in the design of the DAC process, demonstrated the feasibility of steam purging for solid amine adsorbents, and quantitatively determined the effect of co-adsorption of H2O and CO2 on the working capacity and energy demand.137,182 These studies confirmed that co-adsorbed H2O would increase the working capacity of CO2 and reduce the energy demand for desorption. Wijesiri et al.141 further demonstrated that the steam-assisted process resulted in superior CO2 adsorption/desorption kinetics. Compared to the average desorption rate of 0.23 mmol g−1 h−1 of the conventional DAC process under the same conditions, the fastest average desorption rate of the steam-assisted process could reach 3.75 mmol g−1 h−1.
Despite the first attempt to predict the co-adsorption performance of Lewatit R VP OC 1065 for DAC using mechanistic models,140 the universal applicability of accurate co-adsorption models to other types of amine-functionalized adsorbents has not yet been verified. Material development in the area of DAC is very fast; therefore, it is urgent to screen the co-adsorption properties of H2O and CO2 on new amine-functionalized materials with more efficient experimental and simulation tools.
5. Mechanistic study
Although solid amines have been widely recognized as promising DAC adsorbents with significant CO2 capture capacity and selectivity, their CO2 adsorption mechanisms remain unclear. Recent studies have provided new evidence for the unexplained existence of adsorbed CO2 species on amines. FTIR spectroscopy is a leading tool for elucidating the pathway of CO2 adsorption by evaluating the intensity variations of the amine and product. Zhai et al.143 conducted a series of in situ FTIR studies on TEPA/SiO2, concluding that ammonium carbamate preferentially forms on primary amines through the proton migration of zwitterions, followed by carbamic acid formation on the secondary amines (Fig. 35). The former adsorbed species exhibited higher bond energy and tended to constitute a hydrogen-bonded network. High CO2 concentrations are required to overcome such diffusion barriers for further access of CO2 to the amine sites. The authors also suggested that CO2 from air (400 ppm) could compete with H2O (0.5%) for adsorption on amines. However, results from DFT calculations suspect the existence of zwitterions on solid amines.408 Proton transfer/exchange is more likely accomplished through a six-membered mechanism assisted by a Brønsted base.
 Fig. 35  CO2 adsorption pathway on supported TEPA (Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2017). 
Several groups have reported the detection of ammonium bicarbonate on solid amines upon reaction with CO2 in the presence of H2O; however, they commonly assign inconsistent infrared bands to the bicarbonate. This leads to some doubt regarding the existence of bicarbonate.409–411 Solid-state NMR is a powerful alternative for species identification. Many researchers have observed 13C resonances at around 160–161 and 164–165 ppm upon CO2 adsorption, indicating the formation of carbamic acid and carbamate, respectively.153,412–414 These species were identified on grafted primary amines via15N NMR at 88 ppm.415 In fact, 29Si NMR has also been applied to accurately determine the amine loadings.122,280 Unfortunately, NMR is challenging for bicarbonate identification, partly because the bicarbonate resonance is sensitive to the environment416 and is sometimes even shielded by other product resonances.417 Interestingly, when shifting the 13C NMR sequence from the routine CPMAS to MAS Bloch decay, a bicarbonate resonance at 163 ppm was clearly observed on both DMAPS-and APS-grafted mesoporous silica (Fig. 36).145 Further experiments suggested that the bicarbonate signal on CPMAS could only be detected at very low temperatures after arresting its dynamic motion due to the surrounding water. These findings demonstrated the possibility of inadvertently missing CO2 chemisorption products using the most frequently employed experiments.
 Fig. 36  
In situ
13C NMR spectra suggesting “missing” bicarbonate groups (reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). 
The nature of the surface carbonaceous species also depends on the amine type. In situ FTIR spectroscopy with the aid of isotope labeling suggested that both monomeric and dimeric carbamic acids appeared on the secondary amine, while only monocarbamic acid formed on the primary amine (Fig. 37).418 These carbamic acids were stabilized by different surface groups due to the steric hindrance by additional alkyl chains. 13CO2 experiments also revealed two carbamate species on primary amines, and only one was detected on secondary amines. Additionally, bicarbonate can be formed on all three types of amines but it is difficult to observe it on primary and secondary amines.265,281 Afonso et al.142 provided molecular-level understanding of all possible CO2 adsorbed species on aminosilica surfaces by combining NMR experimental evidence and DFT modeling. Their theoretical calculations support the formation of bicarbonate under wet conditions, although carbamic acid with a Gibbs energy 12 kJ mol−1 higher was favored in some samples. The presence of surface-bonded carbamate and ditethered carbamic acid, postulated from spectroscopic observations, was thermodynamically unfavorable. Overall, ammonium carbamate and carbamic acid with various conformations were the predominant CO2 species under the DAC conditions. The same group also extended the discussion on moisture-induced CO2 chemisorption, suggesting that the energetically stable CO2 adsorbed species on the primary and tertiary amines were different.144
 Fig. 37  Formation of CO2-adsorbing species on primary, secondary, and tertiary amines (reproduced from ref. 418 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017). 
Buijs et al.146,147,404,419 conducted a series of molecular modeling studies to elucidate the preferred CO2 adsorption mode and deactivation mechanism on a commercial adsorbent, Lewatit R VP OC 1065, with benzyl amine groups. They suggested that carbamic acid predominantly forms in the presence of CO2 and H2O through amine or amine–H2O catalytic reactions (Fig. 38a and b).404 This conclusion was supported by CO2 adsorption isotherms, which could be described well by the dual-site Langmuir model. One detrimental effect on the application of Lewatit R VP OC 1065 is the deactivation caused by either the presence of O2 at 80 °C or CO2 at 120 °C.394 A three-step process was then proposed to explain the CO2-induced deactivation (Fig. 38c).146 At high CO2 partial pressures and temperatures, carbamic acid was formed through a self-catalyzed reaction. Carbamic acid then decomposed to an isocyanate intermediate with an activation barrier of 144.4 kJ mol−1. Finally, the highly reactive isocyanate transformed into an irreversible urea species after coupling with another amine group. Oxidative degradation of Lewatit R VP OC 1065 was initiated with the formation of α-amino-benzyl hydroperoxides, followed by its decomposition to the corresponding amide and half-aminal (Fig. 38d).147 The half-aminal was further predominantly solvolyzed to an aldehyde. The thermal decomposition of hydroperoxides caused a loss of CO2 capacity because the yield sites could not capture CO2. Recently, Buijs also demonstrated the decisive role of the structure of solid amines in the CO2 capture mechanism, indicating that carbonic acid might also be the main form of linear PEI.419
 Fig. 38  Formation of carbamic acid in the presence of CO2 and H2O through (a) amine–H2O catalytic reactions and (b) amine catalytic reactions (reproduced from ref. 404 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017). (c) Formation of an isocyanate intermediate (reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). (d) Aminolysis of the half-aminals (reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). 
Despite the straightforward involvement of species such as carbamic acid, ammonium carbamate, and/or bicarbonate, the CO2 interaction mechanisms with amines under ultradilute conditions are still not fully understood. Specifically, this needs further investigation on the role of hydrogen bonding as a CO2 binder in reducing the energy barriers and enhancing the stability of products, the effect of the densities and types of surface amines on CO2 adsorbed species and capacity, the inconsistency of real amine efficiency to the theoretical value, the difference in CO2 capacity enhancement upon exposure to H2O, and the formation pathway of CO2 adsorbed species on amines with complicated structures and orientations. Recent advances have illustrated that integrating in situ spectroscopy and theoretical calculations is an effective approach to unravel the nature of adsorbed CO2.
6. Novel amine-functionalized adsorbents
6.1. Diamine-tethered metal–organic frameworks
M2(dobpdc) (M = Mg, Mn, Fe, Co, Zn; dobpdc4− = 4,4-dioxido-3,3-biphenyldicarboxylate), a new family of isostructural MOFs with large pore size and a high density of open metal sites, have attracted significant attention for amine functionalization. The amine-tethered M2(dobpdc) demonstrated superior CO2 capture performance to those of most other solid sorbents under DAC conditions.420 In particular, they showed high CO2 selectivity even under humid conditions and received significant attention after the mmen-Mg2(dobpdc) (mmen = N,N′-dimethylethylenediamine, containing two secondary amines) displayed an exceptional CO2 capacity (2.0 mmol g−1 @ 0.39 mbar, 25 °C).421 In a later work, en-Mg2(dobpdc) (en = ethylenediamine, containing two primary amines) was found to exhibit an even higher capacity (2.83 mmol g−1 @ 0.39 mbar, 25 °C).422
Unlike conventional Langmuir-type adsorption, amine-tethered M2(dobpdc) behave as ‘phase-change’ adsorbents, with unusual step-shaped CO2 adsorption isotherms which shift markedly with temperature and pressure. Because of a cooperative insertion mechanism,423 which can be represented as CO2 inserts into each metal–amine bond to form ion-paired ammonium carbamate chains that propagate vertically with the pore wall of the frameworks, large working capacities are achieved under small temperature swings. Moreover, their adsorption step position can be tuned by varying the amine,422–425 metal ion,423 and organic linker.425,426 Recent work on diamine-tethered MOFs mainly focused on the adjustment of material properties and the enhancement of the cooperative mechanism, especially under humid conditions. Such novel adsorbents have also been tested in fixed bed-based CO2 separation systems coupled with heat recovery, and their scale-up utilization can be less costly than a state-of-the-art MEA capture system.427

6.1.1 Enhancement of cooperative adsorption. 
For a comprehensive synthetic strategy to adjust CO2 capture capabilities, cumulative datasets are required. Hong et al.428 provided a systematic and comprehensive investigation of three tethered amine primary diamines (en = ethylenediamine, men = 1-methylethylenediamine, and den = 1,1-dimethylethylenediamine). The step pressure was affected by the temperature and showed a decreasing trend with increasing bulkiness of the side groups, which was also observed in later work.153
Long et al.150 studied nine diamines (1°/2°-, 1°/3°-, and 2°/2°-alkylethylenediamines, 1°, 2°, 3° represent primary, secondary, and tertiary amines, respectively) and found that small change in the diamine structure can shift the step pressure for cooperative CO2 adsorption by over four orders of magnitude at a given temperature. They concluded that the steric bulk on the metal-bound amine leads to lower step pressures by destabilizing the diamine-bound phase, while substituents added to the terminal amine cause higher step pressures due to weaker ion-pairing interactions within the ammonium carbamate chains. The 1°/2°-alkylethylenediamine appended variants of Mg2(dobpdc) were more appropriate for CO2 capture from dilute gas (40 mbar), giving improved thermal stabilities, lower step pressures, and minimal hysteresis upon CO2 desorption. In addition to mmen-Mg2(dobpdc), e-2-e-Mg2(dobpdc) (e = ethyl, 2 = the number of carbons on the alkyl bridge connecting the amines) was also investigated for DAC recently.150 Unfortunately, a greater temperature range is required to utilize the full adsorption capacity owing to its two-stage isothermal adsorption line. Two-step CO2 adsorption/desorption profiles are formed as the substituents on the terminal amine grow (Fig. 39a–c), which occurs because diamines bearing large alkyl groups impede the stabilization of adjacent ammonium carbamate chains in Mg2(dobpdc).429
 Fig. 39  CO2 adsorption isotherms of diamine-functionalized Mg2(dobpdc) – (a) nmen (N-methyl ethylenediamine), (b) een (N-ethyl ethylenediamine), and (c) ipen (N-isopropyl ethylenediamine) – in the range of 40–150 °C (reproduced from ref. 429 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2018). CO2 uptake using tetraamine-Mg2(dobpdc): (d) pure CO2 adsorbed isobars at 1 bar. Dashed lines indicate the theoretical adsorption of one or two CO2 molecules per tetraamine. (e) Thermogravimetric adsorption isobar for (3-4-3)-Mg2(dobpdc) under 400 ppm CO2 at a temperature ramp rate of 0.1 °C min−1. (f) Tetraamines and their abbreviations (reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2020). 
In practical applications, the working capacity of CO2 adsorbents and low-pressure adsorption amounts affected by step pressure are more important than the absolute CO2 adsorption amount. The working capacity of eight diamine-Mg2(dobpdc) materials was measured using the TSA protocol from the difference between the adsorption amounts at Tads (adsorption temperature) and Tdes (desorption temperature).429 It was found that the working capacity at Tads = 40 °C is correlated with the number of alkyl substituents and alkyl chain length. The thermodynamics of CO2 adsorption by chiral-diamine-appended Mg2(dobpdc) has also been studied, and it is affected by enantioselective interactions between the ammonium carbamate chains and the chiral channels of the framework.151 Besides the working capacity, another consideration about diamine-Mg2(dobpdc) should be the “shock wave” breakthrough behavior caused by the stepped CO2 isotherms.195
Alcoholamine- and alkoxyalkylamine-functionalized variants of Mg2(dobpdc) are new framework materials capable of cooperative CO2 chemisorption, and they are cheaper than diamine-appended MOFs.154 Similar to diamine–Mg2(dobpdc) materials, their substituents affect the step temperatures and pressures. For alcoholamine–Mg2(dobpdc), longer amine alkyl chains generally lead to an increase in the adsorption threshold temperature or a decrease in the adsorption threshold pressure.
A family of robust tetraamine-functionalized frameworks that retain cooperativity was also reported by Long et al.148 for CO2 capture, inspired by the idea that tetraamines could bridge nearest-neighbor metals across the pore with chain lengths of the order of two N-alkylethylenediamines. The frameworks (except for (3-3-3)-Mg2(dobpdc)) exhibited two-step adsorption profiles, with each step corresponding to half of the theoretical capacity of two CO2 molecules per tetraamine (Fig. 39d). (3-4-3)-Mg2(dobpdc) displayed a high CO2 capacity of approximately 2.0 mmol g−1 at 0.40 mbar and 25 °C (Fig. 39e), indicating that these tetraamine-Mg2(dobpdc) materials are also suitable for DAC. Because the size of the alkyl group on the secondary amine increases and affords enhanced stability,156 these materials can overcome the limitation of diamine volatilization upon regeneration in practical capture processes and enable CO2 desorption with inexpensive steam. Overall, changing tethered-amines is an important route for designing suitable appended MOFs for CO2 capture in various applications with different stepped pressures.
Metal ions and organic parts are one of the non-negligible factors in amine-functionalized MOFs. The step pressure of mmen-M2(dobpdc) shifts following the order of metal–amine bond strength Mg < Mn < Fe < Zn < Co when cooperative adsorption occurs, while mmen-Ni2(dobpdc) only shows normal Langmuir-type adsorption.423 This trend can also be observed in other alkylethylenediamine-appended variants, indirectly proving the formation of ammonium carbamate chains.153 For alcoholamine-M2(dobpdc) (M = Mg, Mn, Co, Zn, and Ni), only the variants of M2+ = Mg exhibit step-like CO2 adsorption characteristics. Changing the M2+ type to tailor the CO2 capture performance is limited considering the cost and range of metals which can be used in the synthesis.154 Mg-Based diamine-appended MOFs have obvious advantages in CO2 adsorption because of the low cost of metal precursor salts, high adsorption capacities, and low step pressures.
The organic components can alter the CO2 adsorption properties of the functionalized MOFs by changing the pore characteristics. In fact, en-Mg2(dobdc) [Mg-MOF-74, dobdc = 2,5-dioxido-1,4-benzenedicarboxylate] was previously used to capture CO2 from simulated ambient air (∼1.5 mmol g−1 @ 0.40 mbar, 25 °C).426 The Mg2(dobdc) channel is too narrow (∼11 Å wide) to accommodate the larger amine appended. A later study applied a smaller diamine molecule (N2H4) and achieved a record capacity for DAC (3.89 mmol g−1 @ 0.40 mbar, 25 °C).425 However, N2H4 is highly toxic that is not possible to be applied for DAC. In comparison, M2(dobpdc) with a wider channel of 18.4 Å is more suitable for amine tethering.421
While bulky secondary amine appended Mg2(dobpdc) exhibit unpromising multi-stepped adsorption, a recent study confirmed that the isoreticularly expanded framework Mg2(dotpdc) (dotpdc4− = 4,4′′-dioxido-[1,1′:4′,1′′-terphenyl]-3,3′′-dicarboxylate) and Mg2(pc-dobpdc) (pc-dobpdc4− = 3,3′-dioxidobiphenyl-4,4′-dicarboxylate) can achieve a single CO2 adsorption/desorption step in all cases (Fig. 40a–c).156 Such a change is due to the minimization of the steric interactions between ammonium carbamate chains induced by the asymmetrical hexagonal pores of Mg2(dobpdc). The isobar of dmen-Mg2(dobpdc) features approximately half of the theoretical adsorption capacity at 30 °C. By extending the organic linker, the dmen-Mg2(pc-dobpdc) can avoid the half-capacity trap (Fig. 40d).430
 Fig. 40  CO2 adsorption isobars obtained for (a) Mg2(dobpdc), (b) Mg2(pc-dobpdc) and (c) Mg2(dotpdc) functionalized with a series of primary- and secondary-alkylethylenediamine-appended variants under pure CO2. (d) Adsorption and desorption data for Mg2(dobpdc) and Mg2(pc-dobpdc) functionalized with dmen, indicated with solid and dashed lines, respectively. Gray and black dashed lines indicate half- and full-capacities (4.0 mmol g−1), respectively. Arrows point in the direction of temperature change. (e) Single-crystal X-ray diffraction structures of Zn2(dobpdc)(DMA)2 (DMA = N,N-dimethylacetamide) (top) and Zn2(pc-dobpdc)(DMA)2 (bottom) collected at 100 K (note: the structures of the magnesium-based materials are similar). (f) Model of the hexagonal pore of Mg2(dotpdc) (right). The structures of the ligands are included for comparison. Light blue, green, gray, red, dark blue, and white spheres correspond to Zn, Mg, C, O, N, and H, respectively156 (reproduced from ref. 430 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021). 
The synthesis method also significantly affects the properties of amine-tethered MOFs. The general method involves activating MOFs by heating to remove coordinated solvent molecules and to generate open metal sites.431 The MOF with coordinatively unsaturated metal sites is then soaked in non-coordinating solvents, such as dry toluene, together with desirable amines.432 Functionalization with diamines in the open metal sites can be conducted using different methods, such as stirring or standing for a long time and subsequent drying. Recently, Hong et al.428 demonstrated that combining sonication and microwave irradiation is a more efficient method that facilitates the diffusion of diamines into the pores, compared with methods of stirring for 18 h, refluxing for 3 h, sonication for 3 h, or irradiation in a microwave reactor at 90 °C for 3 h.
They also developed a simple and facile method to stabilize and reinforce amine-tethered MOF adsorbents under wet conditions by placing MOFs and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) in a sealed tube followed by heating at 235 °C for 6 h.157 The PDMS-coated epn-Mg2(dobpdc) (epn = 1-ethylpropane-1,3-diamine) material presented unprecedented and desirable performances to capture CO2 from indoor air (∼2.3 mmol g−1 @ 1 mbar, up to 98% RH).188 In addition, MOF spheres with diameters of 2–3 mm prepared using a hydrophobic polymer binder, PVDF (poly(vinylidene fluoride)), and functionalized with epn follow the same CO2 insertion mechanism, showing one-month stability at 25 °C at 60% RH.433
A deeper understanding of the unprecedented cooperative adsorption mechanism of mmen-M2(dobpdc) was first reported by McDonald et al.423 in 2015. The mechanisms of diamine-M2(dobpdc) materials such as the dmen-M2(dobpdc) series434 and mmen-M2(dobpdc) series435 were investigated using more advanced experimental and simulation tools such as van der Waals (vdW)-corrected density functional theory calculations, single-crystal X-ray diffraction experiments, and quantum chemical methods. The preferred reaction pathway was divided into two steps, where the first step was the rate-determining step. For the cooperative adsorption mechanism of most diamine-appended M2(dobpdc), each metal atom of M2(dobpdc) forms an M–N bond with one amine of the diamine, and the other amine is free as a Lewis base. The CO2 molecule attaches to the free amine and inserts into metal–amine bonds with the help of an adjacent diamine nucleophilic attack to form M–O bonds and C–N bonds, forming the chains of ion-paired ammonium carbamate along the framework channels (Fig. 41a). Such a reaction path indicates that one diamine takes up to one CO2 molecule, and the insertion behavior results in a sudden rise in CO2 capacity upon changing the pressure and temperature.
 Fig. 41  (a) General structures of alkylethylenediamine-appended variants of M2(dobpdc) (reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017). (b) Lewis structure with a 1:1 ratio of ammonium carbamate and carbamic acid for the proposed mixed-chemisorption on dmpn-Mg2(dobpdc) (reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). (c) Structural model of the CO2 adsorption mechanism for Mg2(dobpdc) functionalized with e-2-OH (top) and 3-methoxypropylamine (bottom) (reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2020). (d) Predicted adsorption mechanism obtained from structural relaxations based on vdW-corrected DFT. Green, dark blue, red, gray, and white spheres represent Mg, N, O, C, and H, respectively (reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2020). 
Recently, Milner et al.153 performed 13C nuclear NMR and X-ray diffraction and suggested that the CO2 absorption mechanism of dmpn-Mg2(dobpdc) was more complicated as expected. The formation of carbamate acid pairs in the first experimental verification could compete with ammonium carbamate to form chains. Subsequently, Forse et al.149 proposed a new mixed chemisorption mechanism of dmpn-Mg2(dobpdc) according to the NMR and DFT results (Fig. 41b). In the presence of CO2, dmpn-Mg2(dobpdc) displayed a structure of ammonium carbamate and carbamate acid in a molar ratio of 1:1. The ammonium carbamate and carbamate acid chains propagate along the c-axis. Hydrogen bonds exist not only on the ammonium carbamate chain but also between the hydrogen in carbamate acid and the unbound oxygen atoms in the adjacent carbamate.
In addition, two new cooperative CO2 chemisorption mechanisms were found for alcoholamine- and alkoxyalkylamine-functionalized Mg2(dobpdc) according to the NMR data (Fig. 41c).154 The main feature of the new mechanisms is the insertion of CO2 molecules into covalent bonds formed by O in the amine and metal in the frameworks.

In situ IR and solid-state NMR spectroscopies verified a two-step adsorption mechanism in tetramine-Mg2(dobpdc), which is different from adsorption due to steric conflicts between neighboring ammonium carbamate chains (Fig. 41d).148 The initial chemical adsorption of CO2 was assumed to occur at one amine tethered on Mg atoms, generating ammonium carbamate running along a vertex of the hexagonal channel. The other unreacted binding amine forms a second group of ammonium carbamate chains. Such a unique structure, in which one tetramine is bridged by two metal sites, greatly enhances the stability under steam regeneration conditions.
The kinetic analysis of diamine-Mg2(dobpdc) is necessary for practical applications. Martell et al.436 systematically investigated the CO2 adsorption kinetics of diamine–Mg2(dobpdc) variants under different operating conditions. Most of them exhibited faster adsorption kinetics and shorter induction periods at lower temperatures, contrary to Arrhenius behavior. Because of the unique cooperative CO2 chemisorption mechanisms of diamine–Mg2(dobpdc), an unusual induction period occurred from the time of CO2 injection to the time of the maximum uptake rate. The induction period of adsorbents leads to undesirable breakthrough curves in fixed bed experiments.195 Hughes et al.427 established for the first time a mathematical kinetic model of dmpn-Mg2(dobpdc) by considering a modified weighted dual-site Langmuir isotherm model and a dual-site Sips isotherm model without the presence of water. They confirmed that dmpn-Mg2(dobpdc) exhibits better adsorption kinetics at low temperatures. While diamine-Mg2(dobpdc) works well for flue gas, more studies on the adsorption kinetics of various appended amines under ultradilute conditions are still needed.


6.1.2. Effects of water. 
A series of studies have shown that amine-functionalized MOFs can improve water stability compared to bare MOFs.423,424 Besides, an early study found that MOFs functionalized with alkylamines, especially mmen–Mg2(dobpdc) frameworks, can also maintain a significant CO2 capacity and minimal H2O adsorption under simulated coal flue gas conditions.420 Recently, Darunte et al.189 found that mmen-Mg2(dobpdc) showed higher stability and lower water adsorption at a relative humidity of up to 40% than mmen-Mn2(dobpdc). However, the adsorbents exhibited varying degrees of loss in specific surface areas with preserved crystallinity. Siegelman et al.150 showed that although the step pressure of the 1°/3° diamine-Mg2(dobpdc) is relatively high, it adsorbed less water compared with the frame functionalized with 2°/2° and 1°/2° diamines.
However, both studies only involved one-component adsorption. In practical applications, it is necessary to investigate the effects of water under multicomponent conditions. Notably, recent studies on amine-Mg2(dobpdc) frameworks have shown that H2O enhances the carbamate insertion mechanism as a promoter.148,152,153,156 Milner et al.153 performed multicomponent measurements of CO2 adsorption by bubbling the incident gas stream through water to study the ability of dmpn-Mg2(dobpdc) in the presence of water. The adsorbent maintained a high diamine loading of 97% after 1000 adsorption cycles. The cycling stability of the 1°/2° alkylethylenediamine-appended MOF variants under wet conditions was also studied (Fig. 42). It was found that the water co-adsorption was minimal at temperatures above 60 °C, indicating that the water co-adsorption could be minimized in the humid flows at higher temperatures.152,156 Adding large alkyl groups in the pores of MOFs is another potential strategy to minimize water co-adsorption.156
 Fig. 42  (a) Adsorption isobars for a series of alkylethylenediamine-appended variants of Mg2(dobpdc). (b) Summary of the adsorption capacities at 40 °C for amine-functionalized Mg2(dobpdc), Mg2(dotpdc), and Mg2(pc-dobpdc). Dry CO2 (green), humid CO2 (blue), and humid N2 (purple).156 
However, TGA testing can just be used to identify the adsorbed amounts without the adsorbed species. Forse et al.149 investigated the effects of water on CO2 chemisorption using magic-angle spinning (MAS) NMR experiments and concluded that the major chemisorption products of dmpn-Mg2(dobpdc) are at least two different ammonium carbamate conformations under wet conditions. This result is different from those obtained under dry conditions, supporting that ammonium carbamate formation is more favorable in the presence of water.415,437 A vdW-corrected DFT study by Lee et al.155 indicated that CO2 insertion to form an O-bound carbamate in mmen–M2(dobpdc) is much more favorable than binding H2O at the open metal site of the corresponding bare M2(dobpdc) frameworks. This finding is consistent with experimental observations that these materials can selectively adsorb CO2 under humid conditions. Later, Siegelman et al.152 characterized the effect of water on the behavior of 2-ampd-Mg2(dobpdc) (2-ampd = cyclic diamine 2-(aminomethyl)piperidine) and predicted its structure and energetics. The DFT-calculated binding energy of CO2 in the co-adsorbed structure was larger than that of H2O, indicating that H2O desorbs before CO2 (Fig. 43).
 Fig. 43  vdW-corrected DFT-calculated structures and energetics. Evacuated L-2-ampd-R-Mg2(dobpdc) (top left), water adsorption (top right), the framework following CO2 insertion (bottom left), and co-adsorption of CO2 and H2O (bottom right) are shown, including experimental differential binding enthalpies (ΔHads) in parentheses. Green, dark blue, gray, red, and white spheres represent Mg, N, C, O, and H atoms, respectively (reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). 

6.2. Moisture swing adsorbents
Quaternary ammonium-based ion exchange resins (IER) can effectively adsorb CO2 from dry air and release it under wet conditions.438 Such moisture-swing adsorbents offer an innovative approach to regenerate CO2 adsorbents. Simply wetting the resins with liquid water439 or water vapour440 provides free energy for CO2 release and increases the equilibrium partial pressure by up to two orders of magnitude. The heat of adsorption of the IER (32 kJ mol−1439) is much lower than those of a Ca-based process (179 kJ mol−1441) and amine solution (80 kJ mol−1269). In addition to IER, other functional porous materials such as modified carbon black,442 ordered colloidal crystals,443 and high internal phase emulsion polymers444 have been designed for reversible CO2 capture from air by moisture swinging. Recent studies have extended the family of moisture swing adsorbents by using inexpensive biomass materials such as quaternized cellulose, starch, and chitosan/PVA aerogels.445 Some of them exhibit 10-fold faster kinetics than commercialized materials owing to the accessibility and connectivity of micro- and mesopores. These adsorbent powders can be embedded in porous electrospun scaffolds, allowing for effective exposure to air and enhanced heat removal.192
The working mechanism of moisture-swing adsorbents is of particular interest because it cannot be simply ascribed to the competitive binding of CO2 and water vapor. Previous DFT calculations show that during CO2 adsorption, hydrated water leads to the proton transfer of adsorbents with the anion CO32−.446 Molecular dynamics modeling further demonstrates that the free energy of CO32− hydrolysis to HCO3− and OH− is negative when water is accessible to the nanostructured resins.447 The formation of OH− promotes spontaneous CO2 binding from dry air. The transformed HCO3− decreases the hydrophilicity of materials, leading to a unique self-cooling effect.160 Yang et al.448 held another explanation that at high humidity, HCO3− is replaced by hydrated OH−. Such a contradictory interpretation may be due to the different testing conditions.98
The hypothesis that the equilibrium between HCO3− and CO32− depends on the number of water molecules in the nanopores was later verified by calculating ion hydration energy through quantum mechanics simulations (Fig. 44a).158 The environmental factors of adsorbents greatly affect the CO2 capture efficiency. For instance, high CO2 capacities can potentially be achieved by selecting supporting materials such as zeolites, water-stable MOFs, and COFs with small pore sizes, SiO2 with short cation distances, and carbon black with hydrophobic properties (Fig. 44b). The counterintuitive phenomenon of ion hydration in confined spaces is ubiquitous and applicable to other weak bases. A recent work suggested that strong bases such as guanidine also follow this moisture swing principle.163
 Fig. 44  (a) Quantum mechanics calculations of the ion hydration energy as a function of the number of water molecules and (b) potential moisture swing adsorbents (reproduced from ref.158 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020). 
Amine-functionalized air capture materials face kinetics problems as the amine molecules preferentially fill micro/mesopores and lead to 1–2 orders of magnitude loss of surface area.315,327 The quaternary ammonium adsorbents based on commercial moisture swing resins generally have CO2 capacities above 0.8 mmol g−1, but require adsorption halftimes as high as 100 min.449,450 The small overall activation free energies of the hydrolysis of CO32− (<46 kJ mol−1)164 indicate that the chemical reaction should not constrain the adsorption kinetics of moisture swing adsorbents. On the other hand, compared to the gas film diffusion limitation, the adsorption kinetics under ultradilute CO2 are more likely controlled by diffusion inside the adsorbent particle.451 Therefore, optimizing the porosity and size of the support materials can potentially enhance the overall kinetics.
While applying macroporous materials167 or cellulose fiber166 as supports promotes the adsorption kinetics to some extent, Wang et al.161 recently reported ultrafast kinetics with an adsorption halftime of 2.9 min by grafting quaternary ammonium onto mesoporous resins (Fig. 45). Superb CO2 adsorption kinetics were achieved because of the uniform cylindrical mesopore structures of the supports, which were created by employing appropriate swelling agents to overcome steric hindrance. The mesopores also changed the local humidity properties, thus altering the binding energy of the surface amines to CO2. A relatively low cycling capacity (i.e., 0.26 mmol g−1) may be the main limitation of such adsorbents, which is expected to be improved by introducing hydrophobic groups, such as fluorine-containing monomers,159 onto the mesoporous matrix.
 Fig. 45  (a) Fabrication of quaternary ammonium-functionalized mesoporous resins and (b) CO2 adsorption kinetics at 20 °C and 21% RH and the comparison among moisture swing adsorbents for DAC (reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020). 
At present, CO32− is the main active group in moisture swing adsorbents for DAC owing to its large difference in hydration energy and swing size compared to other anions such as fluoride and acetate.167 A recent work reported a new moisture swing adsorbent that loads movable PO43− ions onto the IER, exhibiting 80% higher working capacity and much faster kinetics than CO32− based absorbents during moisture swing.165 Similar to the CO32−/HCO3− transformation, PO43− is hydrolyzed into OH− and HPO42−/H2PO4− in a dry environment. CO2 is adsorbed onto the produced OH−, and is released upon increasing the humidity. In fact, the hydrolysis of other weak acid ions, such as S2−, SO32−, HPO42−, and SO42−, is also possible by changing the surrounding humidity and is thus potentially applied to moisture swing adsorbents.452 Other efforts have been devoted to investigating the effects of positively charged amine groups in addition to quaternary ammonium.162 Surprisingly, the overall capture performance of amine-based resins, particularly their adsorption capacities, depends more on their chemical functional groups than on their physical properties. The underlying mechanism can be illustrated by the difference in hydrolysis free energy. In dry environments, resins with stronger amine groups (e.g., quaternary amines) tend to produce more OH− groups for CO2 adsorption than those with weak amines (e.g., tertiary amines).
One disadvantage of moisture-swing adsorbents is the low partial pressure of released CO2, requiring additional concentration for subsequent conversion or storage. Greenhouse enrichment might be a potential application, since the optimal CO2 concentrations for plants and algae are only 1–2 orders of magnitude higher than those in air. While there is little public information, moisture swing adsorption-based DAC companies, such as Infinitree and Skytree, focus on niche markets for supplying greenhouse CO2 to urban agriculture. Other disadvantages include contamination with impurity anions, water consumption, and weather restrictions,98 and the requirements for the design of novel adsorbent materials with more robust structures and higher hydration efficiencies, as well as coupling of heat and water recovery systems. The kinetics on sorbent drying, which has not been thoroughly discussed, should also be considered to design rapid humidity swing processes.
6.3. Hydrophobic amine-containing adsorbents
While hydration helps amine-containing adsorbents achieve better CO2 adsorption, additional energy is required to release the adsorbed water. The presence of H2O also leads to leaching or segregation of the amine in the impregnated amine sorbent owing to the water solubility of the amine. Hydrophobic modification can reduce the adverse effects of water vapor. Recently developed hydrophobic amine-containing adsorbents can be roughly divided into two categories: hydrophobic coating encapsulation and hydrophobic functional group grafting. Hydrophobic encapsulation of adsorbents, such as using Pickering emulsions to encapsulate liquid amines in microspheres,453 or a clay-based superhydrophobic material as a protective coating170 achieved promising CO2 adsorption capacities and long-term stability under ultradilute conditions, but the separation performance depends on humidity conditions.
A more attractive approach is the introduction of hydrophobic functional groups into amine-containing adsorbents, such as long-chain alkyl groups,168 aryl groups,454 oxysilane-based groups,170,334 and fluorine-based groups.159 Rather et al.168 extended the 1,4-conjugated addition reaction between branched PEI and dipentaerythritol pentaacrylate, in which residual acrylate groups were modified with small molecules from propylamine to octadecylamine. The length of the alkyl chain in the amines imparted a different degree of hydrophobicity to the CO2 adsorbent. Furthermore, superhydrophobic cotton based on amine amplification was designed, and the effect of water wettability on the CO2 capture performance was systematically evaluated.
The combined effect of amine amplification and hydrophobicity resulted in excellent CO2 capture performance at ambient temperature and pressure. However, it should be noted that although long-chain alkyl groups can increase hydrophobicity, they also increase steric hindrance for CO2 diffusion. Inagaki et al.454 introduced hydrophobic aryl groups as amine ligands to inhibit the hydration of neutral carbamates and found that ortho-, meta-, and para-xylylenediamines (OXDA, MXDA, and PXDA) only adsorb CO2 in air without hydration. Notably, MXDA·CO2 can exist in the form of anhydrous carbamate, even in water. This is because MXDA·CO2 self-assembles into a structure similar to a reverse lipid bilayer, as opposed to a normal lipid bilayer, the hydrophobic aryl groups of self-assembled MXDA·CO2 face the water and protect the intermediate carbamate from hydration. Hou et al.159 synthesized fluorinated diblock copolymers, which enhanced CO2 adsorption by promoting the dissociation of H2O owing to increased hydrophobicity, with a CO2 adsorption capacity of 2.07 mmol g−1 at 21 °C/40%RH. It should be noted that crosslinking can increase the density of amines to synthesize a support-free CO2 adsorbent through the ring-opening reaction of epoxides with amine groups.169,455 Hamdy et al.455 developed PEI-based adsorbents crosslinked with epoxy resin. Because epoxy resin was only used as a “hardening agent,” the dosage was much smaller than that of PEI, only a minority of amines reacted, and the majority of unreacted amines were used for CO2 adsorption. Through the hydrophobic functionalization modification of the poly(amine) chain, the adsorption capacity of CO2 was greatly improved, especially at low temperatures.
Although various hydrophobic modification methods have been shown to be effective, using as few non-adsorbents as possible while maintaining CO2 adsorption capacity is needed. In addition to hydrophobic modifications, hydrophobic solvents are viable options. Mobley et al.456 developed a mixture of hydrophobic 2-fluorophenethylamine and octafluoropentanol as a non-aqueous solvent. The energy required to release captured CO2 can potentially be reduced by 40–50% compared to the conventional CO2 capture processes.
7. Scaling-up design for adsorption-based direct air capture
7.1. Adsorbent shaping technologies
Most DAC adsorbents are synthesized in the form of powders. In actual applications, the gas–solid contact efficiency is an important factor. In particular, at ultralow CO2 concentrations, a much larger amount of feed gas is blown into the contactor than that in post-combustion capture. To this end, powdery adsorbents are transformed into so-called “structured adsorbents” with a specific geometric structure and shape when using shaping technologies. The use of structured adsorbents in the contactor can reduce the gas pressure drop and increase the thermal and mass transfer properties, thus enhancing the capture performance and reducing energy consumption.
Through pelletization and granulation, powdered adsorbents can be transformed into structured adsorbents in the form of millimeter-sized cylinders, cuboids, or spheres. Pelletization and granulation are conventional shaping technologies with advantages of simplicity and convenience. These methods are suitable for a wide range of powdered materials. However, because the pellets and granules are still packed into the beds, the improvement in the gas–solid contact is limited. Therefore, they are regarded as “incomplete” shaping technologies. By packing with adsorbent pellets or granules, it is hard to achieve an acceptable pressure drop for DAC. The typical process of pelletization is extrusion (to form lumpy adsorbents), whereas granulation is typically performed through the agglomeration and packaging of powder adsorbents (to form beaded adsorbents).
In a typical pelletization process, powder materials first undergo pre-treatments such as carbonation and mixing with a binder.329,457,458 They are subsequently compressed in a millimeter-sized mold, followed by optional drying and calcination. The binder composition, carbonation temperature, and compressive force affect the mechanical integrity and adsorption properties of the pelleted adsorbent. The capability for CO2 capture from air using pellet-shaped adsorbents was recently illustrated by Tomas et al.343 and Wijesiri et al.139 In the former study, activated carbon was extruded into pellets with a diameter of 2 mm and a length of 4–5 mm. Such a pelleted adsorbent exhibited a CO2 capacity of 0.5 mmol g−1 in TSA cycles with adsorption conditions of 5000 ppm CO2 at 20 °C. In the latter one, carbonated MCF powder in pure CO2 was made into 4 mm diameter cylindrical pellets using a TDP-6T single-punch tablet press. Each pellet was cut into quadrants with an approximate mean Sauter diameter of 1.8 mm. Under fixed bed testing, the MCF pellets showed a capacity of 1.94 and 2.52 mmol g−1 under dry and humid conditions, respectively, in 420 ppm CO2/N2.
Granulation results in less negative structural effects on structured adsorbents because of the avoidance of the extrusion step, and it enables the functional tunability of the wrapping layers outside the powder to obtain enhanced hydrophobicity, mechanical strength, and thermal conductivity.459–461 For instance, Choe et al.462 synthesized Mg2(dobpdc)/Al beads by using a spray dry method after mixing MOF powders with alumina sol, followed by amine functionalization and alkyl chain silane coating. The resulting beads exhibited significant CO2 capacity as well as high hydrophobicity (Fig. 46a). Luzzi et al.459 embedded zeolite 13X in a highly porous chitosan aerogel (Fig. 46b). Promising CO2 capture performance was achieved after the 13X powder was shaped into beads. In terms of DAC, Park et al.433 fabricated Mg2(dobpdc)/poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) composite beads via a phase inversion method, followed by post-functionalization with 1-ethylpropane-1,3-diamine (epn) (Fig. 46c). A DMF solution of Mg2(dobpdc) and PVDF was dropped into a nonsolvent solution to form beads during solvent exchange. As the MOFs were encapsulated with hydrophobic PVDF, their water durability was significantly enhanced while maintaining good CO2 capture capability from indoor air. Guo et al.463 prepared a kilogram scale MOF/polyacrylate composite to circumvent the defects of NbOFFIVE-1-Ni (Fig. 46d and e). Polyacrylate beads were prepared by copolymerization of acrylate monomers and grafted with amines, after which NbOFFIVE-1-Ni crystals were in situ grown within the macropores of the beads.
 Fig. 46  (a) Photographs and contact angles of een–MOF/Al and een–MOF/Al–Si after adding water dropwise (reproduced from ref. 462 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2021). (b) Granulation of zeolite 13X beads using a chitosan aerogel as the binder (reproduced from ref. 459 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021). (c) Granulation of Mg2(dobpdc) in the PVDF and DMF solution via a phase inversion method (reproduced from ref. 433 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021). (d) Synthesis scheme of polyacrylate beads. (e) NbOFFIVE-1-Ni crystals in situ grown inside the pores of polyacrylate beads (reproduced from ref. 463 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021). 
Pelletization and granulation only provide pellet- and granule-shaped materials, respectively. Improved techniques are required to construct more complex structures to fully realize the advantages of shaping. Coating is another conventional, direct, and facile method for manufacturing structured adsorbents. Typically, a coating solution containing adsorbents or adsorbent precursors is doped onto a substrate through dip coating, spray coating, or spin coating. The obtained adsorbents could be in the form of a membrane, honeycomb, or foam, according to the shape of the substrate. Binders are typically utilized to enhance the combination of the adsorbent and the substrate; however, binders may reduce the adsorption capacity in some cases.
Recently, several attempts have been made to fabricate coated adsorbents to capture CO2 from air. Membrane-shaped adsorbents can be attached to the sheet surface as a passive control of indoor air CO2. Krishnamurthy et al.191 incorporated silica-supported aminopolymers into polyacrylic-based latex and coated the pigment on a flat alumina (Fig. 47a–c). Pigments were effective in controlling the indoor CO2 concentration, with only a ∼20% decrease in the adsorption efficiency compared to that of the powder-based adsorbent.
 Fig. 47  (a) Amine-based latex coated on the alumina sheet and its surface morphology. (b) Chamber tests of the coated latex at 800 ppm and 15% RH. (c) Corresponding calculated CO2 uptake for paints (solid) and powder sorbents (shaded) (reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). (d) epn-functionalized Mg2(dobpdc) made into self-standing membranes or films on the substrates with SBS as the binder (reproduced from ref. 464 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022). (e) Hydrated K2CO3 coated on the activated carbon honeycomb (reproduced from ref. 465 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). 
Self-standing membranes could also be fabricated to separate CO2 from indoor air using the coating method. Shiue et al.466 blended PVA and PAA solutions and coated this material onto the surface of a reverse osmosis membrane via a spin coater. The obtained separation layer was modified with the hydroxyl and amine functional groups. The osmosis membrane exhibited a larger gas permeability toward CO2 than N2 at 25 °C. When the pressure was 0.75 cm Hg, 1 wt% PVA + 7 wt% PAA had the greatest CO2/N2 gas selectivity ratio of 10.7. In another example, the coating solution was made into self-standing membranes as well as films coated on solid substrates. Chae et al.464 mixed epn-functionalized Mg2(dobpdc) with a polystyrene-block-polybutadiene-block-polystyrene (SBS) hydrophobic polymer and fabricated a membrane-shaped composite (Fig. 47d). The epn-Mg80@SBS exhibited a CO2 capacity of 2.8 mmol g−1 at 1000 ppm. The composite was also coated onto the surface of a Ti mesh, air filter, and granular activated carbon via a simple spraying coating method, confirming the feasibility of producing structured adsorbents with the composite. In the study of Mosqueda et al.,465 an adsorbent coated activated carbon honeycomb was made (Fig. 47e). The commercial honeycomb monolith (2.9 cm × 2.9 cm × 3.0 cm) was immersed in K2CO3 solution, and was then shaken to remove the excess liquid and calcined in a N2 atmosphere. The resulting structured adsorbent showed a high capture capacity of 0.249 mmol g−1, whereas the salt loading was only 0.0558 gK2CO3 gadsorbent−1. The salt content was kept low because of the physical deterioration of the carrier at higher loadings.
The development of coating methods is unfortunately hampered owing to the shortcoming of weak bonding between coating films and substrates, which may cause wear and peeling problems during long-term operation. Therefore, strategies to form stronger combinations have been proposed. By covalently anchoring adsorbents to the substrate through in situ growth, uniform adsorbent films and well-ordered crystal orientations connected by rigid bonding could be achieved. The growth conditions vary for different types of adsorbents, and so this method is relatively less versatile and more time- and energy-consuming. However, the superior tunability and retention of the original adsorbent properties make it attractive for the synthesis of high-performance materials.
The growth method was initially used to synthesize zeolites on substrates.467 Recently, an increasing number of MOFs, including Mg2(dobpdc), MOF-74, and UTSA-16, coated on different substrates were explored for CO2 capture.189,468–470 In one case, Mg2(dobpdc) films were synthesized on a cordierite monolith surface wash-coated with α-alumina with MgO nanoparticles as the metal precursor and demonstrated good crystallite density and favorable orientation.189 In another study, the layer-by-layer technique was found to be suitable for MOF-74 film growth, while in situ dip coating resulted in high UTSA-16 weight gain on the cordierite.470 Lawson et al.469 utilized 3D-printing to impregnate a kaolin-based monolith with the precursor Co, and facilitated UTSA-16 growth via a solvothermal method. The UTSA-16 loaded monolith not only retained high mechanical integrity, but also exhibited similar adsorption properties to its powder analogue (Fig. 48a).
 Fig. 48  (a) UTSA-16 growth on the kaolin monolith (reproduced from ref. 469 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). (b) UTSA-16 growth on electrospun fiber mats.468 (c) Epitaxial growth of MOF-508a on QCM discs (reproduced from ref. 471 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). (d) MFS without and with SIFSIX-3-Cu growth (reproduced from ref. 472 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020). 
The growth of UTSA-16 on electrospun fiber mats was also explored and tested for CO2 concentration capture.468 The MOF powders were dispersed within polyacrylonitrile fiber networks and processed to produce MOF crystalline layers under microwave irradiation for the seeded growth of MOFs (Fig. 48b). Wilson et al.471 used plasmonic deposition to achieve epitaxial growth of MOF-508a on quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) discs or polytetrafluorethylene membranes (Fig. 48c). In this study, structurally well-defined pulsed plasma deposited poly(1-allylimidazole) layers provided surface imidazole linker groups for the directed layer-by-layer growth of MOF-508a at 25 °C. The results showed that MOF-508a exhibited a high affinity towards CO2 with a maximum capacity of 2.75 μg cmdisc−2 under a CO2 partial pressure of 0.4 mbar. Activated carbon-supported HKUST-1 and melamine formaldehyde sponge (MFS) monolith-supported SIFSIX-3-Cu were synthesized by Zhen et al.472,473 (Fig. 48d). Metal ions were introduced into the pores of the supports, followed by addition of organic ligands. It was shown that the in situ growth of SIFSIX-3-Cu in the MFS avoided crystal stacking, presenting a multi-level pore structure. With an MOF loading ratio of 5 g g−1 MFS, the monolith composite showed a CO2 uptake of 1.02 mmol g−1 with a CO2 concentration of 5000 ppm at 20 °C.
The flexibility of the growth method enables the attachment of adsorbents to various substrates. Nevertheless, only limited types of materials have been synthesized by in situ growth. The synthesis strategies must be optimized to shorten the growth time and increase the adsorbent loading. The relationship between the substrate surface properties and adsorption properties of the attached MOFs requires further exploration.
Monolith extrusion has been extensively used in molding various inorganic and organic materials. Similar to pelletization and granulation, this method mixes adsorbents, binders, and pore additives to prepare pastes. The pastes are then added to a mold and extruded to form a specific shape. Extrudates generally exhibit rigid mechanical structures and high adsorbent loadings. However, the structural design of extrudates cannot be altered flexibly, and objects with discontinuous structures cannot be fabricated owing to the mold shape limitation.
Extruded zeolite, activated carbon, alumina, and MOF monoliths have been fabricated for CO2 capture.474 Recently, zeolites and conductive carbon were extruded together to prepare hybrid monoliths for electric swing adsorption (Fig. 49a and b).475,476 It has been reported that extrusion has additional positive effects, including an increase in the heat capacity of the material, a decrease in the water heat of adsorption, and an increase in the CO2 isosteric heat of adsorption.476 Hong et al.477 compared MIL-101(Cr) and zeolite 13X monoliths at an adsorbent loading of 75 wt% (Fig. 49c). Bentonite clay and Licowax C micropowder PM were used as the binder and pore former, respectively. In another experiment, the adsorption properties of extruded alumina monoliths were compared with those of powdered adsorbents for DAC.312 The monolith demonstrated a volumetric capacity of 350 mol m−3 and an equilibration time of 350 min.
 Fig. 49  (a) Zeolite/electrically conductive carbon monolith produced from powders by extrusion. (b) Conventional process of preparation of extruded ceramic honeycomb monoliths (reproduced from ref. 476 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017). (c) Extruded MIL-101(Cr) and zeolite 13X honeycomb monoliths (reproduced from ref. 477 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020). 
The extrusion method faces manufacturing difficulties, such as paste composition adjustment for different materials and adsorbent enlargement. There are very few reports on extrudates that capture CO2 from air. Nevertheless, it remains a feasible method for producing high-performance structured adsorbents. Further research should be performed to verify other types of materials like amino solids for effective CO2 adsorption.
The sol–gel method also produces structured adsorbents with high adsorbent content. The sol–gel method enables uniform mixing of active compounds as precursors in the liquid phase. After undergoing hydrolysis and condensation reactions, the colloidal solution polymerizes to form a solid gel with a specific structure. Typically, beads, membranes, and cylindrical adsorbents are fabricated. The sol–gel process is highly adjustable because of the abundant precursor materials and flexible synthesis methods. Various adsorbents have shown their capability for DAC application.
Wörmeyer et al.336,478 investigated amine-functionalized aerogels as cylinders and microspheres, either by pouring the precursor solution into a cylindrical mold or using the emulsion method. Kong et al.282 developed an amine hybrid resorcinol–formaldehyde/silica composite aerogel through a solvothermally-assisted sol–gel process, reaching a CO2 adsorption capacity of 1.85 mmol g−1 in humid air. Later, an amine hybrid titania/silsesquioxane composite gel with a short adsorption half-life and high amine efficiency was prepared using a one-pot sol–gel process followed by supercritical drying.283 Song et al.445 synthesized quaternized chitosan (QCS)/PVA hybrid aerogels using a sol–gel method with glutaraldehyde as the cross-linking agent (Fig. 50). The hydrogel was soaked in a NaOH solution to replace chlorine ions with hydroxide ions. Rim et al.110 developed solvent impregnated polymers loaded with NOHMs for DAC. Firstly, SIPs were fabricated using an encapsulation technique. Then, NOHM-I-PEI were incorporated into the SIPs and ultraviolet-cured to produce gas-permeable solid sorbents with uniform NOHM loading.
 Fig. 50  (a) Quaternized chitosan is cross-linked with PVA, ion-exchanged with NaOH, and freeze-dried to form the aerogel. (b) Ion-exchange process of the QCS/PVA hydrogel with the NaOH solution. (c) Microscopic morphology of the QCS/PVA aerogel. (d) Adsorption cycles of the QCS/PVA aerogel at 20 °C (reproduced from ref. 445 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). 
Through adequate regulation, an adsorbent shaped by sol–gel methods can achieve high adsorption performance and it further benefits from heteroatom doping.479 One of the main obstacles to facilitating the broader application of the sol–gel method is the size enlargement. As the shape of the adsorbents is mainly determined by the container, it is more difficult to manufacture complex structures, such as honeycombs and foams.
Owing to the advantages of high flexibility, adjustable size, and low production cost, fiber adsorbents fabricated through dry-wet spinning or electrospinning are favorable for manufacturing unique gas–solid contacts that allow adequate mass transfer, low pressure drop, and advanced thermal modulation. Nevertheless, current research on fiber adsorbents has been conducted mostly at the laboratory level. Koros et al.480 first synthesized a hollow polymer fiber embedded with adsorbent zeolite 13X particles in the fiber walls using the dry-jet wet-quench spinning method. Since then, a series of studies on solid and hollow fibers have been reported.187,366,481–495 The hollow fiber morphology can take advantage of passing cooling water through the bores during adsorption to maximize the capacity and steam through the bores during desorption to desorb CO2. For instance, Sujan et al.187 recently applied a polymer/silica fiber adsorbent for DAC. Monolithic fiber sorbents composed of cellulose acetate and SiO2 were synthesized via the dry wet-spinning technique, followed by functionalization with PEI in a post-spinning infusion step (Fig. 51a). The amine-loaded monolithic fibers effectively extracted CO2 from ambient air (∼380 ppm) and produced high-purity (>97%) CO2 under both dry and humid conditions. Lee et al.496 investigated the synthesis of Mg-based MOF nanocrystals within a polymeric fiber loaded with stable metal-oxide precursors. The scalable amine-appended Mg2(dobpdc) fiber captured CO2 with a capacity of 1.99 mmol g−1 under DAC conditions (Fig. 51b and c).
 Fig. 51  (a) PEI-loaded polymer/silica fiber sorbents (reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). (b) Workflow diagram of a modular device that contains the fiber sorbents. (c) Breakthrough curve of a tetraamine-Mg2(dobpdc)/PEI fiber sorbent module with 11 fibers under dry 400 ppm CO2 conditions (reproduced from ref. 496 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021). 
Another route for generating nanofibers is electrospinning. In early 2010, Ostermann et al.497 successfully prepared hierarchically porous nanofibers by electrospinning MOF nanoparticles using suitable carrier polymers. Subsequent studies have expanded the material range applied in electrospun fibers and explored the synthesis factors affecting the fiber textural properties, providing new concepts for further development.498–501 Recently, Armstrong et al.192 developed IER-containing porous electrospun fibers using the solvothermal polymer additive removal technique. Different particle scaffolds, including commercially available industrial films, dense electrospun fibers, and porous electrospun fibers, were compared for their ability to capture CO2 from ambient air. The porous fiber had 90% IER availability, whereas the dense fiber had 50% particle accessibility. The sorption halftime for both electrospun fiber samples was 10 ± 3 min, and IER embedded in porous electrospun fibers showed the highest cycle capacity with an uptake rate of 1.4 mol g−1 h−1. Compared to conventional techniques, spinning exhibits greater potential for application on a large scale, although rational design, materials, and cost assessment are still required to drive further development.
The additive manufacturing technique, 3D printing, is a rapid shaping technique based on numerical model files and manufactures structured adsorbents through layer-by-layer accumulation. The technique takes advantage of the easy control of the material structure and active site distribution by model file modification and paste composition regulation. These excellent metrics have facilitated the wide application of 3D printing in determining the crucial printing parameters and their optimization strategies for CO2 adsorption.103 However, a limited number of experiments on 3D-printed adsorbents for DAC have been performed.76,190,502–504 The latest study reported an integrated DAC and oxidative dehydrogenation of a propane system that achieved a combination of carbon capture and utilization in a single bed (Fig. 52).76 Dual-functional material adsorbent/catalyst monoliths comprising CaO and M@ZSM-5 heterogeneous catalysts were manufactured using 3D printing. Varying the metal dopant in the catalysts can flexibly control the chemical properties of the structured DFM, so as to simultaneously achieve effective carbon capture and conversion.
 Fig. 52  (a) Dual-functional adsorbent/catalyst monoliths and their conversion performance and (b) Microscopic morphology of the 3D-printed monolith (reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022). 
7.2. Gas–solid contactors
To meet the cost requirements for commercialization, the design of an efficient DAC process is critical; this can be achieved by designing gas–solid contactors with high heat and mass transfer efficiencies.406 In addition, a DAC adsorber should have a high volumetric adsorption rate and a low pressure drop to minimize equipment and operational costs. Adsorbers are divided into three types of configurations (Fig. 53).505 The fixed-bed type is widely applied because of its simple contactor configuration, in which air is passed through the sorbents directly. However, the pressure drop is quite large in some cases, particularly when the sorbents are powdered. Therefore, the size of the adsorbents should be enlarged and the flow rates should not be too high to reduce the pressure drop. In addition, the heat transfer inside the adsorption bed is poor.505 It is better to design the configuration of an axially-fixed-bed into a “pancake-shaped” flat-bed to reduce the pressure drop.201 Radial flow beds have also been scaled up recently.201,506
 Fig. 53  Contactor configurations used in adsorption-based CO2 capture (reproduced from ref. 505 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021). 
The distribution of the feed gas is complicated for both flat-bed axially fixed-bed and radial flow beds. To overcome these problems, monoliths, another class of solid contactors, have been developed. Typically, a sorbent is mixed with a binder and extruded into a designed structure. Recently, 3D printing has been rapidly developed for the fabrication of monolithic sorbents. Compared to packed beds, the pressure drop is much lower, the mass transfer rate is improved, and the attrition of adsorbents is weakened. However, the loading of adsorbents is reduced per unit volume.507
The concept of a moving belt adsorber has been proposed. This type of bed shows a lower pressure drop, but the movement of large particles is difficult. Drechsler et al.202 proposed a novel moving bed and the bed was divided into several zones, which is helpful in realizing a high degree of thermal integration. In addition, the rotary bed is another type of moving bed that has achieved large-scale application.51 The rotary bed configuration was divided into adsorption and desorption sections. The device was operated continuously without switching. The TSA can be used to regenerate the rotary bed. However, leaks and gas flow distribution are challenges that must be addressed.
The fluidized bed was also proposed for CO2 capture; the adsorbents were suspended in the feed gas, resulting in a good heat transfer rate. However, this method can cause serious abrasion of the adsorbent. Data for some representative gas–solid contactors used for DAC are summarized in Table 5.
Table 5 Comparative study of gas–solid contactors used for DAC




Bed (height, diameter)
Adsorbent (weight)
Adsorption conditions
Desorption conditions
Ref.




Packed bed (5.5 cm, 0.4 cm)
Mg2(dobpdc) (0.06 g)
400 ppm CO2/He, 23, 49, 70 °C
115 °C in He for 4 h

195



1000 ppm CO2/He


5660 ppm CO2/He


10020 ppm CO2/He


Fixed-bed (4.8 cm, 0.9 cm)
Aminoresin (0.5 g g−1)
400 ppm CO2/N2, 25 °C
Heating

194



Heating, inert gas purging


Heating, vacuum


Heating, inert gas purging, vacuum


Heating, vacuum, closed


Fixed-bed (1 cm, 8 cm)
APDES-NFC
400 ppm CO2/air/50%RH
Heating, vacuum

180



Heating, steam purging, vacuum


Packed bed (1 cm, 10 cm)
Lewatits VP OC 1065
400 ppm CO2/N2/30% 50%RH, 25, 50, 70 °C
Heating, vacuum

140



Fixed-bed (60 cm, 1.3 cm)
Lewatits VP OC 1065 (53.6 g)
400 ppm CO2/N2, 20 °C
Heating, steam purging, vacuum

137



5000 ppm CO2/N2, 20 °C


Fixed-bed (1.7 cm, 0.45 cm)
Amine-functionalized resin (0.5 g)
200–4000 ppm CO2/N2, 25–50 °C, H2O 0.16 to 1.86 vol%
Heating, vacuum, N2 purging

407



Fixed-bed (2.4 cm, 40 cm)
Lewatits VP OC 1065
410 ppm CO2/N2, 20 °C, 50% RH
Heating, vacuum, CO2/N2 purging

508



Fixed-bed (12 cm, 1 cm)
PEI_80b (3.45 g)
420 ppm CO2/N2
Heating, steam purging, vacuum

141



Rectangular contactor (7.2 cm, 7.2 cm, 50 cm)
APDES-NFC-FD (85.9 g)
400–490 ppm CO2/N2, 58.3% RH
Heating, vacuum

406



Radial flow contactor (40 cm, 15.4 cm)
Lewatits VP OC 1065 (1700 g)
429–464 ppm CO2/N2, 19–22 °C, 40–65% RH
120 °C in N2 for 16 h

201



Radial flow contactor (50 cm, 1.6 cm)
Lewatits VP OC 1065 (1–3 g)
400 ppm CO2/N2, 25 °C
80 °C in N2

506



Moving belt adsorber (2900 cm, 0.5 cm)
Lewatits VP OC 1065
400 ppm CO2/N2
Heating

202





In such a configuration, the inlet gas typically consists of CO2, N2, O2, and water. The relative humidity of the gas was regulated using either an evaporator filled with water (in a heated water bath) or a water-filled syringe driven with a syringe pump. Darunte et al.195 studied stepped CO2 adsorption isotherms in packed beds to determine the CO2 uptake at different flow rates and concentrations using mmen-Mg2(dobpdc). A sharp breakthrough curve can improve bed utilization. With partial pressures of 0.4 and 1 mbar, the profiles show a rapid initial shock followed by a long wave (Fig. 54). This breakthrough has resulted in poor utilization and a lower CO2 extraction rate (0.11/0.44 mmol g−1 h−1). For 5.67 and 10.02 mbar CO2, a sharp breakthrough curve could be observed and results in an increased CO2 capture fraction and rate (3.34/5.86 mmol g−1 h−1). At lower flow rates, the breakthrough profile exhibited two shockwaves with a lower CO2 extraction rate. At higher flow rates, the breakthrough profile broadens with a higher CO2 extraction rate. These results indicate that increasing the CO2 concentration improves the CO2 extraction rate. Moreover, the Avrami model could be used to describe the CO2 adsorption kinetics at a CO2 concentration of 400 ppm. The Michaelis–Menten expression has been shown to be more suitable at higher CO2 concentrations.
 Fig. 54  Breakthrough curves of mmen-Mg2(dobpdc) at 23 °C and a flow rate of 17.2 N mL min−1. The left one shows simulative results and the right one shows experimental results (reproduced from ref. 195 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). 
The desorption capacities after each step of the regeneration process described above are shown in Fig. 55. The authors attributed the difference between 1000 and 40 mL min−1 to the different calculation methods. The desorption capacity at 60 °C could reach 85–86% of the total desorption capacity. Moreover, it could extend beyond 90% when coupled with purge flow at 60 °C in a vacuum environment. The working capacity at 60 °C is 0.47 mmolCO2 gsorbent−1, which shows a minimum regeneration specific energy requirement (SER) of 4.2 MJ kg−1 CO2. Using a mild vacuum of 500 mbar instead of 25 mbar decreased the regeneration SER dramatically, from 26 MJ kg−1 CO2 to 7.5 MJ kg−1 CO2. This indicates that changing the temperature in a vacuum atmosphere coupled with air or inert gas purge flow has more advantages in terms of productivity, and a mild vacuum could be adopted to reduce energy consumption.
 Fig. 55  CO2 adsorption and desorption capacities using total flow rates of (a) 1000 mL min−1 and (b) 40 mL min−1 in the desorption phase. Error bars indicate the uncertainty (reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021). 
In addition to using vacuum, steam purge is another effective regeneration process for gas–solid contactors to concentrate the desorbed CO2.180,509 After desorption, the outlet gas contained only CO2 and steam. The steam was condensed, and the final product was high-purity CO2. Desorption kinetics can be optimized with the assistance of steam. The desorption rate is 3.75 mmol g−1 h−1 at 12 kPa abs/100 °C, while the rate is only 0.23 mmol g−1 h−1 without the purge of steam under the same working conditions.141
The electrical versus thermal energy consumption for different evacuation pressures and steam flow rates provides a clear illustration of how to achieve target productivity with relatively low energy consumption (Fig. 56).180 It was found that the productivity could not reach 2.45 × 10−5 kg h−1 at high pL (100 mbar). In addition, it could not reach such productivity without steam purge (gray triangular markers). Therefore, a decreased evacuation pressure or increased steam purge is necessary to increase CO2 production. These calculations are based on the energy at the entrance of the adsorption bed. Bos et al.137 analyzed the energy consumption from different perspectives. The sensible heat of the sorbent, water, CO2, reaction heat, latent heat of water, and compression energy were included in the total energy consumption. Interestingly, the authors found that steam purge is helpful in improving the CO2 working capacity. However, the energy consumption for desorption remains almost unchanged owing to the latent heat of the water. The difference in results may be because one is calculated from the perspective of supply, and the other is calculated from the perspective of demand. If low-quality waste heat or renewable energy is available, steam-purged desorption is a promising option.
 Fig. 56  Electrical vs. thermal energy consumption for CO2 production rate isolines of 1.9 (circles), 2.2 (squares), and 2.45 × 10−5 kg h−1 (triangles) and evacuation pressures of pL: 30 (solid), 50 (dashed), and 100 mbar (dotted). The color scheme corresponds to the flow rate of steam, increasing from left to right: Fs: 0 (gray), 5 (purple), 10 (yellow), 17.5 (orange), and 25 cm3 s−1 (blue) (reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020). 
The energy consumption of CO2 capture was assessed using a thermodynamic tool. It was found that the minimum work mainly depended on the shape of the isotherm of solid adsorbents.200 The isotherm shape varies according to the type of adsorbent and gas composition. Young et al.140 used three water–CO2 co-adsorption models to describe the adsorption isotherms of one amine-modified polymer. Elfving et al.407 also proposed a kinetic model for CO2 adsorption on amine-supported resin. Both Schellevis et al.508 and Young et al.140 used the Guggenheim–Anderson–de Boer model as the isotherm model of water, and the Toth isotherm model to describe CO2 adsorption. However, this model must account for three effects: (i) the blockage of the amine sites by water at high water loadings, resulting in a decrease in amine efficiency; (ii) the increased stoichiometry; and (iii) the heats of adsorption change in the presence of water. The modified Toth model is proposed to account for the above effects, and the DAC can be predicted using a WADST and a mechanistic model. Thus, accurate mathematical descriptions of all gas components are required to describe the equilibrium and dynamics. The energy requirements can be determined after solving the differential equations.
7.3. Processes and systems
The design of energy-efficient and cost-effective adsorption-based DAC processes is pivotal for commercialization. Optimizing such processes faces challenges because they should satisfy various constraints such as purity, recovery, productivity, and energy consumption, and data uncertainty sometimes causes significant deviation.172 Generally, TSA or TCSA, which is commonly used in adsorbent development,112,131,510 is only applicable in specific cases such as greenhouses and indoor CO2 control because the purge gas dilutes the desorbed CO2. For instance, a gas mixture containing 2% CO2 for algal cultivation can be produced via TSA operating at desorption temperatures of 70–80 °C.178,511 On the other hand, TSA with a CO2 purge was technologically feasible to concentrate high purity CO2 from air.421 Potential drawbacks of CO2 purge are slow desorption kinetics under high CO2 partial pressures and amine degradation with the formation of irreversible urea groups.275 Vacuum swing adsorption (VSA) or vacuum pressure swing adsorption (VPSA) without heating are impractical for DAC because of the unacceptable vacuum requirement below 0.4 mbar during regeneration.
To date, TVSA has been the most widely applied DAC process, and it is also thermodynamically favorable, requiring only mild vacuum to concentrate high-purity CO2.177 The combination of heating and vacuum allows high working capacities and reduces the amount of adsorbent needed. Comparative techno-economic analyses indicate that the TVSA-based DAC process offers better performance related to exergy demand (1.4–3.7 GJ tCO2−1) and CO2 productivity (3.8–10.6 kg m−3 h−1) than alkali and amine scrubbing (Fig. 57).183 While these three technologies can potentially achieve a total cost below $200 tCO2−1, the TVSA-based DAC process achieves this more easily under a wide range of conditions. Note that the minimum work for separating CO2 at 400 ppm is only 0.45 GJ tCO2−1.176 Cutting down the energy consumption of the TVSA process further relies on better understanding of multicomponent adsorption, and design of novel air contactors with high heat and mass transfer,175 and integrating heat recovery through heat exchangers or heat pumps.171
 Fig. 57  Design of (a) the TVSA process with four cycles, (b) an air contactor, and (c) an adsorption-based CO2 capture system. (d) Relationship between CO2 productivity and separation exergy using adsorbents with different CO2 and H2O isotherms (reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021). 
Climeworks, whose technology originated from ETH Zurich, is a typical DAC company using the TVSA process. In this process, the saturated adsorbent coated on an air filter-like contactor is regenerated at 80–130 °C under reduced pressures of 20–400 mbar.357,406 NFC adsorbents with aminopropyl grafting are primarily used, achieving a capacity of 1.39 mmol g−1 at 400 ppm CO2 and 40% relative humidity. In a realistic TVSA cycle, the maximum CO2 working capacity can reach 0.65 mmol g−1 at 10 °C and 80% relative humidity.512 Climeworks built a pilot plant in Dresden based on the TVSA process to capture 80% of CO2 from the air flowing into the system and convert it into synthetic diesel. Later, a commercial DAC unit was built for a greenhouse in Hinwil that is capable of capturing 900 tons of CO2 per year. Another DAC demonstration unit (CarbFix2) was installed in Iceland. This project used double flashing to generate hot water (120 °C) for heating. High-purity CO2 obtained by desorption is compressed, mixed with water, and injected into a 700 m-deep basalt reservoir for mineralization.72 Recently, Climeworks launched a scaled-up DAC plant, Orca, to capture 4000 tons of CO2 per year. Climeworks currently has 15 DAC facilities; their near-term goal is to reduce the total cost of the DAC to less than $92 tCO2−1.513
Oy Hydrocell Ltd. designed a containerized modular DAC device composed of 8 beds (1 m × 0.2 m each) for the VTT Technical Research Centre under the SOLETAIR project, with a CO2 productivity of 0.0038 TPD (Fig. 58).514 The system contains two core technologies: a brush-type heat exchanger and a renewable CO2 scrubber. A glycol/water mixture was used to achieve regeneration at 60–80 °C, broadening the heat source of DAC. A previous study identified the feasibility of applying a TVSA process for such a system with a low regeneration temperature.177 Because humidity further increases the equilibrium working capacity up to 80%, a kinetic model was proposed to describe the CO2/H2O adsorption of the adsorbent, an amine-functionalized polystyrene resin.407 Even so, a ten-day capture campaign showed 76% of the specific energy requirement due to the thermal energy requirement. An experimental comparison indicates using air purge at 100 °C has benefits over the TVSA process.194 Their DAC prototype has successfully been applied in a Power-to-X plant233 and a biological–inorganic system.211 Recently, Schellevis et al.508 developed a similar TVSA process based on thin ‘flat bed’ contactors (2.4 cm thickness and 40 cm diameter). Interestingly, the authors argued that a high desorption temperature benefits both the energy duty and productivity, which was mainly ascribed to the reduction in the required desorption time.
 Fig. 58  Main components of the containerized modular DAC device designed by the VTT Technical Research Centre (reproduced from ref. 514 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019). Blue line: air flow, black line: waste gas flow, red line: heating liquid flow, and green line: product flow. 
Wilson and Tezel173 constructed a four-step TVSA cycle by applying seven commercial faujasite-structured zeolites that concentrated CO2 from 400 ppm to 95% at a CO2 capture ratio of 81%. The adsorption bed filled with physical adsorbents reached a fast adsorption rate and a low pressure drop. In another study, a novel process configuration consisting of several adsorption beds filled with zeolite-type adsorbents and driven by low-grade heat and optional vacuum was proposed, which was able to concentrate CO2 extracted from air to high pressures for pipeline transportation.515 However, owing to the hydrophilicity of zeolites, it needs additional pre-drying beds to be introduced. Monash University recently teamed up with the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization to develop a mobile DAC prototype (Airthena) using an electric power-supplied three-stage TVSA with an air handling capacity of 50 N m3 h−1.174 The core component of the device is a spiral substrate coated with MOF/polymer nanocomposites, which exhibits good adsorption properties and hydrophobicity and can be regenerated at 80 °C. When the CO2 purity is 70–80%, the operating energy consumption of Airthena reaches 5.76 GJth tCO2−1 in 2680 cycles, equivalent to the energy cost of $35–350 tCO2−1.
Because the desorption of TVSA is much slower than that of TCSA, a high temperature and low pressure must be adopted.196 The co-adsorption of H2O in the adsorption step of TVSA also leads to additional energy consumption for regeneration. Steam-assisted temperature swing adsorption (S-TSA) is another highly efficient DAC cycle that concentrates CO2via steam purging instead of vacuum. Steam purge not only provides heat for regenerating the adsorbent material through direct contact but also induces an additional desorption driving force by the displacement effect. The steam in the desorbed gas can be easily separated by condensation. For amine-based materials, steam purging increases adsorption capacity and prevents CO2-induced degradation. Global Thermostat is an S-TSA-based DAC company whose technology was developed in collaboration with the Georgia Institute of Technology. The company uses amine-based honeycomb ceramic adsorbents that are regenerated using steam purge to produce 98% pure CO2. Global Thermostat built its first commercial DAC for soda production in Alabama in 2018, with a capture capacity of 10.96 TPD and a total cost of $150 tCO2−1. Of all the commercial companies, Global Thermostat reports the current lowest DAC operating energy demand (0.54–0.94 GJe tCO2−1 + 4.21–5.08 GJth tCO2−1).207 Sinha et al.64,181 recently conducted a comprehensive energy and cost assessment of a five-step S-TSA cycle for DAC. The device used monolithic contactors coated with two amine-functionalized MOF adsorbents with a layer thickness of 60 μm. The simulation showed that the minimum energy requirement of the S-TSA process was less than that generated by fuel combustion that releases CO2. Energy consumption could be further reduced by increasing the adsorbent loading and decreasing the wall thickness of the contactors. Assuming that the lifetime of the adsorbent is 1–3 years, the estimated total cost of the DAC with S-TSA is $64–194 tCO2−1.
As the main energy source in an S-TSA cycle, steam can be significantly reduced if it is generated from low-grade renewable energy or industrial waste heat. Gebald et al.516 and Global Thermostat proposed the concept of S-TVSA, separately. By using the hybrid desorption step coupling vacuum, heating, and steam purge, solar energy or waste heat at temperatures below 100 °C can be used to generate purge steam for S-TVSA. Wijesiri et al.141,179 conducted experimental studies on the desorption process under the conditions of 0.12–0.56 bar and 70–100 °C (Fig. 59). They verified that the average desorption rate of S-TVSA reached 3.75 mmol g−1 h−1 at 0.12 bar and 100 °C, much higher than that of TVSA (0.23 mmol g−1 h−1). A later modeling study confirmed that steam purge in TVSA cycles decreases the energy consumption of the DAC and allows high CO2 production.180 When steam purge was considered, high evacuation pressures were favorable for reducing the specific electrical energy. Recently, Zhu et al.182 designed a three-step S-TVSA model based on a packed column for use in a DAC that comprehensively considered the effects of various operating parameters. They suggested that the adsorption of H2O during steam purging significantly reduced the heating time required to reach the target desorption temperature. The optimal case with a variational steam purge step operating at 90 °C and 0.3 bar achieved a CO2 productivity of 4.45 mol kg−1 day−1 and an energy requirement of 0.295 MJ mol−1, in which steam accounted for 80.6% of the total energy consumption.
 Fig. 59  Process flow of a S-TVSA-based DAC system (reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from MDPI, copyright 2019). 
Techno-economic assessments provided different opinions regarding the cost of DAC. A pilot-scale DAC using aqueous KOH sorbent estimated a total cost of $94–232 tCO2−1,51 which drops below $60 tCO2−1 by 2040.207 Adsorption-based DAC benefits from lower regeneration temperatures, and leads to a minimum total cost of $29–91 tCO2−1.83 On the other hand, some researchers hold more negative viewpoints that DAC technologies are far from being economically competitive to fight climate change, that is, costing $600–1000 tCO2−1.179,186 This difference is possibly due to the lack of publicly accessible data for the DAC prototype, causing insufficient process assumptions and specific system design.65 The adsorbent cycle life and stability are also critical to determining the operating cost but are often neglected in process design.54 Integrating low-cost industrial waste heat517 or low-carbon energy sources such as solar, geothermal, biomass, wind, and nuclear518,519 energy for regeneration is an effective approach to significantly cut down the energy cost and increase the physical potential capacity of DAC. The capture cost can be further reduced by 50%, of which international cooperation plays an important role due to lower business risk when countries commit and provide guarantees.520
In fact, while most economic assessments consider DAC infrastructure as a large-scale individual facility, modularized DAC can be designed to achieve mass production by increasing the number rather than the size. In this way, the cost of DAC should decrease rapidly according to the rule of learning-by-doing.521,522 It is expected that growth of three orders of magnitude in the cumulative installed capacity of DAC brings the total cost down to $100 tCO2−1. Another advantage of a modularized DAC is that it provides an independent installation location that can share a low cost for synthetic carbon-based fuels or storage in a sustainable energy system.184,185
7.4. Applications
Because DAC technology allows for CO2 capture anywhere, it is suitable for a variety of applications.86,523,524 In the following section, recent applications of DAC facilities for indoor CO2 removal, greenhouse CO2 fertilization and microbial cultivation, EOR, geological storage, and conversion to chemicals and fuels are discussed.

7.4.1. Indoor CO2 removal. 
Indoor CO2 removal research is motivated by concerns for human health, as well as the need to meet regulations for the indoor CO2 concentration limit.525 The CO2 levels in residential and public places can reach 400–2000 ppm or even higher in densely populated rooms. In international space stations, 3000–7000 ppm could be reached.6 Residents may experience nasal congestion, nausea, headaches, drowsiness, and dizziness as a result of high CO2 levels. DAC is being studied as a promising technology for use in indoor air quality management.
The pioneer study used amine-modified polymeric beads which were employed by NASA for CO2 capture in space shuttles.526 Since then, amine-functionalized adsorbents such as PEI-modified silica monoliths,193 PEI-impregnated resins,115 and MOFs188 have attracted considerable attention for the removal of indoor CO2. Out of safety considerations for air purifiers, the regeneration temperature is typically limited to a maximum of 70 °C.115,188 Humid indoor environments, quantified as increased relative humidity in the range of 0–50%, enhance CO2 adsorption capcities.191,193 In contrast to industrial plants, the temporal change in indoor humidity due to adsorption is also a matter of concern, and the coupling of DAC with an air handling unit was found to reduce the energy load of dehumidifying the air in buildings.209 Innovative ideas, such as incorporating adsorbents into latex for paints,9 coupled heating, ventilation, air conditioning, and DAC systems,527 offer the potential for energy-efficient ventilation and hygienically harmless provision strategies. Table 6 summarizes the investigated operating conditions, CO2 adsorption capacities, and desorption temperatures for indoor CO2 removal.
Table 6 Technical specifications of indoor-air capture




Materials
Sorbent type
CO2 (ppm)
Adsorption capacity (mmol g−1)
Desorption temperature (°C)
Desorption time (min)
Ref.




PEI10000-silica
Monolith
5000
1.33/2.28 (dry/90% RH)
90
18/20

193



TEPA70
Powder
800
1.3/1.6 (15/50% RH)
25
180

191



3000
1.33 (15% RH)


Paint
800
1.0/1.1 (15/50% RH)
25
180


3000
1.33 (15% RH)


PEI50
Powder
800
0.9/1.0 (15/50% RH)
25
180


3000
1.1 (15% RH)


Paint
800
0.5/0.65 (15/50% RH)
25
180


3000
0.8 (15% RH)


PEI-MR10
Resin
1000
2.06/2.27/2.72/2.92 (0/10/30/50% RH)
70
60

115



500
2.2 (50% RH)


1500
2.98 (50% RH)


2000
3.1 (50% RH)




Considering that CO2 adsorbents are still the subject of current research and are mostly available at small scales, their potential application in the building environment may offer easy market entry for commercial DAC installations in residential houses. Currently, indoor DAC only serves as a CO2 transporter from buildings to the atmosphere. According to an estimation in Germany, ventilation systems transport 32 million tons of CO2 per year.527 Further studies are required to investigate the use of this amount of CO2 as a carbon source.


7.4.2. CO2 fertilization. 
CO2 enrichment technologies used in cultivation not only boost yields but also help mitigate global warming. CO2 fertilization can be accomplished using flue gas, which has disadvantages such as high temperatures, contamination of SOx/NOx, toxic byproducts, and excessive CO2 levels. To achieve the cultivation CO2 concentrations of 1000–2000 ppm for terrestrial plants and 1%–6% for algae, DAC is deployable at reasonable costs.214 Due to the moderate requirement of CO2 concentration, desorption by steam or air is realizable, and desorption kinetics at mild temperatures 45–50 °C have been investigated.178,210 The low regeneration temperature can be provided by waste heat or solar heating. A consensus has yet to be reached regarding the economic cost, safety, and environmental impact of DAC adsorbents. The decrease in the fertilization effect of increasing CO2 content, possibly resulting from the limitations of foliar nutrient concentrations, such as nitrogen and phosphorus, or water availability, should be taken care of in biological carbon fixation.528
Microalgae are increasingly being recognized as important CO2 sequestration agents. Photosynthesis converts inorganic carbon into biochemical compounds, which can then be upgraded into products such as biofuels, biomedicine, and cosmetics through biorefinery.215,529 Most microalgae thrive in the pH range of 7.0–8.4. The majority of carbon fixation by microalgae occurs through bicarbonate ions rather than the diffusive uptake of CO2 in ambient air or dissolved in water.529,530 Injecting concentrated CO2 directly into the culture medium lowers the pH and damages enzymes, causing growth inhibition and cell death. Furthermore, the CO2 transportation cost from industrial sources was deemed to limit the microalgal production sites.215 Therefore, DAC is an attractive option to provide a bicarbonate pool for microalgal production.530
DAC has also been used as a carbon source for the production of microbial food. The pilot scale Neo-Carbon Food in Finland employs a hybrid biological–inorganic process in which autotrophic hydrogen-oxidizing bacteria convert H2 and O2 (from water electrolysis) and CO2 (from DAC) to protein.211 Microbial growth supported by more diverse chemicals, specifically methanol and formate produced from H2 and CO2, has been discussed (Fig. 60).212 Quantitative assessments showed that microbial food production outperforms agricultural cultivation in terms of caloric and protein yield per land area, providing a compelling alternative to sustainable nutrition supplies.
 Fig. 60  Schematic representation of solar energy converted to biomass. When hydrogen (case A) serves as an electron donor, CO2 is supplied to the bioreactor along with the H2 and O2 produced in the electrochemical cell. When formate (case B) and methanol (case C) serve as electron donors, CO2 is supplied to the electrochemical unit, and the only input gas supplied to the bioreactor is O2 (reproduced from ref. 212 with permission from the National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2021). 


7.4.3. Geological storage. 
CO2 geological storage has substantial potential to handle large amounts of CO2.531 A recent assessment of 794 oil reservoirs and sedimentary basins for aquifer storage in 87 countries revealed a potential storage capacity of 2082Gt with a CO2-enhanced oil recovery (CO2-EOR) of 168Gt (8%) and an aquifer storage of 1914 Gt (92%).532 CO2, primarily from natural reservoirs, has been used for tertiary oil recovery in the SACROC field in the Permian Basin, Texas, since 1972.533 In CO2-EOR, CO2 is injected into subsurface reservoirs to displace oil, and a large fraction is permanently trapped in different forms such as structural trapping, residual trapping, dissolution trapping, mineralization, and microbial methanogenesis.533,534 In the traditional oil industry, this trap is considered as CO2 retention, and the primary goal is to produce more oil with less CO2. As CCUS is increasingly recognized for its climate portfolio, CO2-EOR becomes economically and environmentally profitable by enhancing oil recovery and achieving CO2 storage. Nonetheless, the source must be changed to anthropogenic CO2 for negative emissions.533,535
CO2-enhanced gas recovery (CO2-EGR) has been implemented for CO2 sequestration and natural gas recovery, and is estimated to have a higher storage capacity of 390–750 Gt compared to 139–320 Gt of CO2-EOR, while being more complex than CO2-EOR.536,537 At the moment, CO2-EGR is mainly available at the pilot scale, and challenges such as CO2/CH4 separation cost due to miscibility, CO2 injectivity, selection criteria for suitable depleted gas reservoirs for CO2-EGR, and CO2 leakage must be investigated.538
Transportation costs must be considered when using CO2 from point-source carbon capture. In contrast, combining geological CO2 storage with DAC technology can reduce transportation costs and ensure social acceptability, as CO2 can be produced and stored in remote locations, such as deserts and offshore platforms. In 2019, Carbon Engineering and Oxy Low Carbon Ventures announced the design of a DAC facility to capture 500,000 tons of CO2 per year for the EOR in the Permian Basin oil field. It was suggested that DAC-CO2-EOR can provide an initial policy jumpstart to drive the DAC in the long run, but the trade-off between maximizing CO2 storage and minimizing oil costs, among other issues, requires the deployment of stringent policies.533 While studies on DAC-CO2-EGR are relatively rare, understanding the CO2 and CH4 adsorption mechanisms on the rock surface in CO2-EGR may provide insights into the design of DAC adsorbents.
The identification of secure geological reservoirs is critical to minimizing the risks of unintended CO2 release due to future leakage or seismic events, such as risks to human lives due to rapid escape, risks to ecosystems such as water acidification, techno-economic risks such as public resistance and impediment to commercial deployment, waste of capital and energy resources of carbon capture, and malfunction of the carbon network.246 Different methods have been developed for identifying secure storage sites based on geological data, such as depth, pressure, temperature, CO2 density, reservoir thickness, and seal thickness. Machine learning tools, such as rough-set-based machine learning246 and mixed-integer linear programing,245 have been applied in conjunction with expert knowledge to classify storage sites. Special consideration has been given to false-positive decisions, which resulted in insecure sites being identified as secure, as well as false negative decisions. These algorithms aim for zero false positives and minimal false negative probabilities for decision-makers.
Furthermore, passive carbonation in mine tailing storage facilities or deposits is significant for offsetting greenhouse gas emissions or sequestration of CO2 from DAC. Treatment strategies are being investigated to accelerate mineralization and base metal recovery.241–244


7.4.4. Conversion to fuels and chemicals. 
One of the most promising CO2 destinations is the synthesis of carbon-based chemicals or fuels, which can improve the carbon and energy efficiencies of existing technologies and stimulate the development of new sustainable industrial processes. The use of CO2, water, and renewable electricity as direct feedstocks for synthesis appears to be an appealing means of transitioning away from a reliance on fossil fuels.224
7.4.4.1. Nano-, micro- to mesoscopic scale studies. 
Green hydrogen produced by water splitting via electrolysis, thermolysis, photo-electrolysis, or biological processes is an important feedstock for the synthesis of hydrocarbons.71,539 Recent research has been conducted in the integrated system of water splitting and DAC to produce CO2, H2, O2, and electricity from solar energy.73 To address the large air flowrates in DAC, a solar updraft tower was applied, and solar heated high temperature steam at 1000 °C was used to dry Na2CO3 solutions during sodium extraction. Heat recuperation and the direct use of renewable energy are critical for integrated DAC and synthesis systems. Schäppi et al.540 designed a 5 kW pilot scale fuel production system entirely powered with solar energy. CO2 and H2O were both extracted directly from ambient air and converted to syngas before being further processed into liquid fuels, as shown in Fig. 61. Substantial improvements are required to upscale the thermochemical production of solar fuels.
 Fig. 61  5 kW pilot scale solar reactor design (reproduced from ref. 540 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2022). 
Methane can be transported and stored using existing infrastructure and used in current power and heat devices. Methanation, which is often considered to be a combination of Sabatier and CO methanation reactions, has attracted much attention. A DAC/methanation process was designed in which the solid sorbent K2CO3/Al2O3222,541,542 was used for DAC, and regeneration occurred in a hydrogen environment for further Sabatier conversion on the nickel catalyst NKM-2V.222 More than 99% CO2 conversion was achieved. Because of the deactivation of Ni-based catalysts at low temperatures caused by the reaction between Ni and CO, a Ru/Al2O3 catalyst was developed that can work at 325–400 °C, down from 425 °C for NKM-2V, with a promising conversion ratio of 98%.543,544 Drechsler and Agar proposed an integrated DAC, electrolysis, and methanation process that focuses on synergies through process coupling.68,70
In addition to using highly concentrated CO2, there are technologies that convert dilute CO2 directly into hydrocarbons through DAC and in situ catalysis. Kosaka et al.75 reported a Ni-based dual-functional catalyst, Ni/Na-γ-Al2O3, which was active in both CO2 capture and methanation. Two steps of the reaction occurred in a fixed-bed contactor. Firstly, a dilute CO2 gas was fed into the contactor, followed by purging to remove the unreacted CO2. Finally, H2 was fed into the contactor to reduce the CO2. Thus, it can avoid the conventional CO2 regeneration which requires large amounts of heat. Intermittent gas supply restricts productivity per unit time. It was shown that elevated pressure promoted both capture and conversion. For both high-concentration CO2 (5–13%) and atmospheric concentrations (100–400 ppm), more than 90% CO2 conversion and CH4 selectivity were achieved. At atmospheric CO2 concentrations, CH4 production up to 160 μmol g−1-catalyst has been reported. Catalyst degradation was reported to be insignificant when O2 was present in the CO2 capture process.
Ce0.8Zr0.2O2 powder was found to be a multi-functional material for CO2 adsorption and subsequent conversion to dimethyl carbonate under gaseous methanol stream feeding, despite the product being at the ppm level.237 This study was meaningful because the conversion occurred at atmospheric pressure and over a mild temperature range of 70–110 °C.
Methanol (MeOH) is one of the most important feedstocks in the chemical industry.545,546 It can also be used to directly produce renewable fuels or power fuel cells. CO2 can be converted to CO first and then to MeOH; alternatively, it can be directly reduced to MeOH. Smith et al.224 investigated a solar-powered integrated system for DAC, electrolysis, and MeOH synthesis. The five processes considered included photovoltaic solar energy to electricity, DAC based on potassium hydroxide solvent, bipolar membrane electrodialysis for regeneration, electrolysis of water and CO2 to produce CO and H2, and methanol synthesis using Cu/ZnO-based catalysts (Fig. 62). This study emphasized the role of a CO2 electrolyzer in the PtX process and aimed to provide relevant studies to contribute to energy transition.
 Fig. 62  Integrated DAC, electrolysis, and methanol synthesis system using a CO2 electrolyzer (reproduced from ref. 224 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019). 
Bos et al.547 designed a liquid out/gas in concept reactor (LOGIC) for the direct conversion of CO2 to MeOH based on a commercial Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst. This design was later used to assess the cost and efficiency of wind power in the MeOH system.71 Sen et al.223,548,549 developed a one-pot DAC-MeOH system using alkali hydroxide in ethylene glycol for CO2 capture from air and subsequent in situ conversion to methanol through Ru-PNP catalysts. In an integrated single-tank system, such a process proceeds at mild temperatures (100–140 °C) and yields 60% MeOH conversion rate. Unfortunately, dehydrogenation of ethylene glycol and the formation of carboxylates were observed. A later work549 investigated the glycol solvent-assisted conversion of CO2 and H2 to MeOH using a Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst. The use of non-noble metal-based catalysts is advantageous for commercial applications. Similar eletroreduction of CO2 is shown in Fig. 63.74
 Fig. 63  Coupled CO2 capture and in situ electroreduction (reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2021). 
For the aviation and heavy-duty transportation sectors, the use of synthetic liquid fuels is considered to be an effective way to achieve carbon neutrality. According to a recent analysis,232 the share of CO2 from DAC for the production of Power-to-Liquid demonstrated a maximum quota of up to 50% by 2050 for Germany. Fischer–Tropsch synthesis is commonly used to produce drop-in fuels.230,232,234,235 A renewable energy driven pilot plant (SOLETAIR) was experimentally demonstrated in 2017 in Finland.233 The pilot plant consisted of a solar PV power plant, an amine-functioned DAC unit, a PEM water electrolyzer for hydrogen production, a RWGS, and a cobalt-based catalytic F–T synthesis unit, and produced 6.2 kg day−1 of combined F-T oil and wax.
The production of other chemicals such as carbon nanotubes,236 urea and its derivatives,550,551 and carboxylic acids552 from atmospheric air is also technically feasible, but further scaling-up verification is currently lacking.
7.4.4.2. Integrated system. 
An integrated PtX system requires the integration of mass and/or energy between different processes in the pursuit of high degrees of synergy. For instance, for an appropriate electrolysis cell voltage, the heat requirement of the DAC–electrolysis–methanation system can be compensated for by the exothermic Sabatier reaction and vapor condensation heat release.68,70 Water recycling from co-adsorption in DAC, evaporation in electrolysis, and generation in the methanation process allows not only minor water loss but also energy integration. The theoretical energy and mass recirculation in SOLETAIR provides a promising energy efficiency of 47% and a carbon efficiency of 94%.233 Careful consideration should be paid to the operation pressure, temperature, electrolysis cell voltage, slip streams of air in the DAC, and hydrogen loss.
7.4.4.3. National scale analysis. 
Synthetic chemicals and fuels from DAC have been demonstrated to be critical for achieving a national scale transition to 100% renewable energy. Bridging technologies allow for stronger coupling of all these sectors. For instance, DAC connects the power, heat, transportation, and industry sectors. An analysis of the Philippines’ path to 2050 reveals that synthetic fuel, using DAC-CO2 as the feedstock, facilitates sustainability in the transportation sector, particularly in marine and aviation transport.229 In another modelling for the power, heat, transport, and industry sectors in Kazakhstan,249 DAC requires heat from the heat generation system. The excess heat from synthetic fuel production can cover a portion of the low-temperature heat demand for district heating systems. F–T synthesis using DAC–CO2 and H2 from water electrolysis as feedstock supplies byproducts, such as naphtha, to the chemical industry. All these technologies are based on electricity from the power sector. Additional flexibility is mainly provided to the energy system using electrolyzers. Integration of sectors with more flexible demands, lower final product storage costs, or the ability to alleviate the mismatch between the overall energy supply and demand reduces the levelized cost of energy and accelerates the defossilization of the power sector. In a study on global green ammonia production,69 it was mentioned that the waste heat from the Haber–Bosch unit and electrolysis process can be used in DAC systems. Moreover, using waste heat from fusion power plants to power a low-temperature DAC was found to reduce the effective fusion levelized cost of electricity by approximately 35%.248
7.4.4.4. Techno-economic analysis. 
In a comparison between DAC-CCS and DAC-CCU to MeOH,225 it was concluded that DAC-CCS was better than DAC-CCU using indexes of CO2 mitigation potential and cost. However, when carbon taxes, electricity prices, and learning rates are considered, CCU was demonstrated to be more competitive than the business-as-usual scenario under certain conditions. Some studies may have overestimated the CCU cost and its reliance on electricity because heat requirements were assumed to be met by electricity without any heat integration.231 Some have focused on the effects of different sources of CO2 and H2. Do et al.553 provided an analysis focusing on eight final products and four conversion technologies and concluded that the H2 price was the dominant factor in the unit production cost. However, the variations in costs of CO2 capture from different pathways were not considered in this work, which could have a significant impact.224 Tavasoli et al.238 considered various CO2 feedstocks from petrochemicals, biogas, landfill gas, flue gas, and DAC for the photocatalytic dry reforming process as shown in Fig. 64; in most cases, the required catalyst activity enables the feedstock to compete with petrochemical alternatives. The highest production cost comes from using biogas as the feedstock option, which differs from other studies.37 On the other hand, in other studies, DAC in combination with H2 from electrolysis produced more costly methane compared to others such as point sources and biogas.221
 Fig. 64  Potential feedstock sources and downstream products that can be converted into or made from synthesis gas (or syngas) produced via solar dry reforming.238 
Techno-economic analyses also directly show the extent of cost reduction using different approaches, efficiencies, and production costs of different energy carriers. For the production of liquefied synthetic methane based on DAC and electrolysis, various approaches including DAC system redesign, energy integration, and scale-up were demonstrated to reduce the DAC cost from $557 t−1 to $114 t−1.217 On comparing methane and H2, it was found that, although the power-to-hydrogen pathway was more efficient than the power-to-methane pathway, it was more expensive due to the hydrogen storage costs. In general, DAC and electrolyzer costs account for a large portion of the overall production costs and determine the overall energy efficiencies.71,217,220,226,230
Emphasis was also given to the cost of using different renewable energies and the inflexibility of processes, such as DAC, water desalination, and fuel synthesis. Berger et al.219 studied methane production in North Africa using a combination of solar and wind energy as well as its delivery to northwestern European markets. Sensitivity analysis showed that the full electricity supply from solar PV was more expensive than that in the combination case. Wind power is sometimes considered to have greater carbon reduction than solar energy because of the carbon-intensive manufacturing of solar panels.235 Curtailment was observed due to the inflexible processes despite the consideration of various storage nodes; thus, relaxing the inflexibility was presumed to have a pronounced impact on the plant design.219,230 A more complicated study considered different chemical production routines such as the FA-routine and direct-routine for OME1 production. Thus, the most energy-efficient and environmentally beneficial combination could be identified.37,226
By analyzing efficiencies, costs, and physical sizes, techno-economic analysis can also be used to identify gaps between current technologies and scaled plants. For industrial-scale solar-driven methanol production,224 the physical sizes required for each sub-process were compared with the largest existing/planned plants, and significant gaps for DAC and CO2 electrolysis of three and six orders of magnitude, respectively, were determined. A similar analysis is necessary for adsorption-based DAC technologies to understand the ability to scale up to sizes required to have a global impact, as well as the gaps in operating conditions and scales between research and industrial applications.

8. Perspectives and conclusions
In this paper, the state-of-the-art progress in the development of DAC technology in the fields of material synthesis, adsorption mechanism, system design, and application was presented and discussed. Adsorption-based DAC has experienced rapid development during the last decade, especially through the extensive exploration of amine-functionalized porous silicas, zeolites, MOFs, carbons, resins, and LDHs as air capture materials. At the same time, a better understanding of the correspondence of the structure, functionalization, and properties of supports is required. To improve the technical feasibility of DAC, it is necessary to develop an efficient gas–solid contactor that combines adsorbent research and separation processes. Additionally, systematic and in-depth techno-economic analyses of the large-scale application of DAC via adsorption are still lacking.
The key metrics for evaluating the effectiveness of DAC adsorbents include the CO2 selectivity of the adsorbent in the presence of other gas compounds, CO2 working capacity of the adsorbent during adsorption–desorption cycling, adsorption and desorption kinetics, energy required for the cycle or regenerative adsorption, chemical stability, mechanical stress robustness of the adsorbent during long-term cycling, and performance over a wide range of temperatures and humidity levels,554 as well as the economic and environmental viability of the adsorbent in the cradle-to-grave full life cycle assessment. The final evaluation of adsorbents requires the analysis of the material structure (e.g., particles, fibers, and monoliths) in a full-scale process, possible cycle configurations (e.g., temperature, pressure, and concentration changes), and adsorption unit configurations (e.g., fixed-bed, fluidized-bed, and rotating-bed). New materials, devices, and architectures are likely to be developed collaboratively to meet the current and future carbon-capture needs.
Recent work indicates the importance of a better understanding of the synergistic enhancement between amines and supports. Polyamine-impregnated ordered mesoporous silica is still the most promising DAC adsorbent, with a good balance between capture performance and cost. The concept of “mixed-polyamines”, which has been successfully adopted in amine solvent systems, may be attractive to further enhance the amine efficiencies.133,555–557 While amine loading is considered to be the main factor determining the CO2 adsorption capacity of DAC adsorbents, the textural characteristics and surface microstructure of the support also significantly affect the overall CO2-capture efficiency. Amine-functionalized LDHs and LDH-derived mixed oxides are a new family of DAC adsorbents, which have either unexpectedly high adsorption capacities111,318 or ultrafast kinetics120 under ultradilute conditions. LDHs can form ideal CO2 diffusion channels with the help of slit-like mesopores from exfoliated nanosheets and additional pore creation during calcination. Even in the absence of additives, amines can be strongly attached and well-dispersed over defect-rich LDHs. Furthermore, the morphology and chemical properties of LDHs can be adjusted by changing the type and ratio of divalent and trivalent metal cations, as well as interlayer anions, thus providing infinite possibilities for the assembly of DAC adsorbents. More importantly, LDHs can be massively produced and shaped at a low cost, typically in the range of $2–8 kg−1.
Prototypical polyamines degrade oxidatively at elevated temperatures. For instance, temperatures above 70 °C cause the oxidative degradation of Lewatit VP OC 1065, a commercialized DAC adsorbent. Therefore, preventing oxidative degradation is an important topic that should be widely explored. To date, TEPA-loaded adsorbents that anchored PEI have exhibited very high CO2 adsorption capacities at various operating temperatures,116 but they become less stable at elevated temperatures. It would be highly attractive if the thermal and oxidative stability of supported TEPA or other novel amines could be enhanced through surface modification and additives. Balancing the CO2 adsorption capacity, manufacturing costs, and oxidative resistance is an additional challenge.
In addition to O2, the effect of water vapor in air on CO2 adsorption is critical. The co-adsorption and desorption of H2O and CO2, followed by solar-driven catalytic conversion, is technically feasible for producing drop-in fuels from air,540 and the improvement of efficiencies relies on an in-depth understanding of the co-adsorption behavior on DAC adsorbents. The establishment of mechanistic co-adsorption isotherm models for Lewatit VP OC 1065 is a meaningful attempt. Further work can be conducted on the high-throughput screening of the co-adsorption properties of H2O and CO2 on new amine-functionalized DAC adsorbents. The development of hydrophobic DAC adsorbents may also be useful in specific applications to avoid amine leaching, increased regeneration energy, and structural degradation due to H2O co-adsorption. Although several ultramicroporous physisorbents have been confirmed to exhibit trace CO2-capture capacities with low water affinities,558–560 the development of hydrophobic amine-containing adsorbents for DAC is still less explored.
The exact chemisorbing CO2 species on the surface of the aminopolymer under ultradilute conditions is still under debate because of the overlap of the IR bands and signal loss in conventional experiments. Combining advanced in situ spectroscopy and theoretical approaches can provide a molecular-level understanding of the CO2 adsorption mechanism on DAC adsorbents. Notably, the existence of hydrated bicarbonate through CO2 chemisorption has been confirmed previously.145,281 Further mechanistic studies on DAC adsorbents are required to investigate the role of hydrogen bonding as a CO2 binder, the effect of the densities and types of surface amines, the inconsistency of amine efficiency with the theoretical value, the enhancement upon exposure to H2O, and the detailed pathway leading to the adsorption of CO2 on amines.
Several novel DAC adsorbents have been reviewed. Amine-tethered MOFs are a series of adsorbents with great potential for DAC, despite most recent research focusing on their application at higher CO2 concentrations. Adsorption/desorption kinetics requires detailed investigations for ultradilute CO2 conditions. While diamine-tethered Mg2(dobpdc) materials maintain a record CO2 adsorption capacity of 3 mmol/g at 0.4 mbar due to the synergistic insertion adsorption mechanism,423 many MOF-based materials are too expensive to be synthesized on a large scale. Finding inexpensive alternative supports, with abundant coordinatively unsaturated metals, is appealing for the large-scale synthesis of such adsorbents. LDH-derived materials containing high-density coordinatively unsaturated sites may be a potential choice. For instance, ultrathin and ultrafine ZnAl-LDH with abundant unsaturated Zn has been successfully used to achieve efficient photocatalytic CO2 reduction.561
Special attention should also be paid to the design of gas–solid gas contactors with extremely low pressure drops and enhanced heat and mass transfer. Surprisingly, while rotating wheel-based contactors meet the abovementioned requirements, they have not yet been used for DAC. In addition, numerous experiments are required to verify the feasibility of structured-adsorbent enlargement. Studies on the DAC performance of structured adsorbents are limited; thus, a good understanding of adsorbent-shaping optimization is required. Novel shaping techniques, such as fiber spinning and 3D printing, are powerful tools for early-stage structure design, and coating and extrusion are more likely applied for scale-up fabrication.562 As 80% of the energy consumption of DAC comes from the regeneration stage, using renewable energy or industrial waste heat-driven steam purge, at negative pressures and reduced regeneration temperatures, can effectively reduce the DAC operating costs.182
Distributed DAC systems have the potential to achieve considerable social and environmental impacts. By boosting plants, DAC fertilization for the production of food, feed, or other biochemical compounds can help tackle global hunger. A portable DAC system for controlling air quality can benefit every home. For a synergistic DAC coupled with CO2 conversion, a novel power system capable of delivering chemicals, work, and heat could be a new option in the transportation sector. A viable starting point could be DAC combined with dry reforming or electrochemical conversion for both carbon reduction and energy storage. Chemical energy can be converted into work and power via syngas combustion or fuel cells. Commercialized equipment and a comprehensive techno-economic analysis are still urgently required. For a holistic analysis, machine learning applied to DAC-related complex systems featuring multiple variables or options is also worth studying, as it is expected to provide the most viable or cost-effective technical path.
The current knowledge on climate reveals that combining low-carbon energy or renewable energy with a DAC system is crucial for reducing the effects of CO2 on the global climate. At present, wind and photovoltaic power are proposed to drive the regeneration of the DAC system. Continuous research should be conducted to investigate the thermodynamic match between DAC and renewable sources. Additionally, actual demonstration systems are required. Other types of low-carbon energy, for example, low-grade waste heat and geothermal energy, can also be considered. However, the CO2 emissions caused by energy utilization should be carefully considered; otherwise, the advantages of DAC can be easily negated.
DAC can be recognized as a separate air handling system; in other words, it removes CO2 from ambient air even though the concentration is ultra-diluted, similar to how the widely adopted air conditioning/purification system removes water vapor/contaminants from the atmosphere. As many adsorbents are also effective in adsorbing water vapor and contaminants, future research should focus on developing adsorption systems that can remove both CO2 and water vapor. This can be realized by exploiting suitable adsorbents that can simultaneously remove CO2 and water vapor and regenerate them at a similar energy consumption. An air conditioning system is necessary even in the carbon-neutralization period if its energy for regeneration can also be utilized to drive CO2 reduction; that is, no auxiliary material and energy are consumed by the DAC. As mentioned earlier, the present LCA results confirmed that the adverse environmental effects of DAC mainly originate from material and energy sources; thus, such a system is worth investigating.
Abbreviations

2-ampdCyclic diamine 2-(aminomethyl)piperidine
AHTSAAmine hybrid titania/silsesquioxane composite aerogel
AMBS(3-Amino-3-methylbutyl)trimethoxysilane
AMOSTAqueous miscible organic solvent treatment
APS3-(Aminopropyl)trimethoxysilane
ARAfforestation/reforestation
BECCSBioenergy carbon capture and storage
B-ethylBis(2-aminoethyl)amine
B-propylBis(2-aminopropyl)amine
C1Aminomethyl-
C22-Aminoethyl-
C44-Aminobutyl-
C55-Aminoamyl-
CCCapture capacity
CCSCarbon capture and storage
CH2DETA3-(2-Aminoethylamino)methylsilane
CHAPS
N-Cyclohexylaminopropyl-
COFCovalent organic framework
CPGControlled pore glass
CP-MASCross-polarization magic-angle spinning
CTABCetyltrimethylammonium bromide
CTACCetyltrimethylammonium chloride
den1,1-Dimethylethylenediamine
dobdc2,5-Dioxido-1,4-benzenedicarboxylate
dobpdc4,4-Dioxido-3,3-biphenyldicarboxylate
dotpdc4,4′′-Dioxido-[1,1′:4′,1′′-terphenyl]-3,3′′-dicarboxylate
DACDirect air capture
DACCSDirect air carbon capture and storage
DFTDensity functional theory
DI3-(2-Aminoethylamino)propyl-
DMA
N,N-Dimethylacetamide
DMAPS(N,N-Dimethylaminopropyl)trimethoxysilane
DOEDepartment of Energy
DRIFTDiffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform
eEthyl
enEthylenediamine
epn1-Ethylpropane-1,3-diamine
EBEpoxybutane
EDEthylenediamine
EGREnhanced gas recovery
EI-den
N
1,N1,N3,N3-Tetrakis(2-aminoethyl)propane-1,3-diamine
EOREnhanced oil recovery
EtSBA-15Ethane-bridged SBA-15
EtSNTEthane-bridged organosilica nanotube
EUEuropean Union
FTIRFourier-transform infrared
GDPGross domestic product
HBPGHyperbranched polyglycerol
HBSHierarchical bimodal mesoporous silica
HMSHexagonal mesoporous silica
HS-DACHumidity-swing-based DAC
IAMIntegrated assessment model
IEAInternational Energy Agency
IERIon exchange resin
ILIonic liquid
LCALife cycle assessment
LCFSLow Carbon Fuel Standard
LDHLayered double hydroxide
LPPILinear PPI

L-Propyl3-(2-Aminopropylamino)propylsilane
men1-Methylethylenediamine
mmen
N,N′-Dimethylethylenediamine
MABMaximum affordable budget
MAPS
N-Methylaminopropyl-
MASMagic-angle spinning
MCFMesocellular siliceous foam
MEA-PCCMonoethanolamine-based post-combustion capture
MeOHMethanol
MFSMelamine formaldehyde sponge
MMOMixed metal oxide
MMSNMicro-mesoporous silica nanoparticle
MOFMetal–organic framework
MXDA
meta-Xylylenediamine
NBAPS
N-Butylaminopropyl-
NETNegative emission technology
NFCNanofibrillated cellulose
NMRNuclear magnetic resonance
NOHMNanoparticle organic hybrid material
NZENet-zero-emission
O&MOperating and maintenance
OXDA
ortho-Xylylenediamine
pc-dobpdc3,3′-Dioxidobiphenyl-4,4′-dicarboxylate
PAAPolyallylamine
PDPropylenediamine
PDMSPolydimethylsiloxane
PEGPoly(ethylene glycol)
PEHAPentaethylenehexamine
PEIPolyethyleneimine
PGAPoly(glycidyl amine)
PHAPS(N-Phenylaminopropyl)trimethoxysilane
Ph-X-YYAlkyl–aryl amine-rich small molecules
PI-den
N
1,N1,N3,N3-Tetrakis(3-aminopropyl)propane-1,3-diamine
POPropylene oxide
PPGPoly(propylene guanidine)
PPIPoly(propylene imine)
PtXPower-to-X
PVAPoly(vinyl alcohol)
PVDFPoly(vinylidene fluoride)
PXDA
para-xylylenediamine
QCMQuartz crystal microbalance
QCSQuaternized chitosan
RHRelative humidity
scCO2Supercritical CO2
sMonoTrimethoxy[3-(methylamino)propyl]silane
SBSPolystyrene-block-polybutadiene-block-polystyrene
SIPSolvent-impregnated polymer
Span80Sorbitan monooleate
S-TCSASteam-assisted TCSA
S-TSASteam-assisted temperature swing adsorption
S-TVSASteam-assisted TVSA

T
ads
Adsorption temperature
TBAPS(tert-Butylaminopropyl)trimethoxysilane
TCSATemperature concentration swing adsorption

T
des
Desorption temperature
TEATetraethylammonium
TEPATetraethylenepentamine
TETATriethylenetetramine
TMATetramethylammonium
TPTATripropylenetetramine
TRENTris(2-aminoethyl)amine
TRI3-[2-(2-Aminoethylamino)ethylamino]propyl-
TSA-DACTemperature swing adsorption DAC
TSPTrisodiumphosphate
TVSATemperature vacuum swing adsorption
UKUnited Kingdom
UREA
N,N′-Bis(3-trimethoxysilpropyl)urea
USUnited States
vdWvan der Waals
VPSAVacuum pressure swing adsorption
VSAVacuum swing adsorption
WADSTWeighted-average dual-site Toth
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy

Author contributions
Conceptualization, X. Z., T. G., and R. W.; data curation, X. Z.; funding acquisition, X. Z., T. G., and J. L.; project administration, X. Z.; resources, X. Z.; supervision, T. G., R. W., J. L., and D. O. H.; writing – original draft, X. Z. (Sections 1.1.1, 1.1.3, 1.2, 1.3, 2.1.2, 2.2.2, 4, 5, 6.1, 6.2, 7.3, 7.4, and 8), W. X. (Sections 1.1.1, 1.1.3, 1.2, 1.3, 2.1.2, 2.2.2, 6.2, 7.3, 7.4, and 8), J. W. (Sections 2.1.1, 2.2.1, 2.3, and 7.1), Y. M. (Sections 1.1.4 and 3), C. X. (Sections 6.3 and 7.4), C. C. (Sections 4 and 6.1), B. G. (Section 6.1), Z. G. (Section 4), F. Y. (Sections 1.1.2 and 7.2), M. Z. (Sections 1.2 and 7.2), J. L. (Sections 1.1.4 and 3), T. G. (Sections 1.1.2, 2.1.1, 2.2.1, 2.3, 7.1, 7.2, and 8), and R. W. (Sections 6.3 and 8); writing – review and editing, X. Z., C. C., T. G., D. O. H., and R. W.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (52006135), the Shanghai Agricultural Science and Technology Program (2022-02-08-00-12-F01176), the International Science and Technology Cooperation Project (20160712800), and the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (21DZ1206200). W. Xie is grateful for the financial support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Project Number 229243862. J. Li would like to acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (72140008).
References
D. Welsby, J. Price, S. Pye and P. Ekins, Nature, 2021, 597, 230–234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Uden, P. Dargusch and C. Greig, Joule, 2021, 5, 1956–1970 CrossRef .
B. S. Koelbl, M. A. van den Broek, A. P. C. Faaij and D. P. van Vuuren, Clim. Change, 2014, 123, 461–476 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rogelj, G. Luderer, R. C. Pietzcker, E. Kriegler, M. Schaeffer, V. Krey and K. Riahi, Nat. Clim. Change, 2015, 5, 519–527 Search PubMed .
K. Zickfeld, D. Azevedo, S. Mathesius and H. D. Matthews, Nat. Clim. Change, 2021, 11, 613–617 CrossRef CAS .
J. O. Asibor, P. T. Clough, S. A. Nabavi and V. Manovic, J. Environ. Manage., 2021, 294, 113039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bui, C. S. Adjiman, A. Bardow, E. J. Anthony, A. Boston, S. Brown, P. S. Fennell, S. Fuss, A. Galindo, L. A. Hackett, J. P. Hallett, H. J. Herzog, G. Jackson, J. Kemper, S. Krevor, G. C. Maitland, M. Matuszewski, I. S. Metcalfe, C. Petit, G. Puxty, J. Reimer, D. M. Reiner, E. S. Rubin, S. A. Scott, N. Shah, B. Smit, J. P. M. Trusler, P. Webley, J. Wilcox and N. Mac Dowell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1062–1176 RSC .
F. Stenzel, P. Greve, W. Lucht, S. Tramberend, Y. Wada and D. Gerten, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Keyßer and M. Lenzen, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2676 CrossRef PubMed .
D. P. Keller, A. Lenton, V. Scott, N. E. Vaughan, N. Bauer, D. Ji, C. D. Jones, B. Kravitz, H. Muri and K. Zickfeld, Geosci. Model Dev., 2018, 11, 1133–1160 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fuhrman, H. McJeon, P. Patel, S. C. Doney, W. M. Shobe and A. F. Clarens, Nat. Clim. Change, 2020, 10, 920–927 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pradhan, W. M. Shobe, J. Fuhrman, H. McJeon, M. Binsted, S. C. Doney and A. F. Clarens, Front. Clim., 2021, 3, 660787 CrossRef .
C. Chen and M. Tavoni, Clim. Change, 2013, 118, 59–72 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fuss, W. H. Reuter, J. Szolgayová and M. Obersteiner, Clim. Change, 2013, 118, 73–87 CrossRef CAS .
A. Marcucci, S. Kypreos and E. Panos, Clim. Change, 2017, 144, 181–193 CrossRef .
J. Strefler, N. Bauer, E. Kriegler, A. Popp, A. Giannousakis and O. Edenhofer, Environ. Res. Lett., 2018, 13, 044015 CrossRef .
G. Realmonte, L. Drouet, A. Gambhir, J. Glynn, A. Hawkes, A. C. Köberle and M. Tavoni, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Supekar, T.-H. Lim and S. J. Skerlos, Environ. Res. Lett., 2019, 14, 084013 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. T. Bistline and G. J. Blanford, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 3732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Butnar, O. Broad, B. Solano Rodriguez and P. E. Dodds, GCB Bioenergy, 2020, 12, 198–212 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chatterjee and K.-W. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Cox, E. Spence and N. Pidgeon, Nat. Clim. Change, 2020, 10, 744–749 CrossRef CAS .
G. Realmonte, L. Drouet, A. Gambhir, J. Glynn, A. Hawkes, A. C. Köberle and M. Tavoni, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hanna, A. Abdulla, Y. Xu and D. G. Victor, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jenkins, E. Mitchell-Larson, M. C. Ives, S. Haszeldine and M. Allen, Joule, 2021, 5, 2777–2796 CrossRef CAS .
J. Strefler, E. Kriegler, N. Bauer, G. Luderer, R. C. Pietzcker, A. Giannousakis and O. Edenhofer, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Net Zero by 2050 – A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector, International Energy Agency (IEA), 2021, https://www.iea.org/events/net-zero-by-2050-a-roadmap-for-the-global-energy-system.
J. Fuhrman, A. Clarens, K. Calvin, S. C. Doney, J. A. Edmonds, P. O’Rourke, P. Patel, S. Pradhan, W. Shobe and H. McJeon, Environ. Res. Lett., 2021, 16, 114012 CrossRef CAS .

Annual Report of Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Storage in China, Chinese Academy of Environmental Planning, 2021, https://www.caep.org.cn/sy/dqhj/gh/202107/t20210725_851241.shtml.
E. Kato and A. Kurosawa, Sustainable Sci., 2021, 16, 463–475 CrossRef .
C. Pozo, Á. Galán-Martín, D. M. Reiner, N. Mac Dowell and G. Guillén-Gosálbez, Nat. Clim. Change, 2020, 10, 640–646 CrossRef CAS .
K. Riahi, C. Bertram, D. Huppmann, J. Rogelj, V. Bosetti, A.-M. Cabardos, A. Deppermann, L. Drouet, S. Frank, O. Fricko, S. Fujimori, M. Harmsen, T. Hasegawa, V. Krey, G. Luderer, L. Paroussos, R. Schaeffer, M. Weitzel, B. van der Zwaan, Z. Vrontisi, F. D. Longa, J. Després, F. Fosse, K. Fragkiadakis, M. Gusti, F. Humpenöder, K. Keramidas, P. Kishimoto, E. Kriegler, M. Meinshausen, L. P. Nogueira, K. Oshiro, A. Popp, P. R. R. Rochedo, G. Ünlü, B. van Ruijven, J. Takakura, M. Tavoni, D. van Vuuren and B. Zakeri, Nat. Clim. Change, 2021, 11, 1063–1069 CrossRef .
F. Babonneau, A. Badran, M. Benlahrech, A. Haurie, M. Schenckery and M. Vielle, Clim. Change, 2021, 165, 64 CrossRef CAS .
S. Deutz and A. Bardow, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 203–213 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Davis, N. S. Lewis, M. Shaner, S. Aggarwal, D. Arent, I. L. Azevedo, S. M. Benson, T. Bradley, J. Brouwer, Y.-M. Chiang, C. T. M. Clack, A. Cohen, S. Doig, J. Edmonds, P. Fennell, C. B. Field, B. Hannegan, B.-M. Hodge, M. I. Hoffert, E. Ingersoll, P. Jaramillo, K. S. Lackner, K. J. Mach, M. Mastrandrea, J. Ogden, P. F. Peterson, D. L. Sanchez, D. Sperling, J. Stagner, J. E. Trancik, C.-J. Yang and K. Caldeira, Science, 2018, 360, eaas9793 CrossRef PubMed .
C. van der Giesen, C. J. Meinrenken, R. Kleijn, B. Sprecher, K. S. Lackner and G. J. Kramer, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 1024–1034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Deutz, D. Bongartz, B. Heuser, A. Kätelhön, L. Schulze Langenhorst, A. Omari, M. Walters, J. Klankermayer, W. Leitner, A. Mitsos, S. Pischinger and A. Bardow, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 331–343 RSC .
F. Creutzig, C. Breyer, J. Hilaire, J. Minx, G. P. Peters and R. Socolow, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1805–1817 RSC .
M. Z. Jacobson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3567–3574 RSC .
G. Mori, S. Coccolo, R. Castello and J.-L. Scartezzini, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2019, 1343, 012118 CrossRef CAS .
N. Thonemann and M. Pizzol, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2253–2263 RSC .
P. Arora, R. Chance, H. Hendrix, M. J. Realff, V. M. Thomas and Y. Yuan, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 40, 101213 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Liu, N. K. Sandhu, S. T. McCoy and J. A. Bergerson, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 3129–3142 RSC .
A. Schreiber, A. Peschel, B. Hentschel and P. Zapp, Front. Energy Res, 2020, 8, 533850 CrossRef .
J. Sillman, V. Uusitalo, V. Ruuskanen, L. Ojala, H. Kahiluoto, R. Soukka and J. Ahola, Int. J. Life Cycle Ass., 2020, 25, 2190–2203 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Wevers, L. Shen and M. van der Spek, Front. Energy Res, 2020, 8, 104 CrossRef .
K. Madhu, S. Pauliuk, S. Dhathri and F. Creutzig, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 1035–1044 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Rodríguez-Vallejo, A. Valente, G. Guillén-Gosálbez and B. Chachuat, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 2504–2516 RSC .
U. Singh and L. M. Colosi, Appl. Energy, 2021, 285, 116394 CrossRef CAS .
T. Terlouw, C. Bauer, L. Rosa and M. Mazzotti, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1701–1721 RSC .
D. W. Keith, G. Holmes, D. St Angelo and K. Heidel, Joule, 2018, 2, 1573–1594 CrossRef CAS .
S. U. Rege, R. T. Yang and M. A. Buzanowski, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2000, 55, 4827–4838 CrossRef CAS .

          L. A. DallBauman and J. E. Finn, in Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., ed. A. Dąbrowski, Elsevier,  1999, vol. 120, pp. 455–471 Search PubMed .
B. R. Sutherland, Joule, 2019, 3, 1571–1573 CrossRef .
P. Smith, S. J. Davis, F. Creutzig, S. Fuss, J. Minx, B. Gabrielle, E. Kato, R. B. Jackson, A. Cowie, E. Kriegler, D. P. van Vuuren, J. Rogelj, P. Ciais, J. Milne, J. G. Canadell, D. McCollum, G. Peters, R. Andrew, V. Krey, G. Shrestha, P. Friedlingstein, T. Gasser, A. Grübler, W. K. Heidug, M. Jonas, C. D. Jones, F. Kraxner, E. Littleton, J. Lowe, J. R. Moreira, N. Nakicenovic, M. Obersteiner, A. Patwardhan, M. Rogner, E. Rubin, A. Sharifi, A. Torvanger, Y. Yamagata, J. Edmonds and C. Yongsung, Nat. Clim. Change, 2016, 6, 42–50 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bednar, M. Obersteiner, A. Baklanov, M. Thomson, F. Wagner, O. Geden, M. Allen and J. W. Hall, Nature, 2021, 596, 377–383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Nikulshina, M. E. Gálvez and A. Steinfeld, Chem. Eng. J., 2007, 129, 75–83 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Stolaroff, D. W. Keith and G. V. Lowry, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 2728–2735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Seipp, N. J. Williams, M. K. Kidder and R. Custelcean, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1042–1045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. Brethomé, N. J. Williams, C. A. Seipp, M. K. Kidder and R. Custelcean, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 553–559 CrossRef .
R. Custelcean, Chem, 2021, 7, 2848–2852 CAS .
R. Custelcean, K. A. Garrabrant, P. Agullo and N. J. Williams, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100385 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wilcox, R. Haghpanah, E. C. Rupp, J. He and K. Lee, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol, 2014, 5, 479–505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sinha, L. A. Darunte, C. W. Jones, M. J. Realff and Y. Kawajiri, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 750–764 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sinha and M. J. Realff, AiChE J, 2019, 65, e16607 CrossRef .
M. Erans, E. S. Sanz-Pérez, D. P. Hanak, Z. Clulow, D. M. Reiner and G. A. Mutch, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 1360–1405 RSC .
A. Gambhir and M. Tavoni, One Earth, 2019, 1, 405–409 CrossRef .
C. Drechsler and D. W. Agar, Appl. Energy, 2020, 273, 115076 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fasihi, R. Weiss, J. Savolainen and C. Breyer, Appl. Energy, 2021, 294, 116170 CrossRef CAS .
C. Drechsler and D. W. Agar, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2021, 105, 103230 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Bos, S. R. A. Kersten and D. W. F. Brilman, Appl. Energy, 2020, 264, 114672 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gutknecht, S. Ó. Snæbjörnsdóttir, B. Sigfússon, E. S. Aradóttir and L. Charles, Energy Procedia, 2018, 146, 129–134 CrossRef CAS .
C. Brady, M. E. Davis and B. Xu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 25001–25007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Sullivan, A. Goryachev, I. A. Digdaya, X. Li, H. A. Atwater, D. A. Vermaas and C. Xiang, Nat. Catal, 2021, 4, 952–958 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kosaka, Y. Liu, S.-Y. Chen, T. Mochizuki, H. Takagi, A. Urakawa and K. Kuramoto, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 3452–3463 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lawson, K. Baamran, K. Newport, T. Alghamadi, G. Jacobs, F. Rezaei and A. A. Rownaghi, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 303, 120907 CrossRef CAS .
N. Grant, A. Hawkes, S. Mittal and A. Gambhir, Joule, 2021, 5, 2593–2605 CrossRef CAS .
V. Campbell-Arvai, P. S. Hart, K. T. Raimi and K. S. Wolske, Clim. Change, 2017, 143, 321–336 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hansen, M. Sato, P. Kharecha, K. von Schuckmann, D. J. Beerling, J. Cao, S. Marcott, V. Masson-Delmotte, M. J. Prather, E. J. Rohling, J. Shakun, P. Smith, A. Lacis, G. Russell and R. Ruedy, Earth Syst. Dyn., 2017, 8, 577–616 CrossRef .
K. S. Wolske, K. T. Raimi, V. Campbell-Arvai and P. S. Hart, Clim. Change, 2019, 152, 345–361 CrossRef CAS .
P. Viebahn, A. Scholz and O. Zelt, Energies, 2019, 12, 3443 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Daggash, C. F. Heuberger and N. Mac Dowell, Int. J. Greenh. Gas Control, 2019, 81, 181–198 CrossRef CAS .
H. Azarabadi and K. S. Lackner, Appl. Energy, 2019, 250, 959–975 CrossRef .
M. Honegger and D. Reiner, Clim. Policy, 2018, 18, 306–321 CrossRef .
A. Aghahosseini, D. Bogdanov and C. Breyer, Energy Strateg. Rev., 2020, 28, 100466 CrossRef .
J. Meckling and E. Biber, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Main work programme of Horizon Europe for the period 2021–2022, European Commission, 2021, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_21_2993.

Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener, HM Government, 2021, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/net-zero-strategy.

          National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, Negative Emissions Technologies and Reliable Sequestration: A Research Agenda, The National Academies Press, Washington, DC,  2019 Search PubMed .

The Long-Term Strategy of the United States – Pathways to Net-Zero Greenhouse Gas Emissions by 2050, The United States Department of State and the United States Executive Office of the President, 2021, https://unfccc.int/documents/308100.

An energy sector roadmap to carbon neutrality in China, International Energy Agency (IEA), 2021, https://www.iea.org/reports/an-energy-sector-roadmap-to-carbon-neutrality-in-china.

Shanghai Science and Technology Innovation Action Plan Project, Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality, 2021, https://stcsm.sh.gov.cn/zwgk/kyjhxm/xmsb/20210623/996a33eb6f7e4a8ba0aedb4f3381bea1.html.
C. W. Jones, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol., 2011, 2, 31–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Sanz-Pérez, C. R. Murdock, S. A. Didas and C. W. Jones, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 11840–11876 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Minx, W. F. Lamb, M. W. Callaghan, S. Fuss, J. Hilaire, F. Creutzig, T. Amann, T. Beringer, W. de Oliveira Garcia, J. Hartmann, T. Khanna, D. Lenzi, G. Luderer, G. F. Nemet, J. Rogelj, P. Smith, J. L. Vicente Vicente, J. Wilcox and M. del Mar Zamora Dominguez, Environ. Res. Lett., 2018, 13, 063001 CrossRef .
S. A. Didas, S. Choi, W. Chaikittisilp and C. W. Jones, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 2680–2687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. F. Nemet, M. W. Callaghan, F. Creutzig, S. Fuss, J. Hartmann, J. Hilaire, W. F. Lamb, J. C. Minx, S. Rogers and P. Smith, Environ. Res. Lett., 2018, 13, 063003 CrossRef .
X. Shi, H. Xiao, H. Azarabadi, J. Song, X. Wu, X. Chen and K. S. Lackner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6984–7006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Siegelman, E. J. Kim and J. R. Long, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 1060–1072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Realff, Y. J. Min, C. W. Jones and R. P. Lively, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2021, 38, 2375–2380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ozkan, A.-A. Akhavi, W. C. Coley, R. Shang and Y. Ma, Chem, 2022, 8, 141–173 CAS .
A. Cherevotan, J. Raj and S. C. Peter, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 27271–27303 RSC .
S. Lawson, X. Li, H. Thakkar, A. A. Rownaghi and F. Rezaei, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 6246–6291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Kolle, M. Fayaz and A. Sayari, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 7280–7345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jahandar Lashaki, S. Khiavi and A. Sayari, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3320–3405 RSC .
O. Gutiérrez-Sánchez, B. Bohlen, N. Daems, M. Bulut, D. Pant and T. Breugelmans, ChemElectroChem, 2022, 9, e202101540 CrossRef .
F. Mantei, R. E. Ali, C. Baensch, S. Voelker, P. Haltenort, J. Burger, R.-U. Dietrich, N. V. d Assen, A. Schaadt, J. Sauer and O. Salem, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 528–549 RSC .
R. Sharifian, R. M. Wagterveld, I. A. Digdaya, C. Xiang and D. A. Vermaas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 781–814 RSC .
J. Sillman, L. Nygren, H. Kahiluoto, V. Ruuskanen, A. Tamminen, C. Bajamundi, M. Nappa, M. Wuokko, T. Lindh, P. Vainikka, J.-P. Pitkänen and J. Ahola, Global Food Secur.-Agr., 2019, 22, 25–32 CrossRef .
G. Rim, T. G. Feric, T. Moore and A.-H. A. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010047 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, T. Ge, F. Yang, M. Lyu, C. Chen, D. O'Hare and R. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16421–16428 RSC .
H. T. Kwon, M. A. Sakwa-Novak, S. H. Pang, A. R. Sujan, E. W. Ping and C. W. Jones, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 5229–5237 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, M. B. Myers, F. G. Versteeg, B. Pejcic, C. Heath and C.
D. Wood, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 7151–7154 RSC .
E. S. Sanz-Pérez, A. Arencibia, G. Calleja and R. Sanz, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 260, 235–244 CrossRef .
W. Wang, F. Liu, Q. Zhang, G. Yu and S. Deng, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 399, 125734 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miao, Z. He, X. Zhu, D. Izikowitz and J. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 131875 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Kumar, C. Rosu, A. R. Sujan, M. A. Sakwa-Novak, E. W. Ping and C. W. Jones, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 10971–10982 CAS .
M. L. Sarazen, M. A. Sakwa-Novak, E. W. Ping and C. W. Jones, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 7338–7345 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Sujan, D. R. Kumar, M. Sakwa-Novak, E. W. Ping, B. Hu, S. J. Park and C. W. Jones, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater, 2019, 1, 3137–3147 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, M. Lyu, T. Ge, J. Wu, C. Chen, F. Yang, D. O’Hare and R. Wang, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100484 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, K. Wang, Z. Hu, Y.-P. Chen, W. Verdegaal, D. Zhao and H.-C. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7867–7874 RSC .
E. S. Sanz-Pérez, A. Fernández, A. Arencibia, G. Calleja and R. Sanz, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 373, 1286–1294 CrossRef .
M. Jahandar Lashaki and A. Sayari, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 1260–1269 CrossRef CAS .
S. Loganathan and A. K. Ghoshal, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 308, 827–839 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and R. T. Yang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 8295–8304 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Potter, K. M. Cho, J. J. Lee and C. W. Jones, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2192–2201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Lee, C.-J. Yoo, C.-H. Chen, S. E. Hayes, C. Sievers and C. W. Jones, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 12279–12292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-T. Anyanwu, Y. Wang and R. T. Yang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2021, 60, 6277–6286 CrossRef CAS .
J.-T. Anyanwu, Y. Wang and R. T. Yang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 7072–7079 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Pang, L.-C. Lee, M. A. Sakwa-Novak, R. P. Lively and C. W. Jones, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3627–3630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Goeppert, H. Zhang, R. Sen, H. Dang and G. K. S. Prakash, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1712–1723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Pang, R. P. Lively and C. W. Jones, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 2628–2637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Rosu, S. H. Pang, A. R. Sujan, M. A. Sakwa-Novak, E. W. Ping and C. W. Jones, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 38085–38097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-J. Yoo, S. J. Park and C. W. Jones, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 7061–7071 CrossRef CAS .
I. Nezam, J. Xie, K. W. Golub, J. Carneiro, K. Olsen, E. W. Ping, C. W. Jones and M. A. Sakwa-Novak, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 8477–8486 CrossRef CAS .
C. Drechsler and D. W. Agar, Energy, 2020, 192, 116587 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Bos, S. Pietersen and D. W. F. Brilman, Chem. Eng. Sci.: X, 2019, 2, 100020 CAS .
Y. C. Ng, L. Yang and Z. R. Jovanovic, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 13987–13998 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Wijesiri, G. P. Knowles, H. Yeasmin, A. F. A. Hoadley and A. L. Chaffee, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 3293–3303 CrossRef CAS .
J. Young, E. García-Díez, S. Garcia and M. van der Spek, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5377–5394 RSC .
R. P. Wijesiri, G. P. Knowles, H. Yeasmin, A. F. A. Hoadley and A. L. Chaffee, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 15606–15618 CrossRef CAS .
R. Afonso, M. Sardo, L. Mafra and J. R. B. Gomes, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 2758–2767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhai and S. S. C. Chuang, Energy Technol.-GER, 2017, 5, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sardo, R. Afonso, J. Juźków, M. Pacheco, M. Bordonhos, M. L. Pinto, J. R. B. Gomes and L. Mafra, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 5542–5555 RSC .
C.-H. Chen, D. Shimon, J. J. Lee, F. Mentink-Vigier, I. Hung, C. Sievers, C. W. Jones and S. E. Hayes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8648–8651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Buijs, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 14705–14708 CrossRef CAS .
W. Buijs, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 17760–17767 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Kim, R. L. Siegelman, H. Z. H. Jiang, A. C. Forse, J.-H. Lee, J. D. Martell, P. J. Milner, J. M. Falkowski, J. B. Neaton, J. A. Reimer, S. C. Weston and J. R. Long, Science, 2020, 369, 392–396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Forse, P. J. Milner, J.-H. Lee, H. N. Redfearn, J. Oktawiec, R. L. Siegelman, J. D. Martell, B. Dinakar, L. B. Porter-Zasada, M. I. Gonzalez, J. B. Neaton, J. R. Long and J. A. Reimer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 18016–18031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Siegelman, T. M. McDonald, M. I. Gonzalez, J. D. Martell, P. J. Milner, J. A. Mason, A. H. Berger, A. S. Bhown and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10526–10538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Martell, L. B. Porter-Zasada, A. C. Forse, R. L. Siegelman, M. I. Gonzalez, J. Oktawiec, T. Runčevski, J. Xu, M. Srebro-Hooper, P. J. Milner, K. A. Colwell, J. Autschbach, J. A. Reimer and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16000–16012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Siegelman, P. J. Milner, A. C. Forse, J.-H. Lee, K. A. Colwell, J. B. Neaton, J. A. Reimer, S. C. Weston and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 13171–13186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Milner, R. L. Siegelman, A. C. Forse, M. I. Gonzalez, T. Runčevski, J. D. Martell, J. A. Reimer and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13541–13553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Y. Mao, P. J. Milner, J.-H. Lee, A. C. Forse, E. J. Kim, R. L. Siegelman, C. M. McGuirk, L. B. Porter-Zasada, J. B. Neaton, J. A. Reimer and J. R. Long, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 19468–19477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Lee, R. L. Siegelman, L. Maserati, T. Rangel, B. A. Helms, J. R. Long and J. B. Neaton, Chem. Sci, 2018, 9, 5197–5206 RSC .
P. J. Milner, J. D. Martell, R. L. Siegelman, D. Gygi, S. C. Weston and J. R. Long, Chem. Sci, 2018, 9, 160–174 RSC .
M. Kang, J. E. Kim, D. W. Kang, H. Y. Lee, D. Moon and C. S. Hong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8177–8183 RSC .
X. Shi, H. Xiao, K. Kanamori, A. Yonezu, K. S. Lackner and X. Chen, Joule, 2020, 4, 1823–1837 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hou, D. R. Kumar, Y. Jin, Y. Wu, J. J. Lee, C. W. Jones and T. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 413, 127532 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, C. Hou, K. Ge, K. S. Lackner, X. Shi, J. Liu, M. Fang and Z. Luo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 3986–3990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, X. Wang, C. Hou and J. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 21429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, J. Song, Y. Chen, H. Xiao, X. Shi, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, Y.-L. He and X. Chen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 16507–16515 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, L. Zhu, Y. Yao, X. Shi, Y. Zhang, H. Xiao and X. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 14811–14817 RSC .
H. Xiao, X. Shi, Y. Zhang, X. Liao, F. Hao, K. S. Lackner and X. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 27435–27441 RSC .
J. Song, L. Zhu, X. Shi, Y. Liu, H. Xiao and X. Chen, Energy Fuel, 2019, 33, 6562–6567 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hou, Y. Wu, T. Wang, X. Wang and X. Gao, Energy Fuel, 2019, 33, 1745–1752 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, K. Ge, Y. Wu, K. Chen, M. Fang and Z. Luo, Energy Fuel, 2017, 31, 11127–11133 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Rather, P. Srikrishnarka, A. Baidya, A. Shome, T. Pradeep and U. Manna, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 10541–10549 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guo, S. Liang, J. Liu, J. Jin and J. Mi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 3853–3864 CrossRef CAS .
A. Baidya, A. Yatheendran, T. Ahuja, C. Sudhakar, S. K. Das, R. H. A. Ras and T. Pradeep, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1901013 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, R. Q. Wang, A. Gonzalez-Diaz, A. Smallbone, R. O. Lamidi and A. P. Roskilly, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2020, 169, 114973 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hüllen, J. Zhai, S. H. Kim, A. Sinha, M. J. Realff and F. Boukouvala, Comput. Chem. Eng., 2020, 136, 106519 CrossRef .
S. M. W. Wilson and F. H. Tezel, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 8783–8794 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Sadiq, M. P. Batten, X. Mulet, C. Freeman, K. Konstas, J. I. Mardel, J. Tanner, D. Ng, X. Wang, S. Howard, M. R. Hill and A. W. Thornton, Adv. Sustain. Syst, 2020, 4, 2000101 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, Y. Hoshino and G. Inoue, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 383, 123123 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhao, L. Liu, L. Zhao, S. Deng, S. Li, Y. Zhang and H. Li, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 183, 418–426 CrossRef CAS .
J. Elfving, C. Bajamundi, J. Kauppinen and T. Sainio, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 22, 270–277 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rodríguez-Mosqueda, J. Rutgers, E. A. Bramer and G. Brem, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 29, 65–73 CrossRef .
R. P. Wijesiri, G. P. Knowles, H. Yeasmin, A. F. A. Hoadley and A. L. Chaffee, Processes, 2019, 7, 503 CrossRef CAS .
V. Stampi-Bombelli, M. van der Spek and M. Mazzotti, Adsorption, 2020, 26, 1183–1197 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sinha, L. A. Darunte, C. W. Jones, M. J. Realff and Y. Kawajiri, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 503–505 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, T. Ge, F. Yang and R. Wang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 137, 110651 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sabatino, A. Grimm, F. Gallucci, M. van Sint Annaland, G. J. Kramer and M. Gazzani, Joule, 2021, 5, 2047–2076 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Eisaman, Joule, 2020, 4, 516–520 CrossRef .
C. Breyer, M. Fasihi, C. Bajamundi and F. Creutzig, Joule, 2019, 3, 2053–2057 CrossRef .
D. Krekel, R. C. Samsun, R. Peters and D. Stolten, Appl. Energy, 2018, 218, 361–381 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Sujan, S. H. Pang, G. Zhu, C. W. Jones and R. P. Lively, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 5264–5273 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, J. R. Park, J. H. Choe, S. Kim, M. Kang, D. W. Kang, J. Y. Kim, Y. W. Jeong and C. S. Hong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 50534–50540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Darunte, Y. Terada, C. R. Murdock, K. S. Walton, D. S. Sholl and C. W. Jones, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 17042–17050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Thakkar, S. Eastman, A. Al-Mamoori, A. Hajari, A. A. Rownaghi and F. Rezaei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7489–7498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Krishnamurthy, B. Salunkhe, A. Zore, A. Rownaghi, T. Schuman and F. Rezaei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 16594–16604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Armstrong, X. Shi, B. Shan, K. Lackner and B. Mu, AiChE J., 2019, 65, 214–220 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. Zhou, L. Fan, L. Chen, L. Li, Z. P. Xu and G. Qian, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 19465–19474 CrossRef CAS .
J. Elfving, J. Kauppinen, M. Jegoroff, V. Ruuskanen, L. Järvinen and T. Sainio, Chem. Eng. J, 2021, 404, 126337 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Darunte, T. Sen, C. Bhawanani, K. S. Walton, D. S. Sholl, M. J. Realff and C. W. Jones, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 366–377 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Bos, V. Kroeze, S. Sutanto and D. W. F. Brilman, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 11141–11153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. von Hippel, Clim. Change, 2018, 148, 491–501 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Petersen and O. R. Luca, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 12533–12536 RSC .
C. Drechsler and D. W. Agar, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2020, 92, 282–287 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Caram, R. Gupta, H. Thomann, F. Ni, S. C. Weston and M. Afeworki, Int. J. Greenh. Gas Control, 2020, 97, 102986 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yu and W. Brilman, Appl. Sci., 2020, 10, 1080 CrossRef CAS .
C. Drechsler and D. W. Agar, Comput. Chem. Eng., 2019, 126, 520–534 CrossRef CAS .
L. Joppa, A. Luers, E. Willmott, S. J. Friedmann, S. P. Hamburg and R. Broze, Nature, 2021, 597, 629–632 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. J. Haertel, M. McNutt, M. Ozkan, E. S. P. Aradóttir, K. T. Valsaraj, P. R. Sanberg, S. Talati and J. Wilcox, Chem, 2021, 7, 2831–2834 CAS .
J. Tollefson, Nature, 2018, 558, 173–174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Sakwa-Novak, Global Thermostat: direct air capture update, in 2020 Integrated Project Review Meeting – Carbon Capture, 2020, https://netl.doe.gov/2020CC-proceedings.
M. Fasihi, O. Efimova and C. Breyer, J. Clean. Prod., 2019, 224, 957–980 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Bryan and F. Ben Salamah, Building-Integrated Carbon Capturing 2.0: Moving a Concept from R&D to a Prototype, in Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture, 2018, pp. 110–115.
M. K. Kim, L. Baldini, H. Leibundgut and J. A. Wurzbacher, Appl. Energy, 2020, 259, 112869 CrossRef CAS .
C.-l Hou, Y.-s Wu, Y.-z Jiao, J. Huang, T. Wang, M.-x Fang and H. Zhou, J. Zhejiang Univ., Sci. A, 2017, 18, 819–830 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ruuskanen, G. Givirovskiy, J. Elfving, P. Kokkonen, A. Karvinen, L. Järvinen, J. Sillman, M. Vainikka and J. Ahola, J. Clean. Prod., 2021, 278, 123423 CrossRef CAS .
D. Leger, S. Matassa, E. Noor, A. Shepon, R. Milo and A. Bar-Even, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2021, 118, e2015025118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Sagues, S. Park, H. Jameel and D. L. Sanchez, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 3135–3146 RSC .
J. Wilcox, P. C. Psarras and S. Liguori, Environ. Res. Lett., 2017, 12, 065001 CrossRef .
C. H. Greene, M. E. Huntley, I. Archibald, L. N. Gerber, D. L. Sills, J. Granados, C. M. Beal and M. J. Walsh, Earth's Future, 2017, 5, 278–284 CrossRef .

          L. Weimann, A. Grimm, J. Nienhuis, P. Gabrielli, G. J. Kramer and M. Gazzania, in Computer Aided Chemical Engineering, eds. S. Pierucci, F. Manenti, G. L. Bozzano and D. Manca, Elsevier,  2020, vol. 48, pp. 1471–1476 Search PubMed .
A. Kiani, M. Lejeune, C. Li, J. Patel and P. Feron, J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng., 2021, 94, 104079 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jeong-Potter and R. Farrauto, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 282, 119416 CrossRef CAS .
M. Berger, D. Radu, G. Detienne, T. Deschuyteneer, A. Richel and D. Ernst, Front. Energy Res, 2021, 9, 671279 CrossRef .
J. G. Yao, M. Bui and N. M. Dowell, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 3147–3162 RSC .
R. Peters, M. Baltruweit, T. Grube, R. C. Samsun and D. Stolten, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 34, 616–634 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Veselovskaya, P. D. Parunin and A. G. Okunev, Catal. Today, 2017, 298, 117–123 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sen, A. Goeppert, S. Kar and G. K. S. Prakash, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 4544–4549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Smith, T. Burdyny, D. A. Vermaas and H. Geerlings, Joule, 2019, 3, 1822–1834 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Daggash, C. F. Patzschke, C. F. Heuberger, L. Zhu, K. Hellgardt, P. S. Fennell, A. N. Bhave, A. Bardow and N. Mac Dowell, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 1153–1169 RSC .
M. Held, Y. Tönges, D. Pélerin, M. Härtl, G. Wachtmeister and J. Burger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1019–1034 RSC .
W. Luc, B. H. Ko, S. Kattel, S. Li, D. Su, J. G. Chen and F. Jiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 9902–9909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. H. Goede, EPJ Web Conf., 2018, 189, 00010 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gulagi, M. Alcanzare, D. Bogdanov, E. Esparcia, J. Ocon and C. Breyer, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 144, 110934 CrossRef .
E. D. Sherwin, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2021, 55, 7583–7594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Becattini, P. Gabrielli and M. Mazzotti, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2021, 60, 6848–6862 CrossRef CAS .
S. Drünert, U. Neuling, T. Zitscher and M. Kaltschmitt, Appl. Energy, 2020, 277, 115578 CrossRef .
F. V. Vázquez, J. Koponen, V. Ruuskanen, C. Bajamundi, A. Kosonen, P. Simell, J. Ahola, C. Frilund, J. Elfving, M. Reinikainen, N. Heikkinen, J. Kauppinen and P. Piermartini, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 28, 235–246 CrossRef .
M. Marchese, G. Buffo, M. Santarelli and A. Lanzini, J. CO2 Util., 2021, 46, 101487 CrossRef CAS .
A. García, J. Monsalve-Serrano, D. Villalta, R. Lago Sari, V. Gordillo Zavaleta and P. Gaillard, Appl. Energy, 2019, 253, 113622 CrossRef .
X. Wang, X. Liu, G. Licht and S. Licht, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 15146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wotzka, R. Dühren, T. Suhrbier, M. Polyakov and S. Wohlrab, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 5013–5017 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Tavasoli, M. Preston and G. Ozin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3098–3109 RSC .
A. Maggi, M. Wenzel and K. Sundmacher, Front. Energy Res, 2020, 8, 161 CrossRef .
K. Leben, R. Motlep, A. Konist, T. Pihu and K. Kirsimae, Oil Shale, 2021, 38, 65–88 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rausis, A. Ćwik and I. Casanova, Int. J. Greenh. Gas Control, 2020, 100, 103114 CrossRef CAS .
I. M. Power, G. M. Dipple, P. M. D. Bradshaw and A. L. Harrison, Int. J. Greenh. Gas Control, 2020, 94, 102895 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Hills, N. Tripathi and P. J. Carey, Front. Energy Res., 2020, 8, 142 CrossRef .
J. L. Hamilton, S. A. Wilson, B. Morgan, A. L. Harrison, C. C. Turvey, D. J. Paterson, G. M. Dipple and G. Southam, Econ. Geol., 2020, 115, 303–323 CrossRef .
R. R. Tan, K. B. Aviso, J. I. B. Janairo and M. A. B. Promentilla, J. Clean. Prod., 2020, 272, 122181 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Aviso, J. I. B. Janairo, M. A. B. Promentilla and R. R. Tan, Clean. Technol. Environ., 2019, 21, 1655–1664 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gonzalo, P. Raul, T. Rodolfo and E.-E. Eleonora, Ct&F-Ciencia Tecnologia Y Futuro, 2020, 10, 39–47 Search PubMed .
M. C. Handley, D. Slesinski and S. C. Hsu, J. Fusion Energy, 2021, 40, 18 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bogdanov, A. Gulagi, M. Fasihi and C. Breyer, Appl. Energy, 2021, 283, 116273 CrossRef .
L. Yang and Z. Li, IOP Conf. Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci., 2020, 508, 012022 CrossRef .
A. M. Varghese and G. N. Karanikolos, Int. J. Greenh. Gas Control, 2020, 96, 103005 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, C. Ma, M. Xu, S. Wang and L. Xu, Curr. Pollut. Rep., 2019, 5, 272–293 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Park, J. J. Lee, C. B. Hoyt, D. R. Kumar and C. W. Jones, Adsorption, 2020, 26, 89–101 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bali, T. T. Chen, W. Chaikittisilp and C. W. Jones, Energy Fuel, 2013, 27, 1547–1554 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zerze, A. Tipirneni and A. J. McHugh, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2017, 52, 2513–2522 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chaikittisilp, R. Khunsupat, T. T. Chen and C. W. Jones, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 14203–14210 CrossRef CAS .
A. Koutsianos, L. B. Hamdy, C.-J. Yoo, J. J. Lee, M. Taddei, J. M. Urban-Klaehn, J. Dryzek, C. W. Jones, A. R. Barron and E. Andreoli, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 10827–10837 RSC .
H. Thakkar, A. Issa, A. A. Rownaghi and F. Rezaei, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2017, 40, 1999–2007 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qi, Y. Han, G. Bai, Q. Liu, Z. Fei, X. Chen, Z. Zhang, J. Tang, M. Cui and X. Qiao, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 106709 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Darunte, A. D. Oetomo, K. S. Walton, D. S. Sholl and C. W. Jones, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 5761–5768 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heydari-Gorji, Y. Belmabkhout and A. Sayari, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 12411–12416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, J. Jiang, F. Yan, S. Tian and X. Chen, Appl. Energy, 2014, 136, 750–755 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Hahn, J. Jelic, E. Berger, K. Reuter, A. Jentys and J. A. Lercher, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2016, 120, 1988–1995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Heo, M. Choi, D. Choi, H. Jeong, H. Y. Kim, H. Jeon, S. W. Kang and J. Hong, J. Membrane Sci., 2020, 601, 117905 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Lee, C.-H. Chen, D. Shimon, S. E. Hayes, C. Sievers and C. W. Jones, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 23480–23487 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, C. Song, J. M. Andresen, B. G. Miller and A. W. Scaroni, Energy Fuel, 2002, 16, 1463–1469 CrossRef CAS .
A. Holewinski, M. A. Sakwa-Novak and C. W. Jones, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11749–11759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Rother, U. Tumuluri, K. Huang, W. T. Heller, S. Dai, J.-M. Carrillo and B. G. Sumpter, Langmuir, 2021, 37, 4622–4631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Choi, J. H. Drese and C. W. Jones, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 796–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Cogswell, H. Jiang, J. Ramberger, D. Accetta, R. J. Willey and S. Choi, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 4534–4541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Cogswell, Z. Xie, A. Wolek, Y. Wang, A. Stavola, M. Finkenaur, E. Gilmore, M. Lanzillotti and S. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8526–8536 RSC .
J. Fonseca and S. Choi, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 3983–3992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Brunelli, S. A. Didas, K. Venkatasubbaiah and C. W. Jones, J.
Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13950–13953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Didas, A. R. Kulkarni, D. S. Sholl and C. W. Jones, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 2058–2064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sayari and Y. Belmabkhout, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6312–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Stuckert and R. T. Yang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 10257–10264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wagner, B. Steen, G. Johansson, E. Zanghellini, P. Jacobsson and P. Johansson, Int. J. Spectrosc., 2013, 690186 Search PubMed .
C. Gebald, J. A. Wurzbacher, A. Borgschulte, T. Zimmermann and A. Steinfeld, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 2497–2504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. He, M. Fan, B. Dutcher, S. Cui, X.-D. Shen, Y. Kong, A. G. Russell and P. McCurdy, Chem. Eng. J, 2012, 189–190, 13–23 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bali, J. Leisen, G. S. Foo, C. Sievers and C. W. Jones, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 3145–3156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Didas, M. A. Sakwa-Novak, G. S. Foo, C. Sievers and C. W. Jones, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 4194–4200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kong, X. Shen, S. Cui and M. Fan, Green Chem, 2015, 17, 3436–3445 RSC .
Y. Kong, G. Jiang, Y. Wu, S. Cui and X. Shen, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 306, 362–368 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, Y. Kong, Z. Zhao and X. Shen, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 25911–25917 RSC .
L. F. Feitosa, B. B. Pozes, A. S. Silva, L. F. Castro, L. S. C. Júnior, C. B. Quitete and M. A. Fraga, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 104951 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, Y. Kong, H. Zou, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhong and X. Shen, J. Porous Mater., 2021, 28, 93–97 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wadi, A. Golmakani, V. Manovic and S. A. Nabavi, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2021, 60, 13309–13317 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Alkhabbaz, P. Bollini, G. S. Foo, C. Sievers and C. W. Jones, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13170–13173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sayari, A. Heydari-Gorji and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13834–13842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Wurzbacher, C. Gebald and A. Steinfeld, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3584–3592 RSC .
C. Gebald, J. A. Wurzbacher, P. Tingaut, T. Zimmermann and A. Steinfeld, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 9101–9108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sánchez-Vicente, L. Stevens, C. Pando and A. Cabañas, Energies, 2020, 13, 5804 CrossRef .
Y. Belmabkhout, R. Serna-Guerrero and A. Sayari, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 359–365 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Belmabkhout, R. Serna-Guerrero and A. Sayari, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2010, 65, 3695–3698 CrossRef CAS .
J.-T. Anyanwu, Y. Wang and R. T. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 131561 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, J. P. Sculley, D. Yuan, R. Krishna and H.-C. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 4057–4061 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. E. Harlick and A. Sayari, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2006, 45, 3248–3255 CrossRef CAS .
J.-T. Anyanwu, Y. Wang and R. T. Yang, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2021, 241, 116717 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kishor and A. K. Ghoshal, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 262, 882–890 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Lee, C. Sievers and C. W. Jones, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 22551–22560 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sánchez-Vicente, C. Pando, M. Cortijo and A. Cabañas, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2014, 193, 145–153 CrossRef .
Y. Sánchez-Vicente, L. A. Stevens, C. Pando, M. J. Torralvo, C. E. Snape, T. C. Drage and A. Cabañas, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 264, 886–898 CrossRef .
Y. Sánchez-Vicente, O. Alonso-Pastor, C. Pando and A. Cabañas, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 2016, 103, 152–156 CrossRef .
Y. Kuwahara, D.-Y. Kang, J. R. Copeland, P. Bollini, C. Sievers, T. Kamegawa, H. Yamashita and C. W. Jones, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 16649–16664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Sakwa-Novak, A. Holewinski, C. B. Hoyt, C.-J. Yoo, S.-H. Chai, S. Dai and C. W. Jones, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 9356–9365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, J. Chen, L. Tao, H. Li and Q. Yang, ChemNanoMat, 2020, 6, 1096–1103 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Parzuchowski, M. Stefańska, A. Świderska, M. Roguszewska and M. Zybert, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 27, 145–160 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, H. Huang, M. Wang, L. Yao, W. Qiao, D. Long and L. Ling, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54, 5319–5327 CrossRef CAS .
L. Keller, B. Ohs, J. Lenhart, L. Abduly, P. Blanke and M. Wessling, Carbon, 2018, 126, 338–345 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chaikittisilp, H.-J. Kim and C. W. Jones, Energy Fuel, 2011, 25, 5528–5537 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Sakwa-Novak and C. W. Jones, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9245–9255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Sakwa-Novak, C.-J. Yoo, S. Tan, F. Rashidi and C. W. Jones, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1859–1868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cai, F. Bao, J. Gao, T. Chen, S. Wang and R. Ma, Environ. Technol., 2015, 36, 1273–1280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, M. Wang, W. Li, W. Qiao, D. Long and L. Ling, AiChE J, 2015, 61, 972–980 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, S. Deng, H. Wei, B. Wang, J. Huang and G. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6937–6945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Si, S. Ye, D. Zhang, B. Yang, Y. Hou, Z. Li, X. Zhang, J. Zhu and L. Lei, Can. J. Chem. Eng., 2019, 97, 697–701 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rim, F. Kong, M. Song, C. Rosu, P. Priyadarshini, R. P. Lively and C. W. Jones, JACS Au, 2022, 2, 380–393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhao, J. Xiao, W. Gao and Q. Wang, J. Energy Chem, 2022, 68, 401–410 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, P. Zhao, Y. Xu, Z. Yang, H. Cheng and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 34340–34354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Rao, M. Wang, Z. Shang, Y. Hou, G. Fan and J. Li, Energy Fuel, 2018, 32, 670–677 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhou, K. He, W. Lv, Y. Chen, S. Tang, C. Liu, H. Yue and B. Liang, Energy Fuel, 2019, 33, 1774–1784 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu and X. Yu, Appl. Energy, 2018, 211, 1080–1088 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kishor and A. K. Ghoshal, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 6078–6087 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, G. Bai, J. Yang, J. Huang, Z. Fei, Q. Liu, Z. Zhang, X. Chen, J. Tang, M. Cui and X. Qiao, J. Solid State Chem, 2020, 290, 121531 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Potter, S. H. Pang and C. W. Jones, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 117–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Zakharova, N. Masoumifard, Y. Hu, J. Han, F. Kleitz and F.-G. Fontaine, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13199–13210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-Q. Liu, L. Wang, Z.-G. Huang, C.-Q. Li, W. Li, R.-X. Li and W.-H. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4371–4381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Son, J.-S. Choi and W.-S. Ahn, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 113, 31–40 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Knowles, Z. Liang and A. L. Chaffee, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 238, 14–18 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, L. Zhang, Y. Zhang, K. Qiao, Z. Yan and S. Komarneni, Chem. Eng. J, 2011, 168, 918–924 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, P. Bollini, S. A. Didas, S. Choi, J. H. Drese and C. W. Jones, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3363–3372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Chintapalli, S. Meckler, G. Iftime, R. Pandey, M. Louie and E. S. M. Beh, Tunable, rapid uptake, aminopolymer aerogel sorbent for direct air capture of CO2, US Pat., 17/211588,  2021 Search PubMed .
N. Linneen, R. Pfeffer and Y. S. Lin, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2013, 176, 123–131 CrossRef CAS .
R. Begag, H. Krutka, W. Dong, D. Mihalcik, W. Rhine, G. Gould, J. Baldic and P. Nahass, Greenh. Gases, 2013, 3, 30–39 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wörmeyer and I. Smirnova, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2014, 184, 61–69 CrossRef .
K. Wörmeyer and I. Smirnova, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 225, 350–357 CrossRef .
K. Wörmeyer, M. Alnaief and I. Smirnova, Adsorption, 2012, 18, 163–171 CrossRef .
Y. Kong, X. Shen, S. Cui and M. Fan, RSC Adv, 2014, 4, 64193–64199 RSC .
Y. Kong, G. Jiang, M. Fan, X. Shen, S. Cui and A. G. Russell, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12158–12161 RSC .
U. Kamran and S.-J. Park, J. Clean. Prod., 2021, 290, 125776 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mohd, W. A. W. Ab Karim Ghani, N. Z. Resitanim and L. Sanyang, J. Disper. Sci. Technol., 2013, 34, 974–984 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Kua, C. Pedapati, R. V. Lee and S. Kawi, J. Clean. Prod., 2019, 210, 860–871 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tomas and F. Karel, AIP Conf. Proc., 2017, 1889, 020023 CrossRef .
M. E. Potter, J. J. Lee, L. A. Darunte and C. W. Jones, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 7563–7575 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Sakwa-Novak, S. Tan and C. W. Jones, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24748–24759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Chan, M. N. Mazlee, Z. A. Ahmad, M. A. M. Ishak and J. B. Shamsul, J. Mater. Cycles Waste, 2017, 19, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Piscopo and S. Loebbecke, ChemPlusChem, 2020, 85, 538–547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Wei and Y. Zhao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 82–93 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, M. Yang, Q. Wang, J.-C. Buffet and D. O'Hare, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15102–15110 RSC .
J. Yu, Q. Wang, D. O'Hare and L. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5950–5974 RSC .
Q. Wang and D. O'Hare, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6301–6303 RSC .
H. Y. Huang, R. T. Yang, D. Chinn and C. L. Munson, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2003, 42, 2427–2433 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Knowles, J. V. Graham, S. W. Delaney and A. L. Chaffee, Fuel Process. Technol., 2005, 86, 1435–1448 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Knowles, S. W. Delaney and A. L. Chaffee, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2006, 45, 2626–2633 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang and R. T. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21264–21272 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Yuan, L. Wang and R. T. Yang, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 8124–8130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gebald, J. A. Wurzbacher, P. Tingaut and A. Steinfeld, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 10063–10070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Y. Zhao, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Zheng, X. Cao, F. Teng, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung, D. O'Hare and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703828 CrossRef PubMed .
A.-Y. Park, H. Kwon, A. J. Woo and S.-J. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 106–109 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, J.-C. Buffet and D. O'Hare, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 8498–8503 RSC .
P. J. E. Harlick and A. Sayari, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 446–458 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kong, X. Shen, M. Fan, M. Yang and S. Cui, Chem. Eng. J, 2016, 283, 1059–1068 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kong, X. Shen, S. Cui and M. Fan, Appl. Energy, 2015, 147, 308–317 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cheng, Y. Liu, H. Wang, X. Weng and Z. Wu, J. Environ. Sci., 2015, 38, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, Q. Liu, D. Chen, Y. Zhou and S. Wen, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 7585–7596 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Labreche, Y. Fan, F. Rezaei, R. P. Lively, C. W. Jones and W. J. Koros, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19336–19346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, D. Cheng, Y. Liu and Z. Wu, Energy Fuel, 2013, 27, 5416–5422 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, Z. Du, W. Zou, H. Li, J. Mi and C. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 409, 123–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yan, J. Tang, Z. Bian, J. Hu and H. Liu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 3653–3662 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fan, F. Rezaei and X. Yang, Energy Technol.-GER, 2019, 7, 253–262 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, L. Yao, J. Wang, Z. Zhang, W. Qiao, D. Long and L. Ling, Appl. Energy, 2016, 168, 282–290 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Fujii, L. Yang and C. Song, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 26, 1030–1038 CrossRef .
L. Wang, M. Al-Aufi, C. N. Pacheco, L. Xie and R. M. Rioux, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 14785–14795 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sanz, G. Calleja, A. Arencibia and E. S. Sanz-Pérez, Energy Fuel, 2013, 27, 7637–7644 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sanz, G. Calleja, A. Arencibia and E. S. Sanz-Pérez, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1956–1962 RSC .
Q. T. Vu, H. Yamada and K. Yogo, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 15598–15605 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, K. Huang and L. Jiang, AiChE J., 2018, 64, 3671–3680 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang and C. Song, Energy Fuel, 2014, 28, 7742–7745 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, D. Long, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, X. Liu and L. Ling, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5742–5749 RSC .
J. Tanthana and S. S. C. Chuang, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 957–964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Srikanth and S. S. C. Chuang, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1435–1442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bollini, S. Choi, J. H. Drese and C. W. Jones, Energy Fuel, 2011, 25, 2416–2425 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Potter, K. M. Cho, J. J. Lee and C. W. Jones, Energy Fuel, 2019, 33, 1372–1382 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heydari-Gorji, Y. Belmabkhout and A. Sayari, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2011, 145, 146–149 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heydari-Gorji and A. Sayari, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 6887–6894 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Didas, R. Zhu, N. A. Brunelli, D. S. Sholl and C. W. Jones, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 12302–12311 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Srikanth and S. S. C. Chuang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9196–9205 CrossRef CAS .
W. Choi, K. Min, C. Kim, Y. S. Ko, J. W. Jeon, H. Seo, Y.-K. Park and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ahmadalinezhad, R. Tailor and A. Sayari, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 10543–10550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ahmadalinezhad and A. Sayari, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 1529–1535 RSC .
Y. Meng, J. Jiang, A. Aihemaiti, T. Ju, Y. Gao, J. Liu and S. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 33781–33791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Calleja, R. Sanz, A. Arencibia and E. S. Sanz-Pérez, Top. Catal, 2011, 54, 135–145 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Hallenbeck and J. R. Kitchin, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 10788–10794 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yu, J. D. L. P. Delgado, R. Veneman and D. W. F. Brilman, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 3259–3269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Si, B. Yang, Q. Yu, L. Lei and J. Zhu, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 11237–11244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. T. Vu, H. Yamada and K. Yogo, Energy Fuel, 2019, 33, 3370–3379 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhai and S. S. C. Chuang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 13766–13775 CrossRef CAS .
K. Min, W. Choi, C. Kim and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 726 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Choi, J. Park and M. Choi, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2021, 60, 6147–6152 CrossRef CAS .
R. Veneman, N. Frigka, W. Zhao, Z. Li, S. Kersten and W. Brilman, Int. J. Greenh. Gas Control, 2015, 41, 268–275 CrossRef CAS .
I. M. Smal, Q. Yu, R. Veneman, B. Fränzel-Luiten and D. W. F. Brilman, Energy Procedia, 2014, 63, 6834–6841 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Madden, H. S. Scott, A. Kumar, K.-J. Chen, R. Sanii, A. Bajpai, M. Lusi, T. Curtin, J. J. Perry and M. J. Zaworotko, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A, 2017, 375, 20160025 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Ray, S. R. Churipard and S. C. Peter, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 26498–26527 RSC .
W. Buijs and S. de Flart, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 12297–12304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Young, E. García-Díez, S. Garcia, C. Ireland, B. Smit and M. van der Spek, Available at SSRN 3814942,  2021,  DOI:10.2139/ssrn.3814942.
J. A. Wurzbacher, C. Gebald, S. Brunner and A. Steinfeld, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 283, 1329–1338 CrossRef CAS .
J. Elfving and T. Sainio, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2021, 246, 116885 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Said, J. M. Kolle, K. Essalah, B. Tangour and A. Sayari, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 26125–26133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Danon, P. C. Stair and E. Weitz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11540–11549 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bacsik, N. Ahlsten, A. Ziadi, G. Zhao, A. E. Garcia-Bennett, B. Martín-Matute and N. Hedin, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 11118–11128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bacsik and N. Hedin, Vib. Spectrosc., 2016, 87, 215–221 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sayari, Y. Belmabkhout and E. Da’na, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 4241–4247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mafra, T. Čendak, S. Schneider, P. V. Wiper, J. Pires, J. R. B. Gomes and M. L. Pinto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 389–408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-T. Hung, C.-F. Yang, J.-S. Lin, S.-J. Huang, Y.-C. Chang and S.-B. Liu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 238, 2–13 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shimon, C.-H. Chen, J. J. Lee, S. A. Didas, C. Sievers, C. W. Jones and S. E. Hayes, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 1488–1495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mani, M. Peruzzini and P. Stoppioni, Green Chem, 2006, 8, 995–1000 RSC .
X. Li, E. Hagaman, C. Tsouris and J. W. Lee, Energy Fuel, 2003, 17, 69–74 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Foo, J. J. Lee, C.-H. Chen, S. E. Hayes, C. Sievers and C. W. Jones, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 266–276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Buijs, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2021, 60, 11309–11316 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Mason, T. M. McDonald, T.-H. Bae, J. E. Bachman, K. Sumida, J. J. Dutton, S. S. Kaye and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4787–4803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. McDonald, W. R. Lee, J. A. Mason, B. M. Wiers, C. S. Hong and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7056–7065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Lee, S. Y. Hwang, D. W. Ryu, K. S. Lim, S. S. Han, D. Moon, J. Choi and C. S. Hong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 744–751 RSC .
T. M. McDonald, J. A. Mason, X. Kong, E. D. Bloch, D. Gygi, A. Dani, V. Crocellà, F. Giordanino, S. O. Odoh, W. S. Drisdell, B. Vlaisavljevich, A. L. Dzubak, R. Poloni, S. K. Schnell, N. Planas, K. Lee, T. Pascal, L. F. Wan, D. Prendergast, J. B. Neaton, B. Smit, J. B. Kortright, L. Gagliardi, S. Bordiga, J. A. Reimer and J. R. Long, Nature, 2015, 519, 303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Lee, H. Jo, L.-M. Yang, H. Lee, D. W. Ryu, K. S. Lim, J. H. Song, D. Y. Min, S. S. Han, J. G. Seo, Y. K. Park, D. Moon and C. S. Hong, Chem. Sci, 2015, 6, 3697–3705 RSC .
P.-Q. Liao, X.-W. Chen, S.-Y. Liu, X.-Y. Li, Y.-T. Xu, M. Tang, Z. Rui, H. Ji, J.-P. Zhang and X.-M. Chen, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 6528–6533 RSC .
S. Choi, T. Watanabe, T.-H. Bae, D. S. Sholl and C. W. Jones, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1136–1141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hughes, G. Kotamreddy, A. Ostace, D. Bhattacharyya, R. L. Siegelman, S. T. Parker, S. A. Didas, J. R. Long, B. Omell and M. Matuszewski, Energy Fuel, 2021, 35, 6040–6055 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jo, W. R. Lee, N. W. Kim, H. Jung, K. S. Lim, J. E. Kim, D. W. Kang, H. Lee, V. Hiremath, J. G. Seo, H. Jin, D. Moon, S. S. Han and C. S. Hong, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 541–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Lee, J. E. Kim, S. J. Lee, M. Kang, D. W. Kang, H. Y. Lee, V. Hiremath, J. G. Seo, H. Jin, D. Moon, M. Cho, Y. Jung and C. S. Hong, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1694–1707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dinakar, A. C. Forse, H. Z. H. Jiang, Z. Zhu, J.-H. Lee, E. J. Kim, S. T. Parker, C. J. Pollak, R. L. Siegelman, P. J. Milner, J. A. Reimer and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 15258–15270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Ü. Kökçam-Demir, A. Goldman, L. Esrafili, M. Gharib, A. Morsali, O. Weingart and C. Janiak, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2751–2798 RSC .
Y. K. Hwang, D.-Y. Hong, J.-S. Chang, S. H. Jhung, Y.-K. Seo, J. Kim, A. Vimont, M. Daturi, C. Serre and G. Férey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4144–4148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, Y. S. Chae, D. W. Kang, M. Kang, J. H. Choe, S. Kim, J. Y. Kim, Y. W. Jeong and C. S. Hong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 25421–25427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, L.-M. Yang and E. Ganz, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 18533–18540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, L.-M. Yang and E. Ganz, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 14104–14112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Martell, P. J. Milner, R. L. Siegelman and J. R. Long, Chem. Sci, 2020, 11, 6457–6471 RSC .
R. W. Flaig, T. M. Osborn Popp, A. M. Fracaroli, E. A. Kapustin, M. J. Kalmutzki, R. M. Altamimi, F. Fathieh, J. A. Reimer and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12125–12128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Lackner, Eur. Phys. J.-Spec. Top., 2009, 176, 93–106 CrossRef .
T. Wang, K. S. Lackner and A. Wright, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 6670–6675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, K. S. Lackner and A. B. Wright, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 504–514 RSC .
M. Mahmoudkhani and D. W. Keith, Int. J. Greenh. Gas Control, 2009, 3, 376–384 CrossRef CAS .
H. He, M. Zhong, D. Konkolewicz, K. Yacatto, T. Rappold, G. Sugar, N. E. David and K. Matyjaszewski, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6810–6821 RSC .
H. He, M. Zhong, D. Konkolewicz, K. Yacatto, T. Rappold, G. Sugar, N. E. David, J. Gelb, N. Kotwal, A. Merkle and K. Matyjaszewski, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4720–4728 CrossRef CAS .
H. He, W. Li, M. Zhong, D. Konkolewicz, D. Wu, K. Yaccato, T. Rappold, G. Sugar, N. E. David and K. Matyjaszewski, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 488–493 RSC .
J. Song, J. Liu, W. Zhao, Y. Chen, H. Xiao, X. Shi, Y. Liu and X. Chen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 4941–4948 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, K. Ge, K. Chen, C. Hou and M. Fang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 13084–13091 RSC .
X. Shi, H. Xiao, K. S. Lackner and X. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4026–4029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, M. Singh and J. Schaefer, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4915–4918 RSC .
T. Wang, J. Liu, H. Huang, M. Fang and Z. Luo, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 284, 679–686 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Shi, Q. B. Li, T. Wang and K. S. Lackner, PLoS One, 2017, 12, e0179828 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Wang, J. Liu, K. S. Lackner, X. Shi, M. Fang and Z. Luo, Greenh. Gases, 2016, 6, 138–149 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shi, H. Xiao, X. Chen and K. S. Lackner, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 18326–18330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wei, W. Wei, N. Xue, F. Cheng and H. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 5814–5822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Inagaki, C. Matsumoto, T. Iwata and C. Mukai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4639–4642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. B. Hamdy, R. J. Wakeham, M. Taddei, A. R. Barron and E. Andreoli, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 4673–4684 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Mobley, A. V. Rayer, J. Tanthana, T. R. Gohndrone, M. Soukri, L. J. I. Coleman and M. Lail, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 11958–11966 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wadi, A. Mahomed, Y. Bai, A. Osatiashtiani, V. Manovic and S. A. Nabavi, Powder Technol, 2021, 393, 257–264 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, C. Qin, S. Pi and H. Cui, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 379, 122385 CrossRef CAS .
E. Luzzi, P. Aprea, M. Salzano de Luna, D. Caputo and G. Filippone, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 20728–20734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Nie, J. Jin, J. Chen and J. Mi, Energy, 2018, 161, 60–69 CrossRef CAS .
D. Nikjoo and F. Akhtar, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 21, 473–479 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Choe, J. R. Park, Y. S. Chae, D. W. Kim, D. S. Choi, H. Kim, M. Kang, H. Seo, Y.-K. Park and C. S. Hong, Commun. Mater., 2021, 2, 3 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guo, H. Wu, L. Lv, H. Meng, J. Yun, J. Jin and J. Mi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 21775–21785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Seok Chae, S. Park, D. Won Kang, D. Won Kim, M. Kang, D. San Choi, J. Hyeak Choe and C. Seop Hong, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 433, 133856 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rodríguez-Mosqueda, E. A. Bramer, T. Roestenberg and G. Brem, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 3628–3638 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Shiue, T. H. Hsu, S. M. Chang and G. Leggett, Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2022, 19, 4237–4250 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Yoon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 29–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gaikwad, S. Gaikwad, Y. Kim and S. Han, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2021, 323, 111233 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lawson, Q. Al-Naddaf, A. Krishnamurthy, M. S. Amour, C. Griffin, A. A. Rownaghi, J. C. Knox and F. Rezaei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 19076–19086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Rezaei, S. Lawson, H. Hosseini, H. Thakkar, A. Hajari, S. Monjezi and A. A. Rownaghi, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 313, 1346–1353 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wilson, S. N. Barrientos-Palomo, P. C. Stevens, N. L. Mitchell, G. Oswald, C. M. Nagaraja and J. P. S. Badyal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4057–4065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-G. Zhen, H. Mao, I. U. Haq, S.-H. Li, A. Ahmad and Z.-P. Zhao, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 233, 116042 CrossRef CAS .
H.-G. Zhen, Z.-P. Zhao, H. Mao, T. Li, J.-H. Li and T.-S. Hou, IOP Conf. Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci., 2019, 330, 032107 CrossRef .
Q. Al-Naddaf, S. Lawson, A. A. Rownaghi and F. Rezaei, AiChE J, 2020, 66, e16297 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Regufe, A. F. P. Ferreira, J. M. Loureiro, Y. Shi, A. Rodrigues and A. M. Ribeiro, Adsorption, 2018, 24, 249–265 CrossRef CAS .
A. Masala, J. G. Vitillo, G. Mondino, G. Martra, R. Blom, C. A. Grande and S. Bordiga, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 8485–8498 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Hong, S. P. Perera and A. D. Burrows, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2020, 308, 110525 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alnaief and I. Smirnova, J. Supercrit. Fluid., 2011, 55, 1118–1123 CrossRef CAS .
J. Singh, H. Bhunia and S. Basu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 374, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Lively, R. R. Chance, B. T. Kelley, H. W. Deckman, J. H. Drese, C. W. Jones and W. J. Koros, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 7314–7324 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Brennan, H. Thakkar, X. Li, A. A. Rownaghi, W. J. Koros and F. Rezaei, Energy Technol.-GER, 2017, 5, 327–337 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, W. J. Koros and C. W. Jones, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9700–9709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Labreche, Y. Fan, R. P. Lively, C. W. Jones and W. J. Koros, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2015, 132, 41845 CrossRef .
Y. Fan, J. Kalyanaraman, Y. Labreche, F. Rezaei, R. P. Lively, M. J. Realff, W. J. Koros, C. W. Jones and Y. Kawajiri, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54, 1783–1795 CrossRef CAS .
F. Rezaei, S. Subramanian, J. Kalyanaraman, R. P. Lively, Y. Kawajiri and M. J. Realff, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2014, 113, 62–76 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Li, Y. Labreche, R. P. Lively, J. S. Lee, C. W. Jones and W. J. Koros, Polymer, 2014, 55, 1341–1346 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, R. P. Lively, C. W. Jones and W. J. Koros, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 7113–7120 CrossRef CAS .
F. Rezaei, R. P. Lively, Y. Labreche, G. Chen, Y. Fan, W. J. Koros and C. W. Jones, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3921–3931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. S. Li, W. Qiu, R. P. Lively, J. S. Lee, A. A. Rownaghi and W. J. Koros, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1216–1223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Labreche, R. P. Lively, F. Rezaei, G. Chen, C. W. Jones and W. J. Koros, Chem. Eng. J, 2013, 221, 166–175 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bhandari, K. O. Olanrewaju, N. Bessho, V. Breedveld and W. J. Koros, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2013, 104, 68–80 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Lively, R. R. Chance, J. A. Mysona, V. P. Babu, H. W. Deckman, D. P. Leta, H. Thomann and W. J. Koros, Int. J. Greenh. Gas Control, 2012, 10, 285–294 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Lively, N. Bessho, D. A. Bhandari, Y. Kawajiri and W. J. Koros, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 15227–15240 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Lively, D. P. Leta, B. A. DeRites, R. R. Chance and W. J. Koros, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 171, 801–810 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Lively, R. R. Chance and W. J. Koros, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 7550–7562 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Lee, Y. Kwon, C. Kim, Y.-E. Hwang, M. Choi, Y. Park, A. Jamal and D.-Y. Koh, JACS Au, 2021, 1, 1198–1207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ostermann, J. Cravillon, C. Weidmann, M. Wiebcke and B. M. Smarsly, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 442–444 RSC .
M. Armstrong, C. Balzer, B. Shan and B. Mu, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 9066–9072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Armstrong, B. Shan, S. V. Maringanti, W. Zheng and B. Mu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 9944–9951 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Armstrong, K. Y. Y. Arredondo, C.-Y. Liu, J. E. Stevens, A. Mayhob, B. Shan, S. Senthilnathan, C. J. Balzer and B. Mu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54, 12386–12392 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-n Wu, F. Li, H. Liu, W. Zhu, M. Teng, Y. Jiang, W. Li, D. Xu, D. He, P. Hannam and G. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16971–16978 RSC .
S. Lawson, C. Griffin, K. Rapp, A. A. Rownaghi and F. Rezaei, Energy Fuel, 2019, 33, 2399–2407 CrossRef CAS .
H. Thakkar, S. Eastman, Q. Al-Naddaf, A. A. Rownaghi and F. Rezaei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 35908–35916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Thakkar, S. Eastman, A. Hajari, A. A. Rownaghi, J. C. Knox and F. Rezaei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 27753–27761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dhoke, A. Zaabout, S. Cloete and S. Amini, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2021, 60, 3779–3798 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yu and D. W. F. Brilman, Energy Procedia, 2017, 114, 6102–6114 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. A. DeWitt, A. Sinha, J. Kalyanaraman, F. Zhang, M. J. Realff and R. P. Lively, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol, 2018, 9, 129–152 CrossRef PubMed .
H. M. Schellevis, T. N. van Schagen and D. W. F. Brilman, Int. J. Greenh. Gas Control, 2021, 110, 103431 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, S. Choi, J. H. Drese, M. Hornbostel, G. Krishnan, P. M. Eisenberger and C. W. Jones, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 899–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sayari, Q. Liu and P. Mishra, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2796–2803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Brilman, L. Garcia Alba and R. Veneman, Biomass Bioenergy, 2013, 53, 39–47 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Wurzbacher, C. Gebald, N. Piatkowski and A. Steinfeld, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 9191–9198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. Beauttler, Climeworks: direct air capture update, in 2020 Integrated Project Review Meeting – Carbon Capture, 2020, https://netl.doe.gov/2020CC-proceedings.
C. J. E. Bajamundi, J. Koponen, V. Ruuskanen, J. Elfving, A. Kosonen, J. Kauppinen and J. Ahola, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 30, 232–239 CrossRef .
G. Santori, C. Charalambous, M.-C. Ferrari and S. Brandani, Energy, 2018, 162, 1158–1168 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Gebald, N. Repond and J. A. Wurzbacher, Steam assisted vacuum desorption process for carbon dioxide capture, US Pat., 10279306,  2019 Search PubMed .
N. McQueen, P. Psarras, H. Pilorgé, S. Liguori, J. He, M. Yuan, C. M. Woodall, K. Kian, L. Pierpoint, J. Jurewicz, J. M. Lucas, R. Jacobson, N. Deich and J. Wilcox, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 7542–7551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fahr, J. Powell, A. Favero, A. J. Giarrusso, R. P. Lively and M. J. Realff, Greenh. Gases, 2022, 12, 170–188 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wohland, D. Witthaut and C.-F. Schleussner, Earth's Future, 2018, 6, 1380–1384 CrossRef .
C. Breyer, M. Fasihi and A. Aghahosseini, Mitig. Adapt. Strat. Gl., 2020, 25, 43–65 CrossRef .
H. Azarabadi and K. S. Lackner, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 5102–5111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Lackner and H. Azarabadi, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2021, 60, 8196–8208 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ghiat and T. Al-Ansari, J. CO2 Util., 2021, 45, 101432 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hepburn, E. Adlen, J. Beddington, E. A. Carter, S. Fuss, N. Mac Dowell, J. C. Minx, P. Smith and C. K. Williams, Nature, 2019, 575, 87–97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Abdul-Wahab, S. Chin Fah En, A. Elkamel, L. Ahmadi and K. Yetilmezsoy, Atmos. Pollut. Res., 2015, 6, 751–767 CrossRef CAS .
S. Satyapal, T. Filburn, J. Trela and J. Strange, Energy Fuel, 2001, 15, 250–255 CrossRef CAS .
L. Baus and S. Nehr, Build. Environ., 2022, 208, 108629 CrossRef .
S. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. Ju, J. M. Chen, P. Ciais, A. Cescatti, J. Sardans, I. A. Janssens, M. Wu, J. A. Berry, E. Campbell, M. Fernández-Martínez, R. Alkama, S. Sitch, P. Friedlingstein, W. K. Smith, W. Yuan, W. He, D. Lombardozzi, M. Kautz, D. Zhu, S. Lienert, E. Kato, B. Poulter, T. G. M. Sanders, I. Krüger, R. Wang, N. Zeng, H. Tian, N. Vuichard, A. K. Jain, A. Wiltshire, V. Haverd, D. S. Goll and J. Peñuelas, Science, 2020, 370, 1295–1300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Daneshvar, R. J. Wicker, P.-L. Show and A. Bhatnagar, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 130884 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, X. Zhai, Y. Xi, J. Wang, F. Kong, Y. Zhao and Z. Chi, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 37, 320–327 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. C. Leung, G. Caramanna and M. M. Maroto-Valer, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 39, 426–443 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-M. Wei, J.-N. Kang, L.-C. Liu, Q. Li, P.-T. Wang, J.-J. Hou, Q.-M. Liang, H. Liao, S.-F. Huang and B. Yu, Nat. Clim. Change, 2021, 11, 112–118 CrossRef .
V. Núñez-López and E. Moskal, Front. Clim., 2019, 1, 5 CrossRef .
R. L. Tyne, P. H. Barry, M. Lawson, D. J. Byrne, O. Warr, H. Xie, D. J. Hillegonds, M. Formolo, Z. M. Summers, B. Skinner, J. M. Eiler and C. J. Ballentine, Nature, 2021, 600, 670–674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Azzolina, W. D. Peck, J. A. Hamling, C. D. Gorecki, S. C. Ayash, T. E. Doll, D. V. Nakles and L. S. Melzer, Int. J. Greenh. Gas Control, 2016, 51, 369–379 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, S. Tian, G. Li, M. Sheng, W. Ren, Q. Liu and S. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 17009–17018 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Oldenburg, K. Pruess and S. M. Benson, Energy Fuel, 2001, 15, 293–298 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hamza, I. A. Hussein, M. J. Al-Marri, M. Mahmoud, R. Shawabkeh and S. Aparicio, J. Petrol. Sci. Eng., 2021, 196, 107685 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nikolaidis and A. Poullikkas, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 67, 597–611 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schäppi, D. Rutz, F. Dähler, A. Muroyama, P. Haueter, J. Lilliestam, A. Patt, P. Furler and A. Steinfeld, Nature, 2022, 601, 63–68 CrossRef PubMed .
V. S. Derevschikov, J. V. Veselovskaya, T. Y. Kardash, D. A. Trubitsyn and A. G. Okunev, Fuel, 2014, 127, 212–218 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Veselovskaya, V. S. Derevschikov, T. Y. Kardash and A. G. Okunev, Renewable Bioresources, 2015, 3, 1 CrossRef .
J. V. Veselovskaya, P. D. Parunin, O. V. Netskina and A. G. Okunev, Top. Catal, 2018, 61, 1528–1536 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Veselovskaya, P. D. Parunin, O. V. Netskina, L. S. Kibis, A. I. Lysikov and A. G. Okunev, Energy, 2018, 159, 766–773 CrossRef CAS .
S. Navarro-Jaén, M. Virginie, J. Bonin, M. Robert, R. Wojcieszak and A. Y. Khodakov, Nat. Rev. Chem, 2021, 5, 564–579 CrossRef .
A. Kätelhön, R. Meys, S. Deutz, S. Suh and A. Bardow, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 11187–11194 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Bos, Y. Slotboom, S. R. A. Kersten and D. W. F. Brilman, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 13987–13999 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sen, A. Goeppert and G. K. S. Prakash, Aldrichim. Acta, 2020, 53, 39–56 Search PubMed .
R. Sen, C. J. Koch, V. Galvan, N. Entesari, A. Goeppert and G. K. S. Prakash, J. CO2 Util., 2021, 54, 101762 CrossRef CAS .
H. Koizumi, K. Takeuchi, K. Matsumoto, N. Fukaya, K. Sato, M. Uchida, S. Matsumoto, S. Hamura and J.-C. Choi, Commun. Chem., 2021, 4, 66 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ishaq, O. Siddiqui, G. Chehade and I. Dincer, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 4749–4760 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Asare Bediako, Q. Qian, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, S. Li, H. Liu, T. Wu, M. Ge and B. Han, Chem. Catal., 2022, 2, 114–124 CrossRef .
T. N. Do, C. You and J. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 169–184 RSC .
F. Kong, G. Rim, M. Song, C. Rosu, P. Priyadarshini, R. P. Lively, M. J. Realff and C. W. Jones, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2022, 39, 1–19 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, Y. Wang, Y. Miao, H. Wang, X. Zhu and J. Li, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 107239 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choi, M. L. Gray and C. W. Jones, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 628–635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Rosu, P. Narayanan, J. E. Leisen and C. W. Jones, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 292, 121042 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Belmabkhout, P. M. Bhatt, K. Adil, R. S. Pillai, A. Cadiau, A. Shkurenko, G. Maurin, G. Liu, W. J. Koros and M. Eddaoudi, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1059–1066 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukherjee, N. Sikdar, D. O’Nolan, D. M. Franz, V. Gascón, A. Kumar, N. Kumar, H. S. Scott, D. G. Madden, P. E. Kruger, B. Space and M. J. Zaworotko, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaax9171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, E. Lin, Y.-L. Peng, Y. Chen, P. Cheng and Z. Zhang, Coordin. Chem. Rev., 2020, 423, 213485 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, G. Chen, T. Bian, C. Zhou, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung, L. J. Smith, D. O'Hare and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7824–7831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, X. Zhu, F. Yang, T. Ge and R. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 425, 131409 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. Lee, L. D. J. Quinn, C. W. Jones, S. E. Hayes and D. A. Dixon, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2021, 125, 9802–9818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Xuancan Zhu
	Xuancan Zhu is an Assistant Professor at Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. He obtained his PhD in 2019 from Tsinghua University. Prof. Zhu engaged in theoretical and applied research studies on novel adsorbent synthesis, CO2 capture and conversion, and gas purification separation. He has published ∼40 papers so far related to CO2 adsorptive separation. He was awarded by the Excellent Innovation Achievement for Postdoctoral Program (2020), Shanghai Excellent Postdoctoral Fellow (2019), Tsinghua Excellent Doctoral Dissertation (2019), National Scholarship for Graduate Students (2017), and Future Researchers Scholarship (2014).

Wenwen Xie
	Wenwen Xie is a postdoctoral researcher at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany. She obtained her PhD in 2020 from Tsinghua University. Her research focuses on the computational fluid dynamics of reacting flows towards clean and efficient combustion and chemical energy storage through high-temperature pathways.

Chunping Chen
	Chunping Chen received her PhD from Nanyang Technological University in Singapore in 2013. Since then, she has been in Professor Dermot O’Hare's research group in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Oxford. Currently, she is an SCG Research Fellow in the Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, and a Programme Manager for functional materials within the SCG–Oxford Centre of Excellence in Chemistry (CoE). Her research interests include the design of 2D layered functional materials for sustainable chemistry, green energy and CO2 capture and utilization.

Dermot O'Hare
	Dermot O’Hare is Professor of Organometallic and Materials Chemistry in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Oxford. In addition, he is currently the Director of the SCG–Oxford Centre of Excellence for Chemistry and Associate Head for Business & Innovation in the Mathematics, Physical and Life Sciences Division. He leads a multidisciplinary research team that works across broad areas of catalysis and nanomaterials. His research is specifically targeted at finding solutions to global issues related to energy, zero carbon and the circular economy. He has been awarded numerous awards and prizes for his creative and ground-breaking work in Inorganic Chemistry, including the Royal Society Chemistry's Sir Edward Frankland Fellowship, the Ludwig Mond Prize, the Tilden Medal and Academia–Industry Prize and the Exxon European Chemical and Engineering Prize.

Jia Li
	Jia Li graduated from Imperial College London, and now is an associate professor at The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou). She is also the Senior Advisor on Clean Energy for the Shanghai Environment and Energy Exchange (Chinese National Carbon Market).

Tianshu Ge
	Tianshu Ge is Professor at Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU), China. She holds a PhD in Refrigeration and Cryogenics, and her major expertise is research of solid desiccant (adsorption) dehumidification and cooling, including material synthesis, desiccant wheel fabrication, system construction and application demonstration. Research interests include ambient water vapor adsorption for dehumidification or water harvesting, CO2 adsorption in flue gas and direct air capture.

Ruzhu Wang
	Ruzhu Wang obtained his bachelor's, master's and PhD degrees from Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU) in 1984, 1987 and 1990 respectively. He was promoted as associate professor in 1992, and full professor in 1994 at SJTU. Now he is a university chair professor of SJTU. He's a leading scientist in heat pumps, solar heating and cooling, green building energy systems, and the energy–water–air nexus. He won Chinese National Research Awards in 2010 and 2014 respectively. Prof. Wang received the J&E Hall International Gold Medal from the Institute of Refrigeration (UK) in 2013, the Asia Refrigeration Academic Award in 2017, the Nukiyama Memorial Award from the Japanese Society of Heat Transfer in 2018, the IIR-Gustav Lorentzen Medal from the International Institute of Refrigeration in 2019, the Peter Ritter von Rittinger International Heat Pump Award from the International Energy Agency (IEA) in 2021, and the Georg Alefeld Memorial Award from the International Sorption Heat Pump Committee (ISHPC) in 2021.

 	Fig. 1  Working principles of different NETs (reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016).	 


Advanced economies	75	130	205	250
Selected emerging market and developing economiesa	45	90	160	200
Other emerging market and developing economies	3	15	35	55

 	Fig. 2  Policy sequence for climate leaders to develop DAC technology. Climate leaders, in particular those with an existing LCFS, could start market development for DAC through an “incentive + mandate” policy mix. Over time, they could intensify the stringency of the mandates, while reducing incentives as the cost decreases and the political support broadens (reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2021).	 

 	Fig. 3  Recommended annual U.S. federal funding allocations for basic and applied research, demonstration, development, and deployment of DAC technology (reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from National Academies Press, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 4  Number of publications during 2011–2021 on the Web of Science database with the keywords: (a) air capture and (b) air capture and adsorption.	 

 	Fig. 5  Molecular formulae of the main types of amines used for DAC.	 

 	Fig. 6  Interactions of PEI with nanoporous silica and carbon. (a) Amine distribution in the pores of the supports. (b) Bead spring model of the branched PEI; the gold, magenta, and cyan beads represent primary, secondary, and tertiary amines, respectively. (c) Cylindrical pore impregnated with PEI that shows attractive beads and green repulsive support beads. (d) Mean pore densities of PEI inside nanopores of the three substrates for different filling degrees and temperatures. (e) CO2 capture capacity (CC) of PEI/controlled pore glass (CPG), PEI/SBA, and PEI/carbon (C) (reproduced from ref. 268 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021).	 

 	Fig. 7  Strategy decoupling the amine loading from increasing diffusion resistance. (a) Amine efficiency of PEI-impregnated MCM-36 versus amine weight percentage loaded (reproduced from ref. 270 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015). (b) Density functional theory pore size distribution analysis of 3dd-silica, 3dd-TEPA, and 3dd-PEI.271 (c and d) Capture capacity and amine efficiency of 3dd-PEI and NEU-1c adsorbent; the blue line marked the maximum theoretical amine efficiency of 0.5. (e) Scanning electron microscopy images and atomic-force micrographs of Zn(BPDI)(Py)2 and NEU-1 (reproduced from ref. 272 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Possibly formed species from the adsorbed CO2 in the presence of water of supported APS, DI, and TRI. (b) CO2 adsorption isotherms of RAW–SBA (raw SBA-15), S-P-2.6 (supported APS at an amine loading of 2.6 mmol g−1), S-D-2.8 (supported DI at an amine loading of 2.78 mmol g−1), S-T-3.5 (supported TRI at an amine loading of 3.52 mmol g−1), and S-T-4.6 (supported TRI at an amine loading of 4.66 mmol g−1) at 25 °C (reproduced from ref. 287 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021). (c) Structures of various aminosilanes containing multiple amine groups, and CO2 uptake as a function of (d) silane loading and (e) active amine loading at 25 °C and 400 ppm of CO2 (reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020).	 

 	Fig. 9  CO2 (filled symbols) and N2 (open symbols) adsorption isotherms for dry-grafted silica gel (●) and wet-grafted silica gel (▲) at 25 °C (reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020).	 

 	Fig. 10  Structures of hindered aminosilanes: AMBS, TBAPS, and CHAPS (reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Interface between an alkylamine solution and MIL-101(Cr).121 (b) Possible linkage configurations for amine grafting using non-polar, dipolar-aprotic, and polar-protic solvents, and their CO2 capacity abilities (reproduced from ref. 285 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021).	 

SBA-15	PEI	50 wt%	1.55	30 °C, 400 ppm, dry	110 °C, He	N/A	
267

SBA-15	PEI	75 wt%	1.12	25 °C, 400 ppm, dry	110 °C, N2 purge	5.5% loss after 10 cycles	
116

SBA-15	PPI	45 wt%	1.35	35 °C, 400 ppm, dry	70 °C, N2 purge	Stable after 4 cycles	
130

SBA-15	PPI	50 wt%	1.0	35 °C, 400 ppm, dry	110 °C, He purge	Nearly no loss after 20 cycles	
133

SBA-15	PPI	14 mmol N gSiO2−1	1.25	25 °C, 400 ppm, dry	110 °C, N2 purge	Nearly no loss after 50 cycles	
132

SBA-15	PGA	15–45 wt%	0.6	25 °C, 400 ppm, dry	110 °C, N2 purge	10.9% loss after 20 cycles	
119

SBA-15	PPG	50 wt%	0.6	30 °C, 400 ppm, dry	120 °C, He purge	54.5% loss after 5 cycles	
253

SBA-15	Ph-3-ED	60 wt%	1.4	25 °C, 400 ppm, 30% RH	110 °C, He purge	Stable after 25 cycles	
117

SBA-15	PEI	30 wt%	0.19	25 °C, 400 ppm, dry	110 °C, Ar purge	41.2% loss after 4 cycles	
304

Al-SBA-15	PEI	34 wt%	0.29	25 °C, 400 ppm, dry	110 °C, Ar purge	N/A	
304

Ti-SBA-15	PEI	32 wt%	0.64	25 °C, 400 ppm, dry	110 °C, Ar purge	6% loss after 4 cycles	
304

Ce-SBA-15	PEI	33 wt%	0.68	25 °C, 400 ppm, dry	110 °C, Ar purge	N/A	
304

Zr-SBA-15	PEI	35 wt%	0.85	25 °C, 400 ppm, dry	110 °C, Ar purge	Stable after 4 cycles	
304

Zr-SBA-15	PEI	50 wt%	1.05	30 °C, 400 ppm, dry	110 °C, N2 purge	N/A	
305

EtSNTs	PEI	33 wt%	1.0	25 °C, 400 ppm, dry	100 °C, N2 purge	Stable after 8 cycles	
306

SBA-15	TEPA	50 wt%	2.3	25 °C, 400 ppm, dry	110 °C, N2 purge	2.8% loss after 10 cycles	
116

MCF pellets	PEI	68 wt%	1.94	46 °C, 420 ppm, dry	81 °C, N2 purge	N/A	
139

MCF pellets	PEI	68 wt%	2.52	46 °C, 420 ppm, 2 vol% H2O	81 °C, N2 purge	N/A	
139

Hierarchical silica	PEI	2.62 g gSiO2−1	2.6	30 °C, 400 ppm, dry	110 °C, He purge	Stable after 5 cycles	
112

Hierarchical silica	PEI	2.62 g gSiO2−1	3.36	30 °C, 400 ppm, 19% RH	110 °C, He purge	18.15% loss after 5 cycles	
112

AHTSA	PEI	10 wt%	1.64	25 °C, 400 ppm	130 °C, N2 purge	Stable after 15 cycles	
283

Fumed silica	PO-PEHA	50 wt%	2.25	25 °C, 1000 ppm, 50% RH	50 °C, 400 ppm CO2 purge	Stable after 5 cycles	
131

Fumed silica	PO-TEPA	50 wt%	2.0	25 °C, 1000 ppm, 50% RH	50 °C, 400 ppm CO2 purge	Stable after 45 cycles	
131

Fumed silica	HBPG	50 wt%	0.80	25 °C, 420 ppm, 35% RH	100 °C, N2 purge	N/A	
307

Mesoporous carbon	PEI	60 wt%	2.25	25 °C, 400 ppm, dry	110 °C, N2 purge	Stable after 10 cycles	
308

Carbon nanotubes	PEI	10 wt%	1.07	25 °C, 3500 ppm, dry	80 °C, vacuum	N/A	
309

γ-Alumina	PEI	48 wt%	1.74	25 °C, 400 ppm, dry	110 °C, steam stripping	Stable after 3 cycles	
310

γ-Alumina	PEI	7.95 g N gAl2O3−1	1.96	30 °C, 400 ppm, dry	110 °C, steam stripping	N/A	
311

Alumina monolith	PEI	0.44 g gAl2O3−1	0.9	30 °C, 400 ppm, dry	110 °C, steam stripping	14% loss after 5 cycles	
312

Halloysite nanotubes	PEI	40 wt%	1.25	25 °C, 400 ppm, dry	80 °C, vacuum	3.28% loss after 50 cycles	
313

Zeolite Y	TEPA	10 wt%	1.12	25 °C, 5000 ppm	100 °C, N2 purge	Stable after 5 cycles	
258

NPEI-SIPs	PEI	49 wt%	1.7	50 °C, 400 ppm, dry	120 °C, N2 purge	7.8% loss after 20 cycles	
110

Resin HP2MGL	PEI	50 wt%	2.13	25 °C, 5000 ppm, dry	100 °C, N2 purge	Stable after 5 cycles	
314

Resin HP2MGL	PEI	50 wt%	3.04	25 °C, 5000 ppm, 40% RH	100 °C, N2 purge	Stable after 5 cycles	
314

Resin HP20	PEI	50 wt%	2.26	25 °C, 400 ppm, dry	100 °C, N2 purge	Almost no loss after 5 cycles	
315

Resin MR10	PEI	50 wt%	2.64	25 °C, 1000 ppm, dry	70 °C, N2 purge	10.6% loss after 3 cycles	
115

Resin MR10	PEI	50 wt%	2.92	25 °C, 1000 ppm, 50% RH	70 °C, N2 purge	N/A	
115

Resin KBS	PEI	20 wt%	1.59	20 °C, 4000 ppm, 1.56 vol% H2O	50 °C, N2 purge	N/A	
316

MIL-101(Cr)	PEI	60 wt%	1.04	25 °C, 400 ppm, dry	110 °C, He purge	4.6% loss after 3 cycles	
260

MIL-101(Cr)	PEI	50 wt%	1.17	−20 °C, 400 ppm, dry	60 °C, He purge	Stable after 15 cycles	
317

MIL-101(Cr)	TREN	45 wt%	2.76	25 °C, 400 ppm, dry	110 °C, He purge	15.1% loss after 3 cycles	
260

MIL-101(Cr)	TEPA	30 wt%	0.72	−20 °C, 400 ppm, dry	25 °C, He purge	30% loss after 15 cycles	
317

PEI–Mg0.55Al–O	PEI	67 wt%	1.66	25 °C, 400 ppm, dry	120 °C, N2 purge	N/A	
111

PEI–Mg0.55Al–O	PEI	67 wt%	2.27	25 °C, 400 ppm, humid	120 °C, N2 purge	2.7% loss after 20 cycles	
111

TEPA–Mg0.55Al–O	TEPA	67 wt%	3.0	25 °C, 400 ppm, dry	120 °C, N2 purge	Maintain ∼90% after 80 cycles	
318


 	Fig. 12  (a) Scanning electron microscopy image and digital photo (inset) of AHTSA. (b) CO2 adsorption uptake of AHTSA versus adsorption time under different CO2 concentrations. (c) Cycle adsorption capacity of AHTSA in dry air (blue), 1% (red), and 10% (black) CO2 stream (reproduced from ref. 283 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016). (d) Cyclic adsorption capacity of PEHA-PO-fumed silica and TEPA-PO-fumed silica from 400 ppm CO2 in air (reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2019). (e) Adsorption breakthrough curves of HBPG/fumed silica adsorbents (25 °C, 35% relative humidity) and typical desorption curve of HBPG-L25-am 1/3 sample at 100 °C; 1/3, 1/2, and 1/1 mean that the adsorbent contains 1 weight part of polymer HBPG-L25-am and 1, 2, and 3 weight parts of fumed silica, respectively (reproduced from ref. 307 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Interior structure of the SIPs. (b) CO2 uptake of NOHM loaded SIPs and neat PEI-functionalized NOHMs. (c) Schematic illustration of the synergistic effect between PEI-functionalized NOHMs and the CO2 permeable polymers. (d and e) Effects of PEI-functionalized NOHM and PEI loading on the adsorption kinetics, capacity, and amine efficiency. (f and g) Effects of temperature on adsorption kinetics, the initial capture rate, and capacity (reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2021).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Scheme of the TEPA-impregnated MIL-101(Cr). (b) Effect of amine loading on the adsorption capacity at 25 °C. (c) Effect of temperature on the adsorption behavior of amine-impregnated MIL-101(Cr). (d) Adsorption kinetics at different temperatures. (e) Desorption behavior after adsorption at different temperatures. (f) Working capacity of TEPA-MIL-101(Cr) over small temperature swing cycles (reproduced from ref. 317 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Scanning electron microscopy images of MMOs impregnated with 0, 33, 50, and 67 wt% PEI. (b) Schematic diagram of the PEI/MMO structure. (c) Thermally-induced weight change rate of the PEI/MMO and PEI/SBA-15 that characterizes the thermal stability of adsorbents. (d) CO2 uptake of PEI/MMO and PEI/SBA-15 in 2 h at 400 ppm CO2 and 25 °C after desorption at different temperatures. (e) Working capacity of PEI67/Mg0.55Al–O over 20 cycles under dry and wet conditions (adsorption: 400 ppm CO2, 25 °C; desorption: N2 purge, 120 °C).111	 

 	Fig. 16  CO2 (filled symbols) and N2 (open symbols) adsorption isotherms for wet-grafted HBS (●) and SBA-15 (■) at 25 °C (reproduced from ref. 295 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022).	 

 	Fig. 17  Concept of template removal by IL treatment for amine grafting (reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020).	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Fabrication process of amine-monolayer-grafted bulk and ultrafine MgAl-LDHs, (b) silylation of AMOST-treated LDHs, and (c) structures of grafted amines (reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021).	 

 	Fig. 19  Synthesis process of spherical amine silica aerogels.284	 

 	Fig. 20  Possible structures of –HCO and –HCN– units identified for air-deactivated (a) sMono, (b) TRI (right) (reproduced from ref. 389 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2013), and (c) PEI (linear and branched).390 All six fragments were detected in deactivated branched PEI, but only the first three were identified in linear PEI.	 

 	Fig. 21  (A–C) C/N and (D–F) H/(C + N) molar ratios of the oxidized sorbents normalized with the ratios of a fresh PEI sorbent over the extent of PEI oxidation. Green error bars indicate the sample-to-sample reproducibility and orange error bars show the run-to-run reproducibility of a chosen number of elemental analyses (reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021).	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 22  Proposed amine interactions with the surface and neighboring amines that can occur based on alkyl chain length. Amines with short alkyl chains have no ability (methyl) or a very limited ability (ethyl) to interact with the silanols on the surface (reproduced from ref. 386 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014).	 

APS	110 °C in simulated air (21% O2/79% N2) for 12 h	25 °C in 400 ppm CO2/He for 3 h	110 °C in He for 3 h	1	
134

L-ethyl	110 °C in simulated air (21% O2/79% N2) for 12 h	25 °C in 400 ppm CO2/He for 3 h	110 °C in He for 3 h	45	
134

L-propyl	110 °C in simulated air (21% O2/79% N2) for 12 h	25 °C in 400 ppm CO2/He for 3 h	110 °C in He for 3 h	5	
134

B-ethyl	110 °C in simulated air (21% O2/79% N2) for 12 h	25 °C in 400 ppm CO2/He for 3 h	110 °C in He for 3 h	28	
134

B-propyl	110 °C in simulated air (21% O2/79% N2) for 12 h	25 °C in 400 ppm CO2/He for 3 h	110 °C in He for 3 h	11	
134


 	Fig. 23  
In situ IR spectra for CO2 adsorbents of (a) L-ethyl, (b) L-propyl, (c) B-ethyl, and (d) B-propyl, respectively, during the oxidation under a simulated air atmosphere (21% O2/N2) at 110 °C for 150 min (reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020).	 

 	Fig. 24  FTIR spectra of fresh (a) PEI-impregnated γ-alumina and oxidized sorbent (ALPEI_21_110) treated with 21% oxygen at 110 °C for 20 h as well as (b) PAA-impregnated γ-alumina (ALPAA fresh & ALPEI_21_110) (reproduced from ref. 254 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2013). (c) IR spectra of fresh and oxidized PGA-impregnated SBA-15 (reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Thermogravimetric analysis to assess the organic content of PEI-impregnated SBA-15 (PEI-SBA) after oxidative treatment at the specified temperatures. (b) Variation in CO2 uptake of the PEI-SBA series as a function of oxidation treatment temperature for both 10 vol% and 400 ppm of CO2 in He, compared to the bare SBA-15 support (reproduced from ref. 383 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Structures of linear and dendritic PEI (TETA and EI-den) and PPI (TPTA and PI-den). (b) CO2 capacity and (c) amine efficiencies of aminopolymers impregnated in SBA-15 at 400 ppm of CO2/N2 and 35 °C over a range of amine loadings. Amine efficiencies were normalized to the number of amines that are active for CO2 capture under dry conditions (1° and 2° only). Open symbols indicate samples exposed to oxidative treatment at the listed temperature. (d) FTIR spectra for samples with fresh aminopolymers (black) and aminopolymers oxidatively treated at 110 °C for 24 h (red). Spectra were acquired under vacuum and normalized to the Si–O–Si framework bending mode at 460 cm−1 (reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017).	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) CO2 capacities of linear PPI and PEI-impregnated in SBA-15 (adsorption in 400 ppm CO2/N2 at 35 °C, 18 h) over a range of amine loadings. Open symbols indicate samples exposed to oxidative treatment (21% O2/N2 at 110 °C, 24 h) prior to CO2 adsorption. Error bars indicate the standard deviation of three separate adsorption experiments on three different powder samples. (b) CO2 adsorption isotherms for the 50 wt% linear PPI (1000 g mol−1)/SBA-15 sample, where open symbols indicate repeated isotherm measurements after acquiring all other isotherms to ensure that no degradation or loss of aminopolymer had occurred due to thermal treatment under vacuum, and cross symbols indicate the isotherm obtained for a sample that had first been exposed to the oxidative treatment. (c) FTIR spectra of linear PPI and PEI-impregnated in SBA-15 before (black) and after exposure to oxidative treatment (21% O2/N2 at 110 °C, 24 h) (red). Spectra were acquired under a flow of UHP N2 and normalized to the Si–O–Si framework bending mode at 460 cm−1 (reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) CO2 capacity (mmol CO2 g−1 SiO2; black) and amine efficiency (mmol CO2 mmol−1 N; gray) measured under a 0.04% CO2 stream at 35 °C for polymers made with various acid initiators. All sorbents were approximately 30% weight polymer in SBA-15. (b) CO2 capacity, amine efficiency, and oxidative resistance measured under a 0.04% CO2 stream at 35 °C for polymers made with hydrobromic acid at various loadings in SBA-15. Oxidative resistances are shown by data points under 0.04% CO2 conditions and are calculated as the ratio of the uptake capacities before and after 12 h oxidation in air at 110 °C (or for 24 h in the case of the sorbent with the highest polymer loading) (reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019).	 

∼30% branched PEI (Mw ∼800)	90/110 °C in air for 24 h	35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/He for 6 h	110 °C in pure N2 for 2 h	29 (90 °C) > 95 (110 °C)	
383

40% TETA	110 °C in air for 24 h	35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 3 h	70 °C in pure N2 for 2 h	∼90	
130

40% TPTA	110 °C in air for 24 h	35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 3 h	70 °C in pure N2 for 2 h	∼20	
130

45% EI-den	110 °C in air for 24 h	35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 3 h	70 °C in pure N2 for 2 h	∼90	
130

45% PI-den	110 °C in air for 24 h	35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 3 h	70 °C in pure N2 for 2 h	∼50	
130

50% Linear PEI (2500 g mol−1)	110 °C in air for 24 h	35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 18 h	110 °C in pure N2 for 2 h	>80	
132

50% Linear PEI (25000 g mol−1)	110 °C in air for 24 h	35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 18 h	110 °C in pure N2 for 2 h	60–75	
132

50% Linear PPI (700 g mol−1)	110 °C in air for 24 h	35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 18 h	110 °C in pure N2 for 2 h	∼35	
132

50% Linear PPI (1000 g mol−1)	110 °C in air for 24 h	35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 18 h	110 °C in pure N2 for 2 h	∼35	
132

50% Linear PPI (6700 g mol−1)	110 °C in air for 24 h	35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 18 h	110 °C in pure N2 for 2 h	<17	
132

50% Linear PPI (36000 g mol−1)	110 °C in air for 24 h	35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 18 h	110 °C in pure N2 for 2 h	<17	
132

40% Branched PEI	110 °C in air for 12 h	35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 12 h	110 °C in pure N2 for 3 h	60	
118

30% Branched PPI made with HClO4	110 °C in air for 12 h	35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 12 h	110 °C in pure N2 for 3 h	17	
118

30% Branched PPI made with HBr	110 °C in air for 12 h	35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 12 h	110 °C in pure N2 for 3 h	24	
118

30% Branched PPI made with HCl	110 °C in air for 12 h	35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 12 h	110 °C in pure N2 for 3 h	31	
118

30% Branched PPI made with CH3SO3H	110 °C in air for 12 h	35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 12 h	110 °C in pure N2 for 3 h	31	
118

50% Branched PEI (Mw ∼800)	110 °C in air for 24 h	35 °C in 400 ppm CO2/N2 for 18 h	110 °C in pure N2 for 2 h	90	
119


 	Fig. 29  (a) Agglomeration of amine molecules in the pores and on the surface of silica with amine loadings in the range of 10–70 wt%. (b) Elemental content and CO2 uptake retention of sorbents after degradation in pure O2 at 100 °C over 18 h. (c) FTIR spectra of TEPA70/MF before and after exposure to O2/N2 at 100 °C for different durations (reproduced from ref. 396 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) 3D color map of the IR spectra of adsorbed CO2 on (a) PEI/SiO2 and (b) PEI/PVA obtained only from the adsorption process of 12-cycle adsorption/degradation. Degraded species obtained following degradation at 130 °C and cooling to 40 °C on (c) PEI/SiO2 and (d) PEI/PVA. IR spectral intensities of the degraded species on (e) PEI/SiO2 at 1675 cm−1 (amide) and (f) PEI/PVA at 1660 cm−1 (urea) (reproduced from ref. 397 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017).	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Schematic of the scalable synthesis of the CO2 adsorbent. (b) Amine state distributions of PEI and functionalized PEIs analyzed by 13C NMR. PEI was functionalized with EB, which generated tethered 2-hydroxybutyl groups. (c) FTIR spectra of the adsorbents that were measured after pre-treatment in synthetic air (20% O2 in N2) at 120 °C over 24 h in an in situ IR cell. Dashed lines indicate the spectra of the fresh samples, while solid lines indicate those of the pre-treated samples (reproduced from ref. 388 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016).	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Retained CO2 working capacity (%) of PEI/SiO2 and EB-PEI/SiO2 prepared with and without 2 wt% TSP after aging under 3% O2, 15% CO2, 10% H2O, and 72% N2 at 110 °C. The trend lines were obtained by fitting the first-order deactivation model. (b) FTIR spectra of PEI/SiO2 without TSP and EB-PEI/SiO2 with 2 wt% TSP, before and after 30 days of aging (reproduced from ref. 398 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018). (c) First-order deactivation rate constants (indicated with bars) and predicted remaining CO2 adsorption capacity (in %) after 1 year contact with flue gas at 110 °C (indicated with solid lines) (reproduced from ref. 399 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021).	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) Examples of reaction products of PEHA with two molar equivalents of PO (reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2019). (b) Schematic of the preparation process of PG–TEPA–PO (reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020).	 

 	Fig. 34  (a–c) Three governing mechanisms: (a) species that adsorb CO2 as on amine-functionalized sorbents in the absence of water, including ammonium carbamate and paired carbamic acid; (b) additional species that adsorb CO2 as on amine-functionalized sorbents in the presence of water, including ammonium bicarbonate and water-stabilized carbamic acid; and (c) hydrogen bonding between water and the supported amine groups. (d) Experimental CO2 adsorption isotherms (markers), at various temperatures (T) and relative humidities (RH), fitted to an empirical literature co-adsorption model.140	 

 	Fig. 35  CO2 adsorption pathway on supported TEPA (Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2017).	 

 	Fig. 36  
In situ
13C NMR spectra suggesting “missing” bicarbonate groups (reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 37  Formation of CO2-adsorbing species on primary, secondary, and tertiary amines (reproduced from ref. 418 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017).	 

 	Fig. 38  Formation of carbamic acid in the presence of CO2 and H2O through (a) amine–H2O catalytic reactions and (b) amine catalytic reactions (reproduced from ref. 404 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017). (c) Formation of an isocyanate intermediate (reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). (d) Aminolysis of the half-aminals (reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 39  CO2 adsorption isotherms of diamine-functionalized Mg2(dobpdc) – (a) nmen (N-methyl ethylenediamine), (b) een (N-ethyl ethylenediamine), and (c) ipen (N-isopropyl ethylenediamine) – in the range of 40–150 °C (reproduced from ref. 429 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2018). CO2 uptake using tetraamine-Mg2(dobpdc): (d) pure CO2 adsorbed isobars at 1 bar. Dashed lines indicate the theoretical adsorption of one or two CO2 molecules per tetraamine. (e) Thermogravimetric adsorption isobar for (3-4-3)-Mg2(dobpdc) under 400 ppm CO2 at a temperature ramp rate of 0.1 °C min−1. (f) Tetraamines and their abbreviations (reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2020).	 

 	Fig. 40  CO2 adsorption isobars obtained for (a) Mg2(dobpdc), (b) Mg2(pc-dobpdc) and (c) Mg2(dotpdc) functionalized with a series of primary- and secondary-alkylethylenediamine-appended variants under pure CO2. (d) Adsorption and desorption data for Mg2(dobpdc) and Mg2(pc-dobpdc) functionalized with dmen, indicated with solid and dashed lines, respectively. Gray and black dashed lines indicate half- and full-capacities (4.0 mmol g−1), respectively. Arrows point in the direction of temperature change. (e) Single-crystal X-ray diffraction structures of Zn2(dobpdc)(DMA)2 (DMA = N,N-dimethylacetamide) (top) and Zn2(pc-dobpdc)(DMA)2 (bottom) collected at 100 K (note: the structures of the magnesium-based materials are similar). (f) Model of the hexagonal pore of Mg2(dotpdc) (right). The structures of the ligands are included for comparison. Light blue, green, gray, red, dark blue, and white spheres correspond to Zn, Mg, C, O, N, and H, respectively156 (reproduced from ref. 430 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021).	 

 	Fig. 41  (a) General structures of alkylethylenediamine-appended variants of M2(dobpdc) (reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017). (b) Lewis structure with a 1:1 ratio of ammonium carbamate and carbamic acid for the proposed mixed-chemisorption on dmpn-Mg2(dobpdc) (reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). (c) Structural model of the CO2 adsorption mechanism for Mg2(dobpdc) functionalized with e-2-OH (top) and 3-methoxypropylamine (bottom) (reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2020). (d) Predicted adsorption mechanism obtained from structural relaxations based on vdW-corrected DFT. Green, dark blue, red, gray, and white spheres represent Mg, N, O, C, and H, respectively (reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2020).	 

 	Fig. 42  (a) Adsorption isobars for a series of alkylethylenediamine-appended variants of Mg2(dobpdc). (b) Summary of the adsorption capacities at 40 °C for amine-functionalized Mg2(dobpdc), Mg2(dotpdc), and Mg2(pc-dobpdc). Dry CO2 (green), humid CO2 (blue), and humid N2 (purple).156	 

 	Fig. 43  vdW-corrected DFT-calculated structures and energetics. Evacuated L-2-ampd-R-Mg2(dobpdc) (top left), water adsorption (top right), the framework following CO2 insertion (bottom left), and co-adsorption of CO2 and H2O (bottom right) are shown, including experimental differential binding enthalpies (ΔHads) in parentheses. Green, dark blue, gray, red, and white spheres represent Mg, N, C, O, and H atoms, respectively (reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 44  (a) Quantum mechanics calculations of the ion hydration energy as a function of the number of water molecules and (b) potential moisture swing adsorbents (reproduced from ref.158 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020).	 

 	Fig. 45  (a) Fabrication of quaternary ammonium-functionalized mesoporous resins and (b) CO2 adsorption kinetics at 20 °C and 21% RH and the comparison among moisture swing adsorbents for DAC (reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020).	 

 	Fig. 46  (a) Photographs and contact angles of een–MOF/Al and een–MOF/Al–Si after adding water dropwise (reproduced from ref. 462 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2021). (b) Granulation of zeolite 13X beads using a chitosan aerogel as the binder (reproduced from ref. 459 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021). (c) Granulation of Mg2(dobpdc) in the PVDF and DMF solution via a phase inversion method (reproduced from ref. 433 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021). (d) Synthesis scheme of polyacrylate beads. (e) NbOFFIVE-1-Ni crystals in situ grown inside the pores of polyacrylate beads (reproduced from ref. 463 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021).	 

 	Fig. 47  (a) Amine-based latex coated on the alumina sheet and its surface morphology. (b) Chamber tests of the coated latex at 800 ppm and 15% RH. (c) Corresponding calculated CO2 uptake for paints (solid) and powder sorbents (shaded) (reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). (d) epn-functionalized Mg2(dobpdc) made into self-standing membranes or films on the substrates with SBS as the binder (reproduced from ref. 464 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022). (e) Hydrated K2CO3 coated on the activated carbon honeycomb (reproduced from ref. 465 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 48  (a) UTSA-16 growth on the kaolin monolith (reproduced from ref. 469 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). (b) UTSA-16 growth on electrospun fiber mats.468 (c) Epitaxial growth of MOF-508a on QCM discs (reproduced from ref. 471 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). (d) MFS without and with SIFSIX-3-Cu growth (reproduced from ref. 472 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020).	 

 	Fig. 49  (a) Zeolite/electrically conductive carbon monolith produced from powders by extrusion. (b) Conventional process of preparation of extruded ceramic honeycomb monoliths (reproduced from ref. 476 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017). (c) Extruded MIL-101(Cr) and zeolite 13X honeycomb monoliths (reproduced from ref. 477 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020).	 

 	Fig. 50  (a) Quaternized chitosan is cross-linked with PVA, ion-exchanged with NaOH, and freeze-dried to form the aerogel. (b) Ion-exchange process of the QCS/PVA hydrogel with the NaOH solution. (c) Microscopic morphology of the QCS/PVA aerogel. (d) Adsorption cycles of the QCS/PVA aerogel at 20 °C (reproduced from ref. 445 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 51  (a) PEI-loaded polymer/silica fiber sorbents (reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). (b) Workflow diagram of a modular device that contains the fiber sorbents. (c) Breakthrough curve of a tetraamine-Mg2(dobpdc)/PEI fiber sorbent module with 11 fibers under dry 400 ppm CO2 conditions (reproduced from ref. 496 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021).	 

 	Fig. 52  (a) Dual-functional adsorbent/catalyst monoliths and their conversion performance and (b) Microscopic morphology of the 3D-printed monolith (reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022).	 

 	Fig. 53  Contactor configurations used in adsorption-based CO2 capture (reproduced from ref. 505 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021).	 

Packed bed (5.5 cm, 0.4 cm)	Mg2(dobpdc) (0.06 g)	400 ppm CO2/He, 23, 49, 70 °C	115 °C in He for 4 h	
195

1000 ppm CO2/He
5660 ppm CO2/He
10020 ppm CO2/He
Fixed-bed (4.8 cm, 0.9 cm)	Aminoresin (0.5 g g−1)	400 ppm CO2/N2, 25 °C	Heating	
194

Heating, inert gas purging
Heating, vacuum
Heating, inert gas purging, vacuum
Heating, vacuum, closed
Fixed-bed (1 cm, 8 cm)	APDES-NFC	400 ppm CO2/air/50%RH	Heating, vacuum	
180

Heating, steam purging, vacuum
Packed bed (1 cm, 10 cm)	Lewatits VP OC 1065	400 ppm CO2/N2/30% 50%RH, 25, 50, 70 °C	Heating, vacuum	
140

Fixed-bed (60 cm, 1.3 cm)	Lewatits VP OC 1065 (53.6 g)	400 ppm CO2/N2, 20 °C	Heating, steam purging, vacuum	
137

5000 ppm CO2/N2, 20 °C
Fixed-bed (1.7 cm, 0.45 cm)	Amine-functionalized resin (0.5 g)	200–4000 ppm CO2/N2, 25–50 °C, H2O 0.16 to 1.86 vol%	Heating, vacuum, N2 purging	
407

Fixed-bed (2.4 cm, 40 cm)	Lewatits VP OC 1065	410 ppm CO2/N2, 20 °C, 50% RH	Heating, vacuum, CO2/N2 purging	
508

Fixed-bed (12 cm, 1 cm)	PEI_80b (3.45 g)	420 ppm CO2/N2	Heating, steam purging, vacuum	
141

Rectangular contactor (7.2 cm, 7.2 cm, 50 cm)	APDES-NFC-FD (85.9 g)	400–490 ppm CO2/N2, 58.3% RH	Heating, vacuum	
406

Radial flow contactor (40 cm, 15.4 cm)	Lewatits VP OC 1065 (1700 g)	429–464 ppm CO2/N2, 19–22 °C, 40–65% RH	120 °C in N2 for 16 h	
201

Radial flow contactor (50 cm, 1.6 cm)	Lewatits VP OC 1065 (1–3 g)	400 ppm CO2/N2, 25 °C	80 °C in N2	
506

Moving belt adsorber (2900 cm, 0.5 cm)	Lewatits VP OC 1065	400 ppm CO2/N2	Heating	
202


 	Fig. 54  Breakthrough curves of mmen-Mg2(dobpdc) at 23 °C and a flow rate of 17.2 N mL min−1. The left one shows simulative results and the right one shows experimental results (reproduced from ref. 195 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 55  CO2 adsorption and desorption capacities using total flow rates of (a) 1000 mL min−1 and (b) 40 mL min−1 in the desorption phase. Error bars indicate the uncertainty (reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021).	 

 	Fig. 56  Electrical vs. thermal energy consumption for CO2 production rate isolines of 1.9 (circles), 2.2 (squares), and 2.45 × 10−5 kg h−1 (triangles) and evacuation pressures of pL: 30 (solid), 50 (dashed), and 100 mbar (dotted). The color scheme corresponds to the flow rate of steam, increasing from left to right: Fs: 0 (gray), 5 (purple), 10 (yellow), 17.5 (orange), and 25 cm3 s−1 (blue) (reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020).	 

 	Fig. 57  Design of (a) the TVSA process with four cycles, (b) an air contactor, and (c) an adsorption-based CO2 capture system. (d) Relationship between CO2 productivity and separation exergy using adsorbents with different CO2 and H2O isotherms (reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021).	 

 	Fig. 58  Main components of the containerized modular DAC device designed by the VTT Technical Research Centre (reproduced from ref. 514 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019). Blue line: air flow, black line: waste gas flow, red line: heating liquid flow, and green line: product flow.	 

 	Fig. 59  Process flow of a S-TVSA-based DAC system (reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from MDPI, copyright 2019).	 

PEI10000-silica	Monolith	5000	1.33/2.28 (dry/90% RH)	90	18/20	
193

TEPA70	Powder	800	1.3/1.6 (15/50% RH)	25	180	
191

3000	1.33 (15% RH)
Paint	800	1.0/1.1 (15/50% RH)	25	180
3000	1.33 (15% RH)
PEI50	Powder	800	0.9/1.0 (15/50% RH)	25	180
3000	1.1 (15% RH)
Paint	800	0.5/0.65 (15/50% RH)	25	180
3000	0.8 (15% RH)
PEI-MR10	Resin	1000	2.06/2.27/2.72/2.92 (0/10/30/50% RH)	70	60	
115

500	2.2 (50% RH)
1500	2.98 (50% RH)
2000	3.1 (50% RH)

 	Fig. 60  Schematic representation of solar energy converted to biomass. When hydrogen (case A) serves as an electron donor, CO2 is supplied to the bioreactor along with the H2 and O2 produced in the electrochemical cell. When formate (case B) and methanol (case C) serve as electron donors, CO2 is supplied to the electrochemical unit, and the only input gas supplied to the bioreactor is O2 (reproduced from ref. 212 with permission from the National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2021).	 

 	Fig. 61  5 kW pilot scale solar reactor design (reproduced from ref. 540 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2022).	 

 	Fig. 62  Integrated DAC, electrolysis, and methanol synthesis system using a CO2 electrolyzer (reproduced from ref. 224 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 63  Coupled CO2 capture and in situ electroreduction (reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2021).	 

 	Fig. 64  Potential feedstock sources and downstream products that can be converted into or made from synthesis gas (or syngas) produced via solar dry reforming.238	 
2-ampd	Cyclic diamine 2-(aminomethyl)piperidine
AHTSA	Amine hybrid titania/silsesquioxane composite aerogel
AMBS	(3-Amino-3-methylbutyl)trimethoxysilane
AMOST	Aqueous miscible organic solvent treatment
APS	3-(Aminopropyl)trimethoxysilane
AR	Afforestation/reforestation
BECCS	Bioenergy carbon capture and storage
B-ethyl	Bis(2-aminoethyl)amine
B-propyl	Bis(2-aminopropyl)amine
C1	Aminomethyl-
C2	2-Aminoethyl-
C4	4-Aminobutyl-
C5	5-Aminoamyl-
CC	Capture capacity
CCS	Carbon capture and storage
CH2DETA	3-(2-Aminoethylamino)methylsilane
CHAPS	
N-Cyclohexylaminopropyl-
COF	Covalent organic framework
CPG	Controlled pore glass
CP-MAS	Cross-polarization magic-angle spinning
CTAB	Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide
CTAC	Cetyltrimethylammonium chloride
den	1,1-Dimethylethylenediamine
dobdc	2,5-Dioxido-1,4-benzenedicarboxylate
dobpdc	4,4-Dioxido-3,3-biphenyldicarboxylate
dotpdc	4,4′′-Dioxido-[1,1′:4′,1′′-terphenyl]-3,3′′-dicarboxylate
DAC	Direct air capture
DACCS	Direct air carbon capture and storage
DFT	Density functional theory
DI	3-(2-Aminoethylamino)propyl-
DMA	
N,N-Dimethylacetamide
DMAPS	(N,N-Dimethylaminopropyl)trimethoxysilane
DOE	Department of Energy
DRIFT	Diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform
e	Ethyl
en	Ethylenediamine
epn	1-Ethylpropane-1,3-diamine
EB	Epoxybutane
ED	Ethylenediamine
EGR	Enhanced gas recovery
EI-den	
N
1,N1,N3,N3-Tetrakis(2-aminoethyl)propane-1,3-diamine
EOR	Enhanced oil recovery
EtSBA-15	Ethane-bridged SBA-15
EtSNT	Ethane-bridged organosilica nanotube
EU	European Union
FTIR	Fourier-transform infrared
GDP	Gross domestic product
HBPG	Hyperbranched polyglycerol
HBS	Hierarchical bimodal mesoporous silica
HMS	Hexagonal mesoporous silica
HS-DAC	Humidity-swing-based DAC
IAM	Integrated assessment model
IEA	International Energy Agency
IER	Ion exchange resin
IL	Ionic liquid
LCA	Life cycle assessment
LCFS	Low Carbon Fuel Standard
LDH	Layered double hydroxide
LPPI	Linear PPI

L-Propyl	3-(2-Aminopropylamino)propylsilane
men	1-Methylethylenediamine
mmen	
N,N′-Dimethylethylenediamine
MAB	Maximum affordable budget
MAPS	
N-Methylaminopropyl-
MAS	Magic-angle spinning
MCF	Mesocellular siliceous foam
MEA-PCC	Monoethanolamine-based post-combustion capture
MeOH	Methanol
MFS	Melamine formaldehyde sponge
MMO	Mixed metal oxide
MMSN	Micro-mesoporous silica nanoparticle
MOF	Metal–organic framework
MXDA	
meta-Xylylenediamine
NBAPS	
N-Butylaminopropyl-
NET	Negative emission technology
NFC	Nanofibrillated cellulose
NMR	Nuclear magnetic resonance
NOHM	Nanoparticle organic hybrid material
NZE	Net-zero-emission
O&M	Operating and maintenance
OXDA	
ortho-Xylylenediamine
pc-dobpdc	3,3′-Dioxidobiphenyl-4,4′-dicarboxylate
PAA	Polyallylamine
PD	Propylenediamine
PDMS	Polydimethylsiloxane
PEG	Poly(ethylene glycol)
PEHA	Pentaethylenehexamine
PEI	Polyethyleneimine
PGA	Poly(glycidyl amine)
PHAPS	(N-Phenylaminopropyl)trimethoxysilane
Ph-X-YY	Alkyl–aryl amine-rich small molecules
PI-den	
N
1,N1,N3,N3-Tetrakis(3-aminopropyl)propane-1,3-diamine
PO	Propylene oxide
PPG	Poly(propylene guanidine)
PPI	Poly(propylene imine)
PtX	Power-to-X
PVA	Poly(vinyl alcohol)
PVDF	Poly(vinylidene fluoride)
PXDA	
para-xylylenediamine
QCM	Quartz crystal microbalance
QCS	Quaternized chitosan
RH	Relative humidity
scCO2	Supercritical CO2
sMono	Trimethoxy[3-(methylamino)propyl]silane
SBS	Polystyrene-block-polybutadiene-block-polystyrene
SIP	Solvent-impregnated polymer
Span80	Sorbitan monooleate
S-TCSA	Steam-assisted TCSA
S-TSA	Steam-assisted temperature swing adsorption
S-TVSA	Steam-assisted TVSA

T
ads
	Adsorption temperature
TBAPS	(tert-Butylaminopropyl)trimethoxysilane
TCSA	Temperature concentration swing adsorption

T
des
	Desorption temperature
TEA	Tetraethylammonium
TEPA	Tetraethylenepentamine
TETA	Triethylenetetramine
TMA	Tetramethylammonium
TPTA	Tripropylenetetramine
TREN	Tris(2-aminoethyl)amine
TRI	3-[2-(2-Aminoethylamino)ethylamino]propyl-
TSA-DAC	Temperature swing adsorption DAC
TSP	Trisodiumphosphate
TVSA	Temperature vacuum swing adsorption
UK	United Kingdom
UREA	
N,N′-Bis(3-trimethoxysilpropyl)urea
US	United States
vdW	van der Waals
VPSA	Vacuum pressure swing adsorption
VSA	Vacuum swing adsorption
WADST	Weighted-average dual-site Toth
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
