Carotenoid–chlorophyll energy transfer in the fucoxanthin–chlorophyll complex binding a fucoxanthin acyloxy derivative  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8FD00193F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8FD00193F
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2019, 216, 460-475Carotenoid–chlorophyll energy transfer in the fucoxanthin–chlorophyll complex binding a fucoxanthin acyloxy derivative

        
          
            Hristina 
            Staleva-Musto
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Robert 
            West
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Marco 
            Trathnigg
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            David 
            Bína
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Radek 
            Litvín
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Tomáš 
            Polívka
          
        
      *ab
aFaculty of Science, University of South Bohemia, Branišovská 1760, 370 05 České Budějovice, Czech Republic. E-mail: tpolivka@jcu.cz;   Tel: +420 387 776 259
bInstitute of Plant Molecular Biology, Biological Centre, Czech Academy of Sciences, České Budějovice, Czech Republic
Received 
      19th November 2018
    , Accepted 29th November 2018First published on 29th November 2018AbstractThe fucoxanthin–chlorophyll a protein from Emiliania huxleyi (E-FCP) is a member of the LHC family of light-harvesting proteins. It has a rather unusual pigment composition as its binds more Chl-c than Chl-a, and 19′-hexanoyloxyfucoxanthin (hFx) as the main carotenoid instead of fucoxanthin (Fx) typically found in various FCP complexes. The presence of a hexanoyloxy tail in hFx suppresses the charge transfer character of the S1/ICT state resulting in almost no effect of polarity on the excited state dynamics of hFx, strongly contrasting with the excited-state properties of Fx. Here we report on the dynamics of the energy transfer between hFx and Chl in E-FCP, and we compare it with Fx–Chl energy transfer in the FCP complex from Phaeodactylum tricornutum. In both complexes, the excited hFx (Fx) transfers energy from the S2 state with a sub-100 fs time constant and no effect of the hexanoyloxy tail on the efficiency of the S2 route was found. The energy transfer via the S1/ICT state has in E-FCP two channels characterized by 1.5 and 11 ps time constants, while for FCP these two channels operate with time constants of 0.8 and 4.5 ps. Thus, minimizing the charge transfer character of S1/ICT in hFx results in about twice slower energy transfer via the S1/ICT state, underlining the importance of the ICT state in facilitating carotenoid–Chl energy transfer in systems utilizing keto carotenoids as energy donors.
Introduction
The efficient conversion of solar radiation energy into chemical energy carried out by photosynthetic organisms heavily relies on the performance of their light-harvesting systems. The role of light-harvesting (or antenna) complexes is to capture sunlight and to transfer the absorbed energy to reaction centers, in which the excitation energy is converted into chemical energy.1,2 The structure and function of reaction centers remained mostly conserved throughout their evolution and only two types of reaction centers can be found in photosynthetic organisms. In contrast, the light harvesting complexes evolved into a large variety of systems containing various pigments carrying out the light-harvesting function.1–3 The diversity of light-harvesting systems is especially pronounced in photosynthetic microorganisms which, depending on the ecological niches they are living in, employ different pigments (typically carotenoids and chlorophylls) resulting in a broad range of light-harvesting efficiencies.1–3
Besides the light-harvesting function, antenna complexes also have an important regulatory role as they are able to quench the Chl excited state under high-light conditions when reaction centers are not able to accept and use all absorbed energy.4 Without regulatory mechanisms, the unexploited energy of an excited Chl would generate a Chl triplet that could in turn react with oxygen resulting in production of deleterious singlet oxygen. Thus, photoprotective mechanisms are clearly needed. It is known that the molecules crucial for photoprotection are carotenoids.5 Using carotenoids, photosynthetic organisms have developed a three-layer photoprotection consisting of the direct quenching of singlet states of Chl,6,7 quenching of Chl triplet states formed by intersystem crossing,8,9 or scavenging singlet oxygen generated through sensitization from Chl triplets.10
Thus, carotenoids in light-harvesting complexes significantly affect the overall efficiency of the light-harvesting and photoprotective processes in a particular photosynthetic organism. Numerous studies addressed the specific excited-state properties of carotenoids which, in the first approximation, may be described with a three-state model consisting of the ground state (S0), the lowest excited state S1, which is forbidden for one-photon transitions from the ground state, and the strongly absorbing S2 state.11 After excitation of a carotenoid into the S2 state, it promptly relaxes to the S1 state and, when embedded in light-harvesting complexes, both the S1 and S2 excited states can serve as energy donors in carotenoid–Chl energy transfer.2,3 The actual efficiency of either channel depends mainly on the carotenoid structure.3 The role of carotenoid excited states in photoprotection is less clear, but at least in some light-harvesting complexes it has been proven that the carotenoid S1 state can accept energy from excited Chl-a.6,12–14
A special family of carotenoids contain a conjugated CO group in their structure: the keto-carotenoids. They exhibit specific excited-state properties as the conjugated keto group introduces an intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) state, which, via coupling to the S1 state, makes their spectroscopic properties dependent on polarity.15–18 Keto-carotenoids often occur in the light-harvesting complexes of photosynthetic microorganisms, e.g. dinoflagellates and diatoms,19 and it has been shown that their excited-state properties are potentially tunable by the binding site. This is an important feature, allowing the highly efficient carotenoid–Chl energy transfer that is typically observed in these systems. The prototypical light-harvesting complexes containing keto-carotenoids are the peridinin–chlorophyll-complex (PCP) from dinoflagellates and fucoxanthin–chlorophyll-protein (FCP) from diatoms, which contain keto-carotenoids peridinin and fucoxanthin (Fx), respectively. In both PCP and FCP, the keto-carotenoids transfer the absorbed energy to Chl-a with ∼90% efficiency,20,21 and the ICT state, specifically its coupling to the S1 state,22,23 plays a key role in achieving such high energy transfer efficiency.
Fucoxanthin in FCP transfers energy to Chl-a from both S2 and S1/ICT states;21,23–26 the S1/ICT pathway consists of two channels that are likely associated with two different Fx–Chl pairs in FCP. These two S1/ICT channels yielded time constants of 0.6 and 2.5 ps for FCP from Cyclotella meneghiniana21,24,25 and 0.8 and 4.5 ps for FCP from Phaeodactylum tricornutum.23 In both FCP complexes, there is also a long-lived Fx (25 and 38 ps for FCP from C. meneghiniana and P. tricornutum, respectively) that does not transfer energy to Chl. Interestingly, Chl-a in isolated FCP has a lifetime of ∼4.5 ns, indicating that the singlet excited states of Chl a in the isolated FCP are not quenched. Instead, the photoprotection mechanism in FCP efficiently quenches the Chl triplets by triplet–triplet energy transfer to Fx.27 Except for the keto-carotenoid Fx, both FCPs also bind small amounts of diadinoxanthin and/or diatoxanthin: the two carotenoids of the diatoms xanthophyll cycle. However, their amount in complexes vary significantly depending on the light conditions during cultivation as well as on the isolation procedure.28–30
Another FCP complex is found in the coccolithophore Emiliania huxleyi. Marine algae of the group Coccolithophyceae (phyllum Haptophyta) are among the most significant contributors to both geologic and present global carbon cycles.31 Haptophyte algae most likely represent an independent branch of eukaryotic life and are not closely related to either diatoms or red algae.32 On the other hand, the major light harvesting antenna proteins of these algae are closely related to diatom FCP.33 In contrast to FCPs studied so far, the FCP complex from E. huxleyi (hereafter denoted as E-FCP) binds fucoxanthin acyloxy derivative 19′-hexanoyloxyfucoxanthin (hFx) as the major carotenoid.34 Under high-light or nutrient starvation conditions, the amount of hFx increases at the expense of Fx,35 suggesting that the acyloxy moiety may provide some advantage for protection. Interestingly, even though the hexanoyloxy group is not conjugated, we have recently shown that its presence significantly affects the excited-state properties. Namely, the presence of a hexanoyloxy tail nearly completely disables the characteristic polarity-dependent behavior of fucoxanthin, and all the typical spectroscopic markers of the ICT state disappear in hFx.36 Therefore, the ICT-assisted fucoxanthin–Chl energy transfer reported for FCPs from C. meneghiniana or P. tricornutum should not work for E-FCP. Here we show that binding hFx to E-FCP indeed slows down the carotenoid–Chl energy transfer compared to the FCP complex from P. tricornutum, underscoring the importance of the ICT state in facilitating energy transfer between a keto-carotenoid and Chl.
Materials and methods
Diatom FCP light-harvesting complexes from P. tricornutum were obtained as described previously.23 Cells of E. huxleyi strain CCMP1516 were used as a source material for obtaining E-FCP samples. E. huxleyi was batch-grown in an artificial seawater medium with f/2 nutrient addition37 in 5 L Erlenmeyer flasks. The cultures were illuminated by a metal halide lamp at an intensity of 300 μmol per photons per m2 per s1 (15 h light, 9 h dark). Cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 8000×g and stored at −80 °C until further use. The E-FCP antenna was isolated as described previously for FCP.23,38 Briefly, cells were resuspended in a breaking buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 2 mM KCl, 10 mM EDTA) and broken by a high-pressure cell disruptor (EmulsiFlex-C5, Avestin Inc., Canada) by several passages at 800 bar. Thylakoid membranes were pelleted by centrifugation at 150000×g, solubilized using 2% n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside and pre-purified using linear sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation. The darkest zone, which contained the antenna proteins, was collected from the gradient and further purified using anion exchange chromatography on a 2 mL column packed with DEAE Sepharose CL-6B (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) using a linear NaCl gradient of 5–400 mM (elution buffer: 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 2 mM KCl, and 0.03% n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside). The fractions eluted at 180–220 mM NaCl were selected for spectroscopic measurements based on the simultaneous criteria of lowest protein/Chl-a (A270/A674) and highest carotenoid/Chl-a (A480/A674) ratios. The collected fractions were desalted and stored at −80 °C. Prior to experiments, the isolated E-FCP was dissolved in a buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 2 mM KCl, and 0.03% n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside) to yield an optical density of 0.4 in a 2 mm path length cuvette at the maximum of the Qy band of Chl-a.
The pigment composition of the samples was determined using an HPLC analysis as described previously.39 Pigments were identified by their absorption spectra, elution times and by comparison with known standards (e.g. FCP pigment extract was used as a fucoxanthin and diadinoxanthin standard). Pigment molar ratios were estimated from areas of their HPLC peaks corrected by their respective extinction coefficients.40 The extinction coefficient of Fx was used for the quantification of hFx.
Steady-state absorption spectra were measured using an Agilent 8453 UV-VIS spectrophotometer. Ultrafast transient absorption measurements were performed with a regenerative chirped pulse amplification system (Spectra-Physics) producing a 100 fs pulse width and 800 nm central wavelength pulses at a repetition rate of 1 kHz at 4 W average power. Beam splitters directed pulses to an optical parametric amplifier, TOPAS Prime (Light Conversion), which generated pump pulses at 510 nm. A third beam path led to a 3 mm sapphire plate, which produced a supercontinuum for probing at the repetition rate of the source. Additionally, this supercontinuum beam was split into a reference beam, which passed outside the sample and probe beam, which overlapped the pump beam in the sample. The timing of the probe pulses relative to the pump pulses was adjusted using a computer-controlled delay line allowing measurement up to 6 ns. Near the sample space, the pump beam was focused with a 350 mm focal-length fused silica lens. The white-light continuum was collimated by an off-axis parabolic mirror, and, after splitting into reference and probe beams, the probe beam was focused with a 300 mm spherical mirror to minimize chirp. The resulting spot-sizes, where the beams overlapped in the sample space, were approximately 300 and 120 μm for pump and probe, respectively. The resulting pump photon flux at the sample space was adjusted using a neutral density filter and kept below 1014 photons per pulse per cm2. A Berek compensator placed into the pump beam fixed the pump beam polarization to 54.7 degrees to the probe beam. Time-resolved spectra obtained from reference and probe signals were detected using a double CCD array system (Pascher Instruments).
Microsecond triplet-minus-singlet (TmS) spectra of fucoxanthin were measured using the home-built microsecond flash-photolysis setup.41 Carotenoid triplet states were generated using Chl-a as photosensitizer. The contribution of the Chl-a triplet-minus-singlet spectrum to the signal was removed by subtracting the pure Chl-a solution spectrum acquired in a separate experiment, scaled to the bleaching of the Chl-a Qy band.
The spectro-temporal datasets from the femtosecond transient absorption experiments were fitted globally using the CarpetView fitting software (Light Conversion). To visualize the excited state dynamics, for simplicity we assumed a sequential, irreversible scheme. In this model, the spectral profiles of the individual excited-state species are called evolution-associated difference spectra (EADS), and although they do not correspond to pure spectra of individual excited states, they provide valuable information about the time evolution of the whole system.42
Results
The HPLC chromatogram of E-FCP presented in Fig. 1 shows the complex pigment composition. The E-FCP complex binds three types of Chl-c: Chl-c3, Chl-c2 and Chl-c2 esterified with monogalactosyl diacylglycerol (Chl-c2-MGDG), in an approximately 3:2:1 ratio. Altogether, Chl-c comprises almost 60% of the chlorophyll content of E-FCP. This contrasts with diatom FCP, where forms of Chl-c typically account for less than 25% of all chlorophyll content, and Chl-c2-MGDG is completely absent.28–30 The pigment stoichiometry of E-FCP is summarized in Fig. 2. The carotenoid pool of E-FCP is dominated by hFx (over 85%), accompanied by ∼8% of Fx. Other carotenoids identified include a cis-isomer of Fx, diadinoxanthin, and a trace amount (<1%) of β-carotene. The small, substoichimetric amount of the xanthophyll cycle carotenoid diadinoxanthin is not surprising and is in line with diatom FCP, where the amount of this carotenoid is known to vary between preparations depending on the purification procedure.28,29,43 In spite of the significant difference in Chl-a/c content between E-FCP and FCP, the two complexes maintain a total carotenoid:total Chl ratio close to 1.
 Fig. 1  HPLC analysis of the pigment content of the purified antenna of E. huxleyi (E-FCP). The chromatogram was detected at 435 nm. The major pigments are labelled at their respective peaks; Fx – fucoxanthin; hFx – 19′-hexanoyloxyfucoxanthin; Chl – chlorophyll. The molecular structures of Fx and hFx are also shown. 
 Fig. 2  Comparison of the pigment composition E-FCP from E. huxleyi and FCP of the pennate diatom P. tricornutum. The pigment stoichiometry is expressed in mol/100 mol Chl-a (mean ± standard deviation of three replicates). For simplicity, all Chl-c forms are grouped, as are the minor carotenoids cis-Fx and diadinoxanthin. 
The absorption spectra of the E-FCP and FCP complexes are shown in Fig. 3. This comparison underlines the significantly larger amount of pigments in E-FCP. The Qy band of Chl-a is the same in both complexes, peaking at 672 nm, but the significantly larger amount of Chl-c in E-FCP is manifested by the characteristic Chl-c peak at 590 nm. Further, the domination of Chl-c over Chl-a in E-FCP is also reflected in the Soret band peaking at 467 nm, the maximum corresponding to Chl-c, with a Chl-a shoulder at 440 nm. A reverse ratio of these peaks is observed for FCP. Due to the higher hFx(Fx)/Chl-a ratio in E-FCP (Fig. 2), the carotenoid band is more intense in E-FCP. Even though E-FCP binds hFx and FCP Fx, there is no significant difference in the carotenoid absorption bands; this agrees with the absorption data on Fx/hFx showing that the absorption spectra are very similar.36 Yet, the red-edge of the carotenoid absorption is slightly red-shifted in FCP (560 nm), which is the first hint that the hexanoyloxy group of hFx minimizes the characteristic features of keto-carotenoids. The extension of the absorption to long wavelengths in a polar environment is typical for fucoxanthin.16
 Fig. 3  Absorption spectra of the E-FCP and FCP complexes. 
To gain information about a possible effect of the hexanoyloxy group of hFx on carotenoid–Chl energy transfer, we have excited Fx (in FCP) as well as hFx (in E-FCP) at 510 nm. Transient absorption spectra taken at 1 ps after excitation are depicted in Fig. 4. In the carotenoid bleaching region, the Fx bleaching signal in FCP extends further to the red compared to hFx in E-FCP, confirming the observation from the absorption spectra. The positive signal is due to a S1–Sn excited state absorption which, in agreement with comparison of hFx and Fx in solution,36 peaks at the same wavelength of 560 nm for both complexes. The major differences are in the Chl bleaching region. First, the magnitude of the Chl bleaching signal is markedly larger for FCP, indicating faster energy transfer from Fx to Chl-a in FCP compared to hFx to Chl-a transfer in E-FCP. Second, the positive signal in the 630–700 nm spectral region, which is due to the ICT-Sn transition overlapping with the Chl-a Qy bleaching, is also larger in FCP. This shows that the ICT character of the coupled S1/ICT state is diminished for hFx bound to E-FCP, mirroring the situation reported for the excited-state dynamics of hFx in solution.36
 Fig. 4  Transient absorption spectra measured at 1 ps after excitation of E-FCP (black) and FCP (red) complexes. Data are normalized to the S1–Sn maximum. 
The differences between Fx and hFx bound to antenna complexes are further exhibited in the energy transfer dynamics. The kinetics were measured at the maximum of Chl-a bleaching at 672 nm to monitor the arrival of energy to Chl-a after excitation of Fx/hFx at 510 nm (Fig. 5a). The rise of the Chl-a bleaching signal is markedly slower in E-FCP, showing that hFx is less efficient in energy transfer to Chl-a compared to Fx in FCP. The excited Chl-a populated by energy transfer from Fx/hFx has the same lifetime in FCP and E-FCP (Fig. 5a, inset), implying no role of the particular fucoxanthin structure (Fx, hFx) in the possible quenching of excited Chl-a. The Chl-a lifetime in both complexes corresponds to essentially unquenched (lifetime close to 4 ns, see below) Chl-a. The less efficient energy transfer in E-FCP is also reflected in the decay of the hFx S1/ICT state which is slower than that of Fx in FCP (Fig. 5b), further confirming the effect of the hexanoyloxy group of hFx on the energy transfer and excited-state dynamics.
 Fig. 5  (a) Kinetics measured at the maximum of Chl-a bleaching at 672 nm. Inset shows the long time scale monitoring the decay of excited Chl-a. (b) Decay of the S1/ICT state monitored at the maximum of the S1–Sn band at 560 nm. The excitation wavelength was 510 nm, and the data are normalized either to Chl-a bleaching minimum (a) or S1–Sn maximum (b). E-FCP: black, FCP: red. 
Detailed information about the dynamics of carotenoid–Chl energy transfer in both complexes is provided in Fig. 6, which shows the results of global fitting in terms of the EADS corresponding to individual compartments in the sequential fitting model. Note that these compartments do not reflect differential spectra of true excited states of the system as they mix carotenoid and Chl states, yet they provide useful information about the energy flow through the system after excitation of Fx/hFx in both complexes. The initial EADS (black) correspond to the spectrum of the initially excited S2 state of Fx/hFx. In both FCP and E-FCP, the Fx/hFx S2 state decays on a sub-100 fs time scale to populate S1/ICT of Fx/hFx and Chl-a. This is evidenced by the characteristic spectroscopic markers in the red EADS: the S1–Sn band of Fx/hFx peaking at 560 nm and Chl-a bleaching at 672 nm. The process characterized by transformation of the red to blue EADS is accompanied by a significant increase of Chl-a bleaching and decay of the S1–Sn band. The same occurs during the decay of the blue EADS; therefore, these two processes represent two channels of energy transfer via the S1/ICT state. For FCP from P. tricornutum, these two channels have lifetimes of 0.8 and 4.5 ps, but they are slower for E-FCP, 1.5 and 10.8 ps. The prolongation of the S1/ICT-mediated energy transfer in E-FCP is clearly visible in the kinetics of the Chl-a rise in Fig. 5a.
 Fig. 6  EADS obtained from global fitting the data measured for (a) FCP and (b) E-FCP complexes. The excitation wavelength was 510 nm, and the short-wavelength (<570 nm) part of the first EADS is omitted due to strong scattering from excitation. 
Thus, the first three EADS in Fig. 6 are related to three energy transfer channels from Fx/hFx to Chl-a. The fastest channel (<100 fs) characterizes the S2-mediated transfer; the other two are due to the S1/ICT route. No other energy transfer channels were identified, and the subsequent dynamics is due to decay of the S1/ICT state of Fx/hFx which does not transfer energy to Chl-a (green EADS). This EADS has a lifetime of 38 ps (FCP) and 57 ps (E-FCP). During the decay, the S1–Sn signal disappears completely, but no change in the amplitude of Chl-a bleaching is observed, confirming that this process is related solely to the decay of Fx/hFx. The difference in lifetimes of the non-transferring Fx (FCP) and hFx (E-FCP) agrees well with the reported S1/ICT lifetimes of Fx and hFx in solution.36 The 3.9 ns (FCP) and 3.8 ns (E-FCP) EADS reflect the decay of excited Chl-a and the formation of the carotenoid triplet state (the final EADS), which has a lifetime in the microsecond timescale, far beyond the time window accessible in our experiment.
Discussion
The specific pigment composition in E-FCP, the major carotenoid being the acyloxy fucoxanthin derivative hFx instead of the fucoxanthin occurring in other FCP antenna, clearly affects the dynamics of the energy transfer between carotenoids and Chl. While the position of the S1–Sn transition remains essentially unaltered when switching from Fx to hFx, the energy transfer rates associated with the S1/ICT state slow down for E-FCP binding hFx (Fig. 5a and 6). To trace the origin of this effect we recall the recent report of the spectroscopic properties of hFx in solution which demonstrated that the non-conjugated hexanoyloxy group of hFx eliminates the polarity-dependent behavior characteristic of Fx, and the spectroscopic markers of the ICT state are nearly absent in hFx.36
It is possible to demonstrate that comparable behavior occurs when hFx is bound to E-FCP. In Fig. 7, we show the EADS associated with the fast energy transfer channel via the S1/ICT route with the contribution of Chl-a subtracted. The EADS in Fig. 7 thus represent an estimation of the ‘pure’ transient spectra of Fx and hFx bound to FCP and E-FCP, respectively. It is obvious that, when normalized to the S1–Sn maximum, the characteristic ICT signal in the 630–700 nm spectral region is enhanced for Fx in FCP, confirming the assumption of the lack of ICT character of the S1/ICT state of hFx in E-FCP. We cannot exclude some involvement of the ICT state in hFx since some ICT character has been observed in alcohols,36 suggesting that hydrogen bonding to the conjugated keto-oxygen of hFx may be a trigger for the appearance of ICT-related features. Since we do not know the structure of either FCP or E-FCP, hydrogen bonding to a keto-oxygen in some hFx cannot be excluded. Yet, our analysis unequivocally shows that the involvement of the ICT state, thus also its coupling to the S1 state, is significantly diminished for hFx in E-FCP.
 Fig. 7  Normalized EADS corresponding to the fast S1/ICT energy transfer channel in E-FCP (black, 1.5 ps) and FCP (red, 0.8 ps). The Chl-a bleaching contribution was removed by subtracting the appropriately scaled Chl-a EADS (3.9 ns). 
The near absence of the ICT features of hFx in E-FCP translates to the significantly slower energy transfer via the S1/ICT state, underscoring the importance of the ICT state for energy transfer between keto-carotenoids and Chl-a. The concept that the ICT state is a key factor in maintaining high energy transfer efficiency was suggested to explain the peridinin–Chl energy transfer in the peridinin–chlorophyll-complex (PCP)20,22 and later in the FCP complex.21,23 However, comparison of FCP and E-FCP provides the final proof, as we can compare two fucoxanthins having an identical structure of the conjugated backbone; yet one of them, hFx, lacks the ICT-related features. As a result, both energy transfer channels involving the S1/ICT state of hFx are about twice as slow as those utilizing Fx. Since ICT-related features are nearly absent in hFx, this result also supports the hypothesis that the S1 part of the S1/ICT potential surface is the energy donor in Fx/hFx–Chl energy transfer.23 The S1-ICT coupling is the mechanism for tuning the energy transfer, mostly by enhancing the transition dipole moment of the donor, resulting in a faster energy transfer rate.
It is important to note, however, that even though the energy transfer rate is slower when hFx is the energy donor, the overall efficiency of the S1/ICT route is not much affected. Since we know that the S1/ICT lifetime of hFx in solution is 60 ps, even for the slower energy transfer channel characterized by the 10.8 ps S1/ICT lifetime of hFx in E-FCP (Fig. 6b), the efficiency is still ∼80% (the energy transfer time is 13.5 ps). The same calculation for the slower S1/ICT channel in FCP, assuming the intrinsic S1/ICT lifetime of Fx is about 35 ps (based on the lifetime of the non-transferrin Fx), yields an efficiency of 87%, only slightly larger than that for hFx in E-FCP. Therefore, although the absence of the ICT state in hFx slows down the energy transfer, the energy transfer efficiency decreases only marginally.
However, the importance of the ICT state for tuning the energy transfer rate is obvious. This is also supported by nearly identical rates for the S2-channel that is not affected by the charge-transfer character of the S1/ICT state. In both FCP and E-FCP are Fx/hFx molecules which do not transfer energy to Chl-a (Fig. 5, green EADS). The lifetimes of the non-transferring carotenoids are 38 ps (Fx) and 57 ps (hFx), somehow mirroring the S1/ICT lifetimes obtained for these molecules in solution. For Fx, the S1/ICT lifetime of 38 ps indicates a mildly polar environment as the S1/ICT lifetimes of Fx span the 20–60 ps range, depending on the polarity and proticity of the environment.16,44 The 58 ps S1/ICT lifetime of non-transferring hFx in E-FCP agrees with the 60 ps S1/ICT lifetime in nearly all solvents, regardless of polarity.36 The only parameter that could decrease the S1/ICT lifetime of hFx in solution is the proticity of the solvent, as hydrogen bonding in alcohols decreased the lifetime to 40 ps.36 This suggests that no hydrogen bonding to the keto-oxygen of hFx occurs in E-FCP. It is also important to note that, based on the amplitude of the S1–Sn band in the EADS corresponding to the non-transferring Fx/hFx, in both complexes the non-transferring carotenoids represent about one third of the Fx/hFx population excited at 510 nm. This implies that even though there are substantially more carotenoids per Chl-a in E-FCP than in FCP (Fig. 2), the fraction of hFx involved in energy transfer remains approximately the same as for Fx in FCP. Thus, the additional hFx molecules must be also involved in energy transfer.
The decay of the Chl-a excited state also remains unaffected by the exchange of Fx for hFx since the lifetime in both complexes is very similar: 3.8 and 3.9 ns, respectively. This shows that presence of hFx does not induce any quenching; the Chl-a remains unquenched in both FCP and E-FCP. This is not surprising, because in both quenching mechanisms, proposed for direct quenching of excited Chl-a by carotenoids, energy transfer to the S1 state6,12–14 or electron transfer forming carotenoid radical cations7 are not favorable for Fx or hFx. The S1 energy of Fx is around 16500 cm−1,16 which is far too high to quench the Qy band of Chl-a, having an energy of ∼14900 cm−1. The spectroscopic properties of hFx, namely the identical maximum of the S1–Sn band, suggests the S1 energy of hFx is comparable to Fx. For electron transfer quenching, the redox properties of keto carotenoids are not favorable as they are much harder to oxidize than their non-keto counterparts.45 Thus, similar to other complexes containing keto-carotenoids such as PCP, FCP and E-FCP complexes, mechanisms are not employed for direct quenching of the excited singlet state of Chl-a. Instead, they use very efficient quenching of the Chl-a triplet state via triplet–triplet energy transfer to the carotenoid.27
The normalized triplet spectra of Fx in FCP and hFx in E-FCP are depicted in Fig. 8. Interestingly, although the S1–Sn transition is identical for Fx and hFx, the spectra of the triplet state generated via quenching of the Chl-a triplet are different for the two fucoxanthin derivatives. While the T–T maximum of Fx in FCP is at 552 nm, hFx has its T–T maximum at 533 nm. This shift of the T–T spectrum is likely another manifestation of the different response of the two fucoxanthin derivatives to the polarity of the environment. A detailed study of the triplet spectra of the keto-carotenoid peridinin in solvents with different polarity showed that the maximum of the T–T band depends on the solvent polarity: it shifts from 513 nm in the non-polar n-hexane to 525 nm in the polar acetonitrile.46 We have measured the triplet spectra of Fx in two organic solvents, the non-polar n-hexane and polar pyridine (Fig. 8b), confirming the trend reported for peridinin, though part of the red-shift of the T–T spectrum of Fx in pyridine is related to the high polarizability of this solvent. We showed that the spectroscopic properties of hFx in essentially all solvents are reminiscent of Fx in a non-polar solvent, and this feature remains also for hFx bound to E-FCP. Then, the reason for the blue shift of the T–T spectrum of hFx in E-FCP is just a different response to the environment polarity. The rise of the triplet state signal is nearly identical in FCP and E-FCP, mirroring the Chl-a lifetime. This shows that, as in essentially all light-harvesting complexes studied so far, the rate limiting step in formation of the carotenoid triplet is the singlet-triplet conversion in Chl-a. The Chl-a to carotenoid triplet–triplet transfer is much faster, taking place on the time scale of 10–100 ps.9,47
 Fig. 8  (a) Normalized EADS of the triplet state of hFx in E-FCP (black) and Fx in FCP (red). The part of the spectrum around the excitation wavelength (510 nm) is omitted due to scattering. The inset shows the triplet rise at 535 nm (E-FCP) and 550 nm (FCP). (b) Triplet-minus-singlet spectra of fucoxanthin in solution in n-hexane and pyridine. 
Conclusions
The light-harvesting complex from E. huxleyi, E-FCP, is yet another example of how various photosynthetic organisms adapt to the light conditions in which they live. E-FCP binds the fucoxanthin derivative hFx that belongs to the family of keto-carotenoids. In contrast to its parent molecule, however, hFx suppresses the formation of the ICT state.36 This gives significantly slower hFx–Chl energy transfer via the S1/ICT route in E-FCP, providing clear proof that the magnitude of the S1-ICT coupling is the key feature determining the energy transfer rate. However, minimizing the S1-ICT coupling in hFx also prolongs the lifetime of the energy donor, the coupled S1/ICT state. This situation results in only a small decrease of energy transfer efficiency of the S1/ICT route as the slower energy transfer rate is compensated by the longer lifetime of the energy donor. Thus, even though E-FCP exhibits the slowest carotenoid–Chl energy transfer rate via the S1 or S1/ICT state reported so far, it still maintains an energy transfer efficiency of around 80%. The regulatory effect of using hFx instead of Fx is therefore only marginal and it cannot serve as a tool to regulate energy flow through the photosynthetic antenna systems.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The research was funded from the Czech Science Foundation grant 16-10417S, and by institutional support RVO:60077344.
References
R. Croce and H. van Amerongen, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2014, 10, 492–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mirkovic, E. E. Ostroumov, J. M. Anna, R. van Grondelle, Govindjee and G. D. Scholes, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 249–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Polivka and H. A. Frank, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1125–1134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Ruban, J. Exp. Bot., 2015, 66, 7–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. P. Duffy and A. V. Ruban, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2015, 152, 215–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Ruban, R. Berera, C. Ilioaia, I. H. M. van Stokkum, J. T. M. Kennis, A. A. Pascal, H. van Amerongen, B. Robert, P. Horton and R. van Grondelle, Nature, 2007, 450, 575–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. E. Holt, D. Zigmantas, L. Valkunas, X. P. Li, K. K. Niyogi and G. R. Fleming, Science, 2005, 307, 433–436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mozzo, L. Dall’Osto, R. Hienerwadel, R. Bassi and R. Croce, J. Biol. Chem., 2008, 283, 6184–6192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Kvicalova, J. Alster, E. Hofmann, P. Khoroshyy, R. Litvin, D. Bina, T. Polivka and J. Psencik, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2016, 1857, 341–349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Schmidt, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 5509–5513 CrossRef CAS .
T. Polivka and V. Sundstrom, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 2021–2071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Staleva, J. Komenda, M. K. Shukla, V. Slouf, R. Kana, T. Polivka and R. Sobotka, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2015, 11, 287–U296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Niedzwiedzki, T. Tronina, H. J. Liu, H. Staleva, J. Komenda, R. Sobotka, R. E. Blankenship and T. Polivka, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2016, 1857, 1430–1439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hontani, M. Kloz, T. Polivka, M. K. Shukla, R. Sobotka and J. T. M. Kennis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1788–1792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Frank, J. A. Bautista, J. Josue, Z. Pendon, R. G. Hiller, F. P. Sharples, D. Gosztola and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 4569–4577 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zigmantas, R. G. Hiller, F. P. Sharples, H. A. Frank, V. Sundstrom and T. Polivka, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 3009–3016 RSC .
K. Redeckas, V. Voiciuk and M. Vengris, Photosynth. Res., 2017, 131, 119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. West, M. Fuciman, H. Staleva-Musto, V. Sebelik, D. Bina, M. Durchan, V. Kuznetsova and T. Polivka, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2018, 122, 7264–7276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Buchel, J. Plant Physiol., 2015, 172, 62–75 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zigmantas, R. G. Hiller, V. Sundstrom and T. Polivka, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 16760–16765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Papagiannakis, I. H. M. van Stokkum, H. Fey, C. Buchel and R. van Grondelle, Photosynth. Res., 2005, 86, 241–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Redeckas, V. Voiciuk, D. Zigmantas, R. G. Hiller and M. Vengris, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2017, 1858, 297–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. West, D. Bina, M. Fuciman, V. Kuznetsova, R. Litvin and T. Polivka, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2018, 1859, 357–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Gildenhoff, J. Herz, K. Gundermann, C. Buchel and J. Wachtveitl, Chem. Phys., 2010, 373, 104–109 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gildenhoff, S. Amarie, K. Gundermann, A. Beer, C. Buchel and J. Wachtveitl, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2010, 1797, 543–549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gelzinis, V. Butkus, E. Songaila, R. Augulis, A. Gall, C. Buchel, B. Robert, D. Abramavicius, D. Zigmantas and L. Valkunas, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2015, 1847, 241–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Di Valentin, C. Buchel, G. M. Giacometti and D. Carbonera, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2012, 427, 637–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Herbstova, D. Bina, R. Kana, F. Vacha and R. Litvin, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 11976 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Lepetit, D. Volke, M. Szabo, R. Hoffmann, G. Z. Garab, C. Wilhelm and R. Goss, Biochemistry, 2007, 46, 9813–9822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Premvardhan, B. Robert, A. Beer and C. Buchel, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2010, 1797, 1647–1656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Read, J. Kegel, M. J. Klute, A. Kuo, S. C. Lefebvre, F. Maumus, C. Mayer, J. Miller, A. Monier, A. Salamov, J. Young, M. Aguilar, J. M. Claverie, S. Frickenhaus, K. Gonzalez, E. K. Herman, Y. C. Lin, J. Napier, H. Ogata, A. F. Sarno, J. Shmutz, D. Schroeder, C. de Vargas, F. Verret, P. von Dassow, K. Valentin, Y. Van de Peer, G. Wheeler, J. B. Dacks, C. F. Delwiche, S. T. Dyhrman, G. Glockner, U. John, T. Richards, A. Z. Worden, X. Y. Zhang, I. V. Grigoriev, A. E. Allen, K. Bidle, M. Borodovsky, C. Bowler, C. Brownlee, J. M. Cock, M. Elias, V. N. Gladyshev, M. Groth, C. Guda, A. Hadaegh, M. D. Iglesias-Rodriguez, J. Jenkins, B. M. Jones, T. Lawson, F. Leese, E. Lindquist, A. Lobanov, A. Lomsadze, S. B. Malik, M. E. Marsh, L. Mackinder, T. Mock, B. Mueller-Roeber, A. Pagarete, M. Parker, I. Probert, H. Quesneville, C. Raines, S. A. Rensing, D. M. Riano-Pachon, S. Richier, S. Rokitta, Y. Shiraiwa, D. M. Soanes, M. van der Giezen, T. M. Wahlund, B. Williams, W. Wilson, G. Wolfe, L. L. Wurch and A. Emiliania Huxleyi, Nature, 2013, 499, 209–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Burki, M. Kaplan, D. V. Tikhonenkov, V. Zlatogursky, B. Q. Minh, L. V. Radaykina, A. Smirnov, A. P. Mylnikov and P. J. Keeling, Proc. R. Soc. B, 2016, 283, 10 Search PubMed .
G. E. Hoffman, M. V. S. Puerta and C. F. Delwiche, BMC Evol. Biol., 2011, 11 Search PubMed .
F. T. Haxo, J. Phycol., 1985, 21, 282–287 CrossRef CAS .
G. N. Harris, D. J. Scanlan and R. J. Geider, J. Phycol., 2005, 41, 851–862 CrossRef .
H. Staleva-Musto, V. Kuznetsova, R. G. West, G. Kesan, B. Minofar, M. Fuciman, D. Bina, R. Litvin and T. Polivka, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2018, 122, 2922–2930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Guillard and J. H. Ryther, Can. J. Microbiol., 1962, 8, 229–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gardian, R. Litvin, D. Bina and F. Vacha, Photosynth. Res., 2014, 121, 79–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Herbstova, D. Bina, P. Konik, Z. Gardian, F. Vacha and R. Litvin, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2015, 1847, 534–543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. W. Jeffrey, R. F. C. Mantoura and S. W. Wright, Phytoplankton pigments in oceanography: Guidelines to modern methods, Monographs on Oceanographic Methodology, UNESCO Publishing, Paris, 2nd edn,  2005, vol. 10 Search PubMed .
D. Bina, R. Litvin, F. Vacha and P. Siffel, Photosynth. Res., 2006, 88, 351–356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. H. M. van Stokkum, D. S. Larsen and R. van Grondelle, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2004, 1657, 82–104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Beer, K. Gundermann, J. Beckmann and C. Buchel, Biochemistry, 2006, 45, 13046–13053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kesan, M. Durchan, J. Tichy, B. Minofar, V. Kuznetsoya, M. Fuciman, V. Slouf, C. Parlak and T. Polivka, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2015, 119, 12653–12663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Z. Liu, Y. L. Gao and L. D. Kispert, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2000, 488, 140–150 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fuciman, M. M. Enriquez, S. Kaligotla, D. M. Niedzwiedzki, T. Kajikawa, K. Aoki, S. Katsumura and H. A. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 4436–4445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Tejeda-Ferrari, C. L. Brown, G. C. Coutinho, G. A. Gomes de Sá Julio, L. Palma, M. J. Llansola-Portoles, G. Kodis, V. Mujica, J. Ho, D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Photochem. Photobiol., 2019, 95, 211–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  HPLC analysis of the pigment content of the purified antenna of E. huxleyi (E-FCP). The chromatogram was detected at 435 nm. The major pigments are labelled at their respective peaks; Fx – fucoxanthin; hFx – 19′-hexanoyloxyfucoxanthin; Chl – chlorophyll. The molecular structures of Fx and hFx are also shown.	 

 	Fig. 2  Comparison of the pigment composition E-FCP from E. huxleyi and FCP of the pennate diatom P. tricornutum. The pigment stoichiometry is expressed in mol/100 mol Chl-a (mean ± standard deviation of three replicates). For simplicity, all Chl-c forms are grouped, as are the minor carotenoids cis-Fx and diadinoxanthin.	 

 	Fig. 3  Absorption spectra of the E-FCP and FCP complexes.	 

 	Fig. 4  Transient absorption spectra measured at 1 ps after excitation of E-FCP (black) and FCP (red) complexes. Data are normalized to the S1–Sn maximum.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Kinetics measured at the maximum of Chl-a bleaching at 672 nm. Inset shows the long time scale monitoring the decay of excited Chl-a. (b) Decay of the S1/ICT state monitored at the maximum of the S1–Sn band at 560 nm. The excitation wavelength was 510 nm, and the data are normalized either to Chl-a bleaching minimum (a) or S1–Sn maximum (b). E-FCP: black, FCP: red.	 

 	Fig. 6  EADS obtained from global fitting the data measured for (a) FCP and (b) E-FCP complexes. The excitation wavelength was 510 nm, and the short-wavelength (<570 nm) part of the first EADS is omitted due to strong scattering from excitation.	 

 	Fig. 7  Normalized EADS corresponding to the fast S1/ICT energy transfer channel in E-FCP (black, 1.5 ps) and FCP (red, 0.8 ps). The Chl-a bleaching contribution was removed by subtracting the appropriately scaled Chl-a EADS (3.9 ns).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Normalized EADS of the triplet state of hFx in E-FCP (black) and Fx in FCP (red). The part of the spectrum around the excitation wavelength (510 nm) is omitted due to scattering. The inset shows the triplet rise at 535 nm (E-FCP) and 550 nm (FCP). (b) Triplet-minus-singlet spectra of fucoxanthin in solution in n-hexane and pyridine.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
