The influence of disorder on the exciton spectra in two-dimensional structures  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CP04111G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CP04111G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 21847-21855The influence of disorder on the exciton spectra in two-dimensional structures

        
          
            E. V. 
            Kirichenko
          
        
       and 

        
          
            V. A. 
            Stephanovich
          
        
      
Institute of Physics, Opole University, Oleska 48, 45-052, Opole, Poland
Received 
      23rd July 2019
    , Accepted 17th September 2019First published on 17th September 2019AbstractWe study the role of disorder in the exciton spectra in two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors. These can be heterostructures, thin films and multilayers (so-called van der Waals structures) of organometallic perovskites, transition metal dichalcogenides and other semiconductors for optoelectronic applications. We model the disorder by introduction of a fractional Laplacian (with Lévy index μ, defining the degree of disorder) to the Scrödinger equation with 2D Coulomb potential. Combining analytical and numerical methods, we observe that the exciton exists only for μ > 1, while the point μ = 1 (strongest disorder) corresponds to the exciton collapse. We show also that in the fractional (disordered, corresponding to 1 < μ < 2; μ = 2 corresponds to the ordered case) 2D hydrogenic problem, the orbital momentum degeneracy is lifted so that its energy starts to depend not only on principal quantum number n but also on orbital m. These features can have a profound influence on the lifetime of optically generated excitons in the above 2D semiconductor structures. They should be taken into account while designing the photovoltaic cells, nanolasers and optical spintronics devices, where 2D excitons play a significant role.
I. Introduction
The development of modern semiconducting materials has motivated experimental and theoretical work on amorphous and disordered structures, which display physical properties, needed in modern nanoelectronics and spintronics. One point is that the disordered (also amorphous) materials have one more possibility to fine tune their physical properties. Namely, varying the type and concentration of defects and impurities, we can manipulate the characteristics of such a material to tailor them to specific needs. The other reason is that the manufacturing costs of single-crystalline-based electronic components (like photovoltaic cells, light-emitting devices and nanolasers1–4) are still relatively high and the use of disordered materials is therefore of great interest to industry. In other words, the amorphous and disordered semiconductors and especially their heterostructures, and interfaces (which are true two-dimensional objects) provide a versatile system to manipulate the electron or hole mean free path, conductivity, photoluminescence and other important characteristics. The same is true for thin-film polycrystalline or amorphous semiconductors, which are good absorbers of solar light.1,5,6 The recent discovery of high photovoltaic efficiency in hybrid organic–inorganic halide perovskites like methylammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3) and so on1,5,6 once more requires knowledge of how the disorder influences their electronic structure (like excitons), which has a direct influence on their power (solar to electric) conversion efficiency. The exciton properties of halide perovskites is a key issue in photovoltaics and its underlying mechanisms are still the subject of intense research and active debate, see, e.g.ref. 7 and 8.
One more important object, where excitons play an important role, is perovskite heterostructures of LaAlO3/SrTiO3 type,9–14 especially in the presence of technological disorder. Experimental and theoretical studies of the latter interfaces become particularly useful for semiconductor quantum wells and interfaces, which also embrace a number of functionalities like photovoltaic cells and nanolasers.4,15 It is well known (see, e.g.ref. 16 and 17) that the exciton (bound state between electron and hole in a semiconductor) is a physical realization of the hydrogen atom problem. It has been shown recently18,19 that adding the spin–orbit interaction in Rashba form20 generates chaotic motion in the above excitons, which can degrade the performance of the above exciton-based devices. On the other hand, the disorder can also adversely influence such device functionality.
As disorder is usually associated with non-Gaussian probability distributions and breaking of ergodicity,21–24 it is therefore natural to model it by introduction of fractional derivatives.22,25 In the case of quantum-mechanical problems like excitonic (hydrogenic) ones, the disorder can be accounted for by substitution of the ordinary Laplacian in the Scrödinger equation by the fractional one of order μ.26 The latter equation is called the fractional Schrödinger equation;26 at μ = 2 it gives the standard one with ordinary Laplacian. Note that the above phenomenological approach to account for disorder is complimentary to microscopic treatment, see, e.g.ref. 27. However, for strong disorder, the detailed microscopic treatment is not always possible. The strong disorder can be imagined as a substantial amorphization of a solid, leading to the disruption of its crystalline structure so that the distances between different neighboring lattice sites become random. In such a case of (almost) amorphous dielectric, the charge transfer would consist of random electron or hole hopping, very similar to the model considered in the seminal paper of Scher and Montroll.28 The quantization of the Scher and Montroll model can be thought of along the lines suggested by Laskin,26 namely, using the path integrals over all possible quantum trajectories, however, with Lévy (rather than Gaussian, as in “ordinary” quantum mechanics) measure, containing Lévy index μ, see below. Levy index μ = 2 corresponds to an ordered substance,26 while μ < 2 describes the deviation from the ordered case, i.e. the degree of disorder. If an electron and a hole come from different (close to one another) lattice sites of the above amorphous substance, they would form a kind of charge transfer exciton. It is obvious that degree of amorphization (disorder, i.e. parameter μ) would play an essential role in such exciton properties. The phenomenological averaging over such disorder is indeed the above path integration with Lévy measure. This means that the strong disorder leads to the introduction of fractional time and spatial derivatives into the corresponding Schrödinger equation.
Conversely, when we have weak disorder (small number of impurities, which usually are weakly interacting) the excitons become trapped on each impurity. The properties of such objects are well-known, see e.g.ref. 29. On the contrary, the above-considered strong disorder modifies the exciton by itself, making the situation much less trivial. In other words, the problem of fractional 2D hydrogen atoms can serve as a model example of an exciton in disordered semiconductor heterostructures and/or quantum wells. The aim of the present paper is to model phenomenologically (by the introduction of fractional derivatives in the corresponding Scrödinger equation) the 2D exciton modification by strong disorder. We discuss also the experimental implications of such modification.
II. General formalism
A. Qualitative remarks
In this paper we consider the problem of 2D fractional hydrogen atoms, where the (quantized) motion of an electron around the proton (or hole in an exciton) is confined to a plane. The most important question for such a two-dimensional system is about the form of the interaction potential U(r) between the above electron and proton. The usual formalism here (see, e.g.ref. 30) is to use Poisson equation ΔU(r) = −4πρ(r),(1)where ρ(r) is a total charge density at the point r. This total density is the sum of external and induced charge densities, see ref. 30 and 31 for details.
In this case, the potential of interaction U(r) is given by the solution (or Green's function constituting the special solution of the corresponding Laplace equation, i.e.(1) without the screening term) of this equation. In bulk 3D materials such Green's function is indeed Coulomb potential U(r) ∼ 1/r. At the same time, it is well known (see, e.g.ref. 32) that in the pure 2D case the corresponding Green's function is −lnr instead of the above 3D Coulomb potential.
It had been shown in ref. 30 that in 2D layers (of finite thickness) like quantum wells, heterostructures, etc., the above solution of the Poisson equation has actually 1/r form (see eqn (2.14) of ref. 30 without screening parameter) due to the presence of external (in our case it is a proton or hole, around which the electron is orbiting) charge density. In other words, if we “chop” the 3D insulator with a point (not line) charge at the origin, into 2D layers, the resulting unscreened interaction in each layer would have 1/r rather than logarithmic form. The same follows also from Fig. 2b of ref. 31. Moreover, the expression (5) of ref. 31 in the absence of screening gives the Fourier image of 1/r Coulomb interaction.
It had been shown in ref. 31 that in the 2D case, the screening is nonlocal. These effects in 2D lead to the modification of unscreened 1/r potential to the so-called Keldysh interaction.31,33,34 It has been demonstrated experimentally35 that the latter Keldysh interaction (i.e. screened Coulomb one in 2D case) is able to reproduce quantitatively the Rydberg series in 2D materials, thus giving important corrections to the “ordinary” (i.e. without fractional Laplacian introduction) 2D hydrogenic model. It would be very interesting to study the effect of such nonlocal screening to the considered fractional 2D hydrogenic problem. We postpone that to future publications.
Hence, in the present paper we consider the simplest possible situation, reflecting the physics of the problem. Namely, here we assume that mutual attraction between electrons and protons is determined by the Coulomb potential (2)where e is electronic charge and ε is dielectric permittivity.
B. Schrödinger equation
The explicit form for the fractional Schrödinger equation for 2D hydrogen atoms reads (3)where the first term contains the so-called fractional Laplacian. Its explicit form reads (4) (5)Here 0 < μ < 2 is Lévy index25 and Γ(x) is Γ-function.36 In eqn (3), r is a two-dimensional vector, and indices n and m denote, respectively, the principal and orbital quantum numbers, which are different for any specific μ value. It can be shown that at μ = 2 the fractional Laplacian becomes an ordinary one. Note, that the reason that eigenenergy E has now two subscripts (contrary to ordinary 2D37,38 and 3D39 hydrogen atoms, where it depends on n only), is that for μ < 2 the orbital degeneracy is lifted, see below. That is to say, that disorder, described phenomenologically by fractional derivative introduction to the problem, lowers its symmetry, thus lifting the orbital degeneracy.
In eqn (3) we measure the energy E and coordinates r in the units (6)which correspond to modified (for μ < 2) Rydberg units.26 The parameter α is defined in eqn (2). Also, Dμ is a mass term; its general μ dependence is purely phenomenological and should be taken from the best fit to experimental results.26 At μ = 2  (m is a real physical mass) and we have from (6), , i.e. standard Rydberg units. It is seen from the expression (6) that at μ = 1 both quantities E0,μ=1 and r0,μ=1 are divergent. Below we will see that this reflects the actual situation with the fractional 2D hydrogenic problem, i.e. that a discrete spectrum of the problem exists for μ > 1 only.
It is well known that integral (4) exists only in the sense of Cauchy principal value. This already complicates the solution of spectral problems for pseudo-differential eqn (3) involving this operator. That is why here we pass to the momentum space as the operator (4) in this space renders simply as −kμ (k ≡ |k|). Although the second term in eqn (3) converts to the integral in momentum space, its properties are well known from the ordinary (i.e. for μ = 2) hydrogenic problems.37 To pass to momentum space, we use the Fourier transfrom in its symmetric form (having the same coefficients before the integrals in direct and inverse transforms) (7a) (7b)
This form is suitable for our case as it gives the same normalization (to unity) of the wave functions both in k (momentum) and r (coordinate) spaces. For our specific problem, the momentum space representation has one more advantage. Namely, it turns out that we can do angular integration without expansion over spherical harmonics (which is customary in quantum hydrogenic problems, see ref. 37 and references therein) and by that virtue derive a very useful representation of eqn (3) in momentum space. The latter representation will make it possible to dramatically improve the accuracy and speed of the numerical solution of the corresponding fractional Schrödinger equation. To find the eigenfunctions in the r space, we perform inverse Fourier transformation (7b).
C. Momentum space. Angular integrals representation
The application of Fourier transformation (7a) to eqn (3) yields (E − kμ)Ψ(k) −W(k) = 0(8)(we suppress subscripts for a moment), where (9) (10)(q ≡ |q|). Expression (10) constitutes, respectively, the Coulomb potential and its Fourier image. The final form of eqn (3) in momentum representation reads (11)where we once more suppress the indices nmμ. Here, similar to the case of ordinary 2D hydrogen atoms (see, e.g.ref. 37), we denote E = −kμ0.(12)It is easy to see that at μ = 2 eqn (11) yields the well-known form for k – space representation of “ordinary” 2D hydrogen atoms.37
As Coulomb potential is central, the solutions are invariant under the rotation around the z axis. In other words, z – projection of the angular momentum is conserved so that we can separate the radial and angular variables in momentum space. This implies that the solution can be represented in the form Ψnmμ(k) = ψnmμ(k)eimφ,(13)where φ is the asimuth angle of vector k. As usual in hydrogenic problems, radial functions ψnmμ(k) are real. The explicit form of the normalization condition for radial functions reads (14)
Substitution of (13) into the Schrödinger eqn (11) yields (15)Performing the substitution φ − φ′ = t in the angular integral (15), we transform this equation to the form (16)where for clarity we suppress the subscripts mnμ in the parameter k0 and (17)Note that at μ = 2, the Scrödinger eqn (11) is usually solved by Fock's method40 (see also ref. 41 for discussion of d = q + 2 dimensional case) of stereographic projection.37,40,41 In this method, the angular integrals are not calculated explicitly; rather, the spherical harmonics expansion of the wave function is used, giving the exact solution of the problem for μ = 2. Our analysis shows that for μ < 2 such a stereografic projection is impossible. That is why here we adopt a different strategy. Namely, we calculate the integrals Im(k,k′) analytically, which makes it possible to easily solve the problem numerically as it now reduces to the effective one-dimensional integral equation.
Although it is impossible to calculate analytically Im for general m, it is possible to do that for each specific m. This calculation shows explicitly that Im(k,k′) does not depend on φ, which once more is the consequence of angular momentum conservation and hence of the possibility to separate the variables (13).
We have for m = 0 (18)where K(m) is a complete elliptic integral of the first kind.36 Note that at k = k′ the integral K(⋯) in (18) is divergent as its argument equals to 1. This reflects the spherical harmonic series divergence at k = k′ both from the side k < k′ and k > k′. Because of weak (logarithmic) character of divergence, it is well compensated by other parts of corresponding integrands. This once more shows the usefulness of the closed form analytical representation for Im as compared to spherical harmonics expansion.
The expressions for the integrals I1(k,k′) and I2(k,k′) can be obtained in a similar way. After lengthy calculations we arrive at (19) (20)where  and E(m) is a complete elliptic integral of the second kind.36 The angular integrals Im(k,k′) for m > 2 can be calculated in a similar manner.
The Scrödinger eqn (16) for each individual m defines the spectrum (eigenfunctions and eigenenergies expressed through k0) of fractional hydrogen atom for that particular m and all n ≥ m. That is to say, the equation for m = 0 (16) determines the eigenfunctions ψ00μ (ground state), ψ10μ, ψ20μetc. In its turn, the equation for m = 1 determines ψ11μ, ψ21μ, ψ31μetc.

Eqn (16) is the central theoretical result of this paper. As we shall see below, it is especially useful in the fractional case as it gives a huge relief in the problem solution. This is because it makes it possible to avoid the account for the angular variable in the numerical solution. We note that the expansion in infinite series over spherical harmonics is not a good idea for the numerical solution of the spectral problem for the integral equation.
III. The eigenfunctions and eigenvalues for the 2D fractional hydrogenic problem
The representation (16) can be used for the numerical solution of the Schrödinger equation for the problem under consideration. Performing substitutions k/k0 = x, k′/k0 = y in it, we arrive at the following form of the Schrödinger equation, which is convenient for numerical solution (21)where κ0 = kμ−10 so that the eigenenergy (22)
The functions Im(x,y) are defined by the expression (17) for each m. Eqn (21) is a linear spectral problem for the Fredholm integral equation,42 which can be easily discretized with subsequent solution of the spectral problem for the obtained matrix. The eigenenergy of our problem E is related to the eigenvalues κ0 of the above matrix by the expression (22). To obtain the satisfactory accuracy of the numerical solution of the eigenproblem (21), we should typically diagonalize a 10000 × 10000 matrix, which makes the task quite time consuming.
Below for comparison, we will be using the eigenenergies of the known case of “ordinary” (i.e. with normal Laplacian in the Schrödinger equation) 2D hydrogen atoms, corresponding to μ = 2. In this case the solution of the problem is well studied (see ref. 38 for coordinate space and ref. 37 for momentum space) and its energy spectrum in our Rydberg units reads (23)

Fig. 1 reports the ground and first excited state energies as functions of Lévy index μ. It is seen that the above energies go to minus infinity as μ approaches 1. The inset of Fig. 1(a) shows the behavior of the ground state energy at μ sufficiently close to 2, and the latter case corresponds to the ordinary quantum 2D hydrogenic problem. It is seen that at μ = 2 our numerical solution gives the exact value Egs = −4, eqn (23) for n = 0. This can be thought of as a “sanity check” for our numerical solution. At μ < 2, the ground state energy diminishes, i.e. the fractional hydrogen atom has lower energy than the ordinary one.
 Fig. 1  Panel (a): Ground state energies as functions of the Lévy index μ. Panel (b): Same for the first excited state energies. Insets of both panels detail the corresponding energies at μ sufficiently close to 2. Additionally, inset of panel (b) reports lifting of orbital degeneracy at μ < 2. Main panel (b) shows the same in larger scale. Both ground and first excited state energies go to −∞ as μ → 1. 
Now we pass to the first excited state, shown in Fig. 1(b). Here a remarkable property of the “fractionalization” (the deviation of μ from 2 in our case) becomes visible. Namely, if at μ = 2 the 2D hydrogen atom energy is degenerate with respect to orbital quantum number m (see eqn (23)), this degeneracy is lifted at μ < 2. Our analysis shows that this is the case for higher excited states also. The detailed μ dependence at μ → 2 of the first excited state energies E10 and E1,±1 (first lower index corresponds to principal quantum number n, while the second to orbital number m) is reported in the inset of Fig. 1(b). It portrays the above lifting of orbital degeneracy for the first excited state. Our numerical analysis of higher excited states shows that although we should choose a larger number of discretization steps, the orbital degeneracy disappears at μ < 2. The main difference between higher and first excited states is that there are (much for high m and n) more states, which cease to be degenerate at μ < 2. Really, if for n = 1, we have two states, for n = 2 we have three states, and for arbitrary n we have n + 1 states with respect to orbital degeneracy (lifted in nonzero external magnetic field as it is related to time inversion symmetry39) m ↔ −m.
We may conclude that the introduction of the fractional derivatives into the quantum hydrogenic problem mimics weak relativistic effects (like Darwin term and spin–orbit interaction, see e.g.ref. 43), which lift the orbital degeneracy in the ordinary 2D and 3D hydrogen atoms. Contrary to relativistic effects, the “fractionalization” in our case is not small (it is rather an intrinsic feature of the problem, related to disorder) so that even at Lévy indices μ close to 2 (say, μ = 1.9), the spectrum of such “almost normal” hydrogen atoms depends explicitly on the orbital quantum number. Our analysis shows that the main source of orbital degeneracy lifting at μ < 2 is nonconservation of the Runge–Lenz vector.39 The conservation of this quantity (the commutativity of its quantum analog with the Hamiltonian) is the main source of specific Coulomb degeneracy in 3D39 and 2D37 cases.
The result of our numerical calculations of ground state wave functions (both in coordinate and momentum spaces) is portrayed in Fig. 2. The functions in coordinate space are obtained by numerical inverse Fourier transformation (7b). The curve for μ = 1.4 is almost (very small) constant (see, however, the inset of Fig. 2(a)) in k space, while it is Dirac δ function like in r space as shown in the inset of Fig. 2(b). It is seen from Fig. 2(a) that in k space as μ → 1 the wave function amplitude diminishes and it becomes progressively more extended. For instance, already for μ = 1.4 (inset of Fig. 2(a)) the wave function amplitude is around 0.04 (while at μ = 2, corresponding to “ordinary” case it is ten times more) and its extension is up to k ∼ 100 (while at μ = 2 it is up to k ∼ 8). This means that at μ = 1 (limiting case of our solution existence) the wave function has zero amplitude and infinite spatial extension. This corresponds to Dirac δ function in the coordinate space. The corresponding coordinate dependences are reported in Fig. 2(b) and show the opposite trend – at μ = 2 we have well-known exponential function exp(−2r),38 while at μ = 1 it is above the Dirac δ function. Note that physically the strong localization of the wave functions in r space at μ → 1 corresponds to the collapse of an exciton (electron “falls” on the hole) at strong disorder. In other words, strong disorder (like substance amorphization, which is common for semiconductor interfaces, where high mechanical stresses occur) destroys the excitons, which may preclude the functionality of the devices like solar cells and/or light emitting diodes.
 Fig. 2  The shape of the ground state wave functions for different Lévy indices μ (figures near curves and different line styles). Panel (a) – momentum space, panel (b) – coordinate one. Insets of both panels detail the behavior of the wave functions for μ = 1.4. 
To better understand the physical situation with exciton as μ → 1, we recollect that the bound (localized) state in quantum mechanics corresponds to negative energy, E < 0.39 Our numerical calculations of the exciton localization radius in Fig. 3(a) show that the latter quantity diminishes as μ → 1, giving exactly zero (say, “infinitely localized state” of zero spatial extension) at μ = 1. So, the exciton collapse at μ = 1, corresponding to “infinitely localized state” must have infinitely large negative energy. This is actually seen in Fig. 1. Our analysis for higher excited states with n > 1 shows the same tendency.
 Fig. 3  Panel (a): Exciton radius (matrix element (25)) as a function of Lévy index μ. Panel (b): Dipole matrix element for transition between the state ψ11 and the ground state ψ00(27). Both functions are strongly decreasing as μ → 1. 
Note that the diminishing of the exciton localization radius as μ → 1 is in a sense equaivalent to Anderson localization,44 when disorder (like impurities or defects in a semiconductor) makes an initially extended state localized. As at μ = 2 (perfectly ordered case), the exciton is already localized, the disorder at μ < 2 makes it “more localized” so that the distance between electron and hole shrinks as μ → 1. Most probably, in real 2D structures having different kinds of disorder (say, defects and/or impurities at the interface), the exciton may be trapped and recombined before its actual collapse. The experimental and theoretical (inclusion of other sources of disorder in our model) studies of this interesting question should be carried out.
IV. Discussion and possible experimental implications
The obtained spectrum can be used for calculation of virtually any observable characteristic of the excitons in 2D systems. For instance, spatial extension of an exciton (say, the exciton radius) is indeed a mean value of its coordinate r ≡ |r| (24)where we use the coordinate representation of the hydrogenic wave functions. For qualitative estimations of the exciton radius behavior as a function of Lévy index μ it is sufficient to calculate the quantity (24) for the ground state. After integration over angle φ we have from (24) (25)where the wave functions ψ00μ are plotted in Fig. 2(b) for several μ values. The curve R(μ) (25) is reported in Fig. 3(a). It is seen that the curve decreases monotonously from its value R(2) = 0.5 for an “ordinary” 2D hydrogen atom to very small value ∼0.015 at μ = 1.4. This confirms our observation that at μ → 1 the exciton radius tends to zero, i.e. the exciton collapses. An interesting picture may arise in the 2D semiconductor with different local degrees of disorder. This is readily realized in amorphous thin films and the so-called van der Waals structures, see, e.g.ref. 45. There can be a situation, when in one place of such 2D structure we have excitons with μ = 2 with finite radius and in another place (not far away, i.e. at distances larger than the exciton radius) we have those with very small radius, corresponding to μ → 1. In other words, the degree of disorder (determined in our model by index μ) varies along the plane of our structure. In this case, the exciton–exciton interaction (or mutual exciton scattering in 2D structure46) will vary from region to region, each having different μ, i.e. the degree of disorder. This is because the average distance entering the interaction function (still of the same electrostatic nature46) will be different for each region with fixed μ. The above variation means that in such a 2D structure, the exciton–exciton interaction becomes highly inhomogeneous, which can strongly decrease the device (like solar cell) performance. The study of this interesting question is under way.
One more important characteristic is the so-called dipole matrix element (the matrix element of dipole moment operator d = er) for the transition between the energy levels with different quantum numbers n, n′ and m, m′ = m + 1. The relation m′ = m + 1 stems from the selection rule, which gives zero (because of angular integration) for any combination of m and m′, other than the latter one. This dipole matrix element is important for evaluation of such experimentally observable characteristics like optical transition rates, exciton ionization probability, oscillator strengths, etc. One of the most important matrix elements of this type defines a transition between the first excited (n = 1) and ground state (n = 0). Without loss of generality, here we consider a transition for the x – component of the dipole moment dx = ex = ercosφ. It reads (26)
Note that having the above spectrum of 2D fractional hydrogen atoms, there is no problem to calculate the dipole matrix element (26) for any pair of principal quantum numbers n and n′ as well as for any pair of orbital numbers, permitted by selection rules.
Doing angular integration, we arrive at the following expression for the dipole matrix element for the transition 11 → 00 (27)where once more we use r representation of the wave functions. The dependence κ11,00(μ) is shown in Fig. 3(b). It is seen that the value of dipole matrix element also (similar to the exciton radius, Fig. 3(a)) strongly diminishes as μ → 1. The origin of this is the same as in the case of exciton radius, namely, that in coordinate space the wave functions for smaller μ look very much like Dirac δ-functions. Contrary to the case of exciton radius in Fig. 3(a), where the rate of decay is almost the same at 1.4 < μ < 2, here the strongest decay of the matrix element (giving the transition probability) occurs approximately at μ > 1.6, while at smaller μ the decay is slow. Once more, this means that the probability of optical transitions in the excitons is much higher in relatively ordered regions, where 1.6 < μ < 2. This fact should also be taken into account in device applications.
Along with aforementioned halide perovskites, other good candidates for optoelectronic applications are 2D transition metal dichalcogenides like MoS2, WS2 and WSe2.6 In these substances, the excitons are extremely thermally stable due to their large binding energy, see below. On the other hand, the influence of defects and other disorder on these excitons properties (like their relaxation and decoherence mechanisms) is still unknown to a larger extent. In the physical units, the typical exciton binding energy in 2D dichalcogenide semiconductor WS2 is around 0.32 eV, which is much more than that (around 0.05 eV) in bulk materials.35 Such large binding energies in 2D material as compared to those in 3D ones suggest a higher thermal stability of 2D excitons. This, in turn, makes 2D materials be good candidates for optoelectronic and photonic devices at room temperatures. The exciton radius is of the order of 5 nm,35 meaning that the width of the 2D layers of interest should be around this value.
The predicted behavior of the 2D hydrogenic problem (exciton) in the presence of disorder can play a role in multi-exciton configurations. For example, they can be relevant for interaction between distant 2D excitons in the above interfaces or semiconductor-based ultrathin films. Indeed, the exciton radii (around 5 nm, which is of the order of 10 lattice constants) presented in Fig. 3(a) are characterized by dipole moments eR, enhancing intrinsic electric fields of the excitons and their interactions. As we have mentioned above, in the semiconductor structures with different degrees of disorder (different μ's in our formalism) such a random exciton–exciton interaction may lead either to their ionization (corresponding to high principal quantum numbers n in our case) or to the collapse at μ → 1. This for sure will have a detrimental effect on the optoelectronic and/or spintronic device functionality.
In addition, the described effects of disorder can strongly influence the relaxation of electron energy on the excitons by phonon emission. This, in turn, lowers the carrier mobility and lifetime, which, for instance, hinders the conversion of solar energy into electricity in a photovoltaic cell. In a disordered 2D substance, instead of a process with well-defined time dependence, the energy relaxation from a highly excited to the ground state may become chaotic. This feature can obviously influence photovoltaic processes in the perovskites since the disorder may reduce the controllability of the photovoltaic performance.
V. Conclusions
A host of 2D semiconductors, ranging from silicene47,48 to group III–V compounds,49 metal dichalcogenide materials6 and organometallic halide perovskites,1,5 have become extremely popular materials for different applications (not only photovoltaic but also optoelectronic and microelectronic devices like light emitters and nanolasers, see above) due to decent mobilities and extremely long lifetimes of charge carriers in them. While the latter aspects have been widely studied, the consequences of the disorder influence on the physical properties of these materials remain largely unexplored. It has been shown experimentally (see, e.g.ref. 6 and 45) that in some cases disorder plays a favourable role in the photovoltaic and optoelectronic device functionality, enhancing the carrier lifetime. On the other hand, the preceding analysis shows that the lattice defects serve as traps for excitons, playing a role of recombination centers for them, which limits the performance of optoelectronic devices. The latter fact has also been established experimentally, see, e.g.ref. 50 and references therein. When μ approaches 1 (the case of strong disorder), the exciton can collapse. The possibility of exciton collapse at strong disorder, inherent either in amorphous thin films or at weakly interacting multilayers like van der Waals structures,45 is one of the chief messages of the present paper.
To describe the properties of the above “disordered excitons”, we use the two-dimensional fractional quantum-mechanical hydrogenic problem. As we have shown, this problem is a theoretical construction, which may have important physical realizations. In this paper, we have studied the spectral problem for 2D fractional quantum-mechanical hydrogen atoms. Combining analytical and numerical methods, we were able to establish two important facts inherent in this model and having obvious physical implications. The first is related to fractional character of the problem. It tells us that the solution to the problem exists only at 1 < μ ≤ 2. This is at odds with 1D fractional quantum mechanical problems of infinite potential well51 and oscillator,52 where the solution exists for all admissible 0 < μ < 2. Second is the lifting of orbital degeneracy in the fractional (μ < 2) case. This fact has a profound influence on the described physical objects like excitons in 2D semiconductor structures like interfaces (heterostructures) and/or thin films. This interesting question will be studied in more detail.
Note that our model is limited to consideration of static disorder only. In its present form (introduction of fractional Laplacian into Schrödinger equation) it is not capable of describing the dynamic (consisting, e.g., of reorientable polar molecules, see ref. 53 and 54 and references therein) disorder. This kind of disorder occurs in amorphous organic (primarily polymer) thin films, additionally doped with polar molecules53,54 and used to fine tune, among other things, the exciton properties in them. This additional doping with reorientable, dynamic defects, has been coined in ref. 53 as “solid state solvation” as it is a solid-state analogue of solvent–solute interactions in the liquids. The simplest possible generalization of our model to describe the dynamic structural disorder is to use the time-dependent Schrödinger equation instead of static one (3). This permits consideration of the quantities like time evolution of exciton quantum states. Also, to consider the so-called long-time evolution of the latter states, the fractional time derivative (additionally to fractional Laplacian) can be introduced in the time-dependent Schrödinger equation. However, it is well known that the Schrödinger equation cannot describe dissipative dynamics (relaxation processes), inherent in amorphous and/or glassy substances. To describe such dymanics phenomenologically, we can do “step back” and consider the classical 2D Kepler problem along the lines of ref. 18, but with fractional time derivatives.
The introduction of fractional time derivatives into the above classical analog of the excitonic problem would also permit tracing theoretically the character of excitonic transport in thin films with a different degree of amorphization (disorder). The experimental investigations had been reported in ref. 55 (see also references therein), where they show that the excitonic transport becomes subdiffusive, when the disorder is increased. In our language the increase of disorder (primarily this is amorphization, but the doping of different static defects can also be considered) is related to index μ. Namely, as μ goes from μ = 2 to μ = 1, the degree of disorder grows. We note here that the experimental studies of excitonic characteristics against the degree of disorder are limited by the transport properties. We were not able to find any systematic experimental research of exciton localization radius (Fig. 3(a)), transition matrix element (Fig. 3(b)) and other quantum characteristics against the degree of disorder. Thus, the latter experimental investigations are highly desirable.
The immediate generalization of the considered problem is 3D fractional quantum hydrogen atom, which can be studied along the lines of the present paper. Namely, we can readily pass to momentum space by means of symmetric 3D Fourier transform to obtain (28)where k is now the 3D vector and parameter k0 is again related to eigenenergy by eqn (12). The solution of the 3D problem can be sought in the form of a decomposition by radial Rnlμ(k) and angular parts ψnlmμ(k) = Rnlμ(k)Ylm(θ,φ),(29)where one more quantum number l (orbital quantum number39) appears. The spherical harmonics have usual form Ylm(θ,φ) = P|m|l(cosθ)eimφ, where P|m|l are associated Legendre polynomials36 and θ is apex angle. Our preliminary analysis shows that for μ ≠ 2 this problem also cannot be solved by the Fock stereographic projection40 so that we should opt for numerical methods. However, it is not yet clear if we can obtain the representation like (16) in the 3D case. The latter fact complicates a lot of the numerical treatment of the problem. This makes the problem of 3D fractional quantum hydrogen atoms much more arduous than that of 2D ones.
Note that the 3D fractional quantum-mechanical hydrogenic problem is important for the description of Rydberg excitons (described by the quantum mechanical Kepler problem, see, e.g.ref. 16 and 17) in bulk semiconductors in the presence of disorder and other imperfections. The latter disorder, influencing the charge carrier (electron or hole in semiconductors) diffusion length, may lead to the excitonic spectrum, which (similar to our 2D case) cannot be described by the Schrödinger equation with ordinary Laplacian. Rather, fractional derivatives, which are usually responsible for “long tails”, should be introduced in this case. The example here is bulk semiconducting perovskites like CsPbBr3, which are also widely used in photovoltaics and have extremely long diffusion lengths.5,56 The influence of disorder on their excitonic properties plays an important role in spintronic (especially with Rashba spin–orbit coupling9), optoelectronic and photovoltaic device functionality. The explanation of this influence is still controversial, see, e.g.ref. 5, 7 and 56. One of the reasons is that the above perovskites have strong spin–orbit coupling, which alters the excitonic spectra.5,7,57 This is closely related to the chaotic features in the spectra of excitons due to Rashba spin–orbit interaction.18,19 This suggests one more generalization of 2D and 3D fractional quantum-mechanical hydrogenic problems. Namely, the spin–orbit interaction term can be added to the corresponding fractional Schrödinger equation. In this case, the solution will be more sophisticated as the wave function will be spinor now,19,58 although the problem can become achievable in the momentum space, where variational or direct diagonalization techniques19 can be utilized. This problem turns out to be extremely important for above classes of substances,56,57,59 where chaos can disturb or even disrupt optoelectronic, spintronic and/or photovoltaic device functionality. It has been shown19 that the description by means of the “ordinary” (i.e. that with conventional Laplacian) Schrödinger equation does not show strong quantum chaotic features like non-Poissonian energy level statistics.60,61 This may be related to the fact that proper description of such features is possible only within 2D and 3D excitonic models, containing fractional Laplacians.
Further experimental and theoretical work on the high-resolution exciton spectroscopy and photovoltaic processes is required for the understanding of the exciton behavior in disordered low-dimensional structures and the effect of this disorder on the device performance.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, Y. Fu, F. Meng, X. Wu, Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, A. Chernikov, M. M. Glazov, T. F. Heinz, X. Marie, Th. Amand and B. Urbaszek, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2018, 90, 021001 CrossRef CAS .
D. Canneson, E. V. Shornikova, D. R. Yakovlev, T. Rogge, A. A. Mitioglu, M. V. Ballottin, P. C. M. Christianen, E. Lhuillier, M. Bayer and L. Biadala, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, A. Bera, C. Ma, Yu. Du, Y. Yang, L. Li and T. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 22476 RSC .
M. Bibes, J. E. Villegas and A. Barthelémy, Adv. Phys., 2011, 60, 5 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aßmann, J. Thewes, D. Fröhlich and M. Bayer, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 741 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Heckötter, M. Freitag, D. Fröhlich, M. Aßmann, M. Bayer, M. A. Semina and M. M. Glazov, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96, 125142 CrossRef .
A. Ohtomo and H. Y. Hwang, Nature, 2004, 427, 423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. A. Stephanovich, V. K. Dugaev and J. Barnaś, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 2104 RSC .
V. A. Stephanovich and V. K. Dugaev, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 045302 CrossRef .
M. Saliba, S. Orlandi, T. Matsui, S. Aghazada, M. Cavazzini, J.-P. Correa-Baena, P. Gao, R. Scopelliti, E. Mosconi, K.-H. Dahmen, F. De Angelis, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt, G. Pozzi, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15017 CrossRef CAS .

          A. I. Anselm, Introduction to semiconductor theory, Prenctice-Hall, Englewood Cilffs, N.J.,  1981 Search PubMed .

          N. W. Ashkroft and N. D. Mermin, Solid State Physics, Harcourt, New York,  1976 Search PubMed .
V. A. Stephanovich and E. Ya. Sherman, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 7836 RSC .
V. A. Stephanovich, E. Ya. Sherman, N. T. Zinner and O. V. Marchukov, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 97, 205407 CrossRef CAS .
Yu. A. Bychkov and E. I. Rashba, JETP Lett., 1984, 39, 78 Search PubMed .
S. A. Gredeskul and Yu. S. Kivshar, Phys. Rep., 1992, 216, 3 CrossRef .
R. Metzler, J.-H. Jeon, A. G. Cherstvy and E. Barkai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 24128 RSC .
S. Flach, D. O. Krimer and C. Skokos, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 024101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lucioni, B. Deissler, L. Tanzi, G. Roati, M. Zaccanti, M. Modugno, M. Larcher, F. Dalfovo, M. Inguscio and G. Modugno, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 230403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Metzler and J. Klafter, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen., 2004, 37, R161 CrossRef .

          N. Laskin, Fractional Quantum Mechanics, World Scientific, Singapore,  2018 Search PubMed .
V. A. Stephanovich and V. V. Laguta, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 7229 RSC .
H. Sher and E. W. Montroll, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1975, 12, 2455 CrossRef .

          S. L. Chuang, Physics of Photonic Devices (Wiley Series in Pure and Applied Optics), John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, 2nd edn,  2009 Search PubMed .
T. Ando, A. B. Fowler and F. Stern, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1982, 54, 437 CAS .
P. Cudazzo, I. V. Tokatly and A. Rubio, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 085406 CrossRef .

          J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, John Wiley & Sons, New York,  1998 Search PubMed .
L. V. Keldysh, JETP Lett., 1979, 29, 658 Search PubMed .
T. C. Berkelbach, M. S. Hybertsen and D. R. Reichman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 045318 CrossRef .
A. Chernikov, T. C. Berkelbach, H. M. Hill, A. Rigosi, Y. Li, O. B. Aslan, D. R. Reichman, M. S. Hybertsen and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 076802 CrossRef PubMed .

Handbook of Mathematical Functions, ed. M. Abramowitz and I. Stegun, Dover, New York,  1972 Search PubMed .
D. G. W. Parfitt and M. E. Portnoi, J. Math. Phys., 2002, 43, 4681 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Yang, S. H. Guo, F. T. Chan, K. W. Wong and W. Y. Ching, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1991, 43, 1186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshits, Quantum Mechanics. Nonrelativistic Theory, Pergamon Press, Oxford,  1995 Search PubMed .
V. A. Fock, Z. Phys., 1935, 98, 145 CrossRef .
M. Lévy, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1950, 204, 145 CrossRef .

          A. D. Polyanin and A. V. Manzhirov, Handbook of Integral Equations, Chapman & Hall/CRC Press, Boca Raton-London,  2008 Search PubMed .

          V. B. Berestetskii, E. M. Lifshitz and L. P. Pitaevskii, Quantum Electrodynamics, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford,  2008 Search PubMed .
P. W. Anderson, Phys. Rev., 1958, 109, 1492 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Thygesen, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 022004 CrossRef .
V. Shahnazaryan, I. Iorsh, I. A. Shelykh and O. Kyriienko, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96, 115409 CrossRef .
L. Tao, E. Cinquanta, D. Chiappe, C. Grazianetti, M. Fanciulli, M. Dubey, A. Molle and D. Akinwande, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lalmi, H. Oughaddou, H. Enriquez, A. Kara, S. Vizzini, B. Ealet and B. Aufray, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 223109 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Al Balushi, K. Wang, R. K. Ghosh, R. A. Vilá, S. M. Eichfeld, J. D. Caldwell, X. Qin, Y. C. Lin, P. A. DeSario, G. Stone, S. Subramanian, D. F. Paul, R. M. Wallace, S. Datta, J. M. Redwing and J. A. Robinson, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. V. Kirichenko, P. Garbaczewski, V. A. Stephanovich and M. Żaba, Phys. Rev. E, 2016, 93, 052110 CrossRef PubMed .
E. V. Kirichenko and V. A. Stephanovich, Phys. Rev. E, 2018, 98, 052127 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Madigan and V. Bulović, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 247403 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Delor, D. G. McCarthy, B. L. Cotts, T. D. Roberts, R. Noriega, D. D. Devore, S. Mukhopadhyay, T. S. De Vries and N. S. Ginsberg, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Akselrod, P. B. Deotare, N. J. Thompson, J. Lee, W. A. Tisdale, M. A. Baldo, V. M. Menon and V. Bulović, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fu, Ph. Tamarat, H. Huang, J. Even, A. L. Rogach and B. Lounis, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Grimaldi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 113308 CrossRef .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. C. Gutzwiller, Chaos in Classical and Quantum Mechanics, Springer-Verlag, New York,  1990 Search PubMed .

          L. E. Reichl, The Transition to Chaos. Conservative Classical Systems and Quantum Manifestations, Springer-Verlag, New York, 2nd edn,  2004 Search PubMed .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
Table Content:
ΔU(r) = −4πρ(r),	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7a)
	(7b)
(E − kμ)Ψ(k) −W(k) = 0	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
E = −kμ0.	(12)
Ψnmμ(k) = ψnmμ(k)eimφ,	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)
	(19)
	(20)

 		 
	(21)
	(22)
	(23)

 	Fig. 1  Panel (a): Ground state energies as functions of the Lévy index μ. Panel (b): Same for the first excited state energies. Insets of both panels detail the corresponding energies at μ sufficiently close to 2. Additionally, inset of panel (b) reports lifting of orbital degeneracy at μ < 2. Main panel (b) shows the same in larger scale. Both ground and first excited state energies go to −∞ as μ → 1.	 

 	Fig. 2  The shape of the ground state wave functions for different Lévy indices μ (figures near curves and different line styles). Panel (a) – momentum space, panel (b) – coordinate one. Insets of both panels detail the behavior of the wave functions for μ = 1.4.	 

 	Fig. 3  Panel (a): Exciton radius (matrix element (25)) as a function of Lévy index μ. Panel (b): Dipole matrix element for transition between the state ψ11 and the ground state ψ00(27). Both functions are strongly decreasing as μ → 1.	 
	(24)
	(25)
	(26)
	(27)
	(28)
ψnlmμ(k) = Rnlμ(k)Ylm(θ,φ),	(29)

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
