Fluorescence of colloidal PbSe/PbS QDs in NIR luminescent solar concentrators   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP42213A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP42213A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 16223-16228Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsFluorescence of colloidal PbSe/PbS QDs in NIR luminescent solar concentrators†

        
          
            Urs 
            Aeberhard
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Roman 
            Vaxenburg
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Efrat 
            Lifshitz
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Stanko 
            Tomić
          
        
      c
aIEK-5 Photovoltaik, Forschungzentrum Juelich, Germany. E-mail: u.aeberhard@fz-juelich.de
bSchulich Faculty of Chemistry, Solid State Institute, Russell Berrie Nanotechnology Institute, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, 32000 Haifa, Israel
cJoule Physics Laboratory, University of Salford, Manchester, UK
Received 
      30th June 2012
    , Accepted 28th September 2012First published on 1st October 2012AbstractFor applications in luminescent solar concentrators harvesting subgap photons, either via direct irradiation of solar cells with optimized band gap or via sensitization of an up-conversion process, exact knowledge and tunability of both the spectral shape and the intensity of the emission are of paramount importance. In this work, we investigate theoretically the photoluminescence spectra of colloidal core–shell PbSe/PbS QDs with type II alignments in the valence band. The method builds on a steady-state formulation of the non-equilibrium Greens function theory for a microscopic system of coupled electrons, photons and phonons interfaced with electronic structure calculations based on a k·p model for PbSe/PbS core–shell QDs. The resulting output spectral density of photons in a realistic QD ensemble is obtained via the renormalization of the incident spectrum according to the polarization of the system.
1 Introduction
One of the major loss mechanisms in conventional silicon-based single-junction solar cell devices is the waste of low-energy photons due to vanishing absorption below the band-gap energy. To mitigate losses of this type, the use of a combination of fluorescent concentration and up-conversion (UC) was proposed.1 The main principles of operation of such a photovoltaic device is shown in Fig. 1. The part of the solar spectrum that is not absorbed or is reemitted by the solar cell is partially absorbed and reemitted by luminescent species embedded in a planar wave guide medium, which guides the light to the emplacement of the up-converter material, typically some doped rare-earth compound (e.g. Er3+).2 There, multiple low-energy photons of a characteristic frequency are absorbed and a lower number of photons with energy above the absorption edge of the solar cell are emitted back into the cell, where they can be utilized. Luminescent species that have been considered for use in fluorescent concentrator photovoltaics include mainly dyes and semiconductor nanocrystal quantum dots (QDs).3 This paper is focused on the theoretical investigation of the latter in view of utilization in concentrator–up-converter applications as described above. The main requirements for near-infrared photoluminescence (NIR PL) of QDs used as sensitizers in up-converter devices are as follows (see also Fig. 2):
 Fig. 1  Components and operating principles of a solar cell device using a combination of luminescent solar concentration and up-conversion to enhance the utilization of the solar spectrum.1 
 Fig. 2  Spectral conversion process via QD luminescence: the low-energy part of the solar spectrum, which lies below the band gap of the solar cell material and is thus transmitted by the solar cell, is absorbed by the QDs and reemitted at a lower energy. In order to achieve highest spectral conversion efficiency the overlap of the UC absorption and the QD emission should be maximum, while the overlap of the QD absorption and the QD emission should be minimum in order to avoid reabsorption losses. 
- broadband near-infrared absorption below the band gap of crystalline silicon
- narrow emission in the spectral range of the up-converter (∼1500 nm for Er3+)
- low reabsorption of emitted light (large ‘‘Stokes shift’’)
- high internal quantum efficiency for fluorescence.
Here, PbSe/PbS core–shell quantum dots were chosen due to the tunability of their optoelectronic properties in the required spectral range (NIR) via variation of composition, size and geometry,4,5 the high luminescence quantum efficiency achievable6 and the stability of their optoelectronic properties in application-relevant environments.7 In view of the wide range of requirements on the strength and spectral shape of QD absorption and emission, a suitable theoretical description of QD NIR PL response should thus provide accurate and quantitative information concerning the lineshape and magnitude of the radiative processes. To this end, the model needs to consider the interaction of electrons and holes with photons (absorption, stimulated and spontaneous emission), phonons (Stokes shift, line broadening) and among themselves (excitons, non-radiative recombination) and to produce the self-consistent non-equilibrium occupation of the QD states at the radiative non-equilibrium steady-state as an emergent feature. Conventional approaches range from simple rate-equation models with phenomenological broadening8 to density matrix theory with a microscopic treatment of scattering processes.9 While the former approach is not able to reproduce physical lineshapes, the latter suffers from the inherent limitation to instantaneous, non-retarded processes, and the inclusion of microscopic relaxation processes is cumbersome. Furthermore, in the situation under investigation, we are not interested in the transients of the photoluminescence decay after monochromatic pulsed excitation, but in the spectrum resulting from steady-state luminescence under low-intensity broadband illumination. A theoretical framework that provides an alternative description and satisfies all of the above requirements exists on the quantum-kinetic level in the form of the steady-state non-equilibrium Green's function formalism, which will be used in the present approach.
2 Theory and simulation of QD fluorescence
The computation of photoluminescence spectra of QDs as studied in this paper consists of two main steps: first, the single particle states of non-interacting electrons and holes in an isolated QD are computed. These states then serve as a basis to parametrize an effective Hamiltonian to be used in the quantum-kinetics of the QD system, which provide the luminescence spectra in terms of the steady-state non-equilibrium polarization. The models used in the two steps are described in the following.
2.1 Electronic structure of PbSe/PbS core–shell QDs
To model the electronic structure of the PbSe/PbS core–shell QDs, at the noninteracting electron level of theory, we use the standard k·p Hamiltonian expanded in (|L6−; ↑〉, |L6−; ↓〉, |L6+; ↑〉, |L6+; ↓〉) basis states in the vicinity of the L characteristic point in the first Brillouin zone of the rock-salt crystal structure.10 In the above basis, the “−” and the “+” refer to the parity of the basis states, being odd for states at the bottom of the conduction band (CB) and even for states at the top of the valence band (VB), respectively. The anisotropy between longitudinal (z) along 〈111〉 and transverse (||) directions (x and y are taken along 〈12〉 and 〈10〉 crystallographic directions respectively)5 of the rock-salt QDs is fully taken into account via the difference between the effective masses of the electrons,  and , and the bulk dipole matrix elements, P0,z and P0,||. The polarisation dependent optical matrix elements |ê·pif|2 of the core–shell QD structure required for description of radiative transitions are obtained using the Hellmann–Feynman theorem, where ê is the unity light polarization vector and pif(k) = (m0/ℏ) 〈i|∂Hk/∂k|f〉 is the electron–hole momentum matrix element of the quantum structure, where |i〉 and |f〉 are envelope functions of the initial and final states involved in the radiative process. To capture the variation of the material parameters in the QDs between core, shell, and surrounding colloid, we have included the radial variation of P0||,z,  as well as the variation in the band edge energy of the CB minimum and VB maximum. All functionalities described in this section are implemented in the kppw code.11,12
2.2 NEGF theory of single QD photoluminescence
Within the framework of the NEGF theory of quantum optoelectronics,13,14 it is possible to describe all relevant processes in the luminescence on equal footing, i.e., photogeneration, relaxation and radiative recombination. A detailed review of the theoretical approach is beyond the scope of the present analysis and will be published elsewhere;15 however, due to the novelty of the method and its considerable deviation from standard approaches, the general features shall be outlined in the following.
Before considering the luminescence of realistic QD ensembles, it is instructive to start with the investigation of the luminescent behaviour of a single, isolated quantum dot. The electronic single particle states of the QDs are described via the field operator (1)with ψ the single electron wave functions as derived in Section 2.1. The non-equilibrium quantum statistical averages of these field operators define the electronic single particle Green's functions, (2) In the same way, the single particle states of the photon field are given by the field operator (3)with mode index λ, which provides the photon Green's function via (4) In analogy to this, the single particle states of the phonon field are given in terms of the operator for the lattice displacement and the phonon GF has a similar form as the one for the photons.
The Hamiltonian operator of the luminescent QD system, which is required for the determination of the operator averages, is given by (5) (6) (7)which in addition to kinetic and potential terms of non-interacting electrons and holes () contains the contributions due to the electron–photon coupling () and dissipative processes, e.g., electron–phonon coupling (). While the former describes the absorption and emission processes, the latter is required to include the intra-state relaxation that occurs between absorption and emission.
The steady-state Green's functions are determined by the corresponding Dyson and Keldysh equations, which in the electronic case are given by GR(E) = [{G0R(E)}−1 − ΣR(E)]−1,(8) (9)where G ≡ [Gmn] with (10)and GA(E) = [GR(E)]†. In the above equations, the self-energy Σ encodes the renormalization of the charge carrier Green's functions due to the interactions in the system as introduced via the various terms in the Hamiltonian (7). The self-energies for electron–photon and electron–phonon interaction are considered perturbatively on the level of a self-consistent Born approximation and describe generation and radiative recombination as well as carrier relaxation processes. Coherent excitonic contributions from singular electron–electron interactions can be considered via the solution of a Bethe–Salpeter type equation for the coherent polarization function.16
For the photons, using a real space basis, the steady-state equations acquire the general form17(the fixed photon energy argument is omitted) (11) (12) (13)where δt is the transverse delta function. The photon self-energy Πγ is related to the electron–hole polarization of the QD system and describes the renormalization of the photon propagator due to (re)absorption and emission processes.
A similar set of equations can be formulated for the phonon Green's functions, introducing a finite phonon lifetime due to anharmonic decay, but at this stage, the vibrational aspect is treated on the level of coupling to non-interacting equilibrium bulk modes.
2.3 Non-equilibrium steady-state rates
If an isolated (i.e., non-contacted) QD is illuminated, the excess charge generated via photon absorption leads to an excess polarization of the system, resulting in the emission of photons. This luminescence process is enhanced up to the point where the absorption is balanced, at which the steady state is reached. This means that the total radiative rate vanishes, Rrad = Rabs − Rem = 0. In terms of the electronic Green's functions and self-energies introduced above, the total rate for radiative transitions between QD states reads18 (14) (15)where the trace is over QD states. Inserting the explicit electron–photon self-energies yields the corresponding expression for the rate in terms of photon Green's functions and self-energies, (16) (17)which defines the spectral absorption and emission rates.
The inset of Fig. 3 shows the computational procedure used to obtain the luminescent output spectrum from the excitation spectrum. The illumination leads to a renormalization of the electronic Green's functions G via the self-energy Σ of electron–photon interaction. Since the interaction process itself and hence the self-energy depend again on the electronic states and their occupation, the equations governing Green's functions and self-energies need to be solved self-consistently. In this iteration process, the system evolves towards a non-equilibrium steady state with a non-vanishing polarization component Π< related to the emission. In the absence of non-radiative recombination channels, the rates for absorption and emission are balanced in this final state; however, the output power may be lower than the input power due the presence of dissipative processes, which in the present approach can be conveniently described via additional contributions to the self-energy Σ.
 Fig. 3  Computational procedure for the description of fluorescence in the NEGF picture. There are two coupled self-consistency loops, one for the electron Green's functions G and self-energies Σ and the other for the photon Green's functions γ and self-energies Πγ. In the electronic loop, the incident photon flux ϕ↙ leads to the build-up of the electron–hole polarization, which via the expression for the photon self energy causes the renormalization of the output photon flux ϕ↗ in the photon loop. At the non-equilibrium steady-state, absorption and emission rates are balanced. 
The properties of the excited system are assessed via numerical evaluation of the quantum-kinetic equations for the single-particle Green's functions. In this way, the non-equilibrium occupation and corresponding electron–hole polarization are determined self-consistently. Fig. 3 shows the evolution of absorption and emission rates during the self-consistency iteration corresponding to the dynamical build-up of the polarization.
2.4 QD ensemble in optically homogeneous medium with reabsorption
If a fluorescent material with concentration sufficient for substantial absorption is placed in a large reflecting cavity, the excitation spectrum is gradually modified due to the contributions from absorption and emission. This corresponds to the solution of the NEGF eqn (11) and (12) for the photon GF under consideration of the actual system polarization in an additional self-consistency iteration. Using a free-field mode expansion, the equation for the retarded component of the dyadic GF reads (18)
In the homogeneous case, the above equation can be rewritten in terms of the bare boson Green's functions, which are related to the dyadic GF via (19)as follows: (20)with the scalar photon self-energy given by (21)where NQD is the number of QDs in the system and  is the retarded component of the bare polarization function of a single dot. This modification of the retarded component of the photon Green's function due to the retarded polarization function of the absorbing medium induces slight shifts in the resonance level structure of the optical cavity.
The lesser and greater components of the scalar photon GF are then obtained from (22)with (23)where  is the equilibrium propagator. The first term in (22) describes the renormalization of the incident spectrum due to absorption, while the second term contains the contributions from the reemission. Fig. 4 shows the corresponding renormalization of the spectral photon density (24)for a narrow excitation spectrum that is slightly detuned from the exciton level determining absorption and emission.
 Fig. 4  Renormalization of a narrow excitation spectrum which is slightly detuned from the exciton state, mediating absorption and emission. The renormalized spectrum consists of the attenuated incident spectrum plus a contribution from reemission. 
In the same isotropic limit, spectral rates for absorption/emission read (25) (26)from which the absorption cross section and the power spectrum of the emitted radiation follow via σabs(Eγ) = rabs(Eγ)Eγ/iγ(Eγ) and p↗(Eγ) = rem(Eγ)Eγ, respectively, where iγ is the incident spectrum.
3 Numerical results for PbSe/PbS core–shell QDs
We now use the formalism introduced above to theoretically describe the fluorescence of PbSe/PbS core–shell QDs. We focus on realistic quantum dot ensembles with finite size distributions for both core and shell. Relaxation resulting in broadening of the spectra is considered via coupling to a single optical phonon mode with energy ℏΩ = 4.2 meV,19 and is described within the NEGF scheme via the corresponding self-energy on the level of a first self-consistent Born approximation. For the optical environment, the isotropic approximation introduced in the previous section is used. Since at this stage, no energy-transfer or efficient Auger-type intra-band relaxation processes are considered, the discussion is limited here to the resonant fluorescence with respect to an excitation corresponding to the AM1.5 solar spectrum in the range between 0.75 eV and 0.9 eV.
3.1 QD ensemble with realistic distribution of core and shell sizes
As a realistic model system, an ensemble of PbSe/PbS core–shell QDs with varying core and shell radii is considered, with size fluctuation of ±5%. Any QD property thus needs to be weighted by the corresponding size distribution in order to obtain the characteristics of the ensemble as a whole, which for the present case amounts to the consideration of a bivariate normal distribution function. In the absence of correlation between core and shell size, the latter is given by f[Rc0,σc;Rs0,σs](Rc,Rs) = g[Rc0,σc](Rc)g[Rs0,σs](Rs),(27)with g[R0,σ] the 1D normal distribution centered on R0 and with standard deviation σ. This distribution is shown in Fig. 5(a) for Rc0 = 1.5 nm, σc = 0.3 Å, Rs0 = 2.5 nm, σRc = 0.3 Å and a configuration resolution corresponding to 7 core radii Rc ∈ [14.25,15.75] Å and 15 shell radii Rs ∈ [23.75,26.25] Å. Fig. 5(b) and (c) show the variation in HOMO–LUMO energy gap and optical matrix elements within the distribution.
 Fig. 5  (a) Bivariate normal distribution for the sizes of PbSe core and PbS shell in the QD ensemble; (b) HOMO–LUMO gap variation in the distribution; (c) variation of optical matrix elements for lowest transition. 
The absorption cross section and the emission spectrum corresponding to this specific size distribution are shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b), respectively, together with the contributions of the individual QD component configurations. Both absorption and emission span the energy range of HOMO–LUMO gaps as given by the map of Fig. 5(b), with confinement contribution depending monotonously on both core and shell size. Due to the absence of energy transfer processes, the resonant luminescence follows closely the excitation spectrum, as shown in Fig. 6(a), where the NIR excitation spectrum is displayed in the background.
 Fig. 6  (a) Absorption cross section for the single QD configurations as well as the ensemble average with respect to the size distribution in Fig. 5; (b) power spectrum of the emitted light for resonant excitation with the NIR spectrum displayed. 
The number of quantum dots in the absorbing volume required to achieve a sizable renormalization of the photon spectrum can be estimated from the computation of the absorption cross section for a single QD. Values of α(ℏω)|NIR ≥ 104 cm−1 for sheets of embedded QDs are thus obtainable for concentrations of ρQD ≥ 1018 cm−3. Fig. 7(a) displays the renormalized spectrum for QD density of ρQD = 1017 cm−3 together with the corresponding spectral rates for absorption and emission, while in Fig. 7(b) the concentration of QDs is varied from ρQD = 1016−1019 cm−3. With increasing concentration, the spectrum is continuously attenuated around the energy range of resonant emission, while it saturates at the resonance, where the photon density stems now primarily from the reemission.
 Fig. 7  (a) Spectra for ρQD > 1017 cm−3, together with the spectral rates for absorption and emission; (b) incident and renormalized spectrum for different concentrations of QDs. 
4 Conclusions
In this paper, a novel approach to the computation of photoluminescence spectra based on the steady state quantum kinetics in the NEGF formulation was introduced and applied to PbSe/PbS core–shell QD dot ensembles with applications in the harvesting of NIR radiation in advanced photovoltaic concepts. The inclusion of inelastic scattering mechanism introduces a physical lineshape in the emission spectra, and the dielectric environment can be considered via the photon density of states of the embedding medium as reflected in the retarded photon GF. The modification of the incident spectrum due to absorption and reemission is obtained from the renormalized photon correlation function.
While the present description reaches beyond the standard approaches in terms of comprehensiveness and physical insight, the consideration of many additional aspects is required to further improve the predictive power of the method. Deviations from spherical shape are expected to relax parity-induced selection rules, and interactions such as exchange-correlation as well as intervalley coupling will lift the degeneracy of the energy levels, resulting in broader and thus more realistic spectra. On the side of quantum-kinetic model, necessary extensions include the specification of the proper vibrational modes and the quenching of fluorescence due to non-radiative recombination via interface defects on the QD surface as well as via Auger processes. Efficient energy transfer processes such as the Förster process need to be included in the model to describe systems with substantial coupling between dots. In terms of the optical environment, the formalism lends itself to the consideration of complex resonator effects.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the UK CECAM node for supporting this work and acknowledge financial support from the European Union FP-7 Programme via grant No. 246200. ST would like to thank the STFC's UK e-Science SCARF facility for providing computer resources.
References

          J. Goldschmidt, P. Loeper, S. Fischer, S. Janz, M. Peters, S. W. Glunz, G. Willeke, E. Lifshitz, K. Kraemer and D. Biner, IUMRS-ICEM08, Sydney, Australia,  2008 Search PubMed .
B. Richards and A. Shalav, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2007, 54, 2679 CrossRef CAS .
M. Brumer, A. Kigel, L. Amirav, A. Sashchiuk, O. Solomesch, N. Tessler and E. Lifshitz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1111–1116 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Bartnik, F. W. Wise, A. Kigel and E. Lifshitz, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 245424 CrossRef .
R. Vaxenburg and E. Lifshitz, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 075304 CrossRef .
G. I. Maikov, R. Vaxenburg, A. Sashchiuk and E. Lifshitz, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6547–6556 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lifshitz, M. Brumer, A. Kigel, A. Sashchiuk, M. Bashouti, M. Sirota, E. Galun, Z. Burshtein, A. Q. Le Quang, I. Ledoux-Rak and J. Zyss, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25356 CrossRef CAS .

          J. E. Carroll, Rate equations in semiconductor electronics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  1985 Search PubMed .

          H. Haug and S. W. Koch, Quantum Theory of the Optical and Electronic Properties of Semiconductors, World Scientific,  2004 Search PubMed .
I. Kang and F. W. Wise, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 1997, 14, 1632–1646 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tomic, A. G. Sunderland and I. J. Bush, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 1963–1972 RSC .
N. Vukmirovć and S. Tomić, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 103718 CrossRef .
R. Binder and S. W. Koch, Prog. Quantum Electron., 1995, 19, 307 CrossRef .
U. Aeberhard, J. Comput. Electron., 2011, 10, 394–413 CrossRef .

          U. Aeberhard and S. Tomić, unpublished.
U. Aeberhard, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 115317 CrossRef .
D. Mozyrsky and I. Martin, Opt. Commun., 2007, 277, 109 CrossRef CAS .
U. Aeberhard, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 035454 CrossRef .
T. D. Krauss and F. W. Wise, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 55, 9860–9865 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† This article was submitted following the 2nd TYC Workshop on Charge Transfer, organised by The Thomas Young Centre in June 2012.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Components and operating principles of a solar cell device using a combination of luminescent solar concentration and up-conversion to enhance the utilization of the solar spectrum.1	 

 	Fig. 2  Spectral conversion process via QD luminescence: the low-energy part of the solar spectrum, which lies below the band gap of the solar cell material and is thus transmitted by the solar cell, is absorbed by the QDs and reemitted at a lower energy. In order to achieve highest spectral conversion efficiency the overlap of the UC absorption and the QD emission should be maximum, while the overlap of the QD absorption and the QD emission should be minimum in order to avoid reabsorption losses.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
GR(E) = [{G0R(E)}−1 − ΣR(E)]−1,	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
	(17)

 	Fig. 3  Computational procedure for the description of fluorescence in the NEGF picture. There are two coupled self-consistency loops, one for the electron Green's functions G and self-energies Σ and the other for the photon Green's functions γ and self-energies Πγ. In the electronic loop, the incident photon flux ϕ↙ leads to the build-up of the electron–hole polarization, which via the expression for the photon self energy causes the renormalization of the output photon flux ϕ↗ in the photon loop. At the non-equilibrium steady-state, absorption and emission rates are balanced.	 
	(18)
	(19)
	(20)
	(21)
	(22)
	(23)
	(24)

 	Fig. 4  Renormalization of a narrow excitation spectrum which is slightly detuned from the exciton state, mediating absorption and emission. The renormalized spectrum consists of the attenuated incident spectrum plus a contribution from reemission.	 
	(25)
	(26)
f[Rc0,σc;Rs0,σs](Rc,Rs) = g[Rc0,σc](Rc)g[Rs0,σs](Rs),	(27)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Bivariate normal distribution for the sizes of PbSe core and PbS shell in the QD ensemble; (b) HOMO–LUMO gap variation in the distribution; (c) variation of optical matrix elements for lowest transition.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Absorption cross section for the single QD configurations as well as the ensemble average with respect to the size distribution in Fig. 5; (b) power spectrum of the emitted light for resonant excitation with the NIR spectrum displayed.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Spectra for ρQD > 1017 cm−3, together with the spectral rates for absorption and emission; (b) incident and renormalized spectrum for different concentrations of QDs.	 
Footnote
† This article was submitted following the 2nd TYC Workshop on Charge Transfer, organised by The Thomas Young Centre in June 2012.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
