Liquid crystal templating as an approach to spatially and temporally organise soft matter  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00029D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00029D
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5935-5949Liquid crystal templating as an approach to spatially and temporally organise soft matter

        
          
            Pim 
            van der Asdonk
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Paul H. J. 
            Kouwer
          
          
        
      *
      Radboud University, Institute for Molecules and Materials, Heyendaalseweg 135, 6525 AJ Nijmegen, The Netherlands. E-mail: p.kouwer@science.ru.nl
Received 
      1st January 2017
    First published on 24th July 2017AbstractChemistry quickly moves from a molecular science to a systems science. This requires spatial and temporal control over the organisation of molecules and molecular assemblies. Whilst Nature almost by default (transiently) organises her components at multiple different length scales, scientists struggle to realise even relatively straightforward patterns. In the past decades, supramolecular chemistry has taught us the rules to precisely engineer molecular assembly at the nanometre scale. At higher length scales, however, we are bound to top-down nanotechnology techniques to realise order. For soft, biological matter, many of these top-down techniques come with serious limitations since the molecules generally show low susceptibilities to the applied stimuli. A new method is based on liquid crystal templating. In this hierarchical approach, a liquid crystalline host serves as the scaffold to order polymers or assemblies. Being a liquid crystal, the host material can be ordered at many different length scales and on top of that, is highly susceptible to many external stimuli, which can even be used to manipulate the liquid crystal organisation in time. As a result, we anticipate large control over the organisation of the materials inside the liquid crystalline host. Recently, liquid crystal templating was also realised in water. This suddenly makes this tool highly applicable to start organising more delicate biological materials or even small organisms. We review the scope and limitations of liquid crystal templating and look out to where the technique may lead us.
Pim van der Asdonk
Pim van der Asdonk was born on a hot summer day in 1986 in Tegelen, the Netherlands. He received his MSc from the Radboud University in 2012 for his work on the development of crystallization-based enantiomeric deracemization techniques under the supervision of Dr Wim Noorduin and Prof. Dr Elias Vlieg. Shortly thereafter, he started as a PhD student in the Molecular Materials group, under the supervision of Dr Paul Kouwer, where he earned his doctorate degree in 2016 in the area of Liquid Crystal Templating. His love for brightly coloured chromophores continues outside of academia; after obtaining his doctorate degree he started his career in industry at Océ-Canon, where he currently works on the development of next-generation inkjet inks.
Paul H. J. Kouwer
Paul Kouwer studied chemistry and polymer chemistry at the University of Groningen (NL) and received his PhD degree from the Delft University of Technology (NL), under the supervision of Prof. Stephen Picken. He moved to the Liquid Crystal group at the University of Hull (UK) as a Ramsay Fellow and continued post-doctoral studies as a Marie Curie Fellow at MIT (Cambridge, MA). Paul was appointed as Assistant Professor at the Institute for Molecules and Materials at the Radboud University in Nijmegen (NL) in 2009. Currently, his main research activities are in controlled (self)-assembly, including Liquid Crystal Templating in the aqueous phase, and in the preparation, mechanical properties and application of semi-flexible hydrogels that are unique mimics of biological gels and find application in wound dressing and tissue engineering.
1. Introduction
Nature has the fascinating ability to precisely create an incredible range of complex structures on multiple length scales from molecular building blocks such as DNA, RNA, proteins, sugars and lipids. These essential bricks and the assembled hierarchical structures they generate are able to perform numerous functions, such as providing (electrical) communication, structural integrity and nutritional transport. Interestingly, Nature built the machinery to carry this out from a molecular to a cellular level and up to the organism level itself. Life in a macroscopic sense can only function if the structural organization of these molecular building blocks is precisely controlled in space and time.
Nowadays, scientists try to apply Nature's approaches to the playground of the lab. In soft matter, examples like 1D self-assembling supramolecular and polymeric materials are examples where individual building blocks are brought together by delicate covalent and non-covalent interactions, forming larger hierarchical assemblies. These individual building blocks can be chemically modified to introduce a range of specific characteristics to the assembly (mechanical stability, electro-optic response, biofunctionality, etc.), allowing ultimately for engineering of desired functions into the assembled structure. As a consequence, the macroscopic organization and their coupled functionality allows these soft materials to be used for a wide array of applications, ranging from sensing devices (which are able to pick up tiny amounts of specific biomolecules in solution), the creation of artificial tissue up to materials printed on plastics which are able to convert solar light into electricity. Due to their ease of processability and versatility in introducing specific properties and functions, these types of soft materials have the potential to provide a cost-effective alternative to many current-day inorganic solid-state devices.1–5
Despite the advantages that polymeric and supramolecular materials offer, a key aspect that holds back their application is the difficulty in controlling the spatial organization of these assemblies across multiple length scales.3,6–8 Although the order within the assembly (nanometre scale) is often extremely high, when dissolved most supramolecular materials form macroscopic assemblies. Examples where spatial control at larger length scales is highly beneficial or even crucial for device performance are in opto-electronic devices,8–11 as well as in tissue engineering. In the latter for instance, a macroscopically organised polymer scaffold is necessary for the growth of highly aligned tissue, such as muscle fibers and neural tissue.12–18
This work reviews recent advances in the field of liquid crystal templating (LCT). First, we briefly summarise the common (top-down) approaches to enforce macroscopic order in (soft) materials. Many of these techniques are difficult to apply to (aqueous) soft matter, which often is delicate and shows low susceptibilities to externally applied triggers. A new method is based on liquid crystal templating. In this hierarchical approach, a liquid crystalline host that is readily ordered and aligned serves as the scaffold to organise polymers or assemblies. The recent successful application of LCT in water makes this technique compatible with the biomaterials fields. In addition to focusing on templated alignment in aqueous and non-aqueous solutions, we will discuss how complex patterns can be made and how the liquid crystalline template may be used to dynamically change the alignment in time.
2. Organising soft matter
To spatially control the hierarchical organization of (soft) materials, many strategies have been developed. As a classical top-down technique, photolithography is able to create well-defined features down to ∼10 nanometre resolution on a high throughput basis, but clean rooms are needed and application of high UV doses to various biomaterials is a concern.17,18 Soft lithography is a flexible cost-effective alternative, as it is compatible with fragile biomaterials although creating complex patterned devices remains challenging due to limited in-plane registration during multiple stamping steps.14,18
By using complex patterned electrodes, electric fields are a great candidate to realise complex structures. Each individual pixel can be locally manipulated (analogous to liquid crystal display technology). Unfortunately, many soft materials possess low susceptibilities to electric fields, which require the use of very unpractically high fields. Furthermore, in (ion-rich) aqueous solutions, especially when using strong electric fields, parasitic heating effects (Joule and dielectric heating) can disrupt molecular self-assembly processes, cause electrochemical degradation or simply can easily destroy the material all together.
Magnetic fields are better suited since they do not suffer from such disruptive (temperature) effects. Other advantages are that it is a contact free technique, it works in large volumes (while surface-oriented techniques only have a finite working distance) and off-plane alignment is easily possible. One major drawback is that it is impossible to make complex patterns on multiple length scales of soft matter with this technique. Secondly, many soft materials have low susceptibilities to magnetic fields (as similar to electric fields), resulting in the need for very high and power-consuming fields to align these materials. Consequently, examples of alignment of soft matter in aqueous and non-aqueous solutions using electric fields19–25 and magnetic fields26–30 (Fig. 1) are relatively limited.
 Fig. 1  Scanning electron microscopy image (a) shows an isotropic network of peptide amphiphile fibers assembled in water. Image (b) shows aligned peptide amphiphile fibers along the 20 Tesla magnetic field direction (indicated by the white arrow). Scale bars indicate 500 nm. Images from ref. 28. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission. 
Electrospinning is a very useful technique since it is able to align materials processed from a wide range of solvents into high aspect ratio fibers.31–34 In addition, it can be integrated with patterned substrates and electric and magnetic field setups, which locally align the electro-spun fibers into basic in-plane patterns (Fig. 2). The creation of more complex patterns on micron length scales is still challenging.
 Fig. 2  Illustration (a) shows the concept of magnetic field assisted electrospinning. Scanning electron microscopy images (b–e) show poly(vinyl) alcohol polymers doped with magnetic nanoparticles which are aligned in-plane at specific angles. Plot (f) shows the relationship between substrate rotation and measured angle between the in-plane aligned polymers. Images from ref. 33. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission. 
Lastly, shear flow9,12 is a very practical technique used to align soft matter, although often the compound needs to possess some anisotropic (or even liquid crystalline) characteristics to retain the organisation after the mechanical field has been removed. Unfortunately, similar to magnetic fields and electrospinning, it is very difficult, if not impossible to make smaller complex patterns on smaller micron-sized length scales.
The brief discussion of these techniques does not do justice to their development and opportunities, since all have specific advantages that make them very useful for specific situations. Many, however, also suffer from disadvantages, ranging from limited control over the organisation to practical challenges regarding equipment. An ideal alignment technique should combine the advantages of
• being compatible with a wide range of materials (especially fragile biomaterials);
• having the ability to create complex patterns on multiple length scales, preferably in three dimensions and also dynamically addressable;
• facile operation in any basic laboratory.
One alignment technique that potentially does have these combined advantages is liquid crystalline templating (LCT). In this relatively new strategy, a liquid crystal (LC) host templates the organisation of the desired material. In turn, the organisation of the LC host is readily manipulated by a range of techniques that can be borrowed from the field of LC science and engineering. Addressing the LC host directly impacts the organisation of the guest. In the remainder of this review, we provide several examples of LCT and discuss its scope and limitations, but first, we briefly introduce the essentials of liquid crystals in the following section.
3. Liquid crystals
3.1 Order in liquid crystals
The liquid crystalline phase is a state of matter in between the solid and liquid phase; it has both solid-like ordering and fluid properties of a liquid (Fig. 3). LCs can be classified by their physical properties. The active materials in the heart of LC display devices are so called thermotropic LCs that typically consist of anisotropic molecules, predominantly rod-shaped or discotic. In the absence of a solvent, the liquid crystalline molecules or mesogens organise into a range of LC phases dependent on the temperature. In the least ordered phase, the nematic phase, the mesogens only possess orientational order. In micron-sized domains, all molecules align in one direction, which is defined by the director ñ (Fig. 3). A chiral nematic or cholesteric phase is characterised by a twist in the position of the molecules perpendicular to the director and is typically formed by chiral LCs or by the addition of a chiral dopant. Besides orientational order, mesogens can also have positional order, where the molecules have translational symmetry, resulting in a range of so-called smectic phases (1D positional order) or columnar phases (2D positional order). Commonly found examples (SmA, SmC and Colh phases) are shown in Fig. 3, but an elaborate overview of the many liquid crystalline phases and sub-phases has been published by Davis and Goodby.35
 Fig. 3  Schematic representation of various states of matter. Liquid crystal phases are found when heating from the crystalline to the isotropic phase. The order in four commonly observed LC phases is represented schematically. 
On heating from the crystalline phase, a liquid crystalline material undergoes one or more phase transitions into one or more mesophases, stepwise decreasing its order, until eventually it reaches the isotropic phase where all positional and orientational order is lost. Due to the long-range interactions between LC mesogens, which span many micrometres, a multitude of mesophases can be distinguished under a polarised optical microscope. In the liquid crystalline material, the difference in the refractive index parallel (or extraordinary, ne) and perpendicular (or ordinary, no) to the director ñ of the LC phase, also called the birefringence Δn = ne − no, creates interference patterns of light in the visible range. In the polarising optical microscope, the birefringence together with defects that are characteristic of the symmetry of the LC phase gives rise to patterns that are unique for every mesophase.36 As such, polarising optical microscopy has become an important tool to analyse the phase structures of LCs. Fig. 4 shows some examples of microscopy images of characteristic textures that correspond to the mesophases schematically drawn in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 4  Characteristic polarized optical microscopy images of the most common and lowest order liquid crystal phases: (a) nematic phase (N) with only orientational order; (b) smectic A (SmA) phase with 1D positional order; (c) smectic C (SmC) phase with similar positional order with the mesogens tilted with respect to the layer normal; and (d) columnar hexagonal (Colh) phase with 2D positional order. 
3.2 Lyotropic and chromonic liquid crystals
Another class of liquid crystalline materials are so-called lyotropic LCs. In contrast with thermotropic LCs, mesophase formation in lyotropics depends on both temperature and the concentration of the compound in a solvent. A sub-class of lyotropic LCs comprises amphiphilic mesogens, which are molecules that are composed of separate hydrophilic and hydrophobic sections, including some common soaps. At sufficient concentrations (above their so-called critical micellar concentration), these molecules form rod-shaped or disk-shaped micelles, where the organization is governed by the polarity of the solvent: in polar solvents, the hydrophilic section is in contact with the solvent whilst the hydrophobic part aggregates to minimise contact; and vice versa in apolar solvents. At increasing concentrations these micelles self-organise into hierarchical liquid crystalline structures (Fig. 5), for instance in hexagonal or in lamellar arrangements.37 Such amphiphilic lyotropic LCs can be found in countless examples all around us, ranging from soap solutions (in which micelles are able to encapsulate non-polar compounds in water) up to the formation of higher ordered bilayer membranes in living cells from such amphiphilic molecules.
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of lyotropic liquid crystalline phases in water. The normal and inverted hexagonal phases are equivalent to the columnar phase of thermotropic LCs and the lamellar phase corresponds to the smectic phase. The cubic phases II, III, QI and QII are 3D ordered phases and, as such, not birefringent. Image from ref. 37. Copyright 2008 Springer. Reproduced with permission. 
Another interesting class of lyotropic LCs are so-called chromonics or lyotropic chromonic LCs (LCLCs). LCLCs are rigid board-like molecules consisting of aromatic cores with water-solubilizing groups on the periphery. To minimise contact of the aromatic core with water (hydrophobic interactions) supported by π–π interactions, they stack face-to-face in columnar aggregates (Fig. 6). The spacing between the individual stacked mesogens for such materials is about 3.4 Å,38 which is roughly the van der Waals distance between aromatic rings. Aggregation is predominantly uniaxial, since the (negative) charges at the periphery of the stack repel each other. At certain concentrations and temperatures, however, the stacks line up and form LC phases (Fig. 6a and b).39,40 These phases include nematic, smectic, columnar and cholesteric-like phases, but these particular phases are not composed of single mesogens, but rather of columnar stacks that contain tens to hundreds of LCLC molecules.38 Due to their often rigid aromatic cores, many of them are highly absorbing in the visible range and, in fact, many commercial organic dyes have also shown LCLC behaviour. As another example, both DNA and RNA can be considered as polymers with side-chain chromonic LC pendants. For liquid crystal templating, LCLCs are particularly interesting, since they allow templating in an aqueous environment, which is required for the organisation of biomolecules and materials, but lack soap-like assembly interactions.
 Fig. 6  Phase structures and molecular structures of two well-studied chromonics: (a and b) schematic representation of common LCLC mesophases: N and M phase. (c) Molecular structure of DSCG and (d) phase diagram of DSCG in water. (e) Molecular structure of SSY and (f) its phase diagram in water. The symbols I, N and M stand for the isotropic, N (nematic) phase and M (smectic-like) phase, respectively. The phase diagram of DSCG is reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry and the phase diagram of SSY is reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
One of the first molecules to be studied in detail was disodium cromoglycate (DSCG, Fig. 6c), which was earlier discovered to be an effective anti-asthmatic drug.41 At room temperature, it forms a nematic phase at about 12 wt% in water and despite its aromatic structure it is optically transparent in the visible range. The second most widely studied chromonic is Sunset Yellow (SSY, Fig. 6e), a brightly orange coloured compound that is applied commercially as a food dye. Both DSCG and SSY have very similarly shaped phase diagrams (Fig. 6d and f),39,42 although SSY forms room temperature nematic mesophases at much higher concentrations (30 wt% in water). On the other side of the spectrum, some chromonics are able to form LCLC phases at far lower concentrations, such as benzopurpurin 4B (0.4 wt%),43 IR-806 (0.5 wt%)44 and pinacyanol acetate (0.75 wt%).45
The columnar LCLC aggregates can be aligned in-plane and homeotropically through various surface treatments,46–49 although controlling the surface anchoring of these materials remains a challenge since the anchoring energy of these phases on conventional surfaces is very weak compared to conventional thermotropic LCs (1 to 2 orders of magnitude weaker)50 and the induced alignment is often not stable over time.47,48,51,52
Lastly, anisotropically shaped (rod- or plate-like) minerals can form LC phases when dispersed at sufficient volume fractions in a solvent. Here, phase formation does not depend on molecular interactions, but is simply the result of entropic excluded volume interactions, as predicted by the Onsager theory.53 Examples of such colloidal or mineral liquid crystals are goethite and beidellite, which both form liquid crystalline phases at sufficient volume fractions in water at room temperature.54,55 Their sizes are much bigger than the size of other conventional molecular LCs and, since Brownian motion plays an insignificant role in these relatively large particles, temperature has a marginal effect on the stability of these phases. Due to their sizes and relatively high densities (as for moderate aspect ratio particles), the rod-shaped, board-shaped or disc-shaped nanoparticles slowly sediment to the bottom of a solution. Colloidal LCs typically show high susceptibilities and they can be easily addressed by both low magnetic and electric fields.56,57
3.3 Liquid crystal applications beyond displays
LCs have the unique ability to form domains whose orientations can be directed and extended to much larger length scales by applying external fields (electric, magnetic, shear) or directing surfaces (such as rubbed polyimide or photosensitive command layers), resulting in a uniformly aligned mono-domain at macroscopic length scales. The intrinsic anisotropy and ease of manipulation of their alignment forms, together with their optical properties, the basis of a wide range of applications. The key example is the development of liquid crystal display TV screens. Inside the displays, thermotropic LCs are uniformly aligned by a directing surface (for example rubbed polyimide) and its local orientation is switched by individual electric fields on a patterned electrode setup. As a result, the orientation of LCs in each compartment (or pixel) can be individually addressed, resulting in an on–off switch for local light transmission.
The ability to manipulate the organization of LCs in time and space can be used to create stimuli-responsive materials that are manipulated by heat or light, for instance in LC polymer networks.58–65 Using photosensitive anisotropic surfaces, these liquid crystalline networks can be organised across multiple length scales and by applying external stimuli (such as heating to the isotropic phase or by excitation of an incorporated photosensitive molecule), the local LC director is locally altered. As a result, the material deforms macroscopically in all three dimensions (Fig. 7) and a variety of complex shapes have been reported. Because a range of external stimuli can be transferred into programmable mechanical motion, these materials are very promising as low-cost mechanical components in microtechnology applications.
 Fig. 7  (a) Preparation of a patterned LC polymer network. (b) Shape deformation of the network upon infrared heating. Images from ref. 59. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission. 
Besides actuation, LC polymers also find application in optical sensing. By introducing chirality into the LC polymer, circular polarised light (corresponding to the pitch length of the elastomer) can be selectively reflected by these materials. A change in the environment (by a temperature change, under specific light illumination and/or in the presence of analytes) induces an alteration of the pitch length. The change in pitch induces a shift in the wavelengths of the optical reflection, which results in a macroscopic colour change. This simple, often reversible process makes this class of smart materials ideal candidates for low-cost sensing devices.66
In addition to the aforementioned applications, thermotropic LCs have also been used in biomedical engineering and sensing devices within biological environments.67–69 The group of Nicholas Abbott and others have pioneered this field with their work on thermotropic LCs that detect a wide range of biological entities such as bacteria,70 viruses,70,71 cells,72 DNA,73 proteins,74,75 endotoxin76 and lipids77,78 present in aqueous solutions. In general, when a biological interaction takes place along the interface between a thermotropic LC and the aqueous solution, the local orientation of the molecules is altered, which results in LC reorientation over much larger length scales. This signal is then easily picked up by observing the change in the optical texture under a polarised optical microscope (Fig. 8). The use of non-water miscible liquid crystals restricts this type of sensing platforms to interfaces.
 Fig. 8  Overview of a thermotropic LC/water interface and the resulting homeotropic reorientation of the mesogens when in contact with phospholipids. Image (A) shows an overview of the experimental setup. Polarized optical microscopy image (B) shows birefringence of the in-plane aligned LC molecules. When a phospholipid anchors to the LC, its orientation becomes locally homeotropic, which translates into reduced birefringence under a polarized optical microscope (C). Image (D) shows the situation when phospholipids have completely decorated the LC/water interface, resulting in a complete homeotropic alignment where no birefringence is visible under the polarized optical microscope. Images from ref. 78. Copyright 2007 American Association for the Advancement of Science. Reproduced with permission. 
Unfortunately, many thermotropic and amphiphilic LCs that act as detergents are toxic to living matter,79,80 making in situ application of bulk LCs with these fragile biomaterials challenging. In the last few years, however, the focus to realise these types of applications has shifted towards chromonic lyotropic LCs. These materials do not form micelles but rather form elongated stacks with charges along their periphery. As such, they do not insert in the apolar bilayer membranes of living cells, which renders these materials much more compatible in a wide range of biological conditions,75,80,81 even allowing for manipulation of living materials82–85 and the detection of biological events.86
Besides these examples, there are many emerging applications in the LC field. Particularly exciting examples are the creation of LC nanostructured materials for electric storage and water-filtration applications87–89 and LC colloidal assembly for a wide range of photonic applications.90–93 For examples of other LC-related topics and applications, the 2012 review of Lagerwall and Scalia is highly recommended.94
4. Liquid crystal templating
A breakthrough in the efforts to macroscopically organise materials was the work of Kresge and co-workers, who condensed tetraethoxysilane in the presence of a surfactant and obtained hexagonally ordered honeycomb structures.95,96 After removal of the surfactant, macroscopically ordered crystalline mesoporous materials with pore diameters of 1.5–10 nm were obtained. In this early work, the surfactant (a lyotropic liquid crystal) acts as a template to direct the crystallisation process. Since the discovery, 25 years ago, numerous LC templates based on surfactants (nanopores, <10 nm) or block-copolymers (<100 nm pore dimensions) have been employed to control and direct the organisation of inorganic (mesoporous) materials. The type, composition and concentration of the LC template determined the symmetry of the mesophase and, as such, the structure and connectivity of the porous structure inside the material. Mesoporous materials obtained by LCT and their applications, for instance in hydrogen or CO2 storage, energy conversion, life sciences, all the way to catalysis have been widely reviewed97–102 and will not be further discussed here. A more recent, very interesting development in this field is the use of biomacromolecules as a mineralisation template, which offers the opportunity to employ Nature's complex hierarchical self-assembled structures as LC templates.103
An alternative interpretation of the term liquid crystal templating considers the response of a (macro)molecule or particle in a highly ordered liquid crystalline environment. If possible, the foreign molecule will most likely end up in a defect, a region of lower order with a reduced energetic penalty compared to the bulk. When LC phases with a highly ordered defect structures are used, for instance the so-called blue phases, the defect pattern acts as a long-range ordered template. Using this strategy, polymers have been polymerised in the defects, yielding so-called polymer-stabilised LC phases.104 The aforementioned blue phases greatly benefit from the polymers in the defects as their stability (and application) window has been shown to increase from <1 °C to more than 200 °C. Also, nanoparticles105 as well as micron-sized particles93,106 are known to migrate to defects in the liquid crystalline structure to minimise the energy of the system, where the latter have been polymerised to form complex 3D structures.107–109 This exciting field allows for templating at much larger length scales, truly bridging the gap from molecular assembly to device dimensions.
In the remainder of this section, we will restrict ourselves to the organisation of soft materials in bulk-aligned LC phases. The liquid crystal serves as an organizational template for other functional non-liquid crystalline materials that, under other circumstances (in other words, in an isotropic solvent), would form isotropic structures. Through elastic-mediated interactions and reorientational shear forces, the LC template is able to direct the organization of dispersed or dissolved materials (Fig. 9a and b). Consequently, the dissolved or dispersed materials will display anisotropic properties: optical, electrical and/or mechanical. Although other phases are not fundamentally excluded, the vast majority of this type of macroscopic templating has been carried out in the lowest ordered nematic phase or its chiral equivalent, the cholesteric phase.
 Fig. 9  Schematic representation of LC templating: (a) dispersant (blue) in isotropic solvent (orange) does not generate alignment; (b) in a LC template (orange) the dispersant aligns through elastic-mediated interactions and reorientational shear forces. (c) Application of an electric field (black electrodes) reorients the liquid crystal and (d) slowly also the dispersant (discussed later in this review). Also other alignment strategies can be used, such as command layers, flow fields, etc. 
In addition, the LC template itself can be readily manipulated by conventional external stimuli such as directing surfaces and shear flow. Of course, classical LC stimuli such as electric and magnetic fields can be used to control the organisation of the template (Fig. 9c and d). As a result of the long range cooperative interactions and anisotropic polarizability of the LC, the fields required to address the template are commonly many times smaller than the fields necessary to drive the (inherently low susceptible) target towards anisotropy.
When is the liquid crystalline templating technique an appropriate approach to generate (hierarchical) long-range order in the materials? And when can the technique be truly beneficial over the techniques described in Section 2? First, let us look at the requirements for successful LC templating (LCT). We need two ingredients. Since the elastic forces at the basis of the techniques are limited, uniaxial alignment of a solute in the LC matrix requires either a relatively shape persistent and anisometric solute (like a nanorod, carbon nanotube, rigid polymer, etc.) or, alternatively, an anisotropic growth or assembly of the solute followed by subsequent aggregation or crystallisation which prevents going back to an isotropic structure. The second requirement would simply be the compatibility of the solute with the liquid crystalline solvent. In this sense, compatibility should be no more than solubility, or at larger length scales good dispersibility. Optimisation of the solute/LC solvent pair may not be necessary, since LCT does not depend on mutual specific interactions, but rather depends on elastic forces in the LC matrix. In addition, LCT is readily applied. Any basic laboratory is likely to be fully equipped for the technique. As a result, it has the potential to be scaled-up to high-throughput fabrication, as it is currently used in the manufacturing lines employed in LC display production.
Compared to other techniques, one of the main advantages of LCT includes local manipulation of the template (for instance using standard LC display technology), which opens the route towards organizing materials over multiple length scales in complex patterns and control over the organisation in time. Before we address these opportunities in Section 5, we first discuss common alignment techniques for LCT (Section 4.1) and important examples in the literature (Section 4.2).
4.1 Liquid crystal alignment techniques
The first step in LCT is to control the microscopic and macroscopic organization and the alignment of the liquid crystalline template (which is commonly crucial for any LC application). The most-used approaches in LCT use the substrate to align the bulk material. They are briefly discussed below:

Rubbed polyimide. 
In the last few decades, rubbed polyimide has been the prime alignment technique for LCs and templates alike. It is very effective and its application method (spin-coating, curing and rubbing) is relatively straightforward. Rubbing has been used for many years in the mass-manufacturing LC display industry. Most spin-coated polyimides give rise to random planar alignment, although nowadays any pre-tilt angle can be realised with different (mixtures of) polyimides.110 By unidirectionally rubbing polyimide with a piece of velvet or an abrasive pad, grooves are created and the top polymer layer is reoriented due to the applied shear force.111,112 These anisotropic (molecular) topographies cause the mesogens to anchor in-plane unidirectionally on such surfaces and, as a result, the surface ordering is extended into the bulk solution for a distance of up to roughly 100 microns.68


Self-assembling monolayers. 
For homeotropic alignment on a substrate, it is often convenient to employ self-assembling monolayers (or SAMs). These molecules are commonly built up from molecules composed of a long aliphatic tail and a functional head group (such as thiol or silane) that covalently binds to a substrate. For many liquid crystals, the long alkyl tail provides homeotropic anchoring conditions. Shorter tails give planar alignment, but then require additional topological structures to induce unidirectionality.113


Photo-addressable command layers. 
Despite the ease of using rubbed polyimide surfaces for LC alignment, complex patterning over multiple length scales with this technique is practically impossible, since it is mechanically extremely difficult and very time-consuming to rub polyimide locally with precise, micron-scale patterns. An excellent alternative is the use of photo-alignment techniques with so-called photo-addressable command layers. One important step forward showing the high-throughput mass market potential of command layers was when Sharp implemented this non-contact LC alignment technique in 2009 in favour of mechanical rubbing of polyimide for the mass-production of their next-generation LC display TVs.114
In general, command layers are polymers functionalised with photosensitive groups such as cinnamates, coumarins and azobenzenes115,116 that can be spin-coated on a substrate. Cinnamate- and coumarin-functionalised polymers can undergo a [2+2] cycloaddition crosslinking reaction when subjected to light. When linearly polarised light is used, these command layers are crosslinked in a specific orientation with respect to the polarization of the light, resulting in an anisotropic molecular topography of the command layer. In the case of azobenzene-functionalised polymers, the chromophores undergo light-mediated reversible cis–trans isomerization. When embedded within a (spin-coated) polymer matrix and when subjected to linearly polarised light, these moieties undergo subsequent reversible cis–trans isomerisation reactions until they are oriented with their long axis perpendicular to the plane of the linearly polarised light. By using multiple illumination steps and by using photomasks, command layers can be locally aligned in-plane in any pattern with domain sizes ranging from micrometres to centimetres. Using this technique, command layers can be spin-coated over a wide range of surfaces, including patterned electrode substrates, curved substrates and even in confined geometries, where traditional alignment techniques form a challenge.115 Recently, also plasmonic metamasks have been used to generate complex patterns in one go, avoiding the need of multiple illumination steps.117
Command layers have been used to control the organization of thermotropic LCs,118 as well as aqueous LCLCs119–122 such as DSCG.123,124 In the latter case, a surfactant is needed which anchors to the hydrophobic command layer interface and couples the in-plane organization of the patterned layer to the hydrophilic LCLC.125,126


Electric and magnetic fields. 
Besides directing surfaces, both electric and magnetic fields can be used to align LC templates, which in turn align the dispersed materials by reorientational shear forces and elastic interactions. In electric fields, LCs align due to their own permanent electric dipole moment. Even if LC molecules do not possess such permanent dipole moment, the application of an electric field induces a small dipole moment in the often highly polarisable molecules, which allows for alignment perpendicular or parallel to the field. Analogous to electric fields, magnetic fields can also align LCs due to their intrinsic magnetic dipole moment or induced magnetic dipole moment by the application of a field.
Electric or magnetic fields used for LC template alignment have the advantage that they are contact free methods, i.e. no specific surfaces are needed within the sample holder or LC cell. Secondly, both fields are effective in the bulk of a sample. They can therefore be used to align much larger volumes of LC templates (and dispersed functional materials) in comparison to polyimide rubbed cells, where surfaces in general can only direct LCs up to 100 microns.68 Furthermore, off-axis alignment is straightforward by tilting the sample in any orientation with respect to the field. Homogeneous and inhomogeneous magnetic fields can be altered in space and/or time (by controlling the rotation of the sample and/or by changing the frequency of the field), allowing even more complex LC template organizations.
The additional advantage of using electric fields is that by using complex electrode-pattern setups, a complex and dynamic local organisation can be realised, especially when used in combination with directing (polyimide or command layers) surfaces. The LCs can then be switched between several orientations, in-plane and homeotropic, which also is the main technological feature behind LC display technology. An additional advantage arises when electric fields are applied to an LC template. In this situation, the dispersed functional material within the aligned template can physically bridge the electrodes, after which this material can act as a transducer in a biosensor or as a transistor in molecular electronic devices.
In the next paragraphs, we will discuss a number of LCT examples in thermotropic and lyotropic chromonic liquid crystals. The latter gives access to start organising biomaterials.

4.2 LC templating in thermotropic liquid crystals
The last 15 years has seen numerous examples where LC templating has been used to organise a range of non-aqueous organic soft materials (those that themselves do not possess liquid crystalline character) on a macroscopic scale.10,127–143 A few of these key examples are highlighted below.
First of all, the group of Kato has shown that by incorporation of self-assembling materials within thermotropic LCs, so-called LC physical gels can be created10 in which the nematic LC host (aligned by rubbed polyimide) shows much faster responses when an electric field is applied (Fig. 10).127 Besides improving electrical responses of LCs, LC physical gels have also been applied in rewritable light-scattering devices.131,144
 Fig. 10  Liquid crystal physical gel in a twisted nematic cell (a), where the presence of self-assembled fibers improves the response times and lowers the threshold voltage when an electric field is applied. Atomic force microscopy image (b) showing twisted alignment of self-assembled fibers. Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A beautiful example was demonstrated by the group of Akagi, who used a chiral LC to template the polymerization of acetylenes into helical super-structures (Fig. 11). Besides the creation of complex, intertwined helical structures at multiple length scales, the polyacetylene films were electrically active; they showed high electrical conductivity as a result of their templated organization.133 This example also clearly demonstrates the “stiffness” requirement of LCT. Here, the polymers separate from the LC template solvent and aggregate to form rigid, shape-persistent structures. In this case, the structures are so stable that removal of the template does not destroy the formed ordered structures. This is not necessarily the case for less strongly aggregated polymers or assemblies.
 Fig. 11  Scanning electron microscopy images of helical polyacetylenes polymerised in a (R)-chiral (left panels) and in the corresponding (S) enantiomer, imaged at different magnifications. The chirality of the template determines the handedness of the helical structures. Images from ref. 118. Copyright 2007 American Association for the Advancement of Science. Reproduced with permission. 
Looking at other semiconducting π-conjugated polymeric materials, poly(3-hexylthiophene), a key component in organic solar cells (where spatial distribution of donor and acceptor materials is essential), was incorporated in a block copolymer.142 When templated by a nematic LC on a rubbed polyimide surface, highly anisotropic absorption and polarised photoluminescence emission emerged, due to induced macroscopic alignment of poly(3-hexylthiophene) fibrils.
4.3 LC templating in LCLCs: organising soft matter in the aqueous phase
With the LCT approach discussed in the previous paragraphs, alignment of (soft) matter in the aqueous phase is much more challenging. This is unfortunate, since applications that could benefit from highly (uniaxially) organised environments are plentiful, including tissue engineering and biosensors. In order to utilise the LCT approach in these aqueous solutions, water-soluble mesogens are required. Despite numerous applications of templating with thermotropic LCs, i.e. in non-aqueous solvents, in water-based systems, there are only sparse examples where unidirectional macroscopic alignment of water-processable soft matter is realised. A major reason for the limited success in aqueous solutions is that conventional water-based amphiphilic lyotropic LCs are notoriously difficult to align in-plane with common surface treatments such as rubbed polyimide.46,47 Furthermore, in ion-rich lyotropic (both amphiphilic and chromonic) LC solution, Joule and dielectric heating render electric fields unsuitable as alignment technique.
An additional complication is that an amphiphilic lyotropic LC can readily function as a surfactant that can interfere with the desired self-assembly process of a supramolecular material.86 In the literature, several examples have appeared that describe the synthesis of a range of soft and hard materials (including 1D nanowires and nanoparticles) in amphiphilic LC templates.37 The lack of long range in-plane alignment techniques of these lyotropic LC in these examples, however held back their development towards functional 1D nanomaterials on macroscopic device length scales.94 In only one example, Lagerwall et al. have shown that CNTs can be dispersed in an amphiphilic lyotropic LC matrix, which is uniaxially aligned by applying a magnetic field, resulting in a macroscopic unidirectional orientation of water-dispersed single-walled carbon nanotubes (Fig. 12).145
 Fig. 12  Schematic representations of the mechanisms of magnetic field aligned lyotropic LC, which templates the orientation of single-walled carbon nanotubes. Images from ref. 130. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission. 
The use of a template based on a lyotropic chromonic LC is an approach to overcome the disadvantages associated with conventional amphiphilic lyotropic LCs. Despite relatively weak anchoring, LCLC templates have so far been successfully applied to align carbon nanotubes146 and amphiphilic supramolecular materials124,147 on anisotropic polymeric alignment layers.
Besides application in aligning synthetic molecular materials, LCLC templates are slowly making headway into biological systems, such as the organised movement of living bacteria.82–84 In these examples, using an LCLC to control the directional motion of bacteria might be a very useful approach for collecting living biomaterials to one specific location for analysis. Moreover, LC templates have the potential to be used far beyond the aspect of solely a matrix for organizing functional materials, but can tailor the properties of the solution. As an example, many bacteria are known to inhabit anisotropic microenvironments (such as fluids rich in various biopolymers) and they accumulate at air/water interfaces. By using an LCLC as a biocompatible ‘solvent’, both anisotropy and interfacial properties (for instance by forming nematic–isotropic regions at specific concentrations or temperatures of the LCLCs) can be controlled, which allows for future studies of the physical mechanisms behind the dynamic behaviour of motile bacteria and other living biomaterials.
In such an approach, it was found by two groups that the propelling forces generated by different motile bacteria are large enough for them to swim through viscous (anisotropic) LCLC solutions.82–84 This is in stark contrast to non-motile particles such as synthetic particles in LCs, which irreversibly aggregate due to attractive elastic forces imposed by the LC on these particles.93,106 Additionally, Abbott co-workers found that motile bacteria formed linear multi-cellular assemblies (Fig. 13), due to an interplay between the elastic-mediated attractive forces in the LCLC and flagella-derived dissociative forces.82 This group also studied bacterial motion in the nematic–isotropic interfaces of an LCLC.84 At the cusps of these domains, two topological defects are located, which are known to attract other micron-sized particles in order to reduce the elastic penalties at these locations. In this particular work, once the bacterium encountered such a tactoid, it followed the curved interface until it left the tactoid at the position of the topological defect. Furthermore, by tuning the size of these tactoids (controlled by temperature), the capture and release of the bacteria could be controlled. As the use of LCLCs slowly expands into the biological domain, we can expect many more both creative applications and methodological studies emerging from these tuneable anisotropic biocompatible solutions in conjunction with a wide range of other biomaterials.
 Fig. 13  Optical microscopy images showing movement of motile bacteria along the uniaxially in-plane aligned nematic DSCG on rubbed polyimide. When bacteria collide, they associate in a linear chain and continue their movement along the LCLC template. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For LCT it is not necessary to have specific attractive or repulsive interactions between the material that needs to be aligned and the organising template. A recent example showed that attractive interactions however can be very favourable, leading to a magnification of the templating effect. In this work, a semi-flexible polymer was added to the low concentration LCLC pinacyanol acetate. The interaction between the polymer and the LCLC induced aligned samples at LCLC concentrations far below the concentrations where stable nematic phases are obtained.148 Macroscopic alignment was observed at concentrations below 0.4% (LCLC + polymer) in aqueous solutions.
So far, most work using LCT that we discussed used the technique to realise large-scale uniaxial alignment, which regularly could have been obtained using (uniaxial) electric or magnetic fields. The true power of LCT that distinguishes this approach from other technologies is the addressability of the matrix, which gives access to complex pattern formation and also to high temporal control. In other words, using LCT, the organisation of the guest material inside the LC matrix may be changed in time. Alternatively, it should also be possible to manipulate the structure formation process inside the template by dynamically addressing the anisotropic solvent. We briefly discuss both aspects in the following paragraphs.
5. Specific advantages of liquid crystal templating for organising soft matter
5.1 Complex pattern formation
In the literature, almost all examples have so far focused on basic unidirectional alignment, foremost in the nematic phase. Higher order parameters should be achievable in higher ordered LC phases, for instance, the columnar phase in thermotropic LCs or the M, N or O phase in chromonic LCs. Such phases, however, also bring practical complications, such as high viscosities. Fortunately, new possibilities have emerged to achieve full spatial control of functional materials due to the development of photosensitive command layers for LC alignment. Besides adoption by the industry as a non-contact alternative to mechanical rubbing of LC display substrates, this technique has also been applied to various functional materials, although liquid crystalline behaviour is required. Examples include organic stimuli-responsive polymeric LC networks,58–60,62,63,149 1D LC organic semiconducting polymers and oligomers,150 and the aligned crystallization of poly(di-n-hexylsilane), which forms a columnar LC phase at elevated temperatures.151–153 LC functionalization (in order to increase the compatibility with command layers) is often undesired since laborious synthesis steps are necessary which might negatively impact the eventual functionality of the material. As expected, examples of patterned non-LC materials are still sparse; only pentacene was successfully aligned using this approach.154–156
Recently, our group applied this command layer approach to spatially pattern self-assembling amphiphilic materials in aqueous LCLC environments in domains of several tens of micrometres. After photopolymerization, these assemblies are transformed in optically active π-conjugated polydiacetylenes. The increased mechanical stability of the assemblies also allows for removal of the LCLC template by a simple washing step (Fig. 14).124
 Fig. 14  Spatially organized bolaamphiphiles on multiple length scales in an LCLC template (DSCG) on a photopatterned alignment layer (PMAz). POM images of a mixture of the amphiphile (n = 2, 0.086 wt%), DSCG (14.2 wt%), and Triton X-100 (0.26 wt%), after capillary insertion in a photopatterned PMAz ITO/glass cell, in which bundles of fibers are aligned locally in each patterned LCLC domain. The orientation of the LCLC is indicated by the single white double arrows. A 137 nm quarter waveplate was inserted between the sample and the analyser (depicted by the white dashed arrows in the top right corner). The colour gradient over the sample indicates a non-uniform cell thickness. (a) POM image, composed of multiple smaller POM images, that shows an overview of the in-plane patterned LCLC domains grouped in three distinct orientations (indicated by the white double arrows). (b–d) Close-ups of areas with multiple orientations. The white dashed letters “Inst” in panel (d) are inserted to show that the patterned resolution of the LCLC is not sufficiently high to make these micrometre-sized letters clearly legible. (e) Molecular structures of the components. Images (a–d) from ref. 110. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission. 
Overall, this command layer based LC templating approach might be a powerful route to fully control the spatial organization of a wide range of materials. The LC solvent can be easily patterned on an organised command layer, where in turn it is able to orient various functional materials, ranging from organic semiconducting polymers, aqueous supramolecular materials up to even cells and bacteria.
More complex pattern formation is possible when multiple alignment strategies are applied simultaneously. In this case, susceptibility and response rates become important parameters in structure formation. In a recent example, we studied the structure formation of peptide amphiphiles in a LCLC template in the presence of a magnetic field. The amphiphile assemblies with a positive diamagnetic anisotropy align parallel to the field, but only at relatively high fields. The LC template, however, has a negative diamagnetic anisotropy and aligns perpendicular to the field and, consequently, orients the amphiphile in the same direction, all at a much lower field strength due to the much higher susceptibility of the liquid crystal. In competing conditions, i.e. at high fields, complex structures are formed in multiple dimensions.157
5.2 Using the dynamic properties of the LC template
Besides complex pattern formation, LCT offers dynamic structure manipulation using external fields. Although this feature distinguishes LCT from any other alignment technique, it is rarely used in practice. In order to benefit from the reorientational properties of the LC matrix, one needs two competing alignment strategies acting at the same time, for instance surface alignment and electric field alignment, analogous to display technology. The electric field dominates the alignment characteristics, but in the absence of the field, the template and the dispersant reorient to follow the alignment dictated by the substrate. For thermotropic LC templates, one can employ commercial display technology to locally apply electric fields with resolutions of tens of microns.
In one example, the dynamic orientation of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) was studied. CNTs have many promising electronic properties, but would benefit from macroscopic alignment. The authors studied their alignment in a LC host as well as their reorientational response. By using a combination of rubbed polyimide and an external switchable electric field, the orientation of both single-wall and multi-wall CNTs was converted by the application of the field, resulting in far higher conductivity when the CNTs are oriented along the field (due to their high anisotropic conductivity along the tubes).137 This work and also later work158 describe that the response rate of the dispersant (sub-seconds) is many times lower than the response rate of the liquid crystalline template (ms) (see Fig. 9c and d).
A photo-addressable command layer/electric field approach was recently followed to allow for reorientation of dispersed functional materials from a 2D patterned substrate.158 In this example, optically active azobenzene functionalised polyisocyanides were spatially patterned in an organic thermotropic template. The orientation of the highly absorbing spatially in-plane patterned polymers could be reversibly switched by the use of an external electric field. Interestingly, the extent of the rotation of the dispersed polymers is directly related to the strength of the electric field, which allows for another level of spatial control over these materials. Also, the study showed that the inertia of the particles greatly affects their response rate.
In order to successfully apply electric fields to aqueous soft matter, we recently applied a slightly modified LC templating strategy. In this case, LCLCs were not viable, as the samples suffered from Joule and dielectric heating after application of the field. Instead, uniaxial colloidal goethite particles in water were used to control the organization of water-processable supramolecular materials.147 With this goethite template, dispersed peptide amphiphiles were aligned and positioned by electric fields, which is the first time that synthetic supramolecular or polymeric materials were manipulated through an electric field in aqueous solutions.
6. Conclusions and outlook
Looking at LC templating in general, the number of potential applications which can be derived from these hybrid techniques is endless, looking at the vast catalogue of materials (with different functionalities) that can be organized as well as the multiple device configurations possible using conventional industrial manufacturing processes. A few potential applications are listed below. For instance, aqueous LC templating can be used for the development of biosensors based on hydrophilic polymer backbones (functionalized with sensing elements) patterned on substrates in between electrodes, which can detect specific (bio)molecules where the macroscopic alignment greatly increases the electrical transduction efficiency. Alternatively, spatially patterned bioscaffolds prepared by LC templating can be used to create cell-seeding islands, but also guide tissue growth (such as neuronal cells) along patterned hydrogels on 2D substrates. In a completely different field, switchable high performance photonic devices might be fabricated from optically active polymeric nanowires dispersed at large concentrations in spatially patterned LC templates with integrated electric fields. Especially since the application of (biologically compatible) chromonic LC templating is in its infancy, many opportunities are waiting to be explored.
In order to benefit from the full capacity of LCT, however, we will need to further develop the formation of complex geometries in 2D or even in 3D. While we discussed 3D strategies for LC alignment in general, these have never been applied to liquid crystal templating. As liquid crystals intrinsically provide order over many length scales, there is ample opportunity to further develop this research field. In addition, the dynamic capabilities of the liquid crystalline template remain underexposed to this date. Some examples have shown that assemblies prepared in the LC matrix indeed realign after application of a field, but one can easily imagine that also the assembly process itself can be manipulated by (dynamically) addressing the liquid crystalline matrix, resulting in different liquid crystal-induced assembly motives. As far as we can see, these opportunities are still completely unexplored to date.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by NanoNextNL (Grant No. 07A.07), a micro and nanotechnology consortium of the government of The Netherlands and 130 partners.
Notes and references
C. J. Drury, C. M. J. Mutsaers, C. M. Hart, M. Matters and D. M. de Leeuw, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 108 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Martin and F. Diederich, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 1350–1377 CrossRef .
F. J. M. Hoeben, P. Jonkheijm, E. W. Meijer and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1491–1546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Gates, Q. Xu, M. Stewart, D. Ryan, C. G. Willson and G. M. Whitesides, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1171–1196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Babu, V. K. Praveen and A. Ajayaghosh, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 1973–2129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Palmer and S. I. Stupp, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1674–1684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Aida, E. W. Meijer and S. I. Stupp, Science, 2012, 335, 813–817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Su, Y. Wu and L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7832–7856 RSC .
B. D. Wall, S. R. Diegelmann, S. Zhang, T. J. Dawidczyk, W. L. Wilson, H. E. Katz, H.-Q. Mao and J. D. Tovar, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5009–5014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kato, Y. Hirai, S. Nakaso and M. Moriyama, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1857–2128 RSC .
L. Jiang, H. Dong and W. Hu, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 1615–1630 RSC .
S. Zhang, M. A. Greenfield, A. Mata, L. C. Palmer, R. Bitton, J. R. Mantei, C. Aparicio, M. O. de la Cruz and S. I. Stupp, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 594–601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. L. Angeloni, C. W. Bond, Y. Tang, D. A. Harrington, S. Zhang, S. I. Stupp, K. E. McKenna and C. A. Podlasek, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 1091–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. McClendon and S. I. Stupp, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 5713–5722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Matson and S. I. Stupp, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 26–33 RSC .
E. J. Berns, S. Sur, L. Pan, J. E. Goldberger, S. Suresh, S. Zhang, J. A. Kessler and S. I. Stupp, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 185–195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Nie and E. Kumacheva, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 277–290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Saavedra, T. J. Mullen, P. Zhang, D. C. Dewey, S. A. Claridge and P. S. Weiss, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2010, 73, 036501 CrossRef .
J. Castillo, S. Tanzi, M. Dimaki and W. Svendsen, Electrophoresis, 2008, 29, 5026–5032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, L. Du, X. Wu, S. Xiong and P. K. Chu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4448–4454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. Messmore, J. F. Hulvat, E. D. Sone and S. I. Stupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 14452–14458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mas-Torrent, D. d. Boer, M. Durkut, P. Hadley and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, S265–S269 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sardone, V. Palermo, E. Devaux, D. Credgington, M. de Loos, G. Marletta, F. Cacialli, J. van Esch and P. Samorì, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1276–1280 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shoji, M. Yoshio, T. Yasuda, M. Funahashi and T. Kato, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 20, 173–179 RSC .
M. Yoshio, Y. Shoji, Y. Tochigi, Y. Nishikawa and T. Kato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6763–6767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. O. Shklyarevskiy, P. Jonkheijm, P. C. M. Christianen, A. P. H. J. Schenning, A. Del Guerzo, J.-P. Desvergne, E. W. Meijer and J. C. Maan, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 2108–2112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Reches and E. Gazit, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 195–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. P. M. Löwik, I. O. Shklyarevskiy, L. Ruizendaal, P. C. M. Christianen, J. C. Maan and J. C. M. van Hest, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1191–1195 CrossRef .
M. van den Heuvel, A. M. Prenen, J. C. Gielen, P. C. M. Christianen, D. J. Broer, D. W. P. M. Löwik and J. C. M. van Hest, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15014–15017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wallace, A. Z. Cardoso, W. J. Frith, J. A. Iggo and D. J. Adams, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 16484–16487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1167–1171 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 361–366 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, B. Lu, Y. Zhao and X. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3702–3706 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Tayi, E. T. Pashuck, C. J. Newcomb, M. T. McClendon and S. I. Stupp, Biomacromolecules, 2014, 15, 1323–1327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. J. Davis and J. W. Goodby, in Handbook of Liquid Crystals, ed. J. W. Goodby, P. J. Collings, T. Kato, C. Tschierske, H. Gleeson and P. Raynes, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH, Weinheim,  2014, ch. 2, vol. 1, pp. 27–56 Search PubMed .

          I. Dierking, Textures of Liquid Crystals, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2003 Search PubMed .

          D. L. Gin, C. S. Pecinovsky, J. E. Bara and R. L. Kerr, in Liquid Crystalline Functional Assemblies and Their Supramolecular Structures, ed. T. Kato, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2008, pp. 181–222 Search PubMed .
D. M. Agra-Kooijman, G. Singh, A. Lorenz, P. J. Collings, H.-S. Kitzerow and S. Kumar, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2014, 89, 062504 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lydon, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10071–10099 RSC .
S.-W. Tam-Chang and L. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1957 RSC .
C. H. Fanta, N. Engl. J. Med., 2009, 360, 1002–1014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Edwards, J. W. Jones, O. Lozman, A. P. Ormerod, M. Sintyureva and G. J. T. Tiddy, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 14628–14636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. McKitterick, N. L. Erb-Satullo, N. D. LaRacuente, A. J. Dickinson and P. J. Collings, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 1888–1896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Mills, M. H. Regan, V. Stanic and P. J. Collings, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 13506–13515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Rodríguez-Abreu, C. A. Torres and G. J. T. Tiddy, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 3067–3073 CrossRef PubMed .

          O. D. Lavrentovich and T. Ishikawa, Bulk Alignment of Lyotropic Chromonic Liquid Crystals, US Pat.,6411354,  2002 Search PubMed .
V. G. Nazarenko, O. P. Boiko, H.-S. Park, O. M. Brodyn, M. M. Omelchenko, L. Tortora, Y. A. Nastishin and O. D. Lavrentovich, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 017801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Tone, M. P. De Santo, M. G. Buonomenna, G. Golemme and F. Ciuchi, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 8478–8482 RSC .
J. Jeong, G. Han, A. T. C. Johnson, P. J. Collings, T. C. Lubensky and A. G. Yodh, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 2914–2920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. McGinn, L. I. Laderman, N. Zimmermann, H.-S. Kitzerow and P. J. Collings, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2013, 88, 062513 CrossRef PubMed .

          Y. A. Nastishin, K. Neupane and A. R. Baldwin, 2008, arXiv:0807.2669.
P. J. Collings, P. van der Asdonk, A. Martinez, L. Tortora and P. H. J. Kouwer, Liq. Cryst., 2017, 44, 1165–1172 CrossRef CAS .
L. Onsager, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1949, 51, 627–659 CrossRef CAS .
P. Davidson and J.-C. P. Gabriel, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2005, 9, 377–383 CrossRef CAS .
I. Dozov, E. Paineau, P. Davidson, K. Antonova, C. Baravian, I. Bihannic and L. J. Michot, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 7751–7765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Lemaire, P. Davidson, J. Ferré, J. P. Jamet, D. Petermann, P. Panine, I. Dozov and J. P. Jolivet, Eur. Phys. J. E: Soft Matter Biol. Phys., 2004, 13, 291–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Lemaire, P. Davidson, D. Petermann, P. Panine, I. Dozov, D. Stoenescu and J. P. Jolivet, Eur. Phys. J. E: Soft Matter Biol. Phys., 2004, 13, 309–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. de Haan, C. Sánchez-Somolinos, C. M. W. Bastiaansen, A. P. H. J. Schenning and D. J. Broer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12469–12472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. de Haan, V. Gimenez-Pinto, A. Konya, T.-S. Nguyen, J. M. N. Verjans, C. Sánchez-Somolinos, J. V. Selinger, R. L. B. Selinger, D. J. Broer and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 24, 1251–1258 CrossRef .
L. T. de Haan, P. Leclère, P. Damman, A. P. H. J. Schenning and M. G. Debije, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 25, 1360–1365 CrossRef .
L. T. de Haan, A. P. H. J. Schenning and D. J. Broer, Polymer, 2014, 55, 5885–5896 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. McConney, A. Martinez, V. P. Tondiglia, K. M. Lee, D. Langley, I. I. Smalyukh and T. J. White, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5880–5885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Ware, M. E. McConney, J. J. Wie, V. P. Tondiglia and T. J. White, Science, 2015, 347, 978–982 CrossRef PubMed .
T. J. White and D. J. Broer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1087–1098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Iamsaard, S. J. Aßhoff, B. Matt, T. Kudernac, J. L. M. CornelissenJeroen, S. P. Fletcher and N. Katsonis, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 229–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Broer, C. M. W. Bastiaansen, M. G. Debije and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7102–7109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, D. S. Miller, E. Bukusoglu, J. J. de Pablo and N. L. Abbott, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 106–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Lowe and N. L. Abbott, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 746–758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Woltman, G. D. Jay and G. P. Crawford, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 929–938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sivakumar, K. L. Wark, J. K. Gupta, N. L. Abbott and F. Caruso, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2260–2265 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Jang, L.-L. Cheng, C. W. Olsen and N. L. Abbott, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1053–1058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Lockwood, J. C. Mohr, L. Ji, C. J. Murphy, S. P. Palecek, J. J. de Pablo and N. L. Abbott, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 618–624 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Price and D. K. Schwartz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8188–8194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Y. Luk, M. L. Tingey, K. A. Dickson, R. T. Raines and N. L. Abbott, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9024–9032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Y. Luk, C.-H. Jang, L.-L. Cheng, B. A. Israel and N. L. Abbott, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4774–4782 CrossRef CAS .
I.-H. Lin, D. S. Miller, P. J. Bertics, C. J. Murphy, J. J. de Pablo and N. L. Abbott, Science, 2011, 332, 1297–1300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Brake, M. K. Daschner, Y.-Y. Luk and N. L. Abbott, Science, 2003, 302, 2088–2094 CrossRef PubMed .
M. I. Kinsinger, D. M. Lynn and N. L. Abbott, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 4095–4104 RSC .
Y.-Y. Luk, S. F. Campbell, N. L. Abbott Correspond and C. J. Murphy Correspond, Liq. Cryst., 2004, 31, 611–621 CrossRef CAS .
L.-L. Cheng, Y.-Y. Luk, C. J. Murphy, B. A. Israel and N. L. Abbott, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 7173–7182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Woolverton, E. Gustely, L. Li and O. D. Lavrentovich, Liq. Cryst., 2005, 32, 417–423 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Mushenheim, R. R. Trivedi, H. H. Tuson, D. B. Weibel and N. L. Abbott, Soft Matter, 2013, 10, 88 RSC .
S. Zhou, A. Sokolov, O. D. Lavrentovich and I. S. Aranson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 1265–1270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Mushenheim, R. R. Trivedi, D. B. Weibel and N. L. Abbott, Biophys. J., 2014, 107, 255–265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Peng, T. Turiv, Y. Guo, Q.-H. Wei and O. D. Lavrentovich, Science, 2016, 354, 882–885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Shiyanovskii, T. Schneider, I. I. Smalyukh, T. Ishikawa, G. D. Niehaus, K. J. Doane, C. J. Woolverton and O. D. Lavrentovich, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2005, 71, 020702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-K. Cho, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 395–405 RSC .
A. P. H. J. Schenning, Y. C. Gonzalez-Lemus, I. K. Shishmanova and D. J. Broer, Liq. Cryst., 2011, 38, 1627–1639 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kato, N. Mizoshita and K. Kishimoto, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 38–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nych, U. Ognysta, M. Skarabot, M. Ravnik, S. Zumer and I. Musevic, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Tkalec, M. Ravnik, S. Copar, S. Zumer and I. Musevic, Science, 2011, 333, 62–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Humar, M. Ravnik, S. Pajk and I. Musevic, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 595–600 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Loudet, P. Barois and P. Poulin, Nature, 2000, 407, 611–613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. F. Lagerwall and G. Scalia, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2012, 12, 1387–1412 CrossRef .
C. T. Kresge, M. E. Leonowicz, W. J. Roth, J. C. Vartuli and J. S. Beck, Nature, 1992, 359, 710–712 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Beck, J. C. Vartuli, W. J. Roth, M. E. Leonowicz, C. T. Kresge, K. D. Schmitt, C. T. W. Chu, D. H. Olson, E. W. Sheppard, S. B. McCullen, J. B. Higgins and J. L. Schlenker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 10834–10843 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, Z. Tang, D. Sun, L. Ouyang and M. Zhu, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2017, 88, 1–48 CrossRef .
A. Sachse and J. García-Martínez, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3827–3853 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, J. Liu and D. Y. Zhao, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16023 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Owens, R. K. Singh, F. Foroutan, M. Alqaysi, C. M. Han, C. Mahapatra, H. W. Kim and J. C. Knowles, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2016, 77, 1–79 CrossRef CAS .
A. Feinle, M. S. Elsaesser and N. Husing, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3377–3399 RSC .
L. Wang, W. B. Ding and Y. B. Sun, Mater. Res. Bull., 2016, 83, 230–249 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Y. Cao, Z. Huang, Y. Duan and S. Che, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 479–497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kikuchi, M. Yokota, Y. Hisakado, H. Yang and T. Kajiyama, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 64–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Blanc, D. Coursault and E. Lacaze, Liq. Cryst. Rev., 2013, 1, 83–109 CrossRef CAS .
I. Muševič, M. Škarabot, U. Tkalec, M. Ravnik and S. Žumer, Science, 2006, 313, 954–958 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-B. Fleury, D. Pires and Y. Galerne, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 267801 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, Y.-K. Kim, E. Bukusoglu, B. Zhang, D. S. Miller and N. L. Abbott, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 116, 147801 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, D. S. Miller, E. Bukusoglu, J. J. de Pablo and N. L. Abbott, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 106–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Vaughn, M. Sousa, D. Kang and C. Rosenblatt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 194102 CrossRef .
N. A. J. M. van Aerle, M. Barmentlo and R. W. J. Hollering, J. Appl. Phys., 1993, 74, 3111 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ree, Macromol. Res., 2006, 14, 1–33 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, M. I. Boamfa, A. E. Rowan and T. Rasing, Adv. Mater., 2009, 22, 961–965 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Miyachi, K. Kobayashi, Y. Yamada and S. Mizushima, SID Int. Symp. Dig. Tech. Pap., 2010, 41, 579–582 CrossRef .
O. Yaroshchuk and Y. Reznikov, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 22, 286–300 RSC .
T. Seki, S. Nagano and M. Hara, Polymer, 2013, 54, 6053–6072 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, M. Jiang, C. Peng, K. Sun, O. Yaroshchuk, O. Lavrentovich and Q.-H. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2353–2358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ichimura, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1847–1874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ichimura, M. Momose, K. Kudo and H. Akiyama, Langmuir, 1995, 11, 2341–2343 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ichimura, T. Fujiwara, M. Momose and D. Matsunaga, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 3380–3386 RSC .
D. Matsunaga, T. Tamaki, H. Akiyama and K. Ichimura, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1477–1480 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ruslim, M. Hashimoto, D. Matsunaga, T. Tamaki and K. Ichimura, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 95–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Fujiwara and K. Ichimura, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 3387–3391 RSC .
P. van der Asdonk, H. C. Hendrikse, M. Fernandez-Castano Romera, D. Voerman, B. E. I. Ramakers, D. W. P. M. Löwik, R. P. Sijbesma and P. H. J. Kouwer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2609–2616 CrossRef CAS .

          P. van der Asdonk and P. H. J. Kouwer, Stable and homogeneous LCLC alignment on polyimide surfaces, Netherlands Pat., Application Number NL2016338,  2016 Search PubMed .
P. van der Asdonk, P. J. Collings and P. H. J. Kouwer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201701209 .
N. Mizoshita, K. Hanabusa and T. Kato, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 313–317 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kitamura, S. Nakaso, N. Mizoshita, Y. Tochigi, T. Shimomura, M. Moriyama, K. Ito and T. Kato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14769–14775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mizoshita and T. Kato, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2218–2224 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yabuuchi, Y. Tochigi, N. Mizoshita, K. Hanabusa and T. Kato, Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 7358–7365 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hirai, S. S. Babu, V. K. Praveen, T. Yasuda, A. Ajayaghosh and T. Kato, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4029–4033 CrossRef CAS .
K. Akagi, S. Katayama, H. Shirakawa, K. Araya, A. Mukoh and T. Narahara, Synth. Met., 1987, 17, 241–246 CrossRef CAS .
K. Akagi, G. Piao, S. Kaneko, K. Sakamaki, H. Shirakawa and M. Kyotani, Science, 1998, 282, 1683–1686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Goh, M. Kyotani and K. Akagi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8519–8527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Goh, S. Matsushita and K. Akagi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2466–2476 RSC .
M. D. Lynch and D. L. Patrick, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1197–1201 CrossRef CAS .
I. Dierking, G. Scalia, P. Morales and D. LeClere, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 865–869 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Kang, S. H. Jin, L.-C. Chien and S. Sprunt, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 329–334 CrossRef CAS .
O. Catanescu and L.-C. Chien, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 305–309 CrossRef CAS .
S. Moynihan, P. Lovera, D. O'Carroll, D. Iacopino and G. Redmond, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2497–2502 CrossRef CAS .
S. Samitsu, Y. Takanishi and J. Yamamoto, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4366–4368 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tong, D. Han, D. Fortin and Y. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 23, 204–208 CrossRef .
J.-W. Chen, C.-C. Huang and C.-Y. Chao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6757–6764 CAS .
N. Mizoshita, Y. Suzuki, K. Hanabusa and T. Kato, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 692–696 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lagerwall, G. Scalia, M. Haluska, U. Dettlaff-Weglikowska, S. Roth and F. Giesselmann, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 359–364 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ould-Moussa, C. Blanc, C. Zamora-Ledezma, O. D. Lavrentovich, I. I. Smalyukh, M. F. Islam, A. G. Yodh, M. Maugey, P. Poulin, E. Anglaret and M. Nobili, Liq. Cryst., 2013, 40, 1628–1635 CrossRef CAS .
P. van der Asdonk, S. Kragt and P. H. J. Kouwer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 16303–16309 CAS .
A. Alvarez Fernandez, R. Hammink, S. Kragt, L. Cattaneo, M. Savoini, J. van der Velden, T. Rasing, A. E. Rowan, P. J. Collings and P. H. J. Kouwer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 9009–9016 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Lee, T. J. Bunning and T. J. White, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2839–2843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Fujiwara, J. Locklin and Z. Bao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 232108 CrossRef .
T. Seki, K. Fukuda and K. Ichimura, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 5098–5101 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fukuda, T. Seki and K. Ichimura, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 1951–1957 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fukuda, T. Seki and K. Ichimura, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 2177–2183 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Chou and H.-L. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 811–815 CrossRef CAS .
D. Guo, K. Sakamoto, K. Miki, S. Ikeda and K. Saiki, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 102117 CrossRef .
K. Sakamoto, J. Ueno, T. Yonezawa, T. Yasuda and K. Miki, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 123702 CrossRef .
P. van der Asdonk, M. Keshavarz, P. C. M. Christianen and P. H. J. Kouwer, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 6518–6525 RSC .
P. van der Asdonk, H. C. Hendrikse, A. C. Sauli, S. P. M. Kraaijkamp and P. H. J. Kouwer, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 8263–8269 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Pim van der Asdonk
	Pim van der Asdonk was born on a hot summer day in 1986 in Tegelen, the Netherlands. He received his MSc from the Radboud University in 2012 for his work on the development of crystallization-based enantiomeric deracemization techniques under the supervision of Dr Wim Noorduin and Prof. Dr Elias Vlieg. Shortly thereafter, he started as a PhD student in the Molecular Materials group, under the supervision of Dr Paul Kouwer, where he earned his doctorate degree in 2016 in the area of Liquid Crystal Templating. His love for brightly coloured chromophores continues outside of academia; after obtaining his doctorate degree he started his career in industry at Océ-Canon, where he currently works on the development of next-generation inkjet inks.

Paul H. J. Kouwer
	Paul Kouwer studied chemistry and polymer chemistry at the University of Groningen (NL) and received his PhD degree from the Delft University of Technology (NL), under the supervision of Prof. Stephen Picken. He moved to the Liquid Crystal group at the University of Hull (UK) as a Ramsay Fellow and continued post-doctoral studies as a Marie Curie Fellow at MIT (Cambridge, MA). Paul was appointed as Assistant Professor at the Institute for Molecules and Materials at the Radboud University in Nijmegen (NL) in 2009. Currently, his main research activities are in controlled (self)-assembly, including Liquid Crystal Templating in the aqueous phase, and in the preparation, mechanical properties and application of semi-flexible hydrogels that are unique mimics of biological gels and find application in wound dressing and tissue engineering.

 	Fig. 1  Scanning electron microscopy image (a) shows an isotropic network of peptide amphiphile fibers assembled in water. Image (b) shows aligned peptide amphiphile fibers along the 20 Tesla magnetic field direction (indicated by the white arrow). Scale bars indicate 500 nm. Images from ref. 28. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 2  Illustration (a) shows the concept of magnetic field assisted electrospinning. Scanning electron microscopy images (b–e) show poly(vinyl) alcohol polymers doped with magnetic nanoparticles which are aligned in-plane at specific angles. Plot (f) shows the relationship between substrate rotation and measured angle between the in-plane aligned polymers. Images from ref. 33. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation of various states of matter. Liquid crystal phases are found when heating from the crystalline to the isotropic phase. The order in four commonly observed LC phases is represented schematically.	 

 	Fig. 4  Characteristic polarized optical microscopy images of the most common and lowest order liquid crystal phases: (a) nematic phase (N) with only orientational order; (b) smectic A (SmA) phase with 1D positional order; (c) smectic C (SmC) phase with similar positional order with the mesogens tilted with respect to the layer normal; and (d) columnar hexagonal (Colh) phase with 2D positional order.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of lyotropic liquid crystalline phases in water. The normal and inverted hexagonal phases are equivalent to the columnar phase of thermotropic LCs and the lamellar phase corresponds to the smectic phase. The cubic phases II, III, QI and QII are 3D ordered phases and, as such, not birefringent. Image from ref. 37. Copyright 2008 Springer. Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 6  Phase structures and molecular structures of two well-studied chromonics: (a and b) schematic representation of common LCLC mesophases: N and M phase. (c) Molecular structure of DSCG and (d) phase diagram of DSCG in water. (e) Molecular structure of SSY and (f) its phase diagram in water. The symbols I, N and M stand for the isotropic, N (nematic) phase and M (smectic-like) phase, respectively. The phase diagram of DSCG is reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry and the phase diagram of SSY is reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Preparation of a patterned LC polymer network. (b) Shape deformation of the network upon infrared heating. Images from ref. 59. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 8  Overview of a thermotropic LC/water interface and the resulting homeotropic reorientation of the mesogens when in contact with phospholipids. Image (A) shows an overview of the experimental setup. Polarized optical microscopy image (B) shows birefringence of the in-plane aligned LC molecules. When a phospholipid anchors to the LC, its orientation becomes locally homeotropic, which translates into reduced birefringence under a polarized optical microscope (C). Image (D) shows the situation when phospholipids have completely decorated the LC/water interface, resulting in a complete homeotropic alignment where no birefringence is visible under the polarized optical microscope. Images from ref. 78. Copyright 2007 American Association for the Advancement of Science. Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic representation of LC templating: (a) dispersant (blue) in isotropic solvent (orange) does not generate alignment; (b) in a LC template (orange) the dispersant aligns through elastic-mediated interactions and reorientational shear forces. (c) Application of an electric field (black electrodes) reorients the liquid crystal and (d) slowly also the dispersant (discussed later in this review). Also other alignment strategies can be used, such as command layers, flow fields, etc.	 

 	Fig. 10  Liquid crystal physical gel in a twisted nematic cell (a), where the presence of self-assembled fibers improves the response times and lowers the threshold voltage when an electric field is applied. Atomic force microscopy image (b) showing twisted alignment of self-assembled fibers. Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  Scanning electron microscopy images of helical polyacetylenes polymerised in a (R)-chiral (left panels) and in the corresponding (S) enantiomer, imaged at different magnifications. The chirality of the template determines the handedness of the helical structures. Images from ref. 118. Copyright 2007 American Association for the Advancement of Science. Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic representations of the mechanisms of magnetic field aligned lyotropic LC, which templates the orientation of single-walled carbon nanotubes. Images from ref. 130. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 13  Optical microscopy images showing movement of motile bacteria along the uniaxially in-plane aligned nematic DSCG on rubbed polyimide. When bacteria collide, they associate in a linear chain and continue their movement along the LCLC template. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Spatially organized bolaamphiphiles on multiple length scales in an LCLC template (DSCG) on a photopatterned alignment layer (PMAz). POM images of a mixture of the amphiphile (n = 2, 0.086 wt%), DSCG (14.2 wt%), and Triton X-100 (0.26 wt%), after capillary insertion in a photopatterned PMAz ITO/glass cell, in which bundles of fibers are aligned locally in each patterned LCLC domain. The orientation of the LCLC is indicated by the single white double arrows. A 137 nm quarter waveplate was inserted between the sample and the analyser (depicted by the white dashed arrows in the top right corner). The colour gradient over the sample indicates a non-uniform cell thickness. (a) POM image, composed of multiple smaller POM images, that shows an overview of the in-plane patterned LCLC domains grouped in three distinct orientations (indicated by the white double arrows). (b–d) Close-ups of areas with multiple orientations. The white dashed letters “Inst” in panel (d) are inserted to show that the patterned resolution of the LCLC is not sufficiently high to make these micrometre-sized letters clearly legible. (e) Molecular structures of the components. Images (a–d) from ref. 110. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
