A wearable thermoelectric generator fabricated on a glass fabric   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE00242C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE00242C
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1959-1965A wearable thermoelectric generator fabricated on a glass fabric†

        
          
            Sun Jin 
            Kim
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ju Hyung 
            We
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Byung Jin 
            Cho
          
        
      *
      Department of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, 335 Gwahak-ro, Yuseong, Daejeon, Republic of Korea. E-mail: bjcho@kaist.edu
Received 
      21st January 2014
    , Accepted 14th March 2014First published on 14th March 2014AbstractThe conversion of body heat into electrical energy using a thermoelectric (TE) power generator is useful for wearable self-powered mobile electronic systems such as medical sensors or smart watches. We herein demonstrate a glass fabric-based flexible TE generator using a screen printing technique and the self-sustaining structure of a TE device without top and bottom substrates. With this technique it is possible to make the device thin (∼500 μm), lightweight (∼0.13 g cm−2), and flexible. In addition, the developed TE generator achieved an unprecedentedly large output power density which is several tens of times higher than that of flexible TE generators reported to date. The developed TE generator shows an allowable bending radius of as low as 20 mm and no change in performance by repeated bending for 120 cycles. This work can expedite the development of wearable self-powered mobile devices.

Broader context
The conversion of body heat into electrical energy using a thermoelectric (TE) power generator is useful for self-powered wearable mobile electronic systems. However, previously reported organic-based flexible TE generators generate low output power that is far below the requirements for wearable electronic devices. On the other hand, inorganic material based TE generators usually have a relatively thick and bulky ceramic substrate, which causes serious thermal energy loss and limits the output power density and energy conversion efficiency. In this work, we report, for the first time, a flexible TE generator prepared on a glass-fabric, realizing a truly wearable TE generator that is not made with organic materials but rather inorganic TE materials that provide high output power. It also has a self-sustaining structure of the TE material without top and bottom substrates. A series of new technical breakthroughs are reported here including the printing of the TE material on a glass-fabric, a new device structure with no substrate, a new electrode transfer technique, a contact resistance reduction technique, and process integration to realize a flexible TE generator suitable for wearable electronics. These achievements have made it possible to fabricate a TE generator that is thin (∼500 μm), lightweight (∼0.13 g cm−2), and flexible. Moreover, the device exhibits high output power density (3.8 mW cm−2 and 28 mW g−1 at a ΔT = 50 K). This new invention can be utilized for wearable electronics such as smart watches and medical sensor systems, the new wave of electronics. The techniques introduced in this work can also be applied to other types of energy harvesting systems such as flexible solar cells and piezoelectric devices.

Introduction
A flexible thermoelectric (TE) power generator, which is important for the realization of wearable self-powered mobile electronics,1,2 requires high mechanical and electrical stabilities under repeated tensile and compressive strains. Many researchers have focused on conducting polymers including polyaniline,3,4 polypyrrole,5,6 and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate)7,8 as a thermoelectric (TE) material and organic-based TE generators9,10 have been fabricated with these elastic polymers. The polymers exhibited high flexibility and outstanding potential for use on human skin whereas the organic-based TE generator shows very low output power density due to several limitations of the polymer: a low power factor, high contact resistance with a metal electrode, and very low thickness of TE materials. These problems are primary concerns for practical applications. In order to achieve high output power density, the use of inorganic materials is inevitable, but it then becomes necessary to overcome the problem of material rigidity by carefully designing the device structure for a flexible TE generator. One of the important concerns is the design of the external substrate, which holds tens or hundreds of TE legs. The substrate must be flexible for a wearable application but also should have high thermal tolerance to endure extreme conditions under the fabrication process. In addition, thermal energy loss must be suppressed across the substrate to improve the energy conversion efficiency while the TE generator is operating on a heat source. A commercial substrate such as Si, Al2O3, or a polymer film generally causes large thermal energy loss and eventually limits the energy conversion efficiency. This energy loss becomes severer, especially in low-dimensional TE devices such as those using thin films,11 superlattices,12 nanowires,13,14 or quantum-dots,15,16 because the relatively thick substrate is the governing factor in determining output performance. This often results in low output power of nanostructure-based TE materials, despite their high ZT value, when they are used in the actual construction of a TE module.17–19 Accordingly, new concepts and technologies for designing a flexible TE generator are needed to minimize unnecessary thermal energy loss across the external substrate and maximize the output power density, while maintaining high flexibility of the device.
We report here a glass fabric-based flexible TE generator prepared using a screen printing technique20–22 and the self-sustaining structure of a TE device without top and bottom substrates. The TE generator is fabricated on a glass fabric-based textile by printing inorganic materials and enables a thinner (∼500 μm), lighter (∼0.13 g cm−2), and more flexible device than the TE devices reported to date.23–25 A prototype, integrating an array of 8 thermocouples (n-type Bi2Te3 film and p-type Sb2Te3 film), was fabricated and evaluated as a wearable TE generator. The developed device not only achieved unprecedentedly large output power density but also shows an allowable bending radius of as low as 20 mm and no change in performance upon repeated bending for up to 120 cycles.
Results
Formation of TE thick films on a glass fabric
In our approach for a flexible TE generator, n-type and p-type TE materials are first formed on the glass fabric-based textile shown in Fig. 1b. We synthesized Bi2Te3 (n-type) and Sb2Te3 (p-type) pastes as precursors and printed them on the glass fabric using a screen printing technique. The steps in the process for the formation of TE films are sketched in Fig. 1a. The first step is to print a Bi2Te3 thick film on the fabric, followed by the formation of a Sb2Te3 thick film. Here, both TE films undergo an annealing process under 530 °C in a N2 atmosphere for crystallization and densification of the film, but the fabric shown in Fig. 1b is not damaged during the annealing process due to the high thermal tolerance of the fabric (∼600 °C). Details of the paste synthesis and formation of TE thick films by the technique are given in the Experimental section.26,27 This screen printing technique is very suitable to form a TE material on the textile, because the liquid-like paste easily infiltrates the glass-fabric meshes due to a capillary phenomenon and forms TE thick films in a range of several hundreds of microns in thickness. As a result, hundreds of Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 dots are printed and well arranged on a specific area. Details of the TE printing process on the glass fabric by the screen printing technique are illustrated in Fig. S1.† The photo in Fig. 1c shows 196 TE dots with a diameter of 1.5 mm on a glass fabric of 40 mm × 40 mm. The thicknesses of the TE dots are ∼500 μm. Easy fabrication of inorganic TE dots with several hundred μm in thickness on a flexible substrate is a strong advantage of this technique for achieving a large-scaled flexible TE generator with high output power density. Another important advantage of this technique stems from this unique structure where the glass fibers serve as a support of the TE material, sustaining the TE thick films and maintaining the patterns, as can be seen in Fig. 1d and e. This self-sustaining structure does not require an external substrate, which causes serious thermal energy loss, as in the case of conventional TE generator modules. In addition, the glass fibers buried in the TE materials (Fig. 1f and g) act as a thermal blocker as well, resulting in reduced thermal conductivity of the printed TE film.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of fabrication process of the screen-printed Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 thick films on a glass fabric. (b) Photo of commercial glass fabric. (c) Photo of 196 Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 dots on a glass fabric of 40 mm × 40 mm. (d) and (e) SEM images of the screen-printed Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 thick films on a glass fabric, respectively. (f) and (g) High magnification SEM images of cross-sectional view of the Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 thick films, respectively. 
Properties of TE on the glass fabric
Properties of the TE film including the glass fabric (hereafter called “TEGL”) were evaluated theoretically and experimentally to optimize the thickness of the TEGL. We began with a model using Fourier's law and an electrical resistivity equation in a steady state to theoretically calculate electrical and thermal properties of the TEGL film (see Fig. S2†). In addition, numerical simulations of the thermoelectric mode (COMSOL Multiphysics) were also implemented to verify and visualize the effects of the glass fibers buried in the TE material. Fig. 2a–d exhibit thermoelectric properties of the TEGL films for various thickness ratios of the TE film and glass fabric layers. The thickness ratio is controlled by varying the TE thickness, but the thickness of the glass fabric is fixed at 25 μm. Absolute Seebeck coefficients of the TEGL films containing Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 thick films are shown in Fig. 2a and their Seebeck coefficients are 141 μV K−1 and 98 μV K−1, respectively, which are similar to those of hot-pressed specimens.28 Here, the Seebeck coefficients remain unchanged regardless of the thickness ratios. Although the Seebeck coefficient of an insulator is known to be much higher than that of TE materials, the total Seebeck coefficient is dominantly decided by the TE materials around the insulation region because carrier transport paths are located only along the TE materials when the conducting and non-conducting materials are connected in parallel. The electrical conductivities of pristine Bi2Te3 (n-type) and Sb2Te3 (p-type) thick films by the screen printing technique are 0.67 × 105 S m−1 and 1.5 × 105 S m−1 respectively. Here, electrical conductivities of the TEGL films decrease as the TE thickness to fabric decreases (Fig. 2b) because the portion of the insulation region in the whole film becomes larger. Thermal conductivities of the TEGL films also decrease due to the insulation region (Fig. 2c). The flow of phonons is interrupted by the presence of bundles of glass fibers, leading to low thermal conductivity of the TEGL. The numerical simulation results using COMSOL in Fig. 2e visually demonstrate that there is a strong temperature gradient near the insulation region, compared to the pristine TE film. Insets of Fig. 2e show magnified temperature profiles of the two films. All simulation details are presented in the Experimental section. Fig. 2d shows the ZT values of both Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 TEGL films. The results suggest that the presence of glass fabric in the TE film has little impact on the final ZT value. In particular, the impact of the glass fabric on the TE material becomes negligible when the thickness ratio is over 15. Therefore, it can be concluded that the glass fabric does not cause degradation of the energy conversion efficiency, in contrast with common external supporting substrates, yet it can successfully serve as a supporting material for flexible TE generator module fabrication.
 Fig. 2  Thermoelectric characteristics of Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 thick films as a function of the thickness ratio of TE film/glass fabric; (a) Seebeck coefficient. (b) Electrical conductivity. (c) Thermal conductivity. (d) Dimensionless figure of merit, ZT. (e) Simulation of the temperature distribution across the TE film without and with the glass fabric (Tcold = 300 K, Thot = 310 K). 
Embedded Cu film in the polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) elastomer for interconnection
One of the challenging issues for the realization of a flexible TE generator is the interconnection between the TE thick films. It is well known that adhesion between a Cu film and PDMS is vulnerable, resulting in delamination of the Cu film, as shown in Fig. 3a.29 To solve this problem, we developed a Ni peel-off method (see Fig. S3†) and then fabricated a screen-printed Cu film (25 μm-thick) embedded in PDMS, which shows no Cu–rubber delamination during bending (Fig. 3b). This is because liquid-like PDMS easily infiltrates the porous screen-printed Cu film due to a capillary phenomenon and is strongly connected with the Cu film (Fig. 3c). Electrical conductivity of a prototype is 2.4 × 107 S m−1, which is 60% lower than that of bulk Cu but acceptable for interconnection. Bending test results demonstrate that both 25 μm and 8.5 μm thick Cu films in 500 μm-thick PDMS (Fig. 3d) maintain the variation of the resistance within 10% until a bending radius of as low as 20 mm.
 Fig. 3  Flexibility of the embedded Cu film in PDMS: (a) the attached Cu foil on PDMS. (b) The screen-printed Cu film embedded in PDMS, using the Ni peel-off method. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of the Cu/PDMS sample shown in (b). (d) Bending test of the Cu films (25 μm-thick or 8.5 μm-thick) in PDMS (500 μm-thick). The resistance was normalized by the resistance measured in the flat state. 
Process integration for fabricating a flexible TE generator
The fabrication process for the flexible TE generator is illustrated in Fig. 4, with the help of actual experimental photos. Once the TE film including the glass fabric (TEGL) is ready, the integration process begins with printing a Cu paste on top and bottom plates composed of Ni (300 nm)/SiO2 (300 nm)/Si wafer, as illustrated in Fig. 4a. Here, the Ni layer deposited by sputtering is used as a sacrificial layer that helps to separate the completed TE module from the silicon wafers by exploiting the poor adhesion between the Ni and SiO2 layers at the end of this fabrication process. The screen-printed Cu film of 25 μm thickness is annealed at 700 °C for 5 min in a vacuum ambient for crystallization and densification (Fig. 4a). 8 couples of TE dots with a diameter of 1.8 mm and a thickness of ∼500 μm are formed on the glass fabric. Meanwhile, we deposit a 200 nm thick Ni layer on both sides of the TEGL because we have found that the Ni interlayer between the screen-printed TE film and Ag paste significantly reduces the contact resistance of the metal-TE film (Fig. 4b). A detailed analysis of the contact resistance is provided in Fig. S4.† The bonding process (Fig. 4c) is then carried out to connect the TE layers electrically in series and thermally in parallel. The TE on the glass fabric is placed between two plates with metal patterns, and then bonded together using Ag paste, followed by annealing at 200 °C for 5 min in a vacuum ambient to harden the Ag paste. The sample is then dipped into PDMS to fill the gap (∼500 μm) between the top and bottom plates with the elastic polymer, followed by a hardening process at 90 °C for 40 min (Fig. 4d). The main role of the PDMS is to separate the completed TE module from the silicon wafers. Filling the gap with PDMS may also have an additional benefit to reduce the thermal energy loss by air convection during operation. Other reasons of using PDMS in this step were explained in the previous section. The two rigid plates (SiO2/Si wafer) are then simply peeled off from the flexible TE generator in DI water immediately after crack growth occurs at the interface between the Ni layer and SiO2, resulting in transfer of the Ni/Cu layer to the TE generator (Fig. 4e). We remove the remaining Ni layers by etching them in a diluted mixture of sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide (Fig. 4f), and then finally achieve a flexible TE generator that is very thin (∼500 μm) and light (∼0.13 g cm−2). Photos of an actual flexible TE generator are shown in Fig. 4f, visually demonstrating its high flexibility.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of a flexible TE generator module; (a) preparation of Cu electrodes on a Ni/SiO2/Si substrate. (b) Deposition of a Ni layer on Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 thick films to reduce contact resistance. (c) Bonding process of top plate/TE film/bottom plate using Ag paste. (d) Infiltrating the elastic polymer (PDMS) into the gap between the top and bottom plates. (e) Removal of the top and bottom plates by Ni peel-off in DI water. (f) Removing the remaining Ni layers by etching in a diluted mixture of sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide. Scale bar, 1 cm. 
High-performance flexible TE generator
As shown in Fig. 5a, a prototype comprising 8 couples of Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 thick films with size of 15.0 mm × 20.0 mm × 0.5 mm was fabricated. For comparison, a control sample with an Al2O3 substrate (650 μm-thick), which is widely used as a substrate in commercial TE modules, was also fabricated. Internal resistance of the Al2O3 based TE generator is almost the same as the glass fabric-based TE generator (∼0.35 Ω). Measurement details are presented in the Experimental section. The advantages of the self-sustaining structure with respect to the output characteristics are clearly demonstrated in Fig. 5a–f. The glass fabric-based TE device generates an open-circuit voltage of 90 mV at a ΔT = 50 K, which is 50% higher compared to the control device (Fig. 5b). The higher output voltage at the glass fabric-based TE device is expected because the Al2O3 substrate causes thermal energy loss, as illustrated in Fig. 5a. As a result, it leads to 133% enhanced power density (3.8 mW cm−2 at a ΔT = 50 K), which is several tens of times higher than flexible TE generators reported to date (Fig. 5c).30,31 Moreover, in terms of power per unit weight, the glass fabric-based flexible TE generator provides 1400% higher output power per unit weight (28 mW g−1) in comparison with that of the control device (2 mW g−1) at ΔT = 50 K. The weight of the flexible TE generator is only 0.13 g cm−2, which is six times lower than that of the control device, even though the two devices use the same TE materials fabricated using the same process (Fig. 5d). These results indicate that the bulky and heavy substrate is a critical factor for degradation of the energy conversion efficiency. This has an especially great impact in cases where the power density per unit area and weight are important, such as applications of a TE generator on human skin, automobiles, aircraft, and spaceships.
 Fig. 5  Output characteristics of the glass fabric-based flexible TE generator and the TE generator using an Al2O3 substrate; (a) schematic illustrations and actual photos of the glass fabric-based flexible TE generator and the Al2O3-based TE generator (ΔT: temperature difference across the TE generator, ΔTTE: temperature difference across the TE film). Comparison of the two TE generators in (b) output voltage, (c) output power per unit area, and (d) output power per unit weight. (e) Internal resistance stability under bending stress along two different directions illustrated in the inset. (f) Reliability test by repeated bending cycles. Scale bar, 1 cm. 
We also investigated the internal resistance stability under bending stress along two different directions, as illustrated in the inset of Fig. 5e. Fig. 5e shows that there is no significant change (less than 5%) in the internal resistance with the allowable bending radius of down to 20 mm. Furthermore, the generator was repeatedly bent up to 120 cycles with a bending radius of 50 mm. Despite the repeated bending cycles, the device exhibits stable internal resistance (less than 7% change), as shown in Fig. 5f. These results indicate that the glass fabric-based TE generator can properly work on curved thermal energy sources such as the human body and industrial pipes as an energy harvester. For further demonstration of the use of the flexible TE generator on the human body, we designed a band-type flexible glass fabric TE generator with 11 TE couples and a shape approximating that of a medical bandage, and applied it to human skin as a body heat energy harvester (Fig. 6). The TE module generates an open-circuit output voltage of 2.9 mV and an output power of 3 μW on a matched external load at an air temperature of 15 °C (Fig. 6b). The measured power density here is enough to activate sub-microwatt or microwatt wearable devices such as a temperature sensor32 or CMOS image sensor.33 This verifies that the glass fabric-based TE generator is useful in generating electricity by body heat and providing power autonomy to portable microwatt electronic devices.
 Fig. 6  Demonstration of band-type flexible TE generator for harvesting thermal energy from human skin: (a) photos of band-type flexible TE generator and (b) electricity generation measured on human skin at an air temperature of 15 °C. Scale bar, 1 cm. 
Experimental details
Formation of Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 thick films
The first step is to print Bi2Te3 paste on the glass fabric. The printing process is repeated a few times to form a ∼500 μm-thick film. The printed film is dried on a hot plate at 100 °C for 10 min for volatilization of the organic solvent. The film then undergoes an annealing process at 530 °C for 10 min in a N2 atmosphere, applying mechanical pressure for crystallization and densification of the film. The Sb2Te3 paste is printed and dried under the same conditions and then the Sb2Te3 film also is subjected to thermal annealing at 500 °C for 30 min in a N2 atmosphere under mechanical pressure.
Experiment set-up
Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 pellets of diameter 12.7 mm and thickness ∼0.5 mm were made by the screen printing technique for measurement of Seebeck coefficient, electrical conductivity, and thermal conductivity. The Seebeck coefficient across the pellet was extracted from the slope of the voltage versus temperature difference curves, measured using a Keithley 2700 multimeter. The electrical conductivity was measured by a commercial hall measurement system (HMS-3000) and the 4-point probe method (CMT-SR1000N). The thermal diffusivity was determined by the commercial laser flash method (LFA 447).34 The specific heat was measured by using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC 204F1). The density was calculated as weight divided by volume. The thermal conductivity was then calculated as the product of thermal diffusivity, specific heat, and density. Seebeck coefficient, electrical and thermal conductivities were measured along the longitudinal (horizontal) and the cross-sectional (vertical) directions of the TE pallet, but no meaningful difference was observed between the two directions. This indicates that the thermoelectric transport properties of the screen-printed Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 thick films are isotropic. This is because the screen-printed TE films after annealing shows a cluster and a bonded structure with a high degree of porosity. Micrometer-size particles, which are randomly placed, may lead to the isotropic transport properties of the films. The physical properties of the screen-printed film were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). To generate a temperature difference across the TE generator and investigate its output characteristics, a heating and cooling system was set up (see Fig. S5†). The temperature of the cold side could be relatively fixed at roughly 300 K by using a cooling water system. The temperature difference ranging from 0 to 50 K could be obtained by increasing the hot side temperature using a temperature controller. To electrically insulate the bare Cu electrodes on the TE generator, and also effectively transfer heat to the TE generators, thermal grease (∼10 μm-thick) was applied to the top and bottom sides of the TE generator. Temperatures of the hot and cold sides were simultaneously monitored with thermocouples. The output characteristics were measured by matching the external load with the internal resistance of the TE generator by using a Keithley 2700 multimeter.
Modeling
In Fig. 2e, a multi-physics finite-element solver (COMSOL software, http://www.comsol.com/) was used to simulate the temperature distribution in a steady-state. We used a thermoelectric model offered by the COMSOL group. The heat flux through the film is calculated by solving the heat transfer equation, and Seebeck and Peltier effects were also considered. In the simulation, the geometries of the TE thick film and the glass fabric were defined to be as close to the actual materials as possible. The Seebeck coefficient (STE = 98 μV K−1), electrical conductivity (σTE = 1.5 × 104 S m−1), and thermal conductivity (κTE = 1.48 W m−1 K−1) of the TE material were taken as inputs for the model. The corresponding parameters of the glass fabric were 107 μV K−1, 10−14 S m−1, and 0.1 W m−1 K−1, respectively. To create and visualize the temperature distribution across the TE film, the temperatures of the hot and cold sides were taken as 310 K and 300 K, respectively.
Preparation and measurement of contact resistivity
A cross-bridge Kelvin resistance (CBKR) structure was utilized to extract the true interfacial specific contact resistivity shown in Fig. S4a,† by using a semiconductor parameter analyzer (Agilent 4156C). The TE film was printed on an Al2O3 substrate and annealed and then a Ni layer of 200 nm was deposited onto the specific contact area of the TE film through a shadow mask by a thermal evaporation process. The Ag paste was subsequently printed on the Ni layer and annealed at 200 °C for 20 min to harden the paste. During the measurement, the electrical signals were applied via a 5 Hz pulse with a 15% duty-cycle to suppress unnecessary thermoelectric effects. At the same time, the induced voltage across the contact region was measured in an open-circuit geometry by a voltage monitor unit (VMU). Finally, the specific contact resistivity was extracted from the slope of the IV curve.
Conclusions
Flexibility and high output power density of a TE generator are highly required for applications involving wearable self-powered mobile electronics. However, previously reported organic or inorganic-based TE generators fail to satisfy these requirements due to a trade-off relationship between flexibility and output power density. In this work, a glass fabric-based flexible TE generator prepared using a screen printing technique and a self-sustaining structure is suggested to overcome the aforementioned limitations, resulting in a thin (∼500 μm), light (∼0.13 g cm−2), and flexible TE generator with high output power density. The output power per unit weight is remarkable (28 mW g−1 at a ΔT = 50 K), and this will facilitate its use in applications where the weight of the TE device is critical. The output power density can be further improved if ternary TE alloys with higher ZT values are used in conjunction with this technique. Another advantage of this technique is that scale-up of the flexible TE generator can be easily accomplished due to the process simplicity of the screen printing technique. It is anticipated that this approach can find further applications for large-scaled flexible TE generators and even hybrid energy harvesting systems together with flexible solar cells35–39 and piezoelectric devices.40,41
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Fusion Research Program for Green Technologies through the National Research Foundation of the Republic of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science, and Technology (2010-0019085).
References
B. A. Cornell, V. L. B. Braach-Maksvytis, L. G. King, P. D. J. Osman, B. Raguse, L. Wieczorek and R. J. Pace, Nature, 2010, 387, 580–583 CrossRef PubMed .
D.-H. Kim, N. Lu, R. Ghaffari and J. A. Roger, NPG Asia Mater., 2012, 4, e15 CrossRef .
L. Jun, L.-M. Zhang, L. He and X.-F. Tang, J. Wuhan Univ. Technol., Mater. Sci. Ed., 2008, 18, 53–55 CrossRef .
K. Lee, S. Cho, S. H. Park, A. J. Heeger, C. W. Lee and S. H. Lee, Nature, 2006, 441, 65–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. T. Kemp, A. B. Kaiser, C.-J. Liu, B. Chapman, O. Mercier, A. M. Carr, H. J. Trodahl, R. G. Buckley, A. C. Partridge, J. Y. Lee, C. Y. Kim, A. Bartl, L. Dunsch, W. T. Smith and J. S. Shapiro, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 1999, 37, 953–960 CrossRef CAS .
A. Eftekhari, M. Kazemzad and M. Keyanpour-Rad, Polym. J., 2006, 38, 781–785 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Nardes, M. Kemerink, R. A. J. Janssen, J. A. M. Bastiaansen, N. M. M. Kiggen, B. M. W. Langeveld, A. J. J. M. van Breemen and M. M. de Kok, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1196–1200 CrossRef CAS .
T. Park, C. Park, B. Kim, H. Shin and E. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 788–792 CAS .
O. Bubnova, Z. U. Khan, A. Malti, S. Braun, M. Fahlman, M. Berggren and X. Crispin, Nat. Mater., 2008, 10, 429–433 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sun, P. Sheng, C. Di, F. Jiao, W. Xu, D. Qiu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 932–937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Venkatasubramanian, E. Siivola, T. Colpitts and B. O'Quinn, Nature, 2001, 413, 597–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Harman, P. J. Taylor, M. P. Walsh and B. E. LaForge, Science, 2002, 297, 2229–2232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Hochbaum, R. Chen, R. D. Delgado, W. Liang, E. C. Garnett, M. Najarian, A. Majumdar and P. Yang, Nature, 2008, 451, 163–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Boukai, Y. Bunimovich, J. Tahir-Kheli, J.-K. Yu, W. A. Goddard Iii and J. R. Heath, Nature, 2008, 451, 168–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Harman, P. J. Taylor, D. L. Spears and M. P. Walsh, J. Electron. Mater., 2000, 29, L1–L4 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khitun, A. Balandin, J. L. Liu and K. L. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 88, 696–699 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, C. Lee and H. Feng, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 2010, 19, 317–324 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, K. Buddharaju, B. C. Tinh, N. Singh and S. J. Lee, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2012, 33, 715–717 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takashiri, T. Shirakawa, K. Miyazaki and H. Tsukamoto, Sens. Actuators, A, 2007, 138, 329–334 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Lee, H. J. Yang, J. H. We, K. Kim, K. C. Choi and B. J. Cho, J. Electron. Mater., 2011, 40, 615–619 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Lee, J. H. We, H. J. Yang, K. Kim, K. C. Choi and B. J. Cho, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 5441–5443 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Kim, J. H. We, G. S. Kim and B. J. Cho, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 104511 CrossRef .
G. J. Snyder, J. R. Lim, C.-K. Huang and J.-P. Fleurial, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 528–531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Franciosoa, C. De Pascali, I. Farella, C. Martucci, P. Creti, P. Siciliano and A. Perrone, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3239–3243 CrossRef .
Y. Li, K. Buddharaju, N. Singh, G. Q. Lo and S. J. Lee, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2011, 32, 674–676 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. We, S. J. Kim, G. S. Kim and B. J. Cho, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 552, 107–110 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Kim, J. H. We, J. S. Kim, G. S. Kim and B. J. Cho, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 582, 177–180 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Oh, D.-B. Hyun and N. V. Kolomoets, Scr. Mater., 2000, 42, 849–854 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. M. Hoefnagels, J. Neggers, P. H. M. Timmermans, O. van der Sluis and M. G. D. Geers, Scr. Mater., 2010, 63, 875–878 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yadav, K. P. Pipe and M. Shtein, J. Power Sources, 2008, 175, 909–913 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Hewitt, A. B. Kaiser, S. Roth, M. Craps, R. Czerw and D. L. Carroll, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1307–1310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, T.-K. Chen, Y.-S. Wang and C.-C. Chen, IEEE Sens. J., 2009, 9, 1639–1646 CrossRef .
S. Hanson, Z. Foo, D. Blaauw and D. Sylvester, IEEE J. Solid–State Circuits, 2010, 45, 759–767 CrossRef .
S.-K. Kim and Y.-J. Kim, Thermochim. Acta, 2008, 468, 6–9 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, D.-K. Lee, J. Y. Kim, B. Kim, N.-G. Park, K. Kim, J.-H. Shin, I.-S. Choi and M. J. Ko, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8950–8957 CAS .
A. Chirilă, S. Buecheler, F. Pianezzi, P. Bloesch, C. Gretener, A. R. Uhl, C. Fella, L. Kranz, J. Perrenoud, S. Seyrling, R. Verma, S. Nishiwaki, Y. E. Romanyuk, G. Bilger and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 857–861 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kraemer, B. Poudel, H. P. Feng, J. C. Caylor, B. Yu, X. Yan, Y. Ma, X. W. Wang, D. Z. Wang, A. Muto, K. McEnaney, M. Chiesa, Z. F. Ren and G. Chen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 532–538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Shrotriya, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 447–449 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vomiero, V. Galstyan, A. Braga, I. Concina, M. Brisotto, E. Bontempi and G. Sberveglieri, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3408–3413 CAS .
L. Persano, C. Dagdeviren, Y. Su, Y. Zhang, S. Girardo, D. Pisignano, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1633 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Yang, Y. Qin, L. M. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 34–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee00242cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Broader context
The conversion of body heat into electrical energy using a thermoelectric (TE) power generator is useful for self-powered wearable mobile electronic systems. However, previously reported organic-based flexible TE generators generate low output power that is far below the requirements for wearable electronic devices. On the other hand, inorganic material based TE generators usually have a relatively thick and bulky ceramic substrate, which causes serious thermal energy loss and limits the output power density and energy conversion efficiency. In this work, we report, for the first time, a flexible TE generator prepared on a glass-fabric, realizing a truly wearable TE generator that is not made with organic materials but rather inorganic TE materials that provide high output power. It also has a self-sustaining structure of the TE material without top and bottom substrates. A series of new technical breakthroughs are reported here including the printing of the TE material on a glass-fabric, a new device structure with no substrate, a new electrode transfer technique, a contact resistance reduction technique, and process integration to realize a flexible TE generator suitable for wearable electronics. These achievements have made it possible to fabricate a TE generator that is thin (∼500 μm), lightweight (∼0.13 g cm−2), and flexible. Moreover, the device exhibits high output power density (3.8 mW cm−2 and 28 mW g−1 at a ΔT = 50 K). This new invention can be utilized for wearable electronics such as smart watches and medical sensor systems, the new wave of electronics. The techniques introduced in this work can also be applied to other types of energy harvesting systems such as flexible solar cells and piezoelectric devices.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of fabrication process of the screen-printed Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 thick films on a glass fabric. (b) Photo of commercial glass fabric. (c) Photo of 196 Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 dots on a glass fabric of 40 mm × 40 mm. (d) and (e) SEM images of the screen-printed Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 thick films on a glass fabric, respectively. (f) and (g) High magnification SEM images of cross-sectional view of the Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 thick films, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  Thermoelectric characteristics of Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 thick films as a function of the thickness ratio of TE film/glass fabric; (a) Seebeck coefficient. (b) Electrical conductivity. (c) Thermal conductivity. (d) Dimensionless figure of merit, ZT. (e) Simulation of the temperature distribution across the TE film without and with the glass fabric (Tcold = 300 K, Thot = 310 K).	 

 	Fig. 3  Flexibility of the embedded Cu film in PDMS: (a) the attached Cu foil on PDMS. (b) The screen-printed Cu film embedded in PDMS, using the Ni peel-off method. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of the Cu/PDMS sample shown in (b). (d) Bending test of the Cu films (25 μm-thick or 8.5 μm-thick) in PDMS (500 μm-thick). The resistance was normalized by the resistance measured in the flat state.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of a flexible TE generator module; (a) preparation of Cu electrodes on a Ni/SiO2/Si substrate. (b) Deposition of a Ni layer on Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 thick films to reduce contact resistance. (c) Bonding process of top plate/TE film/bottom plate using Ag paste. (d) Infiltrating the elastic polymer (PDMS) into the gap between the top and bottom plates. (e) Removal of the top and bottom plates by Ni peel-off in DI water. (f) Removing the remaining Ni layers by etching in a diluted mixture of sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide. Scale bar, 1 cm.	 

 	Fig. 5  Output characteristics of the glass fabric-based flexible TE generator and the TE generator using an Al2O3 substrate; (a) schematic illustrations and actual photos of the glass fabric-based flexible TE generator and the Al2O3-based TE generator (ΔT: temperature difference across the TE generator, ΔTTE: temperature difference across the TE film). Comparison of the two TE generators in (b) output voltage, (c) output power per unit area, and (d) output power per unit weight. (e) Internal resistance stability under bending stress along two different directions illustrated in the inset. (f) Reliability test by repeated bending cycles. Scale bar, 1 cm.	 

 	Fig. 6  Demonstration of band-type flexible TE generator for harvesting thermal energy from human skin: (a) photos of band-type flexible TE generator and (b) electricity generation measured on human skin at an air temperature of 15 °C. Scale bar, 1 cm.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee00242c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
