Butterflies: inspiration for solar cells and sunlight water-splitting catalysts   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE03595B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE03595B
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9195-9216Butterflies: inspiration for solar cells and sunlight water-splitting catalysts†

        
          
            Shuai 
            Lou‡
, 
      
        
          
            Xingmei 
            Guo‡
, 
      
        
          
            Tongxiang 
            Fan
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Di 
            Zhang
            
          
          
        
      
State Key Lab of Metal Matrix Composites, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200240, P.R. China. E-mail: txfan@sjtu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-21-34202749;   Tel: +86-21-54747779
Received 
      31st December 2011
    , Accepted 2nd April 2012First published on 12th April 2012AbstractSolar cells and photocatalysts to yield hydrogen are two significant strategies for taking advantage of clean and sustainable solar energy, and their light manipulation and harvesting ability will play a dominant role in their conversion efficiencies. Butterflies demonstrate their brilliant colors due to their wonderful skills of light manipulation, originating intrinsically from their elaborate architectures. We review the inspiration of butterflies for solar cells and sunlight water-splitting catalysts, focusing on the nipple arrays in butterfly compound eyes, as well as ridge and hole arrays, and the photonic crystal structures in butterfly wing scales. After giving a brief introduction to the typical architectures, we reveal the physical principles lying behind antireflection of compound eyes and black scales and iridescence of wing scales, respective prototypes are extracted and highlighted for the design and fabrication of solar cells and sunlight water-splitting catalysts. We conclude by reviewing the prospects for the integration of these prototypes and the appropriate materials for solar energy, which is the product of an intimate conversation between humanity and nature, as well as close cooperation between scientists from diverse fields.Shuai LouShuai Lou was born in 1990 in Liaocheng, China and received his B.S. degree in 2010 from School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shandong University. He is currently a graduate student of Material Science in Shanghai Jiaotong University. His research interests focus on the optical performances of bio-organisms, and biomimetic materials.Xingmei GuoXingmei Guo was born in 1988 in Linyi, China and received B.S. degree in 2009 from School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shandong University. She is currently pursuing PhD studies in Shanghai Jiaotong University. Her research interests focus on superstructure of bio-organisms, bio-inspired/ biomimetic materials.Tongxiang FanTongxiang Fan was born in 1971 in Weifang, China. He received his PhD degree in Materials Science from Shanghai Jiaotong University in 1999. He is currently a Professor of Materials Science there. He has received several scientific awards, including the STA Fellowship (Japan, 2000) and Fok Ying Tung Foundation (HongKong, 2003). His main research interests focus on bio-inspired/biomimetic materials and their applications in Energy and environmental fields.Di ZhangDi Zhang was born in 1957 in Xi’an, china. He obtained his PhD degree in material science from Osaka University in 1988. He previously worked in Yuasa Company, Kyoto University and Osaka University in Japan from 1991 to 1998. Currently, he is a professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiaotong University and also the Director of the State Key Lab of Metal Matrix Composites. His research interests focus on functional ceramics, bio-inspired materials and metal matrix composites.

Broader context
The global energy crisis has become a major concern to the public in recent years. Solar cells and photocatalysts to yield hydrogen are two significant strategies for utilizing clean and sustainable solar energy to replace conventional fossil fuels, and their light manipulation and harvesting abilities play a dominant role in their conversion efficiencies. This paper reviews the inspiration from butterflies for solar cells and sunlight water-splitting catalysts, focusing on the nipple arrays in butterfly compound eyes, as well as ridge and hole arrays, and the photonic crystal structures in butterfly wing scales. Their wonderful skills of light manipulation originate intrinsically from the elaborate architectures in butterflies, which can broaden the horizon for the design of solar cells and photocatalysts, and provide working prototypes to exploit solar energy. This approach demonstrates a great example of learning from Mother Nature to resolve tough challenges.

1. Introduction
The world population is expected to skyrocket from the current 7 billion to 9 billion by 2050,1 meanwhile the global primary energy consumption rate is estimated to increase at least threefold from 13.5 TW in 2001 to 40.8 TW in 2050.2 The decreasing conventional fossil energy is far from able to meet the consumption of the increasing population, which exerts great challenges and intense strain on human existence and socially sustainable development. Therefore it is extremely urgent to produce and employ alternative renewable energy. Renewable energy resources consist of solar, wind, geothermal, tidal, wave, hydropower, biomass, and so forth, in which solar energy possesses a theoretical potential of 1.2 × 105 TW one year, far more than other forms of energy sources.3 An hour of solar radiation on the Earth can provide 14 TW, which amounts to the world's total annual energy consumption.4 Moreover, solar energy is free and clean. Solar energy has been widely used and rapidly developed in many fields, which is captured and converted into other useful forms of energy including heat, electricity and chemical fuels. Solar cells have been used to convert directly solar radiation into current electricity by the photovoltaic effect for about sixty years.5 Besides, photocatalysts prove an effective and promising method to utilize solar radiation to split water for hydrogen, which is pollution-free, inexhaustible and cost-effective.6
The photovoltaic effect used in solar cells generally refers to the creation of electric current due to the electron transfer between the valence and conduction band within the materials when exposed to light whose photon energy matches or exceeds the band gap.7 Besides, under light radiation with the same energy conditions as solar cells, photocatalysis for splitting water into hydrogen and oxygen usually employs electron–hole pairs from electronic transitions within the catalyst and then redox reactions of water caused by the pairs.8 Although the purposes of excited electrons are different for solar cells and photocatalysts, actually both of them involve the issues of light harvesting and charge motion. Thus, enhancing the light harvesting efficiency to generate more electron–hole pairs is a significant factor to improve the performance of solar cells and photocatalysts.
For solar cells, stable and reliable materials including inorganic semiconductors and organic polymers are usually adopted to produce the electrode. So far, conventional silicon cells include single-crystal, multicrystal and amorphous types, and their conversion efficiency usually ranges from about 10% to 25%.9–11 For CdTe solar cells, the efficiency can reach over 15%.12 Besides, the common single junction III–V solar cells including GaAs and InP have an efficiency of around 20% to 30%,13 while the number for solar cells made of multicomponent compounds including CuInGaSe2 (CIGS)14 and CuInGaSSe (CIGSS)15 can generally reach over 15%. Moreover, III–V compound multi-junction cells usually exhibit higher efficiency of over 30% owing to the appearance of several junctions, in which those made of GaInP/GaAs/InGaNAs can achieve the highest conversion efficiency of 43.5%.16 Apart from the inorganic semiconductors, polymers such as polyacetylene17 and polyacrylonitrile18 have been chosen to manufacture solar cells, which are light, easy to machine and inexpensive, and the efficiency can reach 8%.
For photocatalysts, the well-known TiO2 has been applied to split water for hydrogen since the 1970s.19 From then, a great deal of attention has been paid to TiO2 photocatalysis, which has put the emphasis on the exploration of the physical principles lying behind them, improving the photocatalytic efficiency and widening their usage. However, TiO2 solely works under ultraviolet light and possesses no photocatalytic activity under visible light owing to its wide band gap of 3.2 eV, which means that only 5% of the solar light with wavelengths lower than 350 nm can be absorbed, and this is far from enough.20 Several methods have been used to mitigate the problem, including the addition of dyes for better light sensitization,21 doping elements such as C and N to reduce the band gap22,23 or with some noble metals to form heterojunctions24,25 and using a sacrificial agent as an electron donor. Certainly, many other conventional semiconductors involving CdS,26 ZnO27 and Fe2O3 (ref. 28) are also employed as photocatalysts. Moreover, complex oxides for photocatalysis such as tantalates, germanates, and vandates, have attracted great deal of attention, and they usually contain cations of d0 or d10 electronic configurations including Ag+,29 In3+,30 and Bi5+.31 In addition, polymers are also applied for photocatalysis, such as polymeric C3N4 and C3N3S3.32,33
Above all, plenty of attention has been paid to the aspects of materials to promote the efficiency of solar cells and photocatalysts, and simultaneously a great deal of efforts has been directed towards their structural nature. Along with the development of materials fabrication and processing, the emphasis on structure has transferred from single microporous or mesoporous architectures to ordered nanonetwork structures.34
Original solar cells have directly applied rough-sawn wafers as antireflective front surfaces, and porous coatings have also shown a good antireflection effect due to their lower refractive index compared with the layers lack of nanovoids.35 Textured surfaces without ordered shapes can also reduce unnecessary reflective photon losses.36 Actually, subwavelength groove structures that can be equivalent to layers with a gradient refractive index play a dominant role in antireflection of solar cells, which include parabolic,37 conical,38 pyramidal39 and grating structures.40 Moreover, nanoparticles and nanorods have a large light absorption coefficient but very low diffusion length of their photoinduced charge carriers.41,42
Photocatalysts have been designed in well-organized structures at different length scales ranging from nanometres to the submillimetre scale. Periodic mesoporous powders comprised of nanoparticles show good photocatalytic properties due to the quantum size effect,43 and photocatalyst nanotube arrays have an obstruction effect on charge recombination, leading to a greater probability of redox reaction.44 Besides, photocatalysts with photonic crystal structures have a unique influence on the incident photons and exhibit favorable catalytic performance.45
Certainly, it is significant and arduous work to explore new architectures for solar cells and photocatalysts. Hierarchical construction shows structures with scales ranging from nanometres to millimetres, and therefore can answer the physical and chemical demands occurring at different levels. The hierarchical architecture is a promising approach to further improving the properties of solar cells and photocatalysts.46
After millions of years' evolution, Nature has produced numerous delicate hierarchical structures with unique and wonderful properties. Butterflies with diverse brilliant colors have typical hierarchical architectures, which exhibit an inherent multifunctional integration. The structures of compound eyes provide a very large view-angle, and can detect fast movement, even polarization of light in some cases. The unique hierarchical architectures in the wings are light enough to allow flight, and have functions including superhydrophobicity, directional adhesion, self-cleaning and chemical sensing capacity.47 Moreover, the colors originating from the architectures are favorable for camouflage, frightening predators and attracting mates.48 The elaborate architectures in butterfly compound eyes and wings are primarily based on nipple arrays, regular network and photonic crystal structures, which all demonstrate great skill in physical manipulation of light. These structures can broaden the horizon for the design of solar cells and photocatalysts based on butterfly paradigms and provide working prototypes to exploit solar energy. This paper reviews the inspiration from butterflies for solar cells and sunlight water-splitting catalysts, concentrating on nipple arrays in butterfly compound eyes, together with ridges and holes, and photonic crystals in butterfly wings. After giving a brief introduction to the typical architectures, we discuss the physical mechanisms lying behind the antireflection of compound eyes and black scales, as well as the iridescence of wing scales; the relative prototypes are extracted for the design and fabrication of solar cells and sunlight water-splitting catalysts. Integration of the prototypes and appropriate materials is a multi-disciplinary subject related to materials science, biology, chemistry and physics, etc. Knowledge in this subject will provide insights into these disciplines and inspire material scientists and engineers.
2. Butterflies
In Nature, there are between fifteen and twenty thousand species of butterflies. All adult butterflies have two compound eyes and four wings, a forewing and hindwing on both the left and right side of the body.
In butterfly compound eyes, the outer surface of the facet lenses have an array of excessive cuticular protuberances, known as corneal nipples, which are arranged in domains with almost hexagonal packing.49 As shown in Fig. 1, the nipple distances are nearly constant ranging from around 180 to 240 nm, while the heights vary greatly among butterfly species. The papilionid species have very minor nipples with height less than or equal to 30 nm, while the non-papilionid species possess clear nipples, in which the pierids have a height around 185 nm, lycaenids about 120 nm and nymphalids around 180 nm.50
 Fig. 1  Scanning electron microscopy (a–c) and transmission electron microscopy (d–h) of the corneal nipples of the facet lenses of various butterflies. (a) The eye of the peacock butterfly, Inachis io. (b) A facet lens with the array of corneal nipples. (c) A facet lens in close-up, showing the local order of the corneal nipples. (d) The Bush Brown, Bicyclus anynana. (e) The Asian Comma, Polygonia c-aureum. (f) The Small White, Pieris rapae. (g) A lycaenid, Pseudozizeeria maha. (h) The Japanese yellow swallowtail, Papilio xuthus. Scale bars: (a) 500 µm, (b) 5 µm, (c) 2 µm and (d–h) 0.5 µm. Reprinted from ref. 50. 
The wings that characterize butterflies are covered with minute scales, which create colors. The colors in butterfly wings can be classified into two kinds, pigmentary colors and structural ones. For the former, the incident light with specific wavelengths corresponding to the band gaps of pigments interacts with electrons and excites them to higher states by virtue of the energy consumption. The light that cannot be absorbed is reflected, and thus the respective pigmentary colors are displayed. Differently, the structural colors originate from complex interaction between light and elaborate nanostructures, which generally include thin-layer interference, diffraction grating, light scattering and photonic crystals. Compared with compound eyes, butterfly wing scales have lots of different structures. In general, typical butterfly scales have complicated architectures including a series of longitudinal ridges that are connected by cross-ribs, which locate on a basal substrate with columnar trabeculae as upholders. However, the substructures within the space between the upper ridges and substrate usually have varied forms for different butterfly species.51
Black butterfly wing scales are common but inconspicuous, and play an important role in temperature regulation and visual appearance. Actually, the low reflectivity of the black scales results from both the strong absorption of melanin and the interaction between light and the architectures.52 The structures in black scales are usually comprised of inverse V-type ridges and subwavelength hole arrays. The inverse V-type ridges running through the length of scales, between which hole arrays are exhibited, comprised of struts and walls that extend from the surface towards the substrate beneath. As shown in Fig. 2, black butterfly wings scales can be divided into four types according to the array’s number of holes, including no holes, one array, two arrays and three arrays.
 Fig. 2  Appearance and structures of the black wings in four species of butterflies. (a), (c), (e) and (g) Digital photo of overall view of the butterfly Ornithoptera goliath, Penthema adelma Felder, Troides aeacus and Papilio helenus Linnaeus respectively. (b) FESEM image of the inverse V-type ridges but no holes of the cover scales of Ornithoptera goliath from the top view. (d) FESEM image of the inverse V-type ridges and one hole arrays of the cover scales of Penthema adelma Felder. (f) FESEM image of the inverse V-type ridges and two hole arrays of the cover scales of Troides aeacus. (h) FESEM image of the inverse V-type ridges and three hole arrays of the cover scales of Papilio helenus Linnaeus. Scale bars: (b), (d), (f) and (h) 2 µm. Provided by T. X. Fan, Shanghai Jiaotong University. 
Within iridescent butterfly wing scales, photonic crystal structures are formed through the periodic configuration of chitin and air-spaces. According to the periodicity, these iridescent scales can be divided into three types including one dimensional (1D), two dimensional (2D) and three dimensional (3D).
The Morpho family with brilliant blue coloration has the most representative 1D photonic crystal structure. The chitin lamellae and air-spaces exhibit alternate arrangement, which run parallel or near-parallel to the base of the scale. The reflection color usually becomes brighter with the increasing number of lamellae. Morpho butterflies (Fig. 3(a)–(c)) can demonstrate wide angular iridescence by combining the effects of multilayer interference and grating diffraction.53 Also through the cooperation of interference and diffraction, Troides magellanus (Fig. 3(d)–(f)) and Ancyluris meliboeus (Fig. 3(g)–(i)) can realize limited-view iridescence due to lamellae with inclination to the scale base, which brings about an abrupt termination of the multilayers and thus leads to diffraction concurrent with interference.54,55
 Fig. 3  Appearance and structures of the butterflies with 1D photonic crystal structures. (a) Digital photo of overall view of the butterfly Morpho didius. (b) and (c) Scanning electron microscopy images of a lateral view and a cross-section of dorsal scale of butterfly Morpho didius. (d) Digital photo of overall view of the butterfly Troides magellanus. (e) and (f) Scanning electron microscopy images of a lateral view and a cross-section of dorsal yellow scale of butterfly Troides magellanus. (g) and (h) Real-color images showing the same portion of the butterfly's wing of Ancyluris meliboeus with the camera at different angles. (i) Scanning electron microscope image of the surface of an iridescent scale of Ancyluris meliboeus. Inset, transmission electron microscope image of the cross-section through an iridescent scale at 45° to the line of ridging. Scale bars: (b), (c) and (i) 1 µm, (e) and (f) 2 µm, (g) and (h) 4 mm. Reprinted from ref. 51, 54 and 55. 
The blue patches in the wings of butterfly Papilio zalmoxis have a layer of air-filled alveoli, whose axis is perpendicular to the scale surface.56 Similar architectures exist in the green scales of butterfly Papilio nireus (Fig. 4). A ∼2 µm thick 2D photonic crystal slab (PCS) of hollow air cylinders is distributed in the middle of the solid cuticle. The cylinders have a mean diameter of around 230 nm and a mean spacing of about 320 nm. The slab is parallel to and 1.5 µm above a three-layer distributed Bragg reflector (DBR).57
 Fig. 4  Appearance and structures of the butterfly Papilio nireus with 2D photonic crystal structure. (a) Optical photograph of the dorsal forewing of Papilio nireus. (b) Microscopic image of the green cover scales. (c) Scanning electron microscopy image from a top view. (d) Scanning electron microscopy image of a cross-section view. Scale bars: (a) 1 cm, (b) 1 mm, (c) and (d) 3 µm. (a) and (b) from ref. 57, (c) and (d) provided by T. X. Fan, Shanghai Jiaotong University. 
Some papilionid and lycaenid butterflies have 3D gyroid photonic crystal structures. TEM images (Fig. 5) of a section through the green scales of Parides sesostris shows the domain of the 3D lattice, which exhibits tessellated patterns formed by thin planes through the structure.58
 Fig. 5  Appearance and structures of the butterfly Parides sesostris with 3D photonic crystal structure. (a) Digital photo of overall view of the butterfly Parides sesostris. (b) SEM image of the PhC of the green wing scales after the superficial ridging has been removed. (c) A TEM image showing a 50 nm section through the scale; the ridging is intact whereas the neighboring but differently oriented domains of identical 3D structure are distinguished by contrasting 2D patterns (here, the darkly contrasted material is cuticle). Scale bars: (b) 1.2 µm, (c) 2.5 µm. Reprinted from ref. 58. 
Apart from their photonic crystal structures, the butterflies Papilio palinurus (Fig. 6) and Papilio ulysses (Fig. 7) display iridescent colors due to the sculpted multilayers within the scale body. For both butterflies, the dimensions of each layer in the direction normal to the local layer surface remain constant at every position of a concavity. However, the multilayer dimensions are smaller for the blue colored P. ulysses than the green colored P. palinurus. Moreover, the P. palinurus concavity sides are inclined at approximately 45 degrees to the plane of the scale, while the sides of P. ulysses concavities have inclinations of approximately 30 degrees. When irradiated and observed at normal incidence, the central regions of the concavities reflect yellow for P. palinurus and blue for P. ulysses, while in P. palinurus the inclined sides appear as blue loops around the yellow centers, but there is no analogous annular reflection pattern in P. ulysses. Therefore, for P. palinurus, the bi-colored reflection is perceived by the human eye as green color, while P. ulysses exhibit a blue color.59
 Fig. 6  (a) Digital photo of overall view of the butterfly Papilio palinurus. (b) Optical microscopy image of a region of P. palinurus iridescent scale. (c) SEM image of a small iridescent region from the top view. (d) TEM image showing cross-sections through iridescent scales of P. palinurus perpendicular to ridges. Scale bars: (b) 10 µm, (c) 5 µm, (d) 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 59. 
 Fig. 7  (a) Digital photo of overall view of the butterfly Papilio ulysses. (b) Optical microscopy image of a region of P. ulysses iridescent scale. (c) SEM images of a small iridescent region from the top view. (d) TEM image showing cross-sections through iridescent scales of P. ulysses perpendicular to the ridges. Scale bars: (b) 8 µm, (c) and (d) 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 59. 
The butterfly Argyrophorus argenteus (Fig. 8) demonstrates a metallic whiteness due to the special structures in its scales. The wing scale is comprised of one dorsal and one basal part, which are separated by an air gap with symmetrically distributed different thicknesses along the cross-section. The configuration profile coherently scatters visible light to produce diverse colors, with a range of periodicities that run parallel to the scale surface due to the different air gap thicknesses. All colors create the overall broadband silver coloration owing to the color mixing effect.60
 Fig. 8  (a) Digital photo of overall view of the butterfly Argyrophorus argenteus. (b) SEM image of open-ended structures. (c) and (d) SEM and optical microscope images, respectively, of an identical intra-scale region from the top view. Four corresponding ridge lines of these two images are indicated by the black arrows: three open-ended ridge structure regions are indicated by the white arrows and labels R1, R2 and R3. Scale bars: (a) 0.5 cm, (b) 0.8 µm, (c) and (d) 3 µm. Reprinted from ref. 60. 
The pierid butterflies usually exhibit a matt white color (Fig. 9). The dense array of ellipsoidal scale beads play a significant role in their appearance of matt-whiteness, which are suspended from the ridges and crossribs and then hang down into the scale interior. The beads can enhance optical scattering and the bead array density shows a positive relation with the scattering intensity. Besides, other scale components, such as the ribs and substrates, also make great influence on the optical scattering.61–63
 Fig. 9  (a) Digital photo of overall view of the butterfly Pieris brassicae. (b) Scales on the wings of the Pieris rapae. The scales have scalloped ends and are positioned in overlapping rows. (c) A white scale of P. rapae. The ridges have only slightly overlapping lamellae, the crossribs are densely adorned with beads. (d) A black scale, lacking beads. Scale bars, (a) 1 cm, (b) 50 µm, (c) and (d) 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 62. 
Butterflies demonstrate diverse colors due to their wonderful skills of light manipulation, which originates intrinsically from their different elaborate architectures. The above structures are promising to apply in solar cells and photocatalysts to acquire great abilities of light manipulation and harvesting, and thus high efficiency for solar energy utilization.
3. Solar cells
Conventional thin film solar cells are fabricated by depositing several thin layers of photovoltaic materials on a substrate. Taking the typical crystalline solar cell with a single p–n junction as example (Fig. 10), the most important two layers are the top junction layer (made of an N-type semiconductor) and the bottom junction layer (made of a P-type semiconductor), between which is the p–n junction. Two electrical contact layers present in the cells can allow electric current to flow out of and into the cell, besides, an antireflective coating is necessary to reduce photon loss. In addition, a glass cover plating on the sunlight radiation side can protect the cell from abrasion and impact owing to wind and rain. When incident light strikes the electrons on the P-type side, the excited electrons move out of the valence band into the conduction band. When adding an exterior loads, these electrons will flow out of the P-type side into the N-type side under the aid of the p–n junction, then back into the P-type side after moving through the loads. By this means, sunlight creates an electron current. As for the single p–n junction solar cell, the Shockley–Queisser limit places a maximum conversion efficiency of around 33.7% with a band gap of 1.1 eV. The energy losses can be attributed to practical concerns such as blackbody radiation, charge recombination and unwanted reflection. Therefore, it is an effective way to reduce unnecessary reflection by adopting appropriate antireflection architectures for improving the conversion efficiency of solar cells.64
 Fig. 10  Typical thin film solar cell configuration. 
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) separate the two processes of light absorption and charge carrier transport, which generally consists of a dyed nanocrystal TiO2 photoanode, the electrolyte and a transparent conducting oxide (TCO). As shown in Fig. 11, under incident light, the dye injects its photoinduced electrons into the conduction band of the photoanode, which then transport through the TiO2 layer to the TCO. After performing work through the exterior load, these electrons flow back to a metal electrode on the back side of the cell, then into the electrolyte. The dye is then reduced by the redox shuttle dissolved in the electrolyte. The efficiency of DSSCs has exceeded 12% after the last twenty years' development. The harvesting performances for light within the dyes' absorption band are important for the determination of the cell's efficiency. Hence, suitable structures assisting dye to interact with more absorbed light can improve the power conversion efficiency of DSSCs.65,66
 Fig. 11  Schematic of a typical DSSC. Reprinted from ref. 66. 
3.1 Compound eye structure
Butterfly compound eyes possess hexagonally arrayed protuberances (Fig. 12), which exhibit a good antireflection effect. The phenomenon can be explained with effective medium theory. The interface zones between air and chitin can be divided into infinite layers, each of which has an effective refractive index that can be deduced with the weighted average of the refractive indexes of air and chitin, according to their respective area ratio. Therefore, from the top of nipple arrays, the effective refractive index keeps gradually changing from the low number of air to the high one of chitin. In this way can the abrupt change of refractive index that can result in intense reflection be avoided, and the antireflection effect be achieved.49
 Fig. 12  (a) Optical photograph of facet lens on the compound eye of butterfly Euploea mulciber. (b) SEM image of the facet lens on the compound eye. (c) SEM image of nipple arrays on the borders between facet lens. (d) Detail, showing the local arrangement of domains with highly ordered nipple arrays. Scale bars, (a) 10 µm, (b) 20 µm, (c) 2 µm, and (d) 200 nm. Provided by T. X. Fan, Shanghai Jiaotong University. 
The nipple arrays of the butterfly compound eyes have been investigated systematically. D. G. Stavenga et al. studied the arrays of nineteen butterfly species with electron microscopy, atomic force microscopy and optical modelling. Three models with cone, paraboloid and Gaussian-bell shapes were built respectively, and then their reflectance was calculated with Rigorous Coupled Wave Analysis (RCWA). The results showed reflectance had a negative correlation with the nipple height, and the paraboloid nipple arrays displayed the best antireflection effect. Besides, the nipple shape was found to be unimportant for the reduction of the reflectance, while the height of the nipples was the crucial factor and the nipple width played a secondary role.50
The nipple array structure on butterfly compound eyes provides a good prototype to manufacture antireflection panels, and reactive ion etching (RIE) and nano-imprinting lithography (NIL) are the two most-frequently used methods.
For the RIE method, inorganic materials, for instance, silica, as well as polymers including polystyrene and polyvinylalcohol are usually employed as panels, while some plasmas act as the etching tools. Jiang et al. presented a preparation process to produce a subwavelength scale with a high aspect ratio. Firstly monolayer silica colloidal crystals with non-close-packed structures were prepared by the spin-coating technique. After etching the polymer by O2 plasma, the reserved silica particles were used as panels during a SF6 reactive ion etching to pattern arrays of nipple structures. Then the templating silica spheres were removed with HF, and silicon nipple arrays with a base radius of 210 nm and height of 800 nm were obtained, which demonstrated a reflectance of less than 5% for light with a wavelength from 300 to 900 nm and thus can be applied in crystalline solar cells.67
Yu et al. reported two methods to fabricate the parabola-shaped periodic subwavelength grating (SWG) structures. For both methods, substrate materials were coated with photoresist, which was then exposed under the interference light of two laser beams. After obtaining the two dimensional periodic hexagonal patterns, the follow-up steps were different. For the method (Fig. 13) that produced an aluminium-doped zinc oxide (AZO) SWG structure, the patterns were directly etched with a CH4/H2/Ar plasma to attain AZO dot arrays as a seed layer, and then redeposition of AZO made the seeds grow to form parabola-shaped arrays. For the other method, which produced GaAs SWG structures (Fig. 14), the photoresist patterns were heated to make a lenslike shape and then, through SiCl4/Ar plasma etching with an inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etcher, parabolic arrays were formed. Both the experiments and RCWA calculations revealed that under any incident angle, the parabolic arrays exhibited better antireflection performance for longer wavebands than those with the cone shape.68,69
 Fig. 13  Schematic diagram of the process steps for the fabrication of parabola-shaped SWG structures on an AZO film/Si substrate. Reprinted from ref. 68. 
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure for parabola-shaped SWSs. Reprinted from ref. 69. 
Nano-imprinting lithography generally takes advantage of organic polymers, such as polyvinylchloride (PVC), polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) or perfluoropolyethers (PFPE), to make reversal moulds of natural or artificial templates. Then, with the mould, metals, oxides and polymers are chosen to fabricate the positive nipple arrays. Natural compound eyes are too small to manufacture large scale arrays, therefore artificial templates, which are obtained through the RIE process on metal or silicon substrates, are popular and widely used. Sun et al. made nickel templates with RIE method, then with the PDMS reversal mould; the nanostructured polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) nipple layer was imprinted onto the microtextured surface of silicon crystalline solar cells. The resulting structures reduced the average reflectance from 13.2% to 7.8% and augmented the power conversion efficiency of the solar cells from 12.85% to 14.2%, which have the potential for application in commercial solar cells.70
Han et al. fabricated a PVC film with a reverse shape of the Ni master mold using a hot-embossing method, which was then applied as an imprint mold (Fig. 15). After the imprinting process onto a UV-curable resin layer on the surface of a GaAs solar cell with a PVC mold under UV light, nipple array structures were obtained. Experiment results showed that with the nipple structures, reflectance was reduced to around 5.3%, and the total conversion efficiency of GaAs solar cell was increased from 27.77% to 28.69%.71
 Fig. 15  Schematic diagrams of imprinting process for solar cell structure. Reprinted from ref. 71. 
The nipple array structure on butterfly compound eyes used for antireflection in solar cells has proved to be one of the most famous examples of humans learning from nature. The exciting results encourage us to explore new and inspiring structures in butterflies.
3.2 Ridges and holes structures
Besides the prominent nipple array antireflection structure which has been extensively investigated and mimicked, black butterflies’ wings have also attracted considerable concentration. In the early days, melanin was generally regarded as the sole reason for the black appearance, but in recent years, nanostructures were found to be the intrinsic component of black wing's high antireflection properties. After immersing the matt black scales of the male butterfly Papilio ulysses into bromoform, which matches the refractive index of the scale material to eliminate the optical functions of nanostructures, the optical absorption decreased by 40% compared with that measured in air. The results fully revealed that the wing scale's nanostructures played a significant role in the appearance of blackness.52
To show how structures, including inverse V-type ridges and subwavelength hole arrays, assist the display of the black appearance, systematic studies were carried out. Reflectance and transmittance were measured experimentally with an ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometer (UV-Vis). Relative models were built with parameters from electron microscopy images through optiFDTD, simultaneously the comparison models were constructed by means of an isovolumetric compression method. Then, the interaction between visible light and the models was simulated, and the calculated reflectance and transmittance spectra, as well as the Poynting vectors that can show the energy distribution, were obtained. Moreover, the effects of components within the black scales, such as ridge wall thickness, ridge vertex angle and hole dimensions, were demonstrated by altering the respective size parameters.72–74

3.2.1 Inverse V-type ridges. 
The black wing scales from the butterfly Ornithoptera goliath (Fig. 16) were used, which had only inverse V-type ridges.72 First, the melanin contribution to blackness was studied with the index-matching method. As bromoform has a refractive index that is approximate with the scale chitin, it was used to remove the effects of structures on blackness. So when immersing the black scales into bromoform, the absorption of incident light can be attributed to melanin solely. The results demonstrated that melanin was responsible for ∼92% of the light absorption in Ornithoptera goliath black scales by comparing the absorption spectra of scales in air with that in bromoform.
 Fig. 16  Structure and model of butterfly Ornithoptera goliath. (a) An overall view of the butterfly. (b) Optical microscopic image of the scales of the black area. (c) FESEM image of the microstructures of the scales. (d) and (e) Cross-sectional views of a single scale with parameters for modelling. (f) Schematic diagram showing the overlapped area of the scales. (g) Dimensions of 3D FDTD model. (a): distance between two ridges; (b): height of the ridges; (c): distance between the bottom of the ridge and the base slab; (d): thickness of the base slab; (e): half vertex angle of the ridge; (f): thickness of the ridge wall. (h) Schematic diagram in constructing the planar scale model by squeezing the 3D original model into a slab of the same bottom area and volume. Scale bars: (a) 2 cm, (b) 50 µm, (c) and (d) 2 µm, (e) 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 72. 
Considering the effects and distribution of melanin in the chitin matrix, the black scales' refractive indexes were acquired, which were 1.76 + 0.7i and 1.6 + 0.1i for the upper and bottom layer respectively. Then, 3D FDTD models were built with the dimensions from FESEM images, meanwhile, a contrast planar model was also attained to display the effects of inverse V-type ridges on reflection, by squeezing the original model into a flat slab with the same bottom area and volume.
The simulated reflection spectra of the original architectured scale was generally consistent with the measured result (∼2%), and a considerable decrease (∼11%) existed compared with the planar scale model (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  Reflection spectrum of the original scale, simulated result of model and the planar scale model for the butterfly Ornithoptera goliath. Reprinted from ref. 72. 
Besides the original and planar model, models with altered size parameters were also built to study the influence of structure components, by means of removing the bottom layer or changing the ridge parameters, such as wall thickness and vertex angle. Results showed the corrugated upper layer was a decisive factor for reflection behavior, while the bottom layer could be seen as a barrier for light transmission.
For wall thickness, when it was reduced, both the reflection and transmission increased significantly, while changes were much smaller when the thickness was increased by the same value. This revealed that the wings achieved good antireflection properties with the least chitin material, and hence the lightest weight beneficial for flying. For the vertex angle, as it increased the reflection (transmission) increased (decreased) and a blue shift (red shift) to the peaks of the curve occurred, while a reduction of the vertex angle had the opposite effects.
To explain the good antireflection effect that black scales with inverse V-type ridges display, an effective medium method is used similar to nipple array structures.75 For electric vectors parallel and perpendicular to the grooves, as Fig. 18 demonstrates, the effective refractive indices nII and n⊥ can be respectively calculated as:nII = [n1q + n22(1 − q)]1/2n⊥ = [(1/n1)q + (1/n22) (1 − q)]−1/2where q is the ratio of groove width to periodicity, and n1 = 1 for air, n2 = 1.76 for scales.
 Fig. 18  Rectangular grating. Effective refractive indices nII and n⊥. 
The inverse V-type ridges can be approximated to plenty of rectangular layers that have different q values, and the effective refractive indices of individual layers can be obtained with the above two equations. As the groove width decreases, the index for each thin layer is lower than the adjacent underlayer; thus from the top, the effective refractive index keeps gradually increasing from low number of air to the high one of chitin and a multilayer antireflective constitution occurs (Fig. 19). Therefore the inverse V-type ridges play an important role in antireflection and angle regulation of incident light. The greater part of incident light is absorbed by melanins distributed in chitin, by the process of light propagation, and the rest of the light will enter the bottom layer and be further absorbed. Thus the scales with inverse V-type ridges display an effective antireflection effect.
 Fig. 19  The inverse V-type ridges transform to infinite rectangular layers with increasing effective index as the groove width decreases. 


3.2.2 Inverse V-type ridges and sub-wavelength hole arrays. 
The black wing scales in male butterfly Troides aeacus have structures including inverse V-type ridges and two hole arrays. For the black scales, the reflection and transmission spectra were measured with UV-Vis. Then, relative 3D optiFDTD models were constructed with the size parameters attained from the FESEM images (Fig. 20).
 Fig. 20  Overall view and microstructures of Troides aeacus. (a) An overall view of the butterfly. (b) Optical microscopic image of the scales of the black area. (c) FESEM image of the microstructures of the scales. (d) Close-up of the microstructures. (e) Schematic diagram of the cross-section of a butterfly wing. (f) Schematic diagram after removing the ventral scales of the wing. Scale bars: (a) 2 cm, (b) 50 µm, (c) 5 µm, (d) 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 74. 
After calculation, the reflection and transmission spectra were both acquired, which were well approximated to the experimental results (Fig. 21). In contrast to the simple slab model, which was was squeezed from the original but had the same volume and bottom area, the reflection of models with the original architectures was reduced greatly, which proved the structures' antireflection influence.
 Fig. 21  Reflection spectrum of the experimental and simulated results of the original scale, as well as the simulated result of the planar scale model for the butterfly Troides aeacus. Reprinted from ref. 74. 
Through building different models with diverse ridge and hole dimensions, a series of reflection and transmission spectra together with Poynting vector maps were obtained. From this information, the effects of inverse V-type ridges and sub-wavelength holes on the blackness were revealed, respectively. The inverse V-type ridges in the nanostructures reflect light to the nano-hole regions.
Nano-hole regions are composed of holes, with ribs among them. For ribs, their sharp top parts can be seen as refractive index digressive blocks due to their relatively small width in contrast to the light wavelength. When light reaches the ribs, it will be backscattered with attenuated intensity. For holes, the incident light of short wavelength can directly pass through them, while for light with a wavelength larger than the holes' dimensions, the ribs and holes display a coupled effect by means of merging into a layer with a very low effective refractive index, hence the entire nano-hole array acts as high filtering layers. As the wavelength of most of the visible light is larger than the holes' dimensions, they cannot be transmitted directly, but are absorbed by melanin during a multireflection process. A parameter ‘r’ can be defined as the ratio of the holes' dimensions to the wavelength, and the reflection increases with ‘r’. When ‘r’ is around 1, resonance between the holes in the electric loss materials and the incident light appears, therefore the maximum absorption is reasonably obtained, though the exact value of ‘r’ for this effect is still unknown.74
For both the butterfly Ornithoptera goliath with only inverse V-type ridges, and Troides aeacus with structures including inverse V-type ridges and sub-wavelength hole arrays, the scales' blackness is ascribed to the combined effect of physical and chemical factors. The scales' architectures work as the physical element and augment light harvesting by reducing reflection when the light enters the scales. Then, the melanin distributed in the bottom part chemically absorbs the rest of the light and energy is transferred to the electrons of the melanin. The architectures and melanin mutually assist each other to generate maximum antireflection. Through experiments and optiFDTD simulation, the effects of components within the black scales, including ridge parameters and hole dimensions were revealed. The optimal prototypes from the black scales can be extracted for antireflection, which could assist the design of solar cell panels. The inverse V-type ridges and subwavelength hole arrays can be fabricated with methods including RIE and NIL, similar to the nipple array structures.70,73 The work demonstrates a wonderful example of how studying elaborate architectures in butterflies can provide an insight into how to apply their engineering design rules in artificial solutions for solar cell panels.

3.3 Photonic crystal structures
Photonic crystals refer to periodic optical structures that are designed to affect the motion of photons in a similar way that periodicity of a semiconductor crystal affects the motion of electrons. Photonic crystals are composed of periodic dielectric structures that affect the propagation of electromagnetic waves in the same way as the periodic potential in a semiconductor crystal affects the electron motion by defining allowed and forbidden electronic energy bands.76 Photonic crystals can be divided into three types, 1D, 2D and 3D according to the periodicity of dielectric properties along spatial dimensions (Fig. 22).
 Fig. 22  Simple examples of 1D, 2D and 3D photonic crystals. The different colors represent materials with different dielectric constants. 
The photonic crystals' band gaps, which forbid electromagnetic waves with specific frequencies, can be explained by the solution of Maxwell's equations under periodic dielectric configuration. Without external currents and sources, Maxwell's equations can be simplified to the following form:  where H(r) is the magnetic field of the photon, ω is its frequency, c is the light speed and ε(r) is the macroscopic dielectric function. The solutions H(r) and ω depend completely on the strength and symmetric properties of ε(r). If ε(r) is perfectly periodic, just as the photonic crystals, the solutions can be characterized by the wave vectors k and a band index n. The region of all allowed wave vectors is called a Brillouin zone and all solutions compose a band structure. Under appropriately periodic dielectric distribution, for solutions to Maxwell's equations, a gap between two adjacent bands occurs at the edge of Brillouin zone, below the gap are low frequency modes that concentrate their energy in the high-ε regions, while the high frequency modes that have a larger fraction of their energy in the low-ε regions are above the gap. Light with a frequency within the gap is forbidden to propagate through the crystal but folds back and thus respective colors with such frequencies are displayed.77
The photonic crystal structures have been used in DSSC to enhance the light harvesting efficiency within specific wavebands. Many kinds of butterflies have evolved fantastic natural photonic crystals with delicate structures and periodic dielectric properties, ranging from 1D to 3D, and thus display iridescent colors in their wing scales. The sophisticated structures with periodic configurations in butterfly wing scales display a wonderful light manipulation effect, and can be borrowed to improve the design of DSSC, and thus enhance their conversion efficiency.

3.3.1 1D photonic crystal. 
For 1D photonic crystals, the multilayer reflectors that consist of alternating layers with different dielectric constants are the simplest, and are also the most common type of photonic crystal structures existing in iridescent butterflies. The well known Morpho butterflies have ridge array structures, in which lamellae like the branches of trees run parallel to the base of the scale.
The Morpho wing scales are composed of multilayer stacks with alternating chitin layers and air (Fig. 23). As the dielectric properties of chitin and air are fixed, the thickness of each layer determines whether the light, within some wavelength ranges, interferes either constructively or destructively at specific angles. Besides, the parallel-running ridge grating arrays with irregular heights destroy the interference among adjacent stacks, which results in uniformly distributed reflection over a wide angle.51
 Fig. 23  (a) An overall view of the butterfly Morpho rhetenor. (b) SEM image of the cross-section of the iridescent scale. Scale bar: 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 51. 
Similar to the Morpho butterflies, the 1D multilayer structure has been applied in dye-sensitized solar cells to obtain light with specific wavelengths to improve the power-conversion efficiency. Colodrero et al. coupled a porous highly reflecting 1D photonic crystal to a dye-sensitized titanium dioxide nanocrystal (nc-TiO2) electrode. The porous mesostructure allowed the electrolyte to flow through it, meanwhile, the photonic crystal was able to localize efficiently incident light within a targeted wavelength range consistent with the absorption waveband of dyes. The average power-conversion efficiencies were improved to between 15 and 30% of the reference value for standard electrodes.

Fig. 24 demonstrates schematic and FESEM images of DSSCs. The nanoparticle multilayer made by the deposition of alternate nanoparticle layers of different compositions through spin-coating is porous, and periodic with a period of a few hundred nanometres, which can be controlled by either the concentration of the precursor suspension or the rotation speed during the spinning process. The nanoparticle multilayer as a 1D photonic crystal provides the cell with a brilliant metallic reflection whose color can be modulated by changing the thickness of the layers, and therefore localize incident light within the photoanode in a specific wavelength range that relies on the photonic band gap. In this way, the multilayer presents a Bragg peak that matches the absorption band of the dyes but has no effect on longer wavelengths, which makes the transparency unchanged.78
 Fig. 24  Design and microstructure of a DSSC coupled to a porous nanoparticle-based 1D PC. (a) Scheme of the solar cell based on the 1D PC exposed to frontal illumination. (b) FESEM image showing a cross-section of a dye-sensitized nc-TiO2 electrode (total thickness indicated by the vertical yellow line) onto which a TiO2–SiO2 nanoparticle multilayer has been deposited (bottom of the image). (c) Magnified view of the silica (spherical particles) and titania (smaller crystallites) layers composing the 1D PC. (d) Reference DSSC. (e) and (f) photonic crystal based DSSC. The different colors displayed by the cells in (e) and (f) arise from the different 1D PCs coupled to the same nc-TiO2 electrode. The lattice parameters are 120 ± 10 and 160 ± 10 nm respectively. Scale bars: (b) 5 µm, (c) 500 nm. Reprinted from ref. 78. 

Morpho butterflies demonstrate an intensive blue color in a wide angle due to the coaction of multilayer stacks and grating arrays, however only multilayers, and no grating structures, have been employed in DSSCs; as a result it is difficult for DSSCs to acquire wide angle reflection covering all the dyes. The grating arrays can be integrated into DSSCs by regulating the layer thickness and the space between the neighboring stacks; intensive light with a specific wavelength that matches the absorption band of the dyes can be thus obtained with a wide angle. The reflected light can cover the dyes on the electrode as much as possible, thus more electrons can be excited and the power conversion efficiency will be enhanced. Nano-imprinting lithography79 and focused-ion-beam chemical-evaporation–deposition (FIB-CVD),80 which are with high accuracy and free of templates, can be employed to fabricate parallel-running ridge grating array structures in DSSCs.


3.3.2 2D photonic crystal. 
A 2D photonic crystal is periodic along two of its axes and homogeneous along the third axis, in which typical specimens are a square lattice of columns surrounded by media with different dielectric constants.
In the swallowtail butterfly (Papilio) (Fig. 25), the wing scales from the colored regions demonstrate a ∼2 µm thick 2D photonic crystal slab (PCS) comprised of quasiperiodic hollow air cylinders in a medium of the solid cuticle, which is parallel to a three-layer cuticle-based distributed Bragg reflector (DBR). The elaborate pigment-infused 2D photonic crystals provide intense directed fluorescence, which is then directionally enhanced by the DBR.56
 Fig. 25  (a) Optical microscope image of a green scale from the butterfly Papilio nireus. (b) Scanning electron microscope image of the PCS in the P. nireus colored scale showing fractured air cylinder edges. (c) Transmission electron microscope image of a section through a P. nireus colored scale, taken at a small angle to the plane of the PCS. (d) Band diagram of P. nireus intradomain PCS structure (the horizontal bar at 505 nm represents fluorescence emission full width at half maximum). Scale bars: (a) 50 µm, (b) and (c) 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 57. 
For PCS, Pete Vukusic and I. Hooper calculated the photonic band structure and found that the peak fluorescence emission lied across a frequency band, in which the density of accessible optical states was depleted, due to the inhibition effect of 2D photonic crystal on emission in the crystal plane, thus to increase the out-of-plane emission. To verify that, fluorescence emission was measured with immersing the scales into index-matching fluid which could remove the nanostructures' photonic influence. Through comparing with the relative results in air, they found that immersion in fluids obviously changed the decay lifetime of fluorescent emission from the wing scales, mainly around the peak emission wavelength.
Moreover, DBRs upwardly reflected the downward-emitted fluorescence concurrently with nonabsorbed longer wavelengths passing through the PCS. The spatial separation between the DBR and PCS minimized losses by coupling to guided modes in the DBR. Therefore under the coherent effects of PCS and DBR on incident light, swallowtail (Papilio) butterflies demonstrated a sky blue colour, in accordance with the α-absorbance band of rhodopsin that dominates the green wavelength photosensitivity of Papilio's vision. In this way the butterfly can enhance signals to increase the probability of conspecific mating and communication.57
Like those in the swallowtail (Papilio) butterflies, 2D photonic crystal structures have been used in DSSCs to obtain light within dye absorption band. Huang et al. developed a single approach that achieved the seamless coupling of a photonic crystal (PC) layer to a TiO2 nanotube (NT) arrays, which enhanced the photovoltaic performance of DSSCs (Fig. 26). The TiO2 NT layer was fabricated by normal electrochemical anodization, while the TiO2 PC layer was acquired by a periodic current pulse anodization. DSSCs with a bi-layer structure showed an increase of over 50% in efficiency, compared with the cells without a PC layer. The improvement can be ascribed to the enhanced light harvesting in the specific dye-absorption range corresponding to the photonic band gap. Besides, by tuning the high current duration during anodization, the size parameters of the PC layer could be altered, which resulted in different photonic band gap. This feature could match the band gap of PC layer to any appropriate absorption region of any dye molecules for DSSC at will.81
 Fig. 26  (a) Schematic of the cell fabrication process. (1) Formation of the PC layer. (2) Further formation of the NT layer. (3) The bi-layer was detached from the Ti substrate. (4) The detached bi-layer was glued to a fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate with TiO2 nanoparticles. (5) Final assembly of the DSSC. (b) Cross-section image of the fabricated PC layer. Inset: the PC layer transferred onto a FTO substrate showing a green color. (c) Photographs of PC samples (in ethanol) of various colors. Scale bar: (b) 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 81. 
For the swallowtail (Papilio) butterflies, 2D PCS and DBR work together to demonstrate intensive blue skylight. DSSC can also employ the DBR structure, which can be located between the PC based NT and Pt coated glass (take Fig. 25(a) as example), to enhance the reflection intensity within the dye absorption band. According to the dye absorption band, the optimal diameter for PCS, thickness for DBR and spatial separation between the DBR and PCS can be calculated and controlled. The DBR can be fabricated with spin-coating just as DSSC with 1D PC in the last section,78 which can ensure both their porosity and reflection properties.


3.3.3 3D photonic crystal. 
A 3D photonic crystal is a dielectric structure that is periodic along three different axes, in which a lattice is surrounded by a network of channels with different dielectric properties.
Some papilionid and lycaenid butterflies have a 3D photonic crystal structure, which is composed of a complex network of dielectric cuticular chitin surrounded by air channels. In butterflies, the 3D photonic crystal may be either ‘monocrystalline’, which is oriented in a single horizontal plane and periodic across the entire volume, or polycrystalline that can be divided into domains with different horizontal orientations.82 Wing scales with long range monocrystalline structures, such as the dorsal scales of Cyanophrys remus (Fig. 27(a)), generally show a metallic color, while scales with polycrystalline structures, like the ventral scales of Cyanophrys remus (Fig. 27(d)), usually demonstrate a relatively matt color due to the cumulative effect. Most cases of the 3D photonic crystal in butterflies are polycrystalline structures, which are composed of different oriented subdomains with the same lattice.83 The lattice structures have attracted considerable attention.
 Fig. 27  (a) Dorsal surface and (d) ventral surface of the butterfly Cyanophrys remus showing their structural colors. (b) SEM image of the dorsal scale from top view. (c) TEM image of the cross-section through the dorsal scale, the inset shows a magnified region of the single photonic crystal structure in which the details of the ordered structure are visible. (e) SEM image of the photonic crystal grains with random orientation in a ventral green scale from the top view. (f) TEM image of the cross-section through an individual green scale. Scale bars: (b) 1 µm, (c) 5 µm, (e) and (f) 2 µm. Reprinted from ref. 83. 
Kertész et al. investigated the butterfly Cyanophrys remus and found that the metallic blue dorsal coloration originates from scales which individually were single photonic crystals of a long range around 50 × 120 µm2 (Fig. 27(b) and (c)), while the matt pea-green coloration of the ventral side results from the cumulative effect of randomly arranged bright photonic crystallites (blue, green, and yellow) with typical diameters in the short 3–10 µm range (Fig. 27(e) and (f)).83 Such results are consistent with those that Biró et al. presented.84
The exploration on the butterfly Callophrys rubi conducted by Schröder-Turk et al. demonstrated that the porous 3D reticulated pattern in wing scales was an excellent approximation by a parallel surface of a gyroid, a three-periodic minimal surface with cubic crystallographic symmetry I4132. The scale was commensurate with the wavelength of visible light with the edge of the conventional cubic unit cell of the parallel-gyroid of ∼310 nm.85 For the same kind of butterfly, Michielsen et al. learnt that the camouflaging omnidirectional green coloration arose from the gyroid cuticular structure in the domains of different orientation, through comparing the computer simulation data with optical measurements, and the simulation results also displayed that light scattered from the various domains was elliptically polarized, which could provide additional visual information to the polarization sensitive conspecifics. By analytical modelling and computer-generated TEM micrographs, Michielsen et al. also discovered that the three-dimensional cuticular structures in the matt-colored wing scales of some papilionids and lycaenids can be modeled by gyroid structures with different filling fractions and lattice parameters.86
Saranathan et al. applied small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) on single scales to characterize the 3D photonic nanostructures of five butterfly species from two families (papilionids and lycaenids). The SAXS patterns, the plots of the reciprocal lattice spacings versus the moduli of the assigned Miller index, as well as the computer models, identified the chitin and air nanostructures as single network gyroid (I4132) photonic crystals, which displayed crystallite domains with different orientations distributing in the interior of the scale. The photonic band gap of a simulated level set single gyroid model with a 25% dielectric (n = 1.56) filling fraction was then calculated (Fig. 28(c) and (d)). As the dielectric contrast between air and chitin is not large enough, the gap is not wide enough to create a mutual overlap. Therefore the calculated result showed that the band gap was incomplete, and several partial band gaps occurred.87 For the polycrystalline structures with numerous subdomains, each individual gyroid domain produces angle-dependent reflection, resulting in different spectral and spatial scattering properties (Fig. 28(b)). The ensemble effect can form a relatively complete cumulative band gap and a omnidirectional matt color.88
 Fig. 28  (a) Callophrys rubi in the resting position on an oak leaf, showing the green-colored ventral face of its wings. (b) Optical micrograph of a small region of ventral wing scales taken in reflection. (c) Gyroid structure modelling the cuticular structure. (d) A representative photonic band gap diagram for a simulated single gyroid (I4132) nanostructure with a 25% dielectric (n = 1.56) filling fraction. Reprinted from ref. 87 and 88. 
The polycrystalline gyroid domains can form a relatively complete cumulative band gap, besides, gyroid structure is among the most promising photonic crystal structures for a complete photonic bandgap, and computer simulations have shown the gyroid structure will have a complete band gap for a filling fraction between around 0.04 and 0.55 with a dielectric contrast of 3.5.89 Moreover, it is a type of minimal curvature surface that can be created with the least bending energy cost, inspiring biomimetic self-assembly.90 The gyroid domains can be borrowed from butterflies to apply in DSSCs, and the subdomains will scatter light with different spectral and spacial properties. In this way, DSSCs can have several kinds of dyes with diverse absorption bands, to make full use of the incident light and improve the power conversion efficiency. Though the related work has just begun, some notable efforts have been made. Using a sol–gel method with Callophrys rubi as biotemplate, Mille et al. synthesized an inorganic gyroid silica replica with a unit cell size of the photonic length scale.91 Besides, Hur et al. reported the bottom-up type self-assembly for double gyroid and alternating gyroid, which can control the dielectric contrasts and filling fractions.90 In current DSSCs, the 3D photonic crystal is generally an inverse opal structure, which can provide guidance and experience for further application of polycrystalline gyroid domains.
Braun et al. presented an approach to coupling preformed direct or inverse 3D photonic crystals with the electrode surfaces. First, a silica colloidal crystal film was made on an oxidized silicon substrate by evaporation-induced self-assembly, which was then infilled with TiO2 or Si by gas-phase deposition. After immersing the film into a polycarbonate solution, the photonic film was released through HF etching and the silica template was removed. By this means, the performed photonic crystal film was transferred to the receiving substrate. The transferred photonic films showed high optical quality, and increased the efficiency of a model titania DSSC system from 2.3% to 3.2%.92 Tétreault et al. demonstrated a material assembly method for a double layer DSC (Fig. 29), which integrated a high surface mesoporous underlayer with a 3D inverse opal overlayer. The double layer showed electric and pore connectivity at the mesoporous and microporous level, which allowed effective dye sensitization, electrolyte infiltration and charge collection. Besides, the intimate contact between the two layers ensured photonic crystal-induced resonance and thus light absorption enhancement.93
 Fig. 29  (a–e) Schematic of double layer assembly. (a) A solution of polyisoprene-block-poly(ethylene oxide) copolymer and 1–4 nm TiO2 nanoparticles is (b) codeposited on a FTO-covered glass substrate by spin-coating and solvent evaporation. (c) The covered substrate is placed vertically in an ethanolic suspension of polystyrene microspheres to induce the self-assembly of the 3D PC template. (d) APCVD of amorphous TiO2 into the interstitial pores of the polystyrene template. (e) High temperature annealing reveals the double layer TiO2 photoanode with full pore and electronic connectivity. (f) Schematic of a fully assembled DSC based on the self-assembled double layer photoanode. (g) SEM cross-sectional micrograph of the inversed TiO2 opal PC on top of a mesoscopic TiO2 underlayer after high temperature. Scale bar: 2 µm. Reprinted from ref. 93. 
Butterfly compound eyes with nipple arrays, as well as black wing scales with inverse V-type ridges and sub-wavelength hole arrays, demonstrate favorable antireflection effects. The architectures can be borrowed for the design of solar cell panels to reduce unnecessary reflection and increase the utilization efficiency of light. Besides, quite a number of iridescent butterfly wings provide ideas for optimizing dye-sensitized solar cells: for the Morpho butterflies, multilayer stacks and grating array structures help to obtain intensive large angle iridescence; from the swallowtail (Papilio) butterflies, 2D photonic crystal slabs and distributed Bragg reflectors work together to get intensive reflective light; and from some papilionid and lycaenid butterflies, the polycrystalline structure with differently oriented gyroid subdomains help form omnidirectional colors with different spectral and spacial properties and a relatively complete cumulative band gap with low dielectric contrast. The above architectures, whose size parameters can be tuned according to the dyes, can be applied in DSSCs to enhance the interaction between dyes and light within the dyes' absorption band, and thus augmenting the conversion efficiency.

4. Sunlight water-splitting catalysts
Employing sunlight to split water for hydrogen is a promising way to replace fossil fuels. Photocatalysts are necessary and their performances determine the efficiency of hydrogen output. The process of splitting water to yield hydrogen generally consists of three steps (Fig. 30): first, when the energy of incident photons matches or exceeds the band gaps of photocatalytic semiconductors, the photoinduced electrons transfer from the valence band (VB) to conduction band (CB), leaving an equal number of holes; second, the excited electrons and holes migrate to the surface; third, the electrons reduce the protons to hydrogen molecules. Therefore adopting appropriate structures to enhance the harvesting performances of light matching the band gap of photocatalytic semiconductors for more electron–hole pairs is a significant method to improve the photocatalytic efficiency.94
 Fig. 30  Schematic illustration of basic mechanism of a semiconductor photocatalytic process. 
4.1 Ridges and holes structures
The male butterfly Papilio helenus Linnaeus with basically all black wings has delicate structures including inverse V-type ridges and three hole arrays. The butterfly wings were used as templates to fabricate Pt-loaded TiO2, which exhibited enhancement of the hydrogen evolution rate by 2.3 times in sunlight water splitting, due to the hierarchical architecture in both the meso- and nanoscale.
The reflectance and transmittance spectra for black scales were measured with UV-Vis, then the light harvesting capacity of black scales was studied through 3D FDTD simulations. Besides the original architectured models with dimensions obtained from FESEM images, nonarchitectured models were also built, which were acquired by squeezing the original ones into a slab with the same bottom area and the same volume (Fig. 31). The simulated results ware generally consistent with the measured ones. Moreover, compared with the slab models that had 14% in reflection, the original ones exhibited a much lower value of 1–4%, that is, the hierarchical structures displayed an antireflection effect. Actually, the inverse V-type ridges and hole arrays play the same role as those of Troides aeacus mentioned in the last chapter.
 Fig. 31  (a) An overall view of the butterfly Papilio helenus Linnaeus. (b) Optical microscopic image of the scales of the black area. (c) FESEM image showing the architecture from the top view. (d) FESEM image showing the longitudinal section of the black scale. (e) FESEM image showing the cross-section of a scale. (f) Detail, showing the cross-section of a scale. (g) 3D model with parameters from the FESEM images. Scale bars: (a) 2 cm, (b) 100 µm, (c) 5 µm, (d) 2 µm, (e) 5 µm, (f) 4 µm. Reprinted from ref. 95. 
By using the black wings as templates and TiCl3 solution as precursor, after a simple immersion–calcination method, artificial butterfly wing architectured TiO2 (ABWA–TiO2) was attained. TiO2 nanoparticles without template (NT–TiO2) were also synthesized under the same conditions for comparison. XRD spectra showed they were both anatase TiO2.
Seen from the FESEM images (Fig. 32(a)–(c)) of ABWA–TiO2, in contrast to the original scales, though the hole sizes reduced by 50%, the ridges were actually well copied, the hole arrays were kept intact and the bottom layer was also preserved. Therefore ABWA–TiO2 perfectly inherited the hierarchical architecture of the wing templates. TEM images (Fig. 32(d)) showed TiO2 grains and nano-pores distributed homogeneously, then by nitrogen-adsorption measurements, the adsorption–desorption isotherm and the pore size distribution curve was obtained (Fig. 32(e)). The pore size was about 8.6 nm and the sample had a narrow size distribution. Actually the micro holes in the scales and nano-pores were not separated but worked as a system to form a kind of hierarchical micro-mesoporous catalyst with microporosity embedded in the mesoporous walls. The mesoscope hole arrays and the nano-pores made a highly organized hierarchical evacuating pathway for the photocatalysis products, which were produced on the outermost layer surface and transferred into the nanopores first, then absorbed by the meso-scope hole arrays into the solution.
 Fig. 32  (a)–(c), FESEM image of the architecture of ABWA–TiO2. (d) TEM image of ABWA–TiO2. (e) Nitrogen adsorption measurement results of ABWA–TiO2, with the blue and black curves showing the adsorption–desorption isotherms of the sample, and the red one showing the pore-size distribution of the sample. (f) Light harvesting efficiency of ABWA–TiO2 (red) and NT–TiO2 (blue). Scale bars: (a) 2 µm, (b) 1 µm, (c) 200 nm, (d) 100 nm. Reprinted from ref. 95. 
After measuring the light harvesting efficiency of ABWA–TiO2 and NT–TiO2, compared with NT–TiO2, light absorption was enhanced by about 30% for ABWA–TiO2 in a wavelength range from about 220 nm to 380 nm (Fig. 32(f)). Considering the fact that TiO2 was a high efficiency photocatalyst under UV light, the reason for the phenomenon was that the overall dimension shrank in the process of transforming the original black scales into ABWA–TiO2, and thus the required wavelength shifted from the visible range for butterfly wings to the UV range for a photocatalyst. The result not only substantiated the idea of borrowing nature's architecture to enhance the light harvesting efficiency of an artificial energy transfer system, but also shifted the absorption range from nature's requirement (longer wavelength) to our requirement (shorter wavelength).
Furthermore, the H2 producing performances of ABWA–TiO2 in pure water was much lower than that in 10% aqueous methanol, which acted as a sacrificial electron donor (Fig. 33). The hydrogen evolution rate was about 500 times higher in aqueous methanol than that in pure water. Besides, ABWA–TiO2 has a hydrogen production rate 7 times higher compared with NT–TiO2. What's more, in order to improve charge transfer and create hydrogen desorption sites, Pt nanoparticles were loaded on ABWA–TiO2 and the H2 evolution rate was enhanced by 2.3 times. The yield reached a maximum when Pt was around 1.5 wt%.
 Fig. 33  Hydrogen evolution of the samples in 10% aqueous methanol under UV and visible light irradiation. (a) Comparison between ABWA–TiO2 and NT–TiO2. (b) Comparison between ABWA–TiO2 series loaded with different amount of Pt particles. Reprinted from ref. 95. 
Above all, when the black wing scales are applied as a template, in the mesoscale, the hierarchical wing structure enabled ABWA–TiO2 to enhance the light harvesting capacity. In the nanoscale, as an impurity phase in TiO2 crystallization, ultra-thin scale chitin layers provided large number of nuclei and ensured a size control of grains and pores. In both scales, the micro-hole arrays and nano-pores served as a hierarchical evacuating pathway for H2. Moreover, methanol and Pt particles will improve the H2 production performance as sacrificial electron donor and hydrogen desorption sites, respectively.95
4.2 Photonic crystal structures
Electronic band gaps in semiconductors can affect the motion of electrons. Photonic crystal structures with a photonic band gap can shape and control the flow of light, and usually display many other unique physical properties, such as high specific surface area, directional charge carriers and effects on light propagation. Photocatalysts designed as 3D photonic crystals have a periodic dielectric constant field corresponding to the incident light. When light enters a 3D photonic crystal, light within a specific waveband is trapped due to multireflection (Fig. 34). Besides, the spacial structures can produce coherent Bragg diffraction that prevents light with frequencies in the stop band from passing through the material, hence photocatalysts with appropriately periodic configuration can show an optical coupling effect so that harmonic resonance occurs at particular frequencies around the band gap of the photocatalyst. Moreover, near the stop band edge, the phenomenon of ‘slow photons’ occurs, where light propagates with a decreased velocity. If energy of the photons with reduced velocity overlaps with the absorption of the photocatalyst, they are absorbed.94,96
 Fig. 34  Application of the inverse opal photonic crystal to increase the effective light path through multireflection. 
Therefore, due to multiple reflections and coherent Bragg diffraction, as well as the ‘slow photons’ phenomenon, the probability for the interactions between photons and photocatalysts will greatly increase. In this way 3D photonic crystal structures can enhance the light harvesting efficiency of photocatalysts, as well as their photocatalytic properties. Compared with other 3D photonic crystals, the polycrystalline gyroid domains from some papilionid and lycaenid butterflies can form omnidirectional colors with different spectral and spacial properties and a relatively complete cumulative band gap with low dielectric contrast. By tuning the lattice parameters, filling fractions and refractive indices, the gyroid domains can acquire omnidirectional light at particular frequencies around the band gap of a photocatalyst, hence more photons can interact with the catalyst and more electron–hole pairs can be excited, and the photocatalyst will obtain a better catalytic efficiency. Though the gyroid structures have been fabricated with self-assembly90 and sol–gel91 methods, challenges still exist including templates, precursors, noble metal doping and structural disorder. Solutions to the above challenges for inverse opal structures have been studied, inspiring the design and fabrication of gyroid architectures.
Both soft templates and hard templates have been used to fabricate inverse opal photocatalysts. Soft template materials are easily removed by calcination, and can be polymers or organic ligands; polystyrene spheres are the most well-known. For hard templates, inorganic oxides are usually employed, silica is frequently used, and are usually removed through chemical etching. For photocatalysts with no templates, several physical effects including Ostwald ripening, oriented attachment and so forth are applied in the wet fabrication of hollow structures.97
A great deal of attention has been focused on polystyrene spheres as opal templates to fabricate inverse opal photocatalysts. Zhang et al. applied PS spheres as templates, and a complex aqueous complexation solution as precursor, then after heat treatment at a relatively low temperature, finally obtained a ternary metal oxide Bi2WO6 with inverse opal structure (i-Bi2WO6) (Fig. 35).98
 Fig. 35  SEM images of: (a) PS opal template. (b) Bi2WO6 inverse opal with the inset showing the absorption spectra of Bi2WO6 inverse opal prepared at 450 °C and a reference Bi2WO6 film. (c) A higher magnification image of the Bi2WO6 inverse opal prepared at 450 °C. (d) Bi2WO6 inverse opal prepared with lower concentration of precursor. Scale bars: (a–d) 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 98. 
The photocatalyst i-Bi2WO6 for water splitting was then investigated, and the conventional Bi2WO6 (n-Bi2WO6) acted as a reference sample. The potentiodynamic scans in the dark, under visible light illumination and under chopped illumination were acquired (Fig. 36(a) and (b)). Then photon-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency at varied bias potentials was obtained under visible light irradiation (Fig. 36(c)). The H2 and O2 evolution rate confirmed by gas chromatography analysis (GC) was also measured (Fig. 36(d)). For i-Bi2WO6, photocurrent increased significantly over the entire potential range from 0.1 to 0.8 V, and the transient current response occurred much stronger than n-Bi2WO6 under chopped light. The i-Bi2WO6 photoelectrode displayed a three times larger photon-to-hydrogen efficiency than n-Bi2WO6.
 Fig. 36  Photoelectrochemical measurements: (a) Potentiodynamic scans with i-Bi2WO6 and n-Bi2WO6 photoelectrodes. (b) Potentiodynamic scans under chopped illumination. (c) Photon-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency of the i-Bi2WO6 and n-Bi2WO6 photoelectrodes obtained at varying potential bias under visible-light irradiation (λ > 400 nm). (d) H2 and O2 gas evolution on i-Bi2WO6 electrode measured at an external potential of 0.8 V. Reprinted from ref. 98. 
Sadakane et al. used PMMA spheres as template and ammonium metatungstate ((NH4)6H2W12O40) as precursor to synthesize a WO3 inverse opal structure.99 Xu et al. employed a silica colloidal crystal as template and hexafluorotitanate ammonium ((NH4)2TiF6) as precursor, and got an N–F-codoped inverse opal TiO2.100 Moreover, other colloidal crystals such as oil droplets101 and poly(styrenemethyl methacrylate-acrylic acid) (poly(St-MMA-AA))102 have been also used as templates.
In many cases, noble metals, such as Pt, Au and Ag, are doped into photocatalysts to facilitate photogenerated electron–hole separation and regulate visible light catalytic performances. Liu et al. reported a reversibly phototunable photonic crystal system consisting of Ag nanoparticles (NPs) and TiO2 inverse opal photonic crystals, whose reflectance intensity at the top band position can be modulated by the alternation of UV/Vis illumination. Through switching UV/Vis light irradiation, Ag nanoparticles showed alternate oxidation, Ag2O, and reduction, Ag, states, and thus the quasi “on” and ”off” states of the photonic crystal stop band were reversibly modulated.
The TiO2 inverse opal photonic crystals were fabricated with poly(St-MMA-AA) as templates and had a first-order stop band centered at 610 nm and second-order diffraction band around 380 nm. After illuminating TiO2 in AgNO3 aqueous solution, photoinduced Ag nanoparticles deposited on TiO2, and Ag–TiO2 inverse opal composites were obtained. Fig. 37(d–f) are Ag element mapping images of blank TiO2 reference and Ag–TiO2 composites with AgNO3 solution concentration at 1 and 2 mol L−1.
 Fig. 37  Scanning electron microscope images (a)–(c), Ag elemental mapping (d), (e), (f), and the schematic illustration (g)–(i) of Ag–TiO2 PC with different Ag NP loading. Scale bars: (d)–(f) 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 103. 

Fig. 38 shows the reflectance spectra of the blank TiO2 with inverse opal structure and Ag–TiO2 composites under different irradiation conditions. Fig. 38(a) demonstrates that, after the deposition of photoinduced Ag nanoparticles, the reflectance intensity of TiO2 reduces owing to the Ag's plasmon resonance absorbance. In Fig. 38(b), line 3 and 4 display the same meanings as line 1 and 2 in (a), and lines 5 and 6 are Ag–TiO2 composites respectively under visible light (>420 nm) and UV light.
 Fig. 38  The reflectance changes in Ag–TiO2 PC upon irradiation with alternating UV/Vis light. (a) The reflectance spectra comparison of the original TiO2 PC (line 1) and Ag–TiO2 PC (line 2). (b) The reflectance intensity changes of Ag–TiO2 upon irradiation operation. The reflectance spectrum of original PC (line 3) is transformed to line 4 after photodeposition of Ag NPs. The line 4 is irradiated upon visible light to transform to line 5, which is followed upon irradiation with UV light to transform to line 6. (c) The detailed recovery of reflectance intensity from line 4 to line 5 upon visible light irradiation for total 8 h. The scheme illustrates the mechanism of the transformation between Ag and Ag2O. (d) The reflectance intensity changes of Ag–TiO2 upon irradiation with xenon lamp without cut off filter. The reflectance spectrum of the original PC (line 7) is transformed to line 8 after photodeposition which is followed, upon irradiation with a xenon lamp, by transformation to line 9. Reprinted from ref. 103. 
When inverse opal Ag–TiO2 is irradiated in the atmosphere under visible light, the electrons of the Ag nanoparticles are excited and transferred to the oxygen molecules in the atmosphere. Ag nanoparticles are transformed to colorless Ag+ in the form of Ag2O, and the stop band reflectance intensity increases gradually during the illumination period, as is shown in Fig. 38(c). Then, under ultraviolet light, the electrons in TiO2 are excited from the valence band to the conduction band, and the electrons reduce Ag+ in Ag2O to Ag, which leads to the reduction of stop band reflectance intensity, as is shown from line 5 to line 6 in Fig. 38(b). Fig. 38(d) shows the reflectance results under blend light of visible and UV light due to the removal of the UV cut-off filter from xenon lamp. The difference between line 8 and line 9 are largely due to the simultaneous cooperative effect of visible and UV light on the transformation between Ag and Ag2O.
Thus the reversible transformation between Ag and Ag2O under alternating UV/visible light results in the quasi “on” and ”off” states of the photonic crystal stop band as well as plasmon resonance absorption. This method provides an effective way to modulate the reflectivity of photocatalysts with photonic crystal structures by controlling the incident light, and thus affects the light harvesting and photocatalytic efficiency.103
Actually, the inverse opal structures in photocatalysts are not perfect and the extent of structural disorder indeed has an adverse effect on the photocatalytic performances. Thus it is necessary to evaluate the tolerance of photocatalysts for structural disorder before losing their advantages over common catalysts without the inverse opal structures. Chen et al. presented systematic research concerning the effect of disorder on the inverse TiO2 opals' photocatalytic efficiency by introducing different fractions and sizes of guest spheres into the original opal template. For inverse opals made from monodispersed 150 nm spheres, when the domain size of the host spheres remained above a critical threshold, half of the original enhancement achieved by the inverse opal structures can be conserved. Moreover, as high as 40% of original spheres can be substituted by the guest ones with 1.2 times the original diameter.104
The TiO2 photocatalyst applying black butterfly wings as templates displayed light absorption enhancement of about 30% in a wavelength range from about 220 nm to 380 nm, and showed a better photocatalytic performance than that without the template. The polycrystalline structures with different oriented gyroid subdomains in some papilionid and lycaenid butterflies exhibit omnidirectional colors with different spectral and spacial properties and a relatively complete cumulative band gap with low dielectric contrast. With appropriate lattice parameters, filling fractions and refractive indices, the gyroid domains can obtain omnidirectional light within particular frequencies around the band gap of photocatalyst, hence more photons can interact with the catalyst with more electron–hole pairs excited, and the photocatalyst will obtain a better catalytic efficiency.
5. Conclusions and outlook
This paper reviews the inspiration of butterflies for solar cell and sunlight water-splitting catalysts, emphasizing on nipple arrays in butterfly compound eyes, as well as ridges and holes, and photonic crystals in butterfly wings. After giving a brief introduction to the typical architectures, we reveal the physical mechanisms lying behind antireflection of compound eyes and black scales, together with iridescence of wing scales, and the relative prototypes are extracted for the design and fabrication of solar cells and sunlight water-splitting catalysts. As shown in Table 1, we summarize the typical optical architectures in butterflies exhibiting different effects, which inspire applications for solar energy.
Table 1 Typical optical architectures in butterflies exhibiting different effects and corresponding potential applications for clean energy




Structures
Representative butterfly species
Effects/colors
Applications for clean energy




Nipple array
Butterfly compound eyes
Antireflection
Solar cells


Ridges
Inverse V-type

Ornithoptera goliath

Antireflection/blackness
Solar cells/photocatalysts


Inverse V-type and sub-wavelength hole arrays

Triodes aeacus and Papilio helenus Linnaeus


Photonic crystal structures
1D
Lamellar ridge array

Morpho

Iridescence
Dye-sensitized Solar cells


Intercalated multilayers

Chrysiridia ripheus



2D

Papilio zalmoxis and Papilio nierus
Dye-sensitized solar cells/photocatalysts


3D
Papilionids and lycaenids


Abnormal ridges
Sawtooth type with air gaps inside

Argyrophorus argenteus

Broadband reflection/whiteness
Solar heaters


Bead array
Pierid butterflies




Plenty of the architectures in butterflies are quite consistent with those in existing devices, which demonstrate the same effects. Nipple array structures on both butterfly compound eyes and thin film solar cells display a favorable antireflection effect. The Morpho butterflies obtain intensive iridescence due to 1D photonic crystal structures, which have also been applied in DSSCs to acquire light in a wavelength range corresponding to the dyes' absorption bands. Similarly, 2D photonic crystal structures in the Swallowtail (Papilio) butterflies as well as DSSCs ensure they receive intensive light of specific wavelength. The above coincidences suggest the necessity and importance of learning from butterflies, and inspiration from butterflies will save us a lot of time and endeavor to optimize the devices.
There are more than fifteen thousand species of butterflies in nature, many of which demonstrate brilliant colors due to their wonderful skills of light manipulation intrinsically originating from their elaborate architectures. If we can extract more prototypes from butterflies and integrate them with existing materials, the performances of such devices will be further enhanced. The inverse V-type ridges and sub-wavelength hole array structures from black scales can be employed in solar cell panels to realize antireflection, which can be explained with the effective medium method. Besides 1D multilayer stacks, the Morpho butterflies also show grating array structures, which can assist to obtain intensive large angle iridescence and be used in DSSCs to broaden the reflective angle. The Swallowtail (Papilio) butterflies take advantage of distributed Bragg reflectors to further enhance the light reflected by 2D photonic crystal slab, and the Bragg reflectors can be integrated into DSSCs to augment the reflective light with wavelengths corresponding to the dyes' absorption bands. For some papilionid and lycaenid butterflies, polycrystalline structures with different oriented gyroid subdomains assist to form omnidirectional colors with different spectral and spacial properties. The polycrystalline gyroid domains can hopefully be applied in DSSCs with several kinds of dyes with diverse absorption bands, to make full use of the incident light and improve the power conversion efficiency. Meanwhile, the polycrystalline gyroid domains can inspire photocatalysts with complete cumulative band gaps under low dielectric contrasts, to enhance the harvesting performances of light at particular frequencies around the band gap of the photocatalyst. Besides, metallic whiteness and ultrawhiteness due to high reflection architectures, including the sawtooth type with air gaps and bead arrays will benefit equipment that needs intense reflection, for example, solar heaters.
The prototypes originating from butterfly wings can also be integrated into artificial photosynthesis systems.105 Natural photosynthesis starts when plants capture solar energy, which is used to split water molecules to bind the captured energy. Oxygen is released as a byproduct for us to breathe, meanwhile electrons and hydrogen ions are also produced for the creation of organic compounds.106 Meanwhile, artificial photosynthesis can be separated into two half-reactions, comprised of a four electron photooxidation of water to form dioxygen and a photoreduction reaction to generate dihydrogen or reduced forms of CO2.107,108 The biomimetic synthetic solar devices for artificial photosynthesis can take advantage of low material costs, a negative carbon footprint, material abundance and dynamic self-assembly capacities of photosynthetic proteins. Current biomimetic strategies including water-splitting catalysis, hydrogenases, plant derived photosystems and bio-inspired light-harvesting antennas, have been incorporated into light harvesting and energy conversion mechanisms of synthetic solar devices. Mimicking the oxygen-evolving complexes (OECs) near photosystem II (PSII) in natural photosynthesis system has received much attention, by creating catalysts capable of converting water, carbon dioxide and light into carbohydrates, releasing hydrogen as a source of fuel.109 The hierarchical architectures in butterflies can be employed in water-splitting catalysis and photosystems, to improve the light harvesting performance and thus the efficiency of artificial photosynthesis.
Integration of prototypes extracted from butterflies and appropriate materials is the key to obtaining high-efficiency devices for clean energy, which starts with characterization of their elaborate structures. The available approaches to original structure characterization generally include electron microscopy, atomic force microscopy and small angle X-ray scattering.62,87 Then, to conduct optical analysis and model construction, some well-known calculation methods and software can be utilized. The rigorous couple-wave method is adopted in the analysis of nipple array structures.110 With the finite difference time domain method, the interaction between an electromagnetic field and the models can be calculated directly.72 Thin film optics and Bragg's law computational simulation are used to analyze lamellar arrays.51 The photonic crystal band gaps have been calculated with the plane-wave expansion method.111
On the basis of the models and analysis, a range of fabrication methods can be applied to manufacture devices integrated with architectures in butterflies. The biotemplating method constructs a convenient bridge between natural paradigms and artificial biomimics. The biostructures in butterflies are directly used as templates, and precursors including vapors, liquids and solids are infiltrated or deposited on them. After the removal of templates, the replica can be obtained. Diverse means are employed to attach the precursor to the original scaffold such as atomic layer deposition, low temperature evaporation and sol–gel chemistry.112,113 The replica can inherit the elaborate architectures of butterflies but possess appropriate materials and unique properties. Biotemplating is a versatile strategy to investigate the coupling relationship between natural hierarchical architectures and existing materials, and moreover provide new blueprints for biomimics.
Actually it is much more realistic and controllable to fabricate biomimetic devices through non-biotemplating approaches, as most biotemplates are very small in size and thus only very limited in use for industrial, large-scale applications. Extracting and establishing the theoretical models corresponding to structures in butterflies, artificial devices can be manufactured by routes without biotemplates. Nano-imprinting lithography79 and chemical evaporation deposition80 have been widely used to manufacture relatively simple microstructures, while biomimetic self-assembly is powerful for complex hierarchical structures. The synthesis strategies with self-assembly methods and emerging applications for energy conversion and storage of hierarchical inorganic materials have been presented in several reviews,114–116 which provide beneficial guidance for the complicated architectures inspired by butterflies.
Apart from the architectures that have been researched in detail, plenty of elaborate structures in butterflies are waiting to be explored. Thus, butterflies provide numerous prototypes for human beings to borrow and refer to for clean energy. It can be predicted that the devices coupling advanced materials and new prototypes borrowed from butterflies will demonstrate splendid properties. Actually, the integration of prototypes from butterflies and existing materials is the product of an intimate conversation between humanity and nature, as well as close cooperation between scientists from diverse fields, including biology, physics, chemistry and material science. This multi-disciplinary area will not only bring about improvements in the field of materials science, but also shed new light on and even result in significant breakthroughs in related fields such as nanotechnology, the environment and energy.
Nature is a great teacher, who is continuing to create and evolve. With our knowledge of nature increasing, we will find that it is of more importance to us humans. Nature has much to teach us, and human ingenuity can take advantage of the principles lying behind natural systems for enhanced utility. Learning from nature and mimicking basic principles of the sophisticated tactics is a promising and necessary strategy for human beings to resolve tough problems, the energy crisis included.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for financial support by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 50972090 and 51172141), National Basic Research Program of China (no. 2011CB610300), Shanghai Rising-star Program (10QH1401300), Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (20100073110065, 20110073110004) and Dawn Program of Shanghai Education Commission (08SG15).
References
L. Roberts, Science, 2011, 333, 540–543 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS .

          N. S. Lewis and G. Crabtree, US Department of Energy Report, Washington DC,  2005 Search PubMed .
K. Zweibel, J. Mason and V. Fthenakis, Sci. Am., 2008, 298, 64–73 CrossRef .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789–794 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lubitz and W. Tumas, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 3900–3903 CrossRef CAS .
A. Glass, D. Von der Linde and T. Negran, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1974, 25, 233–235 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Petermann, D. Zielke, J. Schmidt, F. Haase, E. G. Rojas and R. Brendel, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 1–5 CAS .
J. Zhao, A. Wang, M. A. Green and F. Ferrazza, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 1991–1993 CrossRef CAS .
O. Schultz, S. Glunz and G. Willeke, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2004, 12, 553–558 CrossRef CAS .
J. Britt and C. Ferekides, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 62, 2851–2852 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Bauhuis, P. Mulder, E. J. Haverkamp, J. Huijben and J. J. Schermer, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1488–1491 CrossRef CAS .
I. Repins, M. A. Contreras, B. Egaas, C. DeHart, J. Scharf, C. L. Perkins, B. To and R. Noufi, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2008, 16, 235–239 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ennaoui, S. Siebentritt, M. C. Lux-Steiner, W. Riedl and F. Karg, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 67, 31–40 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 565–572 Search PubMed .
S. N. Chen, A. J. Heeger, Z. Kiss, A. G. MacDiarmid, S. C. Gau and D. L. Peebles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1980, 36, 96–98 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dissanayake, L. Bandara, R. S. P. Bokalawala, P. Jayathilaka, O. A. Ileperuma and S. Somasundaram, Mater. Res. Bull., 2002, 37, 867–874 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kitano, M. Matsuoka, M. Ueshima and M. Anpo, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 325, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ferrere and B. A. Gregg, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 1155–1160 RSC .
Y. Choi, T. Umebayashi and M. Yoshikawa, J. Mater. Sci., 2004, 39, 1837–1839 CrossRef CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269 CrossRef CAS .
V. Keller, P. Bernhardt and F. Garin, J. Catal., 2003, 215, 129–138 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Cozzoli, E. Fanizza, R. Comparelli, M. L. Curri, A. Agostiano and D. Laub, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 9623–9630 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jing and L. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11139–11145 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chakrabarti and B. K. Dutta, J. Hazard. Mater., 2004, 112, 269–278 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Jang, J. Lee, H. Ye, F. R. F. Fan and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6719–6724 CAS .
H. Kurachi, T. Iwata, S. Ouyang, J. Ye and K. Fukuda, Powder Diffr., 2012, 25, 15–18 CrossRef .
L. Ge, M. Xu and H. Fang, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 65–73 CrossRef CAS .
C. He and M. Gu, Scr. Mater., 2006, 54, 1221–1225 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, K. Domen, J. D. Epping, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 441–444 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, J. Long, L. Yang, W. Chen, W. Dai, X. Fu and X. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1826–1830 RSC .
G. J. de AA Soler-Illia, C. Sanchez, B. Lebeau and J. Patarin, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 4093–4138 CrossRef .
A. Krotkus, K. Grigoras, V. Pacebutas, I. Barsony, E. Vazsonyi, M. Fried, J. Szlufcik, J. Nijs and C. Levy-Clement, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 45, 267–273 CrossRef CAS .
O. Kluth, B. Rech, L. Houben, S. Wieder, G. Schöpe, C. Beneking, H. Wagner, A. Löffl and H. W. Schock, Thin Solid Films, 1999, 351, 247–253 CrossRef CAS .
D. Feuermann and J. M. Gordon, Sol. Energy, 2001, 70, 423–430 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu and A. Lal, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4651–4656 CrossRef CAS .
P. Papet, O. Nichiporuk, A. Kaminski, Y. Rozier, J. Kraiem, J. F. Lelievre, A. Chaumartin, A. Fave and M. Lemiti, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2319–2328 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Jang, Y. M. Song, C. I. Yeo, C. Y. Park, J. S. Yu and Y. T. Lee, Opt. Express, 2010, 19, A108–A117 CrossRef .
A. Corma, P. Atienzar, H. Garcia and J. Y. Chane-Ching, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 394–397 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Kayes, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 114302–114312 CrossRef .
X. Liu, K. K. Iu and J. K. Thomas, J. Chem. Soc., 1993, 89, 1861–1865 CAS .
J. H. Park, S. Kim and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 24–28 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sordello, C. Duca, V. Maurino and C. Minero, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6147–6149 RSC .
H. Zhou, T. X. Fan and D. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1344–1387 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu and L. Jiang, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 155–175 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Jorgensen and M. H. Bartl, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10583–10591 RSC .
D. G. Stavenga and K. Arikawa, Arthropod Struct. Dev., 2006, 35, 307–318 CrossRef .
D. G. Stavenga, S. Foletti, G. Palasantzas and K. Arikawa, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2006, 273, 661–667 CAS .
S. Kinoshita, S. Yoshioka and J. Miyazaki, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2008, 71, 076401 CrossRef .
P. Vukusic, J. R. Sambles and C. Lawrence, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2004, 271, S237–S239 Search PubMed .
S. Kinoshita, S. Yoshioka and K. Kawagoe, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2002, 269, 1417–1421 Search PubMed .
J. P. Vigneron, K. Kertész, Z. Vértesy, M. Rassart, V. Lousse, Z. Bálint and L. P. Biró, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2008, 78, 0219031–0219039 CrossRef .
P. Vukusic, J. R. Sambles, C. R. Lawrence and R. J. Wootton, Nature, 2001, 410, 36 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huxley, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 1976, 193, 441–453 Search PubMed .
P. Vukusic and I. Hooper, Science, 2005, 310, 1151 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vukusic and J. R. Sambles, Nature, 2003, 424, 852–855 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vukusic, J. R. Sambles, C. Lawrence and G. Wakely, Appl. Opt., 2001, 40, 1116–1125 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vukusic, R. Kelly and I. Hooper, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2009, 6, S193–S201 Search PubMed .
P. Vukusic and D. G. Stavenga, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2009, 6, S133–S148 Search PubMed .
D. G. Stavenga, S. Stowe, K. Siebke, J. Zeil and K. Arikawa, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2004, 271, 1577–1584 CAS .
N. I. Morehouse, P. Vukusic and R. Rutowski, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2007, 274, 359–366 CAS .
R. Miles, Vacuum, 2006, 80, 1090–1097 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yella, H. W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. Nazeeruddin, E. W. Diau, C. Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–633 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Hamann, R. A. Jensen, A. B. F. Martinson, H. Van Ryswyk and J. T. Hupp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 66–78 CAS .
C. H. Sun, P. Jiang and B. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 0611121–0611123 Search PubMed .
J. Leem, D. Joo and J. Yu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 2221–2227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Song, S. J. Jang, J. S. Yu and Y. T. Lee, Small, 2010, 6, 984–987 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Chen, W. L. Chang, C. K. Huang and K. W. Sun, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 14411–14419 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Han, J. H. Shin, W. Y. Yoon and H. Lee, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 288–291 CrossRef CAS .

          Q. B. Zhao, Master thesis, Shanghai Jiaotong University,  2010.
Q. B. Zhao, T. X. Fan, J. Ding, D. Zhang, Q. X. Guo and M. Kamada, Carbon, 2011, 49, 877–883 CrossRef CAS .
Q. B. Zhao, X. M. Guo, T. X. Fan, J. Ding, D. Zhang and Q. X. Guo, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 11433–11439 RSC .
Y. Ono, Y. Kimura, Y. Ohta and N. Nishida, Appl. Opt., 1987, 26, 1142–1146 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, Y. Li, L. Wang, Y. Sun and S. Zhang, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 5120–5129 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Joannopoulos, P. R. Villeneuve and S. Fan, Nature, 1997, 386, 143–149 CrossRef CAS .
S. Colodrero, A. Mihi, L. Häggman, M. Ocana, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and H. Míguez, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 764–770 CrossRef CAS .
A. Saito, Y. Miyamura, Y. Ishikawa, J. Murase, M. Akai-Kasaya and Y. Kuwahara, Proc. SPIE, 2009, 7205, 7205061–7205069 Search PubMed .
K. Watanabe, T. Hoshino, K. Kanda, Y. Haruyama and S. Matsui, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 48–50 CrossRef .
C. T. Yip, H. T. Huang, L. M. Zhou, K. Y. Xie, Y. Wang, T. H. Feng, J. Li and W. Y. Tam, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5624–5628 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ingram and A. Parker, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2008, 363, 2465–2480 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kertész, Z. Bálint, Z. Vértesy, G. I. Márk, V. Lousse, J. P. Vigneron, M. Rassart and L. P. Biró, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2006, 74, 0219221-15 Search PubMed .
L. P. Biró, K. Kertész, Z. Vértesy, G. I. Márk, Z. Bálint, V. Lousse and J. P. Vigneron, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2007, 27, 941–946 CrossRef .
G. E. Schroder-Turk, S. Wickham, H. Averdunk, F. Brink, J. D. Gerald, L. Poladian, M. C. J. Large and S. T. Hyde, J. Struct. Biol., 2011, 174, 290–295 CrossRef CAS .
K. Michielsen, H. De Raedt and D. G. Stavenga, J. R. Soc. Interface, 2009, 7, 765–771 CrossRef .
V. Saranathan, C. O. Osuji, S. G. J. Mochrie, H. Noh, S. Narayanan, A. Sandy, E. R. Dufresne and R. O. Prum, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 11676–11681 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kinoshita and S. Yoshioka, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 1442–1459 CrossRef CAS .
K. Michielsen and D. G. Stavenga, J. R. Soc. Interface, 2008, 5, 85–94 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hur, Y. Francescato, V. Giannini, S. A. Maier, R. G. Hennig and U. Wiesner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11985–11989 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mille, E. C. Tyrode and R. W. Corkery, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9873–9875 RSC .
A. Mihi, C. Zhang and P. V. Braun, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 5830–5833 CrossRef .
S. Guldin, S. Hüttner, M. Kolle, M. E. Welland, P. Müller Buschbaum, R. H. Friend, U. Steiner and N. Tétreault, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2303–2309 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tong, S. Ouyang, Y. Bi, N. Umezawa, M. Oshikiri and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2011, 10, 1–23 Search PubMed .
H. H. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Ding, D. Zhang, H. Zhu and T. X. Fan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 10872–10876 RSC .
C. Aprile, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 769–783 RSC .
O. D. Velev and E. W. Kaler, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 531–534 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, C. Baumanis, L. Robben, T. Kandiel and D. Bahnemann, Small, 2011, 7, 2714–2720 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sadakane, K. Sasaki, H. Kunioku, B. Ohtani, R. Abe and W. Ueda, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1811–1818 RSC .
J. Xu, B. Yang, M. Wu, Z. Fu, Y. Lv and Y. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15251–15259 CAS .
V. N. Manoharan, A. Imhof, J. D. Thorne and D. J. Pine, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 447–450 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, G. Liu, M. Li, W. Shen, Z. Liu, J. Wang, J. Zhao, L. Jiang and Y. Song, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1503–1506 CAS .
J. Liu, M. Li, J. Zhou, C. Ye, J. Wang, L. Jiang and Y. Song, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 0231101–0231103 CrossRef .
J. I. L. Chen, G. von Freymann, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1196–1202 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Brad and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141–145 CrossRef .
J. Barber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 185–196 RSC .
C. Herrero, A. Quaranta, W. Leibl, A. W. Rutherforda and A. Aukauloo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2353–2365 CAS .
C. F. Meunier, J. C. Rooke, K. Hajdu, P. V. Cutsem, P. Cambier, A. Leo-nard and B. L. Su, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6568–6575 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Boghossian, M. H. Ham, J. H. Choi and M. S. Strano, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3834–3843 CAS .
R. Bouffaron, L. Wscoubas, J. J. Simon, P. H. Torchio, F. Flory and G. Berginc, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 19304–19309 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zi, X. Yu, Y. Li, X. Hu, C. Xu and X. Wang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 12576–12578 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cook, P. L. Timms and C. G. Spickermann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 557–559 CrossRef CAS .
T. X. Fan, S. Chow and D. Zhang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2009, 54, 542–659 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Marek, H. Hahnabc and T. S. Balaban, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2366–2378 CAS .
X. Y. Yang, A. Leonard, A. Lemaire, G. Tian and B. L. Su, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2763–2786 RSC .
Z. Y. Yuan and B. L. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 663–677 RSC .

Footnotes† This article was submitted as part of a special collection on Catalysis for Clean Energy.‡ These authors contributed equally to this work and should be considered co-first authors.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Shuai Lou	Shuai Lou was born in 1990 in Liaocheng, China and received his B.S. degree in 2010 from School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shandong University. He is currently a graduate student of Material Science in Shanghai Jiaotong University. His research interests focus on the optical performances of bio-organisms, and biomimetic materials.
Xingmei Guo	Xingmei Guo was born in 1988 in Linyi, China and received B.S. degree in 2009 from School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shandong University. She is currently pursuing PhD studies in Shanghai Jiaotong University. Her research interests focus on superstructure of bio-organisms, bio-inspired/ biomimetic materials.
Tongxiang Fan	Tongxiang Fan was born in 1971 in Weifang, China. He received his PhD degree in Materials Science from Shanghai Jiaotong University in 1999. He is currently a Professor of Materials Science there. He has received several scientific awards, including the STA Fellowship (Japan, 2000) and Fok Ying Tung Foundation (HongKong, 2003). His main research interests focus on bio-inspired/biomimetic materials and their applications in Energy and environmental fields.
Di Zhang	Di Zhang was born in 1957 in Xi’an, china. He obtained his PhD degree in material science from Osaka University in 1988. He previously worked in Yuasa Company, Kyoto University and Osaka University in Japan from 1991 to 1998. Currently, he is a professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiaotong University and also the Director of the State Key Lab of Metal Matrix Composites. His research interests focus on functional ceramics, bio-inspired materials and metal matrix composites.

Broader context
The global energy crisis has become a major concern to the public in recent years. Solar cells and photocatalysts to yield hydrogen are two significant strategies for utilizing clean and sustainable solar energy to replace conventional fossil fuels, and their light manipulation and harvesting abilities play a dominant role in their conversion efficiencies. This paper reviews the inspiration from butterflies for solar cells and sunlight water-splitting catalysts, focusing on the nipple arrays in butterfly compound eyes, as well as ridge and hole arrays, and the photonic crystal structures in butterfly wing scales. Their wonderful skills of light manipulation originate intrinsically from the elaborate architectures in butterflies, which can broaden the horizon for the design of solar cells and photocatalysts, and provide working prototypes to exploit solar energy. This approach demonstrates a great example of learning from Mother Nature to resolve tough challenges.


 	Fig. 1  Scanning electron microscopy (a–c) and transmission electron microscopy (d–h) of the corneal nipples of the facet lenses of various butterflies. (a) The eye of the peacock butterfly, Inachis io. (b) A facet lens with the array of corneal nipples. (c) A facet lens in close-up, showing the local order of the corneal nipples. (d) The Bush Brown, Bicyclus anynana. (e) The Asian Comma, Polygonia c-aureum. (f) The Small White, Pieris rapae. (g) A lycaenid, Pseudozizeeria maha. (h) The Japanese yellow swallowtail, Papilio xuthus. Scale bars: (a) 500 µm, (b) 5 µm, (c) 2 µm and (d–h) 0.5 µm. Reprinted from ref. 50.	 

 	Fig. 2  Appearance and structures of the black wings in four species of butterflies. (a), (c), (e) and (g) Digital photo of overall view of the butterfly Ornithoptera goliath, Penthema adelma Felder, Troides aeacus and Papilio helenus Linnaeus respectively. (b) FESEM image of the inverse V-type ridges but no holes of the cover scales of Ornithoptera goliath from the top view. (d) FESEM image of the inverse V-type ridges and one hole arrays of the cover scales of Penthema adelma Felder. (f) FESEM image of the inverse V-type ridges and two hole arrays of the cover scales of Troides aeacus. (h) FESEM image of the inverse V-type ridges and three hole arrays of the cover scales of Papilio helenus Linnaeus. Scale bars: (b), (d), (f) and (h) 2 µm. Provided by T. X. Fan, Shanghai Jiaotong University.	 

 	Fig. 3  Appearance and structures of the butterflies with 1D photonic crystal structures. (a) Digital photo of overall view of the butterfly Morpho didius. (b) and (c) Scanning electron microscopy images of a lateral view and a cross-section of dorsal scale of butterfly Morpho didius. (d) Digital photo of overall view of the butterfly Troides magellanus. (e) and (f) Scanning electron microscopy images of a lateral view and a cross-section of dorsal yellow scale of butterfly Troides magellanus. (g) and (h) Real-color images showing the same portion of the butterfly's wing of Ancyluris meliboeus with the camera at different angles. (i) Scanning electron microscope image of the surface of an iridescent scale of Ancyluris meliboeus. Inset, transmission electron microscope image of the cross-section through an iridescent scale at 45° to the line of ridging. Scale bars: (b), (c) and (i) 1 µm, (e) and (f) 2 µm, (g) and (h) 4 mm. Reprinted from ref. 51, 54 and 55.	 

 	Fig. 4  Appearance and structures of the butterfly Papilio nireus with 2D photonic crystal structure. (a) Optical photograph of the dorsal forewing of Papilio nireus. (b) Microscopic image of the green cover scales. (c) Scanning electron microscopy image from a top view. (d) Scanning electron microscopy image of a cross-section view. Scale bars: (a) 1 cm, (b) 1 mm, (c) and (d) 3 µm. (a) and (b) from ref. 57, (c) and (d) provided by T. X. Fan, Shanghai Jiaotong University.	 

 	Fig. 5  Appearance and structures of the butterfly Parides sesostris with 3D photonic crystal structure. (a) Digital photo of overall view of the butterfly Parides sesostris. (b) SEM image of the PhC of the green wing scales after the superficial ridging has been removed. (c) A TEM image showing a 50 nm section through the scale; the ridging is intact whereas the neighboring but differently oriented domains of identical 3D structure are distinguished by contrasting 2D patterns (here, the darkly contrasted material is cuticle). Scale bars: (b) 1.2 µm, (c) 2.5 µm. Reprinted from ref. 58.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Digital photo of overall view of the butterfly Papilio palinurus. (b) Optical microscopy image of a region of P. palinurus iridescent scale. (c) SEM image of a small iridescent region from the top view. (d) TEM image showing cross-sections through iridescent scales of P. palinurus perpendicular to ridges. Scale bars: (b) 10 µm, (c) 5 µm, (d) 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 59.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Digital photo of overall view of the butterfly Papilio ulysses. (b) Optical microscopy image of a region of P. ulysses iridescent scale. (c) SEM images of a small iridescent region from the top view. (d) TEM image showing cross-sections through iridescent scales of P. ulysses perpendicular to the ridges. Scale bars: (b) 8 µm, (c) and (d) 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 59.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Digital photo of overall view of the butterfly Argyrophorus argenteus. (b) SEM image of open-ended structures. (c) and (d) SEM and optical microscope images, respectively, of an identical intra-scale region from the top view. Four corresponding ridge lines of these two images are indicated by the black arrows: three open-ended ridge structure regions are indicated by the white arrows and labels R1, R2 and R3. Scale bars: (a) 0.5 cm, (b) 0.8 µm, (c) and (d) 3 µm. Reprinted from ref. 60.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Digital photo of overall view of the butterfly Pieris brassicae. (b) Scales on the wings of the Pieris rapae. The scales have scalloped ends and are positioned in overlapping rows. (c) A white scale of P. rapae. The ridges have only slightly overlapping lamellae, the crossribs are densely adorned with beads. (d) A black scale, lacking beads. Scale bars, (a) 1 cm, (b) 50 µm, (c) and (d) 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 62.	 

 	Fig. 10  Typical thin film solar cell configuration.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic of a typical DSSC. Reprinted from ref. 66.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Optical photograph of facet lens on the compound eye of butterfly Euploea mulciber. (b) SEM image of the facet lens on the compound eye. (c) SEM image of nipple arrays on the borders between facet lens. (d) Detail, showing the local arrangement of domains with highly ordered nipple arrays. Scale bars, (a) 10 µm, (b) 20 µm, (c) 2 µm, and (d) 200 nm. Provided by T. X. Fan, Shanghai Jiaotong University.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic diagram of the process steps for the fabrication of parabola-shaped SWG structures on an AZO film/Si substrate. Reprinted from ref. 68.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure for parabola-shaped SWSs. Reprinted from ref. 69.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic diagrams of imprinting process for solar cell structure. Reprinted from ref. 71.	 

 	Fig. 16  Structure and model of butterfly Ornithoptera goliath. (a) An overall view of the butterfly. (b) Optical microscopic image of the scales of the black area. (c) FESEM image of the microstructures of the scales. (d) and (e) Cross-sectional views of a single scale with parameters for modelling. (f) Schematic diagram showing the overlapped area of the scales. (g) Dimensions of 3D FDTD model. (a): distance between two ridges; (b): height of the ridges; (c): distance between the bottom of the ridge and the base slab; (d): thickness of the base slab; (e): half vertex angle of the ridge; (f): thickness of the ridge wall. (h) Schematic diagram in constructing the planar scale model by squeezing the 3D original model into a slab of the same bottom area and volume. Scale bars: (a) 2 cm, (b) 50 µm, (c) and (d) 2 µm, (e) 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 72.	 

 	Fig. 17  Reflection spectrum of the original scale, simulated result of model and the planar scale model for the butterfly Ornithoptera goliath. Reprinted from ref. 72.	 
nII = [n1q + n22(1 − q)]1/2
n⊥ = [(1/n1)q + (1/n22) (1 − q)]−1/2

 	Fig. 18  Rectangular grating. Effective refractive indices nII and n⊥.	 

 	Fig. 19  The inverse V-type ridges transform to infinite rectangular layers with increasing effective index as the groove width decreases.	 

 	Fig. 20  Overall view and microstructures of Troides aeacus. (a) An overall view of the butterfly. (b) Optical microscopic image of the scales of the black area. (c) FESEM image of the microstructures of the scales. (d) Close-up of the microstructures. (e) Schematic diagram of the cross-section of a butterfly wing. (f) Schematic diagram after removing the ventral scales of the wing. Scale bars: (a) 2 cm, (b) 50 µm, (c) 5 µm, (d) 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 74.	 

 	Fig. 21  Reflection spectrum of the experimental and simulated results of the original scale, as well as the simulated result of the planar scale model for the butterfly Troides aeacus. Reprinted from ref. 74.	 

 	Fig. 22  Simple examples of 1D, 2D and 3D photonic crystals. The different colors represent materials with different dielectric constants.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 23  (a) An overall view of the butterfly Morpho rhetenor. (b) SEM image of the cross-section of the iridescent scale. Scale bar: 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 51.	 

 	Fig. 24  Design and microstructure of a DSSC coupled to a porous nanoparticle-based 1D PC. (a) Scheme of the solar cell based on the 1D PC exposed to frontal illumination. (b) FESEM image showing a cross-section of a dye-sensitized nc-TiO2 electrode (total thickness indicated by the vertical yellow line) onto which a TiO2–SiO2 nanoparticle multilayer has been deposited (bottom of the image). (c) Magnified view of the silica (spherical particles) and titania (smaller crystallites) layers composing the 1D PC. (d) Reference DSSC. (e) and (f) photonic crystal based DSSC. The different colors displayed by the cells in (e) and (f) arise from the different 1D PCs coupled to the same nc-TiO2 electrode. The lattice parameters are 120 ± 10 and 160 ± 10 nm respectively. Scale bars: (b) 5 µm, (c) 500 nm. Reprinted from ref. 78.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Optical microscope image of a green scale from the butterfly Papilio nireus. (b) Scanning electron microscope image of the PCS in the P. nireus colored scale showing fractured air cylinder edges. (c) Transmission electron microscope image of a section through a P. nireus colored scale, taken at a small angle to the plane of the PCS. (d) Band diagram of P. nireus intradomain PCS structure (the horizontal bar at 505 nm represents fluorescence emission full width at half maximum). Scale bars: (a) 50 µm, (b) and (c) 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 57.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Schematic of the cell fabrication process. (1) Formation of the PC layer. (2) Further formation of the NT layer. (3) The bi-layer was detached from the Ti substrate. (4) The detached bi-layer was glued to a fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate with TiO2 nanoparticles. (5) Final assembly of the DSSC. (b) Cross-section image of the fabricated PC layer. Inset: the PC layer transferred onto a FTO substrate showing a green color. (c) Photographs of PC samples (in ethanol) of various colors. Scale bar: (b) 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 81.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Dorsal surface and (d) ventral surface of the butterfly Cyanophrys remus showing their structural colors. (b) SEM image of the dorsal scale from top view. (c) TEM image of the cross-section through the dorsal scale, the inset shows a magnified region of the single photonic crystal structure in which the details of the ordered structure are visible. (e) SEM image of the photonic crystal grains with random orientation in a ventral green scale from the top view. (f) TEM image of the cross-section through an individual green scale. Scale bars: (b) 1 µm, (c) 5 µm, (e) and (f) 2 µm. Reprinted from ref. 83.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Callophrys rubi in the resting position on an oak leaf, showing the green-colored ventral face of its wings. (b) Optical micrograph of a small region of ventral wing scales taken in reflection. (c) Gyroid structure modelling the cuticular structure. (d) A representative photonic band gap diagram for a simulated single gyroid (I4132) nanostructure with a 25% dielectric (n = 1.56) filling fraction. Reprinted from ref. 87 and 88.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a–e) Schematic of double layer assembly. (a) A solution of polyisoprene-block-poly(ethylene oxide) copolymer and 1–4 nm TiO2 nanoparticles is (b) codeposited on a FTO-covered glass substrate by spin-coating and solvent evaporation. (c) The covered substrate is placed vertically in an ethanolic suspension of polystyrene microspheres to induce the self-assembly of the 3D PC template. (d) APCVD of amorphous TiO2 into the interstitial pores of the polystyrene template. (e) High temperature annealing reveals the double layer TiO2 photoanode with full pore and electronic connectivity. (f) Schematic of a fully assembled DSC based on the self-assembled double layer photoanode. (g) SEM cross-sectional micrograph of the inversed TiO2 opal PC on top of a mesoscopic TiO2 underlayer after high temperature. Scale bar: 2 µm. Reprinted from ref. 93.	 

 	Fig. 30  Schematic illustration of basic mechanism of a semiconductor photocatalytic process.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) An overall view of the butterfly Papilio helenus Linnaeus. (b) Optical microscopic image of the scales of the black area. (c) FESEM image showing the architecture from the top view. (d) FESEM image showing the longitudinal section of the black scale. (e) FESEM image showing the cross-section of a scale. (f) Detail, showing the cross-section of a scale. (g) 3D model with parameters from the FESEM images. Scale bars: (a) 2 cm, (b) 100 µm, (c) 5 µm, (d) 2 µm, (e) 5 µm, (f) 4 µm. Reprinted from ref. 95.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a)–(c), FESEM image of the architecture of ABWA–TiO2. (d) TEM image of ABWA–TiO2. (e) Nitrogen adsorption measurement results of ABWA–TiO2, with the blue and black curves showing the adsorption–desorption isotherms of the sample, and the red one showing the pore-size distribution of the sample. (f) Light harvesting efficiency of ABWA–TiO2 (red) and NT–TiO2 (blue). Scale bars: (a) 2 µm, (b) 1 µm, (c) 200 nm, (d) 100 nm. Reprinted from ref. 95.	 

 	Fig. 33  Hydrogen evolution of the samples in 10% aqueous methanol under UV and visible light irradiation. (a) Comparison between ABWA–TiO2 and NT–TiO2. (b) Comparison between ABWA–TiO2 series loaded with different amount of Pt particles. Reprinted from ref. 95.	 

 	Fig. 34  Application of the inverse opal photonic crystal to increase the effective light path through multireflection.	 

 	Fig. 35  SEM images of: (a) PS opal template. (b) Bi2WO6 inverse opal with the inset showing the absorption spectra of Bi2WO6 inverse opal prepared at 450 °C and a reference Bi2WO6 film. (c) A higher magnification image of the Bi2WO6 inverse opal prepared at 450 °C. (d) Bi2WO6 inverse opal prepared with lower concentration of precursor. Scale bars: (a–d) 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 98.	 

 	Fig. 36  Photoelectrochemical measurements: (a) Potentiodynamic scans with i-Bi2WO6 and n-Bi2WO6 photoelectrodes. (b) Potentiodynamic scans under chopped illumination. (c) Photon-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency of the i-Bi2WO6 and n-Bi2WO6 photoelectrodes obtained at varying potential bias under visible-light irradiation (λ > 400 nm). (d) H2 and O2 gas evolution on i-Bi2WO6 electrode measured at an external potential of 0.8 V. Reprinted from ref. 98.	 

 	Fig. 37  Scanning electron microscope images (a)–(c), Ag elemental mapping (d), (e), (f), and the schematic illustration (g)–(i) of Ag–TiO2 PC with different Ag NP loading. Scale bars: (d)–(f) 1 µm. Reprinted from ref. 103.	 

 	Fig. 38  The reflectance changes in Ag–TiO2 PC upon irradiation with alternating UV/Vis light. (a) The reflectance spectra comparison of the original TiO2 PC (line 1) and Ag–TiO2 PC (line 2). (b) The reflectance intensity changes of Ag–TiO2 upon irradiation operation. The reflectance spectrum of original PC (line 3) is transformed to line 4 after photodeposition of Ag NPs. The line 4 is irradiated upon visible light to transform to line 5, which is followed upon irradiation with UV light to transform to line 6. (c) The detailed recovery of reflectance intensity from line 4 to line 5 upon visible light irradiation for total 8 h. The scheme illustrates the mechanism of the transformation between Ag and Ag2O. (d) The reflectance intensity changes of Ag–TiO2 upon irradiation with xenon lamp without cut off filter. The reflectance spectrum of the original PC (line 7) is transformed to line 8 after photodeposition which is followed, upon irradiation with a xenon lamp, by transformation to line 9. Reprinted from ref. 103.	 

Nipple array	Butterfly compound eyes	Antireflection	Solar cells
Ridges	Inverse V-type	
Ornithoptera goliath
	Antireflection/blackness	Solar cells/photocatalysts
Inverse V-type and sub-wavelength hole arrays	
Triodes aeacus and Papilio helenus Linnaeus
Photonic crystal structures	1D	Lamellar ridge array	
Morpho
	Iridescence	Dye-sensitized Solar cells
Intercalated multilayers	
Chrysiridia ripheus

2D	
Papilio zalmoxis and Papilio nierus	Dye-sensitized solar cells/photocatalysts
3D	Papilionids and lycaenids
Abnormal ridges	Sawtooth type with air gaps inside	
Argyrophorus argenteus
	Broadband reflection/whiteness	Solar heaters
Bead array	Pierid butterflies
Footnotes
† This article was submitted as part of a special collection on Catalysis for Clean Energy.
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work and should be considered co-first authors.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
