Morphology-dependent photocatalytic and gas-sensing functions of three-dimensional TiO 2 –ZnO nanoarchitectures   - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CE01036G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CE01036G
(Paper)
CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 7575-7589Morphology-dependent photocatalytic and gas-sensing functions of three-dimensional TiO2–ZnO nanoarchitectures†

        
          
            Yuan-Chang 
            Liang
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Wei-Cheng 
            Zhao
          
        
      
Department of Optoelectronics and Materials Technology, National Taiwan Ocean University, 20224, Taiwan. E-mail: yuanvictory@gmail.com
Received 
      18th July 2020
    , Accepted 2nd October 2020First published on 3rd October 2020AbstractNanocomposites consisting of three-dimensional ZnO nanorods-decorated TiO2 nanorod templates (TiO2–ZnO) have been prepared by combining sputtering and hydrothermal growth strategies. The TiO2–ZnO heterostructures (TiO2–ZnO-1) were formed via an elevated temperature-grown ZnO seed layer-assisted crystal growth comprised of hexagonally structured ZnO nanorod branches on the top region and numerous ZnO nanoparticles on the sidewall region of the TiO2 nanorod template. In contrast, ZnO nanorods were randomly oriented on the top region of the TiO2 nanorod template by interweaving the neighboring segments via a room-temperature-grown ZnO seed layer-assisted crystal growth (TiO2–ZnO-2). The as-synthesized three-dimensional TiO2–ZnO nanoarchitectures exhibited significantly enhanced photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic performances towards the degradation of rhodamine B dyes under solar light irradiation as compared to the single-component counterparts. Moreover, the branched hexagonally structured ZnO nanorods in TiO2–ZnO-1 contributed to higher degrees of charge transfer ability and charge separation efficiency than those of the TiO2–ZnO-2 composite nanorods, explaining the superior photoactive performance of the TiO2–ZnO-1 composite nanorods under irradiation. The unique three-dimensional branched morphology of the TiO2–ZnO-1 composite nanorods also resulted in a greater number of potential barriers in the composite nanorod system, demonstrating their high gas-sensing performance towards ethanol vapor than that of the TiO2–ZnO-2. The control of the three-dimensional crystal morphology of the hydrothermally derived ZnO nanorods on the surface of the TiO2 nanorod template via changing the initial microstructures of the sputtering deposited ZnO seed layer is a promising approach to the design of three-dimensional TiO2–ZnO nanoarchitectures with desirable photocatalytic and gas-sensing functions.
Introduction
TiO2 nanorods can act as excellent nanomaterials for applications in photocatalysts, gas sensors, and photoelectrodes.1–3 TiO2 nanorod arrays can be synthesized by various chemical methods for a large-area growth and low-cost preparation method, including hydrothermal growth,4 electrodeposition,5 and the sol–gel method.6 Among these chemical synthesis routes, the hydrothermal synthesis of TiO2 nanoarrays is a promising approach due to its simple process parameter control and no further high-temperature post-annealing procedure being needed. One-dimensional (1D) ZnO nanorods are also an excellent n-type semiconductor, and they can be prepared by various chemical approaches for applications in gas-sensing, photocatalysis, and photoelectrode materials; for example, hydrothermal growth,7,8 chemical bath deposition,9 and electrodeposition.10 Although earlier works have shown that individual 1D TiO2 or ZnO nanorods exhibit satisfactory functions, the integration of TiO2 and ZnO nanorods to form a heterogeneous architecture to study the fundamental properties related to the band alignment, the generation of excited charge carriers and their transport through the interface, and potential barrier at the interface in order to understand the performances of photoactive and gas-sensing dual functions is still limited.
A 1D metal oxide semiconductor coupled with other metal oxide materials with a suitable band alignment between the constituent oxides to form a heterogeneous structure demonstrates a promising approach to improving the intrinsic photoactive and gas-sensing properties of the metal oxide semiconductors.3,11,12 Constructing TiO2-based or ZnO-based heterostructures has proved to be a promising approach in enhancing the photoactive and gas-sensing abilities of pristine TiO2 and ZnO constituent counterparts. Several TiO2-based or ZnO-based heterogeneous systems have been proposed and investigated.7,12–14 According to the literature, TiO2-based or ZnO-based heterojunctions have been confirmed as effective strategy for enhancing the photocatalytic activity for the charge-transfer and spatial separation of photogenerated charge carriers, and significantly enhance their photoactivity. Furthermore, the formation of TiO2-based or ZnO-based heterojunction regions improve the resistance variation size upon exposure to target gases and involve an enhanced gas-sensing ability.
Three-dimensional (3D) branched metal oxide nanoarchitecture materials provide an appealing platform with well-defined structures and interfaces, offering long optical paths for efficient light absorption, high-quality conducting channels for rapid electron–hole separation and charge transport, as well as high surface areas.15 Therefore, 3D nanoarchitecture materials have attracted considerable research interest due to their fascinating physical and chemical properties and potential applications in photoactivated and gas-sensing devices. The 3D architectured TiO2 nanomaterials exhibit superior photoactive performance as compared to the 1D TiO2 constituent and they demonstrate higher efficiency in the application of dye-sensitized solar cells.16 Single-step-synthesized 3D nanostructured TiO2 revealed higher photoactive performance than that of vertically aligned 1D nanorods as photoanode materials.17 3D hierarchical nanostructured ZnO displays substantially enhanced gas-sensing properties as compared to 1D ZnO.18 In addition to the aforementioned 3D architecture composed of a single metal oxide, heterogeneous 3D architecture metal oxide nanomaterials demonstrate a higher degree of crystal engineering design for highly efficient photoactive and gas-sensing device applications. The 3D structure of Bi2S3–TiO2 branched heterostructure arrays reveals improved photoelectrochemical properties in comparison with that of the single constituents.19 The 3D branched CdO–ZnO heterogeneous structure demonstrates enhanced photoelectrocatalytic performance in comparison with that of pristine ZnO.20 SnO2–ZnO hierarchical structure-based gas sensors demonstrate favorable potential for enhanced sensitive and selective H2S detection with long-term stability and repeatability.21 All the above-mentioned works show that the 3D heterogeneous nanoarchitectures are beneficial for designing functional nanodevices with desirable performances.
This study proposes the synthesis of 3D TiO2–ZnO nanoarchitectures with desirable device applications via controlling sputtering ZnO seed layer microstructures to modulate the morphology of 3D TiO2–ZnO nanoarchitectures. The sputtering growth temperature of the ZnO seed layer on the TiO2 nanorod templates shows a profound effect on the subsequent morphology evolution of hydrothermally derived ZnO nanorods. Controlling the ZnO seed layer microstructures, leading to the subsequently grown 3D morphology of the TiO2–ZnO nanoarchitectures via simple hydrothermal growth routes not only has novelty but also has potential for designing multi-functional nanomaterials with enhanced photoactive and gas-sensing performances. Research on the crystal growth of 3D TiO2–ZnO heterogeneous nanosystems via controlling the ZnO seed layer microstructure on the surfaces of the TiO2 nanorod templates is limited and not well investigated, and experimental results herein might provide a promising reference for the design of crystalline TiO2–ZnO heterogeneous nanomaterial systems with desirable dual functionality applications.
Experimental methods
Preparation of the 3D architectured TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods
The first step was the preparation of the TiO2 nanorod templates. TiO2 nanorods were grown on F-doped SnO2 (FTO) glass substrates. First, 0.25 mL of TiCl4 and 19 mL HCl were added to 11 mL deionized water and then stirred to obtain a transparent solution for the hydrothermal growth of TiO2 nanorods. The hydrothermal reaction was conducted at 180 °C for 3 h.
The second step was the preparation of the ZnO seed layer. For the preparation of the 3D architectured TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods, ZnO thin films were sputter-coated onto the surface of the TiO2 nanorod template. Radio-frequency magnetron sputtering of ZnO was conducted using a ZnO ceramic target with a diameter of 3 inches in an Ar/O2 (Ar:O2 = 4:1) mixed environment. The sputtering deposition temperature of the ZnO was maintained at 400 °C and room temperature to fabricate the ZnO seed layers with various degrees of crystalline quality. The H-seed layer and L-seed layer represent ZnO seed layers prepared at 400 °C and room temperature, respectively. The gas pressure during sputtering deposition was fixed at 20 mTorr and the ZnO target sputtering power was fixed at 90 W. The microstructural differences between the H- and L-seed layers are shown in Fig. S1 and S2.† Comparatively, larger surface grains were observed for the H-seed layer. The average ZnO surface grain sizes of the H- and L-seed layers were approximately 35 and 17 nm, respectively. All the seed layers exhibited the c-axis textured structure, and a higher degree of c-axis texture was shown in the H-seed layer than that of the L-seed layer.
The third step was the preparation of the TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods. Here, 100 mL of deionized water containing 0.25 M Zn(NO3)2·6H2O and 0.25 M hexamethylenetetramine (HMT, C6H12N4) was prepared as the precursor solution for hydrothermal growth. Then, 20 mL of precursor solution was transferred into a stainless steel Teflon-lined autoclave and the TiO2 nanorod templates coated with elevated temperature and room temperature-grown ZnO seed layers were immersed in the precursor solution. The autoclave was sealed and kept at 95 °C for 6 h in an oven for the hydrothermal growth of ZnO nanorods. The obtained products were collected and washed with absolute ethanol and distilled water several times and then dried in an oven at 60 °C; the obtained 3D architectured TiO2–ZnO products were collected for further analyses. The 3D architectured TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods formed based on hydrothermal growth of ZnO crystals on the elevated temperature (H-seed layer) and room temperature (R-seed layer)-grown ZnO seed layers were assigned the sample codes TiO2–ZnO-1 and TiO2–ZnO-2, respectively. The mass of the as-grown ZnO nanostructures via hydrothermal reaction was approximately 0.015 ± 0.001 g.
Materials analysis and characterization tests
An X-ray diffractometer (XRD; D2 PHASER) was used to analyze the crystal structures of the TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM; Hitachi S-4800) and transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM; JEOL JEM-2100F) were used to characterize the morphologies, detailed microstructures, and compositions of the composite nanorod samples. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS; ULVAC-PHI XPS) was used to characterize the elemental binding states of the composite nanorod samples. Photodegradation tests were performed by comparing the degradation of aqueous solutions of rhodamine B (RhB; 10−5 M) containing various composite nanorod samples under light irradiation from a 100 W Xe arc lamp. The UV-vis light was used throughout all the photoactive tests. The volume of the RhB solution was 20 mL. The ratio of the RhB concentration (C) after light irradiation to the initial RhB concentration without light irradiation (Co), i.e., C/Co, was used to determine the level of photodegradation of the RhB solution with various nanorod photocatalysts. Photoelectrochemical (PEC) properties were determined in a three-electrode electrochemical system, where the as-synthesized nanorod sample was used as the working electrode, a Pt wire was used as the counter electrode, and an Ag/AgCl electrode was used as the reference electrode in an aqueous solution containing 0.5 M Na2SO4. The Nyquist plots of various samples were measured at the open circuit potential using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The ethanol vapor sensing performances of various sensors made from TiO2 and TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods were measured using a home-built computer-controlled gas-sensing measurement system in which a vacuum chamber equipped with a pumping system and pressure gages, heating holder, mass flow controllers, sophisticated electric probe system together with a data acquisition system was integrated into the gas-sensing system. A given amount of ethanol vapor (purity: >99.99%, concentration: 50–750 ppm) was injected into the testing chamber through a microsyringe, and the output senor resistance was monitored. The patterned metallic platinum electrodes were coated onto the surface of the sample for electric contacts with probes during the gas-sensing measurements. The response of the sensors herein is defined as Ra/Rg for ethanol vapor, where Ra and Rg are the sensor resistance in air and target gas, respectively. The response speed of the sensor is defined as the time needed for the variation in electrical resistance to reach 90% of the equilibrium value after injecting the target gas, and the recovery speed is defined as the time needed for the sensor resistance to drop to 90% of the maximum resistance with the removal of the target gas.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1(a) and (b) show SEM images of the as-synthesized TiO2 nanorod template; the nanorods are uniformly and vertically aligned on the FTO substrate and have a rectangular morphology. The lengths and diameters of the nanorods were approximately 1–1.5 μm and 50–80 nm, respectively, and they had smooth side facets. After the hydrothermal growth of ZnO crystals with an H-seed layer (Fig. 1(c) and (d)), dense hexagonally structured ZnO nanorods with diameters of approximately 70–100 nm and lengths of 50–400 nm were grown divergently on the TiO2 nanorod tips and formed a branched structure. Hexagonally structured ZnO nanorod dendrites were decorated on the TiO2 nanorod top region with naked side surfaces, implying selective anisotropic crystal growth on the TiO2 nanorods.22 Notably, the sidewall of the TiO2 nanorods became rough with the uniform decoration of numerous ZnO nanoparticles after the two-step hydrothermal ZnO crystal growth. Fig. 1(e) and (f) show the SEM images of the heterogeneous TiO2–ZnO nanostructures synthesized via the L-seed layer assisted hydrothermal growth of ZnO nanorods. The ZnO nanorods in the heterogeneous arrays have an average diameter of approximately 10–25 nm and length of 0.5–1 μm, growing divergently on the TiO2 nanorod tips. The two-step hydrothermally-grown ZnO crystals were randomly oriented on the TiO2 top region by interweaving with neighboring segments; the diameters of the ZnO crystals were smaller herein as compared to those grown on the H-seed layer. A small amount of ZnO nanoparticle-like crystals were decorated on the sidewalls of the TiO2 nanorods. The SEM analyses revealed that the sputtering temperature of the ZnO seed layers on the TiO2 nanorod templates profoundly affects the hydrothermally derived ZnO crystal morphology of the TiO2–ZnO heterogeneous structures. More ZnO nuclei will be attracted to the H-seed layer than on the L-seed layer during the hydrothermal crystal growth reaction, and result in the formation of larger diameters and well hexagonally structured primary rods in the TiO2–ZnO-1 composite nanorods. This might further promote the secondary ZnO rod crystals formed during the hydrothermal reaction along the distinct six lateral facets of the primary ZnO rods on the in situ heating formed ZnO seed layer covering the TiO2 nanorod template in this study.22
 Fig. 1  Top view and cross-sectional view SEM images of various samples: (a) and (b) TiO2, (c) and (d) TiO2–ZnO-1, (e) and (f) TiO2–ZnO-2. 

Fig. 2(a) reveals the XRD pattern of the as-synthesized TiO2 nanorod template. In addition to the Bragg reflections originating from the FTO substrate, the intense Bragg reflections centered at approximately 27.45°, 36.08°, and 54.32° are ascribed to the crystallographic planes (110), (101), and (211) of the rutile TiO2 phase (JCPDS 021-1276). Fig. 2(b) and (c) display the XRD patterns of TiO2–ZnO-1 and TiO2–ZnO-2 composite nanorods, respectively. In comparison with Fig. 2(a), four additional Bragg reflections centered at approximately 31.77°, 34.42°, 47.54° and 56.60° were observed; these distinct Bragg reflections are ascribed to the (100), (002), (102) and (110) planes of the hexagonally structured ZnO (JCPDS 36-1451). Notably, the intensity of the ZnO (002) Bragg reflection is higher than that of other ZnO crystallographic planes herein, revealing the c-axis-dominated crystal growth of ZnO.11 This finding is in agreement with the observations of the SEM images in which the one-dimensional ZnO nanostructures were grown on the seed layer-coated TiO2 nanorods. No Bragg reflections from other impurity phases were detected on the samples formed with a two-step hydrothermal crystal growth procedure. The XRD results demonstrated that the TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods with good crystalline quality were prepared in this study.
 Fig. 2  XRD patterns of various samples: (a) TiO2, (b) TiO2–ZnO-1, (c) TiO2–ZnO-2. 

Fig. 3(a) shows the low-magnification TEM image of the TiO2–ZnO-1 composite nanorod. The sidewall of the composite nanorod was rugged. This revealed that ZnO particles were decorated on the side facets of the TiO2 nanorods. Notably, the hydrothermally derived primary and dendrite ZnO nanorod crystals did not adhere to the TiO2 nanorod template in Fig. 3(a) as seen in earlier SEM observations. This is because the one-dimensional ZnO crystals grown on the TiO2 through the two-step growth were mostly scratched off from the TiO2 nanorod template during the TEM grid sample preparation. The top region of the composite nanorod demonstrated large and irregular shaped crystals, which were residual hydrothermally derived ZnO crystals. The high-resolution (HR) TEM images taken from various regions of the composite nanorod are shown in Fig. 3(b)–(d). The distinct lattice fringes with a spacing of approximately 0.26 nm were assigned to the crystallographic plane spacing of hexagonal ZnO (002). The lattice fringes with a spacing of 0.33 nm in the inner region of the composite nanorod were assigned to the interplanar distance of the tetragonal TiO2 (110). The HRTEM results demonstrated that the TiO2–ZnO composite nanorod was in a crystalline structure. Fig. 3(e) shows the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of several TiO2–ZnO-1 composite nanorods. Several clear diffraction spots arranged in centric rings are associated with the wurtzite ZnO (100), (002), and (102) planes, and rutile TiO2 (110) and (101) planes. This demonstrates the well-constructed TiO2–ZnO heterogeneous structure and the good crystallinity of the composite nanorods. The energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) line-scan analysis in Fig. 3(f) confirmed the localization of Ti in the core area and the tendency of Zn to be distributed around the surface of the TiO2 nanorod template. Furthermore, Fig. 3(g) reveals the Zn, Ti, and O elemental mapping images of the TiO2–ZnO-1 composite nanorod from the selected region. The results demonstrated Zn to be homogeneously covered the outer region of the composite nanorod and O was homogeneously distributed over the whole composite nanorod; Ti was confined to the inner region of the composite nanorod. The compositional analysis results demonstrated the good compositional distribution of the TiO2–ZnO composite structure in this study.
 Fig. 3  TEM analyses of TiO2–ZnO-1: (a) low-magnification image. (b)–(d) HRTEM images taken from the TiO2/ZnO interface, TiO2 nanorod template, and outer ZnO layer regions of the sample, respectively. (e) SAED pattern of several composite nanorods. (f) EDS line-scanning profiles across the composite nanorod. (g) Ti, Zn, and O elemental mapping images taken from the selected composite nanorod. 

Fig. 4(a) shows the low-magnification TEM image of the TiO2–ZnO-2 composite nanorod. The sidewall of the composite nanorod showed an undulated feature because of the decoration of ZnO crystals. The ZnO nanorods grown through the two-step hydrothermal procedure on the TiO2 template as observed earlier in the SEM images were not shown herein. This is because the one-dimensional ZnO crystals grown on the TiO2 through the two-step growth were most scratched off from the TiO2 during the TEM grid sample preparation. It is easy to destroy the integrity of the TiO2–ZnO composite during the destructive TEM sample preparation. Fig. 4(b) and (c) display the HR images of the local regions taken from the composite nanorod. The distinct lattice fringes with a distance of approximately 0.26 nm from the crystallographic interplane spacing of hexagonal ZnO (002) and the lattice fringes with a spacing of 0.33 nm from the crystallographic interplane spacing of tetragonal TiO2 (110) were clearly distinguished. The coverage of ZnO crystals on the TiO2 nanorod was well demonstrated herein. Fig. 4(d) and (e) show the EDS spectra of the selected composite nanorod taken from the top irregular protrusion and inner region, respectively. The C and Cu signals in the spectrum originated from the TEM grid; Ti, Zn, and O were detected in the composite nanorod. No other impurity atoms were detected herein. Notably, the corresponding EDS spectrum taken from the top region of the composite nanorod demonstrated that the Zn and O were the main constituent elements; moreover, the Ti and O were the main constituent elements in the EDS spectrum taken from the inner region of the composite nanorod. This revealed that the one-dimensional ZnO crystal grown from the two-step hydrothermal growth was residual on the top irregular protrusion region of the composite nanorod. Fig. 4(f) exhibits the SAED pattern of several TiO2–ZnO-2 composite nanorods. Several clear diffraction spots arranged in rings associated with (100), (002), and (102) planes of the ZnO and (110) and (101) planes of the rutile TiO2 were observed, revealing the heterogeneous structure of the prepared TiO2–ZnO sample in this study.
 Fig. 4  TEM analyses of TiO2–ZnO-2: (a) low-magnification image. (b) and (c) HRTEM images of the TiO2/ZnO interface and outer ZnO layer regions of the sample, respectively. (d) EDS spectrum taken from the region marked d in (a). (e) EDS spectrum taken from the region marked e in (a). (f) SAED pattern of several composite nanorods. 

Fig. 5(a) and (b) show the XPS spectra of the TiO2–ZnO-1 and TiO2–ZnO-2 composite nanorods, respectively. The XPS spectra displayed the main binding-energy peaks of Zn, Ti, and O in the samples, indicating the good formation of TiO2/ZnO composite architecture via a two-step hydrothermal method. The trace carbon contamination on the surface of the nanorod samples was associated with the exposure of the samples to ambient air. No impurity atoms were detected in the composite nanorod samples.
 Fig. 5  XPS spectra of composite nanorods: (a) TiO2–ZnO-1, and (b) TiO2–ZnO-2. 

Fig. 6(a) presents the optical absorption properties of the pristine TiO2, ZnO, TiO2–ZnO-1, and TiO2–ZnO-2 nanorods. For the TiO2 nanorods, a sharp drop in the absorption edge was observed, and the onset was at approximately 410 nm, which is consistent with the intrinsic band-gap absorption of rutile TiO2.3,23 The ZnO nanorods showed a sharp drop in the absorption edge with the onset at approximately 389 nm (Fig. 5(a)), which is consistent with the intrinsic band-gap absorption of wurtzite ZnO.8,24 After the ZnO nanorods and nanoparticles were grown on the surfaces of the TiO2 nanorod template, the absorption edge of the TiO2–ZnO composites was broadened, and a red-shifted extension in the absorption edge was observed as shown in Fig. 6(a). The markedly improved light-harvesting ability of the TiO2–ZnO-1 composites was a consequence of the formation of the ZnO granule-like layer feature and numerous branched ZnO nanorods of the composite from the second hydrothermal ZnO crystal growth were displayed. The substantial increase in the coverage thickness effect for the composites might account for the improved light-harvesting ability. Fig. 6(b) and (c) show the optical bandgap values of the control samples of the TiO2 and ZnO nanorods, respectively, in which the bandgap values were evaluated by the conversion of the absorbance spectra according to the previously reported formula.25 The optical bandgap of the TiO2 nanorods was approximately 3.03 eV, and that for the ZnO nanorods was 3.19 eV in this study.
 Fig. 6  (a) Optical absorbance spectra of the pristine TiO2 (black), ZnO (green), TiO2–ZnO-1 (red), and TiO2–ZnO-2 (blue). (b) The bandgap evaluation of the TiO2 nanorods. (c) The bandgap evaluation of the ZnO nanorods. 

Fig. 7(a) shows the transient photocurrent density versus time curves for the TiO2, TiO2–ZnO-1 and TiO2–ZnO-2 at an applied potential voltage of 0.8 V versus Ag/AgCl. In the dark, the current densities for the TiO2, TiO2–ZnO-1, and TiO2–ZnO-2 samples were low; the photocurrent density of various rod-like samples rapidly increased to the steady states upon illumination. The time-dependent photocurrent density curves were reproducible for five on/off cycles with chopped illumination, indicating their satisfactory stability. Notably, TiO2–ZnO-1 achieved a photocurrent density of approximately 0.56 mA cm−2, about 11-fold that of the pristine TiO2, and the TiO2–ZnO-2 achieved a photocurrent density of approximately 0.15 mA cm−2, about 3-fold that of the pristine TiO2. A substantial photoresponse enhancement of the TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods was observed. The Nyquist plots of the TiO2, TiO2–ZnO-1, and TiO2–ZnO-2 nanorods are presented in Fig. 7(b). All TiO2–ZnO composite samples showed a smaller semicircle radius in comparison to that of the pristine TiO2. TiO2–ZnO-1 had the smallest semicircle radius as compared to the other samples, indicating its fastest interfacial charge transfer of the photoexcited carriers.8,23Fig. 7(c) shows the corresponding fitting equivalent circuit, composed of a series resistance Rs (accounting for the resistances of the conductive substrate, the external electrical contacts, and the liquid electrolyte), surface state charge trapping resistance (Rtrap), double-layer capacitance (CPEbulk), charge-compensated capacitance (CPEss), and charge transfer resistance (Rct) for the TiO2–ZnO composite nanorod system in the Nyquist curves.26 The fitted Rct values for the TiO2–ZnO-1 and TiO2–ZnO-2 were 352 and 2005 Ω, respectively. Notably, the Rct for the pristine TiO2 control sample is also shown herein and is approximately 3507 Ω. The heterogeneous structure of the TiO2–ZnO displayed substantially lower Rct values in comparison with the pristine TiO2. The TiO2–ZnO-1 electrode possessed the smallest impedance as compared to the other samples, confirming that it offers the fastest charge transport and the longest survival of photoexcited charge carriers. A similar smaller semicircle, i.e., the reduced interfacial charge transfer resistance of the oxide semiconductor integrated with another oxide with a suitable band alignment was also reported in the ZnO–ZnS and SrTiO3–TiO2 heterogeneous systems.27,28
 Fig. 7  (a) Photocurrent density versus time curves of various samples at an applied potential of 0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl under chopped illumination. (b) Nyquist plots of TiO2 (black), TiO2–ZnO-1 (red), and TiO2–ZnO-2 (blue) at an open-circuit potential under illumination. (c) A possible equivalent circuit was used to fit the Rct values of the composite nanorods. 
The Mott–Schottky (M–S) plots of various samples are exhibited in Fig. 8 according to eqn (1). For comparison, the M–S plots of the pristine TiO2 and ZnO nanorod control samples are also included in Fig. 8(a) and (b), respectively. Both pristine TiO2 and ZnO control samples exhibited n-type characteristics in which a positive slope in the 1/C2versus potential plot was observed. The flat band potential and carrier density at the electrode/electrolyte interface were further estimated by the M–S equation29,30 1/C2 = (2/eεε0Nd)[(V − VFB − kT)/e](1)where C is the capacitance of the space charge region, e is the electron charge, ε is the dielectric constant of the semiconductor. εo is the permittivity of the free space, Nd is the donor density, V is the applied potential, VFB is the flat band potential, k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature. By extrapolating the X-axis intercepts of the linear region in the M–S plots, the VFB values of rutile TiO2 and ZnO nanorods were respectively determined to be −0.21 and −0.41 V versus NHE (Fig. 8(a) and (b)). Consequently, when the TiO2 and ZnO were integrated to form the TiO2–ZnO-1 and TiO2–ZnO-2 heterogeneous structures, electrons migrated from the Fermi level of the ZnO to that of the TiO2 until their Fermi levels were equal; the corresponding M–S results are displayed in Fig. 8(c) and (d), respectively. The more negative onset potentials in all TiO2–ZnO heterogeneous structures also implied less carrier recombination than the TiO2.31 The carrier density Nd variation for the TiO2–ZnO-1 and TiO2–ZnO-2 heterogeneous structures can be evaluated from the slope size of the linear region of M–S plots; the TiO2–ZnO-1 had a smaller slope than that of the TiO2–ZnO-2 in the linear regions. It is concluded that the TiO2–ZnO-1 had a higher carrier density in comparison with that of the TiO2–ZnO-2, revealing a superior charge separation efficiency in TiO2–ZnO-1. The construction of the TiO2/ZnO heterojunction in the TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods explained the aforementioned observations. It has been shown that in n-type semiconductors, the flat band potentials are usually approximately 0–0.1 eV lower than their conduction bands (CB).32 The conduction band (CB) edge potentials of the TiO2 and ZnO were at −0.21 and −0.41 V versus NHE, respectively, and the location of the TiO2 and ZnO conduction bands were similar to their flat band potentials in this study as reported in the previous work.33 Herein, the bandgap values of TiO2 and ZnO were 3.03 eV and 3.19 eV, respectively. The difference in the relative positions of the CB and valence band (VB) against the Fermi level in TiO2 and ZnO engendered band bending at the TiO2/ZnO interface region and accelerated the transfer of photoexcited electrons from the CB of ZnO to the CB of TiO2, as revealed in Fig. 8(e). Moreover, the photogenerated holes were transferred from the VB of TiO2 to the VB of ZnO. Notably, photoexcited electrons in the ZnO were injected into TiO2 because of the type II band alignment between the ZnO and TiO2 in Fig. 8(e). A similar effective photoexcited charge separation has been widely reported in other heterostructure systems constructed with two different wide bandgap semiconductors with a suitable type II band alignment.25,34,35
 Fig. 8  Mott–Schottky plots of various samples: (a) TiO2, (b) ZnO, (c) TiO2–ZnO-1, (d) TiO2–ZnO-2. (e) Schematic illustration of the photo-induced charge transfer and separation at the interface of the TiO2–ZnO heterostructure. 
The enhanced photoactivity of the TiO2 nanorod template via two-step growth with ZnO nanorods was determined through photocatalytic decomposition experiments involving RhB dyes. As shown in Fig. 9(a)–(c), the intensity of the absorbance peak of the RhB solution containing TiO2, TiO2–ZnO-1, and TiO2–ZnO-2 photocatalysts decreased with light irradiation duration, indicating that these nanorod samples exhibited photocatalytic degradation behavior. The C/Coversus irradiation duration results for the RhB solutions containing various nanorod photocatalysts are shown in Fig. 9(d). Before irradiation, the nanorod photocatalysts were immersed in the RhB solution for 60 min to reach adsorption–desorption equilibrium, and the decreased concentration of the RhB solution reflected the dye absorptivity onto the surfaces of the nanorod photocatalysts. A marked drop by approximately 8% for the TiO2–ZnO-1 photocatalyst was observed under the given dark balance conditions. This revealed that the TiO2–ZnO-1 photocatalyst exhibited more intense dye absorptivity than did other nanorod photocatalysts herein. After light irradiation for 60 min, the 82.4% and 45.7% RhB dyes were photodegraded for the RhB solutions containing TiO2–ZnO-1 and TiO2–ZnO-2 photocatalysts, respectively. In contrast, only 34.6% of the RhB dyes were photodegraded by using the pristine TiO2 photocatalyst under the same test conditions. The TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods exhibited superior photodegradation performance as compared with the pristine TiO2 nanorods herein. The kinetic linear simulation curves of the photocatalytic RhB degradation over different samples demonstrated that the degradation reactions followed an apparent first-order kinetic model at low initial concentrations, as exhibited in Fig. 9(e). This kinetic model follows the formula ln(Co/C) = kt, where k is the first-order rate constant (min−1) and t is the irradiation duration.36 Remarkably, the TiO2–ZnO-1 photocatalyst exhibited the highest k value of 0.0299 min−1, and for the TiO2–ZnO-2 photocatalyst, the value was 0.0109 min−1. Notably, the pristine TiO2 nanorod photocatalyst exhibited relatively low photoactivity with k = 0.0074 min−1. The photoactivity of various nanorod photocatalysts showed the following order: TiO2–ZnO-1 > TiO2–ZnO-2 > TiO2. The construction of the TiO2–ZnO heterostructures substantially enhanced the photodegradation efficiency of the TiO2 nanorod template, and this is attributable to the formation of heterojunctions between the ZnO nanorods and TiO2 nanorod template. The heterogeneous structures of the sputtering-assisted-derived ZnO–ZnS and hydrothermally-derived TiO2–ZnS have shown similar enhanced photoactivities for the composite structures in comparison with the constituent counterparts.37,38 According to the band alignment of the TiO2/ZnO constructed in Fig. 8(e), the possible processes of photodegradation of the RhB organic dyes involving the TiO2–ZnO composite nanorod system herein can be described as follows.8,39 The photodegradation processes might consist of a complex sequence of reactions including several interface transfer processes. ZnO + hv → ZnO (e−) + ZnO (h+)(2) TiO2 + hv → TiO2 (e−) + TiO2 (h+)(3) e− (from secondary dendrite ZnO) + O2 → ˙O2−(4) h+ (from secondary dendrite ZnO) + H2O → ˙OH + H+(5) TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods + hv (charge separation) → TiO2 template (e−) + ZnO primary (h+)(6) h+ (from primary ZnO) + H2O → ˙OH + H+(7)in which the primary ZnO means the first initially hydrothermally grown ZnO nanorod crystals, and the secondary dendrite ZnO represents the hydrothermally grown secondary ZnO branches in the TiO2–ZnO-1 composite structure. Notably, when the TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods are illuminated, the major electrons might accumulate in the TiO2 nanorod template and holes accumulate in the primary ZnO nanorods because of the type II band alignment of the TiO2/ZnO. This might dominate the major charge separation route in the composite system. Moreover, the contacts of the ZnO homojunction between the primary and secondary ZnO crystals might also contribute to the improved charge separation efficiency but with a minor effect in the overall TiO2–ZnO composite system. The as-formed ˙O2− in eqn (4) might further react with water molecules to form hydroperoxy and finally generate ˙OH radicals. Notably, the electron from the TiO2 nanorod template might not be involved in the formation of ˙O2− because the potential is below −0.33 V for generating superoxide radicals. The ˙OH radicals directly decomposed RhB dyes during the photodegradation process and the final products were mainly carbon dioxide, water and inorganic ions. The existence of these TiO2/ZnO heterojunctions and ZnO/ZnO homojunctions could enhance the photoexcited charge transfer and separation, thus enhancing the photocatalytic activity of the TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods as revealed by the earlier PEC and EIS results. Notably, in comparison with the TiO2–ZnO-2, the TiO2–ZnO-1 demonstrated higher photodegradation efficiency towards RhB dyes. In addition to the heterojunctions formed in the TiO2/ZnO composite nanorods, the branched morphology of ZnO nanorods provided numerous ZnO homojunctions among the primary and secondary dendrite-grown ZnO nanorods. It has been shown that the homojunctions in the TiO2 nanosheets-TiO2 quantum dots homojunction semiconductors contribute to the improved photoinduced charge separation and, therefore, the superior photoactivity.40 The hexagonally structured ZnO nanorods in the TiO2–ZnO-1 have shown better crystal quality than the non-hexagonally structured ZnO nanorods in TiO2–ZnO-2. The better crystal quality of the one-dimensional ZnO crystal provides an effective route for the charge transfer ability and might improve the charge separation efficiency in the composite structure under irradiation.41 The aforementioned reasons might account for the superior photoactivity of the TiO2–ZnO-1 as compared to TiO2–ZnO-2 in this study. Notably, in Fig. 9(f) and (g), after five test cycles, the TiO2–ZnO-1 and TiO2–ZnO-2 photocatalysts maintained high reusability and stability; approximately 81.3% and 44.2% photodegradation of the RhB solution were observed, respectively. The retained photoactivity considerably promoted the practical application of these composite structures in eliminating RhB dye pollutants.
 Fig. 9  The irradiation duration-dependent absorption spectra of the RhB solution containing various samples: (a) TiO2, (b) TiO2–ZnO-1, (c) TiO2–ZnO-2. (d) Plots of C/Coversus irradiation duration. (e) Plots of ln(Co/C) versus irradiation duration. (f) Recycling photodegradation tests of the RhB solution containing the TiO2–ZnO-1 photocatalyst. (g) Recycling photodegradation tests of the RhB solution containing the TiO2–ZnO-2 photocatalyst. 

Fig. 10(a) illustrates the temperature-dependent ethanol vapor sensing responses of the TiO2, TiO2–ZnO-1, and TiO2–ZnO-2 sensors on exposure to 750 ppm ethanol vapor. The optimal operating temperature of various nanorod sensors was 300 °C in this study. The pristine TiO2, TiO2–ZnO-1, and TiO2–ZnO-2 sensors showed the maximum responses of approximately 3.0, 14.9, and 7.6, respectively on exposure to 750 ppm ethanol vapor; further increasing the operating temperature decreased the ethanol vapor sensing responses of the various sensors. The optimal gas sensor operating temperature of the oxide nanomaterials is associated with a resultant equilibrium between the surface reaction with ethanol vapor molecules and the diffusion of ethanol vapor molecules to the surfaces of the oxide nanomaterials.42 Moreover, such a temperature-dependent gas-sensing behavior has also been reported to be responsible for the kinetics and thermodynamics of target gas adsorption and desorption on the surface of the oxide materials.43 The optimal operating temperature for ethanol vapor concentration-dependent gas-sensing tests of the various sensors was fixed at 300 °C herein. Fig. 10(b)–(d) display the dynamic resistance variation curves of the TiO2, TiO2–ZnO-1, and TiO2–ZnO-2 sensors on exposure to various ethanol vapor concentrations. When the sensors were exposed to ethanol vapor, their bulk resistance decreased; moreover, the drop degree of the bulk resistance was increased with a raised ethanol vapor concentration. All the sensors followed n-type gas-sensing behavior on exposure to ethanol vapor, associated with the n-type semiconductor nature of the TiO2 and ZnO. The sensors based on the TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods had higher resistance variation amplitudes towards each ethanol vapor concentration as compared to that of the pristine TiO2 sensor. Fig. 10(e) summarizes the ethanol vapor sensing responses of various sensors exposed to various concentrations of ethanol vapor. Notably, the ethanol vapor sensing response of the TiO2–ZnO-1 sensor on exposure to 50–750 ppm ethanol vapor ranged from 5.6 to 14.9, relative to which the TiO2–ZnO-2 nanorods demonstrated a poorer ethanol vapor sensing ability, with responses ranging from 3.5 to 7.6 on exposure to 50–750 ppm ethanol vapor. Notably, the TiO2 sensor on exposure to 50–750 ppm ethanol vapor showed gas-sensing responses ranging from 1.5 to 3.0. Comparatively, the ethanol vapor sensing responses of the sensors made of TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods were superior to those of the sensor made from pristine TiO2 nanorods. Fig. 10(f) and (g) show the cyclic ethanol vapor sensing test results for the TiO2–ZnO-1 and TiO2–ZnO-2 sensors exposed to 750 ppm ethanol vapor. A stable ethanol vapor sensing behavior over five test cycles was observed for these composite nanorods, demonstrating their high stability and reproducibility for ethanol vapor detection.
 Fig. 10  (a) The operating temperature-dependent ethanol vapor sensing responses of various sensors on exposure to 750 ppm ethanol vapor. Dynamic resistance variation curves of various sensors towards different ethanol concentrations (50, 100, 250, 500, and 750 ppm): (b) TiO2, (c) TiO2–ZnO-1, (d) TiO2–ZnO-2. (e) The summarized concentration-dependent ethanol vapor sensing responses of various sensors. (f) Cyclic gas-sensing response curves of the TiO2–ZnO-1 sensor on exposure to 750 ppm ethanol vapor. (g) Cyclic gas-sensing response curves of the TiO2–ZnO-2 sensor on exposure to 750 ppm ethanol vapor. 

Fig. 11(a) and (b) show the possible ethanol vapor sensing mechanisms of the TiO2–ZnO-1 and TiO2–ZnO-2 sensors, respectively. Oxygen molecules were adsorbed on the surfaces of the n-type oxide semiconductors (TiO2 or ZnO) to form ionized oxygen species in ambient air; the extraction of the free electrons from the conduction band of the oxide semiconductors resulted in a decrease in surface carrier concentration and increased bulk resistance. When ethanol vapor molecules are introduced, they will react with the ionized oxygen species on the surface of the n-type oxide semiconductors and the reductive ethanol vapor molecules will reduce the concentration of ionized oxygen species on the oxide surfaces and release electrons back to the conduction band of the oxide semiconductors, decreasing the bulk resistance.11,44 The involved reactions can be expressed as follows:45 C2H5OH (vapor) + 6O− (ads.) → 2CO2 + 3H2O + 6e−(8) C2H5OH (vapor) + 3O2− (ads.) → 2CO2 (g) + 3H2O (g) + 3e−(9)Notably, the work function of TiO2 is smaller than that of ZnO. The electrons in ZnO will transfer to TiO2, and holes in TiO2 will flow to ZnO (to equalize the Fermi levels) when the TiO2 and ZnO are contacted to form a heterogeneous system. As a result, a heterogeneous depletion thin layer will form at the TiO2/ZnO contact regions.46 The heterogeneous depletion thin layer will hinder the flow of electrons and establishes the potential barrier height at the TiO2/ZnO interfacial region.34,44 The exposure of the TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods in ambient air will generate surface depletion layers on the ZnO crystals of the TiO2–ZnO composites nanorods, and further thicken the initially formed heterogeneous depletion layer thickness at the TiO2/ZnO hetero-contact regions. Accordingly, the potential barrier heights at the ZnO crystal surface and TiO2/ZnO interfacial region will be considerably high, resulting in a substantially high bulk resistance in the composite nanorods. Upon the introduction of ethanol vapor molecules, according to eqn (8) and (9), the ethanol vapor molecules will interact with the adsorbed ionized oxygen species and eliminate them by forming volatile compounds, in turn releasing the captured electrons back to the conduction band of the ZnO. The surface and interface depletion layers in the composite system will be further narrowed. This will markedly lower the height of the total potential barriers in the composite system, decreasing the bulk resistance of the composite nanorods. The relative change in the total potential barrier height variation by the injection/stoppage of ethanol vapor might dominate the ethanol vapor sensing response of the rod-like composites in this study; a substantial variation degree will induce obvious enhancement in the gas sensor response. Based on the aforementioned discussions, the extra interfacial depletion layer at the TiO2/ZnO interfaces might explain the enhanced ethanol vapor sensing ability in the TiO2–ZnO sensors as compared to that of the pristine TiO2 sensor. A similar design of SnO2/ZnO hierarchical nanostructures with enhanced ethanol vapor sensing ability is attributed to the additional formation of the SnO2/ZnO heterojunction.47 The enhanced trimethylamine gas-sensing ability of branch-like nanostructures consisting of α-Fe2O3 nanorods and TiO2 nanofibers also showed the important contribution of α-Fe2O3/TiO2 heterojunctions.48 In contrast, the superior ethanol vapor sensing ability of the TiO2–ZnO-1 sensor as compared to that of the TiO2–ZnO-2 sensor can be understood by the factors explained below. According to the schematic regions (1)–(3) in Fig. 11(a), the surface charge carrier depletion layer of the ZnO, homojunction between the primary ZnO and secondary ZnO dendrites, and the heterojunction between the primary ZnO and TiO2 nanorod template contributed three types of potential barrier heights in the TiO2–ZnO-1 sensor. However, according to the schematic regions (1)–(2) in Fig. 11(b), only two types of potential barrier height existed in the TiO2–ZnO-2 sensor, i.e., the surface depletion layer of the ZnO and the heterojunction between the primary ZnO and TiO2 nanorod template. When the TiO2–ZnO-1 and TiO2–ZnO-2 sensors were exposed to ethanol vapor, the total potential barrier height variation degree in the TiO2–ZnO-1 was expected to be larger than that of the TiO2–ZnO-2 sensor in this study. The hydrothermally derived 3D dendrite-like ZnO crystals formed by the assistance of the elevated-temperature grown ZnO seed layer provided the TiO2–ZnO-1 composite nanorods with more potential barrier numbers in comparison with the TiO2–ZnO-2 composite nanorods because of the substantial difference in morphology. Notably, the contact between the primary ZnO rods and secondary ZnO dendrites also plays an important role in affecting the sensor resistance variation before and after exposure to ethanol vapor. An enhanced hydrogen gas-sensing ability has been observed because of the existence of ZnO/ZnO homojunctions in the ZnO oxide crystal.49 In the ZnO nanowire networks, the interplay between the conduction through individual nanowires and the nanowire-to-nanowire homojunctions enhances their gas-sensing ability.50 The proposed possible ethanol vapor sensing mechanisms explained the superior ethanol vapor sensing performance obtained for the TiO2–ZnO-1 sensor in this study. The response speeds were in the range of 18–68 s for the TiO2 sensor upon exposure to 50–750 ppm ethanol vapor. The recovery speeds of the TiO2 sensor exhibited slower values than their corresponding response speeds and were in the range of 85–119 s upon exposure to 50–750 ppm ethanol vapor. Notably, the TiO2–ZnO-1 and TiO2–ZnO-2 sensors not only exhibited an improved gas-sensing response but also displayed faster response and recovery speeds under the given test conditions. The response speeds of the TiO2–ZnO-1 and TiO2–ZnO-2 sensors on exposure to 50–750 ppm ethanol vapor were in the ranges of 3–10 s and 7–22 s, respectively; moreover, the recovery speeds of the TiO2–ZnO-1 and TiO2–ZnO-2 sensors were in the ranges of 38–91 s and 73–111 s, respectively on exposure to 50–750 ppm ethanol vapor. These results revealed that the response and recovery speeds of the pristine TiO2 nanorods towards ethanol vapor can be slightly improved by the formation of the TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods. A similar enhancement in the response and recovery speeds of heterogeneous materials because of the branched morphology and formation of heterojunctions in the composite system has been proved on Bi2O3 branched SnO2 composite nanowires.51Table 1 compares the ethanol vapor sensing performance of the representative TiO2–ZnO-1 sensor and other reported TiO2-based heterostructures.52–55 Most TiO2-based composites demonstrate adequate gas-sensing response to ethanol vapor only at high operating temperatures of 270–350 °C. The TiO2–ZnO-1 sensor exhibited superior ethanol vapor sensing response as compared with other competing TiO2-based heterostructures, and the comparison of results herein proved the high potential of the 3D architectured TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods for application in detecting ethanol vapor with desirable performance.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematics of the possible ethanol vapor sensing mechanism of the TiO2–ZnO-1 sensor. (b) Possible schematics of the ethanol vapor sensing mechanism of the TiO2–ZnO-2 sensor. 
Table 1 Ethanol vapor sensing performance of various TiO2-based composites prepared using various methods under similar gas-sensing test conditions52–55




Materials
Synthesis method
Operating temperature
Ethanol concentration
Response
Response/recovery time (s)




TiO2–SnO2 (ref. 52)
Hydrothermal + hydrothermal
350 °C
300 ppm
10.1
26/121


TiO2–WO3 (ref. 53)
Hydrothermal + annealing
270 °C
100 ppm
5.4
17/64


TiO2–CeO2 (ref. 54)
Hydrothermal + annealing
320 °C
300 ppm
5.6
15/55


TiO2–Fe2O3 (ref. 55)
Annealing + annealing
270 °C
100 ppm
3.5
21/52


TiO2–ZnO-1
Hydrothermal + annealing
300 °C
100 ppm
7.7
5/39




Conclusion
In summary, 3D TiO2–ZnO nanoarchitectures were initially synthesized through a two-step hydrothermal crystal growth. The sputtering growth temperature of the ZnO seed layer on the TiO2 nanorod templates showed a profound effect on the morphology evolution of hydrothermally-derived ZnO nanorods. The decoration of ZnO nanorods on the surfaces of the TiO2 nanorod templates enhanced the light-harvesting ability of the composite nanorods. Moreover, the PEC and EIS results showed an improved photoinduced charge separation efficiency in the TiO2–ZnO composite system because of the suitable type II band alignment between the TiO2 and ZnO. These factors explain the superior photodegradation performance of the RhB solution containing the TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods as compared to pristine TiO2 nanorods. The branched morphology of the TiO2–ZnO-1 composite nanorods exhibited superior photoactivity as compared to the TiO2–ZnO-2 composite nanorods. Furthermore, the ethanol vapor sensing performance studies revealed that the TiO2–ZnO-1 sensor exhibited substantially enhanced sensing performance towards ethanol vapor as compared with the TiO2–ZnO-2 and pristine TiO2 sensors. The difference in charge separation and transfer efficiencies, together with the potential barrier height number among various nanostructures explained their different functional performances. The design and tuning of the sputtering-deposited ZnO seed layer crystalline quality is a promising approach to controlling the crystal morphology of hydrothermally derived ZnO nanorods on the TiO2 nanorod templates. The controllable 3D architecture in the TiO2–ZnO composite systems via changing the microstructures of the sputtering grown ZnO seed layer in this study realized the synthesis of TiO2–ZnO nanoarchitectures with desirable device applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was funded by Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan. Grant No. MOST 108-2221-E-019-034-MY3.
References
Y.-C. Liang and K.-J. Chiang, Coverage Layer Phase Composition-Dependent Photoactivity of One-Dimensional TiO2–Bi2O3 Composites, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 1005–1018 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Liang and Y.-C. Liu, Design of Nanoscaled Surface Morphology of TiO2–Ag2O Composite Nanorods through Sputtering Decoration Process and Their Low-Concentration NO2 Gas-Sensing Behaviors, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 1150–1162 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Liang and Y.-C. Liu, Microstructures and Photodegradation Performance toward Methylene Orange of Sputtering-Assisted Decoration of ZnFe2O4 Crystallites onto TiO2 Nanorods, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 205–211 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Liang, N.-C. Xu, C.-C. Wang and D.-H. Wei, Fabrication of Nanosized Island-Like CdO Crystallites-Decorated TiO2 Rod Nanocomposites via a Combinational Methodology and Their Low-Concentration NO2 Gas-Sensing Behavior, Materials, 2017, 10, 778 CrossRef .
Y. S. Tian, C. G. Hu, X. S. He, C. L. Cao, G. S. Huang and K. Y. Zhang, Titania nanotube arrays for light sensor and UV photometer, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 144, 203–207 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kanie and T. Sugimoto, Shape control of anatase TiO2 nanoparticles by amino acids in a gel–sol system, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1584–1585 RSC .
Y.-C. Liang, T.-Y. Lin and C.-M. Lee, Crystal growth and shell layer crystal feature-dependent sensing and photoactivity performance of zinc oxide–indium oxide core–shell nanorod heterostructures, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 7948–7955 RSC .
Y.-C. Liang, Y.-C. Liu and C.-S. Hung, Sputtering control of Ag2O decoration configurations on ZnO nanorods and their surface arrangement effects on photodegradation ability toward methyl orange, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 495701 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Mwankemwa, F. J. Nambala, F. Kyeyune, T. T. Hlatshwayo, J. M. Nel and M. Diale, Influence of ammonia concentration on the microstructure, electrical and raman properties of low temperature chemical bath deposited ZnO nanorods, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2017, 71, 209–216 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoshida, T. Oekermann, K. Okabe, D. Schlettwein, K. Funabiki and H. Minoura, Cathodic Electrodeposition of ZnO/EosinY Hybrid Thin Films from Dye Added Zinc Nitrate Bath and Their Photoelectrochemical Characterizations, Electrochemistry, 2002, 70, 470–487 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Liang and C.-W. Chang, Improvement of Ethanol Gas-Sensing Responses of ZnO–WO3 Composite Nanorods through Annealing Induced Local Phase Transformation, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 669–680 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Liang and N.-C. Xu, Synthesis of TiO2–ZnS nanocomposites via sacrificial template sulfidation and their ethanol gas-sensing performance, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 22437–22446 RSC .
J. Ma, Y. Cai, X. Li, S. Yao, Y. Liu, F. Liu and G. Lu, Synthesis of hierarchical ZnO/ZnFe2O4 nanoforests with enhanced gas-sensing performance toward ethanol, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 8683–8688 RSC .
Y. Yu, Z. Ren, M. Li, S. Gong, S. Yin, S. Jiang and G. Han, Facile synthesis and visible photocatalytic activity of single-crystal TiO2/PbTiO3 heterostructured nanofiber composites, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 1024–1029 RSC .
D. Wang, F. Qian, C. Yang, Z. Zhong and C. M. Lieber, Rational Growth of Branched and Hyperbranched Nanowire Structures, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 871–874 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, J. Wan, Q. Liu, J. Zhang and H. Wang, Optimizing the prepared condition of TiO2 1D/3D network structure films to enhance the efficiency of dye-sensitized solar cells, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 82968–82976 RSC .
S. S. Mali, H. Kim, C. S. Shim, W. R. Bae, N. L. Tarwal, S. B. Sadale and C. K. Hong, Single-step synthesis of 3D nanostructured TiO2 as a scattering layer for vertically aligned 1D nanorod photoanodes and their dye-sensitized solar cell properties, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 5660 RSC .
M. R. Alenezi, S. J. Henley, N. G. Emerson and S. R. P. Silva, From 1D and 2D ZnO nanostructures to 3D hierarchical structures with enhanced gas sensing properties, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 235–247 RSC .
Y. Wan, M. Han, L. Yu, G. Yi and J. Jia, 3D Bi2S3 salix leaf-like nanosheet/TiO2 nanorod branched heterostructure arrays for improving photoelectrochemical properties, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 1577–1584 RSC .
P. Sun, R. Liu, R. Ma, Z. Xie, F. Su, Y. Gong and Q. Wan, Branched CdO/ZnO Core/Shell Heterogeneous Structure and Its Enhanced Photoelectrocatalytic Performance, ACS Omega, 2018, 3(9), 11517–11525 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, K. Yuan and J. Yang, 
            et al., Hierarchical highly ordered SnO2 nanobowl branched ZnO nanowires for ultrasensitive and selective hydrogen sulfide gas sensing, Microsyst. Nanoeng., 2020, 6, 30 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Liang, Growth and physical properties of three-dimensional flower-like zinc oxide microcrystals, Ceram. Int., 2012, 38, 1697–1702 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Liang and K. J. Chiang, Design and tuning functionality of rod-like titanium dioxide–nickel oxide composites via a combinational methodology, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 195709 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, G. Chen, W. Li and D. Wu, Preparation and Photocathodic Protection Properties of ZnO/TiO2 Heterojunction Film Under Simulated Solar Light, Materials, 2019, 12, 1–14 Search PubMed .
Y.-C. Liang and Y.-J. Lo, High-temperature solid-state reaction induced structure modifications and associated photoactivity and gas-sensing performance of binary oxide one-dimensional composite system, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 29428–29439 RSC .
Z. Liang, H. Hou, Z. Fang, F. Gao, L. Wang, D. Chen and W. Yang, Hydrogenated TiO2 Nanorod Arrays Decorated with Carbon Quantum Dots toward Efficient Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 19167–19175 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hassan, A. Waseem, M. A. Johar, I. V. Bagal, J.-S. Ha and S.-W. Ryu, Single-step fabrication of 3D hierarchical ZnO/ZnS heterojunction branched nanowires by MOCVD for enhanced photoelectrochemical water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 10, 1039 Search PubMed .
J. Zhou, L. Yin, H. Li, Z. Liu, J. Wang, K. Duan and B. Feng, Heterojunction of SrTiO3/TiO2 nanotubes with dominant (001) facets: Synthesis, formation mechanism and photoelectrochemical properties, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2015, 40, 107–116 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wolcott, W. A. Smith, T. R. Kuykendall, Y. Zhao and J. Z. Zhang, Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting Using Dense and Aligned TiO2 Nanorod Arrays, Small, 2009, 5, 104–111 CrossRef CAS .
B. Klahr, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert and T. W. Hamann, Photoelectrochemical and Impedance Spectroscopic Investigation of Water Oxidation with “Co–Pi”-Coated Hematite Electrodes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16693–16700 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, H. Zhang, S. Hu and J. Li, Preparation and Enhanced Photoelectrochemical Performance of Coupled Bicomponent ZnO−TiO2 Nanocomposites, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 112, 117–122 CrossRef .
G. Yang, D. M. Chen, H. Ding, J. J. Feng, J. Z. Zhang, Y. F. Zhu, S. Hamid and D. W. Bahnemann, Well-designed 3D ZnIn2S4 nanosheets/TiO2 nanobelts as direct Z-scheme photocatalysts for CO2 photoreduction into renewable hydrocarbon fuel with high efficiency, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 611–618 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, C. Guanghui and L. Weihua, Preparation and Photocathodic Protection Propertiesof ZnO/TiO2 Heterojunction Film Under Simulated Solar Light, Materials, 2019, 12, 1–14 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Liang and Y. Chao, Crystal phase content-dependent functionality of dual phase SnO2–WO3 nanocomposite films via cosputtering crystal growth, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 6482–6493 RSC .
Y.-C. Liang and C.-C. Wang, Surface crystal feature-dependent photoactivity of ZnO–ZnS composite rods via hydrothermal sulfidation, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 5063–5070 RSC .
Y.-C. Liang, C.-C. Chung, Y.-J. Lo and C.-C. Wang, Microstructure-dependent visible-light driven photoactivity of sputtering-assisted synthesis of sulfide-based visible-light sensitizer onto ZnO nanorods, Materials, 2016, 9, 1014 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Liang, Y.-R. Lo, C.-C. Wang and N.-C. Xu, Shell Layer Thickness-Dependent Photocatalytic Activity of Sputtering Synthesized Hexagonally Structured ZnO-ZnS Composite Nanorods, Nanomaterials, 2018, 11, 87–107 Search PubMed .
S. Talebi, N. Chaibakhsh and Z. Moradi-Shoeili, Application of nanoscale ZnS/TiO2 composite for optimized photocatalytic decolorization of a textile dye, J. Appl. Res. Technol., 2017, 15, 378–385 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Liang, N.-C. Xu and K.-J. Chiang, Surface Morphology-Dependent Functionality of Titanium Dioxide–Nickel Oxide Nanocomposite Semiconductors, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 1651 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, R. Xia, E. Muhire, S. Jiang, X. Huo and M. Gao, Highly enhanced Photocatalytic performance of TiO2 nanosheets through constructing TiO2/TiO2 quantum dots homojunction, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 459, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Reddy, M. Devika and C. W. Tu, High-quality ZnO nanorod based flexible devices for electronic and biological applications, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 37563–37568 RSC .
Y.-C. Liang, C.-M. Lee and Y.-J. Lo, Reducing gas-sensing performance of Ce-doped SnO2 thin films through a cosputtering method, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 4724–4734 RSC .
L. Zhu, W. Zeng, J. Yang and Y. Li, One-step hydrothermal fabrication of nanosheet assembled NiO/ZnO microflower and its ethanol sensing property, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 19825–19830 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Liang and Y. Chao, Enhancement of Acetone Gas-Sensing Responses of Tapered WO3 Nanorods through Sputtering Coating with a Thin SnO2 Coverage Layer, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 864 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Liang and S.-L. Liu, Structure-dependent gas detection ability of clustered ZnS crystallites with heterostructure and tube-like architecture, Acta Mater., 2015, 88, 245–251 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Choi, S.-H. Kwon, W.-S. Lee, K.-G. Im, T.-H. Kim, B.-R. Noh and K.-K. Kim, Ultraviolet Photoactivated Room Temperature NO2 Gas Sensor of ZnO Hemitubes and Nanotubes Covered with TiO2 Nanoparticles, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 462 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Khoang, D. D. Trung, N. Van Duy, N. D. Hoa and N. Van Hieu, Design of SnO2/ZnO hierarchical nanostructures for enhanced ethanol gas-sensing performance, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 174, 594–601 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lou, F. Li, J. Deng, L. Wang and T. Zhang, Branch-like Hierarchical Heterostructure (α-Fe2O3/TiO2): A Novel Sensing Material for Trimethylamine Gas Sensor, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 23, 12310–12316 CrossRef .
S. K. Hazra and S. Basu, Hydrogen sensitivity of ZnO p–n homojunctions, Sens. Actuators, B, 2006, 117, 177–182 CrossRef CAS .
N. Caicedo, R. Leturcq, J.-P. Raskin, D. Flandre and D. Lenoble, Detection mechanism in highly sensitive ZnO nanowires network gas sensors, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 297, 126602 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Bang, M. S. Choi, A. Mirzaei, Y. J. Kwon, S. S. Kim, T. W. Kim and H. W. Kim, Selective NO2 sensor based on Bi2O3 branched SnO2 nanowires, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 274, 356–369 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Sang, D. Wang, S. Ji and H. Liu, Enhanced gas sensing property of SnO2 nanoparticles by constructing
the SnO2–TiO2 nanobelt heterostructure, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 639, 571–576 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, S. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Yang, X. Gao and L. Wang, TiO2(B) nanoparticle-functionalized WO3 nanorods with enhanced gas sensing properties, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 10830–10836 RSC .
Y. J. Chen, G. Xiao, T. S. Wang, F. Zhang, Y. Ma, P. Gao, C. L. Zhu, E. Zhang, Z. Xu and Q. H. Li, Synthesis and enhanced gas sensing properties of crystalline CeO2/TiO2 core/shell nanorods, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 156, 867–874 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Zhu, H. L. Yu, Y. Zhang, T. S. Wang, Q. Y. Ouyang, L.-H. Qi and X. Y. Xue, Fe2O3/TiO2 Tube-like Nanostructures: Synthesis, Structural Transformation and the Enhanced Sensing Properties, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 665–671 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ce01036gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Top view and cross-sectional view SEM images of various samples: (a) and (b) TiO2, (c) and (d) TiO2–ZnO-1, (e) and (f) TiO2–ZnO-2.	 

 	Fig. 2  XRD patterns of various samples: (a) TiO2, (b) TiO2–ZnO-1, (c) TiO2–ZnO-2.	 

 	Fig. 3  TEM analyses of TiO2–ZnO-1: (a) low-magnification image. (b)–(d) HRTEM images taken from the TiO2/ZnO interface, TiO2 nanorod template, and outer ZnO layer regions of the sample, respectively. (e) SAED pattern of several composite nanorods. (f) EDS line-scanning profiles across the composite nanorod. (g) Ti, Zn, and O elemental mapping images taken from the selected composite nanorod.	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM analyses of TiO2–ZnO-2: (a) low-magnification image. (b) and (c) HRTEM images of the TiO2/ZnO interface and outer ZnO layer regions of the sample, respectively. (d) EDS spectrum taken from the region marked d in (a). (e) EDS spectrum taken from the region marked e in (a). (f) SAED pattern of several composite nanorods.	 

 	Fig. 5  XPS spectra of composite nanorods: (a) TiO2–ZnO-1, and (b) TiO2–ZnO-2.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Optical absorbance spectra of the pristine TiO2 (black), ZnO (green), TiO2–ZnO-1 (red), and TiO2–ZnO-2 (blue). (b) The bandgap evaluation of the TiO2 nanorods. (c) The bandgap evaluation of the ZnO nanorods.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Photocurrent density versus time curves of various samples at an applied potential of 0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl under chopped illumination. (b) Nyquist plots of TiO2 (black), TiO2–ZnO-1 (red), and TiO2–ZnO-2 (blue) at an open-circuit potential under illumination. (c) A possible equivalent circuit was used to fit the Rct values of the composite nanorods.	 
1/C2 = (2/eεε0Nd)[(V − VFB − kT)/e]	(1)

 	Fig. 8  Mott–Schottky plots of various samples: (a) TiO2, (b) ZnO, (c) TiO2–ZnO-1, (d) TiO2–ZnO-2. (e) Schematic illustration of the photo-induced charge transfer and separation at the interface of the TiO2–ZnO heterostructure.	 
ZnO + hv → ZnO (e−) + ZnO (h+)	(2)
TiO2 + hv → TiO2 (e−) + TiO2 (h+)	(3)
e− (from secondary dendrite ZnO) + O2 → ˙O2−	(4)
h+ (from secondary dendrite ZnO) + H2O → ˙OH + H+	(5)
TiO2–ZnO composite nanorods + hv (charge separation) → TiO2 template (e−) + ZnO primary (h+)	(6)
h+ (from primary ZnO) + H2O → ˙OH + H+	(7)

 	Fig. 9  The irradiation duration-dependent absorption spectra of the RhB solution containing various samples: (a) TiO2, (b) TiO2–ZnO-1, (c) TiO2–ZnO-2. (d) Plots of C/Coversus irradiation duration. (e) Plots of ln(Co/C) versus irradiation duration. (f) Recycling photodegradation tests of the RhB solution containing the TiO2–ZnO-1 photocatalyst. (g) Recycling photodegradation tests of the RhB solution containing the TiO2–ZnO-2 photocatalyst.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The operating temperature-dependent ethanol vapor sensing responses of various sensors on exposure to 750 ppm ethanol vapor. Dynamic resistance variation curves of various sensors towards different ethanol concentrations (50, 100, 250, 500, and 750 ppm): (b) TiO2, (c) TiO2–ZnO-1, (d) TiO2–ZnO-2. (e) The summarized concentration-dependent ethanol vapor sensing responses of various sensors. (f) Cyclic gas-sensing response curves of the TiO2–ZnO-1 sensor on exposure to 750 ppm ethanol vapor. (g) Cyclic gas-sensing response curves of the TiO2–ZnO-2 sensor on exposure to 750 ppm ethanol vapor.	 
C2H5OH (vapor) + 6O− (ads.) → 2CO2 + 3H2O + 6e−	(8)
C2H5OH (vapor) + 3O2− (ads.) → 2CO2 (g) + 3H2O (g) + 3e−	(9)

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematics of the possible ethanol vapor sensing mechanism of the TiO2–ZnO-1 sensor. (b) Possible schematics of the ethanol vapor sensing mechanism of the TiO2–ZnO-2 sensor.	 

TiO2–SnO2 (ref. 52)	Hydrothermal + hydrothermal	350 °C	300 ppm	10.1	26/121
TiO2–WO3 (ref. 53)	Hydrothermal + annealing	270 °C	100 ppm	5.4	17/64
TiO2–CeO2 (ref. 54)	Hydrothermal + annealing	320 °C	300 ppm	5.6	15/55
TiO2–Fe2O3 (ref. 55)	Annealing + annealing	270 °C	100 ppm	3.5	21/52
TiO2–ZnO-1	Hydrothermal + annealing	300 °C	100 ppm	7.7	5/39
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ce01036g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
