Silicon: toward eco-friendly reduction techniques for lithium-ion battery applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA08554H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA08554H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24715-24737Silicon: toward eco-friendly reduction techniques for lithium-ion battery applications

        
          
            Guanjia 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Luo
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lianjun 
            Wang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wan 
            Jiang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jianping 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, China. E-mail: jianpingyang@dhu.edu.cn
Received 
      5th August 2019
    , Accepted 30th September 2019First published on 30th September 2019AbstractSilicon-based anode materials have been intensively studied over the past few decades owing to their exceptionally high specific capacity. However, silicon (Si) mainly exists as Si(IV) in the form of silica (SiO2) or silicates in nature. The current industrial production methods of Si mainly cater to solar energy and semiconductor industry applications, and they usually suffer from high energy consumption in order to produce ultra-high purity Si. Therefore, developing efficient reduction techniques for producing Si, especially nanostructured Si (Nano Si) with comparable cost and scalability, is fundamentally desirable for the commercialization of Si anodes. In recent years, several pioneering avenues have been established to explore the fabrication of Si and Nano Si in regard to anode materials. A few environmentally friendly and cost-effective reduction strategies such as magnesiothermic reduction, magnesio-milling reduction, molten salt reduction, and electrochemical reduction have been developed. In this review, we summarize the progress on current reduction approaches, including the detailed mechanism, reaction conditions, and the relationship between the diverse morphologies and electrochemical performance. The current synthetic challenges and future research directions based on these routes are summarized, which is of great significance to the fundamental research and industrial application of Si-based anode materials.Guanjia ZhuGuanjia Zhu received her MS degree from the Department of Materials Science and Chemical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology in 2011 and she is currently a Ph.D. candidate at Donghua University. Her research interests focus on silicon-based materials for application in lithium-ion batteries.Wei LuoWei Luo is a professor at the State Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering at Donghua University. He obtained his Bachelor's (2006) and Master's (2009) degrees from Nanjing Tech University. He received his Ph.D. degree in chemistry from Fudan University in 2014. His research interests mainly include the synthesis of functional mesoporous materials and nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion as well as sensors.Lianjun WangLianjun Wang is a full professor at the College of Materials Science and Engineering at Donghua University. Dr Wang received his Ph.D. in chemical engineering from Dalian University of Technology in 2002. He carried out his postdoctoral research at Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (2002–2004) and Stockholm University (2007–2008). His research interests focus on the design and controlled fabrication of bulk nanocomposites with all-scale hierarchical architectures and their application in energy-related areas and in the field of LEDs.Wan JiangWan Jiang, Ph.D. of Engineering, worked at Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, CAS from 1999 to 2009. Currently, he is a distinguished professor at Donghua University, and the director of the Engineering Research Center of Advanced Class Manufacturing Technology Ministry. His research interests focus on inorganic non-metallic materials, especially in the research field of rapid sintering of ceramic materials.Jianping YangJianping Yang is a full professor (2016) at Donghua University, China. He obtained has Bachelor's degree (2007) from Huazhong University of Science and Technology. His Master's (2010) and Ph.D. degrees (2013) were received from Fudan University supervised by Professor Dongyuan Zhao. He then worked as a postdoctoral and visiting research fellow at Tongji University, University of Wollongong and Monash University. His research interests focus on spatially confined design of environmentally friendly materials for environmental remediation, electrocatalytic denitrification, and energy conversion and storage (including Si-based lithium ion batteries and sodium/potassium ion batteries).
1. Introduction
Silicon (Si) is an extremely important foundational material with traditional applications in the metallurgical,1 solar energy,2–4 and semiconductor industries.5–7 Owing to its unique physical and chemical properties, nanostructured silicon (Nano Si) exhibits a variety of promising applications in nanoelectronics,8–10 optics,11–13 sensors,14,15 biocatalysts,16,17 and lithium-ion batteries (LIBs).18–23 The ever-growing momentum behind renewable energy storage calls for advanced anodes to substitute for commercial graphite anodes.24–27 Among the numerous anode materials, Si has been regarded as the most promising next-generation candidate anode material due to its highest known theoretical capacity and relatively low potential plateau.28–36 As the second most abundant element in the crust, Si makes up 27.7% of the Earth's crust. However, it is naturally found in all rocks as well as in soil, sand, and clays, combined either with oxygen as silica or other elements (e.g., aluminum, magnesium, or sodium) as metal silicates.37,38
Normally, industrial production methods of producing bulk Si mainly include carbothermic reduction which can be used to prepare metallurgical grade Si,39 the Siemens process which can produce both solar-grade (99.9999%)40 and electronic grade Si (>99.9999999%)41 and silane (SiH4) chemical vapor decomposition (CVD), which is the primary route for scalable synthesis of electronic grade Si.42 In specific, carbothermic reduction is typically performed in an electric furnace at high temperatures over 1700 °C with coke as the reducing agent, and has poor energy efficiency and generates significant CO2 emissions.43 Siemens and SiH4 CVD methods are both limited to tedious processing steps that involve preparation of expensive precursors (SiHCl3 and SiH4) and sophisticated equipment, suffering from high energy consumption.44
Over the past few decades, a wide spectrum of strategies has been developed for preparing Nano Si. The most frequently used approaches can be generally divided into reduction of silicon halides,45–47 decomposition of silane using plasma or heat,48–50 oxidation of metal silicides,51–54 metallothermic reduction,55–57 molten salt reduction,58–60 chemical etching,61–63 electrochemical etching64–66 or reduction,67–70 and ball-milling from bulk Si.71–73 With the sustainable demand in the LIB field,74,75 developing environmentally benign and cost-effective strategies for Nano Si or Si applicable to anode materials is highly desirable.76 In this regard, all reagents involved in the reaction should be low-cost, innocuous and easy to handle. Besides, all the reaction operation conditions should be simple and practicable, avoiding high temperature and/or high pressure. When combining these requirements with the available methods, there are only a couple of them that can cater to this demand.
So far, several classical and good reviews have been published to summarize the significant progress on Si-based anode materials from different perspectives such as surface and interface engineering,77 atomic-scale monitoring,78 chronicle scale,79 practical application-oriented development20 and dimensional design.80 These reviews have systematically outlined a historical map for the explosive progress on Si-based anode materials.81 However, there are few reviews that have focused on discussing the reduction techniques for producing Nano Si or Si in view of their potential application in LIBs.82 Past reviews on the preparation of Nano Si have focused on other application fields such as quantum dots,5,83 solar energy84 and optics.85 To date, all the current reviews addressing Si for use in LIBs discuss the surface modification and structural design toward high energy LIBs.
In this review, the progress of the fundamental research activities on fabrication strategies for Nano Si is reviewed. The most promising reduction techniques, which are environmentally friendly, price effective, and scalable, are highlighted. We start by discussing the selection of precursors and reducing agents in terms of stability, cost and environmental friendliness. Then, the structure (size, crystallinity, porosity and dispersity)–property relationship for Si-based anode materials is clarified. In Section 4, the most promising and eco-friendly synthetic routes such as the magnesiothermic reduction reaction (MRR), magnesio-milling reduction (MMR), molten salt reduction (MSR), and electrochemical reduction (ECR) are discussed in detail. The diverse morphologies of the produced Si-based materials based on these methods and the corresponding electrochemical performance are further summarized. Finally, we propose the current challenges and future directions of each promising reduction strategy toward commercial applications of Si-based anode materials.
2. General background
2.1 Precursors (stability and cost)
As the most abundant and fundamental element, Si has a wide spectrum of chemical compounds ranging from inorganic substances to organics. Up to now, diverse Si compounds have been explored as precursors to produce Nano Si. Owing to the variable chemical bonding environment, different precursors have different stabilities which substantially affect the reduction activity. It has been well demonstrated that the precursor stability depends mainly on the bond dissociation enthalpy and on the decomposition kinetics.85 The bond dissociation energy (standard-state enthalpy change) for Si–O, Si–Cl, Si–C, Si–Si, and Si–H is 798, 456, 435, 327 and 298.49 kJ mol−1, respectively. The relatively low bond dissociation energy endows silanes such as silane (SiH4) and disilane (Si2H6) with high reactivity, and they have been the most commonly used precursors to prepare Nano Si through chemical vapor deposition (CVD) or vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) growth triggered by laser ablation.86 However, the highly pyrophoric and toxic nature of these kinds of precursors and the expensive ultrahigh vacuum equipment hinder the commercialization of these synthesis approaches.87 In the development of wet-chemical synthesis of Nano Si, SiCl4 and RCl3 (R = H, cotyl) are the frequently used precursors and several reduction strategies have been demonstrated.45,88 Although in both cases Si can be well produced, it is crucial to carry out the synthesis in an inert atmosphere, owing to the extreme reactivity of silanes and chlorosilanes towards water and oxygen. It can be found that more reactive precursors are more dangerous, more difficult to handle and more expensive.89 Besides those compounds mentioned above, metal silicides such as Mg2Si and NaSi have also been explored as precursors to produce Si through the chemical dealloying process. Unfortunately, these methods generally require expensive reagents and the resulting Nano Si is partially oxidized. When considering issues of price and environment, as well as scalability, direct reduction of inexpensive silicas and natural silicates will be more welcomed.37,90
To make clear the relationship between upstream and downstream products in the whole Si industry, a flow chart of existing Nano Si synthesis routes including different precursors is summarized in Fig. 1. Fabrication of Nano Si from Si wafers through electrochemical anodization suffers from the highest energy consumption (route 1, red line). Similarly, both reduction from silane (route 2, orange line) and SiCl4 (route 3, purple line) are energy inefficient methods for scalable manufacturing of Nano Si. Alternatively, alloying Si with Mg followed by chemical dealloying (route 4, grey line) and acid leaching require major efforts to deal with huge amounts of waste discharge.91 Although silica (route 5, blue line) and other natural precursors such as earth, rock, plants and so on (route 6, green line) have stable Si–O bonds, and elimination of oxygen element from these well-defined structures requires high energy, researchers still spare no effort to develop effective reduction methods due to their potential environmentally friendly nature, cost-effectivity and large-scale production possibility.
 Fig. 1  Flow chart showing the current synthesis routes of Nano Si for Li-ion battery anodes from the perspective of the whole Si industry chain. Route 1 (red line) represents electrochemical anodization fabrication of Nano Si from Si wafers, through a tedious preparation process. Route 2 (orange line) represents preparation of Nano Si through chemical vapor deposition (CVD) from SiH4. Route 3 (purple line) shows synthesis of Nano Si from SiCl4, which is the by-product of polysilicon production. Route 4 (grey line) represents a dealloying process of Mg2Si to obtain Nano Si. Route 5 (green line) and route 6 (blue line) are processes comprising direct reduction from natural precursors and silica, respectively. 
2.2 Reducing agents
The strength of reductants has a significant influence on the nucleation rate and subsequent particle size and dispersity. Common chemical reducing agents include hydrides, such as sodium borohydride (NaBH4) and lithium aluminum hydride, metals, such as K, Na, Mg, Al and Zn, organic salts, such as sodium napthalenide, and H2 gas, with strength decreasing in the order hydrides > organic salts > metals > H2 gas. Powerful reductants such as hydrides have been largely used to synthesize Si quantum dots with a narrow size distribution and a relatively small size of no more than 10 nm.8 Sodium naphthalide92 and potassium napthalide93 have been employed to reduce SiCl4 to Nano Si at ambient temperature through a one-electron transfer mechanism. All these methods are based on organic solution, and can't be extended to the reduction of silica due to its insolubility in organic solvents.
One class of promising reductants is metals and their reduction ability can be evaluated from the Ellingham diagram (Fig. 2).94 Based on the thermodynamic principle, the metals with lower Gibbs free energy of oxidation on the diagram will reduce the oxides with higher Gibbs free energy of formation.95 In the case of SiO2, the potential reducing metals include Ti, Al, Mg and Ca.96 Because of the narrow gap between the two lines, Ti has low reducing effectiveness. Although Ca's line locates at the lowest position, rarely has headway been made in calcium reduction of silica. This should be attributed primarily to the difficult operation conditions considering issues of high exothermicity and violent reaction with moisture. In addition, NaK alloy has also been used as a reducing agent for the reduction of SiCl4.97,98 However, the aggressive nature (for example, explosion in contact with air) makes it an undesirable reducing agent. As Mg and Al are milder and safer than Ca or NaK, they have been investigated extensively for silica reduction through thermochemical and electrochemical processes.
 Fig. 2  The Ellingham diagram for a series of metals. This diagram can be used to find the most suitable reducing agent for a reduction process. In principle, metals that have curves at the bottom of the diagram can reduce the metals found more towards the top. For the reduction of SiO2 to Si, Ti, Al, Mg and Ca are all the available reducing agents. Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission. 
3. Structure–property relationship in Si-based anode materials
Because of the various morphologies of Si precursors, changeable structures can be derived by using different reductants based on different mechanisms. Understanding the structure–property relationship can be conducive to developing impactful reduction routes. Traditionally, the structure–property relationship usually refers to the correlation between the structure and the intrinsic properties of materials.78 For electrode materials, enhancing the electrochemical performance requires deep understanding of the influence of the structure on the specific performance in terms of coulombic efficiency, stability, rate capability and so on. In this section, we will clarify the structure–property relationship for Si-based anode materials from size, crystallinity, porosity and dispersity.
3.1 Size
It has been well substantiated that reducing the size of Si to the nanoscale can mitigate the pulverization issue of the bulk Si anode.92 As theoretical evidence, Verbrugge and co-workers carefully analyzed diffusion-induced stresses in terms of surface tension and surface modulus in spherical nanoparticles.99 They pointed out that the significantly reduced tensile state of stress in magnitude with decreasing particle radius may be responsible for the resilience to fracture of nanoparticles. However, one of the basic questions remains indistinct: whether there exists a critical size below which the surface strain induced by lithiation can be accommodated in a Si electrode. Liu and co-workers discovered a strong size-dependent fracture behavior of Si nanoparticles during lithiation through in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM).100 There exists a critical particle size of ∼150 nm, that is, below which cracks and fractures would be inhibited, and above which surface cracks would be initiated followed by fractures after several cycles (Fig. 3a). Thus, tremendous efforts have been devoted to exploring different nanostructured Si-based anode materials, and fruitful achievements have been made.
 Fig. 3  Structure–property relationship for Si-based anode materials in terms of size, crystallinity, porosity and dispersity. (a) Statistics showing a critical size (Dc) of about 150 nm. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b) In situ TEM experiments: time series of the lithiation of a single a-Si sphere. The relatively sharp contrast between the lithiated shell and the Si-rich core reveals a two-phase lithiation mechanism. (c) Summary of the first lithiation and subsequent cycling of a-Si and c-Si. Reproduced with from ref. 101 permission from the American Chemical Society. (d) A schematic model of the mesoporous Si sponge particle. (e) The correlation of the pore radius after full lithiation (r2), and the expansion rates of the particle along the radial direction (κ) and along the axial direction (ξ). (f) Particle volume expansion as a function of porosity (Vf). Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. Schematic illustration of the lithiation behavior of a solid Si particle (g) and porous Si particle (h). Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. The packing model of watermelon-like Si/C anodes with (i) single size distribution and (j) optimized size distribution. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Despite those impressive advances in Nano Si anode materials, the inevitable drawbacks such as high cost, poor CE, and low tapped density have hampered its widespread application.104 Engineering micrometer-sized Si as an anode has been resurrected.20 Some significant breakthroughs such as growth of conformal graphene cages on micrometer-sized Si particles105 and 3D structures with characteristics of Nano Si106 have been achieved. Accordingly, it is crucial to engineer nanosized Si as an anode to avoid structural pulverization. From the perspective of commercial application, it is more meaningful to explore micrometer-sized structures, with nanocharacteristics.107
3.2 Crystallinity
In addition to the size effects of Si on the electrochemical behavior, there have also been reports about the effect of crystallinity of Si on the performance. In earlier research, it was found that amorphous silicon (a-Si) had a superior cycling performance compared to crystalline silicon (c-Si).108 A subsequent study revealed that c-Si alloys with lithium at slightly lower potential (∼120 mV) than a-Si does (∼220 mV), which led to the idea of using a core (c-Si)–shell (a-Si) composite as the anode material through dedicatedly tailoring the limiting charging potential.109 Furthermore, the lithiation/delithiation behavior of a-Si nanospheres was observed through performing in situ TEM experiments (Fig. 3b).101 The first lithiation for both a-Si and c-Si was a two-phase reaction, in which c-Si underwent anisotropic lithiation while the lithiation of a-Si was isotropic (Fig. 3c). Additionally, a-Si has more favorable kinetics behavior when alloying with Li than does c-Si, making it beneficial for improving lithium ion transport. Consistent with this, Kim and co-workers demonstrated a fast-charging anode material via implanting an a-Si nanolayer in edge-site-activated graphite, in which the fast lithium diffusion rate was attributed to the a-Si nanolayer.110 It should be noticed that the c-Si will transform into a-Si after the first lithiation process and undergo the same lithiation process in the subsequent cycling. Although a-Si has superior kinetic properties compared to c-Si, preparation of a-Si always involves aggressive conditions such as large flows, high pressure or high temperature based on a CVD reaction, giving rise to few relevant studies.
3.3 Porosity
The contribution of a porous structure to the enhancement of electrochemical performance is mainly manifested in two aspects.65,102,111 First, the pre-formed pores can accommodate the large volume changes during the cycling process, which would help to stabilize the whole structure, maintaining cycling stability.112 Second, the high specific surface area can improve the accessibility of the electrolyte to the Si surface, shortening lithium ion diffusion lengths and thus increasing available capacity at high rates.
Both simulation and in situ TEM experiments have been utilized to study the effects of porosity (for example, pore size and void volume fraction) on the structural stability. Ge and co-workers established a mathematical model to the study the change of pore size and strain induced stress on porous doped Si nanowires.111 In specific, if the ratio of initial pore radius and the pore-to-pore distance (r/l) increases, the maximum stress would decrease. Therefore, high porosity with large pore size is beneficial for obtaining high electrochemical capacity and long cycling retention. Similarly, Liu and co-workers synthesized a large mesoporous Si sponge (MSS) as a model structure (Fig. 3d–f).65 The continuum medium mechanical calculations revealed that the overall volume expansion decreases with increasing the void volume fraction in the MSS particles. Combined with in situ TEM results, it was deduced that the volume expansion of MSS particles could be limited to ∼30% at full lithiation. Moreover, Shen and co-workers demonstrated a larger critical fracture diameter size of up to 1520 nm for porous Si particles than the previously reported 150 nm for c-Si particles.102 This remarkable difference could be due to the distinct lithiation behaviors in which porous Si adopted an end-to-end arrangement (Fig. 3g) while a surface-to-center arrangement was adopted by c-Si (Fig. 3h).
It is believed that the interconnected nanopores enable inward volume expansion without obvious particle-level outer expansion, which makes porous structures appealing candidates for LIBs.112 However, there are still several drawbacks to their further application, including poor electronic conductivity, increasing side reactions, and a large solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) because of the increased contact interface between the electrolyte and electrode.113
3.4 Dispersity
Monodispersity is generally considered as a critical factor that influences the homogeneity of performance. However, synthesis of monodisperse Si particles is a huge challenge based on current techniques.92,114 Thus, there exist few reports correlating the dispersity with the electrochemical performance. And yet, some trends can be summarized by a careful survey of the literature.
Zuo and co-workers fabricated a three-dimensional (3D) macro-/mesoporous Si hierarchical structure from zero-dimensional (0D) Stöber silica particles with a high mass loading density.115 A self-templating mechanism was proposed to explain the formation of a 3D structure. This assembling trend is probably caused by the good monodispersity of Stöber silica particles. Differently, Xu and co-workers designed watermelon-like Si/C microspheres via ball milling combined with spray drying.103 The optimized size distribution of the as-prepared Si/C microspheres contributes to achieving efficient occupation of void space and strengthening the supporting effect by filling the interspace (Fig. 3i and j), which leads to a high pressing density and a high areal capacity. Accordingly, dispersity mainly affects the areal capacity of an electrode via stacking patterns or assembling.
4. Progress on reduction strategies
Section 3 clearly elucidates the structure–property relationship in Si-based anode materials. No one has yet synthesized ideal Si-based anode materials that can be successfully used in commercial LIBs.20 As a bottleneck problem, developing cost-effective and environmentally benign reduction techniques from cheap and abundant precursors as discussed in Section 2 is of great significance. In this section, we discuss the most promising and eco-friendly synthetic routes towards Si-based anode materials: magnesiothermic reduction, magnesio-milling reduction, molten salt reduction, and electrochemical reduction. We will present the progress, mechanism, and unique structures obtained from each reduction approach.
4.1 Magnesiothermic reduction

4.1.1 Progress on this method. 
The magnesiothermic reduction reaction (MRR) is a popular reduction method in the metallurgical field due to its relatively low reaction temperature (500–900 °C) and ease of handling.43 The reduction process to obtain Si is through displacing oxygen from silica (SiO2) using magnesium (Mg) vapor, during which new oxide-bearing composites are formed, and subsequent selective magnesia (MgO) dissolution. This process can be described as follows: SiO2(s) + 2Mg(g) → 2MgO(s) + Si(s)(4.1)
The standard Gibbs free energy change for this reaction is −327.5 kJ mol−1 at 650 °C, which indicates that this process is exothermic and thermodynamically spontaneous.14 The theoretical equilibrium partial pressure of Mg gas is calculated to be 4.1 × 10−7 Torr for reaction (4.1) at 650 °C, the value of which is far smaller than the equilibrium vapor pressure (3.1 Torr) of Mg vapor at this temperature.14 That is to say, the pressure of Mg vapor generated upon Mg evaporation at 650 °C is sufficient to drive reaction (4.1) to proceed from a thermodynamic perspective. However, it should be noted that the actual reaction process is controlled by both thermodynamics and kinetics, which makes it more complicated.
Besides, as the ratio between Mg and SiO2 varies, different chemical reactions are involved, as described by the following equations (eqn (4.2)–(4.4)). (4.2) (4.3) SiO2(s) + 4Mg(g) → 2MgO(s) + Mg2Si(s)(4.4)
These potential reactions indicate that an appropriate ratio between Mg and SiO2 is of critical importance to acquire the target products MgO and Si.116 When the reaction stoichiometry of Mg and SiO2 is in excess of 2:1, Mg2Si can be the dominant product, while when this ratio is less than 1:1, Mg2SiO4 or Mg2SiO4 may inevitably be produced.117 The high reaction stoichiometry dependence feature, combined with the complex control of Mg vapor kinetics, gives rise to poor yield and repeatability of the MRR.
As a pioneering study, Bao and co-workers explicitly demonstrated the shape preserving feature and microporosity of the liberated Si product inevitably created when MgO is removed.118 They emphasized that a modest temperature (650 °C) is necessary to suppress the formation of volatile gas species such as SiO (g) and Si (g). Moreover, the formation of a continuous refractory MgO phase intertwined with the Si product effectively inhibited the coarsening and sintering of the Si product, so that an interconnected network of Si nanocrystals can be obtained after etching of MgO. Taking advantage of the MRR, a large number of assemblies with well-controlled morphologies were synthesized.11 For example, ordered mesoporous Si thin films were successfully fabricated through magnesiothermic reduction of mesoporous SiO2 films.119 Similarly, monodisperse Si ordered arrangements (opals) by reduction of silica opals were also fabricated.114
With the research boom in Si-based anodes, the MRR has been regarded as a robust strategy to synthesize Si-based anode materials.120 Yu and co-workers appear to be the first group to synthesize 3D macroporous Si-based anode materials with uniformly distributed macropores using the MRR.121 The rich and various silica templates with tailored geometries, along with the shape preserving feature of the MRR, enable fabrication of a wide range of Si-based anode materials as discussed in Section 4.1.3. In addition to silica, earth-abundant substances (such as sand,122 rice husk,123 reed leaf124 and so on125) have also attracted increasing attention owing to their low cost and sustainability. Moreover, silicon monoxide can also be converted into porous Si via the MRR at a low temperature of 500 °C.126
On account of the exothermic reaction nature, the local reaction temperature in the MRR may rise to a very high level, which would cause the pores to collapse and agglomerate. An effective way to solve this problem is through employing a heat scavenger such as table salt (NaCl).125 Fusion of NaCl during the MRR would consume a great deal of heat released, which effectively prevents the pore structure from collapsing and aggregating.127 Similarly and very recently, Pei and co-workers demonstrated that potassium iodide (KI) can also be used as a heat scavenger to suppress the formation of SiC, which provides an effective approach to extend the MRR to the composite of SiO2 and C.128
Further research on the MRR process demonstrated that an Mg2Si intermediate phase may be formed at the initial stage, which plays a critical role in tailoring the final morphology.129,130 Kim and co-workers synthesized Si nanosheets from natural sand, the formation mechanism of which was attributed to reactions between this intermediate Mg2Si phase and unreacted SiO2 which can be expressed as follows:129 SiO2(s) + Mg2Si(s) → 2MgO(s) + 2Si(s)(4.5)
Very recently, a hierarchical mesoporous/microporous Si-based anode was designed and constructed through adjusting the phase ratio between Mg2Si and MgO intermediate products.130 Besides, the air-oxidation demagnesiation of Mg2Si to obtain nanoporous Si has also been reported.131 Interestingly, the intermediate Mg2Si and MgO could also serve as both the template and catalyst for the conformal coating of graphene cages, giving rise to the formation of unique hollow graphene-encapsulated Si spheres.132
Despite intense research studies with respect to the MRR, the low conversion yield of this method, which may be governed by the reaction conditions, remains a critical issue.133 In Section 4.1.2, we will discuss the influence of different reaction conditions on the resulting products in terms of mixing and molar ratios, reaction temperature and time, ramp rate, and reaction pressure. As most research studies focus mainly on one specific precursor under the set reaction conditions, and the as-synthesized Si anode materials obtained from the same precursor can differ, these reduction conditions are not comparable between studies. Even then, some appealing conclusions can be drawn by a careful investigation of the literature.


4.1.2 Exploration of reaction conditions. 
Evenly mixing Mg and SiO2 precursors in an appropriate molar ratio is a prerequisite to obtaining a relatively high yield. In earlier research, the Mg and silica precursors were placed at separate locations in a steel boat, and Mg vapor diffuses to react with SiO2.118 The production based on this configuration usually contains different regions, and the extent of reaction differs with the distance from the Mg source, which limits the yield scalability. Accordingly, an even premixing method was adopted by subsequent researchers. There are several reactions involved in the reaction between Mg and SiO2 as discussed in Section 4.1.1. Insufficient or excessive Mg would lead to the formation of undesired by-products such as MgSiO4 or Mg2Si. It has been demonstrated that MgSiO4 was detected when decreasing the molar ratio of Mg and SiO2.55 Thus, a slight excess of Mg (the molar ratio of Mg/SiO2 is between 2 and 2.5) were preferred.134
Generally, the reaction temperature and time can modulate the rate and extent of chemical reactions. Bao and co-workers examined the influence of reaction temperature (650 °C/2.5 h and 900 °C/1.5 h) on the structure of the resulting Si replicas.16 They found that both the average size and specific surface area of the Si crystals significantly decreased after the 900 °C/1.5 h treatment compared to those after the 650 °C/2.5 h treatment, indicating enhanced reaction kinetics at higher temperature. Wong and co-workers demonstrated that the surface of soda lime glass can be converted into Si thin film through the MRR at an initial low temperature of 520 °C.136 Furthermore, the thin film thickness can be tuned by varying the reaction time from 1 min to 600 min, which confirms such extent of reaction control by reaction time.
The ramp rate can significantly influence the morphology of the Si product.137 Liu and co-workers found that the specific surface area of the Nano-Si obtained at 5 °C min−1 decreased dramatically compared with that of the 40 °C min−1 sample.138 The different characteristics were attributed to local heat accumulation on account of the large amount of heat released by the MRR. Therefore, a slow heating rate (less than 5 °C min−1) should be employed considering the heat transfer issues.
From the above analysis, it can be found that effective control of the Mg vapor diffusion kinetics remains a huge challenge. To address this issue, Yoo and co-workers reported an extremely high yield (>98%) MRR method through reducing the reaction pressure to mild vacuum (∼0.1 Torr).135 The homogeneity of the MRR can be remarkably improved owing to the homogeneous and fast transport of Mg under vacuum conditions (Fig. 4a). Ball-milled sands were selected as the starting materials, and Mg2Si is formed on the surface at the initial reaction stage. Then, the solid-state diffusion of Mg from Mg2Si will occur, resulting in reaction with the remaining SiO2, which will lead to the production of Nano-Si mixed with MgO, and the whole MRR process takes only ≈30 min. Fig. 4b shows the schematic structure of the partially reduced samples, which is consistent with the TEM analysis (Fig. 4c–e). Both the improvement of the yield and the acceleration of the kinetics were ascribed to the more efficient transport of Mg into the individual sand particles. The authors pointed out that the significantly amplified mean-free-path under mild vacuum ensures more rapid and uniform diffusion of Mg vapor (Fig. 4f–g).
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the detailed step-by-step processes during the low-pressure magnesiothermic reduction reaction (MRR) for the synthesis of hierarchical Nano Si. (b) A schematic illustration for the intermediate product during the MRR. (c) TEM image of a hierarchical Nano-Si after a 15 min-long MRR, and a clear boundary can be seen between the inner and shell regions. The inset is the SAED pattern for region 3 (zone axis = [1–10]). High resolution TEM images of region 1 (d) and region 2 (e). Illustrations of Mg vapor diffusion behaviors under atmospheric pressure (f) and low-pressure (g) conditions. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 


4.1.3 Morphological variety. 
Owing to the various and abundant silica templates and derivations from natural resources, along with the morphology preserving nature of the MRR, diverse Si structures ranging from 0D, 1D, and 2D Nano-Si to 3D porous Si have been fabricated. For the 0D nanostructure, hollow porous Si (HP Si) has been intensively reported due to its negligible outward expansion and short diffusion path, which contributes to enhanced capacity retention and rate performance.139,141–145 The fabrication process of HP Si usually involves the preparation of HP SiO2 and the subsequent MRR.141 Differently, Xiao and co-workers reported a size-dependent chemical transformation strategy to fabricate HP Si nanoparticles, in which the MRR only occurred on the porous SiO2 shell, while the solid SiO2 core remained nearly intact (Fig. 5a–c).139 The final HP Si nanoparticles could be obtained after acid etching. Surprisingly, both mechanical analysis and in situ TEM results revealed that the HP Si nanoparticles featured inward lithium breathing, which is distinct from the outward volume change behavior of solid Si. However, the poor conductivity of the HP Si nanoparticles hindered their practical application. To tackle this issue, surface coating or binding strategies with conductive materials such as Ag,141 carbon,143 polypyrrole142 and so on146 were introduced. Very recently, more complicated Si nanoparticles (cp-Si) with canyon-like surfaces derived from wrinkled SiO2 nanoparticles (WSN) via the MRR were synthesized (Fig. 5d–j).140 Although this unique canyon-like structure with smaller Si dimensions exhibited enhanced electrochemical performance, a gradual capacity decrease remained obvious, indicating an unavoidable long-cycling electron transport issue.
 Fig. 5  0D structures obtained based on the MRR. (a) Schematic of fabrication of the hollow porous (HP) Nano-Si via the MRR. The TEM images of the mesoporous SiO2 nanoparticles with a solid core (b), and HP Nano-Si (c). Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic of the fabrication of the carbon coated complicated Si nanoparticles (cpSi@C). FE-SEM and TEM images of (e and f) the as-synthesized wrinkled SiO2 nanoparticles (WSN), (g and h) cpSi + MgO after the MRR, and (i and j) the final product cpSi@C. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Benefiting from the flexible nature and robust electrical contact between the collector and active materials, 1D Si structures were considered as one of the most promising candidates.86 Generally, two categories of 1D Si structures could be constructed via the MRR. One is direct conversion of 1D SiO2 templates to 1D porous Si,147 and the other is self-templating synthesis from natural sources.148 In the first case, a lotus-root-like mesoporous Si was fabricated from a rod-shaped mesoporous SiO2 template through the MRR (Fig. 6a–c).147 In addition, carbon nanotubes149 or electrospun organic nanowires150 were usually selected as templates for co-axial growth of SiO2, and 1D porous Si structures could be constructed by the subsequent MRR. In the second category, elaborate selection of natural source is of critical importance. Take sepiolite as an example: there is one octahedral (O) sheet and two tetrahedral (T) sheets in its crystal structure (Fig. 6d).148 Due to the discontinuous O sheet, a fibrous pattern with channels running parallel to it is naturally formed. This intrinsic crystal structure allows for the preservation of 1D structures during the MRR without any additional templates (Fig. 6e and f).
 Fig. 6  1D and 2D structures obtained based on the MRR. (a) Schematic of the synthesis of the lotus-root like mesoporous Si. (b) SEM images of mesoporous SiO2, and (c) TEM image of the porous Si product after the MRR. Reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic of the synthesis of Si nanorods. SEM images of (e) natural sepiolite and (f) Si nanorods. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematic of the preparation of reduced graphene oxide (RGO)-encapsulated Si nanosheets from sand. FE-SEM (h) and TEM (i) images of the as-prepared Si nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Similarly, 2D Si nanostructures can be fabricated either using graphene oxide (GO) as a sacrificial template or direct conversion of natural sources through the MRR. In specific, free-standing ultrathin Si nanosheets were synthesized from the SiO2 coated GO through the MRR.151 To improve the conductivity of the anode materials, 2D graphene/porous Si composites have attracted tremendous attention, giving rise to research studies on more complicated 2D structures based on the MRR.152–154 Interestingly, Kim and co-workers found that Si nanosheets can be synthesized from sand through the MRR, which is different from other research.129 They pointed out that an Mg2Si intermediate phase played a significant role in tailoring the ultimate morphology (Fig. 6g–i).
Despite the tremendous advantages of nanostructures, the inevitably low tapped/pressing density has hindered its commercial application. Hence, engineering micrometer-sized 3D hierarchical structures with nanosized features has been resurrected. Besides, 3D Si hierarchical anodes are of great interest because they can not only reap the benefits of nanostructures ranging from 0D to 2D, but can also extend these advantages to a 3D scale.157 Among the various strategies, the MRR has been regarded as one of the most facile and effective protocols to fabricate 3D hierarchical structures on account of the shape maintainability feature and intertwined nanopore structures possessed by the final products.158,159 Wu and co-workers designed a 3D macroporous Si by simple control of MRR reaction conditions (Fig. 7a–c).155 Furthermore, the 3D porous Si/GO architectures were also constructed based on the MRR.160 Significantly, the fabrication of 3D porous Si structures using natural sources as the skeleton templates becomes the unique superiority of the MRR. Liu and co-workers demonstrated that reed leaves can be transformed into 3D porous Si microstructures where the well-defined sheet-like hierarchical structures of reeds can be well inherited (Fig. 7d–g).124 The 3D hierarchical architecture with 2D highly porous nanonet/nanosheet units can accommodate the huge volume change and facilitate the diffusion of lithium ions into the electrode. Similarly, Praneetha and co-workers successfully extracted 3D porous Si architectures from earth-abundant agricultural residues such as bamboo culm, rice husk, and sugarcane bagasse based on the MRR, which further demonstrated its feasibility for synthesizing nanoporous 3D Si (Fig. 7h–j).156 Accordingly, this sustainable and low-cost approach based on the MRR has manifested its powerful validity in producing a highly porous 3D Si architecture from earth-abundant natural and biological resources.
 Fig. 7  3D structures obtained based on the MRR. (a) Schematic of the synthesis of 3D macroporous Si. SEM images (b and c) of the as-synthesized 3D macroporous Si with different magnifications. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Elsevier. The optical photograph (d) and SEM images (e) of reeds. SEM images (f and g) of the as-synthesized 3D macroporous Si, which inherits the original morphology of reed. Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from Wiley-VCH. The optical photographs of (h) rice husk (RH), (i) sugar bagasse (SB), and (j) bamboo culm. The two following images corresponding to each optical photograph are the SEM images (middle) of their extracted SiO2 and SEM images of the as-synthesized 3D Si, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 

4.2 Magnesio-milling reduction
The MRR usually experiences a vapor–solid process in which Mg atoms diffuse into the internal structure of SiO2 with a suitable Mg vapor pressure in the temperature range from 500 to 900 °C. Nonetheless, the yield of Si often varies because of the difficulty in precisely controlling the pressure. Besides, the heat-treatment process is time-consuming. For these reasons, the magnesio-milling reduction (MMR) strategy was proposed, and it can be expanded to a 5 L-scale.161 During the milling process, the SiO2 particles and Mg powder were repeatedly mixed, fractured, and rewelded, giving rise to a reduction in grain size. As the milling proceeds, increasing “active” interfaces and lattice defects triggered by continuously transferred kinetic energy from the milling balls will promote the increase of temperature inside the milling vial. When a certain critical point is reached, which can overcome the reaction activation barrier, spontaneous reduction will be initiated (Fig. 8a). Thereafter, the reaction will self-propagate without the aid of any external energy owing to its highly exothermic nature. The ignition time can be determined through testing the pressure in the milling vial. The Si yield based on the MMR method was determined to be as high as 90%. Furthermore, a variety of volume-dependent processes were investigated (Fig. 8b). Both the lab-scale planetary-ball mills and 5 L-scale attrition-mills can be successfully utilized as reactors of MMR. Recently, the validity of MMR has been further verified by reducing both the size of the SiO2 and Mg powder to the nanoscale.162 Liu and co-workers found that the reaction time can be reduced to 10 min with a high Si yield of 89% in MMR when using nanosized starting materials (Fig. 8c). The MMR process not only takes advantage of the traditional MRR but also shows high Si yield and outstanding scalability, making it an intriguing approach.
 Fig. 8  Reduction of SiO2 based on magnesio-milling. (a) Graphical illustration of the MMR using a planetary mill. (b) Volume-dependent milling processes. Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (c) XRD patterns of the products and reactants at different reaction stages. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
4.3 Molten salt reduction

4.3.1 An assortment of molten salts. 
Molten salt refers to salt which is in its solid phase at standard temperature (25 °C) and pressure (1 atm) but enters the liquid phase due to elevated temperature. Chloride salts such as alkali or alkali earth metal chlorides are the most commonly used molten salts due to the low temperature region of 200–900 °C, inert chemical character, and low cost.163 According to the Ellingham diagram (Fig. 2), SiO2 can be reduced to Si by most of the alkali (Na, K) or alkali earth (Ca, Mg) metals.56 These reducing agents will be solvated through an ionization process which produces ions and solvated electrons,58 contributing to the reduction of SiO2 by SiO2 + 4e− → Si + 2O2−. Single or binary molten salt systems have been investigated for the reduction of SiO2 to Si. In earlier research studies, LiCl–KCl and MgCl2–NaCl eutectic compositions have been chosen as the “solvent” and the Si yield increased as the reaction temperature was raised from 550 °C to 700 °C.58 Thereafter, Liang and co-workers found that mixed NaCl–KCl could also be used as a molten salt to obtain Si from SiO2 at 700 °C.164 To further reduce the reaction temperature, AlCl3 with low melting temperature (∼190 °C) was used as the molten salt to reduce both SiCl4 and SiO2 at temperatures as low as 200–300 °C.60,165 However, the likely sublimation properties of AlCl3 induce an exponential increase of the vapor pressure in the reactor, causing difficulties in practical operation. And thus, NaCl or ZnCl2 was added to form a mixture with lower eutectic melting temperature for easy handling.166,167


4.3.2 Investigation of the mechanism. 
Different from the vapor–solid chemical reaction of MMR, molten salt assisted reduction (MSR) is a liquid–solid process, where the reducing metal will be solvated. Liu and co-workers proposed an ionization mechanism in which metal ions and solvated electrons can be produced by M → M2+ + 2e−. These solvated electrons possess strong reducing power and can adsorb on the surface of SiO2 and break the Si–O bond, realizing complete reduction.58 Further study revealed that the molten salt does participate in the reduction process by forming AlOCl (Fig. 9a and b).60 Based on the XRD result of the crude products, the chemical reaction involved in the molten salt system can be described as follows: 4Al + 3SiO2 + 2AlCl3 → 3Si + 6AlOCl(4.6) 2Mg + SiO2 + 6AlCl3 → 3Si + 6AlOCl + 2MgAl2Cl8(4.7)
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the low temperature molten salt process. (b) The XRD patterns of the coarse products. (c) The optical photograph of the experiment at different reaction stages in the quartz tube. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) The tracked reaction mechanisms (path a and path b) on the SiO2 surface to form AlOCl based on theoretical simulation. Path a can be defined as a ligand dissociation mechanism, while path b refers to an Al activation mechanism. (e) The reaction coordinate based on two different reaction mechanisms shown in (d). Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
Direct observation of the reaction process confirmed that the real reaction proceeds in a solution environment and the unreacted AlCl3 can be recycled (Fig. 9c). Recently, Song and co-workers elucidated the whole reaction pathway and revealed a salt-expedited reduction mechanism based on both theoretical simulation and experimental observation.168 At the initial stage of reaction, the Al-AlCl3 complex was the preferred species in situ formed at the surface of Al metal through the solvation effect. Subsequently, the as-formed complex adsorbed on the surface of SiO2, where activated AlCl* was formed through two pathways based on thermodynamic calculations (Fig. 9d). Path a can be regarded as a ligand dissociation mechanism in which ligand dissociation followed by two rounds of the Cl transfer process is involved. In path b, the Cl-sharing ligand was first formed and dissociated to AlCl2* which then underwent one Cl transfer process. Detailed calculation indicated that path b should be both the thermodynamically and kinetically favorable route (Fig. 9e). Finally, the activated AlCl* in situ formed on the surface of SiO2 can detach the O atoms, resulting in formation of the by-product AlOCl and Si, which is consistent with previous reports.60 Based on this mechanism, the formation of HP Si, which is the most frequently obtained structure, can be reasonably explained.169 As the reduction reaction proceeds, successively generated AlCl* species will dissociate more O atoms and the Si cluster will grow to a Si seed, which has relatively free motion in the salt solution. These concurrently generated Si seeds can recrystallize into a spherical shell, and inner seeds will dissolve away to minimize the surface energy, leading to the formation of HP Si. In this study, the step-by-step reduction mechanism of MSR was thoroughly investigated, which may provide vigorous theoretical evidence for molten salt assisted synthesis.170
Very recently, Ryu and co-workers found that an infinitesimal amount of sulfur can be doped into the Si crystal lattice during MSR through introducing MgSO4 into the reaction system.171 Because of the strong reducing power of the activated AlCl* in situ formed in the AlCl3 molten salt, the oxygen in MgSO4 can be dissociated, yielding metallic Mg and isolated sulfur clusters. Then spontaneous cogrowth of the sulfur seed and reduced Si contributes to the uniform doping of a small quantity of sulfur into the Si crystal in the form of an interior channel. Importantly, this kind of doping dramatically increases the electronic conductivity of the resulting product, resulting in the formation of quasi-metallic Si. This work revealed that the AlCl3 molten salt possesses unique and unexpected reduction ability, which deserves an in-depth study.


4.3.3 Diverse anode structures. 
Due to the different reduction mechanism, the morphology of precursors can't be preserved in MSR, causing reconstruction of the final morphology through the synergistic effect of minimization of surface energy and Kirkendall effect or Ostwald ripening.164,169 However, the above processes often fail to form a well dispersed HP Si owing to the absence of a robust support or stable interface.166 To tackle this issue, several strategies such as construction of an artificial interface167 or matrix encapsulation172 have been proposed.
In the first tactic, the SiO2 spheres were conformally coated with a thin porous carbon layer, which works as a stable interface in the MSR (Fig. 10a–d).167 The authors demonstrated that the coated carbon layer could influence the mass transfer kinetics through adjusting the interdiffusion of the reagent, facilitating the formation of the HP structure. Besides carbon materials, Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets can also be used as an effective interface and template. Very recently, Hui and co-workers fabricated a novel porous MXene Ti3C2/Si nanocomposite via a controllable hydrolysis of TEOS on the surface of treated Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets and subsequent low temperature MSR.175 Owing to the existence of a 2D interface, SiO2 can be reduced to ultra-small Si nanoparticles decorated homogeneously on the surface of Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets. Importantly, the relatively mild reaction conditions of MSR are beneficial for the preservation of the layered structure of MXene. As another strategy, Vrankovic and co-workers designed a novel structure in which carbon coated porous Si is embedded in a ceramic matrix (Fig. 10e).172 The irregular porous Si obtained by MSR could anchor strongly on the surface of a polymer-derived silicon oxycarbide matrix, forming a stable composite. Differently, Kai and co-workers demonstrated that a polymeric precursor derived from cross-linking divinyl benzene and polymethylhydrosiloxane can be reduced to a Si/SiOx@C composite through MSR and subsequent pyrolysis, indicating a wider range of selection of precursors.176
 Fig. 10  The diverse Si nanomaterials synthesized based on molten salt reduction. (a) Schematic illustration of the conversion process of HP Si at different reaction stages. (b–d) TEM images of the formation of HP Si at different stages. Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of HP Si embedded in a ceramic matrix. Reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (f) Schematics of the preparation process of 3D-interconnected Si frameworks derived from natural halloysite clay. SEM images of halloysite clay (g) and acid-treated halloysite (h). TEM image of the as-prepared 3D Si framework (i). Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (j) Schematics of the synthesis of a silicon flake/nitrogen-doped graphene-like carbon composite from organoclay. SEM images of montmorillonite (k), bare Si (l), and the final Si-based composite (m). Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Despite the collapse of the original precursor structure, MSR still manifested its application, inheriting the primary skeleton template of some natural sources. Wan and co-workers fabricated 3D interconnected Si frameworks derived from natural halloysite clay by MSR (Fig. 10f).173 The tubular morphology of the natural halloysite clay could be well maintained after acid treatment, while the final product partially inherited the tubular characters due to the inevitable recrystallization process (Fig. 10g–i). Furthermore, a Si flake/nitrogen-doped graphene-like carbon composite was synthesized from organoclay through an in situ strategy, which involved carbonization followed by MSR (Fig. 10j).174 Specifically, the organoclay precursors can be fabricated by simply intercalating montmorillonite with crystal violet, simultaneously acting as the sources of carbon and nitrogen. Subsequent calcination induced the formation of a thin carbon layer, which served not only as a barrier to prevent Si seeds from agglomerating, but also as a template to induce the formation of a fake morphology (Fig. 10k and m). However, irregular agglomerated Si particles were formed without this pre-formed carbon layer, further indicating the importance of introducing a structural skeleton during MSR. Similarly, Huang and co-workers fabricated porous Si/C composite nanosheets from vermiculite, a kind of layered silicate, based on precoating carbon layers on expanded vermiculite. The authors also pointed out that the precoated carbon layer is necessary for the maintenance of the nanosheet morphology.

4.4 Electrochemical reduction
Electrochemical reduction (ECR) of SiO2 is a relatively new research field, mainly due to the insulating character of SiO2 at low temperature.177 Electrochemical deoxygenation of SiO2 is assumed not to occur as there is no pathway available for electron transfer.178 Inspired by the ECR of TiO2 in molten chlorides, Toshiyuki and co-workers first reported pinpoint and bulk ECR of quartz in molten CaCl2.67 This methodology involved a ‘contact electrode’ which can be realized by winding molybdenum (Mo) wire several times round a quartz plate. When the electrode potential was controlled to be lower than the SiO2 reduction potential, the O atom in the SiO2 near the three-phase interface would move to the conductor wire, where the O atom acquired two electrons to form O2−, diffusing into molten CaCl2 (Fig. 11a). The morphology and crystallization conversion during the electrolytic reduction were further investigated.179 The as-formed Si has hexagonal prism structures with many stacking faults along the 〈111〉 direction (Fig. 11b). It was found that these columns were perpendicular to the reaction interface, experiencing thermal transformation from amorphous Si to crystalline Si (Fig. 11c). Furthermore, the electrolytic reduction rate for dense SiO2 was found to be faster than that for a porous SiO2 pellet, which could be improved through Si doping.180 In addition, several fundamental studies, such as those on reduction rate,181 purity of the Si product,182 and the effect of different starting materials on the resulting morphology of Si,183 were performed in detail.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the proposed mechanism at the conductor–SiO2–electrolyte three-phase interfaces. (b) SEM image of the 1D Si columns obtained by electrochemical reduction in molten CaCl2 at 850 °C. (c) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of the 1D Si columns. Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from IOP Publishing. (d) Schematic illustration of the electrolysis system. (e) Synthesis route for the Si nanowire arrays. (f) SEM image of the obtained double-layered Si nanowire arrays. Reproduced from ref. 184 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematic illustration of an electrolysis cell in molten salts. (h) The working cell. (i) SEM image of the Si nanowire. Reproduced from ref. 184 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Recently, freestanding Si nanowire arrays were synthesized through ECR of SiO2 in molten CaCl2 at 850 °C.184 Typically, a SiO2 glass plate sandwiched by two pieces of nickel net was chosen as the working electrode, which was reduced to double-layered Si nanowire arrays as long as the reaction completed (Fig. 11d–f). However, the operating temperature in molten CaCl2 is still too high, and the Si yield is low.185 To address these two issues, Dong and co-workers developed a more sustainable approach to produce Si nanowires in bulk quantities via ECR of CaSiO3.186 Unlike previous reports, CaSiO3 would dissolve in the melt to generate Ca2+ and SiO32−, and then the SiO32− was reduced to Si at a certain potential. The whole process was controlled by the diffusion rate of O2−, which could be accelerated by adding CaO which acted as a supporting electrolyte (Fig. 11g and h). The authors further found that the electrolysis temperature could be reduced to as low as 650 °C when using a ternary molten salt system, CaCl2–MgCl2–NaCl. The resulting Si product has a 1D nanowire morphology and its highest yield reached 80 mg at an optimized combination (Fig. 11i). This research provided new insights into ECR, which opened up a new horizon for sustainable production of Si. However, the commonly used carbon anode in the above system is a consumable anode, the size of which will decrease as electrochemical reaction proceeds in the form of CO2. Differently and very recently, Ge and co-workers reported an alternative anode material (Ti4O7) which can be used to produce Si without CO2 emissions.187 What's more, different Si morphologies such as wires, films and particles can be prepared with this recyclable anode under different cathodic current densities. The development of this dimensionally stable anode can not only avoid the production of CO2 but also simplify the cell operation, which is less energy intensive.
Benefiting from the facile implantability of ECR, several Si-based composites have been fabricated. Very recently, a Si@C@Si hybrid was prepared via pyrolysis-cum-electrolysis of SiO2@polydopamine in a binary molten salt system, NaCl–CaCl2, at 800 °C.188 The authors pointed out that it is the synergetic effect between carbonization of polydopamine and electrodeoxidation of SiO2 in molten salts that results in the formation of the unique Si@C@Si structure. Carbon cloth can also be utilized as a freestanding carrier to achieve deposition of Si nanowires based on ECR of soluble SiO2 in the form of SiO32−.189 Intriguingly, it is found that the electrodeposited Si nanowires have much smaller diameters and thinner surface oxide coating layers, which can be attributed to the explosive nucleation process and sluggish oxidation with the role of carbon cloth. It can be seen that the ECR method is effective and facile for constructing various kinds of SI–C composites.
5. Electrochemical performance
The assessment of the electrochemical performance of the current Si anode material toward practical applications involves various performance metrics, such as specific capacity, rate performance, cyclability, mass loading, coulombic efficiency (CE), volumetric performance, and so on. Nonetheless, research studies in the current scientific literature have commonly focused on some of the parameters on account of optimization of one parameter at the expense of other parameters.190 In addition, due to the lack of uniform battery testing standards, there is no comparability between performance metrics reported in different reports. It seems that a large number of anode materials were reported to possess exceptional performance in academic research, which was often obtained through intentionally reducing the mass loading, or adding more conductive agent or binder. These overstated data further weakened the credibility of comparing the performance of anode materials with distinct structures. Based on the above considerations, some exemplary research studies on the electrochemical performance of Si-based anodes derived from a variety of reduction methods are summarized in the form of range intervals (Table 1). Significantly, we are dedicated to evaluate the intrinsic factors that influence the most common performance metrics such as initial coulombic efficiency (ICE), gravimetric specific capacity, cyclability and rate performance through comparing the various structures obtained by different reduction methods.
Table 1 Representative examples of the characteristics and electrochemical performance of Si-based anodes prepared via different reduction routes




Method
Dimensions
Precursors
Morphology
Compositing
ICE (%)
Cycling and rate performance
Ref.




Magnesiothermic reduction reaction (MRR)
0D
Solid SiO2 core–porous SiO2 shell
HP Si
—
52
1000 mA h g−1 at 0.36 A g−1 after 200 cycles

139



∼700 mA h g−1 at 7.2 A g−1


HP SiO2
HP Si
Ag polypyrrole carbon
84
>2000 mA h g−1 at 4 A g−1

141



68
1161 mA h g−1 at 4 A g−1 after 100 cycles

142



63.7
1000 mA h g−1 at 4 A g−1 after 1000 cycles

143



1D
Mesoporous SiO2
Lotus-root-like mesoporous Si
Carbon
73.6
568 mA h g−1 at 15C (1C = 4.2 A g−1)

147



SiO2 coated carbon nanotubes
Si nanotubes
Carbon
66.2
1508 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 after 1000 cycles

149



Sepiolite
Porous Si nanorods
—
60.5
816 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1 after 500 cycles

148



2D
SiO2/graphene
Porous Si/carbon
Carbon
80.7
1318 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 after 250 cycles

154



MXene/SiO2
MXene/Si@carbon layer-by-layer
Carbon
81.3
1547 mA h g−1 at 2.1 A g−1 after 200 cycles

191



398 mA h g−1 at 10C (1C = 4.2 A g−1)




Sand
Si nanosheets
Carbon
70
1113 mA h g−1 at 3 A g−1

129



3D
SiO2/carbon
Mesoporous Si/carbon nanocomposite
Carbon
89
1480 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 1000 cycles

134



>1200 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1


SiO2/graphene
3D porous architecture of Si/graphene
Carbon
—
290 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1 after 100 cycles

160



440 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1


SiO2 fumes
Silicene flowers
—
74
1100 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 600 cycles

192



950 mA h g−1 at 8 A g−1


Reed leaves
3D porous hierarchical architecture
Carbon
61
420 mA h g−1 at 10C after 4000 cycles

124



Rice husk
—
83.9
1554 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 200 cycles

193



Magnesio-milling reduction (MMR)
3D
Rice husk
Porous Si
—
84.9
1213 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 200 cycles

161



Nano SiO2 spheres
Nanoporous Si@graphene
Carbon
81.4
1750 mA h g−1 at 2.1 A g−1 after 500 cycles

162



500 mA h g−1 at 21 A g−1


Molten salt reduction (MSR)
0D
Fumed SiO2
Vesical-like Si
—
75
∼712 mA h g−1 at 0.36 A g−1 after 200 cycles

164



288 mA h g−1 at 10.8 A g−1


SiO2 nanoparticles
Hollow Si spheres
—
89
1318 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 100 cycles

169









936 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1


SiO2@C
Hollow Si spheres
Carbon
72.3
∼800 mA h g−1 at 8 A g−1 after 600 cycles

167



974 mA h g−1 at 8 A g−1


2D
Organoclay
Si flakes
Carbon
80
1138 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 after 240 cycles

174



434 mA h g−1 at 21 A g−1


3D
Porous SiO2@C microspheres
Porous Si@C microspheres
Carbon
79
∼2000 mA h g−1 at 1.2 A g−1 after 250 cycles

166



1290 mA h g−1 at 8 A g−1


Halloysite clay
3D interconnected Si frameworks


—
970 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 500 cycles

173



1020 mA h g−1 at 3.5 A g−1


Electrochemical reduction (ECR)
0D
SiO2@polydopamine
Si/C hybrid
Carbon
85.4
904 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 after 100 cycles

188



1D
CaSiO3
Si nanowires
—
74
714 mA h g−1 at 2.1 A g−1 after 500 cycles

186



521 mA h g−1 at 4.2 A g−1




Typically, the ICE of different dimensional anode materials locates in the wide range of 50–89%. The low ICE is attributed to the irreversible capacity loss of forming a SEI and the consumption of Li by the amorphous carbon during the first lithiation.105 As shown from Table 1, the 0D hollow porous Si without compositing has a relatively low ICE of 52%, on account of the large surface area available to form a SEI.139 Interestingly, nano-porous Si anodes obtained from MMR have an ultra-high initial CE of over 80%, probably due to the aggregation of Si nanoparticles induced by the milling process, dramatically reducing the contact interface between electrolyte and Si anodes.72,162 When hybridizing Si with carbon or other substances, the ICE can be improved. For example, the ICE of silver coated HP Si is as high as 84%.141 Besides, the 3D hierarchical architectures derived from natural sources reveal distinct ICEs, which may be ascribed to the difference in grain size, crystallinity, and purity of the products.
The specific capacity retention for anode materials is normally related to the structural integrity and interface stability during deep cycling, which can be realized via compositing or building 3D assemblies. As shown in Table 1, the 0D hollow Si anode derived from SiO2@C through MSR demonstrated ultrahigh specific capacity which could reach about 800 mA h g−1 at a current density of 8 A g−1 after 600 cycles, corresponding to 80% capacity retention.167 This stable capacity revealed that through the introduction of a carbon layer, it was possible to preserve the structural integrity of the hollow Si during the lithiation/delithiation process. Very recently, an MXene/Si@C layer-by-layer structure was rationally fabricated through the MRR of MXene/SiO2.191 Such an intriguing superstructure delivered a stable specific capacity of 1547 mA g g−1 at a current density of 2.1 A g−1 after 200 cycles, suggesting its extraordinary stability. As a representative study on constructing 3D building blocks, a Si flower-like ensemble, which is composed of interconnected Si nanoplates with different spatial orientations, was derived from SiO2 fumes based on the MRR.192 The as-prepared 3D structure exhibits extraordinary gravimetric capacity and excellent cycling stability (1100 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 600 cycles). This building block revealed dual stabilized characters, in which the interconnected Si nanoplates in the respective spatial orientations can accommodate the volume change of Si, shorten the Li ion diffusion length, and further improve the interfacial stability due to the limited variable SEI area. Remarkably, the 3D porous hierarchical architecture derived from reed leaves via the MRR delivered ultra-stable cycling behavior (∼420 mA h g−1 at a current density of as high as 10C after 4000 cycles).124 These results indicate that 3D porous hierarchical architectures derived from natural sources can inhibit the original unique 3D hierarchical structures, and possess outstanding structural integrity and interface stability contributing to long cycle life.
A fast charging rate, which indicates the reaction kinetics of an electrode, is also a key element for practical application of LIBs.110 As we have discussed in Section 3.3, a porous structure can contribute to the enhancement of the Li ion and electron transfer rate, yielding excellent rate capacity, which is confirmed by the performance listed in Table 1. In specific, a 3D mesoporous Si/C nanocomposite derived from a mesoporous SiO2/C composite via the MRR shows a specific capacity of 1200 mA h g−1 at a current density of 10 A g−1.134 The lotus-root-like mesoporous Si can maintain a specific capacity of 568 mA h g−1 at a current density of 15C (1C = 4.2 A g−1).147 The porous Si@C microspheres synthesized from porous SiO2@C microspheres via MSR also demonstrated excellent rate performance (1290 mA h g−1 at 8 A g−1).166 Besides the porous structure, hollow spheres or hollow porous structures also can promote fast charging. Specifically, the 0D silver treated HP Si via MRR delivered a specific capacity of over 1290 mA h g−1 at a current density of 8 A g−1.141 The 0D hollow Si spheres obtained from MSR with and without carbon compositing showed a specific capacity of 974 mA h g−1 at a current density of 8 A g−1 and 936 mA h g−1 at a current density of 5 A g−1, respectively.167,169 The enhancement of reactivity with Li ions and electrons in porous or hollow structures originates from the largely exposed surface area available to the electrolyte which accelerates ion diffusion.
As we have discussed above, the reduction of SiO2 to Si-based anode materials has been attempted via several promising techniques. Each of them has their own merits and demerits toward ideal anode materials, and thus we summarized the characteristics of these methods as shown in Table 2. The MRR is one of the predominant reduction methods owing to its unique shape-preservation and generalization character. The as-prepared Si-based anode materials normally demonstrated excellent rate capacity and long cycle life, which may be applied to 3C (computer, communication, and consumer electronics) batteries, power batteries (e.g. electric vehicles) and energy storage batteries (e.g. grid storage). However, the product yield based on this method is always very low, and some byproducts like Mg2SiO4 and Mg2Si, which are caused by the discrepant atomic mobilities in the middle solid product are hard to control. What's more, the detailed kinetics during this process is not well understood which further hinders its scale-up. To overcome these issues, MMR was reported, which allowed homogeneous local reaction environments between Mg vapor atoms and SiO2. Nonetheless, the resulting Nano Si was liable to aggregate, giving rise to a gradual decay of the specific capacity. Besides, it is difficult to accurately control the ignition point when utilizing different types of SiO2 precursors. Furthermore, owing to the exothermic nature of this reduction reaction, the obtained product may experience fusion without a controllable microstructure. Significantly, low temperature MSR was a promising thermal reduction method owing to its facile operation and high yield. The limitations behind this method lie in the reconstruction of the morphology during reaction, suffering from the uncontrollable structure of products. Previously introducing structural skeleton materials such as a carbon coating layer not only could offer an interface for tailoring the interdiffusion of reagents, but also realized in situ composition with Si, giving rise to enhanced cycling stability and rate capacity. However, this pre-introduced structural framework may slow down the reduction reaction or even prevent it from happening. Therefore, longer reaction time may be required. Moreover, a large amount of molten salts may be used in this reaction, which gives rise to difficulties in post-processing. As a relatively novel approach, molten salt electrolysis reduction is a new sustainable method for producing Si from an inexpensive CaSiO3 precursor, which could be extended to the reduction of recycled glass waste or coal ash. However, the product morphology is difficult to control through changing the input parameters such as current density. Besides, the output based on this method is relatively low.
Table 2 Summary of the drawbacks/limitations and potential applications based on different reduction routes




Method
Advantages
Drawbacks/limitations
Performance implications
Potential applications




Magnesiothermic reduction (MRR)
• Shape-preservation
• Low yield
• Low ICE
• 3C batteries


• Generalization
• Lack of suitable reactors
• Long cycle life
• Power batteries


• Construction of a unique 3D hierarchical architecture
• Excellent rate capacity
• Energy storage batteries


• Intertwined pores


Magnesio-milling reduction (MMR)
• Scalability
• Poor dispersity
• High ICE
• 3C batteries


• High yield
• Reduction in the size of precursors to the nanoscale
• Moderate cycle life
• Power batteries


• Short reaction time
• Poor rate capacity


• Low reaction temperature


Molten salt reduction (MSR)
• Low reaction temperature
• Uncontrollable product morphology
• Low ICE
• Power batteries


• High yield
• Poor dispersity
• Long cycle life
• Energy storage batteries


• In situ composition
• Long reaction time
• Excellent rate capacity


Electrochemical reduction (ECR)
• Sustainability
• Uncontrollable product morphology
• High ICE
• 3C batteries


• High quality
• Relatively low output
• Long cycle life
• Energy storage batteries


• Generalization
• Poor rate capacity




Although these reduction techniques are premature for commercialization, it is still useful to estimate the energy consumption of each method. It is well known that the traditional carbothermic reduction process suffers from high energy input (∼20 kW h kg−1-Si).186 This consumption of electrical energy will decrease to ∼13 kW h kg−1-Si when utilizing the ECR technique, in which the energy can be completely supplied with renewable energy.194 For the other reduction approaches, the energy consumption is expected be lower due to the lower reaction temperature. We believe that these low temperature reduction techniques introduced here are competitive and cost-effective for realizing commercialization in the near future.
6. Conclusions and outlook
In this review, a comprehensive discussion of synthetic techniques for Nano Si and Si has been presented. From the viewpoint of commercial application, it is reasonable to engineer the impactful reduction routes from low-cost precursors such as natural resources or wastes. The MRR is currently the most frequently used reduction method and has been extended to construct multiple dimensional structured Si-based anodes. Although a porous network is inevitably formed after acid treatment of by-product MgO, the evolution process and the detailed characterization of it has failed in current research work. Thus, an in situ method should be established to evaluate the detailed relationship between the pore structure and cycle life, which will give researchers more information necessary to design suitable porous structures. In addition, slow headway has been made with regard to the kinetic process mechanism during the MRR, which may play a critical role in regulating the final composition of products. Besides, the reactors used in the MRR are always homemade, leading to a distinct morphology even under the same reaction conditions. This may be ascribed to the different Mg vapor pressures caused by different reactor volumes. Thus, standard reaction equipment like hydrothermal synthesis reactors should also be developed.
MMR is an extension of the MRR method to some extent, as the reduction reactions involved in these two methods are the same. Differently, MMR is realized in a planetary ball mill, which can easily be extended to a larger attrition mill, and even a drum mill. However, the ignition point, a critical parameter indicating the initiation of reaction, may give rise to local high temperature, which poses a potential safety hazard. More efforts should be devoted to clarifying the influence of ignition point on the real reaction temperature. In addition, aggregation of the final products always inevitably happens during the milling process, giving rise to poor monodispersity which may be related to inferior cycling stability.
Low temperature MSR is a promising reduction method due to the facile operation and relatively high yield. The drawbacks of this strategy lie in the recrystallization of the final morphology during reaction. Accordingly, how the pre-introduced template or support skeleton influences the interdiffusion process should be further studied. Besides, an in situ technique should be applied to probe the morphology evolution process based on this method. Moreover, much deeper research should be done on the choice of different types of molten salts, which influence the optimized reaction temperature and product yield.
As a new reduction technique, the electrolysis process for reducing low-cost silicates is a sustainable approach. And more efforts should be made to test the electrochemical performance of Si-based anode materials based on this method. Besides, how to regulate the morphology of the products through changing the input parameters should also be explored. Furthermore, boosting the production efficiency based on electrolytic Si extraction is also of significant importance in promoting its commercialization.
In summary, we have surveyed the current eco-friendly reduction strategies for producing Si to address the fundamental issues involved in commercialization of Si-based anode materials. Approaches such as metallothermic reduction reactions (MRR and MSR), metal milling reduction (MMR), and electrochemical reduction (ECR) have been demonstrated to be powerful in reducing the Si precursors that have stable Si–O bonds. However, more intensive research should be devoted to developing new environmentally friendly strategies for the fabrication of Si from low-cost precursors, which has potential large-scale applications. Meanwhile, more efforts are still needed to explore the underlying mechanism of each reduction route, which is of critical importance to synthesize morphology controllable Si-based anodes. Besides, incorporating these reduction methods with the compositing strategy can significantly enhance the electrochemical performance of the electrodes. Consequently, how to effectively combine these approaches to construct an ideal hybrid anode that can achieve satisfactory performance remains a huge challenge.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51702046, No. 51772050, No. 51432004, and No. 51822202), the Innovation Program of Shanghai Municipal Education Commission (2017-01-07-00-03-E00025), Shanghai Committee of Science and Technology, China (No. 17ZR1401000, No. 16JC1401800 and No. 18JC1411200), the Program for Professor of Special Appointment (Eastern Scholar) at Shanghai Institutions of Higher Learning, and the State Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, Donghua University.
References
M. Garibaldi, I. Ashcroft, M. Simonelli and R. Hague, Acta Mater., 2016, 110, 207–216 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, J. Ma, R. Long, C. Gao and Y. Xiong, Nano Today, 2017, 17, 96–116 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. Zhu, K. Wang, A. Cao, J. Wei, C. Li, Y. Jia, Z. Li, X. Li and D. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2743–2748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2009, 17, 183–189 CAS .
X. Cheng, S. B. Lowe, P. J. Reece and J. J. Gooding, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 2680–2700 RSC .
M. Wittmer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1980, 36, 456–458 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Reiss, M. Carrière, C. Lincheneau, L. Vaure and S. Tamang, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10731–10819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Priolo, T. Gregorkiewicz, M. Galli and T. F. Krauss, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tian, X. Zheng, T. J. Kempa, Y. Fang, N. Yu, G. Yu, J. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2007, 449, 885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dasog, Z. Yang and J. G. C. Veinot, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 7576–7578 RSC .
Y. Zhong, F. Peng, F. Bao, S. Wang, X. Ji, L. Yang, Y. Su, S.-T. Lee and Y. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8350–8356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, Z. Yu, G. F. Burkhard, C.-M. Hsu, S. T. Connor, Y. Xu, Q. Wang, M. McGehee, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 279–282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cai, S. M. Allan, K. H. Sandhage and F. M. Zalar, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 88, 2005–2010 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Y. Lin, K. Motesharei, K.-P. S. Dancil, M. J. Sailor and M. R. Ghadiri, Science, 1997, 278, 840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bao, E. M. Ernst, S. Yoo and K. H. Sandhage, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 474–478 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. J. Kan, R. D. Lewis, K. Chen and F. H. Arnold, Science, 2016, 354, 1048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Franco Gonzalez, N.-H. Yang and R.-S. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 27775–27787 CrossRef CAS .
X. Su, Q. Wu, J. Li, X. Xiao, A. Lott, W. Lu, B. W. Sheldon and J. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300882 CrossRef .
K. Feng, M. Li, W. Liu, A. G. Kashkooli, X. Xiao, M. Cai and Z. Chen, Small, 2018, 14, 1702737 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhu, F. Zhang, X. Li, W. Luo, L. Li, H. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. Wang, W. Jiang, H. K. Liu, S. X. Dou and J. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6669–6673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Su, A. A. Barragan, L. Geng, D. Long, L. Ling, K. N. Bozhilov, L. Mangolini and J. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10780–10785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, G. Zhu, K. Wang, X. Qian, Y. Zhao, W. Luo and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17426–17434 RSC .
L. Ji, Z. Lin, M. Alcoutlabi and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2682 RSC .
Y.-X. Wang, J. Yang, S.-L. Chou, H. K. Liu, W.-x. Zhang, D. Zhao and S. X. Dou, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Zheng, S. Zhang, J. Yang, Z. Shao and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2310–2340 RSC .
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 16 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Choi and D. Aurbach, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16013 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Y.-X. Wang, S.-L. Chou, R. Zhang, Y. Xu, J. Fan, W.-x. Zhang, H. Kun Liu, D. Zhao and S. Xue Dou, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 133–142 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, D. Shen, R. Zhang, B. Zhang, Y. Wang, S. X. Dou, H. K. Liu and J. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 7800–7806 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, Y. Wang, S. Chou, Y. Xu, W. Li, B. Kong, S. X. Dou, H. K. Liu and J. Yang, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 255–264 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, Y. Wang, L. Wang, W. Jiang, S.-L. Chou, S. X. Dou, H. K. Liu and J. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10524–10532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Y. Wang, W. Li, L. Wang, Y. Fan, W. Jiang, W. Luo, Y. Wang, B. Kong, C. Selomulya, H. K. Liu, S. X. Dou and D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700523 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhu, Y. Gu, Y. Wang, Q. Qu and H. Zheng, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 787, 928–934 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Gu, Q. Qu, G. Zhu, G. Liu, V. S. Battaglia and H. Zheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 270, 480–489 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou and Y.-G. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9019–9023 RSC .
W.-S. Chang, C.-M. Park, J.-H. Kim, Y.-U. Kim, G. Jeong and H.-J. Sohn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6895 RSC .
Z. Liu, Q. Yu, Y. Zhao, R. He, M. Xu, S. Feng, S. Li, L. Zhou and L. Mai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 285–309 RSC .
A. M. Zhilkashinova, S. K. Kabdrakhmanova, A. V. Troyeglazova and M. B. Abilev, Silicon, 2018, 10, 2201–2210 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pizzini, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1528–1533 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yasuda, K. Morita and T. H. Okabe, Energy Technol., 2014, 2, 141–154 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Jasinski and S. M. Gates, Acc. Chem. Res., 1991, 24, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, J. Liu, P. Zhang, Q. Zhang, L. Xu, L. Zhao, X. Song and L. Gao, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 1262–1272 RSC .
Y. Yuan, W. Xiao, Z. Wang, D. J. Fray and X. Jin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15743–15748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Heath, Science, 1992, 258, 1131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Boettcher, J. M. Spurgeon, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, J. R. Maiolo, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2010, 327, 185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Xie, P. Wei, R. B. King, H. F. Schaefer, P. von R. Schleyer and G. H. Robinson, Science, 2008, 321, 1069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Solomon, M. P. Schmidt and H. Tran-Quoc, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1988, 38, 9895–9901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gresback, T. Nozaki and K. Okazaki, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 305605 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shi, T. U. Tuzer, R. Fenollosa and F. Meseguer, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5934–5938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-S. Yang, R. A. Bley, S. M. Kauzlarich, H. W. H. Lee and G. R. Delgado, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 5191–5195 CrossRef CAS .
D. Neiner, H. W. Chiu and S. M. Kauzlarich, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11016–11017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Atkins, M. C. Cassidy, M. Lee, S. Ganguly, C. M. Marcus and S. M. Kauzlarich, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1609–1617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Atkins, A. Thibert, D. S. Larsen, S. Dey, N. D. Browning and S. M. Kauzlarich, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20664–20667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Z. Fan, A. Dhanabalan, C. Chen and C. Wang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A1055–A1059 CrossRef CAS .
T.-D. Nguyen, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2581–2588 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lai, J. R. Thompson and M. Dasog, Chem.–Eur. J., 2018, 24, 7913–7920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, C. Giordano and M. Antonietti, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5454–5459 RSC .
M. Zhu, J. Yang, Z. Yu, H. Chen and F. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7026–7034 RSC .
N. Lin, Y. Han, J. Zhou, K. Zhang, T. Xu, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3187–3191 RSC .
B. Zhu, X. Wu, W.-J. Liu, H.-L. Lu, D. W. Zhang, Z. Fan and S.-J. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 747–752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhu, W.-J. Liu, S.-J. Ding, D. W. Zhang and Z. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 21537–21542 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sohn, D. G. Lee, H.-I. Park, C. Park, J.-H. Choi and H. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800855 CrossRef .
J. Müllerová, Ľ. Scholtz, J. Ďurišová, E. Pinčík, M. Solanská and D. Pudiš, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 461, 182–189 CrossRef .
X. Li, M. Gu, S. Hu, R. Kennard, P. Yan, X. Chen, C. Wang, M. J. Sailor, J.-G. Zhang and J. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Peng, A. Lu, R. Zhang and S.-T. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3026–3035 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nohira, K. Yasuda and Y. Ito, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 397–401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, P. Dong, D. Wang, M. Liu, J. Duan, G. P. Nayaka, D. Wang, C. Xu, Y. Hua and Y. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 781, 362–370 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, L. Ji, X. Zou, T. Lim, J. Zhao, E. T. Yu and A. J. Bard, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15078–15082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiao, J. Zhou, L. Yu, D. Wang and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7427–7431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gauthier, D. Mazouzi, D. Reyter, B. Lestriez, P. Moreau, D. Guyomard and L. Roué, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2145 RSC .
L. Zong, Y. Jin, C. Liu, B. Zhu, X. Hu, Z. Lu and J. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7210–7215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Heintz, M. J. Fink and B. S. Mitchell, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3984–3988 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zheng, L. Wang, X. Feng and X. He, J. Power Sources, 2018, 378, 527–536 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, D. Ren, H. Hsu, X. Feng, G.-L. Xu, M. Zhuang, H. Gao, L. Lu, X. Han, Z. Chu, J. Li, X. He, K. Amine and M. Ouyang, Joule, 2018, 2, 2047–2064 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Bao, Y.-H. Huang, C.-K. Lan, B.-H. Chen and J.-G. Duh, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 173, 82–90 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, X. Chen, Y. Xia, M. Chen, L. Wang, Q. Wang, W. Li and J. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701083 CrossRef .
T. Shang, Y. Wen, D. Xiao, L. Gu, Y.-S. Hu and H. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700709 CrossRef .
X. Zuo, J. Zhu, P. Müller-Buschbaum and Y.-J. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 113–143 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, D. Kong, X. Li and L. Zhi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806061 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, G. Zhou, K. Liu and Y. Cui, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 2895–2905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Entwistle, A. Rennie and S. Patwardhan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18344–18356 RSC .
M. Dasog, J. Kehrle, B. Rieger and J. G. C. Veinot, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2322–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, P. R. Coxon, M. Peters, B. Hoex, J. M. Cole and D. J. Fray, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3223–3263 RSC .
M. L. De Marco, S. Semlali, B. A. Korgel, P. Barois, G. L. Drisko and C. Aymonier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 4478–4498 CrossRef PubMed .
C. K. Chan, H. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 3, 31 CrossRef PubMed .
I. H. Son, J. Hwan Park, S. Kwon, S. Park, M. H. Rümmeli, A. Bachmatiuk, H. J. Song, J. Ku, J. W. Choi, J.-m. Choi, S.-G. Doo and H. Chang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Bley and S. M. Kauzlarich, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 12461–12462 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, X. Chang, B. Sun, S. Yang, J. Zheng and X. Li, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6223–6226 RSC .
C. Tang, Y. Liu, C. Xu, J. Zhu, X. Wei, L. Zhou, L. He, W. Yang and L. Mai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704561 CrossRef .
Y. An, H. Fei, G. Zeng, L. Ci, S. Xiong, J. Feng and Y. Qian, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4993–5002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, M. Seo, M.-H. Park and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2146–2149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shiohara, S. Hanada, S. Prabakar, K. Fujioka, T. H. Lim, K. Yamamoto, P. T. Northcote and R. D. Tilley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 248–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. T. Ellingham, J. Soc. Chem. Ind., London, 1944, 63, 125 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Devi and M. P. Kannan, Energy Fuels, 2007, 21, 596–601 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choi, T. Bok, J. Ryu, J.-I. Lee, J. Cho and S. Park, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 161–168 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dai, J. Zai, R. Yi, M. L. Gordin, H. Sohn, S. Chen and D. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3605 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Dai, R. Yi, H. Yang, Y. Zhao, L. Luo, M. L. Gordin, H. Sohn, S. Chen, C. Wang, S. Zhang and D. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 13257–13263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-T. Cheng and M. W. Verbrugge, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 083521 CrossRef .
X. H. Liu, L. Zhong, S. Huang, S. X. Mao, T. Zhu and J. Y. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1522–1531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee, J. T. Harris, B. A. Korgel, C. Wang, W. D. Nix and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 758–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shen, M. Ge, L. Luo, X. Fang, Y. Liu, A. Zhang, J. Rong, C. Wang and C. Zhou, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xu, J.-Y. Li, J.-K. Sun, Y.-X. Yin, L.-J. Wan and Y.-G. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601481 CrossRef .
J.-Y. Li, G. Li, J. Zhang, Y.-X. Yin, F.-S. Yue, Q. Xu and Y.-G. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 4057–4064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, K. Yan, H.-W. Lee, Z. Lu, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15029 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, Z. Lu, J. Zhao, M. T. McDowell, H.-W. Lee, W. Zhao and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 187–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, J.-Y. Hwang and Y.-K. Sun, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2624–2633 CAS .
H. Jung, J. Power Sources, 2003, 115, 346–351 CrossRef CAS .
L.-F. Cui, R. Ruffo, C. K. Chan, H. Peng and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 491–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kim, S. Chae, J. Ma, M. Ko and J. Cho, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 812 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ge, J. Rong, X. Fang and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2318–2323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. An, B. Gao, S. Mei, B. Xiang, J. Fu, L. Wang, Q. Zhang, P. K. Chu and K. Huo, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1447 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Z. A. Manj, X. Chen, W. U. Rehman, G. Zhu, W. Luo and J. Yang, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ibisate, D. Golmayo and C. López, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2899–2902 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zuo, Y. Xia, Q. Ji, X. Gao, S. Yin, M. Wang, X. Wang, B. Qiu, A. Wei, Z. Sun, Z. Liu, J. Zhu and Y.-J. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 889–899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. D. Banerjee, S. Sen and H. N. Acharya, Mater. Sci. Eng., 1982, 52, 173–179 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Sandhage, M. B. Dickerson, P. M. Huseman, M. A. Caranna, J. D. Clifton, T. A. Bull, T. J. Heibel, W. R. Overton and M. E. A. Schoenwaelder, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 429–433 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bao, M. R. Weatherspoon, S. Shian, Y. Cai, P. D. Graham, S. M. Allan, G. Ahmad, M. B. Dickerson, B. C. Church, Z. Kang, H. W. Abernathy III, C. J. Summers, M. Liu and K. H. Sandhage, Nature, 2007, 446, 172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. K. Richman, C. B. Kang, T. Brezesinski and S. H. Tolbert, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3075–3079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, G. Zhu, K. Wang, M. Li and J. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 10531–10534 RSC .
Y. Yu, L. Gu, C. Zhu, S. Tsukimoto, P. A. van Aken and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2247–2250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Furquan, A. Raj Khatribail, S. Vijayalakshmi and S. Mitra, J. Power Sources, 2018, 382, 56–68 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Zhang, Y. You, S. Xin, Y.-X. Yin, J. Zhang, P. Wang, X.-S. Zheng, F.-F. Cao and Y.-G. Guo, Nano Energy, 2016, 25, 120–127 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, P. Kopold, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9632–9636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, L. Wu, J. Yang, J. Tang, L. Xi and B. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 33–40 CrossRef CAS .
A. Xing, J. Zhang, Z. Bao, Y. Mei, A. S. Gordin and K. H. Sandhage, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6743–6745 RSC .
W. Luo, X. Wang, C. Meyers, N. Wannenmacher, W. Sirisaksoontorn, M. M. Lerner and X. Ji, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2222 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Han, W. Sun, D. Li, D. Luo, Y. Wang, B. Yang, C. Li, Y. Zhao, L. Chen, J. Xu and C. Zhu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 481, 933–939 CrossRef CAS .
W.-S. Kim, Y. Hwa, J.-H. Shin, M. Yang, H.-J. Sohn and S.-H. Hong, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4297–4302 RSC .
M. Cui, L. Wang, X. Guo, E. Wang, Y. Yang, T. Wu, D. He, S. Liu and H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3874–3881 RSC .
J. Liang, X. Li, Z. Hou, C. Guo, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7230–7233 RSC .
P. Nie, Z. Le, G. Chen, D. Liu, X. Liu, H. B. Wu, P. Xu, X. Li, F. Liu, L. Chang, X. Zhang and Y. Lu, Small, 2018, 14, 1800635 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yan and J. Guo, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103845 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, Y. Du, D. Li, D. Shen, J. Yang, Z. Guo, H. K. Liu, A. A. Elzatahry and D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6749–6755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-K. Yoo, J. Kim, M.-J. Choi, Y.-U. Park, J. Hong, K. M. Baek, K. Kang and Y. S. Jung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400622 CrossRef .
D. P. Wong, H.-T. Lien, Y.-T. Chen, K.-H. Chen and L.-C. Chen, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 896–900 RSC .
L. Shi, W. Wang, A. Wang, K. Yuan and Y. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 661, 27–37 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, K. Huo, M. T. McDowell, J. Zhao and Y. Cui, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1919 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Xiao, M. Gu, H. Yang, B. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Liu, F. Liu, F. Dai, L. Yang, Z. Liu, X. Xiao, G. Liu, P. Zhao, S. Zhang, C. Wang, Y. Lu and M. Cai, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kim, J. Ahn, Y. Oh, J. Tan, D. Lee, J.-K. Lee and J. Moon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3028–3037 RSC .
D. Chen, X. Mei, G. Ji, M. Lu, J. Xie, J. Lu and J. Y. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2409–2413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-H. Du, B. Li, W. Fu, Y.-J. Xiong, K.-X. Wang and J.-S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6145–6150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, S. Li, Y. Jin, J. Zai, M. Chen, A. Nazakat, P. Zhan, Y. Huang and X. Qian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21098–21103 RSC .
Y. Yu, G. Li, X. Chen, W. Lin, J. Rong and W. Yang, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 15094–15101 RSC .
M.-P. Liu, C.-H. Li, H.-B. Du and X.-Z. You, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4950–4952 RSC .
X. Zhang, L. Huang, P. Zeng, L. Wu, Q. Shen, Z. Gao and Y. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 357, 625–632 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jia, P. Gao, J. Yang, J. Wang, Y. Nuli and Z. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1036–1039 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, R. Zhu, S. Liu, D. Wu, H. Fu, J. Zhu and H. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6356–6362 RSC .
R. Liu, C. Shen, Y. Dong, J. Qin, Q. Wang, J. Iocozzia, S. Zhao, K. Yuan, C. Han, B. Li and Z. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14797–14804 RSC .
J.-K. Yoo, J. Kim, Y. S. Jung and K. Kang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5452–5456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, J. Zhu, D. Sim, W. Zhou, W. Shi, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 5293–5295 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xu, D. Wang, P. Qiu, J. Zhang, Q. Wang, B. Xia and X. Xie, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 16638–16644 RSC .
K. Yu, H. Zhang, H. Qi, J. Liang and C. Liang, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 19811–19817 RSC .
X.-Y. Yue, Z. Yan, Y. Song, X.-J. Wu and Y.-N. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 19195–19202 RSC .
H. Wu, N. Du, X. Shi and D. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 331, 76–81 CrossRef CAS .
S. Praneetha and A. V. Murugan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 224–236 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, J. Ryu, S. Choi, X. Zhang, D. Pribat, X. Li, L. Zhi, S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2307–2315 CAS .
P. Wu, H. Wang, Y. Tang, Y. Zhou and T. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3546–3552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, L. Huang, P. Zeng, L. Wu, R. Zhang and Y. Chen, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 2584–2592 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xin, X. Zhou, F. Wang, X. Yao, X. Xu, Y. Zhu and Z. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7724–7730 RSC .
W. C. Cho, H. J. Kim, H. I. Lee, M. W. Seo, H. W. Ra, S. J. Yoon, T. Y. Mun, Y. K. Kim, J. H. Kim, B. H. Kim, J. W. Kook, C.-Y. Yoo, J. G. Lee and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7261–7269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, X. Chang, T. Wang, W. Li, H. Ju, X. Zheng, X. Wu, C. Wang, J. Zheng and X. Li, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6065–6073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Lin, T. Li, Y. Han, Q. Zhang, T. Xu and Y. Qian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8399–8404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, X. Li, Q. Cheng, Z. Hou, L. Fan, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3440–3444 RSC .
N. Lin, Y. Han, L. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Zhou, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3822–3825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mishra, J. Zheng, R. Patel, L. Estevez, H. Jia, L. Luo, P. Z. El-Khoury, X. Li, X.-D. Zhou and J.-G. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 269, 509–516 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, X. Huang, Y. Zhao, X. Hu, D. Cen, G. Gao, Z. Bao, Y. Mei, Z. Di and G. Wu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11481–11490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Song, J. Ryu, J. C. Kim, J. H. Lee, S. Kim, C. Wang, S. K. Kwak and S. Park, Chem. Commun., 2018, 1, 42 CrossRef .
Z.-W. Zhou, Y.-T. Liu, X.-M. Xie and X.-Y. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8401–8404 RSC .
X. Huang, D. Cen, R. Wei, H. Fan and Z. Bao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26854–26862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ryu, J. H. Seo, G. Song, K. Choi, D. Hong, C. Wang, H. Lee, J. H. Lee and S. Park, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2351 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Vrankovic, M. Graczyk-Zajac, C. Kalcher, J. Rohrer, M. Becker, C. Stabler, G. Trykowski, K. Albe and R. Riedel, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11409–11416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wan, H. Xiong, X. Liu, G. Chen, N. Zhang, H. Wang, R. Ma and G. Qiu, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 7522–7527 RSC .
Q. Chen, R. Zhu, Q. He, S. Liu, D. Wu, H. Fu, J. Du, J. Zhu and H. He, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 2644–2647 RSC .
X. Hui, R. Zhao, P. Zhang, C. Li, C. Wang and L. Yin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901065 CrossRef .
K. Yang, Z. Yu, C. Yu, M. Zhu, L. Yang, H. Chen and F. Pan, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1900239 CrossRef .
W. Xiao and D. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3215–3228 RSC .
S. K. Cho, F.-R. F. Fan and A. J. Bard, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12740–12744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yasuda, T. Nohira, K. Amezawa, Y. H. Ogata and Y. Ito, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, D69–D74 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yasuda, T. Nohira, K. Takahashi, R. Hagiwara and Y. H. Ogata, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, D232–D237 CrossRef CAS .
T. Toba, K. Yasuda, T. Nohira, R. Hagiwara, K. Ichitsubo, K. Masuda and T. Homma, ECS Trans., 2013, 50, 119–126 CrossRef .
K. Kobayashi, T. Nohira, R. Hagiwara, K. Ichitsubo and K. Yamada, ECS Trans., 2010, 33, 239–248 CAS .
Y. Nishimura, T. Nohira, K. Kobayashi and R. Hagiwara, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, E55–E59 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, J. Li, P. Ying, W. Zhang, L. Meng and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 4477–4479 RSC .
J. Yang, S. Lu, S. Kan, X. Zhang and J. Du, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3273–3275,  10.1039/b902029b .
Y. Dong, T. Slade, M. J. Stolt, L. Li, S. N. Girard, L. Mai and S. Jin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14453–14457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Bard, J. Ge, X. Zou, S. Almassi, L. Ji and B. P. Chaplin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58 DOI:10.1002/anie.201905991 .
W. Weng, C. Zeng and W. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9156–9163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Weng and W. Xiao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 804–813 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, T. Liu, X. Ai and C. Liang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5262 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z. Mu, J. Lai, Y. Chao, Y. Yang, P. Zhou, Y. Li, W. Yang, Z. Xia and S. Guo, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2167–2175 CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Qiu, D. Kong, L. Zhou, Z. Li, X. Li and L. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7476–7484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Jung, M.-H. Ryou, Y. J. Sung, S. B. Park and J. W. Choi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 12229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li and R. B. Wehrspohn, Joule, 2019, 3, 1172–1175 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Guanjia Zhu	Guanjia Zhu received her MS degree from the Department of Materials Science and Chemical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology in 2011 and she is currently a Ph.D. candidate at Donghua University. Her research interests focus on silicon-based materials for application in lithium-ion batteries.
Wei Luo	Wei Luo is a professor at the State Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering at Donghua University. He obtained his Bachelor's (2006) and Master's (2009) degrees from Nanjing Tech University. He received his Ph.D. degree in chemistry from Fudan University in 2014. His research interests mainly include the synthesis of functional mesoporous materials and nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion as well as sensors.
Lianjun Wang	Lianjun Wang is a full professor at the College of Materials Science and Engineering at Donghua University. Dr Wang received his Ph.D. in chemical engineering from Dalian University of Technology in 2002. He carried out his postdoctoral research at Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (2002–2004) and Stockholm University (2007–2008). His research interests focus on the design and controlled fabrication of bulk nanocomposites with all-scale hierarchical architectures and their application in energy-related areas and in the field of LEDs.
Wan Jiang	Wan Jiang, Ph.D. of Engineering, worked at Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, CAS from 1999 to 2009. Currently, he is a distinguished professor at Donghua University, and the director of the Engineering Research Center of Advanced Class Manufacturing Technology Ministry. His research interests focus on inorganic non-metallic materials, especially in the research field of rapid sintering of ceramic materials.
Jianping Yang	Jianping Yang is a full professor (2016) at Donghua University, China. He obtained has Bachelor's degree (2007) from Huazhong University of Science and Technology. His Master's (2010) and Ph.D. degrees (2013) were received from Fudan University supervised by Professor Dongyuan Zhao. He then worked as a postdoctoral and visiting research fellow at Tongji University, University of Wollongong and Monash University. His research interests focus on spatially confined design of environmentally friendly materials for environmental remediation, electrocatalytic denitrification, and energy conversion and storage (including Si-based lithium ion batteries and sodium/potassium ion batteries).

 	Fig. 1  Flow chart showing the current synthesis routes of Nano Si for Li-ion battery anodes from the perspective of the whole Si industry chain. Route 1 (red line) represents electrochemical anodization fabrication of Nano Si from Si wafers, through a tedious preparation process. Route 2 (orange line) represents preparation of Nano Si through chemical vapor deposition (CVD) from SiH4. Route 3 (purple line) shows synthesis of Nano Si from SiCl4, which is the by-product of polysilicon production. Route 4 (grey line) represents a dealloying process of Mg2Si to obtain Nano Si. Route 5 (green line) and route 6 (blue line) are processes comprising direct reduction from natural precursors and silica, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  The Ellingham diagram for a series of metals. This diagram can be used to find the most suitable reducing agent for a reduction process. In principle, metals that have curves at the bottom of the diagram can reduce the metals found more towards the top. For the reduction of SiO2 to Si, Ti, Al, Mg and Ca are all the available reducing agents. Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 3  Structure–property relationship for Si-based anode materials in terms of size, crystallinity, porosity and dispersity. (a) Statistics showing a critical size (Dc) of about 150 nm. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b) In situ TEM experiments: time series of the lithiation of a single a-Si sphere. The relatively sharp contrast between the lithiated shell and the Si-rich core reveals a two-phase lithiation mechanism. (c) Summary of the first lithiation and subsequent cycling of a-Si and c-Si. Reproduced with from ref. 101 permission from the American Chemical Society. (d) A schematic model of the mesoporous Si sponge particle. (e) The correlation of the pore radius after full lithiation (r2), and the expansion rates of the particle along the radial direction (κ) and along the axial direction (ξ). (f) Particle volume expansion as a function of porosity (Vf). Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. Schematic illustration of the lithiation behavior of a solid Si particle (g) and porous Si particle (h). Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. The packing model of watermelon-like Si/C anodes with (i) single size distribution and (j) optimized size distribution. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 
SiO2(s) + 2Mg(g) → 2MgO(s) + Si(s)	(4.1)
	(4.2)
	(4.3)
SiO2(s) + 4Mg(g) → 2MgO(s) + Mg2Si(s)	(4.4)
SiO2(s) + Mg2Si(s) → 2MgO(s) + 2Si(s)	(4.5)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the detailed step-by-step processes during the low-pressure magnesiothermic reduction reaction (MRR) for the synthesis of hierarchical Nano Si. (b) A schematic illustration for the intermediate product during the MRR. (c) TEM image of a hierarchical Nano-Si after a 15 min-long MRR, and a clear boundary can be seen between the inner and shell regions. The inset is the SAED pattern for region 3 (zone axis = [1–10]). High resolution TEM images of region 1 (d) and region 2 (e). Illustrations of Mg vapor diffusion behaviors under atmospheric pressure (f) and low-pressure (g) conditions. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  0D structures obtained based on the MRR. (a) Schematic of fabrication of the hollow porous (HP) Nano-Si via the MRR. The TEM images of the mesoporous SiO2 nanoparticles with a solid core (b), and HP Nano-Si (c). Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic of the fabrication of the carbon coated complicated Si nanoparticles (cpSi@C). FE-SEM and TEM images of (e and f) the as-synthesized wrinkled SiO2 nanoparticles (WSN), (g and h) cpSi + MgO after the MRR, and (i and j) the final product cpSi@C. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  1D and 2D structures obtained based on the MRR. (a) Schematic of the synthesis of the lotus-root like mesoporous Si. (b) SEM images of mesoporous SiO2, and (c) TEM image of the porous Si product after the MRR. Reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic of the synthesis of Si nanorods. SEM images of (e) natural sepiolite and (f) Si nanorods. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematic of the preparation of reduced graphene oxide (RGO)-encapsulated Si nanosheets from sand. FE-SEM (h) and TEM (i) images of the as-prepared Si nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  3D structures obtained based on the MRR. (a) Schematic of the synthesis of 3D macroporous Si. SEM images (b and c) of the as-synthesized 3D macroporous Si with different magnifications. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Elsevier. The optical photograph (d) and SEM images (e) of reeds. SEM images (f and g) of the as-synthesized 3D macroporous Si, which inherits the original morphology of reed. Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from Wiley-VCH. The optical photographs of (h) rice husk (RH), (i) sugar bagasse (SB), and (j) bamboo culm. The two following images corresponding to each optical photograph are the SEM images (middle) of their extracted SiO2 and SEM images of the as-synthesized 3D Si, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Reduction of SiO2 based on magnesio-milling. (a) Graphical illustration of the MMR using a planetary mill. (b) Volume-dependent milling processes. Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (c) XRD patterns of the products and reactants at different reaction stages. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 
4Al + 3SiO2 + 2AlCl3 → 3Si + 6AlOCl	(4.6)
2Mg + SiO2 + 6AlCl3 → 3Si + 6AlOCl + 2MgAl2Cl8	(4.7)

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the low temperature molten salt process. (b) The XRD patterns of the coarse products. (c) The optical photograph of the experiment at different reaction stages in the quartz tube. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) The tracked reaction mechanisms (path a and path b) on the SiO2 surface to form AlOCl based on theoretical simulation. Path a can be defined as a ligand dissociation mechanism, while path b refers to an Al activation mechanism. (e) The reaction coordinate based on two different reaction mechanisms shown in (d). Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  The diverse Si nanomaterials synthesized based on molten salt reduction. (a) Schematic illustration of the conversion process of HP Si at different reaction stages. (b–d) TEM images of the formation of HP Si at different stages. Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of HP Si embedded in a ceramic matrix. Reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (f) Schematics of the preparation process of 3D-interconnected Si frameworks derived from natural halloysite clay. SEM images of halloysite clay (g) and acid-treated halloysite (h). TEM image of the as-prepared 3D Si framework (i). Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (j) Schematics of the synthesis of a silicon flake/nitrogen-doped graphene-like carbon composite from organoclay. SEM images of montmorillonite (k), bare Si (l), and the final Si-based composite (m). Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the proposed mechanism at the conductor–SiO2–electrolyte three-phase interfaces. (b) SEM image of the 1D Si columns obtained by electrochemical reduction in molten CaCl2 at 850 °C. (c) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of the 1D Si columns. Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from IOP Publishing. (d) Schematic illustration of the electrolysis system. (e) Synthesis route for the Si nanowire arrays. (f) SEM image of the obtained double-layered Si nanowire arrays. Reproduced from ref. 184 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematic illustration of an electrolysis cell in molten salts. (h) The working cell. (i) SEM image of the Si nanowire. Reproduced from ref. 184 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

Magnesiothermic reduction reaction (MRR)	0D	Solid SiO2 core–porous SiO2 shell	HP Si	—	52	1000 mA h g−1 at 0.36 A g−1 after 200 cycles	
139

∼700 mA h g−1 at 7.2 A g−1
HP SiO2	HP Si	Ag polypyrrole carbon	84	>2000 mA h g−1 at 4 A g−1	
141

68	1161 mA h g−1 at 4 A g−1 after 100 cycles	
142

63.7	1000 mA h g−1 at 4 A g−1 after 1000 cycles	
143

1D	Mesoporous SiO2	Lotus-root-like mesoporous Si	Carbon	73.6	568 mA h g−1 at 15C (1C = 4.2 A g−1)	
147

SiO2 coated carbon nanotubes	Si nanotubes	Carbon	66.2	1508 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 after 1000 cycles	
149

Sepiolite	Porous Si nanorods	—	60.5	816 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1 after 500 cycles	
148

2D	SiO2/graphene	Porous Si/carbon	Carbon	80.7	1318 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 after 250 cycles	
154

MXene/SiO2	MXene/Si@carbon layer-by-layer	Carbon	81.3	1547 mA h g−1 at 2.1 A g−1 after 200 cycles	
191

398 mA h g−1 at 10C (1C = 4.2 A g−1)

	Sand	Si nanosheets	Carbon	70	1113 mA h g−1 at 3 A g−1	
129

3D	SiO2/carbon	Mesoporous Si/carbon nanocomposite	Carbon	89	1480 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 1000 cycles	
134

>1200 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1
SiO2/graphene	3D porous architecture of Si/graphene	Carbon	—	290 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1 after 100 cycles	
160

440 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1
SiO2 fumes	Silicene flowers	—	74	1100 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 600 cycles	
192

950 mA h g−1 at 8 A g−1
Reed leaves	3D porous hierarchical architecture	Carbon	61	420 mA h g−1 at 10C after 4000 cycles	
124

Rice husk	—	83.9	1554 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 200 cycles	
193

Magnesio-milling reduction (MMR)	3D	Rice husk	Porous Si	—	84.9	1213 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 200 cycles	
161

Nano SiO2 spheres	Nanoporous Si@graphene	Carbon	81.4	1750 mA h g−1 at 2.1 A g−1 after 500 cycles	
162

500 mA h g−1 at 21 A g−1
Molten salt reduction (MSR)	0D	Fumed SiO2	Vesical-like Si	—	75	∼712 mA h g−1 at 0.36 A g−1 after 200 cycles	
164

288 mA h g−1 at 10.8 A g−1
SiO2 nanoparticles	Hollow Si spheres	—	89	1318 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 100 cycles	
169


	
	
	936 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1
SiO2@C	Hollow Si spheres	Carbon	72.3	∼800 mA h g−1 at 8 A g−1 after 600 cycles	
167

974 mA h g−1 at 8 A g−1
2D	Organoclay	Si flakes	Carbon	80	1138 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 after 240 cycles	
174

434 mA h g−1 at 21 A g−1
3D	Porous SiO2@C microspheres	Porous Si@C microspheres	Carbon	79	∼2000 mA h g−1 at 1.2 A g−1 after 250 cycles	
166

1290 mA h g−1 at 8 A g−1
Halloysite clay	3D interconnected Si frameworks	
	—	970 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 500 cycles	
173

1020 mA h g−1 at 3.5 A g−1
Electrochemical reduction (ECR)	0D	SiO2@polydopamine	Si/C hybrid	Carbon	85.4	904 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 after 100 cycles	
188

1D	CaSiO3	Si nanowires	—	74	714 mA h g−1 at 2.1 A g−1 after 500 cycles	
186

521 mA h g−1 at 4.2 A g−1

Magnesiothermic reduction (MRR)	• Shape-preservation	• Low yield	• Low ICE	• 3C batteries
• Generalization	• Lack of suitable reactors	• Long cycle life	• Power batteries
• Construction of a unique 3D hierarchical architecture	• Excellent rate capacity	• Energy storage batteries
• Intertwined pores
Magnesio-milling reduction (MMR)	• Scalability	• Poor dispersity	• High ICE	• 3C batteries
• High yield	• Reduction in the size of precursors to the nanoscale	• Moderate cycle life	• Power batteries
• Short reaction time	• Poor rate capacity
• Low reaction temperature
Molten salt reduction (MSR)	• Low reaction temperature	• Uncontrollable product morphology	• Low ICE	• Power batteries
• High yield	• Poor dispersity	• Long cycle life	• Energy storage batteries
• In situ composition	• Long reaction time	• Excellent rate capacity
Electrochemical reduction (ECR)	• Sustainability	• Uncontrollable product morphology	• High ICE	• 3C batteries
• High quality	• Relatively low output	• Long cycle life	• Energy storage batteries
• Generalization	• Poor rate capacity

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
