Metal–organic frameworks in photocatalytic Z-scheme heterojunctions: an emerging technology  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CC05819G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CC05819G
(Highlight)
Chem. Commun., 2023, 59, 3627-3654Metal–organic frameworks in photocatalytic Z-scheme heterojunctions: an emerging technology

        
          
            Amrita 
            Chatterjee
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Linyang 
            Wang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Pascal 
            Van Der Voort
          
        
      *
      COMOC-Center for Ordered Materials, Organometallics and Catalysis, Department of Chemistry, Ghent University, Krijgslaan281-S3, 9000Ghent, Belgium. E-mail: Pascal.VanDerVoort@UGent.be
Received 
      27th October 2022
    , Accepted 2nd February 2023First published on 7th February 2023AbstractThere is an urgent need for cleaner production processes for chemicals. An efficient and promising alternative for such reactions is heterogeneous photocatalysis, which works on the principle of converting (visible) light, including solar energy, into chemical energy. To that end, properly designed semiconductor based photocatalysts are necessary to trigger the photocatalytic reactions. Many commonly used photocatalysts have too large bandgaps (3–3.4 eV) to use visible light and a too low surface area for efficient production. Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have emerged as an encouraging class of materials for photocatalytic applications due to their (i) large surface area and porosity that facilitate adsorption towards chemicals, (ii) tunable crystallinity and optical and electronic properties for efficient light absorption in the visible region, (iii) tunable composition and functionality that make them versatile photocatalysts for a wide range of reactions, and (iv) facile development of composites with other semiconductors to produce Z-scheme heterojunctions that can effectively suppress the recombination of photogenerated charges. Ongoing research has started focusing on the judicious construction of Z-scheme heterojunctions in MOFs, to mimic natural photosynthesis, such that the MOF photocatalysts have higher light harvesting capacity, spatially separated reductive and oxidative active sites, and well-preserved redox ability. This review provides a concise compilation of the recent progress in the development and applications of MOF-based Z-scheme photocatalysts, their advanced characterization, and future perspectives for further advancements.
Introduction
Energy scarcity, also caused by geopolitics, and environmental pollution are two critical issues that have pushed the world into a state of concern in recent years.1 Therefore, it is increasingly urgent to develop new technologies to create new energy sources and combat environmental pollution. Solar energy or visible light utilization technology is recognized as one of the most influential and promising technologies for splitting water into clean fuel H2 and O2, reducing greenhouse gases such as CO2 and degrading water pollutants, under the illumination of (sun)light under ambient conditions.2 The development of efficient semiconductor photocatalysts to improve light conversion efficiency and expand the range of applications has become an important issue in terms of both scientific research and societal impact. Though photolysis of water has been of continued research interest in the past, it was only in 1972 that Honda and Fujishima first developed a working model for “photosensitized electrolytic oxidation of water”. They showed that it is possible to decompose water in an electrochemical cell by visible light irradiation using a titanium oxide anode.3 Since then, an enormous amount of research has been conducted on photocatalysts to mitigate their low efficiency and pave the way for efficient practical applications. Before venturing into the drawbacks of photocatalysis that need to be addressed, let us understand the process of photocatalysis. Photocatalysis mainly consists of the following steps: (i) absorption of light by the semiconductor-type photocatalyst, (ii) formation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, (iii) migration or recombination of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs, (iv) adsorption of reactants on/inside the pores of the semiconductor photocatalyst, followed by desorption of the products, and (v) redox reactions on the active sites of the photocatalyst driven by the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Though the photocatalytic pathway may seem straightforward, it is not the case. The critical concern for low photocatalytic activity is the recombination of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. When an electron gets excited by light irradiation, it jumps from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB). But there is a strong coulombic force that acts between the electron in the CB and the hole generated in the VB. Therefore, the electron tends to fall back from the CB back to the VB and recombine with the hole, generating useless heat energy in the process. To prevent this fall back/recombination of electron–hole pairs, it is necessary to design photocatalysts rationally, such that the photocatalysts achieve the following properties: (i) absorption of light in the visible region preferably, (ii) redox band edges (VB and CB) in appropriate energy levels for driving the photocatalytic reaction, (iii) generation of a large quantity of charge carriers upon excitation, (iv) high mobility of the charge carriers and low recombination rate, and (v) chemical and photo stability.4
Currently, TiO2 semiconductors have been proven to be one of the most used photocatalysts for water splitting and oxidative decomposition of many organic compounds. However, due to its wide band gap of 3.2 eV, TiO2 can only be excited by ultraviolet or near-ultraviolet radiation, which accounts for only 4% of the incident solar spectrum on Earth.5 Therefore, the development of visible light driven photocatalysts is the future trend. So far, although a lot of efforts have been made in preparing different visible light photocatalysts, the short lifetimes of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and the short lifetimes of electron–hole pairs with limited absorption of visible light still hinder their practical applications.
To overcome the serious drawbacks of fast charge recombination and the limited visible-light absorption of semiconductor photocatalysts, many strategies have been developed in the past few decades and the most widely used one is to develop photocatalytic heterojunctions.2,6–9 Conventional photocatalytic heterojunctions are divided into three categories, such as Type I, Type II, and Type III, and only the type II has a positive effect in photocatalysis (Fig. 1a), because it can effectively separate photogenerated electron–hole pairs spatially through a band arrangement between two semiconductors. Under the irradiation of light, photogenerated electrons in the conduction band (CB) of semiconductor 1 will migrate to the CB of semiconductor 2, while photogenerated holes in the valence band (VB) of semiconductor 2 will transfer to the VB of semiconductor 1. Since the photogenerated electrons and holes accumulate on semiconductor 2 and semiconductor 1, respectively, the spatial separation of electrons and holes can be achieved by such heterojunction photocatalysts to enhance photocatalytic activity. Briefly, the reduction and oxidation reactions of type II heterojunction photocatalysts occur in semiconductor 2 with lower reduction potential and semiconductor 1 with lower oxidation potential, respectively. Therefore, the ensuing problem is that the redox ability of type II heterojunction photocatalysts will be greatly reduced. Therefore, it is necessary to develop new heterostructure photocatalytic systems to overcome these problems.7,8
 Fig. 1  Difference between the (a) type II heterojunction and (b) Z-scheme photocatalyst. 
The emergence of the Z-scheme heterojunction photocatalytic system (Fig. 1b) has provided a powerful solution to the above restriction6,7,10–15 because it can simultaneously meet the above requirements, i.e., effectively enhance the light absorption capacity while making the CB potential more negative and the VB potential more positive. This system is a promising strategy for photocatalyst improvement. Unlike conventional type II heterojunction photocatalysts, the reaction in the Z-scheme system is driven by photogenerated electrons (in the CB of PS I) which can maintain a high reduction capacity, and photogenerated holes (in the VB of PS II), which can maintain a high oxidation capacity. From a physical point of view, the charge carrier transfer by Z-scheme photocatalysts is simple. With their unique properties, Z-scheme photocatalysts are promising for various applications and have therefore been intensively studied. Even so, most of the current Z-scheme heterojunction photocatalysts are based on materials with low specific surface area, such as ZnO, TiO2 and CdS-based materials,15,16 which constrains the number of available catalytic sites.
With the aim to construct optimal Z-scheme heterojunction photocatalysts, the excellent structure of MOFs17,18 has come to the forefront. MOFs are a new class of materials that are crystalline and highly porous. They are constructed from inorganic nodes such as metal ions or clusters (secondary building units, SBUs) which are connected to organic ligands by coordination bonds to form an infinite array with a specific topology. MOFs can possess surface area up to 10000 m2 g−1 and pore size of up to 3–100 Å. MOFs have shown promising results in applications such as gas storage, catalysis, luminescence, and photovoltaic cells. In 2005, Widom and Divosi demonstrated by theoretical calculations that IRMOFs are equivalent to semiconductors with large band gaps. The HOMO–LUMO bands are dependent on the Csp2 state of the organic ligands. The HOMO band of the MOFs are primarily constituted of the organic ligands. In the presence of light irradiation, the ligands in the HOMO harvest light and get photoexcited, further activating the metal nodes/clusters via the linker-to-metal charge transfer (LCMT) mechanism. Such structure–property configurations have made MOFs lucrative photocatalysts of the next generation. Experimentally, the MOFs have also shown favourable results in photocatalysis owing to the following: (i) highly crystalline structure that can promote charge transfer from catalytic active sites to the surface adsorbed reactant molecules; (ii) high porosity which allows the loading of enhanced number of catalytic active sites as well as mass transport of reactants and products during photocatalysis; (iii) the tunable pore size of MOFs which can be exploited to use them as customized photocatalysts for reactions with different reactant and product sizes, thus increasing the selectivity of reactions; (iv) the facile modulation of the electronic and optical structure of MOFs by changing their metal cluster or the organic ligands, which can configure their band gaps and band edges, such that theoretical band gaps can extend from 1.0 to 5.5 eV, enough to overcome the potential barrier of a wide range of photocatalytic reactions;19 (v) the high content of heteroatoms in the ligands of MOFs, which permits the chemical functionalization of various photoactive molecules/materials, which in turn enables them to form heterojunction hybrids (composites) in a Z-scheme configuration. The most commonly used MOFs in Z-scheme photocatalysts are listed in Table 1 and their band gaps are presented in Fig. 2. The estimated band gaps and the corresponding HOMO–LUMO position of photocatalytic MOFs are evidence that supports the fact that tunable ligands of MOFs allow facile construction of tailormade photocatalysts for highly selective products.
Table 1 Comparison of various types of Z-scheme photocatalysts




Type
Generation
Medium of application
Charge transfer pathway
Drawbacks




Liquid phase Z-scheme
1st
Liquid phase
Redox ion
Back reactions, light shielding, pH sensitive, slow rate


All solid-state Z-scheme
2nd
Liquid and gas phase
Metal nanoparticles
Expensive fabrication, partial shielding


Direct Z-scheme
3rd
Liquid and gas phase
Built-in electric field
Expensive fabrication, difficult to match band edges of two semiconductors




 Fig. 2  Band gap and HOMO–LUMO positions of various photocatalytic MOFs.20–24 
In the past few years, many studies have been published by our group focussing on MOFs for clean energy and pollutant degradation applications by MOF-based photocatalysts possessing Z-scheme heterojunctions. This review mainly focuses on the recent progress in the development of MOF-based Z-scheme heterojunctions, their characterization, and applications like hydrogen production, CO2 reduction, and pollutant degradation. To understand the progress of MOFs towards photocatalytic Z-scheme heterojunctions, only pristine MOFs have been discussed. MOF-derived carbonaceous or metal oxide photocatalysts are out of the scope of this review. Further, we have also put forward our perspectives on future opportunities and development of direct Z-scheme photocatalytic systems and their advancements towards metal-free and engineered photoelectrocatalytic Z-scheme heterojunctions.
Principles and methodologies of Z-scheme heterojunctions
Classifications of Z-scheme heterojunctions
During natural photosynthesis, the electron transfer between photosystem I and II follows a “Z” pathway, and hence the name Z-scheme. In the case of Z-scheme heterojunction-based photocatalysts that essentially mimic the natural photosynthesis process, the photosystems are replaced by two semiconductors, and hence this process is called artificial photosynthesis (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Comparison of natural25 and artificial Z-scheme photosynthesis. 
The first pioneering work on Z-scheme photocatalysts was done by Bard et al. in 1979.26 Since then, the Z-scheme photocatalysts have gone through a massive evolution as shown in Fig. 4. The first generation photocatalysts (Fig. 5a) as developed by Bard et al. constitute the liquid-phase Z-scheme photocatalysts, where the two semiconductors are connected by a shuttle redox mediator (Fe3+/Fe2+ and IO3−/I−) that act as the charge transfer pathway. However, their applications are limited by the reversible electron mediators and their implementation in liquid systems only. The second generation all-solid-state-Z-scheme photocatalysts (Fig. 5b) by Tada et al. have the two semiconductors connected by metal nanoparticles such as Ag and Au, thus resulting in lower ohmic resistance and faster charge carrier transfer.27 To mitigate the high cost of noble metals, current research has also focused on using transition metals such as Fe, Co, and Cu as the charge carrier medium. Among the metal-free mediators, metal-free carbon nanotubes, carbon quantum dots,28 and carbon nitrides29 have also shown promising results. The third generation direct Z-scheme photocatalysts (Fig. 5c) developed by Yu et al. have the two semiconductors in direct contact at the interface. The light shielding and reversible backward reactions are suppressed in this type of configuration, resulting in higher separation of charge carriers, lower recombination rate, and improved mobility that finally contributes to efficient photocatalytic quantum yield.30,31Table 2 provides an overview of comparison of various types of Z-scheme photocatalysts with their properties and drawbacks.
 Fig. 4  Evolutionary roadmap of Z-scheme photocatalysts.6 
 Fig. 5  Various types of Z-scheme photocatalytic systems. 
Table 2 Commonly used MOFs for Z-scheme photocatalysis




MOFRef
Metal
Linker
Structure




MIL-5399
Fe, V, Cr, Al, In, Ga








MIL-68100
In, Fe, Al








MIL-125-NH2101
Ti








PCN-224102
Cu, Zr, Ni, Mn








UIO-66103
Zr, Hf, Ce








UIO-66-NH2104
Zr, Ce








MIL-88A105
Fe








MIL-88B105
Fe








NU-1000106
Zr








ZIF-8107
Zn








MIL-101108
Cr, Fe








MOF-5109
Zn










Synthesis methods of MOF-based Z-scheme heterojunctions
As discussed previously, MOFs have become an attractive class of materials for development of Z-scheme photocatalysts owing to their crystallinity, tunable metal clusters, photoactive ligands with appropriate redox potentials, extremely high surface area and porosity that exposes the active sites, and free functional groups for chemical hybridization with other semiconductors to form Z-scheme configurations. As it is possible to choose the inorganic and organic composition at the initial stages of synthesizing MOFs, unique properties, tailored to the photocatalytic reactions, can be obtained. Among the various methods for developing Z-scheme photocatalysts using MOFs, some principal ones are (i) hydro/solvothermal, (ii) impregnation/precipitation, and (iii) electro/photo-deposition. Fig. 6 shows various MOF-based Z-scheme heterojunction type photocatalysts synthesized by the methods discussed.
 Fig. 6  (a and b) Schematic and TEM image of hydrothermally synthesized benzoic acid/g-C3N4/NH2-MIL-125(Ti);33 (c and d) schematic and TEM image of impregnated phosphotungstic acid@UIO-66;32 (e and f) schematic and TEM image of electrodeposited In2O3@InP/Cu2O.33 
The versatile and facile hydro/solvothermal method generally follows encapsulation of the pre-synthesized nanoparticles in a solution of MOF components or vice versa. Judicious usage of temperature and solvents allows the MOF to grow tightly around the nanoparticles. Benzoic acid functionalized g-C3N4/NH2-MIL-125(Ti) was synthesized solvothermally by adding a dispersion of benzoic acid functionalized g-C3N4/dimethylformide in a solution containing the MOF reagents like 2-aminoterephthalic acid and tetra-n-butyl titanate.34 By subjecting the mixture to heating at 150 °C for 72 h, the MOFs supposedly wrapped intimately around the benzoic acid functionalized g-C3N4, thus providing a Z-scheme photocatalyst. Alternately, the MOF can be treated as a core and other photoactive materials can be grown as a shell, as in hydrothermally synthesized UiO-66-(COOH)2/ZnIn2S4/MoS2. After the synthesis of pristine UiO-66-(COOH)2, it was mixed in a salt solution containing indium chloride tetrahydrate (InCl3·4H2O), zinc chloride (ZnCl2), sodium molybdate dihydrate (Na2MoO4·2H2O) and excess thioacetamide (C2H5NS). The mixture was subjected to heating at 165 °C for 24 h, followed by purification by centrifugation.35 The one-pot method and high degree of control in the pre-fabricated materials allow the hydro/solvothermal method to be the most common method for the design of Z-scheme photocatalysts. However, it is energy-intensive, difficult to control the final product, and requires high usage of toxic solvents for dissolution.
The impregnation method requires the addition of MOF powder in a required concentration of the desired nanoparticles, which thereby form covalent interactions with the MOF support.32,36 As a rule of thumb, such impregnations are carried out by introducing nanoparticles equivalent to the pore volume of MOFs. Since MOFs have high pore volume, development of impregnation-based Z-scheme photocatalysts is easier. For example, to synthesize phosphotungstic acid (HPW)/UIO-66 or MOS2 dots/MIL-101(Fe), it is required to introduce a required pore volume amount of HPW or MoS2 solution and stir them with the MOF, followed by drying. This simple approach has a high degree of control in the amount of impregnated nanoparticles, provides heterojunctions and transfer of charge carriers via the covalent interactions, and is less energy-intensive. However, it is difficult to replicate in materials which do not dissolve easily and form a solution, or crystallize to larger size than the pore size of the support.
To obtain homogeneous growth of ultra-small nanoparticles at the MOF/MOF-derived substrates, electrodeposition of the metal-salt via tuning the potential has become the chosen method. Electrodeposition of copper using Cu(OAc)2 on MOF-derived In2O3@InP can be achieved in seconds.33 Briefly, in a three-electrode system, In-MIL-68 derived In2O3@InP was used as the working electrode, platinum wire as the counter electrode, and calomel as the reference electrode. The electrolyte was composed of copper acetate (Cu(OAc)2) solution. By applying a potential of 4 V, copper nanoparticles were deposited on the In2O3@InP in 200 s. The electrodeposition method allows the deposition of ultra-small nanoparticles with better interfacial contacts and offers an extremely fast synthesis process. However, this method still needs to be explored more to understand its versatility and optimization parameters.
In a unique example, Zheng et al. prepared Ag/NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/CdS by impregnation and photo-deposition. To a certain quantity of NH2-MIL-125(Ti) MOF dispersion in water, a predefined concentration of AgNO3 was added and the mixture was irradiated for 2.5 h under a 350 W Xenon lamp to photo-reduce AgNO3 to Ag. The prepared Ag/NH2-MIL-125(Ti) was dispersed in water with the addition of thiourea and cadmium acetate and heated for 60 °C for 1 h (also called chemical bath deposition), to obtain Ag/NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/CdS.37 Another example of such a photo-deposition method is the synthesis of the Ti-MOF/Ag/NiFe LDH Z-scheme photocatalyst.38 Just as in the previous example, NH2-MIL-125(Ti) was used and represented as Ti-MOF. To a certain quantity of Ti-MOF dispersed in N,N-dimethylformamide and water, Ni(NO3)2·6H2O, Fe(NO3)3·9H2O and urea were added followed by heating at 120 °C for 12 h in an autoclave. The Ti-MOF/NiFe LDH thus obtained was dispersed in water and AgNO3 was added and the mixture was irradiated under a 300 W Xenon lamp (180 mW cm−2, λ > 300 nm) to photo-reduce AgNO3 to Ag. This work further explored how the radiation time and concentration of AgNO3 affect the photo-deposition process. An optimized concentration of 0.2 g L−1 and an irradiation time of 30 min were considered as the best photoreduction conditions for conversion of AgNO3 to Ag. Lower irradiation time or concentration was unable to produce enough Ag nanoparticles, while higher irradiation time or concentration caused excessive Ag deposition or large sized Ag nanoparticles. Both of these blocked the light from reaching Ti-MOF and NiFe LDH, resulting in poor light absorption ability. Though Ag nanoparticles facilitated the charge transfer in Ti-MOF/Ag/NiFe LDH, the higher surface coverage of Ag acted as recombination centres, resulting in a lower plasmon effect.
Photocatalytic applications of MOF-based Z-scheme catalysts
Since the MOF-based Z-scheme photocatalyst is still an emerging technology, only a handful of research papers have been published so far. Here, we primarily focus on applications that aim towards the sustainability and reduction of carbon footprint, such as photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, oxygen evolution, CO2 reduction, and organic pollutant degradation. The overall mechanism of the above-mentioned reactions in the presence of Z-scheme photocatalysts is provided in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Reaction mechanism in the presence of Z-scheme photocatalysts for (a) water splitting (HER and OER); (b) CO2-reduction; (c) pollutant degradation. 
MOF-based Z-scheme catalysts for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution
The photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) from water splitting is considered to be one of the best green solutions to generate clean hydrogen that can replace the polluting fossil fuels. The photocatalyst absorbs solar energy and splits water into hydrogen via a four-electron or two-electron process. Prior to MOFs, materials such as cadmium sulphide (CdS), zinc indium sulphide (ZnIn2S4, ZIS), and phosphotungstic acid (HPW) have shown promising activity towards HER. However, their limitations have hindered the scope of their commercialization. Developing Z-scheme heterojunctions of such materials with MOFs has provided a new outlook in the photocatalytic field. CdS is regarded as an excellent semiconductor for photocatalytic hydrogen generation due to its suitable band position and visible light absorption capacity. However, CdS-based semiconductors have drawbacks such as susceptibility to agglomeration, low surface area, and rapid recombination of carriers.39 To mitigate the downsides of CdS, they have been hybridized with MOFs to develop composites such as CdS/MIL-53(Fe),39 CdS/Ni-MOF,40 and CdS/NH2-MIL-125(Ti).41 The decoration of CdS on the outer surface or micropores of these MOFs caused intimate contact that benefitted interfacial charge transfer. On the other hand, using Fe- or Ti-based MOFs provided the advantage of metal-oxo centres which are highly responsive to light irradiation and facilitate the linker-to-metal charge transfer of photogenerated electrons. In the case of CdS/NH2-MIL-125(Ti), the bandgaps of CdS and NH2-MIL-125(Ti) are computed to be 2.40 eV and 2.66 eV respectively. But the hybridization caused strong contact interfaces and electron transfer between CdS and NH2-MIL-125(Ti) that led to the bandgap of 2.50 eV in the composite CdS/NH2-MIL-125(Ti). Also, the CBs of CdS and NH2-MIL-125(Ti) were calculated to be -0.76 eV and +0.66 eV respectively. Combining these data with electron spin resonance (ESR), it was deduced that the Z-scheme heterojunction improved the separation efficiency of the charge carriers by recombination of electrons of the CB of NH2-MIL-125(Ti) and holes of the VB of CdS as shown in Fig. 8(a–c). Therefore, a large amount of effective electrons in the CB of CdS could participate in the reduction of H+ to hydrogen, while the holes in the VB of the MOF enabled the oxidation of water with sacrificial agents.41 A similar mechanism occurred in CdS/MIL-53(Fe) and CdS/Ni-MOF, where due to the difference in the Fermi levels of CdS and MOFs, the electrons and holes redistributed to create a Z-scheme electron transmission pathway.40 The Z-scheme improved the HER in the composites by 3–10 times (∼2334 μmol g−1 h−1–6.62mmol g−1 h−1) compared to that of pure CdS. Further improvements in HER were achieved by exploiting the synergism of Z-scheme interfaces. By tuning the functional group in α-NiS-β-NiS/CdS/UiO-66, the heterojunction could be transformed from Type-I to Z-scheme. Additionally, the loading of α-NiS-β-NiS on CdS improved the light absorption ability and concentration of active sites. However, the optical shielding effect of these binary materials limited their HER activity. Therefore, loading them on NH2-UiO-66 changed the photoelectron pathway via an in-built electric field and improved the separation efficiency.42 To reduce the bandgap of CdS, further research has been conducted on developing Cd-based semiconductors with ternary metal sulphides such as CdLa2S4 and CdxZn1−xS. However, they still suffer from the issue of agglomeration and low surface area of CdS. Therefore, loading them on MOFs to achieve CdLa2S4/MIL-88A(Fe) or CdxZn1−xS/Ni-MOF-74 has improved their photocatalytic HER activity. In spite of CdLa2S4 featuring a bandgap of 2.1 eV, it was difficult to form a Z-scheme heterojunction when it was combined with TiO2 or g-C3N4. Finally, MIL-88A(Fe) as the host provided a suitable energy level similar to CdLa2S4 to develop the Z-scheme CdLa2S4/MIL-88A(Fe), that promoted the separation of photoexcited charge carriers. The formed solid–solid heterointerface between the materials allows higher transfer and separation efficiency of photoinduced carriers, that could be verified from the higher photocurrent intensity.43 Apart from the similar band positions to form the Z-scheme, the spatial structure formed by the metal-sulfide nanoparticles and MOFs also contributes to the suppression of the agglomeration of the nanoparticles. CdxZn1−xS/Ni-MOF-74 possesses a unique 0D/2D spatial structure, where the 2D rhomboid-shaped Ni-MOF-74 flakes acted as a carrier for the 0D CdxZn1−xS nanoparticles. The high surface area of the MOF provides better dispersion for the CdxZn1−xS nanoparticles and maximizes the dispersity of the active sites, reduces the charge migration distance, provides more convenient transfer channels for photogenerated electrons, and enhances the HER by 10 times (1713.18 μmol) compared to that of CdxZn1−xS.44 In contrast to the previous composites, where HER took place on the CB of the nanoparticle, CdxZn1−xS/Ni-MOF-74 exhibits the opposite trend which was confirmed by theoretical and experimental investigations. Under light irradiation, the electrons of CdxZn1−xS and Ni-MOF-74 will absorb enough energy to be excited and transferred from the VB to the CB, leaving photo-induced holes in the VB. Since the CB of Ni-MOF-74 (−0.68 eV) is more negative than the CB of CdxZn1−xS (−0.58 eV), the Z-scheme is established by flow of electrons from the CB of CdxZn1−xS to the VB of Ni-MOF-74. Eventually, the HER takes place in the CB of Ni-MOF-74. Therefore, to form a perfect Z-scheme, alignment of band positions of the composite forming materials is essential.
 Fig. 8  TEM image, Z-scheme mechanism, and HER activity of (a–c) CdS/NH2-MIL-125(Ti); Z-scheme formed by simple band alignment due to difference in the Fermi energy level of the materials;41 (d–f) boron-doped g-C3N4/cobalt porphyrin MOF; pseudo-gap is formed at the interfacial Co–N bond between the two materials;46 (g–i) α-SnWO4/NH2-UiO-66(Zr)/g-C3N4; double Z-scheme formed on both sides of α-SnWO4 (SW).47 
Another attractive material for visible light HER is the hexagonal ZnIn2S4 (ZIS). ZIS is a typical layered transition metal chalcogenide that is composed of stacked S–Zn–S–In–S–In–S layers. It exhibits a bandgap of 2.06–2.85 eV, and is generally cheap and less toxic. However, pure ZnIn2S4 suffers from poor photocatalytic activity due to its low migration ability and poor separation efficiency of the photogenerated carriers.35 To extract the maximum activity from ZIS, it is presumed that directional synthesis of hollow structures would provide a large amount of exposed photocatalytic sites. Hence, MIL-68(In) rods composed of coordinating In3+ ions with organic ligand 2-aminoterephthalic acid were used as templates to grow ZIS as the outer shell to ultimately form a channel architecture. Based on Kubelka–Munk conversion and Mott–Schottky analyses, the CBs of ZIS and MIL-68(In) were deduced as −0.40 eV and +0.74 eV respectively. The CB of MIL-68(In) and the unchanged EPR signal of photo-induced electrons before and after light irradiation over pristine MIL-68(In) proved that a Type-II heterojunction would be impossible. If electrons flowed from ZIS to MIL-68(In) and holes moved from MIL-68(In) to ZIS, then it was impossible for the collected electrons on the CB of MIL-68(In) to be used for HER. Therefore, it was only the interfacial connection between ZIS and MIL-68(In) that encouraged the transfer and recombination of photogenerated electrons in the CB of MIL-68(In) and holes in the VB of ZIS, thus establishing the Z-scheme.45 To improve the water stability of ZIS/MOF composites, 2D ZIS nanosheets have been combined with spindle shaped NH2-MIL-88B(Fe), that has a compatible bandgap of 2.5 eV. It is to be noted that Fe-MOFs generally suffer from limited photo absorption and poor charge separation; therefore, NH2-MIL-88B(Fe) had been modified by defect engineering via doping with monodentate ligand pyrrole 2-carboxylic acid (PDC). The defective MOF not only had an expanded light absorption range but also a lower band gap. The defect was characterized by the enhanced EPR signal intensity of core@shell ZIS/defective NH2-MIL-88B(Fe). The 502.4 μmol g−1 h−1 photocatalytic hydrogen production (∼2.69 times that of pristine ZIS) is attributed to two factors. Firstly, the unsaturated Fe clusters that are formed after doping with defect ligands, give rise to ligand vacancies. The unsaturated sites impart higher photo-absorption and charge separation. Secondly, the ligand doping bolsters the Z-scheme interface by promoting additional charge transfer, separation of carriers, and shortening the electron–hole pair transmission distance.48 To further shorten the charge carrier distance at the interface, mediators with lower densities, small size and metal-like conductivity for efficient electron transfer are required. Therefore, a novel all-solid-state Z-scheme NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/Ti3C2 MXene quantum dots/ZnIn2S4 (Ti-MOF/QDs/ZIS) photocatalyst was developed. MXene, as a new type of 2D layered material with metallic conductivity and outstanding chemical stability, can also create Schottky barriers when combined with semiconductors and enhance the photo-carrier separation efficiency. When such powerful MXenes are reduced to 0D QDs, they exhibit exceptional photochemical properties as electron mediators due to the confinement effect. Under light irradiation, the photogenerated electrons in the CB from NH2-MIL-125(Ti) transfer to recombine with the holes in the VB of ZIS, via the Ti3C2 QD electron mediator. The presence of the mediator improves the fast transfer of electrons and provides a Z-scheme interface. On the other hand, the electron density in the CB of ZIS improves because of this mechanism and increases the photocatalytic hydrogen production to 2931.9 μmol g−1 h−1 (∼12.7 times that of ZIS).49 Introducing cocatalysts is another way to manipulate the electron density in the CB and improve the HER activity in photocatalysis. In a 3D hierarchical UiO-66-(COOH)2/MoS2/ZIS microarchitecture, the Z-scheme transfer mode was established by transfer of photogenerated electrons from UiO-66-(COOH)2 to ZIS due to their internal field from the mismatched Fermi level. Thereafter, the MoS2 co-catalyst accepts the electrons from the CB of ZIS, thus improving the photocarrier separation efficiency. Finally, these electrons from MoS2 transfer to H+ to produce H2. It should be noted that this photocatalyst uses the environmentally friendly and more water stable UiO-66-(COOH)2 instead of UIO-66. Due to the stability of the host MOF, the overall photocatalyst was able to endure 5 cycles of reactions without any evident agglomeration of the ZIS.35
Other photoactive materials like bismuth oxyiodine (BiOI) with a very low bandgap of 1.7–1.9 eV or polyoxometalate (HPW) with very high oxidizing power have also been coupled with MOFs to create Z-scheme photocatalysts (BiOI@NU-1000 and HPW@UIO-66).32,50 Such engineered photocatalysts provide better photostability to the core nanoparticles as well as increase the molecular diffusion of the reactants and products owing to the high surface area and porosity of the MOFs.
Since metals are toxic, cause pollution, and are expensive, carbonaceous materials have lately gained attraction to be integrated with MOFs. Among such photoactive metal-free carbon materials is graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), with an impressive band gap of 2.7 eV. g-C3N4 is a 2D layered photocatalyst and is considered as an n-type semiconductor; it has an adjustable electronic structure and photochemical stability. However, the fast recombination of photogenerated carriers and low surface area limit its applications.47 Though homogeneous distribution of ZIF-8 on g-C3N4 provides better separation efficiency and prolonged charge carrier lifetime, it is more logical to use mediators for stronger interactions between the heterojunctions.51 With that in mind, C3N4 nanosheets have been loaded on NH2-UiO-66 (NH2-UiO-66/N-CN)52 or boron-doped g-C3N4 on cobalt porphyrin metal organic frameworks (HBCNN/CoPMOF),46 as shown in Fig. 8(d–f). Such heterointerfaces are formed by π⋯π interactions between the conjugate structure of N-CN and the benzene rings of ligands in NH2-UiO-66. In the case of HBCNN/CoPMOF, interfacial coordinative interactions of N-Co-N are formed between the N of HBCNN and partially oxidized Co centres, which give rise to a pseudo-gap and improve the charge separation efficiency. Further, to extend the interfacial contact, ternary Z-scheme novel catalysts like α-SnWO4/UIO-66(NH2)/g-C3N4 have been developed, as shown in Fig. 8(g–i). The ternary structure not only increases the interfacial surface area but also suppresses recombination of charge carriers. Due to the Fermi level shift, a built-in electric field is formed on either side of UIO-66(NH2) between the n-type g-C3N4 and p-type α-SnWO4, constructing a double Z-scheme, that favours spatial charge separation and inhibits the recombination.47
Therefore, it is evident that a judicious choice of MOFs contributes to the development of HER Z-scheme photocatalysts by acting as hosts to improve the dispersion of nanoparticles, providing strong chemically interactive heterojunctions, stability, expanded light absorption range, built-in electric fields, molecular diffusion of reactants, and assistance via ligand to metal charge transfer. A detailed comparative analysis of MOF-based Z-scheme photocatalysts for HER is provided in Table 3.
Table 3 MOF-based Z-scheme photocatalysts for HER




PhotocatalystRef.
Synthesis method
Heterojunction
Reaction conditions
Performance




CdS/MIL-53(Fe)39
Solvothermal
Band alignment
300 W Xe lamp; benzyl alocohol oxidation
2334 μmol h−1 g−1


CdS/Ni-MOF40
Solvothermal
Internal electric field and the Coulombic attraction
300 W Xe lamp; 10% volume ratio lactic acid as a sacrificial electron donor
4500 μmol h−1 g−1


CdS/NH2-MIL-125(Ti)41
Solvothermal
Band alignment
350 W Xe lamp; 0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S as sacrificial agents
6.62 mmol h−1 g−1


α-NiS-β-NiS/CdS/NH2-UIO-66((Zr)42
Hydrothermal
Band alignment via organic ligand
300 W Xe lamp; 10% volume ratio lactic acid as a sacrificial electron donor
17.8 mmol h−1 g−1


CdLa2S4/MIL-88A(Fe)43
Hydrothermal
Band alignment
300 W Xe lamp; ethanedioic acid as a sacrificial agent
411.8 μmol h−1 g−1


CdxZn1−xS/Ni-MOF-7444
Physical and hydrothermal
Band alignment due to 0D/2D spatial structure and electron transport due to the size effect
5 W LED; 10% volume ratio lactic acid a as sacrificial electron donor
1713.8 μmol h−1 g−1


BiOI@NU-1000(Zr)50
Solvothermal
Internal electric field due to confinement
100 W LED; 0.5 vol% TEOA
610 μmol h−1 g−1


HPW@UIO-66(Zr)32
Hydrothermal
Band alignment due to interfacial contact
125 W Hg lamp; 10 vol% methanol as a sacrificial agent
353.89 μmol h−1 g−1


ZnIn2S4/MIL-68(In)45
Hydrothermal


300 W Xe lamp; 0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S as sacrificial agents; Pt co-catalyst
28.2 mmol h−1 g−1


Defective NH2-MIL-88B(Fe)@ZnIn2S448
Hydrothermal
Low band gap and unsaturated metal sites via defects
300 W Xe lamp; methanol as a sacrificial agent
502 μmol h−1 g−1


NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/Ti3C2 QD/ZnIn2S449
Electrostatic
Ti3C2 QD as an electron mediator
300 W Xe lamp; 0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S as sacrificial agents
2931.9 μmol h−1 g−1


UiO-66(Zr)-(COOH)2/ZnIn2S4/MoS235
Hydrothermal
Built-in electric field between UiO-66-(COOH)2 and ZnIn2S4Co; Co-catalyst MOS2
300 W Xe lamp; 0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S as sacrificial agents
18.794 mmol h−1 g−1


MOF-5/CuO@ ZnIn2S4110
Solvothermal
Tandem core@shell structure with CuO as an intermediate
300 W Xe lamp; methanol as a sacrificial agent
1938.3 μmol h−1 g−1


ZIF-8(Zn)/g-C3N445
Electrostatic
Interfacial contact due to hollow structure
300 W Xe; 10 vol% TEOA as a sacrificial agent; 3 wt% Pt co-catalyst
309.5 μmol h−1 g−1


NH2-UIO-66(Zr)/g-C3N4 nanosheets52
Electrostatic
Built-in electric field by varying the component ratio
300 W Xe; TEOA as a sacrificial agent; Pt co-catalyst
3936 μmol h−1 g−1


Boron-doped g-C3N4/cobalt porphyrin MOF46


Delocalized covalent N-Co-N bond between the two materials
225 W Xe; ascorbic acid as a sacrificial agent; Pt co-catalyst
33.17 mmol h−1 g−1


α-SnWO4/NH2-UiO-66(Zr)/g-C3N447
Hydrothermal
Built-in electric field on both sides of α-SnWO4
300 W Xe; TEOA as a sacrificial agent; Pt co-catalyst
2105 μmol h−1 g−1


Benzoic acid functionalized g-C3N4/NH2-MIL-125(Ti)34
Hydrothermal
Organic ligand mediator
160 mW cm−2 Xe lamp; Pt co catalyst; triethanolamine as a sacrificial agent
1.123 mmol g−1 h−1




MOF-based Z-scheme catalysts for carbon dioxide reduction (CO2-RR)
Owing to the temperature rise due to high CO2 concentration, it is imperative that CO2 capture and its conversion to useful chemicals should be a priority research domain. However, CO2-RR is an uphill reaction due to the following issues: Firstly the strong CO bond (∼750 kJ mol−1) requires huge energy to dissociate. Secondly, photoreduction of CO2 is a complicated multi-electron pathway along with proton assistance. Thirdly, the HER occurs in a similar potential range to CO2-RR and is energetically more favourable than CO2-RR, thus bringing upon issue of selectivity. In mitigating the well-known issues of low surface area and poor separation efficiency, MOF-based Z-scheme photocatalysts for CO2-RR have shown promising results. As mentioned previously, the metal sulphide CdS semiconductor has an extended absorption capacity and favourable CB position for CO2-RR. However, to prevent its agglomeration and leaching, a Z-scheme photocatalyst has been developed by loading it in the matrix of UIO-66-NH2. UIO-66 NH2 possesses a high surface area for CO2 capture and CdS dispersion, visible light absorption capacity, and chemical stability to prevent the agglomeration of CdS as well as improve the separation efficiency. Due to the difference in the Fermi levels of the two materials, their band alignment provides a built-in electric field. Upon irradiation by light, the photogenerated electrons of UIO-66-NH2 and holes of CdS recombine, thus leaving a high concentration of electrons in the CB of CdS (−0.98 V) to reduce the CO2-RR. On the other hand, the holes in the VB of UIO-66-NH2 (2.19 eV) participate in the water reaction to release protons.53 Similarly, rare earth CeCO3OH is also integrated in UIO-66-NH2, to form a Z-scheme via the covalent bonding between CO32− of CeCO3OH and Zr–O of the MOF. Apart from the band alignment where the CB of UIO-66-NH2 takes part in CO2-RR, the presence of Ce3+/Ce4+ also improves the electron transfer and provides additional catalytic active sites.54
Since HER strongly competes with CO2-RR, the suppression of HER should also be considered while engineering the photocatalysts. In CuO/Ag/UiO-66, Ag acts as a bridge to promote charge transfer between the CO2-RR active site of CuO and the MOF, thus improving separation efficiency at the Z-scheme interface, as shown in Fig. 9(a–c). Additionally, Ag also acts as a co-catalyst which has stronger adsorption capacity for the *H protons. Eventually, these *H protons combine with the adjacent *OCO adsorbed on CuO, to form *OCOH, and generate formic acid (HCOOH) with 63 μmol g−1 h−1 yield and 95.9% selectivity. Therefore, it can be seen that the cocatalyst induced MOF-Z scheme can promote the generation of a two-electron pathway and tune the product selectivity by controlling reaction intermediates.55 In the other instance, Pt was used as the bridge in Cu2O/Pt/NH2-MIL-125(Ti). In this case, owing to the large Fermi level of Pt nanoparticles, the photogenerated electrons of the CB of the MOF migrated via the Pt electron mediator and recombined with the holes of the VB of Cu2O, thus ensuring high separation efficiency. The electron of the active site of Cu2O converted CO2 photocatalytically to methanol (CH3OH) and ethanol (CH3CH2OH) with a yield of 434.46 and 718.47 μmol g−1 h−1 respectively. Additionally, the Schottky barrier formed between the Pt nanoparticles and the MOF prevented the complexation of the photogenerated carriers and improved their lifetime.56
Striving towards metal-free photocatalysts, there have been research studies where instead of using metal-based electron mediators, carbonaceous mediators like reduced graphene oxide (r-GO) and g-C3N4 have been successfully integrated in Z-schemes. Aiming towards the same, photocatalysts such as O-defective ZnO/r-GO/NH2-UIO-66 and g-C3N4/NH2-MIL 125 (Ti)/r-GO have been developed. The introduction of oxygen defects in ZnO reduces the bandgap from 3.7 eV to 2.98 eV. This enables it to form a band aligned Z-scheme photocatalyst with compatible band positions with NH2-UIO-66. Upon irradiation, r-GO is able to transfer the electrons quickly from the CB of O-ZnO to the VB of NH2-UIO-66, thus increasing the electron concentration in the CB of the catalytic centre of the MOF, as well as preventing recombination of photogenerated carriers.57 Similarly, in g-C3N4/NH2-MIL 125 (Ti)/r-GO, r-GO acts as the solid mediator (Fig. 9(d–g)) to ensure suppression of recombination and thereby improve the lifetime of catalytically active electron density in the CB of g-C3N4, that can reduce CO2 to CO and CH4.58
 Fig. 9  TEM image, Z-scheme mechanism, and CO2-RR activity of (a–c) CuO/Ag/UiO-66; Ag as a co-catalyst regulates the intermediate adsorption;55 (d–g) NH2-MIL-125(Ti) MOF/r-GO/g-C3N4; r-GO acts as a solid electron mediator;58 (h–k) metalloscope image, Z-scheme mechanism, and CO2-RR activity of PCN-222(Ni)@NH2-UIO-67(Zr); MOF@MOF hierarchical structure generates new intrinsic heterointerfaces that align energy levels.60 
Since MOFs are highly tunable, to improve their CO2 adsorption and band positions to be compatible with CO2-RR, more sophisticated MOF structures have been investigated. To incorporate the advantages of high CO2 adsorptivity and selectivity of metalloporphyrins in MOFs, the PCN group have come into being with porphyrin-based ligands. PCN-224(Cu) is a cubical structure composed of a zirconium MOF with a copper(II)-porphyrin ligand. It is built by connection between metalloporphyrins and six-connected Zr6 cluster. Owing to its unique structure and nitrogen-rich skeleton, PCN-224(Cu) has a bandgap of only 1.68 eV, which makes it a perfect candidate for photocatalytic CO2-RR. On confining TiO2 nanoparticles on PCN-224(Cu), an inner electrical field was built in the direction from PCN-224(Cu) to TiO2, due to their band compatibility. This static electrical field caused the electrons in the CB of TiO2 to be transferred to the Z-scheme interface and combine with the holes in the VB of the MOF. Consequently, the reducing power of electrons in the CB of the MOF was augmented, that resulted in a CO evolution of 37.21 μmol g−1 h−1 (∼45 times higher than that of TiO2), without any redox mediator.59 Further improvements in Z-scheme MOF engineering were achieved by developing a 3D hierarchical core@shell MOF@MOF structure with PCN-222(Ni)@UIO-67-NH2, via a one-pot synthesis reaction exploiting the nucleation mechanism. Such MOF@MOF hierarchical architectures provide tunability at the atomic to mesoscopic level, in terms of chemical composition, pore structure, and functionality. FTIR and XRD patterns suggest that new heterointerfaces have been developed in PCN-222(Ni)@UIO-67-NH2, that allow intrinsic rearrangement of energy levels and efficient charge separation as shown in Fig. 9(h–k). In situ DRIFTs during CO2-RR also proved that the composite showed strong peaks of COOH* and HCOOH*, in comparison to CHO*. Therefore, it was more selective to HCOOH compared to CH4 and CO evolution.60 Hence, it can be concluded that more such engineered hierarchical architectures should be developed by utilizing the generation of new interfaces that can lead to intrinsic formation of heterojunctions and modulate the optoelectronic properties. A detailed comparative analysis of MOF-based Z-scheme photocatalysts for CO2-RR is provided in Table 4.
Table 4 MOF-based Z-scheme photocatalysts for CO2-RR




PhotocatalystRef.
Synthesis method
Heterojunction
Reaction conditions
Performance




CdS@UiO-66-NH253
Solvothermal
Band alignment
LED lamp; visible light; water as the electron donor
CO – 280.4 μmol h−1 g−1


NH2-UiO-66/CeCO3OH54
Precipitation
Coexistence of Ce3+/Ce4+; bond between CO32− and Zr–O
300 W Xe lamp; water and TEOA as electron donors
CO – 103 μmol h−1 g−1


CH4 – 70 μmol h−1 g−1


UiO-66-NH2/Cu2O/Cu111
Solvothermal
Band alignment with Cu as an electron mediator
300 W Xe lamp; water as the electron donor
CO – 4.54 μmol h−1 g−1


Cu/Ag/UIO-66(Zr)55
Hydrothermal
Ag as electron the bridge
300 W Xe lamp; water as the electron donor
HCOOH – 63 μmol h−1 g−1


Cu2O/Pt/NH2-MIL-125 (Ti)56
Solvothermal
Pt as the electron mediator and Schottky barrier between Pt and MOF
300 W Xe lamp; water as the electron donor
CH3OH – 434.46 μmol h−1 g−1


CH3CH2OH – 718.47 μmol h−1 g−1


O-defective ZnO/r-GO/NH2-UIO-66(Zr)57
Solvothermal
r-GO as a solid state electron mediator
300 W Xe lamp; NaHCO3 aqueous solution as the electron donor
CH3OH –34.85 μmol h−1 g−1


HCOOH – 6.40 μmol h−1 g−1


NH2-MIL-125(Ti) MOF/r-GO/g-C3N458
Electrostatic, hydrothermal
r-GO as a solid state electron mediator
35 W Xe lamp; water vapor as an electron donor
CO – 383.79 μmol h−1 g−1


CH4 – 13.8 mol h−1 g−1


PCN-224(Cu)/TiO259
Solvothermal
Built-in electric field due to band alignment
300 W Xe lamp; water as an electron donor
CO – 37.21 μmol h−1 g−1


PCN-222(Ni)@NH2-UIO-67(Zr)60
Solvothermal
Generation of new intrinsic heterointerfaces that align energy levels
300 W Xe lamp; water vapor as an electron donor
CO – 10.3 μmol h−1 g−1


CH4 – 10.8 μmol h−1 g−1


HCOOH – 146.0 μmol h−1 g−1




MOF-based Z-scheme catalysts for pollutant degradation
Photocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction (OER) requires a potential drive of 1.23 eV and a four electron transfer process, which is too high for most photocatalysts to achieve, in spite of their compatible band positions. Further, the cleavage of the O–H bond and formation of the O–O bond has a high overpotential of ∼700 mV, that hinders the OER.61 Therefore, most Z-scheme photocatalysts for OER investigations are still in nascent stages and pristine MOF-based Z-schemes are practically unavailable. In contrast, the photo-oxidation power of MOF-Z-scheme photocatalysts has been widely studied for pollutant degradation, where the pollutants themselves act as sacrificial agents and lower the thermodynamic potential for the oxidation reaction. With increasing pollutant concentrations of dyes, pesticides, and drugs in wastewater, the ecological environment is disrupted. Conventional wastewater treatments, such as adsorption, coagulation and ultrafiltration, can remove most water pollutants. However, azo-dyes at a low concentration and non-biodegradable antibiotics are difficult to remove using traditional purification techniques. Hence, photocatalysis as an advanced oxidation process can offer a cheap and versatile solution with high efficiency in this domain.

Antibiotics degradation. 
In recent years, the resistance of antibiotics to bio-degradation has posed a serious problem, with the concentration of ciprofloxacin being 31.5 and 2.5 mg L−1 in wastewater and surface water respectively.62 In the previous examples, it has already been shown that loading low band-gap metal oxides or metal sulphides in MOFs with high surface area and light absorption range is a general way of engineering heterojunctions. Photocatalysts for antibiotics degradation are no exceptions. Therefore, hybrids such as V2O5/NH2-MIL-101(Fe),63 Fe2O3/MIL-101(Cr),64 and SnS2/MIL88B(Fe)65 have shown some promising progress, achieving almost 80–100% degradation of tetracycline, carbamazepine, or ibuprofen, in the presence of scavengers. The n-type metal oxide or sulphide semiconductors possess low surface area and are prone to agglomeration and thus low stability. Dispersion in the high surface area MOF structures enables them to provide a larger number of active catalytic sites and improve the stability of the photocatalyst. On the other hand, the MOFs with their porosity and metal clusters are promising materials for reactant diffusion and additional catalytic sites. However, their low band gap and poor charge separation efficiency can be mitigated by coupling with said metal oxides or sulphides. To overcome the problem of limited photo-efficiency of the metal oxides, perovskites have come into being.
Perovskite integrated MOFs form stable Z-scheme photocatalysts for removal of such toxic pharmaceuticals. Perovskite metal oxides (ABO3) have a nearly cubic structure with A-ion (alkaline earth metal) in the centre and B-ions (3d, 4d, 5d transition metal) on the corners of the lattice, with the A-cations in 12-fold coordination with the anions and the B-cations in 6-fold coordination.66 The bismuth based perovskite Bi2WO6 typically acts as an n-type semiconductor with a bandgap of 2.75 eV enabled by the conducive migration of photogenerated carriers within its layers of (WO4)2− and (Bi2O2)2+. However, the maximum light absorption wavelength of a single Bi2WO6 is only about 460 nm, which implies that it still cannot make full use of solar energy.67 Further, the recombination rate is too high. Hence, integrating it with NH2-UIO-66 forms a Z-scheme interface where photogenerated carriers can transfer via the Bi–W–O–N–C–O–Zr network, that eventually broadens the spectral range and suppresses the recombination rate. Prior to analyzing the Z-scheme mechanism of ciprofloxacin degradation in Bi2WO6/NH2-UIO-66, it is to be noted that the potential range of hydroxyl radicals is OH˙/OH− = 1.99 eV and that of superoxide radicals is O2/O2˙− = −0.33 eV. Based on the calculated band positions as depicted in Fig. 10(a–c), the photogenerated electrons in the CB of Bi2WO6 would migrate to the VB of NH2-UIO-66. Meanwhile, the holes in the VB of Bi2WO6 participate spontaneously in the direct oxidation of ciprofloxacin or oxidize water, thereby generating hydroxyl radicals, that further degrade ciprofloxacin. On the other hand, the photogenerated electrons in the CB of NH2-UIO-66 reduce the oxygen molecule to produce superoxide radicals (O2˙−) that again oxidize ciprofloxacin. Therefore, both the O2˙− and holes are the active catalytic sites67,68 that degrade 83.1% of ciprofloxacin in 60 min. Similar mechanisms and trends have been observed in Bi2MoO6/NH2-UIO-6662 and Bi2WO6/MIL-88B(Fe).69 Introducing nitrogen doping in Bi2WO6 to form N-Bi2FeO3/MIL-53(Fe) further narrows the bandgap of the perovskite and improves its light absorption ability, resulting in 99% degradation of tetracycline hydrochloride in the presence of H2O2. Such non-metallic doping eventually allows the formation of some defects in the perovskite lattice that improves their charge transfer of photogenerated carriers.72
 Fig. 10  SEM/TEM image, Z-scheme mechanism, and antibiotic degradation efficiency of (a–c) Bi2WO6/NH2-UIO-66 used for ciprofloxacin degradation; band alignment due to functionalization and covalent interaction;68 (d–f) Ag/AgCl/MIL-100(Fe) used for tetracycline hydrochloride degradation; SPR effect of Ag forms the Z-scheme;70 (g–i) PDI/MIL-53(Fe) used for tetracycline hydrochloride degradation; Z-scheme formed by covalent interaction with the organic molecule.71 
Among other semiconductors, silver phosphate (Ag3PO4) has quite attractive features owing to its high quantum efficiency under visible light. Unfortunately, its practical applications are hindered by severe photo-corrosion (agglomeration or dissolution of nanoparticles). Besides, in the presence of light irradiation, the Ag+ of Ag3PO4 reacts with electrons to reduce into metallic Ag0, which loses its semiconductor properties and photoactivity.73,74 Therefore, establishing Z-scheme heterojunctions of Ag3PO4 with MOFs can transfer and separate the photogenerated electrons to prevent the formation of Ag0. Yolk@shell structured Ag3PO4@MIL-53(Fe) had been synthesized via a bottle-around-ship strategy. The yolk@shell structure prevented the dissolution of Ag3PO4, as well as provided a pathway for efficient charge transfer and separation by suppressing the recombination rate of photogenerated carriers, as indicated by the photoluminescence intensity. Subsequently, the holes in the VB of Ag3PO4 and O2˙− generated in the CB of the MOF catalytically degraded tetracycline by 76.22% without any scavenger, and the catalyst was photostable for up to 5 cycles.73 To improve the photocatalytic activity further, Ag3PO4 has also been confined in mixed-valence MIL-88A(Fe). By changing the ratio of FeII/FeIII, the band gap reduces by 1.04 eV and aligns better with Ag3PO4, which has a bandgap of 2.14 eV. The flow of electrons from P and Ag atoms towards the MOF establishes the built-in electric field via the Z-scheme heterojunction. Apart from modulating the electronic configuration, a mixed valence MOF increases the O2 absorption on Ag3PO4 and optimizes FeII to enhance H2O2 decomposition via photo-Fenton. Subsequently, the composite was able to achieve 90.9% photodegradation of tetracycline in 20 min.75 However, when AgI is confined in MOF-808(Zr), the Z-scheme heterojunction follows a slightly different pathway to achieve 93.6% photodegradation of tetracycline. Due to the low chemical stability of AgI under illumination, the photogenerated electrons reduce a small part of Ag+ to Ag0 (confirmed by XPS), which then acts as a mediator between AgI and MOF-808(Zr) via the Schottky barrier. Based on the band positions, electrons from the CB of the MOF recombine with the holes in the VB of AgI, thus increasing the accumulation of electrons in the CB of AgI and holes in the VB of the MOF. Since the CB of AgI lies at −0.35 eV, the electrons were able to reduce O2 to O2˙−, that subsequently degrades the pollutant. Further oxidation of O2˙− to 1O2 allowed mineralization of the pollutants to CO2 and H2O. On the other hand, the holes in the VB of the MOF also possess strong oxidizing capability and degrade the pollutants.76
The use of noble metals like gold and silver as photocatalysts also allows the exploitation of their surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect. SPR is a phenomenon where the electrons in the metal surface layer are excited by photons of incident light with a certain angle of incidence, and then propagate parallel to the metal surface. Subsequently, SPR can expand the optical response range to the visible region. Therefore, the optical absorption edge of core@shell Ag/AgCl nanowire@MIL-100(Fe)70 or Ag/NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/CdS red-shifts from ∼400 nm to ∼600 nm (Fig. 10(d–f)). In Ag/NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/CdS, the hot electrons flow from Ag nanoparticles to the CB of the MOF, owing to SPR. These electrons are subsequently transferred to Ag and form a Schottky junction by recombining with the holes in the VB of CdS. The remaining electrons in the VB of the MOF at 2.20 eV have strong oxidizing ability to convert OH− to OH˙. On the other hand, O2˙− is generated at the CB of CdS. The OH˙, O2˙−, and holes in the VB of the MOF finally mineralized 94.2% of ketoprofen in 180 min. Hence, we see that SPR of noble metals can alter the light absorption range and improve the charge separation efficiency of photogenerated carriers by fast transfer from one energy band to other.37
To strive towards usage of less metals due to their toxicity and high cost, MOFs have also been integrated with n-type organic supramolecular semiconductor perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic diimide (PDI) to form a Z-scheme heterojunction as depicted in Fig. 10(g–i). The introduction of PDI in MIL-53(Fe) enhanced the migration of photoelectrons through the phase-interface boundaries due to the good interfacial contact effect, which subsequently improved the charge separation ability and provided a strong redox potential. Therefore, 94.08% degradation of tetracycline hydrochloride could be achieved in 30 min.71 Other examples of applications of metal-free substituents include using r-GO as an electron mediator in a Z-scheme photocatalyst consisting of UIO-66 and ZnO or TiO2.77 A detailed comparative analysis of MOF-based Z-scheme photocatalysts for antibiotic degradation is provided in Table 5.
Table 5 MOF-based Z-scheme photocatalysts for antibiotic degradation




PhotocatalystRef.
Synthesis method
Heterojunction
Reaction conditions
Performance




V2O5/NH2-MIL-101(Fe)63
Solvothermal
Band alignment
UV-Vis light; 0.1 L tetracycline
88.3% in 120 min


Fe2O3/NH2-MIL-101(Cr)64
Hydrothermal
Band alignment
300 W Xe lamp; 30 mg L−1 carbamazepine; H2O2 scavenger
100% in 120 min


SnS2/MIL-88B(Fe)65
Solvothermal
Band alignment
500 W Xe lamp; 50 mg L−1 ibuprofen; Na2S2O8 scavenger
100% in 120 min


BiOI/MIL-88B(Fe)112
Hydrothermal
Band alignment
150 W Xe lamp; 100 mL ciprofloxacin
∼98% in 120 min


NH2-UiO-66(Zr)/BiOBr/Bi2S3113
Solvothermal
Built-in electric field on both sides of BiOBr via NH2-UiO-66(Zr) and Bi2S3
200 W Xe lamp; 20 mg L−1 tetracycline
93% in 60 min


MIL-53(Fe)@BiOBr/modified g-C3N4114
Solvothermal
Energy band defect; MIL-53(Fe) acted as an electron mediator
300 W Xe lamp; 10 ppm ciprofloxacin
92.9% in 120 min


Bi2MoO6/NH2-UiO-66(Zr)62
Solvothermal
Built-in electric field due to electron density difference
300 W Xe lamp; 10 mg L−1 ciprofloxacin; or ofloxacin
ciprofloxacin – 96% in 90 min


Ofloxacin – 100% in 90 min


Bi2WO6/NH2-UiO-66(Zr)67
Solvothermal
Band alignment
350 W Xe lamp; 30 mg L−1 tetracycline
80% in 150 min


Bi2WO6/NH2-UiO-66(Zr)68
Solvothermal

Via the Bi–W–O–N–C–O–Zr network
100 W Xe lamp; 10 ppm ciprofloxacin
83.1% in 60 min


Bi2WO6/MIL-88B(Fe)69
Solvothermal
Band alignment
500 W Xe lamp; 10 mg L−1 tetracycline
96.4% in 90 min


N-doped Bi2FeO3/NH2-MIL-53(Fe)72
Solvothermal
Built-in electric field due to N-doping
300 W Xe lamp; 20 ppm tetracycline hydrochloride; ciprofloxacin; sulfamethoxazole
Tetracycline hydrochloride – 99% in 60 min


Ciprofloxacin – 76% in 60 min


Sulfamethoxazole – 91% in 60 min


Ag3PO4@MIL-53(Fe)73
Solvothermal
Built-in electric field
300 W Xe lamp; 10 mg L−1 tetracycline
95.8% in 60 min


Ag3PO4/MIL-53(Fe)74
Electrostatic precipitation
Schottky barrier with metallic Ag as an electron mediator
300 W Xe lamp; 20 mg L−1 tetracycline; oxytetracycline; chlortetracycline; deoxy tetracycline
Tetracycline – 93.72% in 60 min


Chlortetracycline – 85.54% in 60 min


Deoxy tetracycline – 91.74% in 60 min


Ag3PO4/mixed-valence MIL-88A(Fe)75
Hydrothermal
Built-in electric field due to electron flow from modulated MOF
300 W Xe lamp; 30 mg L−1 tetracycline
90.9% in 20 min


AgI/MOF-808(Zr)76
Electrostatic precipitation
Schottky barrier with metallic Ag as an electron mediator
300 W Xe lamp; 20 mg L−1 tetracycline
93.65% in 80 min


Ag/AgCl@MIL-100(Fe)70
Hydrothermal
Electron transfer from MOFs to Ag due to the fluctuation caused by SPR
Visible light ∼420–780 nm; 50 mg L−1 tetracycline hydrochloride
93% in 220 min


Ag/NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/CdS37
Electrostatic
Schottky barrier promoted by the hot electron transfer SPR of Ag
350 W Xe lamp; 10 mg L−1 ketoprofen
94.2% in 180 min


MIL-53(Fe)/PDI71
Solvothermal
Covalent bonding
300 W Xe lamp; 20 mg L−1 tetracycline hydrochloride
94.08 in 30 min


UiO-66@ ZnO/r-GO77
Solvothermal
r-GO electron mediator
500 W Hg lamp; 20 mg L−1 tetracycline; or malathion
Tetracycline – 81% in 90 min


UIO-66@TiO2/r-GO
Malathion – 100% in 90 min


CuWO4/Bi2S3/ZIF-67(Co)115
Hydrothermal
Double Z-scheme formed on both sides of Bi2S3
400 W m−2 LED; 20 ppm metronidazole; or cephalexin
Metronidazole – 95.6% in 80 min


Cephalexin – 90.1% in 80 min






Dye and other pollutant degradation. 
Apart from antibiotics, the other organic pollutants that constitute a major threat to wastewater and cause scarcity of drinking water are the organic dyes from textile industries, phenol and bisphenols from plastic industries, insecticides like diazonin, and aromatic hydrocarbons like o-xylene. These pollutants have been proved to be carcinogenic and life threatening and have been listed as contaminants of emerging concern by the United states Environmental Protection Agency.78 It has been observed that these contaminants are in concentrations significantly higher than expected, and/or their risk to human and environmental health in ways that may not be fully understood. Therefore, fast and green methodologies to degrade them are necessary. The mentioned pollutants also follow the same mechanism of photocatalytic degradation as the antibiotics discussed previously. Hence, in this section we will mainly highlight the Z-scheme photocatalysts that have not been already mentioned.
Constructing Z-scheme heterojunctions with low bandgap photoactive materials has already been discussed earlier. Some examples include (i) narrow-bandgap (∼2.3 eV) silver-based nanoparticles (Ag, AgCl, Ag3PO4); (ii) semiconductor like metal sulphides and perovskites (MOS2, ZIS), with a bandgap of 1.9–2.6 eV and (iii) bismuth-based oxyhalide semiconductors with a bandgap of 1.8 eV. They perform similarly as in HER or antibiotic degradation reaction pathways. Instead in this section we will focus on some exclusive types of Z-scheme photocatalysts that have been explored for dye and phenol degradation exclusively. In the 2D/3D Z-scheme heterojunction formed in BiOI/MIL-53(Fe), the Z-scheme is formed via interface coupling when the FeIII of the MOF binds to Bi through covalent interactions. The composite exhibits a high performance in degrading phenol, bisphenol, and methylene blue, i.e. 67–98%, which is ∼20–30% higher than its pristine counterparts. What is more interesting is that the composite can be moulded in the form of beads by binding with biodegradable chitosan. Such moulding is necessary if Z-scheme photocatalysts need to make way to industrialization. These beads also showed 98% degradation efficiency for methylene blue and could be recycled for a minimum of 8 cycles.81 Exploiting the plasmonic and metallic character of silver, a ternary photocatalyst with dual Z-scheme has also been constructed using g-C3N4/Ag3PO4/(Co, Ni)-MOF.79 The synergism in such ternary heterostructures alleviates the individual problems of agglomeration or low photoactivity of the materials, and makes the composite a powerful one. The matrix used was ultrathin nanosheets of mixed metal (Co, Ni)-MOF denoted as UMOFNs. They were synthesized by combining Ni2+, Co2+, and terephthalate linkers. The interaction between mixed metals is presumed to alter the bridging with O2− and optimize the orbital occupancy, thus modulating the electronic properties. To improve their visible light absorption range and separation efficiency, the UMOFNs had been hybridized with Ag3PO4. Ultimately, g-C3N4, was also added to facilitate the charge carrier ability and photostability. From Fig. 11(a–c), it can be concluded that the photo-reduced Ag nanoparticles form a dual Z-scheme as g-C3N4/Ag/Ag3PO4 and Ag3PO4/Ag/UMOFNs. Additionally, the Ag nanoparticles exhibit the SPR effect in the presence of visible light. Therefore, under visible light irradiation, in the system of C3N4/Ag/Ag3PO4, both g-C3N4 and Ag3PO4 on either side of Ag nanoparticles can be activated to photo-generate electron–hole pairs. The electrons in the CB of Ag3PO4 migrate via the Ag bridge and recombine with the holes in the VB of g-C3N4. This enhances the reducing power of electrons in the CB of g-C3N4 to reduce O2 to O2˙−, which subsequently oxidizes 2-chlorophenol. On the other hand, the holes in the VB of Ag3PO4 degrade 2-chlorophenol as well. In the second Z-scheme system consisting of Ag3PO4/Ag/UMOFNs, Ag nanoparticles absorb the visible light as a photosensitizer, and aid the formation of electron–hole pairs by the SPR effect. The SPR-induced electrons migrate from Ag to the CB of UMOFNs to reduce O2 to O2˙−. Simultaneously, the SPR-induced holes of Ag recombine with the photogenerated electrons from Ag3PO4 due to the lower Fermi level of Ag nanoparticles (Ef = +0.80 V vs. NHE).43 Therefore, the dual Z-scheme that could facilitate more positive and negative potentials of VB and CB respectively could be constructed, that ultimately oxidized the pollutants with high efficiency and photostability.
 Fig. 11  SEM/TEM images, Z-scheme mechanism, and pollution degradation activity of (a–c) g-C3N4/Ag3PO4/(Co, Ni)-MOF for 2-chlorophenol degradation;79 dual Z-scheme via Ag plasmonic nanoparticles; (d–f) Fe-GDY3@MIL(Fe) for dinotefuran degradation; Z-scheme formed via the CC-Fe|O interface;80 (g–i) TTA-BPDA@ZIF-L-Co for rhodamine B degradation; Z-scheme formed via confinement effects. 
Instead of using metal-free carbon nitride and r-GO in Z-scheme heterojunctions, Zhang et al. introduced graphdiyne (GDY) as a new carbon allotrope in photocatalysis. GDY is reported as a new carbon allotrope with a special π-conjugated structure embedded in a triangular sp–sp2 hybridized structure.80 Hence, it was easy to confine a large amount of MIL(Fe) sites anchored on the GDY via CC–Fe coordination. The Z-scheme analysis shown in Fig. 11(d–f) provides us with the conclusion that under irradiation, Fe–O clusters within MIL-100(Fe) were excited to produce e−/h+ pairs, and the e− in its CB combined with the holes in the VB of Fe-GDY via the CC-Fe heterojunction to establish the Z-scheme and improve the separation efficiency. Owing to its highly positive 2.38 eV VB position, the h+ in MIL-100(Fe) were able to oxidize water to produce ˙OH. On the other hand, the CB potential of Fe-GDY at −0.79 eV was more negative and able to reduce O2 to O2˙−. The ˙OH and O2˙− subsequently acted as active radicals to oxidize 98% of dinotefuran in 60 min.
To further improve and understand the role of metal-free materials in forming Z-schemes with MOFs, covalent organic frameworks (COFs) have been recently started to be explored,82,83 as shown in Fig. 11(g–i). The deliberate construction of compatible band alignment, crystallinity, higher porosity, numerous π–π bonding for electron delocalization and flexible design strategies make COFs an exceptional choice as an organic component for Z-scheme photocatalysts. In the case of both NH2-MIL-(Ti)/TTB-TTA and TTA-BPDA@ZIF-L-Co, the hybrids showed exceptional photostability and dye degradation efficiency (∼98–100%), owing to their high separation efficiency of photogenerated carriers obtained due to spatial confinement of MOFs with the COF shell. Further, the micro/nanoporous model improves the adsorption of pollutants and increases the reaction rate. Finally, the robust covalent bond between these two porous materials guarantees excellent stability of such a multi-component photocatalytic system. A detailed comparative analysis of MOF-based Z-scheme photocatalysts for antibiotic degradation is provided in Table 6.
Table 6 MOF-based Z-scheme photocatalyst for dye and other pollutant degradation




Photocatalyst Ref.
Synthesis method
Heterojunction
Reaction conditions
Performance




Ag/Ag3PO4/MIL-53(Fe)116
Microwave
Ag as an electron mediator
500 W tungsten lamp; visible light; 300 mL; Ponceau BS
94.8% in 50 min


Ag3PO4/MIL-101/NiFe2O4117
Impregnation
3D MOF structure as a mediator
300 W Xe lamp; 20 mg L−1 rhodamine B
93% in 30 min


AgCl/Ag-doped-ZIF-8118
Stirring and precipitation
Band alignment via Ag+ doping
210 W Xe lamp; 15 mg L−1 rhodamine B
81.1% in 60 min


Ni-MOF@Bi2WO6119
Hydrothermal
Ag as an electron bridge
300 W Xe lamp; 20 mg L−1 methylene blue
98.8% in 60 min


MIL-53(Fe)/α-Bi2O3/g-C3N4120
Precipitation
Solid-state mediated dual Z-scheme on both sides of α-Bi2O3
35 W Xe lamp; 10 mg L−1 amido black 10B
97.09% in 120 min


UiO-66-NH2/Bi2WO6121
Solvothermal
r-GO as a solid state electron mediator
500 W Xe lamp; visible light; 20 mg L−1 rhodamine B; 15 mg L−1 phenol
Rhodamine B – 100% in 90 min


Phenol – 88% in 150 min


BiOI/MIL-53(Fe)81
Co-precipitation
r-GO as a solid state electron mediator
100 W Hg lamp; 20 mg L−1 phenol; 20 mg L−1 bisphenol; 20 μM methylene blue
Phenol – 59% in 60 min


Bisphenol – 90.4% in 120 min


Methylene blue – 99% in 10 min


Ti-MOF/Ag/NiFe-LDH38
Photoreduction
SPR of Ag nanoparticles
300 W Xe lamp; 15 mg L−1 rhodamine B
95% in 50 min


(MOF)-5/CuO@ZnIn2S4110
Complexation–oxidation
Tandem heterojunctions formed at the interface of core@shell
300 W Xe lamp; 10 mg L−1 2,4-dichlorophenol; or phenol; methyl orange; methylene blue
2,4-Dichlorophenol – 98.7%


Phenol – 97.3%


Methyl orange – 95.4%


Methylene blue – 98.7% in 120 min


Defective NH2-MIL-88B(Fe)@ZnIn2S448
Hydrothermal
Low band gap and unsaturated metal sites via defects
300 W Xe lamp; 20 mg L−1 bisphenol A
99.4% in 180 min


MIL-88A(Fe)/MoS2122
Hydrothermal

In situ hetero-interface via electron flow
UV irradiation; 20 mg L−1 bisphenol A
98.2% in 60 min


Fe3O4-COOH@ZIF-8/Ag/Ag3PO4123
Solvothermal
SPR of Ag nanoparticles
200 W tungsten lamp; 20 mg L−1 diazinon
63.5% in 55 min


HKUST-1@Ag-Ag3PO4124
Microwave
SPR of Ag nanoparticles
500 W Halogen lamp; visible light; 1 mg L−1 Ponceau BS
87% in 80 min


Ag/AgCl@MIL-53(Fe)125
Solvothermal

Via plasmonic Ag/AgCl
500 W Xe lamp; 10 mg L−1 rhodamine B; 20 mg L−1 methylene blue
100% in 45 min


MIL-88A(Fe)/g-C3N4126
Hydrothermal
Covalent interaction via electron transfer from MOF to g-C3N4
1000 W iodine tungsten lamp; visible light; 10 mg L−1 rhodamine B; or phenol
Rhodamine B – 100% in 30 min


Phenol – 45% in 120 min


Fe-GDY3@MIL(Fe)80
Stirring

In situ growth of the C = C-Fe|O interface
500 W Xe lamp; 200 mg L−1 dinotefuran; 20 mM H2O2 scavenger
98% in 60 min


TTA-BPDA-COF@ZIF-L-Co82
Hydrothermal
Band matching achieved through MOF confinement
300 W Xe lamp; visible light; 10 mg L−1 methyl orange; or rhodamine B; or methylene blue; or bisphenol
Methyl orange – 98% in 25 min


Rhodamine B – 98% in 15 min


Methylene blue – 98% in 20 min


Bisphenol – 90% in 40 min


NH2-MIL-(Ti)/TTB-TTA83
Solvothermal
Covalent interaction
300 W Xe lamp; visible light; 10 mg L−1 methyl orange; or phenol
∼100% in 20 min


g-C3N4/Ag3PO4/(Co, Ni)-MOF79
Ultrasonication
Dual Z-scheme with Ag bridge
300 W Xe lamp; visible light; 30 mg L−11 2-chlorophenol
100% in 5 min


MIL-100(Fe)/α-Fe2O3127
Hydrothermal
Covalent interaction
250 W Xe lamp; 50 ppm o-xylene
100% in white light; 90% in visible light in 300 min





Characterization of MOF-based Z-scheme heterojunctions
The in-depth characterization of (MOF-based) Z-scheme heterojunctions and the associated charge transfer mechanism is challenging and still under development. The current methods for this include (i) XPS, (ii) photoluminescence (PL), (iii) electrochemical measurements like photocurrent, Nyquist plot, and Mott–Schottky plot and (iv) electron spin resonance (ESR) measurements. Since it is assumed that photoemission spectra are proportional to the valence band density of states, VB maxima can be estimated from XPS spectra.84 XPS can be used to validate the formation of Z-scheme heterojunctions and estimation of the VB and CB in MOF-based Z-scheme photocatalysts.35,38,85 PL spectroscopy in a non-destructive characterization method. Here, a material is excited with light of certain energy such that it is higher than its energy bandgap, and consequently the electrons within the material move into excited states. While coming down from this excited state to equilibrium, the energy is released by emitting photons. Hence, PL spectroscopy is used to study separation/recombination of photogenerated charge carriers. A low PL intensity is generated due to the high separation of charge carriers, while a high PL intensity reflects the fast recombination of charge carriers. Time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy (TRPL) can supplement the information about the lifetime of excitons and dynamics of photogenerated charge carriers from the resulting decay curves. Higher lifetime of charge carriers is reflective of their better separation and longer residence time to participate in reactions. In the case of characterization by time dependent transient photocurrent response, the semiconductor of interest is sandwiched between two extracting electrodes and excited by light; the photogenerated charge carriers are extracted by the electrodes, resulting in a current response. In the “light on” position, the photogenerated charge carriers build-up, while in the “light off” position, the charge carriers decay. The high intensity of photocurrent is directly proportional to the charge build-up and reflects on the quantity of excitons that can actively participate in the photocatalysis. However the decay time of the charge carriers should also be taken into account. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy is a powerful and versatile tool to investigate the optoelectronic properties and pathways of photogenerated charge carriers. Mott–Schottky spectroscopy provides valuable insights into flat band potential estimation and the number of available charge carriers upon excitation. This supplements the data estimated from XPS and PL spectra. The formation of n-type or p-type heterojunctions at the interfaces and the consequent charge transfer directions can be inferred from Mott–Schottky plots. However, due to the limitations of porosity and electrolyte–electrode interfacial interactions, Mott–Schottky plots need to be carefully interpreted. The Nyquist plot indicates the resistance to charge transfer at the interface of the photocatalyst and the reactant medium. The equivalent series resistance modelled from the Nyquist plot provides additional comprehension towards the built-in electric field formed by the charge carriers, their diffusion lengths, and charge transfer mechanism.
For example, XPS has been used to probe into the formation of Z-scheme heterojunctions and estimation of the VB and CB in Ti-MOF/Ag/NiFe LDH.38 In Fig. 12(a–d), it could be seen that when comparing XPS spectra of Ti-MOF, Ti-MOF/NiFe LDH and Ti-MOF/Ag/NiFe LDH, the Ti 2p peaks of Ti-MOF/Ag/NiFe LDH are shifted to lower binding energy, while the Ni 2p and Fe 2p peaks are shifted slightly to higher binding energy, implying close heterointerfacial contact between Ti-MOF and NiFe LDH via metallic Ag. Due to this complexation, partial charge localization is facilitated during Z-scheme photocatalysis of Rhodamine B. UPS and XPS spectra of Ti-MOF and Ni-Fe LDH are depicted in Fig. 12(e–h). The incident photon energy (hν) used was ∼21.22 eV and Fermi levels (EFermi) were assumed to be set at 0 eV. The cut-off energy (Ecutoff) obtained from UPS spectra was calculated at 17.53 eV and 18.07 eV for Ti-MOF and NiFe LDH respectively. Conclusively the work function ϕ for Ti-MOF and NiFe LDH was calculated as 3.68 and 3.15 eV respectively from the equation ϕ = hν − (Ecutoff − EFermi). The VB of Ti-MOF and NiFe LDH was estimated from the XPS spectra as 2.12 eV and 1.31 eV vs. NHE respectively. Utilizing the bandgap measured experimentally from the UV-Vis spectroscopy, the CB could be calculated from ECB = EVB − bandgap. The CB of Ti-MOF and NiFe LDH was calculated to be −0.41 eV and −0.88 eV respectively. Therefore, a Z-scheme heterostructure could be reconstructed such that the excited electrons from the CB of Ti-MOF recombined with the holes of NiFe LDH via Ag plasmons.
 Fig. 12  (a–d) High resolution XPS spectrum of Ti 2p, Ni 2p, Fe 2p, and Ag 3d in Ti-MOF, Ti-MOF/NiFe LDH and Ti-MOF/Ag/NiFe LDH; (e and f) UPS spectra and (g and h) VB-XPS spectra for Ti-MOF and NiFe LDH.38 
A Z-scheme photocatalyst constructed by hybridizing ZnIn2S4 with UIO-66-(COOH)2 was developed for photocatalytic HER (Fig. 13). To verify the type of heterojunction, first, the PL emission spectra of UiO-66-(COOH)2/ZnIn2S4 were compared to pristine ZnIn2S4. In principle, the PL intensity is dependent on the recombination rate of minority carriers. Therefore, the reduced PL intensity after hybridization indicates that the recombination of free electron–hole pairs is suppressed in UiO-66-(COOH)2/ZnIn2S4, since the electron/hole pair can migrate between ZnIn2S4 and UIO-66-(COOH)2. Incorporation of MoS2 causes a further reduction of PL intensity since the photogenerated electrons get further scope of migration towards the MoS2 nanosheets located at the edge of the UiO-66-(COOH)2/ZnIn2S4 nanoarchitecture. The high separation of charge carriers due to long migration to MoS2 forms a built-in electric field that drives the photocatalytic process. After confirming the reduced recombination rate, the TRPL decay spectra proved that the average carrier lifetime (τavg) of the minority carriers of UiO-66-(COOH)2/ZnIn2S4/MOS2 was higher compared to UiO-66-(COOH)2/ZnIn2S4 or ZnIn2S4 due to suppressed recombination of charge carriers in UiO-66-(COOH)2/ZnIn2S4/MOS2 owing to their efficient migration. The high photocurrent density of UiO-66-(COOH)2/ZnIn2S4/MOS2 further evidences the slow recombination kinetics of the charge carriers in Z-scheme heterojunction nanoarchitectures. Low charge transfer resistance calculated from the semicircle of the Nyquist plot followed the same trend of ZnIn2S4 > UiO-66-(COOH)2/ZnIn2S4 > UiO-66-(COOH)2/ZnIn2S4/MOS2, signifying efficient charge separation of photogenerated carriers under light at the heterojunction. As discussed previously, the XPS spectra were utilized to assess the VB of ZnIn2S4 and UiO-66-(COOH)2 to be 2.16 eV and 3.64 eV vs. NHE. Owing to the efficient charge transfer via the interfacially interacting heterojunctions, the ESR peaks of the DMPO-˙O2− adduct follow the same trend as UiO-66-(COOH)2/ZnIn2S4/MOS2 > ZnIn2S4 > UiO-66-(COOH)2. From this optoelectronic characterization, it was inferred that under irradiation, the VBs of ZnIn2S4 and UiO-66-(COOH)2 generate photoelectrons that transfer to their respective CBs. The CB of UiO-66-(COOH)2 and the now vacant VB of ZnIn2S4 form a Z-scheme heterojunction by recombining their holes and electrons, and thereby generating high separation efficiency between the holes in the VB of >UiO-66-(COOH)2 and the electrons in the CB of ZnIn2S4. Additional MoS2 nanosheets act as an electron sink from the CB of ZnIn2S4, further improving the separation efficiency of the charge carriers. Finally, the HER or chromium(IV) reduction reactions occur by accepting the electrons from MoS2.35
 Fig. 13  (a) Photoluminescence spectra; (b) TRPL decay spectra; (c) transient photocurrent responses; (d) electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) Nyquist plots; (e) XPS valence band spectra; (f) ESR signals of DMPO-˙O2− with light irradiation for 5 min in a methanol dispersion containing photocatalysts for ZnIn2S4, UiO-66-(COOH)2/ZnIn2S4 (U0.30Z), and UiO-66-(COOH)2/ZnIn2S4/MOS2 (U0.30 M0.02Z); (g) Z-scheme mechanism.35 
In the case of the CO2-RR ternary photocatalyst composed of O-ZnO/rGO/UiO-66-NH2 (Fig. 14), the Mott–Schottky plots were used to determine the CB and flat band potentials of the individual components of O-ZnO and UiO-66-NH2. The flat band potentials of O-ZnO and UiO-66-NH2 were extrapolated as −0.19 V vs. NHE and −0.55 vs. NHE respectively. Since the positive slopes of O-ZnO and UiO-66-NH2 in Mott–Schottky plots reveal their n-type (or electron donating) properties, the CBs of O-ZnO and UiO-66-NH2 were calculated as −0.29 V vs. NHE and −0.65 vs. NHE respectively (assuming the flat band potential is 0.1 V below the CB in n-type materials). The VB could be determined easily by adding the band gap (from UV-Vis spectra) to the CB energy. From the low intensity of steady-state PL and 5 times higher decay time (τavg-calculated from TRPL) of O-ZnO/rGO/UiO-66-NH2, it was evident that there is efficient electron separation between O-ZnO and UiO-66-NH2 along with suppressed recombination of charge carriers. The individual components exhibited low photocurrent density owing to rapid recombination of photogenerated charge carriers, unlike the O-ZnO/rGO/UiO-66-NH2 heterojunction photocatalyst. The low charge transfer resistance of the composite obtained from the Nyquist plot proved the facile transfer and transport of charge carriers from UiO-66-NH2 to O-ZnO via electroconductive rGO, thus preventing their recombination. To verify the charge transfer pathways, the photogenerated hydroxyl radical concentration was investigated by PL, using coumarin as the probe molecule. The PL intensity of O-ZnO/rGO/UiO-66-NH2 increases with irradiation time due to the increased generation of active hydroxyl radicals. On the other hand, the negligible PL intensity of UiO-66-NH2 points towards the absence of photogenerated hydroxyl radicals since its VB edge (2.17 vs. NHE) is above the OH−/˙OH potential (2.3 V vs. NHE). The high PL intensity of O-ZnO/rGO/UiO-66-NH2 was attributed to the Z-scheme pathway of transfer and transport of charge carriers, where the electrons in the CB of O-ZnO recombine with holes in the VB of UiO-66-NH2 resulting in high separation efficiency and enrichment of holes in the VB of O-ZnO. These holes encourage the hydroxyl radical production. Simultaneously, the electrons in the CB of UiO-66-NH2 transport with ease via the rGO electron mediator backbone to participate in CO2-RR.57
 Fig. 14  Mott–Schottky plots of (a and b) O-ZnO and UiO-66-NH2; (c) PL spectra; (d) time-resolved transient PL decay; (e) photocurrent response; and (f) EIS Nyquist plot of UiO-66-NH2, O-ZnO, and O-ZnO/rGO/UiO-66-NH2; (g) PL spectra of O-ZnO/rGO/UiO-66-NH2 against illumination time using coumarin as the probe molecule to determine the hydroxyl radical; (h) comparison of the PL peak intensity around 430 nm for all samples using coumarin as the probe molecule to determine the hydroxyl radical; (i) Z-scheme mechanism.57 
The characterization of the surface plasmon resonance effect in a Z-scheme MOF-based photocatalyst was studied in Ag/NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/CdS that was used for photocatalytic ketoprofen degradation (Fig. 15). With the bandgap from UV-Vis spectra and flat band potential from Mott–Schottky curves, the VB and CB of NH2-MIL-125(Ti) and CdS could be obtained as VBTiO2-2.2, CBTiO2-−0.15, VBCdS-1.45, CBCdS-−0.55 vs. NHE. It can be seen from PL intensity that CdS undergoes a high recombination of charge carriers owing to its extremely low bandgap with possible orbital overlap. In contrast, Ag/CdS gives rise to low PL intensity due to the inhibited recombination of photogenerated charge carriers by forming a Schottky barrier at the interface between Ag and CdS. Yet the ternary Ag/NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/CdS has the lowest PL intensity owing to the Z-scheme pathway for migration of charge carriers and suppressed recombination rate on introduction of the MOF. The high charge density of transient photocurrent and the small Nyquist semicircle suggest good electronic conductivity and fast transfer of charge carriers at the heterointerfaces. The ESR spectra indicate production of ˙OH and ˙O2− radicals during photocatalytic degradation. Analysing the above characterization, the authors proposed that under illumination, both NH2-MIL-125(Ti) and CdS generate electrons and holes populated in their respective CB and VB. Due to the surface plasmon resonance effect, additional hot electrons from Ag flow to the CB of NH2-MIL-125(Ti). On the other hand, due to the more negative potential, O2/˙O2− generation occurs at the CB of CdS, which subsequently catalyses the ketoprofen degradation. Besides, the electrons from the CB of NH2-MIL-125(Ti) get transferred to Ag, where they recombine with the holes from CdS. The free holes in the VB of NH2-MIL-125(Ti) participate in H2O/˙OH generation.37
 Fig. 15  Photocatalytic characterization of Ag/NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/CdS; (a and b) Mott–Schottky plots; (c) band gap energy calculated from UV-Vis spectra; (d) PL spectra; (e) transient photo-current responses; (f) EIS Nyquist plots; (g and h) ESR spectra of DMPO-˙OH and DMPO-˙O2−; (i) Z-scheme pathway.37 
To summarize, the above-mentioned characterization techniques can be vigilantly employed to understand the recombination/suppression rate of photogenerated charge carriers, separation efficiency, their transfer and transport resistance across heterojunctions, and their mechanistic pathways to generate active species that catalyse the reactions.
Recent developments beyond the MOF-based Z-scheme
Despite the attractive features possessed by MOF-based Z-scheme heterojunction photocatalysts, it is to be noted that the metal reserves of the world are depleting and hence metal-free materials need to be developed that can provide similar and/or better functionalities than MOFs. Additionally, the sustainable production of MOFs at low price is still challenging. The optimization of physical and chemical structures of MOF-based Z-scheme photocatalysts needs further improvement in terms of both engineering and theoretical modelling for perfect band alignment. We propose the following for future research advancements: (i) metal-free covalent organic frameworks (COFs), (ii) S-scheme photocatalyst, and (iii) photoelectrocatalytic configuration.
Covalent organic frameworks (COFs) have emerged as the next generation metal-free photocatalyst materials due to their versatile structure, morphology, high porosity, crystallinity, polymeric network, ease of obtaining desired bandgap and band edges by selecting starting monomers, low density, and facile surface modifications. Their unique and multifunctional properties have been explored in photocatalytic reactions like C–S coupling, HER, hydrogen peroxide production, and alcohol oxidation.86–89 Zhang et al. have developed a series of ambient light Z-scheme photocatalysts by integrating semiconductor type metal oxide nanoparticles like TiO2 and Fe–TiO2 with COFs. The composites showed 95% efficient photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue and high recyclability owing to the high charge separation and transfer via the covalent bonds between TiO2 and COF.90 Adopting a similar approach, Lan et al. developed polyarylether COFs and connected the semiconductors TiO2, Bi2WO6, and α-Fe2O3via covalent bonds (Fig. 16). The fast charge carrier transfer from the semiconductor to the COF network via the covalent coupling resulted in electron accumulation in the cyano/pyridine moieties of the COF for CO2 reduction and holes in the semiconductor for H2O oxidation. COF-318-TiO2 exhibited the highest CO production rate of 69.67 μmol g−1 h−1, which is about six times higher than that of the pure COF-318 and TiO2 individually.92 Direct Z-scheme photocatalyst SnS2/CTF possessed high separation efficiency and strong reducing potential for photoinduced electrons, thus reducing CO2 to CO and CH4 at 123.6 and 43.4 mmol g−1 h−1 respectively.91
 Fig. 16  Schematic for the development of covalently linked semiconductor/COF Z-Scheme photocatalysts.91 
The S-scheme (Step-scheme) photocatalyst is a novel idea proposed by Xu et al. in 2020 (Fig. 17). Previous discussions show that the Z-scheme is formed between two semiconductors when their interfaces come in contact with each other and their respective Fermi levels try to equilibrate. Under light irradiation, the electrons transfer from the CB of semiconductor 2 to the VB of semiconductor 1. Contrarily, in the S-scheme, the difference in the Fermi energy levels of the semiconductors promotes band bending. Under irradiation, the charge carriers move via the bent edges similarly as in the Z-scheme. The combination of the built-in electric field, band-bending, and recombination of the useless electrons and holes drives the charge transfer favourably and enhances the redox capacity of the S-scheme photocatalysts.8
 Fig. 17  Formation and photocatalytic charge transfer in Z-scheme vs. S-scheme.93 
The pseudo first order photodegradation of methylene blue via the 1% nitrogen-doped quantum-ZIF-8-dot (NDCQDs/ZIF-8) catalyst showed 93% efficiency, which is 6% higher than that of pristine ZIF-8 (Fig. 18). The improved performance is attributed to the S-scheme formed at the interface of NDCQD and ZIF-8, where the photogenerated electrons from NDCQDs and holes from ZIF-8 are preserved to participate in dye photodegradation.94 The S-scheme formed at the interface of the composite of olefin linked TTCOF and NH2-UiO-66 (Zr) improved the transportation of photogenerated electrons and redox ability, thus enhancing photocatalytic CO2 conversion to CO displaying a yield of 6.56 μmol g−1 h−1.95
 Fig. 18  S-Scheme in NDCQDs/ZIF-8 for photocatalytic methylene blue degradation.94 
In continuation with the band bending feature of photocatalytic systems, the photoelectrocatalytic (PEC) configuration has also shown promising performance. PECs operate on the same concept as Z-scheme photocatalysis by mimicking natural photosynthesis. However, the main difference lies in the fact that an external electric field can be applied (Fig. 19a). The application of an external bias allows continual extraction and transfer of electrons from the photoanode to photocathode via the external circuit. Therefore, the recombination rate is highly suppressed, and the separation of oxidation and reduction in separate zones improves their quantum yield and faradaic efficiency. PECs allow more relaxation in the design and band edge alignment of photocatalysts, compared to Z-scheme photocatalysts. Core@shell type ZnO@Au@ZIF-67, Ni(OH)2/ZIF-8/ZnO/NF, and Fe2O3/NH2-MIL-101(Fe) show high photoanode current density at 1.23 VRHE of 1.9 mA cm−2, 1.95 mA cm−2, and 2.27 mA cm−2 respectively (Fig. 19b), in the visible or AM1.5G illumination range.96–98 These reports suggest that besides exposing the metal cluster sites for better photocatalytic activity and stimulation by visible light, the MOF thin shell is crucial to promote charge separation by providing a cascade band level.
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of the photoelectrocatalytic Z-scheme for water splitting; (b) PEC performance of the Ni(OH)2/ZIF-8/ZnO/NF photoanode.96 
Conclusions
In this review, we have presented an overview of the current research trends that show the emergence of MOF-based Z-scheme heterojunctions for photocatalytic sustainable pathways for production of clean energy and value-added chemicals and degradation of pollutants, e.g. in HER, CO2-RR, and pollutant and dye degradation. The unique properties of MOFs owing to their topological versatility have made them attractive alternatives in photocatalysis. Through logical choice of ligands and metal clusters, it is possible to design MOFs tailored for specific reaction potentials. The most used MOFs to date are MIL-53, MIL-68, MIL-125-NH2, and UIO-66-NH2, since their ligand network can be excited within the visible range and they have metal clusters like Ti and Fe that are active towards photocatalysis. Undoubtedly, MOFs will continue to trigger future research; however, achieving the Z-scheme photocatalytic configuration alone in MOFs is still an uphill task. Therefore, the promising strategies require hybridization of MOFs with semiconductor like metal/metal oxide/metal sulfide nanoparticles, that act as the oxidation or reduction catalyst, depending on the VB and CB of the two systems. To meet the challenges of a global scale sustainable energy system by Z-scheme photocatalysts, more exploration should be done on the front of COFs, S-scheme, and photoelectrocatalytic configurations. These new technologies when combined with MOFs have the promising aspects of mitigating the low photocatalytic stability of MOFs, rigidity arising due to required band alignment, and recombination of photogenerated charges.
Future perspectives
For artificial photosynthetic Z-schemes to be translated to industrialization, multicomponent system modulation of photoactive materials is a necessary technique. The evolution of MOF-based Z-scheme photocatalysts is still in a growing stage, but they possess wide potential to remedy the environmental problems. Especially, in reactions such as HER, CO2-RR, and pollution degradation, the high adsorptivity of MOFs and their hierarchical porosity can improve the molecular diffusion and reaction rates to a higher limit than could be comprehended using metal oxide/phosphate/sulphide nanoparticles. For instance, the selective adsorption of MOF towards CO2 in a mixture of other gases tends to be very high, thus making them suitable materials for CO2-RR photocatalysis. Therefore, versatile functionalization of MOF ligands needs to be investigated to achieve better hydrophilicity, pollutant uptake, and stronger covalent bonding between MOFs and other binary/ternary materials. These can lead to efficient charge separation, light absorption in the visible range, higher product yield, and photostability. Better understanding of the cause of the heterojunction and the chemical configuration of the heterojunctions should be deduced by careful characterization of Mott–Schottky and Nyquist plots, taking into consideration the altering environments of the reactions. Since MOFs have a complex framework, advanced characterization techniques like EXAFS need to be employed to understand the exact loading of the second material and their bonding nature. Since Z-scheme heterojunctions can alter the reaction pathway, more in situ DRIFTS, FTIR or GC-MS characterization of the intermediates should be carried out to evaluate the correct pathway and utilize this knowledge in developing multi-functional MOF-based Z-scheme photocatalysts. Further, the mechanistic reaction pathways of Z-scheme photocatalytic systems require more pertinent explanations subjected to suitable characterisation techniques. It is also important to identify the reactive radical species that actually participate in the reactions. With the aid of EPR and ESR, such radicals and intermediates can be identified. But caution should be applied during refining the spectrum and data interpretation from such analyses. Whenever possible, post-reaction characterization should be carried out to confirm the stability of materials and understand the cause of catalyst destruction. Future research should also focus more on full cell reactions and limit the use of scavengers to understand the rate limiting step in the realistic situation. That would provide more insights into the logical engineering of MOF-based Z-scheme photocatalysts. Additionally, steps must be taken to mould such Z-scheme photocatalysts into beads or tubes, that are viable for industrial reactors. Various start-ups like NOVOMOF AG have already sharpened their techniques to compact certain MOFs for industrial purposes. More emphasis should be given to check if the lab-scale MOF-based photocatalysts can sustain the moulding processes and still retain their photostability. Additionally, theoretical modelling is an important tool which not only provides structural understanding of the band structures of MOFs, but also helps in deducing reaction pathways. An all-inclusive effort from theoretical, chemical, and engineering fields is necessary to tackle the challenges in the pathway of advancing MOF-based Z-scheme photocatalysts.
Author contributions
A. C. – conceptualization, investigation, original draft, funding; L. Y – investigation, diagrams, editing, funding; P. V. D. V. – supervision, review, funding.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
A. C. acknowledges the financial support from the FWO postdoctoral fellowship (12T7521N) and L. W. acknowledges the financial support from the China Scholarship Council (CSC202108110055).
References
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Hu, S. Li, Z. Wang, J. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234–5244 RSC .
K. H. Akira Fujishima, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Di Liberto, L. A. Cipriano, S. Tosoni and G. Pacchioni, Chem. – Eur. J., 2021, 27, 13306–13317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, W. Cai, M. Long, B. Zhou, Y. Wu, D. Wu and Y. Feng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6425–6432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, C. Garlisi, Q. Guan, S. Anwer, K. Al-Ali, G. Palmisano and L. Zheng, Materials Today, 2021, 47, 75–107 CrossRef CAS .
J. Low, C. Jiang, B. Cheng, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and J. Yu, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700080 CrossRef .
Q. Xu, L. Zhang, B. Cheng, J. Fan and J. Yu, Chem, 2020, 6, 1543–1559 CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Lin, S. Shen, W. Zhong and S. Cao, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 710–730 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhou, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4920–4935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1486–1503 CrossRef CAS .
D. Huang, S. Chen, G. Zeng, X. Gong, C. Zhou, M. Cheng, W. Xue, X. Yan and J. Li, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 385, 44–80 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, W. Tu, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500389 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, A. R. Mohamed and W.-J. Ong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 22894–22915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-J. Ng, L. K. Putri, X. Y. Kong, Y. W. Teh, P. Pasbakhsh and S.-P. Chai, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Qi, B. Cheng, J. Yu and W. Ho, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1936–1955 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ding, R. W. Flaig, H.-L. Jiang and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2783–2828 RSC .
M. Alvaro, E. Carbonell, B. Ferrer, F. X. LlabrésiXamena and H. Garcia, Chem. – Eur. J., 2007, 13, 5106–5112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kuc, A. Enyashin and G. Seifert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 8179–8186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kolobov, M. G. Goesten and J. Gascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 26038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, J. Li, X. Feng, J. Li, Y. Hao, J. Zhang, H. Wang, A. Yin, J. Zhou, X. Ma and B. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2177 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Zhang, H. Hu, L. Shi, B. Jia, H. Huang, X. Han, X. Sun and T. Ma, Small Science, 2021, 1, 2100060 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wen, M. Feng, P. Zhang, H.-C. Zhou, V. K. Sharma and X. Ma, ACS ES&T Engg., 2021, 1, 804–826 Search PubMed .
L. Jiao, Y. Dong, X. Xin, R. Wang and H. Lv, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 19725–19733 RSC .
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bard, J. Photochem., 1979, 10, 59–75 CrossRef CAS .
J. Low, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec, S. Wageh and A. A. Al-Ghamdi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601694 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Jiang, W. Ma, P. Xiao, L. Shao, D. Li and M. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 512, 693–700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dong, S. Hong, P. Zhang, S. Yu, Y. Wang, S. Yuan, H. Li, J. Sun, G. Chen and C. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 395, 125150 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, L. Zhang, J. Yu, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and M. Jaroniec, Materials Today, 2018, 21, 1042–1063 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Belousov, D. G. Fukina and A. V. Koryagin, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2022, 97, 2675–2693 CrossRef CAS .
S. Subudhi, S. Mansingh, G. Swain, A. Behera, D. Rath and K. Parida, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 4921–4934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Xu, J. Wan, J. Wang and L. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 616, 532–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhou, M.-F. Wu, Q.-J. Xing, F. Li, H. Liu, X.-B. Luo, J.-P. Zou, J.-M. Luo and A.-Q. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 607–614 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mu, Q. Cai, H. Hu, J. Wang, Y. Wang, S. Zhou and Y. Kong, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 384, 123352 CrossRef CAS .
A. Li, Y. Liu, X. Xu, Y. Zhang, Z. Si, X. Wu, R. Ran and D. Weng, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 17154–17162 RSC .
X. Zheng, Y. Li, J. Yang and S. Cui, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 422, 130105 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, X. Jiang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, Z.-M. Zhang and L.-M. Yu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 278, 119525 CrossRef .
P. Li, X. Yan, S. Gao and R. Cao, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 421, 129870 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, C. Yang, N. Zhang, K. Mo, Q. Li, K. Lv, J. Fan and L. Wen, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 285, 119801 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Luo, X. Han, Q. Jiang, T. Zhou, H. Yang and J. Hu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 405, 124128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Z. Yu, R. Jiang, Y. Hou, J. Huang, H. Zhu, F. Yang, M. Li, F. Li and Q. Ran, Renewable Energy, 2021, 168, 1112–1121 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, J. Li, L. Cheng and H. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 379, 122389 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, J. Li and Z. Jin, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 5143–5156 RSC .
Q. Zhang, H. Gu, X. Wang, L. Li, J. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y.-F. Li and W.-L. Dai, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 298, 120632 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Pu, B. Xiao, S. Mao, Y. Sun, D. Ma, H. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Cheng and J.-W. Shi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 628, 477–487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wei, S. Xiong, W. Li, C. Jin, Y. Chen, L. Hou, Z. Wu, Z. Pan, Q. He, Y. Wang and D. Tang, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 885, 160984 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, Z. Xing, H. Zhao, S. Song, Y. Wang, Z. Li and W. Zhou, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 437, 129436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, X. Jiang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, Z.-M. Zhang and L.-M. Yu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 294, 121094 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, K. Gao, B. Mo, J. Tang, J. Wu and H. Hou, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 1352–1358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tian, X. Yang, Q. Liu, F. Qu and H. Tang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 455, 403–409 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wu, T. Sun, N. Liu, L. Lu, R. Zhang, W. Shi and P. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 26742–26751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-N. Wang, Y.-H. Zou, Y.-M. Fu, X. Meng, L. Xue, H.-X. Sun and Z.-M. Su, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 16977–16985 RSC .
Y. Mei, N. Yuan, Y. Xie, Y. Li, B. Lin and Y. Zhou, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 597, 153725 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Qi, H. Guo, L. Liu, Q. Zhao and W. Cui, J. Catal., 2022, 413, 31–47 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jia, J. Zhou, L. Gong, L. Wang, X. Ma and Y. Zhao, Mol. Catal., 2022, 530, 112599 CrossRef CAS .
J. Meng, Q. Chen, J. Lu and H. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 550–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Ikreedeegh and M. Tahir, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 105600 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, P. Jin, J. Huang, H. She and Q. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 15660–15670 CrossRef CAS .
H.-B. Huang, Z.-B. Fang, R. Wang, L. Li, M. Khanpour, T.-F. Liu and R. Cao, Small, 2022, 18, 2200407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, D. Yang, J. Shi, Z. Wang, W. Zhu, Y. Wang and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 14513–14528 RSC .
Q. Su, J. Li, B. Wang, Y. Li and L. A. Hou, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 318, 121820 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, J. Wang, M. Li, X. Lei and Q. Wu, Solid State Sci., 2021, 117, 106611 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Huo, X. Qi, J. Li, G. Liu, Y. Ning, X. Zhang, B. Zhang, Y. Fu and S. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 255, 117751 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, F. Fei, W. Dai, J. Lei, F. Bi, B. Wang, G. Quan, X. Zhang and L. Tang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 625, 965–977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Peña and J. L. G. Fierro, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1981–2018 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Zhou, W. Cao, C. Chen, C. Jiang and Y. Wang, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2020, 120, 108162 CrossRef CAS .
R. Karuppannan, S. Mohan and T.-O. Do, New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 22650–22660 RSC .
P. Hu, C. Yao, L. Yang, Y. Xin and Y. Miao, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 627, 127248 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Kong, B. Yu, S. Wang, W. Xu, Z. Fang, J. Zhang, K. Yao and Y. Liu, RSC Adv., 2022, 12, 3119–3127 RSC .
H. Chen, W. Zeng, Y. Liu, W. Dong, T. Cai, L. Tang, J. Li and W. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 16364–16373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, Z. Yu, P. Wang, N. He, Q. Tan, Q. Wang and X. Xiao, Colloids Surf., A, 2022, 654, 130112 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Z. Zeng, G. Zeng, D. Wang, R. Xiao, Y. Wang, C. Zhou, H. Yi, S. Ye, Y. Yang and W. Xiong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 561, 501–511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xie, Z. Yang, W. Xiong, Y. Zhou, J. Cao, Y. Peng, X. Li, C. Zhou, R. Xu and Y. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 465, 103–115 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, X. Xia, L. Shao, L. Wang and Y. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 410, 128454 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, L. Lin, Y. Dong and X. Liu, New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 16584–16592 RSC .
H. Fakhri and H. Bagheri, J. Environ. Sci., 2020, 91, 222–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. E. P. Agency, Journal.
T. Kusutaki, H. Katsumata, I. Tateishi, M. Furukawa and S. Kaneco, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 39843–39853 RSC .
Z. Zhang, Y. Muhammad, Y. Chen, S. J. Shah, Y. Peng, S. Shao, R. Wang, X. Li, H. Liu and Z. Zhao, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 131621 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, L. Zhang, K. Akiyama, P. A. Bingham, Y. Zhou and S. Kubuki, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 22694–22707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deng, Y. Wang, Z. Di, M. Xie, F. Dai, S. Zhan and Z. Zhang, Small Methods, 2022, 6, 2200265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. He, Q. Rong, H. Niu and Y. Cai, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 247, 49–56 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Kraut, R. W. Grant, J. R. Waldrop and S. P. Kowalczyk, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1983, 28, 1965–1977 CrossRef CAS .
M.-L. Xu, M. Lu, G.-Y. Qin, X.-M. Wu, T. Yu, L.-N. Zhang, K. Li, X. Cheng and Y.-Q. Lan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202210700 CAS .
H. Chen, W. Liu, A. Laemont, C. Krishnaraj, X. Feng, F. Rohman, M. Meledina, Q. Zhang, R. Van Deun, K. Leus and P. Van Der Voort, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 10820–10827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Jena, C. Krishnaraj, S. Parwaiz, F. Lecoeuvre, J. Schmidt, D. Pradhan and P. Van Der Voort, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 44689–44699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Krishnaraj, H. Sekhar Jena, L. Bourda, A. Laemont, P. Pachfule, J. Roeser, C. V. Chandran, S. Borgmans, S. M. J. Rogge, K. Leus, C. V. Stevens, J. A. Martens, V. Van Speybroeck, E. Breynaert, A. Thomas and P. Van Der Voort, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 20107–20116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Abednatanzi, P. Gohari Derakhshandeh, P. Tack, F. Muniz-Miranda, Y.-Y. Liu, J. Everaert, M. Meledina, F. Vanden Bussche, L. Vincze, C. V. Stevens, V. Van Speybroeck, H. Vrielinck, F. Callens, K. Leus and P. Van Der Voort, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 269, 118769 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Hu, J. Zhao, E. Park, Y. Jin, Q. Liu and W. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16364–16371 RSC .
S. Guo, P. Yang, Y. Zhao, X. Yu, Y. Wu, H. Zhang, B. Yu, B. Han, M. W. George and Z. Liu, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 6278–6283 CAS .
M. Zhang, M. Lu, Z.-L. Lang, J. Liu, M. Liu, J.-N. Chang, L.-Y. Li, L.-J. Shang, M. Wang, S.-L. Li and Y.-Q. Lan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6500–6506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bao, S. Song, G. Yao and S. Jiang, Solar RRL, 2021, 5, 2100118 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Abd El Khalk, M. A. Betiha, A. S. Mansour, M. G. Abd El Wahed and A. M. Al-Sabagh, ACS Omega, 2021, 6, 26210–26220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Niu, S. Dong, J. Tian, G. Huang, J. Bi and L. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 24299–24308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, S. Liu, K. Fan, Z. Liu, B. Song and J. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800101 CrossRef .
Y. Dou, J. Zhou, A. Zhou, J.-R. Li and Z. Nie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19491–19498 RSC .
Y.-J. Dong, J.-F. Liao, Z.-C. Kong, Y.-F. Xu, Z.-J. Chen, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang, D. Fenske and C.-Y. Su, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 9–17 CrossRef CAS .
F. Millange and R. I. Walton, Isr. J. Chem., 2018, 58, 1019–1035 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Todorova, X. Rozanska, C. Gervais, A. Legrand, L. N. Ho, P. Berruyer, A. Lesage, L. Emsley, D. Farrusseng, J. Canivet and C. Mellot-Draznieks, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 16531–16538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kim, Y.-R. Lee, H.-Y. Kim and W.-S. Ahn, Polyhedron, 2018, 154, 343–349 CrossRef CAS .
M.-J. Liu, S.-M. Cao, B.-Q. Feng, B.-X. Dong, Y.-X. Ding, Q.-H. Zheng, Y.-L. Teng, Z.-W. Li, W.-L. Liu and L.-G. Feng, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 14995–15001 RSC .
S. Yuan, L. Feng, K. Wang, J. Pang, M. Bosch, C. Lollar, Y. Sun, J. Qin, X. Yang, P. Zhang, Q. Wang, L. Zou, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Fang, J. Li and H.-C. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704303 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wan, C. Zhou, K. Xu, B. Feng and A. Huang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 252, 207–213 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Xuan Huynh, V. Chihaia and D. N. Son, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 3994–4010 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Webber, S. P. Desai, R. L. Combs, S. Bingham, C. C. Lu and R. L. Penn, Cryst. Growth Des., 2020, 20, 2965–2972 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fujie, K. Otsubo, R. Ikeda, T. Yamada and H. Kitagawa, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 4306–4310 RSC .
T. K. Trung, N. A. Ramsahye, P. Trens, N. Tanchoux, C. Serre, F. Fajula and G. Férey, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2010, 134, 134–140 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Lyle, R. W. Flaig, K. E. Cordova and O. M. Yaghi, J. Chem. Educ., 2018, 95, 1512–1519 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Z. Xing, W. Kong, C. Wu, H. Peng, Z. Li and W. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 14741–14749 RSC .
X. Zhao, L. Sun, X. Jin, M. Xu, S. Yin, J. Li, X. Li, D. Shen, Y. Yan and P. Huo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 545, 148967 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jahurul Islam, H. K. Kim, D. Amaranatha Reddy, Y. Kim, R. Ma, H. Baek, J. Kim and T. K. Kim, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 6013–6023 RSC .
R. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Li, C. Zhao, L. Cai, J. Yu, Z. Yang and J. Jiang, Colloids Surf., A, 2022, 649, 129350 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, X. Hu, D. Shen, Z. Li, R. Chen, Y. Li, J. Lu and M. Bao, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 295, 121216 CrossRef CAS .
N. Askari, M. Beheshti, D. Mowla and M. Farhadian, Chemosphere, 2020, 251, 126453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. A. Sofi and K. Majid, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 942–951 RSC .
T. Zhou, G. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Yang, P. Ma, X. Li, X. Qiu and G. Liu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 2402–2416 RSC .
N. Chang, Y.-R. Chen, F. Xie, Y.-P. Liu and H.-T. Wang, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 616, 126351 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cheng, M. Xie, Y. Sun and H. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 896, 163055 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, L.-c Nengzi, J. Gou, Y. Huang, B. Li and X. Cheng, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 232, 115959 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, Y. Wang, R. Huang, Y. Hu, J. Guo, S. Zhang and Q. Zhong, Colloids Surf., A, 2020, 603, 125256 CrossRef CAS .
D. Roy, S. Neogi and S. De, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 428, 131028 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naimi Joubani, M. A. Zanjanchi and S. Sohrabnezhad, Adv. Powder Technol., 2020, 31, 29–39 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Sofi, K. Majid and O. Mehraj, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 737, 798–808 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, C. Zeng, L. Ai, Z. Hao and J. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 38–45 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shao, D. Zhang, H. Li, C. Su, X. Pu and Y. Geng, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 220, 16–24 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, X. Wang, Z. Rao, Z. Tang, Y. Wang, G. Shi, G. Lu, X. Xie, D. Chen and J. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 416, 129112 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Difference between the (a) type II heterojunction and (b) Z-scheme photocatalyst.	 

Liquid phase Z-scheme	1st	Liquid phase	Redox ion	Back reactions, light shielding, pH sensitive, slow rate
All solid-state Z-scheme	2nd	Liquid and gas phase	Metal nanoparticles	Expensive fabrication, partial shielding
Direct Z-scheme	3rd	Liquid and gas phase	Built-in electric field	Expensive fabrication, difficult to match band edges of two semiconductors

 	Fig. 2  Band gap and HOMO–LUMO positions of various photocatalytic MOFs.20–24	 

 	Fig. 3  Comparison of natural25 and artificial Z-scheme photosynthesis.	 

 	Fig. 4  Evolutionary roadmap of Z-scheme photocatalysts.6	 

 	Fig. 5  Various types of Z-scheme photocatalytic systems.	 

MIL-5399	Fe, V, Cr, Al, In, Ga	

	


MIL-68100	In, Fe, Al	

	


MIL-125-NH2101	Ti	

	


PCN-224102	Cu, Zr, Ni, Mn	

	


UIO-66103	Zr, Hf, Ce	

	


UIO-66-NH2104	Zr, Ce	

	


MIL-88A105	Fe	

	


MIL-88B105	Fe	

	


NU-1000106	Zr	

	


ZIF-8107	Zn	

	


MIL-101108	Cr, Fe	

	


MOF-5109	Zn	

	



 	Fig. 6  (a and b) Schematic and TEM image of hydrothermally synthesized benzoic acid/g-C3N4/NH2-MIL-125(Ti);33 (c and d) schematic and TEM image of impregnated phosphotungstic acid@UIO-66;32 (e and f) schematic and TEM image of electrodeposited In2O3@InP/Cu2O.33	 

 	Fig. 7  Reaction mechanism in the presence of Z-scheme photocatalysts for (a) water splitting (HER and OER); (b) CO2-reduction; (c) pollutant degradation.	 

 	Fig. 8  TEM image, Z-scheme mechanism, and HER activity of (a–c) CdS/NH2-MIL-125(Ti); Z-scheme formed by simple band alignment due to difference in the Fermi energy level of the materials;41 (d–f) boron-doped g-C3N4/cobalt porphyrin MOF; pseudo-gap is formed at the interfacial Co–N bond between the two materials;46 (g–i) α-SnWO4/NH2-UiO-66(Zr)/g-C3N4; double Z-scheme formed on both sides of α-SnWO4 (SW).47	 

CdS/MIL-53(Fe)39	Solvothermal	Band alignment	300 W Xe lamp; benzyl alocohol oxidation	2334 μmol h−1 g−1
CdS/Ni-MOF40	Solvothermal	Internal electric field and the Coulombic attraction	300 W Xe lamp; 10% volume ratio lactic acid as a sacrificial electron donor	4500 μmol h−1 g−1
CdS/NH2-MIL-125(Ti)41	Solvothermal	Band alignment	350 W Xe lamp; 0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S as sacrificial agents	6.62 mmol h−1 g−1
α-NiS-β-NiS/CdS/NH2-UIO-66((Zr)42	Hydrothermal	Band alignment via organic ligand	300 W Xe lamp; 10% volume ratio lactic acid as a sacrificial electron donor	17.8 mmol h−1 g−1
CdLa2S4/MIL-88A(Fe)43	Hydrothermal	Band alignment	300 W Xe lamp; ethanedioic acid as a sacrificial agent	411.8 μmol h−1 g−1
CdxZn1−xS/Ni-MOF-7444	Physical and hydrothermal	Band alignment due to 0D/2D spatial structure and electron transport due to the size effect	5 W LED; 10% volume ratio lactic acid a as sacrificial electron donor	1713.8 μmol h−1 g−1
BiOI@NU-1000(Zr)50	Solvothermal	Internal electric field due to confinement	100 W LED; 0.5 vol% TEOA	610 μmol h−1 g−1
HPW@UIO-66(Zr)32	Hydrothermal	Band alignment due to interfacial contact	125 W Hg lamp; 10 vol% methanol as a sacrificial agent	353.89 μmol h−1 g−1
ZnIn2S4/MIL-68(In)45	Hydrothermal	
	300 W Xe lamp; 0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S as sacrificial agents; Pt co-catalyst	28.2 mmol h−1 g−1
Defective NH2-MIL-88B(Fe)@ZnIn2S448	Hydrothermal	Low band gap and unsaturated metal sites via defects	300 W Xe lamp; methanol as a sacrificial agent	502 μmol h−1 g−1
NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/Ti3C2 QD/ZnIn2S449	Electrostatic	Ti3C2 QD as an electron mediator	300 W Xe lamp; 0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S as sacrificial agents	2931.9 μmol h−1 g−1
UiO-66(Zr)-(COOH)2/ZnIn2S4/MoS235	Hydrothermal	Built-in electric field between UiO-66-(COOH)2 and ZnIn2S4Co; Co-catalyst MOS2	300 W Xe lamp; 0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S as sacrificial agents	18.794 mmol h−1 g−1
MOF-5/CuO@ ZnIn2S4110	Solvothermal	Tandem core@shell structure with CuO as an intermediate	300 W Xe lamp; methanol as a sacrificial agent	1938.3 μmol h−1 g−1
ZIF-8(Zn)/g-C3N445	Electrostatic	Interfacial contact due to hollow structure	300 W Xe; 10 vol% TEOA as a sacrificial agent; 3 wt% Pt co-catalyst	309.5 μmol h−1 g−1
NH2-UIO-66(Zr)/g-C3N4 nanosheets52	Electrostatic	Built-in electric field by varying the component ratio	300 W Xe; TEOA as a sacrificial agent; Pt co-catalyst	3936 μmol h−1 g−1
Boron-doped g-C3N4/cobalt porphyrin MOF46	
	Delocalized covalent N-Co-N bond between the two materials	225 W Xe; ascorbic acid as a sacrificial agent; Pt co-catalyst	33.17 mmol h−1 g−1
α-SnWO4/NH2-UiO-66(Zr)/g-C3N447	Hydrothermal	Built-in electric field on both sides of α-SnWO4	300 W Xe; TEOA as a sacrificial agent; Pt co-catalyst	2105 μmol h−1 g−1
Benzoic acid functionalized g-C3N4/NH2-MIL-125(Ti)34	Hydrothermal	Organic ligand mediator	160 mW cm−2 Xe lamp; Pt co catalyst; triethanolamine as a sacrificial agent	1.123 mmol g−1 h−1

 	Fig. 9  TEM image, Z-scheme mechanism, and CO2-RR activity of (a–c) CuO/Ag/UiO-66; Ag as a co-catalyst regulates the intermediate adsorption;55 (d–g) NH2-MIL-125(Ti) MOF/r-GO/g-C3N4; r-GO acts as a solid electron mediator;58 (h–k) metalloscope image, Z-scheme mechanism, and CO2-RR activity of PCN-222(Ni)@NH2-UIO-67(Zr); MOF@MOF hierarchical structure generates new intrinsic heterointerfaces that align energy levels.60	 

CdS@UiO-66-NH253	Solvothermal	Band alignment	LED lamp; visible light; water as the electron donor	CO – 280.4 μmol h−1 g−1
NH2-UiO-66/CeCO3OH54	Precipitation	Coexistence of Ce3+/Ce4+; bond between CO32− and Zr–O	300 W Xe lamp; water and TEOA as electron donors	CO – 103 μmol h−1 g−1
CH4 – 70 μmol h−1 g−1
UiO-66-NH2/Cu2O/Cu111	Solvothermal	Band alignment with Cu as an electron mediator	300 W Xe lamp; water as the electron donor	CO – 4.54 μmol h−1 g−1
Cu/Ag/UIO-66(Zr)55	Hydrothermal	Ag as electron the bridge	300 W Xe lamp; water as the electron donor	HCOOH – 63 μmol h−1 g−1
Cu2O/Pt/NH2-MIL-125 (Ti)56	Solvothermal	Pt as the electron mediator and Schottky barrier between Pt and MOF	300 W Xe lamp; water as the electron donor	CH3OH – 434.46 μmol h−1 g−1
CH3CH2OH – 718.47 μmol h−1 g−1
O-defective ZnO/r-GO/NH2-UIO-66(Zr)57	Solvothermal	r-GO as a solid state electron mediator	300 W Xe lamp; NaHCO3 aqueous solution as the electron donor	CH3OH –34.85 μmol h−1 g−1
HCOOH – 6.40 μmol h−1 g−1
NH2-MIL-125(Ti) MOF/r-GO/g-C3N458	Electrostatic, hydrothermal	r-GO as a solid state electron mediator	35 W Xe lamp; water vapor as an electron donor	CO – 383.79 μmol h−1 g−1
CH4 – 13.8 mol h−1 g−1
PCN-224(Cu)/TiO259	Solvothermal	Built-in electric field due to band alignment	300 W Xe lamp; water as an electron donor	CO – 37.21 μmol h−1 g−1
PCN-222(Ni)@NH2-UIO-67(Zr)60	Solvothermal	Generation of new intrinsic heterointerfaces that align energy levels	300 W Xe lamp; water vapor as an electron donor	CO – 10.3 μmol h−1 g−1
CH4 – 10.8 μmol h−1 g−1
HCOOH – 146.0 μmol h−1 g−1

 	Fig. 10  SEM/TEM image, Z-scheme mechanism, and antibiotic degradation efficiency of (a–c) Bi2WO6/NH2-UIO-66 used for ciprofloxacin degradation; band alignment due to functionalization and covalent interaction;68 (d–f) Ag/AgCl/MIL-100(Fe) used for tetracycline hydrochloride degradation; SPR effect of Ag forms the Z-scheme;70 (g–i) PDI/MIL-53(Fe) used for tetracycline hydrochloride degradation; Z-scheme formed by covalent interaction with the organic molecule.71	 

V2O5/NH2-MIL-101(Fe)63	Solvothermal	Band alignment	UV-Vis light; 0.1 L tetracycline	88.3% in 120 min
Fe2O3/NH2-MIL-101(Cr)64	Hydrothermal	Band alignment	300 W Xe lamp; 30 mg L−1 carbamazepine; H2O2 scavenger	100% in 120 min
SnS2/MIL-88B(Fe)65	Solvothermal	Band alignment	500 W Xe lamp; 50 mg L−1 ibuprofen; Na2S2O8 scavenger	100% in 120 min
BiOI/MIL-88B(Fe)112	Hydrothermal	Band alignment	150 W Xe lamp; 100 mL ciprofloxacin	∼98% in 120 min
NH2-UiO-66(Zr)/BiOBr/Bi2S3113	Solvothermal	Built-in electric field on both sides of BiOBr via NH2-UiO-66(Zr) and Bi2S3	200 W Xe lamp; 20 mg L−1 tetracycline	93% in 60 min
MIL-53(Fe)@BiOBr/modified g-C3N4114	Solvothermal	Energy band defect; MIL-53(Fe) acted as an electron mediator	300 W Xe lamp; 10 ppm ciprofloxacin	92.9% in 120 min
Bi2MoO6/NH2-UiO-66(Zr)62	Solvothermal	Built-in electric field due to electron density difference	300 W Xe lamp; 10 mg L−1 ciprofloxacin; or ofloxacin	ciprofloxacin – 96% in 90 min
Ofloxacin – 100% in 90 min
Bi2WO6/NH2-UiO-66(Zr)67	Solvothermal	Band alignment	350 W Xe lamp; 30 mg L−1 tetracycline	80% in 150 min
Bi2WO6/NH2-UiO-66(Zr)68	Solvothermal	
Via the Bi–W–O–N–C–O–Zr network	100 W Xe lamp; 10 ppm ciprofloxacin	83.1% in 60 min
Bi2WO6/MIL-88B(Fe)69	Solvothermal	Band alignment	500 W Xe lamp; 10 mg L−1 tetracycline	96.4% in 90 min
N-doped Bi2FeO3/NH2-MIL-53(Fe)72	Solvothermal	Built-in electric field due to N-doping	300 W Xe lamp; 20 ppm tetracycline hydrochloride; ciprofloxacin; sulfamethoxazole	Tetracycline hydrochloride – 99% in 60 min
Ciprofloxacin – 76% in 60 min
Sulfamethoxazole – 91% in 60 min
Ag3PO4@MIL-53(Fe)73	Solvothermal	Built-in electric field	300 W Xe lamp; 10 mg L−1 tetracycline	95.8% in 60 min
Ag3PO4/MIL-53(Fe)74	Electrostatic precipitation	Schottky barrier with metallic Ag as an electron mediator	300 W Xe lamp; 20 mg L−1 tetracycline; oxytetracycline; chlortetracycline; deoxy tetracycline	Tetracycline – 93.72% in 60 min
Chlortetracycline – 85.54% in 60 min
Deoxy tetracycline – 91.74% in 60 min
Ag3PO4/mixed-valence MIL-88A(Fe)75	Hydrothermal	Built-in electric field due to electron flow from modulated MOF	300 W Xe lamp; 30 mg L−1 tetracycline	90.9% in 20 min
AgI/MOF-808(Zr)76	Electrostatic precipitation	Schottky barrier with metallic Ag as an electron mediator	300 W Xe lamp; 20 mg L−1 tetracycline	93.65% in 80 min
Ag/AgCl@MIL-100(Fe)70	Hydrothermal	Electron transfer from MOFs to Ag due to the fluctuation caused by SPR	Visible light ∼420–780 nm; 50 mg L−1 tetracycline hydrochloride	93% in 220 min
Ag/NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/CdS37	Electrostatic	Schottky barrier promoted by the hot electron transfer SPR of Ag	350 W Xe lamp; 10 mg L−1 ketoprofen	94.2% in 180 min
MIL-53(Fe)/PDI71	Solvothermal	Covalent bonding	300 W Xe lamp; 20 mg L−1 tetracycline hydrochloride	94.08 in 30 min
UiO-66@ ZnO/r-GO77	Solvothermal	r-GO electron mediator	500 W Hg lamp; 20 mg L−1 tetracycline; or malathion	Tetracycline – 81% in 90 min
UIO-66@TiO2/r-GO	Malathion – 100% in 90 min
CuWO4/Bi2S3/ZIF-67(Co)115	Hydrothermal	Double Z-scheme formed on both sides of Bi2S3	400 W m−2 LED; 20 ppm metronidazole; or cephalexin	Metronidazole – 95.6% in 80 min
Cephalexin – 90.1% in 80 min

 	Fig. 11  SEM/TEM images, Z-scheme mechanism, and pollution degradation activity of (a–c) g-C3N4/Ag3PO4/(Co, Ni)-MOF for 2-chlorophenol degradation;79 dual Z-scheme via Ag plasmonic nanoparticles; (d–f) Fe-GDY3@MIL(Fe) for dinotefuran degradation; Z-scheme formed via the CC-Fe|O interface;80 (g–i) TTA-BPDA@ZIF-L-Co for rhodamine B degradation; Z-scheme formed via confinement effects.	 

Ag/Ag3PO4/MIL-53(Fe)116	Microwave	Ag as an electron mediator	500 W tungsten lamp; visible light; 300 mL; Ponceau BS	94.8% in 50 min
Ag3PO4/MIL-101/NiFe2O4117	Impregnation	3D MOF structure as a mediator	300 W Xe lamp; 20 mg L−1 rhodamine B	93% in 30 min
AgCl/Ag-doped-ZIF-8118	Stirring and precipitation	Band alignment via Ag+ doping	210 W Xe lamp; 15 mg L−1 rhodamine B	81.1% in 60 min
Ni-MOF@Bi2WO6119	Hydrothermal	Ag as an electron bridge	300 W Xe lamp; 20 mg L−1 methylene blue	98.8% in 60 min
MIL-53(Fe)/α-Bi2O3/g-C3N4120	Precipitation	Solid-state mediated dual Z-scheme on both sides of α-Bi2O3	35 W Xe lamp; 10 mg L−1 amido black 10B	97.09% in 120 min
UiO-66-NH2/Bi2WO6121	Solvothermal	r-GO as a solid state electron mediator	500 W Xe lamp; visible light; 20 mg L−1 rhodamine B; 15 mg L−1 phenol	Rhodamine B – 100% in 90 min
Phenol – 88% in 150 min
BiOI/MIL-53(Fe)81	Co-precipitation	r-GO as a solid state electron mediator	100 W Hg lamp; 20 mg L−1 phenol; 20 mg L−1 bisphenol; 20 μM methylene blue	Phenol – 59% in 60 min
Bisphenol – 90.4% in 120 min
Methylene blue – 99% in 10 min
Ti-MOF/Ag/NiFe-LDH38	Photoreduction	SPR of Ag nanoparticles	300 W Xe lamp; 15 mg L−1 rhodamine B	95% in 50 min
(MOF)-5/CuO@ZnIn2S4110	Complexation–oxidation	Tandem heterojunctions formed at the interface of core@shell	300 W Xe lamp; 10 mg L−1 2,4-dichlorophenol; or phenol; methyl orange; methylene blue	2,4-Dichlorophenol – 98.7%
Phenol – 97.3%
Methyl orange – 95.4%
Methylene blue – 98.7% in 120 min
Defective NH2-MIL-88B(Fe)@ZnIn2S448	Hydrothermal	Low band gap and unsaturated metal sites via defects	300 W Xe lamp; 20 mg L−1 bisphenol A	99.4% in 180 min
MIL-88A(Fe)/MoS2122	Hydrothermal	
In situ hetero-interface via electron flow	UV irradiation; 20 mg L−1 bisphenol A	98.2% in 60 min
Fe3O4-COOH@ZIF-8/Ag/Ag3PO4123	Solvothermal	SPR of Ag nanoparticles	200 W tungsten lamp; 20 mg L−1 diazinon	63.5% in 55 min
HKUST-1@Ag-Ag3PO4124	Microwave	SPR of Ag nanoparticles	500 W Halogen lamp; visible light; 1 mg L−1 Ponceau BS	87% in 80 min
Ag/AgCl@MIL-53(Fe)125	Solvothermal	
Via plasmonic Ag/AgCl	500 W Xe lamp; 10 mg L−1 rhodamine B; 20 mg L−1 methylene blue	100% in 45 min
MIL-88A(Fe)/g-C3N4126	Hydrothermal	Covalent interaction via electron transfer from MOF to g-C3N4	1000 W iodine tungsten lamp; visible light; 10 mg L−1 rhodamine B; or phenol	Rhodamine B – 100% in 30 min
Phenol – 45% in 120 min
Fe-GDY3@MIL(Fe)80	Stirring	
In situ growth of the C = C-Fe|O interface	500 W Xe lamp; 200 mg L−1 dinotefuran; 20 mM H2O2 scavenger	98% in 60 min
TTA-BPDA-COF@ZIF-L-Co82	Hydrothermal	Band matching achieved through MOF confinement	300 W Xe lamp; visible light; 10 mg L−1 methyl orange; or rhodamine B; or methylene blue; or bisphenol	Methyl orange – 98% in 25 min
Rhodamine B – 98% in 15 min
Methylene blue – 98% in 20 min
Bisphenol – 90% in 40 min
NH2-MIL-(Ti)/TTB-TTA83	Solvothermal	Covalent interaction	300 W Xe lamp; visible light; 10 mg L−1 methyl orange; or phenol	∼100% in 20 min
g-C3N4/Ag3PO4/(Co, Ni)-MOF79	Ultrasonication	Dual Z-scheme with Ag bridge	300 W Xe lamp; visible light; 30 mg L−11 2-chlorophenol	100% in 5 min
MIL-100(Fe)/α-Fe2O3127	Hydrothermal	Covalent interaction	250 W Xe lamp; 50 ppm o-xylene	100% in white light; 90% in visible light in 300 min

 	Fig. 12  (a–d) High resolution XPS spectrum of Ti 2p, Ni 2p, Fe 2p, and Ag 3d in Ti-MOF, Ti-MOF/NiFe LDH and Ti-MOF/Ag/NiFe LDH; (e and f) UPS spectra and (g and h) VB-XPS spectra for Ti-MOF and NiFe LDH.38	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Photoluminescence spectra; (b) TRPL decay spectra; (c) transient photocurrent responses; (d) electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) Nyquist plots; (e) XPS valence band spectra; (f) ESR signals of DMPO-˙O2− with light irradiation for 5 min in a methanol dispersion containing photocatalysts for ZnIn2S4, UiO-66-(COOH)2/ZnIn2S4 (U0.30Z), and UiO-66-(COOH)2/ZnIn2S4/MOS2 (U0.30 M0.02Z); (g) Z-scheme mechanism.35	 

 	Fig. 14  Mott–Schottky plots of (a and b) O-ZnO and UiO-66-NH2; (c) PL spectra; (d) time-resolved transient PL decay; (e) photocurrent response; and (f) EIS Nyquist plot of UiO-66-NH2, O-ZnO, and O-ZnO/rGO/UiO-66-NH2; (g) PL spectra of O-ZnO/rGO/UiO-66-NH2 against illumination time using coumarin as the probe molecule to determine the hydroxyl radical; (h) comparison of the PL peak intensity around 430 nm for all samples using coumarin as the probe molecule to determine the hydroxyl radical; (i) Z-scheme mechanism.57	 

 	Fig. 15  Photocatalytic characterization of Ag/NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/CdS; (a and b) Mott–Schottky plots; (c) band gap energy calculated from UV-Vis spectra; (d) PL spectra; (e) transient photo-current responses; (f) EIS Nyquist plots; (g and h) ESR spectra of DMPO-˙OH and DMPO-˙O2−; (i) Z-scheme pathway.37	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic for the development of covalently linked semiconductor/COF Z-Scheme photocatalysts.91	 

 	Fig. 17  Formation and photocatalytic charge transfer in Z-scheme vs. S-scheme.93	 

 	Fig. 18  S-Scheme in NDCQDs/ZIF-8 for photocatalytic methylene blue degradation.94	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of the photoelectrocatalytic Z-scheme for water splitting; (b) PEC performance of the Ni(OH)2/ZIF-8/ZnO/NF photoanode.96	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
