Band engineering of mesoporous TiO 2 with tunable defects for visible-light hydrogen generation   - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CE00707B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CE00707B
(Paper)
CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 4030-4038Band engineering of mesoporous TiO2 with tunable defects for visible-light hydrogen generation†

        
          
            Jin 
            Yan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Dai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Penghui 
            Shi
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Jinchen 
            Fan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yulin 
            Min
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Qunjie 
            Xu
          
        
      *ab
aShanghai Key Laboratory of Materials Protection and Advanced Materials in Electric Power, Shanghai University of Electric Power, Shanghai 200090, China. E-mail: shipenghui@shiep.edu.cn
bShanghai Institute of Pollution Control and Ecological Security, Shanghai 200090, P.R. China
Received 
      12th May 2020
    , Accepted 17th May 2020First published on 18th May 2020AbstractA limited light absorption range and low electron transfer efficiency have always been the major problems in semiconductor photocatalysis. Here, a defect-rich heterophase junction-containing TiO2 porous nanostructure was designed and synthesized to improve the low utilization rate of photoexcited carriers in photocatalysis. Defects were first introduced into titanium dioxide, and co-doping was used to obtain defect-rich materials. At the same time, heterophase junction TiO2 with anatase and rutile phases was obtained under temperature control. The TiO2 phase junction could significantly improve the interface charge recombination. These two synergistically regulated the hydrogen production favorably, thus improving the carrier separation efficiency and reducing the band gap from the ultraviolet to the visible region, which resulted in the construction of the most effective defects. Theoretical predictions and empirical characterizations indicate that TiO2 with defects introduced into it presents a porous structure, and the doped phase exposes the internal defects of the bulk phase of the material to the surface and adjusts the defect position. The experimental results confirmed that the synergistic effect of B and Rh co-doping increased the photocatalytic hydrogen production yield of TiO2 by 10 times. This study provides new insights into photocatalyst defect regulation.
1. Introduction
The global energy crisis has become increasingly serious in the past decades, and non-renewable fossil fuel energy has caused irreversible pollution to the environment. Therefore, developing new clean energy has been suggested.1–4 As a new type of energy source, solar energy has become increasingly important because of its low cost and renewable characteristics. Converting solar energy into clean chemical fuels has become a recent research hotspot.5–7 Irrespective of the physical or chemical changes associated with solar photocatalytic transformations, they are all completed by the key processes such as multiphase flow and energy and mass transfer, phase interface exchange and chemical reaction, which have multi-scale and cross-scale characteristics. The performance of traditional photocatalytic cracking of hydrogen production is limited by the following three factors: 1) extremely narrow solar absorption band, 2) carrier separation and diffusion rate, and 3) interface reaction and mass transfer rate.8–10 Fundamentally improving the performance of photocatalysts, such as the catalyst absorption bandwidth, carrier recombination rate, and charge transport, is highly desirable. The oxygen vacancy (VO) defects on semiconductor photocatalysts can effectively improve carrier separation and shorten the distance of carrier migration to the surface.11–13 In general, a high VO concentration indicates a large number of electrons entering the conduction band and good conductivity. However, carrier mobility is another important factor affecting the catalytic performance, and the internal high concentration of Schottky defects can trap carriers before the carriers migrate to the surface of the semiconductor to undergo redox reactions, hence affecting the photocatalytic performance. Therefore, in combination with the above-mentioned two cases, proper adjustment of the concentration of oxygen vacancies may be an effective preparation method for high-performance oxygen-rich vacancy catalysts. Many kinds of defect control methods are available. Heterojunctions obtained via transition metal ion and non-metal co-doping are used for semiconductor modification.14–16 In our study, a high-defect-concentration titanium dioxide heterophase junction material was constructed to study a strategy that is beneficial for light absorption and charge transfer in photocatalysis.
Among various materials and technologies, the inexpensive, non-toxic, and chemically stable TiO2 is a promising solar-driven water-cleaving photocatalyst. TiO2 has a suitable band structure that thermodynamically produces hydrogen in cracked water, but it also has the disadvantage of a large band gap (the anatase band gap reaches 3.2 eV) with slow charge transfer kinetics, resulting in a limited light absorption range and weak visible light response. Visible light accounts for approximately 43% of the solar spectrum, thus causing a huge waste of resources. The shortcomings of TiO2 can be effectively overcome by means of noble metal modification, element doping, and composite structure to improve its redox kinetics and expand its visible light absorption range, thereby creating several efficient catalysts. Zhang et al. constructed the surface defects by regulating the TiO2 crystal plane to enhance the catalytic performance of TiO2. Gopal et al. used non-metal-modified TiO2 to improve its optical properties and found that the non-metallic element B-doped TiO2 facilitates the formation of oxygen vacancies with two excess electrons. However, the effect of the location of defects on the optical properties of the material is still unclear. P25 has been proved to be an excellent multiphasic titanium dioxide. It is known that temperature is a key factor in the anatase crystal transition but temperature control is not simple. At the same time, the specific surface area and porosity of the material obtained by single temperature control are not satisfactory and limit the transfer and diffusion of the reactants. The study found that cation doping can produce a localized state in the band gap, thus inhibiting the catalytic activity.39 The stable donor–acceptor formed by co-doping can form a delocalized intermediate band, thereby reducing the band gap. The introduction of elements with d6 electronic configuration is a good choice, which can not only achieve charge balance but also avoids the formation of paramagnetic centers of electron traps that are caused by doping.40–46 Studies have shown that Rh-doped TiO2 or titanate promotes visible light response in photocatalysis. In order to balance the valence state of the doped atoms and to maintain charge neutrality, co-doping can be carried out.
Herein, a new porous molecular sieve type TiO2 with confined O-vacancies has been firstly presented as a typical material model to reveal the role of O-vacancy concentration in the photocatalytic performance. First, VO-rich titanium dioxide was prepared using Gopal's method.17 The effects of oxygen vacancies on the electronic structure and the catalytic performance were investigated by calculation. It is shown that the O-vacancies induced a significant increase in the density of states (DOS) of B–TiO2 at the maximum valence band (VB). In addition, the carriers generated by the illumination excitation have a shorter transmission distance to the surface of the bulk phase. The doping concentration of boron directly affects the doping sites of boron elements in the TiO2 unit cell. Interstitial boron mainly exists in the case of low concentration doping and is accompanied by the appearance of oxygen vacancies.18,19 Therefore, only low concentration of boron doping was considered to accurately study the effect of VO concentration on the performance of TiO2 photocatalytic cracking for hydrogen production. Interstitial boron weakens the surrounding Ti–O bond and reduces the energy required for Rh atoms to replace the approaching Ti atom while Bδ+ provides additional electron compensation, thus replacing the atomic charge difference. We explored the effect of defects on the electron transfer and finally obtained the best photocatalytic conditions.
2. Experimental section
2.1. Synthesis of Rh/B–TiO2
All the samples were prepared by one-pot sol–gel hydrothermal method. A given amount of boric acid (Aladdin) (molar ratio of B/Ti is 10%) and rhodium(III) chloride hydrate (Aladdin) (molar ratio of Rh/Ti is 0, 0.1%, 0.5%, 1%, and 2%) were dissolved in methyl alcohol–water mixture to form a uniform solution. Then, we added titanium(IV)-isopropoxide (Aladdin) drop-wise to the mixed solution at low temperature (<4 °C) under vigorous stirring. After stirring at <4 °C for 4 h, the mixture was continuously stirred at room temperature to completely hydrolyze Ti(IV)-isopropanol. After aging for 24 h, the precipitate was separated by centrifugation, dried at room temperature, ground with a mortar and pestle, and then, the prepared sample was heated in air at 400 °C for 4 h. Finally, the target product was obtained. The same method was used to synthesize bare TiO2 and Rhx/B–TiO2. The products obtained are denoted as TiO2, B–TiO2, Rh0.1/B–TiO2, Rh0.5/B–TiO2, and Rh1/B–TiO2. We also prepared a comparative Rh–TiO2 sample, whose preparation method is the same as the preparation process of the above materials but the Rh source with the molar ratio of 0.5% was added to the precursor solution without adding boric acid.
2.2. Characterization methods
XRD was performed using an Ultima IV X-ray diffractometer at a voltage of 40 kV using Cu Kα (λ = 1.5418 Å) radiation and a current of 40 mA at a scanning speed of 0.01° s−1 from 10° to 90° (2θ). The XPS spectra were obtained on an ESCALAB 250 photoelectron spectrometer (Thermo VG Scientific, USA) by using Al Kα (1486.6 eV) as the X-ray source. The FTIR spectra were collected on a Shimadzu 8400S in KBr pellets. The SEM images were obtained on a JEOL FEG-XL30S. The TEM images were collected on a JEOL JEM-2100F with Cs correction. The UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (UV-vis-DRS) were recorded using a spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, UV-2401PC) and BaSO4 was used as the reference. The PL images were measured on a RF-5301 PC at an excitation wavelength of 416 nm. The H2 contents were measured by gas chromatography (Techcomp, GC7900). All the light irradiations were obtained using a 300 W xenon light source as simulated sunlight. The 11B magic angle spinning nuclear magnetic resonance (MAS NMR) experiments were performed on a JNM-ECZ600R spectrometer by using a 4 mm rotor and a spinning frequency of 12 kHz.
2.3. DFT
All the calculations were carried out using the projector-augmented wave method in the framework of DFT,20 as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package. The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) and Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof exchange functional 1 were used. The plane-wave energy cutoff was set to 500 eV and Monkhorst–Pack method21 with 6 × 6 × 3 k-meshes was employed for the Brillouin zone sampling of the unit cell of anatase TiO2. The convergence criteria of energy and force calculations were set to 10−5 eV per atom and 0.01 eV Å−1, respectively. The B-doped TiO2 model was built from the 2 × 2 × 1 supercell of the anatase TiO2 unit cell by replacing one oxygen atom with a boron atom and inserting a boron atom into the three-coordinated interstitial site simultaneously, as shown in Fig. 1a. The Rh-doped B–TiO2 model was constructed by replacing one titanium atom with a rhodium atom (Fig. 1b). Considering the strong coulombic repulsion interactions of transition metals, the spin-polarized GGA + U method with a value of Ueff = 8.5 (ref. 22) and 2.0 eV (ref. 23) was applied for Ti 3d and Rh 4d states, respectively.
 Fig. 1  The TEM image of modified TiO2 with the corresponding structural models. (a–c) Rh–TiO2, (d–f) B–TiO2, (g–i) Rh0.5/B–TiO2, the corresponding SAED (selected area electron diffraction) image (top right inset) of (g). (j) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms and (k) the corresponding pore size distribution curves of B doped-TiO2, Rh–TiO2, and Rh0.5/B–TiO2. 
2.4. Photocatalytic activity measurements
A 5 mg sample was dispersed in 10 mL methanol–H2O solution (Vmethanol:VH2O = 1:9), ultrasonically dispersed for 10 min, and blown continuously with high-purity argon for 30 min to completely flush out the air in the system. The reaction system was then treated with a xenon lamp with an AM 1.5G filter or a 420 nm cut-off filter, and the amount of hydrogen produced was analyzed using a gas chromatograph.
2.5. Photoelectrochemical property
Rh0.5/B–TiO2, B–TiO2, and TiO2-modified FTO electrodes were prepared by the following procedure: 1 mL α-terpineol and 1 mg ethyl cellulose were added to a 7.5 mg sample. Then, 0.5 mL of ethanol was added and stirred until the liquid became a homogenous suspension. Finally, a certain amount of the above suspension was applied to the conductive surface of clean FTO glass with an area of about 1 cm × 1 cm and then dried in a blast drying oven at 60 °C for 2 h to obtain a film with uniform thickness. Photoelectrochemical measurements were performed in a standard three-electrode system using the CHI660E electrochemical workstation with the as-synthesized material-modified FTO, Ag/AgCl electrode, and Pt wire as the working, counter, and reference electrode, respectively. The transient photocurrent response, electrochemical impedance spectra, and MS plots were measured in 0.5 M Na2SO4 electrolyte. The photocurrent responses were recorded with an AM 1.5G filter or 400 nm cut filter, and the photocurrent and dark current tests were cycled every 10 s. For the photoelectrochemical experiments, the working electrodes were irradiated by a 300 W xenon lamp.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Structural features of the TiO2 photocatalysts
Ti(IV)-Isopropoxides were hydrolyzed and polycondensed in an ice-assisted water bath containing the doping element precursor solution by stirring and further annealing at high temperature to synthesize the target TiO2 nanocrystals and prepare the nano-molecular sieve structure of TiO2. The process is illustrated in detailed in the Experimental section and the synthetic steps of the material are illustrated in Scheme 1. Ti underwent slow hydrolysis under controlled acidic conditions, polymerized into tiny micelles, and was uniformly dispersed in a solution to form a milky white sol. The doping elements were uniformly embedded in the Ti(OH)4 structure during the hydrolysis polymerization. The sol was then evaporated at room temperature to form small spherical particles. Finally, the microspheres were annealed at high temperatures to obtain the hierarchically porous TiO2 nanomolecular sieves.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of defective mesoporous TiO2 microspheres. 
We successfully prepared a nanoporous molecular structure with a large specific surface area by a simple sol–gel method. The scanning electron microscopic (SEM) images of TiO2 prepared by the above method are shown in Fig. S1–S4 (ESI†), which revealed that the catalyst material has a relatively uniform spherical morphology. As shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†), pure TiO2 exhibits a typically regular small spherical shape and the spherical particles have a diameter of approximately 70 nm, which is similar to the B–TiO2 morphology (Fig. S2, ESI†). Although no significant change is observed in the particle size of Rh0.5/B–TiO2 (Fig. S4, ESI†), many tiny pores appear on the surface. An opening is formed on the surface, cracking occurs, and the small spherical shape shows a porous structure. As preliminarily concluded, the embedding of the doping elements changes the unit cell structure microscopically and exhibits numerous defect characteristics. This condition is reflected in the microscopic to the macroscopic characteristics. When the material changes its morphology, a porous channel is formed on the surface of the spherical particles. The channel diameter is approximately 7 nm. This phenomenon is clearly displayed in the transmission electron microscopic (TEM) image. The particle diameter of the modified material is still approximately 70 nm, indicating that the nanostructure is well preserved during the modification.
3.2. Morphological and structural characterization

Fig. 1 shows the typical TEM images of the modified sample under low and high magnifications. The TEM image of Rh–TiO2 (Fig. 1a and b) clearly shows that the Rh metal nanoparticles adhere to the TiO2 surface and no porous structure exists inside TiO2. The B–TiO2 (Fig. 1d and e) pellet has a porous structure inside and the outer shell of the core shell is still intact with lattice fringes corresponding to the (101) crystal plane and a large number of pores with a pore diameter of approximately 5–10 nm. As shown in the model (Fig. 1f), the exterior of the particle is wrapped in a complete shell but the interior is porous. The TEM image of Rh0.5/B–TiO2 at low magnification is shown in Fig. S6.† With the further embedding of the Rh element, the crystal lattices of different phases appear on the surface of the particles and the internal porous channels are well retained. To conclude, the controlled material has an opening on the surface of the particle and a honeycomb-like porous structure inside. The lattice fringes with d = 0.352 nm shown in the high-resolution TEM images (Fig. 1g and h) agree well with the (101) plane of anatase TiO2. Also, the lattice fringes with d = 0.29 nm correspond to the (211) plane of rutile TiO2. This result corresponds to the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern (Fig. 2a and S8, ESI†). No Rh-related species is noted possibly because the Rh atoms are highly dispersed (e.g., cluster-like or nearly atomically) inside the TiO2 support. However, a thin layer of disordered structure having a thickness of approximately 1 nm is formed on the material's surface and is attributed to an increase in the defect concentration. As a result, the phase structure is destroyed.
 Fig. 2  (a) The Raman spectra of pure TiO2, B–TiO2, Rh–TiO2, and Rh/B–TiO2. (b) 11B MAS NMR spectra of B–TiO2 and Rh0.5/B–TiO2. (c and d) High-resolution XPS spectra of O 1s for B-doped-TiO2 and Rh0.5/B–TiO2. (e) Ti 2p XPS spectra. (f) Electron spin resonance spectra at 120 K. 
Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms were used to further analyze the pore structures. As shown in Fig. 1j, Rh–TiO2 shows characteristic type IV curves with low nitrogen adsorption and two capillary condensation steps, indicating the presence of abundant mesopores.24 The sorption isotherms of B–TiO2 and Rh0.5/B–TiO2 have two hysteresis loop along with a typical pore condensation step and P/P0 = 0.45 to 0.75 is reflected in the uniform mesopores. The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller surface area and pore volume are as high as 381.5 m2 g−1 and 0.332 cm3 g−1, respectively. Meanwhile, pure TiO2 shows the typical sorption isotherms that result from nanoparticle aggregation. A hysteresis loop at an increased pressure (P/P0 = 0.85 to 0.99) reflects the structural defects formed by the doped boron. The pore size of Rh0.5/B–TiO2 calculated using the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda model reveals pores with diameters centered at 2.28 nm.
The XRD patterns (Fig. S8, ESI†) exhibit two series of well-defined diffraction peaks that can be indexed to anatase (JCPDS No. 21-1272) and rutile (JCPDS No. 01-0562). No other diffraction peaks exist, proving that the pure target material was successfully prepared. The average crystal size of different amounts of TiO2 doping calculated using the Scherrer equation implied that the crystal size decreases with increasing Rh load. This result is shown in Table S1 (ESI†). The phase structure was further studied by XRD. In agreement with the TEM image, the plane exposed outside the surface of the Ti porous sphere is the (101) facet (from XRD).
The Raman spectrum of TiO2 in the range from 100 cm−1 to 800 cm−1 are shown in Fig. 2a, indicating that four well-defined bands at 135, 382, 506, and 629 cm−1 can be assigned to the Eg, B1g, and A1g modes of the anatase phase, respectively. The absorption became weak after doping of boron and embedding of Rh. Evidently, Rh/TiO2 and Rh0.5/B–TiO2 show weak and broad Raman peaks at 138 cm−1, with a positive shift by about 3 cm−1. With Rh introduction, the defect concentration gradually decreases. Elemental boron doping increases the carrier separation and migration and further changes its energy band structure but it is also a photo-generated electron trap.25 Therefore, we speculated that the defect concentration can be controlled by regulating the doping concentration of Rh to reach an optimum value for defect concentration.
The Fourier-transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra (Fig. S9, ESI†) were utilized to examine the changes and accumulation in the surface species of the catalyst materials. Compared with the FT-IR spectra of pure TiO2, the B–O absorption bonds at 1191, 1398, 1640, and 3741 cm−1 were observed in B, Rh co-doped TiO2. The bonds at 1191–1398 cm−1 could be assigned to the formation of interstitial B3+ (tricoordinated), which easily interact with the surrounding oxygen atoms and tend to form a chemical environment similar to Ti–O–B. The peak at 1280 cm−1 may be ascribed to the valence vibrations of the B–O bond in the BO4 tetrahedra. The broad bond at 1640 cm−1 may stem from the surface crystal water.26–29 The infrared data indicate that the boron species in the modified TiO2 mainly are present in the form of interstitial boron but the existence of surface boron oxide is not excluded.
The modified TiO2 material was characterized by conventional solid-state 11B MAS NMR spectroscopy in a 9 T magnetic field for further verification of the boron species. The chemical environment, in which the boron species are present, is obtained by chemical shifts and the line shape of the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrum. As shown in Fig. 2b, the NMR spectra of B–TiO2 and TiO2 showed a similar local structure of boron of the doping species. Rh incorporation does not affect the form of existence of B in B–TiO2.29–32 In previous studies of boron species in Deng's group, the signals of B-doped and (B, N)-codoped TiO2 corresponding at δ = 2.8 and 13.3 ppm were unambiguously deconvoluted to the surface normal oxide boron (BO4) species and tricoordinated interstitial boron (Ti–O–B), respectively.28,29
To shed light on the relevance between the location of the defect and photocatalytic electron transfer, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and electron spin resonance (ESR) studies were conducted. B doped TiO2 can introduce VO. Two peaks can be identified from Fig. 2c. The peak at 531.4 eV can be considered to originate from oxygen vacancies and the other is deemed to originate from the O-atoms in the O–Ti bond (obtained using the XPSPEAK41 software).28,33 Compared with the O 1s XPS spectra of B–TiO2, the O 1s XPS (Fig. 2d) can also be allocated to physically adsorbed water, except for the O-atoms of oxygen vacancies and the O–Ti bond. The appearance of surface-bound water peaks indicates a hydrophilic TiO2 surface. The appearance of oxygen vacancies on the surface of metal oxides is a possible reason for the material to exhibit hydrophilic properties. Furthermore, the surface VO concentration was calculated by XPS. By comparing the peak area ratios of the oxygen vacancies, the concentration of the modified TiO2 oxygen vacancies can be estimated.25
The surface VO concentration of Rh0.5/B–TiO2 is 20%, which is higher than the surface VO concentration of B–TiO2 by about 16%. Combined with the appearance of the crystal water peaks, the content of oxygen vacancies on the Rh0.5/B–TiO2 surface is much higher than that on the B–TiO2 surface. This result is consistent with the conclusions drawn from the TEM image. Furthermore, the XPS spectrum in Fig. 2e reveals the formation of B–O–Ti bonds and B–O bonds.26,34 Meanwhile, the O 1s spectrum also confirms the formation of B–O–Ti bonds, thus further supporting that B successfully replaced and occupied the Ti lattice position.
The synergistic catalysis by Rh and B in the co-doped TiO2 nanoparticles was further investigated by XPS observation. As shown in Fig. S12a (ESI†), the B 1s XPS peak of B–TiO2 was deconvoluted into two typical asymmetrical and broad peaks corresponding to the doped boron species (Ti–O–B) and the polymer and/or surface B2O3. Two weak shoulders appear at 188.9 and 187.6 eV, representing the presence of a small number of B substitutions. The same is true for Rh0.5/B–TiO2 (Fig. S12b, ESI†). Obviously, as shown in Fig. S12b (ESI†), the concentration of interstitial B increases, thus significantly reducing the amount of boron oxide on the surface. The combined results of NMR spectroscopy concluded that the metal Rhδ+ was added to facilitate the formation of the interstitial boron structure on the surface and to regulate the doping sites thereof. B2O3 has no gain effect on photocatalysis. Accordingly, B–TiO2 did not significantly absorb in the visible region, as shown in the UV-vis spectrum. Fig. 2e shows that the BE of the Ti 2p peak is shifted to a higher energy level by about 0.3 eV, indicating the increased binding energy of Ti. This result is related to B and Rh doping, which causes a change in the electron cloud around Ti. Interstitial B doping facilitates the formation of anatase TiO2 defects and B provides additional electron compensation and transfers trivalent electrons to the 3d orbital of Ti, thereby replacing the charge difference in the atoms, thus further promoting the substitution of the metal for Ti4+.
In addition, as shown in Fig. 2f, we investigated the electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) of TiO2, B–TiO2, Rh–TiO2, and B/Rh–TiO2, which showed a distinct VO signal that can be identified as an electronic signal for adsorption on the oxygen vacancies.25,27,28,35 The signal value of B/Rh–TiO2 was significantly higher than the comparative materials, which is consistent with the results of XPS and photoluminescence measurements. This result confirmed that Rh doping exhibits a regulatory effect on the oxygen vacancy position of B–TiO2. The synergistic effect of the two causes the oxygen vacancies to shift to the surface, thus promoting a blue shift in the light absorption band of the material and contributing to the effective utilization of solar energy.
3.3. Density functional theory (DFT)
Theoretical prediction was conducted on the basis of DFT calculations. The mechanism of photoelectron generation, electron transfer pathway, and consumption distribution was studied by first-principles calculation to assist in explaining the modified TiO2 showing excellent photocatalytic activity. To simplify the model, anatase TiO2 was constructed as the research goal. As a comparison, a typical TiO2 tetragonal crystal form was constructed and subjected to DOS calculation. The calculation result is shown as Fig. S15 (ESI†). The structure and calculated results of modified TiO2 are shown in Fig. 3. The calculations prove that the presence of O-vacancies endows the B–TiO2 with obviously increased DOS at the valence band maximum (VBM) and the formation of an impurity level near the VB. Also, the DOS of Rh0.5/B–TiO2 was further increased and the defect level at the VB was increased. The impurity level obtained by constructing the defect greatly reduces the energy required for electron transition and visible light is sufficient to excite the electron to realize transition between the bands, accordingly obtaining high light-conversion efficiency. First, the low-band light is absorbed by the intrinsic part of TiO2 and the ultraviolet light excites the electrons to transition to the conduction band and shifts to the surface reaction zone of TiO2, which completed the photocatalytic process.36 Simultaneously, B, Rh co-doping increases the surface defects of TiO2; the distance of the carriers generated by photoexcitation to the surface is greatly shortened relative to the carrier migration distance generated in the TiO2 bulk phase. This phenomenon reduces the probability of charge recombination during the transfer. Its defect environment is beneficial for the substrate electron transport pathway and is expected to have low resistance and inhibit charge recombination, which are consistent with the experimental results.
 Fig. 3  (a and c) Element-projected density of states of the B-doped TiO2 and Rh/B co-doped TiO2. The Fermi level was set to zero; (b and d) Structure models of the B-doped TiO2 and Rh/B co-doped TiO2. The green, blue, cyan, and red balls denote B, Rh, Ti, and O atoms, respectively. 
The value of the VB of TiO2 nanoporous crystals was also measured by the Mott–Schottky (MS) curve (Fig. 4f). The TiO2 nanoporous crystals exhibit typical conduction band DOS characteristics with the minimum energy edge at approximately 0.1 eV. For the modified TiO2 nanoporous crystals, the maximum energy of the VB blue-shifts towards the vacuum level at approximately 0.54 eV. According to the results of solid ultraviolet diffuse reflection, the band gap of modified TiO2 is reduced and the conduction band DOS does not change significantly.
 Fig. 4  Evaluation of the photoelectrocatalytic activity with the pure TiO2, Rhx/B–TiO2 (x = 0.1, 0.5, 1) under 300 W Xe lamp irradiation; (a) transient photocurrent measurements, (b) electrochemical impedance spectra at 1.6 V vs. RHE. (c) Time-resolved fluorescence spectra of pure TiO2, B–TiO2, and Rh0.1/B–TiO2. (d) Room temperature photoluminescence spectra. The photocatalytic H2 evolution activities of the pure TiO2, Rhx/B-TiO2 (x = 0.1, 0.5, 1) from a water/methanol mixture (volume ratio = 4:1) under light irradiation (Xe lamp, 300 W). (e) UV-vis absorption spectra, inset: the corresponding Kubelka–Munk plots transformed from UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra; (f) Mott–Schottky spectra measured in an aqueous solution of Na2SO4 (0.05 M). 
3.4. PEC measurements and charge transfer dynamics
The photoelectrochemical properties of the as-prepared TiO2 and modified TiO2 samples were evaluated via transient photocurrent responses and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) (Fig. 4a and b). It can be seen from Fig. 4a that the photocurrent density of the Rh/B–TiO2-modified material is approximately 16 times as high as that of pure TiO2. Nyquist plots were created to evaluate the internal resistances for the charge transfer of the samples. In the high-frequency region, Rh/B–TiO2 displays a smaller semi-circular diameter of the Nyquist curves compared with that of TiO2 under simulated solar light irradiation, indicating the low interface resistance of the material. The results demonstrate that the introduction of B or Rh increased the interfacial charge transfer rate.
The above conclusion was further validated via time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy. Time-resolved fluorescence spectra (Fig. 4c) were used to measure the lifetime of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. With an excitation wavelength of 400 nm, the corresponding PL lifetimes assumed as model functions were obtained by fitting the data with three-exponential decay curves. In addition, the fitted parameters are listed in Table S2 in the ESI† and the relevant parameters reveal a very fast relaxation. The three-exponential decay indicates three composite mechanisms for the generation of fluorescence, which are generally considered to be: semiconductor intrinsic exciton transition from the conduction band to the valence band; defect luminescence, exciton transition from the conduction band to the defect levels; composite luminescence between the internal defects in the semiconductors. The rising edge, reflecting the electronic layout time of the emission level, shows the strongest fluorescence excitation of co-doped TiO2. This condition indicates that co-doped TiO2 has less trapping centers, prolonged retention of electrons, and enhanced H2 production. The long-lived fluorescence spectra corresponding to the three materials are substantially parallel and exhibit a single exponential decay, which is similar to the intrinsic luminescence of the semiconductor. After the semiconductor is excited by light, the electrons transition from the conduction band to the VB. The exponentially decaying short-lived fluorescence is considered as defect luminescence.37,38 The center of illumination is located at another location, such as the doped boron or rhodium, and defects in the surface locations. Combined with the PL spectrum, we concluded that τ2 corresponds to the carriers generated by photoexcitation of the material surface that leads to a direct transition to the conduction band. In addition, the fluorescence effect is generated when recombination occurs and the fluorescence lifetime is 1020.73 ns. The fluorescence corresponding to the fluorescence lifetime of 34.99 ns (τ3) is estimated to be the fluorescence generated by carrier recombination when the fluorescence generated by the VO defect in the semiconductor body phase transitions to the luminescent center ion Rhδ+ or Ti3+ at another position.
To prove that B/Rh–TiO2 is indeed capable of facilitating charge-carrier separation, a series of PL measurements was performed. First, Fig. 4b shows the PL spectra of pure TiO2, B–TiO2, Rh–TiO2, Rh0.1/B–TiO2, Rh0.5/B–TiO2, and Rh1/B–TiO2, and the results were monitored to reveal the charge-carrier separation efficiency and material defect concentration. Obviously, the recombination of photogenerated carriers at the Rh0.5/B–TiO2 and Rh1/B–TiO2 interface is effectively suppressed. Undoped and monodoped TiO2 exhibited near-unity PL peak strength but the underlying mechanism was unclear. Herein, we prove that the high peak is due to a large number of defects in the interior and surface of the bulk of the material, leading to a high trapping rate of the photogenerated carriers. The main emission peak at 470 nm is produced by the band gap transition of anatase TiO2. In addition, several small PL peaks observed in the wavelength range are mainly due to the surface defects of the TiO2 samples. However, when B and Rh are co-doped, when the doping amount of Rh is less than 0.1%, the PL peak does not change significantly. When we judge that the Rh doping amount is too small, the main doping site is located inside the bulk phase of the material. No significant change is observed in the defect concentration at the Ti lattice position. As the doping amount of Rh increases, a greater number of electrons accumulated around Rh means that lesser electrons are accumulated around B and the weaker degree of the Ti–O bond or the Rh–O bond around B caused by the surrounding lattice distortion. Less influence means several oxygen vacancies are affected. The internal oxygen vacancies are gradually reduced and the possible recombination sites are decreased during the transport of the photogenerated carriers inside the bulk phase, and the recombination rate of the photogenerated carriers is greatly reduced, which is consistent with the PL spectrum.
3.5. Optical properties
UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS) measurements of pure TiO2 and B/Rhx–TiO2 show that pure TiO2 exhibits a narrow optical absorbance with the edge at approximately 387 nm, whereas the absorbance of B/Rhx–TiO2 is significantly enhanced in the visible range (Fig. 4e). Compared with pure TiO2, we observed neither absorption edge shift nor a significant enhancement in the visible light absorption on B–TiO2 and Rh–TiO2. Compared with Rh0.5/B–TiO2, with gradually embedded Rhδ+, in addition to the band gap absorption of TiO2, a slight enhancement in the visible light region was observed. When the doping amount of Rh increased to 0.5%, the absorption intensity in the visible region of 400–600 nm was increased to a certain extent. Two dramatic absorption peaks emerged at 430 and 540 nm corresponding to the electronic excitation from the impurity level to the conduction band (CB) and the electronic transition from the VB to the impurity level, respectively. The band gap value was determined using Tauc plot (Fig. 4b), which showed that the band gap of pure TiO2 was 3.2 eV. B/Rhx–TiO2 (x = 0.1, 0.5, 1) shows the presence of two absorption edges (2.5 and 3.1 eV), indicating a local state between the CB and the VB. The enhanced absorption can be attributed to the synergistic effect of boron and rhodium. Fig. 4f shows the MS plots calculated for modified TiO2. By contrast, Rh–TiO2 and Rh0.5/B–TiO2 exhibit a shallower slope than pure TiO2 and B–TiO2, indicating an increase in the donor density after doping of Rh. Combined with the PL data, the carrier density increase after doping Rh is beneficial for the effective space separation of photogenerated charge carriers, thus effectively improving the photocatalytic activity. At the same time, this result is consistent with the theoretical calculation.
After the successful synthesis of defect tunable TiO2 and the direction of their framework and electronic structures, the photocatalytic capabilities of the samples were comprehensively investigated (Fig. 5a and b). No activity was found in the absence of light, photocatalysts, or sacrificial reagent. Notably, with increase in the amount of surface VO, the photocatalytic activity was sharply enhanced with rhodium loading and attained a maximal value on B/Rh0.5–TiO2 (Fig. 5a). Comparative experiments on catalysts with different contents of Rh revealed that 0.5 wt% Rh was the optimized content of the co-catalyst (Fig. 5a). Furthermore, we also measured the photocatalytic H2 evolution performances by cutting off light shorter than 400 nm (Fig. 5b). We found that under visible light irradiation, the hydrogen production performance increases with the loading amount. In addition, through four cycles of experiments and current-time long cycling curves (Fig. S16 and S17, ESI†), we explored the stability of photocatalytic hydrogen production of TiO2 materials. No noticeable decrease in the H2 production rate for TiO2 was observed within 20 h, indicating a high photostability. The highest hydrogen evolution rate for Rh0.5/B–TiO2 can be attributed to the high surface area and rich surface defects. The enhancement can be attributed to the 3D porous structures, consisting of pores of different scales, from mesopores to macropores, thus providing a combination of high-specific surface area and open channels for the efficient diffusion of reactants. These control experiments indicate that only TiO2 nanoporous molecular sieve does not contributes to the absorption of ultraviolet light but the oxygen vacancies can also significantly improve the visible light absorption.
 Fig. 5  (a) Comparison of photocatalytic H2 production activity of different photocatalysts; (b) with 400 nm cut-off filter. (c) Schematic representation of the band structure obtained according to the results in Fig. 4e and f. (d) Proposed mechanism to regulate VO reaction on modified TiO2 under visible light illumination. 
To further verify the active species in the photocatalyst reaction, we conducted DMPO-trapped EPR experiments. As shown in Fig. S18 (ESI†), without the 300 W Xe lamp for blank experiments, no definable ESR peak exists. When light was used, the typical signals for the DMPO–OH adducts could be detected, with the quartet lines with hyperfine coupling constant of αN = αH = 1.49 mT and peak strength of 1:2:2:1. The above results indicates that ˙OH can be obtained and captured by DMPO after the photocatalyst material is excited by light.
Based on the above results, a possible reaction mechanism of the increased visible light absorption on VO-rich-modified TiO2 porous nanostructure was proposed. Importantly, UV-vis spectra and Mott–Schottky spectra illustrate that the co-doped TiO2 (optimized defect TiO2) porous nanostructure, compared with B–TiO2 (deficient TiO2), showed a narrow bandgap. As shown in Fig. 5c, the level of defects generated by O-vacancies at the top of the VB helps to transfer the absorbed light from the ultraviolet to the visible region. Notably, replacing Rh doping can further shorten the distance from the top of the VB to the CB. Therefore, the increasing visible light absorption by modified TiO2 could be due to the transition of electrons from the VB to the defect level or from the defect level to the CB.
Herein, the oxygen defects create new defect levels in TiO2, thus reducing the energy required for electronic transitions. This condition helps the light-absorbing edge to migrate from the ultraviolet region to the visible region. Therefore, the increase in light absorption of the modified material is due to the transition of the VB electrons to a new defect level or the electron CB level transition at the impurity level. This phenomenon is vividly represented in Fig. 5c and d.
Conclusions
In summary, a defect-rich heterophase junction-TiO2 was successfully constructed. The regulation of the oxygen vacancy position and the concentration through ion modification and the effect of optimized doping on the photocatalytic hydrogen production of oxygen-rich vacancy-TiO2 was predicted by theoretical simulation. A simple sol–gel method was used to prepare the TiO2 photocatalytic material containing ideal doping sites. The optimal regulation of the defects by the insertion of Rh was revealed by XPS and 11B MAS NMR. First-principles calculations showed that the defect of boron build-up provides a new impurity level near the CB and reduces the band gap, thus greatly improving the photocatalytic activity. The unique synergistic effect of the two promotes the photocatalytic hydrogen production. This work provides a new strategy for the VO optimization of 3D bulk catalysts.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The study was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21671133), Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (18020500800, 18JC1412900, 19DZ2271100).
Notes and references
Y. Sun, Z. Sun, S. Gao, H. Cheng, Q. Liu, J. Piao, T. Yao, C. Wu, S. Hu, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1057 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Akihide, T. W. Yang and A. Rose, Chem. Lett., 2011, 40, 108–110 CrossRef .
H. Tong, S. Ouyang, Y. Bi, N. Umezawa, M. Oshikiri and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 229–251 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, H. Zhao, R. Sun, X. Li and D. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 225–235 RSC .
J. Ran, J. Qu, H. Zhang, T. Wen, H. Wang, S. Chen, L. Song, X. Zhang, L. Jing, R. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803402 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, J. Yu, Y. Zhang, Q. Li and J. R. Gong, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4774–4779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, B. Qu, Q. Liu, S. Gao, Z. Yan, W. Yan, B. Pan, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3761–3767 RSC .
S. Hoang, S. Guo, N. T. Hahn, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 26–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Wang, B. Huang, Y. Ma, Y. Liu, X. Qin, X. Zhang and Y. Dai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4024–4030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Naldoni, M. Allieta, S. Santangelo, M. Marelli, F. Fabbri, S. Cappelli, C. L. Bianchi, R. Psaro and V. Dal Santo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7600–7603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, Y. Zeng, M. Yu, T. Zhai, C. Liang, S. Xie, M.-S. Balogun and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3148–3155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Y. Hu, S. Xie, Y. Huang, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4341–4343 RSC .
B. H. Lee, S. Park, M. Kim, A. K. Sinha, S. C. Lee, E. Jung, W. J. Chang, K. S. Lee, J. H. Kim, S. P. Cho, H. Kim, K. T. Nam and T. Hyeon, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 620–626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Gopal, H. Lo and S. Ke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, N. Kikugawa and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3816–3819 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, Y. Zhou, J. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Wang, F. Wang, C. Chen, C. Li, R. Li and C. Li, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3242–3252 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev. [Sect.] A, 1965, 140(4), 1133–1138 CrossRef .
H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1976, 13(12), 5188–5192 CrossRef .
M. H. Samat, A. M. M. Ali, M. F. M. Taib, O. H. Hassan and M. Z. A. Yahya, Results Phys., 2016, 6, 891–896 CrossRef .
A. A. M. Abadi, G. Forozani, S. M. Baizaee and A. Gharaati, J. Supercond. Novel Magn., 2019, 32, 2479–2488 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, W. Zhou, H. Li, L. Ren, P. Qiao, W. Li and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1804282 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, H. He, Y. Tian, H. Li, K. Lan, L. Zu, Y. Xia, L. Duan, W. Li and D. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104113 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, D. Widmann, M. Heenemann, T. Diemant, J. Biskupek, R. Schlögl and R. J. Behm, J. Catal., 2017, 354, 46–60 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shang, M. Li, H. Li, S. Huang, C. Mao, Z. Ai and L. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 6444–6453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lei, Y. Sun, K. Liu, S. Gao, L. Liang, B. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6826–6829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Feng, A. Zheng, Q. Wang, P. Ren, X. Gao, S.-B. Liu, Z. Shen, T. Chen and F. Deng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2709–2719 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Lee, K. Mibe, Y. Fei, G. D. Cody and B. O. Mysen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 165507 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Hung, A. P. Howes, B. G. Parkinson, T. Anupõld, A. Samoson, S. P. Brown, P. F. Harrison, D. Holland and R. Dupree, J. Solid State Chem., 2009, 182, 2402–2408 CrossRef CAS .
N. Feng, Q. Wang, A. Zheng, Z. Zhang, J. Fan, S. B. Liu, J. P. Amoureux and F. Deng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1607–1616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Feng, Z. Xu, L. Ren, C. Liu, J. Zhuang, Z. Hu, X. Xu, J. Chen, J. Wang, W. Hao, Y. Du and S. X. Dou, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4288–4293 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Y. Jiang, A. Gautam, Y. Li and R. Amal, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1451–1457 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xiong, L. Wu, Y. Liu, T. Gao, K. Li, Y. Long, R. Zhang, L. Zhang, Z. A. Qiao, Q. Huo, X. Ge, S. Song and H. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901634 CrossRef .
R. Zhou, B. Qu, D. Li, X. Sun and X. C. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705529 CrossRef .
H. Wang, H. Y. Wang, H. B. Sun, A. Cerea, A. Toma, F. Angelis, X. Jin, L. Razzari, D. Cojoc, D. Catone, F. Huang and R. Proietti Zaccaria, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801761 CrossRef .
C. Gao, T. Wei, Y. Zhang, X. Song, Y. Huan, H. Liu, M. Zhao, J. Yu and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1806596 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, H. Sun, J. Huang, Q. Li and J. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 7451–7457 CrossRef CAS .
K. Iwashina and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13272–13275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Shen, J. C. Lofaro, W. R. Woerner, M. G. White, D. Su and A. Orlov, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 223, 200–208 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Lee, R. Antoniou Kourounioti, J. C. S. Wu, E. Murchie, M. Maroto-Valer, O. E. Jensen, C.-W. Huang and A. Ruban, J. CO2 Util., 2014, 5, 33–40 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Yunarti, M. Lee, Y. J. Hwang, J.-W. Choi, D. J. Suh, J. Lee, I. W. Kim and J.-M. Ha, Catal. Commun., 2014, 50, 54–58 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kuncewicz and B. Ohtani, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 298–301 RSC .
J. Kuncewicz and B. Ohtani, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 77201–77211 RSC .
J. Huang, G. Li, Z. Zhou, Y. Jiang, Q. Hu, C. Xue and W. Guo, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 337, 282–289 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ce00707bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The TEM image of modified TiO2 with the corresponding structural models. (a–c) Rh–TiO2, (d–f) B–TiO2, (g–i) Rh0.5/B–TiO2, the corresponding SAED (selected area electron diffraction) image (top right inset) of (g). (j) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms and (k) the corresponding pore size distribution curves of B doped-TiO2, Rh–TiO2, and Rh0.5/B–TiO2.	 

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of defective mesoporous TiO2 microspheres.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The Raman spectra of pure TiO2, B–TiO2, Rh–TiO2, and Rh/B–TiO2. (b) 11B MAS NMR spectra of B–TiO2 and Rh0.5/B–TiO2. (c and d) High-resolution XPS spectra of O 1s for B-doped-TiO2 and Rh0.5/B–TiO2. (e) Ti 2p XPS spectra. (f) Electron spin resonance spectra at 120 K.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a and c) Element-projected density of states of the B-doped TiO2 and Rh/B co-doped TiO2. The Fermi level was set to zero; (b and d) Structure models of the B-doped TiO2 and Rh/B co-doped TiO2. The green, blue, cyan, and red balls denote B, Rh, Ti, and O atoms, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  Evaluation of the photoelectrocatalytic activity with the pure TiO2, Rhx/B–TiO2 (x = 0.1, 0.5, 1) under 300 W Xe lamp irradiation; (a) transient photocurrent measurements, (b) electrochemical impedance spectra at 1.6 V vs. RHE. (c) Time-resolved fluorescence spectra of pure TiO2, B–TiO2, and Rh0.1/B–TiO2. (d) Room temperature photoluminescence spectra. The photocatalytic H2 evolution activities of the pure TiO2, Rhx/B-TiO2 (x = 0.1, 0.5, 1) from a water/methanol mixture (volume ratio = 4:1) under light irradiation (Xe lamp, 300 W). (e) UV-vis absorption spectra, inset: the corresponding Kubelka–Munk plots transformed from UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra; (f) Mott–Schottky spectra measured in an aqueous solution of Na2SO4 (0.05 M).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Comparison of photocatalytic H2 production activity of different photocatalysts; (b) with 400 nm cut-off filter. (c) Schematic representation of the band structure obtained according to the results in Fig. 4e and f. (d) Proposed mechanism to regulate VO reaction on modified TiO2 under visible light illumination.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ce00707b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
