Hydrogen producing water treatment through solar photocatalysis   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C003858J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C003858J
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1042-1045Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsHydrogen producing water treatment through solar photocatalysis†

        
          
            Jungwon 
            Kim
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Wonyong 
            Choi
          
        
      *
      School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang 790-784, Korea. E-mail: wchoi@postech.edu;  Fax: +82 54 279 8299
Received 
      3rd March 2010
    , Accepted 22nd May 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      22nd June 2010
    AbstractThe production of hydrogen accompanied by the simultaneous degradation of organic pollutants in water was achieved using surface-modified TiO2 photocatalysts working under solar irradiation conditions.

Broader context
Semiconductor photocatalysis has been extensively studied for the synthesis of solar fuels such as hydrogen and the degradation of pollutants. Although both applications are based on the same principle of photoinduced electron transfer, achieving dual-purpose photocatalysis (i.e., simultaneous production of hydrogen and degradation of water pollutants) remains a challenging issue. In this study, the surface of TiO2 nanoparticles was modified by simultaneous surface fluorination and platinization and the surface-modified photocatalysts were successfully demonstrated for the simultaneous production of hydrogen and degradation of organic compounds (particularly phenolic compounds) in water. The production of hydrogen gradually decreased as the organic compounds were depleted. The dual-purpose photocatalysis was also confirmed under sunlight irradiation and can be developed into a solar conversion technology that achieves hydrogen production and water treatment simultaneously.

Hydrogen is being intensively investigated as a new energy carrier that stores and transports energy obtained from renewable energy resources (e.g., solar and wind power) to the point of use. In particular, efficient methods that can convert solar energy into hydrogen are being actively sought.1 One of the ideal methods is solar hydrogen production from water splitting that can be driven by photocatalysis or photoelectrochemical reaction. Photocatalytic hydrogen production through water splitting has been demonstrated but the number of successful cases of overall water splitting are limited.2 Many studies of photocatalytic hydrogen production are based on sacrificial systems and have been carried out in the presence of an excess of electron donors (e.g., alcohols, organic acids).3 On the other hand, the photocatalytic oxidation of organic compounds has been intensively studied and found to be successful in achieving the mineralization of various organic pollutants in water and air.4 In particular, TiO2-based photocatalysts have demonstrated excellent performances for this purpose.
The general stoichiometry of the photocatalytic degradation of organic compounds can be represented by the following equation. CxHyOz + (x + 0.25y − 0.5z)O2 → xCO2 + 0.5yH2O(1)
As reflected in the above reaction, typical photocatalytic oxidation (mineralization) converts hydrogen bound to organic carbons to hydrogen bound to water since this is the most thermodynamically stable form. If one can achieve a partial conversion instead of the complete mineralization of organic compounds, it should be possible, in principle, to produce molecular hydrogen from the degradation of organic compounds [e.g., eqn (2)]. CxHyOz + (2x − z)H2O → xCO2 + (2x + 0.5y − z)H2(2)
Such an ideal partial mineralization process can be developed into a technology that combines water/waste treatment with the production of hydrogen. If reactions like eqn (2) can be driven by solar photocatalysis, photocatalytic water treatment can be dual functional with additional recovery of energy from wastewater hence reducing the overall cost of wastewater treatment. The proposed dual-purpose photocatalytic process might be conceptually compared with biological methods that recover energy from wastewater such as microbial fuel cells and anaerobic digestion with methane production.5 As for the electrochemical technology, the simultaneous production of hydrogen and the degradation of organic compounds in water was recently demonstrated through water electrolysis driven by a commercial photovoltaic solar panel and a BiOx–TiO2 anode.6 The hydrogen generated from water electrolysis was synergically enhanced when phenolic compounds were present in water, which indicates that some hydrogen was derived from organic compounds. An electrochemical process that recovers hydrogen from oxidizing urea (a component of urine) has also been reported.7 However, such electrolytic degradation of organic compounds requires electrical energy. This work aims to achieve the simultaneous production of hydrogen and degradation of organic compounds through solar photocatalysis without the need for electricity.
The partial mineralization of organic compounds through photocatalysis is not easily achieved because the oxidative reactions induced by hydroxyl radicals or valence-band holes are usually non-selective with complete degradation favored. Although photocatalytic reactions have often been applied to the selective oxidation of organic compounds,8 there have been few studies of their use in hydrogen abstraction from organics. Although stripping hydrogen out of organic compounds cannot be a truly renewable source of hydrogen, it can be successfully applied to the utilization of wastewater containing high levels of organics as a resource of hydrogen. A variety of organic compounds found in wastewater may serve as precursors for hydrogen in solar photocatalysis.
The photocatalytic activities and reaction mechanisms are sensitively affected by the surface properties. The reaction pathway of the photocatalytic oxidation might be controlled by modifying the catalyst surface properties because the substrate–surface and substrate–oxidant interactions can be changed through this method. To obtain hydrogen via the selective photocatalytic oxidation of organic compounds, the surface of TiO2 nanoparticles was modified by simultaneous surface fluorination and platinization (SFP) in this study. We have previously reported that SFP of the TiO2 surface (F-TiO2/Pt) results in a markedly enhanced photocatalytic activity for the anoxic degradation of phenolic compounds,9 which is ascribed to the synergic action of the two surface modifications. In this study, the photocatalytic oxidation of organic compounds was carried out in a de-aerated aqueous suspension of F-TiO2/Pt whilst monitoring the removal of the organic substrate and the concurrent production of hydrogen. Bare TiO2, F-TiO2, Pt/TiO2, and F-TiO2/Pt were compared for the photocatalytic degradation of 4-chlorophenol (4-CP) and bisphenol A (BPA) in Fig. 1. The synergic effect of the SFP in F-TiO2/Pt is outstanding in both cases. With F-TiO2/Pt, the degradation of 4-CP was accompanied by the marked production of hydrogen, whereas the production of hydrogen was negligible with the other catalysts. With F-TiO2/Pt, the removal of 4-CP was almost complete within 30 min irradiation while the production of hydrogen continued for up to 5 h without showing any sign of deceleration. The time-dependent variation of total organic carbon (TOC) in the suspension of (4-CP + F-TiO2/Pt) is compared along with the time profiles of 4-CP, Cl−, and H2 in Fig. 1c. Because the reaction was carried out in the de-aerated suspension, the mineralization of 4-CP was insignificant but the dechlorination was completed within 2 h. The anoxic phototransformation of 4-CP on F-TiO2/Pt produced a variety of intermediates such as hydroquinone, benzoquinone, 4-chlorocatechol, 4-chlororesorcinol, hydroxyl-hydroquinone, and organic acids that were detected by liquid chromatographic analysis (see Fig. S1 of the ESI†).
 Fig. 1  Simultaneous degradation of the substrate and production of hydrogen in the presence of (a) 4-CP and (b) BPA in UV-irradiated suspensions of bare TiO2, F-TiO2, Pt/TiO2, and F-TiO2/Pt. (Filled symbols: the degradation of the organic substrate, empty symbols: the production of hydrogen) (c) Time-dependent variation of TOC in the pre-anoxic and post-oxic period in the suspension of F-TiO2/Pt. (▼: 4-CP, ■: Cl−, ○: TOC, ▽: H2) Reactor volume: 30 mL for (a) and (b), 90 mL for (c), incident light intensity = 2.3 × 10−3 einstein min−1 L−1. 
When air was introduced into the reactor after 5 h under irradiation, the TOC was rapidly removed. This demonstrates that the photocatalytic degradation on F-TiO2/Pt can be carried out in two steps: (1) the pre-phase of anoxic degradation where hydrogen is produced and (2) the post-phase of oxic degradation where the mineralization of organic intermediates is achieved. Such a photocatalytic water treatment process may be similarly compared with the biological wastewater treatment that consists of sequential anaerobic and aerobic phases.
The photonic efficiencies of the photocatalytic hydrogen production in the presence of various organic compounds were measured and are listed in Table 1. Compared to the control case without any organic substrate, the photocatalytic hydrogen production on F-TiO2/Pt was markedly enhanced in the presence of organic substrates, whereas bare TiO2 and F-TiO2 showed no such effect. Pt/TiO2 showed enhanced activity for some substrates (dichloroacetate and N-nitrosodimethylamine) but not as prominently as that for F-TiO2/Pt. In particular, enhanced hydrogen production in the presence of aromatic compounds (hydroquinone, 4-chlorophenol, 4-chlorobenzoic acid, and bisphenol A) and F-TiO2/Pt is clearly noticeable in all cases. It should be noted that the photocatalytic production of hydrogen in the absence of organic substrates (i.e., in pure water) was also observed on F-TiO2/Pt while bare TiO2 and F-TiO2 showed negligible production of hydrogen. The activity of Pt/TiO2 for hydrogen production in the absence of organic substrates was not negligible but lower than that of F-TiO2/Pt.
Table 1 Photonic efficiency (PE)a for H2 production (×10−3)




Substrateb
Bare TiO2
F-TiO2
Pt/TiO2
F-TiO2/Pt





a Incident light intensity of 2.3 × 10−3 einstein min−1 L−1 according to ferrioxalate actinometry PE = 2 × (H2 molecules generated)/(number of incident photons) for 5 h. The experimental uncertainties in all PE values were within ±7%.
b DCA: dichloroacetate, NDMA: N-nitrosodimethylamine, HQ: hydroquinone, 4-CP: 4-chlorophenol, 4-CBA: 4-chlorobenzoic acid, BPA: bisphenol A.
c Not determined due to very low yield.





DCA
n.d.c
n.d.
1.22
0.46


NDMA
n.d.
n.d.
1.39
1.00


HQ
n.d.
n.d.
0.52
0.94


4-CP
n.d.
n.d.
0.03
1.16


4-CBA
n.d.
n.d.
0.02
2.49


BPA
n.d.
n.d.
0.44
3.34


No substrate
n.d.
n.d.
0.19
0.30




The production of hydrogen should gradually reduce as the organic compounds are depleted. The time profiles of hydrogen production with F-TiO2/Pt were measured throughout the repeated cycles of photocatalysis in the presence or absence of organic compounds (4-CP or BPA). The first photocatalysis run was carried out for 5 h and then the suspension was purged with nitrogen prior to starting the second cycle to remove accumulated H2 that might be reoxidized by holes. This process was repeated for up to 10 cycles as shown in Fig. 2a. The hydrogen production in the first cycle was markedly higher than the control case (without organic substrates) but the difference gradually decreased with increasing number of cycles. After the 7th cycle, the additional hydrogen generated in the presence of the organic substrates seems to be negligible and the total accumulated H2 produced up to the 7th cycle in the presence of 4-CP and BPA (9 µmoles) was 100 and 88 µmoles, respectively. Subtracting the H2 production without organic substrates from these numbers yields 65 and 53 µmoles, respectively. If all hydrogen atoms bound to the organic substrate are converted into H2 as in eqn (2), the theoretical maximum number of H2 derived from the organic should be 18 and 72 µmoles.10 To confirm the source of H2, an isotope experiment was carried out using deuterated phenol and BPA but little D2 and DH were detected. This indicates that the generation of H2 observed in the (4-CP/BPA + F-TiO2/Pt) system comes mainly from water, not from the organics. This is not the selective abstraction of hydrogen from organics that eqn (2) represents. Being an ideal reaction, eqn (2) cannot properly represent the real photocatalytic process in which various organic intermediates are generated with limited mineralization and water is not an efficient oxygen donor. The organic substrates seem to serve primarily as hole scavengers that enhance the reduction of water. The removal of 4-CP in the anoxic suspension of F-TiO2/Pt was accompanied by the production of CO2 and CO (Fig. 2b). The total organic carbon was reduced by 50% after 50 h reaction, which indicates that the mineralization did proceed slowly even in the absence of dissolved oxygen.
 Fig. 2  Time profiles of hydrogen production from the degradation of the substrate (4-CP and BPA: 300 µM or 9 µmoles) in F-TiO2/Pt suspension with repeated cycles. (a) Production of hydrogen. (b) Generation of CO2 and CO from the degradation of 4-CP in the reactor headspace. The reactor was purged with N2 at the beginning of each cycle. Incident light intensity = 3.0 × 10−3 einstein min−1 L−1. 
Hydrogen production should be related to the electron transfer from the conduction band of TiO2 to protons or water molecules. Therefore, the highly enhanced production of hydrogen on F-TiO2/Pt should be ascribed to the effect of the surface modification on the electron transfer process. The surface species may affect the charge pair recombination and the charge transfer to organic substrates. As an indirect indicator of the electron transfer process on the catalyst surface, the decay profile of open-circuit potential (Eoc) of the catalyst-coated electrode was monitored immediately after the UV irradiation was turned off and compared in Fig. 3. Eoc should decay as the accumulated electrons on the illuminated electrode recombine with trapped holes or are scavenged by electron acceptors (e.g., protons) in the dark. The decay rate of Eoc was retarded in the presence of 4-CP (hole scavenger) because 4-CP scavenged the trapped holes retarding their recombination with the accumulated electrons. The time-dependent decay of Eoc in the presence of 4-CP was markedly retarded on the F-TiO2/Pt electrode whereas the decay of Eoc was less affected by 4-CP with other electrodes (bare TiO2, F-TiO2, and Pt/TiO2). A similar retardation in the decay of Eoc on the F-TiO2/Pt electrode was also observed in the presence of BPA. The platinum deposits on TiO2 can act as an electron sink and a temporary electron reservoir by preventing electron–hole recombination.11 This enables the photocatalytic degradation of organic compounds even in the absence of oxygen (an ambient electron scavenger that retards the charge pair recombination).
 Fig. 3  Time profiles of the open-circuit potential (Eoc) decay on the catalyst-coated electrodes after the UV irradiation was turned off. Dashed line (red) indicates Eoc in the absence of 4-CP and solid line (blue) indicates Eoc in the presence of 4-CP. 
In addition, surface fluorides inhibit the adsorption of organic substrates on the catalyst surface but facilitate the generation of unbound OH radicals instead of surface-bound OH radicals.12 The OH radical generation in the UV-irradiated anoxic suspensions of various catalysts was monitored using the coumarin fluorescence method and the OH radical production was indeed far higher with F-TiO2/Pt catalyst (see Fig. S2 of the ESI†). This property enables the photocatalytic degradation to proceed off the surface and inhibits the recombination of the conduction band electrons with surface-bound OH radicals and organic intermediates.
The primary role of SFP of TiO2 seems to be to enable the anoxic photocatalytic degradation by efficiently using the aromatic organic substrate as the hole scavenger and water as the electron scavenger with retarded recombination. The slower decay of Eoc on the F-TiO2/Pt electrode in the presence of organic substrates supports this reasoning. The detailed reaction mechanism occurring on F-TiO2/Pt needs to be further studied.
The feasibility of using natural sunlight for the simultaneous production of hydrogen and degradation of pollutants was tested outdoors (Fig. 4). The simultaneous degradation of organic substrates (4-CP or BPA) and production of H2 occurred effectively in the suspension of F-TiO2/Pt whereas their direct photolytic degradation (without catalyst) under solar irradiation was negligible. The outdoor solar degradation experiment was continued for three consecutive days as shown in Fig. 4a and the H2 production rate remained relatively constant up to the third cycle although the initial substrate (4-CP) was completely removed within the first 2 h irradiation. The degradation intermediates should serve as a hole scavenger after the complete removal of 4-CP.
 Fig. 4  Outdoor solar tests for the simultaneous degradation of the organic pollutants (filled circles: substrates, empty circles: chlorides) and production of hydrogen (red squares) in F-TiO2/Pt suspension with (a) 4-CP and (b) BPA (for three consecutive days in (a) and for one day in (b)). (purple solid line: solar light intensity, green triangles: direct solar photolysis without catalyst). 
In summary, this study has demonstrated that the simultaneous production of hydrogen and degradation of organic pollutants can be achieved by modifying the surface of titania with fluorides and platinum nanoparticles. This is attributed to the synergic effect of SFP. The controlled photocatalytic degradation of organic compounds accompanied by the simultaneous production of H2 can be applied to a water treatment process that recovers energy. The energy-recovering photocatalytic water treatment consists of the anoxic phase in which H2 is generated and the post-oxic phase in which the organic intermediates are fully mineralized.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the KOSEF NRL program (No. R0A-2008-000-20068-0), the KOSEF EPB center (Grant No. R11-2008-052-02002), and KCAP (Sogang Univ.) funded by MEST through NRF (2009-C1AAA001-2009-0093879).
Notes and references

  (a) H. G. Kim, P. H. Borse, W. Choi and J. S. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4585 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Fihri, V. Artero, M. Razavet, C. Baffert, W. Leibl and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 564 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. Zong, H. Yan, G. Wu, G. Ma, F. Wen, Lu. Wang and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7176 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) E. Bae and W. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 14792 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. Choi, Catal. Surv. Asia, 2006, 10, 16 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) D. Chatterjee and S. Dasgupta, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2005, 6, 186 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. R. Lovley, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2006, 4, 497 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) P. Weiland, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2010, 85, 849 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Park, C. D. Vecitis, W. Choi, O. Weres and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 885 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Park, C. D. Vecitis and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 7616 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Boggs, R. L. King and G. G. Botte, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4859 RSC .

  (a) H. Yoshida, H. Yuzawa, M. Aoki, K. Otake, H. Itoh and T. Hattori, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4634 RSC ; 
  (b) M. Zhang, C. Chen, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9730 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, J. Lee and W. Choi, Chem. Commun., 2008, 756 RSC .
The stoichiometric degradation reactions for 4-CP and BPA based on eqn (2) (neglecting the formation of CO) are: 4-CP: C6H5OCl + 11H2O → 6CO2 + 13H2 + HCl (ΔfG° = 164 kJ mol−1) BPA: C15H16O2 + 28H2O → 15CO2 + 36H2 (ΔfG° = 732 kJ mol−1). Both reactions are energy-uphill and non-spontaneous.

  (a) B. Kraeutler and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 4317 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. W. Bahnemann, M. Hilgendorff and R. Memming, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 4265 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) N. Lakshminarasimhan, E. Bae and W. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 15244 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. Minero, G. Mariella, V. Maurino and E. Pelizzetti, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 2632 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Park and W. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4086 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, analysis of the intermediates, OH radical measurement. See DOI: 10.1039/c003858jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Broader context
Semiconductor photocatalysis has been extensively studied for the synthesis of solar fuels such as hydrogen and the degradation of pollutants. Although both applications are based on the same principle of photoinduced electron transfer, achieving dual-purpose photocatalysis (i.e., simultaneous production of hydrogen and degradation of water pollutants) remains a challenging issue. In this study, the surface of TiO2 nanoparticles was modified by simultaneous surface fluorination and platinization and the surface-modified photocatalysts were successfully demonstrated for the simultaneous production of hydrogen and degradation of organic compounds (particularly phenolic compounds) in water. The production of hydrogen gradually decreased as the organic compounds were depleted. The dual-purpose photocatalysis was also confirmed under sunlight irradiation and can be developed into a solar conversion technology that achieves hydrogen production and water treatment simultaneously.

CxHyOz + (x + 0.25y − 0.5z)O2 → xCO2 + 0.5yH2O	(1)
CxHyOz + (2x − z)H2O → xCO2 + (2x + 0.5y − z)H2	(2)

 	Fig. 1  Simultaneous degradation of the substrate and production of hydrogen in the presence of (a) 4-CP and (b) BPA in UV-irradiated suspensions of bare TiO2, F-TiO2, Pt/TiO2, and F-TiO2/Pt. (Filled symbols: the degradation of the organic substrate, empty symbols: the production of hydrogen) (c) Time-dependent variation of TOC in the pre-anoxic and post-oxic period in the suspension of F-TiO2/Pt. (▼: 4-CP, ■: Cl−, ○: TOC, ▽: H2) Reactor volume: 30 mL for (a) and (b), 90 mL for (c), incident light intensity = 2.3 × 10−3 einstein min−1 L−1.	 


DCA	n.d.c	n.d.	1.22	0.46
NDMA	n.d.	n.d.	1.39	1.00
HQ	n.d.	n.d.	0.52	0.94
4-CP	n.d.	n.d.	0.03	1.16
4-CBA	n.d.	n.d.	0.02	2.49
BPA	n.d.	n.d.	0.44	3.34
No substrate	n.d.	n.d.	0.19	0.30

 	Fig. 2  Time profiles of hydrogen production from the degradation of the substrate (4-CP and BPA: 300 µM or 9 µmoles) in F-TiO2/Pt suspension with repeated cycles. (a) Production of hydrogen. (b) Generation of CO2 and CO from the degradation of 4-CP in the reactor headspace. The reactor was purged with N2 at the beginning of each cycle. Incident light intensity = 3.0 × 10−3 einstein min−1 L−1.	 

 	Fig. 3  Time profiles of the open-circuit potential (Eoc) decay on the catalyst-coated electrodes after the UV irradiation was turned off. Dashed line (red) indicates Eoc in the absence of 4-CP and solid line (blue) indicates Eoc in the presence of 4-CP.	 

 	Fig. 4  Outdoor solar tests for the simultaneous degradation of the organic pollutants (filled circles: substrates, empty circles: chlorides) and production of hydrogen (red squares) in F-TiO2/Pt suspension with (a) 4-CP and (b) BPA (for three consecutive days in (a) and for one day in (b)). (purple solid line: solar light intensity, green triangles: direct solar photolysis without catalyst).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, analysis of the intermediates, OH radical measurement. See DOI: 10.1039/c003858j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
