Nonlinear features of Fano resonance: a QM/EM study  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CP02459K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CP02459K
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 15994-16004Nonlinear features of Fano resonance: a QM/EM study

        
          
            Jin 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            ZongLing 
            Ding
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            YuanQin 
            Yu
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            WanZhen 
            Liang
          
        
      *b
aSchool of Physics and Optoelectronics Engineering, Energy Materials and Devices Key Lab of Anhui Province for Photoelectric Conversion, Anhui University, Hefei 230601, People's Republic of China
bState Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Theoretical and Computational Chemistry, and Department of Chemistry, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, People's Republic of China. E-mail: liangwz@xmu.edu.cn
Received 
      2nd June 2021
    , Accepted 12th July 2021First published on 13th July 2021AbstractThe nonlinear Fano effects on the absorption of hybrid systems composed of a silver nanosphere and an indoline dye molecule have been systematically investigated by the hybrid approach, which combines the quantum mechanics method (QM) with the computational electromagnetic method (EM). The absorption spectra of the dye molecule in the proximity of an Ag nanoparticle have been calculated by changing the incident field intensity, the phenomenological dephasing of molecular excitation, and the enhancement ratio of the near field. The contribution of molecular nonlinear response properties and the quantum interferences of the incident and scattered fields and of resonant plasmon–molecular excitations to the spectra has been identified. It is in no doubt that Fano resonance due to the plasmon–molecular interaction can appear in both the weak and strong field regimes; however, the Fano effect is more pronounced in the strong field regime where quantum interference leads to a nonlinear Fano effect controlled by a complex field-dependent Fano factor. When the incident field is strong enough, the resonance antisymmetry structure is spectrally resolved, and it changes with the change of the field intensity. As the field intensity varies from weak to strong, the Fano lineshape's asymmetry increases with increasing intensity in the beginning, and then decreases with a further increase of the field intensity attributed to the increase of the detuning energy induced by the integrated energy shift upon field dressing during the excitation. Decreasing the enhancement ratio of the near field or the dephasing of molecular excitation can also control the spectral lineshape transformation from an asymmetric profile to a symmetric Lorentzian lineshape. These findings are consistent with previous experimental and theoretical observations arisen by quantum interferences and are expected to stimulate further work toward exploring the plasmon–molecular interplay and the applications of Fano resonance in optical switching and sensing.
I. Introduction
For a nanosystem involving plasmonic metal NPs (MNPs) and organic molecules or semiconductors, its optical performance is influenced by many factors such as the excitation strengths, spatial separation, excited-state lifetimes, and the spectral overlapping of the constituent parts. Due to the complex interplay between the MNP's localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) and the molecule or semiconductor's excitation (exciton), a set of particular characteristics in absorption/scattering spectra such as excitonic splitting, asymmetric lineshapes, plasmon-induced absorption enhancement and transparencies have been observed in those nanosystems.1–8 Recently, resonant plasmonic structures have been considered promising candidates for enhancing nonlinear optical processes such as above-threshold ionization and high-order harmonic generation of nearby molecules9,10 due to their ability to greatly enhance the optical near field.
In the strong plasmon–exciton coupling regime where the plasmon–exciton coupling is much larger than the damping rates of plasmon resonance and excitons,11 the interaction of plasmons and excitons results in two new mixed states of light and matter separated energetically by a Rabi splitting that exhibits a characteristic anticrossing behavior of the LSP–exciton energy tuning.12–14 In the weak coupling regime where the plasmon–exciton coupling strength is much less than one of the dampings,11 the absorption spectra characterize an asymmetric Fano lineshape.15–20 The realistic lineshape has been found to be susceptible to the detuning energy,21–25 the external radiation loss and intrinsic losses of the molecule–plasmon system,22,23,26 and the laser power.27,28 This usual Fano resonance effect can be introduced for both the linear regime29 and the strongly nonlinear regime.27,28,30,37 Govorov et al. found that when a semiconductor quantum dot becomes strongly excited at a high intensity of light, a nonlinear Fano effect appears in hybrid metal–semiconductor nanostructures.27,28,30 The field-tunable nonlinear Fano effect appears at high intensities when the degree of coherence in the system becomes strongly increased, because in this case the Rabi frequency starts to exceed the exciton broadening. With their unique characteristic and unusual combination of classical and quantum structures, Fano resonances are quite attractive for applications in a wide range of fields, from telecommunications to ultrasensitive biosensing, medical instrumentation, data storage, optical switching and solar energy harvesting and conversion. For example, LSPR biochemical sensors with improved sensitivities31–36 have been built by exploiting the feature that plasmonic Fano resonances are extremely sensitive to their local dielectric environment.
Fano's pioneering work29 found that the interference of a discrete localized state with a continuum band of states gives rise to characteristically asymmetric peaks in excitation spectra. The Fano resonance lineshape manifested in the absorption spectrum, σ(E), was described by the famous Fano formula:  where E is the energy,  and Er and Γ are the energy and resonance width of the continuous band, respectively. The absorption lineshape is predominantly determined by the Fano asymmetry parameter q, being a cotangent of the phase shift δ between two modes. At |q| ≫ 1, |q| ≪ 1 and |q| ∼ 1, one may observe the characteristic resonance, antiresonance, and dispersion absorption lineshapes. This Fano formula is generally applicable to the weak field case. When the laser power in the nonlinear regime interacts with the molecule in the proximity of a MNP, the multiphoton absorption and emission processes can take place easily, the field dressing of the strongly driven excitation may induce energy and phase shifts of the molecular excited state relative to the field-free resonant transition energy,38 and quantum interference leads to the nonlinear Fano effect controlled by a complex field-tunable Fano factor.39 Additionally, for a molecule, the two-state model may not be suitable since a few molecular excited states may lie within the plasmon mode volume. In this regard, for a plasmon–molecular system under an intense field, it is difficult to derive an analytical formula for the Fano lineshape. A numerical ab initio calculation is required.
One faces challenges in theoretically describing the optical responses of plasmon–exciton hybrid systems because the elementary excitations of molecules or semiconductors and MNPs possess different properties, and there exists a large disparity in length scales in such systems. Furthermore, the interaction between the LSPR and the exciton needs to be suitably tackled because it endows hybrid superstructures with novel properties. Many theoretical approaches have been proposed to investigate plasmon–exciton systems. The first category of the most commonly used methods is the multiscale approaches40–46 wherein the plasmonic nanostructures are treated by the classical47–53 or cavity quantum electromagnetic methods (EM),43,54–57 and the molecules are described by quantum mechanics (QM) approaches such as time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) or TD Hartree–Fock (TDHF). The second category is based on the effective model Hamiltonian,23,28,30,58–65 where the molecule or semiconductor is identified by a two-level model and the resonant plasmonic system is identified by the plasmonic resonance modes. The third one is based on a pure classical electrodynamic framework such as the dipole–dipole coupling approximation model,5 and coupled harmonic oscillators.66,67 Detailed atomic distribution information of hybrid systems is missed by the latter two categories of treatment.
In the past few years, we investigated the linear and nonlinear optical properties of hybrid complexes assembled from molecules and MNPs using the mixed QM/EM approach, where the localized field produced by the LSPR, as usual, was obtained by the numerical solution of Maxwell's equations using the classical electrodynamics finite difference time domain (FDTD) technique,68 and the optical properties of the adsorbates were described by the real-time time-dependent density functional theory (RT-TDDFT)52,69 or RT-TDHF methods.70 In this work, we adopted this hybrid approach to study nonlinear properties of Fano lineshapes. The surface enhanced localized field obtained by FDTD will interact with the molecule described by RT-TDHF. We will investigate the factors which control the transformation from symmetric Lorentzian to nonlinear asymmetric Fano absorption lineshapes of a dye molecule–Ag NP hybrid system, and unveil how the absorption lineshape varies with the intensity of the incident laser field and the phenomenological dephasing of molecular excitation. The effects of the interference between the incident and scattered fields, and of the different approximations used for truncating the induced density matrix, on the absorption lineshapes will be demonstrated. The origin of the nonlinear Fano effect is thus unveiled.
The rest of the paper is arranged as follows. In Section II, we briefly describe the hybrid scheme for molecular optical absorption spectroscopy. The details of RT-TDHF coupled with the FDTD method to simulate optical absorption spectroscopy are shown. In Section III, the plasmon-enhanced nonlinear optical properties will be discussed. We investigate how the spectral lineshapes change with the incident field intensity, the interference behaviours between the incident and scattered fields, the absorption difference yielded by the approximations with and without a linear response, etc. The plasmon–exciton coupling is tuned by the incident field intensity and the enhancement ratio of the local near field. Besides, the influence of the damping ratio of molecular excitation on the spectral lineshape will also be shown. Finally, concluding remarks are given in Section IV.
II. Theoretical methods and computational details
In this work, the optical properties of a hybrid system composed of a silver nanosphere with a radius of 10 nm and an organic adsorbate, an indoline dye molecule (ID1)71 (see Fig. 1), are investigated by using the mixed quantum-classical approach, where the localized field produced by the plasmon resonance of noble metal NPs is obtained by the numerical solution of Maxwell's equations using the FDTD technique,68 and the optical properties of the adsorbates are described by the real time TDHF (RT-TDHF) approach. Indoline dyes are one class of organic photosensitizer dyes with high power conversion efficiencies for dye sensitized solar cells. A detailed description of this hybrid QM/EM method can be found in our previous work.52,70
 Fig. 1  (a) The structure of the Ag–ID1 hybrid system. (b) The incident electric field and the scattered field in the x and y directions for the observed point, which is set at the center of mass of ID1; the distance between the point and the surface of the NP is about 1 nm. The strength of the incident field is normalized to 1. (c) The real and imaginary part of the SRF for the Ag NP at the observed point. 
In RT-TDHF, the time-dependent one-electron density matrix ρ(t) for spin κ is obtained by solving the equation of motion in an AO basis, (1)where the matrix element of the Fock operator with spin κ reads (2)
Here  is the one-electron integral,  is the two-electron integral, and ‖μν,λσ = 2Vμν,λσ − Vμλ,σν. {χμ} denotes the set of atomic orbitals. μν is the matrix element of the electronic dipole operator.
The field acting on the molecule which interacts with Ag NPs includes the incident laser field 0(r,t) and the scattered field sca(r,t) produced by the NPs. The time-dependent incident field is set as  with  = 0.0, and τ = 0.1 fs. E0max is the field amplitude of the Gaussian beam. In order to keep the numerical effort of the RT-TDHF calculation feasible, here we adopted the spectroscopic parametrization of the semi-empirical intermediate neglect of differential overlap Hamiltonian.72 Four valence orbitals 2s, 2px, 2py, and 2pz for C, N, and O atoms will be included in the simulation. On the basis of the zero differential overlap approximation, all one-electron integrals involving three centers, all two-electron integrals involving three or four centers, and two-center two-electron integrals except those of the Coulomb type are neglected; the remaining integrals are parametrized on the basis of experimental or higher-level computational data.
At first, eqn (1) is solved in the time-domain by the fourth-order Runge–Kutta technique without linear expansion (W/OLRA). In this case, nonlinear properties may appear in the spectra and high order responses will work. The total external laser field and the internal Coulomb forces of the atoms and molecules are treated on an equal footing. Once ρ(t) = ρα(t) + ρβ(t) is known, the time-dependent dipole moment μi(t) = Tr(ρ(t)μi) with the i-th component can be calculated, and the dynamic polarizability tensor is obtained as (3)
Here γ is a damping factor representing the phenomenological dephasing. To account for spatial averaging over the incident polarization directions, the absorption cross section of the bound ID1 dye irradiated by light with a fixed propagation direction is given by the following48 (4)
Here λ is defined as the scattering response function (SRF), which measures the enhancement of the local electric field due to plasmon excitation, (5)
Then sca(t) can be expressed as a two-dimensional Fourier transform of 0(t) and λij(ω) (6)
By introducing sca(t) to the time-dependent Fock operator (eqn (2)) and obtaining the average absorption cross section by eqn (4), the local field enhancement effects on absorption can be shown. In addition, the influence of polarization of the electromagnetic field near the particle surface and its coupling with the transition moment associated with excitation in the molecule are also taken into account.
Maxwell's equations are solved using the FDTD method within the FDTD++ package.73 The light propagation direction is set along the +z axis. A cubic simulation box with a side length of 40 nm and a grid size of 0.2 nm is adopted. Each grid cell is characterized by an ε value based on its distance to the center of the cubic box, which is also the origin of the cartesian coordinates, with  inside the Ag NP according to the Drude–Lorentz model and ε = 1 in the surrounding medium. Here ε∞ is the relative permittivity,  is the relative permittivity resulting from the Drude pole, ωp is the bulk plasmon frequency, and γp is a width factor which includes electron–phonon and other intrinsic electron relaxation mechanisms. The last term  describes the relative permittivity arising from each Lorentz oscillator pole. Δεp is the shift in relative permittivity at the electron transition at ωp and δ is the electron dephasing rate. All the parameters were determined by fitting the experimental result.74
To identify the contribution of the nonlinear response properties to the absorption cross section, we then apply the linear response approximation (LRA) to eqn (1). With the LRA (W/LRA), the equation-of-motion of the density matrix becomes (7)with ρ(t) = ρ(0) + δρ(1)(t), and F(1)(t) = ‖δρ(1)(t) + Fext(t). F0 and ρ0 are the ground-state Fock and density matrices, respectively. In W/LRA, the high-order response of the density is neglected.
III. Results and discussion
The plasmon resonance of an Ag NP with R = 10 nm appears around 3.5 eV (see Fig. 1(c)).
Compared with the pulse duration of the incident field, those of the scattered fields obtained by eqn (6) are much longer as Fig. 1(b) shows. The intense near field of the resonant plasmons behaves like a strong coherent optical excitation source, leading to increased population rates of excited states and new resonance-enhanced emission of the molecules. Since the off-diagonal terms of λ(r,ω) are nearly negligible compared with the diagonal terms, only λxx(r,ω) and λyy(r,ω) are involved in the spectral calculations. Two separate RT-TDHF simulations have been carried out by assuming that the incident electric field pulse is applied along the x- and the y-axis, respectively. The calculated spectral cross sections are obtained as σ(ω) = 1/2(σxx + σyy).
The dye molecule is optimized at the B3LYP/6-31G* level of theory. For the isolated ID1 molecule, three low-energy absorption peaks appear at around 2.77, 3.42 and 3.52 eV (see the inset of Fig. 2). As the damping factor γ increases, the two bands centered at 3.42 and 3.52 eV mix together to form a broad absorption band centered around 3.5 eV, at which the NP plasmon is resonant with the excitation frequency.
 Fig. 2  The absorption spectra of an isolated ID1 molecule varying with the optical intensity I in W/OLRA. γ = 0.2 is employed. The inset shows the absorption spectra of the isolated ID1 dye with different γ at I = 1.0 × 106 W cm−2. 
A. The effect of the incident optical intensity on the absorption spectra
At first, we investigate the influence of the optical intensity (I ∝ (E0max)2) of the incident laser on the absorption of both isolated and bound ID1 molecules. The corresponding absorption spectra are shown in Fig. 2 and 3, respectively. γ = 0.2 eV is set.
 Fig. 3  The absorption spectra of the bound ID1 molecule varying with I in (a) W/LRA and (b) W/OLRA. 
In the strong field regime, the relative intensities and locations of the absorption peaks are susceptible to I when RT-TDHF includes the response of the electron density beyond the linear response regime (without LRA (W/OLRA)). As Fig. 2 shows, the increase of the field intensity continuously decreases the on-resonance absorption of the two high-energy bands at around 2.77 and 3.5 eV, blue-shifting and red-shifting their peak locations, respectively. Besides, many new absorption bands appear in the low-energy range. These phenomena show that the fields couple with the molecule nonlinearly. The decrease of the on-resonance absorption and the integrated energy shift are attributed to the absorption saturation and the field dressing during the excitation, respectively, which are consistent with the experimental observation.38 The higher-power applied field strongly admixes the states of different energy levels and makes higher-order multiphoton processes become increasingly important.
Compared with the spectra of the isolated ID1 molecule, the impact of the scattered field on the molecular spectra is very pronounced. It not only further alters the absorption peak intensities and locations, but also gives rise to a characteristically asymmetric lineshape in the resonance energy region. For example, at I = 5 × 1011 W cm−2, the absorption peak at ∼2.77 eV nearly disappears, and a distinctive antisymmetric profile appears at around 3.5 eV. The antisymmetric profile becomes sharp at I ≥ 1 × 1011 W cm−2, and the negative part of the absorption reaches a maximum at I = 5 × 1011 W cm−2. However, further increasing I inhibits the Fano resonance effect.
The complex optical responses can be explained by the field-induced dipole change. At a given time, the time-dependent dipole moment or optical polarization can be expanded into a Taylor-series as, (8)where i,j,k are Cartesian coordinate directions, and μ0i is the permanent dipole moment in the absence of the external field. α and β are the time-domain response functions of first and second order, respectively. The induced dipole consists of the linear part in the field  and of the nonlinear part . In the weak field domain, the linear part is dominant, and σ is thus not sensitive to the optical intensity because all nonlinear high-order responses are negligibly small. For example, at I = 1.0 × 106 W cm−2, the spectra produced by W/LRA and W/OLRA are nearly the same. If the molecule is immobilized in a strong field, the contribution of the nonlinear parts to μ(t) is also significant. As I become larger and larger, the nonlinear parts in eqn (8) increase more obviously than the linear part since the dipole moment is proportional to the second and higher powers of the field intensity.
The induced dipole moment oscillates with the basis frequency ω of the induced field as well as with other frequencies: such as the second (2ω) and third (3ω) harmonics. However, because the phases of different orders of optical responses are different, μ(t)/Emax decreases more quickly with the increase of the propagation time as Fig. 4 shows. Besides, the equilibrium position of the induced dipole moment shifts away from zero because an oscillating electric field may result in a non-oscillating dipole moment related to the hyperpolarizabilities βi,j,k(0;ω,ω) and γi,j,k,l(0;0,ω,ω).75,76
 Fig. 4  
 evolving with time for the bound ID1. A = E0max on the vertical axis. 
When the incident field is strong enough, the highly excited molecule cannot absorb subsequent radiation, and the absorption saturates. The higher frequency signal modes begin to dominate the time-resolved dipole moment. So the on-resonance absorption around 2.77 eV decreases with the nonlinearity.77 Besides, in the nonlinear regime, the absorption around 2.77 eV is blue-shifted with the increase of the field intensity. It is because the highly displaced charge density experiences a nonlinear restoring force which is stronger than in the linear regime.77
Compared with the absorption in other regions, the absorption in the resonant energy region of about 3.47 eV is more complex due to the quantum interference between resonance plasmons and molecular excitations. In the linear regime, the plasmon–exciton coupling increases linearly with E0, and the Fano asymmetry parameter q doesn't change. Therefore, from I = 1.0 × 106 to I = 1.0 × 108 W cm−2, there are no changes for this peak in the normalized spectra as Fig. 3(b) shows. Quickly, nonlinear saturation effects make the excitation to the discrete state stop increasing. But the transition to the continuum still increases with the enhanced incident field, leading the Fano parameter q to decrease. Besides, when I increases to 1.0 × 1010 W cm−2, the absorption at 3.52 eV of the isolated ID1 molecule red shifts by 0.01 eV (see Fig. 2), and the plasmon–exciton coupling enhances because Δω = |ωm − ωp| decreases. The competition between the coupling and q makes the absorption spectra at the resonance energy increase a little when I = 1.0 × 1010 W cm−2, and decrease quickly as I increases continuously. As the field intensity increases, the negative absorption part becomes deeper and deeper. But the negative peak doesn't further enhance with a further increase of I. At I = 2 × 1012 W cm−2, the Fano interference effect becomes weak since this strong field red-shifts the molecular excitation slightly, leading to the increase of detuning energy Δω.
To unveil the nonlinear Fano effect clearly, we calculate the absorption spectra with the LRA. Fig. 3(a) shows that the absorption profile does't vary with I in W/LRA. There is no obvious difference in σ as I increases from 1.0 × 106 to 1.0 × 1012 W cm−2, and no negative absorption peak appears.
To show a more obvious demonstration of the nonlinear feature in the excitation, the absorption difference near the resonance regime produced using W/LRA and W/OLRA is plotted in Fig. 5. It is clear that the applied fields coupled to the molecule nonlinearly, and the nonlinear component is susceptible to I. For the dye–Ag NP hybrid system, the effect of the nonlinear response on the spectrum is mainly twofold. On the one hand, it induces a significant Fano effect in the resonance energy regime, and, on the other hand, it leads to a nonlinear change in the relative spectral intensities and peak positions. As Fig. 5 shows, at I = 1 × 1010 W cm−2, sharp antisymmetric Fano profiles appear at around 2.7 and 3.5 eV. As I increases to 2 × 1011 W cm−2, the Fano lineshape formed by the nonlinear response changes from asymmetric to a dip. As I continually increases, the dip deepens. At I = 2 × 1012 W cm−2, the Fano effect decreases in the W/OLRA absorption spectra because the detuning energy of Δω increases. However, the hyperpolarizability still prevents the absorption strength from growing linearly with E0. So there is also a shifted dip in Fig. 5 and the depth of the dip decreases. It is clear that at higher power a laser field strongly admixes the states and the physics becomes rich. A remarkable interplay of coherent nonlinear transitions takes place in the strong field regime.78
 Fig. 5  The difference between the absorption calculated using W/LRA and W/OLRA for the bound ID1. 
B. The interference effect of incident and scattered fields on the spectra
The nonlinear properties of surface-enhanced absorption spectra can also be studied from a different point of view. As we know, when two light beams recombine, they interfere and form a pattern that is dependent on the phase difference between them. For a dye in the proximity of NPs, light with an intensity I ∝ (E0max)2 + (Escamax)2 + 2E0maxEscamaxcos(δ)(9)interacts with the dye molecule. Here E0max and Escamax are the amplitude of the incident and scattered fields, respectively, and δ denotes the phase difference between those two light beams. The third term in eqn (9) is the coherence term which induces the multiphoton processes.
In order to investigate the contribution of the coherence term to the absorption spectra, we calculate σ(Esca) and the absorption difference defined by σ(Etotal) − σ(E0) − σ(Esca) and show the results in Fig. 6. Here σ(Etotal), σ(E0) and σ(Esca) are the absorption cross sections produced by the fields applied to the dye molecule with Etotal, E0 and Esca, respectively.
 Fig. 6  (a) The absorption spectra produced by Esca varying with I. (b) The absorption difference of σ(Etotal) − σ(E0) − σ(Esca). 
In the intense field regime, both E0 and Esca couple to the molecule nonlinearly. The Fano antisymmetric profile only appears in σ(Esca), demonstrating that it originates from the quantum interference between the plasmon and exciton. Compared with the absorption arisen by the incident field E0, the absorption arisen by the scattered field is more susceptible to I. As Fig. 6(a) shows, the sharp antisymmetric lineshape in σ(Esca) appears more quickly than that in σ(Etotal) as I increases.
As Fig. 6(b) shows, the antisymmetric profile near the resonant energy originating from the coherent term is very evident even when the field intensity is as low as I = 1.0 × 1010 W cm−2. As I increases, this phenomena become more pronounced. The antisymmetric profile induced by the coherence term of two fields varies from the style of ‘negative peak after positive peak’ to ‘positive peak after the negative peak’ as I increases from 1 × 1010 to 2 × 1012 W cm−2. As a result, the negative part of the absorption in σ(Etotal) disappears gradually at I ≥ 2 × 1012 W cm−2 as Fig. 3(b) shows.
C. Lineshape variation with the SRF and the damping ratio
Last, we investigated the variance of the absorption lineshape with the plasmon–exciton coupling and the damping ratio of molecular excitation. The plasmon–exciton coupling is tuned by the local near field intensity. Here we set I = 1 × 106 W cm−2, and tune the enhancement ratio of the near field by scaling the SRF, λ, with a factor of 0.6, 0.4, 0.2, and 0.1, respectively, and the reduction of the SRF can be achieved by increasing the distance between the molecule and Ag NPs. Then the corresponding absorption spectrum of ID1 in the proximity of the Ag NP is calculated. The results are shown in Fig. 7. We found that both the absorption intensity and profile near the resonance region are more sensitive to the scaling factor than those around 2.77 eV. Decreasing the scaling factor weakens the interaction between the exciton and plasmon, and the lineshape becomes broad and more symmetric.
 Fig. 7  (a) The absorption spectra varying with the scaling factor of λ. (b) The lineshapes of the bound ID1 near the resonance energy. γ = 0.2 eV and I = 1.0 × 106 W cm−2. 
In addition to the resonant plasmon–exciton coupling, the dampings of plasmons and molecular excitation can also affect the optical response of the hybrid system. Fig. 8 displays the electronic absorption spectra at different γ. As the half-width of the molecular absorption spectra increases, the asymmetric character of the lineshape becomes more obvious. An antisymmetric Fano lineshape starts to appear at γ = 0.3 eV. This is because, in the weak field regime, the damping ratio of the molecular excitation is larger than the plasmon–exciton coupling.
 Fig. 8  The absorption spectra of the bound ID1 varying with γ at I = 1 × 106 W cm−2. 
IV. Concluding remarks
We have calculated the surface enhanced absorption spectra of a dye molecule in the proximity of an Ag nanosphere of R = 10 nm by using the hybrid RT-TDHF/FDTD approach as a function of the incident optical intensity, the phenomenological dephasing of molecular excitation, the enhancement ratio of the near field, and different approximations adopted to truncate the induced electron density. The quantum interference effects between the incident and scattered fields as well as between the resonant plasmon and molecular excitations on the spectra have been unveiled. A result comparison is made with the isolated molecule. The main conclusions are summarized as follows:
(1) Our findings support the previous experimental and theoretical evidence that Fano resonance behaviour can appear at a field intensity in the linear and strongly nonlinear regimes. However, it is more pronounced in the nonlinear regime at high power due to a remarkable interplay of coherent nonlinear transitions.
(2) In the strong field regime, we clearly observe the absorbance decrease and the energy shift of the molecular on-resonance absorption bands with increasing intensity. A remarkable Fano asymmetric lineshape appears in the resonance energy region, mainly attributed to the molecular nonlinear optical response properties. The lineshape's asymmetry increases with increasing intensity at the beginning and decreases with further increasing intensity because the integrated energy shift upon field dressing during the excitation leads to the increase of the detuning energy.
(3) The nonlinear Fano effect can always be clearly observed in the absorption difference of σ(Etotal) − σ(E0) − σ(Esca), which corresponds to the interference effect between the incident field and scattered field. Around the resonant energy region, the antisymmetric lineshape in the absorption difference varies from the style of ‘negative peak after positive peak’ to ‘positive peak after the negative peak’ as I increases from 1 × 1010 to 2 × 1012 W cm−2. When two fields interact with a molecule, the first field E0(t) induces a dipole, μind = αE + βE2 + γE3 + …, the second field Esca interacts with both the molecular permeant dipole and μind, and multiphoton processes may take place even when the field intensity is in the linear regime.
(4) An asymmetric Fano lineshape can also appear in the weak field regime when the damping ratio of the molecular excitation is larger than the plasmon–exciton coupling. The larger the near field enhancement ratio, the more remarkable the asymmetric lineshape. Besides, in the resonance energy region, the molecular absorption doesn't respond to the plasmon–exciton coupling linearly, manifesting the nonlinear feature of the Fano effect.
Our study establishes the microscopic mechanisms underlying the appearance and variance of the Fano resonance phenomenon with the light intensity. It reveals the feature of the Fano resonance and the influence of quantum interferences on the absorption lineshape. The general and fundamental principles established by analysis of the simulation results are useful for understanding the nonlinear phenomena in surface-enhanced absorption spectra, the development of nonlinear plasmonic devices, and the design of plasmonic metal nanoparticles to tune the photochemical and photophysical properties of nearby molecules. Our findings are expected to stimulate further work toward exploring the plasmon–molecular interplay and exploiting the Fano resonance.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
J. S. is thankful for the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21773001), the Key Project of the Foundation of Anhui Educational Committee, China (KJ2019A0020), and the State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, X. M. U. W. Z. L. is thankful for the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21833006).
References
B. K. Juluri, M. Q. Lu, Y. B. Zheng, T. J. Huang and L. Jensen, Coupling between Molecular and Plasmonic Resonances: Effect of Molecular Absorbance, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18499–18503 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yoshida, N. Uchida and N. Kometani, Synthesis and Spectroscopic Studies of Composite Gold Nanorods with a Double-Shell Structure Composed of Spacer and Cyanine Dye J-Aggregate Layers, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11802–11807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yoshida, Y. Yonezawa and N. Kometani, Tuning of the Spectroscopic Properties of Composite Nanoparticles by the Insertion of a Spacer Layer: Effect of Exciton–Plasmon Coupling, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 6683–6689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Antosiewicz, S. P. Apell and T. Shegai, Plasmon–Exciton Interactions in a Core–Shell Geometry: From Enhanced Absorption to Strong Coupling, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 454–463 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Faucheaux, J. Y. Fu and P. K. Jain, Unified Theoretical Framework for Realizing Diverse Regimes of Strong Coupling between Plasmons and Electronic Transitions, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 2710–2717 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gonzalez-Ballestero, J. Feist, E. Moreno and F. J. Garcia-Vidal, Harvesting Excitons Through Plasmonic Strong Coupling, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 121402 CrossRef .
S. J. Ding, X. G. Li, F. Nan, Y. T. Zhong, L. Zhou, X. D. Xiao, Q. Q. Wang and Z. Y. Zhang, Strongly Asymmetric Spectroscopy in Plasmon–Exciton Hybrid Systems due to Interference-Induced Energy Repartitioning, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 177401 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Cao, W. H. Lin, M. T. Sun, W. J. Liang and Y. Z. Song, Exciton-Plasmon Coupling Interactions:From Principle to Applications, Nanophotonics, 2018, 7, 145–167 Search PubMed .
M. F. Ciappina, J. A. Pérez-Hernández and A. S. Landsman, 
            et al., Attosecond Physics at the Nanoscale, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2017, 80, 054401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, J. Jin, Y. J. Kim, I. Y. Park, Y. Kim and S. W. Kim, High-Harmonic Generation by Resonant Plasmon Field Enhancement, Nature, 2008, 453, 757–760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Limonov, M. V. Rybin, A. N. Poddubny and Y. S. Kivshar, Fano Resonances in Photonics, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 543–554 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Fofang, T. H. Park, O. Neumann, N. A. Mirin, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Plexcitonic Nanoparticles: Plasmon–Exciton Coupling in Nanoshell-J-Aggregate Complexes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3481–3487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. T. Fofang, N. K. Grady, Z. Y. Fan, A. O. Govorov and N. J. Halas, Plexciton Dynamics: Exciton-Plasmon Coupling in a J-Aggregate-Au Nanoshell Complex Provides a Mechanism for Nonlinearity, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1556–1560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manjavacas, F. J. G. Abajo and P. Nordlander, Quantum Plexcitonics: Strongly Interacting Plasmons and Excitons, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2318–2323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Hao, H. Y. Wang, Y. Jiang, Q. D. Chen, K. Ueno, W. Q. Wang, H. Misawa and H. B. Sun, Hybrid-State Dynamics of Gold Nanorods/Dye J-Aggregates under Strong Coupling, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7824–7828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Eizner, O. Avayu, R. Ditcovski and T. Ellenbogen, Aluminum Nanoantenna Complexes for Strong Coupling between Excitons and Localized Surface Plasmons, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6215–6221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Neubrech, C. Huck, K. Weber, A. Pucci and H. Giessen, Surface-Enhanced Infrared Spectroscopy using Resonant Nanoantennas, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 5110–5145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Sun, W. B. Cai, L. J. Wan and M. Osawa, Infrared Absorption Enhancement for CO Adsorbed on Au Films in Perchloric Acid Solutions and Effects of Surface Structure Studied by Cyclic Voltammetry, Scanning Tunneling Microscopy, and Surface-Enhanced IR Spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 2460–2466 CrossRef CAS .
O. Krauth, G. Fahsold, N. Magg and A. Pucci, Anomalous Infrared Transmission of Adsorbates on Ultrathin Metal Films: Fano Effect Near the Percolation Threshold, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 6330 CrossRef CAS .
A. Priebe, M. Sinther, G. Fahsold and A. Pucci, The Correlation Between Film Thickness and Adsorbate Line Shape in Surface Enhanced Infrared Absorption, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 119, 4887 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yi, E. M. You, S. Y. Ding and Z. Q. Tian, Unveiling the Molecule–Plasmon Interactions in Surface-Enhanced Infrared Absorption Spectroscopy, Nat. Sci. Rev., 2020, 7, 1228–1238 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Li, L. Zhou, Z. H. Hao and Q. Q. Wang, Plamon-Exciton Coupling in Comlex Systems, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800275 CrossRef .
B. Zhang and W. Z. Liang, The Vibronic Absorption Spectra and Exciton Dynamics of Plasmon–Exciton Hybrid Systems in the Regimes Ranged from Fano Antiresonance to Rabi-Like Splitting, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 014102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, A. B. Khanikaev and R. Adato, 
            et al., Fano-Resonant Asymmetric Metamaterials for Ultrasensitive Spectroscopy and Identification of Molecular Monolayers, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 69–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Neubrech, A. Pucci, T. W. Cornelius, S. Karim, A. García-Etxarri and J. Aispurua, Resonant Plasmonic and Vibrational Coupling in A Tailored Nanoantenna For Infrared Detection, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 157403 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Adato, A. Artar, S. Erramilli and H. Altug, Engineered Absorption Enhancement and Induced Transparency in Coupled Molecular and Plasmonic Resonator Systems, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2584–2591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kroner, A. O. Govorov, S. Remi, B. Biedermann, S. Seidl, A. Badolato, P. M. Petroff, W. Zhang, R. Barbour, B. D. Gerardot, R. J. Warburton and K. Karrai, The Nonlinear Fano Effect, Nature, 2008, 451, 311–314 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, A. O. Govorov and G. W. Bryant, Semiconductor-Metal Nanoparticle Molecules: Hybrid Excitons and Non-linear Fano effect, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 146804 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Fano, Effects of Configuration Interaction on Intensities and Phase Shifts, Phys. Rev., 1961, 124, 1866 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang and A. O. Govorov, Quantum Theory of the Nonlinear Fano Effect in Hybrid Metal-Semiconductor Nanostructures: The Case of Strong Nonlinearity, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 081405 CrossRef .
B. Luk’Yanchuk, N. I. Zheludev, S. A. Maier, N. J. Halas, P. Nordlander, H. Giessen and C. T. Chong, The Fano Resonance in Plasmonic Nanostructures and Metamaterias, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 707–715 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, J. Ye, C. Chen, L. Hermans, N. Verellen, J. Ryken, H. Jans, W. Van Roy, V. V. Moshchalkov, L. Lagae and P. Van Dorpe, Biosensing using Diffractively Coupled Plasmonic Crystals: the Figure of Merit Revisited, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 176–181 CrossRef CAS .
N. Verellen, P. Van Dorpe, C. Huang, K. Lodewijks, G. A. E. Vandenbosch, L. Lagae and V. V. Moshchalkov, Plasmon Line Shaping using Nanocrosses for High Sensitivity Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance Sensing, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 391–397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Eftekhari, C. Escobedo, J. Ferreira, X. Duan, E. M. Girotto, A. G. Brolo, R. Gordon and D. Sinton, Nanoholes as Nanochannels: Flow-Through Plasmonic Sensing, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 4308–4311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Yanik, M. Huang, A. Artar, T.-Y. Chang and H. Altug, Integrated Nanoplasmonic-Nanofluidic Biosensors with Targeted Delivery of Analytes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 021101–021103 CrossRef .
A. Barik, L. M. Otto, D. Yoo, J. Jose, T. W. Johnson and S.-H. Oh, Dielectrophoresis-Enhanced Plasmonic Sensing with Gold Nanohole Arrays, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2006–2012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. E. Tasgn, A. Bek and S. Postac, Fano Resonances, in the Linear and Nonlinear Plasmonic Response. in Fano Resonances in Optics and Microwaves. Springer Series in Optical Sciences, ed. E. Kamenetskii, A. Sadreev and A. Miroshnichenko, Springer, Cham,  2018, vol. 219 Search PubMed .
C. Ott, L. Aufleger, T. Ding, M. Rebholz, A. Magunia, M. Hartmann, V. Stoo, D. Wachs, P. Birk, G. D. Borisova and K. Meyer, 
            et al., Strong-Field Extreme-Ultraviolet Dressing of Atomic Double Excitation, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2019, 123, 163201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lambropoulos and P. Zoller, Antoionizing states in strong laser fields, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1981, 24, 379 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Wright, P. M. Rodger, S. Corni and T. R. Walsh, GolP-CHARMM: First-Principles Based Force Fields for the Interaction of Proteins with Au(111) and Au(100), J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2013, 9, 1616–1630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Andreussi, A. Biancardi, S. Corni and B. Mennucci, Plasmon-Controlled Light-Harvesting: Design Rules for Biohybrid Devices via Multiscale Modeling, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4475–4484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Smith, T. E. Karam, L. H. Haber and K. Lopata, Capturing Plasmon–Molecule Dynamics in Dye Monolayers on Metal Nanoparticles Using Classical Electrodynamics with Quantum Embedding, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 16932–16942 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fregoni, G. Granucci, E. Coccia, M. Persico and S. Corni, Manipulating Azobenzene Photoisomerization Through Strong Light–Molecule Coupling, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mennucci and S. Corni, Multiscale Modelling of Photoinduced Processes in Composite Systems, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2019, 3, 315–330 CrossRef .
S. M. Morton and L. Jensen, A Discrete Ineraction Model/Quantum Mechanical Method to Describe the Interaction of Metal Nanoparticles and Molecular Absorption, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 135, 134103 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gao and D. Neuhauser, Dynamical Quantum-Electrodynamics Embedding: Combining Timedependent Density Functional Theory and the Near-Field Method, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 137, 074113 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Chen, J. M. McMahon, M. A. Ratner and G. C. Schatz, Classical Electrodynamics Coupled to Quantum Mechanics for Calculation of Molecular Optical Properties: a RT-TDDFT/FDTD Approach, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14384–14392 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, M. G. Blaber, S. D. Standridge, E. J. DeMarco, J. T. Hupp, M. A. Ratner and G. C. Schatz, Computational Modeling of Plasmon-Enhanced Light Absorption in a Multicomponent Dye Sensitized Solar Cell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10215–10221 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yam, L. Meng, G. Chen, Q. Chen and N. Wong, Multiscale Quantum Mechanics/Electromagnetics Simulation for Electronic Devices, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 14365–14369 RSC .
L. Meng, C. Yam, S. Koo, Q. Chen, N. Wong and G. Chen, Dynamic Multiscale Quantum Mechanics/Electromagnetics Simulation Method, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2012, 8, 1190–1199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Payton, S. M. Morton, J. E. Moore and L. Jensen, A Hybrid Atomistic Electrodynamics–Quantum Mechanical Approach for Simulating Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 47, 88–99 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sun, G. Li and W. Z. Liang, How does the Plasmonic Enhancement of Molecular Absorption Depend on the Energy Gap Between Molecular Excitation and Plasmon Modes: A Mixed TDDFT/FDTD Investigation, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 16835–16845 RSC .
T. A. R. Purcell and T. Seideman, Modeling the Chiral Imprinting Response of Oriented Dipole Moments on Metal Nanostructures, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 4801–4809 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Nascimento and A. E. D. Prince, Modeling Molecule–Plasmon Interactions Using Quantized Radiation Fields within Time-Dependent Electronic Structure Theory, J. Chem. Phys., 2015, 143, 214104 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Luk, J. Feist, J. J. Toppari and G. Groenhof, Multiscale Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Polaritonic Chemistry, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2017, 13, 4324–4335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Vendrell, Coherent Dynamics in Cavity Femtochemistry: Application of the Multi-Configuration Time-Dependent Hartree Method, Chem. Phys., 2018, 509, 55–65 CrossRef CAS .
T. Neuman, R. Esteban, D. Casanova, F. J. García-Vidal and J. Aizpurua, Coupling of Molecular Emitters and Plasmonic Cavities beyond the Point-Dipole Approximation, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2358–2364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao and W. Z. Liang, Theoretical Investigation of Resonance Raman Scattering of Dye Molecules Absorbed on Semiconductor Surfaces, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 135, 044108 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zelinskyy, Y. Zhang and V. May, Supramolecular Complex Coupled to a Metal Nanoparticle: Computational Studies on the Optical Absorption, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 11330–11340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. O. Govorov, H. Zhang and Y. K. Gun'ko, Theory of Photoinjection of Hot Plasmonic Carriers from Metal Nanostructures into Semiconductors and Surface Molecules, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 16616–16631 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Ye, Y. Zhao and W. Z. Liang, Resonance Raman Spectra of Organic Molecules Absorbed on Inorganic Semiconducting Surfaces: Contribution From Both Localized Intramolecular Excitation and Intermolecular Charge Transfer Excitation, J. Chem. Phys., 2015, 143, 154105 CrossRef PubMed .
L. X. Wang and V. May, Control of Intermolecular Electronic Excitation Energy Transfer: Application of Metal Nanoparticle Plasmons, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 13428–13433 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. You, S. Ramakrishna and T. Seideman, Plasmon-Mediated Absorption and Photocurrent Spectra in Sensitized Solar Cells, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 1178–1187 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, Y. Zhao and W. Z. Liang, Collaborative Effect of Plasmon-Induced Resonance Energy and Electron Transfer on the Interfacial Electron Injection Dynamics of Dye-Sensitized Solar Cell, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 151, 044702 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zhang, Y. Zhao and W. Z. Liang, Joint Effects of Exciton-Exciton and Exciton-Photon Couplings on the Singlet Fission Dynamics in Organic Aggregates, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 1654–1664 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Wu, A. B. Khanikaev, R. Adato, N. Arju, A. A. Yanik, H. Altug and G. Shvets, Fano-Resonant Asymmetric Metamaterials for Ultrasensitive Spectroscopy and Identification of Molecular Monolayers, Nat. Mater., 2011, 11, 69–75 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Adato, A. Artar, S. Erramilli and H. Altug, Engineered Absorption Enhancement and Induced Transparency in Coupled Molecular and Plasmonic Resonator Systems, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2584–2591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. K. Miller, Time-Domain Modeling in Electromagetics, J. Electromagn. Waves Appl., 1994, 8, 1125 CrossRef .
P. C. Zhang and W. Z. Liang, Plasmon-Driven High Harmonic Generation of Benzene: Effect of Spatial Inhomogenity of Near Field, Electon. Struct., 2019, 1, 044001 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, Z. L. Ding, Y. Q. Yu and W. Z. Liang, Plasmon-Enhanced High order Harmonic Generation of Open-Ended Finite-Sized Carbon Nanotubes: The Effects of Incident Field's Intensity and Frequency and the Interference Between the Incident and Scattered fields, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 224708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Horiuchi, H. Miura, K. Sumioka and S. Uchida, High Efficiency of Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells Based on Metal-Free Indoline Dyes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12218–12219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Karlsson and M. C. Zerner, Determination of One-Centre Core Integrals from the Average Energies of Atomic Configurations, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 1973, 7, 35 CrossRef CAS ; M. C. Zerner, G. H. Loew, R. F. Kirchner and U. T. Mueller-Westerhoff, An Intermediate Neglect of Differential Overlap Technique for Spectroscopy of Transition-Metal Complexes. Ferrocene, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 589 CrossRef .

          J. M. Atkinson, J. M. McMahon and G. C. Schatz, FDTD Studies of Metallic Nanoparticle Systems, Springer, Dordrecht,  2009 Search PubMed .
P. B. Johnson and R. W. Christy, Optical Constants of the Noble Metals, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1972, 6, 4370 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Piela, The Molecule Subject to the Electric or Magnetic Field, Ideas of Quantum Chemistry, Elsevier,  2007, ch. 12, pp. 615–680 Search PubMed .
F. Z. Ding, B. E. V. Kuiken, B. E. Eichinger and X. S. Li, An Efficient Method for Calculating Dynamical Hyperpolarizabilities using Real-Time Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 064104 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Lopata and N. Govid, Modeling Fast Electron Dynamics with Real-Time Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory: Application to Small Molecules and Chromophores, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2011, 7, 1344–1355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rzazewski and J. H. Eberly, Confluence of bound-Free Coherences in Laser Induced Autoionization, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1981, 47, 408–412 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) The structure of the Ag–ID1 hybrid system. (b) The incident electric field and the scattered field in the x and y directions for the observed point, which is set at the center of mass of ID1; the distance between the point and the surface of the NP is about 1 nm. The strength of the incident field is normalized to 1. (c) The real and imaginary part of the SRF for the Ag NP at the observed point.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 2  The absorption spectra of an isolated ID1 molecule varying with the optical intensity I in W/OLRA. γ = 0.2 is employed. The inset shows the absorption spectra of the isolated ID1 dye with different γ at I = 1.0 × 106 W cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 3  The absorption spectra of the bound ID1 molecule varying with I in (a) W/LRA and (b) W/OLRA.	 
	(8)

 	Fig. 4  
 evolving with time for the bound ID1. A = E0max on the vertical axis.	 

 	Fig. 5  The difference between the absorption calculated using W/LRA and W/OLRA for the bound ID1.	 
I ∝ (E0max)2 + (Escamax)2 + 2E0maxEscamaxcos(δ)	(9)

 	Fig. 6  (a) The absorption spectra produced by Esca varying with I. (b) The absorption difference of σ(Etotal) − σ(E0) − σ(Esca).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The absorption spectra varying with the scaling factor of λ. (b) The lineshapes of the bound ID1 near the resonance energy. γ = 0.2 eV and I = 1.0 × 106 W cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 8  The absorption spectra of the bound ID1 varying with γ at I = 1 × 106 W cm−2.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
