Elimination of unstable residual lead iodide near the buried interface for the stability improvement of perovskite solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3EE00293D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3EE00293D
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 2295-2303Elimination of unstable residual lead iodide near the buried interface for the stability improvement of perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            You 
            Gao‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Fumeng 
            Ren‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Derun 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sibo 
            Li
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Guanhaojie 
            Zheng
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            Jianan 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hasan 
            Raza
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rui 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Haixin 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sanwan 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Yu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Meng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jizhou 
            He
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Zhou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaodong 
            Hu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhengping 
            Zhang
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Longbin 
            Qiu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Chen
          
        
      af and 

        
          
            Zonghao 
            Liu
          
        
      *af
aWuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics (WNLO), Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: liuzonghao@hust.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Micro-Nano-Electronics and Software Technology of Guizhou Province, College of Big Data and Information Engineering, Guizhou University, Guiyang, 550025, China. E-mail: zpzhang@gzu.edu.cn
cSUSTech Energy Institute for Carbon Neutrality, Department of Mechanical and Energy Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
dShanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF), Zhangjiang Lab, Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201204, China
eUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100049 Beijing, China
fOptics Valley Laboratory, Hubei 430074, China
Received 
      30th January 2023
    , Accepted 22nd March 2023First published on 23rd March 2023AbstractIn perovskite solar cells, the formation of residual/excess lead iodide (PbI2) in the perovskite film is detrimental to device stability. However, the understanding of the effect of residual/excess PbI2 and its distribution on perovskite degradation is still insufficient. Herein, we verify that the existence of residual PbI2 near the buried interface largely deteriorates perovskite stability. By using a pre-embedding mixed A-cation halide strategy, the residual unstable PbI2 near the buried interface is transformed into a more stable 3D perovskite for stability improvement. Moreover, this strategy could balance the lattice strain of the formamidinium-based perovskite near the buried interface, suppress the detrimental α to δ phase transition and improve perovskite phase stability. As a result, promising power conversion efficiencies of 24.26% and 20.97% are obtained for perovskite solar cells and modules, respectively. In addition, the solar cells maintain 94.7% of their initial efficiencies after operating for 1000 hours under one sun illumination.
Introduction
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are one of the most promising emerging photovoltaic technologies, and their power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) have quickly increased to 25.7%.1 To date, most of the PSCs with PCEs over 25% are based on mixed cation and halide perovskites.2–4 However, the perovskite in PSCs rarely has a perfect single-crystal-like 3D perovskite structure,5 meaning that organic cations and inorganic anions are not always evenly distributed throughout the hundreds of nanometer layers. Such inhomogeneity originates from the imperfect stoichiometric ratios, nonequilibrium reactions, and partial sublimation of the organic components6 and is inevitably accompanied by numerous defects, lattice strain, and even phase separation, which are detrimental to photovoltaic performance and long-term stability of PSCs.
In terms of inhomogeneity in the perovskite, the existence of residual/excess lead iodide (PbI2) in the perovskite film is one of the most commonly observed inhomogeneities evidenced by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) characterization studies.7,8 Residual or excess PbI2 has been widely employed for high-performance PSCs manufactured using both one-step9 and two-step10 procedures since it has been shown that even a small amount of excess PbI2 can improve photovoltaic performance due to its passivation effect.11–18 However, the long-term stability of PSCs is compromised by the fact that excess PbI2 readily decomposes under light illumination into metallic lead (Pb0) and iodine (I2).19–21 Particularly, characterization using thermo- and light-coupled quadrupole mass spectrometry has demonstrated the photodecomposition of PbI2.22 However, the understanding of the effect of residual/excess PbI2 and its distribution on perovskite degradation is still insufficient.
In terms of the photodecomposition of PbI2, it has a threshold wavelength of 520 nm, where only higher photon energies initiate the photodecomposition of PbI2.23 Considering the relatively low penetration depth of short-wavelength light, for example, the light with a wavelength of 532 nm has a penetration depth of 80 nm,24 short-wavelength light-driven decomposition of PbI2 should mainly occur near the light receiving interface, i.e., the bottom/buried interface of PSCs. Thus, it is crucial to manage residual unstable PbI2, especially near the bottom interface of the perovskite film, to achieve high-efficiency and high-stability PSCs. Recently, Fang et al. demonstrated that perovskites themselves without excess PbI2 have much better tolerance for light and X-ray irradiation than PbI2, where the former hardly decomposes into Pb0 impurities due to its higher dissociation energy than that of PbI2.19 This inspires us to find a reliable method of transforming the residual PbI2, particularly near the region of the bottom interface, into a more stable perovskite, so as to further enhance solar cell efficiency and stability.
Herein, we verify that the residual PbI2 near the buried interface undergoes serious photodecomposition, which largely deteriorates perovskite stability. By using a pre-embedding mixed A-cation halide strategy, the residual unstable PbI2 near the buried interface is transformed into a more stable 3D formamidinium-cesium (FACs) perovskite for the stability improvement of n–i–p PSCs based on a sequential two-step method (Fig. 1(a)). The underlying mechanisms that govern the improvement of perovskite stability by transforming the residual PbI2 into the perovskite near the buried interface are discussed in detail. We also demonstrated that our pre-embedding mixed A-cation halide strategy could effectively suppress the formation of a non-active δ-phase for phase stability improvement and reduce the interfacial defects of the formamidinium-based perovskite for efficiency improvement. As a result, a promising PCE of 24.26% and a T94.7 one-sun operational stability lifetime of 1000 hours have been obtained.
 Fig. 1  Management of excess PbI2 in the perovskite. (a) Schematic of the n–i–p PSC structure and buried interface in devices. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of the pristine (without pre-embedded A-cation halides) films. (c) Lift-off process for characterizing the bottom interface of pristine and pre-embedded A-cation halide based samples. (d) SEM images of the top and bottom interfaces of the pristine perovskite films and the perovskite films with different pre-embedded A-cation halide concentrations. 
Results and discussion
Here, we prepared formamidinium-methylammonium (FAMA) perovskite-based n–i–p PSCs using a modified two-step method.10,25 As part of this process, a layer of PbI2 is initially deposited on a substrate, followed by a layer of organic ammonium. After further thermal annealing, a perovskite is formed with interdiffusion of organic ammonium and its reaction with PbI2. In Fig. 1(b), a cross-sectional SEM image of a pristine perovskite-based device reveals the presence of bright nanosheets and grains embedded in the perovskite layer and large nanosheets concentrated near the layer's bottom surface, i.e., the buried interface. Such bright flaky structures have been verified to be PbI2 domains.7 To further explore the distribution of residual PbI2 at the bottom interface, a scatheless lift-off technique (Fig. 1(c)) is used to prepare samples for the characterization of the morphology at the bottom interface of the perovskite layer.7 It is found that a large amount of PbI2 crystals are randomly distributed at the bottom interface of the pristine film (Fig. 1(d)). This feature may cause a loose contact between the electron transport layer (ETL) and the perovskite layer, which is likely to be detrimental to the stability of devices.26 From the SEM image of the top surface, only a small amount of PbI2 is observed in the pristine perovskite film. The incomplete transformation of PbI2 into the perovskite may account for the presence of excess PbI2 within the pristine perovskite layer. In particular, the perovskite created early in the two-step process impedes the further downward migration of organic cation salts, resulting in a deficiency of organic cation salts towards the bottom interface and, ultimately, the incomplete transformation of PbI2 into the perovskite.27
To eliminate the residual/excess PbI2 near the buried interface, we incorporated mixed A-cation halides, i.e., FAI/CsBr, into the buried SnO2-based charge transport layer to facilitate the transformation of the excess PbI2 into a more stable 3D FACs perovskite. Additionally, the introduction of A-cation halide salts in moderate quantities not only yields no detrimental effects on the SnO2 layer,28,29 but also improves the interaction of SnO2 and the perovskite layer, resulting in an improvement in overall device performance. The corresponding photovoltaic performance optimization results of the devices are shown in Tables S1 and S2, ESI.† FAI/CsBr (molar ratio 6:1) with a concentration of 60 mM in SnO2 exhibited the best performance. As shown in Fig. 1(d), only a trace amount of PbI2 crystals existed on the bottom and top surfaces of the perovskite film with 60 mM FAI-CsBr in SnO2 (denoted as the target film). Introducing the pre-embedded mixed A-cation halides in SnO2 gradually reduced the amount of bright PbI2 crystals within the perovskite films by increasing the A-cation halide concentration. This observation suggested that the amount of residual PbI2 in the perovskite film is effectively reduced by using the pre-embedding mixed A-cation halide strategy.
We further used grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) to probe the residual PbI2 content within the pristine and target perovskite films from the top surface to the bottom interface by changing the incident angle from 0.1° to 0.8°.30 As shown in Fig. 2(a), the scattering ring at a scattering vector of q ≈ 9 nm−1 is assigned to the characteristic peak of PbI2, and the scattering ring at q ≈ 10 nm−1 corresponds to the (100) plane of α-FAPbI3.30,31 In the pristine film, a characteristic peak of PbI2 was detected near the top surface of the film with an incident angle of 0.1°. From Fig. 2(a), (b) and Fig. S1a and b, ESI,† the PbI2 signal in the pristine film is gradually enhanced with the increase of the incident angle. The integrated line files of the 2D GIWAXS patterns and the corresponding peak ratio of the PbI2/perovskite are shown in Fig. 2(c) and Fig. S2, ESI.† It was observed that the PbI2 content changed with depth, and most of the residual PbI2 domains are located close to the bottom interface of the pristine perovskite layer. For the target film with pre-embedded mixed A-cation halides, the residual PbI2 content near the top surface, the central region, and the buried interface of the film did not show a considerable variation, which is also largely reduced when compared with that of the pristine film (Fig. 2(d)–(f) and Fig. S1 and S2, ESI†). This observation further confirms that the pre-embedding mixed A-cation halide strategy is effective to eliminate the residual PbI2. In addition, the target sample also showed a higher intensity at a tilt angle of χ = 45°, indicating that the resulting perovskite crystals have a preferred grain orientation rather than a disordered feature.32 This may be caused by the redistribution of Cs+/MA+/FA+ cations in the target films, leading to a preferred crystal growth feature, which is beneficial to charge transportation and device performance.25 Moreover, the elimination of the residual PbI2 by the pre-embedded A-cation halides could help to form a tightly bound buried interface, resulting in perovskite films with improved stability.28
 Fig. 2  Distribution of PbI2 in perovskite films with/without pre-embedded A-cation halides. (a, b) and (d, e) Depth-resolved GIWAXS patterns of the pristine and target films (with pre-embedded A-cation halides) with incident angles of 0.1° and 0.8°, respectively. (c) and (f) Integrated line files at different incidence angles for the pristine film and target film (with pre-embedded A-cation halides). 
The excess PbI2 accumulated near the buried interface could be one of the key origins of perovskite instability. To verify this inference, we aged the pristine and target perovskite films under UV light irradiation to explore the effect of residual PbI2 existing near the buried interface on the film stability. After seven days of aging, a large number of pinholes appeared in the pristine film with excess PbI2 near the buried interface, while the target film with pre-embedded mixed A-cation halide salts did not show a significant change (ESI,† Fig. S3). This observation confirmed the better stability of the target film with less residual PbI2 near the buried interface. To further gain insights into the perovskite stability improvement mechanism with pre-embedded mixed A-cation halide salts, XPS characterization was performed to probe the changes in the exfoliated samples after aging. As shown in Fig. 3(b), a small Pb0 peak was observed at the bottom interface of the aged pristine film. The Pb0 is also evidenced by a subtle peak near 31.3° in the XRD results (Fig. 3(c)). The appearance of the Pb0 peak indicates that PbI2 undergoes photodecomposition under UV illumination (Fig. 3(a)). The degradation process of PbI2 under light with a threshold wavelength of 520 nm is summarized as follows:23 (1)
 Fig. 3  Perovskite film stability. (a) Schematic of the perovskite solar cells illuminated by light with different wavelengths. (b) X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results of the bottom interface for the pristine film after aging under UV light for 7 days. (c) X-ray diffraction results of pristine film before and after UV illumination aging. The inset plots show a partial zoom-in in the range of 30.6° to 32.6°. (d) Photographs of the corresponding aged perovskite films under UV illumination exposed to N2 atmosphere for different time. 
The generated Pb0 and I2 would further induce the instability of devices. The reason for this is that Pb0 is a deep-level defect, which could act as a carrier recombination center to exacerbate nonradiative recombination.33,34 Meanwhile, the accumulation of Pb0 forms a Pb-cluster and could also result in extreme photo-instability of the devices.35,36 Likewise, another product, I2, spontaneously catalyzes the decomposition of adjacent perovskites and induces the formation of more I2 and PbI2.37,38 Increased internal pressure in the perovskite can be caused by the release of too much I2, potentially resulting in the formation of pinhole-like films, as illustrated in Fig. S3a, ESI,† or, in the worst case, the fracturing of the device's top electrode.37 Based on the above results, the modulation of excess PbI2 in the pristine film, especially near the bottom interface, is imperative to improve the photostability of the device. By pre-embedding a small amount of A-cation ammonium halide into SnO2, the excess PbI2 at the bottom interface can be transformed to perovskite, which significantly improves the photostability of the films. The improved stability of the target films, when compared to pristine samples, is further supported by the absence of pinholes and Pb0 peaks in the corresponding SEM (ESI,† Fig. S3b), XPS, and XRD results (ESI,† Fig. S4 and S5), respectively.
Besides decomposition, the phase transition of the FA-based perovskite was also observed after UV light aging. As shown in Fig. 3(c), except for the Pb0 peak, the characteristic peak of non-active δ-FAPbI3 at 11.7° was also observed in the illumination-aged pristine film. To investigate this phenomenon clearly, we studied the phase stability of the perovskite films under UV illumination under N2 atmosphere conditions. As shown in Fig. 3(d), after 288 hours of aging, no noticeable change was observed in the W/FAI-CsBr film, while yellowing was observed in the pristine and W/FAI films. The evolution of the corresponding crystal structure of these films was also monitored by XRD (ESI,† Fig. S6a–c). It was found that the pristine film showed the δ phase only after 72 hours of aging, while W/FAI and W/FAI-CsBr showed the δ phase after 192 and 288 hours, respectively. The results show worse phase stability in the pristine film than in pre-embedded A-cation halide films. Some studies believed that this is resulted from the decomposed perovskite components, especially the generated I2 from the decomposition of excess PbI2, which have been demonstrated to induce the formation of δ-FAPbI3 at room temperature.37 In addition, the lattice stress changes could also lead to undesirable perovskite phase transitions.39,40 Undoubtedly, no matter the reason, the transition from the α phase to the δ phase would also lead to the degradation of device performance.
Time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) characterization was further utilized to probe the cation distribution inside the pristine and target films, which helps to explain the underlying reason of why FA-based perovskites containing excess PbI2 are more prone to the phase change under UV illumination. Both perovskite films exhibit uniform distributions of Pb+ and FA+, as shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b), but MA+ displays a gradient distribution from the surface to the deeper region of the absorber layer, possibly due to the volatility of MA+.41 And the distribution of MA+ is consistent with previous studies.41,42 Such a gradient distribution of MA+ in the pristine sample resulted in the lack of MA+ at the bottom interface, forming the pure FAPbI3-dominated perovskite near the bottom interface, as schematically shown in Fig. 4(c) and (d). Due to the intrinsic instability of FAPbI3, the anisotropic strain in the (111) plane would drive the phase transition from the α phase to the δ phase because of its pseudo-cubic structure.40 The existence of a large amount of pure FAPbI3 may lead to residual tensile stress at the bottom interface.
 Fig. 4  Strain released by pre-embedded A-cation halides. (a) and (b) Time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) depth elemental profiles of the pristine and target films. (c) and (d) Schematic of the tensile-strain state in the pristine film and strain-released state in the target film. (e) and (f) Grazing incident X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) spectra in different tilt angles at a depth of 500 nm for the pristine and target films. 
To further investigate the residual stress within the pristine and target films, grazing incident X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) measurements were used to characterize these samples (ESI,† Table S3). In the pristine film (Fig. 4(e)), with an increase of ψ, the diffraction peaks are shifted obviously to the small angle direction, which indicates that the lattice at the bottom interface is in an expanded state, and residual tensile stress exists. For the target sample, the diffraction peak at (012) does not shift significantly (Fig. 4(f) and ESI,† Fig. S7), indicating that there is negligible tensile stress within the films. To further quantitatively estimate the residual stress, the values are calculated according to the following equation: (2)where E is Young's modulus, ν is Poisson's ratio of the perovskite, and E and ν are evaluated as 10.2 GPa and 0.3, respectively.43θ0 is half the scattering angle corresponding to the (012) diffraction peak for the stress-free perovskite.44 The residual stress of the pristine film was estimated to be 130.4 MPa at a depth of 500 nm (ESI,† Table S4). Such residual stress could drive the phase transitions of the perovskite from the α phase to the undesired δ phase, which is detrimental to the device stability.40,41
In addition to transforming the excess PbI2 at the bottom interface to the perovskite, the perovskite phase near the buried interface can be controlled by pre-embedded mixed A cation halide salts, i.e., FAI and CsBr, in SnO2. As shown in Fig. 4(b) and (d), Cs+ exhibits a gradient distribution in the target film. In contrast to MA+, more Cs+ ions are distributed on the side close to the buried interface. Consequently, the pure FAPbI3-dominated perovskite near the interface transformed to the intrinsically stable FAxCs1−xPbI3 perovskite upon Cs+ incorporation, which eliminated the lattice stress imbalance induced by the inhomogeneity of the composition due to the departure of MA+. This is also the reason behind the use of a mixed FAI-CsBr complement as the pre-embedded A cation halides of choice. The bottom interface residual stress for the target film is much lower than that for the pristine film case, decreasing from 130.4 to 8.7 MPa, proving this point. The improved stability of the target perovskite film when compared to that of the pristine film suggests that the residual stress and phase transition are efficiently discharged with pre-embedded mixed A-cation halide salts. In addition, the characteristic peaks of the GIXRD images of the pristine and the target films at a depth of 200 nm did not shift significantly (ESI,† Fig. S8a–c), indicating that the shallow region in the films has a uniform lattice structure and does not accumulate too much residual stress. This also suggested that the pre-embedded mixed A-cation halide salts mainly work at the region near the buried interface rather than the top surface. Besides, we also conducted absorption spectrum measurements on both the pristine and the target perovskite films, and found that the pre-embedding mixed A-cation halide strategy has a negligible effect on the bandgap of the perovskite (ESI,† Fig. S9). This is likely due to the minor ionic inhomogeneity in the corresponding perovskite films is inadequate to induce a discernible alteration in the bandgap energy level.
Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the devices were evaluated under AM1.5G one sun illumination to examine how removing excess PbI2 at the buried interface affected device performance. The statistical results of performance and the J–V curves of the best devices based on pristine and pre-embedded A-cation halides are shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b). The average efficiency of 20.92% and best performance of 22.04% for the pristine case are much lower than those of the devices with pre-embedded A-cation halides, which obtained an average efficiency of 22.71% and the best efficiency of 23.62% for the W/FAI case, and an average efficiency of 23.69% and the best efficiency of 24.26% for W/FAI-CsBr case. Compared with the pristine devices, the short circuit current density has been greatly improved, which can be attributed to the efficient utilization of short-wavelength light in the bottom region of the perovskite layer as shown in Fig. 5(d). After FAI or FAI-CsBr is added to the electron transport layer, the excess PbI2 at the bottom interface is successfully transformed to the perovskite. This strategy not only eliminated the adverse effects of excess PbI2 but also improved the poor contact between the interfaces of the ETL and the perovskite layer. This could be the reason for the higher fill factor in pre-embedded A-cation halide devices versus the pristine devices. Furthermore, the addition of CsBr to the target devices compensates for the deficiency of volatile MA+ ions in the bottom area and passivates the perovskite defects brought on by the distortion of the lattice. Ultimately, the device with pre-embedded mixed A-cation halides not only exhibits improved PCE, but also shows decent thermal stability (ESI,† Fig. S10). We also extended the strategy into large-area perovskite solar modules. As shown in Fig. S11 and S12, ESI,† a module efficiency of 20.97% with an active area of 9.66 cm2 was obtained. Besides, our modules also showed good reproducibility, giving an average PCE of 20.3 ± 0.5% (ESI,† Fig. S13).
 Fig. 5  Photovoltaic performance and stability of PSCs. (a) Statistical distributions of PCEs for the pristine device, pre-embedded FAI based device and pre-embedded FAI/CsBr based device, respectively. (b) J–V curves of the PSCs without or with A-cation pre-embedded halides. (c) Laser beam induced current (LBIC) evolutions of un-encapsulated PSCs under a N2 atmosphere for one hour. (d) External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra and integrated current density results of the pristine and pre-embedded A-cation halide based PSCs. (e) Long-term stability results of the encapsulated PSCs with the continuous maximum power point (MPP) tracking at a temperature of 25 ± 5 °C under one sun equivalent white light emitting diode (LED) illumination. 
To investigate the origin of the performance enhancement, we performed a series of characterizations on the device physics. In the Mott–Schottky plots (ESI,† Fig. S14), the target device showed a higher built-in potential than the pristine device, which is consistent with the higher VOC of the target device versus the pristine case. Thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS) was also performed to analyze the energetic distribution of the trap density of states (tDOS) (ESI,† Fig. S15). In the deep trap region (0.4–0.48 eV), the defects of the target device are far below the pristine device by the order of magnitude, which may be related to the suppression of deep-level defect Pb0. According to the results obtained by space charge limited current (SCLC) measurements (ESI,† Fig. S16), the defect density is significantly decreased from 3.46 × 1015 to 1.33 × 1015 cm−3. The above results invariably show that the defects of the target device are much lower than those in the pristine device. Adding pre-embedded A-cation halides, especially CsBr, eliminates the residual stress at the bottom region. It was the residual stress that caused the distortion of the lattice and led to the presence of a large number of defects in the pristine film. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra (ESI,† Fig. S17) show that carrier lifetimes are prolonged, indicating that carrier recombination is inhibited and defects are efficiently reduced or passivated. The results of EQEEL, transient photocurrent (TPC) decay and transient photovoltage (TPV) decay (ESI,† Fig. S18–S20) also verified the positive effect of pre-embedded A cation halides on device performance.
We also evaluated the stability of the devices based on the pristine and target perovskite films. The stability of devices under high energy light aging was studied by laser beam-induced current (LBIC) measurement (Fig. 5(c)). Under the illumination with a wavelength of 405 nm, it was found that the target device had an exceptionally stable current output, whereas the pristine device showed a considerable decline in the photocurrent, preserving only 65.5% of its initial output current after aging for 60 min. The modulation of residual PbI2 is the most likely explanation for this finding. The photolysis of PbI2 does not quickly occur in A cation halide-containing devices. In addition, incorporating a trace amount of CsBr in W/FAI-CsBr devices reduces the trap density and leads to less photoinduced current loss.
We further investigated the operational stability of encapsulated PSCs by tracking the performance evolution of the devices under continuous one sun equivalent white-light light-emitting diode (LED) illumination under ambient atmosphere with maximum power point tracking (MPPT) (Fig. 5(e)). The devices with pre-embedded FAI and FAI-CsBr had superior stability, maintaining 69.1% and 94.7% of their initial efficiencies, respectively, after continuous illumination for 1000 h, while the pristine device retained less than 50% after 600 h operation. Since the W/FAI-only devices cannot reverse the adverse effects of pure FAPbI3 at the bottom of the perovskite layer, the addition of CsBr is critical for phase stability in the target device. The improvement in MPPT stability can be attributed to the following two factors. On the one hand, the pre-embedded FAI can transform the excess PbI2 at the bottom of the light-absorbing layer into the perovskite, inhibiting the photo-instability of films under UV illumination caused by the decomposition of PbI2. On the other hand, adding a small amount of CsBr compensates for the inhomogeneity of MA+ so that the residual stress accumulated at the bottom interface is released to form a more stable FACs based perovskite. Due to the suppressed perovskite transition from the α phase to the δ phase by reduced tensile stress and the formation of a more stable FACs based perovskite, the stability of the device is improved.
Conclusions
In this work, we have demonstrated a pre-embedding mixed A-cation halide strategy in SnO2 to transform the residual PbI2 near the buried interface to the FACs perovskite. Based on this strategy, the photostability of devices can be significantly improved due to the transformation of the residual PbI2 into the intrinsic stable FACs perovskite. Additionally, CsBr inclusion can stabilize the lattice strain of the formamidinium-based perovskite near the buried interface, which in turn reduces the interfacial defects and slows down the phase transition from the active α-phase to the non-active δ-phase. As a result, the efficiencies of the target devices are increased to 24.26% for small size PSCs and 20.97% for solar modules. More importantly, the encapsulated PSCs with FAI/CsBr maintained up to 94.7% of the initial efficiency for 1000 hours of continuous illumination in ambient air. This work provides a simple and reliable perovskite composition inhomogeneity modulation strategy to improve the efficiency and stability of PSCs.
Author contributions
Z. L. and Z. Z. supervised the project. Z. L. and Y. G. conceived the idea and designed the experiment. Y. G., F. R. and D. S. were involved in all the experimental parts. Y. G. performed device fabrication and most of the characterization studies (TOF-SIMS, XRD, XPS, etc.). R. C. and F. R. fabricated the mini-modules. J. W. and S. L. performed the SEM characterization. S. L. and L. Q. carried out the GIXRD measurements. G. Z. provided technical assistance for the GIWAXS characterization. X. M. performed the LBIC characterization. H. W. and P. Y. assisted in stability testing. J. Z., X. H. and J. H. discussed and analyzed the data. Finally, Z. L., Y. G. and H. R. wrote the manuscript, with input from all the authors.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (52002140, U20A20252, and 12104467), the Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program by CAST, the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province (2022CFA093), the Self-determined and Innovative Research Funds of HUST (2020kfyXJJS008), the National Key Research and Development Project funding from the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2021YFB3800104), the Innovation Project of Optics Valley Laboratory (OVL2021BG008), and the Shanghai Sailing Program (21YF1453500). The authors thank the Analytical and Testing Center of HUST for the facilities’ support of sample measurements. We appreciate Dr. Xiaoyu Yang for his guidance on the lift-off techniques of perovskite films.
References
M. A. Green, E. D. Dunlop, G. Siefer, M. Yoshita, N. Kopidakis, K. Bothe and X. Hao, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2022, 1, 14 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao, F. Ma, Z. Qu, S. Yu, T. Shen, H.-X. Deng, X. Chu, X. Peng, Y. Yuan, X. Zhang and J. You, Science, 2022, 377, 531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jeong, M. Kim, J. Seo, H. Lu, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, Y. Yang, M. A. Hope, F. T. Eickemeyer, M. Kim, Y. J. Yoon, I. W. Choi, B. P. Darwich, S. J. Choi, Y. Jo, J. H. Lee, B. Walker, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley, U. Rothlisberger, A. Hagfeldt, D. S. Kim, M. Gratzel and J. Y. Kim, Nature, 2021, 592, 381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Min, D. Y. Lee, J. Kim, G. Kim, K. S. Lee, J. Kim, M. J. Paik, Y. K. Kim, K. S. Kim, M. G. Kim, T. J. Shin and S. Il Seok, Nature, 2021, 598, 444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jaffe, Y. Lin, C. M. Beavers, J. Voss, W. L. Mao and H. I. Karunadasa, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, P. N. Rudd, S. Yang, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3842 RSC .
X. Yang, D. Luo, Y. Xiang, L. Zhao, M. Anaya, Y. Shen, J. Wu, W. Yang, Y. H. Chiang, Y. Tu, R. Su, Q. Hu, H. Yu, G. Shao, W. Huang, T. P. Russell, Q. Gong, S. D. Stranks, W. Zhang and R. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2006435 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhao, Q. Li, C.-H. Hou, S. Li, X. Yang, J. Wu, S. Zhang, Q. Hu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Jiang, S. Jia, J.-J. Shyue, T. P. Russell, Q. Gong, X. Hu and R. Zhu, J. Appl. Chem. Sci., 2022, 144, 1700 CAS .
J. J. Yoo, G. Seo, M. R. Chua, T. G. Park, Y. Lu, F. Rotermund, Y.-K. Kim, C. S. Moon, N. J. Jeon, J.-P. Correa-Baena, V. Bulović, S. S. Shin, M. G. Bawendi and J. Seo, Nature, 2021, 590, 587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, T.-B. Song, S. Luo, Z. Hong, H.-S. Duan, L. Dou, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shao, H. Wang, F. Ye, C. Wang, C. Wang, H. Cui, K. Dong, Y. Ge, T. Wang, W. Ke and G. Fang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 252 RSC .
C. Wang, W. Shao, J. Liang, C. Chen, X. Hu, H. Cui, C. Liu, G. Fang and C. Tao, Small, 2022, 18, 2204081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Guo, F. Ye, S. Liu and Y. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2200174 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, F. Ye, J. Liang, Y. Liu, X. Hu, S. Zhou, C. Chen, W. Ke, C. Tao and G. Fang, Joule, 2022, 6, 2869 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ge, F. Ye, M. Xiao, H. Wang, C. Wang, J. Liang, X. Hu, H. Guan, H. Cui, W. Ke, C. Tao and G. Fang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2200361 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas, M. J. Katz, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 091101 CrossRef .
Z. Ma, D. Huang, Q. Liu, G. Yan, Z. Xiao, D. Chen, J. Zhao, Y. Xiang, C. Peng, H. Li, M. Zhang, W. Zhang, L. Duan and Y. Huang, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 66, 152 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, X. Hu, C. Wang, C. Liang, C. Chen, M. Xiao, J. Li, C. Tao, G. Xing, R. Yu, W. Ke and G. Fang, Joule, 2022, 6, 816 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tumen-Ulzii, C. Qin, D. Klotz, M. R. Leyden, P. Wang, M. Auffray, T. Fujihara, T. Matsushima, J.-W. Lee, S.-J. Lee, Y. Yang and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, J. Chen, C. Wang, H. Ren, Y. X. Luo, K. C. Shen, Y. Li, F. Song, X. Gao and J. X. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 24692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono, M. Maeda, Y. Jiang, Z. Hawash and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9604 RSC .
R. I. Dawood, A. J. Forty, M. R. Tubbs and F. C. Frank, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1965, 284, 272 CAS .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, Z. Liu, N. Li, G. Tang, G. Zheng, C. Zhu, Y. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Huang, L. Li, N. Zhou, J. Hong, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900390 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Dai, S. K. Yadavalli, M. Chen, A. Abbaspourtamijani, Y. Qi and N. P. Padture, Science, 2021, 372, 618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, Y. C. Zheng, Y. Hou, X. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Wang, H. Zhao and H. G. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6705 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dong, C. Zhu, M. Chen, C. Jiang, J. Guo, Y. Feng, Z. Dai, S. K. Yadavalli, M. Hu, X. Cao, Y. Li, Y. Huang, Z. Liu, Y. Shi, L. Wang, N. P. Padture and Y. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, Y. Miao, N. Wei, H. Chen, Z. Qin, X. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Qi, T. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2103151 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qin, P. F. Chan and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2105290 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Qin, Y. Chen, X. Wang, N. Wei, X. Liu, H. Chen, Y. Miao and Y. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2203143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ren, S. Yu, L. Chao, Y. Xia, Y. Sun, S. Zuo, F. Li, T. Niu, Y. Yang, H. Ju, B. Li, H. Du, X. Gao, J. Zhang, J. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 154 CrossRef CAS .
C. Qin, T. Matsushima, T. Fujihara, W. J. Potscavage Jr. and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cho, S.-H. Jeong, M.-H. Park, Y.-H. Kim, C. Wolf, C.-L. Lee, J. H. Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. Myoung, S. Yoo, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T.-W. Lee, Science, 2015, 350, 1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Alberti, C. Bongiorno, E. Smecca, I. Deretzis, A. La Magna and C. Spinella, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2196 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tian, Y. Zhao, X. Han, B. Li, Y. Rui, H. Xiong, Y. Qiu, W. An, K. Li, C. Hou, Y. Li, H. Wang and Q. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 452, 139345 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fu, S. Pisoni, Q. Jeangros, J. Sastre-Pellicer, M. Kawecki, A. Paracchino, T. Moser, J. Werner, C. Andres, L. Duchêne, P. Fiala, M. Rawlence, S. Nicolay, C. Ballif, A. N. Tiwari and S. Buecheler, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3074 RSC .
S. Wang, Y. Jiang, E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16195 CrossRef .
J. Wu, S.-C. Liu, Z. Li, S. Wang, D.-J. Xue, Y. Lin and J.-S. Hu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2021, 8, nwab047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, C. Wu, S. K. Jha, Z. Li, K. Zhu and S. Priya, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1014 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, X. Niu, Y. Fu, N. Li, C. Hu, Y. Chen, X. He, G. Na, P. Liu, H. Zai, Y. Ge, Y. Lu, X. Ke, Y. Bai, S. Yang, P. Chen, Y. Li, M. Sui, L. Zhang, H. Zhou and Q. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Christians, P. Schulz, J. S. Tinkham, T. H. Schloemer, S. P. Harvey, B. J. Tremolet de Villers, A. Sellinger, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 68 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tu, D. Kim, M. Shyikh and M. G. Kanatzidis, Matter, 2021, 4, 2765 CrossRef CAS .
G. Abadias, E. Chason, J. Keckes, M. Sebastiani, G. B. Thompson, E. Barthel, G. L. Doll, C. E. Murray, C. H. Stoessel and L. Martinu, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 2018, 36, 020801 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ee00293d‡ Y. G. and F. R. contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Management of excess PbI2 in the perovskite. (a) Schematic of the n–i–p PSC structure and buried interface in devices. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of the pristine (without pre-embedded A-cation halides) films. (c) Lift-off process for characterizing the bottom interface of pristine and pre-embedded A-cation halide based samples. (d) SEM images of the top and bottom interfaces of the pristine perovskite films and the perovskite films with different pre-embedded A-cation halide concentrations.	 

 	Fig. 2  Distribution of PbI2 in perovskite films with/without pre-embedded A-cation halides. (a, b) and (d, e) Depth-resolved GIWAXS patterns of the pristine and target films (with pre-embedded A-cation halides) with incident angles of 0.1° and 0.8°, respectively. (c) and (f) Integrated line files at different incidence angles for the pristine film and target film (with pre-embedded A-cation halides).	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  Perovskite film stability. (a) Schematic of the perovskite solar cells illuminated by light with different wavelengths. (b) X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results of the bottom interface for the pristine film after aging under UV light for 7 days. (c) X-ray diffraction results of pristine film before and after UV illumination aging. The inset plots show a partial zoom-in in the range of 30.6° to 32.6°. (d) Photographs of the corresponding aged perovskite films under UV illumination exposed to N2 atmosphere for different time.	 

 	Fig. 4  Strain released by pre-embedded A-cation halides. (a) and (b) Time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) depth elemental profiles of the pristine and target films. (c) and (d) Schematic of the tensile-strain state in the pristine film and strain-released state in the target film. (e) and (f) Grazing incident X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) spectra in different tilt angles at a depth of 500 nm for the pristine and target films.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 5  Photovoltaic performance and stability of PSCs. (a) Statistical distributions of PCEs for the pristine device, pre-embedded FAI based device and pre-embedded FAI/CsBr based device, respectively. (b) J–V curves of the PSCs without or with A-cation pre-embedded halides. (c) Laser beam induced current (LBIC) evolutions of un-encapsulated PSCs under a N2 atmosphere for one hour. (d) External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra and integrated current density results of the pristine and pre-embedded A-cation halide based PSCs. (e) Long-term stability results of the encapsulated PSCs with the continuous maximum power point (MPP) tracking at a temperature of 25 ± 5 °C under one sun equivalent white light emitting diode (LED) illumination.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ee00293d
‡ Y. G. and F. R. contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
