Luminescence-based detection and identification of illicit drugs  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3CP00524K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3CP00524K
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 13244-13259Luminescence-based detection and identification of illicit drugs

        
          
            M. 
            Chen
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            P. L. 
            Burn
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            P. E. 
            Shaw
          
          
        
      *
      Centre for Organic Photonics & Electronics, School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia. E-mail: p.burn2@uq.edu.au; p.shaw3@uq.edu.au
Received 
      2nd February 2023
    , Accepted 26th April 2023First published on 5th May 2023AbstractLuminescence-based sensing is capable of being used for the sensitive, rapid, and in some cases selective detection of chemicals. Furthermore, the method is amenable to incorporation into handheld low-power portable detectors that can be used in the field. Luminescence-based detectors are now commercially available for explosive detection with the technology built on a strong foundation of science. In contrast, there are fewer examples of luminescence-based detection of illicit drugs, despite the pervasive and global challenge of combating their manufacture, distribution and consumption and the need for handheld detection systems. This perspective describes the relatively nascent steps that have been reported in the use of luminescent materials for the detection of illicit drugs. Much of the published work has focused on detection of illicit drugs in solution with less work on vapour detection using thin luminescent sensing films. The latter are better suited for handheld sensing devices and detection in the field. Illicit drug detection has been achieved via different mechanisms, all of which change the luminescence of the sensing material. These include photoinduced hole transfer (PHT) leading to quenching of the luminescence, disruption of Förster energy transfer between different chromophores by a drug, and chemical reaction between the sensing material and a drug. The most promising of these is PHT, which can be used for rapid and reversible detection of illicit drugs in solution and film-based sensing of drugs in the vapour phase. However, there are still significant knowledge gaps, for example, how vapours of illicit drugs interact with the sensing films, and how to achieve selectivity for specific drugs.
M. Chen
Ming Chen received his MSc from University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2019 on the topic of organic optoelectronic materials. He is now a PhD candidate at the Centre for Organic Photonics & Electronics, The University of Queensland under the supervision of Prof. Paul Burn and Dr Paul Shaw. His research interests lie in the development of novel organic optoelectronic materials and their application in sensing technology.
P. L. Burn
Paul Burn is Professor of Chemistry and Head of the Centre for Organic Photonics & Electronics at The University of Queensland. He received his PhD from the University of Sydney before moving to Cambridge University during which he held the Dow Research Fellow at Christ's College, Cambridge. In 1992 he moved to the University of Oxford and then in 2007 moved to The University of Queensland as an Australian Research Council (ARC) Federation Fellow. His research focuses on the development of organic optoelectronic materials and their application in technologies. He is currently a UQ Laureate Fellow, and a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Science and Royal Society of Chemistry.
P. E. Shaw
Paul Shaw received his PhD in Physics from the University of St Andrews in 2009 on the topic of exciton diffusion in conjugated polymers. Since then, he has worked as a postdoctoral research fellow at The University of Queensland, an Advance Queensland Research Fellow, and he currently a Senior Lecturer in Chemistry. His research interests lie in the application of optical spectroscopy to understand the properties of organic semiconductor and the development of sensing technologies based on fluorescent compounds.
1. Introduction
The illegal distribution and abuse of illicit drugs around the world poses a continual threat to human health and our communities. Around 0.5 million people worldwide were reported to have died due to drug use in 20191 and the total societal cost of opioid abuse in USA was estimated to be $1.02 trillion in 2017.2 Therefore, the safe and reliable detection of illicit drugs is critical for restricting their illegal distribution, detection of contaminated items (including rental homes), as well as ensuring the safety of those tasked with providing law enforcement. However, due to the broad range of target compounds as well as the emergence of high-potency synthetic opiates and new designer drugs, the detection and identification of illicit drugs is an evolving challenge. Illicit drugs can be broadly placed into three categories based on their effects, namely depressants, hallucinogens, and stimulants (Table 1).3 Depressants such as morphine, heroin, and fentanyl can reduce or inhibit the activity of the central nervous system (CNS).3 These three along with synthetic opiates are major contributors to drug abuse deaths due to their high-potency and ease of access. Hallucinogens such as lysergic acid diethylamide and ketamine alter the CNS function and cause hallucinations.3 While hallucinogens might have lower potency and be less likely to directly lead to a fatality, the effects of their use cannot be underestimated. For example, in addition to their use as recreational drugs4 they have also been used as date rape drugs for drug-facilitated sexual assault (DFSA).5 Amphetamines and cocaine are the most abused stimulants. They can accelerate the activity of the CNS and may cause panic, seizures, and even death if someone takes an overdose.3 The majority of illicit drugs contain an amine-based functional group, with alcohol and ether groups also being present (see Table 1).6 It is worth noting that drugs containing amine-based functional groups can be sold and used in their free-base or salt (e.g., hydrochloride or hydrogen sulphate) forms. It will be appreciated that the different forms give rise to significantly different physical and chemical properties, which creates challenges for drug detection. For example, free-base methamphetamine (MA) is a volatile liquid with a vapour pressure of ∼370 ppm at 25 °C,7 but its hydrogen chloride salt is a solid. Furthermore, ‘street’ versions of illicit drugs are frequently mixed (cut) with other compounds, which can be inactive excipients, legal drugs, or toxic additives.8,9 The use of additives can lead to increased profit for sellers and mask the presence of the drug from law enforcement officers. A further consequence of the additives is that the actual content of the illicit drug in a sample (hit) can be relatively low.10 Hence, detection techniques with high sensitivity and selectivity are highly desired for detecting and identifying illicit drugs in scenarios encountered by law enforcement agencies in the field.
Table 1 Categories, chemical structures, and vapour pressures of illicit drugs and simulants featured in this Perspective




Category
Illicit drug
Structure
Vapour pressure (v/v at 25 °C)





a Hydrochloride form.
b Vapour pressure at 20 °C.





Depressants
Morphine



0.24 ppt11


Heroin



75 ppt/a18 ppt12


Fentanyl



90 ppq/a0.018 ppq13


Gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB)



171 ppm14






Hallucinogens
Ketamine



68 ppb15


Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)



27 ppt16






Stimulants
Methamphetamine (MA)



370 ppm7


Cocaine



610 ppt/a37 ppt12


Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)



254 ppt17


3,4-Methylenedioxy-methamphetamine (MDMA)/ecstasy



2.1 ppm18






Simulant

N-methylphenethylamine (MPEA)



∼b300 ppm19




The majority of illicit drug detection technologies are based on standard analytical equipment including X-ray backscattering,20,21 gas chromatography, and mass,22–24 ion-mobility,25–27 or Raman spectrometry.28–30 However, not all these methods can be deployed in the field. For example, X-ray backscatter imaging scanners can only be deployed at screening points in environments such as airports and train stations due to their bulk. Significant effort has been put into developing portable versions of laboratory analytical equipment. However, such methods can be power hungry – leading to short battery life, heavy, and often require an up-to-date library of the drugs and cutting agents. A successful example of the strategy of miniaturising laboratory analytic equipment are portable Raman spectrometers, which have emerged in recent years as a powerful approach due to their capability of detecting bulk quantities of drugs through packaging.28 Raman detectors require an extensive compound library for identification of the drugs present, which can be difficult due to similar chemical functionality being found in different drugs and the fact that the characteristic fingerprint can be masked by a cutting agent.30,31 The two most often used portable detection methods are colorimetric kits32,33 and trained canines. Despite the availability of multiple types of detectors, trained canines are still widely used because they can usually identify trace amounts of drugs on-site even with the presence of interferents and cutting agents.34 However, canines need significant training and care,35 are unsuitable for continuous use, and the frequent exposure to high-potency illicit drugs may also cause serious problems to their health.36 Colorimetric kits require sample collection and processing, and often require multiple tests leading to potential exposure of the operative to the drugs. Furthermore, the need for the user to accurately perceive a colour change means they may be unsuitable for people who are colour blind or use in environments with poor lighting. Therefore, there is a need to develop a detector that can allow first responders and law enforcement personnel to rapidly identify suspected illicit drugs at trace levels in scenarios such as clandestine labs,37 bars,5 rave clubs38 and on the streets.39 Considering the differences in drug form (free-base or salt), sample collection method (solution, vapour, or swab-based collection), portability, sensitivity, ease of use, and cost, it is unlikely that a single technology can be used in all detection scenarios.
Luminescence-based detection is considered a promising option for the detection of illicit drugs due to the potential for high sensitivity, rapid response, and portability.40,41 Luminescence-based sensors have been widely studied for the detection of explosives,40,42 hazardous chemicals,43,44 and biological species,45,46 with the chemical of interest being in solution, solid, or vapour phase. Luminescent sensors composed of small molecules,47–49 aptamers,50–56 and nanomaterials,57–61 have been developed for sensing and differentiating illicit drugs in solutions such as drinks47,62 and biofluids.48,55 In contrast, the development of luminescence-based detection of illicit drug vapours is still at an early stage for several reasons: (1) the low vapour pressures of most drugs, especially in salt form creates an issue of sensitivity;12,13 (2) the difficulty of discriminating an illicit drug from potential interferants in the vapour phase gives rise to issues relating to selectivity;8,63 and (3) the lack of understanding of the process behind the sensing response (turn-on, turn-off, colour change) of the luminescent materials (usually a film) when exposed to drug vapours, and the physical interactions between the drug and the sensing material. Given the potential of luminescence-based detection it is perhaps surprising that there are so few reports of it being used for the detection of illicit drugs.
In this perspective, we will review luminescence-based detection of illicit drugs and simulants. We will first discuss the sensing mechanisms that have been used for the luminescence-based detection of illicit drugs. It is important to note most luminescence-based sensing of illicit drugs use fluorescent chromophores, as the singlet excited state is not quenched by oxygen. We will then summarise the types of sensing materials along with their performance in detecting illicit drugs in solution. Finally, we will discuss the detection of vapours of illicit drugs and simulants, including drug vaporisation methods, sensing materials, as well as the influence of film morphology on sensing performance in real-life detection.
2. Mechanisms used for luminescence based illicit drug detection
Luminescence-based detection is a powerful technique as there are multiple modes that can be used. Detection can be achieved through a change in the luminescence intensity (turn-off or turn-on), the wavelength of the emission, or even the lifetime of the excited state in the presence of a chemical of interest.40 Luminescence quenching (turn-off) or enhancement (turn-on) are the most commonly used methods for illicit drug detection. These changes in luminescence can result from direct or indirect interactions between the sensing material and the drug molecule, with mechanisms including photo-induced hole transfer,64,65 energy transfer,56,66 and/or a chemical reaction.19,48
2.1. Photo-induced hole transfer
While photo-induced electron transfer (PET) (Fig. 1a) has been widely used for detecting analytes with high electron affinities (e.g., nitro-containing explosives),67–69 this mechanism is not suitable for drug (especially amine-containing narcotics) detection due to their low electron affinities. In contrast, photo-induced hole transfer (PHT) based luminescence quenching can in principle be used for detecting illicit drugs.63–65,70,71 As shown in Fig. 1b, the first step in the PHT mechanism is the same as that for PET, where the sensing material is photoexcited from the ground state to the lowest lying excited state. In the case of PET, the excited sensor is then oxidised by the high electron affinity analyte to form a radical cation and the luminescence is quenched (Fig. 1a). The electron is then transferred back to the ground state of the sensing material non-radiatively. However, in PHT the excited sensing material oxidises the drug (analyte), forming a non-emissive radical anion on the sensing material (Fig. 1b). The excited electron is then transferred non-radiatively back to the drug, with the sensing material being left in its ground state. Both PET and PHT result in the sensing material being returned to the ground state and hence they are reversible mechanisms whereby the sensing material can be reused until it has degraded, for example, by photooxidation. The challenge for PHT-based detection of drugs is the need to have luminescent materials that have a sufficiently high ionisation potential (IP). Such materials generally absorb light in the visible region of the spectrum and hence also have high electron affinities (EAs). There are a small number of materials that have been developed for organic solar cells with large IPs and EAs but only a small number of these are luminescent, especially in the solid state. For example, the non-fullerene acceptor, 2-[(7-{9,9-di-n-propyl-9H-fluoren-2-yl}benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazol-4-yl)methylene]malononitrile,72–74 has an IP of 5.9 eV with a film photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) of 34 ± 2%, and has been shown to have its luminescence quenched by aliphatic amines through PHT.72 Perylene diimides (PDIs) have been widely used as non-fullerene acceptors for organic solar cells due to their large EAs and corresponding IPs,75 but their film PLQYs are strongly dependent on the degree of aggregation in the solid state.76
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the photoexcitation of the sensing chromophore and the quenching of the luminescence via (a) photo-induced electron transfer or (b) photo-induced hole transfer. Both processes lead to formation of charge-transfer states that decay to enable both the sensor and the analyte to return to the ground state. 
Controlling the relative energy levels, and in particular, the ionisation potentials (IPs) is therefore crucial. Specifically, the ionisation potential (IP) of the sensing material should be larger than the that of the drug so that hole transfer is energetically favourable. For example, Cheng et al.65 introduced moieties with different electron affinities [2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-4,7-diyl (BTD), 2,1,3-benzooxadiazole-4,7-diyl (BOD), and quinoxaline-5,8-diyl (BDZ)] into the backbone of poly(fluorene) to modulate the IP between 5.9 eV and 6.1 eV. Luminescence quenching of the three polymers was observed in the presence of MA vapour, which has been reported from cyclic voltammetry measurements to have an IP ≈ 5.6 eV.65 Based on the energy levels it is reasonable to assign the luminescence quenching to PHT. However, in most reports there is no direct experimental evidence that PHT has occurred. Where PHT is proposed as the detection mechanism, transient absorption spectroscopy could be used to detect the formation and decay of the radical anion intermediate. Further challenges for PHT-based detection include understanding the factors that affect the hole transfer rate from the sensing material to the drug and the luminescence quenching efficiency.
2.2. Energy transfer
Energy transfer mechanisms have been used for detecting illicit drugs in solution. Energy transfer can occur through either long-range dipole–dipole coupling (Förster resonance energy transfer – FRET) or short-range electron exchange (Dexter energy transfer). FRET results in the radiationless transfer of the excited state from the donor chromophore to the acceptor with the donor returning to the ground state (Fig. 2a). The rate at which FRET occurs is dependent on: (1) the distance between the donor and acceptor molecules (typically 10–100 Å); (2) the spectral overlap of the emission spectrum of the donor and the absorption spectrum of the acceptor; and (3) orientation of the transition dipoles of the donor and acceptor, and (4) the photoluminescence quantum yield of the donor.77,78 Given that most illicit drugs only absorb light in the ultraviolet region there will be no spectral overlap with the emission of a sensing material and so FRET from the sensing material to the drug cannot occur. In principle, the reverse process could be used for FRET detection of drugs. That is, the drug could be photoexcited and then transfer its energy via FRET to the luminescent chromophore. However, the problem with this strategy is two-fold; first, most narcotics are only weakly luminescent (if at all), and the wavelength used to excite the drug would inevitably photoexcite the chromophore giving rise to the serious issue of background luminescence. The rate of Dexter transfer also depends on the spectral overlap between the donor emission and acceptor absorption and, consequently, there are no reports of sensors based on direct energy transfer between the drug and sensing material.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of (a) Förster resonance energy transfer and (b) Dexter energy transfer. Both processes result in luminescence quenching of the photoexcited donor. 
Given that direct FRET between the drug and luminescent sensing molecule is inefficient, FRET based detection has typically employed a different strategy. The approach used is for the drug molecule to be the activator or blocker for FRET between two separate chromophores. Johnson et al.66 constructed a quantum dot (QD)-based aptameric sensor integrating a luminescent quantum dot (605QD), an aptamer capable of binding cocaine, and a second luminescent chromophore (Cy5). In the absence of cocaine, upon photoexcitation at 488 nm, FRET from the quantum dot to Cy5 occurred with emission from the latter at ∼670 nm observed (Fig. 3a). The presence of cocaine caused a conformational change within the aptamer that increased the separation between the 605QD and Cy5, which turned off the luminescence from Cy5. The reverse process has also been used where a second non-luminescent acceptor was included. For example, the same group developed a turn-on aptameric sensor based on the 605QD/aptamer/Cy5/Iowa Black RQ complex.66 As shown in Fig. 3b, while FRET from 605QD to Cy5 could occur, this would be followed by FRET from Cy5 to the non-emissive Iowa Black RQ and thus the complex was in the off (dark) state. The addition of cocaine and its interaction with the aptamer released the Iowa Black RQ from the complex, and hence the luminescence from Cy5 arising from FRET from the quantum dot could then be observed. In another example, Nebu et al.59 reported the detection of morphine using a mixture of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) and fluorescein. In the initial state, the luminescence of surface-sorbed fluorescein was quenched by the AuNPs through nanometal surface energy transfer. Addition of morphine to the AuNPs quenched fluorescein solution led to an increase in the fluorescein luminescence. This was attributed to a displacement of the fluorescein from the AuNPs surface due to preferential binding of the morphine. Furthermore, the loss of fluorescein from the surface of the AuNPs and the associated net negative charge (imparted by the fluorescein) on the nanoparticle surface resulted in AuNP aggregation. The AuNP aggregation led to the surface plasmon absorption peak having reduced intensity and hence less efficient energy transfer from the fluorescein remaining on the surface. The authors conclude that these two factors led to the observed increase in the luminescence in the presence of morphine.
 Fig. 3  (a) Mechanism of a luminescence turn-off QD-based aptameric sensor for cocaine detection. In the absence of cocaine, the Cy5 luminescence was detected due to FRET between the 605QD and Cy5. Addition of cocaine led to the formation of a cocaine aptamer complex, which hindered FRET between the 605QD and Cy5, and emission was observed from the 605QD. (b) Mechanism of a luminescence turn-on QD-based aptameric sensor for cocaine detection. In the absence of cocaine, Cy5 was non-luminescent (“OFF” state) due to FRET between Cy5 and Iowa Black RQ (Black RQ is not luminescent) in the complex. Addition of cocaine led to the formation of a cocaine–aptamer complex without Iowa Black RQ, preventing FRET between the Cy5 and Iowa Black RQ, which resulted in Cy5 luminescence being observed. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 66. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society. 
2.3. Chemical reaction
A chemical reaction between a sensing molecule and a drug molecule can also lead to a change in the luminescence. However, most chemical reactions are irreversible, negating reusability of the sensor. Furthermore, not all chemical reactions are conducive to being undertaken in the solid state and hence chemical reaction-based sensing tends to work best in solution. For example, Deng et al.48 reported the rapid detection of MA in aqueous solution through reaction with dansyl chloride (DNC). Reaction of MA with DNC to form the sulfonamide yielded the luminescent 5-(N,N-dimethylamino)-N-methyl-N-(1-phenylpropan-2-yl)naphthalene-1-sulfonamide (FSP), with the turn-on of the luminescence observable by eye (see Fig. 4). Chemical reactions have also been utilized to detect narcotics in the vapour phase. Cheng et al.19 made a luminescent film by doping a DPP derivative (BOR-CHO) into polystyrene. In this case, saturated vapour of the MA simulant, N-methylphenethylamine (MPEA), or diethylamine (DEA), led to the luminescence being quenched within minutes (Fig. 5). Optimisation of the film morphology enabled the luminescence to be fully quenched within 20 seconds. The authors proposed that exposure of the BOR-CHO to secondary amines like MPEA or DEA led to deborylation, giving H-CHO, which was not luminescent. However, there is some ambiguity in the proposed mechanism. The 1H NMR data provided does indicate that deborylation has occurred, but the absorption spectrum shows an increase in absorption at longer wavelengths, which is more likely to arise from the formation of the iminium species through reaction of the aldehyde and amine. The results suggest that more than one chemical reaction is occurring during the sensing process.
 Fig. 4  Reaction of MA and dansyl chloride (DNC) in solution and comparison of the luminescence intensity in the absence of MA (red line in A) and presence of MA (blue line in A). A: luminescence spectra; B and C: images of the luminescence from the solutions. Excitation wavelength = 315 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2016 the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 5  Proposed reaction scheme between BOR-CHO and a secondary amine and (a) Ultraviolet-visible responses of BOR-CHO (THF, 2 × 10−5 M) upon addition of DEA (0–7000 eq.); (b) luminescence response of BOR-CHO (THF, 2 × 10−5 M) upon addition of DEA (0–7000 eq.); (c) images of the luminescence of BOR-CHO in solution (left), neat film 1 (middle), and BOR-CHO:PS blend film 2 under a UV lamp; (d) fluorescent spectra of film 2 before (red) and after (dark red) exposure to saturated DEA vapor for 300 s at room temperature (25 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. 
3. Luminescence detection of illicit drugs in solution
The majority of the relatively small number of luminescence-based sensors have focussed on detecting drugs in solution. Detection of illicit drugs in solution is important as they can be used to spike drinks, for example, the date rape drugs, gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB), gamma-butyrolactone (GBL), and ketamine are known to have been added to beverages to incapacitate victims.47,49 Furthermore, the sensing of illicit drugs in biofluids (e.g., saliva and urine) is an important means of drug detection.79 The sensing materials developed for luminescence detection of illicit drugs in solutions and biofluids can be basically classified into three categories according to structure: aptamer-based sensors, nanomaterials, and non-polymeric sensing materials.
3.1. Aptamer and biomimetic-based sensors
Aptamers are short sequences of artificial DNA, RNA, or peptide sequences that bind a specific target molecule. For sensing, the aptamers are designed to undergo a conformational change when binding a target molecule. The aim is to have compound specific binding to provide the selectivity for the luminescent sensor. An early report of an aptamer-based luminescent sensor for illicit drug detection was by Stojanovic et al. in 2000,50 where two cocaine–aptamer subunits, one labelled with a 5′-6-carboxy-fluorescein fluorophore and the other labelled with a 3′-dabcyl (a luminescence quencher) were employed to detect cocaine in a buffer solution (c(TRIS) = 20 mM, pH = 7.4, c(NaCl) = 140 mM, and c(Mg2+) between 0 to 4 mM). The heterodimerization of the two aptameric subunits in the presence of cocaine led to the fluorophore and quencher being sufficiently close to quench the luminescence. The method allowed the reliable detection of cocaine in the concentration range of 10 to 1250 μM in the buffer solution. Despite the excellent selectivity of the aptameric sensor, it is unsuitable for rapid, on-site identification of illicit drugs at trace levels due to complex sample preparation and long incubation time (1 hour), as well as its relatively low sensitivity. Yu et al.53 reported a luminescence turn-on aptameric sensor based on a strand-displacement polymerization strategy that could amplify the signal for cocaine sensing. Although the sensitivity was significantly improved with a limit of detection (LOD) of 2 nM due to the amplification effect, the reported sensor still had the problems of slow detection (1 to 2 hours) and the requirement for multiple reagents (including polymerase, dNTP, primers, Tris–HCl (pH 7.5), MgCl2 and dithiothreitol). In 2014, Roncancio et al.54 established a label-free aptameric sensor that could identify cocaine with a LOD of 200 nM. In the sensing process, a pre-quenched fluorophore 2-amino-5,6,7-trimethyl-1,8-naphthyridine (ATMND) bound to the cocaine-target aptamer was competitively displaced by a cocaine molecule, achieving turn-on detection of cocaine in 20 seconds in a 10 mM Tris buffer (pH 7.4) with 0.01 mM MgCl2 and 5% DMSO (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Schematic of cocaine detection with the 38-GC aptamer sensor. 38-GC stably folds in the absence of a ligand at room temperature. ATMND binding to the aptamer quenches its luminescence, but competitive binding with cocaine displaces ATMND from the binding site, turning on its fluorescence. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 54. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
In addition to aptameric sensors, fluorescence immunoassays (FIA) have been reported for selectively detecting drugs in biofluids.80–83 The general approach for using an FIA sensor is to have a fluorophore-labelled drug antibody that specifically binds with the target drug, which leads to a change in the fluorophore emission. The advantages of FIA are high selectivity and sensitivity, but the disadvantages include long incubation times and complex sample preparation. For example, Cao et al.83 reported a competitive fluorescence immunoassay consisting of a ketamine hapten and a fluorescein isothiocyanate-labelled antibody for detecting ketamine in human urine, blood, or sewage, which showed high specificity to ketamine versus a range of drugs and a LOD of 0.1 pg mL−1. However, the method required a 2 hour sample incubation and multiple reagents. Molecular imprinted polymers (MIPs) have also been proposed as biomimetic-like materials. For example, the use of a MIP in combination with a fluorophore and/or quantum dots have been employed to improve the selectivity of fluorescence-based small molecule sensors.84 For example, Piñeiro et al. prepared a MIP using cocaine as the template molecule, ethylenedimethacrylate as the functional monomer, divinylbenzene as the crosslinker, and 2,2′-azo-bis(iso-butyronitrile) as the initiator, and immobilised it on a Mn-doped ZnS quantum dot. The MIP-coated quantum dots showed fluorescence quenching upon exposure to cocaine and its metabolites in solution whereas no quenching was observed for the non-imprinted polymer. Furthermore, the MIP-coated quantum dots showed 121 times and 81 times higher Stern–Volmer constants to cocaine than to morphine and codeine, respectively.85
3.2. Nanomaterial-based sensors
The last few decades have witnessed rapid development of nanomaterials, particularly luminescent quantum dots (QDs), which have been used for multiple applications including sensing. Recently, luminescent nanomaterial-based sensors have been developed to detect illicit drugs in solution. Hassanzadeh et al.58 reported a sensor based on L-cysteine capped CdS QDs whose luminescence could be quenched by MA hydrochloride in 0.013 M Tris buffer at a pH = 6.5 with a LOD of ∼10 nM. In a different approach, it had been previously shown that the chemiluminescence (CL) of rhodamine B oxidation by potassium permanganate with sacrificial cetyltrimethylammonium bromide could be sensitized by CdS QDs. It was found that MA hydrochloride could replace the cetyltrimethylammonium bromide allowing its rapid detection in seconds with an LOD of ∼460 pM.58 It was found that other illicit drugs and medicines could not replace the cetyltrimethylammonium bromide and hence the method showed a degree of specificity for MA hydrochloride. In another example, a sensing system composed of a mixture of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) and fluorescein in aqueous solution has been reported of being capable of detecting morphine within 3 minutes through a luminescence turn-on mechanism with a LOD of ∼53 pM.59 The high sensitivity was presumed to arise from strong binding of the morphine onto the surface of the AuNPs that stopped the fluorescein emission being quenched by the AuNPs. Interestingly, no turn-on responses were found when the sensor was exposed to other illicit drugs (ketamine and heroin) and potential interferents including various cations, anions, and biomolecules. The selectivity was attributed to the presence of both a phenolic hydroxyl group and a cyclic tertiary amino group within the morphine structure. Finally, the authors demonstrated the detection of morphine in human serum and urine samples with LODs of 67 pM and 62 pM, respectively, by using a paper strip containing fluorescein and the AuNPs. Nanomaterials have also been employed to detect date rape drugs in beverages. Chang et al.62 reported the luminescence quenching detection of nitro-containing benzodiazepines (including nimetazepam, flunitrazepam, clonazepam, and nitrazepam), a class of date rape drugs, with carbon dots (hC-dots). They reported a LOD of ∼7.2 μM for nimetazepam. Although the sensing system could discriminate the nitro-containing benzodiazepines from other types of illicit drugs such as heroin, MA, and cocaine, the compounds of interest needed to first be extracted from the spiked beverages with organic solvents before being detected with the hC-dots. Recently, the same group developed a nanomaterial-based sensor array comprising bovine serum albumin-stabilized gold nanoclusters (BSA–Au NCs), carbon dots (C dots), thiosalicylic acid-stabilized silver nanoclusters (TA–Ag NCs), and Marquis reagent (an established colorimetric sensor) to identify five illicit drugs.86 Each of the drugs caused different luminescence responses (turn-on: “1”, turn-off: “−1”, and no response: “0”) when exposed to the four materials. Using this approach, a specific response pattern (e.g., “0, −1, 1, 0” for cocaine) could be established for each drug. To improve the identification accuracy, deep learning was used to analyse the response patterns of an array, and the authors reported a 100% accuracy with a confidence threshold of 0.7 for identification of 4-chloroethcathinone (2–20 × 10−3 M), cocaine (1.5–20 × 10−3 M), ketamine (0.8–6 × 10−3 M), MA (1.6–20 × 10−3 M), and heroin (1.6–20 × 10−3 M). Photoluminescent metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have also been studied as luminescence sensors for drug detection. Sheta et al.87 reported chromium metal–organic framework nanoparticles (Cr(III)-MOF-NPs) that can detect morphine in solution with a LOD of ∼0.2 nM and a quantification limit of ∼0.5 nM, with no false positive reports to interferents such as inorganic cations and anions, or organic compounds (e.g., MA and caffeine). Interestingly, the emission of the Cr(III)-MOF-NP solution showed an initial blueshift (from 593 to 566 nm), which was then followed by an enhancement in the emission intensity as further morphine was added. It was proposed that the changes occurred due to the morphine hydrogen bonding to the sensing material. Furthermore, it was demonstrated that the Cr(III)-MOF-NPs could be used to quantify the morphine concentration in spiked urine and serum samples (morphine at 0.5, 5, 50, and 100 nM). Recently, Li et al.88 reported europium MOFs for detecting a new psychoactive substance, methcathinone (MC) in urine with a LOD of ∼2 nM after 10 min of incubation. It was proposed that the decrease in the observed luminescence was mainly due to the inner filter effect, where the MC absorbed a proportion of the excitation leading to the Eu-MOF being excited to a lesser extent.
3.3. Non-polymeric sensing materials
Compared to aptamers and nanomaterials, there are relatively few reports that use non-polymeric conjugated chromophores for luminescence-based drug detection in solution. Chang et al.47 reported a fluorescent BODIPY derivative named “Green date” for detecting GBL in spiked beverages with a LOD of around 35 mM. The authors proposed a “disassembly-driven luminescence turn-on” mechanism in which the presence of hydrophobic GBL molecules facilitated the breakdown of BODIPY aggregates. BODIPY aggregates have a low PLQY in aqueous solution, with individual BODIPY molecules having a larger PLQY value. Hence, the detection method is based on a turn-on mechanism. However, the problem of this approach is that the background luminescence can decrease the LOD. Solution detection of drugs can in some cases be achieved with the sensing material on a solid support. For example, a benzyl alcohol-substituted fluorene derivative was sorbed onto filter paper and was reported to show high sensitivity to aqueous solutions of ketamine with a LOD of ∼36 nM.89 The detection was achieved through a change in the colour (wavelength) of the emission (Fig. 7). As the concentration of the ketamine increased, the emission spectra gradually shifted from 463 to 398 nm. The change in colour was attributed to a strong drug-fluorophore interaction that changed the aggregation state of the sensing material on the filter paper, which is reasonable, as not only did the emission blue-shift, but it also had increased phonon structure.
 Fig. 7  Chemical Structure of 8BA-2F, and emission spectra (a) and photographs of the colour change (b) under excitation with a UV lamp at 254 nm of 8BA-2F-sorbed filter paper after the addition of different concentrations of ketamine. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 89. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
Finally, as introduced earlier, a sensing strip containing N-butylpyridinium bis[(trifluoromethyl)sulfonyl]amide (BPyNTf2) (an anionic liquid) and a non-fluorescent molecule DNC was used to detect MA in aqueous solution through a chemical reaction (see Fig. 4).48 It was reported that the anionic liquid provided an efficient extraction medium for MA from the aqueous solution as well as a hydrophobic environment to accelerate the reaction between the DNC and MA to yield a fluorescent dye. The detection was rapid (completed within 1 minute), achieving a turn-on detection of MA with a LOD of 27 μM. It was also demonstrated that the sensing strip could differentiate MA and ephedrine from other drugs including chlorpheniramine, phenobarbital, lorazepam in human urine due to the selective reactivity of DNC to primary and secondary amines.
4. Luminescence detection of illicit drug and simulant vapours
Illicit drugs are often traded, transported, and concealed in solid form. The most desirable approach for first responders to rapidly identify suspected drug solids on site is to detect the drug vapours as it reduces direct physical contact and eliminates complex sample preparation and long incubation times. Thus, in principle the detection can be performed with increased safety, convenience, and speed.41 However, there are relatively fewer reports on luminescence vapour detection of illicit drugs compared to solution detection. This is in part due to the low vapour pressure of many drugs and a limited understanding of the fundamental processes behind the responses of the sensing films to the drug vapours.
4.1. Vapour pressure and vaporisation of illicit drugs
As shown in Table 1, many illicit drugs such as cocaine, fentanyl, and heroin have vapour pressures at ppt or even ppq level at 25 °C in free base and/or hydrochloride form, which means direct vapour sampling is difficult. Therefore, there is generally a need to increase the illicit drug vapour concentration to facilitate their detection and identification. One method to increase the vapour concentration is to convert the drug salt to its corresponding free-base. An approach to achieve the conversion is to mix the drug salt with a suitable base in the solid phase. For example, Fang et al.63 converted the hydrochloride salts of MA, ecstasy, and ketamine by grinding a mixture of the salt and sodium carbonate for 10 minutes. In doing so they managed to increase the vapour concentration of the drugs, with a greater than 10 times enhancement in the observed sensing responses. However, this approach requires additional reagents and extra time for sample preparation and only works for drugs having relatively high vapour pressures (ppm level) in the free-base form, such as amphetamine-type stimulants. Another way to facilitate the vaporisation of an analyte is by heating. It has been reported that the drug vapour pressure can rise by several orders of magnitude with a moderate increase in temperature. For example, the vapour pressures of cocaine (free-base) and THC increase from ∼611 ppt and ∼254 ppt to ∼2.5 ppm and ∼1.1 ppm, respectively, when the temperature increases from 25 °C to 100 °C.12,17 It is important to note that when swabs are used for sample collection, the sample is usually released to the detector through heating the swab.90 Thus, heating the drug sample can enable detection of a broader range of illicit drugs without the use of extra reagents, which makes the vapour detection of drugs with extremely low vapour pressures possible. However, the disadvantage of using heating for portable devices is that it significantly decreases battery life.
4.2. Sensing materials for drug vapour detection

4.2.1. Non-polymeric materials. 
Perylene diimide (PDI) based materials have been the most studied class of materials for illicit drug detection through PHT due to their high PLQY in solution, appropriate IP and excellent photostability.91 For example, Fang et al.64 reported nanofibers of a PDI derivative containing cholesteryl groups, named PDC (Fig. 8a), which showed luminescence quenching by MPEA (MA simulant) vapour with a LOD of ∼5.5 ppb (see Fig. 9a). Although the sensor displayed reversibility and reusability by placing under a flow of air for 5 minutes after each MPEA exposure, the sensor could also be quenched by other interferents including xylidine, o-toluidine, and various amines (Fig. 9b). It should be noted that a lack of selectivity can be an issue for all PHT based sensors.
 Fig. 8  Chemical structures of luminescent non-polymeric molecules reported for illicit drug and simulant vapour detection. 
 Fig. 9  (a) Luminescence spectra of a PDC film in the presence of different concentrations of MPEA vapor (λex = 467 nm). Inset: Stern–Volmer plot of the film in the presence of low concentrations of MPEA vapor. (b) Luminescence response of a PDC film to the vapor of various reagents (Note – the concentration of the MPEA vapor is 2.5 ppm, while the others are at a concentration of 190 ppm or higher). Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2016 Elsevier. (c) Two-step protocol for the discrimination of different illicit drugs. (d) The truth table of the responses recorded, where a positive response (i.e., a positive or negative change in the luminescence intensity) is counted as “1”, and no response as “0”. (e) Schematic representation of the PL dynamics of the PDI-CB films to the vapours of different illicit drugs. The responses were grouped into three types, dependent on the PL recovery ratio (R). (f) Schematic representation (top left) and picture (right) of the prototype detector as well as pictures of the films used in the device taken in day light and under UV excitation (365 nm, bottom left). Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. 
Another PDI-based fluorescent material (PDI-CB) containing an o-carborane linking unit between two perylene diimides (Fig. 8b) was developed by the same group, and its quenching response to MA, ecstasy, and ketamine in both free-base and salt form were demonstrated.63 Interestingly, the compound showed different luminescence responses (turn-off/turn-on/no response) to the drugs and potential interferents depending on the substrate on which they were deposited (plastic/glass/silica gel). The authors then went the extra step and developed a sensor array that integrated three films of PDI-CB on different substrates to identify illicit drugs in two steps (Fig. 9c). The first step used the luminescence response of each film (Fig. 9d) from a ten second sampling time to identify whether an illicit drug or interferent was present. If an illicit drug was considered present, then the PL recovery ratio was used to partially classify the type of drug present (Fig. 9e). Similarly, three films based on three pyrene-containing sensing materials (see Fig. 8c) were integrated into a sensor array to differentiate between vapours of illicit drugs and interferents using an in-house built detector with three channels (Fig. 9f).92 The three sensing materials showed different responses (turn-off/turn-on/no response) and recovery to individual analytes, but the authors did not study the processes that led to the different PL responses. Furthermore, a sensing film composed of a single perylene monoimide attached to an o-carborane (see Fig. 8d) was also reported to show a PHT-based quenching response to MA vapour in seconds when used in a prototype detector.71
Fu et al.93 have developed a different strategy. They synthesised the sensing material 9,9-di-n-octylfluorene-2,7-bisthiophene (FBT) (see Fig. 8e), with films of the material showing a luminescence turn-on response to MA vapour with a LOD of ∼2 ppm. The luminescence was found to increase by 500% in 300 seconds in the presence of saturated MA vapour. It can be easily understood that the PHT between FBT and MA is not energetically favourable due to the IPs of the components – fluorene and thiophene. However, the origin of the observed luminescence enhancement is not clear. The authors proposed that the MA binds with the thiophene units and in doing so reduces the heavy-atom effect of sulfur that leads to intersystem crossing. However, no experimental evidence (e.g., transient absorption spectroscopy) was provided to support this hypothesis, and it was unclear why FBT only showed a luminescence enhancement to di-iso-propylamine and MA and no other amines such as n-propylamine and benzylamine. The proposed thiophene–amine interactions should also exist between these latter amines and FBT. It is more likely that the increase in film luminescence arises from a reduction in the inter-chromophore interactions that can lead to non-radiative decay processes as the analyte sorbs into the film, and perhaps n-propylamine and benzylamine sorb to a lesser extent.


4.2.2. Fluorescent conjugated polymers. 
Fluorescent conjugated polymers (CPs) have been widely studied for explosive vapour detection. It is therefore not surprising that luminescent CP-based sensors for detecting illicit drug and simulant vapours have also been investigated. In 2010, Cheng et al.94 reported the luminescence turn-on detection of saturated MA vapour by using tetraphenylporphyrin (TPP) or metallotetraphenylporphyrins (MTPP) blended into films of poly(9,9-di-n-octylfluorene) (PFO) (Fig. 10). It was reported that in the absence of the drug the luminescence of PFO was quenched. When the films were exposed to MA the PFO emission was switched on. The turn-on of the luminescence was ascribed to the TPP or MTPP binding the MA, which suppressed the electronic and/or energy transfer between PFO and TPP/MTPP. In follow up work, the same group made a series of donor–acceptor type conjugated polymers (CPs) (CP1, CP2, CP3, see Fig. 11a) that incorporated the high electron affinity components, BTD, BOD, and BDZ, into the PF backbone.65 The incorporation of the higher electron affinity components into the polymer backbone led to the copolymers having larger IPs than MA, and their luminescence was quenched in the presence of MA vapour through PHT. The best LOD for MA was ∼180 ppb and the detection process showed good reversibility (Fig. 11b and c). However, the copolymers were found not to be selective for MA with similar quenching responses upon exposure to other amines. Recently, the same group further modified the structure of the donor–acceptor (D–A) polymer (CP1) by introducing fluorine atoms on the BTD acceptor (see Fig. 11a),70 which led to an increase in the IP but a decrease in the film PLQY. It was also found that while the sensitivity to MPEA vapour was improved by introducing one fluorine atom onto the BTD unit (1F-CP), it decreased when two fluorine atoms were introduced (2F-CP) (Fig. 11d). The difference was ascribed to the different binding strength between MPEA and the sensing materials. Finally, a copolymer containing a mixture of non-fluorinated and mono-fluorinated BTD units, 0F–1F-CP (Fig. 11a), was prepared. The copolymer showed higher sensitivity than either 0F-CP or 2F-CP, but a slower response than 1F-CP to saturated MPEA vapour (Fig. 11d). Its luminescence quenching response to MA vapour was also demonstrated (Fig. 11e).
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic representation of the ‘‘turn on’’ mechanism for the vapor-phase detection of amine containing analytes using an MTPP-doped PFO film. (b) Time-course fluorescent response of the PdTPP:PFO film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2010 the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 11  (a) Chemical structures of CPs. (b) Reversibility of CP1 film exposed to MA vapor. (c) Luminescence quenching efficiency of CP1 film as a function of the vapor pressure of MA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2012 Elsevier. (d) The time-course fluorescent responses to saturated MPEA vapor for 300 s. (e) The time-course fluorescent responses of 0F–1F-CP film exposed to MA vapor. Inset: The luminescence spectra of 0F–1F-CP films before and after exposure to saturated MA vapor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 

4.3. Analyte vapour diffusion
For efficient film-based luminescence detection of drug vapours, the drug molecules need to be sufficiently close to the sensing chromophore units for PHT, energy transfer or a chemical reaction to occur. Given the low vapour pressure of many drugs in salt form, even when heated, the luminescence response would be larger if the drugs could diffuse into the bulk of the sensing film rather than just been sorbed onto the film surface. Therefore, in addition to the energetic considerations (e.g., differences in IP) or the chemical reactivity of the sensing materials to the illicit drugs and simulants, the diffusion of the drug vapour into the sensing films is another critical factor that can affect the sensing performance. Studies on the PET-based luminescence quenching detection of nitro-containing explosive vapours have shown that analyte diffusion into the sensing film is a first-order factor for their detection in real-time sensing.95,96 Although the diffusion of illicit drugs or simulants into sensing films has yet to be reported, and it may be that illicit drugs are simply deposited onto the sensing film following vaporization, there are studies suggesting that the morphology of the sensing film can play an important role in the luminescence detection of drugs and simulants that are in the vapour phase. For example, sensing films containing nano- or micro-structures made by self-assembly or grafting onto nanoparticles to increase the surface contact area have been reported to give an enhanced luminescence response.63,64,97 Substrate modification has also been used to modulate the sensing film morphology. For example, Li et al.98 reported a method to improve the sensing responses of two materials to MPEA vapour by treating the substrate with UV–ozone. A hydrophobic polymer (S1) was found to wet the hydrophilic surface of the UV-ozone substrates more poorly leading to samples that had a greater surface area (Fig. 12a). The UV–ozone treatment led to larger changes in the luminescence response (in this case a turn-on) of S1 samples exposed to MPEA vapour (Fig. 12b), which was attributed to the increased surface area. In contrast, films of the non-polymeric S2 gave uniform films independent of whether the substrate was treated with UV-ozone or not. Furthermore, the change in luminescence was found to decrease with increasing film thickness (Fig. 12c and d), which suggests MPEA vapour tends to sorb onto the film surface. An alternative approach to increasing the surface area has been to create porous poly(styrene) films containing the sensing material.19 Films with different porosity were achieved by tuning the ratio of the polymer and sensing material, and the solvent and humidity. It was found that the film with the greatest porosity, corresponding to the highest surface area, had a larger quenching efficiency and faster response. In summary, modification of the film morphology has been demonstrated to be important for the sensing performance. The examples thus far have focussed on increasing the surface-to-volume ratio. However, it is still unclear which sensing material modifications would lead to favourable analyte diffusion into the bulk of the film, and further, what are the key factors responsible for efficient drug vapour diffusion in the solid state. Therefore, further studies on drugs/simulants diffusion using specific measurements (e.g., quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) and neutron reflectometry) could provide key insights in a similar manner to that used for elucidating the diffusion of explosives into luminescent sensing films.95,99,100
 Fig. 12  Chemical structures of S1 and S2. (a) SEM images of S1 deposited on quartz substrates with different UV-ozone treatment times, and (b) changes in luminescence intensity of the four S1 samples at λem(max) = 553 nm after exposure to saturated MPEA vapor for 150 s. (c) SEM images of S2 films on quartz substrates with different UV-ozone treatment times (insets: cross-section SEM images) and (d) changes in luminescence intensity at λem(max) = 537 nm of the four S2 films with different UV-ozone treatment time and film thickness after exposure to saturated MPEA vapor for 600 s. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2022 Springer Nature. 
5. Summary and perspective
The increasing use of illicit drugs worldwide and their associated damage to our communities means that there is an urgent need for the scientific research community to find novel and reliable approaches to detect and identify illicit drugs. Luminescence-based detection has the potential to be the leading method for rapid, on-site identification of suspected illicit drugs at trace level, which is a challenge for conventional analytical techniques. Portable real-time luminescence sensors are suitable for assessing environments including clandestine laboratories, vehicles, and on the street, where the drugs are often illegally produced, transported, and sold. Film-based luminescence detection of drug vapours is particularly desirable due to the advantages of simple use, reduced physical contact, rapid response, and reusability. In contrast, solution detection remains useful for determining whether a person has taken drugs or whether drinks have been spiked. The low vapour pressure of the illicit drugs and current lack of selectivity are problems that still need to be overcome. The vapour pressure of the drugs can be increased by converting the drug salts to their free-base form as well as by vaporizing them through heating. In the future, other strategies such as preconcentration and the development of highly sensitive sensing materials are important approaches that could be undertaken. Photo-induced hole transfer has been employed as a key mechanism for drug vapour detection, but has not been conclusively established with techniques such as transient absorption spectroscopy or electron paramagnetic resonance that would prove that charge-transfer has in fact taken place. Förster resonance energy transfer has been used for the detection of drugs in solution and is an exciting avenue to explore. Furthermore, there have only been nascent efforts in exploring how film morphology affect the sensing performance. At this time little if anything is known how illicit drugs can diffuse into and out of sensing films, and hence is an important direction for future research activities. Finally, the successful selective detection of illicit drugs has still not been reported. The use of sensor arrays as described in the perspective provide clear directions that should be followed to achieve selectivity.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
References

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, World Drug Report 2021, United Nations Publication, Vienna, 2021.
C. Florence, F. J. Luo and K. Rice, Drug Alcohol Depend., 2021, 218, 108350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. R. Richard, M. S. Kallinca, M. L. Fernanda and D. M. Denise, in Drug Abuse: Classifications, Effects and Risks, ed. M. O. Simone, A. R. Richard and A. B. Roberto, springer, Switzerland,  2021, ch. 1, pp. 3–20 Search PubMed .
Y. Schmid, F. Enzler, P. Gasser, E. Grouzmann, K. H. Preller, F. X. Vollenweider, R. Brenneisen, F. Muller, S. Borgwardt and M. E. Liechti, Biol. Psychiatry, 2015, 78, 544–553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Jansen and L. Theron, J. Psychoact. Drugs, 2006, 38, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zapata, J. M. Matey, G. Montalvo and C. Garcia-Ruiz, Microchem. J., 2021, 163, 105877 CrossRef CAS .
M. Thornton, C. Gobble and J. Chickos, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 2014, 73, 51–56 CrossRef CAS .
J. Broseus, N. Gentile, F. B. Pont, J. M. G. Gongora, L. Gaste and P. Esseiva, Forensic Sci. Int., 2015, 257, 307–313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Fiorentin, A. J. Krotulski, D. M. Martin, T. Browne, J. Triplett, T. Conti and B. K. Logan, J. Forensic Sci., 2019, 64, 888–896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Evrard, S. Legleye and A. Cadet-Tairou, Int. J. Drug Policy, 2010, 21, 399–406 CrossRef PubMed .
National Center for Biotechnology Information, PubChem Database, Morphine, https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/morphine, (accessed January 15, 2023).
A. B. Dindal, M. V. Buchanan, R. A. Jenkins and C. K. Bayne, Analyst, 2000, 125, 1393–1396 RSC .
R. G. Ewing, M. K. Nims, K. A. Morrison, G. L. Hart, N. M. Avalos and E. H. Denis, Analyst, 2022, 147, 4888–4894 RSC .
National Center for Biotechnology Information, PubChem Database, 4-Hydroxybutanoic acid, https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/4-Hydroxybutanoic-acid, (accessed January 15, 2023).
National Center for Biotechnology Information, PubChem Database, Ketamine, https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/3821, (accessed January 15, 2023).
National Center for Biotechnology Information, PubChem Database, Lysergide, https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/5761, (accessed January 15, 2023).
T. M. Lovestead and T. J. Bruno, Forensic Chem., 2017, 5, 79–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
National Center for Biotechnology Information, PubChem Database, 3,4-Methylenedioxy-methamphetamine, https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/1615, (accessed January 15, 2023).
K. K. Li, L. X. Wang, J. M. Chen, M. Z. Yan, Y. Y. Fu, Q. G. He and J. O. Cheng, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 334, 129629 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Smith, Hum. Detect. Positive Identif. Methods Technol., 1997, 2932, 115–120 Search PubMed .
S. W. Park, S. Yuk, J. S. Ryu, M. S. Kim and Y. Yi, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2006, 568, 369–374 CrossRef CAS .
U. Staerk and W. R. Kulpmann, J. Chromatogr. B: Biomed. Sci. Appl., 2000, 745, 399–411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Meier, C. Berchtold, S. Schmid and R. Zenobi, J. Mass Spectrom., 2012, 47, 555–559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Van Hese, P. M. Vaysse, T. P. Siegel, R. Heeren, S. Rex and E. Cuypers, Talanta, 2021, 221, 121391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Fulton, S. R. Vaughan and L. E. DeGreeff, Drug Test. Anal., 2022, 14, 1451–1459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Moran, H. McCall, B. Yeager and S. Bell, Talanta, 2012, 100, 196–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mohsen, N. Gharbi, A. Lenouvel and C. Guignard, Procedia Eng., 2014, 87, 536–539 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Zou, L. H. Yin and S. H. Jin, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 2018, 147, 81–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Yu, M. H. Ge, P. Li, Q. W. Xie and L. B. Yang, Talanta, 2019, 191, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Hodges, P. J. Hendra, H. A. Willis and T. Farley, J. Raman Spectrosc., 1989, 20, 745–749 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Green, J. N. Park, M. Gilbert, M. McKenzie, E. Struth, R. Lucas, W. Clarke and S. G. Sherman, Int. J. Drug Policy, 2020, 77, 102661 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Philp and S. L. Fu, Drug Test. Anal., 2018, 10, 95–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Philp and S. Fu, Drug Test. Anal., 2018, 10, 95–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Jezierski, E. Adamkiewicz, M. Walczak, M. Sobczynska, A. Gorecka-Bruzda, J. Ensminger and E. Papet, Forensic Sci. Int., 2014, 237, 112–118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hickey, F. Mcilwraith, R. Bruno, A. Matthews and R. Alati, Drug Alcohol Rev., 2012, 31, 778–783 CrossRef PubMed .
G. S. Davidson, Int. J. Pharm. Compd., 2008, 12, 384–390 CAS .
D. G. E. Caldicott, P. E. Pigou, R. Beattie and J. W. Edwards, Aust. N. Z. J. Public Health, 2005, 29, 155–162 CrossRef PubMed .
R. H. Schwartz, R. Milteer and M. A. LeBeau, South. Med. J., 2000, 93, 558–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. DeBeck, E. Wood, J. Z. Qi, E. Fu, D. McArthur, J. Montaner and T. Kerr, Int. J. Drug Policy, 2011, 22, 376–384 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Sun, Y. Wang and Y. Lei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8019–8061 RSC .
P. E. Shaw and P. L. Burn, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 29714–29730 RSC .
M. E. Germain and M. J. Knapp, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2543–2555 RSC .
N. Kaewnok, J. Sirirak, S. Jungsuttiwong, Y. Wongnongwa, A. Kamkaew, A. Petdum, W. Panchan, S. Sahasithiwat, T. Sooksimuang, A. Charoenpanich and N. Wanichacheva, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 418, 126242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Jiang, D. S. Guo and Y. Liu, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 7258–7264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Chinen, C. M. Guan, J. R. Ferrer, S. N. Barnaby, T. J. Merkel and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10530–10574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bettini, Z. Syrgiannis, R. Pagano, L. Dordevic, L. Salvatore, M. Prato, G. Giancane and L. Valli, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 17079–17089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhai, B. K. Agrawalla, P. S. Eng, S. C. Lee, W. Xu and Y. T. Chang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6170–6172 RSC .
R. Wang, X. Qi, S. Liu, L. Zhao, L. Lu and Y. Deng, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 52372–52376 RSC .
R. Dahiwadkar, H. Kumar and S. Kanvah, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2022, 427, 113844 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Stojanovic, P. Prada and D. W. Landry, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 11547–11548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Stojanovic, P. Prada and D. W. Landry, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4928–4931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Shlyahovsky, D. Li, Y. Weizmann, R. Nowarski, M. Kotler and I. Willner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3814–3815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. He, Z. S. Wu, H. Zhou, H. Q. Wang, J. H. Jiang, G. L. Shen and R. Q. Yu, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 1358–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Roncancio, H. Yu, X. Xu, S. Wu, R. Liu, J. Debord, X. Lou and Y. Xiao, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 11100–11106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Song, X. Wang, S. Wu, Y. Zhao, P. Luo and C. Meng, Talanta, 2016, 161, 437–442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, Y. Chen, L. Yang, Z. Zhu, G. Zhu, X. Yang, K. Wang and W. Tan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 28, 450–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Guler, G. Bozokalfa, B. Demir, Z. P. Gumus, B. Guler, E. Aldemir, S. Timur and H. Coskunol, Drug Test. Anal., 2017, 9, 578–587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hassanzadeh, A. Khataee and R. Lotfi, Microchem. J., 2017, 132, 371–377 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nebu, J. S. Anjali Devi, R. S. Aparna, B. Aswathy, A. O. Aswathy and G. Sony, Mikrochim. Acta, 2018, 185, 532 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wei, Y. Li, H. Liang, Y. Yen, Y. Lin and H. Chang, Anal. Sci., 2022, 38, 247–260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Abnous, N. M. Danesh, M. Ramezani, S. M. Taghdisi and A. S. Emrani, Anal. Methods, 2018, 10, 3232–3236 RSC .
Y. T. Yen, Y. S. Lin, T. H. Chen, S. C. Chyueh and H. T. Chang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 305, 127441 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, C. Shang, Z. Wang, Y. Qi, R. Miao, K. Liu, T. Liu and Y. Fang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1695 CrossRef PubMed .
M. He, H. Peng, G. Wang, X. Chang, R. Miao, W. Wang and Y. Fang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 227, 255–262 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wen, Y. Y. Fu, L. Q. Shi, C. He, L. Dong, D. F. Zhu, Q. G. He, H. M. Cao and J. G. Cheng, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 168, 283–288 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Zhang and L. W. Johnson, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 3051–3055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Yang and T. M. Swager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 11864–11873 CrossRef CAS .
B. Balan, C. Vijayakumar, M. Tsuji, A. Saeki and S. Seki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 10371–10378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Geng, M. A. Ali, A. J. Clulow, S. Fan, P. L. Burn, I. R. Gentle, P. Meredith and P. E. Shaw, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Yu, W. Xu, Y. Y. Fu, H. M. Cao, Q. G. He and J. G. Cheng, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 172, 107852 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Ding, K. Liu, Y. Y. Qi, C. D. Shang, X. M. Chang and Y. Fang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 340, 129964 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, A. S. Loch, J. C. M. Kistemaker, P. L. Burn and P. E. Shaw, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 13723–13732 RSC .
P. E. Schwenn, K. Gui, A. M. Nardes, K. B. Krueger, K. H. Lee, K. Mutkins, H. Rubinstein-Dunlop, P. E. Shaw, N. Kopidakis, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 73–81 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gui, K. Mutkins, P. E. Schwenn, K. B. Krueger, A. Pivrikas, P. Wolfer, N. S. Stutzmann, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1800–1806 RSC .
Z. T. Liu, Y. Wu, Q. Zhang and X. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17604–17622 RSC .
B. L. Zhang, H. Soleimaninejad, D. J. Jones, J. M. White, K. P. Ghiggino, T. A. Smith and W. W. H. Wong, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8395–8403 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sahoo, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2011, 12, 20–30 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Zhang, X. Xiang, P. Mei, J. Dai, L. L. Zhang and Y. Liu, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2009, 72, 907–914 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. Ahmed, R. Chand, S. Kumar, N. Mittal, S. Srinivasan and A. R. Rajabzadeh, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2020, 131, 116006 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gandhi, P. Sharma, N. Capalash, R. S. Verma and C. R. Suri, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 392, 215–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mishra, I. Banga, R. Tyagi, T. Munjal, A. Goel, N. Capalash, P. Sharma, C. R. Suri and S. Gandhi, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 23163–23170 RSC .
J. C. Guo, S. L. Tian, K. Liu and J. H. Guo, IEEE Trans. NanoBiosci., 2021, 20, 2–8 Search PubMed .
J. Cao, M. J. Li and X. Y. Chen, RSC Adv., 2022, 12, 30529–30538 RSC .
K. Haupt and K. Mosbach, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 2495–2504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Chantada-Vazquez, J. Sanchez-Gonzalez, E. Pena-Vazquez, M. J. Tabernero, A. M. Bermejo, P. Bermejo-Barrera and A. Moreda-Pineiro, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 75, 213–221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Yen, Y. S. Lin, Y. J. Chang, M. T. Li, S. C. Chyueh and H. T. Chang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2022, 7, 2200243 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alhaddad and S. M. Sheta, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 28296–28304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Guo, T. Wang, X. Ding, H. Wang, Q. Wu, Z. Zhang, S. Ding, S. Li and J. Li, Talanta, 2022, 249, 123663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Fan, W. Xu, J. Yao, Z. Jiao, Y. Fu, D. Zhu, Q. He, H. Cao and J. Cheng, ACS Sens., 2016, 1, 312–317 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. E. Glackin, R. N. Gillanders, F. Eriksson, M. Fjallgren, J. Engblom, S. Mohammed, I. D. W. Samuel and G. A. Turnbull, Analyst, 2020, 145, 7956–7963 RSC .
Q. Liu, T. Liu and Y. Fang, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 2155–2169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, Z. L. Wang, C. D. Shang, X. Li, H. N. Peng, R. Miao, L. P. Ding, J. Liu, T. H. Liu and Y. Fang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800644 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, L. Shi, D. Zhu, C. He, D. Wen, Q. He, H. Cao and J. Cheng, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 180, 2–7 CrossRef CAS .
C. He, Q. He, C. Deng, L. Shi, D. Zhu, Y. Fu, H. Cao and J. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7536–7538 RSC .
M. A. Ali, Y. Geng, H. Cavaye, P. L. Burn, I. R. Gentle, P. Meredith and P. E. Shaw, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 17406–17409 RSC .
M. A. Ali, S. S. Y. Chen, H. Cavaye, A. R. G. Smith, P. L. Burn, I. R. Gentle, P. Meredith and P. E. Shaw, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 210, 550–557 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rouhani and S. Haghgoo, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 209, 957–965 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, K. K. Li, W. Xu, M. Z. Yan, J. H. Zhao, W. K. Zhang, M. S. Yuan, Y. Y. Fu, Q. G. He and J. G. Cheng, Nano Res., 2023, 16, 4055–4060 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cavaye, A. R. Smith, M. James, A. Nelson, P. L. Burn, I. R. Gentle, S.-C. Lo and P. Meredith, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12800–12805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cavaye, P. E. Shaw, A. R. G. Smith, P. L. Burn, I. R. Gentle, M. James, S.-C. Lo and P. Meredith, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 18366–18371 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
Table Content:

M. Chen
	Ming Chen received his MSc from University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2019 on the topic of organic optoelectronic materials. He is now a PhD candidate at the Centre for Organic Photonics & Electronics, The University of Queensland under the supervision of Prof. Paul Burn and Dr Paul Shaw. His research interests lie in the development of novel organic optoelectronic materials and their application in sensing technology.

P. L. Burn
	Paul Burn is Professor of Chemistry and Head of the Centre for Organic Photonics & Electronics at The University of Queensland. He received his PhD from the University of Sydney before moving to Cambridge University during which he held the Dow Research Fellow at Christ's College, Cambridge. In 1992 he moved to the University of Oxford and then in 2007 moved to The University of Queensland as an Australian Research Council (ARC) Federation Fellow. His research focuses on the development of organic optoelectronic materials and their application in technologies. He is currently a UQ Laureate Fellow, and a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Science and Royal Society of Chemistry.

P. E. Shaw
	Paul Shaw received his PhD in Physics from the University of St Andrews in 2009 on the topic of exciton diffusion in conjugated polymers. Since then, he has worked as a postdoctoral research fellow at The University of Queensland, an Advance Queensland Research Fellow, and he currently a Senior Lecturer in Chemistry. His research interests lie in the application of optical spectroscopy to understand the properties of organic semiconductor and the development of sensing technologies based on fluorescent compounds.


Depressants	Morphine	

	0.24 ppt11
Heroin	

	75 ppt/a18 ppt12
Fentanyl	

	90 ppq/a0.018 ppq13
Gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB)	

	171 ppm14


Hallucinogens	Ketamine	

	68 ppb15
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)	

	27 ppt16


Stimulants	Methamphetamine (MA)	

	370 ppm7
Cocaine	

	610 ppt/a37 ppt12
Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)	

	254 ppt17
3,4-Methylenedioxy-methamphetamine (MDMA)/ecstasy	

	2.1 ppm18


Simulant	
N-methylphenethylamine (MPEA)	

	∼b300 ppm19

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the photoexcitation of the sensing chromophore and the quenching of the luminescence via (a) photo-induced electron transfer or (b) photo-induced hole transfer. Both processes lead to formation of charge-transfer states that decay to enable both the sensor and the analyte to return to the ground state.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of (a) Förster resonance energy transfer and (b) Dexter energy transfer. Both processes result in luminescence quenching of the photoexcited donor.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Mechanism of a luminescence turn-off QD-based aptameric sensor for cocaine detection. In the absence of cocaine, the Cy5 luminescence was detected due to FRET between the 605QD and Cy5. Addition of cocaine led to the formation of a cocaine aptamer complex, which hindered FRET between the 605QD and Cy5, and emission was observed from the 605QD. (b) Mechanism of a luminescence turn-on QD-based aptameric sensor for cocaine detection. In the absence of cocaine, Cy5 was non-luminescent (“OFF” state) due to FRET between Cy5 and Iowa Black RQ (Black RQ is not luminescent) in the complex. Addition of cocaine led to the formation of a cocaine–aptamer complex without Iowa Black RQ, preventing FRET between the Cy5 and Iowa Black RQ, which resulted in Cy5 luminescence being observed. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 66. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Reaction of MA and dansyl chloride (DNC) in solution and comparison of the luminescence intensity in the absence of MA (red line in A) and presence of MA (blue line in A). A: luminescence spectra; B and C: images of the luminescence from the solutions. Excitation wavelength = 315 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2016 the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Proposed reaction scheme between BOR-CHO and a secondary amine and (a) Ultraviolet-visible responses of BOR-CHO (THF, 2 × 10−5 M) upon addition of DEA (0–7000 eq.); (b) luminescence response of BOR-CHO (THF, 2 × 10−5 M) upon addition of DEA (0–7000 eq.); (c) images of the luminescence of BOR-CHO in solution (left), neat film 1 (middle), and BOR-CHO:PS blend film 2 under a UV lamp; (d) fluorescent spectra of film 2 before (red) and after (dark red) exposure to saturated DEA vapor for 300 s at room temperature (25 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2021 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of cocaine detection with the 38-GC aptamer sensor. 38-GC stably folds in the absence of a ligand at room temperature. ATMND binding to the aptamer quenches its luminescence, but competitive binding with cocaine displaces ATMND from the binding site, turning on its fluorescence. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 54. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Chemical Structure of 8BA-2F, and emission spectra (a) and photographs of the colour change (b) under excitation with a UV lamp at 254 nm of 8BA-2F-sorbed filter paper after the addition of different concentrations of ketamine. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 89. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Chemical structures of luminescent non-polymeric molecules reported for illicit drug and simulant vapour detection.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Luminescence spectra of a PDC film in the presence of different concentrations of MPEA vapor (λex = 467 nm). Inset: Stern–Volmer plot of the film in the presence of low concentrations of MPEA vapor. (b) Luminescence response of a PDC film to the vapor of various reagents (Note – the concentration of the MPEA vapor is 2.5 ppm, while the others are at a concentration of 190 ppm or higher). Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2016 Elsevier. (c) Two-step protocol for the discrimination of different illicit drugs. (d) The truth table of the responses recorded, where a positive response (i.e., a positive or negative change in the luminescence intensity) is counted as “1”, and no response as “0”. (e) Schematic representation of the PL dynamics of the PDI-CB films to the vapours of different illicit drugs. The responses were grouped into three types, dependent on the PL recovery ratio (R). (f) Schematic representation (top left) and picture (right) of the prototype detector as well as pictures of the films used in the device taken in day light and under UV excitation (365 nm, bottom left). Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic representation of the ‘‘turn on’’ mechanism for the vapor-phase detection of amine containing analytes using an MTPP-doped PFO film. (b) Time-course fluorescent response of the PdTPP:PFO film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2010 the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Chemical structures of CPs. (b) Reversibility of CP1 film exposed to MA vapor. (c) Luminescence quenching efficiency of CP1 film as a function of the vapor pressure of MA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2012 Elsevier. (d) The time-course fluorescent responses to saturated MPEA vapor for 300 s. (e) The time-course fluorescent responses of 0F–1F-CP film exposed to MA vapor. Inset: The luminescence spectra of 0F–1F-CP films before and after exposure to saturated MA vapor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  Chemical structures of S1 and S2. (a) SEM images of S1 deposited on quartz substrates with different UV-ozone treatment times, and (b) changes in luminescence intensity of the four S1 samples at λem(max) = 553 nm after exposure to saturated MPEA vapor for 150 s. (c) SEM images of S2 films on quartz substrates with different UV-ozone treatment times (insets: cross-section SEM images) and (d) changes in luminescence intensity at λem(max) = 537 nm of the four S2 films with different UV-ozone treatment time and film thickness after exposure to saturated MPEA vapor for 600 s. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2022 Springer Nature.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
