Coordination chemistry of macrocyclic ligands  - Annual Reports Section "A" (Inorganic Chemistry) (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B818281G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B818281G
(Review Article)
Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. A: Inorg. Chem.
, 2009, 105, 297-322Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsCoordination chemistry of macrocyclic ligandsStephen J. ArchibaldDepartment of Chemistry, The University of Hull, Hull, UK HU6 7RX. E-mail: s.j.archibald@hull.ac.uk;  Fax: +44 (0)1482 466410;   Tel: +44 (0)1482 465488First published on 19th May 2009AbstractThis chapter reviews the literature published during 2008 on macrocyclic coordination chemistry. Porphyrin ligands and supramolecular chemistry are not covered in this review which primarily focuses on complexes formed with transition metals and lanthanide ions, although a few examples of s-block, p-block and actinide metals are included. In general, the focus is on the coordination properties and reactivity of the compounds, although some applications will also be discussed, particularly in a brief section at the end of the chapter. Representations of X-ray structures have been included to show interesting coordination geometries, ion encapsulation or ligand orientation.1. HighlightsHighlight achievements for 2008 include further development of imaging applications, actinide coordination chemistry and advances in the understanding of stabilised high oxidation state metal complexes.The research groups led by Meade and by Logothetis and Toth have made significant advances in the area of MRI contrast agent sensors.1,2 Meade and co-workers produced new compounds that can sense zinc(II) binding by causing an increase in relaxivity due to a change in hydration number at the gadolinium(III) centre. Similarly Logothetis, Toth and co-workers produced a new generation of calcium(II) binding compounds building on previous work in this area and showing a combination of rigidity and increased hydration number to improve relaxivity. Parker and co-workers have been developing luminescent lanthanide sensors for cellular systems over many years and these systems are gradually becoming better understood and the design optimised. This group published a number of papers in 2008 showing an impressive understanding of the cellular localisation properties in relation to the structure and the use of two-photon excitation techniques.3–6Another highlight was the study of uranium complexes with triaza macrocyclic chelators. This is an area which is not well studied and the research was aimed at harnessing the catalytic power of uranium(IV) and uranium(V) complexes, in particular with the goal of carbon dioxide activation.7,8 Again using the ability of macrocyclic ligands to stabilise high oxidation state metal ion complexes, the continuing work by a number of research groups with either tetraaza or amide macrocycles and iron(IV)/iron(V) ions has given some exciting advances and much promise in the future design of catalysts. These researchers developed mechanistic understanding and showed that this insight could inform the design of new catalytic systems.9,102. IntroductionThis review is sub-divided into sections by donor atom with the majority of the literature reporting research into N-donor macrocycles. These chelators are generally easier to synthesise and the scope for N-substitution offers considerable potential for functionalisation. It is becoming more common to incorporate these N-donor macrocycles into more complex frameworks or onto surfaces of nanoparticles. There is also a continuing drive to provide ‘multi-functionality’ through the choice of metal centre, attached components and/or the surface to which the macrocyclic unit is attached.As in previous years, there is a continued focus on the use of macrocycles in medical imaging agents, with new compounds incorporating further functionality such as the fluorescent dyes to allow detection by two different imaging modalities. Adventurous ligand design was also shown in the synthesis of larger compartmental chelators and functional cryptands.3. N-donor macrocyclesThis section is organised by increasing macrocyclic ring size and number of donors. As in the previous few years, the 9[ane]N3/tacn, cyclam and cyclen macrocycles are the most common frameworks, which have been used in a variety of complexation studies and modified to provide new ligand systems.3.1 Triaza macrocyclesThe [9]aneN3 and [12]aneN3 ligands were investigated for their coordination properties towards the facial technetium(I) tricarbonyl unit.11 Although both ligands bound effectively, the smaller ring species formed a more stable compound when challenged with other strongly coordinating ligands in a biological medium and so would be more suitable for in vivo use.Uranium(V) complexes of sterically hindered triazamacrocycles, such as L1, were studied to determine their carbon dioxide activation activity.7 A seventh coordination position could be occupied by an amide species resulting in insertion of the carbon dioxide into the uranium-amide bond to form a carbamate. Related lower oxidation state uranium complexes with this ligand were investigated for reactions with other substrates. In one example, a stable ketyl radical uranium(IV) species was observed on reaction of a substituted benzophenone with the uranium(III) complex.12 Diazomethane complexes could be formed by a similar reaction from the same species with diphenyldiazomethane and if more sterically demanding ligands are used than L1 then C–H activation produces an indazole ligand bound to the metal centre.8Carboxylate functionalised [9]aneN3 chelators have been used to deplete iron in cellular systems in an effort to cause toxicity to cancer cells, particularly targeting the transferrin receptor and ribonucleotide reductase.13 Bifunctional chelator versions were also produced, such as L2, to allow conjugation of dyes and tracking of the chelator uptake by the cells. A further investigation was carried out to determine the coordination properties of these ligands with lanthanides for use in radioimmunotherapy or as MRI contrast agents.14 The gadolinium(III) complex has improved relaxivity over the clinically used contrast agent and forms highly stable complexes. L3 was radiolabelled with 177Lu and displayed excellent stability both in serum and in vivo.15[9]aneN3 chelators with pyridyl pendant arms, such as L4, were used to produce iron(II) complexes that were either high or low spin dependent on the number of pyridyl groups.16 The potential for these complexes to be used as MRI probes for enzymatic reactions was highlighted, as the high spin complex shows significant relaxivity but the low spin complex is essentially silent. In another example of iron tacn chemistry, bio-inspired oxidation reactions were investigated with a series of iron(II) complexes based on pyridyl appended [9]aneN3 chelators, such as L5.17 Stereospecific oxidations of alkanes and alkenes in the presence of hydrogen peroxide were carried out with the substituents on the macrocyclic and pyridyl rings influencing the selectivity.   Similarly there is interest in biomimetic manganese compounds. Manganese(II) complexes were synthesised with ligand L6 to model the active site of oxalate decarboxylases and oxalate oxidases.18 The complexes were analysed using a number of techniques including X-ray crystallography and EPR spectroscopy which showed them to be excellent corroborative models of the enzyme structures that may give mechanistic insight with further study. Manganese complexes of related mono-pyridyl dimethyl [9]aneN3 chelators were used to catalyse epoxidation reactions using peracetic acid as the oxidant.19 A wide range of olefin substrates were investigated showing useful selectivity for aliphatic cis-olefins with conversions generally over 90% and up to 1000 turnovers.Ruthenium(II) complexes of pendant arm [9]aneN3 ligands, such as L7, were investigated for the reaction of hydride containing compounds with protons.20 Compounds with a pyridyl pendant arm and the correct choice of phosphine bound to the ruthenium centre gave dihydrogen complexes that were stable enough to be characterised by NMR spectroscopy.Zinc tacn complexes were used to model the binding of cysteine thiol groups to zinc(II) in biological systems and the potential effects on reaction of the cysteine towards NO donors.21 Matrix metalloproteases contain such zinc sites and the model system backed up the hypothesis that zinc(II) coordination activates the S-nitrosylation reaction with some NO donors. To induce DNA cleavage using a metal complex, intercalating groups were attached to a copper(II) macrocylic complex, L8.22 However the results were mixed, with cleavage experiments actually showing the free complex with no intercalating group to be more active at low concentrations. The data shows that a cooperative system with multiple metal centres and an intercalating group would be a suitable future target.One route to cooperative multi-metal catalysts is the formation of linked macrocyclic species. A new bis-macrocyclic chelator was synthesised by linking two [9]aneN3 macrocycles through a bis-cresol unit, L9, to provide two tetradentate coordination sites.23 However, at lower pH values the macrocycle remains protonated and only coordinates through two of the ring nitrogen donors. The X-ray structure of the copper(II) complex shows two independent five coordinate metal centres bound to the four available donors and a nitrate counter anion. A related bis-triaza macrocyclic chelator system, L10, was used to synthesise di-zinc(II) complexes as catalysts for phosphodiester cleavage.24 Higher catalytic rates are observed in methanol indicating a key role for the solvent and it was also shown that the reactive intermediate is a methoxide-bridged compound.   3.2 Tetraaza macrocycles: cyclenCyclen chemistry was again extremely popular in 2008. The exploitation of this macrocycle to form the basis of more complex multi-functional constructs used in biomedical imaging has maintained the large number of publications.There has been an increasing use of macrocycles to act as bridging or capping units in the formation of polymetallic species. Cyclen carboxylate macrocycles have been used to cap polymetallic iron(III) compounds with different core sizes.25 Both an Fe8 and an Fe9 species were isolated dependent on the number of carboxylate pendant arms (di- and tri-acetate ligands were used, L11 and L12) and a preliminary investigation of their magnetic properties showed some interesting results clearly resulting from interaction of the iron(III) ions.Lanthanide complexes with bridging hydride ligands can be stabilised by the deprotonated cyclen ligand L13.26 Trimeric species with bridging hydrides between the metal centres were isolated for yttrium(III), holmium(III) and lutetium(III) and it was demonstrated that the trimers remained intact in solution by NMR but they are still active catalysts in hydrosilylation reactions. Maecke and co-workers have investigated divalent functionalisation of the cyclen macrocyclic framework to provide metal complexes for tumour imaging and therapy.27 The chelator, L14, has two non-adjacent nitrogen functionalised with pendant arms that are attached to peptide vectors (bombesin) to offer improved tumour targeting. The compound was labelled with both gadolinium(III) and a radioisotope of a lanthanide (177Lu) to allow evaluation of its properties using in vitro biological studies.   As discussed in the highlights section (section 1) there has been increased research into the development of sensing contrast agents. In an effort to create pH responsive MRI contrast agents, functionalised macrocycles were designed, L15, which could be incorporated into a larger structure with a PAMAM dendrimer to give 96 gadolinium-containing macrocyclic units per dendrimer.28 The phosphonate groups are gradually protonated as the pH drops and become more efficient at transfer of the relaxation effects to the surrounding solvent, relaxivity rises from 10.8 mM−1 s−1 at pH = 9 to 24.0 mM−1 s−1 at pH = 6. Meade and co-workers produced a DO3A chelator functionalised with an alkynyl group for use in assembly of multimeric arrays of MRI contrast agents via‘click’ chemistry, L16.29 Benzyl groups or a cyclodextrin were used as central units for attachment of the gadolinium(III) bound chelators to give complexes with increased relaxivity. A dual functional agent has been synthesised for boron neutron capture therapy and imaging via MRI.30 A gadolinium(III) DO3A unit has been linked to a decaborane and a long hydrophobic chain attached to allow targeting of the tumour cells via the overexpressed lipoprotein transporters, L17. The gadolinium(III) centre also improves the neutron capture properties of the conjugate.   MRI contrast agents for the detection of calcium ions in vivo have been developed further. Some of the previous issues with such systems were the detection range and the sensitivity. A new system designed by Dhingra and co-workers, L18, combines a lower affinity calcium binding group that allows rapid changes in calcium concentration to be detected with a ca. 100% increase in relaxivity for the gadolinium(III) centre.31 This is a significant advance but further modifications may be required to improve the physiological response, which can be strongly influenced by anion binding. Bismacrocyclic complexes linked by calcium(II) binding groups, L19, were also used to form ion sensitive contrast agents.2 An increase in the relaxivity offered by the two gadolinium(III) centres located in the macrocyclic units is observed on binding to calcium(II) but not to magnesium(II). The origin of the increase is mainly due to the change in hydration at the Gd centres with a smaller component relating to the rotational correlation time due to increased rigidity. Zinc(II) binding MRI contrast agents have been produced that show an enhancement of contrast properties when the ion is bound by altering the number of water molecules bound to the gadolinium(III) centre.1 Chelator L20 has a DO3A chelator and a zinc(II) binding unit, however this study shows that for ideal zinc(II) coordination a further binding unit is required but this destabilises the gadolinium(III) complex.  There is still considerable interest in the production of dual functional fluorescent/MRI contrast agents. A heterobimetallic complex containing a rhenium(I) bipyridine chromophore linked to a DO3A gadolinium(III) complex via a pyridyl group on the ligand, L21, was investigated as dual modality MRI luminescence imaging agent.32 The luminescence lifetime of the rhenium(I) unit is sufficient for gating out background fluorescence but the concentration ranges for detection of the two components is less compatible at low concentrations, and improvements need to be made to the MRI component to facilitate detection at nanomolar concentrations.Sherry and co-workers have continued to investigate paramagnetic chemical exchange saturation transfer MRI contrast agents and their latest results show that the electronics of the ligand system, such as L22, can have a major influence on the contrast properties of the complex.33 An increased CEST contrast effect was observed by MRI imaging for the electron withdrawing substituent in contrast to the reduced, electron donating amino form. The modification of PARACEST agents was carried out in order to allow conjugation of the europium(III) compounds without disruption of the PARACEST properties.34 This was achieved by unsymmetric functionalisation of cyclen unit to give one pendant arm terminating in a cystamine, L23, that offers potential for attachment to biologically active molecules via the thiol, for example in the formation of disulfide bonds.A bis-phosphonate version of the DOTA chelator was produced, L24, where two of the acetate arms have been replaced by methyl phosphonate arms.35 The properties of the lanthanide complexes were investigated using potentiometric titration and NMR, and shown to fall between those observed for either DOTA and the tetramethylphosphonate derivative. Of particular interest was the rigidity, which followed this trend, demonstrating that it can be tuned by sequential addition of methyl phosphonate arms.The EPR properties of two DOTA type gadolinium(III) complexes were investigated, the combination of chiral arms and a C-nitrobenzyl substituent fix the complexes into either square anti-prismatic or twisted square anti-prismatic geometries, allowing the relationship between electronic relaxation and coordination environment to be probed.36 This study showed that electronic spin relaxation, a key parameter influencing the relaxivity, is largely environment independent.One strategy to improve the cell permeability of zinc(II) sensing fluorescent macrocycles is to mask the fluorophore group, which can then be hydrolysed on coordination of the zinc ion. This offers a further route to selectivity with a metal specific cleavage step. The cyclen-based example described, L25, incorporates a quinoline group which is masked from coordination by a benzenesulfonyl group that can be hydrolytically cleaved.37 The cadmium(II) complexes of ligand L26 were designed to act as receptors for aromatic oxoanions.38 The fluorescence of the anthracene group was perturbed by the binding of benzoate type anions with additional stability resulting for the hydroxy benzoate derivatives where hydrogen bonding was possible with the aromatic side chains of the macrocycle.  A linked rhodamine cyclen ligand, L27, was synthesised to act as a fluorescent sensor for mercury(II) ions.39 The selectivity of this system is thought to come from the requirement for two mercury(II) ions interacting with the chelator system to open the spirocycle and give the fluorescent response. The first ion binds in the macrocycle cavity and the second with the dye unit on ring opening.The isothiocyanate functionalised DOTA ligand, L28, was used to label proteins with lanthanide complexes by reaction with surface lysine residues to form thiourea linkages.40 The aim was to produce a system for proteomic analysis of the proteins using mass spectrometry, the significant advantage of using lanthanide labels is that different lanthanides can be used for facile multi-element labelling followed by detection using ICP-MS. The same chelator was used to attach 64Cu labelled macrocycles to magnetic nanoparticles for dual modality PET/MRI imaging probes.41 A novel coupling method was developed with a diamine spacer incorporated to link to aldehyde groups generated from dextran sulfate coated onto the iron oxide nanoparticles.A number of investigations were carried to develop methods for complex formation or delivery of radioisotopes in biological systems. 64Cu labelling experiments were carried out using DO3A ligands with a tetraphenylphosphonium group attached to the macrocyclic backbone, L29.42 The biodistribution properties of the compounds were investigated showing significant substitution pattern and linking group effects on biodistribution in tumour bearing mice, with the introduction of methoxy groups improving the clearance from the liver and lungs. A new bifunctional chelator based on DO3A, L30, was developed for labelling antibodies with 64Cu or 111In.43 It offers a versatile approach to labelling via reactions of a vinyl sulfone linker which can be coupled to either surface lysines on the antibody or reduced disulfide bridges (cysteine thiols).  Parker and co-workers continued their in depth studies of luminescent lanthanide complexes with a cyclen chelator functionalised with an azaxanthone antenna. Cellular localisation of terbium(III) complexes of this type conjugated to octa-peptides and a tetra-guanidinium cation was examined.5 The uptake was followed by two-photon microscopy detecting the emission from the terbium(III) complex and different localisation profiles that were dependent on the conjugated group. In a related study, this group also looked at how the variation of substituents on the azaxanthone unit influenced cellular uptake and localisation properties of the europium(III) and terbium(III) complexes.3 Significant influence was demonstrated on the speed of uptake into the cells with ester derivatives taken up much faster than acid or amide functionalised compounds. The response of the azaxanthone and azathiaxanthone complexes to their environment was investigated, particularly focussing on their application as cellular sensors for anions.4 A selective response was observed for the europium(III) complexes in binding to citrate or bicarbonate anions, suggesting good potential for some compounds in further studies. A ratiometric sensing system for intracellular pH was developed with an alkylsulfonamide group incorporated as a pH sensitive binding moiety.6 The intensity ratio vs. pH was plotted and intracellular pH could be measured in the range pH 6–8 using a suitable microscope.Luminescent ratiometric sensors with lanthanide(III) complexes were also developed by Gunnlaugsson and co-workers to detect anions.44 A tris-macrocyclic system was synthesised around a central cyclen unit with two other macrocycles which could also bind to lanthanide ions, L31. A mixed metal trimetallic system with two europium(III) and one terbium(III) ions acted as a ratiometric sensor for anions with the terbium luminescence acting as an internal reference. The luminescence properties of the europium(III) ions can be tuned by minor changes in the coordination sphere. A tetrapyridyl cyclen ligand, L32, was used to form europium(III) complexes with a bound chloride completing the inner sphere coordination.45 The luminescence properties of this complex are subtly dependent on the Eu–Cl bond length which can be tuned by altering the outer sphere/non-bonded anion. This was varied between hexafluorophosphate, tetrafluoroborate, chloride and triflate. Faulkner and co-workers have used the Ugi four component reaction to prepare novel DOTA derivatives, such as L33, for use in formation of lanthanide complexes with applications in MRI and luminescent imaging.46 The Ugi reaction is particularly useful in the rapid formation of large libraries of compounds to test their biological activity. The next stage is to take a toolkit approach incorporating peptide vectors for targeting biological systems. Amide functionalised DO3A lanthanide complexes have been developed as luminescent probes for protease activity.47 The ligand L34 is formed when an amide group attached to a peptide substrate is cleaved to unmask the primary amine, and forms a significantly better antenna group for sensitisation of the terbium(III) luminescence, offering a time dependent increase in intensity that can be linked to enzyme activity.  Cyclen derivatives have been produced with thiol groups attached, L35, for immobilisation of the chelating unit on the surface of gold nanoparticles.48 The water solubilised nanoparticles can also be functionalised with antennae groups to allow sensitisation of the lanthanide luminescence and give a sensor molecule, as the luminescence could be turned off by coordination of a series of quenching anions, such as phosphate.Dinuclear europium(III) complexes for the cleavage of RNA have been formed with ligand L36.49 The most important feature of these complexes is that at neutral pH they coordinate water molecules rather than hydroxides, as is observed for dinuclear copper(II) or zinc(II) complexes, which are more easily displaced to allow binding of the phosphate diester species for cleavage. These compounds are amongst the most active synthetic catalysts known but there is still only weak cooperativity between the two metal centres. A related bis-cyclen system was produced where the two macrocyclic rings were linked by different heterocyclic spacers such as triazine, L37.50 The zinc(II) complexes were shown to be active catalysts for the hydrolysis of a model phosphatediester system and the influence of the spacer could be used to determine whether cooperativity between the two metal centres was important. Optimising the cooperative process increased the catalytic rates and gave species that are active at pH < 9.Tri-aza, tetra-aza and hexa-aza cyclic peptoids (L38) were synthesised which have the potential to act as chelators for alkali and transition metals.51 NMR studies demonstrated binding to sodium cations in solution and a crystal structure was obtained of the hexa-aza form with strontium ions sandwiched between the cavities of neighbouring macrocycles.3.3 Tetraaza macrocycles: cyclamThe larger cyclam macrocycle has been mainly used in the stabilisation of high oxidation state metal complexes that act as catalysts, and in the formation of bifunctional chelators for the attachment of radioisotopes to biological targeting units such as antibodies or peptides.Tetramethylcyclam, L39, is frequently used for the stabilisation of reactive high valent iron oxo compounds. Calculations have been carried out to compare the electronic properties of ruthenium(IV)–oxo and iron(IV)–oxo compounds formed with this ligand.52 The known properties of the species combined with the calculations gave insight into the mechanism of the H-abstraction process that proceeds efficiently for the iron(IV) complex due to an unusual blended reactivity where the reaction proceeds on two energy surfaces. Tetramethylcyclam has been used to form stable oxoiron(IV) compounds with a variety of anions coordinated trans to the oxo ligand.53 The trends in the spectroscopic measurements were explained by calculations showing the effects of the trans ligands on the energies of the FeO σ- and π-antibonding orbitals.A high frequency and high field EPR study of the acetonitrile coordinated complex was carried out to determine the zero-field splitting of oxoiron(IV) units.54 These experimental parameters are very useful for calculations to determine the electronic structures of such units. The inverted form of the oxoiron(IV) complex with tetramethylcyclam was synthesised, in the previously discussed isomer all methyl groups point in the same direction relative to the N4 plane which is anti to the oxo atom.55 The inverted isomer was synthesised by reaction with iodosylbenzene and intriguingly shows enhanced oxidative reactivity demonstrating the effects of a change in coordination environment. Other research groups were also interested in studying the fundamental electron transfer properties of non-haem oxoiron complexes and showed that these compounds have much larger reorganisation energies and lower reduction potentials than the analogous haem compounds.9Attaching cyclam units to biomolecules can be achieved by functionalising the macrocycle framework in a number of different ways. An unsymmetric N-functionalised bifunctional chelator version has been produced of the cross bridged cyclam chelators, L40, that are being extensively studied for their application in the formation of high stability 64Cu complexes as PET radiopharmaceutical imaging agents.56 This follows on from the report of a C-functionalised compound in 2004 by Archibald and co-workers. The latest compound has great versatility and has been used to label a tumour targeting peptide, providing an important advance towards clinical applications of copper isotopes in therapy and imaging. Meares and co-workers used the nitrobenzyl functionalised TETA ligand, L41, to label liposomes with 64Cu.57 The chelator was attached via a polyethylene glycol unit to a lipid and then used to tag the liposomes. Preliminary in vivo data showed that the liposomes could be tracked using PET imaging and this technique could potentially be used to monitor drug delivery.  Kotek and co-workers produced a methylphosphonate functionalised cyclam, L42, which has an ethyl bridge between two adjacent nitrogens in the cyclam ring.58 This compound is very interesting due to its potential applications in the formation high stability radiopharmaceuticals for biomolecule conjugation. The synthetic procedures for functionalisation of the ‘side bridged’ cyclam macrocycle are complicated by the reduced reactivity of the secondary amine position due to hydrogen bonding interactions across the cavity.The ruthenium(II) nitrosyl complex of N-carboxypropyl cyclam, L43, has been prepared and shown to have a tridentate coordination of the macrocycle with only the three unsubstituted nitrogen atoms coordinating to the ruthenium centre.59 This leaves the uncoordinated carboxyl group free to anchor the unit to surfaces or biomolecules opening up new routes to selective delivery of NO species for therapeutic applications. Cyclam complexes of chromium(III) were attached to the surface of quantum dots to observe whether the QDot could photosensitise reactions at the chromium centre, such as the release of NO.60 The metal complexes on the surface quench the fluorescence by a FRET mechanism and appropriate complexes show photoactivated release of NO.A cyclam ligand has been produced with methylphosphonate groups appended in the 1,4-positions, L44, and complexes formed with copper(II), zinc(II) and nickel(II).61 All complexes showed significant acid stability and the nickel(II) complex could be isolated at different pHs with varying protonation patterns on the phosphate groups. A related novel ligand derivative with one methylphosphonate arm and three acetate arms, L45, was synthesised and thermodynamic stability of divalent transition metal complexes studied.62 In general the complexes were shown to be as stable as complexes formed with TETA.3.4 Other tetraaza macrocyclesThe iron(IV) oxo complex of the tetra-amido ligand L46 has been prepared under aqueous conditions where it is in a pH dependent equilibrium with the oxo-bridged dimeric species.63 This is the same system for which an iron(V) oxo species has previously been produced, and once again characterisation with EXAFS and DFT calculations was reported. Studies were also made of the catalase and peroxidase type activity of the iron(III) complexes of these ligands in the presence of H2O2.64 The compounds are particularly active as peroxidase mimics with comparable activity to the lower limit observed for the enzymatic processes (>104 M−1 s−1). An attempt was also made to design new more active versions of these catalysts by changing the substituents.10 Calculations and an in-depth knowledge of the mechanism allowed changes to be made and an optimally stable compound produced with a maximum activity at the preferred pH of 7.  Copper(III) complexes of aza-macrocycles that incorporate aryl donors, L47 (although it is not a tetraazamacrocycle it fits most appropriately into this section), show that copper catalysed formation of carbon–nitrogen bonds is possible with weakly nucleophilic amide type substrates.65 This type of reaction has not been reported previously but shows the reactivity of high valent copper species that are stabilised in a macrocyclic ring system. New chiral tetraaza chelators were designed, L48, and copper(I) complexes formed for the catalysis of asymmetric cyclopropanation reactions, see Fig. 1.66 Reasonable selectivity was achieved and further tuning of the ligand structure is possible to improve these catalysts. A catechol functionalised tetraaza macrocyclic ligand, L49, has been synthesised and both homo- and hetero-dinuclear complexes formed with copper(II), zinc(II) and iron(III).67 The iron(III) ion has a preference for binding to the catecholate arms on formation of a heterodinuclear complex. EPR studies showed weak coupling when two paramagnetic metal centres were incorporated (Cu/Fe). Fig. 1  A ball and stick representation of the X-ray structure of [CuL48]+. Ruthenium(II) and ruthenium(III) complexes of the tetramethyl [16]aneN4 were investigated as potential cyano bridging groups in the formation of multi-metallic compounds, see Fig. 2. The nature of the bonding was investigated spectroscopically to evaluate the potential of the two complexes as building blocks in the formation of these supramolecular species.68 Fig. 2  A ball and stick representation of the X-ray structure of [Ru(CN)2(Me4[16]aneN4)]2+. 3.5 Pentaaza macrocycles and larger ring sizesThe formation of dinuclear complexes with first row transition metals and the more complete encapsulation of larger ions is more commonly observed on moving to these larger ring compounds. Cryptate ligands are also included in this section and show some different properties in the orientation and interaction of metal centres.Cyclic peptides found in nature can be used to bind metal ions by the organisms that produce them. The 18-membered hexaaza macrocycle westiellamide, L50, is synthesised by ascidians (sea squirts) and the copper(II) coordination chemistry of this macrocycle and its analogues was investigated.69 Stable mononuclear complexes could be formed and the potential for dicopper(II) complexes with either a methoxide or hydroxide bridge was investigated. This revealed an increased stability for the bimetallic complexes particularly for the imidazole derivative which bound the second copper(II) via a cooperative mechanism.Bazzicalupi and co-workers investigated the DNA cleavage properties of zinc(II) complexes with phenanthroline and bipyridine containing chelators, such as L51.70 Many of the compounds synthesised had poorly nucleophilic Zn–OH units and were inactive in the cleavage of a model phosphodiester, however they were still active in the cleavage of DNA due to favourable positioning of the unit by intercalation.   A hexaaza macrocycle with hydrazide pendant arms, L52, was synthesised for the complexation of lanthanide(III) ions and forms ten coordinate complexes.71 The acetylhydrazide pendant arms are reactive and could be used to link the species to biomolecules via known conjugation strategies.New compounds have been developed for the electrocatalysis of hydrogen production, which is essential if future energy demands are to be based on hydrogen fuel cells. Boron capped glyoximato chelators, L53, were used to form complexes with cobalt(III) and showed an electrochemical potential for hydrogen formation of −0.55 V.72 Further work is required to elucidate the mechanism and there is also the possibility for fine tuning the system by structural modifications to the ligand system.A pyridyl containing octaaza macrocyclic system, L54, has been functionalised with methyl-naphthyl groups for the detection of zinc(II) using chelation enhanced fluorescence.73 Clear selectivity for zinc(II) over cadmium(II) was demonstrated and the fluorescence was not switched on by other biologically relevant ions, enhancing its potential as a sensor for biological systems.Dicobalt(II) cryptate complexes of ligand L55 have been used to recognise anions that bind in the cavity between the two metal centres, the rigid xylyl spacer group determines the separation of the two metal centres, see Fig. 3.74 Selectivity in halide binding is displayed with bromide and chloride of the correct size to accommodate within the cavity, bridging the two cobalt(II) centres, but there is insufficient space to bind iodide, and fluoride is not sufficiently large. The related tren based cryptate with the linked xylyl groups substituted in the meta rather than the para positions has been synthesised and investigated for its anion binding properties.75 Fig. 3  A ball and stick representation of the X-ray structure of [Co2ClL55]3+. 4. O-, P- and S-donor macrocyclesThere are fewer examples of single donor type macrocycles with O, P and S, mainly because they do not have the same potential for functionalisation with pendant groups as the aza ligands. This section either reports C-functionalised ligand derivatives or the use of existing ligands in new applications.12-crown-4 ether ligands were used as electrolyte traps (Li+) in the gel polymer electrolyte layer of model systems for dye sensitised solar cells.76 Theoretically this should increase the performance of such devices enhancing the photocurrent generation. A 15-crown-5 complex incorporating a fluorescent biarylpyridyl group, L56, acts as a sensor for magnesium(II) ions.77 The sensor must initially be protonated to give a twisted ground state configuration which is not fluorescent, then on binding of the magnesium ion the aryl group in the crown ether is forced to align with the biarylpyridyl unit and fluoresce. The particular advantage of this system is its selectivity for magnesium(II) over calcium(II).  A 16-crown-5 ligand bound to an organotin centre through the attached methyl group, L57, provides a ditopic receptor for complexation of sodium fluoride.78 This is the first example of a system that ditopically binds a salt with such a high lattice energy, the solution data has been published previously but this report gives crystallographic evidence of the strongly separated sodium and fluoride ions in the complex.Potassium 18-crown-6 units were used to stabilise hypervalent hydridosilicates.79 The crown ether complex is the cation balancing the charge of the silicate species and in the solid state interactions with the potassium are observed to both hydride and oxide atoms attached to the silicon. DFT calculations were used to analyse the actinyl (dioxo-actinide) complexes formed with 18-crown-6.80 The stability of different oxidation states and solvation parameters were determined for uranium, plutonium and neptunium, and a comparison with available experimental data suggested a close match to the calculations.[9]aneS3 ligands were used to form cyclometalled species with palladium(II) and platinum(II).81 The macrocyclic ligand shows fluxionality in all cases and one example was isolated in a rare conformation where the third sulfur donor is pointing away from the metal centre, in most cases a long weak interaction is observed with platinum(II) and palladium(II). A rare platinum(III) complex has been isolated with the [9]aneS3 ligand and the electronic structure studied using EPR spectroscopy and DFT calculations.82 The complex has two of the tridentate ligands bound to the platinum(III) centre in a distorted octahedral geometry and the calculations show the stabilising effects of the thiol donors. Germanium(II) coordinates to thioether macrocycles such as [9]aneS3 and [12]aneS4, the germanium ion is not located in the macrocyclic cavity but forms coordination polymers in the solid state binding between the sulfurs of the macrocycles.83Rhodium(III) and iridium(III) complexes of a [16]aneS4 diol, L58, were produced for labelling with a radioactive astatide ion.84 An astatine isotope (211At) is an alpha particle emitter which can be produced using a medical cyclotron and has appropriate properties for applications in targeted radiotherapy but methods need to be found to deliver it to the target cells. The compounds were shown to be easily synthesised and preliminary stability investigations were promising.A series of Se/O mixed donor macrocycles of varying ring sizes and incorporating ortho xylyl units, such as L59, have been synthesised by Reid and co-workers.85 The smaller ring analogues forms 2:1 complexes copper(I) and silver(I) with two ligands present for each metal ion, however these appeared to be less stable than compounds formed with the larger ring chelators.5. Mixed donor macrocycles5.1 N/O mixed donor macrocyclesThe first part of this section reports on mixed N/O donor macrocycles ordered by increasing ring size.A mixed donor tridentate macrocycle, L60, was used as the basis of a multifunctional construct for the sensitisation of lanthanide luminescence and attachment to biological macromolecules.86 The macrocycle based design provided better protection from bound solvent quenching of the lanthanide luminescence than related linear chelating units, and the thiol reactive group incorporated was successfully used to attach proteins.In a departure from the more commonly investigated DOTA and DO3A chelates, the 12-membered diazadioxa macrocycle L61 has been synthesised to complex lanthanides for the formation of MRI contrast agents.87 The ligand is octadentate and gave europium(III) and terbium(III) complexes that are in an equilibrium between nine- and ten-coordinate species in solution with one or two bound waters, respectively.The kinetics of oxidation of bromide and iodide by the dioxoruthenium(VI) complex formed with ligand L62 have been studied.88 Different mechanisms were observed for the two halides with concurrent oxygen atom and electron transfer reactions with the iodide but only an oxygen atom transfer pathway for the bromide reaction.A quantum dot system for the selective detection of cadmium(II) ions was developed by functionalising the surface of the QDot with 1,10-diaza-18-crown-6.89 A carbon disulfide linker was used to facilitate the direct interaction of the lone pair on the macrocyclic N donor attached with the QDot to quench the fluorescence via electron transfer. The coordination of the cadmium(II) ion restored the emission of the QDot in a selective fashion with a considerably smaller positive response observed for zinc(II) ions.The zirconium(IV) complex formed with 4,13-diaza-18-crown-6 was used to catalyse the hydrolysis of bovine insulin.90 This is the largest peptide successfully cleaved using a zirconium catalyst and shows the potential for designed ligands and metal ion combinations that will offer increased selectivity in targeting cleavage.   A diaza-18-crown-6 ligand with appended hydroxyquinolines, L63, was developed to bind to mercury(II) ions in aqueous solution.91 The compound can be used as a fluorescent sensor for mercury(II) ions forming an unusual Hg2 complex. A new mixed donor cryptate compound was synthesised for the fluorescent detection of zinc(II) ions, L64.92 The luminescence properties are tunable by the formation of an aminal derivative linking the two primary amine groups, and the fluorescence lifetime of the zinc(II) complex is considerably longer than those of the complexes of group 1 and 2 metal ions. This should allow discrimination on the basis of lifetime when monitoring zinc(II) concentration in biological systems.Sauvage and co-workers produced a pseudo-rotaxane supramolecular architecture based on the combination of a bis-macrocyclic unit with linear binding groups.93 The bis-macrocyclic unit contains two crown either type macrocycles linked by a bis-phenanthroline unit that coordinates to copper(I) when forming the tetrameric structure. The fluorescent crown ether system L65 was synthesised and attached to a calixarene to produce a sensor for alkali metal ions.94 A size dependent selectivity for metal ion binding was observed and there were clear cooperative effects in complex formation with the calixarene unit.Luminescent europium(III) complexes have been formed by cyclisation of an isothiocyanato functionalised DTPA ligand.95 The thiourea groups formed in the cavity can interact with anions to alter the cavity shape and influence the luminescence response. This is a rare example of a system where the anions are not directly bonded to the metal centre but alter the luminescence properties. A calixarene capped with a tren unit creates a cryptand that can form complexes with copper(I) leaving a free coordination site for reactive substrates such as O2.96 The complex reacts readily to form superoxide which is either rapidly ejected, in the presence of other coordinating ligands, or can react with the calixarene backbone, suggesting the potential for a catalytic pathway.An oxa-aza cryptand attached to a boron dipyrromethene unit has been generated as a potassium ion sensor for biological systems.97 The linked units are then attached to dextran and the system used as a sensor for extracellular potassium concentration with a sufficiently bright response to be detected when using commercial plate readers.5.2 N/S mixed donor macrocyclesThere are only a few examples of mixed N/S donor ligands. A potentiometric study was used to study the interactions of a series of 1,10-phenanthroline containing chelators, L66, with mixed donor atoms with metal ions including copper(II).98 X-ray structures showed the configuration of the ligand was similar in the lead(II), copper(II) and cadmium(II) structures, see Fig. 4, and in liquid–liquid extraction experiments selectivity for silver(I) was observed.   Fig. 4  A ball and stick representation of the X-ray structure of [PbL66]2+. 5.3 S/O mixed donor macrocyclesA number of mixed S/O donor macrocycles were studied in 2008. Gold complexes of the smaller ring S/O macrocycle, [9]aneS2O, were studied by Schroder and co-workers.99 X-ray crystal structures were obtained for complexes with ML2 stoichiometry with gold in oxidation states from +1 to +3 showing significant rearrangement of the coordination geometry around the metal centre, as would be expected on moving from d10 to d9 to d8 electronic arrangements. The study also included extensive characterisation by multifrequency EPR, electrochemistry and DFT calculations.The reaction of mercury(II) halide complexes with S/O donor macrocycles, such as L67, was shown to give a series of exocyclic coordinated species.100 In all cases, only the sulfur donors were bound to the metal centres. Some structural variation was observed with four coordinate monomeric species forming in some cases and in others the mercury ion bridged two macrocyclic species forming coordination polymers in the solid state. Larger ring thiaoxacrown ligands based on a central calixarene unit were also used to produce coordination polymers in the solid state.101 In this case, the assembled species is linked by copper(I) iodide clusters, again only bonding to the macrocyclic unit through the sulfur donors. The structural motif of the metal organic frameworks isolated is dependent on the temperature of reaction.The [18]aneS4O2 ligand, L68, was used to form a stable silver(II) complex providing a rare example of a crystal structure with silver(II) ion stabilised by sulfur donors.102 The structure shows a boat conformation for the ligand with the silver(II) ion bonded to the four sulfur donors in a square planar arrangement. A dithiolate macrocyclic chelator, L69, coordinates to platinum(II) in an exocyclic fashion with a substituted 2,2′-bipyridine ligand completing the square planar coordination geometry.103 The complexes show significant shifts of an absorbance band in the visible spectrum on coordination of a sodium ion in the cavity, and in one case the colour change could be detected with the naked eye.5.4 N/S/O mixed donor macrocycles and compartmental ligandsMixed N/S/O chelator systems were investigated including a number of compartmental ligands designed to encapsulate multiple metal centres.Calixphyrin type ligands have been designed containing a phosphole group and further nitrogen and sulfur donors, L70, with the aim of creating novel reactive catalysts.104 Rhodium and palladium bind to the ligands in a tetradentate fashion but the gold(I) complex has a linear geometry and is only bound to the phosphole from the chelator. Some of the complexes act as catalysts for the Heck reaction and hydrosilylations.The zirconium complex of the P2N2 donor ligand L71 reacts with dinitrogen to form a bridged dimeric compound.105 The reaction was optimised by studying the byproducts and adjusting the conditions in the reduction of the zirconium(IV) centre.  The dinuclear copper(II) complex of the Robson type ligand L72 was the subject of an in-depth study of the electrochemical processes of reduction using both electrochemical techniques and molecular modelling.106 Many factors were considered including solvent effects and an electron transfer route involving protonation of the intermediate species. A related compartmental ligand, L73, incorporating a dizinc or dimanganese pair of metals can be linked to a ruthenium(II) bipyridyl unit through a carboxylate group attached to one of the bipyridyl ligands.107 This ruthenium complex could be light activated and the mechanism of the energy transfer to the manganese centres determined. A through bond (Dexter) energy transfer mechanism was found to predominate rather than a through space (Forster) mechanism.  The dinickel(II) complex with compartmental ligand system L74 has been used to form species with bridging sulfides between the metal centres.108 The two examples characterised are with a hydrosulfide and a hexasulfide which link two of the dinickel units. The steric protection offered by this ligand appears to stabilise these species. A related compartmental ligand system, L75, containing either two or four aluminium centres was used to catalyse the ring opening polymerisation of caprolactone.109 The Al⋯Al distance and the linking atoms (i.e. Al–O–Al) influence the catalyst efficiency, see Fig. 5. These results provide important insight into the design of improved efficiency catalysts. Fig. 5  A ball and stick representation of the X-ray structure of [Al4L75]. A new 36-membered ring N6O4 donor macrocycle has been synthesised, L76, and its solvent extraction properties towards various transition metal salts studied.110 Water chloroform extraction experiments showed efficient extraction of zinc(II) sulfate when the cation extracting macrocycle was combined with a tripodal thiourea ligand to bind the sulfate anion, forming an interesting dual host system. A 3 + 3 macrocylic Schiff base ligand, L77, was used to template the formation of a heptanuclear zinc(II) carboxylate assembly.111 The structure can be described as a tri-zinc macrocyclic complex with a bound tetranuclear zinc carboxylate unit. The control of formation and additional solubility imparted to the cluster unit indicate possible applications in catalysis for such compounds.6. ApplicationsThe main applications for macrocyclic complexes continue to be in biomedical imaging (as radiopharmaceuticals and MRI contrast agents), catalysis and ion transport. Examples of all of these uses have already been discussed, but a few more have been selected in this section to indicate the future directions of macrocyclic coordination chemistry research.The area of ion transport has been relevant since the initial discovery of crown ether compounds, and better designed multi-macrocyclic molecules will continue to have an impact in such applications. For example, mixed donor aza/oxa crown ethers were used as components of systems to transport ions across phospholipid bilayers (membranes).112 The variation of the central residues in a chain, terminating with a macrocycle at either end, could be used to influence the transport of both sodium and chloride, either transporting both effectively or showing a marked preference for sodium.DO3A type chelators were used in the attachment of gadolinium(III) chelated units to a QDot to provide a dual modality fluorescence/magnetic resonance contrast agent.113 This report is one of the first to combine near-IR fluorescence imaging (with improved tissue penetration) with MRI contrast properties improving the potential for translation to in vivo diagnostic applications. In a further example of dual modality imaging agents, DOTA chelators were used to label somatostatin peptides with either 64Cu or 177Lu to monitor their accumulation in the tumour tissue due to selective binding or uptake.114 Dual imaging agents could then be generated by combining this construct with a cyanine dye showing that in vivo, these peptide analogues did not show the desired receptor mediated targeting properties. However, the concept of such dual functional agents was validated.A further study of DOTA/somatostatin conjugates was carried out with cobalt radioisotopes, where the 57Co isotope was used to determine the potential for labelling this system with the positron emitting 55Co isotope.115 In a comparison of the cobalt(II) complexes with gallium(III), it was demonstrated that varying the metal ion significantly influences key properties such as receptor affinity, biodistribution and pharmacokinetics. An important lesson to inform the future design of such systems.The future energy sources may well rely on novel methods for harvesting light energy. The area of ‘dye sensitisers’ has traditionally been more effectively addressed using phthalocyanine complexes but there are opportunities with aza-macrocycles. Dye sensitised solar cell systems were synthesised, based on cobalt(III)/iron(II) mixed valence complexes, where the cobalt centre is coordinated to a pentadentate ligand such as L78.116 The properties of the prepared systems were poor due to a low extinction coefficient for the metal–metal charge transfer band at ca. 500 M−1 cm−1, but will inform the design of aza-macrocyclic systems in the future.List of abbreviations[18]aneN61,4,7,10,13,16-hexaazacyclooctadecane[16]aneN41,4,8,13-tetraazacyclohexadecane[15]aneN41,4,8,12-tetraazacyclopentadecane[12]aneN31,4,9-triazacyclododecane[12]aneN41,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane[9]aneN31,4,7-triazacyclononane[9]aneS31,4,7-trithiacyclononaneCESTchemical exchange saturation transfercyclam1,4,8,11-tetraazacyclotetradecanecyclen1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecaneDFTDensity Functional TheoryDO3A1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-1,4,7-triacetic acidDOTA1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-1,4,7,10-tetraacetic acidDTPAN,N′-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acidEPRelectron paramagnetic resonanceEXAFSextended X-ray absorption fine structureMe3tacn1,4,7-trimethyl-1,4,7-triazacyclononaneMRImagnetic resonance imagingPAMAMpoly(amido)aminePARACESTparamagnetic chemical exchange saturation transferphen1,10-phenanthrolineQDotquantum dottacn1,4,7-triazacyclononaneTETA1,4,8,11-tetraazaacyclotetradecane-1,4,8,11-tetraacetic acidtrentris(2-aminoethyl)amineReferencesJ. L. Major, R. M. Boiteau and T. J. Meade, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 10788 CrossRef CAS .A. Mishra, P. Fouskova, G. Angelovski, E. Balogh, A. K. Mishra, N. K. Logothetis and E. Toth, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1370 CrossRef CAS .F. Kielar, G. L. Law, E. J. New and D. Parker, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2008, 6, 2256 RSC .B. S. Murray, E. J. New, R. Pal and D. Parker, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2008, 6, 2085 RSC .F. Kielar, A. Congreve, G. L. Law, E. J. New, D. Parker, K. L. Wong, P. Castreno and J. de Mendoza, Chem. Commun., 2008, 2435 RSC .R. Pal and D. Parker, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2008, 6, 1020 RSC .S. C. Bart, C. Anthon, F. W. Heinemann, E. Bill, N. M. Edelstein and K. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12536 CrossRef CAS .O. P. Lam, P. L. Feng, F. W. Heinemann, J. M. O'Connor and K. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2806 CrossRef CAS .Y. M. Lee, H. Kotani, T. Suenobu, W. Nam and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 434 CrossRef CAS .D. L. Popescu, A. Chanda, M. J. Stadler, S. Mondal, J. Tehranchi, A. D. Ryabov and T. J. Collins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12260 CrossRef CAS .K. Suzuki, N. Shimmura, K. Thipyapong, T. Uehara, H. Akizawa and Y. Arano, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 2593 CrossRef CAS .C. P. Lam, C. Anthon, F. W. Heinemann, J. M. O'Connor and K. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6567 CrossRef CAS .H. S. Chon, X. Ma, H. Lee, P. Bui, H. A. Song and N. Birch, J. Med. Chem., 2008, 51, 2208 CrossRef CAS .H. S. Chong, H. A. Song, X. Ma, D. E. Milenic, E. D. Brady, S. Lim, H. Lee, K. Baidoo, D. Cheng and M. W. Brechbiel, Bioconjugate Chem., 2008, 19, 1439 CrossRef CAS .H. S. Chong, X. Ma, T. Le, B. Kwamena, D. E. Milenic, E. D. Brady, H. A. Song and M. W. Brechbiel, J. Med. Chem., 2008, 51, 118 CrossRef CAS .V. Stavila, M. Allali, L. Canaple, Y. Stortz, C. Franc, P. Maurin, O. Beuf, O. Dufay, J. Samarut, M. Janier and J. Hasserodt, New J. Chem., 2008, 32, 428 RSC .A. Company, L. Gomez, X. Fontrodona, X. Ribas and M. Costas, Chem. Eur. J., 2008, 14, 5727 CrossRef CAS .M. Scarpellini, J. Gatjens, O. J. Martin, J. W. Kampf, S. E. Sherman and V. L. Pecoraro, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 3584 CrossRef CAS .I. Garcia-Bosch, A. Company, X. Fontrodona, X. Ribas and M. Costas, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 2095 CrossRef CAS .A. L. Gott, P. C. McGowan and T. J. Podesta, Dalton Trans., 2008, 3729 RSC .S. M. McCarthy, P. F. Bove, D. E. Matthews, T. Akaike and A. van der Vliet, Biochemistry, 2008, 47, 5832 CrossRef CAS .T. S. A. Tseng and J. N. Burstyn, Chem. Commun., 2008, 6209 RSC .E. Arturoni, C. Bazzicalupi, A. Bencini, C. Caltagirone, A. Danesi, A. Garau, C. Giorgi, V. Lippolis and B. Valtancoli, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 6551 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Neverov, C. T. Liu, S. E. Bunn, D. Edwards, C. J. White, S. A. Melnychuk and R. S. Brown, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6639 CrossRef CAS .A. A. H. Abu-Nawwas, P. V. Mason, V. A. Milway, C. A. Muryn, R. J. Pritchard, F. Tuna, D. Collison and R. E. P. Winpenny, Dalton Trans., 2008, 198 RSC .M. Ohashi, M. Konkol, I. Del Rosal, R. Poteau, L. Maron and J. Okuda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6920 CrossRef CAS .K. Abiraj, H. Jaccard, M. Kretzschmar, L. Helm and H. R. Maecke, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3248 RSC .M. M. Ali, M. Woods, P. Caravan, A. C. L. Opina, M. Spiller, J. C. Fettinger and A. D. Sherry, Chem. Eur. J., 2008, 14, 7250 CrossRef CAS .Y. Song, E. K. Kohlmeir and T. J. Meade, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6662 CrossRef CAS .S. Aime, A. Barge, A. Crivello, A. Deagostino, R. Gobetto, C. Nervi, C. Prandi, A. Toppino and P. Venturello, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2008, 6, 4460 RSC .K. Dhingra, M. E. Maier, M. Beyerlein, G. Angelovski and N. K. Logothetis, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3444 RSC .T. Koullourou, L. S. Natrajan, H. Bhavsar, S. J. A. Pope, J. H. Feng, J. Narvainen, R. Shaw, E. Scales, R. Kauppinen, A. M. Kenwright and S. Faulkner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2178 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Ratnakar, M. Woods, A. J. M. Lubag, Z. Kovacst and A. D. Sherry, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6 CrossRef CAS .M. Suchy, A. X. Li, R. Bartha and R. H. E. Hudson, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2008, 6, 3588 RSC .F. K. Kalman, Z. Baranyai, I. Toth, I. Banyai, R. Kiraly, E. Brucher, S. Aime, X. K. Sun, A. D. Sherry and Z. Kovacs, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 3851 CrossRef CAS .A. Borel, J. F. Bean, R. B. Clarkson, L. Helm, L. Moriggi, A. D. Sherry and M. Woods, Chem. Eur. J., 2008, 14, 2658 CrossRef .S. Aoki, K. Sakurama, R. Ohshima, N. Matsuo, Y. Yamada, R. Takasawa, S. I. Tanuma, K. Talkeda and E. Kimura, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 2747 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Bradbury, S. F. Lincoln and K. P. Wainwright, New J. Chem., 2008, 32, 1500 RSC .Y. Shiraishi, S. Sumiya, Y. Kohno and T. Hirai, J. Org. Chem., 2008, 73, 8571 CrossRef CAS .N. Jakubowski, L. Waentig, H. Hayen, A. Venkatachalam, A. von Bohlen, P. H. Roos and A. Manz, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23, 1497 RSC .B. R. Jarrett, B. Gustafsson, D. L. Kukis and A. Y. Louie, Bioconjugate Chem., 2008, 19, 1496 CrossRef CAS .Y. S. Kim, C. T. Yang, J. J. Wang, L. J. Wang, Z. B. Li, X. Y. Chen and S. Liu, J. Med. Chem., 2008, 51, 2971 CrossRef CAS .L. Li, J. Bading, P. J. Yazaki, A. H. Ahuja, D. Crow, D. Colcher, L. E. Williams, J. Y. C. Wong, A. Raubitschek and J. E. Shively, Bioconjugate Chem., 2008, 19, 89 CrossRef CAS .S. E. Plush and T. Gunnlaugsson, Dalton Trans., 2008, 3801 RSC .A. Wada, M. Watanabe, Y. Yamanoi and H. Nishihara, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1671 RSC .M. Main, J. S. Snaith, M. M. Meloni, M. Jauregui, D. Sykes, S. Faulkner and A. M. Kenwright, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5212 RSC .S. Mizukami, K. Tonai, M. Kaneko and K. Kikuchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14376 CrossRef CAS .J. Massue, S. J. Quinn and T. Gunnlaugsson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6900 CrossRef CAS .K. Nwe, C. M. Andolina and J. R. Morrow, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14861 CrossRef .M. Subat, K. Woinaroschy, C. Gerstl, B. Sarkar, W. Kairn and B. Konig, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 4661 CrossRef CAS .N. Maulucci, I. Izzo, G. Bifulco, A. Aliberti, C. De Cola, D. Comegna, C. Gaeta, A. Napolitano, C. Pizza, C. Tedesco, D. Flot and F. De Riccardis, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3927 RSC .S. N. Dhuri, M. S. Seo, Y. M. Lee, H. Hirao, Y. Wang, W. Nam and S. Shaik, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3356 CrossRef CAS .T. A. Jackson, J. U. Rohde, M. S. Seo, C. V. Sastri, R. DeHont, A. Stubna, T. Ohta, T. Kitagawa, E. Munck, W. Nam and L. Que, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12394 CrossRef CAS .J. Krzystek, J. England, K. Ray, A. Ozarowski, D. Smirnov, L. Que and J. Telser, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 3483 CrossRef CAS .K. Ray, J. England, A. T. Fiedler, M. Martinho, E. Munck and L. Que, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8068 CrossRef CAS .C. A. Boswell, C. A. S. Regino, K. E. Baidoo, K. J. Wong, A. Bumb, H. Xu, D. E. Milenic, J. A. Kelley, C. C. Lai and M. W. Brechbiel, Bioconjugate Chem., 2008, 19, 1476 CrossRef CAS .J. W. Seo, H. Zhang, D. L. Kukis, C. F. Meares and K. W. Ferrara, Bioconjugate Chem., 2008, 19, 2577 CrossRef CAS .J. Plutnar, J. Havlickova, J. Kotek, P. Hermann and I. Lukes, New J. Chem., 2008, 32, 496 RSC .F. G. Doro, E. E. Castellano, L. A. B. Moraes, M. N. Eberlin and E. Tfouni, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 4118 CrossRef CAS .D. Neuman, A. D. Ostrowski, A. A. Mikhailovsky, R. O. Absalonson, G. F. Strouse and P. C. Ford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 168 CrossRef CAS .J. Havlickova, H. Medova, T. Vitha, J. Kotek, I. Cisarova and P. Hermann, Dalton Trans., 2008, 5378 RSC .L. M. P. Lima, R. Delgado, M. G. B. Drew, P. Brandao and V. Felix, Dalton Trans., 2008, 6593 RSC .A. Chanda, X. P. Shan, M. Chakrabarti, W. C. Ellis, D. L. Popescu, F. T. de Oliveira, D. Wang, L. Que, T. J. Collins, E. Munck and E. L. Bominaar, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 3669 CrossRef CAS .A. Ghosh, D. A. Mitchell, A. Chanda, A. D. Ryabov, D. L. Popescu, E. C. Upham, G. J. Collins and T. J. Collins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15116 CrossRef CAS .L. M. Huffman and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9196 CrossRef CAS .A. Caselli, F. Cesana, E. Gallo, N. Casati, P. Macchi, M. Sisti, G. Celentano and S. Cenini, Dalton Trans., 2008, 4202 RSC .K. P. Guerra and R. Delgado, Dalton Trans., 2008, 539 RSC .C. Y. Wong, F. W. Lee, C. M. Che, Y. F. Cheng, D. L. Phillips and N. Zhu, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 10308 CrossRef CAS .P. Comba, L. R. Gahan, G. Haberhauer, G. R. Hanson, C. J. Noble, B. Seibold and A. L. van den Brenk, Chem. Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4393 CrossRef CAS .C. Bazzicalupi, A. Bencini, C. Bonaccini, C. Giorgi, P. Gratteri, S. Moro, M. Palumbo, A. Simionato, J. Sgrignani, C. Sissi and B. Valtancoli, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 5473 CrossRef CAS .C. Nunez, R. Bastida, A. Macias, M. Mato-Iglesias, C. Platas-Iglesias and L. Valencia, Dalton Trans., 2008, 3841 RSC .O. Pantani, S. Naskar, R. Guillot, P. Millet, E. Anxolabehere-Mallart and A. Aukauloo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9948 CrossRef CAS .J. Alarcon, M. T. Albelda, R. Belda, M. P. Clares, E. Delgado-Pinar, J. C. Frias, E. Garcia-Espana, J. Gonzalez and C. Soriano, Dalton Trans., 2008, 6530 RSC .J. M. Chen, X. M. Zhuang, L. Z. Yang, L. Jiang, X. L. Feng and T. B. Lu, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 3158 CrossRef CAS .I. Ravikumar, P. S. Lakshminarayanan, E. Suresh and P. Ghosh, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 7992 CrossRef CAS .J. E. Benedetti, M. A. de Paoli and A. F. Nogueira, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1121 RSC .Y. Liu, M. Han, H. Y. Zhang, L. X. Yang and W. Jiang, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 2873 CrossRef CAS .G. Reeske, M. Schuermann and K. Jurkschat, Dalton Trans., 2008, 3398 RSC .P. D. Prince, M. J. Bearpark, G. S. McGrady and J. W. Steed, Dalton Trans., 2008, 271 RSC .G. A. Shamov, G. Schreckenbach, R. L. Martin and P. J. Hay, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1465 CrossRef CAS .D. E. Janzen, D. G. VanDerveer, L. F. Mehne, D. A. D. Silva, J. L. Bredas and G. J. Grant, Dalton Trans., 2008, 1872 RSC .E. Stephen, A. J. Blake, E. S. Davies, J. McMaster and M. Schroder, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5707 RSC .F. Cheng, A. L. Hector, W. Levason, G. Reid, M. Webster and W. J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5508 RSC .M. Pruszynski, A. Bilewicz and M. R. Zalutsky, Bioconjugate Chem., 2008, 19, 958 CrossRef CAS .W. Levason, J. M. Manning, M. Nirwan, R. Ratnani, G. Reid, H. L. Smith and M. Webster, Dalton Trans., 2008, 3486 RSC .P. H. Ge and P. R. Selvin, Bioconjugate Chem., 2008, 19, 1105 CrossRef CAS .M. Mato-Iglesias, A. Roca-Sabio, Z. Palinkas, D. Esteban-Gomez, C. Platas-Iglesias, E. Toth, A. de Blas and T. Rodriguez-Blas, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 7840 CrossRef CAS .W. W. Y. Lam, W. L. Man, Y. N. Wang and T. C. Lau, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 6771 CrossRef CAS .S. Banerjee, S. Kara and S. Santra, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3037 RSC .S. S. Cepeda and K. B. Grant, New J. Chem., 2008, 32, 388 RSC .M. L. Ho, K. Y. Chen, L. C. Wu, J. Y. Shen, G. H. Lee, M. J. Ko, C. C. Wang, J. F. Lee and P. T. Chou, Chem. Commun., 2008, 2438 RSC .C. E. Felton, L. P. Harding, J. E. Jones, B. M. Kariuki, S. J. A. Pope and C. R. Rice, Chem. Commun., 2008, 6185 RSC .J. Frey, C. Tock, J. P. Collin, V. Heitz, J. P. Sauvage and K. Rissanen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11013 CrossRef CAS .I. Stoll, J. Eberhard, R. Brodbeck, W. Eisfeld and J. Mattay, Chem. Eur. J., 2008, 14, 1155 CrossRef CAS .C. G. Gulgas and T. M. Reineke, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1548 CrossRef CAS .G. Izzet, J. Zeitouny, H. Akdas-Killig, Y. Frapart, S. Menage, B. Douziech, I. Jabin, Y. Le Mest and O. Reinaud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9514 CrossRef CAS .W. Namkung, P. Padmawar, A. D. Mills and A. S. Verkman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7794 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Aragoni, M. Arca, A. Bencini, S. Biagini, A. J. Blake, C. Caltagirone, F. Demartin, G. De Filippo, F. A. Devillanova, A. Garau, K. Gloe, F. Isaia, V. Lippolis, B. Valtancoli and M. Wenzel, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 8391 CrossRef CAS .D. G. Huang, X. F. Zhang, E. J. L. McInnes, J. McMaster, A. J. Blake, E. S. Davies, J. Wolowska, C. Wilson and M. Schroder, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 9919 CrossRef CAS .S. Y. Lee, S. Park, H. J. Kim, J. H. Jung and S. S. Lee, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1913 CrossRef CAS .J. Y. Lee, S. Y. Lee, W. Sim, K. M. Park, J. Kim and S. S. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6902 CrossRef CAS .D. Huang, A. J. Blake, E. J. L. McInnes, J. McMaster, E. S. Davies, C. Wilson, J. Wolowska and M. Schroder, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1305 RSC .Y. Ji, R. Zhang, X. B. Du, J. L. Zuo and X. Z. You, Dalton Trans., 2008, 2578 RSC .Y. Matano, T. Miyajima, N. Ochi, T. Nakabuchi, M. Shiro, Y. Nakao, S. Sakaki and H. Imahori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 990 CrossRef CAS .L. Morello, M. J. Ferreira, B. O. Patrick and M. D. Fryzuk, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1319 CrossRef CAS .R. R. Nazmutdinov, N. V. Roznyatovskaya, D. V. Glukhov, I. Manyurov, V. M. Mazin, G. A. Tsirlina and M. Probst, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 6659 CrossRef CAS .M. Soler and J. K. McCusker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4708 CrossRef CAS .V. Lozan and B. Kersting, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 5386 CrossRef CAS .A. Arbaoui, C. Redshaw and D. L. Hughes, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4717 RSC .M. Wenzel, K. Gloe, K. Gloe, G. Bernhard, J. K. Clegg, X. K. Ji and L. F. Lindoy, New J. Chem., 2008, 32, 132 RSC .P. D. Frischmann, A. J. Gallant, J. H. Chong and M. J. MacLachlan, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 101 CrossRef CAS .J. C. Iglesias-Sanchez, W. Wang, R. Ferdani, P. Prados, J. de Mendoza and G. W. Gokel, New J. Chem., 2008, 32, 878 RSC .T. Jin, Y. Yoshioka, F. Fujii, Y. Komai, J. Seki and A. Seiyama, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5764 RSC .W. B. Edwards, B. Xu, W. Akers, P. P. Cheney, K. Liang, B. E. Rogers, C. J. Anderson and S. Achilefu, Bioconjugate Chem., 2008, 19, 192 CrossRef CAS .A. Heppeler, J. P. Andre, I. Buschmann, X. J. Wang, J. C. Reubi, M. Hennig, T. A. Kaden and H. R. Maecke, Chem. Eur. J., 2008, 14, 3026 CrossRef CAS .P. V. Bernhardt, G. K. Boschloo, F. Bozoglian, A. Hagfeldt, M. Martinez and B. Sienrad, New J. Chem., 2008, 32, 705 RSC .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 1  A ball and stick representation of the X-ray structure of [CuL48]+.	 

 	Fig. 2  A ball and stick representation of the X-ray structure of [Ru(CN)2(Me4[16]aneN4)]2+.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  A ball and stick representation of the X-ray structure of [Co2ClL55]3+.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 4  A ball and stick representation of the X-ray structure of [PbL66]2+.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 5  A ball and stick representation of the X-ray structure of [Al4L75].	 
[18]aneN6	1,4,7,10,13,16-hexaazacyclooctadecane
[16]aneN4	1,4,8,13-tetraazacyclohexadecane
[15]aneN4	1,4,8,12-tetraazacyclopentadecane
[12]aneN3	1,4,9-triazacyclododecane
[12]aneN4	1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane
[9]aneN3	1,4,7-triazacyclononane
[9]aneS3	1,4,7-trithiacyclononane
CEST	chemical exchange saturation transfer
cyclam	1,4,8,11-tetraazacyclotetradecane
cyclen	1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane
DFT	Density Functional Theory
DO3A	1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-1,4,7-triacetic acid
DOTA	1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-1,4,7,10-tetraacetic acid
DTPA	N,N′-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid
EPR	electron paramagnetic resonance
EXAFS	extended X-ray absorption fine structure
Me3tacn	1,4,7-trimethyl-1,4,7-triazacyclononane
MRI	magnetic resonance imaging
PAMAM	poly(amido)amine
PARACEST	paramagnetic chemical exchange saturation transfer
phen	1,10-phenanthroline
QDot	quantum dot
tacn	1,4,7-triazacyclononane
TETA	1,4,8,11-tetraazaacyclotetradecane-1,4,8,11-tetraacetic acid
tren	tris(2-aminoethyl)amine

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
