A review on ‘self-cleaning and multifunctional materials’  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA02542C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA02542C
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14773-14797A review on ‘self-cleaning and multifunctional materials’

        
          
            Prathapan 
            Ragesh
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            V. 
            Anand Ganesh
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shantikumar V. 
            Nair
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            A. Sreekumaran 
            Nair
          
          
        
      *a
aAmrita Centre for Nanosciences and Molecular Medicine, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham University, AIMS Ponekkara PO, Kochi 682041, Kerala, India. E-mail: sreekumarannair@aims.amrita.edu
bEngineering Product Development (EPD) Pillar, Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD), 20 Dover Drive, Singapore – 138682
Received 
      21st May 2014
    , Accepted 18th June 2014First published on 25th June 2014AbstractThis review article exemplifies the importance of self-cleaning materials and coatings. Self-cleaning coatings are becoming an integral part of our daily life because of their utility in various applications such as windows, solar panels, cements, and paints. In this review, various categories of materials for the fabrication of hydrophilic, hydrophobic, oleophobic, amphiphobic and multifunctional coatings and their synthesis routes have been discussed. Furthermore, different natural organisms exhibiting superhydrophobic behaviour have been analysed. This review also covers the fundamentals of self-cleaning attributes such as water contact angle, surface energy, and contact angle hysteresis.Prathapan RageshMr Prathapan Ragesh is pursuing his final year of Master of Technology (MTech) in Nanotechnology at Amrita Centre for Nanosciences & Molecular Medicine at Kochi, Kerala, India. His present research is on self-cleaning coatings, i.e. materials for photocatalytic and superhydrophobic coatings. He graduated with a first class honors degree in Electronics & Communication Engineering from Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Amritapuri at Kollam, Kerala, India.V. Anand GaneshDr Anand Ganesh Venkatesan is currently working as a Research Assistant in Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD). He graduated with a first class honours degree in Mechatronics Engineering from Anna University at Chennai, India. He completed his PhD studies (thesis submitted) from National University of Singapore (NUS), under the supervision of Professor Seeram Ramakrishna. His research interests include the development of materials for self-cleaning/anti-icing (hydrophilic, hydrophobic and amphiphobic) surfaces, water harvesting and energy conversion applications.Shantikumar V. NairDr Shantikumar V. Nair is currently Dean of Research at Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham University and the Director of Amrita Centre for Nanosciences & Molecular Medicine, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences, Amrita University at Kochi, Kerala, India. A graduate of IIT Bombay (Mumbai) in Metallurgical Engineering, he received his PhD from Columbia University in New York (1983). Prior to joining Amrita, he was a professor at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. He is a recipient of the prestigious Presidential Young Investigator Award from the President of the United States (1986) and the National Research Award from the Ministry of Science and Technology, Govt. of India (2011).A. Sreekumaran NairDr A. Sreekumaran Nair is currently an Associate Professor at Amrita Centre for Nanosciences & Molecular Medicine at Kochi, Kerala, India. He completed his PhD (Chemistry) at Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Madras (2006) and had postdoctoral training at University of Hyogo in Japan (JSPS fellow, 2006–2008) and Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Initiative at National University of Singapore (2008–2012). His current research interests include organic–inorganic nanohybrids for renewable energy, self-cleaning coatings and environmental remediation.
1 Introduction
Man tries to mimic the kaleidoscopic forms of nature,1a and one such vivacious source is the self-cleaning surfaces (Fig. 1) inspired by the lotus leaf,2 legs of water strider,3 wings of cicada,4 gecko's feet,5 and the wings of butterflies.6 Self-cleaning coatings prove to be a labour-saving technique due to their wide range of applications, extending from glass coatings, cement and paints to textiles.7,8 Many companies have commercialized several self-cleaning multi-functional products, which can be used effectively in our daily life.9,10
 Fig. 1  (a) Photograph of a silver ragwort leaf with a water droplet on it; (b and c) the leaf SEM images at different magnifications.1b Inset of (a): images of water droplets on Lotus (left) and Ramee leaf (right) indicating their inherent self-cleaning nature. 
Self-cleaning coatings are primarily categorized into hydrophobic and hydrophilic,7 and both these types clean the surfaces by their different behavior towards water. The former makes the water droplets to slide and roll over the surfaces, thereby carrying the dirt away with them, while the latter uses appropriate metal oxides to sheet the water that removes the dirt from the surface. In addition to the sheeting effect, metal oxides have an additional property of chemically breaking down complex dirt deposits by a sunlight-assisted cleaning mechanism, i.e. Photocatalytic effect.11 This review deals with the basics of self-cleaning phenomena inspired by nature, followed by hydrophobic/superhydrophobic, photocatalysis-based hydrophilic/superhydrophilic self-cleaning materials. Furthermore, recent advancements in self-cleaning surfaces, including oleophobic and amphiphobic surfaces, and multifunctional coating materials have also been analysed and discussed.
2 Basics of self-cleaning
The chemical composition and the geometrical structure of solid surfaces govern the wettability of liquids on surfaces.12 The angle measured through the droplet at the intervention of three phases, i.e. solid, liquid and vapour, is referred as the water contact angle (WCA).13 The contact angle is modelled using Young's equation as follows:14 cosθc = (γSV − γSL)/γLV(1)where γ represents the surface energy and SLV represents the solid, liquid and vapour phase, respectively. If the contact angle >90°, the solid surface is referred to as a hydrophobic surface, and if it is less than 90°, the surface becomes hydrophilic in nature. If the contact angle approaches more than 150°, the surface is termed as a ultrahydrophobic/superhydrophobic surface. Similarly, as the contact angle approaches 0° (water completely wets the surface), then the surface is termed as a superhydrophilic surface (Fig. 2). David Quere, whose findings are listed in a series of papers, studied the dynamic behaviour of droplets on ultraphobic surfaces.15–20 When the substrate is tilted to certain angle and the water droplets are made to move on such a tilted surface, the angle formed at the front of droplet motion is known as advancing angle (θA) and the rear angle is known as the receding angle (θR).21 The differences between the advancing and receding angles gives the contact angle hysteresis value. The drops tend to stick onto the surface if the contact angle hysteresis is too large;22 hence, low values of the contact hysteresis angle and sliding angle are preferred, which helps the water droplets roll down more easily. The water contact angle is dependent on the surface roughness, which is explained via two models: Cassie–Baxter24 and Wenzel25 (Fig. 3). The Wenzel state reveals that the liquid keeps intimate contact with a microstructured surface, in which the change of the contact angle is according to the equation:23 cosθw = rcosθ(2)where cosθw is the Wenzel contact angle and r is the surface roughness factor. The water droplets penetrate into surface cavities, and as a result of which, the surface roughness factor tends to be greater than unity, thus resulting in an increase and decrease of the contact angle for hydrophobic and hydrophilic surfaces, respectively. The Cassie–Baxter model explains the heterogeneous wetting state in which water in the surface cavities entraps the air, and as a result of which, the liquid and solid interface area is minimized and the same between water and air is maximized. This results in the formation of spherical droplets with lower hysteresis, and the hysteresis could be further reduced by increasing the roughness (higher contact angle).26 Both the models explain how surface roughness increases with an increase in the contact angle but fail to explain the dynamic behaviour of moving droplets on a surface.14 Above a certain roughness factor, the Wenzel state transits to the Cassie–Baxter model. It should be noted that biomimicking of nature's self-cleaning design is tedious and may result in several loopholes in the artificial design. For example, plants have the inherent ability to repair or rejuvenate themselves, which may be an uphill task when artificially trying to mimic such. Even though self-cleaning surfaces like water-repellent fabrics have been fascinating objects in the market, still they are not ubiquitous. This is mostly due to the inefficacy of the as-such produced self-cleaning membranes to withstand high hydrostatic pressure and prevent damage. Hence, care must be taken to produce practical surfaces, which can withstand high pressures, have long durability and are easy to manufacture. In totality it must be environmentally stable without causing any damage. Moreover, the synthesized/fabricated self-cleaning membranes must be scratch-resistant and must have good adhesion to the substrates on to which they are applied. No air gap should be present between the substrate and the coating applied. Because of the advantages over traditional coatings, cost-effectiveness and environmental friendliness, nanostructured coatings have witnessed great demand in applications such as solar glasses or oil and gas industry. Nanostructured materials have properties such as water-repellence, corrosion resistance, ultraviolet radiation stability, and anti-microbial activity, which give them potential for various applications in day-to-day life.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram indicating hydrophilic, hydrophobic and ultra-hydrophobic surface and (b) schematic representing water contact angle on a slanted surface.23 
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram showing the water droplets on a flat solid surface, Wenzel model (middle) and Cassie–Baxter model (right).27 
3 Hydrophobic surfaces
Because of a wide variety of applications such as in self-cleaning, stain-resistant fabrics, and anti-corrosion, hydrophobic surfaces tend to attract considerable attention of researchers.28–36 Hydrophobicity is enhanced by the roughness factor.37–46 The surface roughness is frequently controlled by the use of nanoparticles,47–54 which can be synthesized with uniform size and can be tuned via Stober method.55 Fluorinated polymers have enough potential for creating hydrophobic materials with a static contact angle greater than 130°.56 Such hydrophobic materials can be extensively viewed in nature.57 The electron micrographs in Fig. 4 illustrate the ultraphobicity in two plant species, highlighting the rough structure of leaves in microscale range. Indian literature exemplifies lotus as the embodiment of purity, which although originates from muddy water, is devoid of dirt and other pollutants. This was first observed by Ward et al.58 The leaf surface becomes superhydrophobic due to the presence of epicuticular wax crystalloids.
 Fig. 4  Electron micrographs of ultraphobic leaves, Nelumbo nucifera (with a scale bar of 50 μm) in left and Hygroryza aristata (with a scale bar of 20 μm) in right, highlighting various textures.57 
3.1 Mechanisms to produce superhydrophobic coatings
Because of the considerable applications of superhydrophobic surfaces, researchers find interest in developing new technologies encompassed with a motto of low surface energy and controlled morphology on nano- and micro-scales. Broadly, the techniques to produce superhydrophobic surfaces can be categorized as follows: (a) roughening of low surface energy materials and (b) modification of rough surface with low surface energy materials.

3.1.1 Modifying a low surface energy material. 
Khorasani et al.59 used a CO2 pulsed laser as an excitation source to modify PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane) by introducing peroxide groups onto PDMS surface (Fig. 5a and b), which graft 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) onto PDMS. The resultant contact angle was obtained as 175°. Porosity and chain ordering on PDMS surface resulted in such an increment in WCA. Jin et al.60 induced roughness on PDMS surface using laser etching and obtained a WCA of 160°. Electrospinning technique was employed by Ma et al.61 in producing superhydrophobic membranes. PS–PDMS/PS homopolymer (Fig. 6) exhibited a WCA of 163°. Such an increment in WCA is seen due to the ability of PDMS to enrich fiber surfaces and surface roughness with small fiber diameter. Due to low surface energy, fluorinated polymers are of great interest, which when roughened result in superhydrophobic surfaces. Zhang et al.62 observed that when Teflon (polytetrafluoroethylene) was stretched, the superhydrophobicity was achieved, attributed by the presence of void space and fibrous crystals on the surface. Shiu et al.63 observed that oxygen plasma treatment on Teflon yielded a rough surface with a WCA of 168°. However, fluorinated materials are linked with rough materials in producing superhydrophobic surfaces rather than using it directly due to its limited solubility. Inexpensive superhydrophobic coating was produced by Lu et al.64 using “low-density polyethylene” (LDPE), which yielded a WCA of 170°. Materials like alkylketene,65 polycarbonate66 and polyamide67 are potential candidates, exhibiting superhydrophobic properties. ZnO nanorods were synthesized by Feng et al.68 using a two-step solution method (Fig. 7). Due to low surface energy of (001) plane, ZnO nanorod films turned out to be superhydrophobic, but when exposed to UV light, they became superhydrophilic because of the adsorption of hydroxyl group on their surface.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram depicting laser-induced graft polymerization technique.59 (b) SEM image showing the treatment of CO2 pulsed laser on PDMS surface.59 
 Fig. 6  SEM image of PS–PDMS/PS electrospun mat and the behavior of droplets on the mat (inset).61 
 Fig. 7  SEM image of aligned ZnO nanorods synthesized by two-step solution approach.68 Insets: bottom: XRD spectrum of the nanorods; top: UV induced hydrophilicity. 


3.1.2 Synthesizing a rough surface and modifying it with a low-surface energy material. 
Controlled dimensionality and morphology of nanostructures like nanowires and nanoparticles were obtained using wet chemical reactions.69–71 Superhydrophobic surface on copper substrate was produced by chemical method by Jiang et al.72 Superhydrophobicity was attained through surface modification of substrate by immersing the substrate into n-tetradecanoic acid solution for about a week. Wet chemical process was utilized to create superhydrophobic surfaces on nickel substrates, in which monoalkyl phosphonic acid reacts with Ni to produce flowery microstructures.73 Another efficient bottom-up route is hydrothermal technique, by which we can fabricate functional materials with different patterns and technologies.74–77In situ hydrothermal synthesis was employed to create nanolamellate structures on titanium.78 Through surface modification using PDMSVT, the superhydrophilic surface was converted to superhydrophobic surface. Biomimetic superhydrophobic surfaces were synthesized using electrochemical deposition, a versatile technique for producing microscale and nanoscale structures.79–84 Galvanic deposition technique on metals was employed by Bell et al.85 to deposit a metallic salt solution, resulting in the formation of superhydrophobic surface with a WCA of 173°. Lithography techniques such as photolithography, electron-beam lithography, and X-ray lithography, were employed to create micro- and nano-patterns.86–95 Photocatalytic lithography technique was utilized on composite surfaces by Notsu et al.96 to synthesize superhydrophilic and superhydrophobic patterns. Inexpensive techniques like self-assembly and layer-by-layer (LBL) were employed for the formation of multilayer thin films with controlled surface morphologies.97–109 Rambutan-like surface with hollow spheres of aniline was fabricated by Jiang et al.97 using self-assembly technique. Assembly of silica particles was performed by Lee et al.104 to obtain raspberry-like particles with dual-size surface roughness. A versatile technique to produce nanofibres is electrospinning, which enhances the surface roughness and produces continuous nanofibres. A hydrophobic material when electrospun results in superhydrophobicity.110 Micro- and nano-surface patterns could be produced on macroscopic substrate.111–113 using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process. Some of the other techniques that are used for making superhydrophobic surfaces include sol–gel method (all kinds of solid substrates114–121 could be used), polymerization technique,122–125 texturing,126,127 electrospraying,128,129 and sandblasting.130
3.1.2.1 Hydrothermal technique. 
Hydrothermal technique is an efficient technique for creating nanostructures under high pressure and temperature conditions. It is an environmentally benign technique and can be used for low temperature processing (T < 200 °C, P < 1.5 MPa).131–133 No additional calcination and grinding or milling of the initial mixture is required, which makes it cost-effective. The size and shape of the nanoparticles formed can be controlled by controlling factors such as the synthesis temperature and concentrations of the precursors.134,135 Typically, hydrothermal technique works on the principle of temperature gradient method. The nutrient solution is taken in the jar and is heated to create two zonal areas, i.e. hot and cold zone. The nutrient dissolves in the hotter zone, and when it gets saturated in the lower part, it is made to move towards the upper part by the convective motion. During this time, the cooler upper solution descends to the hotter zone and by reducing the temperature of the upper part, supersaturation is initiated for crystallization process. The parameters governing the process are temperature, pressure, pH of the solution and duration of synthesis. If pH > 8, more OH− ions tend to move to the surfaces and passivate the high surface energy plane and the growth happens thereafter to yield elongated structures like nanowires and nanorods. If pH < 4, spiroidal shapes are observed.
3.1.2.2 Electrospinning technique. 
With the development of nanotechnology, electrospinning has got importance in producing continuous nanofibres with high surface roughness. Basically, an electrospinning set-up consists of a high-voltage supply, a grounded collector, a syringe loaded with precursor solution and a pump for regulating the flow of the precursor solution (Fig. 8). When the high voltage applied at the tip of the syringe exceeds the surface tension of the precursor solution, a Taylor cone is produced, which first forms a jet. For the Taylor cone136 formation, the applied voltage must exceed a critical voltage,137 which is given by the following equation: (3)where Vc indicates the critical voltage, γ refers to the surface tension of the precursor solution, H refers to the distance between the needle tip and the collector, r is the radius of meniscus and ε refers to the permittivity. The jet being unstable gets accumulated at the collector surface where the fibres are obtained. The parameters governing electrospinning are surface tension of the precursor solution, concentration of the precursor solution, viscosity of the precursor solution, the applied voltage, flow rate of solution, and distance between the tip of syringe and collector. If the viscosity of the solution is high, there are high chances of clogging, and if it is low, electrospraying occurs instead of electrospinning. The bead formation in the resultant fibres could be controlled by optimizing the viscosity of the solution. For electrospinning to happen, sufficient voltage (5–30 kV) needs to be applied, or else it results in spraying. The distance parameter is critical as it has to be optimized to facilitate the evaporation of the solvent before the collection of fibres on the collector. Nowadays, humidity controllable electrospinning set-up is available which remedies the bead formation in the resulting fibres.
 Fig. 8  A schematic representation of electrospinning procedure.14 
Hydrophobic surfaces are required for applications like anti-corrosive systems (Fig. 9), anti-icing (Fig. 10), and water repellence. In industry, they are widely used for ultra-dry and surface applications. On applying the coating, air molecules come in contact between the coating and the substrate, thus increasing the WCA. Superhydrophobic coatings enhance the fuel efficiency in maritime industry by reducing the skin friction drags occurring in ship hulls. Such a coating increases the ship speed and also acts as anti-corrosive systems, preventing any organic contaminant or marine microorganisms to come in contact with the ship hulls. In vehicles, superhydrophobic coatings are applied on the glasses to prevent them from clinging, thereby helping to clean the car itself. Moreover, such superhydrophobic membranes are used in water desalination plants for effective fresh water generation. A well-known superhydrophobic coating used in small boats is “HullKote speed polish,” which gives surface protection on boats and is easy to use. In medical field, superhydrophobic coatings when applied to the medical instruments provide sterility by detaching the bacteria from the instrument surface. Cao et al.138 investigated the utility of superhydrophobic coatings for anti-icing and found that such treated surfaces prevent ice formation by inhibiting the frost nucleation process. Anti-icing capability also depends upon the size of the particles exposed on the surface. The factors affecting the frost nucleation were studied in detail by Na et al.139 Formation of ice depends on several other factors like temperature, surface roughness, and contact area. Intensive research is still ongoing in this field, which will be a boon for mainly colder regions of the world. Another interesting phenomenon found with superhydrophobic surfaces is electrowetting behavior. Krupenkin et al.140a demonstrated the change of wettability from a superhydrophobic state to complete wetting state as a function of tuning voltage and liquid surface tension (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 9  Photographs depicting coated (left) and non-coated (right) steel plates taken after exposure to atmosphere for about 60 days (adapted from http://www.ornl.gov/File%20Library/…/06-Superhydrophobic_Materials.pdf). 
 Fig. 10  Photographs of coated (left) and uncoated cables (right) depicting the functionality of hydrophobic coatings for anti-icing (adapted from http://www.ornl.gov/File%20Library/…/06-Superhydrophobic_Materials.pdf). 
 Fig. 11  Pictorial representation of application areas of hydrophobic surfaces.1 
 Fig. 12  Electrowetting behavior of liquid by tuning the voltage and surface tension.140 
Anti-bacterial textile encompassing superhydrophobicity was developed by Ivanova et al.140b for biomedical applications. Nanoparticle (NP) dispersion was sprayed over textile sample for the coating formulation, which resulted in multiscale textured layer on the top of cotton fabric. Chitosan-based NPs incorporated anti-bacterial functionality to the coating. Electrostatic interaction between amine group of chitosan and negatively charged fluoroanion was used as the basis for the nanoparticle fabrication. It was observed that the structure of aggregates in the coating and wettability and durability of coating is regulated or controlled by the relative number of fluoroanions/elementary unit of chitosan. Shateri-Khalilabad et al.140c fabricated superhydrophobic and electroconductive textiles using graphene-coated cotton cellulose. Dip-pad dry method was used to deposit graphene oxide on cotton fibres followed by reduction with ascorbic acid, which yielded graphene-layer incorporated fabric. Polymethylsiloxane (PMS) nanofilaments were formed on the fiber surface by the reaction of fabric with methyl trichlorosilane. Such fabric (Fig. 13) coated with graphene showed hydrophobicity with a contact angle of 143.2° ± 2.9°. The self-cleaning ability of the fabric consisting of PMS nanofilaments was evident from a contact angle of 163° ± 3.4° (superhydrophobic character).
 Fig. 13  (a–c) SEM images of original cotton, graphene–cotton and PMS–graphene–cotton, respectively, with the right hand side showing its higher magnification images.140c 
Wang et al.140d fabricated superhydrophobic asymmetric cotton fabrics (Fig. 14) using graft-polymerization process with atomized lauryl methacrylate as monomer. Nanoscale hierarchical structures are formed on the cotton surface using the synthesized polymers. By choosing a suitable solvent or by varying the monomer mist stream, the surface morphology could be controlled. An asymmetric superhydrophobic surface was obtained by surface modification of cotton fabrics without any additional nanosized particles. Modified cotton fabric has laundering durability and mechanical stability with a water contact angle more than 150°, revealing its superhydrophobic character.
 Fig. 14  SEM images (low magnification) of (a) pristine cotton fabric and (b) cotton fabric modified with mist-polymerization process.140d 
Inspired from mussel adhesion, Zhu et al.140e fabricated superhydrophobic surfaces and a one-step and versatile strategy for the robust immobilization of oxides nanoparticles. By tuning the pH or adding n-dodecanethiol, the oxidation of dopamine could be tuned, which internally has a great influence on the immobilization of the nanoparticles. Effective oil separation from water surface through a magnetic-actuated manner was performed using the superhydrophobic PU sponges and exhibited the highest space utilizations for oil-storage.

4 Hydrophilic surfaces
Irrespective of potential applications of hydrophobic surfaces (Fig. 11), researchers also focus on hydrophilic surfaces that have proven to be useful in water purification and paint industry. They clean the surfaces by the process of photocatalysis, followed by sheeting of water. The wettability of such surfaces is normally high, as a result of which the water contact angle tends to be approximately 0°. In spite of such a cleaning ability, it is still in a matured state compared to the hydrophobic coatings, and research is still ongoing in this field to innovate an efficient cleaning capability for such coatings by varying the material compositions.
4.1 Photocatalysis
Pilkington7 was successful in commercializing the first self-cleaning windows in 2001. Following them, several other companies came forward in the same area. These windows utilized titanium-dioxide (TiO2) as transparent coatings, by which the cleaning happens in two distinct ways: photocatalysis, a process in which the organic dirt molecules get decomposed in the presence of sunlight, and the sheeting of water, which makes the surface superhydrophilic (contact angle ∼ 0°), thereby carrying away the dirt molecules. TiO2 has become a potential candidate exhibiting photocatalytic activity, and it is widely used because of its non-toxicity, availability, cost effectiveness, chemical stability, and favourable physical and chemical properties. TiO2 is used even in paint and cosmetics as pigment and as a food-additive. The material is also used in anti-pollution applications and for water purification (the membrane is coated with TiO2 that kills the bacteria present in water). Several forms of TiO2 are available, among which the primary phases are the anatase, rutile and brookite phases. The most common form of TiO2 is the rutile phase, which is densely packed and is used in pigments as sun-blockers and paints. The anatase phase is rare and has open crystal structure, which makes it highly photocatalytic. Both anatase and rutile phases have tetragonal structure. The brookite phase being orthorhombic, it is extremely rare. Anatase phase TiO2 when heated to more than 400 °C becomes the rutile phase. Photocatalysis can be generally categorized into two classes of processes. The process in which the adsorbate molecule gets photoexcited and interacts with the ground state catalyst substrate is known as a catalyzed photoreaction.141 Moreover, if the initial photoexcitation takes place in the catalyst substrate and transfers an electron or energy into a ground state molecule, the process is referred to as a sensitized photoreaction.141 The quantum yield (number of events occurring per photon absorbed) determines the efficiency of a photocatalytic process. By analyzing all the possible pathways for electrons and holes, the efficiency or quantum yield is calculated. TiO2 being a semiconductor, upon absorption of light greater than or equal to its bandgap, it gets excited to produce electrons and holes. Most of these charge carriers undergo recombination and some migrate to the surface. The electrons produced move from valence band to the conduction band where it reacts with the atmospheric oxygen to produce superoxide radicals. These superoxide radicals being highly energetic, decompose the organic dirt into carbon dioxide and water, which is referred to as the cold combustion process. The decomposition of stearic acid into carbon dioxide and water vapour in the presence of atmospheric oxygen occurs on a TiO2 surface, which leaves behind no byproducts (Fig. 15); thus, it proves to be a remarkably clean surface.142 The destruction of a modelled pollutant is performed to analyze the photocatalytic property of a material. The popular choices of such modelled pollutants include stearic acid, methylene blue, and chlorophenol. The holes produced in the valence band oxidize the surface oxygen producing oxygen vacancies, onto which the hydroxyl radicals are adsorbed (sheeting of water). This lowers the contact angle to ∼0°, thus making the surface superhydrophilic in nature. Thus, both the bandgap of TiO2 and the electron-hole generation (Fig. 16), control the self-cleaning property. The advancement in nanotechnology with the use of nanoparticles, nanowires, nanotubes, and nanoflowers, typically in the range of 1–100 nm has led to considerable development in making nanoscale TiO2 with increased photocatalytic effect because of its large surface-to-volume ratio and a wider band-gap, thereby oxidizing and reducing holes and electrons, respectively, to a great extent than the bulk TiO2.143 Still there are a lot of challenges that need to be overcome by nanocrystalline TiO2, especially its robustness and optical transparency in glazing industries. For enhanced coatings, some strategies may be employed like increasing the lifetime of charge carriers by reducing the recombination, increasing the absorption of light to longer wavelengths, which thereby extends to a larger area of the solar spectrum, and increasing the number of charge carriers and surface area of the film deposited. This indicates that when thicker films are deposited, they increase the number of excited charge carriers by absorbing more light. However, above 25 nm, it is seen that there is a wide chance of recombination because of the thick film, which makes the charge carriers difficult to move towards the surface. Moreover, the more the thickness, the more the cost per unit area because of the longer deposition time and the amount of material required, which also sacrifices the optical transparency and durability, thus hindering the thicker films to be used for window-coating applications. Another brilliant approach in enhancing the self-cleaning property of TiO2 is doping, in which the impurities added influence the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 even in low concentrations. In this scenario, wide transition metals as dopants have been reported based on their oxidative powers.
 Fig. 15  Stearic acid undergoing photocatalytic decomposition, monitored by infrared spectroscopy.142 
 Fig. 16  Schematic representation of different processes occurring when titanium dioxide absorbs ultra-band-gap light.7 
The photocatalytic activity of transition metal cations like Fe3+-, Co2+- and Ni2+-doped TiO2 are low compared to the transition metals with higher oxidation states such as Mo5+, Nb5+, and W6+. High proportion of hydroxyl groups are adsorbed on to the surface of high oxidation state transition metal surfaces compared to the lower oxidation transition metal surfaces, which was confirmed using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). This clearly explains why higher oxidation state metal dopants increase the photocatalytic behavior when added to TiO2, thus enhancing superhydrophilicity. Several other materials, in addition to TiO2 have been investigated for self-cleaning (superhydrophilicity), such as CdS, WO3, and ZnO, but none has become successful in surpassing the efficacy of TiO2 to date.144a,145a Alcoa Architectural products144b introduced an innovative coating comprising of TiO2 that helps in making the buildings clean themselves. They coated a TiO2 layer to a pre-painted aluminium surface, thus washing away the contaminants in presence of the sun. The details of the cleaning action achieved can be seen in Fig. 17. Titan Shield TM Solar Coat145b uses TiO2 as a photocatalyst material (inexpensive coating technique in which the TiO2 is sprayed to the desired substrate, mainly of glass) for photovoltaic panels to provide better transmittance and lower reflectance, thereby increasing the efficiency of the solar panel using superhydrophilicity. Because of the superhydrophilic nature, the treated glass surface becomes devoid of water droplets, thus rendering the surface clean during rain.
 Fig. 17  Various steps in photocatalysis achieved using the Titanium dioxide coating on the buildings (pre-painted aluminium surfaces).144b 
5 Nature's contribution
5.1 Lotus leaf

Nelumbo nucifera (the lotus plant) is considered to be an embodiment of purity in Asian religions. The dirt-resistant property of lotus leaf has encouraged researchers to investigate this effect in detail. Randomly distributed micropapillae of about 5–9 μm in diameter, enclosed by fine nanostructured branches of 120 nm in diameter was observed (Fig. 18b and c). The presence of such surface structures and epicuticular wax crystalloids makes its surface highly superhydrophobic with small sliding angles. Thus, the dirt particles are carried away by the rolling spherical water droplets, an intrinsic process called self-cleaning or lotus effect (Fig. 18a). Several researchers have attempted to mimic this lotus effect to create artificial superhydrophobic surfaces146–150 whose water contact angle is greater than 150° (Fig. 18d). Recently flexible superhydrophobic films were synthesized on flexible hemisphere arrays by thermal evaporation of Ag nanoparticles. The deposited film was then modified with 1-dodecanethiol.151 It was found that the obtained morphology had resemblance with the natural micro-/nano-structures present in lotus leaf (Fig. 18f). Using electrohydrodynamic technique, polystyrene film with superhydrophobic nature was synthesized, which had porous microspheres and nanofibers (Fig. 18e).
 Fig. 18  (a) Demonstration of self-cleaning effect in which the dirt particles are carried away by the rolling water droplets. (b) SEM image (low magnification) showing random micropapillae structures in lotus effect. (c) Cilium-like nanostructures superimposed on the top of micropapillae observed in the SEM image of a single papilla. (d) AFM image of a i-PP coating. Inset shows a water contact angle of 160°, measured via water droplet on the coating applied on a glass slide.152 (e) Special microsphere/nanofiber composite structures observed in SEM image of polystyrene films (inset shows the superhydrophobic nature) synthesized via EHD technique.153 (f) Ag nanoparticles composite arrays observed in SEM image of biomimic surfaces. Inset shows water contact angle of 166°.151 
5.2 Rice leaves
Hierarchical structured papillae on rice leaves are arranged in quasi-one-dimensional order similar to those of lotus leaf. Such special structures make the rice leaf both superhydrophobic and impose anisotropic wettability; thus the water droplets roll easily along the direction parallel to the rice leaf. Carbon nanotube film of rice-like alignment was prepared by surface deposition of catalyst in a controlled manner so as to mimic the anisotropic wetting function of rice leaf.154 Au surfaces with positive and negative textures were fabricated to biomimic rice leaf textures, in which rice leaves were used as templates.155 Anisotropic micro-/nano-scale hierarchical structures were observed on Au surface, indicating anisotropic sliding angle performances. Reduction of adhesion between water droplets and the surface (with negative texture) was observed when the surface was modified with 1-decanethiol. Two-step phase-separation micro-molding process was investigated recently to replicate rice leaf structures.156 The artificial structures thus replicated showed similarity to the natural rice leaf structure with anisotropic wetting. When the replicated artificial structures were modified or treated with poly(N-isopropylacrylamide), they showed good thermal responsive wettability.157 Laser interference lithography technique was proposed to achieve controlled anisotropic wetting by which large area micropearl arrays were fabricated.158 It was found that there exists similarity between natural rice leaf and anisotropic wettability of biomimetic materials, which is illustrated in Fig. 19.
 Fig. 19  Figures exemplifying the similarity between anisotropic surfaces and natural rice leaf. (a) Micropearl arrays SEM image (cross-sectional). (b) Upper photo shows the modified micropearl arrays with water droplet. The lower figure shows the contact angle measurement of fluoroalkylsilane-modified surface. (c) Structures clearly seen in SEM image of natural rice leaf. (d) Digital photos buttressing the similarity of designed anisotropy to those with natural ones.158 
5.3 Butterfly wings and peacock feather
The scintillating colors present in the wings of butterflies charm everybody and thus have attracted many researchers like Hooke and Newton. These colors are a result of structural color (iridescence) and pigmentation.159 The interaction of light with complex architectures results in the so-called structural color. Multiscale photonic structures ranging from nanometer to millimeter are found on wing scales, imparting brilliant blue iridescent colors to Morpho butterflies (found in Central and South America).160–162 The multiscale structures, in addition to the brilliant iridescent color, imparts superhydrophobicity and acute chemical sensing ability to the butterfly wings. The scales present in wings can be categorized into two types:163 the structural color due to ground scales and superhydrophobicity, and self-cleaning properties due to cover scales. One-dimensional oriented arrangement with directional adhesion was observed in Morpho butterfly wings.164 Lamella-stacking nano-stripes covering microsquama overlap the above oriented arrangement. It was observed that water rolls easily along a radial outward direction but gets tightly pinned in the opposite direction. Thus, scientists, who were inspired by such multiscale structures of butterflies, designed biomimetic materials for functional integration. Self-assembly of polystyrene spheres and silica nanoparticles was performed to fabricate a uniform opal film, mimicking Morpho butterfly wings (Fig. 20). The film exhibited superhydrophobicity165 with structural colors. Alumina coating through a low-temperature atomic layer deposition (ALD) process was performed to replicate micro and nanometer scale hierarchical photonic structures with natural butterfly wings as the templates.166
 Fig. 20  (a) Morpho butterfly. (b) Oblique view SEM image. (c) SEM image indicating the ground scale of Morpho butterfly.168 
Another natural material with structured color is the peacock feather. The peacock feather shows iridescent colors and intricate eye patterns in the tails (observed in the male peacock).
The kaleidoscopic color production in peacock (Pavo muticus) feathers (Fig. 21) is due to small two-dimensional photonic crystal structure.167 In addition to color, superhydrophobicity is also observed in peacock feather. The variation in the colour is attributed to the change in lattice constant and the number of periods in photonic crystal structure.
 Fig. 21  (a) Peacock feather showing superhydrophobicity. (b and c) SEM images of barbule structures.167 
5.4 Water strider legs and insect compound eyes
Water strider (Gerris remigis) effortlessly moves on water using its legs.169 Researchers trying to mimic its legs found that a water strider's leg (Fig. 22) was covered with needle-shaped micrometer scale setae with a surface inclination of 20°. Numerous helical nano-grooves were also found in each microseta, which traps even small air bubbles.170 Apart from all these features, a water strider's legs were found to have a hydrophobic character. Until a depth of 4.3 mm is covered, a water strider's legs do not pierce the water. Because of the tremendous support offered from its leg, water strider is flexible even under turbulent conditions in moving water. A water volume of about 300 times its leg is flushed off, exemplifying its hydrophobic nature. Inspired from a water strider's leg, a superhydrophobic robust copper surface was fabricated that comprised nanoneedle arrays embedded with nanogrooves.171
 Fig. 22  (a) Photograph depicting a water strider signifying its superhydrophobic nature. (b) SEM image showing the spindle microsetae orientation observed on water strider’s leg. (c) Low and (d) high magnification SEM image exemplifying the copper hydroxide nanoneedle arrays and its self-cleaning nature (inset of Fig. c).187 
Anti-reflective surfaces are found in some insects that impart attractive properties.172–174 For instance, the eyes of moths (Fig. 23), butterflies and flies have anti-reflection and attractive physiological optics with high sensitivity due to the presence of a multiscale structure.175–178 The insect's head consists of a compound eye that again is an aggregation of several little eyes known as ommatidia. Several multifunctional artificial compound eyes have been designed to biomimic such eye structures with antireflective properties. The suppression of reflection of light at a range of wavelengths from ultraviolet to terahertz region was observed in silicon nanotips that were arranged as aperiodic arrays.179 Such structures are used in applications in renewable energy sector, especially photovoltaic devices. Wet etching of silicon by metal catalysts was employed in fabricating high aspect ratio silicon hollow tip arrays that biomimicked the compound eye of moth.180 These arrays possessed high anti-reflective properties along with hydrophobicity. Recently, silica substrates were used to construct superhydrophilic surfaces along with anti-reflective and anti-fogging properties. The presence of surface multiscale structures comprising hexagonally non-close-packed nano-nipples covering micro-ommatidia was observed in the compound eyes of mosquitoes. Soft lithography technique was used to create artificial compound eyes with superhydrophobicity and anti-fogging properties that mimic mosquito compound eyes.181 Anti-reflection property is also found in insect wings for camouflage. Superhydrophobic anti-reflective self-cleaning properties were found in the wings of cicada.182–184 Self-cleaning and anti-reflective properties were combined to form the so-called multifunctional optical coatings.185,186 Such coatings are used in glass modules for photovoltaic applications so as to enhance its efficiency by repelling the dust and dirt molecules and to transmit almost all the light incident on it.
 Fig. 23  (a) Compound eyes of moth. (b) Figure showing the SEM image of a moth eye with an anti-reflective surface. (c) SEM image (cross-sectional view) of silicon hollow-tip arrays and its wetting behavior (inset). (d) Image highlighting the mosquito eyes after exposure to water aerosol. (e) SEM image showing adjacent ommatidia. (f) SEM image exemplifying the analogue between an artificial compound eye and the behavior of a water droplet (spherical) on the surface (inset).187 
6 Oleophobic surfaces
Oleophobic surfaces are oil-repelling surfaces. Such surfaces are used in applications in the steel industry, oil industry and marine environments where oil spilling results in havoc. Choi et al.188 investigated oleophobicity using a dip-coating process on various surfaces with inherent re-entrant texture. Tunable wettability along with reversible-deformation dependent property was observed in such dip-coated fabrics. Moreover, such surfaces have shown high wetting properties with various polar and non-polar liquids. Researchers have attempted to fabricate various superhydrophobic/superoleophobic surfaces by biomimicking nature. Oleophobic surfaces have immense capability for self-cleaning and anti-fouling characteristics. In order to synthesize a superoleophobic surface (oil and organic liquids have lower surface tension), the solid surface in air must have a surface energy lesser than oil. Jung et al.189 studied the wetting behavior of water and oil droplets at three-phase interfaces for oleophobic surfaces. A material with a low surface energy compared to oil was used for fabricating oleophobic surfaces at solid/air/oil interface with various contact angles of oil and water droplets. Surface energies at different interfaces were studied to understand oleophobicity applications in the underwater regime. Contact angles of water and oil were predicted using a model, which was validated by studying the wetting behavior of micro-patterns and flat surfaces (with changing pitch value). Wang et al.190 engineered superoleophobic surfaces on functional titanium using a novel anodization method or its combination with laser technology approach. TiO2 nanotube arrays were formed on a microstructured titanium surface, after which hydrophobic materials were post-modified. By applying varying UV and annealing, switchable wettability was achieved towards superoleophobicity. Moreover, reversible adhesion of oil droplets between sliding and sticky superoleophobicity was achieved. Such engineered surfaces were accounted for their applications in oil-sealing and anti-creeping. Aulin et al.191 demonstrated the formation of structured porous aerogels (using freeze-drying), which was comprised of nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC). FE-SEM and nitrogen adsorption/desorption measurements indicate high porosity of aerogels and their low density (<0.03 g cm−3). Tuning of surface texture and density was performed by appropriate selection of NFC dispersion concentration before freeze-drying. The aerogel was uniformly coated so as to tune their wetting properties towards non-polar liquids. This was performed using chemical vapor deposition of 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltrichlorosilane (PFOTS). A robust composite interface was observed for modified aerogels with an apparent contact angle of θ ≫ 90° for castor oil and hexadecane. By solid–liquid–vapor composite interface generation and trapping microscopic air pockets, realization of surfaces having strong wetting to oil and low surface tension liquids can be made. Such a composite interface is metastable for liquids with low surface tension such as hexadecane (γlv = 27.5 mN m−1), which is attributed to the lower value of equilibrium contact angle. As a result, metastable composite interface gets converted fully to wetted interface irreversibly due to pressure perturbations. Chhatre et al.192 investigated tuning the liquid wettability of polyester fabrics using thermal annealing procedure and dip-coating technique. The fabric surface was uniformly coated with a mixture of 90% polyethylmethacrylate (PEMA) and 10% 1H,1H,2H,2H-heptadecafluorodecyl polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (fluorodecyl POSS). High contact angle values were achieved for robust metastable surfaces like hexadecane (γlv = 27.5 mN m−1) and dodecane (γlv = 25.3 mN m−1). A reversible treatment in contact with dry air/water using thermal annealing was carried out to tune the solid surface energy of coated surface. Reversible switchable oleophobicity between a highly non-wetting and fully wetted surface was achieved for hexadecane and dodecane (low-surface tension liquids) by tuning the solid surface energy attributed by polyester fabric with inherent re-entrant texture. For liquids with lower surface energies than water, a contact angle greater than 150° was displayed by superoleophobic surfaces. Geometrical shape of etched silicon surfaces on the contact angle and hysteresis observed when surface comes in contact with different liquids needs to be apprehended for the design of superoleophobic surfaces. Liu et al.193 created superoleophobic surfaces on Si(111) surface using various silane treatments and liquid-based metal-assisted etching technique. The oleophobicity of Si (111) was controlled by the concentration of the etch solution and duration of etching. When different silane treatments were applied to the silicon surface, a transition from Cassie to Wenzel state (for low-surface energy liquids) was observed from apparent contact angle. A relation between the contact angle transition among Cassie and Wenzel behavior on etched Si (111) surfaces and the re-entrant angle of etched surface structures were observed. Bellanger et al.194 investigated the synthesis and characterization of 3,4-ethylene dioxy pyrrole derivatives having two fluorinated tails. Elaboration of superoleophobic surfaces was achieved using such monomers by electrodeposition of conducting polymers. The presence of two fluorinated chains exhibited high steric hindrances during electro-polymerization, which was evident from cyclic voltammetry experiments. Various deposition methods were employed to enhance surface oleophobicity. Galvanostatic deposition technique and pulse potentiostatic deposition technique was employed to create superoleophobic surfaces with contact angle approximately 140° using PEDOP. The presence of surface microstructures and nanoporosites were responsible for the superoleophobic property. Dong et al.195 investigated water and oil wettabilities of silica surfaces modified with hierarchical POSS. A monosubstituted FPOSS (fluorinated POSS) was synthesized, and silica particles were decorated with POSS nanocages by a one-pot reaction. This was performed to biomimic the lotus leaf, thereby achieving self-cleaning property. It was observed that the surface after modifying with fluorinated copolymer showed high oil-repellency. Hydrophobic and oleophobic coatings constituting ceramic particles, such as SiO2, SiO, and Al2O3, with thermal and chemical durability were developed as an alternative to Teflon. Using spin-coating method, these coatings were applied on aluminium substrates.196a Superoleophobic surfaces were fabricated via a perfluorothiolate reaction, which was carried out on nanostructured Cu(OH)2 surfaces. Such surfaces showed controlled oil adhesion and are used in application for oil transportation.196b By adjusting external preload forces and nanostructures of the surfaces, the surface adhesion to oil could be controlled, thereby making it fit for oil transportation in a safer way (Fig. 24). Oil droplet-based microreactor for oil transportation was constructed using superoleophobic surfaces. Hydrophobic–oleophobic properties were observed in high-thermal resistant heteroatomic polymers like polyimides when modified by the addition of fluoro oligomers. It was observed that such coatings exhibited excellent scratch resistance, and they were harder than coatings devoid of ceramic particles. Steele et al.197a fabricated superoleophobic coatings using spray casting of nanoparticle–polymer suspensions. ZnO nanoparticles blended with a perfluoroacrylic polymer emulsion (water borne) were employed in this method using co-solvents. Acetone was found to be a potential co-solvent for producing self-assembling nanocomposite slurries. The speciality of such coatings was that no additional surface treatments were required as the nanocomposites were inherently superoleophobic. Tuteja et al.197b fabricated a superoleophobic surface by the usage of re-entrant surface curvature in the surface design in conjunction with chemical composition and roughened texture. Such surfaces displayed high repellency to several low surface tension liquids including alkanes. For the fabrication of surfaces with re-entrant curvature, two different approaches were utilized. In each case, the non-wetting behaviour was exhibited in accordance with the Cassie state. Recently, for various polar liquids, silicone nanofilaments were used to fabricate superoleophobic coatings via a grow-from approach, which yielded ultralow sliding angles for the surfaces.198a During TCMS (trichloromethylsilane) hydrolysis and condensation, regulation of water concentration in toluene is done so as to monitor the surface microstructure and oleophobicity. Such superoleophobic coatings exhibited excellent environmental and chemical stability along with good anti-reflection property. Anti-reflective property was shown
during fabrication of silicone nanofilaments at low concentration of water. This resulted in an increment in transmittance from 91.2% (bare glass) to 94% at 600 nm (Fig. 25). A slight decrement in transmission was observed after modification with PFDTS (perfluorooctyl/perfluorodecyl trichlorosilane). The nanofilaments present in the surface decreased the light scattering, thereby maintaining good transparency.
 Fig. 24  Images indicating the proof of superoleophobic surfaces used in oil-based microreactor. To transport oil droplets, a metal cap is used and superoleophobic surfaces with different oil adhesion are used as substrate. (a–d) Low adhesive superoleophobic surface transporting oil droplets to the metal cap; (e–f) oil droplet (with different chemicals-styrene and Br2) getting coalesced; (g–j) in oil-based microreactor, the colour fades due to the reaction between the different chemicals in oil; (k–l) due to high adhesion the final droplet is left on the substrate.196b 
 Fig. 25  Images of glass slides coated with TCMS/PFDTS (a) toluene jet bouncing off; (b) glass slides in toluene; (c) glass slides with various droplets of nonpolar liquids; (d) graph indicating the enhancement of transmittance with TCMS/PFDTS; (e) image showing the text upon which the TCMS/PFDTS coated glasses are kept.198a 
Li et al.198c reported nanometer-thick polymer coated surfaces, which are more wettable to water than to oil and indicated their cause due to combination of nanoscale and interfacial phenomena, which are kinetic in nature. The key factor to the specific size of the intermolecular hole in the polymer layer is due to the interaction between nanometer-thick polymer and substrate, which in turn determines the penetration kinetics of water and hexadecane. The peculiar wetting performance is observed when the hole size is appropriate because hexadecane has much slower penetration rate than water. Cheng et al.198d fabricated surfaces with controlled underwater oil wettability by self-assembly of mixed thiols ((containing both HS(CH2)9CH3 and HS(CH2)11OH)) on nanostructured copper substrates. Switchable underwater superoleophilicity to superoleophobicity for surfaces with controlled oil wettability is achieved by changing the concentration of HS(CH2)11OH in the solution. The synergistic effect of nanostructures and surface chemistry variation on the surfaces could be the reason for the tunable effect discussed above. Moreover, selective oil–water separation on as-prepared copper mesh films was realized.
7 Amphiphobic coatings
Amphiphobic coatings repel both water and oil. In-short, it is a combination of hydrophobicity and oleophobicity. Ganesh et al.198b fabricated a stable superamphiphobic coating using electrospinning technique on glass substrate with rice-shaped TiO2 nano/mesostructures (Fig. 26). It was observed that the as-such fabricated TiO2 nanostructures were superhydrophilic in nature, but they became superamphiphobic upon salinization. The obtained WCA (Fig. 27) were 166° and 138.5° using water (surface tension γ = 72.1 mN m−1) and hexadecane (surface tension γ = 27.5 mN m−1), respectively. A contact angle hysteresis of 2° and 12° was obtained for water droplet and hexadecane. Thus, a thermally and mechanically stable, cost-effective coating with better adherence to glass surface was fabricated. Lee et al.199 used nanotransfer molding and controlled etching of the facile undercut to fabricate a nanoscale re-entrant curvature possessing superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces. Such a method prevents capillary-induced bundling effects because of the ordered re-entrant nanostructures. Water droplet bouncing and contact angle measurements were performed to demonstrate superhydrophobic and superoleophobic characteristics. Xiong et al.200 used bifunctional silica particles and epoxy glue bearing poly(2-perfluorooctylethyl methacrylate) (PFOEMA) and poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) coronal chains to fabricate amphiphobic particulate coatings. A rough particulate coating was obtained by spraying particles comprising both PAA and PFOEMA (dispersed in trifluoro toluene) onto a glass plate containing epoxy film. Using a two-step mediated sol–gel technique, amphiphobic organic–inorganic hybrid coating materials were prepared by Nagappan et al.201 The first step included hydrosilylation reaction with polymethyl hydrosiloxane and 2,2,3,4,4,4-hexafluorobutyl methacrylate. The reaction was carried out for the synthesis of fluorinated polymethyl hydrosiloxane (precursor), in which Pt was used as the catalyst. The reaction of precursor and tetraethyl orthosilicate was carried out in the second step to prepare fluorinated polymethylsiloxane/silica hybrid (FSH), in which equivalent amounts of water and varied quantities of ethanol were used. The reaction was carried out at a temperature of 70–80 °C for 24 h. Sheen et al.202 fabricated superamphiphobic coating material using fluorinated silica nanoparticles. The contact angle measurements gave a value of 167.5° and 158.6° for water and diiodomethane, respectively. A higher water contact angle was also observed for soyabean oil (146.6°), decahydronaphthalene (142.5°), xylene (140.5°) and diesel fuel (140.4°). The as-such developed coatings repel both water and organic liquids. Plasma modification of benzoxazine films (Fig. 28) were carried out by Wang et al.203 to fabricate super-amphiphobic surfaces. During the plasma treatment process, a micro-/nano-binary structure is formed with a rugged surface by fluorination and microroughening of benzoxazine films. High advancing contact angles of 157° and 152° were obtained for water and diiodomethane, respectively, due to the effect of substrate roughness and low surface energy. Moreover, low contact angle hysteresis was observed for such surfaces. Fluoroalkylsilane (FAS) modification of electrospun pure silica nanofibrous mats were carried out by Guo et al.204 for fabricating amphiphobic mats, which were found to be flexible and highly heat-resistant. A solution of poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) and silica gel were blended and was electrospun to obtain inorganic silica nanofibrous mats. In order to remove the organic component, the obtained mat was calcinated. The fiber diameter in the non-woven mats was found to be in the range of 150–500 nm. The silica that was amphiphilic in nature initially was converted into amphiphobic upon FAS modification. A water contact angle of 154° and 144° was obtained for water and oil, respectively (Fig. 29). Moreover, a high heat resistance was exhibited by the fluorinated inorganic fibrous mats. Such a developed mat can be used for several potential applications such as high temperature filtration, selective filtration and self-cleaning coatings. Choi et al.205 used electrospinning technique to fabricate fluoro-compound fibres, forming a web-like structure (Fig. 30) showing superamphiphobicity, which was exhibited by an electrospun web of poly(2,2,2-trifluoroethyl methacrylate) fibres. The water contact angles for both water and hexadecane exceeded 150°. By varying the polymer solution concentration from 24 to 30 wt%, modulation of the web was achieved with other fixed processing conditions. The polymer concentration indeed affects the fibre diameter length. Smaller and uniform fiber diameter was observed when 26 wt% solution was used to prepare the web. A simple method of dispersion polymerization of solution of methanol encompassing perfluoroalkyl methacrylates was employed by Yoshida206 to prepare superamphiphobic surface that constituted of micro- and nano-spheres. Microspheres were obtained by the polymerization of 2,2,2-trifluoroethyl methacrylate (TFMA), which had an average diameter of 4–12 μm. Nanospheres were obtained by the polymerization of 2-(perfluorooctyl)ethyl methacrylate (POMA) to yield an average diameter of 679 nm. Superamphiphobicity was shown by the surfaces coated with spheres. Water contact angles of 150° and 173° were obtained for PTFMA microspheres and PPOMA nanospheres, respectively, whereas water contact angles of 159° and 160° were obtained for diiodomethane microspheres and diiodomethane nanospheres, respectively. The superamphiphobicity was produced due to the synergestic effects of spherical structure and high concentration of fluorine, observed on the top surface (confirmed with X-ray photo electron spectroscopy analysis). A remarkable superamphiphobic coating (Fig. 31) was fabricated by Deng et al.,207a which was oil-rebounding and transparent in nature. The candle soot was collected, which was porous in nature. Onto them, thick silica shell of 25 nm was coated. Upon calcination at 600 °C, the transparency was observed on the black coating. Superamphiphobic nature was attained after silanization. Sand impingement was performed to test durability, and it was observed that even though the top layer was damaged, the superamphiphobic nature was retained. Barthwal et al.207b employed anodization technique to fabricate superamphiphobic functional Ti foils. Maximization of contact angle of water and various oils were achieved using a two-step anodization method (Fig. 32), in which the voltage supply and anodization time were varied. Superamphiphobicity was controlled by the morphology of TiO2 nanotube surface. Good superamphiphobic stability was observed for the anodized surface along with long-term storage. Moreover, reversible switching of wetting property from hydrophobic and oleophobic to hydrophilic and oleophilic was observed for water and oil and vice versa via fluorination and air-plasma treatment, respectively. Such a developed technique could be used to fabricate amphiphobic Ti surfaces with large area 3-D surfaces. Mou et al.208 fabricated amphiphobic epoxy coatings, deposited on silicon wafers. The coatings encompassed a mixture of bisphenol A diglycidyl ether, tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) and fluorinated side chain (F-silicon)-containing alkoxy silane. Water and oil contact angle measurements were performed to ensure the amphiphobic behavior of the film. 10 nm-thick epoxy ultrathin films were deposited on silicon wafer, and to attain amphiphobicity, nominal fluorinated silane was added to the epoxy coatings. The sub-micrometer granules present in ultrathin coatings retained the surface lyophobicity. By adding tetraethylorthosilicate, the film hardness was improved. Ganesh et al.209a fabricated a superamphiphobic coating using electrospun nanofibers that has a one-dimensional morphology. The resultant coating was transparent and robust. By depositing a thick layer of SiO2 nanofibers on glass, the template was created. An ultrathin porous silica membrane (25 nm) was deposited on the SiO2 nanofiber template by vapour deposition process. A hybrid silica network (silica membrane enclosing SiO2 nanofibers) (Fig. 33) was obtained upon heat treatment at 600 °C, and the resultant coating was found to be transparent and superhydrophilic in nature. Reinforcement of SiO2 nanofibers were done by the coated silica membrane during the heat treatment process, thereby preventing the disintegration of nanofibers into nanoparticles. A high roughness and surface texture was observed with such fiber morphology. The coating exhibited superamphiphobic property upon silanization. The contact angle measurements showed a value of 161° and 146.5° for water and
hexadecane, respectively. With aluminium (Al) plate as substrate, Barthwal et al.209b fabricated a superamphiphobic surface (Fig. 34) on the surface, which was mechanically robust. By using a combination of chemical etching and anodization technique, micro- and nano-scale structures were developed on Al plate surface. This surface showed super-repellent behaviour towards liquids (evident from wettability measurements) whose surface energy falls in the range of 27.5–72 mN m−1. The effects of morphological change on wettability was analysed by changing the anodization time. Scotch tape and hardness tests revealed that the prepared surface had good adhesion and mechanical durability, respectively.
 Fig. 26  (a and b) Higher and lower magnification of SEM image of TiO2-coated samples showing amphiphobicity (inset). (c) TEM image of single nano-rice structure. (d) Resolved image of lattice. (e) XRD pattern of 500 °C sintered TiO2-coated sample.198b 
 Fig. 27  Photograph depicting superamphiphobic surface with water (blue; dyed with trypan blue dye), glycerol (pink; dyed with rhodamine B) and ethylene glycol (colourless) droplets.198 
 Fig. 28  SEM image of Ar-plasma treated (7 min) cross-linked benzoxazine film, which was heated for 1 h at 200 °C and treated with CF4 plasma (30 s).203 
 Fig. 29  Photograph showing the oil and water droplets on silane-modified electrospun pure silica nanofibrous mat.204 
 Fig. 30  SEM image of fluoro-compound fibers with a web-like structure (below), hexadecane (left) and water (right) droplets on the web surface showing its superamphiphobicity.205 
 Fig. 31  (a) Figure indicating the candle soot preparation; (b) SEM image of the candle soot; (c) SEM image of the candle soot with high resolution; (d) SEM Image of the candle soot coated with silica shell; (e) and (f) SEM and TEM image of the calcined candle soot and silica shell mixture, respectively.207a 
 Fig. 32  Figure showing the two-step anodization method of preparation of superamphiphobic functional Ti foils.207b 
 Fig. 33  (a and c) Low and high magnification SEM images of SiO2 nanofibers as-spun. (b and d) Low and high magnification SEM images of silica, which forms a hybrid network (silica membrane enclosing SiO2 nanofibers).209 
 Fig. 34  Schematic diagram showing the various steps for fabricating superamphiphobic surface on aluminium substrate.209b 
By combining fluorinated polyurethane (FPU) containing a terminal perfluoroalkane segment and incorporated SiO2 nanoparticles, Wang et al.209c fabricated nanofibrous membranes encompassing superamphiphobic nature, which exhibited breathable and robust water–oil proof performances. A water contact angle of 165° and oil contact angle of 151° were observed for FPU/SiO2 nanoparticles-incorporated hybrid membranes, revealing superhydrophobic and superoleophobic characteristics, respectively. By tuning the surface composition, as well as hierarchical structures, wettability of resultant membranes could be manipulated, which was confirmed using surface morphological studies.
8 Multifunctional coatings
Multifunctional coatings, as the name suggests have a wide range of potential applications with a greater degree of control and scalability. Multiple properties can be encompassed into such coatings such as scratch-resistance, self-cleaning property, anti-icing, self-healing, and anti-reflective property. Lee et al.210 used a simple dip-coating technique to fabricate multifunctional polymer coatings in an aqueous solution of dopamine. To biomimic the adhesive proteins in mussels, a thin film of polydopamine was developed using dopamine self-polymerization. These films were used for a range of substrates like polymers, ceramics, noble metals, and oxides. Additional layers could be deposited using secondary reactions such as electrode-less metallization for depositing metal films, macromolecule grafting for bio-inert and bioactive surfaces. Wei et al.211 used oxidant-induced polymerization to synthesize polydopamine coatings, which can be prepared in acidic/neutral/alkaline aqueous media. Such coatings are found to be multifunctional as well as material-independent. Inspired by the moth eyes, which are antireflective, and the cicada wings, which are superhydrophobic in nature, Sun et al.212 tried to biomimic both these functionalities by fabricating multifunctional optical coatings (a template technique). Using a soft-lithography process, fluoropolymer nipple arrays are created, which are subwavelength-structured. The enhancement of both anti-reflective and hydrophobic functionalities is performed by the utilization of fluoropolymers. An experiment and modelling have been performed to study the effect of size and crystalline ordering of the replicated nipples on the antireflective property. Such coatings find extensive applications in antireflection self-cleaning coatings. Dingremont et al.213 tried to combine both physical vapor deposition and nitriding treatment in synthesizing multifunctional coatings, which made the coating to withstand higher loads, thus improving their mechanical strength. The thermal stability of the iron nitride layers was affected by the coating conditions. For biomedical coatings, layer-by-layer assembly is a versatile technique for the incorporation of drugs into the coatings, which is also the case for drug delivery systems. However, such hydrophobic drugs have a drawback of poor loading capacity. Hu et al.214 tried to provide nanoreservoirs for such hydrophobic molecules (guest) by the incorporation of sulphonated hyperbranched polyether (HBPO-SO3) with a hydrophobic core onto layer-by-layer (LbL) films. For LbL assembly into a buffer solution of sodium acetate and acetic acid, HBPO-SO3 formed stable micelles. Quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) measurements and ellipsometry experiments exemplified that HBPO-SO3 micelles and chitosan can be deposited in an alternating fashion so as to form LbL films. Controlled release of guest molecules into LbL films was achieved using post-diffusion process (incorporation of hydrophobic pyrene). Using post-diffusion of anti-restenosis agents into HBPO-SO3/chitosan multilayer film, a multifunctional coating was fabricated that prevents restenosis after coronary angioplasty. Such a coating was found to possess anticoagulation, anti-bacterial and local release of the hydrophobic drug, i.e. Probucal (powerful antioxidant property). Cebeci et al.215 used LbL assembly method to fabricate multifunctional nanoporous thin films from silica nanoparticles and a polycation. Both anti-reflection and anti-fogging properties were shown by the synthesized multifunctional coating. Superhydrophilic wetting characteristics were developed in the coating, which caused the anti-fogging property. The WCA was found to be <5°. The light scattering water droplets were prevented from forming on a surface by using such a characteristic superhydrophilic wetting surface. The presence of nanopores yielded low refractive index for the film (1.22), which in turn imparted good antireflective properties. Transmission of 99.8% was recorded for the multilayer films coated on both sides of a glass slide. The stability of superhydrophilic wetting characteristics was considered by a critical number of bilayers, which was deposited on surface. The film property is also affected by the choice of nanoparticle size, nanoparticle concentration, and pH of the solution. Yuan et al.216 used LbL assembly technique to fabricate a multilayered multifunctional coating encompassing TiO2 and Ag nanoparticles and the TiO2 nanoparticles served as the contact-active antibacterial agent, whereas the nanosilver acted as the active antibacterial agent. Crystalline anatase TiO2 nanoparticles were synthesized by sol–gel method, and the assemblage of TiO2 nanoparticle–chitosan with heparin through LbL assembly was substantiated with the results obtained from AFM, QCM and contact angle measurements. The loading of silver nanoparticles onto the multilayers and was proven using UV-visible spectroscopy. The bactericidal effect of nanosilver-loaded TiO2–chitosan/heparin multilayers was confirmed with a short-term antibacterial assay, which was performed in dark and low-intensity UV. Voevodin et al.217 investigated self-assembled nanophase particle (SNAP)-based nanostructured surface treatment coatings, which can replace the chromate-based surface treatments on aluminium alloys used in aircraft industry. Such a process could be carried out in a low-temperature regime. This technique of designing coating components from the molecular level gives a key path in the fabrication of multi-functional coatings. To study the corrosion protection of aluminium alloys, organic inhibitors were used with SNAP. Jin et al.218 used TiO2 coating to fabricate a VO2 thermochromic film for window structure. Compared to SiO2, TiO2 showed excellent anti-reflective properties. Such a coating becomes multifunctional with the introduction of photocatalytic property. An increment in luminous transmittance by 53% was observed for these coatings. The window structure synthesized has the capability of UV stopping, automatic solar/heat control with luminous transmission and photocatalytic functions, thus rendering it multifunctional. Zhao et al.219 presented a review on multifunctional coatings based on TiO2 multilayer film and other functional coatings, which are applied as photoactive material in the glasses. Using sol–gel method, TiO2 photocatalyst-based thin films (nanoporous) can be synthesized, which are superhydrophilic in nature and show self-cleaning effect. By treating the films in acidic solutions, the photocatalytic activity of soda-lime glass coated with TiO2 thin films can be enhanced. Excellent photo-induced antibacterial property was also shown by the film. Silver in small amounts is added to TiO2 porous film so as to enhance its anti-bacterial effect in the absence of UV radiation. To make the TiO2 thin films functionalize as self-cleaning glass in visible region, appropriate heat treatments are performed. To yield low-E self-cleaning glasses, a multilayer of TiO2/TiN/TiO2 was deposited on the glass substrate. Lauridsen et al.220 used direct current magnetron sputtering of Ti3SiC2 compound target at a deposition rate of 16 μm h−1 to deposit Ti–Si–C coatings (amorphous and nanocomposite) onto high speed steel, SiO2 and Si substrates. The deposition was carried out at a temperature of 200 or 270 °C. By changing the pressure to 4 mTorr and target to substrate distance to 2 cm, nanocrystalline coating can be modified into amorphous type. To impart superhydrophobicity, self-cleaning and UV blocking properties, Ates et al.221 synthesized cotton fabric loaded with zinc oxide nanowires. Microwave-assisted hydrothermal method was used to grow ZnO nanowires, and a WCA of 150° was observed upon functionalizing with stearic acid exemplifying its superhydrophobic nature. A decrement in UV transmission was observed for the synthesized cotton fabric. Degradation of methylene blue under UV irradiation exhibited self-cleaning activity of cotton fabric coated with ZnO nanowire. The synthesis of inorganic–organic transparent multifunctional coatings can be performed by the sol–gel synthesis of ceramic colloidal particles, in which particle size is maintained in the lower nano-range. The synthesis is carried out in the presence of organo-alkoxy silanes. With this approach, Schmidt222 fabricated a multifunctional coating with anti-fogging, anti-soiling properties with low-surface energy and thermal stability up to 350 °C. Spinning technique involving incorporation of ZnO nanoparticle into inorganic–organic hybrid matrices was carried out by Li et al.223 in order to fabricate multifunctional inorganic–organic nanocomposite coatings on poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA). From tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) and 3-glycidyloxypropyl trimethoxycilane (GLYMO), hybrid matrices were derived. The interface between nanoparticles and organic groups was modified so as to protect the polymer structure from destruction caused
by ZnO. The coatings thus obtained are UV absorbent, dense, flexible and abrasion resistant. Dervishi et al.224 investigated a novel method to control bulk and surface electrical conductivity of polymeric films. The electrical bulk resistivity was decreased by several orders of magnitude upon addition of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) in small amounts into the polymeric material. Moreover, the polymeric surface films were electrosprayed with nanolayers of single and multiwall CNTs, and surface resistivity was analyzed as a function of nanotube loading. High charge dissipation rates were observed for CNT modified surfaces. Faustini et al.225 used sol–gel technique to deposit a multifunctional coating with photocatalytic, hydrophobic, anti-fogging and anti-reflective properties. Sol–gel liquid deposition of two successive oxide layers (Fig. 35) was performed to fabricate such multifunctional coatings. Nanoporous SiO2 material with high mechanical stability, transparency and water resistance functionalized with methyl groups constituted the first layer. The anti-reflective property could be controlled by selecting proper processing and chemical conditions so as to control thickness and refractive index. On the top of this anti-reflective layer, an ultrathin TiO2 layer was deposited, which was crystalline and nanoperforated. This layer ensures antifogging, photocatalysis and exhibits a barrier towards mechanical aggressions. Organic species adsorbed into anti-reflective layer was photo-decomposed. The coatings have high mechanical and chemical durability and can be produced at low cost. Such multifunctional coatings are great potential candidates for Photovoltaic cells. A combined sol–gel, dip-coating process was carried out by Miao et al.226 in fabricating multifunctional coatings of double-layered SiO2–TiO2 coatings on glass substrates wherein the successive oxide layer deposition was done. The multifunctional coating encompassed both anti-reflective and self-cleaning property. Hybrid methyl-functionalized nanoporous SiO2 material forms the first layer with an anti-reflection gain of 6%. By adjusting the thickness and by selecting suitable solvents and pore-forming agents, thickness and refractive index of the coating could be controlled. An ultrathin layer, which is nanoporous in nature, forms the second layer. This layer has dual functionalities: ensuring self-cleaning and preventing mechanical damage. By SiO2–TiO2 bilayers (Fig. 36), 3.4% anti-reflectivity is obtained (400–800 nm). The band-edge absorption in TiO2 can be compensated by controlling the pore-size distribution in SiO2 layer. The coating synthesized has high mechanical and chemical durability, and it can be used for solar cells as large substrates. The coatings that provide high transmittance along with self-cleaning capacity are the herald for glasses and glazing materials for solar applications. Prado et al.227 fabricated a multifunctional coating comprising both self-cleaning and anti-reflective property. By controlling the solvent and template agent ratio, film thickness and nanostructure could be controlled, thereby monitoring transmittance and refractive index of each layer. The multifunctional coating had a stack layer of SiO2 (anti-reflective) and a dense TiO2 (mesoporous) (Fig. 37) layer. A higher degree of photodegradation of organic matter was achieved for mesoporous TiO2 layers compared to dense TiO2 layer. A net transmission of 95.9% and 96.6% was achieved for multifunctional and anti-reflective coatings. Son et al.228 demonstrated that a superhydrophilic glass without surface chemical treatment showed high anti-reflective and self-cleaning effects. As a result, an outdoor test for 12 weeks (Fig. 38) showed only 1.39% of solar efficiency drop compared to a 7.79% and 2.62% efficiency drop for bare glass and superhydrophobic packing. Due to the reflection of incident light at air/glass interface and through the scattering effect (due to dust accumulation), the incident energy is lost on solar modules. Even though certain anti-reflective coatings can remedy dust accumulation, it still remains a critical problem that affects the efficiency. Verma et al.229 reported a reduction of reflection at air/glass interface and enhanced self-cleaning property by non-lithographic nanostructuring of packaging glass surface (Fig. 39). Upon nanostructuring, superhydrophilic property is shown by the glass surface with a CA <5°, thus proving to be a better self-cleaning coating. Liu et al.230a fabricated a multifunctional coating of SiO2–TiO2 bilayer via. sol–gel dip-coating method with self-cleaning and anti-reflective properties. Due to the lower refractive index, SiO2 layer (bottom) acts as anti-reflective coating, whereas TiO2 layer (top) models self-cleaning coating (combination of photocatalysis and photo-induced superhydrophilicity). Irrespective of high refractive index and coverage of TiO2 nanoparticles, a transmission of 96.7% was achieved by SiO2–TiO2 bilayer. However, the effect of coverage due to TiO2 nanoparticles had a control over the photocatalytic property of the bilayer synthesized. Significant self-cleaning functionality was observed when UV light was irradiated on SiO2–TiO2 bilayer film, and the water contact angle was found to be less than 2°.
 Fig. 35  Schematic representation of multifunctional SiO2–TiO2 bilayer on glass substrate.225 
 Fig. 36  SEM image indicating the SiO2–TiO2 bilayer.226 
 Fig. 37  AFM image (top view) of TiO2 mesoporous layer.227 
 Fig. 38  Left side shows the SEM image of bare glass (top) and nanohole (bottom), which have undergone a 12 week outdoor test. The right side shows the graph depicting the strength of self-cleaning effect for nanohole, which has a lesser number of particles on 800 μm2 (dust) even after 12 week outdoor test.228 
 Fig. 39  Schematic diagram elucidating steps involved in non-lithographic nanostructuring of packaging glass surface.229 
Tang et al.230b fabricated a novel nanofibrous membrane modified with fluorinated polybenzoxazine (F-PBZ) to achieve gravity driven oil–water separation. By combining electrospun poly(m-phenylene isophthalamide) (PMIA) nanofibers and SiO2 nanoparticles-incorporated polymerized (in situ) F-PBZ functional layer, realization of membrane design was achieved. The pristine hydrophilic PMIA nanofibrous membranes upon modification with F-PBZ/SiO2 nanoparticle showed a water contact angle of 161° and an oil contact angle of 0° and revealed superhydrophobicity and superoleophilicity, respectively. Such a membrane showed excellent thermal and mechanical stability and good hot water repellency. Moreover, the as-prepared membranes prove to be a good candidate for industrial oil-polluted water treatments and oil spill clean-up due to their fast and efficient oil–water separation by a solely process driven by gravity.
New synthesis methods have been developed in order to combine both oleophobic and hydrophilic character in coatings so as to overcome the limitation of thermodynamic surface energetics. Such smart surfaces possess different functional groups with favourable and unfavourable interaction with polar and non-polar liquids, respectively.231a In such smart surfaces, intercalation of oleophobic and hydrophilic constituents occur. Oleophobic character is obtained when the interface, in the presence of oil droplets gets occupied by low-surface energy component. Nevertheless, due to the hydrophilic components, water molecules penetrate through such surfaces. Recently, spray-casting technique of nanoparticle–polymer suspensions on various substrates was used to fabricate nanocomposite coatings that encompass both superhydrophilicity and superoleophobicity.231b Such a dual character is due to the combined cooperation of oleophobic–hydrophilic groups of PFO–PDDA and hierarchical surface structures. Fluorinated groups in high surface concentration occupied the interface in the presence of oil, indicating superoleophobic nature of the surfaces. Due to the surface molecular re-arrangement induced by water, water molecules could penetrate through these surfaces. Coatings with such dual character find immense practical application in oil–water separation. The reaction between fluoroalkanoyl peroxides with trimethoxyvinylsilane and acryloylmorpholine resulted in fluoroalkylated flip-flop silane-coupling agents that contain morpholino groups. Such silane-coupling agents are used to modify glass surfaces, which exhibited both hydrophilic and oleophobic character.232a Similarly, fluorinated sulfonic acid co-oligomer/SiO2 polymer hybrid was used to modify glass surfaces, which exhibited both oleophobicity and hydrophilicity.232b Using covalently grafted f-PEG, surfaces with oleophobic-hydrophilic nature were constructed by a grafting approach. Solvent-sensitive stimuli-responsive properties were exhibited by the f-PEG polymer brush coatings, which also showed hydrophilic–oleophobic behaviour. Oleophobic–hydrophilic polymers with stimuli responses are a great venture for the fabrication of next generation anti-fogging and self-cleaning coatings.232c,d
The frequent oil-spill accidents and increasingly oily industrial wastewater (which destroys the aquatic species) demand facile solutions in oil–water separation. Conventionally special wetting materials with simultaneous superhydrophobicity and superoleophilicity were used for oil–water separation.233a–c Recently, a novel mesh coated with PAM hydrogel, which exhibited superoleophobicity underwater and superhydrophilicity in air was fabricated to tackle the oil–water separation.234a Without any extra power, water from oil–water mixtures, such as vegetable oil and diesel, was removed effectively and selectively by the obtained mesh (Fig. 40). Such meshes coated with hydrogel possess promising advantages compared to traditional hydrophobic and oleophobic materials such as high efficiency, resistance to oil fouling and easy recyclability. Introduction of smart materials like stimuli-responsive polymers on porous materials is a new attempt for oil–water separation. A smart surface has been fabricated on porous textiles or polyurethane sponges using block copolymer comprising oleophilic/hydrophobic PDMS and pH-responsive P2VP blocks.234b Such porous materials in aqueous media have a switchable superoleophobic–superoleophilic characteristic, which can be used for effective water–oil separation. A photo-responsive surface with aligned ZnO nanorod array was used for water–oil separation.234c Switchable superhydrophobicity–superhydrophilicity and underwater superoleophobicity was obtained by stainless steel mesh films coated with ZnO, which exhibited highly controlled separation efficiency of oil–water mixtures.
 Fig. 40  Image showing the oil–water separation process in which a coated mesh is used for the separation purpose.234a 
Inspired from self-cleaning lotus effect, Zhang et al.235 has fabricated a polyurethane foam, which encompasses both superhydrophobicity and superhydrophilicity. The as-prepared foam floats easily on water due to its low density, light weight and superhydrophobicity (Fig. 41). Multifunctional properties are demonstrated by the foam-like material in oil–water separation, super-repellency towards corrosive liquids and self-cleaning. Such low-cost process is promising for the design of multifunctional foams that can be used for oil-spill clean-up in larger areas.
 Fig. 41  (a) The optical image of the water floating as-prepared polyurethane foam, which reveals its light weight and superhydrophobicity, (b) digital image showing the superhydrophobic foam, which is immersed in water by an external force, and as such the air bubbles surround the foam exhibiting a silver mirror-like surface.235 
By combining electrospun cellulose acetate (CA) nanofibers and silica nanoparticles-incorporated polymerized fluorinated polybenzoxazine (F-PBZ) functional layer, Shang et al.236 fabricated nanofibrous membranes encompassing superhydrophobic and superoleophilic character, which exhibited robust oil–water separation. A water contact angle of 161° and oil contact angle of 3° was observed by employing F-PBZ/SiO2 nanoparticles modification to reveal superhydrophobicity and superoleophobicity, respectively. The as-prepared membranes are a promising candidate in industrial oil-polluted water treatments and oil spill clean-up as they exhibited excellent stability over a wide range of pH conditions and efficient separation of oil–water mixtures.
Due to unique pore character, excellent chemical, thermal and mechanical stability, zeolite films have attracted intense research for oil–water separation. Wen et al.237 demonstrated oil–water separation driven by gravity using mesh films coated with zeolite. The zeolite surface possessed excellent superhydrophilicity and underwater superoleophobicity that finds high efficiency separation of various oils. By tuning the pore size, the flux and intrusion pressure could be tuned. Moreover, such films are promising candidates in oil–water separation because of their corrosion-resistant character in the presence of corrosive media.
Zhang et al.238 fabricated PAA/PDDA–silicate multilayer films by alternatively depositing complexes of poly(diallyldimethyl ammonium chloride) (PDDA) and sodium silicate (PDDA–silicate) with poly(acrylic acid), (PAA). Highly porous silica coatings with excellent substrate adhesion and mechanical stability were produced by calcinating PAA/PDDA–silicate multilayer films, in which the organic components were removed. Such porous silica coatings covering quartz substrates exhibit antireflection and antifogging properties as the resultant films possess reduced refractive index and superhydrophilic nature. High porosity could be introduced to the resultant silica coatings by the use of PDDA–silicate complexes, which favors the fabrication of coatings encompassing antireflection and antifogging properties with enhanced performance. Rapid fabrication of porous silica coatings is facilitated by PDDA–silicate complexes after calcination due to the larger dimensions of solution complexes.
9 Conclusions
Smart self-cleaning coatings are those which respond to external influences such as electric field, temperature, and light. Researchers have been inspired by the nature's boundless kaleidoscopic effects, and they try to biomimic them to create artificial structures almost close to the nature's phenomenon. Self-cleaning, basically comprising hydrophobic and hydrophilic coatings, has been reviewed. It is already being reflected in our daily life in applications such as silver nano-coated clothes, waterproof paints, shoes, and umbrellas. In TiO2-based photocatalytic–hydrophilic coatings, further research should focus on broadening the absorption wavelength range of the photocatalysts since the photocatalytic effect of the TiO2 coatings is UV light-based, which only represents ∼4% of the solar spectrum; hence, the efficiency of the photocatalytic effect is minimum. Other potential coatings that possess various real applications, such as oleophobic coatings, amphiphobic coatings and multifunctional coatings, have also been reviewed. The multifunctional coating is an open area where further research can be motivated. It will find immense applications in the glass industry, medical field (drug-targeting, self-healing), and solar cells. New synthesis and surface modification routes need to be developed, which can provide excellent adhesion and strength for the coating on the substrates used. Other areas of investigation will probably be the study of toxicity of such coatings, so that they can be applied safely in real-life applications such as water purification membranes, and self-repair, self-healing and self-lubricating coatings. Currently, although research studies are focused on the fabrication of such coatings, novel synthesis routes need to be developed that are cost-effective without compromising on the quality.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Ministry of New and Renewable energy (MNRE), Government of INDIA for financial support.
References

  (a) V. A. Ganesh, H. K. Raut, A. S. Nair and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16304–16322 RSC ; 
  (b) M. Yasuhiro, D. Bin and S. Seimei, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 5151 CrossRef .
W. Barthlott and C. Neinhaus, Planta, 1997, 202(1), 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao and L. Jiang, Nature, 2004, 432(7013), 36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, J. Zhang, G. Xie, Z. Liu and H. Shao, Small, 2006, 2(12), 1440–1443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, B. P. Lee and P. B. Messersmith, Nature, 2007, 448(7151), 338–341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Byun, J. Hong, Saputra, J. H. Ko, Y. J. Lee, H. C. Park, B.-K. Byun and J. R. Luker, J. Bionic. Eng., 2009, 6(1), 63–70 CrossRef .
I. P. Parkin and R. G. Palgrave, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 1689–1695 RSC .

          http://www.lotusan.de/(in%20German)
        .

          http://www.activglass.com/index_eng.htm
        .

          http://www.ppg.com/
        .
K. Hashimoto, H. Irie and A. Fujishima, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 8269–8285 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, L. Feng, M. Jin, J. Zhai, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 62–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lafuma and D. Quéré, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 457–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Nuraje, W. S. Khan, Y. Lei, M. Ceylan and R. Asmatulu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1929–1946 CAS .
J. Bico, C. Marzolin and D. Quere, Europhys. Lett., 1999, 47, 220–226 CrossRef CAS .
D. Richard and D. Quere, Europhys. Lett., 1999, 48, 286–291 CrossRef CAS .
D. Richard and D. Quere, Europhys. Lett., 2000, 50, 769–775 CrossRef CAS .
P. Aussillous and D. Quere, Nature, 2001, 411, 924–927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Richard, C. Clanet and D. Quere, Nature, 2002, 417(6891), 811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bico, C. Tordeux and D. Quere, Europhys. Lett., 2001, 55, 214–220 CrossRef CAS .
R. Blossey, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 301–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Miwa, A. Fujishima, K. Hashimoto and T. Watanabe, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 5754–5760 CrossRef CAS .
I. Sas, R. E. Gorga, J. A. Joines and K. A. Thoney, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 824–845 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. D. Cassie and S. Baxter, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1944, 40, 546–551 RSC .
T. N. Wenzel, J. Phys. Colloid Chem., 1949, 53, 1455 CrossRef .
A. Nakajima, K. Hashimoto and T. Watanabe, Monatsh. Chem., 2001, 132, 31–41 CrossRef CAS .
R. Blossey, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 301–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhu, Q. Gao, Y. Guo, C. Q. Yang and L. Shen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50(10), 5881–5888 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, W. Liu and B. L. Su, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 353(2), 335–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cao, T. P. Price, M. Weiss and D. Gao, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 1640–1643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vilcnik, I. Jerman, A. Surca Vuk, M. Kozelj, B. Orel, B. Tomsic, B. Simoncic and J. Kovac, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 5869–5880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Chhatre, A. Tuteja, W. Choi, A. Revaux, D. Smith, J. M. Mabry, G. H. McKinley and R. E. Cohen, Langmuir, 2009, 25(23), 13625–13632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Choi, A. Tuteja, S. Chhatre, J. M. Mabry, R. E. Cohen and G. H. McKinley, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2190–2195 CrossRef CAS .
R. Misra, R. D. Cook and S. E. Morgan, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2010, 115, 2322–2331 CrossRef CAS .
P. Muthiah, S. H. Hsu and W. Sigmund, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 12483–12487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Yan, N. Gao and W. Barthlott, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 169, 80–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. N. Wenzel, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1936, 28, 988–994 CrossRef CAS .
M. Miwa, A. Nakajima, A. Fujishima, K. Hashimoto and T. Watanabe, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 5754–5760 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Johnson and R. H. Dettre, Adv. Chem. Ser., 1964, 43, 112–135 CrossRef CAS .
T. Onda, S. Shibuichi, N. Satoh and K. Tsujii, Langmuir, 1996, 12(9), 2125–2127 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shibuichi, T. Onda, N. Satoh and K. Tsujii, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100(50), 19512–19517 CrossRef CAS .
C. Neinhuis and W. Barthlott, Ann. Bot., 1997, 79(6), 667–677 CrossRef .
J. Bico, C. Marzolin and D. Quéré, Europhys. Lett., 1999, 47, 220 CrossRef CAS .
S. Herminghaus, Europhys. Lett., 2000, 52(2), 165–170 CrossRef .
D. Oner and T. J. McCarthy, Langmuir, 2000, 16(20), 7777–7782 CrossRef .
Z. Yoshimitsu, A. Nakajima, T. Watanabe and K. Hashimoto, Langmuir, 2002, 18(15), 5818–5822 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, X. Li and J. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2365–2372 CAS .
X. Li, X. Du and J. He, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13528–13534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Du and J. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1269–1276 CAS .
P. C. Lin and S. Yang, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 1011–1018 RSC .
W. Ming, D. Wu, R. Van Benthem and G. de With, Nano Lett., 2005, 5(11), 2298–2301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qian, Z. Zhang, L. Song and H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1297–1304 RSC .
B. Leng, Z. Shao, G. de With and W. Ming, Langmuir, 2009, 25(4), 2456–2460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, T. He, M. C. Calama and D. N. Reinhoudt, Langmuir, 2008, 24(15), 8008–8012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Stober, A. Fink and E. Bohn, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1968, 26, 62–69 CrossRef .
S. R. Coulson, I. Woodward, J. P. S. Badayal, S. A. Brewer and C. Willis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8836–8840 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, S. Li, Y. Li, H. Li, L. Zhang, J. Zhai, Y. Song, B. Liu, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1857–1860 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Ward, J. Aes. Art Crit., 1952, 11, 135 CrossRef .
M. T. Khorasani, H. Mirzadeh and Z. Kermani, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 242, 339–345 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jin, X. Feng, J. Xi, J. Zhai, K. Cho, L. Feng and L. Jiang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 1805–1809 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ma, R. M. Hill, J. L. Lowery, S. V. Fridrikh and G. C. Rutledge, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5549–5554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Li and Y. Han, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2004, 25, 1105–1108 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shiu, C. W. Kuo and P. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 561–564 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, C. Zhang and Y. Han, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2004, 25, 1606–1610 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mohammadi, J. Wassink and A. Amirfazli, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 9657–9662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhao, J. Xu, Q. Xie, L. Weng, X. Guo, X. Zhang and L. Shi, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 1075–1080 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Lu, W. Huang and Y. Han, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 477–480 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, L. Feng, M. Jin, J. Zhai, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 126, 62–63 CrossRef PubMed .
W. M. Liu, Z. G. Guo and B. L. Su, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 063104 CrossRef .
W. J. Wang, T. C. Lee and T. Y. Han, J. Adhes. Sci. Technol., 2009, 23, 1799–1810 CrossRef .
S. Szunerits, H. Q. Liu, M. Pisarek, W. G. Xu and R. Boukherroub, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 2086–2091 Search PubMed .
L. Feng, S. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 767–770 CrossRef .
J. H. Xu, M. Li and Q. H. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 4772–4776 RSC .
J. M. Lim, W. Y. Zhu and L. I. Jiang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 239–243 CrossRef .
J. J. Zhou, P. Jiang, H. F. Fang, C. Y. Wang, Z. L. Wang and S. S. Xie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1303–1310 CrossRef .
Z. F. Bian, H. X. Li, J. Zhu, D. Q. Zhang, G. S. Li, Y. N. Huo, H. Li and Y. F. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8406–8407 CrossRef PubMed .
V. K. Praveen, S. Srinivasan, R. Philip and A. Ajayaghosh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5750–5754 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. G. Guo, D. A. Wang, Y. M. Chen, J. C. Hao and W. M. Liu, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 7707–7709 CrossRef PubMed .
D. K. Sarkar, A. Safaee and M. Farzaneh, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 2493–2498 CrossRef .
A. Strep, N. Vourdas, A. G. Boudouvis and E. Gogolides, Microelectron. Eng., 2008, 85, 1124–1127 CrossRef .
M. L. Liu and H. C. Shin, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 5460–5464 CrossRef .
F. Shi, X. Zhang, X. Yu, H. Liu, Y. Fu, L. Jiang, X. Li and Z. Q. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3064–3065 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jang, J. T. Han, D. Y. Lee, J. H. Park, S. H. Song and D. Y. Ban, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3089–3092 RSC .
S. Fujihara, E. Hogono, I. Honma and H. S. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13458–13459 CrossRef PubMed .
S. E. J. Bell, I. A. Larmour and G. C. Saunders, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1710–1712 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Barthlott, R. Furstner, C. Neinhuis and P. Walzel, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 956–961 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, M. Callies, F. Marty, A. Pepin and D. Quere, Microelectron. Eng., 2005, 78–79, 100–105 Search PubMed .
P. N. B. Barlett, M. E. Abdelsalam and T. Kelf, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 1753–1757 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, X. J. Huang, S. H. Heo, C. C. Li, Y. K. Choi, W. P. Cai and S. O. Cho, Langmuir, 2006, 23, 2169–2174 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, C. C. Li, S. O. Cho, G. T. Duan and W. P. Cai, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 9802–9807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cai, Y. Li, B. Cao, G. Duan, F. Sun, C. Li and L. Jia, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 238–243 CrossRef .
Y. Li, W. Cai, G. Duan, B. Cao, F. Sun and F. Lu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2005, 287, 634–639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, G. Duan and W. Cai, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 314, 615–620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, W. Cai and G. Duan, J. Adhes. Sci. Technol., 2008, 22, 1949–1965 CrossRef .
L. Li, Y. Li, S. Gao and N. Koshizaki, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8366–8371 RSC .
H. Notsu, W. Kubo, I. Shitanda and T. Tatsuma, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 1523–1527 RSC .
D. Hu, Y. Zhu, M. X. Wang, L. Jiang and Y. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2092–2096 CrossRef .
J. Tang, Y. Y. Liu, R. H. Wang, H. F. Lu, L. Li, Y. Y. Kong, K. H. Qi and J. H. Xin, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1071–1078 RSC .
X. G. Hu, T. Wang and S. J. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1849–1851 Search PubMed .
V. Tsyalkovsky, K. Ramaratnam, V. Klep and I. Luzinov, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4510–4512 Search PubMed .
Y. Ofir, B. Samanta, P. Arumugam and V. M. Rotello, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4075–4079 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Ge, C. Sun and Z. Z. Gu, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 4686–4690 CrossRef .
J. A. Orlicki, N. E. Zander, A. S. Karikari, T. E. Long and A. M. Rawlett, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 6145–6149 CrossRef .
Y. L. Lee and H. J. Tsai, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 12687–12692 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, E. J. Lee and S. O. Cho, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14813–14817 CAS .
Y. M. Yang, P. S. Szu and Y. L. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 465604 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wu, W. Ming, R. Van Benthem and G. de With, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2298–2301 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Chen, L. B. Zhang, J. Q. Sun and J. C. Shen, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 948–953 CrossRef .
F. C. Cebeci, L. Zhai, R. E. Cohen and M. F. Rubner, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1349–1353 CrossRef .
M. Ma, Y. Mao, M. Gupta, K. K. Gleaason and G. C. Rutledge, Macromolecule, 2005, 38, 9742–9748 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Tay, X. B. Yan, Y. Yang and Y. K. Po, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17254–17259 Search PubMed .
R. Vajtai, L. J. Ci and P. M. Ajayan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9077–9080 Search PubMed .
H. B. Xie, S. H. Li, S. B. Zhang and X. H. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4857–4859 Search PubMed .
S. W. Lam, W. Y. Gan, K. Chiang, R. Amal, H. J. Zhao and M. P. Brungs, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 952–954 RSC .
H. Kono, X. T. Zhang, Z. Y. Liu, S. Nishimoto, D. A. Tryk, T. Murakami, H. Sakai, M. Abe and A. Fujishima, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4949–4951 Search PubMed .
Q. H. Wang and W. X. Hou, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 9695–9698 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Jin, X. T. Zhang, Z. Y.Liu, D. A. Tryk, S. Nishimoto, T. Murakami and A. Fujishima, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14521–14529 Search PubMed .
Y. Q. Wen, J. X. Wang, J. P. Hu, Y. L. Song and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 219–225 CrossRef .
D. Wu, H. F. Hoefnagels, G. With and W. Ming, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 13158–13163 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhu, Z. B. Huang, J. H. Zhang and G. F. Yin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6821–6825 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, W. Cai and G. Duan, Chem. Mater., 2007, 20, 615–624 CrossRef .
E. Benito, N. Garcia, J. Guzman and Y. Tiemblo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5052–5069 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. X. Wang, W. B. Zhong, Y. Yan, Y. F. Sun, J. P. Deng and W. T. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 111, 3918–3926 Search PubMed .
S. Park, W. K. Cho, S. Y. Jon and S. Choil, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 395602 CrossRef PubMed .
X. F. Wen, A. L. Qu, P. H. Pi, J. Cheng and Z. R. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 9430–9434 CrossRef .
F. Wang, S. Song and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 28, 4239–4241 RSC .
C. T. Hsieh, W. Y. Chen, F. L. Wu and W. M. Hung, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2010, 19, 26–30 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Saul, E. Burkarter, F. Thomazi, N. C. Cruz, L. S. Roman and W. H. Schreiner, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2007, 202, 194–198 CrossRef .
T. Mizukoshi, H. Matsumoto, M. Minagawa and A. Tanioka, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2007, 103, 3811–3817 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Z. G. Guo, J. Fang, B. G. Guo and W. M. Liu, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2007, 9, 316–321 CrossRef .

  (a) 
            K. Byrappa and M. Yoshimura, Handbook of Hydrothermal Technology, Noyes Publications, William Andrew Publishing LLC, USA,  2001 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) G. R. Patzke, Y. Zhou, R. Kontic and F. Conrad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 826–859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Roy, J. Solid State Chem., 1994, 111, 11–17 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Somiya, Hydrothermal Reactions for Materials Science and Engineering: An Overview of Research in Japan, Elsevier Science Publishers Ltd., UK, 1st edn,  1989 Search PubMed .
S. Somiya and R. Roy, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2000, 23(6), 453–460 CrossRef CAS .
O. Masala and R. Seshadri, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2004, 34, 41–81 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Yeo and J. R. Friend, J. Exp. Nanosci., 2006, 1, 177–209 CrossRef CAS .
G. Taylor, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1969, 313, 453–475 CrossRef .
L. Cao, A. K. Jones, V. K. Sikka, J. Wu and D. Gao, Langmuir, 2009, 25(21), 12444–12448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Webb and B. Na, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2003, 46, 3797–3808 CrossRef .

  (a) J. A. Taylor, T. N. Krupenkin, T. M. Schneider and S. Yang, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 3824–3827 CrossRef ; 
  (b) N. A. Ivanova and A. B. Philipchenko, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 263, 783–787 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Shateri-Khalilabad and M. E. Yazdanshenas, Cellulose, 2013, 20, 963–972 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) L. Wang, G. H. Xi, S. J. Wan, C. H. Zhao and X. D. Liu, Cellulose, 2014, 21, 2983–2994 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) Q. Zhu and Q. Pan, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1402–1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mills, A. Lepre, N. Elliot, S. Bhopal, I. P. Parkin and S. A. O'Neill, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2003, 160, 213–224 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldtt and M. Gratzel, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 49–68 CrossRef .

  (a) A. Mills and S. Le Hunte, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1997, 108, 1–35 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) 
            https://www.alcoa.com/ecoclean/
          .

  (a) S. Kim, H. Park and W. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 6402–6411 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            http://www.titanshield.co.il/pdf/E/TS-SolarCoat_V1_E.pdf
          .
A. Lafuma and D. Quere, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 457–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Genzer and A. Marmur, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 742–746 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bhusan, Y. C. Jung and K. Koch, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2009, 367, 1631–1672 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, F. Shi, J. Niu, Y. G. Jiang and Z. Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 621–633 RSC .
X. Yao, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23(6), 719–734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Xu, N. Lu, H. B. Xu, D. P. Qi, Y. D. Wang, S. L. Shi and L. F. Chi, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 1438–1443 RSC .
H. Y. Erbil, A. L. Denirel, Y. Avci and O. Mert, Science, 2003, 299, 1377–1380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, Y. Zhao and J. Zhai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4338–4341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Feng, S. H. Li, Y. S. Li, H. J. Li, L. J. Zhang, J. Zhai, Y. L. Song, B. Q. Liu, L. Jiang and D. B. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1857–1860 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Zhao, L. P. Wang and Q. J. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11509–11514 CAS .
J. Gao, Y. L. Liu, H. P. Xu, Z. Q. Wang and X. Zhang, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 4365–4369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Gao, Y. L. Liu, H. P. Xu, Z. Q. Wang and X. Zhang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 9673–9676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Wu, D. Wu, J. Yao, Q. D. Chen, J. N. Wang, L. G. Niu, H. H. Fang and H. B. Sun, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 12012–12016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Vukusic and J. R. Sanbles, Nature, 2003, 424, 852–855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kinoshita and S. Yoshioka, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 1442–1459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Ingram and A. R. Parker, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., B, 2008, 363, 2465–2480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Parker, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2009, 367, 1759–1782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Sato, S. Kubo and Z. Z. Gu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Zhang, X. F. Ghao and L. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 178–182 RSC .
Z. Z. Gu, H. Uetsuka, K. Takahashi, R. Nakajima, H. Onishi, A. Fujishima and O. Sato, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 894–897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Huang, X. D. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2325–2331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zi, X. D. Yu, Y. Z. Li, X. H. Hu, C. Xu, X. J. Wang, X. H. Liu and R. T. Fu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 12576–12578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kinoshita, S. Yoshioka and K. Kawagoe, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2002, 269, 1417–1421 CrossRef PubMed .
D. L. Hu, B. Chan and J. W. M. Bush, Nature, 2003, 424, 663–666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Gao and L. Jiang, Nature, 2004, 432, 36–136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yao, Q. W. Chen, L. Xu, Q. K. Li, Y. L. Song, X. F. Gao, D. Quere and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 656–662 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Li, J. H. Zhang and B. Yang, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 117–127 CrossRef .
M. Srinivasarao, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1935–1961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Parker and H. E. Townley, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 347–353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Miller, G. D. Bernard and J. L. Allen, Science, 1968, 162, 760–767 CAS .
D. G. Stavenga, S. Foletti, G. Palasantzas and K. Arikawa, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2006, 273, 661–667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Watson and J. A. Watson, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 235, 139–144 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Huang, X. D. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 025602 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. F. Huang, S. Chattopadhyay, Y. J. Jen, C. Y. Peng, T. A. Liu, Y. K. Hsu, C. L. Pan, H. C. Lo, C. H. Hsu, Y. H. Chang, C. S. Lee, K. H. Chen and L. C. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 770–774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Li, J. H. Zhang, S. J. Zhu, H. P. Dong, Z. H. Wang, Z. Q. Sun, J. R. Guo and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1806–1810 RSC .
X. F. Gao, X. Yan, X. Yao, L. Xu, K. Zhang, J. H. Zhang, B. Yang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2213–2217 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, M. K. Jin, W. C. Yoo and J. K. Lee, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 7665–7669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Zhang, J. Zhang, G. Y. Xie, Z. F. Liu and H. B. Shao, Small, 2006, 2, 1440–1443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Xie, G. M. Zhang, F. Lin, J. Zhang, Z. F. Liu and S. C. Mu, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 095605 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Sun, A. Gonzalez, N. C. Linn, P. Jiang and B. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 051107 CrossRef .
W. L. Min, B. Jiang and P. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3914–3918 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu and L. Jiang, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 155–175 CrossRef CAS .
W. Choi, A. Tuteja, S. Chhatre, J. M. Mabry, R. E. Cohen and G. H. McKinley, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21(21), 2190–2195 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Jung and B. Bhushan, Langmuir, 2009, 25(24), 14165–14173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, X. Wang, X. Liu and F. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(21), 9938–9944 CAS .
C. Aulin, J. Netrval, L. Wagberg and T. Lindstrom, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 3298–3305 RSC .
S. S. Chhatre, A. Tuteja, W. Choi, A. Revaux, D. Smith, J. M. Mabry, G. H. McKinley and R. E. Cohen, Langmuir, 2009, 25(23), 13625–13632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Xiu, D. W. Hess and C. P. Wong, Langmuir, 2010, 26(11), 8908–8913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bellanger, T. Darmanin, E. T. de Givenchy and F. Guittard, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2896–2903 CAS .
F. Dong and C. S. Ha, Macromol. Res., 2011, 19(2), 101–104 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Uyanik, E. Arpac, H. Schmidt, M. Akarsu, F. Sayilkan and H. Sayilkan, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2006, 100(3), 2386–2392 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. Yao, J. Gao, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21(22), 4270–4276 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Steele, I. Bayer and E. Loth, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(1), 501–505 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. Tuteja, W. Choi, M. Ma, J. M. Mabry, S. A. Mazzella, G. C. Rutledge, G. H. McKinley and R. E. Cohen, Science, 2007, 318, 1618–1622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. Zhang and S. Seeger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50(29), 6652–6656 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) V. A. Ganesh, S. S. Dinachali, A. S. Nair and S. Ramakrishna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1527–1532 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) L. Li, Y. Wang, C. Gallaschun, T. Risch and J. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16719 RSC ; 
  (d) Z. Cheng, H. Lai, Y. Du, K. Fu, R. Hou, N. Zhang and K. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11363–11370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Lee, H. J. Kim, S. H. Lee and D. G. Choi, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 8070–8075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xiong, G. Liu and E. J. Scott Duncan, Polymer, 2013, 54(12), 3008–3016 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Nagappan, J. J. Park, S. S. Park, S. H. Hong, Y. Sik Jeong, W. Ki Lee and C. S. Ha, Second – Japan – Korea Joint Symposium on Polymer Nanohybrid Mater.2.,  2013, vol. 20(1).
Y. C. Sheen, Y. C. Huang, C. S. Liao, H. Y. Chou and F. C. Chang, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2008, 46(18), 1984–1990 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Wang, S. F. Chiou, F. H. Ko, C. T. Chou, H. C. Lin, C. F. Huang and F. C. Chang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2006, 27(5), 333–337 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guo, B. Ding, X. Li, X. Wang, J. Yu and M. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(2), 916–921 CAS .
G. R. Choi, J. Park, J. W. Ha, W. D. Kim and H. Lim, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2010, 295(11), 995–1002 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yoshida, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2012, 290(6), 525–530 CAS .

  (a) X. Deng, L. Mammen, H. J. Butt and D. Vollmer, Science, 2012, 335, 67–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Barthwal, Y. S. Kim and S. H. Lim, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 400, 123–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Mou, W. L. Yuan and C. H. Shih, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 537, 202–207 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) V. A. Ganesh, S. S. Dinachali, H. K. Raut, T. M. Walsh, A. S. Nair and S. Ramakrishna, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 3819–3824 RSC ; 
  (b) S. Barthwal, Y. S. Kim and S. H. Lim, Langmuir, 2013, 29(38), 11966–11974 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) J. Wang, A. Raza, Y. Si, L. Cui, J. Ge, B. Ding and J. Yu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7549 RSC .
H. Lee, S. M. Dellatore, W. M. Miller and P. B. Messersmith, Science, 2007, 318, 426–430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wei, F. Zhang, J. Li, B. Li and C. Zhao, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 1430–1433 RSC .
C. H. Sun, A. Gonzalez, N. C. Linn, P. Jiang and B. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 051107 CrossRef .
N. Dingremont, E. Bergmann, P. Collignon and H. Michael, Surf. Coat. Technol., 1995, 72(3), 163–168 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu and J. Ji, Langmuir, 2010, 26(4), 2624–2629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Cebeci, Z. Wu, L. Zhai, R. E. Cohen and M. F. Rubner, Langmuir, 2006, 22(6), 2856–2862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yuan, J. Ji, J. Fu and J. Shen, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2008, 85(2), 556–563 CrossRef PubMed .
N. N. Voevodin, V. N. Balbyshev, M. Khobaib and M. S. Donley, Prog. Org. Coat., 2003, 47(3–4), 416–423 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jin, G. Xu, M. Tazawa and K. Yoshimura, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 41, L278–L280 CAS .
X. Zhao, Q. Zhao, J. Yu and B. Liu, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2008, 354(12–13), 1424–1430 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lauridsen, P. Eklund, T. Joelsson, H. Ljungcrantz, A. Oberg, E. Lewin, U. Jansson, M. Beckers, H. Hogberg and L. Hultman, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2010, 205(2), 299–305 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Ates and H. E. Unalan, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520(14), 4658–4661 CrossRef CAS .
H. Schmidt, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1994, 178, 302–312 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. Chen, C. Ruan, W. Gao and Y. Xie, J. Nanopart. Res., 2001, 3(2–3), 157–160 CrossRef CAS .
E. Dervishi, Z. Li, V. Saini, R. Sharma, Y. Xu, M. K. Mazumder, A. S. Biris, S. Trigwell, A. R. Biris, D. Lupu and D. Saini, IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., 2009, 45(5), 1547–1552 CrossRef CAS .
M. Faustini, L. Nicole, C. Boissiere, P. Innocenzi, C. Sanchez and D. Grosso, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22(15), 4406–4413 CrossRef CAS .
L. Miao, L. F. Su, S. Tanemura, C. A. J. Fisher, L. L. Zhao, Q. Liang and G. Xu, Appl. Energy, 2013, 112, 1198–1205 CrossRef CAS .
R. Prado, G. Beobide, A. Marcaide, J. Goikoetxea and A. Aranzabe, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1081–1088 CrossRef CAS .
J. Son, S. Kundu, L. K. Verma, M. Sakhuja, A. J. Danner, C. S. Bhatia and H. Yang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 46–51 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Verma, M. Sakhuja, J. Son, A. J. Danner, H. Yang, H. C. Zeng and C. S. Bhatia, Renewable Energy, 2011, 36, 2489–2493 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Z. Liu, X. Zhang, T. Murakami and A. Fujishima, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 1434–1438 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. Tang, Y. Si, J. Ge, B. Ding, L. Liu, G. Zheng, W. Luo and J. Yu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11657 RSC .

  (a) K. Liu, Y. Tian and L. Jiang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2013, 58, 503–564 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Yang, Z. Z. Zhang, X. H. Xu, X. T. Zhu, X. H. Men and X. Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2834–2837 RSC .

  (a) H. Sawada, Y. Ikematsu, T. Kawase and Y. Hayakawa, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 3529–3530 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Sasazawa, J. Kurachi, T. Narumi, H. Nishi, Y. Yamamoto and H. Sawada, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2007, 103, 110–117 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. A. Howarter and J. P. Youngblood, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3838–3843 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. A. Howarter and J. P. Youngblood, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 455–466 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. S. Liu and L. Jiang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 825–838 RSC ; 
  (b) L. Feng, Z. Y. Zhang, Z. H. Mai, Y. M. Ma, B. Q. Liu and L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2012–2014 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) M. Guix, J. Orozco, M. Garcia, W. Gao, S. Sattayasamitsathit and A. Merkoci, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4445–4451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Z. X. Xue, S. T. Wang, L. Lin, L. Chen, M. J. Liu and L. Feng, Adv Mater., 2011, 23, 4270–4273 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) L. B. Zhang, Z. H. Zhang and P. Wang, NPG Asia Mater., 2012, 4, e8 CrossRef ; 
  (c) D. Tian, X. Zhang, Y. Tian, Y. Wu, X. Wang and J. Zhai, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19652–19657 RSC .
X. Zhang, Z. Li, K. Liu and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2881–2886 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shang, Y. Si, A. Raza, L. Yang, X. Mao, B. Ding and J. Yu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7847 RSC .
Q. Wen, J. Di, L. Jiang, J. Yu and R. Xu, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 591 RSC .
L. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Sun and J. Shen, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 10851–10857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Prathapan Ragesh	Mr Prathapan Ragesh is pursuing his final year of Master of Technology (MTech) in Nanotechnology at Amrita Centre for Nanosciences & Molecular Medicine at Kochi, Kerala, India. His present research is on self-cleaning coatings, i.e. materials for photocatalytic and superhydrophobic coatings. He graduated with a first class honors degree in Electronics & Communication Engineering from Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Amritapuri at Kollam, Kerala, India.
V. Anand Ganesh	Dr Anand Ganesh Venkatesan is currently working as a Research Assistant in Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD). He graduated with a first class honours degree in Mechatronics Engineering from Anna University at Chennai, India. He completed his PhD studies (thesis submitted) from National University of Singapore (NUS), under the supervision of Professor Seeram Ramakrishna. His research interests include the development of materials for self-cleaning/anti-icing (hydrophilic, hydrophobic and amphiphobic) surfaces, water harvesting and energy conversion applications.
Shantikumar V. Nair	Dr Shantikumar V. Nair is currently Dean of Research at Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham University and the Director of Amrita Centre for Nanosciences & Molecular Medicine, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences, Amrita University at Kochi, Kerala, India. A graduate of IIT Bombay (Mumbai) in Metallurgical Engineering, he received his PhD from Columbia University in New York (1983). Prior to joining Amrita, he was a professor at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. He is a recipient of the prestigious Presidential Young Investigator Award from the President of the United States (1986) and the National Research Award from the Ministry of Science and Technology, Govt. of India (2011).
A. Sreekumaran Nair	Dr A. Sreekumaran Nair is currently an Associate Professor at Amrita Centre for Nanosciences & Molecular Medicine at Kochi, Kerala, India. He completed his PhD (Chemistry) at Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Madras (2006) and had postdoctoral training at University of Hyogo in Japan (JSPS fellow, 2006–2008) and Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Initiative at National University of Singapore (2008–2012). His current research interests include organic–inorganic nanohybrids for renewable energy, self-cleaning coatings and environmental remediation.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Photograph of a silver ragwort leaf with a water droplet on it; (b and c) the leaf SEM images at different magnifications.1b Inset of (a): images of water droplets on Lotus (left) and Ramee leaf (right) indicating their inherent self-cleaning nature.	 
cosθc = (γSV − γSL)/γLV	(1)
cosθw = rcosθ	(2)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram indicating hydrophilic, hydrophobic and ultra-hydrophobic surface and (b) schematic representing water contact angle on a slanted surface.23	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram showing the water droplets on a flat solid surface, Wenzel model (middle) and Cassie–Baxter model (right).27	 

 	Fig. 4  Electron micrographs of ultraphobic leaves, Nelumbo nucifera (with a scale bar of 50 μm) in left and Hygroryza aristata (with a scale bar of 20 μm) in right, highlighting various textures.57	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram depicting laser-induced graft polymerization technique.59 (b) SEM image showing the treatment of CO2 pulsed laser on PDMS surface.59	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM image of PS–PDMS/PS electrospun mat and the behavior of droplets on the mat (inset).61	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM image of aligned ZnO nanorods synthesized by two-step solution approach.68 Insets: bottom: XRD spectrum of the nanorods; top: UV induced hydrophilicity.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 8  A schematic representation of electrospinning procedure.14	 

 	Fig. 9  Photographs depicting coated (left) and non-coated (right) steel plates taken after exposure to atmosphere for about 60 days (adapted from http://www.ornl.gov/File%20Library/…/06-Superhydrophobic_Materials.pdf).	 

 	Fig. 10  Photographs of coated (left) and uncoated cables (right) depicting the functionality of hydrophobic coatings for anti-icing (adapted from http://www.ornl.gov/File%20Library/…/06-Superhydrophobic_Materials.pdf).	 

 	Fig. 11  Pictorial representation of application areas of hydrophobic surfaces.1	 

 	Fig. 12  Electrowetting behavior of liquid by tuning the voltage and surface tension.140	 

 	Fig. 13  (a–c) SEM images of original cotton, graphene–cotton and PMS–graphene–cotton, respectively, with the right hand side showing its higher magnification images.140c	 

 	Fig. 14  SEM images (low magnification) of (a) pristine cotton fabric and (b) cotton fabric modified with mist-polymerization process.140d	 

 	Fig. 15  Stearic acid undergoing photocatalytic decomposition, monitored by infrared spectroscopy.142	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic representation of different processes occurring when titanium dioxide absorbs ultra-band-gap light.7	 

 	Fig. 17  Various steps in photocatalysis achieved using the Titanium dioxide coating on the buildings (pre-painted aluminium surfaces).144b	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Demonstration of self-cleaning effect in which the dirt particles are carried away by the rolling water droplets. (b) SEM image (low magnification) showing random micropapillae structures in lotus effect. (c) Cilium-like nanostructures superimposed on the top of micropapillae observed in the SEM image of a single papilla. (d) AFM image of a i-PP coating. Inset shows a water contact angle of 160°, measured via water droplet on the coating applied on a glass slide.152 (e) Special microsphere/nanofiber composite structures observed in SEM image of polystyrene films (inset shows the superhydrophobic nature) synthesized via EHD technique.153 (f) Ag nanoparticles composite arrays observed in SEM image of biomimic surfaces. Inset shows water contact angle of 166°.151	 

 	Fig. 19  Figures exemplifying the similarity between anisotropic surfaces and natural rice leaf. (a) Micropearl arrays SEM image (cross-sectional). (b) Upper photo shows the modified micropearl arrays with water droplet. The lower figure shows the contact angle measurement of fluoroalkylsilane-modified surface. (c) Structures clearly seen in SEM image of natural rice leaf. (d) Digital photos buttressing the similarity of designed anisotropy to those with natural ones.158	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Morpho butterfly. (b) Oblique view SEM image. (c) SEM image indicating the ground scale of Morpho butterfly.168	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Peacock feather showing superhydrophobicity. (b and c) SEM images of barbule structures.167	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Photograph depicting a water strider signifying its superhydrophobic nature. (b) SEM image showing the spindle microsetae orientation observed on water strider’s leg. (c) Low and (d) high magnification SEM image exemplifying the copper hydroxide nanoneedle arrays and its self-cleaning nature (inset of Fig. c).187	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Compound eyes of moth. (b) Figure showing the SEM image of a moth eye with an anti-reflective surface. (c) SEM image (cross-sectional view) of silicon hollow-tip arrays and its wetting behavior (inset). (d) Image highlighting the mosquito eyes after exposure to water aerosol. (e) SEM image showing adjacent ommatidia. (f) SEM image exemplifying the analogue between an artificial compound eye and the behavior of a water droplet (spherical) on the surface (inset).187	 

 	Fig. 24  Images indicating the proof of superoleophobic surfaces used in oil-based microreactor. To transport oil droplets, a metal cap is used and superoleophobic surfaces with different oil adhesion are used as substrate. (a–d) Low adhesive superoleophobic surface transporting oil droplets to the metal cap; (e–f) oil droplet (with different chemicals-styrene and Br2) getting coalesced; (g–j) in oil-based microreactor, the colour fades due to the reaction between the different chemicals in oil; (k–l) due to high adhesion the final droplet is left on the substrate.196b	 

 	Fig. 25  Images of glass slides coated with TCMS/PFDTS (a) toluene jet bouncing off; (b) glass slides in toluene; (c) glass slides with various droplets of nonpolar liquids; (d) graph indicating the enhancement of transmittance with TCMS/PFDTS; (e) image showing the text upon which the TCMS/PFDTS coated glasses are kept.198a	 

 	Fig. 26  (a and b) Higher and lower magnification of SEM image of TiO2-coated samples showing amphiphobicity (inset). (c) TEM image of single nano-rice structure. (d) Resolved image of lattice. (e) XRD pattern of 500 °C sintered TiO2-coated sample.198b	 

 	Fig. 27  Photograph depicting superamphiphobic surface with water (blue; dyed with trypan blue dye), glycerol (pink; dyed with rhodamine B) and ethylene glycol (colourless) droplets.198	 

 	Fig. 28  SEM image of Ar-plasma treated (7 min) cross-linked benzoxazine film, which was heated for 1 h at 200 °C and treated with CF4 plasma (30 s).203	 

 	Fig. 29  Photograph showing the oil and water droplets on silane-modified electrospun pure silica nanofibrous mat.204	 

 	Fig. 30  SEM image of fluoro-compound fibers with a web-like structure (below), hexadecane (left) and water (right) droplets on the web surface showing its superamphiphobicity.205	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Figure indicating the candle soot preparation; (b) SEM image of the candle soot; (c) SEM image of the candle soot with high resolution; (d) SEM Image of the candle soot coated with silica shell; (e) and (f) SEM and TEM image of the calcined candle soot and silica shell mixture, respectively.207a	 

 	Fig. 32  Figure showing the two-step anodization method of preparation of superamphiphobic functional Ti foils.207b	 

 	Fig. 33  (a and c) Low and high magnification SEM images of SiO2 nanofibers as-spun. (b and d) Low and high magnification SEM images of silica, which forms a hybrid network (silica membrane enclosing SiO2 nanofibers).209	 

 	Fig. 34  Schematic diagram showing the various steps for fabricating superamphiphobic surface on aluminium substrate.209b	 

 	Fig. 35  Schematic representation of multifunctional SiO2–TiO2 bilayer on glass substrate.225	 

 	Fig. 36  SEM image indicating the SiO2–TiO2 bilayer.226	 

 	Fig. 37  AFM image (top view) of TiO2 mesoporous layer.227	 

 	Fig. 38  Left side shows the SEM image of bare glass (top) and nanohole (bottom), which have undergone a 12 week outdoor test. The right side shows the graph depicting the strength of self-cleaning effect for nanohole, which has a lesser number of particles on 800 μm2 (dust) even after 12 week outdoor test.228	 

 	Fig. 39  Schematic diagram elucidating steps involved in non-lithographic nanostructuring of packaging glass surface.229	 

 	Fig. 40  Image showing the oil–water separation process in which a coated mesh is used for the separation purpose.234a	 

 	Fig. 41  (a) The optical image of the water floating as-prepared polyurethane foam, which reveals its light weight and superhydrophobicity, (b) digital image showing the superhydrophobic foam, which is immersed in water by an external force, and as such the air bubbles surround the foam exhibiting a silver mirror-like surface.235	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
