Flexible in-plane zinc-ion hybrid capacitors with synergistic electrochemical behaviors for self-powered energy systems   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA04058A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA04058A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 14011-14019Flexible in-plane zinc-ion hybrid capacitors with synergistic electrochemical behaviors for self-powered energy systems†

        
          
            Xiaocong 
            Tian
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Ma
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yuanyuan 
            Gao
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Bingang 
            Xu
          
        
      *a
aNanotechnology Center, Institute of Textiles and Clothing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR 999077, China. E-mail: tcxubg@polyu.edu.hk
bFaculty of Materials Science and Chemistry, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, 430074, China
Received 
      20th May 2022
    , Accepted 12th June 2022First published on 13th June 2022AbstractMultifunctional energy integration has drawn booming attention for portable devices and wearable electronics. Self-powered energy systems are considered as advanced integrated energy systems that can harvest and store sustainable environmental energy to stably power electronics. However, achieving synergistic or matchable electrochemical performance output for energy storage device parts remains challenging, which directly restricts further energy output of self-powered energy systems. Herein, we report flexible in-plane zinc-ion hybrid capacitors (ZIHCs) with synergistic electrochemical behaviors for self-powered energy systems. By designing and optimizing asymmetric interdigitated microelectrodes with favorable structures, an optimal device capacitance of 92.5 mF cm−2, a high energy density of 25.2μWh cm−2, a moderate operating voltage of 1.6 V and an outstanding cycling stability (92% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles) are achieved for ZIHCs. Owing to the outstanding and synergistic electrochemical performance of ZIHCs, self-powered energy systems integrated with in-plane ZIHCs and triboelectric nanogenerators deliver a desirable self-charging process and exceptional discharging ability in powering various electronics in the long term. These advances illustrate a great significance of in-plane ZIHCs for future advanced energy storage applications.
1. Introduction
Ever-growing needs for portable and wearable electronic devices have boosted the importance of high-performance energy devices.1–3 Integrated energy systems are regarded as ideal energy devices in which various types of energy-related forms are utilized reasonably.4,5 Both energy storage and energy conversion/harvesting functions are typical advanced energy forms, and significant effort has been devoted to combining the two energy forms.6–8 Self-powered energy systems with energy conversion/harvesting devices (such as triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs) and solar cells) and energy storage devices (such as batteries and supercapacitors) are potential energy systems that can continuously generate electricity from ambient mechanical energy and achieve energy storage and export at the same time.9–12 For a self-powered energy system, electrochemical performance of the energy storage device, electric output of the energy conversion/harvesting device and their energy matching are critical indices.13 Moreover, for portable and wearable applications, device flexibility and miniaturization are both highly expected.14,15
In terms of energy storage device parts, supercapacitors are one of the widely studied device types for self-powered energy systems.16–18 Owing to their high power density, rate capability, cycling stability and long lifespan, they have drawn worldwide attention.19,20 Until now, supercapacitor-TENG-based self-powered energy systems have been constructed widely.21–23 For instance, Jayababu et al. manufactured ZnO nanorods@conductive carbon black nanocomposite based supercapacitors and TENGs, which are then combined into integrated energy conversion and storage systems.24 Mao et al. reported supercapacitor-TENG self-powered energy textiles based on a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) yarn wrapped polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)/MnO2 nanowire hybrid elastomer, indicating the high promise of supercapacitors for self-powered energy systems.25 Although pioneering progress has been made, a neglected property of supercapacitors is the limited device voltage and energy density, which hinders the further energy output of supercapacitor-TENG-based self-powered energy systems. Meanwhile, the device flexibility and ability in long-term powering electronics are not well implemented. Micro-sized energy storage devices (e.g., in-plane devices) with advanced charge storage mechanisms and high flexibility are thus urgently in demand.
Device hybridization is an efficient approach towards achieving satisfactory electrochemical performance.26–28 Using the device hybridization strategy (e.g., replacing one supercapacitor electrodes with conversion-type electrode materials such as zinc anodes), zinc-ion hybrid capacitors (ZIHCs) have been put forward as new types of favorable energy storage devices. Due to the different working potential ranges for the two electrodes, the operation voltage of ZIHCs becomes enlarged, thus improving the capacitance and energy/power density at low costs.29–32 Recently, Guo et al. developed 2D silicene nanosheets (NSs) for ZIHC applications where a maximum areal capacity of 14 mF cm−2 and superior cycling stability were exhibited.33 Zhang and co-workers incorporated N and P heteroatoms to boost zinc-ion adsorption of cross-linked porous carbon NSs, and obtained high ZIHC electrochemical performance.34 These studies also reveal the importance of electrode design for achieving desirable electrochemical performance. To further meet the flexibility requirement and achieve energy matching with energy harvesting devices, key challenges such as compatible device capacitance and operating voltage remain for ZIHCs, which play an essential role and are a research spot for future self-powered energy systems to power various electronics.
Herein, we have developed flexible in-plane ZIHCs with synergistic device capacitance and voltage window for new kinds of self-powered energy systems. Using mask-assisted ion sputtering and microelectrode deposition, asymmetric interdigitated in-plane electrodes consisting of a polypyrrole (PPy)/reduced graphene oxide (rGO) hybrid framework cathode and a Zn NS anode are constructed respectively onto flexible substrates. ZIHCs deliver remarkable electrochemical behaviors with a high device capacitance of 92.5 mF cm−2, a high energy density of 25.2μWh cm−2, a moderate operating voltage of 1.6 V and outstanding cycling stability (92% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles). Meanwhile, the as-obtained in-plane ZIHCs exhibit superior flexibility during charge and discharge processes. By integrating a flexible TENG with single ZIHC and ZIHCs connected in series, new kinds of self-powered energy systems are presented with desirable self-charging processes as well as remarkable discharging capability in powering various electronics. These advances demonstrate that our self-powered energy systems are promising multifunctional energy systems with desirable integration of energy harvesting and storage for future flexible energy-related applications.
2. Materials and methods
2.1 Materials
Pyrrole was purchased from Shang Macklin Biochemical Co., Ltd. Aqueous rGO dispersion (10 mg mL−1) was obtained from Nanjing XFNANO Materials TECH Co., Ltd. Polyethylene terephthalate (PET ) film was obtained from South China Science Technology Co., Ltd. Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and Zn(CF3SO3)2 were purchased from Shang Aladdin Biochemical Co., Ltd. ZnSO4 and zinc foil were supplied by Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd, and BaTiO3 (BTO) nanoparticle powder (cubic crystalline phase, <100nm particle size) was purchased from Aladdin Chemistry Co., Ltd (China). Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) was purchased from Dow Corning Co., Ltd.
2.2 Fabrication of flexible in-plane PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs
PET film was first washed through the ultrasonication method in ethyl alcohol and deionized (DI) water and then used as the substrate. After drying, ion sputtering was conducted on the PET substrate with a customized mask in an interdigitated pattern. Then, the PPy/rGO hybrid microelectrode was deposited on one side of interdigitated Au microelectrodes through an electrochemical polymerization, where the Au microelectrode side, Pt plate and saturated calomel electrode worked as the working electrode, counter electrode, and reference electrode, respectively. The solution for the corresponding electrochemical polymerization was obtained as follows. First, 1.7 g disodium hydrogen phosphate dodecahydrate (Na2HPO4) and 0.145 g sodium perchlorate were added into 60 mL DI water. Then, 6 mL diluted rGO dispersion at different concentrations (0.5, 1 and 1.5 mg mL−1) and 3 mL pyrrole were added to the above solution in sequence, and the obtained solution was ultrasonicated for 30 min. Electrochemical polymerization of PPy/rGO hybrid microelectrodes was performed at a constant potential of 0.8 V with different polymerization times (900, 1500 and 2100 s) at room temperature. The obtained microelectrodes were cleaned with ethyl alcohol and DI water. Subsequently, Zn NS microelectrodes were electrodeposited on the other interdigitated Au side at 50 mA cm−2 for 50 s using Zn foil as the counter electrode in 2 M aqueous zinc sulfate solution at room temperature. Finally, flexible in-plane ZIHCs were obtained with gel electrolyte. The gel electrolyte was prepared through a typical method: 1 g PVApowder was added into 10 mL of 2.5 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 aqueous solution, which was then stirred continuously at 100 °C for 24 h.
2.3 Fabrication of PDMS/BTO//Cu–Ni TENGs
First, the PDMS base and curing agent were mixed in the weight ratio of 10:1. Then, BTO nanoparticle powder (10wt%) was added into the above mixed liquid and stirred for 5 min. After keeping the reaction mixture still for 30 min at room temperature to remove bubbles, PDMS/BTO film was kept at 70 °C for 1 hour in an oven to obtain negative triboelectric materials with ∼78 cm2 effective area. Flexible TENGs in contact–separation mode were obtained using PDMS/BTO and Cu–Ni fabric with the same effective area as negative and positive triboelectric materials, respectively.
2.4 Characterization and measurements
Optical images of the obtained in-plane ZIHCs were collected using an optical microscope. Morphologies and microstructures of the PPy/rGO hybrid framework and Zn NS interdigitated electrodes were studied using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and EDS mapping recorded using a Hitachi SU8010. Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra and Raman spectra were recorded on a Thermo Scientific Nicolet 6700 spectrometer and a Thermo DXR Raman microscope, respectively. Electrochemical results (galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD) results and cyclic voltammetry (CV) results) were measured on a LAND CT2001A multichannel battery test system at room temperature. For TENGs and self-powered energy systems, the output voltage and current signals were recorded on an electrometer (Keithley 6514).
3. Results and discussion
The fabrication process of flexible in-plane PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1a, in which two major steps, namely mask-assisted ion sputtering and microelectrode deposition, were carried out. Prior to the direct growth of interdigitated microelectrodes, a patterning of micro-current collectors was firstly conducted. By placing a mask onto a target PET substrate tightly, the sputtered Au film was deposited in the interdigitated pattern as current collectors. In the subsequent step, microelectrode deposition processes of PPy/rGO hybrid frameworks and Zn NS layers were conducted onto different sides of Au current collectors using electrochemical polymerization and electrodeposition, respectively. The as-obtained PPy/rGO hybrid frameworks and Zn NSs acted as the ZIHC cathode microelectrode and anode microelectrode, respectively. Notably, combining two major steps enabled strong adhesion between the microelectrode layer and Au film. As displayed in Fig. 1b, well-patterned growth of PPy/rGO hybrid frameworks and Zn NSs was found for the obtained in-plane ZIHCs, where uniformly deposited microelectrodes were also initially revealed. Moreover, multiple flexible in-plane PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs could be readily fabricated, showing the good potential of our utilized method for flexible energy storage applications. The high flexibility of in-plane ZIHCs was also clearly demonstrated under an exogenous force (Fig. 1c). As a typical energy storage device part, electrochemical performance with the focus on matchable capacitances and operating voltage is critical for desirable self-powered energy systems and their powering ability for various electronics (Fig. 1d).
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process of flexible in-plane PPY/rGO//Zn ZIHCs. (b and c) Digital images of the obtained flexible in-plane ZIHCs. (d) Schematic showing the integration of ZIHCs and TENGs for self-powered energy systems. 

Fig. 2a displays the configuration of ZIHCs, in which the interspace between neighboring microelectrode fingers was controlled at a moderate distance at ∼600 μm, preventing the short-circuit between PPy/rGO and Zn. On the interdigitated Zn NS anode side, uniform growth was observed, as shown in Fig. 2b. At a higher magnification (Fig. 2c), Zn NSs were clearly found with abundant pores, which were favorable for diffusion of electrolyte ions. On the other side, it was observed that the grown PPy/rGO hybrid framework microelectrodes were highly uniform (Fig. 2d) and a porous microstructure was also presented (Fig. 2e) for electrodeposited microelectrodes with a polymerization time of 1500 s, indicating sufficient contact with electrolyte ions. rGO NSs were self-interwoven to form a network structure for PPy/rGO hybrid frameworks, where PPy nanorods were decorated onto surfaces of each rGO NS (Fig. 2f). The FT-IR spectrum of the PPy/rGO composite is presented in Fig. S1,† showing characteristic peaks. The peak at 1695 cm−1 is ascribed to the CO stretching vibration, and the peaks located at 1550 and 1473 cm−1 corresponded to the symmetric and asymmetric stretching vibrations of the pyrrole ring. The peaks located at 1283 and 1174 cm−1 were attributed to the C–N stretching vibrations. Meanwhile, the peaks at 964 and 777 cm−1 indicated the presence of polymerized pyrrole.35,36 Besides, corresponding EDS mapping images (Fig. 2g), Raman spectrum (Fig. S2†) and XPS spectra (Fig. 2h, i, and S3†) further confirmed the existence of PPy and rGO components and revealed more detailed information, which was consistent with the previously reported literature.37,38
 Fig. 2  (a) Optical image of in-plane PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs. (b and c) SEM images of Zn NS anodes. (d–f) SEM images of PPy/rGO hybrid framework cathodes. (g) SEM image and corresponding EDS mapping of PPy/rGO hybrid framework cathodes. (h and i) XPS spectra corresponding to C 1s states (h) and N 1s states (i). 
To investigate the polymerization time effect for PPy and rGO materials, the microstructural evolution was studied with different polymerization times. Compared with PPy/rGO polymerized for 1500 s, larger-sized pores and only few PPy nanorods were observed for each pore unit of PPy/rGO polymerized for 900 s (Fig. S4a and b†). When the polymerization time was increased from 1500 s to 2100 s, only few internal porous structures with rGO-sheets-covered PPy were found for each pore unit (Fig. S4c and d†), indicating blocked diffusion channels for electrolyte ions.
The electrochemical performance of in-plane ZIHC devices was evaluated by various electrochemical measurements in a two-electrode configuration. For comparison purposes, CV curves of in-plane PPy//Zn and PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs were first recorded in the voltage range between 0.2 and 1.6 V as shown in Fig. 3a. With the presence of rGO in PPy-based microelectrodes, charging and discharging current values of the obtained in-plane ZIHCs were much larger than those of in-plane ZIHCs without rGO addition, indicating significantly enhanced electrochemical charge storage processes and improved device capacitances. It might be attributed to the optimized electrical transport as well as enhanced ionic diffusion within interdigitated microelectrodes. To understand the electrochemical influence of polymerization time, CV curves of in-plane PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs with different electrochemical polymerization times (900 s, 1500 s and 2100 s) were then studied (Fig. 3b). Results showed that increased charging and discharging current values of in-plane PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs were clearly observed as the polymerization time was increased from 900 s to 1500 s, while decreased current values were then found when the polymerization time was increased to 2100 s. It was a clear indication that the microstructure of the grown PPy/rGO hybrid frameworks was important for the resultant electrochemical behaviors. With growing polymerized electrode materials, more available active sites were constructed. However, excess material buildup would lead to the blockage of the internal porous structure and ultimately lead to insufficient contact with electrolyte ions, resulting in decreased sluggish ionic diffusion kinetics and device capacitances. For the obtained flexible in-plane PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs with optimized electrochemical polymerization time of 1500 s, the rGO concentration was another crucial factor. GCD curves at the same current density are shown in Fig. 3c, where devices with 0.1 mg mL−1 electrodeposition electrolytes delivered the highest capacitances. The polarization phenomenon might be dependent on the inherent physicochemical property of the PPy component.
 Fig. 3  (a) CV curves of PPy//Zn and PPy/rGO//Zn based ZIHCs at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (b) CV curves of PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs with different PPy-based electrochemical polymerization times. (c) GCD curves of PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs electrodeposited at different rGO concentrations. (d) CV curves of PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs at various scan rates. (e) GCD curves of PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs at various current densities. (f) Areal device capacitances at various current densities for PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs electrodeposited at different rGO concentrations. 
CV curves at various scan rates were further investigated, and a typical evolution of charge and discharge current values was observed in Fig. 3d. The wide potential window initially reflected the high promise of our flexible in-plane PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs. GCD curves of flexible in-plane PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs tested at various current densities ranging from 0.2 to 1 mA cm−2 are displayed in Fig. 3e, where longer charge and discharge processes were found for the ones tested at smaller current densities. Based on these data, areal device capacitances were calculated and are presented in Fig. 3f. At a current density of 0.2 mA cm−2, the areal device capacitance reached a remarkable value of 92.5 mF cm−2, which corresponded to an outstanding device energy density of 25.2μWh cm−2. At current densities of 0.4, 0.6, 0.8 and 1 mA cm−2, areal device capacitances were 43.7, 36.2, 31.9 and 28.1 mF cm−2, respectively. At even higher current densities, the devices still exhibited good charge and discharge processes (Fig. S5†).
In flexible in-plane PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs, migration of zinc ions took place during the charge and discharge processes. As illustrated in Fig. 4a, doping/de-doping and deposition/stripping of electrolyte ions (Zn2+ or H+) occurred between two microelectrode structures.39,40 In detail, the pseudocapacitive PPy material provided active sites along the chains, affording substantially improved charge storage capacitances of the electrodes, while its decreased conductivity might cause degraded electrochemical performance during cycling. To suppress the structural degradation, efficient structural optimization strategies are needed such as introduction of highly conductive frameworks. In the present work, an rGO interconnected conductive network was introduced to obtain favorable microelectrodes. Moreover, the as-obtained in-plane ZIHCs delivered excellent flexibility and exhibited over 95% capacitance retention over 500 bending state cycles (Fig. 4b), illustrating a highly stable electrochemical performance output for flexible energy applications. Long-term cycling stability tests were also conducted for flexible in-plane PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs as presented in Fig. 4c. After 10000 charge and discharge cycles, the device capacitance value was 92% of that at the first cycle, further revealing the advantageous device electrochemical properties. This was also an indication for the tight connection between microelectrodes and the current collector. In contrast, the device capacitance of PPy//Zn ZIHCs declined rapidly.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the basic charge storage mechanism of ZIHCs. (b) Capacitance retention of PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs during bending state cycles. (c) Cycling performance of PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs and PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs. The coulombic efficiency curve is for PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs. (d) Ragone plots of in-plane PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs in comparison with those of reported ZIHCs and other energy storage devices, which were integrable with TENGs for self-powered energy systems. (e and f) Schematic of the ion and electron transport in PPy-based electrodes for (b) PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs and (c) PPy//Zn ZIHCs. 

Ex situ XPS characterization was further conducted to study the changes in PPy/rGO and bare PPy electrodes during the charge and discharge process. As shown in Fig. S6,† four peaks for PPy/rGO electrodes in the XPS spectrum corresponding to C 1s were observed after 3000 charge and discharge cycles, while a small peak corresponding to C–F emerged for PPy/rGO at the charged state, indicating the reaction with CF3SO3− for the charging process. After a further discharge process, this peak highly weakened, demonstrating the high reversibility for PPy/rGO electrodes. For bare PPy electrodes, the peak corresponding to C–F was still obvious even after a further discharge process, implying the low reversibility of the process. XPS spectra corresponding to Zn 2p reveal the reaction with Zn2+, as shown in Fig. S7.† These results were consistent with cycling performance results, providing in-depth understanding and new knowledge on the structure–property relationship for ZIHCs.
For an electrochemical energy storage device, energy density and power density values are two major evaluation indicators. As displayed in the Ragone plots (Fig. 4d), our flexible in-plane PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs showed superior energy and power densities as compared to most previously reported energy storage device parts that were integrated in self-powered energy systems including graphene foam-based supercapacitors, Ti3C2Tx MXene-based micro-supercapacitors (MSCs), oxidized single-walled carbon nanotube (SW-CNT) MSCs, rGO-Ni-fabric MSCs, graphene MSCs as well as previously reported ZIHCs.8,41–45 In addition, operation voltages of flexible in-plane PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs were also advantageous than those of aforementioned supercapacitor devices applied in reported self-powered energy systems, demonstrating the superiority of our microelectrode design.
The improved device capacitance and enhanced cycling stability may be attributed to the rationally designed structure of PPy-based electrodes. As illustrated in Fig. 4e and f, PPy/rGO hybrid framework electrodes ensured continuous ion and electron transport during the charge–discharge process. This open structure also enabled sufficient surface contact between the electrodes and electrolyte, enabling more efficient ion transport. For bare PPy electrodes, a closely packed structure without rGO could not enable efficient ion and electron transport, resulting in a much lower device capacitance and cycling stability.
The integration of ZIHC-based devices and TENGs was performed to assemble a new type of flexible self-powered energy systems for practical energy applications. As displayed in Fig. 5a, flexible in-plane ZIHCs and TENG acted as the energy storage device part and energy harvesting device part, respectively, which were integrated together through a bridge rectifier (Fig. 5b). The rectifier played a critical role in converting the alternating current (AC) generated by TENGs to direct current (DC) that is stored in in-plane ZIHCs. To select a suitable rectifier, input/output parameters (current, voltage, etc.) and size are important considerations. In the full structure of the TENG device (Fig. 5c), PDMS/BTO and Cu–Ni fabric worked as two TENG electrodes and the contact–separation mode was employed to achieve the electrical output characteristics. As seen in Fig. 5c–e, both Cu–Ni fabric and PDMS/BTO coated on Cu–Ni fabric exhibited excellent flexibility, which enhanced the flexibility property of the full TENG device. With the contact–separation action, voltage and current output was recorded for TENG while tapping with the machine (Fig. S8†). Flexible TENGs can generate a voltage output of ∼195.1 V and current output of ∼1.1 μA cm−2. Such electrical generation performance indicated good energy harvesting properties and the potential ability of charging energy storage devices.
 Fig. 5  Schematic of the integration of (a) energy storage/harvesting devices, (b) circuit diagram of integrated self-powered ZIHC–TENG energy systems through a bridge rectifier and (c) TENG. Digital images of the (d) PDMS/BTO TENG electrode on Cu–Ni fabric and (e) Cu–Ni fabric TENG electrode. (f) Real-time image of the powering of electronic device A with a self-powered energy system containing a ZIHC, a bridge rectifier and a TENG. (g) TENG-charging and ZIHC-discharging curve. (h) Real-time image of the powering of electronic device B with a self-powered energy system containing ZIHCs in series, a bridge rectifier and a TENG. (i) TENG-charging and ZIHCs in series-discharging curve. 
By combining flexible in-plane PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs with TENG, flexible self-powered energy systems were assembled, in which matchable integration of energy harvesting and energy storage was achieved. As displayed in Fig. 5f, a single flexible in-plane PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHC was first integrated with a TENG and a bridge rectifier to form a ZIHC–TENG self-powered energy system, by which a low-power electronic device was powered. The self-charging curve revealed that the rectified voltage and current of TENG could charge the ZIHC efficiently and stably, indicating the voltage and current matching between the ZIHC and self-powered energy systems. A moderately charged voltage of ∼1.5 V was reached, enabling the direct powering of an electronic device (A). Besides, as shown in Fig. 5g, the discharging life could last a long time. The electronic device (A) was powered for 3 h, and this power supply was to be continued. To further study the synergistic electrochemical behavior of ZIHCs for self-powered energy systems, ZIHCs connected in series were also introduced. This introduction enabled a higher voltage output of ∼1.8 V with a shorter self-charging time by the TENG. Such voltage achievement resulted in the stable powering of a multifunctional digital meter for over 15 min, clearly illustrating the synergistic electrochemical behaviors of ZIHCs and the huge advance of our ZIHC–TENG self-powered energy systems. As stated above, the electrochemical performance of the energy storage device part was vital for the resultant energy output. Using flexible in-plane PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs, a high operating voltage window was readily reached, which was mainly attributed to the intrinsic electrochemical properties of the ZIHC, which in turn significantly promoted a much wider application of integrated self-powered energy systems.
4. Conclusion
In conclusion, we have developed flexible in-plane zinc-ion hybrid capacitors with synergistic electrochemical behaviors for self-powered energy systems. Using two facile microelectrode fabrication steps, interdigitated PPy/rGO hybrid frameworks and Zn NSs are constructed respectively onto two sides of Au current collectors. PPY/rGO//Zn ZIHCs obtained on the PET substrate show remarkable electrochemical behavior with a high device capacitance of 92.5 mF cm−2, a high energy density of 25.2μWh cm−2, a moderate operating voltage window of 1.6 V, outstanding cycling stability (92% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles) and superior flexibility. By integrating the flexible TENG with ZIHCs, new kinds of self-powered energy systems are presented. Such self-powered energy systems deliver high energy density, high power density and high operating voltage output, showing remarkable ability in powering high-power electronics. These advances illustrate that ZIHC–TENG self-powered energy systems show great promise to obtain desirable multifunctional energy systems for future flexible energy-related applications.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the funding support from the Hong Kong Scholar Program (XJ2020005) and the Hong Kong Polytechnic University (G-YZ4H).
References
Y. Song, H. Wang, X. Cheng, G. Li, X. Chen, H. Chen, L. Miao, X. Zhang and H. Zhang, High-efficiency self-charging smart bracelet for portable electronics, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 29–36 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yu, X. Pan, G. Zhang, X. Liao, X. Zhou, M. Yan, L. Xu and L. Mai, Nanowires in Energy Storage Devices: Structures, Synth. Appl., 2018, 8, 1802369 Search PubMed .
S. A. Hashemi, S. Ramakrishna and A. G. Aberle, Recent progress in flexible–wearable solar cells for self-powered electronic devices, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 685–743 RSC .
R. Paul, F. Du, L. Dai, Y. Ding, Z. L. Wang, F. Wei and A. Roy, 3D Heteroatom-Doped Carbon Nanomaterials as Multifunctional Metal-Free Catalysts for Integrated Energy Devices, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805598 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Pu and Z. L. Wang, Self-charging power system for distributed energy: beyond the energy storage unit, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 34–49 RSC .
J. Han, C. Xu, J. Zhang, N. Xu, Y. Xiong, X. Cao, Y. Liang, L. Zheng, J. Sun, J. Zhai, Q. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Multifunctional Coaxial Energy Fiber toward Energy Harvesting, Storage, and Utilization, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 1597–1607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mehrali, J. E. ten Elshof, M. Shahi and A. Mahmoudi, Simultaneous solar-thermal energy harvesting and storage via shape stabilized salt hydrate phase change material, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 405, 126624 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zeng, L. Dong, L. Sun, W. Wang, Y. Zhou, L. Wei and X. Guo, Printable Zinc-Ion Hybrid Micro-Capacitors for Flexible Self-Powered Integrated Units, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 13, 19 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yun, Y. Zhang, Q. Xu, J. Liu and Y. Qin, Recent advance in new-generation integrated devices for energy harvesting and storage, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 600–619 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo and Z. L. Wang, Recent advances in triboelectric nanogenerator based self-charging power systems, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 617–628 CrossRef .
W. Xiong, K. Hu, Z. Li, Y. Jiang, Z. Li, Z. Li and X. Wang, A wearable system based on core-shell structured peptide-Co9S8 supercapacitor and triboelectric nanogenerator, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104149 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, S. Zheng, F. Zhou, J. Qin, X. Shi, S. Wang, C. Sun, X. Bao and Z.-S. Wu, Scalable fabrication of printed Zn//MnO2 planar micro-batteries with high volumetric energy density and exceptional safety, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2019, 7, 64–72 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, X. Li, Y. Zi, S. Wang, Z. Li, L. Zheng, F. Yi, S. Li and Z. L. Wang, A Flexible Fiber-Based Supercapacitor–Triboelectric-Nanogenerator Power System for Wearable Electronics, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4830–4836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guan, B. Xu, J. Huang, T. Jing and Y. Gao, Fiber-shaped stretchable triboelectric nanogenerator with a novel synergistic structure of opposite Poisson's ratios, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 131698 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ko, S. Lee, C. H. Kwon, S. W. Lee and J. Cho, Interfacial Design and Assembly for Flexible Energy Electrodes with Highly Efficient Energy Harvesting, Convers. Storage, 2021, 11, 2002969 CAS .
Y. Yang, L. Xie, Z. Wen, C. Chen, X. Chen, A. Wei, P. Cheng, X. Xie and X. Sun, Coaxial Triboelectric Nanogenerator and Supercapacitor Fiber-Based Self-Charging Power Fabric, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 42356–42362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, F. R. Fan, T. Jiang, Z. Wang, W. Tang, C. Zhang, M. Liu, G. Cao and Z. L. Wang, Integration of micro-supercapacitors with triboelectric nanogenerators for a flexible self-charging power unit, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 3934–3943 CrossRef .
J. H. Lee, K.-W. Kim, J. K. Kim and U. Jeong, DC Voltage Modulation for Integrated Self-Charging Power Systems of Triboelectric Nanogenerators and Ion Gel/WO3 Supercapacitors, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 2550–2557 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tian, Direct ink writing of 2D material-based supercapacitors, 2D Materials, 2021, 9, 012001 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. Zeng, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Oxygen Defects in Promoting the Electrochemical Performance of Metal Oxides for Supercapacitors: Recent Advances and Challenges, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1900823 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, X. Cheng, H. Chen, J. Huang, X. Chen, M. Han, Z. Su, B. Meng, Z. Song and H. Zhang, Integrated self-charging power unit with flexible supercapacitor and triboelectric nanogenerator, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14298–14306 RSC .
B. K. Deka, A. Hazarika, S. Lee, D. Y. Kim, Y.-B. Park and H. W. Park, Triboelectric-nanogenerator-integrated structural supercapacitor based on highly active P-doped branched Cu–Mn selenide nanowires for efficient energy harvesting and storage, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104754 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, W. Wang, J. Zou, Z. Li, X. Cao and S. Xu, Self-powered energy conversion and energy storage system based on triboelectric nanogenerator, Nano Energy, 2020, 76, 105008 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jayababu and D. Kim, ZnO nanorods@conductive carbon black nanocomposite based flexible integrated system for energy conversion and storage through triboelectric nanogenerator and supercapacitor, Nano Energy, 2021, 82, 105726 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mao, Y. Li, J. Xie, H. Liu, C. Guo and W. Hu, Triboelectric nanogenerator/supercapacitor in-one self-powered textile based on PTFE yarn wrapped PDMS/MnO2NW hybrid elastomer, Nano Energy, 2021, 84, 105918 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Lukatskaya, B. Dunn and Y. Gogotsi, Multidimensional materials and device architectures for future hybrid energy storage, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12647 CrossRef PubMed .
D. P. Dubal, O. Ayyad, V. Ruiz and P. Gómez-Romero, Hybrid energy storage: the merging of battery and supercapacitor chemistries, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1777–1790 RSC .
D. Tie, S. Huang, J. Wang, J. Ma, J. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Hybrid energy storage devices: Advanced electrode materials and matching principles, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 21, 22–40 CrossRef .
Z. Huang, A. Chen, F. Mo, G. Liang, X. Li, Q. Yang, Y. Guo, Z. Chen, Q. Li, B. Dong and C. Zhi, Phosphorene as Cathode Material for High-Voltage, Anti-Self-Discharge Zinc Ion Hybrid Capacitors, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001024 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, J. Yao and Y. Zhu, Recent Developments and Future Prospects for Zinc-Ion Hybrid Capacitors: a Review, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003994 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dong, W. Yang, W. Yang, Y. Li, W. Wu and G. Wang, Multivalent metal ion hybrid capacitors: a review with a focus on zinc-ion hybrid capacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13810–13832 RSC .
G. Sun, H. Yang, G. Zhang, J. Gao, X. Jin, Y. Zhao, L. Jiang and L. Qu, A capacity recoverable zinc-ion micro-supercapacitor, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3367–3374 RSC .
Q. Guo, J. Liu, C. Bai, N. Chen and L. Qu, 2D Silicene Nanosheets for High-Performance Zinc-Ion Hybrid Capacitor Application, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 16533–16541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Zhang, Z. Ma, Y. Zhang, L. Bai and L. Sun, Boosting Zn-ion adsorption in cross-linked N/P co-incorporated porous carbon nanosheets for the zinc-ion hybrid capacitor, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 16565–16574 RSC .
J. Wang, F. Gao, X. Du, X. Ma, X. Hao, W. Ma, K. Wang, G. Guan and A. Abudula, A high-performance electroactive PPy/rGO/NiCo-LDH hybrid film for removal of dilute dodecyl sulfonate ions, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 331, 135288 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, Y. Wang, J. Chen, X. Li, F. C. Walsh, J.-H. Ouyang, D. Jia and Y. Zhou, Three-dimensional graphene oxide/polypyrrole composite electrodes fabricated by one-step electrodeposition for high performance supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14445–14457 RSC .
J. Sun, X. Shu, Y. Tian, Z. Tong, S. Bai, R. Luo, D. Li and C. C. Liu, Facile preparation of polypyrrole-reduced graphene oxide hybrid for enhancing NH3 sensing at room temperature, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 241, 658–664 CrossRef CAS .
R. Qian, Q. Pei and Z. Huang, The role of H+ ions in the electrochemical polymerization of pyrrole, Die Makromolekulare Chemie, 1991, 192, 1263–1273 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, X. Zeng, P. J. Cullen and Z. Pei, The rise of flexible zinc-ion hybrid capacitors: advances, challenges, and outlooks, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 19054–19082 RSC .
C. Han, W. Li, H. K. Liu, S. Dou and J. Wang, Principals and strategies for constructing a highly reversible zinc metal anode in aqueous batteries, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104880 CrossRef CAS .
L. Manjakkal, C. G. Núñez, W. Dang and R. Dahiya, Flexible self-charging supercapacitor based on graphene-Ag-3D graphene foam electrodes, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 604–612 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Yang, J.-W. Lee, S. H. Seo, B. Jeong, B. Lee, W. J. Do, J. H. Kim, J. Y. Cho, A. Jo, H. J. Jeong, S. Y. Jeong, G.-H. Kim, G.-W. Lee, Y.-E. Shin, H. Ko, J. T. Han and J. H. Park, Fully stretchable self-charging power unit with micro-supercapacitor and triboelectric nanogenerator based on oxidized single-walled carbon nanotube/polymer electrodes, Nano Energy, 2021, 86, 106083 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cong, W. Guo, Z. Guo, Y. Chen, M. Liu, T. Hou, X. Pu, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Stretchable Coplanar Self-Charging Power Textile with Resist-Dyeing Triboelectric Nanogenerators and Microsupercapacitors, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 5590–5599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, C. Wu, Z. Wang, A. C. Wang, J.-H. He, Z. L. Wang and H. N. Alshareef, MXene electrochemical microsupercapacitor integrated with triboelectric nanogenerator as a wearable self-charging power unit, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 266–272 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, C. Jiang, F. Zhao, Y. Shao, Y. Ying and J. Ping, A self-charging device with bionic self-cleaning interface for
energy harvesting, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104738 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta04058aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process of flexible in-plane PPY/rGO//Zn ZIHCs. (b and c) Digital images of the obtained flexible in-plane ZIHCs. (d) Schematic showing the integration of ZIHCs and TENGs for self-powered energy systems.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Optical image of in-plane PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs. (b and c) SEM images of Zn NS anodes. (d–f) SEM images of PPy/rGO hybrid framework cathodes. (g) SEM image and corresponding EDS mapping of PPy/rGO hybrid framework cathodes. (h and i) XPS spectra corresponding to C 1s states (h) and N 1s states (i).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) CV curves of PPy//Zn and PPy/rGO//Zn based ZIHCs at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (b) CV curves of PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs with different PPy-based electrochemical polymerization times. (c) GCD curves of PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs electrodeposited at different rGO concentrations. (d) CV curves of PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs at various scan rates. (e) GCD curves of PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs at various current densities. (f) Areal device capacitances at various current densities for PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs electrodeposited at different rGO concentrations.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the basic charge storage mechanism of ZIHCs. (b) Capacitance retention of PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs during bending state cycles. (c) Cycling performance of PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs and PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs. The coulombic efficiency curve is for PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs. (d) Ragone plots of in-plane PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs in comparison with those of reported ZIHCs and other energy storage devices, which were integrable with TENGs for self-powered energy systems. (e and f) Schematic of the ion and electron transport in PPy-based electrodes for (b) PPy/rGO//Zn ZIHCs and (c) PPy//Zn ZIHCs.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of the integration of (a) energy storage/harvesting devices, (b) circuit diagram of integrated self-powered ZIHC–TENG energy systems through a bridge rectifier and (c) TENG. Digital images of the (d) PDMS/BTO TENG electrode on Cu–Ni fabric and (e) Cu–Ni fabric TENG electrode. (f) Real-time image of the powering of electronic device A with a self-powered energy system containing a ZIHC, a bridge rectifier and a TENG. (g) TENG-charging and ZIHC-discharging curve. (h) Real-time image of the powering of electronic device B with a self-powered energy system containing ZIHCs in series, a bridge rectifier and a TENG. (i) TENG-charging and ZIHCs in series-discharging curve.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta04058a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
