Structural design of graphene for use in electrochemical energy storage devices   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00147A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00147A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6230-6257Structural design of graphene for use in electrochemical energy storage devices†

        
          
            Kunfeng 
            Chen
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shuyan 
            Song
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Fei 
            Liu
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Dongfeng 
            Xue
          
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Resource Utilization, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun 130022, China. E-mail: dongfeng@ciac.ac.cn
Received 
      15th February 2015
    First published on 8th June 2015AbstractThere are many practical challenges in the use of graphene materials as active components in electrochemical energy storage devices. Graphene has a much lower capacitance than the theoretical capacitance of 550 F g−1 for supercapacitors and 744 mA h g−1 for lithium ion batteries. The macroporous nature of graphene limits its volumetric energy density and the low packing density of graphene-based electrodes prevents its use in commercial applications. Increases in the capacity, energy density and power density of electroactive graphene materials are strongly dependent on their microstructural properties, such as the number of defects, stacking, the use of composite materials, conductivity, the specific surface area and the packing density. The structural design of graphene electrode materials is achieved via six main strategies: the design of non-stacking and three-dimensional graphene; the synthesis of highly packed graphene; the production of graphene with a high specific surface area and high conductivity; the control of defects; functionalization with O, N, B or P heteroatoms; and the formation of graphene composites. These methodologies of structural design are needed for fast electrical charge storage/transfer and the transport of electrolyte ions (Li+, H+, K+, Na+) in graphene electrodes. We critically review state-of-the-art progress in the optimization of the electrochemical performance of graphene-based electrode materials. The structure of graphene needs to be designed to develop novel electrochemical energy storage devices that approach the theoretical charge limit of graphene and to deliver electrical energy rapidly and efficiently.
Kunfeng Chen
Kunfeng Chen received his BE degree in inorganic non-metallic materials engineering in 2009 and his PhD in inorganic chemistry in 2014, both from Dalian University of Technology under the supervision of Professor Dongfeng Xue. He is currently working as Assistant Professor in Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests focus on the controllable growth of functional materials such as graphene and metal oxide materials for electrochemical energy storage.
Shuyan Song
Shuyan Song received his BSc degree in Chemistry in 2003 and his MSc in inorganic chemistry in 2006, both from Northeast Normal University. He then joined the group of Professor Hongjie Zhang at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), where he received his PhD in inorganic chemistry in 2009. He is currently working as Associate Professor at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, CAS. His research is primarily in the development of new and functional nanomaterials for clean energy, including thermoelectric devices, photocatalysts and lithium ion batteries, which are fundamentally important and potentially useful in renewable energy applications.
Fei Liu
Fei Liu received his Bachelor degree in applied chemistry from Dalian University of Technology, and continued PhD at Dalian University of Technology and Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry under the supervision of Professor Dongfeng Xue. After being awarded his PhD degree in 2012, he worked as a postdoctoral researcher in the Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology for one year and then started work at the University of Manchester, UK as a research associate in early 2014. His current research interests focus on the design, mass production and functionality of graphene-based materials.
Dongfeng Xue
Professor Dongfeng Xue received his PhD from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CIAC, CAS) in 1998. From 1999 to 2003 he worked at the Universitaet Osnabrueck (AvH research fellow), the University of Ottawa (postdoctoral researcher) and at National Institute for Materials Science, Japan (JSPS postdoctoral researcher). In 2001 he was appointed as full Professor in Dalian University of Technology. In 2011 he joined CIAC as a full Professor. His research interests include crystallography, crystallization, the calculation and simulation of functional materials, the chemical synthesis of condensed matter and electrochemical energy storage.
1. Introduction
Graphene, the first two-dimensional (2D) atomic crystal, has generated much excitement in the scientific community since it was extracted from bulk graphite by Andre Geim and Konstantin Novoselov in 2004.1–3 Much research has been carried out on graphene during the past decade.4 Studies of graphene have taken place in both research laboratories and in industry and these studies have promoted rapid developments in graphene research and commercialization. The first graphene-based supercapacitor was developed in 2008.5 In the same year, graphene was used as a transparent electrode in solar cells.6 In 2009, Korea funded a major graphene project and, in 2010, the Nobel Prize for Physics was awarded for groundbreaking experiments using graphene. In 2011, the UK government pledged £50 million toward developing spin-off technologies from graphene. Graphene-wrapped sulfur particles were used as the cathode materials for rechargeable lithium–sulfur batteries in the same year.7 In 2013, the EU listed graphene as one of its flagship research projects and scheduled funding of €1 billion over the following 10 years. The size of the graphene market was estimated to be around US$ 12 million in 2013.8
However, at the current time, graphene is still at the research and development stage and the market is dominated by sales of the raw materials for graphene.4 The number of patent applications for graphene is still increasing, which indicates the potential development of an industrial market for graphene.9 As a result of their electrical, mechanical and optical properties, graphene and its derivatives have been proposed for use in varied applications ranging from flexible electronic devices, printed electronic circuits, energy storage, the prevention of corrosion, DNA sequencing and other biomedical and aerospace applications.10–17 These materials offer the potential to significantly improve existing products and to enable the design of materials and devices with novel functionalities. Several challenges still remain in graphene applications, however – for example, the large-scale production of graphene materials and the control of the quality of graphene in different applications.18 There are now both opportunities and challenges in the graphene field and, to further stimulate the fast progress of this important field of research, we need to solve key issues with regard to the use of graphene materials in specific application fields.
The development of reliable and environmentally friendly forms of energy storage is a key challenge for society. The storage of electrical energy is a major challenge in future energy infrastructure, transportation and consumer electronics.19–22 As a result of the increased energy demands of electronic equipment, electrochemical energy storage devices such as lithium ion batteries, supercapacitors, sodium ion batteries and metal–air batteries require high energy densities and rapid charge–discharge rates.23–26 Graphene has the potential to revolutionize electrochemical energy storage devices.19 As a result of its excellent physical and chemical properties (Table 1) [high specific surface area (SSA), high conductivity and high flexibility], graphene has been widely used as both an active and inactive electrode material in lithium ion batteries, supercapacitors and metal–air batteries. Graphite has traditionally been used as the anode material in lithium ion batteries, while activated carbon has been used as an anode in supercapacitors. Compared with graphite and activated carbon, graphene has a high capacity and energy density and fast charge–discharge rates.13 However, graphene-based electrode materials have some intrinsic problems that limit their large-scale practical application and an objective analysis of these limitations and drawbacks has not yet been published.19 For example, graphene sheets have a high tendency to re-stack during their preparation and subsequent electrode production procedures, resulting in inter-graphene pore sizes that are inaccessible to electrolytes.27 Graphene often shows a low packing density, resulting in a low volumetric energy density, which limits its practical application.28,29 The experimental SSA of graphene is only about 1500 m2 g−1, which strongly limits its electrochemical capacity.19
Table 1 Properties of carbon-based materials used for electrochemical energy storage




Properties
Graphene
Graphite19
Activated carbon




Dimensions
2D
3D
3D


Experimental specific surface area (m2 g−1)
About 1500 (2630 for theoretical SSA)
10–20
150013


Electric conductivity (S cm−1)
About 2000
2–30000
Low


Density (g cm−3)
0.05–0.75, 1.33
2.2
0.5–0.7


Theoretical Li+ storage capacity (mA h g−1)
744 (LiC3)
372 mA h g−1 (LiC6)
—


Theoretical electrical double-layer capacitance (F g−1)
550
—
150–300




To overcome these limitations, much work has carried out in the design of various graphene structures, such as porous 3D graphene, graphene composites, defect-free graphene, graphene doped with heteroatoms, metals or metal oxides, and functionalized graphene.30,31 The success of graphene materials in energy storage applications depends on their rational design and optimization with on-demand performance for targeted applications. We present here an objective review of the structural design required to overcome these limitations and drawbacks to improve the electrochemical performance of graphene electrode materials. We highlight emerging research and the development of structural designs for graphene as a high-performance material for electrodes in electrochemical energy storage devices. This review aims to outline the benefits and challenges of the use of graphene-based materials in electrochemical energy storage devices. We also highlight the key technical challenges with the hope of stimulating further advances in research.
2. Fundamentals of the structural design of graphene
2.1 Challenges of using graphene materials in electrochemical energy storage devices
There is an urgent need in modern society to increase the energy and power densities of electrochemical energy storage devices. Graphene has huge potential in achieving this aim and in enabling the development of the next generation of high-performance energy storage devices as a result of its high theoretical SSA (up to 2630 m2 g−1), high electrical conductivity and high mechanical strength.32–36Fig. 1a shows that the energy density of supercapacitors based on graphene fibers (GFs) is about ten times higher than that of commercially available supercapacitors (2.75 V/44 mF and 5.5 V/100 mF, <1 mW h cm−3, respectively) and are comparable with the energy density of thin-film lithium batteries (4 V/500 mA h, 0.3–10 mW h cm−3).37 A fully packaged device of a graphene framework with holes can deliver gravimetric and volumetric energy densities of 35 W h kg−1 and 49 W h l−1, respectively, approaching those of lead-acid batteries (Fig. 1b).38 The charge storage mechanism of pristine graphene supercapacitor materials can be classified as electrical double-layer capacitance (EDLC), where the charge is physically stored through the adsorption of electrolyte ions on the graphene surface.19 If the entire SSA of 2630 m2 g−1 is fully utilized, graphene electrode materials can have an EDLC of 550 F g−1.39 To increase this capacitance further, doped graphene, functionalized graphene and graphene composites have been designed with additional pseudocapacitance.31
 Fig. 1  Energy and power densities of graphene-based supercapacitors compared with commercially available state-of-the-art energy storage systems. (a) All-solid-state micro-supercapacitors (SCs). Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Holey graphene framework electrochemical capacitors (HGF-ECs). Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
When used as anode materials in commercial lithium ion batteries, graphite can form an intercalation compound of LiC6 during the lithiation reaction in which lithium can only be stored within the sp2 carbon hexadrons with a maximum theoretical capacity of 372 mA h g−1.40 Graphene can achieve a maximum theoretical specific capacity of 744 mA h g−1 (forming LiC3 during the lithiation reaction) because lithium ions can be stored on both sides of the graphene sheets.19,41,42 One of the most significant advantages of graphene materials is that the surfaces of both sides of a graphene sheet are exterior surfaces that can be accessed by electrolyte ions. However, the experimental capacity data can vary over a fairly wide range, from <100 to >1000 mA h g−1.43,44 A capacity higher than the theoretical capacity of graphene can usually be achieved by intentionally introducing defects onto the graphene plane; such defects are thought to be able to provide more lithium storage sites.45,46 The low lithium storage capacity mainly originates from the aggregation of the graphene sheets, which leads to the loss of the active surface area.
Despite the advantages of the use of graphene in electrochemical energy storage devices, there are still many challenges to its use.
• The aggregation or re-stacking of graphene sheets is unavoidable during the preparation process and electrochemical reactions. The adhesion between the graphene sheets induced by van der Waals forces can make the electrode partially lose the advantages of graphene, such as the high SSA. As only the surface areas accessible to the electrolyte can contribute to the specific capacitance, the electrochemical performance of these graphene materials is therefore reduced.
• A very low packing density for graphene of 0.015 g cm−3, compared with 2.2 g cm−3 for graphite, leads to a low volumetric capacitance and energy density for graphene, which limits its application in high energy electrochemical energy storage devices.
• A higher electric conductivity can lead to graphene having a better electrochemical performance, especially at high operating rates. However, graphene with both a high surface area and high conductivity is difficult to synthesize.
• Decorating graphene with the correct defects/impurities and electroactive materials (e.g. metals or metal oxides) may provide extra active sites, leading to an enhanced specific capacitance and energy density. However, the controlled growth of such defects/impurities or electroactive materials on graphene sheets is still a major challenge in synthesis.
An effective route to improving the electrochemical performance of graphene is structural design. Understanding the inherent limitations of graphene as an electrode material for electrochemical energy storage devices can give guidance for the structural design of graphene. The structural design of graphene electrode materials includes the design of high SSA and high conductivity graphene, the synthesis of highly packed graphene, the control of defects on graphene and the synthesis of functionalized graphene and composites.
2.2 Chemistry of the structural design of graphene
Graphene is formed from a single layer of graphite and is built from sp2-hybridized carbon atoms arranged in a honeycomb lattice.47 Although perfect graphene is extremely chemically inert as a result of the giant delocalized π electron system, chemically synthesized graphene has many structural defects, such as holes, merged graphene domains and sp3-hybridized carbon, which lead to a broken hexagonal symmetry.2 Ideal graphene is a plane of infinite dimensions; however, real graphene exhibits edges that have either a zigzag or an armchair arrangement (Fig. 2a).47 Graphite oxide (GO) is often used as a precursor to synthesize graphene materials. GO is a single layer of graphite oxide with functional groups in the GO sheets, such as carboxylic acids and hydroxy and carbonyl groups (Fig. 2a). These functional groups strongly depend on the reaction conditions, such as the preparation time and temperature, as well as on the synthesis procedure. Both non-covalent (electrostatic forces, van der Waals forces) and covalent functionalization can be used to modulate the chemical properties of graphene, which is the basis of the structural design of graphene using chemistry. These characteristics can favor the structural design of graphene materials. For example, defects on the graphene sheet may result in locally curved structures that cause local doping and therefore influence the reactivity.48–51 Various spacer materials can be introduced between the graphene sheets to construct graphene with a high surface area and 3D structure (Fig. 2b).52,53 Graphene provides a substrate that allows access to oxide nanoparticles and increases the conductivity of these oxides, allowing them to perform their functions better.54–57
 Fig. 2  (a) Structures of graphene (with and without defects) and graphene oxide. (b) The most common structural design route for graphene-based materials. 
The principle in the structural design of graphene electrode materials is the optimization of lithium ion batteries and supercapacitors with high energy densities, high power densities and long cycle lives.58–62Fig. 2b shows that, to achieve the maximum electrochemical storage capability of graphene, the effective prevention of inter-sheet re-stacking is a key issue. The rational design of the structure of graphene will allow the development a new generation of devices that approach the theoretical limit for electrochemical storage and deliver electrical energy both rapidly and efficiently. The goal of the structural design of graphene is to release the full potential of graphene as an electrode material in electrical energy storage devices.
2.3 Production methods for graphene electrode materials
The success of the structural design of graphene for electrochemical energy storage devices crucially depends on the development and optimization of the production methods. Since it was first obtained by the “scotch tape” method, a range of methods have been developed for the production of graphene using both “top-down” and “bottom-up” strategies (Table 2; Fig. S1, ESI†). The properties of graphene materials can be varied considerably by using different processing methods.63–65 The costs of production and its scalability should also be considered in practical applications. The large-scale production of graphene while retaining its outstanding performance is one of the key challenges in its application to electrochemical energy storage devices.31,66
Table 2 Comparison of the most commonly used production methods for graphene




Synthesis method
Quality
Purity
Cost
Scalability
Yield




Mechanical exfoliation
High
Middle
Low
Very low
Low


Synthesis on SiC
High
Middle
Middle
Low
Low


Bottom-up synthesis
High
Middle
Middle
Middle
Middle


Chemical vapor deposition
High
Middle
Middle
Middle
Low


Liquid phase exfoliation
High
Middle
Low
High
Low


Reducing graphene oxide
Low
Low
Low
High
Low




Mechanical exfoliation can produce very high quality graphene with a large lateral size and a pristine 2D sp2 carbon plane (with a fairly low concentration of defects), but the poor scalability of this method means that it is only suitable for research purposes.1,67 Methods such as synthesis on SiC and the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of carbon precursors have been developed to produce large areas of graphene films at acceptable cost and with a moderate concentration of defects.19 These graphene materials can be used in specific applications, such as touch screens and high frequency transistors, which require high conductivity and reliable film quality during mass production. Such methods can produce graphene materials on a large scale – for example, a large amount of free-standing graphene nanosheets can be easily obtained via thermally splitting commercial SiC granules and by a CVD process over magnesium oxide.68 Although CVD has been reported for the production of vertically oriented graphene nanosheet electrodes, the packing density of the as-obtained graphene is very low and the conductivity is fairly high, which makes it more suitable for use in ultra-fast capacitors than in energy storage devices.68
The mass production of graphene at low cost should be the most important factor to be considered in the field of electrochemical energy storage. Only a moderate purity is required in most cases, so the most suitable production routes are the reduction of GO and liquid phase exfoliation, including the electrochemical exfoliation of graphene in various solvents (Fig. 3). Both methods can be started with low cost graphite powder as the raw material and the products are usually in powder form, which can be easily applied to electrode fabrication processes.69–75 Although these chemically derived graphene materials contain multiple stacked graphene sheets, structural defects and oxidized functional groups, they are more suitable for energy storage applications than single-layer graphene because they provide additional active sites.12,76,77 Another advantage of the GO route is that it can facilitate the preparation of graphene-based composites. In contrast with the highly chemically inert surface of graphene, GO is enriched by a variety of oxygen-containing groups, which make it easier to anchor the surface with a wide range of substances to form GO-based composites, including electroactive materials of conductive polymers and metal oxides (Fig. 2a).78–80
 Fig. 3  Four typical production methods for synthesizing small graphene sheets via the exfoliation of bulk graphite (the top-down approach) used in the structural design of graphene for use in electrochemical energy storage devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
Liquid phase exfoliation is another route that could possibly be scaled-up for the production of graphene for electrochemical energy storage applications.81,82 As a result of the absence of an oxidation process, the quality of graphene can be higher than reduced GO (rGO). However, the yield of graphene from liquid phase exfoliation is low due to the difficulty of fully exfoliating the graphite into a few layers; a size selection process is needed to obtain the desired products.19 The electrochemical exfoliation of graphene, in which an electro-force is used to intercalate the solution ions into the graphitic layers and to exfoliate the graphene sheets, can also be considered as a liquid phase exfoliation route. Such a method has the advantages of a higher yield and simple processing and is promising in electrochemical energy storage applications.83,84
The structural design of graphene materials for energy storage can be achieved by the development and optimization of these synthesis methods.85–88 For example, solid exfoliation can produce edge-functionalized graphene; low defect graphene can be obtained by liquid exfoliation and the oxidation–exfoliation–reduction route favors the formation of graphene composites. By using these methods or modified routes, doped graphene, activated graphene, defect graphene and multilayer graphene can be designed.89,90
3. Structural design of graphene materials for use in supercapacitors
3.1 High SSA and high conductivity graphene electrode materials
At a given maximum voltage, the total amount of energy stored in a capacitor is proportional to the capacitance. A large SSA is one of the most important parameters leading to a large gravimetric capacitance and hence a high energy density.91 Although much progress has been made in increasing the SSA of carbon materials by engineering porous structures, the experimentally obtained EDLC data for pure graphene electrodes is still lower than the theoretical value (550 F g−1), which limits the practical energy density of carbon-based supercapacitors.92 The area-normalized capacitance of metal electrodes with a flat surface93 is in the range 30–70 μF cm−2; however, carbon-based electrode materials only show limited area-normalized capacitance values of 4–5 μF cm−2. The reason for these low values is still unresolved. To be able to improve the performance of supercapacitors by structural design, we need to understand the charge transfer and storage mechanisms at the graphene sheet interfaces. The charge storage capacitance of graphene electrode materials is dependent on the interfacial double-layer capacitance (μF cm−2) and the surface area (m2 g−1). Therefore it is important to be able to measure the interfacial capacitance of single-layer graphene. Xia et al.39 found that the interfacial capacitance of single-layer graphene is dominated by the quantum capacitance of the solid side of the graphene interface. Stoller et al.94 directly measured the interfacial capacitances of on both sides of single-layer graphene. They found that the area-normalized charge capacitance stored simultaneously on both sides (5 μF cm−2) was significantly lower than that on just one side of the single-layer graphene (8 μF cm−2), indicating a quantum capacitance component in the charge storage mechanism. Therefore the development of graphene materials with a higher surface area alone will not be sufficient to give further increases in the electrochemical performance; modification of the electronic properties of the graphene sheets will also be required. By measuring the capacitance in one- to five-layer graphene, Ji et al.93 investigated the origin of the low experimental EDLC values. They found that the capacitance was suppressed near the point of zero charge for thicknesses of less than a few layers. The area-normalized capacitance near the point of zero charge was 2.5 and 3.0 μF cm−2 for one- and three-layer graphene, respectively. The reduction in capacitance at the point of zero charge can be attributed to the quantum capacitance of the graphene sheet. When the graphene electrode was charged, an increase in the area-normalized capacitance with decreasing electrode thickness was found. The area-normalized capacitance was 12.5 and 7.5 μF cm−2 V−1 for one- and three-layer graphene, respectively. This unexpected increase may be attributed to electrostatic interactions between the graphene sheet electrons and the electrolyte ions. These findings will allow us to improve the capacitance of carbon-based electrodes by coupling charged graphene with the electrolyte ions. An increase in the capacitance of single-layer graphene could increase the energy density of graphene supercapacitors to values comparable with those of batteries. Therefore graphene should be structurally designed to have a high SSA, the modified electronic properties and the correct charged state.
However, the high SSA and interfacial capacitance of graphene do not necessarily lead to a high capacitance. Graphene with a high electrical conductivity can increase the rate performance of supercapacitors (high power density), which favors fast electron transfer within the electrode. A high SSA and high conductivity often display a trade-off relationship – for example, porous graphene materials may have a large SSA, but these structures decrease the electrical conductivity as a result of the discontinuous inter-nanosheet structure. Crystalline sp2 carbon materials (except fullerenes), such as carbon nanotubes and graphene, have much better electrical conductivity than amorphous carbon materials, but have a rather limited SSA in their bulk state in spite of the high theoretical SSA (Table 1).95–98 The design of graphene electrode materials with a high SSA and high conductivity is very important in the development of high-performance electrochemical energy storage devices. However, it remains very challenging to synthesis graphene materials with both these properties.
Highly porous graphene-derived carbon materials with high electrical conductivity via the KOH activation of microwave-exfoliated GO (MEGO) were first developed in 2011 by Zhu et al.99 Extremely high BET surface areas of 3100 m2 g−1 and high electrical conductivity values of 500 S m−1 were obtained for the activated MEGO. As supercapacitors, MEGO electrode materials showed a high energy density of about 70 W h kg−1 in organic electrolytes.99 In 2012, a graphene film with a high electrical conductivity of 1738 S m−1 and a high SSA of 1520 m2 g−1 was fabricated by El-Kady et al.100 using a standard LightScribe DVD optical drive by the direct laser reduction of GO films to graphene. Used as a supercapacitor, this graphene film displayed a high energy density of 1.36 mW h cm−3, two times higher than the energy density of activated carbon supercapacitors, while still maintaining a high power density of 20 W cm−3, 20 times higher than that of activated carbon supercapacitors. Progress is being made to develop graphene materials with the two outstanding properties of high electrical conductivity and high SSA in the bulk state.101 In 2013, 3D bulk graphene-based porous materials with an ultra-high SSA of 3523 m2 g−1 and a high bulk conductivity of 303 S m−1 were fabricated.102Fig. 4a shows that two simple standard industrial steps were used to synthesize these graphene materials: first, the in situ hydrothermal polymerization/carbonization of a mixture of cheap biomass or industrial carbon sources with GO to obtain 3D hybrid precursor materials; and, second, a chemical activation step to achieve the desired SSA and conductivity.102 It was concluded that these materials consist of defected/wrinkled single-layer graphene sheets a few nanometers in size (Fig. 4b–e), which can induce a high SSA. As a supercapacitor, these materials showed an outstanding performance in ionic liquids with a specific capacitance and energy density of 231 F g−1 and 98 W h kg−1, respectively. Zhang et al.103 reported the synthesis of graphene thin films with a very high SSA of 2400 m2 g−1 and a high in-plane electrical conductivity of 5880 S m−1. Fig. 4f shows the synthesis process for the activated rGO films: (1) an aqueous colloidal suspension was prepared by adding 1 M KOH; (2) graphene “ink paste” was obtained by evaporating water at 100 °C with constant stirring; and (3) the dry film was heated under a flow of argon at 800 °C for 1 h to activate the graphene film. When used as a supercapacitor electrode in TEABF4/AN electrolyte, these graphene materials showed a high power density of 500 kW kg−1 and a high energy density of 26 W h kg−1. In this case, the as-obtained graphene films had a continuous and well-interconnected 3D porous network, which favored rapid ion and charge transfer during the electrochemical reactions.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic drawing of the simple and green process of synthesizing porous 3D graphene-based materials. (b, c) SEM and (d, e) TEM images of products from mixtures of phenol and formaldehyde with GO at optimized ratios. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Schematic illustration showing the experimental steps for producing activated GO (aG-O) film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Based on these examples, to retain a high SSA and high conductivity, graphene materials should be designed to include both a porous nanosheet structure (high SSA) and a continuous nanosheet network (high conductivity). The pore density and pore size should be carefully controlled because too high a pore density decreases the conductivity of graphene. A general and scalable synthesis approach to the control of the pore size of porous graphene has been developed; this can be used in the rational design of the SSA and conductivity of graphene materials.104 This synthesis method is basis on the carbo-thermal reaction between graphene and metal oxide nanoparticles. Pore engineering on graphene is conducted by controlling the pore size and/or the nitrogen doping on the porous graphene sheets by varying the amount of oxometalates or polyoxometalates, or by using ammonium-containing oxometalates or polyoxometalates. With much research work being focused on this field, there should be good progress in the near future.
3.2 High packing density graphene electrode materials
Porous structured graphene materials have been designed to increase the SSA, but this often leads to a low packing density, which means that the graphene materials cannot compete with cheaper and more established activated carbon materials. It is important to design graphene materials with a high packing density to achieve their inherent outstanding electrochemical performance. The low packing density of graphene materials results in large empty spaces in the electrode. These are not effective for the storage of ions and may be flooded by the electrolyte, thereby increasing the weight of the device without adding capacitance.105 Porous, yet densely packed, carbon electrodes with a surface area highly accessible to ions and a low ion transport resistance are crucial to the realization of high density electrochemical energy storage devices. However, such electrodes have proved to be very challenging to fabricate.106,107
Graphite, with a volumetric density of about 2.2 g cm−3, is possibly the most compact conductive carbon material and displays only a small capacitance because electrolyte ions cannot access the interplanar spaces.107 If the packing density of graphene is 1.1 g cm−3, its interplanar spacing can approach about 6.7 Å, which still guarantees access for most electrolyte ions, e.g. Li+ (0.68 Å), K+ (1.37 Å) and Na+ (0.98 Å).108,109 Although much work has been carried out to synthesize high packing density graphene, the packing density of laser scribed or chemically activated graphene still ranges from 0.05 to 0.75 g cm−3, which limits their energy densities when used as practical supercapacitor electrode materials.44,84,99,100 However, the production of high packing density graphene electrodes is emerging through proper structural design. To develop high packing density graphene electrode materials, both external and internal forces should be used to compress the graphene sheets, but the distance between the graphene sheets must be larger than the size of the electrolyte ions.
A low packing density often leads to a small volumetric capacitance, which limits the practical application of graphene materials in commercial electrochemical energy storage devices. Thus electrode materials with both high gravimetric and volumetric capacitances are urgently required for future applications in portable energy storage devices where space is relatively limited.19 Yang et al.107 synthesized a graphene film with a high packing density of about 1.33 g cm−3, nearly double that of traditionally activated porous carbon (0.5–0.7 g cm−3). In this synthesis process, the chemically converted graphene hydrogel films were irreversibly compressed by capillary pressure to increase the packing density through the controlled removal of the volatile solvent trapped in the graphene gel.107 The high packing density is a result of the nearly face-to-face stacking of the graphene sheets in these films, although the electrolyte ion diffusion path can be retained. More importantly, these liquid electrolyte-mediated chemically converted graphene films can display an exceptionally high volumetric capacitance (Cvol) of 255.5 F cm−3 in aqueous electrolytes and a volumetric energy density (Evol-stack) of 59.9 W h L−1 because highly efficient ion transport channels were retained in these graphene films, even when they were densely packed.107
A close-grained graphene-based macroassembly with a density of 1.58 g cm−3 (70% of the density of graphite) has been developed,110 which balances the two opposing characteristics of a porous microstructure and a high density in same graphene material. Fig. 5 shows that the as-obtained high density porous graphene macroassembly was produced by the evaporation-induced drying of a graphene hydrogel (vacuum drying at room temperature). In contrast, a traditional 3D hydrogel-like assembly obtained through freeze-drying had a very low apparent density (0.02 g cm−3; Fig. 5a). The high density porous graphene macroassembly consisted of curved and very compactly packed nanosheets, which had interconnected small cylindrical pores that favored access by electrolyte ions. As a supercapacitor, this graphene macroassembly showed a high volumetric capacitance of 376 F cm−3. In addition, it was conductive and moldable and could be used directly as a shaped electrode material in additive-free supercapacitor devices (Fig. 5d). In the evaporation-induced drying process, the evaporation of water produced a “pulling force” on the graphene layers, which led to the shrinkage of the 3D network because there was strong interactions between the water and the graphene nanosheets.
 Fig. 5  Self-assembly of high density porous graphene macroform (HPGM). (a) Schematic diagram of the formation of graphene-based 3D porous macroforms with different drying process and SEM images of the resultant porous graphene macroform (PGM) and HPGM. (b) PGM and HPGM in water; an enlarged view shows a rod-like HPGM with bubbling due to the desorption of the adsorbed air. Note that the material shown here is PGM with adsorbed water as a result of the hydrophilic properties. (c) Rod-like HPGM (lower) with writing using a soft pencil (upper) as the reference. (d) Photograph of HPGM monoliths with different shapes but similar SSA (300–500 m2 g−1). Reproduced with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 
Highly porous graphene electrodes offer a large SSA and favor ion diffusion to give a high gravimetric capacitance, but usually have a lower volumetric capacitance as a result of the relatively low packing density.111 A free-standing holey graphene framework has been reported with both the highest gravimetric capacitance (298 F g−1) and the highest volumetric capacitance (212 F cm−3) in organic electrolytes.38 The fully packaged holey graphene framework supercapacitor can deliver high gravimetric and volumetric energy densities of 35 W h kg−1 and 49 W h l−1, approaching those of lead-acid batteries. Fig. 6 shows that the holey graphene framework with significantly larger nanopores is well integrated into a hierarchical porous architecture, which has a highly continuous network of open channels for efficient ion transport throughout the entire network, even in a highly compressed form. However, a traditional graphene framework often limits ion diffusion because the ions need to travel much longer distances to reach the broken edge of the graphene sheet to cross each layer (Fig. 6e), which lowers the electrochemical performance. A spacer with a larger size than the electrolyte ions should be designed to construct porous and high packing density graphene electrode materials. Functionalized graphene with ultra-high specific gravimetric and volumetric capacitances of 456 F g−1 and 470 F cm−3 has been developed using Mg(OH)2 nanosheets as the spacer.112 As a result of its dented sheet with a high surface area, oxygen-containing groups and a low pore volume, the specific gravimetric and volumetric capacitances of the as-obtained graphene were almost 3.7 and 3.3 times higher, respectively, than that of hydrazine-reduced graphene. In this case, the oxygen-containing functional groups in the graphene not only enhance the surface wettability and accessible electroactive surface area, but also provide a high pseudocapacitance. Heteroatom-doped graphene films assembled layer-by-layer can provide an ultrahigh volumetric capacitance (about 488 F cm−3), which is the highest value reported to date for graphene-based supercapacitors.113 In this case, cationic poly-L-lysine and H3BO3 intercalated into the multilayer film not only serve as N- and B-containing precursors, but also as spacers to form porous, yet densely packed, films after thermal treatment.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the holey graphene framework as an ideal material for supercapacitor electrodes. Initial solvated 3D macroporous structures of (a) graphene framework and (b) holey graphene framework. Compressed films of (c) the solvated graphene framework and (d) the holey graphene framework. Closed-up view of (e) graphene framework and (f) holey graphene framework films, with the arrows highlighting the ion transport pathway. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
3.3 Graphene-based macroscopic assemblies for low-stacking graphene
The re-stacking of graphene sheets is caused by adhesion induced by van der Waals forces in graphene products, which can reduce the accessible SSA, resulting in a decrease in the electrochemical performance.25,70,114 In addition, the poor inter-sheet connections between isolated graphene flakes also break the continuous pathways for electron transport and severely suppress the intrinsically high conductivity of the graphene electrode materials.115 To avoid re-stacking of the graphene sheets, various macroscopic assemblies of graphene, such as 1D fibers/tubes, 2D films and 3D porous structures, have been designed, where the key step is to design the correct fixed “spacer” between the graphene sheets. The spacer can be a self-sacrificial template, ice/water, a gas, a solvent, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), functional groups (–OH, –COOH, –CO, etc.) or a metal oxide/metal. In addition, the effective prevention of inter-sheet re-stacking is essential to allow the individual sheets in multilayered graphene structures to behave as graphene rather than graphite.116 We focus here on the design of effective spacers to construct non-stacking and low-stacking graphene electrode materials.
To reduce the stacking of graphene, CNT materials can be used as a spacer to form 2D CNT–rGO hybrid films117,118 and 3D vertically aligned CNT/graphene pillars,119–121 which show enhanced electrochemical performance. Fig. 7 shows that graphene–CNT microfibers can be fabricated in a silica capillary column hydrothermal microreactor.37 The resultant hybrid fiber exhibits a high packing density, a large ion-accessible surface area (396 m2 g−1) and a high conductivity of 102 S cm−1. When used as a supercapacitor, these CNT–GFs show a high specific volumetric capacitance of 305 F cm−3 in H2SO4 (measured at 73.5 mA cm−3 in a three-electrode cell) or 300 F cm−3 in a polyvinyl alcohol/H3PO4 electrolyte (measured at 26.7 mA cm−3 in a two-electrode cell).37 In this case, 1D CNTs can reduce the strong inter-sheet π–π interaction between the graphene sheets, leading to an enhanced electrochemical performance.
 Fig. 7  Schematic diagram of the synthesis of CNT–graphene microfibers. (a) The fiber was synthesized by injecting a homogeneous solution containing acid-oxidized SWNTs, GO and EDA through a pump into a flexible silica capillary column. This was followed by in situ thermal treatment in an oven at 220 °C for 6 h before a continuous fiber was pushed into a water reservoir by a pressurized nitrogen flow. (b) Photograph of the as-prepared fibers collected in water. (c) A dry fiber with diameter of about 50 mm and length of about 0.5 m. (d) Planar structures obtained by bending fibers. (e) Compressed and stretched fiber springs. (f) A knitted textile fabricated from fibers. All scale bars = 0.5 cm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
The surface functional groups on GO or graphene can be also used as a spacer to construct non-stacking 1D GFs. In supercapacitor applications, the 1D nanostructure has many unique characteristics. It can: (1) shorten the carrier transportation path; (2) enhance the carrier collection ability; and (3) function as an electron expressway in the axial direction.122–124 GFs, which integrate individual 2D graphene sheets into macroscopic fiber assemblies, not only have the common characteristics of fibers, such as mechanical flexibility for textiles, but also maintain the unique advantages of graphene, i.e. low cost, light weight, ability to be shaped and ease of functionalization in an in situ or post-synthetic manner in various applications.125 The construction methods include: wet spinning of the GO liquid crystal phases; dimension-confined hydrothermal strategies; CVD-assisted processes; the spontaneous reduction and assembly of GO; and aligned CNT sheets being transformed to graphene yarn.125 During the synthesis of GFs, GO with surface functional groups is often used; these functional groups can be used as spacers to construct non-stacking graphene. Many advances have been made in the fabrication of GFs in laboratory studies and many reviews have focused on these novel GFs for electrochemical energy storage devices.126–129 For example, a facile one-step dimensionally confined strategy has been developed to fabricate neat GFs by the direct hydrothermal assembly of graphene within glass pipelines.130 However, the direct assembly of 2D graphene sheets into macroscopic fibers can be an extraordinary challenge as a result of the irregular size and shape of chemically derived graphene. Most of the current studies focus on the establishment of new strategies for the fabrication of GFs, however the precise modulation and control of the assembly of graphene sheets for GFs remains a challenge.125
Graphene film/paper can be synthesized by constructing spacers between the graphene sheets to prevent re-stacking. The free-standing paper-like graphene electrodes with a light weight, flexibility and high conductivity are promising for the production of flexible energy storage devices.131–136 Filtration and liquid/air assembly are normally used for the fabrication of graphene films.137–139 However, the as-obtained graphene films also suffer from re-stacking as a result of the absence of effective spacers between the graphene sheets, which leads to the as-prepared supercapacitors based on graphene paper only displaying a moderate performance.140 Yang et al.141 demonstrated that water can serve as an effective spacer to prevent the re-stacking of chemically converted graphene sheets, which showed an unprecedented electrochemical performance. Our group has used a water crystallization route to create ice spacers between GO sheets to form highly electroactive graphene aerogel papers.142Fig. 8 shows that ice crystallized from water molecules within the as-obtained GO sheets can be used as a spacer between individual GO sheets to form an expanded GO aerogel with a 3D porous network structure (Fig. 9a and b). The designed specific structure is retained during the reduction processes to form a graphene aerogel and graphene paper (Fig. 9c and d). After manual pressing, the paper-like graphene materials are free-standing and flexible with porous structures (Fig. 9e–h). As a binder-free supercapacitor, graphene paper has a specific capacitance of 172 F g−1 at a charge–discharge rate of 1 A g−1. The folded graphene structure with only a fewer layers can provide more active sites, such as edge-type sites and nanopores, which may lead to an enhanced electrochemical performance.143 The graphene materials formed by ice crystallization can create a specific porous structure, providing more electroactive surfaces and interfaces to significantly increase the Faradaic reaction efficiency. With the introduction of a redox electrolyte of K3Fe(CN)6 into the KOH and Na2SO4 electrolyte, 95- and 5-fold increases in the specific capacitance were obtained compared with the values obtained in the traditional KOH and Na2SO4 electrolytes.142,144
 Fig. 8  (a–c) Schematic drawing of the formation mechanism for a GO aerogel during the freeze-drying process. (d, e) Schematic drawing of the chemical origin for the expansion of the GO layers via crystallized water molecules within the graphene sheets.142 
 Fig. 9  (a) Digital and (b) SEM images of a GO aerogel. (c) Digital and (d) SEM images of a graphene aerogel. (e–g) Digital and (h) SEM images of graphene paper. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. 
A graphene-based film with an open and graded microstructure has been designed by freeze-drying trapped water as a spacer between GO sheets.145 The synthesis process included freezing of a wet GO sample with abundant trapped water followed by the sublimation of frozen ice at very low temperatures, leading to the formation of a gaseous state. In the sublimation-dominated drying process, the resultant GO membrane had a slightly loosened layer structure because the trapped frozen ice separated the GO sheets.146,147 The as-obtained membrane included three graded sections: a tightly layered structure (top), a loosely layered structure (middle) and vertically aligned sheets (bottom). The middle loosely layered structure and the vertical openings of the bottom layer were accessible to electrolyte ions. In contrast, the slow vaporization of the water between the GO sheets (from liquid to gaseous water) led to the formation of a closely stacked microstructure. The ice-assisted growth of graphene film can be a facile and effective method to construct low-stacking graphene films. More efforts are needed to precisely tune the thickness and layer orientation of this graphene film to optimize the electrochemical performance.
The design of 3D graphene can be one of most novel and effective ways to construct non-stacking graphene.148 Three-dimensional porous graphene not only facilitates the access of electrolytes into its surface, but also provides electrically conductive channels for the active materials (e.g. metals, metal oxides or polymers) anchored on it. These 3D graphene structures mainly include 3D graphene networks, 3D porous graphene films, graphene balls and honeycomb-like 3D graphenes.149 With the use of porous Ni as a self-sacrificial template, 3D structured porous graphene can be fabricated that has perfect sheet-to-sheet connectivity and a substantial supportive ability. In 2011, Cao et al.150 synthesized novel 3D graphene networks for supercapacitor applications. In this work, 3D graphene networks were prepared using Ni foam as a sacrificial template in a facile CVD process with ethanol as the carbon source. This also proved that the 3D graphene networks were excellent substrates for the construction of graphene–metal oxide composites, which can be used as binder-free electrodes. Hollow structures have received much attention in electrochemical energy storage devices because they can accommodate large changes in volume during electrochemical reactions.151–155 Hollow graphene structures need to be designed using metal oxides/metals as sacrificial spacers (templates). Wu et al.156 have reported a facile and straightforward approach to construct 3D graphene-based hollow spheres using SiO2 spheres as a template (spacer). The fabrication process for hollow graphene spheres consists of three steps: (1) electrostatic assembly to obtain GO-coated SiO2 spheres; (2) an Na–NH3 reduction process to reduce GO in a dry ice–acetone bath and to restore the graphene structure; and (3) dissolution of the SiO2 core by immersion in concentrated hydrofluoric acid. The rGO hollow spheres can provide a higher SSA for electrochemical reactions, which should lead to a higher electrochemical performance. Highly ordered mesoporous few-layer graphene frameworks have been synthesized with self-assembled superlattices of Fe3O4 nanocrystals as a template.157 The mesoporous graphene frameworks have a face-centered cubic symmetry with interconnected mesoporosity, a tunable pore width and a high surface area. However, it still remains a challenge to synthesize highly graphitic frameworks with well-defined mesoporosity and a high surface area by a rational structural design.
Although the hard template method is one of most important routes to fabricate 3D graphene, this method often needs multiple synthesis steps, which is complex for the large-scale production of 3D graphene. Novel structural design routes based on one-step methods without using a hard template have been developed to construct 3D graphene with different architectures. Traditionally, after drying, a well-dispersed GO solution can form densely stacked GO (Fig. 10b), which often shows a low surface area and low pore volume.158 After reducing these densely stacked GO structures, the as-obtained graphene also displays a low surface area and low pore volume, which often leads to a low electrochemical performance. To this end, a novel anti-solvent strategy was designed to fabricate non-stacking rGO (NS-rGO).159Fig. 10a shows the synthesis processes for the non-stacking GO. Hexane was used as a non-polar aprotic anti-solvent for hydrophilic GO, which does not interact with the oxygen functional groups of GO and thus has no ability to disperse the GO sheets. Therefore only the oxygen functional groups from different regions within the GO sheets can create hydrogen bonding interactions, which serve as a spacer between the graphene sheets. Finally, after drying, a highly crumpled NSGO powder was formed (Fig. 10c). Through a conventional thermal reduction process, NSGO can be easily turned into NS-rGO to give a high surface area (1435.4 m2 g−1) and simultaneously an ultra-high pore volume (4.11 cm3 g−1). Used as electrode materials for supercapacitors, the NS-rGO films can give a specific capacitance of 236.8 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1, which is higher than that of densely stacked rGO (163.0 F g−1). This result proved that developing high-performance graphene electrode needs both a high SSA and a high pore volume at the same time.
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration for fabricating non-stacking graphene oxide (NSGO). (a) Fabrication process of NSGO using hexane (Hx) as an anti-solvent. (b) GO dispersed in water can easily make a densely stacked GO film after drying. (c) Non-stacking GO (NSGO) shows a highly aggregated and crumpled structure even after complete drying. Reproduced with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. 
Another novel route to construct 3D graphene bubble networks is a sugar-blowing approach based on a polymeric predecessor.160 In this case, bubbles formed in situ were used as spacers to construct 3D graphene. Fig. 11a shows that glucose and NH4Cl were transformed to melanoidin bubbles with a blowing reaction and were finally transformed into strutted graphene by heat treatment. The bubble networks included mono- or few-layered graphitic membranes that were tightly glued, rigidly fixed and spatially scaffolded by micrometer-scale graphitic struts (Fig. 11b–d). In a two-electrode supercapacitor system, the capacitance of the strutted graphene can reach as high as 250 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and slowly decreases to 130 F g−1 at a high current density of 100 A g−1. The excellent performance of strutted graphene electrodes originates from the following three factors: (1) the total strutted graphene porosity is 99.85%, which guarantee the access of electrolyte ions without a diffusion limit; (2) a natural, nearly perfect electron freeway provided by the interconnected struts leads to a low inner contact resistance; and (3) robust graphitic membranes avoid the agglomeration of graphene.127
 Fig. 11  (a) Growth process for strutted graphene (SG) containing graphitic membranes and struts (marked in gray). Scale bar = 50 μm. (b) SEM image and optical photograph of a 70 mg piece of SG. (c) SEM image of the flat rear side of the SG product with the regular arrangement of connected cells identified by artificial colors. (d, e) 2D and 3D optical photos of SG networks. (f) Photos of original, compressed and recovered states of a SG specimen. (g) XRD profile of SG. Scale bars = 200 μm (b–e) and 1 cm (f). Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 
3.4 Defect-controllable graphene electrode materials
Chemical methods have proved to be feasible routes to produce bulk quantities of graphene for use as electrode materials. However, strong oxidation/reduction reactions and thermal shock during the synthesis processes often leads to extreme damage and the imperfect recovery of the original graphene structure, in addition to high polydispersity of the sheet size and thickness.47,161 The structural defects in graphene include lattice defects, holes, merged graphene domains and so-called grain boundaries with a broken hexagonal symmetry.47 These structural defects can result in local doping, influence the reactivity of the graphene and dramatically decrease its electronic conductivity.86,162 To ensure a long cycle life, graphene electrode materials should have a high degree of chemical purity and structural uniformity. The main challenge is how to effectively exfoliate the graphite layers without damaging the graphene sheets. To this end, the externally applied energy should be sufficient to overcome the huge van der Waals energy stored in the π–π stacked sheets within a graphite crystal.163 Many attempts have been made to directly exfoliate natural graphite flakes through sonication in organic solvents and surfactant solutions.164 However, these methods have the disadvantages that: (1) the actual yield of the exfoliated graphene is very low; (2) it requires the use of expensive organic solvents that may contaminate the environment; and (3) the prolonged sonication time limits the size of graphene flakes that can be obtained.
Low defect graphene materials have been synthesized by the insertion of alkali/alkali salts or halogens followed by sonication in a specially selected solvent.165–170 Relatively high-quality graphene with different sizes and thicknesses has been fabricated in this way. The resulting graphene materials show a relatively broad area distribution (from about 0.1 to 10 μm2) at <10 layers and may even contain disordered and degraded materials as the number of layers decreases.169 Feng et al.171 have reported a method for the facile non-oxidized chemical exfoliation of graphite, which gave a high yield of high-quality graphene sheets. This strategy is based on a pre-intercalation process with oleum, followed by a strong reaction with sodium in the graphite layers during grinding. The graphene sheets can be extracted via a strong chemical reaction between sodium and the sulfuric acid molecules, in which a rapid release of energy and the formation of gas contribute to the formation of the graphene sheets. The final graphene products show a low number of defects – 96.3% C and 3.12% O by atomic composition – compared with 97.43% C and 2.37% O in natural graphite. As a supercapacitor, these graphene electrode materials display a specific capacitance of 120 F g−1. However, the value of the specific capacitance is still much smaller than the theoretical value and much work is still needed to optimize the graphene structures with respect to the SSA and conductivity. Despite intense research in this area, the size control of defect-free graphene without any trace of oxidation or structural damage remains a key challenge. Park et al.172 have proposed a scalable method for producing defect-free graphene with a controllable submicron to micron size through the sequential insertion of potassium and pyridine at low temperatures. By controlling the reaction temperature, the size of the defect-free graphene can be varied in the approximate range 0.25–14 μm2. In this case, solvated electrons were formed in the exfoliating pyridine solvent; these can serve as a reducing agent to remove any defects (i.e. oxygen) generated during the exfoliation process, which will preserve the pristine graphene structure.23
When graphite is exfoliated to graphene, a dramatic increase in electronic conductivity should occur. However, over-oxidation during the synthesis of graphene by the oxidation–reduction route often results in a loss of conductivity as a result of the formation of covalent bonds – as for GO.173 Methods for the non-oxidative intercalation and exfoliation of graphite have been developed to solve this problem using Brønsted acids (phosphoric, sulfuric, dichloroacetic and alkylsulfonic acids).174 First, neutral graphite sheets were intercalated with Brønsted acid molecules within the galleries. The intercalated graphite then readily exfoliated in dimethylformamide to give suspensions of crystalline single- and few-layer graphene sheets. The exfoliation process was initiated by the activation of the outermost host layers by acid–base interaction rather than electron transfer reactions. No over-oxidation occurs in this exfoliation process, which leads to the production of low defect graphene sheets.
In the mass production of high-quality graphene, the electrochemical exfoliation of graphite is also a good choice as a result of its simplicity, rapidity and environmentally friendly nature.31 Electrochemical exfoliation of graphene can be achieved by the intercalation of ions and compounds within graphite-based working electrodes with the application of reduction or oxidation potentials/currents.175 The electrochemical exfoliation of graphite has been performed in three types of electrolytes: organic solvents, ionic liquids176 and aqueous acids (e.g. H2SO4 or H3PO4).177 Parvez et al.178 have reported the electrochemical exfoliation of graphene sheets in neutral aqueous solutions with different inorganic salts [e.g. (NH4)2SO4, Na2SO4, K2SO4], which is more environmentally friendly. Fig. 12 shows that the oxidation reaction occurring at the edge sites and grain boundaries leads to depolarization and expansion of the graphite layers, thereby facilitating the intercalation of sulfate ions (SO42−) within the graphitic layer.179,180 The as-obtained graphene has a high yield (>85%, ≤3 layers), a large lateral size (up to 44 μm), low degree of oxidation (C/O ratio 17.2) and a remarkable hole mobility of 310 cm2 V−1 s−1. Solid-state flexible supercapacitors fabricated by these conductive graphene films (11 Ω sq−1) on A4-sized paper can deliver a high area capacitance of 11.3 mF cm−2 and an excellent rate capability of 5000 mV s−1. Our group has also synthesized colloidal graphene via the direct anodic exfoliation of graphite in (NH4)2SO4 aqueous solution.181 However, electrochemical exfoliation still faces some challenges: (1) graphene with a homogeneous size and layer distribution is difficult to fabricate; (2) anodic exfoliation methods can produce the unwanted oxidation of graphite and introduce oxygen functional groups; and (3) the presence of both structural damage and oxygen functional groups can influence the electrochemical properties of the resulting graphene.
 Fig. 12  Photographs of: (a) graphite flakes after electrochemical exfoliation; (b) dispersed exfoliated graphene in DMF solution (concentration about 2.5 mg mL−1); and (c) exfoliated graphene powders on a bulk scale (about 16.3 g). (d) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of electrochemical exfoliation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Current research has found that graphene materials that include a smaller number of oxygen functional groups have an increased capacitance.182–184 For this reason, this modification or functionalization of graphene should also be designed. In addition, these surface functional groups can provide additional pseudocapacitance to further increase the specific capacitance and energy density of graphene electrode materials. However, a large number of surface functional groups can cause a loss of electrical conductivity in graphene, so the location and density of the functional groups need to be carefully controlled. In the oxidation–exfoliation–reduction method, it is difficult to finely control the density of functional groups. The controllable and reversible thermal oxidation of graphene has been achieved; however, ultra-high vacuum conditions were required.185 To solve this problem, we have developed an in situ electrochemical oxidation route to tunable C/O ratios in the graphene framework, which can create enhanced pseudocapacitance as the oxygen content is increased (Fig. 13).186 By applying cyclic voltammetry, oxygen-containing groups can be quantitatively introduced on the graphene framework by controlling the potential interval of the scan. Graphene electrode materials with controllable surface functionality display a high specific capacitance and negligible loss of electrical conductivity. The specific capacitance of functionalized graphene can reach 279 F g−1 at a current of 1 A g−1 in a 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte; this value was 152 F g−1 at 100 A g−1, which is much higher than the values for non-oxidized graphene. The excellent performance of functionalized graphene emphasizes the importance of the precise control of the surface chemistry of graphene-based materials.
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the electrochemical oxidation of the graphene framework and the introduction of pseudocapacitance in addition to EDLC by controllable surface functionalization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. 
A new method has been developed to finely control the levels of oxygen in chemically modified graphene materials based on refluxing aqueous colloidal suspensions of GO for specific reflux times; this method did not require any additional reducing agents.187 As the reflux time increased, the C/O ratio increased from 1 to 7 and the C/O ratios reached a steady state of 7 after refluxing for two weeks. The optimized capacitive performance was achieved after a reflux time of five days due to the synergistic coupling of the oxygen functional groups with the C/O ratio and surface area. Although a higher C/O ratio can lead to a higher conductivity and faster electronic transport, too high a C/O ratio can induce slower ion diffusion as a result of the pore blocking induced by re-stacking and the lower accessible surface area at high rates. The development of methods that allow the fine control of oxygen functionality would help us to better understand the mechanisms associated with chemically modified graphene and would facilitate optimization of the material properties.
Further increases in the capacitance of graphene materials can be achieved by doping graphene with various heteroatoms, such as N, P, S or B.31,188 Heteroatom doping may enhance the capacitance of graphene as a result of the modification of the electronic properties and the introduced pseudocapacitance in addition to the EDLC.189–191 N-doped graphene can improve the conductivity of graphene electrodes, which may then meet the application requirements of supercapacitors. Synthesis methods for N-doped graphene include the annealing of GO with ammonia gas at high temperatures, hydrothermal methods, CVD, electrochemical exfoliation and plasma treatment.192–194 An efficient and facile strategy to fabricate highly crumpled N-doped graphene nanosheets (C-NGNSs) has been developed.194b In this process, GO was reduced to graphene and the C3N4 polymer on the graphene was completely decomposed into N-containing species (e.g. C2N2+, C3N2+ and C3N3+)194c that served as N sources. The C-NGNSs-900 supercapacitor delivered a capacitance of 302 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV S−1 in an aqueous KOH electrolyte. The high performance is due to the highly wrinkled structure, high pore volume, the N-doping and the improved electrical conductivity. However, the design of a scalable process to prepare N-doped graphene without aggregation is now of paramount importance. A thermal expansion process has been used before the hydrothermal reaction, which led to the production of high-performance N-doped graphene by preventing aggregation and improving the conductivity.195 The specific capacitance was 270 F g−1 at a discharge current density of 1 A g−1 and the capacitance retention was 97% after 2000 cycles at this density. The sulfur-doped graphene resulted in the specific electro-sorption of electrolyte ions and increased the capacitance of the sulfur-doped graphene.196
N- (n-dopant) and B- (p-dopant) doped graphene led to the introduction of electron-donor and electron-deficient atoms in the graphene structure, resulting in increased capacitance.197,198 A simplified prototype device for a high-performance all-solid-state supercapacitor based on 3D N and B co-doped monolithic graphene aerogels has been reported (Fig. 14).198b The as-prepared N and B co-doped graphene aerogels showed 3D interconnected frameworks with a macroporous architecture, which enabled ion diffusion and electron transport in the bulk electrode. The all-solid-state supercapacitors not only exhibited a minimal device thickness (about 1 mm), but also had a high specific capacitance (about 62 F g−1), a good rate capability and an enhanced energy (8.65 W h kg−1) or power density (about 1600 W kg−1) with respect to undoped, N-doped or B-doped graphene aerogels, or layer-structured graphene paper.198c All-solid-state supercapacitors are emerging candidates for smart and efficient energy storage devices as a result of the increasing demand for wearable and miniaturized electronics.198d However, despite many papers reporting the increased capacitance of heteroatom-doped graphene materials, the detailed mechanism requires further study, which may be helpful in rational structural design.
 Fig. 14  (a) Fabrication process for all-solid-state supercapacitors based on N and B co-doped graphene aerogels (BN-GAs) including a combined hydrothermal process and freeze-drying process. (b) Atomic force microscopy image and (c) the corresponding height profile of the GO used with a thickness of about 1 nm. (d) Digital images of two pairs of GO solutions with different volumes in vials and N/B co-doped graphene hydrogels before and after hydrothermal self-assembly. Inset: digital images of the BN-GAs obtained after freeze-drying. (e) Low and (f) high magnification SEM images of the as-prepared BN-GAs. (g) Low and (h) high magnification SEM images of the as-prepared BN-GAs as binder/additive-free electrode upon physical pressing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198b. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. 
3.5 Graphene composite electrode materials
The formation of graphene composites not only hinders the re-stacking of graphene sheets, but also improves the specific capacitance of pure graphene materials as a result of the introduction of additional pseudocapcitance.19 Graphene not only serves as a current collector, but can also enhance the conductivity of supercapacitor composite electrodes because the metal oxide materials are often semiconductors. Much work has been carried out on the synthesis of various graphene-based composites and there have been many reviews of this area of research.22,87,199 Typical graphene-based composites include graphene–carbon, graphene–metal, graphene–metal oxide and graphene–polymer composites.200–203 Graphene-based composites can be synthesized by two types of route: in situ and ex situ hybridization. Ex situ hybridization involves a mixture of graphene nanosheets and pre-synthesized or commercially available nanocrystals in solution.204 The advantage of ex situ hybridization is that it can pre-select nanostructures with desired functionalities; the disadvantage is that the nanostructures on the GO or rGO sheets may be of low density and have a non-uniform coverage.204In situ hybridization can produce uniform surface coverage of nanocrystals by controlling the nucleation sites on the GO or rGO via surface functionalization, leading to the formation of a continuous film of nanocrystals on the rGO surfaces. Fig. 15 shows structural models for graphene composites,19 which include encapsulated, mixed, wrapped, anchored, sandwich-like and layered models. The anchored model, in which electroactive nanoparticles are anchored to the graphene surface, is the most common structure for graphene composites. To improve the overall performance of electrochemical energy storage devices, the composite structure should be optimized, including the spatial orientation and weight ratio of graphene and their synergistic effect.19
 Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of the different structures of graphene composite electrode materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
The incorporation of transition metal oxides into 3D graphene can be used to synthesize 3D composites, which may exhibit synergistic properties and diverse functionalities.205–208 3D graphene composites have received increasing interest in electrochemical energy storage devices. Three-dimensional graphene is usually formed first, then inorganic or polymer active materials are grown on the 3D graphene to form graphene-based composite electrodes. Three-dimensional graphene networks (3DGNs) grown on nickel foam are an excellent template for the growth of graphene-based composite electrodes and have opened up a promising strategy for the application of graphene-based materials in supercapacitors.209,210 For example, 3D hybrid nanostructures, Ni3S2 nanorod@Ni(OH)2 nanosheet 3DGNs have been synthesized by a simple one-step hydrothermal reaction.211 The Ni3S2@Ni(OH)2/3DGN exhibits a high specific capacitance (1277 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1 and 1037.5 F g−1 at 5.1 A g−1) and an areal capacitance (4.7 F cm−2 at 2 mV s−1 and 3.85 F cm−2 at 19.1 mA cm−2) with a good cycle performance (99.1% capacitance retention after 2000 cycles). Three-dimensional graphene nanostructures can provide a short path for ion diffusion and a large surface area with more efficient contact between the ions of the electrolyte and the active materials. However, the electrochemical performance of the 3DGN-based materials still cannot meet long-term cycle stability and high rate capability requirements. To solve this problem, high SSA 2D inorganic nanosheets were designed and grown on 3DGNs. NiCo2O4 nanosheet/3DGN supercapacitors showed an ultra-high specific capacitance (2173 F g−1 at 6 A g−1), excellent rate capability (954 F g−1 at 200 A g−1) and a superior long-term cycle performance (94% capacitance retention after 14 000 cycles at 100 A g−1).212 The design of high-performance 3D graphene composites for supercapacitors should focus on: (1) selecting high capacitance active materials; (2) engineering the morphology of the active materials; and (3) assuring close contact between the active materials and the graphene.
Fiber-based devices have attracted much attention because of their potential applications in portable and wearable electronics.213 One of the key challenges in fiber-based supercapacitors is how to achieve a high energy density without compromising the rate stability. Sun et al.214 have reported a general strategy for the fabrication of ultra-long hybrid microfibers from rGO nanosheets and 2D nanosheets of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) such as MoS2, TiS2, TaS2 and NbSe2. The performance of supercapacitors based on hybrid fibers was greatly improved by the introduction of the TMDs. To further increase the energy density of fiber-based supercapacitors, MoS2–rGO/MWCNT and rGO/MWCNT fibers have been fabricated by incorporating MoS2 and rGO nanosheets into a well-aligned multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) sheet. With MoS2–rGO/MWCNT and rGO/MWCNT fibers used as the anode and cathode, solid-state asymmetrical supercapacitors were fabricated that operated in a wide potential window of 1.4 V with a high Coulombic efficiency, good rate and cycle stability, and improved energy density.215
However, the development of a one-step route to synthesize 3D graphene composites is more important in practical applications. Our group has synthesized 3D graphene–CeO2 composite aerogels via a one-step in situ exfoliation and electric deposition route in (NH4)2SO4/Ce(NO3)3 and (NH4)2SO4/(NH4)2Ce(NO3)6 mixed electrolytes.208 First, a graphene–CeO2 colloidal solution was formed by the electrochemical exfoliation of a graphite anode and the in situ deposition of CeO2 nanoparticles on graphene sheets. A graphene–CeO2 aerogel was then formed via freeze-drying this colloidal solution. The introduction of CeO2 to the graphene electrode produces additional pseudocapacitance in addition to EDLC. CeO2 nanoparticles in close contact with graphene can enhance the Faradaic reactivity of these composites when used as supercapacitors. This in situ electrochemical route can be extended to synthesize other graphene/rare earth oxide aerogel electrode materials for use in electrochemical energy storage devices.
4. Structural design of graphene materials for lithium ion batteries
In lithium ion batteries, the Li+ ions continuously shuttle between a cathode (often layered lithium metal oxide) and anode (often graphite). As a result of its high SSA and conductivity, graphene can improve the performance of lithium ion batteries compared with commercial graphite anodes (Table 1). The lithium storage properties of graphene nanosheets used as anode materials in lithium ion batteries were first investigated by Yoo et al.216 The specific capacity of the graphene nanosheets was 540 mA h g−1, which is much larger than that of graphite (372 mA h g−1). This is because the lithium ions could be bound not only on both sides of the graphene sheets, but also on the edges and covalent sites of the graphene nanoplatelets.217 The first reversible specific capacity of these graphene electrode was as high as 1264 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1, which is higher than the theoretical capacity of single-layer graphene (744 mA h g−1).218 Furthermore, the first discharge capacity of rGO electrodes has been reported to exhibit a high value of >2000 mA h g−1.219 Our current work has proved that the enhanced interlayer spacing, the increased availability of the surface area and fewer disordered/porous layers in graphene samples can result in a superior lithium storage capacity.220,221 Therefore the majority of research regarding graphene lithium ion batteries has focused on achieving greater disorder in the graphene via structural design, such as heteroatom doping and the formation of hybrid/composite materials.
4.1 Heteroatom-doped graphene electrode materials
Pristine graphene is not suitable for lithium storage as a result of (1) its low binding energy, which leads to lithium clustering, and (2) the high energy barrier limiting lithium diffusion through the graphene sheet.90,222 Defects in the graphene sheets can enable lithium diffusion and prevent lithium clustering; however, a large number of defects on the graphene sheets can destroy the electrical conductivity, mechanical robustness and lateral diffusion of Li.223 Therefore heteroatom-doped graphene can be used to optimally balance lithium storage and diffusion in graphene-based electrodes.90,224 Much work has been carried out on the electrochemical performance of graphene doped with heteroatoms (e.g. N, B and P) for lithium storage.225,226 As B and N have similar sizes to C, they are easily incorporated into graphene. The doping of graphene with various heteroatoms has been discussed in a number of review papers.90,227,228 Typical doping strategies include CVD, post-treatment of GO, arc discharge and the dangling bond functionalization method with different heteroatom precursors.228 As the electronegativity of N (3.5) is higher than that of C (2.55), N-doped graphene is more favorable for the insertion of lithium and the N-doping level can affect the lithium storage capacity. Because a higher density of N atoms in the 2D graphene lattice can result in structural instability, most N-doped carbon materials used for lithium ion batteries have less than 10 wt% N. Zheng et al.229 have reported the synthesis of N-doped graphene particle analogs with an N content of 17.72 wt%, which were prepared by the pyrolysis of an N-containing zeolitic imidazolate framework at 800 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere. These materials delivered a high capacity of 2132 mA h g−1 after 50 discharge–charge cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1 and 785 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles at 5 A g−1. Fig. 16 shows the particles of graphene analogs doped with N within the hexagonal lattice and edges; these can form a large number of nanopores that provide more active sites for lithium storage.
 Fig. 16  Schematic representation of extra lithium storage in N-doped graphene analogous particles. (a) Aggregates of small graphene analogous particles with N atoms localized at their edges can generate large amounts of nanopores with their inner surface decorated with pyridinic and pyrrolic N, which also provide extra capacity. (b) Cleaved surface of the aggregate. (c) Enlargement of a nanopore between the N-doped graphene analogous particles. (d) Theoretical calculations for a model of the space for lithium storage based on a graphene sheet with a hole containing eight N atoms at the edge. Reproduced with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
By selecting the correct heteroatom with a higher electronegativity than carbon, more lithium can be stored on the graphene sheet, which can then display a high capacity, excellent rate capability and long-term cycling performance. In addition to single heteroatom-doped graphene materials, co-doped graphene materials have been developed to increase the electrochemical performance of lithium ion batteries. Graphene co-doped with N and S (NS-G) has been synthesized via thermal treatment of the covalently functionalized GO using 2-aminothiophenol as the source of N and S.230 Co-doping with N and S results in topological defects in graphene and the formation of micropores and mesopores, which can serve as reservoirs for lithium storage. In addition, the random aggregation of crumpled graphene sheets can act as continuous channels for electron transportation. These unique structural characteristics and synergistic effects of N and S co-doping make NS-G a superior anode material for lithium ion batteries, delivering a high reversible capacity of 1090 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles, more than twice that of rGO (420 mA h g−1).
Halogen ions with an electronegativity of approximately χ = 2.66–3.98 have a lower electrostatic repulsion than O2− (χ = 3.44), which can facilitate the extraction/insertion of lithium and stabilize the graphene structure during cycling.231 Ball-milling is an option for the mass production of various heteroatom-doped graphene nanoplatelets (GnPs).232,233 A series of edge-selectively halogenated graphene nanoplatelets (XGnPs; X = Cl, Br or I) have been prepared by simply ball-milling graphite with chlorine (Cl2), bromine (Br2) or iodine (I2) (Fig. 17a).234 The average grain size of HGnP and XGnPs is <1 μm (Fig. 17b–f). As shown in Fig. 17g, these samples showed an initial charge capacity of 511.3 (HGnP), 626.5 (ClGnP), 546.8 (BrGnP) and 562.8 (IGnP) mA h g−1. After 500 cycles, the sample cells delivered charge capacities of 208.5 (HGnP), 229.5 (ClGnP), 210.6 (BrGnP) and 458.0 mA h g−1 (IGnP). IGnP displayed an excellent rate capability and cycling performance, which can be attributed to the high electronegativity of I (χ = 2.66) and the enlarged entrance of the functional edges due to the relatively larger atomic size of iodine (dI > dBr > dCl > dH) at the edges of the GnPs that facilitates the insertion/extraction of lithium.234 Edge-selectively fluorinated graphene nanoplatelets (FGnPs) have been prepared by the mechano-chemically driven reaction between fluorine gas and activated carbon species.235 As a result of the large difference in electronegativity between carbon (χ = 2.55) and fluorine (χ = 3.98) and the strong C–F bond, the edge-fluorination of GnPs can provide maximized charge polarization with enhanced chemical stability and gives a high capacity of 650.3 mA h g−1 at 0.5 C and with a retention of 76.6% of the charge after 500 cycles. The design of high-performance heteroatom-doped graphene materials for lithium ion batteries should consider: (1) the correct selection of heteroatoms with a specific electronegativity and atomic size compared with the C atom; (2) controlled doping concentrations; and (3) the selection of the correct synthesis method, which guarantees uniform doping on the graphene sheets.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic diagram of the mechano-chemical functionalization at the broken edges of graphene nanoplatelets (GnPs) in the presence of H2, Cl2, Br2 or I2 to produce HGnP, ClGnP, BrGnP or IGnP. SEM images: (b) pristine graphite (100 mesh, <150 μm); (c) HGnP; (d) ClGnP; (e) BrGnP; (f) IGnP. Scale bars = 1 μm. (g) Cycling performance at 0.5 C of HGnP and XGnPs (X = Cl, Br or I) in the voltage range 0.02–3.0 V. Continued cycling performance of the IGnP cell was obtained after 500 cycles and one month of storage under ambient conditions (25 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. 
4.2 Graphene composite electrode materials
Graphene composites can overcome the energy storage limitations and poor cycling behavior of bare graphene anodes. The electroactive composite materials used, which include metals and metal oxide nanoparticles, provide additional alloying, insertion and conversion reactions with Li+, leading to an enhanced lithium storage capacity. For example, Co3O4 (<50 nm) wrapped with defect-free graphene shows a capacity as high as 1050 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1 and 900 mA h g−1 at 1000 mA g−1 even after 200 cycles.172 The wrapping of positively charged Co3O4 with negatively charged defect-free graphene (about 10.5 μm2) in pyridine solution was realized by using their electrostatic attraction, which led to a high degree of electrical and mechanical integrity of the electrode. The structural model of graphene composites is shown in Fig. 15. The structural design of graphene composite electrode materials has focused on three aspects: (1) the design of graphene materials; (2) the design of electroactive composite materials; and (3) the design of their assembled model. Exfoliated 2D nanosheets can re-aggregate or re-stack easily as a result of the van der Waals forces between the nanosheets. In lithium storage applications, the diffusion time t of Li+ in the electrode materials is proportional to the square of the diffusion length L (t = L2/D), thus the re-stacking of nanosheets can significantly reduce their electrochemical performance.236,237 We have already reported that 3D graphene-based macroscopic assemblies can prevent the re-stacking of graphene sheets, which is an interesting research direction for graphene-based lithium ion batteries. The advantages of 3D graphene-based macroscopic assemblies are:131 (1) the graphene framework provides a robust buffer to accommodate the volume change during the insertion–extraction process for lithium ions; (2) the loosely stacked graphene with an interconnected network offers a large surface area for more functional nanoparticles to contact with the electrolyte, which simultaneously prevents nanoparticle aggregation; and (3) the porous structure in graphene assemblies is favorable for electrolyte access and rapid lithium ion diffusion. The formation of 3D composites that include active materials and 2D graphene nanosheets is an effective route to preventing the re-stacking of these nanosheets, which improves their electrochemical performance.
Interest in 2D materials has extended to other inorganic materials, such as TMDs and layered oxides.20 Among these materials, MoS2 has received much interest for the construction of 3D graphene composite electrodes in electrochemical energy storage applications. For example, an MoS2-coated 3DGN exhibited reversible capacities of 877 and 665 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at current densities of 100 and 500 mA g−1, respectively, indicating a good cycle performance. In this case, the 3DGN not only served as a template for the deposition of MoS2, but also provided good electrical contact between the current collector and the deposited MoS2.238 A bottom-up approach has been developed to construct 3D architectures using the 2D nanosheets of MoS2 and GO as co-building blocks via their controllable assembly properties.239Fig. 18 shows the synthesis process for 3D MoS2–graphene architectures. The as-obtained 3D MoS2–graphene materials not only had a high surface area (202 m2 g−1), a multilevel porous structure and thin walls, but also showed high electrical conductivity. Such unique features can provide numerous channels for the electrolyte to access and facilitate the ultra-fast diffusion of lithium ions during the cycling processes. At the same time, they are favorable for fast electron transport in the electrode.239 As a consequence, the optimum MoS2–graphene architecture exhibits a very high capacity of 1220 mA h g−1 at a current density of 74 mA g−1, with an excellent cycling performance for lithium storage.
 Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of the construction of 3D MoS2–graphene architectures. This involves three steps: (1) the fabrication of MoS2 and GO nanosheets via the liquid exfoliation and Hummers methods, respectively; (2) hydrothermal treatment of the mixed dispersion of MoS2 and GO nanosheets in isopropyl alcohol/water (1:2 v/v) at 180 °C for 12 h; and (3) chemical reduction of GO to generate 3D MoS2–graphene architectures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 239. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. 
Three-dimensional graphene-based composites are not only electrically conductive, but also macroscopically porous, which allows easy access for electrolyte ions.240 Monolithic 3D metal oxide/GS (graphene sheet) aerogels have been fabricated for use as lithium ion battery anode materials.241 In this case, the GSs self-assemble into an interconnected macroporous framework and Fe2O3 nanocrystals (20–50 nm) are uniformly deposited on the GSs. Benefiting from the integration of a macroporous structure, large surface area, high electrical conductivity and good electrode homogeneity, the hybrid electrode displays a superior rate capability (930, 660 and 520 mA h g−1 at 500, 2000 and 4000 mA g−1, respectively) and excellent prolonged cycle stability at high rates (733 mA h g−1 during 1000 charge–discharge cycles at 2000 mA g−1). Most work has focused on the improvement of the surface area of graphene; however, the growth of porous metal oxide nanostructures on 3DGNs usually involves agglomeration. Porous metal oxides grown on the 3DGNs were synthesized with the use of metal–organic frameworks as the precursors.242 As shown in Fig. 19, a porous 3D graphene structure was used as a template for the growth of the metal–organic framework–3DGN composite, then porous metal oxide–3DGN composites were formed by a two-step annealing process. ZnO–3DGN and Fe2O3–3DGN materials can be synthesized by this method. As shown in Fig. 19f and g, Fe2O3-coated 3D graphene composites display a high reversible capacity of 864 mA h g−1 after 50 discharge–charge cycles at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 (about 76% of the initial capacity of 1133 mA h g−1).242 The high anode performance may be a result of the formation of a high density of cross-plane ion diffusion channels, which promote a high rate of lithium ion transport and storage capability for an ultra-fast charge–discharge function.31 In addition, the areal density of 3DGNs (0.65 mg cm−2) is much lower than that of the commonly used copper current collector (10 mg cm−2).243 This feature makes 3DGNs promising for the development of lightweight lithium ion batteries as a result of the low total weight and high capacity per unit mass of electrode.242
 Fig. 19  Preparation of metal oxide–3DGN composites. (a) Schematic illustration of the process used for the synthesis of metal oxide–3DGN composites. Photographs of the ZnO–3DGN composite (b) as-obtained, (c) under bending and (d) after the release of pressure. (e) Photograph of the obtained Fe2O3–3DGN composite under bending. (f) Discharge–charge curves of the Fe2O3–3DGN composite. (g) Cycling performance of the Fe2O3–3DGN composite and Fe2O3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 242. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. 
Graphene can be considered to be an inactive material when the composite is used as a cathode in lithium ion batteries. In this context, graphene composites can compensate for some of the deficiencies suffered by common cathode materials, i.e. the poor electrical conductivity, the sluggish kinetics of electron and lithium ion transportation and the low specific capacities and particle agglomeration generated from their nanostructures.19,23 In addition, the introduction of graphene into the cathode system can provide a protective barrier for the dissolution of conventional cathode materials.23 For example, introducing graphene into low conductivity LiCoO2, LiMn2O4 and LiFePO4 cathode materials can increase the cycle life and rate performance of these materials.244 The cathode materials can be grown directly on graphene by an in situ synthesis method, which is different from simply blending carbon additives and active materials in the preparation of commercial cathodes. Three-dimensional graphene cathode electrodes have been designed to further improve the electrochemical performance of graphene composite cathodes. For example, Chao et al.245 reported the synthesis of VO2 arrays coated by graphene quantum dots (GQDs) by nanoscale surface engineering, which shows the multiple roles of graphene in composite cathodes. Fig. 20 shows that the designed battery electrodes allow bi-continuous electron and lithium ion transfer channels through the GQD–GF network without the requirement for extra conductive additives. Graphene foam acted as both a scaffold for the bottom-up growth of VO2 and was an efficient current collector. VO2 is a high capacity, but less stable material for lithium ion battery cathodes of average performance. GQDs can serve as a highly efficient surface “sensitizer” and provide protection to further increase the electrochemical properties. The integrated electrodes delivered a lithium storage capacity of 421 mA h g−1 at a rate of 1/3 C and a capacity of 200 mA h g−1 after 1500 cycles at the rate of 60 C. This 3D nanostructured electrode design offers the following advantages: (1) a binder-free electrode rendered by the bifacial graphene foam; (2) VO2 nanobelts beneficial for fast ion diffusion; and (3) GQDs as an effective sensitizer and stabilizer. The rational design of tuning the assemblage structures of cathode materials and graphene is still necessary to further improve the cathode performance. In replacing the commercial carbon black used in cathode preparation, the use of graphene should reduce costs and result in easier handling.
 Fig. 20  Fabrication processes for graphene foam supported GQDs-coated VO2 nanobelt arrays. (a–c) Schematic diagrams of the fabrication process. The yellow bases represent the GF substrate. The green arrays represent the VO2 nanoarrays and the blue covering represents the GQDs. (d–f) Corresponding SEM images (fine structure in inset). Reproduced with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
5. Conclusions
Since the Nobel Prize in physics was awarded for research into graphene in 2010, there has been worldwide interest in this material in the fields of physics, chemistry and materials science. In the field of electrochemical energy storage, there are great expectations for the use of graphene to increase the energy and power density of practical devices in the near future. Much progress has been made toward achieving such an ambition – for example, the design of high-performance graphene-based electrode materials with a high SSA, high conductivity and high packing density, the production of controllable defects on GSs, and the development of graphene composites via structural design methodologies. However, the real breakthroughs are still in the future246 and there is much research to be carried out on graphene-based electrode materials.
(i) Investigation of charge storage mechanisms
Understanding charge transfer and storage at single layer GSs could provide a direction for the structural design of graphene. Studies of this mechanism have demonstrated that the interfacial capacitance of graphene can be influenced by the quantum capacitance, the electronic properties of GSs and the charged state. Graphene electrode materials should therefore be designed to have a high SSA, modified electronic properties and the correct charged state. An understanding of the charge mechanism of functionalized graphene with different C/O ratios will facilitate the optimization of the material properties and allow the design of high-performance chemically modified graphene. It has been suggested that no synergistic effect occurs in CNT–graphene hybrids; the total capacitance is simply the sum of the capacitances of the individual components.247 There is little reason to believe that a breakthrough in energy storage will be achieved by simply combining graphene with other electroactive nanomaterials. To overcome this, in situ characterization techniques are required to determine the actual reaction mechanism in graphene electrode materials.
(ii) Thermodynamically unstable 2D nanosheets
According to classical physics, 2D materials are thermodynamically unstable at any finite temperature as a result of thermal lattice fluctuations.248 Therefore GSs easily re-stack during synthesis and electrochemical tests. To avoid the re-stacking of GSs and to increase the SSA, the key step is to design “spacer” materials for use between the GSs, which could be a self-sacrificial template, ice/water, gases, solvents, CNTs, functional groups (–OH, –COOH or –CO) or metal oxides/metals. The effective prevention of inter-sheet re-stacking is essential to allow the individual sheets in multilayered graphene structures to behave as graphene and to attain the potential storage capacity of graphene. The design of hierarchical and 3D graphene architectures with tailored pore sizes and morphologies will also prevent the re-stacking of GSs. The rational design of the structure of graphene electrode materials could allow us to develop a new generation of devices that approach the theoretical limit for electrochemical storage and deliver electrical energy both rapidly and efficiently.
(iii) From performance demand to structural design
There are some trade-offs in graphene electrode materials applied in electrochemical energy storage devices. For example, increasing the defects on graphene can promote its performance in energy storage devices, although it will also reduce the conductivity of graphene. Highly porous graphene electrodes offer a large SSA and favor ion diffusion, resulting in a high gravimetric capacitance, but usually have a lower volumetric capacitance due to the relatively low packing density. In addition, the improvement of one specific property of graphene cannot guarantee an enhancement in the electrochemical performance. In this context, the design and optimization of the microstructures of graphene-based electrode materials on the basis of the system-level control of its total electrochemical performance is the design principle. For example, a large number of surface functional groups can cause a decrease in the electrical conductivity of graphene, so the location and density of functional groups need to be carefully controlled. In lithium ion batteries, the type and density of heteroatoms on doped graphene should be carefully selected to optimally balance lithium storage and diffusion for graphene-based electrodes. To obtain graphene electrode materials with high volumetric capacitance, we must design small-sized spacers to construct high packing density graphene materials.
This review has paved the way to a more rational design strategy for energy storage materials based on graphene. The review has addressed the advantages and limitations of graphene as an energy storage material and reported the current state-of-the-art in this field. To reach the theoretical charge storage limit of graphene electrode materials for use in electrochemical energy storage devices, much work is needed in the rational design of the structure and chemistry of graphene materials, which will require inputs from the diverse fields of physics, chemistry and material science.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 51125009 and 91434118), the National Natural Science Foundation for Creative Research Group (grant no. 21221061) and the Hundred Talents Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences is acknowledged.
Notes and references
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieval and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liao, H. Peng and Z. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12194–12200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, L. Tang and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3157–3180 RSC .
A. Zurutuza and C. Marinelli, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 730–734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Stoller, S. J. Park, Y. W. Zhu, J. H. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. J. Zhi and K. Müllen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liang, J. T. Robinson, Y. Li, A. Jackson, Y. Cui and H. Dai, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2644–2647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Z. Ma, R. Kozarsky, M. Holman, Graphene Market Update. Lux Research http://www.luxresearchinc.com, 26 June 2014.
H. Alcalde, J. de la Fuente, B. Kamp and A. Zurutuza, Proc. IEEE, 2013, 101, 1793–1800 CrossRef .
Anonymous, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 737 Search PubMed .
J. Ahn and B. H. Hong, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 737–738 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Torrisi and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 738–739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 739–741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Böhm, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 741–742 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Drndić, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 743 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kostarelos and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 744–745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Siochi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 745–747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 1246501 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Raccichini, A. Varzi, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 271–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2713–2731 RSC .
H. Zhang, X. Lv, Y. Li, L. Li and J. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 380–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Dubal, O. Ayyad, V. Ruiz and P. Gómez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1777–1790 RSC .
J. Liu, H. Xia, D. Xue and L. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12086–12087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saiful Islam and C. A. J. Fisher, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 185–204 RSC .
Y. Li and H. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5257–5275 RSC .
C. Liu, Z. Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu and B. Z. Jang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4863–4868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. Beidaghi and Y. Gogotsi, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 253–254 CrossRef PubMed .
R. L. D. Whitby, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9733–9754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, D. Yang, Z. Yin, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Small, 2014, 10, 3480–3498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ambrosi, C. K. Chua, A. Bonanni and M. Pumera, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7150–7188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Fal’ko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Yang, X. L. Feng, S. Ivanovici and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8408–8411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. P. Randviir, D. A. C. Brownson and C. E. Banks, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 426–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Chabot, D. Higgins, A. Yu, X. Xiao, Z. Chen and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1564–1596 CAS .
C. Hu, L. Song, Z. Zhang, N. Chen, Z. Feng and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 31–54 CAS .
D. Yu, K. Goh, H. Wang, L. Wei, W. Jiang, Q. Zhang, L. Dai and Y. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 555–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Zhong, X. Huang, N. O. Weiss, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4554 CAS .
J. Xia, F. Chen, J. Li and N. Tao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 505–509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, F. Li, L. P. Ma and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E28–E62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Dahn, T. Zheng, Y. Liu and J. S. Xue, Science, 1995, 270, 590–593 CAS .
K. Sato, M. Noguchi, A. Demachi, N. Oki and M. Endo, Science, 1994, 264, 556–558 CAS .
G. Wang, X. Shen, J. Yao and J. Park, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2049–2053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113–1132 CAS .
R. Mukherjee, A. V. Thomas, D. Datta, E. Singh, J. Li, O. Eksik, V. B. Shenoy and N. Koratkar, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3710 CAS .
J. C. Meyer, C. Kisielowski, R. Erni, M. D. Rossell, M. F. Crommie and A. Zettl, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3582–3586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Eigler and A. Hirsch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7720–7738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, G. Zhou, L. Yin, W. Ren, F. Li and H. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 107–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Singh, D. Joung, L. Zhai, S. Das, S. I. Khondaker and S. Seal, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2011, 56, 1178–1271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Y. Yin, S. X. Wu, X. Y. Qi, Q. Y. He, Q. C. Zhang, Q. Y. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876–1902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Y. He, S. X. Wu, Z. Y. Yin and H. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 1764–1772 RSC .
Y. Guo, K. Xu, C. Wu, J. Zhao and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 637–646 RSC .
D. Yu, Q. Qian, L. Wei, W. Jiang, K. Goh, J. Wei, J. Zhang and Y. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 647–662 RSC .
Y. Zhao, X. Li, B. Yan, D. Li, S. Lawes and X. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 869–884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, N. Mahmood, J. Zhu, Y. Hou and S. H. Sun, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 668–683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, Q. Liu and S. Guo, Nano-Micro Lett., 2014, 6, 316–326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Salunkhe, Y. Lee, K. Chang, J. Li, P. Simon, J. Tang, N. L. Torad, C. Hu and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 13838–13852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 560–563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, C. Sun and D. Xue, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 732–750 RSC .
K. Chen, S. Song and D. Xue, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 23338–23343 RSC .
K. Chen, D. Xue and S. Komarneni, J. Power Sources, 2015, 279, 365–371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, S. Yin and D. Xue, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1161–1166 RSC .
A. Ciesielski and P. Samori, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 381–398 RSC .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. Rao, A. K. Sood, K. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7752–7777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Paton, E. Varrla, C. Backes, R. J. Smith, U. Khan, A. O’Neill, C. Boland, M. Lotya, O. M. Istrate, P. King and T. Higgins, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 624–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, A. Lombardo, T. Hasan, Z. Sun, L. Colombo and A. C. Ferrari, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 564–589 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. R. Miller, R. A. Outlaw and B. C. Holloway, Science, 2010, 329, 1637–1639 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) D. Deng, X. Pan, H. Zhang, Q. Fu, D. Tan and X. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2168–2171 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) M. H. Rummeli, A. Bachmatiuk, A. Scott, F. Borrnert, J. H. Warner, V. Hoffman, J. Lin, G. Cuniberti and B. Buchner, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4206–4210 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Chen and J. Li, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 6027–6053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ren and H. Cheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 726–730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 46, 14–33 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Y. Jeon, Y. R. Shin, G. J. Sohn, H. J. Choi, S. Y. Bae, J. Mahmood, S. M. Jung, J. M. Seo, M. J. Kim, D. W. Chang, L. M. Dai and J. B. Baek, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 5588–5593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Schniepp, J. Li, M. J. McAllister, H. Sai, M. Herrera-Alonso, D. H. Adamson, R. K. Prud’homme, R. Car, D. A. Saville and I. A. Aksay, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 8535–8539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. F. Pei, J. Du, F. Li, K. Huang, W. Ren and H. M. Cheng, Method for preparing high-quality graphene. Chinese Pat., ZL.201110282370.5,  2011 Search PubMed .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Feng, R. Cheng, X. Zhao, X. Duan and J. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1539 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Zeng, Z. Fan, J. Liu and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5979–6004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Feng and J. Li, Small, 2014, 11, 2165–2181 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, Z. Wen, H. Feng and J. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 5631–5636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cai, D. Thorpe, D. H. Adamson and H. C. Schniepp, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24992–25002 RSC .
N. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1226419 CrossRef .
K. Chen, S. Song and D. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2441–2453 CAS .
D. Wei, L. Grande, V. Chundi, R. White, C. Bower, P. Andrew and T. Ryhanena, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1239–1241 RSC .
M. Quintana, J. Tapia and M. Prato, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2014, 5, 2328–2338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Soldano, A. Mahmood and E. Dujardin, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2127–2150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .
M. Agharkar, S. Kochrekar, S. Hidouri and M. A. Azeez, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 59, 323–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, M. Ma, L. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Huang and X. Dong, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13301–13313 RSC .
X. Wang, G. Sun, P. Routh, D. Kim, W. Huang and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7067–7098 RSC .
L. L. Zhang, Y. Gu and G. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9395–9408 CAS .
R. Kotz and M. Carlen, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2483–2498 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ji, X. Zhao, Z. Qiao, J. Jung, Y. Zhu, Y. Lu, L. Zhang, A. H. MacDonald and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3317 Search PubMed .
M. D. Stoller, C. W. Magnuson, Y. Zhu, S. Murali, J. W. Suk, R. Piner and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4685–4689 CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1094–1103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Wen and J. H. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8707–8713 RSC .
Z. H. Wen, J. Liu and J. H. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 743–747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, T. Q. Lin, F. Q. Huang, Y. J. Zhong, Z. Wang, Y. F. Tang and B. Hui, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2263–2269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. A. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Hall, M. Mirzaeian, S. Isobel Fletcher, F. B. Sillars, A. J. R. Rennie, G. O. Shitta-Bey, G. Wilson, A. Cruden and R. Carter, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1238–1251 CAS .
L. Zhang, F. Zhang, X. Yang, G. Long, Y. Wu, T. Zhang, K. Leng, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, A. Yu and Y. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1408 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Zhao, M. D. Stoller, Y. Zhu, H. Ji, S. Murali, Y. Wu, S. Perales, B. Clevenger and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1806–1812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhou, Y. Cui, P. Xiao, M. Jiang and B. Han, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, Science, 2011, 334, 917–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, T. N. Cong, W. Yang, C. Tan, Y. Li and Y. Ding, Prog. Nat. Sci., 2009, 19, 291–312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, C. Cheng, Y. Wang, L. Qiu and D. Li, Science, 2013, 341, 534–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, Y. D. Noh, K. Li, S. Komarneni and D. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 10770–10779 CAS .
O. Ghodbane, J. Pascal and F. Favier, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1130–1139 CAS .
Y. Tao, X. Xie, W. Lv, D. Tang, D. Kong, Z. Huang, H. Nishihara, T. Ishii, B. Li, D. Golberg, F. Kang, T. Kyotani and Q. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2975 Search PubMed .
J. Yan, Q. Wang, T. Wei, L. Jiang, M. Zhang, X. Jing and Z. Fan, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4720–4729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, Q. Wang, T. Wei, L. Jiang, M. Zhang, X. Jing and Z. Fan, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4720–4729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, K. Parvez, A. Winter, H. Vieker, X. Liu, S. Han, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4552–4558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. Hu, L. Song, L. Wang, G. Shi, L. Dai and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1913–1918 CAS .
T. Kobayashi, N. Kimura, J. Chi, S. Hirata and D. Hobara, Small, 2010, 6, 1210–1215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, J. Zhu, L. Qiu and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2833–2838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu and L. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 467–470 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jha, P. Ramesh, E. Bekyarova, M. E. Itkis and R. C. Haddon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 438–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, L. Li, C. Zhang, G. Casillas, Z. Sun, Z. Yan, G. Ruan, Z. Peng, A. O. Raji, C. Kittrell, R. H. Hauge and J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1225 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Du, D. Yu, L. Dai, S. Ganguli, V. Varshney and A. K. Roy, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4810–4816 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, C. Zhang, Z. Yan, Y. Zhu, Z. Peng, R. H. Hauge, D. Natelson and J. M. Tour, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 72–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Xie, C. X. Guo and C. M. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2559–2579 CAS .
K. Chen and D. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 22576–22583 CAS .
Y. Meng, Y. Zhao, C. Hu, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, Z. Zhang, G. Shi and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2326–2331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, C. Hu, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Xiang, C. C. Young, X. Wang, Z. Yan, C. C. Hwang, G. Cerioti, J. Lin, J. Kono, M. Pasquali and J. M. Tour, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4592–4597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. C. Jiang, C. G. Hu, Z. L. Dong, J. L. Xue, Y. N. Meng, N. Zheng, P. W. Chen and L. T. Qu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2406–2412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, Z. Liu, H. Y. Sun and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3249–3253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Dong, C. C. Jiang, H. H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, G. Q. Shi, L. Jiang and L. T. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1856–1861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Dong, C. C. Jiang, H. H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, G. Q. Shi, L. Jiang and L. T. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cong, J. Chen and S. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7295–7325 RSC .
J. Shao, W. Lv and Q. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5586–5612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Nyholm, G. Nystrom, A. Mihranyan and M. Stromme, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3751–3769 CAS .
H. Nishide and K. Oyaizu, Science, 2008, 319, 737–738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hua, J. W. Choi, Y. Yang, S. Jeong, F. L. Mantia, L. F. Cui and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 21490–21494 CrossRef PubMed .
V. L. Pushparaj, M. M. Shaijumon, A. Kumar, S. Murugesan, L. Ci, R. Vajtai, R. J. Linhardt, O. Nalamasu and P. M. Ajayan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 13574–13577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, E. J. Zimney, R. D. Piner, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2007, 448, 457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Chen, Q. H. Yang, Y. G. Yang, W. Lv, Y. F. Wen, P. X. Hou, M. Z. Wang and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Wu, W. Lv, J. Xu, D. Han, X. Chen, P. Wang and Q. H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17204 RSC .
L. Qiu, X. Yang, X. Gou, W. Yang, Z. F. Ma, G. G. Wallace and D. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 10653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, J. Zhu, L. Qiu and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2833–2838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, F. Liu, S. Song and D. Xue, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 7771–7776 RSC .
F. Liu, S. Song, D. Xue and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1089–1094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, F. Liu, D. Xue and S. Komarneni, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 432–439 RSC .
W. Lv, Z. Li, G. Zhou, J. Shao, D. Kong, X. Zheng, B. Li, F. Li, F. Kang and Q. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3456–3463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qiu, J. Z. Liu, S. L. Y. Chang, Y. Z. Wu and D. Li, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1241 CrossRef PubMed .
W. L. Li, K. Lu and J. Y. Walz, Int. Mater. Rev., 2012, 57, 37–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Luo, J. L. Liu, Z. Y. Zeng, C. F. Ng, L. J. Ma, H. Zhang, J. Y. Lin, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6136–6143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Cao, Z. Y. Yin and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1850–1865 CAS .
X. H. Cao, Y. M. Shi, W. H. Shi, G. Lu, X. Huang, Q. Y. Yan, Q. C. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 3163–3168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yan and D. Xue, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1055–1058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, F. Liu, K. Gao, J. Wu and D. Xue, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6073–6084 RSC .
J. Liu, H. Xia, L. Lu and D. Xue, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1506–1510 RSC .
K. Chen, S. Song and D. Xue, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 10028–10033 RSC .
J. Liu and D. Xue, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 1525–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, H. Feng, M. Liu, K. Zhang and J. Li, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10839–10843 RSC .
Y. Jiao, D. Han, L. Liu, L. Ji, G. Guo, J. Hu, D. Yang and A. Dong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5727–5731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen and L. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6229–6233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yoon, K. Lee, C. Baik, H. Yoo, M. Min, Y. Park, S. M. Lee and H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4437–4444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhi, X. Wang, D. Tang, Y. Xu, Q. Weng, X. Jiang, M. Mitome, D. Golberg and Y. Bando, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2905 Search PubMed .
K. He, G. D. Lee, A. W. Robertson, E. Yoon and J. H. Warner, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3040 Search PubMed .
J. Lu, Y. Bao, C. L. Su and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8350–8357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, M. Fang, F. Wu, H. Wu, L. Wang and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5817–5819 RSC .
L. Y. Jiao, L. Zhang, X. R. Wang, G. Diankov and H. J. Dai, Nature, 2009, 458, 877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Wang, Z. Jin, K. K. Kim, A. J. Hilmer, G. L. Paulus, C. J. Shih, M. H. Ham, J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Kong, P. Jarillo-Herrero and M. S. Strano, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 724–732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Park, B. H. Kim, S. H. Song, J. Kwon, B. S. Kong, K. Kang and S. Jeon, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2871–2876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Shih, A. Vijayaraghavan, R. Krishnan, R. Sharma, J. H. Han, M. H. Ham, Z. Jin, S. C. Lin, G. L. C. Paulus, N. F. Reuel, Q. H. Wang, D. Blankschtein and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 439–445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Zhong and T. M. Swager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17896–17899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Valles, C. Drummond, H. Saadaoui, C. A. Furtado, M. He, O. Roubeau, L. Ortolani, M. Monthioux and A. Penicaud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15802–15804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Y. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun’ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Feng, Y. Wu and J. Li, Small, 2014, 11, 2233–2238 CrossRef PubMed .
K. H. Park, D. Lee, J. Kim, J. Song, Y. M. Lee, H. Kim and J. Park, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4306–4313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lerf, H. He, M. Forster and J. Klinowski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 4477–4482 CrossRef CAS .
N. I. Kovtyukhova, Y. Wang, A. Berkdemir, R. Cruz-Silva, M. Terrones, V. H. Crespi and T. E. Mallouk, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 957–963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. J. Low, F. C. Walsh, M. H. Chakrabarti, M. A. Hashim and M. A. Hussain, Carbon, 2013, 54, 1–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, F. Luo, H. X. Wu, Y. H. Liu, C. Zhang and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1518–1525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Parvez, R. J. Li, S. R. Puniredd, Y. Hernandez, F. Hinkel, S. H. Wang, X. L. Feng and K. Müllen, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3598–3606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Parvez, Z. Wu, R. Li, X. Liu, R. Graf, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6083–6091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Beck, J. Jiang and H. Krohn, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 389, 161–165 CrossRef .
C. A. Goss, J. C. Brumfield, E. A. Irene and R. W. Murray, Anal. Chem., 1993, 65, 1378–1389 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen and D. Xue, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 436, 41–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Buglione, E. L. K. Chng, A. Ambrosi, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 14, 5 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bonanni and M. Pumera, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 26, 52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Song, X. Ji, W. Deng, Q. Chen, C. Shen and C. E. Banks, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4799 RSC .
M. Z. Hossain, J. E. Johns, K. H. Bevan, H. J. Karmel, Y. T. Liang, S. Yoshimoto, K. Mukai, T. Koitaya, J. Yoshinobu, M. Kawai, A. M. Lear, L. L. Kesmodel, S. L. Tait and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 305–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu and D. Xue, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 10716–10722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Park, S. K. Park, J. Han, T. Y. Ko, S. Lee, J. Oh, S. Ryu, H. S. Park and S. Park, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 36377–36384 RSC .
P. Chen, J. Yang, S. Li, Z. Wang, T. Xiao, Y. Qian and S. H. Yu, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lei, L. Lu and X. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6391 CAS .
L. Zhao, L. Z. Fan, M. Q. Zhou, H. Guan, S. Qiao, M. Antonietti and M. M. Titirici, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jin, J. Yao, C. Kittrell and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Jeong, J. W. Lee, W. H. Shin, Y. J. Choi, H. J. Shin, J. K. Kang and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, H. Yang, S. G. Zhen, C. K. Poh, A. Chaurasia, J. Luo, X. Wu, E. K. L. Yeow, N. G. Sahoo, J. Lin and Z. Shen, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 11745 RSC .

  (a) J. W. Lee, J. M. Ko and J. D. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 85, 459 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Z. Wen, X. Wang, S. Mao, Z. Bo, H. Kim, S. Cui, G. Lu, X. Feng and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5610–5616 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) A. Fischer, J. O. Mueller, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2489–2496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zou, I. A. Kinloch and R. A. W. Dryfe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19495–19499 CAS .
M. Seredych and T. J. Bandosz, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11717 CAS .
L. L. Zhang, X. Zhao, H. X. Ji, M. D. Stoller, L. F. Lai, S. Murali, S. McDonnell, B. Cleveger, R. M. Wallace and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9618 CAS .

  (a) J. Han, L. L. Zhang, S. Lee, J. Oh, K. S. Lee, J. R. Potts, J. Y. Ji, X. Zhao, R. S. Ruoff and S. Park, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 19 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Z. Wu, A. Winter, L. Chen, Y. Sun, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5130–5135 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) D. W. Wang, F. Li, J. P. Zhao, W. C. Ren, Z. G. Chen, J. Tan, Z. S. Wu, I. Gentle, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1745–1752 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) B. G. Choi, J. Hong, W. H. Hong, P. T. Hammond and H. Park, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7205–7213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, X. Y. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
X. Lv, W. Fu, H. Chang, H. Zhang, J. Cheng, G. Zhang, Y. Song, C. Hu and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1539–1546 RSC .
X. Tu, S. Luo and J. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 14359–14366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Cao, Z. Y. Zeng, W. H. Shi, P. R. Yep, Q. Y. Yan and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 1703–1707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wei, T. C. He, X. Teng, S. X. Wu, L. Ma, H. Zhang, J. Ma, Y. H. Yang, H. Y. Chen, Y. Han, H. D. Sun and L. Huang, Small, 2012, 8, 2271–2276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, L. Zhang, B. Chen, N. Ji, F. Chen, Y. Zhang and Z. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2733–2738 RSC .
F. Liu, J. Zhu and D. Xue, Graphene, 2013, 1, 58–64 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Liu and D. Xue, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2015, 19, 7–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, J. Zhu and D. Xue, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2013, 5, 904–908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen and D. Xue, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 446, 77–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Cao, Y. M. Shi, W. H. Shi, G. Lu, X. Huang, Q. Y. Yan, Q. C. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 3163–3168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Dong, H. Xu, X. W. Wang, Y. X. Huang, M. B. C. Park, H. Zhang, L. H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206–3213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, X. Cao, Z. Zeng, W. Shi, Y. Zhu, Q. Yan, H. Liu, J. Wang and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2216–2221 CAS .
J. Zhou, Y. Huang, X. Cao, B. Ouyang, W. Sun, C. Tan, Y. Zhang, Q. Ma, S. Liang, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7035–7039 RSC .
T. Chen, L. B. Qiu, Z. B. Yang and H. S. Peng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5031–5041 RSC .
G. Sun, J. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Wang, H. Li, Y. Yu, W. Huang, H. Zhang and P. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12576–12580 CAS .
G. Sun, X. Zhang, R. Lin, J. Yang, H. Zhang and P. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4651–4656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Yoo, J. Kim, E. Hosono, H. Zhou, T. Kudo and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2277–2282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, X. Shen, J. Yao and J. Park, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2049–2053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lian, X. Zhu, S. Liang, Z. Li, W. Yang and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 3909–3914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. O. A. Vargas, Á. Caballero and J. Morales, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2083–2092 RSC .
E. J. Yoo, J. Kim, E. Hosono, H. S. Zhou, T. Kudo and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2277–2282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. C. Brownson, D. K. Kampouris and C. E. Banks, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6944–6976 RSC .
Y. Y. Liu, V. I. Artyukhov, M. J. Liu, A. R. Harutyunyan and B. I. Yakobson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1737–1742 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yao, F. Gunes, H. Q. Ta, S. M. Lee, S. J. Chae, K. Y. Sheem, C. S. Cojocaru, S. S. Xie and Y. H. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8646–8654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ma, X. Shao and D. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8911–8915 RSC .
Z. S. Wu, W. C. Ren, L. Xu, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5463–5471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, N. Mahmood, H. Yin, F. Liu and Y. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4932–4937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. R. Rao, K. Gopalakrishnan and A. Govindaraj, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 324–343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue, B. Wu, Q. Bao and Y. Liu, Small, 2014, 10, 2975–2991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zheng, Y. Yang and Q. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ai, Z. Luo, J. Jiang, J. Zhu, Z. Du, Z. Fan, L. Xie, H. Zhang, W. Huang and T. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6186–6192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Frayret, A. Villesuzanne, N. Spaldin, E. Bousquet, J. N. Chotard, N. Recham and J. M. Tarascon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 15512–15522 RSC .
I. Y. Jeon, H. J. Choi, M. Choi, J. M. Seo, S. M. Jung, M. J. Kim, S. Zhang, L. P. Zhang, Z. H. Xia, L. M. Dai, N. Park and J. B. Baek, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2260 Search PubMed .
I. Y. Jeon, H. J. Choi, S. M. Jung, J. M. Seo, M. J. Kim, L. M. Dai and J. B. Baek, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1386–1393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, I. Jeon, J. Seo, S. Dou, L. Dai and J. Baek, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7317–7323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Jeon, M. J. Ju, J. Xu, H. Choi, J. Seo, M. Kim, I. T. Choi, H. M. Kim, J. C. Kim, J. Lee, H. K. Liu, H. K. Kim, S. Dou, L. Dai and J. Baek, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1170–1179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. Van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J. M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Y. Shi, W. Shi, X. Rui, Q. Yan, J. Kong and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 3433–3438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, S. Yang, L. Zhan, L. Ma, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 125–130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chabi, C. Peng, D. Hu and Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2440–2445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, C. Xu, M. Du, J. Sun, L. Gao, P. Zhang, H. Yao and C. Lin, Small, 2014, 10, 2260–2269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, B. Zheng, X. Rui, W. Shi, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1404–1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Z. Chen, W. Ren, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 17360–17365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kucinskis, G. Bajars and J. Kleperis, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 66–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chao, C. Zhu, X. Xia, J. Liu, X. Zhang, J. Wang, P. Liang, J. Lin, H. Zhang, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 565–573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gogotsi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5369–5371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Buglione and M. Pumera, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 157, 45–47 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Miró, M. Audiffred and T. Heine, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6537–6554 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cs00147aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Kunfeng Chen
	Kunfeng Chen received his BE degree in inorganic non-metallic materials engineering in 2009 and his PhD in inorganic chemistry in 2014, both from Dalian University of Technology under the supervision of Professor Dongfeng Xue. He is currently working as Assistant Professor in Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests focus on the controllable growth of functional materials such as graphene and metal oxide materials for electrochemical energy storage.

Shuyan Song
	Shuyan Song received his BSc degree in Chemistry in 2003 and his MSc in inorganic chemistry in 2006, both from Northeast Normal University. He then joined the group of Professor Hongjie Zhang at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), where he received his PhD in inorganic chemistry in 2009. He is currently working as Associate Professor at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, CAS. His research is primarily in the development of new and functional nanomaterials for clean energy, including thermoelectric devices, photocatalysts and lithium ion batteries, which are fundamentally important and potentially useful in renewable energy applications.

Fei Liu
	Fei Liu received his Bachelor degree in applied chemistry from Dalian University of Technology, and continued PhD at Dalian University of Technology and Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry under the supervision of Professor Dongfeng Xue. After being awarded his PhD degree in 2012, he worked as a postdoctoral researcher in the Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology for one year and then started work at the University of Manchester, UK as a research associate in early 2014. His current research interests focus on the design, mass production and functionality of graphene-based materials.

Dongfeng Xue
	Professor Dongfeng Xue received his PhD from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CIAC, CAS) in 1998. From 1999 to 2003 he worked at the Universitaet Osnabrueck (AvH research fellow), the University of Ottawa (postdoctoral researcher) and at National Institute for Materials Science, Japan (JSPS postdoctoral researcher). In 2001 he was appointed as full Professor in Dalian University of Technology. In 2011 he joined CIAC as a full Professor. His research interests include crystallography, crystallization, the calculation and simulation of functional materials, the chemical synthesis of condensed matter and electrochemical energy storage.

Dimensions	2D	3D	3D
Experimental specific surface area (m2 g−1)	About 1500 (2630 for theoretical SSA)	10–20	150013
Electric conductivity (S cm−1)	About 2000	2–30000	Low
Density (g cm−3)	0.05–0.75, 1.33	2.2	0.5–0.7
Theoretical Li+ storage capacity (mA h g−1)	744 (LiC3)	372 mA h g−1 (LiC6)	—
Theoretical electrical double-layer capacitance (F g−1)	550	—	150–300

 	Fig. 1  Energy and power densities of graphene-based supercapacitors compared with commercially available state-of-the-art energy storage systems. (a) All-solid-state micro-supercapacitors (SCs). Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Holey graphene framework electrochemical capacitors (HGF-ECs). Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Structures of graphene (with and without defects) and graphene oxide. (b) The most common structural design route for graphene-based materials.	 

Mechanical exfoliation	High	Middle	Low	Very low	Low
Synthesis on SiC	High	Middle	Middle	Low	Low
Bottom-up synthesis	High	Middle	Middle	Middle	Middle
Chemical vapor deposition	High	Middle	Middle	Middle	Low
Liquid phase exfoliation	High	Middle	Low	High	Low
Reducing graphene oxide	Low	Low	Low	High	Low

 	Fig. 3  Four typical production methods for synthesizing small graphene sheets via the exfoliation of bulk graphite (the top-down approach) used in the structural design of graphene for use in electrochemical energy storage devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic drawing of the simple and green process of synthesizing porous 3D graphene-based materials. (b, c) SEM and (d, e) TEM images of products from mixtures of phenol and formaldehyde with GO at optimized ratios. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Schematic illustration showing the experimental steps for producing activated GO (aG-O) film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Self-assembly of high density porous graphene macroform (HPGM). (a) Schematic diagram of the formation of graphene-based 3D porous macroforms with different drying process and SEM images of the resultant porous graphene macroform (PGM) and HPGM. (b) PGM and HPGM in water; an enlarged view shows a rod-like HPGM with bubbling due to the desorption of the adsorbed air. Note that the material shown here is PGM with adsorbed water as a result of the hydrophilic properties. (c) Rod-like HPGM (lower) with writing using a soft pencil (upper) as the reference. (d) Photograph of HPGM monoliths with different shapes but similar SSA (300–500 m2 g−1). Reproduced with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the holey graphene framework as an ideal material for supercapacitor electrodes. Initial solvated 3D macroporous structures of (a) graphene framework and (b) holey graphene framework. Compressed films of (c) the solvated graphene framework and (d) the holey graphene framework. Closed-up view of (e) graphene framework and (f) holey graphene framework films, with the arrows highlighting the ion transport pathway. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic diagram of the synthesis of CNT–graphene microfibers. (a) The fiber was synthesized by injecting a homogeneous solution containing acid-oxidized SWNTs, GO and EDA through a pump into a flexible silica capillary column. This was followed by in situ thermal treatment in an oven at 220 °C for 6 h before a continuous fiber was pushed into a water reservoir by a pressurized nitrogen flow. (b) Photograph of the as-prepared fibers collected in water. (c) A dry fiber with diameter of about 50 mm and length of about 0.5 m. (d) Planar structures obtained by bending fibers. (e) Compressed and stretched fiber springs. (f) A knitted textile fabricated from fibers. All scale bars = 0.5 cm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a–c) Schematic drawing of the formation mechanism for a GO aerogel during the freeze-drying process. (d, e) Schematic drawing of the chemical origin for the expansion of the GO layers via crystallized water molecules within the graphene sheets.142	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Digital and (b) SEM images of a GO aerogel. (c) Digital and (d) SEM images of a graphene aerogel. (e–g) Digital and (h) SEM images of graphene paper. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration for fabricating non-stacking graphene oxide (NSGO). (a) Fabrication process of NSGO using hexane (Hx) as an anti-solvent. (b) GO dispersed in water can easily make a densely stacked GO film after drying. (c) Non-stacking GO (NSGO) shows a highly aggregated and crumpled structure even after complete drying. Reproduced with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Growth process for strutted graphene (SG) containing graphitic membranes and struts (marked in gray). Scale bar = 50 μm. (b) SEM image and optical photograph of a 70 mg piece of SG. (c) SEM image of the flat rear side of the SG product with the regular arrangement of connected cells identified by artificial colors. (d, e) 2D and 3D optical photos of SG networks. (f) Photos of original, compressed and recovered states of a SG specimen. (g) XRD profile of SG. Scale bars = 200 μm (b–e) and 1 cm (f). Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  Photographs of: (a) graphite flakes after electrochemical exfoliation; (b) dispersed exfoliated graphene in DMF solution (concentration about 2.5 mg mL−1); and (c) exfoliated graphene powders on a bulk scale (about 16.3 g). (d) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of electrochemical exfoliation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the electrochemical oxidation of the graphene framework and the introduction of pseudocapacitance in addition to EDLC by controllable surface functionalization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Fabrication process for all-solid-state supercapacitors based on N and B co-doped graphene aerogels (BN-GAs) including a combined hydrothermal process and freeze-drying process. (b) Atomic force microscopy image and (c) the corresponding height profile of the GO used with a thickness of about 1 nm. (d) Digital images of two pairs of GO solutions with different volumes in vials and N/B co-doped graphene hydrogels before and after hydrothermal self-assembly. Inset: digital images of the BN-GAs obtained after freeze-drying. (e) Low and (f) high magnification SEM images of the as-prepared BN-GAs. (g) Low and (h) high magnification SEM images of the as-prepared BN-GAs as binder/additive-free electrode upon physical pressing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198b. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of the different structures of graphene composite electrode materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic representation of extra lithium storage in N-doped graphene analogous particles. (a) Aggregates of small graphene analogous particles with N atoms localized at their edges can generate large amounts of nanopores with their inner surface decorated with pyridinic and pyrrolic N, which also provide extra capacity. (b) Cleaved surface of the aggregate. (c) Enlargement of a nanopore between the N-doped graphene analogous particles. (d) Theoretical calculations for a model of the space for lithium storage based on a graphene sheet with a hole containing eight N atoms at the edge. Reproduced with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic diagram of the mechano-chemical functionalization at the broken edges of graphene nanoplatelets (GnPs) in the presence of H2, Cl2, Br2 or I2 to produce HGnP, ClGnP, BrGnP or IGnP. SEM images: (b) pristine graphite (100 mesh, <150 μm); (c) HGnP; (d) ClGnP; (e) BrGnP; (f) IGnP. Scale bars = 1 μm. (g) Cycling performance at 0.5 C of HGnP and XGnPs (X = Cl, Br or I) in the voltage range 0.02–3.0 V. Continued cycling performance of the IGnP cell was obtained after 500 cycles and one month of storage under ambient conditions (25 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of the construction of 3D MoS2–graphene architectures. This involves three steps: (1) the fabrication of MoS2 and GO nanosheets via the liquid exfoliation and Hummers methods, respectively; (2) hydrothermal treatment of the mixed dispersion of MoS2 and GO nanosheets in isopropyl alcohol/water (1:2 v/v) at 180 °C for 12 h; and (3) chemical reduction of GO to generate 3D MoS2–graphene architectures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 239. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 19  Preparation of metal oxide–3DGN composites. (a) Schematic illustration of the process used for the synthesis of metal oxide–3DGN composites. Photographs of the ZnO–3DGN composite (b) as-obtained, (c) under bending and (d) after the release of pressure. (e) Photograph of the obtained Fe2O3–3DGN composite under bending. (f) Discharge–charge curves of the Fe2O3–3DGN composite. (g) Cycling performance of the Fe2O3–3DGN composite and Fe2O3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 242. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  Fabrication processes for graphene foam supported GQDs-coated VO2 nanobelt arrays. (a–c) Schematic diagrams of the fabrication process. The yellow bases represent the GF substrate. The green arrays represent the VO2 nanoarrays and the blue covering represents the GQDs. (d–f) Corresponding SEM images (fine structure in inset). Reproduced with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cs00147a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
