Carbon nitride based materials: more than just a support for single-atom catalysis  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CS00806H View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D2CS00806H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2023, Advance Article Carbon nitride based materials: more than just a support for single-atom catalysis
Guilherme F. S. R Rocha

a, 
Marcos A. R. da Silva

a, 
Andrea Rogolino

b, 
Gabriel A. A. Diab

a, 
Luis F. G. Noleto

a, 
Markus Antoniettic and 
Ivo F. Teixeira

*ac
aDepartment of Chemistry, Federal University of São Carlos, SP, Brazil. E-mail: ivo@ufscar.br
bCavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0HE, UK
cDepartment of Colloid Chemistry, Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Potsdam, Germany
Received 
31st January 2023
First published on 6th July 2023AbstractRecently, the missing link between homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis has been found and it was named single-atom catalysis (SAC). However, the SAC field still faces important challenges, one of which is controlling the bonding/coordination between the single atoms and the support in order to compensate for the increase in surface energy when the particle size is reduced due to atomic dispersion. Excellent candidates to meet this requirement are carbon nitride (CN)-based materials. Metal atoms can be firmly trapped in nitrogen-rich coordination sites in CN materials, which makes them a unique class of hosts for preparing single-atom catalysts (SACs). As one of the most promising two-dimensional supports to stabilize isolated metal atoms, CN materials have been increasingly employed for preparing SACs. Herein, we will cover the most recent advances in single-atoms supported by CN materials. In this review, the most important characterization techniques and the challenges faced in this topic will be discussed, and the commonly employed synthetic methods will be delineated for different CN materials. Finally, the catalytic performance of SACs based on carbon nitrides will be reviewed with a special focus on their photocatalytic applications. In particular, we will prove CN as a non-innocent support. The relationship between single-atoms and carbon nitride supports is two-way, where the single-atoms can change the electronic properties of the CN support, while the electronic features of the CN matrix can tune the catalytic activity of the single sites in photocatalytic reactions. Finally, we highlight the frontiers in the field, including analytical method development, truly controlled synthetic methods, allowing the fine control of loading and multi-element synthesis, and how understanding the two-way exchange behind single-atoms and CN supports can push this topic to the next level.Guilherme F. S. R RochaGuilherme F. S. R. Rocha obtained his BSc in Chemistry from the University of São Paulo (USP) in 2021 and is expected to receive his MSc degree in Inorganic Chemistry in 2024 from the Federal University of São Carlos (UFSCar) under the supervision of Prof. Ivo Teixeira. His research interests include the synthesis of heterogeneous catalysts with a focus on photocatalytic applications for chemical synthesis and energy conversion.Marcos A. R. da SilvaMarcos A. R. da Silva received his BSc in Chemistry from the Federal University of Pará (UFPA) in 2019 and obtained his master's degree in Inorganic Chemistry from the Federal University of São Carlos (UFSCar) in 2021. Currently, he is a PhD student at the UFSCar and a research fellow at Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation (Embrapa). His research focuses on the development of metal single-atoms coordinated at crystalline carbon nitrides for oxidation reactions, such as C–H functionalization, especially methane conversion to valuable chemicals.Andrea RogolinoAndrea Rogolino received his BSc (2020) and MSc (2022) in Chemistry from the University of Padova, Italy, where he was a fellow student at the Galilean School of Higher Education. In 2021, he was a visiting student at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces in Potsdam, Germany. He is currently a PhD candidate in the Reisner Lab at the University of Cambridge. He nurtures a strong passion for every field of Chemistry since his participation in the International Chemistry Olympiads in 2016 and 2017. His actual research interests are photo(electro)chemical devices for solar fuel production.Gabriel A. A. DiabGabriel Ali Atta Diab has a BSc degree in chemistry from the University of Brasília (2021). Currently, he is a PhD candidate at the Federal University of São Carlos (UFSCar), supervised by Prof. Ivo Freitas Teixeira. His research interests focus on investigating heterogeneous photocatalysts applied to energy production, particularly in hydrogen evolution, natural gas photo-oxidation, CO2 reduction, as well as other applications in organic molecule synthesis.Luís F. G. NoletoLuis Fernando Guimarães Noleto majored in Chemistry at Universidade Estadual e Federal do Piauí (UESPI/UFPI, Brazil), where he investigated the photocatalytic properties of silver phosphate (Ag3PO4). He is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Ivo F. Teixeira, focusing on the development of catalysts based on crystalline carbon nitride and single-atoms, for applying in photocatalytic production of hydrogen peroxide and ammonia, as well as in the selective hydrogenation of organic compounds.Ivo F. TeixeiraIvo Teixeira received his BS in 2012 and his MSc in 2013 from the Federal University of Minas Gerais. He received his PhD from the University of Oxford in 2017. Between 2020 and 2022, Ivo was a Humboldt Fellow at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Potsdam, Germany). He became Assistant Professor at the Federal University of São Carlos (Brazil) in 2019, since then Ivo and 12 students under his supervision have fun every day doing science research. His research interests focus on catalysis, especially heterogeneous catalysis, single-atom catalysis, energy conversion and nanomaterials.
1. Introduction
The development of new catalysts is extremely important as they are essential for the chemical industry, and it is estimated that around 80% of the processes rely on such substances.50 In that, heterogeneous catalysts are the most used due to their high stability and recyclability. In heterogeneous catalysis, by definition, the phase of the catalysts differs from that of the reactants. Catalysts based on noble metals, such as Au, Pt and Pd, are among the most employed, and because of the widespread application of these systems, efforts have been made to reduce the amount of metal needed to produce a given product. In reactions catalysed by heterogeneous compounds, the interactions between the substrate and the catalytic sites occur predominantly on the surface, while the atoms present in the bulk are generally not directly used. To increase the interaction area, the generation of pores along the material and the increase of the surface area by moving to nanometre structures stand out. Reducing the size of metals to nanoparticles and even clusters helped to enhance the catalytic performance of the respective metal. The synthesis of metal single-atoms, which are isolated from each other along the surface of a support, is the final possible solution for increasing the atomic efficiency of metals in catalysts, opening a new horizon in terms of affordability and new applications.48,51–53
Furthermore, the environmental concerns on the excessive use of metals directly impact the application of metallic oxides as catalytic supports. As an eco-friendly alternative, carbon nitrides are non-toxic, low-cost, highly stable and composed of earth-abundant elements (carbon and nitrogen).54 In addition, carbon nitrides (CNs) are visible-light-active semiconductors, thus having great potential for use in light supported processes, such as solar light conversion. These compounds have great potential to improve the single-atom catalysis due to their coordination sites composed of electron-rich nitrogens. Herein, we will present the most recent advances in metal single-atom catalysts (SACs) supported by carbon nitride-based materials.
1.1. Carbon nitrides
1.1.1. Definition of carbon nitrides. The name “carbon nitride” refers to a series of polymer materials with carbon and nitrogen in their composition. The synthesis of the primary carbon nitride materials dates back to 1834, when Berzelius and Liebig fabricated a series of aromatic structures with carbon and nitrogen through the pyrolysis of mercury thiocyanate, including compounds named melon, melam and melamine (Fig. 1A).1,55 In 1937, Pauling and Sturdivant idealized that the basic units of melon were composed of tri-s-triazines (heptazine units) connected in the same plane.56 After that, Redemann and Lucas noticed a similarity between melon and graphite, both having long planar structures formed by sp2 bonds.57 This similarity led to the assignment of these new materials as graphitic-carbon nitrides, where the word “graphitic” is related to a packed structure of 2D sheets.58 Although some theoretical studies have projected their ideal structure, experimental studies failed to unravel their composition and ideal structure, mostly because these materials can be considered as a complex mixture of polymers of different sizes and architectures.59–63
 Fig. 1  (A) Nitrogen and carbon compounds synthesized by Liebig; (B) carbon nitride basic units: triazine units (top) and heptazine (or tris-s-triazine) units (down). Adapted from ref. 1 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2011. 
Among the possible configurations, carbon nitrides have several theoretical phases.58,64–69 β-C3N4, for example, has gained prominence because of its hardness, which was calculated to be higher than that of diamond.63,70 After several studies, it was found that the graphitic phase was more stable under ambient conditions.71–73 With that, after the popularization of the compound, the name was changed to g-C3N4, with “g” referring to the word graphitic. There was some debate about what basic units composed the graphitic phase, and several authors claimed that the synthesized compounds would be built based on triazine molecules,74–78 while others found evidence that heptazine groups were the most stable to form (Fig. 1B).59,79–82
In the first studies, several CN-compounds were used to synthesize graphitic carbon nitrides. Most of the obtained compounds were poorly crystalline and with high amounts of hydrogen in their composition.61,83 One of the approaches to synthesizing ideal g-C3N4 materials was to use precursors such as cyanuric and cyameluric chloride, dicyanamides, or melamine.84–90 Komatsu synthesized carbon nitride structures close to Redemann's prediction using potassium melonate and cyameluryl trichloride as molecules for the polymerization.81 Schnick and Lotsch fabricated a layered and graphitic structure with metal-free tricyanomelaminates, showing that triazine structures are labile to convert into heptazine units during polymerization.82 Thomas et al. first applied carbon nitride as a catalyst for a chemical reaction, whereby polymeric compounds synthesised using the thermal self-condensation of cyanamide were applied to the Friedel–Crafts reaction.91
Besides solvothermal or gas-phase methods, the main advances in the development of new carbon nitride materials have occurred through the self-condensation of precursors at high temperatures. This process is shown in Fig. 2, and several compounds, such as melamine, can produce higher condensates upon heating. Schnick et al. revealed that melem is an intermediate in the condensation route of melamine and of carbon nitride synthesis.92,93 Many other even more simple monomers are also able to produce carbon nitride polymers, such as urea and even thiourea.94–96
 Fig. 2  Condensation routes for carbon nitride polymerization under thermal treatment. Adapted from ref. 1 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2011. 

1.1.2. Polymeric carbon nitrides (g-C3N4). The existence of a “true” graphitic carbon nitride is still debated by scientists since most of the materials reported in the literature have lower structural organization and several termination defects. Theoretically, an ideal carbon nitride should have only sp2 bonds interconnected by tertiary amines. However, thermal condensation of C/N compounds leads to lower product control due to kinetic problems of the s-triazine group to react with primary/secondary amines.97 Melamine is unstable at high temperatures, but the generation of intermediate species with H-bridges prohibits its sublimation. Overall, condensation of triazine or heptazine units into a highly extended material occurs above 520 °C.98 In this path, the liberation of ammonia along the process makes the control of the products difficult as the degree of polymerization is governed by the equilibria between precursors and NH3 in the system.99 Generally, the materials obtained by simple thermal treatment have lower crystallinity, being composed mostly of poorly condensed melem oligomers. The name polymeric carbon nitrides (PCNs) was applied in the past few years to evidence the defective nature of this class of compounds.Although there are imperfections, the ease of manufacture and the low-cost of the starting materials have made studies on polymeric carbon nitrides explode in recent years. The main applications are related to electronic properties since PCNs are visible, light-active semiconductors, especially in photocatalysis. The photocatalytic studies with carbon nitrides bloomed after the publication of the work by Wang et al., who showed that PCN has an activity to generate H2 by water reduction using visible-light.100 Since then, several works investigated the photocatalytic role of PCNs in H2 evolution,101–121 as well as other photocatalytic reactions such as overall water-splitting,122–126 CO2 reduction,127–135 H2O2 production from oxygen,136–143 N2 reduction,144–147 and pollutant degradation.96,148–160

1.1.3. Crystalline carbon nitrides (PHI/PTI). Synthesizing crystalline carbon nitrides was always a challenge due to the limitations of thermal polymerization. Wang et al. were some of the pioneers to produce graphitic carbon nitrides with a relatively good crystallinity in a solvothermal synthesis with CCl4 and NH4Cl as precursors.161 Nevertheless, among different materials reported in the literature for synthesis, eutectic salt melts are useful in the synthesis of more crystalline carbon nitrides, either with ordered poly(triazine imide) (PTI) or poly(heptazine imide) (PHI) structures.112,162–165 Salt melts are high temperature solvents for intermediates and amorphous species, from which only ordered structures precipitate. Thomas et al. have synthesized highly crystalline PTI structures using a combination of LiCl/KCl with dicyanamide.165 This mixture melts below the synthesis temperature (i.e. 600 °C) and supports the condensation by dissolution. As investigated by Schnick et al., temperatures above 600 °C promote PTI decomposition and increase carbonization, while temperatures below 600 °C led to a considerable decrease of crystallinity.164 The influence of the salts is very clear as in the first systems using low melting eutectics based on LiCl, only triazine units are built in the synthesis, in contrast to heptazine motifs, which are generally produced without salt and many other salt melts. In this compound, the pores are filled with lithium ions, i.e. Li+ acts as a template. Interestingly, all salt melt synthesized carbons are imides, i.e. these carbon nitrides avoid partially the steric problem of tertiary amine formation and stay partially ionic. If the components of the eutectic salt mixtures are changed, different structures are obtained. For example, Zhang et al. prepared copolymers of triazine and heptazine in order to boost hydrogen production from sea water.166 The obtained heterostructure was produced in NaCl/KCl molten salts and exhibits higher quantum yields caused by the heterojunctions between the units. Dontsova et al. proved that potassium cations could be introduced into the crystalline carbon nitride structure using a LiCl/KCl mixture. The resultant product contains negative imide units that counterbalance the positive charge K+ between the heptazine units, and the product was named K–PHI.167,168 It is important to emphasize that the cations in PHI enlarge the interactions between CN-layers to set up more ordered arrays compared to PCNs or even protonated PHI.169Molten salts are considered to act as solvents for the condensation intermediates. The mixtures melted, providing a reaction medium to control the mobility of the blocks.165 It is interesting to note that non-eutectic mixtures with just one alkaline salt have recently also proved to be effective in producing PTI and PHI structures.170 A chemical reaction between imidic carbon nitride precursors and alkali chlorides takes place with the elimination of HCl, and the cations are accommodated within the CN–polymer structure.38,170 Depending on the size of the ion used, different units were formed. For example, when lithium chloride (LiCl) is introduced into the synthesis, PTI structures are formed. Meanwhile, NaCl, KCl and CsCl yield carbon nitrides with PHI units.170 To date, PHI and PTI have been synthesized using eutectic salt melts or solid-state reactions (all using alkali chlorides). However, two stage methods could also produce poly(heptazine imide) structures from PCNs with alkali salts such as KSCN.169,171,172
PHI and PTI structures have a different local structure and a corresponding 3D framework. PTI carbon nitrides are layered frameworks with Li+ and Cl− (or LiBr) ions within the pores,164,169 while PHI structures have negative charges localized on the deprotonated imide bridge, which are compensated by alkali cations (such as Na+ or K+).26 In Fig. 3, it is indicated that potassium cations interact with these negative nitrogens in predominantly ionic bonds.
 Fig. 3  (A) High-resolution TEM image of H-PHI clearly revealing lattice fringes over extended areas; (B) SAED pattern and (C) simulated SAED pattern of the [001] zone axis of H-PHI, based on a theoretical trigonal cell model depicted in (D); (E–G) cover the corresponding figures for K-PHI. Insets show the FFT confirming the 6-fold symmetry of the diffraction pattern for H-PHI and the reduced monoclinic layer symmetry for K-PHI, respectively; (H) structural model obtained from Rietveld refinement for K-PHI water molecules inside the pores were omitted for better visibility. Adapted from ref. 26 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019; (I) structure of potassium poly(heptazine imide) (K-PHI). Adapted from ref. 30 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020; PXRD pattern of (J) PCN and (K) K-PHI. Adapted from ref. 40 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020. 

1.1.4. PCNs vs. PHI/PTI: differences. Polymeric carbon nitrides and the PHI/PTI ionic structures have quite different intrinsic characteristics. The first differentiation can be made through their structural organization; PCNs usually have X-ray diffractograms with few peaks or only one peak.169 The main peak observed in the XRD patterns of polymeric materials corresponds to the 2D stacking of the sheets, which are based on melon linear units. Poly(heptazine/triazine imides) structures, on the other hand, present more peaks than PCNs in their XRD patterns (Fig. 3J and K). The reflections of the 2D organization are clear and intense, showing the long arrangement of these compounds, especially within the plane. This can be verified using transmission microscopy analysis, which shows layers with a high organization over larger distances (Fig. 3A–H).FTIR assays indicate the presence of metal–NC2 bonds in ionic materials. Since alkali metals are introduced between heptazine units, the vibrations of bridged nitrogens are expected to change. FTIR spectra show new vibration bands between 950 and 1100 cm−1.173 PCNs do not show these bands due to the protonated nitrogen bridges in the structure. Also, negative bridged nitrogens can be detected using XPS analyses (signal at 396.6 eV in the N 1s spectrum) due to their different binding energy compared to other nitrogen species.168,169
Despite their low crystallinity, PCNs sometimes display a superior activity as a photocatalyst than PHI/PTI, usually attributed to their high defect number and charge localization sites on their structural networks. On the other hand, ionic carbon nitrides have better conductivity, turning them into better candidates for electrochemical applications.174–176 Finally, ionic carbon nitrides have the ability to store charges in their structure, which enables the employment of these materials as photo-capacitors and for dark photocatalysis.26,169

1.2. Single-atom catalysis (SAC)
1.2.1. SAC relevance in applied catalysis. The relevance of single-atom catalysis (SAC) was discussed in the Introduction. Minimizing the size of metal agglomerates was always a challenge to researchers over decades, and the stabilization of isolated metal sites is the ultimate step to improve sample catalytic activity and metal utilization.48,50,177–182 The development of highly ordered atomically dispersed catalytic sites is still a major task as common synthetic routes lead to irregular distribution and inhomogeneous metal centres.48,179 The great interest in minimizing metal loadings resulted from the intense employment of noble metals such as gold, platinum, and palladium as active sites for numerous industrial reactions.50 Thus, to avoid the unnecessary use of such expensive and rare elements, attempts were made to increase their dispersion and consequently decrease their concentration in the material, in order to improve atomic utilization.179The concept of single-atom catalysts (SACs) has changed through the years. Initially, the definition was attributed to materials containing late transition metals (e.g. Pt, Pd, Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) spatially isolated from others.183 However, the definition of single-atoms can still encompass a larger group of compounds. Recently, the terminology has been expanded to different matrix substituents in heterogeneous materials. Ramirez et al., in a recent review, proposed a much broader definition, referring to SAC as “An atom of any element (metal, metalloid, non-metal, and halogen) that is spatially isolated from atoms of the same chemical identity (e.g., adsorbed, embedded, immobilized, grafted, or confined) and directly bound to a solid carrier”.53 In this context, doping elements or promotors of chemical reactivity, such as non-metals, metalloids, alkali metals and lanthanides, could also be classified as SACs. The main feature of a SAC is its unique chemical environment, capable of directing chemical reactions to pathways in a way that is different from nanoparticulates or clustered materials. A more precise definition of these materials is the necessary participation of the isolated active sites in the catalytic cycle. Several dopants or non-metals only change the structural or electronic characteristics of the materials, with no direct participation in the catalytic cycle. Such examples will not be included in this review. Still, non-metallic sites with an explicit catalytic role will be covered. For example, boron single-atoms can participate in the activation of N2 molecules in reactions of nitrogen reduction to ammonia and, in this way, are active sites of the catalytic process.184–186
More than an economic issue, the synthesis of metal single-atom catalysts (SACs) considerably affects the role of active sites in a chemical reaction. First, isolated sites are more accessible to interact with substrates of a given chemical reaction.180 Furthermore, the quantum-size effect changes the energy levels of the active site, producing discrete energy levels compared to nanoparticles (NPs) or clusters.48,178,180,187–189 Nevertheless, the specific connection between the metal and the ligands favours the charge transfer and tailoring of charge density.180,190–195 All of these features make the SACs’ active sites different from those produced before and put these materials in the frontline of a new pathway in the catalysis field.
The working principle of SACs is closely related to homogeneous catalysis.196 The centre of metal complexes possesses a unique chemical identity that gives this class of catalysts a high specificity and powerful activity. Thus, metal utilization in chemical reactions can reach 100% homogeneous complexes.50 Homogeneous systems lack stability and recyclability, and, to address the latter issue, several studies attempted to disperse/attach metal complexes onto heterogeneous supports.197,198 The atomic dispersion inherited from the metal complexes was confirmed, for example, using Ir complexes supported on magnesium oxide (MgO).199,200 The presence of iridium isolated sites was preserved even after catalytic hydrogenation tests, showing that mononuclear species are the main active centres in this material. Although the stabilization of metal complexes is an interesting strategy to increase atomic efficiency, it is important to emphasize that the synthesis of such compounds is quite difficult and laborious to apply on a large scale. Furthermore, complexes supported on heterogeneous matrices suffer from constant leaching of the active phase. Thus, the synthesis of heterogeneous materials with metallic single-atoms anchored in the support structure itself was addressed.
The development of heterogenous SACs originated in the late 1990s, with the dispersion of Pd atoms in MgO for propane combustion.201 Although some works have indicated the importance of isolated atoms to catalyse certain chemical reactions before, the identification of these regions was scarce.202–204 The development of single-atom identification was growing with the development of advanced analytical methods.205 High-resolution microscopy was one of the first modern approaches to visualize metals at the atomic level, as reported by Lee et al., who showed single-sites of Pd supported on Al2O3.206 Also, the interaction of atomically dispersed sites was investigated by Freund et al., who studied the influence of single-atoms and nanoparticles on oxide supports.207 Another case of observing metal single-atoms using microscopy techniques was for iridium atoms anchored on HY zeolite catalysts. In this work, the simultaneous application of high-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectroscopy helped to extract information on the local structure of the Ir atom, which was found to be connected to two neighbouring oxygens and one Al atom.208
Single-atom catalysis research was boosted by the work of Zhang et al., who reported single Pt atoms anchored on the surface of iron oxide. The authors showed that these sites improved the metal efficiency, as well as the activity and selectivity for CO oxidation.183 With this work, the term single-atom was coined, and after that, several works were performed trying to understand the effects caused by the presence of isolated sites in the catalysts. The first studies focused mainly on noble metals due to their broad applications and the cost-driven need to increase their atomic efficiency.209–215 Besides noble metals, more abundant metals, such as iron, can be isolated as single-sites.23,216,217 One of the first studies was carried out using graphene as the support, as reported by Rummeli et al.23 In this study, the authors not only demonstrated that Fe atoms were isolated on the surface but also identified their movement along the graphene edge (Fig. 4A–D).
 Fig. 4  (A and B) High-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images and magnified regions of HRTEM with overlaps of the DFT-calculated atomic structures of Fe atoms incorporated into a five-atom ring forming a pentagon on graphene; (C and D) high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images and magnified regions of HRTEM with overlaps of the DFT-calculated atomic structures of Fe atoms incorporated into a six-atom ring forming a distorted hexagon. Adapted from ref. 23 with permission from PNAS; (E) schematic illustrations of the homogeneous and heterogeneous palladium catalysts studied in the Suzuki reaction, including Pd deposited on PCN. Adapted from ref. 28 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018; (F) CO2 methanation activity over CeO2-Supported Ru single-atoms, nanoclusters and nanoparticles. Adapted from ref. 31 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018; (G) relative TOF (calculated by the total metal content and normalized to the maximum value) alteration upon decreasing the atomic population of metal NPs (■) to SAs (Δ). Adapted from ref. 48 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018. 
One of the major difficulties in the synthesis of SACs is the stabilization of the isolated atoms as there is a surface energy driven tendency to agglomerate which affects activity and thereby applicability.191 In this sense, the choice of support is extremely important as it governs the dispersion, uniformity and stability of single-sites. Several supports were applied for SAC synthesis: oxides, such as Al2O3,207,218 MgO,201,207 CeO2,31,51,219–224 FeOx,183,212,225,226 and TiO2,210,227–231 carbon materials,232–235 graphene,23,211,236–240 zeolites,44,208,241,242 MOFs,243–247 and N-doped carbons.248–253
Among the several potential supports, CN materials stand out as a superior support for single-atoms, due to their high content of coordination sites, provided mainly by nitrogen atoms, coupled with chemical and thermal stability. Apart from that CN materials with high crystallinity also display great homogeneity and uniformity of coordination sites. Additionally, carbon nitrides act as a non-innocent support, capable of performing catalytic and photocatalytic reactions on their own.

1.2.2. Nanoparticles versus single-atoms: activity. In view of all the interesting properties of the single-atoms, the reader must be wondering: are single-atom always superior to nanoparticles? The answer to this question is certainly no because each chemical reaction has its own mechanism. As shown in Fig. 4G, different reactions can display distinct activity curves depending on metal dispersion. The activity of SACs compared to NPs (or clusters) has already been investigated using theoretical studies before the popularization of these materials. The cyclotrimerization of acetylene to benzene, for example, can occur with a single Pd site at lower temperatures than small clusters.204 In another case, the selective oxidation of primary alcohols to their respective aldehydes works better in the presence of isolated Pd2+ sites on Al2O3, in contrast to clusters and nanoparticles.206 The high surface area of the support guarantees a high ability to stabilize isolated palladium species, which promotes an increase in the order of 10 times in comparison to uncontrolled metal dispersion systems. In another study, Pt single-atoms were dispersed on PMA (phosphomolybdic acid), inducing a better electron transfer to support a remarkable performance in hydrogenation reactions.254 The selectivity for a desired reaction could be changed when using single-atoms, for instance, the CO oxidation in a rich H2-steam is improved at the same time that H2 adsorption on the active sites is reduced. The presence of isolated Au atoms decreases the reactivity of H2 on the metal, preferentially favouring the oxidation of CO to CO2.220In addition, the regiospecificity of the active sites in the SACs guarantees activities on reactions known otherwise from homogeneous catalysis. For example, in the study by Zhang et al., single-atom Rh supported on ZnO showed superior results (higher TON) than Wilkinson's homogeneous catalysts for olefin hydroformylation.255 Likewise, Ramirez et al. showed that Pd SACs in exfoliated carbon nitrides have the same activity as palladium complexes (Pd(PPh3)4) for Suzuki coupling reactions, but with high recyclability, inherent in heterogeneous materials (Fig. 4E).256
Nevertheless, the activity of a catalyst for a certain reaction will not always increase with the presence of isolated sites. In this context, one of the pioneering studies on SACs revealed that single sites of Pt have the same effectiveness as metallic particles for propane combustion to CO2; however, Pt clusters have higher activity for this oxidation.201 A difference in activities between groups of atoms is also observed for CO2 hydrogenation reactions. In this study, the authors noted that the highest performance (measured in TOF) is obtained with small clusters of ruthenium supported on CeO2 compared to single-atoms and nanoparticles. In this case, the strong interfacial charge transfer of SAs hinders the carbonyl activation step (Fig. 4H).31 Similarly, Stair et al. showed that Pt SAs deposited on HZSM-5 zeolites lack activity for CO oxidation in water–gas shift reactions due to the strong binding of CO molecules on the sites.44 This finding exposes that the support plays an essential role in the metal–ligand charge transfer and, consequently, in the activity of the SAs for certain reactions. CO oxidation, for example, is not observed in Pt SAs supported on zeolites but is reported for other materials such as ceria.219,221
The influence of the support is directly related to the chemical environment to which the SA is attached. The geometry, coordination number, and local composition affect the activity of the SACs to a desired reaction.257 Oxides are good materials for stabilizing isolated metals due to the strong metal–support interaction (SMSI), however, their structural rigidity imposes a barrier to geometric changes in the SA environment.178 This rigidity restricts the adaption of these systems to a certain mechanism, affecting their activity. Furthermore, organic supports offer a suitable environment for symmetry modification as well as strong ligands for a metal–support charge transfer. Recently, several research groups tried to synthesize different organic or polymeric supports for the coordination of SAs, and among them, N-doped carbons and carbon nitrides stand out.

1.2.3. The potential of carbon nitride as a single-atom support. Between organic/polymeric supports, N-containing materials anchoring SAs have gained attention in the past few years owing to their ability to strong metal coordination and efficient metal–ligand charge transfer.204,249,250,258,259 N-doped carbon is more regularly employed in SACs than ordinary carbon materials, the latter lacking anchoring points to stabilize highly dispersed metals. Also, the diversity of these compounds provides a large possibility of coordination environments for SAs. The synthesis of N-doped carbons is apparently simple but difficult to control, e.g. homogeneity and the amount of metal loading, and they are usually heterogeneous and amorphous.257,258Carbon nitrides offer higher homogeneity and uniformity of coordination sites for single-atoms in their structure compared to N-doped carbons. Considering that the control of the interaction between the metal and the support is essential for the effective coordination of spatially isolated species, carbon nitrides have an advantage over other materials due to the high presence of nitrogens with well pore-oriented lone pairs of electrons. Ramirez et al. were one of the first to exploit the ability of carbon nitrides to stabilize SAs.260 In this study, the authors decorated PCNs with Pd SAs for hydrogenation reactions. Beyond PCN materials, PHI/PTI compounds have been applied as the support for SACs. Our group recently pointed out the advantage of the negatively charged imide nitrogens in Na–PHI to improve metal coordination.43 The coordination of iron single-atoms was not only successful as well as reproducible for different synthesis batches.
Carbon nitride materials are organic semiconductors, nitrogen rich, with unique layered structures and remarkable intrinsic properties, such as high chemical and thermal stability. The CN materials have been synthesized in different dimensions (1D, 2D and 3D), with different structural units (i.e. triazine- or heptazine-based), different organization degrees and charge balances in their structure (e.g. Li–PTI and K or Na–PHI and g-C3N4).22,261 Herein, we aim to cover not only the many examples of carbon nitride-based materials to stabilize single-atom sites but also the commonly employed synthetic and analytical methods, as well as examples where the CN materials act as a non-innocent support. The semiconductor properties of these materials in a number of examples promote the activity of the metal single-atoms under photocatalytic conditions. On the other hand, the coordination of single-atoms in CN materials can modify their electronic properties and lead to better e−/h+ pair separations, more efficient charge transfers and finally enhanced photocatalytic activities.

2. Strategies and techniques for single-atom characterization
Several publications from 2007 to the present date have shown the possibility of stabilizing single-atoms in supports and exploiting their high activity. However, the field of SAC has been limited by the restrictions of the analytical methods, and only with some recent advances, it has become possible to investigate the single-atom sites with high precision.53,262 The first step toward a rational understanding of single active sites in a catalytic reaction is their identification and characterization. A local view is critical to reveal the single-atom species and their distribution. The existence of atomically dispersed systems is a challenge to prove and requires advanced tools and strategies, and efforts have been made to develop sensitive techniques to access atomic-level information.201,262–268 With new and more sophisticated approaches, it is now possible to provide chemical information on the atomic scale. In general, several tools are combined to elucidate the chemical nature of atomically dispersed atoms, including X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS–XANES and EXAFS)269 techniques combined with transmission electron microscopy analysis (HR-TEM, STEM–HAADF, and EELS),266,267,270 as well as absorption of molecular probes.271,272 This section overviews the recent advances in the characterization of single-atoms dispersed on carbon nitride supports. We also point to other recommendable reviews focussing on the characterization of SACs in general.53,261,262,269,273–278
2.1. X-ray source techniques
The interaction of X-rays with matter involves different phenomena and sources of different information. X-ray diffraction (XRD) is one of the most common techniques in materials science. It reveals details about the translational spatial ordering of a system and provides information about the crystallographic structure of a material. To characterize carbon nitride-supports, XRD has an important role in assigning a specific structure and its degree of crystallinity (Fig. 5). Typically, a polymeric carbon nitride gives a main intense signal at 26–28° related to the interplanar stacking and, occasionally, a weak peak around 13° associated with the spatial-oriented repetition of the units that form its backbone, as shown in Fig. 5.95,98,279,280 High crystalline structures such as poly(heptazine imide)22,26,38,165,166,170,173 and poly(triazine imide)22,162,164,166,281 exhibit further signals associated with repeats within the layers, being both well distinguished from polymeric carbon nitride by this technique.
 Fig. 5  Typical diffractogram patterns of sodium poly(heptazine imide) (Na-PHI), lithium poly(heptazine imide) (Li-PTI) and polymeric carbon nitride (PCN). 
Although XRD is not suitable to directly affirm the existence of SA, the technique is limited to detecting only particles larger than 2 nm, while well-dispersed isolated atoms are in the Angstrom range. It is worth repeating that the absence of signals referring to nanoparticles or large clusters is indicative of a high dispersion of sites on the carbon nitride. The no-show of peaks in the XRD related to the dispersed metal can be an important preliminary indication of SA formation, especially when the metal loading is confirmed by other techniques (e.g. ICP-OES or AAS). It can therefore be considered as an auxiliary initial analysis during the study of SACs.3,9,13,19,282–287 In view of that, the stabilization process of SA until the beginning of formation of metallic agglomerates can be monitored by XRD data, and many contributions have used this approach as a simple way to determine the maximum amount of metal supported until the visualization of metal patterns in the diffractograms.19,282,284,287
X-rays can also be used as a spectroscopic source.
2.1.1. X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). Essentially, X-ray beams have enough energy to cause electronic transitions from inner shells to vacant states or to the continuum. Due to the specific electronic structures and unique short-range differences of each element, core-level X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy (XAS) is extremely sensitive to small changes in the chemical environment and can offer information about the local structure. These unique characteristics are recorded simultaneously on the absorption spectrum and, due to the complexity of information grouped in a single curve, the individual interpretation of the results becomes very difficult. Here, the employment of reference patterns makes it convenient to unravel each property separately. Two main phenomena are included during the analysis: X-ray absorption near edge spectra (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS).
2.1.1.1. X-ray absorption near edge spectra (XANES). Features in the XANES region provide the position of pre-edge and edge adsorption, which is associated with electronic transitions into unoccupied states. Therefore, information regarding the oxidation state, geometric arrangement, and coordination number can be obtained. In addition, the identification of different metal species can be done in a simplified way using XANES measurements. A practical application of this was made by Guo and collaborators who synthesized Fe–PCN through the pyrolysis of iron precursors and melamine generating SACs, which were applied in oxidation reactions. They observed through pre-edge absorption the presence of both Fe(II) and Fe(III) in the catalyst, corroborated using the XPS and Mössbauer spectroscopy data (Fig. 6D)19 The same was observed by Eid et al. for the identification of Cu(I) and Cu(II) in their system.288 Studies focusing on understanding the changes in the carbon nitride network after the insertion of the metal have been carried out using XAS approaches. In general, C K-edge and N K-edge spectra show little variations after the metal introduction, because the inserted metal amount is low compared to the high atom density that composes the matrix, and their influences end up being incremental. It is however possible to identify the differences at the N and C edges.32,46,289–292
 Fig. 6  (A) Ti K-edge XANES, (B) FT-EXAFS curve and (C) wavelet transform plot produced by Ti single-atoms dispersed in polymeric carbon nitride. Adapted from ref. 5 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2022; (D) Fe K-edge revealing the existence of both iron(II) and iron(III) in the catalyst. Adapted from ref. 19 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018; (E) Sb K-edge FT-EXAFS and DFT optimized model fitting, (F) FT-EXAFS, (G) XANES spectra of Sb atomically dispersed in polymeric carbon nitride. Adapted from ref. 42 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2021; (H) C K-edge and (I) N K-edge of Ag SA supported in polymeric carbon nitride revealing a new signal after the metal insertion. Adapted from ref. 46 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021; (J) Co K-edge XANES experimental of Co on PCN and the calculated for the model where the metal is twofold, fourfold coordinated to N or the same coordinated to C and N. Adapted from ref. 47 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017. 
2.1.1.2. Extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS). In more energetic regions of the spectrum, electrons are excited to the continuum, generating photoelectrons. The photo-emitted electrons are backscattered by neighbouring atoms, which can generate constructive or destructive overlap, appearing in the spectrum as an oscillation curve (Fig. 6). This region is called EXAFS. It allows indication of the local structure and spatial proximity between the atoms in the 1–5 Å range, becoming the main and most important characterization technique to confirm the existence of SA. After normalizing the oscillating curve followed by applying Fourier transform spectroscopy, FT-EXAFS can predict precisely radial distances, and it is sensitive to different types of bonds, being able to differentiate metallic bonds in clusters/nanoparticles of M–N/O/C bonds that are common coordination sites for single-atom stabilization on carbon nitride scaffolds (Fig. 6B and F). Correlating the normalized curve with the post Fourier transform plot produces a wavelet transform profile that consists of a topographic map that facilitates the visualization of different bond types (Fig. 6C). However, it is worth noting that bonds of the type M–N, M–C and M–O have very close bond lengths and are indistinguishable for this technique, even when assisted by wavelet transform, requiring the aid of computational resources to identify the suitable configuration.16,293 The combination of experimental data from EXAFS and theoretical fitting models can suggest the more probable geometric arrangement, providing information about coordination numbers and more stable conformations.In this way, Zhang et al., using measurements of XAS accompanied by theoretical calculations, confirmed the obtention of porous tubular carbon nitride containing single-atoms of Mo with a valency close to +6, fourfold coordinated with first shell bond lengths about 1.3 Å (Fig. 7F–H).35 In a seminal work carried out by Zheng et al., it was demonstrated using EXAFS and DFT calculations the preferential formation of Co coordination to 2 pyridine nitrogens.289 On the other hand, Cao and collaborators complemented the formation of Co–N4 species in carbon nitrides rich in unsaturated nitrogen (Fig. 7J).47 Likewise, a study carried out by Teng and collaborators investigated the chemical environment of Sb anchored in polymeric carbon nitride. The formation of SACs was confirmed by EXAFS and XANES measurements, and it was possible to estimate the valence around +3 and coordinated with an average of 3.3 N atoms (Fig. 7E–G).42 In another work, Mori et al. studied europium atomically dispersed in exfoliated PCN nanosheets as a possible selective sensor for volatile organic compounds. Supported by the EXAFS fitting curves, it was possible to verify single Eu dispersed with valence ≅+3 and a coordination number around 9.15
 Fig. 7  (A) Er L3-edge k3-weighted FT-EXAFS, (B) XANES spectra and (C) wavelet transform (WT) of high-density Er supported, (D) and (E) in situ Er L3-edge XANES spectra of high-density Er SACs during photocatalytic the CO2 reduction reaction. Adapted from ref. 15 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020; (F) K-edge Mo FT-EXAFS, (G) FT-EXAFS fitting curves and (H) optimized DFT calculation model of Mo SA on tubular carbon nitride. Adapted from ref. 35 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022; (I) operando XANES spectra at different applied voltages from the open circuit condition and (J) k3-weighted FT-EXAFS both at the Co K-edge. Adapted from ref. 39 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. 
In situ/operando XAS data have been considered promising to follow the dynamics of active sites during the real-time analysis, but these approaches are complex, as fabricating a cell that mimics the reaction system is not trivial.269 Among some works involving the use of in situ/operando XAS to analyse SACs based on carbon nitride materials, Ji et al. obtained erbium confined in the walls of carbon nitride nanotubes at different loads. By employing in situ XAS experiments, it was possible to follow transformations at Er sites during the photocatalytic cycle of CO2 reduction (Fig. 7A–E).15 Cao and collaborators applied operando XAS to investigate the behaviour of cobalt sites atomically coordinated with PCNs, while different voltages are applied in the reaction of electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution (Fig. 7I and J).39
Moreover, several other works using XAS analysis confirmed metals atomically dispersed in carbon nitrides, in some cases accurately describing the chemical environment. We list here, in our opinion, the most relevant works, which confirmed metal single-atoms supported in carbon nitride-based materials using XAS: Fe,43,294–299 Co,47,289,290,300–307 Ti,5 Zn,32,308,309 Cr,310 V,311 Ni,45,312–314 Mn,27,315 Mo,35,316,317 Cu,14,288,293,318–323 Sb,42 Pd,18,256,260,282,324–327 Pt,6,16,21,283,325,328–334 Ru,25,305,335–337 Ir,338 Au,284,287,292 Ag,2,307 Ga,339 La,340 Eu,341 Er,15 and Pr.342

2.2. Electron microscopy imaging
Imaging with atomic resolution is addressed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). With the substantial advancement in the electron microscope components, it has become possible to gain resolution and directly visualize isolated atoms. This achievement is made thanks to the development of objective lenses corrected for chromatic and spherical aberration.205,266,343,344
2.2.1. Transmission electron microscopy imaging. Through TEM analyses, a range of operating modes contributes to measuring different effects and therefore obtaining different pictures. In the conventional TEM mode, the electron beam is focused into a small and coherent volume, controlled by an electromagnetic lens array. Then, the beam is transmitted through the sample, and the picture is recorded using a CCD camera. Using this set-up and using the scattering instead of the reconstructed picture, selected area electron diffraction (SAED) provides crystallographic profiles of scattered electrons. In the same idea as XRD, techniques such as SAED and high-resolution, HR-TEM and SAED, are excellent ways to evaluate the crystallinity of carbon nitrides.22 This approach was employed by Wu and co-workers who observed a mixture of nanoparticles and palladium single-atoms attached to the surface of hollow-rod-like graphitic carbon nitride (Fig. 8G–I).3
 Fig. 8  (A) AC HAADF-STEM and EDX mapping of monoatomic (Pt, Pd, Ir), (B) binary (Pt/Pd) and (C) ternary (Pt/Pd/Ir) metals atomically immobilized at carbon nitride accompanied by its intensity profile. Adapted from ref. 10 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2022; (D)–(F) AC HR-TEM with different region magnification accompanied by their intensity profile analysis with a different magnification of Co and Ru supported on a polymeric carbon nitride bimetallic catalyst. Adapted from ref. 25 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2021; (G) TEM and HR-TEM, (H) AC HAADF-STEM and (I) EDX mapping images of the loaded Pd single-atoms in PCN where it is clearly possible to see the presence of single-atom coexisting with Pd nanoparticles. Adapted from ref. 3 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. 

2.2.2. Scanning transmission electron microscopy. In STEM mode, the beam becomes narrow enough to scan the sample. This condition allows the acquisition of images and simultaneously allows analysis of the material from different perspectives. High-angle annular dark field (HAADF) provides images with bright contrasts to heavier atoms, facilitating the identification of single-atoms, which show up as single bright points in the image (Fig. 8). STEM–HAADF imaging has been widely used to prove the existence of SACs; however, it is worth noting that this technique still not provides an absolute proof for single atom homogeneity, as STEM–HAADF images represent only a small part of the sample.Some papers involving multiple metals dispersed in carbon nitride through the observation of different contrasts prove the formation of individual SA.10,25 In this context, Ma and collaborators developed bimetallic (Pt/Pd) and trimetallic (Pt/Pd/Ir) catalysts and were able to use STEM–HAADF images to differentiate the structure of platinum and palladium atoms, despite iridium atoms could be confused with platinum atoms, as they have similar masses (Ir = 192 u, Pt – 195 u) (Fig. 8A–C).10 A similar approach was adopted by Cheng and collaborators for Co and Ru identification (Fig. 8D–F).25 Non-transition metal doped carbon nitrides, such as gallium, tin and indium, have also been reported and visualized as bright spots in STEM–HAADF images.339,345 In order to demonstrate the high potential of carbon nitride to produce single-atoms in a facile approach, Vilé et al. prepared a catalyst based on palladium-embedded mesoporous carbon nitride and compared it with other palladium-based benchmarks. Using the FT-EXAFS data supplemented by STEM–HAADF imaging, they easily confirmed the presence of single-atoms only on the carbon nitride-based catalyst.346
As discussed earlier, verifying the morphology and evaluating the crystallinity of carbon nitrides can be done by TEM. However, crystalline carbon nitrides, especially PHI-based, are sensitive to depolymerization when exposed to the electron beam at high doses. In general, a rapid degradation (less than 1 minute) of PHI sheets is observed, making image collection more difficult.124,347,348 Recently, Büchelle et al. reported that the use of grids coated with graphene monolayers to improve conductivity can enhance the stability during the analysis.348 Micron-sized carbon nitride hollow spheres functionalized with atomically separated Cr were obtained and displayed by TEM by Luo and co-workers.310 Nanoreactors built based on hollow porous spheres of carbon nitrides decorated with highly dispersed Pt and Ni were produced and verified by transmission imaging.349 During TEM analyses, semi-quantitative and elemental distribution of the solid matrix can be achieved through electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) complemented by energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) techniques. Recently, in a work reported by Vorobyeva and collaborators, the deactivation of catalysts based on Cu atomically adsorbed on graphitic carbon nitride was observed in N-arylation reactions, in which the copper sites diffused to the bulk of the carbon nitride network. They also reported that iron doping in the structure blocks the diffusion process, and this assumption could be confirmed through EDX mapping.293

2.3. Non-synchrotron spectroscopic techniques
Despite that XAS experiments provide spatial information on the electronic structure, the technique requires a high-intensity X-ray beam source, which is typically only available at synchrotron facilities, making it a costly and hard-to-access technique. Similarly, TEM/HAADF–STEM imaging can reveal the atomic structure of materials, and it requires expensive equipment and specialized skills, which may limit its accessibility in some cases. For this reason, there has been a growing effort to develop low-energy techniques and strategies that allow for SAC characterization using more accessible tools.
Unfortunately, the very nature of single-atoms hinders their identification using primary techniques, and the atomic dispersion coupled with low metal loadings make SACs invisible to simple techniques.
2.3.1. Probe assisted techniques. A still poorly developed technique, however, with huge potential is the use of probe molecule adsorption or selective chemisorption, along with the detection using an auxiliary technique such as FT-IR and solid-state NMR. The most frequent molecules used are CO and NO measured in DRIFT cells, for FT-IR spectroscopy.271,350 The coordination of the probe molecule in isolated atoms necessarily has to be monocoordinated, while a small metallic agglomerate might bind the probe molecule in the so-called bridge-conformation (one probe molecule bonded to two metallic atoms). In practice, linear bonds appear in higher frequency regions than bridged bonds and their exact position depends on a series of factors, such as the oxidation state, coordination number, nature of the metal and also the support to which it is connected (Fig. 9).44,268,271,272,350 From this principle, probe adsorption monitoring allows identification and potentially quantification of the single sites accessible to a probe molecule, including charge transfer from and to the support.
 Fig. 9  DRIFT spectra after CO adsorption on (A) Ni-PHI. Adapted from ref. 38 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019; (B) Pt-ZSM-5 samples with different Pt loadings; (C) time-dependent IR spectra of CO adsorbed on 2.6 wt% Pt/HZSM-5 during the oxidation process. Adapted from ref. 44 with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2015; (D) 27Al MAS-NMR spectra of the support before (black) and after (red) Pt insertion, where it is possible to visualize the reduction of the pentacoordinate Al (anchoring centre). Adapted from ref. 49 with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2009. 
The application of probed assisted techniques is still poorly developed for SAC characterization. To the best of our knowledge, just a few examples of SA quantification were reported to date centred around this type of analytical method. Not long ago, using CO adsorption monitored by DRIFT, Ding et al. showed the potential of this methodology by investigating the formation of SA and NPs in the Pt impregnated ZSM-5 zeolite and other classic supports.44 They were able to identify and quantify the SA Pt sites and accompany the formation of NPs by increasing the metal loading (Fig. 9B). In addition, still using evidence sustained by this technique, they assigned the Pt nanoparticles as the active sites for CO oxidation and not the single-atom sites (Fig. 9C).44 One of the few works introducing DRIFT of probe molecules applied to carbon nitride-based catalysts was reported by Colombari et al. where CO was chemisorbed onto Ni-PHI. The obtained spectrum shows the existence of two bands in 2040 and 2179 cm−1 referring to the formation of linear coordination between nickel and CO molecules, while bands 1900 to 2000 cm−1 associated with bridged bonds were not observed. This confirmed the presence of nickel only as SA (Fig. 9A).38
From this same principle, the employment of MAS-NMR has received attention due to its high sensibility allowing the identification of SA species at lower loading, especially when used in situ/operando approaches, despite its high susceptibility to respond to impurities.351,352 An issue of solid-state NMR analysis is a low signal-to-noise ratio. As demonstrated by Corma and collaborators, the 27Al signal can be improved by taking advantage of the hyperpolarization effect produced by pairwise parahydrogen, involved in this SAC hydrogenation reaction investigation.353 So far, no publications have been found investigating SA anchored on the carbon nitride matrix by means of this technique. It has been successfully applied to identify quantitatively the monoatomic centres of Pt/Al2O3 (Fig. 9D).49,354
In summary, preliminary tools such as XRD and TEM are good to evaluate the possible formation of metallic clusters or nanoparticles, the absence of which suggests the presence of metal SA. XAS stands out and has been demonstrated to be highly efficient and suitable to prove the existence of SAs and reveals their coordination environment on the covalent support. The characterization of SACs severely depends on XAS and aberration-corrected STEM, and the accessibility of both is restricted: one is a synchrotron technique, and the other depends on expensive and hard-to-operate facilities. Microscopy techniques also have the “sampling problem”, which is the analysis of only a localized part of the sample. Probe assisted technologies are still in development, and we have high expectations for this approach, due to its high sensibility and easy access. We envision that aligning the high reproducibility of crystalline CN materials, with a systematic investigation of their SACs using probe-assisted techniques might lead to a library that will allow us to identify and perhaps quantify SAs of different elements on CN matrixes, giving a general idea of the SA homogeneity in a library of possibilities, integrated over the complete sample.

3. Synthesis of SACs based on carbon nitride materials
The synthesis of atomically distributed elements on bulk substrates presents numerous challenges, including accurately controlling the loading and deposition rates to prevent aggregation into clusters or nanoparticles. Carbon nitride materials, by virtue of their localized N atoms exposing coordinating lone pairs, behave as excellent scaffolds for the distribution of doping elements in isolated sites. Indeed, several examples have been presented in the past few years, with a plethora of creative synthetic efforts. The scope of the single-atoms has been rapidly expanded from a vast proportion of the d-block of the periodic table to non-metals and even lanthanides. Several preparation techniques were reported, such as the co-polymerization of carbon nitrides and doping element precursors, which is a direct synthetic method. Post-functionalization of pre-synthesized CN can either be realized by wet impregnation (with the possibility of microwave-assisted deposition), atomic layer deposition or cation exchange of supports with cations stabilized in their structure. For each of these strategies, the main advantages, drawbacks and application fields will be delineated in the following paragraphs on some relevant model cases.
3.1. Wet impregnation
Wet impregnation is by far the most common method to synthesize single-atoms on several substrates, including carbon nitride-based materials. In this process, a previously polymerized carbon nitride substrate is dispersed in a solution of a precursor of the element to be deposited, most commonly a soluble salt or an organometallic complex. The method relies on the spontaneous adsorption of the elemental unit on a polymeric substrate. As for the advantages, it is extremely easy to operate, and it does not require specialised tools. It allows better control of loading, although atomic distribution is harder to achieve.259 For this reason, wet impregnation is not recommended for high-loading targets, as it possibly leads to aggregation as nanoparticles.259 Indeed, key parameters for the adsorption of single-atoms are the concentration of the precursor and the pH of the aqueous solution.355 Chen et al. were one of the first to synthesize CN-based SACs through different methods and exemplified the post-synthetic wet impregnation strategy with Pt, Ir and Pd.12 Graphitic bulk or mesoporous carbon nitrides were first synthesized using known strategies. Then, the C3N4 substrate was dispersed in deionized water, and metal salts, namely H2PtCl6, K2IrCl6 and PdCl2, were added at a mass fraction of 0.5 wt% relative to CN. The slurry was stirred at ambient temperature, followed by the addition of NaBH4, overnight work-up and filtration of the obtained powder (Fig. 10). The identical procedure has been reproduced many times for numerous metals since then.3,7,21,282,284,295,296,301,314,324–327,329,356–373
 Fig. 10  General synthetic scheme towards CN-based SACs via post-synthetic wet impregnation (right) and direct synthesis wet co-polymerization (left). The latter technique will be discussed in detail in a separate paragraph. Adapted from ref. 12 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017. 
Although the powders obtained after wet impregnation were not calcined in the work reported by Chen and co-workers, most of the later reports in the literature involve a final thermal annealing step at temperatures generally between 500 and 600 °C. Indeed, annealing temperature appears to be crucial for the transition from single-atoms to nanoparticle regimes, as higher temperatures promote atom migration.6,363 Only in a few instances, no pyrolysis at all was carried out.292,374–376 The atmosphere of the thermal process also may play a role. Gaseous H2 might flow as a reducing agent instead of NaBH4 or other chemicals added in the wet step. Hu et al. proposed that an ammonia atmosphere improves the deposition of Pt by the formation of volatile Pt(NH3)x complexes that are captured by the defects of C3N4.332 In other variants from the typical protocol, organic solvents, including organic alcohols and dimethylformamide, have been used as impregnation media.309,316,320,338,376–380 Other authors reported the use of bulk metallorganic precursors, including porphyrins and phthalocyanines, to introduce N vacancies and modify electronic properties relevant to photocatalysis.381–384 An unconventional metal precursor was used by Yan et al. in a top-down synthetic strategy towards Ag single-atoms.385 In particular, 5 nm of Ag NPs were mixed with CN in an aqueous suspension. After calcination at 350 °C, the authors observed that most metallic nanoparticles were broken down into individual atoms, i.e. dissolved in the matrix. The number of washing cycles for the purification of the final material might also be surprisingly crucial. Liu et al. showed that when holey carbon nitride nanosheets functionalized with Pt by wet impregnation (Pt–HCNNS) were washed three times with water/EtOH, single-atoms could be detected (PtSA–HCNNS), while clusters were more probable if the powder was washed only once (PtCl–HCNNS) (Fig. 11A–C).6
 Fig. 11  (A) Scheme of the synthesis of PtSA–HCNNS (three washing cycles) and PtCL–HCNNS (one washing cycle); STEM–HAADF images of PtSA–HCNNS (B) and PtCL–HCNNS (C). Adapted from ref. 6 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. 
Carbon nitride scaffolds can also be chemically modified to facilitate the adsorption of single-atoms by wet impregnation. For example, Zeng et al. pointed out that isolated Au+ ions on photocatalytic carbon nitrides tend to be reduced to metallic gold and, ultimately, to agglomerates, due to generated photoelectrons. To tackle this issue, they demonstrated that pre-treatment of CN with H2O2 introduces C–OH in the polymeric matrix, which can in turn immobilize gold introduced from HAuCl4 into Au(I)–O moieties.386 Metal-oxide or metal-hydroxyl single catalytic centres were also specifically synthesized because of their benefits in catalysis. For example, oxometallates, with well-established high turnover numbers for the oxygen evolution reaction, were successfully introduced into spatially separated sites of carbon nitrides using a wet impregnation method making use of (NH4)2CrO4, (NH4)2MoO4 or Na2WO4 precursor salts.387 For similar aims, other authors claimed the preparation of coordinated Co–OH species from the simple wet impregnation of graphitic CN and CoCl2.305 In a few examples, SACs synthesized through wet impregnation were post-functionalized with chemical treatments. The most common post-functionalization is phosphidation: SACs are calcined with NaH2PO2 in an inert atmosphere to introduce metal–P catalytic centres. Although the role of phosphorus atoms is still not well understood, they appear to lower the activation energy of relevant photocatalytic reactions, including oxygen and hydrogen evolution.388–391 A similar approach was also followed to introduce S coordinating atoms from Na2S2O3.392 The simplicity of the wet impregnation method allows extension of the synthetic scope to dual single-atoms, where pairs of metals can directly interact through covalent bonding or through non-metal bridging atoms. Such structures display important differences in the distribution and energetics of molecular orbitals around the catalytic centres, as demonstrated by computational simulations.390,391 No special deviations from the standard protocol are needed. Simply, carbon nitrides are suspended in solutions containing two different metal salts. Examples include Pt–Cu,9 Co–Na393 and Fe–K.299 Bridged isolated Fe–P–Ni sites were synthesized from iron–nickel layered double hydroxides, thermally annealed with NaH2PO2.390,391 A peculiar synthetic protocol for the preparation of pyrrolic N-rich M–N4 single-atom sites on carbon nitrides was described by Chen et al. In their strategy, the introduction of imidazole groups facilitated the coordination of metal ions to fulfil spatially separated distribution.33 The design was bio-inspired, given the similarity of M–N4 sites to metallic centres found in porphyrins. The enhanced charge density calculated for the as-prepared M–N4 sites resulted in the efficient homolytic cleavage of O–O bonds in peroxidase-like activity. Briefly, the material was prepared by pre-assembling cyanuric acid, xanthine and melamine in deionized water through a network of hydrogen bonds. Then, a metal salt (M = Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, and Cu) aqueous solution was added. The resulting mixture was dried and calcined at 550 °C under a N2 atmosphere (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  Schematic synthesis of bio-mimicking pyrrolic N-rich M–N4 single-atoms. Adapted from ref. 33 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020. 
Finally, engineering the morphology of the hosting polymeric structure can significantly improve spatial confinement, robustness and stability. An interesting contribution in this direction was from Shin and co-workers, aimed at the synthesis of a Pt-single-atom SAC on a CN/SnO2 nanofiber for formaldehyde sensing.16 First, platinum was deposited on mesoporous carbon nitride (Pt-MCN) by wet impregnation: bulk graphitic carbon nitride pre-synthesized by the pyrolysis of melamine was sonicated and suspended in an aqueous solution of K2PtCl4. Then, the as-obtained dried powder was dispersed in DMF with dissolved polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) and SnCl2·2H2O. The solution was electrospun and subsequently calcined at 500 °C in air to decompose the templating PVP and achieve Pt-MCN-decorated tin oxide nanofiber-in-tubes (FIT) (Fig. 13A). Isolated Pt was observed in STEM–HAADF images (Fig. 13B–D). The key role of Pt-MCN in the synthesis is to prevent the radial diffusion of the Sn precursor, which is trapped in the single-atom polymeric structure. XANES spectroscopy revealed an oxidation state of Pt slightly higher than +2, with a total loading of 4.3 wt%. Pt reduction is supposed to occur due to electron transfer from Sn, which was confirmed by the detection of Pt–Sn bonds from EXAFS spectroscopy. The FIT morphology provides more catalytic sites both on the exterior and on the interior of the material and efficiently immobilizes single atoms.
 Fig. 13  (A) Schematic synthesis of Pt–MCN-functionalized SnO2 nanofiber-in-tubes (FIT). (B) Dark-field STEM image of Pt–MCN-functionalized SnO2 FIT; (C) STEM–HAADF image of Pt–MCN–SnO2; (D) magnified image of the white dotted region in (C). Adapted from ref. 16 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 
3.2. Co-polymerization
The vast majority of carbon nitride materials are synthesized through thermal polymerization, where typical C,N-containing monomers (urea, melamine, cyanamide or dicyandiamide) are ground in crucibles and calcined at temperatures generally between 500 and 600 °C under an inert atmosphere.394 While in the wet impregnation route a metal is added to the pre-polymerized organic scaffold, co-polymerization involves mixing the metal precursor with the organic monomer before the thermal activation. In this strategy, metal is trapped within the growing organic framework, with noticeable advantages for the synthesis of SACs. The in situ coordination of metal atoms or ions favours the isolation of elements, preventing aggregation into clusters or nanoparticles. Homogeneous mixing of organic and inorganic precursors prior to polymerization leads to more uniform distribution of dopants and extended electronic networks, which is reflected in higher photoluminescence, for instance. Moreover, inorganic atoms and ions can have a templating effect, yielding unique CN networks.20,53 The method can be distinguished into dry and wet co-polymerization.
Dry co-polymerization is probably the most straightforward method for the synthesis of CN-based SACs. The procedure is totally similar to the synthesis of bare CN materials, with the only difference of grinding organic monomers together with metal sources (inorganic salts, most commonly). In the simplest scenario, C,N-rich organic monomers are ground with inorganic metal salts, possibly via vigorous ball-milling, heated in a furnace under Ar or N2, cooled down and washed. Examples of metal SACs synthesized through this process include Fe,395 Ni,396 Cu,318,395,397 and Zn,32,395 most of which derived from their chlorides. Loadings higher than 20 wt% with atomic dispersions were obtained, among the highest reported in the literature.318,397 Zhao et al. deposited zinc on a sponge-like carbon nitride in the form of electron-deficient Zn–N6 centres.32 The synthetic protocol was carried out in two calcination steps. First, ZnCO3 and melamine were ground and annealed at 400 °C under Ar. After cooling, washing with 1 M HCl and freeze-drying, the powder was subjected to a second thermal process at 520 °C to yield Zn–PCN, with the final highest loading of 4.79 wt% (Fig. 14A). The sponge-like structure was attributed to a templating effect of ZnCO3 and the released NH3 and CO2 gases (Fig. 14B). BET surface area measurements revealed that the porosity increased with higher loadings of ZnCO3 (Fig. 14C). DFT calculations also suggested an improved charge separation due to hole localization on the Zn centres.
 Fig. 14  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Zn-PCN; (B) SEM image of the sponge-like Zn-PCN; (C) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms at 77 K and the corresponding pore size distribution curves (inset) of bulk carbon nitride (BCN) and Zn–PCN. Adapted from ref. 32 with permission from Springer, copyright 2022. 
The dry co-polymerization method also allows the addition of ligands on single-atoms by direct one-pot calcination. In the work reported by Xie and co-workers, Ru single-atoms on C3N4 coordinated by L-alanine were prepared merely by grinding RuCl3, melamine and the amino acid through ball-milling and annealing.398 Some have reported a “pseudo” dry co-polymerization method in which pre-synthesized CN is ground with metal salts and calcined. For example, Co–CN was synthesized by annealing a dry mixture of CN and CoCl2, in one case adding eutectic KCl/LiCl as templating additives to increase the yield in heptazine units.290,399 Intercalated alkali-metals were also proposed as photocatalytic single-atoms for achieving enhanced hydrogen evolution. In particular, bimetallic K1Na1–CN was synthesized by calcination of melamine with KCl and NaCl and compared with the counterpart obtained by mixing prepared CN with molten salts.400 Nevertheless, it should be pointed out that Na+ and K+ generally exhibit very poor catalytic activity, if any. Instead, K–CN, Na–CN and Li–CN are best utilized as precursors for transition metal SACs in the cation exchange procedure, which will be discussed in the following subsection.22 Metallorganic complexes were also explored as metal precursors in dry co-polymerization, with many examples on Co SACs, involving Co(acac)2, Co(salen) and Co(phthalocyanine) complexes, with catalytically active loadings generally around 1 wt%.302,401–403 An identical procedure was later translated to Mn(acac)2.404 Guo et al. deposited Fe on g-C3N4 compared to a Fe(II)-imidazole complex and a Fe(II) metal–organic framework with 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate units as metal precursors in dry co-polymerization with melamine.405 Nitrogen-rich Fe-imidazole resulted in ultrahigh loading (18.2 wt%) single-atoms accompanied by a significant volume expansion during pyrolysis, while iron small clusters appeared when the metal–organic framework was used. The authors attributed the better dispersion of Fe atoms to the high content of nitrogen atoms in the imidazole ligand, which favoured the formation of isolated Fe(II)–Nx active sites.405 To ensure an atomically distributed dispersion, Liu et al. incorporated Ni(II) into CN, by calcining bulk Ni(II)–phytate complexes and urea.406 Coordination of Ni ions from spatially separated phosphate groups allowed single-atom deposition in NiN4 sites up to 5.68 wt%. Ni nanoparticles were observed when Ni(II) acetate was used instead.406 The method was also applied to the incorporation of third-row transition metal tungsten and rare earth lanthanum. In particular, W–CN was synthesized by the co-polymerization of ammonium metatungstate and dicyandiamide.407 XPS and XANES spectroscopy identified N–W–O3 moieties in the catalyst, with an average oxidation state of W lower than 6. The catalyst significantly outperformed the counterpart obtained by calcination of ammonium metatungstate and pre-synthesized CN in the oxidation of organic contaminants. This result was attributed to enhanced charge separation in isolated N–W–O3 centres. A straightforward one-step pyrolysis procedure was also successfully applied to the synthesis of La–N bridges between graphitic C3N4 sheets.340 In this work, La2(CO3)·8H2O and urea were used as precursors. The catalyst was especially interesting for CO2 reduction catalysis, exhibiting rapid COOH* formation and CO desorption. One-step pyrolysis proved to be an efficient method to synthesize dual single-atoms starting from layered double hydroxides.340 Moreover, the addition of dopant P atoms affects the electron configuration of metal centres and introduces M1–P–M2 bridges, with benefits for photocatalytic purposes.408,409 The protocol consists of a “pseudo” co-polymerization in which bimetallic layered double hydroxides (FeCo/LDH or NiCo/LDH) are ground with pre-synthesized carbon nitride powder and heated at 350 °C under Ar. NaH2PO2 is put at the inlet of the furnace as a PH3 source. A multi-step, carefully designed synthetic protocol, was followed by Li et al. in the synthesis of Cu–CN.8 In the first step (Fig. 15A), the monomeric precursors, namely CuCl2 and melamine, were pre-assembled in a HCl solution to yield an extended network of organic–inorganic complexes comprising [CuCl5]n3n− layers and protonated melamine counterions [H2mela]2+, overall named [H2mela]2[CuCl5]Cl. Next, excess chloride anions were removed and heptazine units were formed by calcining the filtered yellow powder at 500 °C in air. After cooling, the powder was subsequently ground with KCl and LiCl as templating agents and further annealed at 550 °C. Finally, parasitic Cu compounds on the catalyst surface were removed by acidic leaching (Fig. 15A). Single-atoms with loadings of 10.93 wt% were observed in the STEM–HAADF images (Fig. 15B). The innovative synthetic method is supposed to improve atomic dispersion compared to one-step co-polymerization because of the controlled positioning of Cu atoms in the pre-assembled unpolymerized precursor. Finally, the dry co-polymerization method was also applied to synthesize carbon nitrides doped with isolated C and O atoms, which substituted three-coordinated and two-coordinated N atoms in the CN structure.410 Ascorbic acid was chosen as the C and O source, and was simply calcined with urea at 550 °C in air. The generality of the method was demonstrated by using a variety of O-rich organic precursors.
 Fig. 15  (A) Schematic diagram of the four-step synthetic protocol for the co-polymerization of CuCl2 and melamine; (B) STEM–HAADF image of Cu–CN obtained through the four-step synthesis. Adapted from ref. 8 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2020; (C) proposed scheme for the synthesis of AgTCM-mpg-CN. Adapted from ref. 20 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016; STEM–HAADF images of Pt mesoporous graphitic CN prepared by (D) wet impregnation and (E) wet co-polymerization. Please note the difference in scale bars. Adapted from ref. 12 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017; (F) scheme of the atom-confinement and coordination method to grow rare earth single-atoms on carbon nitride nanotubes grown on a melamine sponge. (G) STEM–HAADF image of Er-CN with 20.1 wt% lanthanide loading (scale bar: 200 nm) and (H) corresponding Er EDX mapping. Adapted from ref. 15 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020. 
In wet co-polymerization, the metal is incorporated into the C–N network using a complexation chemical reaction in a solvent. In most applications, the same precursors commonly found in dry co-polymerization protocols are used. Pérez-Ramírez and Antonietti's groups pioneered this methodology for highly efficient carbon nitride-based SACs.20 They first proposed this approach in the synthesis of Ag SACs via the co-polymerization of silver tricyanomethanide and dicyandiamide in an aqueous environment. Tricyanomethanides (TCMs) were chosen as particularly suitable complexing agents because they present three reactive cyano groups, and their planar structure is expected to help the formation of graphitic C3N4 sheets with trapped metal ions or atoms. The material is supposed to grow as a divergent dendrimer, where subsequent cyanamide groups attach the core consisting of the metal–TCM ionic couple leading to the radial formation of aromatic C–N rings, which in turn condense in extended triazine units (Fig. 15C). Negatively charged nitrogen and carbon atoms in the resulting structure are said to be especially beneficial for reductive catalysis. Indeed, the Ag SACs synthesized using this method were shown to have a mesoporous structure and to be very active in the HER and hydrogenation reactions, when the metal content was 1 wt%. In detail, AgTCM-mpg-CN was synthesized by dispersing AgTCM, cyanamide and colloidal silica as a templating agent in deionized water. The mixture was stirred at 100 °C to evaporate water, and the obtained powder was calcined at 550 °C under N2. Next, the material was washed with NH4HF2 to remove the silica template, subsequently washed with water and ethanol and dried. Conversely, the same catalyst prepared by conventional wet impregnation or spray deposition methods resulted in nanoparticle formation. The same methodology, involving metal–TCM complexes and silica particles as templates, was then extended to Cu SACs411,412 and Ag–CN co-loaded with carbon dots.413 The same groups later conducted a systematic study of the structural and catalytic properties of several CN SACs (Pd, Ag, Ir, Pt and Au) prepared by wet impregnation and co-polymerization targeting the same metal loading of 0.5 wt%.12 The main conclusion was an increased metal content, reflected in higher catalytic activity, achieved with wet impregnation methods, but a much better atomic distribution of metals in the case of wet co-polymerization.12 STEM–HAADF images clearly showed Pt nanoparticles when H2PtCl6 was added to pre-polymerized mesoporous carbon nitride. Conversely, isolated single-atoms appeared when the same metal precursor was mixed with cyanamide, dried and calcined (Fig. 15D and E). Although tricyanomethanide complexes certainly appear more suitable to achieve atomically distributed functionalization of carbon nitrides, the simplest wet co-polymerization strategy is to stir solutions of metal inorganic salts and one among the most common CN precursors previously mentioned under heating. As usual, a pyrolysis step yields the final material. Antonietti and Wang first reported this technique in 2010, although the presence of single-atoms was not demonstrated.414 Nevertheless, the authors disclosed the intuition that g-C3N4 should be able to coordinate isolated metal ions, given its similarities to porphyrin and phthalocyanine rings. In their method, dicyandiamide was mixed with metal chloride salts in deionized water and heated at 100 °C until the water was removed. Then, the obtained powder was calcined at 500–600 °C under N2.414 A totally similar approach was reproduced in numerous works in the following years, with atomically distributed dispersions usually proven by STEM–HAADF imaging. Most common transition metals deposited from inorganic or organic salts through this technique include Mn,315,415–417 Fe,418–423 Co,46,424–426 Cu,288,427–429 Ni,45,46,313,430 Ag,46 V,311 Mo317 and W.431 Metal loadings were between 0.1 wt% and 5 wt%, with few exceptions, including ultra-high loadings of 20 wt% or above.425,428,430 Interestingly, some of these works synthesized CN from a dicyandiamide–formaldehyde resin.425,428 Other variants are worth mentioning. For example, nitrogen vacancies in Fe–CN were introduced using a second calcination step.420 This modification was found to increase the electron density of metal centres, with enhanced accumulation of photoelectrons. In a different Fe–CN, acid etching after calcination resulted in expanded interlayer spacing and improved Fenton-like catalytic activity, despite a diminished metal loading.422 Liu et al. used trihydroxymethyl melamine as a CN precursor in wet co-polymerization with Cu(NO3)2. Hydroxyl groups were beneficial for the atomic dispersion of the metal.429 Few authors also reported the incorporation of Na single-atoms from sodium salts, with benefits for catalytic purposes.432,433 Particular care was taken in the synthesis of Ti SACs. Titanium was always present as isolated Ti–O centres on CN. The metal was introduced either from TiCl4 in excess NH4Cl in a cold bath to prevent hydrolysis of TiO2+ ions into H2TiO3,434 or from stable titanium (di-i-propoxide)-bis(acetylacetonate) (TYZOR).5 In both works, dicyandiamide was the CN precursor. The wet co-polymerization strategy also found application for the dispersion of non-metal single-atoms on carbon nitride scaffolds. Melamine was mixed with NaSbF6 and H3BO3 for Sb42 and B435 incorporation, respectively. Antimony was coordinated as Sb3+, while boron atoms mainly replaced carbon in the polymeric structure. A remarkable contribution from Ji et al. demonstrated the functionalization of carbon nitride nanotubes with a large variety of rare-earth single-atoms, starting with erbium, through a novel atom-confinement and coordination strategy.15 Briefly, a commercial porous melamine sponge was immersed in an aqueous solution of urea and Er(NO3)3, subsequently frozen in liquid nitrogen and freeze-dried. Finally, the material was calcined at 550 °C in the N2 atmosphere (Fig. 15F). Cooling at cryogenic temperatures is supposed to facilitate an atomic distribution. The final Er loading was 2.5 wt% and went up to 20.1 wt% upon increasing the concentration of erbium nitrate (Fig. 15G and H). The procedure was replicated with all the lanthanides (La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Tm, Yb, Lu) and for Eu in a different work.341
Jiang et al. first proposed a wet co-polymerization method consisting of a pre-assembling of a metal–cyanuric acid–melamine supramolecular structure followed by pyrolysis.2 In brief, melamine, cyanuric acid and a metal salt were dissolved into three separate aqueous solutions, named A, B and C, respectively. Then, solution C is poured into B with stirring and the resulting solution is added to A. The as-obtained dried powder is calcined in an inert atmosphere (Fig. 16A). Jian et al. reported the formation of Ag–C2N2 sites, compared to Ag–N4 sites obtained via the dry co-polymerization technique, as the major benefit of this protocol. Coordination from C2N2 centres led to improved photocurrent and reduced photogenerated carrier recombination. The procedure has been replicated many times with variations in the order of the additions and extended to different metals, including Fe, Cu, Mn, Cr, Co and Ba.310,319,322,436–443 DMSO or ethylene glycol is also used as an organic solvent to dissolve melamine and cyanuric more efficiently. Nevertheless, all these procedures rely on the formation of a melamine–cyanuric acid supramolecular assembly held together by hydrogen bonding. In other variants, the metal salt is added as a dry powder before pyrolysis,444 cyanuric acid is omitted,24,445 or a mixture of metal precursors is used to prepare dual single-atoms.323 Luo et al. also reported the addition of NH4Cl in a crucible prior to calcination to obtain crimped CN nanosheets with a weakened conjugated structure, due to NH3 evolution in the furnace.446 Zhao et al. also observed an amorphization of CN with the formation of hollow nanotubes, when AgNO3 and melamine were mixed above 0.375 molar ratio (Fig. 16B–D).24 Similarly, Wagh et al. obtained Cu, Co, and Fe CN nano-spheroid SACs.447 These results show how the wet co-polymerization strategy can be very useful to modify the morphology of carbon nitride scaffolds.
 Fig. 16  (A) Schematic illustration of the preparation of Ag–N2C2/CN via the supramolecular pre-assembly. Adapted from ref. 2 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020; (B) schematic illustration of the fabrication of amorphous hollow tubular g-C3N4 via the wet co-polymerization of AgNO3 and melamine. STEM–HAADF image (C) and corresponding EDS Ag mapping (D) of amorphous hollow tubular g-C3N4 synthesized as in (B). Adapted from ref. 24 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 
Dual single-atom synthesis via wet co-polymerization was also reported. In the simplest strategy, Fe–Ni dual SACs were prepared from the two metal salt precursors stirred in an aqueous solution of dicyandiamide prior to calcination.448 In a different simple protocol, RuCl3 and Co(NO3)2·6H2O were just mixed in formamide and subjected to solvothermal conditions in an autoclave at 180 °C.25 Ou et al. followed a two-step method to limit the aggregation of metal.27 In particular, a pre-assembled structure formed from trithiocyanuric acid, melamine and manganese acetate was formed in water. After calcination, the powder was further immersed in a cobalt nitrate solution and calcined again in a reducing (H2) atmosphere.
Finally, Tan et al. proposed an integrated material that combines carbon nitride structure covalently grafted to carbon-rich sheets enclosing CoN4 sites.11 In their method, a cobalt tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin (Co-TCPP) and D-glucose were dissolved in deionized water. Then, melamine was added, and the resulting solution was freeze-dried. Finally, it underwent sequential pyrolysis cycles at 300 °C, 400 °C and 550 °C (Fig. 17A). Co loadings were from 0 to 0.35 wt% and single-atoms were identified by STEM–HAADF (Fig. 17B and C). The catalyst was successfully applied for photoelectrochemical oxygen evolution.11
 Fig. 17  (A) Synthetic scheme for hybrid g-C3N4/CoN4 single-atoms; (B) STEM–HAADF image of the catalyst synthesized as in (A) and (C) corresponding intensity profiles obtained in regions 1 and 2 from (B). Adapted from ref. 11 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2022. 
3.3. Cation exchange
The cation exchange synthetic strategy is peculiar to certain carbon nitride scaffolds. More specifically, this method can be applied to carbon nitrides that possess alkali metal cations in their structure. Such materials tend to be highly crystalline and generally prepared through the calcination of a CN organic precursor and alkali metal salts. They belong to a subcategory of CN materials, which has poly(heptazine imides) (PHI) and poly(triazine imides) (PTI) as the main representatives.167,168,170 NaCl, KCl and LiCl are usually chosen as alkali metal ion precursors to synthesize PHI and PTI. As a result, Na+, K+ or Li+ ions intercalate between graphitic sheets through electrostatic interactions with deprotonated, negative nitrogen atoms, while HCl is eliminated, the driver of the reaction. Alkali metal ions are very easily replaced by transition metal cations bearing multiple charges, because of the stronger coulombic attraction (Fig. 18A). Most transition metal ions also have a suitable ionic radius to fit into PHI coordinating sites, while PTI is selective towards smaller cations. The approach is remarkably fast and simple, covering a broad scope of metals, allowing for high metal loading and with promising scalability.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic representation of the controlled non-thermal cation exchange method used to replace the Na+ cations in the structure of PHI with Fe3+ cations; (b) HR-TEM image of Fe–PHI (0.1 wt%) and the corresponding fast Fourier transform (left) indexed in a hexagonal lattice; (c) Annular dark-field STEM image of Fe–PHI showing metal single-atoms. Adapted from ref. 43 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. 
The cation exchange procedure was first proposed by Pérez-Ramírez and co-workers. Mg–PHI with a metal loading of 1.94 wt% was prepared by simply dispersing K–PHI in an aqueous solution of MgCl2.22 No cation exchange occurred with Li–PTI, confirming the size-selective nature of this CN structure. The as-obtained Mg–PHI was used as a substrate for subsequent microwave-assisted Pd deposition, and the synthesized material exhibited improved catalytic activity in alkyne semi-hydrogenation. The scope of the cation exchange method was then broadened by Teixeira and collaborators. Ru–PHI, Ni–PHI and Pt–PHI were synthesized by mixing Na–PHI with RuCl3, NiCl2 and H2PtCl6, respectively.38 The powders were then washed with deionized water and acetone and dried at 60 °C. Diffuse-reflectance UV-Vis spectroscopy and computational studies indicated the strong influence of metal ions on optical and electronic properties. Later, the same group successfully applied Fe–PHI to the photocatalytic oxidation of hydrocarbons.43 Fe–PHI was synthesized before utilizing FeCl3 as the metal precursor. Metal loadings from 0.02 to 5.54 wt% were obtained, although in the latter case, the authors also observed FeOOH spikes in TEM images. The presence of single-atoms was confirmed by annular dark-field STEM (Fig. 18C and D). Interestingly, EPR and Raman spectroscopy suggested the formation of high valent iron species (Fe(IV) or Fe(V)). This finding may indicate that the PHI scaffold can host highly charged cations with no perturbations in their structure. The group also used Co–PHI and Ni–PHI in a recent catalytic study on the oxygen reduction reaction,449 and Cu–PHI was successfully employed in the selective photooxidation of methane into methanol.450 All these metal PHI were prepared using the cation exchange method.449,450
Careful measures were taken by Zhang et al. in the synthesis of Pt-intercalated PHI by cation exchange from K–PHI.333 The Pt content in an aqueous suspension of CN and Pt(NH3)4Cl2 was monitored in situ for one day employing ICP. The cation exchange was considered complete when the detected Pt concentration did not change. Moreover, the suspension was covered with an aluminium foil to avoid Pt photoreduction. Finally, excess surface Pt atoms were washed away with aqua regia. The authors claimed an ultra-high loading of Pt (up to 8.7 wt%) still in the single-atom regime. In further examples, Pt2+ was exchanged with K+ as in Zhang et al., followed by heating in an inert atmosphere.336,451 Interestingly, the authors also highlighted that a Pt cationic source was needed to exchange with K+ ions, while an anionic form would not yield the same exchange efficiency due to the electrostatic repulsion from deprotonated nitrogen atoms. Indeed, when Pt(NH3)4Cl2 was replaced with H2PtCl6 at the same molar amount, nanoparticles formed instead. These results are apparently not consistent with the work reported by Teixeira et al., although a much lower amount of H2PtCl6 was used in that case.38 H2PtCl6 as the precursor targeting 5 or 0.5 wt% was used in a similar protocol.348 In this case, Pt–CN was subjected to two thermal activation steps. The material was first annealed at around 230 °C in a N2 atmosphere, washed in DMSO to remove loosely bound species and annealed again at around 330 °C. The loading decreased from 4% to 2% after the first annealing process. Song et al. achieved ultra-high loading of Cu by cation exchange resulting in a material with well-defined metal–metal distance.14 [Cu(NH3)4(H2O)2]2+ was used as a metal precursor and the powder obtained after prolonged stirring and drying was annealed at 550 °C under Ar. Cu was loaded at 4, 9 and 21 wt%. In all these cases, single-atom formation was confirmed using STEM–HAADF, and interatomic distances were statistically calculated (Fig. 19A–D). The highest loading of Cu led to the highest catalytic activity in nitrile–azide cycloaddition, which was attributed to dinuclear catalytic species.
 Fig. 19  Atomic-resolution STEM–HAADF images of (A) 21 wt% (B) 9 wt% and (C) 4 wt% Cu1–C3N4 SACs. Scale bars: (A) 2 nm; (B) and (C) 1 nm; and (D) statistic distribution of the inter-Cu distance in the Cu1–C3N4 SACs from STEM–HAADF images. Adapted from ref. 14 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2022. 
Very similar approaches were also followed to synthesize Co on carbon nitride nanorods, starting from CoCl2 and then calcining the obtained powder in a reducing (H2/Ar) atmosphere.452 Isolated atoms were observed for a loading of up to 0.32 wt%, while clusters started to appear at 1.0 wt%. Cation exchange was also applied to the synthesis of Ni–C3N4 later adsorbed on a TiO2 substrate for photoelectrocatalytic purposes.453
3.4. Microwave-assisted deposition
The key advantage of microwave irradiation in thermally activated processes is a reduction of the operational time.454 Moreover, since its first appearance as a synthetic tool in organic synthesis,455,456 it proved to be a valuable method for the preparation of materials with highly sensitive growth conditions. Microwave irradiation generates heat at precise locations of a vessel, and heat transfer can be easily adjusted by modulating the duration of irradiation pulses and cooling. Pressure can also be easily controlled, unlike in conventional thermal methods with furnaces. Better selectivity and reproducibility can be achieved by suppressing side-reactions. Although microwave-assisted synthesis still remains a research methodology, recent scale-up attempts in graphene chemistry have been made.457
Today, only a few examples of single-atom carbon nitrides synthesized in microwave reactors can be found, most of which compare materials prepared with other conventional techniques. Pérez-Ramírez and co-workers first proposed the deposition of Pd single-atoms on C3N4 scaffolds for catalytic semi-hydrogenation of alkynes (Fig. 20A).4,22,356,458 In a typical protocol, CN and Pd(NH3)4(NO3)2 are mixed in an aqueous suspension and placed in a microwave reactor. Synthesis is completed after 20 cycles of 15 s irradiation and 3 min cooling at a power of 100 W, targeting 0.5 wt% of palladium. In their first attempt, the authors achieved uniform distribution of metal atoms on both conventional and C-enriched carbon nitride.4 The method was also extended to crystalline PHI and PTI (Fig. 20B).22 Microwave-assisted deposition of Pd on P-doped CN resulted in promising catalytic activity for the semi-hydrogenation of 2-methyl-3-butyn-2-ol. Nevertheless, the authors also verified that the same results could be achieved with the catalyst prepared by wet-impregnation in view of easier scalability for possible industrial applications.356 In a further report, they pointed out that microwave irradiation might be more appropriate for the carbon nitride scaffold rather than carbon nanofibers or reduced graphene oxide, where agglomeration into nanoparticles is favoured upon irradiation.458 Microwaves at higher power (1000 W) were also successfully applied in the deposition of Ru atoms from RuCl3 on mesoporous carbon nitride.335 Deposition in non-aqueous media was also studied. It was observed that the addition of triethylamine to a suspension of CoCl2 and carbon nitrides in acetonitrile facilitate Co adsorption on the CN scaffolds. The same effect was observed both on g-C3N4303 and thin CN nanosheets.307 In a different work, Co single-atoms at loadings comparable with previous reports were obtained on C-enriched carbon nitrides even in the absence of triethylamine in a microwave reactor.459 In all these cases, longer synthesis times (2 h) were needed. The microwave-assisted deposition was preceded by chemical reduction with NaBH4. This approach was reported for Ni29,460 (Fig. 20C–E) and Cu.461 The role of the reducing agent is unclear. Indeed, in the case of Cu, XPS revealed the co-presence of Cu2+ ions and metallic single-atoms, indicating a successful partial reduction of the precursor CuCl2.461 Conversely, only signals from Ni2+ appeared in the XPS spectra of Ni–CN prepared using a reduction-microwave approach. Nevertheless, given the low N–Ni bond length determined from EXAFS fitting, the authors claimed that Ni single-atoms were covalently bonded.29
 Fig. 20  (A) Schematic representation of the introduction of palladium by microwave-irradiation-assisted metal deposition. Adapted from ref. 4 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017; (B) AC-STEM–HAADF images of the fresh and used Pd-SACs based on graphitic carbon nitride (GCN), poly(heptazine imide) (PHI) and poly(triazine imide) (PTI). Adapted from ref. 22 with permission from Oxford Academic, copyright 2018; (C) schematic representation of the microwave-assisted deposition of Ni on polymeric carbon nitride; (D) STEM–HAADF image of the synthesized material; and (E) intensity profiles obtained in regions 1 and 2 of the image in (B). Adapted from ref. 29 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
3.5. Atomic layer deposition
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a thin-film growth method especially suitable for the deposition of uniformly distributed particles. The technique is closely related to chemical vapor deposition (CVD), except that the process consists of sequential deposition cycles of volatile precursors that react with each other. This workflow results in a self-limiting growth of individual layers on a support. Indeed, the first precursor is only adsorbed on the available surface sites on the support, while the following precursors stabilize the adsorption by a chemical reaction. The thickness of the thin film can be finely tuned by varying the number of deposition cycles. In a typical method involving two precursors, atomic layer deposition is divided into four main steps: (1) exposure of the substrate to the first volatile precursor, (2) purge of the reaction chamber to remove unadsorbed precursors, (3) exposure to the second volatile precursor that reacts with the primary adsorbed species, and (4) purge of the reaction chamber to remove unreacted precursors and by-products.462–464 ALD has largely been used for the deposition of nanoparticles. One of the advantages of self-limitation growth is that the size of nanoparticles can be controlled with very good precision by choosing the appropriate number of deposition cycles.465 Therefore, single-atom deposition is achieved through a single cycle, while agglomerates are generally formed with multiple steps. Atomic distribution is successfully obtained only if adsorption sites on the substrates are sufficiently separated and if the free energy of adsorbed material is lower than the free energy of the substrate,464 otherwise clusters or thin films might be formed. These requirements are usually met for carbon nitrides, where metal atoms or ions intercalate between the layers of the CN network and experience a strong coordination from nitrogen atoms. Isolation of coordinating centres is even more easily fulfilled in N-doped carbon nanosheets, which can be derived from the calcination of carbon nitrides with organic compounds.334
To date, only three works reported the synthesis of metallic single-atom carbon nitrides by atomic layer deposition. The first attempt consisted of a Co1–N4 catalytic site for hydrogen evolution on a carbon nitride subjected to phosphidation (PCN) for improved carrier mobility.47 Cobalt bis(cyclopentadienyl) was chosen as the primary precursor and deposited on PCNs in a viscous flow reactor using N2 as the carrier gas. After purging, O3 was flowed to remove cyclopentadienyl ligands. The atomic distribution of Co atoms was confirmed by STEM–HAADF. Interestingly, isolated atoms were obtained although ALD was repeated for 3 cycles. Huang et al. reported the atomic layer deposition of Pd on carbon nitrides for hydrogenation reactions.36,37 The technique followed a standard procedure for ALD-deposited Pd. In the first step, C3N4 was exposed to palladium hexafluoroacetylacetate (Pd(hfac)2) in a viscous flow reactor. Subsequently, formalin (37% formaldehyde and 15% methanol aqueous solution) was allowed to react with adsorbed Pd species to reduce hfac ligands (Fig. 21A–C). In order to compare the performances of Pd single-atoms and Pd NPs, the authors repeated the synthesis with one and ten cycles of ALD, respectively.36,37
 Fig. 21  (A) Schematic illustration of a single-atom Pd1/C3N4 catalyst synthesized by ALD from Pd(hfac)2 followed by treatment with formalin; (B) and (C) aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of the single-atom Pd1/C3N4 catalyst at different magnifications. Adapted from ref. 37 with permission from Springer, copyright 2016. 
3.6. Photodeposition
Irradiating metal precursors in the presence of electron donors or electron acceptors can induce redox reactions, which in turn allow the deposition of metal atoms or oxides on substrates.466 Because of the low control on nucleation and growth, photodeposition has largely been selected as a method to synthesize nanoclusters and nanoparticles, with only very recent attempts to achieve atomically dispersed configurations.467,468 The transition from nanoaggregates to single-atoms regimes can be regulated by the amount of precursors. Moreover, carbon nitrides lend themselves as excellent substrates for photodeposition, since they are capable of transferring electrons or holes to other species upon photoexcitation. This property might avoid the need for sacrificial agents. Indeed, most of the existing works on the light-assisted synthesis of single atoms on CN do not involve auxiliary reactants. Interestingly, this approach usually does not require subsequent thermal treatment, unlike typical wet impregnation synthesis, with consistent time savings.
H2PtCl6 is the ideal precursor for photodeposition of Pt atoms. Selective deposition of Pt single-atoms (0.11 wt%) and Pt nanoparticles (1.87 wt%) on g-C3N4 by UV-Vis (λ > 300 nm) irradiation in aqueous suspension was demonstrated.331,469 In a similar synthetic protocol, H2PtCl6 was mixed with g-C3N4 in a water/MeOH solution and irradiated under a 300 W Xe lamp.470 Here, the alcohol might behave as the sacrificial electron donor. As in the previous example, Pt loading was varied to obtain SA (0.5 wt%), nanoclusters (1 wt%) or NPs (2–5 wt%). Deposition of Pt was also carried out on CN modified with Ni–phytate for photocatalytic water splitting under IR irradiation.471 The same amount of H2PtCl6 precursor resulted in single-atoms and nanoparticles when irradiated under NIR (>800 nm) and visible (>420 nm) light, respectively. Photodeposited Pd single-atoms on CN nanosheets outperformed Pt in catalytic hydrogen evolution.256 The protocol for Pd deposition consisted of a preliminary wet impregnation at 80 °C for 8 h in a suspension of CN, PdCl2 and NaCl. The dried powder was then re-dispersed in deionized water and irradiated with a 350 W Xe lamp, achieving a final Pd loading of 0.17 wt%. Metal loading was also adjusted by varying the duration of preliminary wet impregnation. In a similar procedure, Pd loadings between 0.10 and 0.19 wt% were obtained depending on the amount of PdCl2 precursor without the addition of NaCl in the preliminary step.324 Metal loading can also be tuned by choosing the appropriate sacrificial electron donor. This was demonstrated for the light-assisted synthesis of carbon-vacant carbon nitrides (CCN) functionalized with Ni. When CCN and Ni(NO3)2 were dispersed in 10% triethanolamine (TEOA) aqueous solution and irradiated with a 300 W Xe lamp, atomically dispersed metal was obtained. Instead, nanoclusters formed when triethanolamine was replaced with methanol.312 The author proposed that TEOA improved the uniform distribution of the metal by chelating Ni2+ ions in a precursor complex [Ni(TEOA)]2+. Liu et al. also reported the use of TEOA for the efficient light-driven deposition of Ag single-atoms on S-doped CN in asymmetric catalytic sites.467 According to previous studies, the authors suggested that TEOA might play both the role of a hole scavenger and a complexing agent to form [(Ag)(TEOA)2]+. Such complexation enables a slow deposition rate of Ag on the substrate, with an optimal loading of 1.41 wt% for HER catalytic purposes. Also, computational studies revealed that [(Ag)(TEOA)2]+ preferentially interacted with asymmetric N3S1 centres on CN. The universality of amine ligand-assisted Ag deposition was proven by replacing TEOA with other hydramines. Conversely, only nanoclusters and nanoparticles were produced when non-amines sacrificial agents were used. The amine-assisted deposition was unsuccessful for noble metals including Pt, Pd and Au, likely because no complexation occurred. Bai et al. observed that photodeposition was the best method to achieve a single Ru atom on P-doped CN for H2O2 synthesis, when compared to thermal annealing and NaBH4 chemical reduction.472 Indeed, they proposed that light allowed the best control of size by preventing fast metal agglomeration. RuCl3 was used as the precursor and isopropanol as the sacrificial electron donor. Finally, photoreduction was also investigated to synthesize dual-single-atom catalyst on CN. A suspension of CN and metal precursors is first stirred for several hours, then quickly frozen either using a refrigerator (−10 °C) or liquid N2 to facilitate a slow deposition rate and immediately irradiated under a 300 W Xe lamp. The approach was applied to make Pt–Ru359 and Pt–Cu9 dual-single-atom SACs.
3.7. Other synthetic methods
Other unconventional synthetic methods specifically aimed at atomically distributed metals on carbon nitrides can be found. Among these, the electrochemical method first proposed by Yang's group deserves to be mentioned. The setup proposed is very simple and holds promise for easy scalability. Briefly, a disk of the metal to be deposited is placed in an aqueous suspension of CN between two graphite electrodes. A constant voltage of at least 10 V is then applied between the electrodes. Surface metal ions in the suspension are accelerated in the electric field and captured by N atoms upon collision with CN sheets (Fig. 22A).34
 Fig. 22  (A) Schematic diagram of the electric-field-assisted fabrication process for SACs; (B) STEM–HAADF images of SACs prepared using different metal atoms. Scale bars: 2 nm. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022; (C) scheme of the “chemical scissors” strategy applied to Pd deposition on polymeric carbon nitride; and (D) XRD and (E) XPS characterization of Pdh–PCN, Pd1–PCN and Pdp–PCN. Pd1–PCN clearly exhibited no signal from Pd NP or metallic atoms. Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2022. 
Characterization of Ag/CN and Cu/CN (0.31 and 0.29 wt% loading, respectively) revealed that nanoparticles started to appear immediately at a voltage of 50 V and after 90 minutes at 30 V. The method was tested with a wide range of elements covering Ag, Cu, Ni, Co, V, Fe, Zn, Ru, Ce, Sm, Mo, W and Bi (Fig. 22B). The procedure was also successfully applied for the synthesis of Cu SACs nanozymes with ascorbate peroxidase-like activity.473 A related electrochemical method was proposed by Shixuan et al., in this case, a homogenous precursor in solution was electrodeposited on a glassy carbon electrode coated with a boron carbon nitride (BCN), in turn, synthesized from the reaction of g-C3N4 with boric acid.474 The deposition was performed in a standard three-electrode cell comprising an Ag/AgCl reference electrode, a carbon rod counter electrode and a BCN/Nafion/glassy carbon working electrode in a 1 M KOH electrolyte and 100 μM H2PtCl6. The potential was swept linearly to induce Pt reduction on the substrate, obtaining single-atoms with a loading of 0.45 wt%. EXAFS characterization indicated that Pt was coordinated by four N atoms and no interaction with B atoms was present. An innovative method to post-process metal-functionalized CN in order to break down possible clusters and aggregates into single-atoms was designed by Li et al.41 The strategy, named “chemical scissors”, consists of selective etching of metal–metal bonds on the substrate to isolate single-atoms.41 This technique allows atomically distributed configurations with high metal loadings to be achieved. The principle is based on the generally stronger metal–CN bonds compared to metal–metal interactions. The authors demonstrated this strategy on Pd–CN. Briefly, a high amount of Pd was first deposited on polymeric carbon nitrides from PdCl2 by a wet impregnation method to achieve Pdh–PCN. Then, this was etched by adding the as-obtained powder to an aqueous solution of KBr and FeCl3. 1 M HCl was added, and the suspension was centrifuged after prolonged stirring at high temperature. The supernatant was recovered to recycle the Pd solution, while the dried powder was named Pd1–PCN, with a loading as high as 2.02 wt% (Fig. 22C). As a benchmark, Pd at the same metal loading was also deposited using a wet impregnation method to obtain Pdp–PCN. XRD and XPS showed that Pd0 was removed after selective etching in favour of ionic species (Fig. 22D and E). Indeed, etching is expected to work through oxidation promoted by FeCl3.
Finally, Zhang et al. reported a ligand replacement approach to synthesize single-atoms on CN from metal–organic frameworks (MOFs).475 MOFs offer a templating effect enabling an atomically distributed deposition of metals on a substrate. In their work, single-atom Co–CN was synthesized through a facile thermal copolymerization. Urea and pre-synthesized Co-MOF were ground in a crucible and annealed at 550 °C in air. The metal confinement within organic ligands allowed the uniform dispersion of Co2+ centres at a loading of 1.72%. The material also showed one of the best performances in photocatalytic CO2-to-CO conversion.
4. Catalytic applications
4.1. Photocatalytic applications
Single-atom-based catalysts have emerged as one of the most promising new enabling systems in heterogeneous catalysis, due to their maximum atomic utilization, tunable electronic structure and unique coordination environment for transition metals.53 When associated with carbon nitrides, they can shine the brightest. As a rule, a high-performing photocatalyst should be able to (i) absorb light efficiently; (ii) separate charges and transfer them to reactant species; and (iii) act as a catalyst by creating pathways with a lower redox overpotential at active sites and helping the activation of molecules.54
In this regard, CN materials have proven to be very promising candidates for photocatalytic applications due to their ability to absorb light efficiently, especially in the visible range, their suitable valence and conduction bands, an optical band gap of ∼2.7 eV, chemical stability, non-toxicity, and of course, the straightforward synthesis using only earth-abundant elements. When stabilized within the CN structure, metal single-atoms can lead to modifications in the electronic structure of these materials, altering their light absorption and charge separation, as well as acting as an active site for catalytic reactions. On the other hand, the CN support can transfer the charge density from and to the metal single sites, changing their redox potential. The relationship between single-atoms and CN supports is two-way, where the SA can change the electronic properties of the CN support, while the electronic features of the CN matrix can tune the catalytic activity of the single sites in photocatalytic reactions.
4.1.1. Water splitting (hydrogen and oxygen evolution). Hydrogen is seen by many as the most promising alternative fuel to oil derivatives, due to its high energy density of 140 MJ kg−1 and the possibility to produce it using renewable resources.476,477 The generation of H2 from water using photocatalysts and solar energy has been considered a promising strategy for so-called solar hydrogen.478,479 A wide range of photocatalysts have been reported to being able to catalyse the generation of H2 from water. However, the main limitations of this approach are the usually fast recombination of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs within the photocatalysts, as well as limitations in charge transfer to the reaction medium and poor interaction between the semiconductor and co-catalysts.480The water-splitting reaction involves two half-reactions, the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), which are rarely studied simultaneously. A suitable photocatalyst for this reaction should have its conduction band potential more negative than the reducing potential of H2O (0 V vs. NHE) for the HER, while its valence band potential should be more positive than the H2O oxidation potential (1.23 V vs. NHE) for the OER. In this regard, CN materials possess the appropriate band positions to catalyse the water-splitting reaction, combined with their visible-light absorption properties making CN a promising candidate for H2 generation from water.481,482 However, despite its great potential as a photocatalyst for this application, it leads to low conversions and quantum efficiency when pristine CN is used to catalyse the water-splitting reaction.54 Therefore, it is of utmost importance to modify CN materials to enable larger rates of H2 production, as well as higher quantum efficiencies, in order to make them feasible candidates for large scale applications.
Regarding the reduction of water (HER), platinum is one of the most efficient cocatalysts for H2 production and has been widely used in enhancing the performance of C3N4-based materials.21,285,286,328,331–333,471,483–486 Li et al. employed Pt single-atoms as a cocatalyst for g-C3N4 in the HER. In their work, it is shown that isolated Pt single-atoms induce an intrinsic change of the surface trap states leading to a longer lifetime of photogenerated electrons and thereby improving photocatalytic performance (Fig. 23). Single-atom Pt cocatalysts led to remarkable enhancements in photogeneration of H2; Pt single-atom/g-C3N4 presented, in the specific system of the authors, an 8.6 times higher activity compared to Pt nanoparticles (NPs), and nearly 50-fold compared to pristine g-C3N4.21
 Fig. 23  Representative ultrafast transient absorption (TA) kinetics probed at 750 nm (pump at 400 nm) for (A) g-C3N4; (B) PtSingle-Atom/g-C3N4 and (C) Pt NPs/g-C3N4. (D) Schematic model of PtSingle-Atom/g-C3N4 and photocatalytic comparison with Pt NPs/g-C3N4; (E) schematic illustration of the mechanisms which led to a longer lifetime of photogenerated electrons. Adapted with permission from ref. 21 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016. 
A illustrative example of the versatility of CN materials as a support, as well as the strength of Pt as an active cocatalyst, was reported by Huang et al. In their work, they immobilized Ni–phytate photosensitizers over C3N4 to maximize the light absorption range, which led to active H2 generation at λ > 800 nm.471 On this system, they photodeposited Pt single-atoms, which not only increased the activity 140 times compared to the system without Pt but also allowed the reaction to occur in the absence of a sacrificial reagent. This is an example of water splitting leading to the generation of both H2 and O2 simultaneously in the near-infrared region.471 Another example of overall water splitting using Pt single-atoms as cocatalysts was reported by Su and collaborators. The authors claimed that the improved activity is due to the modification of the band structure through “high-valence metal single-atom confinement”. The authors reported an almost 10-fold increment for the Pt single-atom catalyst compared with the corresponding system based on Pt NPs.285 Similar results were reported by Zeng et al., who showed that Pt single-atoms supported on g-C3N4 are 14 times more active than their nanoparticle counterparts.
Palladium single-atoms have also been used as an efficient cocatalyst for H2 generation with CN materials.256,324,374 Cao et al. surpassed the activity of Pt single-atoms by employing Pd single-atoms instead. The authors reported the preparation of atomically dispersed Pd on g-C3N4, which led to the formation of two distinct sites, bridging Pd atoms located between the layers and surface Pd atoms, these being the active sites.256 They claimed that the 1.8 times higher activity observed for Pd/g-C3N4 compared to Pt/g-C3N4 was due to the better vertical charge migration mediated by the interlayer Pd sites and the improved charge separation due to the capture of photogenerated electrons by surface Pd atoms.256
Some other noble metal single-atoms have also been investigated as potential catalytic sites over CN materials for increasing the activity in the water-splitting reaction, such examples are Ru,338,363,487 Ir338 and Ag.2,20,46 Yu and co-workers investigated the properties of Ir and Ru single-atoms deposited on g-C3N4. They reported that in both cases there were significant modifications in the electronic and optical properties of pristine g-C3N4. Both modifications also led to increased activity towards the HER, with Ru–g-C3N4 presenting the highest H2 evolution rates when normalized by noble metal mass, which was 4.5 times larger than that of Ir–g-C3N4.338 The high activity of ruthenium was also reported by An et al., where Ru single-atoms were immobilized at 3D porous g-C3N4. This catalyst showed conversion rates similar to Pt single-atoms over the same material, as well as superior activities to metallic and non-metallic cocatalysts over g-C3N4.487 Meanwhile, silver single-atoms have also shown promising results, as shown by Jiang et al. In their work, they have claimed to stabilize silver single-atoms on both nitrogen and carbon in the structure of g-C3N4 (Ag–N2C2/CN).2 They compared this novel material against reference Ag nanoparticle systems (AgNP/CN) Ag single-atoms coordinated with four nitrogens in the carbon nitride (Ag–N4/CN) and Pt nanoparticles (Pt/CN) for the H2 evolution reaction. Here, Ag–N2C2/CN managed to outperform all materials, being 7 times more active than Ag NPs, 3.5 times more active than Ag–N4/CN, and slightly higher than Pt nanoparticles, demonstrating the great potential of Ag-based systems for this reaction.2 The authors explained that in Ag–N2C2/CN, there is a lowering in the energy band gap, which led to an expanded light absorption range. They also reported that Ag–N2C2/CN has a faster electron transfer from CN to silver when compared to Ag–N4/CN and Ag–N2C2/CN (Fig. 24).
 Fig. 24  Schematic diagram comparing the enhancement effect during the water-splitting reaction by Ag–N2C2/CN with pure CN. Adapted from ref. 2 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020. 
Despite the promising results of noble metal-based SA over CN materials, with Pt being the most effective cocatalyst, their high costs and low abundance make them prohibitively expensive and limit most of their practical applications. Fortunately, in the past few years, there has been a surge in successful approaches of non-noble metal based SACs combined with CN materials for H2 evolution. Such examples encompass Cu,383,488 Ni,45,312,367,396 Fe,378 Co,47,290,306,307,380 Zn,32 Al,489 Mo,316 V,311 W,296 Ti,490 Ga,339 and alkali metals.400 Nickel has been regarded as a promising candidate for Pt-free high efficiency H2-generating catalysts, as shown in the work of Hu et al. where the authors managed to achieve overall water-splitting using Ni-coordinated C3N4 fibres (Ni/C3N4Fs), and they also successfully enhanced the capabilities of these catalysts by reassembling the surface Ni atoms into nickel phosphate particles (NiP/C3N4Fs), which increased the electron transfer and utilization in the reaction.45 In their proposed mechanism for this reaction (Fig. 25), the photogenerated electrons move from the bulk of the material to the convex surface, facilitated by the Ni single-atoms within the structure, and migrate to NiP, where water is reduced to H2; meanwhile, the holes move transversally in the interior of the C3N4Fs, leading to water oxidation into O2.45 Li and co-workers also showed a similar result, where Ni single-atoms coordinated to PCN (PCNNi) were successfully employed in H2 generation without the addition of a sacrificial agent, yielding H2O2 instead of O2 as the water oxidation product.396
 Fig. 25  (A) TEM and (B) HR-TEM images synthesized SA catalysts (Ni/C3N4Fs-3). (C) TEM, SEM (inset) and (D) HR-TEM of the Ni/C3N4Fs-3 catalyst modified on the surface with NiP. (E) Schematic illustration for the electron transfer mechanism where e− moves from bulk to surface aided by Ni-SA, and h+ move transversally through the C3N4 framework. Adapted from ref. 45 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2023. 
Another transition metal that has been widely studied, which recently demonstrated high conversion rates towards H2 production, is cobalt. Wu et al. have managed to synthesize a catalyst using cobalt single-atoms and a phosphine-doped PCN. The photocatalyst was capable of promoting H2 evolution at a conversion rate of 420 μmol g−1 h−1 without the addition of noble metals or sacrificial reagents. They attributed the improved activity to the effective suppression of photoexcited charge recombination, facile charge separation and transfer, which prolonged by about 20-fold the carrier lifetime compared to pristine PCN, boosting both half-reactions of water splitting.306 Another illustrative example of using cobalt was reported by Liu et al., where exfoliated sheets of PCNs were used as a support for cobalt single-atoms (Co1-2DPCN).380 This catalyst displayed a H2 evolution rate of 28.3 mmol g−1 h−1, and is 4.2 times more active than Co NPs. Surprisingly, this catalyst when combined with a 0.75 wt% of the Pt cocatalyst had its conversion rate increased to 138.6 mmol gmetal−1 h−1, which is 6.2 times higher than that of Co NPs with the same amount of platinum.380
Remarkably, some materials have been presented in recent years with activities that are comparable to those of established noble metals. For instance, Wang and collaborators produced vanadium anchored on ultrathin carbon nitride (SAVCN). This material managed to perform the HER at evolution rates of 5 mmol g−1 h−1 at 420 nm and 3 mmol g−1 h−1 at 495 nm, which are 3.1 times and 10 times higher than those of pristine ultrathin carbon nitride.311 In another example, Jiang et al. doped polymeric carbon nitride with Ga single-atoms (GCN), and they observed that GCN with 0.15 wt% Ga has an optimal H2 evolution rate of 9.9 mmol g−1 h−1, about 162 times greater than that of pure CN and 3.3 times greater than that of Pt/CN.339 They claimed that on GCN, the GaN4 sites led to extended lifetimes of excited electrons, leading to proton adsorption and electron transfer. At the same time on GaN4 sites, the adsorption energy of H2 is positive, which facilitates the desorption of hydrogen, accelerating the reaction cycle.339
Recently, zinc was successfully applied in overall water splitting under visible light. In their work, Zhao and co-workers coordinated Zn single-atoms in a 3D sponge-like polymeric carbon nitride (Zn–PCN).32 Zn–PCN was tested on the HER in the presence and absence of a sacrificial reagent (e.g. TEOA). In the experiments with TEOA, the photocatalyst produces hydrogen at a rate of 1.1 mmol g−1 h−1, which is 14 times higher than that of bulk carbon nitride (BCN). In the absence of TEOA, the catalyst could produce both O2 and H2 at stoichiometric proportions. The authors attributed the results to the presence of Zn single-atoms, which were said to induce a midgap energy level, increase carrier concentration, reduce overpotentials of water redox reactions and, consequently, accelerate charge separation and transfer (Fig. 26).32
 Fig. 26  (A) Schematic illustration and (B) band structure of proposed reaction mechanism for overall water splitting over Zn–PCN. Adapted with permission from ref. 32 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2022. 
The targeted oxygen evolution reaction (OER) using CN-based materials is still mainly performed using electrochemical approaches.491 However, some examples indicate that SACs based on CN materials might be promising catalysts for this half-reaction in the photochemical mode as well. Fu et al. showed that Co single-atoms over PCNs can promote O2 evolution at 37.3 μmol h−1 with an apparent quantum yield (AQY) of 4.69% at 400 nm.305 Within the contributions of Chu et al. and Teng et al., there are also reports on the OER, but their main focus is the further reduction of O2 into H2O2,42,389 which will be discussed in a later section.
A comparison of the photocatalytic activity towards the water-splitting reaction of all the systems discussed in this section is presented in Table 1.
Table 1 Utilization of g-C3N4-based SA photocatalysts for the water splitting reaction




Catalysts
Fraction of cocatalysts
Total mass of catalysts
Reactant solution
Light source (wavelength-nm)
Activity (μmol h−1)
QE (%)
Ref.




g-C3N4
—
0.1 g
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA and methanol aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
0.1–4
<0.1%
100


SA–Cu–TCN
0.3 wt% Cu
0.02 g
100 mL of 15 vol% methanol aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 10600
9.2% (420 nm)
383


1 wt% Pt


Pd/C3N4
0.1 wt% Pd
0.1 g
100 mL of 20 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
H2: 728
N/A
374


U-1Ru/3DpCN
1 wt% Ru
0.025 g
50 mL of 20 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
H2: 2945.47
9.5% (420 nm)
487


CCN-SANi
0.12 wt%
0.01 g
80 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 511
N/A
312


K1Na1/pCN
5.5 wt% K
0.05 g
100 mL of 20 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>380 nm)
H2: 4561
21.8% (420 nm)
492


1.3 wt% Na


1 wt% Pt


Co–CCN/PTI
1 wt% Pt
0.05 g
30 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 3538
20.88% (425 nm)
290


0.4 wt% Co


Co1/PCN
1 wt% Co
0.05 g
100 mL of 20 vol% TEOA aqueous solution;
300 W Xe lamp (>300 nm)
H2: 9.1
3.02% (450 nm)
47


Pt/C3N4
0.32 wt% Pt
0.05 g
80 mL of 25 vol% methanol aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
H2: 14740
38.8% (435 nm)
328


NiP/C3N4Fs
3.98 wt% Ni
0.03 g
100 mL deionized H2O
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 1890
12.5% (420 nm)
45


O2: 920


Co1/2DPCN
0.8 wt% Co
0.01 g
50 mL of TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 138600
1.38% (420 nm)
380


0.75 wt% Pt


SAAg–g-CN
1 wt% Ag
0.05 g
120 mL of 25 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp
H2: 498
N/A
46


CN–0.2Ni–HO
2.2 wt% Ni
0.025 g
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp
H2: 354.9
N/A
367


Ru1-t-CN
0.78 wt% Ru
0.03 g
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (> 300 nm)
H2: 4052.1
3.8%
363


Zn–PCN
4.79 wt% Zn
0.01 g
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 35.1
N/A
32


O2: 17.3


Pt–CN
0.74 wt% Pt
0.01 g
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
30 W LED (λ = 520 nm)
H2: 34.2
0.84%
286


Pd/DN-UCN
0.16 wt% Pd
0.005 g
25 mL of 15 vol% methanol aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp
H2: 441.6
15.8% (400 nm)
324


g-C3N4–Pt2+
0.18 wt% Pt
0.1 g
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2 604.9
N/A
493


Pt/g-C3N4
1.4 wt% Pt
0.001 g
20 mL of 20 vol% methanol aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp
H2: 46.2
(400 nm)
486


O2: 18.7


Fe@g-C3N4
0.5 at% Fe
0.05 g
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 3390
6.89% (420 nm)
378


3 vol% H2PtCl4


AgTCM-mpg-CN
1 wt% Ag
0.05 g
38 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
50 white LED (>420 nm)
H2: 103
N/A
20


3% Pt


Pt/g-C3N4
0.5 wt% Pt
0.01 g
100 mL of 20 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 115080
N/A
483


Cu/CN
1.49 at% Cu
0.002 g
20 mL of 30 vol% methanol aqueous solution
LED (λ = 427 nm)
H2: 3774.3
1.37% (427 nm)
488


Mo1@CNNTs
0.53 wt% Mo
0.01 g
50 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 4861
4.88% (420 nm)
316


1 wt% Pt


GCN
0.015 wt% Ga
0.05 g
10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 9904
10.3% (380 nm)
339


Ag–N2C2/CN
3.7 wt% Ag
0.02 g
80 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 1866
N/A
2


Pt–SA/CN
0.11 wt% Pt
0.03 g
200 mL of 10 vol% methanol aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (> 300 nm)
H2: 1403
N/A
331


PA-Ni@PCN/Pt-SAC
0.22 wt% Pt
1 g
50 mL ultrapure H2O
300 W Xe lamp (>800 nm)
H2: 0.06
N/A
312


O2: 0.03


Pt–CNNT
0.05 wt% Pt
0.01 g
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 918 (TOF)
N/A
494


Al-aa_PCN
0.32 wt% Al
0.05 g
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 1190
6.2% (420 nm)
489


3 wt% Pt


Pt SAs/C3N4
0.91 wt% Pt
0.05 g
100 mL of 20 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp
H2: 11472
N/A
332


Ru–g-CN
0.24 wt% Ru
0.075 g
150 mL of 10 vol% methanol aqueous solution
Near-UV LEDs (λmax = 427 nm)
H2: 489.7
N/A
338


Pd/g-CN
0.33 wt% Pt
0.05 g
80 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
Solar simulator
H2: 6688
4% (420 nm)
256


Pt–SA–CN
0.2 wt% Pt
0.02 g
50 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 1224
N/A
484


WSA–CN–PUNS
0.33 wt% W
0.01 g
20 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 3020
4.11% (420 nm)
296


1 wt% Pt


Co–PCN
0.75 wt% Co
0.05 g
80 mL of a 0.1 M AgNO3 aqueous solution
200 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
O2: 37.3
4.69% (400 nm)
305


PCNNi
1 wt% Ni
0.03 g
80 mL of deionized H2O
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 26.6
1.52% (380 nm)
396


H2O2: 24


SAVCN
1.586 wt% V
0.02 g
TEOA aqueous solution
Four 3 W LEDs (λ = 420 nm and 495 nm)
H2: 5102 (420 nm)
17.32% (420 nm)
311


1 wt% Pt
2951 (495 nm)


SA–Pt/(g-C3N4)
8.7 wt% Pt
0.01 g
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 22650
22.5% (420 nm)
333


Co1–phosphide/PCN
0.4 wt% Co
0.02
100 mL of deionized H2O
300 W Xe lamp
H2: 410.3
3.6% (420 nm)
306


O2: 204.6


Pt–CN
0.075 wt% Pt
0.05 g
200 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp
H2: 4.0 (mmol h−1 mgPt−1)
N/A
21


SA–Cu–CN
4.26 wt% Cu
0.01 g
80 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 11230
31.6% (420 nm)
495


1 wt% Pt


Pt1–Co1/CN
0.27 wt% Co
0.03 g
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 1880
N/A
496


0.21 wt% Pt


NiN2S/SA–CN
0.74 wt% Ni
0.01 g
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 1095
4.1% (420 nm)
497


SR–g-C3N4–Ni
1.0 wt% Ni
N/A
Deionized H2O
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
H2: 26.65
N/A
498


H2O2: 23.95


Ce–SA–C3N4
0.26 wt% Ce
0.03 g
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
33500
32.6% (420 nm)
499


1.0 wt% Pt


PtII−C3N4
N/A
0.03 g
100 mL of deionized H2O
300 W Xe lamp
H2: 140
(420 nm)
285


O2: 46


PtSA–CN
1.72 wt% Pt
0.02 g
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 174500
(420 nm)
500


Co/P/CN-sc
3 wt% Pt
0.02 g
50 mL of 20 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
H2: 3740.4
N/A
307





4.1.2. Photocatalytic reduction of CO2. As a consequence of the industrial revolution since the mid-19th century and the combustion of fossil fuels, large amounts of CO2 have been released to the atmosphere significantly altering the world's climate.501 Moreover, the over-reliance on fossil sources will lead to increasing prices and certain scarcity in the next decades.502,503 Fuelled by concerns regarding uncontrolled climate change, great efforts have been made to reduce our CO2 emissions and recapture the excess that has been emitted.501,504 The natural pathway to convert CO2 into energy-bearing products is biological photosynthesis, and an artificial photocatalytic process mimicking nature is regarded as one of the valid alternatives to tackle shrinking fossil resources and increased concentration of greenhouse gases.505 The photocatalytic reduction of CO2 is a multielectron transfer process, possessing many pathways and potential products. The possible reaction process and corresponding reducing potentials (vs. reversible hydrogen electrode, RHE) are shown as follows:(1) CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O (Eredox = +0.17 V)
(2) CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O (Eredox = +0.03 V)
(3) CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O (Eredox = −0.07 V)
(4) CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O (Eredox = −0.12 V)
(5) CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH (Eredox = −0.20 V)
Added to the complexity of the reaction, CO2 is thermodynamically stable, which makes its activation and further reduction at room temperature challenging. Much like in the water splitting reaction, pure CN materials are capable of reducing CO2 into other molecules (CO,506 CH3OH507 and CH4507), although in first experiments with relatively low efficiency. In a similar fashion to that discussed before, the stabilization of single-atoms could greatly increase the efficiency towards this process. For instance, Gao et al. utilized DFT simulations to investigate the photocatalytic CO2 reduction over Pd or Pt single-atoms anchored at g-C3N4. By comparing the rate-determining barriers of different possible reaction pathways, the authors reported that the HCOOH was the lowest energy product of CO2 reduction over the Pd/g-C3N4 catalyst, while CH4 was favoured over Pt/g-C3N4.508 The high selectivity of Pt towards CH4 conversion from CO2 has been reported by Shi et al.; in their work, they utilized Pt single-atoms stabilized over a defective carbon nitride (Pt@DefCN) for the reduction of CO2 in pure water.329 They reported a 99% carbon selectivity towards CH4, while also producing O2 as the other half-reaction. The conversion rates of Pt@DefCN were 20 and 3 times greater than those of a standard polymeric carbon nitride and a pristine DefCN.329
Gold single-atoms have also shown potential to increase the activity of CN materials.509 Yang et al. employed gold over an amino-modified carbon nitride and managed to obtain an activity increase of 1.97-fold for CO and 4.15-fold for CH4 compared to pure g-C3N4, with high selectivity towards CO.287 They have attributed the enhanced activity to the lowered energy barriers in CO2 reduction to CH4, narrowed band gap, suppressed recombination of charge carriers, as well as a higher affinity of CO2 due to the introduced amino groups.287 Sharma et al. stabilized Ru single-atoms on mesoporous carbon nitride (RuSA-mC3N4) by microwave-assisted deposition, and the obtained material was used in the photoreduction of CO2 to methanol. They reported that RuSA-mC3N4 displayed an increased light absorption window (700 nm > λ > 420 nm) and an enhanced average life of photogenerated e−/h+ pair, in which the holes lead to the water oxidation (O2/H+) while the electrons reduced CO2 into methanol. They achieved an impressive conversion rate of methanol (1500 μmol h−1 g−1) under illumination and optimized conditions.335
Interestingly in recent years, synergistic effects of bimetallic single-atom systems were also reported, leading to improved yields in CO2 reduction without significant loss in selectivity. An inspiring example is demonstrated by Chen et al. where Pt and Cu single-atoms were incorporated on a N-vacancy rich g-C3N4 (crCN). The PtCu–crCN system displayed a narrower band gap than those of pure cr–C3N4 and the individual Pt–crCN and Cu–crCN, which leads to an expanded light absorption range, demonstrating the synergistic interaction of metals in this system.9 The authors reported that CO2 readily adsorbed under dark conditions (Fig. 27A and B), and in their photocatalytic tests, PtCu–crCN managed to increase the CO2 reduction reaction towards CH4 by 5 and 1.75 times, when compared to Cu–crCN and Pt–crCN, respectively. For CO, the enhancement was 3 times greater than that of Cu–crCN and 1.5 times greater than that of Pt–crCN. The authors explained that superior activity of PtCu–crCN is triggered by the Pt–Cu synergistic effects, where Pt sites serve as a hydrogen reservoir to hydrogenation, and Cu sites act as the active CO2 adsorption sites, while both metal centres are active in accelerating a long-lived charge separation process (Fig. 27C).9 A similar result was obtained by Zheng and co-workers, where a RuCu–PCN catalyst was able to reduce CO2 into methane with higher selectivity than Cu–PCN (95.1% vs. 83.1% respectively) while increasing gas yield by almost 3-fold, whereas the main product of Ru–PCN was H2 gas.323
 Fig. 27  In situ DRIFTS spectra of CO2 interact with PtCu–crCN in different frequency ranges (A) 2500–2000 cm−1 and (B) 3200–3900 cm−1. (C) Schematic representation of CO2 reduction on PtCu–crCN. Adapted from ref. 9 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022; (D) photocatalytic activities of the dual single-atom system Mn–Co representing their synergy for CO2 reduction; (E) comparative experiment with single-atoms sites being utilized for H2O oxidation; and (F) similar comparison where samples of single-atom catalysts are tested individually for the CO2 reduction reaction. Adapted from ref. 27 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2022. 
Non-noble metallic single-atoms have also been shown to be efficient to enhance CN materials’ activity for the CO2 reduction reaction. For instance, Zhang et al. managed to synthesize Mo SACs over amorphous CN (a-Mo-C3N4), and this catalyst converted CO2 into CO, with 99.3% of selectivity, while simultaneously leading to H2 evolution rates 4 times greater than that of pristine g-C3N4, without the addition of a sacrificial reagent.510 Cobalt single-atoms have also demonstrated a similar performance, Zu et al. reported a Co–CN photocatalyst that produced CO and H2 in good rates of 94.9 μmol g−1 h−1 and 56.4 μmol g−1 h−1, respectively. These results were at least one order of magnitude higher than those of pristine g-C3N4.401 Ji et al. reported that rare-earth erbium single-atoms are also active for CO2 reduction. In their work, a 20 wt% Er/CN-NT (carbon nitride nanotubes) enhanced CH4 and CO evolution nearly 19 and 24-fold compared to pure CN-NT.15
Non-noble systems employing bimetallic single-atoms also demonstrated promising results in artificial photosynthesis. Ou et al. stabilized Mn and Co single-atoms over a carbon nitride photocatalyst (Mn1Co1/CN) and observed that in the isolated systems, Mn possessed high activity towards O2 evolution, while Co presented similar results to pure C3N4.27 For the CO2 reduction into CO, the results were inverted, Co yielded 3 times more gas evolution than pure carbon nitride, while Mn was just slightly higher. When the two metals were combined (Mn1Co1/CN), CO evolution from CO2 was higher than the sum of each monometallic catalyst (Fig. 27D–F). For the oxidation half-reaction, both O2 and H2O2 were produced demonstrating the versatility of this kind of approach.27 The authors claimed that the synergy present in the bimetallic system is due to the fact that Mn promotes the accumulation of h+, favouring the water oxidation, while the Co sites possess a high affinity for CO2 molecules, effectively activating them and promoting their reduction by the photogenerated electrons.27
A comparison of the photocatalytic activity for CO2 reduction of all the systems presented in this section is shown in Table 2.
Table 2 Photocatalytic CO2 reduction using SA over CN-based materials




Catalysts
Fraction of cocatalysts
Total mass of catalysts
Light source (wavelength-nm)
Reaction conditions
Activity (μmol g−1 h−1)
QE (%)
Ref.




g-C3N4
—
0.20 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
100 mL of a 1 M NaOH aqueous solution
CH3OH: 6.28
0.18
129


C2H5OH: 4.51


O/La-CN
N/A
0.01 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
12 mL of a 3:2:1 mixture solution (CH3CN:H2O:TEOA)
CO: 92
N/A
340


CH4: 5.6


Co2+@C3N4
0.75 wt%
0.001 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
4 mL of a 4:1 (v/v) CH3CN:TEOA solution
CO: 528
0.084
303


Er1/CN-NT
20.1 wt%
0.02 g
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
4 mL deionized H2O
CO: 47.11
N/A
15


CH4: 2.5


2D TiO–CN
N/A
0.003 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
5 mL of a 3:1:1 mixture solution (CH3CN:TEOA:H2O)
CO: 283.9
N/A
511


U-ACN
N/A
0.03 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
N/A
CO: 8.68
N/A
287


CH4: 0.961


PCN–RuCu
2.44 wt% Cu
0.01 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
9 mL of a NaHCO3 (3 M) aqueous solution
CH4: 19.25
N/A
323


0.6 wt% Ru
1 mL TEOA
CO: 0.25


FeN4/K–g-C3N4
N/A
0.03 g
300 W Xe lamp (280 mW cm−2) (>420 nm)
80 mL of a 0.075 M KOH aqueous solution
CO: 20
2.7
299


g-C3N4–CoxNiy
1.26 wt% Co
0.003 g
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
3 mL of deionized H2O
CO: 13.55
N/A
512


0.32 wt% Ni
CH4: 1.68


Pd1 + NPs/C3N4
1.9 wt% Pd1+ NPs
0.02 g
300 W Xe lamp (250 mW cm−2) (>400 nm)
10 mL of deionized H2O
CH4: 20.3
2.93
360


CO: 0.8


Pt–SA/CTF-1
0.032 wt%
0.01 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
12.075 mL of a 20% TEOA aqueous solution
CH4: 4.6
0.82
330


CO: 1.5


Pt@Def-CN
1.08 wt%
0.03 g
300 W Xe lamp
0.1 mL of deionized H2O
CH4: 6.3
N/A
329


PtCu–crCN
0.32 wt% Pt
0.025 g
300 W Xe lamp
0.5 mL of deionized H2O
CO: 11.74
N/A
9


2.4 wt% Cu
CH4: 2.8


Cu–CCN
N/A
0.025 g
300 W Xe lamp
0.5 mL of deionized H2O
CO: 3.1
N/A
8


Mn1Co1/CN
3 wt% Mn
0.05 g
300 W Xe lamp (89.5 mW cm−2)
2 mL deionized H2O
CO: 47
N/A
27


1.3 wt% Co


a-Mo/C3N4
3.3 wt% Mo
0.05 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
20 mL of deionized H2O
CO: 18
N/A
510


RuSA–mC3N4
0.4 wt%
0.05 g
34 W Blue LED (500 nm > λ > 400 nm)
8 mL of 7:1 (v/v) (DMF:H2O) solution mixture
CH3OH: 250
N/A
335


Co–CN
1 wt%
0.05 g
300 W Xe lamp
80 mL of a 3:1:1 mixture solution (CH3CN:TEOA:H2O)
CO: 94.9
0.3
401


Pr1–N4O2
21.05 wt%
0.005 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
4 mL of CO2
CH3OH: 511.1
N/A
513


1 mL of deionized H2O


CuACs/CN
N/A
0.005 g
300 W Xe lamp
50 mL of a 10% TEOA aqueous solution and [Ru(bpy)3]2+
C2H4: 10.17
N/A
514


CH4: 8.95


CNNb
1.6 wt%
0.05 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
0.8 mL of deionized H2O
CO: 110.6
N/A
515


0.8 MPa of CO2
CH4: 60


Cu/CN
0.14 wt%
0.05 g
300 W Xe lamp (100 mW cm−2)
10 mL of H2O
CO: 11.21
1.32
412


0.084 g of NaHCO3
CH3OH: 1.75


0.5 mL H2SO4 (2 M)
CH4: 0.61





4.1.3. Photocatalytic pollutant degradation and water treatment. Not only modern industrial production but also modern pharmaceutical practices have led to a significant increase in contaminants present in the water, air, and soil, posing a threat to both human health, as well as the environment. The need for sustainable and effective pollutant treatment is a pressing matter in most countries. In this context, photocatalytic pollutant degradation rises as a promising strategy due to its high effectiveness and low cost.516 Currently, CN materials are well recognized as viable photocatalysts for degradation of contaminants, due to their band position, which exhibits comparably high oxidation power. Photogenerated electrons are able to reduce O2 to generate ˙O2−, while h+ can lead to the oxidation of OH− to create the highly reactive ˙OH radical. The photocatalytic production of active species (h+, ˙O2− and ˙OH) can then be instrumentalized for the degradation of persistent contaminants and their eventual mineralization into CO2 and H2O.The application of CN-based photocatalysts for contaminant degradation can be separated into two categories: liquid phase and gas phase. In Table 3, there is a summarization of photocatalytic applications of CN materials modified with metallic single-atoms for superior pollutant degradation. Many studies tend to use the degradation of organic molecules as model reactions for photocatalytic activity studies, due to their easy identification by simple analytical methods.
Table 3 Utilization of g-C3N4-based SA photocatalysts for degradation of pollutants




Catalysts
Fraction of cocatalysts
Total mass of catalysts
Light source (wavelength-nm)
Irradiation time
Target molecule (s)
Activity (%)
Ref.




g-C3N4
—
0.04 g
500 W Xe lamp (36 mW cm−2) (>420 nm)
3.3 hours
RhB
100
157


Ce–CN
0.5 wt%
0.005 g
250 W HP-Na lamp (400–800 nm)
2 hours
RhB
90
517


PtSA/g-C3N4
0.6 wt%
0.025 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
4 hours
Phenol
83
336


BPA
40


4-CP
70


Y/g-C3N4
N/A
0.03 g
500 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
110 min
RhB
100
518


S-Fe/CN-4
17.7 wt%
0.025 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
10 min
MB
96
519


10 min
RhB
98


10 min
Phenol
98


15 min
MO
95


Pd/HR–g-C3N4
0.5 wt%
0.05 g
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
1 hour
HBCD
92.6
3


Ag/OKCN
3.04 wt%
0.005 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
1 hour
TC
80.4
520


Fe–g-C3N4
1 mol%
N/A
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
5 hours
PNP
55
521


10-Mo/Nv-TCN
2.01 wt%
0.05 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
1 hour
TC
94.45
35


Ba–g-C3N4 (MB20)
18.5 wt%
0.4 g L−1
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
1 hour
CBZ
99.9
441


DCF
99.9


Ag–g-C3N4
N/A
0.25 g
500 W Xe lamp (48 mW cm−2) (>420 nm)
2 hours
ACE
83.1
522


SDAg-CQDs/UCN
3 wt% Ag
0.05 g
350 W Xe lamp (290 & 420 nm)
25 min
NPX
87.5
523


1 wt% CQD


ZCB
0.3 wt%
0.02 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
1 hour
TBBPA
100
309


MCN-2
1.36 wt%
0.0135 g
350 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
40 min
TC
82
404


Ag/mpg-C3N4
N/A
0.01 g
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
1 hour
BPA
98
524


C3N4–0.25Co
0.25 wt%
0.02 g
210 W Xe Lamp (>400)
6 hours
4-Chloro-guaiacol
73.7
525


Mo1@CNNTs
0.36 wt%
0.025 g
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
1 hour
TC
97.3
316


K1Na1/pCN
5.5 wt% K
0.02 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
10 min
CIP
100
492


1.3 wt% Na


Cu−C3N4
0.6 wt%
0.02 g
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
30 min
CIP
99
321


I-FeNx/g-C3N4-5
18.2 wt%
0.025 g
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
11 min
MB
99
405


8 min
RhB
100


10 min
Phenol
98


SA-Cr/PN–g-C3N4
N/A
0.01 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
70 min
BPA
98.8
33


Ru–PHI
6.84 wt%
0.01 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
4 hours
MO
90
38


Pt–PHI
10.4 wt%
RhB


Co-pCN
1.28 wt%
0.03 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
40 min
OTC
75.7
302


PtSA–HCNNS
0.16 wt%
0.03 g
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
3 hours
HSM
85.5
6


Ag–g-C3N4 (MA)
48 wt%
0.01 g
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
30 min
NPX
100
24


Ag–CNNS
1 wt%
0.015 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
20 min
RhB
99
446


25 min
MBT
99


Al-aa_PCN
0.32 wt%
0,015 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
3 hours
4-CP
100
489


CNPd
0.08 wt%
0.08 g
300 W Xe lamp (>380 nm)
30 min
NO
92.7
326


SAVCN
1.6 wt%
0.02 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
3 hours
HCHO
80
311


SAAg/3DT-CN
2.59 wt%
0.02 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
75 min
TC
95
17


Pt–SA–CN
0.3 wt%
0.1 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
150 min
NO
96.2
484


Pd–Cv–CN
0.3 wt%
0.02 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
30 min
NO
56.3
18


AgTCM/UCN
1 wt%
0.05 g
350 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
21 min
SMT
86.4
526


W-CN
11.16 wt%
0.002 g
Solar simulator (Q-Sun Xe-1)
200 min
CBZ
96
407


FTCN
1.69 wt% Fe
0.01 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
1 hour
OTC
98
527


0.37 wt% Ti


Ni–SA/CN
0.98 wt%
0.025 g
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
1 hour
BPA
94.1
406


Fe–W–CN
0.345 wt% Fe
0.01 g
Solar simulator (Q-Sun Xe-1)
20 min
CBZ
100
528


1.484 wt% W





4.1.4. Liquid phase degradation of pollutants. The removal of pollutants during water and effluent treatment is of special concern due to the increasing presence of persistent molecules. Organic molecules such as dyes, antibiotics, persistent organic pollutants (POPs), and phenols are rather resistant to traditional water treatment and therefore are the focus of studies regarding the advanced oxidation process. In many water purification strategies, H2O2 is used as an oxidant thanks to its safeness and its green character; however, it typically requires activation from a catalyst to be converted into more reactive oxidizing agents.516,529,530 For the sake of practicality, easily available dyes, such as methyl orange (MO), methylene blue (MB) and rhodamine B (RhB), are employed in photodegradation studies as model molecules with UV-Vis spectroscopy monitoring.531 As reported by Cui et al., pristine g-C3N4 is capable of activating H2O2 through visible light excitation, and driving the photogenerated oxy-radical reactive species to decompose RhB as a model reaction.157Among many modifications of CN-based materials, Ag single-atoms are one of the most chosen for pollutant degradation and water treatment.17,24,310,413,438,446,520,522,524 Partially due to their well-documented antimicrobial activity, which was explored by Lu et al., Ag embedded in O,K doped g-C3N4 proved to increase the disinfection of water in the presence of E. coli bacteria under light irradiation for 60 minutes.520 Besides its natural potential as an antimicrobial agent, Ag synergizes well with CN materials demonstrating capabilities of degradation of persistent molecules and antibiotics.17,24,413,520,522,524 For instance, Ag single-atoms were successfully employed in the degradation of naproxen (NPX), a pharmaceutical compound that threatens microbiological systems. Ag modification in this CN system led to an increase in the surface area, but more importantly, increased light absorption, while suppressing charge recombination. As a result, electrons were transferred into Ag sites, in which O2 molecules were activated into ˙O2−, while holes on CN also contributed to the oxidation of the molecule.24 Another work reported by Wang et al. also tackled NPX as a target molecule, employing a combination of Ag, carbon quantum dots and carbon nitride as a photocatalyst. This approach proved to be successful, as it maximized visible light absorption through the whole spectrum and increased the reaction rate up to 430% in longer wavelengths.
Another antibiotic of growing concern is tetracycline (TC) and its derivatives, which are considered emerging contaminants, due to their potential to cause environmental damage. Several CN photocatalysts with transition metal SA have been tested for the degradation of TC and proved to possess very distinct reactive species, being able to achieve the mineralization of TC in some studies. For example, Mo-based SA was investigated by Mateen et al., and it was demonstrated that when stabilized by carbon nitride nanotubes, ˙O2−, ˙OH and 1O2 species were created at the Mo-sites by photogenerated electrons, while h+ stays on the CN surface. All these species combined are relevant for the degradation of TC, but their relative importance, as evaluated by different scavengers, varies. In this system, ˙O2− and ˙OH are the more relevant reactive species proving it to be a radical-induced mineralization.316 Other Mo–CN synthesized by Zhang and co-workers also generated the same reactive species; however, they attributed most of the degradation of TC to ˙O2− and h+ species.35 By replacing Mo with Mn, Wang et al. reported that Mn–CN acted mostly through the activation of O2. This photocatalytic system enhanced the degradation of TC up to 13-fold compared to pure CN. As expected, Ag single-atoms were also tested for this reaction, and according to the results from Lu et al. and Sun et al., Ag/C3N4 photocatalysts enhance electron transport in the reaction and improve the efficiency of carrier separation.17 Under light irradiation, Ag-based systems benefit the formation of ˙O2−, which in both studies was attributed as the main contributor to the degradation of TC, while also leading to in situ generation of H2O2 and ˙OH instead from the water oxidation reaction (Fig. 28).17
 Fig. 28  Proposed mechanism for the degradation of TC over SAAg/3DT-CN. The photogenerated electrons activate O2 into ˙O2−, which may directly react with TC or instead lead to the formation of more oxygen-reactive species (H2O2 and ˙OH) and h+ directly oxidizes TC into simpler molecules. Adapted from ref. 17 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. 
Despite their high costs, noble metal-based SA systems have also been exploited for enhancing the CN materials’ activity for the degradation of pollutants. A tutorial example was reported by Zeng et al. using Pt/g-C3N4 photocatalysts. In this work, the authors coupled the degradation reaction of three organic pollutants (4-chlorophenol, phenol and BPA) using the hydrogen evolution reaction. The catalyst proved to be significantly active for the degradation of 4-CP and phenol, with a total organic carbon removal higher than 70%, while more than 350 μmol g−1 of H2 were generated. BPA being a more stable molecule led to a 45% removal, which is still significant.336 Another application of Pt single-atoms reported by Liu et al. was the degradation of sulfonylurea herbicides (SUH), which are carried over groundwater and are highly ecotoxic for aquatic plants and accumulate over the food chain. The authors dispersed Pt SA over holey carbon nitride nanosheets and applied the catalyst for the photodegradation of different SUH. PtSA–HCNNS showed satisfactory results for the degradation of all five herbicides. These results were also reproduced with minor losses in degradation activity using river water as a solvent.6 Wu et al. reported an exceptional result regarding the degradation of hexabromocyclododecane (HBCD), a flame retardant of polystyrene foams, which is highly toxic for both humans and ecosystems and is considered a POP. The Pd/HR–g-C3N4 catalyst managed to degrade 100% of HBCD, while debromination efficiency was calculated to be around 92.6% under a relatively short period of time (60 min).3 The authors proposed two reaction pathways for the hydrodebromination of HBCD molecules (Fig. 29): during light irradiation, e− are transferred to Pd-sites, while h+ lead to the oxidation of methanol, and the H+ species are adsorbed onto the activated Pd single-atoms, where HBCD is hydrogenated. In turn, the low-brominated intermediates undergo ring-opening and subsequently are fully hydrogenated into saturated alkanes. Alternatively, HBCD can first undergo ring-opening and then gradual hydrogenation.3
 Fig. 29  Schematic representation of the photocatalytic degradation of HBCD pathways over Pd/HR–g-C3N4. Adapted from ref. 3 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. 
Besides the traditional O2 activation for the generation of reactive species in order to decompose organic molecules, SA-modified C3N4 can undergo other reaction pathways and utilize other molecules for the same goal. As is the case of Cu–C3N4 reported by Dong et al., Cu–N4 sites enhance the photo-Fenton degradation of ciprofloxacin (CIP) through a nonradical mechanism. In this case, the authors propose that copper-oxo species (OCu–N4) are generated in the presence of H2O2 and visible light and are the main contributors to the degradation of CIP. This claim is supported by the fact that the scavenger assays lead to a reduction in activity, but still allow conversion to lower than 50%. In another example, Wang et al. used Ag/mpg-C3N4 catalysts for the activation of PMS in order to degrade BPA. PMS when activated generates SO4˙− species, which possess stronger oxidizing capabilities than ˙OH, while also being insensitive to pH variations. The authors successfully managed to remove BPA from the reaction media in 60 minutes and also demonstrated that this result can be easily achieved independently of pH (from pH 3 to 11). The only other radical species contributing to the efficiency of the catalyst is ˙O2− generated spontaneously from O2.524

4.1.5. Gas-phase pollutant degradation. The gas phase application of CN-based materials is rather limited to the oxidation of nitric oxide (NO).54 Nitric oxides (NOx) are pollutants generated in combustion engines and are responsible for a plethora of environmental issues (acid rain, photochemical smog, and tropospheric O3 generation). By legislation, it is imperative to treat such gas streams catalytically, among them by the development of catalysts being active to oxidize NO.532 Sano et al. were the first to report the application of CN photocatalysts for the oxidation of NO. However, the authors observed low oxidation rates under visible light.533 As an alternative, single atoms on CN materials to improve their photocatalytic activity is a promising approach. Ou et al. utilized Pt single-atoms on g-C3N4 nanosheets and managed to fully oxidize NO to NO3− with a 96.2% removal ratio at higher NO concentrations (400 ppm). In these experiments, H2O2 was used as an oxidizing agent. The authors attributed the high oxidation ratio of NO to its reaction with radicals ˙O2− and ˙OH, generated by the activation of H2O2 via photogenerated e−/h+ pairs over Pt–SA–CN.484 In another interesting example, Hu et al. stabilized Pd over graphitic carbon nitride and applied the catalysts towards the photocatalytic oxidation of NO into NO2, which resulted in a 83% removal efficiency with 92.8% selectivity towards NO2. This high efficiency and selectivity could be kept throughout a constant 117.6 hour reaction under simulated sunlight, proving the system to be an extremely stable and reliable photocatalyst.326 A similar result utilizing Pd single-atoms was reported by Liu and co-workers.18 Their photocatalyst Pd–Cv–CN was able to fully oxidize NO into NO3−, with good selectivity (Fig. 30A), thanks to an improved charge transfer efficiency. The authors proposed that the oxidation of NO occurs by its reaction with ˙O2− and ˙OH, both generated from oxygen during light irradiation (Fig. 30B), each radical species leading to different reaction pathways, which explains the mixed products obtained during this reaction, as shown in Fig. 30B.
 Fig. 30  (A) Photocatalytic oxidation of NO by 20 mg of 0.3 wt% Pd–Cv–CN (b) Schematic representation of the mechanism of photooxidation of NO into NO2, NO2− and NO3− catalysed by Pd–Cv–CN. The radical species ˙O2− leads to the direct oxidation of NO into NO3− while ˙OH is responsible for partial oxidation of NO. Adapted from ref. 18 with permission from Elsevier, 2021. 

4.1.6. Nitrogen fixation. The industrial synthesis of ammonia, also known as the Haber–Bosch process, is one of the most important chemical processes in the world. Since its inception more than a hundred years ago, the fixation of atmospheric nitrogen into reactive nitrogen species is estimated to have allowed the life of more than 45% of the humans alive today, by allowing large-scale agriculture practices.534 Despite its importance, the Haber–Bosch process is a high energy-demanding process, consuming about 1–2% of the whole world's energy production and generating more than 300 million metric tons of CO2.535,536 The desire for a carbon-neutral society has led research towards alternative methods of nitrogen fixation under mild or ambient conditions without sacrificing production.535 There have been many different approaches for this: electrochemical,537 coordination compounds mimicking nature's enzymes536 and photocatalytic processes.538 The photocatalytic approach seems very promising, as it can make use of the abundant solar energy available on Earth to reduce N2 to NH3 using water as a hydrogen source. However, N2 is regarded as an inert molecule thanks to the high stability provided by its triple bond, and the nature of its reduction is quite complex being a multielectron reaction with potential non-desirable side products (e.g. N2H4).538 Wang et al. estimated that a photocatalytic system with about 10% solar-to-chemical conversion should be capable of completely substituting the modern Haber–Bosch process.539Therefore, efficient photocatalysts for the N2 reduction reaction (NRR) need to possess the following characteristics: (i) high affinity towards N2 gas facilitating its adsorption; (ii) to possess a suitable band gap capable of harvesting visible light as efficiently as possible; (iii) to activate the N2 molecule opening pathways more thermodynamically favourable for its reduction; and (iv) a poor affinity for NH3 or NH4+ molecules facilitating their desorption from actives sites accelerating the catalytic cycle.
Studies regarding the use of CN materials towards nitrogen fixation have demonstrated that they are capable of converting N2 into NH3, but despite their promising optical and electronic properties, the low surface area and weak interaction with N2 lead to poor yields.540 These hindrances can be overcome by structural and chemical modifications, such as exfoliation, functionalization, nanoparticle deposition and single-atom stabilization.540 Such examples of single-atoms anchored on CN can be seen in the work of Li et al., in which a ruthenium-based SAC led to a 2.8-fold increase in the surface area and enhanced light absorption capabilities. These modifications led to a 1.5 times increase in NH3 production, using water as the hydrogen source.362 Fe single-atoms have also been demonstrated to efficiently enhance CN-based materials' N2 fixation properties.541,542 For instance, Hu et al. reported that a 1.3 wt% Fe single-atoms over carbon nitride which possessed 6 times more surface area than pure CN, in terms of activity, the denominated Fe0.05–CN generated 5.4 mg L−1 h−1 gcat−1 of NH4+, whereas Fe-free CN only produced 0.4 mg L−1 h−1 gcat−1.541 The authors claimed that in Fe0.05–CN, both chemisorption and physisorption were happening, while in pure CN, only physical adsorption was happening; moreover, the Fe3+ dopants can act as electron traps, leading to better charge separation and electron transfer to adsorbed N2.541 Some other transition metals, such as Cu,368 Mo,317 Co543 and Pt,544 have demonstrated enhancement in NH3 production when immobilized on carbon nitride, although on a less significant scale than the other abovementioned examples. Overall, single-atom enhancing N2 fixation over CN materials is still a new research topic, but nonetheless, we expect a rapid expansion of the literature body.

4.1.7. Photooxidations. Oxidation processes are one of the most important chemical transformations of organic molecules towards more reactive molecules. This type of reaction is widely employed in the synthesis of fine chemicals, especially in the conversion of alcohol to aldehydes. Traditionally, oxidation reactions utilize oxidants, such as CrO3, MnO4 and noble metal catalysts, to achieve their goals; however, these strategies are usually expensive, non-selective or generate a lot of waste.545 Therefore, there is great interest in utilizing molecular oxygen as an inexpensive oxidant chemical and widely available solar energy as the energy input for the activation of the O2 molecules. For this purpose, a lot of effort is made in the development of suitable photocatalysts that are efficient to activate O2 and also selectively oxidizing target molecules into the desired products.546,547Single-atom heterogeneous catalysts based on metal–N coordination sites have already demonstrated high potential for the oxidation of C–H bonds.43 Fe-based catalysts have been widely studied due to their abundance, low cost, and also iron centre reactivity, with diverse oxidation states and possible redox transitions.423,548,549 Silva et al. successfully demonstrated that Fe single-atoms immobilized over highly crystalline carbon nitrides (poly(heptazine imide) or PHI) were suitable to selectively oxidize aromatic compounds into their respective ketones, generating H2O2 in situ, as well as benzene into phenol, both under mild conditions.43 The authors claimed that in this reaction instead of the classical Fenton or photo-Fenton process, where ˙OH is the main reactive component, iron-oxo species are responsible for the activation of C–H, leading to their oxidation of C–H into C–OH and CO (Fig. 31). In the reaction mechanism, Fe(III) is oxidized into Fe(IV) in the presence of H2O2, the Fe(IV) oxo species can further be photo-oxidized into Fe(V)-dioxo, reacting once again with H2O2. Both Fe(IV)/Fe(V) can participate in the C–H bond activation and oxidize it into C–OH or CO depending on the substrate.43 In another example, Xiao et al. used Fe single-atoms on tubular carbon nitrides as a photocatalyst for the conversion of ethylbenzene into acetophenone. In this work, the authors explained that O2˙− species are produced by the photocatalyst with no signs of ˙OH radical forming, and the superoxide anion is responsible for activating the C–H bond and later leading to the ketone formation.294 Wang et al. also demonstrated the versatility of Fe-based SACs, by using Fe–g-C3N4 catalysts, and the authors claimed to sensitize O2 into 1O2. This photocatalyst proved to be capable of oxidizing 1,5-DHN (dihydroxynaphthalene) into jugulone with 63% yield, 3 times greater than that of pure g-C3N4, using molecular O2.298
 Fig. 31  (A) Illustrative representation of the e−/h+ pair leading to the formation of Fe-oxo species on single-atom centres; (B) mechanism for the formation of highly oxidative Fe(IV)/Fe(V) sites leading to C–H oxidation. Adapted from ref. 43 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. 
Methane is one of the most abundant hydrocarbons, with important applications in power generation, fuel and chemical feedstock. Regardless of this, CH4 is also a potent greenhouse gas, and its conversion into other chemicals is highly desired to avoid its emission. Traditional processes are rather energy-intensive and proceed under harsh conditions.450 Recently, da Silva et al. employed Cu single-atoms over poly(heptazine imide) (Cu–PHI) and managed to convert CH4 into methanol photocatalytically, with an impressive activity of 2900 μmol g−1 (in 4 hours). When considering the total oxygenated species, this activity increases up to 4600 μmol g−1, while negligible CO2 production was reported, recently Ding et al. reported a cobalt-based catalyst capable of selectively oxidizing methane into methanol with selectivity up to 87%.450,550 Some other relevant photooxidations catalysed by Cu single-atoms also include the benzene conversion into phenol383,551 and CO oxidation into CO2.288
Despite its high price, Pt-based catalysts have also been investigated for photooxidation catalysis. For instance, Wang et al. utilized Pt/g-C3N4 for the oxidation of benzaldehyde while simultaneously generating H2. They reported that benzaldehyde yielded specifically benzoic acid with an activity of 70.8 mmol gPt−1 while the simultaneous hydrogen production rate was about 34 mmol gPt−1. The authors commented that these remarkable results are observed due to Pt SA being efficient in the delivery of photo-induced holes, which lead to the oxidation of the aldehyde, while the H+ species can be readily reduced by the electrons over the surface of the catalyst into H2.470 Chu et al. managed to stabilize Co phthalocyanine complexes over mesoporous C3N4 and successfully utilized this hybrid catalyst to oxidize benzylic alcohols into the corresponding aldehydes.552

4.1.8. Other photocatalyzed reactions. Besides the reactions extensively discussed in previous sections, CN-based SACs have also been investigated as potential photocatalysts for other relevant applications. This final section is devoted to cases that, despite their importance, are still only covered by single contributions. We document and briefly discuss them because of their potential interest in the following years.
Cross-coupling reactions (C–C, C–N, C–O and C–S). Cross-coupling reactions are an important set of reactions used in organic synthesis, especially in the synthesis of fine chemicals. Traditionally, they are performed utilizing expensive metal catalysts (usually Pd-based) and homogeneous systems, in which product isolation is harder and catalyst removal is suboptimal. Here, CN-based SACs arose as alternative catalysts. Moreover, the use of visible light as an energy source can lead to increased activity even in non-noble metals.For C–C bond formation, Han et al. compared the effects of Pd NPs over CN, and a dual system where Pd NPs and Cu SA were stabilized over the same CN material for the Suzuki cross-coupling reaction. The authors observed that in the Pd/CN system, the reaction under light irradiation reached a maximum of 56% yield, whereas with increasing Cu SA content, the activity was enhanced up to 98% for 2 wt% Cu SAs. This increased activity was explained by the authors as the result of a lowering in the work function in the CN/-2Cu material, which increased the presence of electrons on Pd and accelerated the oxidative addition (the rate-determining step) on the surface of the nanoparticles.320
Photoredox C–N coupling was successfully tested by Kwak and co-workers. In their experiments, NiSAC/CN catalysts were tested in the coupling of aryl bromides and secondary amines. They reported that neither NiCl2, pure CN nor the NiNP/CN catalysts were active in the reaction in significant yields, meanwhile, NiSAC/CN managed to achieve a 79% yield under the same conditions.365 They tested this reaction within a wide scope of molecules, with overall success in demonstrating the versatility of the photocatalyst.365 Wang et al. reported that Cu single-atoms can also lead to a photocatalyzed C–N coupling. The authors managed to conduct the coupling of benzylamine and its derivatives in water, without additives, with a selectivity higher than 80% and a conversion rate as high as 10583 μmol g−1 h−1.322
Other Ni-based systems demonstrated promising activity towards C–O bond formation as well. For instance, Zhao et al. synthesized a C3N4–Ni photocatalyst and applied it in the coupling of aryl halides and different alcohols. The catalyst performed extremely well, displaying at least 80% conversion for most of the substrates studied.553 Vijeta et al. also reported similar results using Ni SA over mesoporous g-C3N4, being successful even with aryl chlorides, which are significantly less reactive than their higher halide counterparts.554
As for the C–S coupling reaction, Wen et al. managed to synthesize a biomimetic Fe-based SAC. In their work, a hemin molecule was anchored on CN for the application of a photoinduced sulfonation of olefins. The authors reported that this photocatalyst was successful in this application, and conversion yields higher than 70% for most substrates under mild conditions were achieved.555 From mechanistic studies, the authors proposed that carbon nitride hemin (CNH) acts in two distinct sites. When light is irradiated, the CN photoactive support separates the e−/h+ pair, and the electron is transferred to the Fe site on hemin, which activates O2 into 1O2, and the hole stays in the CN, converting the alkene into the cation radical form. The active oxygen species leads to the formation of sulfone radicals and both radicals (alkene and sulfone) recombine, leading to the C–S bond formation.555
Hydrogen peroxide synthesis. Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is a simple chemical compound but with a wide range of applications, from consumer goods to industrial processes, being regarded as a potential chemical fuel alternative. Despite its importance, H2O2 is industrially still produced using the cumbersome and waste-intensive anthraquinone process. Photocatalytic production of H2O2 from water or O2 emerges as a promising alternative for a sustainable and energy-efficient process. As shown in previous sections, H2O2 can be produced using SACs over carbon nitride; however, in most cases, it is regarded as a side product (e.g. during water splitting on the water oxidation side) or as a reagent species (e.g. pollutant degradation). Therefore, this short section is dedicated to efforts made to produce H2O2 as the main reaction product.A distinct number of single-atoms on CN-based materials have been tested for the synthesis of H2O2.556,557 Teng et al. tested five different metal single-atoms over polymeric carbon nitride (Co, Fe, Ni, Sn, and In) in order to identify those with more promising activity. The authors verified that among the tested transition metals, In and Sn presented the highest activity (4.41 and 2.65 mmol L−1 h−1 g−1 respectively) of H2O2. They explained that the In(III) and Sn(IV) single-atoms significantly improved charge separation, while also increasing O2 adsorption.345
In another study, Chu et al. synthesized a hybrid catalyst containing Co single-atoms stabilized over C3N4 and anthraquinone, named Co/AQ/C3N4. The authors reported that this catalyst produced about 10.33 mmol L−1 h−1 g−1 of H2O2, a value more than 5 times higher than those of CoNP/AQ/C3N4 and pristine C3N4. They also mentioned that using a single-atom catalyst in the absence of anthraquinone, H2O2 yields are reduced, due to the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide over the Co sites. This decomposition is hindered in the presence of anthraquinone, as the production of H2O2 occurs on AQ centres, far from Co decomposition centres.389 A similar result is described in the work of Rogolino et al. where the authors utilized Fe, Ni, Ru and Co as metal single-atoms over poly(heptazine imide) PHI and observed that most metals had poor performance for H2O2 production, with 0.02 wt% Fe–PHI having the best yield among metals (840 mmol L−1 h−1 g−1). Meanwhile, the metal-free catalysts H–PHI had higher activity than any of the metal counterparts, up to 1520 mmol L−1 h−1 g−1. The authors claimed that the metal sites, while improving H2O2 synthesis, also at the same time led to its fast decomposition, whereas H–PHI still maintained a certain degree of H2O2 production, but a lower H2O2 decomposition rate, consequently, leading to better yields.449
An interesting result was reported by Teng et al., in which antimony single-atoms were used to modify polymeric carbon nitride. This catalyst was utilized in the non-sacrificial photocatalyzed H2O2 synthesis. The authors managed to successfully synthesize H2O2 with high selectivity (>96%) and yield up to 14.2 mmol L−1 h−1 g−1. Through mechanistic studies, the authors verified that H2O2 is predominantly produced by the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), besides that O2 is generated through the water oxidation reaction (WOR) and subsequently participated in the 2-electron ORR.42
Hydrogen transfer reactions. Hydrogenations are another important class of reactions that could benefit from the versatility of CN materials as supports for highly active single-atoms. Traditionally, this class of reactions utilize fossil-derived H2, high loading of metals and high temperatures to achieve the desirable products, still with challenges in terms of selectivity. In this context, hydrogen transfer reactions, wherein H2O or some simple renewable molecules, such as MeOH and EtOH, are used as H donors to directly hydrogenate under light target molecules, without making molecular H2 as an intermediate are highly desirable and chemically sophisticated.558Zhao et al. addressed this question by using Pd anchored on mesoporous g-C3N4, and the Pd-mpg-C3N4 catalyst possessed similar activity towards the hydrogenation of CC and CO bonds while being 50% less active towards the reduction of nitrobenzene. Nonetheless, the catalyst offered high stability over several cycles and utilized rather low Pd loading (∼0.54 wt%) to achieve its results.327 Zhang et al. managed to apply the first non-noble SAC for hydrogen transfer reduction.559 By utilizing –OH enriched carbon nitrides (OHCN), the authors stabilized Cp2TiCl2 leading to the formation of Ti single-sites Ti/OHCN-g. This catalyst was applied to selectively reduce several nitroaromatics. The authors claimed that the abundant functional groups were potentially the active sites for the reduction of nitroaromatics into their respective amines. The authors tested a broad scope (38 substrates) and reported successful results, with no yield lower than 78%, demonstrating the robustness of this system.559

4.2. Thermal catalysed applications
Hydrogenation, dehydrogenation, oxidation and reduction reactions are examples of important chemical transformations used by the industrial sector and science community to synthesize a variety of products, such as dyes, active pharmaceutical materials, rubber and fine chemicals.560,561 So far, several reports have already been published on the use of palladium (Pd) single-atoms supported on carbon nitride materials,12,22,28 focusing especially on the hydrogenation of alkyne and alkene molecules.22 It should be noted that Pd is one of many metals used as single-atoms, several others are also used.
Vilé et al. demonstrated that mesoporous polymeric graphitic carbon nitride stabilizing Pd single-atoms ([Pd]mpg-C3N4) is a strong candidate to catalyse the semi-hydrogenation of 1-hexyne, with high selectivity.260 In this report, it was observed that the reaction rate at 303 K and 1 bar is three times higher than that of other catalytic systems (based on Ag, Au or CeO2).562,563 The authors also reported a selectivity of almost 100% to 1-hexyne, indicating the resistance of the material to the formation of β-hydrides.260 Other studies have also reported good catalytic performance for the hydrogenation of 1-hexyne.12,20 Single Pd, Ag, Ni, and Pt atoms supported on g-C3N4 catalyst proved to be a strong candidate in the semi-hydrogenation of acetylene, phenylacetylene and 2-methyl-3-butyn-2-ol, with higher selectivity and good resistance to coke formation.4,22,36,37,237,260,356,458,564,565
In a similar study, Gu et al. reported an 11-fold increase in acetylene hydrogenation due to the combination of single Cu and Ni atoms deposited on g-C3N4 supports (Ni1Cu2/g-C3N4), as well as high selectivity to ethylene (Fig. 32).13 The authors found that compared to Cu2/g-C3N4 and Ni1/g-C3N4, Ni1Cu2/g-C3N4 showed much higher activity by achieving 100% conversion at ∼170 °C. Ethylene selectivity reached 90% even at full acetylene conversion, demonstrating that SA of 1Ni:2Cu is a promising combination for this reaction. The corresponding activity was 7.01 h−1 at 160 °C, about 11 and 58 times higher than that of Ni1/g-C3N4 and Cu2/g-C3N4, respectively.13
 Fig. 32  (A) Acetylene conversion as a function of temperature; (B) ethylene selectivity as a function of acetylene conversion over Ni1Cu2/g-C3N4, Cu1/g-C3N4 and Ni1/g-C3N4 catalysts and (C) activity of these three samples at 160 °C. Adapted from ref. 13 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2021. 
Hydrogenation of alkenes is also considered one of the most important reactions in petrochemical synthesis and fine chemistry.566 Yan et al.237 achieved excellent selectivity and conversion rates (100% and 95%, respectively) under moderate conditions during the hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene due to changes in the adsorption mode of 1,3-butadiene and enhanced steric effect on the single Pd atoms. Subsequent selective hydrogenation experiments of 1,3-butadiene using Pd1/C3N4 led to 100% conversion of 1,3-butadiene achieved at about 75 °C and almost 100% butene selectivity, and no obvious butane was produced at conversions below 80% (Fig. 33B).36 The estimated TOF value for the reaction at 35 °C was 1.1 min−1, which proved to be lower when compared to the reactions using Pd1/graphene (8.0 min−1) of the same study (Fig. 33A).36 However, it should be noted that when the conversion was greater than 80%, the selectivity to the by-product butane increased faster on Pd1/C3N4 than on Pd1/graphene (Fig. 33A and C). Another study has also reported good catalytic performance for the hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene.358
 Fig. 33  Catalytic performance of Pd1/C3N4 and Pd1/graphene catalysts in the selective hydrogenation of 1,3-butene; (A) 1,3-butene conversion as a function of reaction temperature; (B) product selectivity as a function of 1,3-butene conversion over Pd1/C3N4 and (C) product selectivity as a function of 1,3-butene conversion over Pd1/graphene. Adapted from ref. 36 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
Single Pd atoms distributed on phosphorus-doped g-C3N4 also exhibited positive results for styrene hydrogenation reactions; Lin et al. reported 856.89 mmolStyrene min−1 gPd−1 and a TOF value of 18974 h−1, attributed to the improved Pd dispersion, more Pd0 species and the intrinsic advantages of the support.567 Furthermore, Hu et al. showed that Pd/g-C3N4 was also used in the selective hydrogenation of furfural into furfuryl alcohol (64% conversion and 99% selectivity, 4 h) and styrene into ethylbenzene (98% conversion, 1.5 h).282 The performance for selective hydrogenation and semi-hydrogenation reactions of CO2568–571 and nitroarenes260,572 was also investigated using the single-atom catalysts stabilized on carbon nitrides.
Propane dehydrogenation reactions are also considered a promising, ecological and cost-effective strategy to produce propylene, one of the most important compounds in the chemical industry.573 Motivated by this, Wang et al. used vanadium-doped carbon nitride (V/g-C3N4) catalysts to dehydrogenate propane.574 They achieved an optimum propylene yield of 16.16% with a propylene selectivity of 68.6% at 600 °C, compared to undoped g-C3N4, which displayed a propylene yield of 5.42% with a propylene selectivity of 53.9%, under the same reaction conditions.574 Theoretical studies suggest that the high activity of V/g-C3N4 for the dehydrogenation of propane is attributed to the low-coordinating 3d orbitals of single V atoms, while the propylene selectivity originates from the inhibition of the di-σ bonding mode of propylene on single V atoms.573 It is worth highlighting that Wang et al. have employed a polymeric carbon nitride in their work, as evidenced by their synthesis description.574 However, the theoretical work performed by Kong et al. has modelled the carbon nitride support as a perfect graphitic carbon nitride.573 This mismatch between experimental and modelled carbon nitrides is very common in the CN field and limits the potential support that theoretical calculations can provide for the carbon nitride field. The same is observed in the Gao et al.'s work, where a perfect graphitic carbon nitride is used as the model for the support of Pd and Pt applied to CO2 reduction.508 This mismatch between models and experimental is partially promoted by the poor understanding of polymeric carbon nitride structure which was named g-C3N4.
Oxidation reactions of carbon monoxide (CO) are also crucial for various industrial and energy conversion applications.575 Eid et al. tested the catalytic properties of Cu/g-C3N4 in the CO oxidation reaction under atmospheric pressure during heating from 25 to 350 °C.288 The study revealed that pristine g-C3N4 does not show significant catalytic performance (conversion of only 3.8% at 350 °C). In contrast, the Cu/g-C3N4 catalyst increased the CO conversion efficiency to 100% (with a steady increase noted in the oxidation of CO to CO2 after heating up to 160 °C and then immediately increased to reach 100% conversion at 184 °C).288 Another study reported that the single Cr and Mn atoms incorporated into g-C3N4 are promising for low-temperature CO oxidation.576 The single-atoms and the g-C3N4 support play distinct roles in the high catalytic activity in the reaction: while the partially oxidised single-atoms simultaneously serve as active sites for the oxidation charge and CO transfer from the support, g-C3N4 acts as a charge reservoir and ensures that clustering of the single-atoms is circumvented.576 The potential use of a single of Co, Cu, Pt, Ru, and Ni atoms combined with g-C3N4 was also investigated for CO,359,577,578 benzene,551 ethylbenzene,384 cyclohexane,370 silanes,284 and methane319 oxidation reactions.
The catalytic performance of single Cu1 atoms deposited on g-C3N4 at different metal loadings was examined in the standard nitrile–azide cycloaddition reaction. During the tests, it was found that the catalyst with 21% by weight Cu1 showed the highest yield among all, reaching an isolated yield for the tetrazole product of 87%.14 Single Cu atoms deposited on PCN were also tested to catalyse the carboxylation of terminal alkynes with CO2. The results pointed to a phenylpropionic acid yield of 97% and a TOF frequency of 9.7 h−1.318
Suzuki coupling reactions catalysed by these materials were well investigated by Perez-Ramirez.28 The performance of Pd single-atoms anchored in exfoliated graphitic carbon nitride (Pd-ECN) was evaluated in the continuous coupling of bromobenzene with phenylboronic acid pinacol ester under optimised conditions.28 Catalytic tests revealed that Pd-ECN is very effective, exhibiting a reaction rate of 0.57 mmolproduct min−1 gcat−1 for biphenyl (63% conversion, 90% selectivity and 56% purified yield), which outperformed all other homogeneous catalysts used for comparison purposes, such as Pd(PPh3)4 which exhibited 0.49 mmolproduct min−1 gcat−1 (56% conversion, 88% selectivity and 41% purified yield) and Pd(dtBpf)Cl2 and Pd(OAc)2 with even lower rates of the desired product (0.03 and 0.06 mmolproduct min−1 gcat−1, respectively). Moreover, based on the total metal content, the turnover frequency (TOF) for Pd-ECN was 549 h−1, outperforming all other catalysts by an order of magnitude, especially in the reaction of aryl bromides with pinacol ester derivatives of phenylboronic acid.28
A major advantage of using Pd-ECN is its resistance to leaching, which can be confirmed by stable performance in continuous mode and additional tests. Fu et al. also recorded that the Pd1/C3N4/rGO monolith catalyst exhibits greatly improved activity compared to its nanoparticle counterpart (Pdnano/C3N4/rGO) for the Suzuki–Miyaura reaction.7 Pd1/C3N4/rGO was able to fully convert p-iodonitrobenzene to 4-nitro-1,1′-biphenyl in about 60 min (Fig. 34A). In contrast, the yield of Pdnano/C3N4/rGO was lower than that of Pd1/C3N4/rGO (Fig. 34B), indicating that the reduction of Pd nanoparticles into Pd-ISAS in C3N4/rGO can improve the catalytic efficiency of the Suzuki–Miyaura reaction.7
 Fig. 34  Yield of 4-nitro-1,1′-biphenyl as a function of time in the Suzuki–Miyaura reaction catalysed by (A) Pd1/C3N4/rGO (batch reaction), (B) Pdnano/C3N4/rGO (batch reaction). Adapted from ref. 7 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020. 
Finally, other examples of reactions catalyzed by supported single-atoms on carbon nitride can be mentioned, like activation of peroxymonosulfate to generate 1O2,442 hydroxylation of benzene,579 monochlorophenol degradation,580 oxidative desulfurisation,581 and arylation of amines.293
4.3. Other applications
Some other applications of SA over CN still in the very early stage of development encompass: reductive activation of ozone,421 photocatalyzed nitrile-azide cycloaddition,14 cofactor regeneration in enzyme catalysed reactions,304 and anti-biofouling agents in seawater.310
5. Conclusions and perspectives
In this review, we try to present a rather complete overview of SACs based on carbon nitrides, addressing their identification and characterization using advanced characterization techniques, the commonly employed synthetic methods, highlighting their pros and cons, and their catalytic applications, especially in photocatalysis. The versatility of the CN materials concerning control over their structural units (i.e. triazine- or heptazine-based), degree of organization (“crystallinity”), charge balances in their structure and electronic band structure, promoted CN materials to the position of more than just a support with potential to anchoring single atoms. As shown here, there are a majority of examples where the CN materials act as a non-innocent support. The semiconductor properties of the CN materials can promote the SA's activity under photocatalytic conditions. On the other hand, the coordination of single-atoms in CN materials can fine-tune their electronic properties, leading to better e−/h+ pair separations, more efficient charge transfers and finally enhanced photocatalytic activities.
Despite the great progress in the SAC field, we believe that we are still at the early stages in terms of truly controlled synthesis, identification methods and photocatalytic efficiency, which remains far from the solar to chemical efficiency required to reach economic feasibility. In order to overcome these challenges, we believe that some issues need to be urgently addressed as indicated below:
(1) Despite the immense development of advanced analytical methods for SACs in the last decade, allowing for example atomic resolution in electronic microscopy techniques, most of the available techniques fail especially in two features: accessibility and broad SA identification. The characterization of SACs heavily relies on XAS and aberration-corrected STEM, the drawback of which is accessibility; one is a synchrotron technique and the second depends on expensive and hard-to-operate facilities. Microscopy techniques still have a second downside, the “sampling problem”, i.e. the identification of SA only in a local, selected part of the sample. We have high hopes that probe-assisted techniques, such as FT-IR of CO chemisorbed and 31P solid-state NMR of adsorbed phosphines, might become powerful techniques in the identification of SA over CN scaffolds. We imagine that aligning the high reproducibility of crystalline CN materials, with a systematic investigation of their SACs using a probe-assisted technique, might lead to a library that will allow us to identify and perhaps quantify SA of different elements on CN matrixes, giving a general idea of the SA homogeneity in the entire sample.
(2) The development of truly controlled synthesis methods is imperative to the future development of the SAC field. Most of the synthetic methods employed to stabilize SA in CN materials are still imperfect to control the properties of the resulting catalysts, even very simple properties, such as control of the metal loading. We believe that some interesting characteristics of CN materials are being underestimated to control synthesis, for example, carbon nitride scaffolds with charges (i.e. PHI and PTI). These supports permit the stabilization of metal single-atoms using a simple cation exchange method, with fine control of the metal loading. We believe that by controlling charges on the layers of CN materials, for example by their pH-dependent partial protonation, we might be able to, in the future, design the coordination sites, where metal SA will be anchored, perhaps even controlling the coordination sphere of the inserted metal.
(3) A fundamental understanding of the mechanism behind the charge transport between SA and CN materials in photocatalytic reactions is critical. As mentioned in this review, the relationship between single-atoms and carbon nitride scaffolds is two-way, where the CN materials behave as a non-innocent support. The semiconductor features of the CN materials can enhance the activity of catalytic single-sites, under photocatalytic conditions. On the other hand, the coordination of single-atoms in CN supports can fine-tune the electronic properties of these materials, leading to better e−/h+ pair separations, more efficient charge transfers and finally enhanced photocatalytic activities. Therefore, understanding this synergistic interaction in SA/CN support systems is of paramount importance to optimize light utilization via photogenerated charge carriers for driving charge-transfer reactions and improve the catalytic activity of the SA catalytic sites.
(4) The improvement and application of theoretical models and approaches to understand metal simulated SA/CN-based systems, such as the proper modelling of the electronic structure of surface–adsorbate interactions and its combination with light excitation, are important to better understand photocatalytic mechanisms promoted by these systems. It is important to underline that there are many examples in the literature, where CN structures are poorly modelled. For example, PCN is simulated as a long 2D layer of perfect graphitic carbon nitride.22 Crystalline carbon nitrides have been modelled only in a few contributions; however, none of them simulated complete structures of PHI and PTI, considering, for example, water molecules and alkali metals in the structure. Close collaborations between experimental and theoretical research groups can importantly improve the quality of the CN modelled, especially for the most recent structures, such as PHI and PTI.
(5) As demonstrated in this review, SA in CN supports can display remarkable catalytic and photocatalytic activities with important gain in atomic efficiency. However, in many cases especially for SA of noble metals their application is limited by the high price and low abundance of these metals. This limitation can be bypassed by substituting expensive metals with low-cost alternatives. Extraordinary advances have been made in the application of first-row transition metals as single-atoms, and we presented here examples where iron, copper and nickel overcame noble metal SAs in terms of catalytic activity. However, we would like to highlight the importance of further developing SACs based on first-row transition metals. This can be a key factor to enable their large-scale application in an economically feasible manner.
(6) Regarding industrial applications, carbon nitride-based SACs possess clear advantages: they are composed of Earth-abundant elements; in many examples, they display great activity with low metal loadings, minimizing the use of metals; and they are visible active semiconductors with potential to harvest visible light as the energy input. More importantly, carbon nitride-based SACs can be synthesized using easily scalable methods i.e., thermal condensation, pyrolysis and cation exchange. Despite these clear advantages, the CN field lacks studies evaluating CN-based catalysts’ potential for industrial applications. For example, simulations taking into account scalability, the full life cycle of the catalysis and economic feasibility are needed, in order to allow rational decisions concerning the large-scale application of these materials.
There is unanimity in the scientific community that a green and sustainable economy must rely, directly or indirectly, on processes driven by sunlight. Consequently, photocatalytic systems will play a major role in our journey to a green future. In light of this, photocatalytic systems employing earth-abundant elements, such as CN materials, and first-row transition metals are particularly attractive, especially single-atoms exhibiting high atomic efficiency. The SAC field is very promising and still is in a rather early stage of development. We strongly believe that CN-based materials are important for the further advancement of this emerging field. The recent findings in the anchoring of SA in CN-based materials, undoubtedly, have revealed that the macroheteroatom-cavities present in the structure of these materials have a key role in the resulting monodispersity of the SA, preventing aggregation and improving stability. Therefore, the layered 2D structure of CN-based supports offers an ideal platform to maximize SA stability and accessibility, leading to a catalytic single site firmly bonded to the CN scaffold, however, at the same time easily reached by the reactant during the catalytic reaction. The field of the SAC based on CN supports thereby holds a bright future with numerous challenges to be faced, but also with even more exciting opportunities.
Author contributions
The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. IFT and GFSRR conceived and planned the review and all others contributed to the literature revision and writing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
AcknowledgementsThe authors are grateful to the Brazilian Funding agencies CNPq (423196/2018-9, 405752/2022-9 and 403064/2021-0) and FAPESP (2020/14741-6, 2022/04748-9, 2021/14006-7, 2021/13271-9 and 2021/11162-8) and the Max Planck Society. We would like to thank Prof. Roberta Cerasi Urban for the careful revision and kind comments on the section about photocatalytic contaminant degradation.
Notes and referencesY. Wang, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 68–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. H. Jiang, L. S. Zhang, H. Y. Liu, D. S. Wu, F. Y. Wu, L. Tian, L. L. Liu, J. P. Zou, S. L. Luo and B. B. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 23112–23116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. G. Wu, Q. Q. Li, C. Chen, G. J. Su, M. Y. Song, B. H. Sun, J. Meng and B. Shi, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 297, 120409 CrossRef CAS .E. Vorobyeva, Z. Chen, S. Mitchell, R. K. Leary, P. Midgley, J. M. Thomas, R. Hauert, E. Fako, N. Lopez and J. Perez-Ramirez, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16393–16403 RSC .C. Xin, S. Liang, J. Hu, J. Guo, X. Cheng, W. Shang, J. Wei, S. Zhang, W. Liu, C. Zhu, J. Hou and Y. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 50849–50857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Liu, S. J. Wang, W. S. Yu, J. Q. Zhang, S. Fang, J. G. Zhang, J. Qiu, F. Y. Kong and X. G. Duan, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 446, 137426 CrossRef CAS .N. H. Fu, X. Liang, Z. Li, W. X. Chen, Y. Wang, L. R. Zheng, Q. H. Zhang, C. Chen, D. S. Wang, Q. Peng, L. Gu and Y. D. Li, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 947–951 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, B. Li, D. Zhang, L. Cheng and Q. Xiang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 10552–10561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Cheng, P. Zhang, Q. Y. Wen, J. J. Fan and Q. J. Xiang, Chin. J. Catal., 2022, 43, 451–460 CrossRef CAS .M. Ma, X. Cheng, Z. Shi, C. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Yang, C. Gong, Z. Zhang, H. Fei, C. Zhu, Y. He and E. Xie, Small Methods, 2022, 6, e2200295 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Tan, J. Ma, F. Zhang, S. Wang, F. Lan, H. B. Liu and R. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 12065–12071 CrossRef CAS .Z. P. Chen, S. Mitchell, E. Vorobyeva, R. K. Leary, R. Hauert, T. Furnival, Q. M. Ramasse, J. M. Thomas, P. A. Midgley, D. Dontsova, M. Antonietti, S. Pogodin, N. Lopez and J. Perez-Ramirez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605785 CrossRef .J. Gu, M. Jian, L. Huang, Z. Sun, A. Li, Y. Pan, J. Yang, W. Wen, W. Zhou, Y. Lin, H. J. Wang, X. Liu, L. Wang, X. Shi, X. Huang, L. Cao, S. Chen, X. Zheng, H. Pan, J. Zhu, S. Wei, W. X. Li and J. Lu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 1141–1149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Song, Z. Chen, X. Cai, X. Zhou, G. Zhan, R. Li, P. Wei, N. Yan, S. Xi and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2204638 CrossRef PubMed .S. Ji, Y. Qu, T. Wang, Y. Chen, G. Wang, X. Li, J. Dong, Q. Chen, W. Zhang, Z. Zhang, S. Liang, R. Yu, Y. Wang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 10651–10657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Shin, W. G. Jung, D. H. Kim, J. S. Jang, Y. H. Kim, W. T. Koo, J. Bae, C. Park, S. H. Cho, B. J. Kim and I. D. Kim, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 11394–11405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. L. Sun, Y. B. Feng, K. Ma, X. H. Jiang, Z. Y. Gao, J. G. Wang, N. Jiang and X. S. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 306, 121106 CrossRef CAS .G. M. Liu, Y. Huang, H. Q. Lv, H. Wang, Y. B. Zeng, M. Z. Yuan, Q. G. Meng and C. Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 284, 119683 CrossRef CAS .S. F. An, G. H. Zhang, T. W. Wang, W. N. Zhan, K. Y. Li, C. S. Song, J. T. Miller, S. Miao, J. H. Wang and X. W. Guo, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9441–9450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Chen, S. Pronkin, T. P. Fellinger, K. Kailasam, G. Vile, D. Albani, F. Krumeich, R. Leary, J. Barnard, J. M. Thomas, J. Perez-Ramirez, M. Antonietti and D. Dontsova, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3166–3175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Li, W. Bi, L. Zhang, S. Tao, W. Chu, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2427–2431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. P. Chen, E. Vorobyeva, S. Mitchell, E. Fako, N. Lopez, S. M. Collins, R. K. Leary, P. A. Midgley, R. Hauert and J. Perez-Ramirez, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2018, 5, 642–652 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhao, Q. Deng, S. M. Avdoshenko, L. Fu, J. Eckert and M. H. Rummeli, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 15641–15646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Zhao, W. Zhang, W. Liu, Y. Li, J. Ye, J. Liang and M. Tong, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 742, 140642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Cheng, X. Yue, L. Wang, D. Zhang, P. Zhang, J. Fan and Q. Xiang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2105135 CrossRef PubMed .H. Schlomberg, J. Kroger, G. Savasci, M. W. Terban, S. Bette, I. Moudrakovski, V. Duppel, F. Podjaski, R. Siegel, J. Senker, R. E. Dinnebier, C. Ochsenfeld and B. V. Lotsch, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 7478–7486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Ou, S. Ning, P. Zhu, S. Chen, A. Han, Q. Kang, Z. Hu, J. Ye, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202206579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Chen, E. Vorobyeva, S. Mitchell, E. Fako, M. A. Ortuno, N. Lopez, S. M. Collins, P. A. Midgley, S. Richard, G. Vile and J. Perez-Ramirez, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 702–707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Ma, F. Zhang, Y. Tan, S. Wang, H. Chen, L. Zheng, H. Liu and R. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 18383–18392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Savateev, N. V. Tarakina, V. Strauss, T. Hussain, K. Ten Brummelhuis, J. M. Sanchez Vadillo, Y. Markushyna, S. Mazzanti, A. P. Tyutyunnik, R. Walczak, M. Oschatz, D. M. Guldi, A. Karton and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15061–15068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Guo, S. Mei, K. Yuan, D. J. Wang, H. C. Liu, C. H. Yan and Y. W. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6203–6215 CrossRef CAS .D. Zhao, Y. Wang, C.-L. Dong, F. Meng, Y.-C. Huang, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, L. Liu and S. Shen, Nano-Micro Lett., 2022, 14, 1–15 CrossRef PubMed .F. Chen, X. L. Wu, C. Shi, H. Lin, J. Chen, Y. Shi, S. Wang and X. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2007877 CrossRef CAS .B. Yan, H. Song and G. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 131795 CrossRef CAS .C. Zhang, D. Qin, Y. Zhou, F. Qin, H. Wang, W. Wang, Y. Yang and G. Zeng, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 303, 120904 CrossRef CAS .X. Huang, H. Yan, L. Huang, X. Zhang, Y. Lin, J. Li, Y. Xia, Y. Ma, Z. Sun, S. Wei and J. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 123, 7922–7930 CrossRef .X. Huang, Y. Xia, Y. Cao, X. Zheng, H. Pan, J. Zhu, C. Ma, H. Wang, J. Li, R. You, S. Wei, W. Huang and J. Lu, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1302–1312 CrossRef CAS .F. M. Colombari, M. A. R. da Silva, M. S. Homsi, B. R. L. de Souza, M. Araujo, J. L. Francisco, G. da Silva, I. F. Silva, A. F. de Moura and I. F. Teixeira, Faraday Discuss., 2021, 227, 306–320 RSC .L. L. Cao, Q. Q. Luo, W. Liu, Y. K. Lin, X. K. Liu, Y. J. Cao, W. Zhang, Y. Wu, J. L. Yang, T. Yao and S. Q. Wei, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 134–141 CrossRef CAS .S. Mazzanti and A. Savateev, ChemPlusChem, 2020, 85, 2499–2517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Li, E. Kan, S. Chen, Z. Du, X. Liu, T. Wang, W. Zhu, H. Huo, J. Ma, D. Liu, L. Song, H. Feng, M. Antonietti and J. Gong, Small, 2022, 18, e2200073 CrossRef PubMed .Z. Teng, Q. Zhang, H. Yang, K. Kato, W. Yang, Y.-R. Lu, S. Liu, C. Wang, A. Yamakata, C. Su, B. Liu and T. Ohno, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 374–384 CrossRef CAS .M. A. R. da Silva, I. F. Silva, Q. Xue, B. T. W. Lo, N. V. Tarakina, B. N. Nunes, P. Adler, S. K. Sahoo, D. W. Bahnemann, N. López-Salas, A. Savateev, C. Ribeiro, T. D. Kühne, M. Antonietti and I. F. Teixeira, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 304, 120965 CrossRef CAS .K. Ding, A. Gulec, A. M. Johnson, N. M. Schweitzer, G. D. Stucky, L. D. Marks and P. C. Stair, Science, 2015, 350, 189–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. J. Hu, J. Q. Huang, J. Wang, S. J. Jiang, C. Z. Sun and S. Q. Song, Appl. Catal., B, 2023, 320, 121945 CrossRef CAS .X. J. Li, S. Y. Zhao, X. G. Duan, H. Y. Zhang, S. Z. Yang, P. P. Zhang, S. P. Jiang, S. M. Liu, H. Q. Sun and S. B. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 283, 119660 CrossRef CAS .Y. Cao, S. Chen, Q. Luo, H. Yan, Y. Lin, W. Liu, L. Cao, J. Lu, J. Yang, T. Yao and S. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12191–12196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Mitchell, E. Vorobyeva and J. Perez-Ramirez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15316–15329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. H. Kwak, J. Hu, D. Mei, C.-W. Yi, D. H. Kim, C. H. Peden, L. F. Allard and J. Szanyi, Science, 2009, 325, 1670–1673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Q. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 65–81 CrossRef CAS .L. Nie, D. Mei, H. Xiong, B. Peng, Z. Ren, X. I. P. Hernandez, A. DeLaRiva, M. Wang, M. H. Engelhard and L. Kovarik, Science, 2017, 358, 1419–1423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Gao, J. Low, R. Long, T. Kong, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 12175–12216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. K. Kaiser, Z. Chen, D. Faust Akl, S. Mitchell and J. Perez-Ramirez, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 11703–11809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .I. F. Teixeira, E. C. M. Barbosa, S. C. E. Tsang and P. H. C. Camargo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7783–7817 RSC .J. v Liebig, Ann. Pharm., 1834, 10, 10 Search PubMed .L. Pauling and J. H. Sturdivant, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1937, 23, 615–620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Redemann and H. Lucas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1940, 62, 842–846 CrossRef CAS .G.-M. Rignanese, J.-C. Charlier and X. Gonze, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 66, 205416 CrossRef .T. Komatsu, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 799–801 RSC .S. Matsumoto, E. Q. Xie and F. Izumi, Diamond Relat. Mater., 1999, 8, 1175–1182 CrossRef CAS .H. Montigaud, B. Tanguy, G. Demazeau, I. Alves and S. Courjault, J. Mater. Sci., 2000, 35, 2547–2552 CrossRef CAS .H. Montigaud, B. Tanguy, G. Demazeau, I. Alves, M. Birot and J. Dunogues, Diamond Relat. Mater., 1999, 8, 1707–1710 CrossRef CAS .J. Kouvetakis, A. Bandari, M. Todd, B. Wilkens and N. Cave, Chem. Mater., 1994, 6, 811–814 CrossRef CAS .C. M. Sung and M. Sung, Mater. Chem. Phys., 1996, 43, 1–18 CrossRef CAS .S.-D. Mo, L. Ouyang, W. Ching, I. Tanaka, Y. Koyama and R. Riedel, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 83, 5046 CrossRef CAS .D. M. Teter and R. J. Hemley, Science, 1996, 271, 53–55 CrossRef CAS .I. Alves, G. Demazeau, B. Tanguy and F. Weill, Solid State Commun., 1999, 109, 697–701 CrossRef CAS .A. Y. Liu and R. M. Wentzcovitch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 10362–10365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Miyamoto, M. L. Cohen and S. G. Louie, Solid State Commun., 1997, 102, 605–608 CrossRef CAS .T. Hughbanks and Y. C. Tian, Solid State Commun., 1995, 96, 321–325 CrossRef CAS .J. Ortega and O. F. Sankey, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 51, 2624–2627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. E. Lowther, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 11683–11686 CrossRef CAS .J. Gracia and P. Kroll, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3013–3019 RSC .V. N. Khabashesku, J. L. Zimmerman and J. L. Margrave, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3264–3270 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhang, K. Leinenweber, M. Bauer, L. A. Garvie, P. F. McMillan and G. H. Wolf, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 7788–7796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. F. Lu, L. G. Gai, D. F. Cui, Q. Wang, M. Zhao and X. T. Tao, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 4255–4258 CrossRef CAS .Q. Guo, Y. Xie, X. Wang, S. Zhang, T. Hou and S. Lv, Chem. Commun., 2004, 26–27 RSC .E. G. Gillan, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3906–3912 CrossRef CAS .J. R. Holst and E. G. Gillan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7373–7379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Komatsu and T. Nakamura, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 474–478 RSC .T. Komatsu, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 802–805 RSC .B. V. Lotsch and W. Schnick, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1891–1900 CrossRef CAS .D. R. Miller, J. R. Holst and E. G. Gillan, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 2767–2774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Li, C. B. Cao, H. W. Hao, H. L. Qiu, Y. J. Xu and H. S. Zhu, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2006, 15, 1593–1600 CrossRef .J. Li, C. B. Cao and H. S. Zhu, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 115605 CrossRef .J. L. Zimmerman, R. Williams, V. N. Khabashesku and J. L. Margrave, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 731–734 CrossRef CAS .S. Tragl, K. Gibson, J. Glaser, V. Duppel, A. Simon and H. J. Meyer, Solid State Commun., 2007, 141, 529–534 CrossRef CAS .S. Hwang, S. Lee and J. S. Yu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 5656–5659 CrossRef CAS .B. V. Lotsch and W. Schnick, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3976–3982 CrossRef CAS .Y. C. Zhao, D. L. Yu, H. W. Zhou, Y. J. Tian and O. Yanagisawa, J. Mater. Sci., 2005, 40, 2645–2647 CrossRef CAS .F. Goettmann, A. Fischer, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4467–4471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Jurgens, E. Irran, J. Senker, P. Kroll, H. Muller and W. Schnick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 10288–10300 CrossRef PubMed .B. V. Lotsch, M. Doblinger, J. Sehnert, L. Seyfarth, J. Senker, O. Oeckler and W. Schnick, Chemistry, 2007, 13, 4969–4980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X.-X. Zou, G.-D. Li, Y.-N. Wang, J. Zhao, C. Yan, M.-Y. Guo, L. Li and J.-S. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1066–1068 RSC .J. H. Liu, T. K. Zhang, Z. C. Wang, G. Dawson and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14398–14401 RSC .F. Dong, Y. J. Sun, L. W. Wu, M. Fu and Z. B. Wu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 1332–1335 RSC .C. Grundmann and A. Kreutzberger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1955, 77, 6559–6562 CrossRef CAS .A. Thomas, A. Fischer, F. Goettmann, M. Antonietti, J. O. Muller, R. Schlogl and J. M. Carlsson, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4893–4908 RSC .T. K. Mukhopadhyay, L. Leherte and A. Datta, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 1396–1406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Li, B. Shen, Z. Hong, B. Lin, B. Gao and Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 12017–12019 RSC .H. Yu, R. Shi, Y. Zhao, T. Bian, Y. Zhao, C. Zhou, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605148 CrossRef PubMed .Q. Han, B. Wang, J. Gao, Z. Cheng, Y. Zhao, Z. Zhang and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2745–2751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Chu, Y. Wang, Y. Guo, J. Y. Feng, C. C. Wang, W. J. Luo, X. X. Fan and Z. G. Zou, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 912–919 CrossRef CAS .X. H. Li, J. S. Zhang, X. F. Chen, A. Fischer, A. Thomas, M. Antonietti and X. C. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4344–4348 CrossRef CAS .J. Kroger, F. Podjaski, G. Savasci, I. Moudrakovski, A. Jimenez-Solano, M. W. Terban, S. Bette, V. Duppel, M. Joos, A. Senocrate, R. Dinnebier, C. Ochsenfeld and B. V. Lotsch, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2107061 CrossRef PubMed .K. Schwinghammer, M. B. Mesch, V. Duppel, C. Ziegler, J. Senker and B. V. Lotsch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1730–1733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Wang, Y. Di, M. Antonietti, H. R. Li, X. F. Chen and X. C. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5119–5121 CrossRef CAS .S. Yang, Y. Gong, J. Zhang, L. Zhan, L. Ma, Z. Fang, R. Vajtai, X. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2452–2456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Niu, L. L. Zhang, G. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4763–4770 CrossRef CAS .Q. H. Liang, Z. Li, Z. H. Huang, F. Y. Kang and Q. H. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6885–6892 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhang, X. Liang, C. Zhang, L. Lin, W. Xing, Z. Yu, G. Zhang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202210849 CAS .Y. Di, X. C. Wang, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 834–838 CrossRef CAS .X. F. Chen, Y. S. Jun, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, K. Domen, X. Z. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. C. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4093–4095 CrossRef CAS .X. Wang, K. Maeda, X. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Domen, Y. Hou, X. Fu and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1680–1681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7355–7363 CrossRef CAS .H. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3430–3432 RSC .J. S. Zhang, J. H. Sun, K. Maeda, K. Domen, P. Liu, M. Antonietti, X. Z. Fu and X. C. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 675–678 RSC .Y. J. Cui, J. S. Zhang, G. G. Zhang, J. H. Huang, P. Liu, M. Antonietti and X. C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13032–13039 RSC .H. Yan and H. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, L26–L29 CrossRef CAS .K. Schwinghammer, B. Tuffy, M. B. Mesch, E. Wirnhier, C. Martineau, F. Taulelle, W. Schnick, J. Senker and B. V. Lotsch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2435–2439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Mo, H. Xu, Z. G. Chen, X. J. She, Y. H. Song, J. B. Lian, X. W. Zhu, P. C. Yan, Y. C. Lei, S. Q. Yuan and H. M. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 452–460 CrossRef CAS .J. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Liu, Y. Han, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Lifshitz, S. T. Lee, J. Zhong and Z. Kang, Science, 2015, 347, 970–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. H. Lin, Z. Y. Lin, J. Zhang, X. Cai, W. Lin, Z. Y. Yu and X. C. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 649–655 CrossRef CAS .G. Zhang, Z.-A. Lan, L. Lin, S. Lin and X. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 3062–3066 RSC .Z. Pan, G. Zhang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7102–7106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. M. Di, B. C. Zhu, B. Cheng, J. G. Yu and J. S. Xu, J. Catal., 2017, 352, 532–541 CrossRef CAS .P. F. Xia, M. Antonietti, B. C. Zhu, T. Heil, J. G. Yu and S. W. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900093 CrossRef .J. Mao, T. Peng, X. Zhang, K. Li, L. Ye and L. Zan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1253–1260 RSC .L. Shi, T. Wang, H. B. Zhang, K. Chang and J. H. Ye, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5360–5367 CrossRef CAS .S. Zhou, Y. Liu, J. M. Li, Y. J. Wang, G. Y. Jiang, Z. Zhao, D. X. Wang, A. J. Duan, J. Liu and Y. C. Wei, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 158, 20–29 CrossRef .W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai and S.-T. Yong, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 1249–1257 RSC .J. Fu, B. Zhu, C. Jiang, B. Cheng, W. You and J. Yu, Small, 2017, 13, 1603938 CrossRef PubMed .P. Xia, B. Zhu, J. Yu, S. Cao and M. Jaroniec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3230–3238 RSC .R. Kuriki, K. Sekizawa, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2406–2409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G.-h Moon, M. Fujitsuka, S. Kim, T. Majima, X. Wang and W. Choi, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2886–2895 CrossRef CAS .S. N. Li, G. H. Dong, R. Hailili, L. P. Yang, Y. X. Li, F. Wang, Y. B. Zeng and C. Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 190, 26–35 CrossRef CAS .Y. Shiraishi, Y. Kofuji, H. Sakamoto, S. Tanaka, S. Ichikawa and T. Hirai, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3058–3066 CrossRef CAS .Z. Wei, M. L. Liu, Z. J. Zhang, W. Q. Yao, H. W. Tan and Y. F. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2581–2589 RSC .Y. Shiraishi, S. Kanazawa, Y. Sugano, D. Tsukamoto, H. Sakamoto, S. Ichikawa and T. Hirai, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 774–780 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yang, G. M. Zeng, D. L. Huang, C. Zhang, D. H. He, C. Y. Zhou, W. J. Wang, W. P. Xiong, X. P. Li, B. S. Li, W. Y. Dong and Y. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 272, 118970 CrossRef CAS .Q. He, B. Viengkeo, X. Zhao, Z. Y. Qin, J. Zhang, X. H. Yu, Y. P. Hu, W. Huang and Y. U. Li, Nano Res., 2021, 16, 4524–4530 CrossRef .Y. Shiraishi, S. Kanazawa, Y. Kofuji, H. Sakamoto, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13454–13459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. M. Liu, Z. Q. Tang, X. K. Gu, N. Li, H. Q. Lv, Y. Huang, Y. B. Zeng, M. Z. Yuan, Q. G. Meng, Y. T. Zhou and C. Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 317, 121752 CrossRef CAS .C. Liang, H. Y. Niu, H. Guo, C. G. Niu, D. W. Huang, Y. Y. Yan, H. Y. Liu, B. B. Shao and H. P. Feng, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 396, 125395 CrossRef CAS .G. Dong, W. Ho and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23435–23441 RSC .Y. Zhang, J. Di, P. Ding, J. Zhao, K. Gu, X. Chen, C. Yan, S. Yin, J. Xia and H. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 553, 530–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Cheng, J. Tian, Q. Liu, C. Ge, A. H. Qusti, A. M. Asiri, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6815–6819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. W. Tong, D. Yang, T. X. Xiao, Y. Tian and Z. Y. Jiang, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 260, 117–125 CrossRef CAS .J.-X. Sun, Y.-P. Yuan, L.-G. Qiu, X. Jiang, A.-J. Xie, Y.-H. Shen and J.-F. Zhu, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 6756–6763 RSC .J. Xue, S. Ma, Y. Zhou, Z. Zhang and M. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9630–9637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. L. Wang, P. Chen, Y. P. Feng, Z. J. Xie, Y. Liu, Y. H. Su, Q. X. Zhang, Y. F. Wang, K. Yao, W. Y. Lv and G. G. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 207, 103–113 CrossRef CAS .H. Li, C. Shan and B. Pan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 2197–2205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. S. Jun, E. Z. Lee, X. C. Wang, W. H. Hong, G. D. Stucky and A. Thomas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3661–3667 CrossRef CAS .G. Liao, S. Chen, X. Quan, H. Yu and H. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2721–2726 RSC .X. C. Wang, X. F. Chen, A. Thomas, X. Z. Fu and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1609–1612 CrossRef CAS .Y. Cui, Z. Ding, P. Liu, M. Antonietti, X. Fu and X. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 1455–1462 RSC .Y. J. Cui, J. H. Huang, X. Z. Fu and X. C. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 1396–1402 RSC .S. C. Yan, Z. S. Li and Z. G. Zou, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 10397–10401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Liu, Y. Li, F. Liu, W. Jiang, D. Zhang and J. Liang, Water Res., 2019, 151, 8–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. J. Bai, B. Lu, Z. G. Liu, L. Li, D. L. Cui, X. G. Xu and Q. L. Wang, J. Cryst. Growth., 2003, 247, 505–508 CrossRef CAS .M. Liu, C. Wei, H. Zhuzhang, J. Zhou, Z. Pan, W. Lin, Z. Yu, G. Zhang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202113389 CAS .A. Savateev, D. Dontsova, B. Kurpil and M. Antonietti, J. Catal., 2017, 350, 203–211 CrossRef CAS .E. Wirnhier, M. Doblinger, D. Gunzelmann, J. Senker, B. V. Lotsch and W. Schnick, Chemistry, 2011, 17, 3213–3221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. J. Bojdys, J. O. Muller, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Chemistry, 2008, 14, 8177–8182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Zhang, L. Lin, G. Li, Y. Zhang, A. Savateev, S. Zafeiratos, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 9516–9520 CrossRef .A. Savateev, S. Pronkin, J. D. Epping, M. G. Willinger, C. Wolff, D. Neher, M. Antonietti and D. Dontsova, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 167–174 CrossRef CAS .D. Dontsova, S. Pronkin, M. Wehle, Z. P. Chen, C. Fettkenhauer, G. Clavel and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5170–5179 CrossRef CAS .A. Savateev and M. Antonietti, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 6166–6176 CrossRef CAS .Z. Chen, A. Savateev, S. Pronkin, V. Papaefthimiou, C. Wolff, M. G. Willinger, E. Willinger, D. Neher, M. Antonietti and D. Dontsova, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700555 CrossRef PubMed .G. Zhang, G. Li, Z. A. Lan, L. Lin, A. Savateev, T. Heil, S. Zafeiratos, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13445–13449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Kröger, A. Jiménez-Solano, G. Savasci, P. Rovó, I. Moudrakovski, K. Küster, H. Schlomberg, H. A. Vignolo-González, V. Duppel and L. Grunenberg, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003016 CrossRef .A. Savateev, S. Pronkin, M. G. Willinger, M. Antonietti and D. Dontsova, Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 1517–1522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Jia, Q. Guan, Y. Chen, Y. Wang, Q. Zhao and J. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 492, 879–885 CrossRef CAS .W. R. Lee, Y. S. Jun, J. Park and G. D. Stucky, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24232–24236 RSC .A. Munde, P. Sharma, S. Dhawale, R. G. Kadam, S. Kumar, H. B. Kale, J. Filip, R. Zboril, B. R. Sathe and M. B. Gawande, Catalysts, 2022, 12, 1560 CrossRef CAS .Q. L. Zhao, Y. Wang, W. H. Lai, F. Xiao, Y. X. Lyu, C. Z. Liao and M. H. Shao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5444–5456 RSC .L. Liu and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4981–5079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. F. Yang, A. Wang, B. Qiao, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1740–1748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. B. Zhang, G. G. Liu, L. Shi and J. H. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701343 CrossRef .M. B. Gawande, K. Ariga and Y. Yamauchi, Small, 2021, 17, 2101584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Singh, V. Sharma, R. P. Gaikwad, P. Fornasiero, R. Zbořil and M. B. Gawande, Small, 2021, 17, 2006473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Mao, S. Zhou, C. Yan, Z. Zhu and A. Du, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 1110–1116 RSC .C. Ling, X. Niu, Q. Li, A. Du and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 14161–14168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Ai, H. Chen, X. Liang, L. Shi, M. Zhang, K. Zhang, Y. Zou and X. Zou, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 2967–2978 CrossRef CAS .E. Roduner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 583–592 RSC .M. Boronat, A. Leyva-Perez and A. Corma, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 834–844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. Cui, H. Li, C. Zhang, D. Qiao, M. B. Gawande, C.-H. Tung and Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 299, 120674 CrossRef CAS .P. Hu, Z. Huang, Z. Amghouz, M. Makkee, F. Xu, F. Kapteijn, A. Dikhtiarenko, Y. Chen, X. Gu and X. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3418–3421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Li, X. Chang, X. Lin, Z. J. Zhao and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8156–8178 RSC .V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943–4950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Han, Y. Guo, Y. Huang, W. Xi, J. Xu, J. Luo, H. Qi, Y. Ren, X. Liu, B. Qiao and T. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 11824–11829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Daelman, M. Capdevila-Cortada and N. Lopez, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1215–1221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Shi, Z. R. Ma, Y. Y. Xiao, Y. C. Yin, W. M. Huang, Z. C. Huang, Y. Z. Zheng, F. Y. Mu, R. Huang, G. Y. Shi, Y. Y. Sun, X. H. Xia and W. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 3021 CrossRef PubMed .F. Chen, X. Z. Jiang, L. L. Zhang, R. Lang and B. T. Qiao, Chin. J. Catal., 2018, 39, 893–898 CrossRef CAS .K. Mori, K. Yamaguchi, T. Hara, T. Mizugaki, K. Ebitani and K. Kaneda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 11572–11573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Maschmeyer, F. Rey, G. Sankar and J. M. Thomas, Nature, 1995, 378, 159–162 CrossRef CAS .A. Uzun, V. Ortalan, N. D. Browning and B. C. Gates, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4657–4659,  10.1039/b823171k .A. Uzun, V. Ortalan, N. D. Browning and B. C. Gates, J. Catal., 2010, 269, 318–328 CrossRef CAS .K. Asakura, H. Nagahiro, N. Ichikuni and Y. Iwasawa, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 188, 313–324 CrossRef CAS .M. Chen, D. Kumar, C. W. Yi and D. W. Goodman, Science, 2005, 310, 291–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Fu, H. Saltsburg and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Science, 2003, 301, 935–938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Abbet, A. Sanchez, U. Heiz, W. D. Schneider, A. M. Ferrari, G. Pacchioni and N. Rösch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 3453–3457 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhu, H. Inada, K. Nakamura and J. Wall, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 808–812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. F. Hackett, R. M. Brydson, M. H. Gass, I. Harvey, A. D. Newman, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8593–8596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Risse, S. Shaikhutdinov, N. Nilius, M. Sterrer and H. J. Freund, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 949–956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .V. Ortalan, A. Uzun, B. C. Gates and N. D. Browning, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 506–510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. M. Thomas, Z. Saghi and P. L. Gai, Top. Catal., 2011, 54, 588–594 CrossRef CAS .T. Y. Chang, Y. Tanaka, R. Ishikawa, K. Toyoura, K. Matsunaga, Y. Ikuhara and N. Shibata, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 134–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. H. Sun, G. X. Zhang, N. Gauquelin, N. Chen, J. G. Zhou, S. L. Yang, W. F. Chen, X. B. Meng, D. S. Geng, M. N. Banis, R. Y. Li, S. Y. Ye, S. Knights, G. A. Botton, T. K. Sham and X. L. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1–9 Search PubMed .J. Lin, A. Wang, B. Qiao, X. Liu, X. Yang, X. Wang, J. Liang, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15314–15317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Huang, X. Gu, Q. Cao, P. Hu, J. Hao, J. Li and X. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4198–4203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Bar-Sadan, J. Barthel, H. Shtrikman and L. Houben, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2352–2356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Wang, Q. Wang, Y. Cheng, K. Li, Y. Yao, Q. Zhang, C. Dong, P. Wang, U. Schwingenschlogl, W. Yang and X. X. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 141–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. W. Robertson, B. Montanari, K. He, J. Kim, C. S. Allen, Y. A. Wu, J. Olivier, J. Neethling, N. Harrison, A. I. Kirkland and J. H. Warner, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1468–1475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Singh, M. B. Gawande, A. D. Kute, R. S. Varma, P. Fornasiero, P. McNeice, R. V. Jagadeesh, M. Beller and R. Zbořil, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 13620–13697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. K. Ghosh and N. N. Nair, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 1811–1821 CrossRef CAS .F. Dvorak, M. Farnesi Camellone, A. Tovt, N. D. Tran, F. R. Negreiros, M. Vorokhta, T. Skala, I. Matolinova, J. Myslivecek, V. Matolin and S. Fabris, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Qiao, J. Liu, Y.-G. Wang, Q. Lin, X. Liu, A. Wang, J. Li, T. Zhang and J. Liu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6249–6254 CrossRef CAS .C. Wang, X.-K. Gu, H. Yan, Y. Lin, J. Li, D. Liu, W.-X. Li and J. Lu, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 887–891 CrossRef CAS .J. Jones, H. Xiong, A. T. DeLaRiva, E. J. Peterson, H. Pham, S. R. Challa, G. Qi, S. Oh, M. H. Wiebenga, X. I. Pereira Hernandez, Y. Wang and A. K. Datye, Science, 2016, 353, 150–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Riley, S. Zhou, D. Kunwar, A. De La Riva, E. Peterson, R. Payne, L. Gao, S. Lin, H. Guo and A. Datye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12964–12973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. F. Xie, T. C. Pu, A. M. Nie, S. Hwang, S. C. Purdy, W. J. Yu, D. Su, J. T. Miller and C. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4044–4048 CrossRef CAS .H. Wei, X. Liu, A. Wang, L. Zhang, B. Qiao, X. Yang, Y. Huang, S. Miao, J. Liu and T. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. W. Wang, S. H. Xie, Y. Feng, P. J. Ma, K. Zheng, E. H. Duan, Y. X. Liu, H. X. Dai and J. G. Deng, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 298, 120612 CrossRef CAS .P. Liu, Y. Zhao, R. Qin, S. Mo, G. Chen, L. Gu, D. M. Chevrier, P. Zhang, Q. Guo and D. Zang, Science, 2016, 352, 797–800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Xing, J. F. Chen, Y. H. Li, W. T. Yuan, Y. Zhou, L. R. Zheng, H. F. Wang, P. Hu, Y. Wang, H. J. Zhao, Y. Wang and H. G. Yang, Chemistry, 2014, 20, 2138–2144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Wan, W. Chen, C. Jia, L. Zheng, J. Dong, X. Zheng, Y. Wang, W. Yan, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705369 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Chen, S. Ji, W. Sun, Y. Lei, Q. Wang, A. Li, W. Chen, G. Zhou, Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, X. Han, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1295–1301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zhang, J. Zhao, H. Wang, B. Xiao, W. Zhang, X. Zhao, T. Lv, M. Thangamuthu, J. Zhang and Y. Guo, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 1–10 Search PubMed .D. Liu, X. Li, S. Chen, H. Yan, C. Wang, C. Wu, Y. A. Haleem, S. Duan, J. Lu and B. Ge, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 512–518 CrossRef CAS .Y. Cheng, S. Zhao, B. Johannessen, J. P. Veder, M. Saunders, M. R. Rowles, M. Cheng, C. Liu, M. F. Chisholm, R. De Marco, H. M. Cheng, S. Z. Yang and S. P. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1706287 CrossRef PubMed .Z. Zhang, J. Sun, F. Wang and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9038–9043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. Zhang, L. Tao, J. An, J. Zhang, L. Meng, X. Zheng, Y. Wang, N. Li, S. Du, J. Zhang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202117347 CAS .N. Cheng, S. Stambula, D. Wang, M. N. Banis, J. Liu, A. Riese, B. Xiao, R. Li, T. K. Sham, L. M. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Yan, H. Cheng, H. Yi, Y. Lin, T. Yao, C. Wang, J. Li, S. Wei and J. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10484–10487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. L. Fei, J. C. Dong, Y. X. Feng, C. S. Allen, C. Z. Wan, B. Volosskiy, M. F. Li, Z. P. Zhao, Y. L. Wang, H. T. Sun, P. F. An, W. X. Chen, Z. Y. Guo, C. Lee, D. L. Chen, I. Shakir, M. J. Liu, T. D. Hu, Y. D. Li, A. I. Kirkland, X. F. Duan and Y. Huang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 63–72 CrossRef CAS .K. Jiang, S. Siahrostami, T. Zheng, Y. Hu, S. Hwang, E. Stavitski, Y. Peng, J. Dynes, M. Gangisetty and D. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 893–903 RSC .D. Deng, X. Chen, L. Yu, X. Wu, Q. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Yang, H. Tian, Y. Hu, P. Du, R. Si, J. Wang, X. Cui, H. Li, J. Xiao, T. Xu, J. Deng, F. Yang, P. N. Duchesne, P. Zhang, J. Zhou, L. Sun, J. Li, X. Pan and X. Bao, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500462 CrossRef PubMed .Q. Sun, N. Wang, T. Zhang, R. Bai, A. Mayoral, P. Zhang, Q. Zhang, O. Terasaki and J. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18570–18576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Z. Qiu, J. B. Hu, J. G. Lan, L. F. Wang, G. Y. Fu, R. J. Xiao, B. H. Ge and J. X. Jiang, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 9413–9421 CrossRef CAS .M. Ranocchiari, C. Lothschutz, D. Grolimund and J. A. van Bokhoven, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2012, 468, 1985–1999 CAS .C. Zhao, X. Dai, T. Yao, W. Chen, X. Wang, J. Wang, J. Yang, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8078–8081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Zhang, J. Wei, J. Dong, G. Liu, L. Shi, P. An, G. Zhao, J. Kong, X. Wang, X. Meng, J. Zhang and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14310–14314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. N. Gong, L. Jiao, Y. Qian, C. Y. Pan, L. Zheng, X. Cai, B. Liu, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2705–2709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Wang, C. T. He, R. Huang, J. Mao, D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 19339–19345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Yin, T. Yao, Y. Wu, L. Zheng, Y. Lin, W. Liu, H. Ju, J. Zhu, X. Hong, Z. Deng, G. Zhou, S. Wei and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10800–10805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. J. Chen, S. F. Ji, Y. G. Wang, J. C. Dong, W. X. Chen, Z. Li, R. A. Shen, L. R. Zheng, Z. B. Zhuang, D. S. Wang and Y. D. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6937–6941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Liu, L. Zhang, X. Liu, X. Liu, X. Yang, S. Miao, W. Wang, A. Wang and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10790–10798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Gu, C. S. Hsu, L. Bai, H. M. Chen and X. Hu, Science, 2019, 364, 1091–1094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Pan, R. Lin, Y. Chen, S. Liu, W. Zhu, X. Cao, W. Chen, K. Wu, W.-C. Cheong and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4218–4221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Li, Y. Chen, S. Ji, Y. Tang, W. Chen, A. Li, J. Zhao, Y. Xiong, Y. Wu, Y. Gong, T. Yao, W. Liu, L. Zheng, J. Dong, Y. Wang, Z. Zhuang, W. Xing, C. T. He, C. Peng, W. C. Cheong, Q. Li, M. Zhang, Z. Chen, N. Fu, X. Gao, W. Zhu, J. Wan, J. Zhang, L. Gu, S. Wei, P. Hu, J. Luo, J. Li, C. Chen, Q. Peng, X. Duan, Y. Huang, X. M. Chen, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 764–772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Zhang, H. Asakura, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. De and N. Yan, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 8459–8463 CrossRef .R. Lang, T. Li, D. Matsumura, S. Miao, Y. Ren, Y. T. Cui, Y. Tan, B. Qiao, L. Li, A. Wang, X. Wang and T. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 16054–16058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. W. Cao, H. Li, T. Tong, H. C. Chen, A. C. Yu, J. G. Yu and H. M. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802169 CrossRef .L. Wang, C. Zhu, M. Xu, C. Zhao, J. Gu, L. Cao, X. Zhang, Z. Sun, S. Wei, W. Zhou, W. X. Li and J. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 18854–18858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. F. Sun, Q. Q. Xu, J. L. Qi, D. Zhou, H. Y. Zhu and J. Z. Yin, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 14630–14656 CrossRef CAS .G. Gentile, M. Marchi, M. Melchionna, P. Fornasiero, M. Prato and G. Filippini, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2022, e202200944 CAS .G. Vile, D. Albani, M. Nachtegaal, Z. Chen, D. Dontsova, M. Antonietti, N. Lopez and J. Perez-Ramirez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11265–11269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Zhao, J. Feng, W. Yang, S. Song and H. Zhang, ChemCatChem, 2021, 13, 1250–1270 CrossRef CAS .X. N. Li, X. F. Yang, J. M. Zhang, Y. Q. Huang and B. Liu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2521–2531 CrossRef CAS .U. Heiz, A. Sanchez, S. Abbet and W. D. Schneider, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 3214–3217 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1988, 27, 1673–1691 CrossRef .M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and B. C. Gates, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2012, 3, 545–574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Varela, S. D. Findlay, A. R. Lupini, H. M. Christen, A. Y. Borisevich, N. Dellby, O. L. Krivanek, P. D. Nellist, M. P. Oxley, L. J. Allen and S. J. Pennycook, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 095502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. V. Crewe, J. Wall and J. Langmore, Science, 1970, 168, 1338–1340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Yates Jr, S. Worley, T. Duncan and R. Vaughan, J. Chem. Phys., 1979, 70, 1225–1230 CrossRef .B. B. Sarma, F. Maurer, D. E. Doronkin and J. D. Grunwaldt, Chem. Rev., 2022, 123(1), 379–444 CrossRef PubMed .O. L. Krivanek, M. F. Chisholm, V. Nicolosi, T. J. Pennycook, G. J. Corbin, N. Dellby, M. F. Murfitt, C. S. Own, Z. S. Szilagyi, M. P. Oxley, S. T. Pantelides and S. J. Pennycook, Nature, 2010, 464, 571–574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. C. Meunier, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 21810–21823 CrossRef CAS .C. Asokan, L. DeRita and P. Christopher, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1473–1480 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, J. Mao, X. Meng, L. Yu, D. Deng and X. Bao, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 1806–1854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Tieu, X. Yan, M. Xu, P. Christopher and X. Pan, Small, 2021, 17, e2006482 CrossRef PubMed .Y. X. Chen, Z. W. Huang, Z. Ma, J. M. Chen and X. F. Tang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 4250–4258 RSC .J. W. Fu, S. D. Wang, Z. H. Wang, K. Liu, H. J. W. Li, H. Liu, J. H. Hu, X. W. Xu, H. M. Li and M. Liu, Front. Phys., 2020, 15, 1–14 Search PubMed .R. Lang, X. Du, Y. Huang, X. Jiang, Q. Zhang, Y. Guo, K. Liu, B. Qiao, A. Wang and T. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 11986–12043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Liang, N. Fu, S. Yao, Z. Li and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 18155–18174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Fina, S. K. Callear, G. M. Carins and J. T. S. Irvine, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2612–2618 CrossRef CAS .X. C. Wang, S. Blechert and M. Antonietti, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1596–1606 CrossRef CAS .L. H. Lin, H. H. Ou, Y. F. Zhang and X. C. Wang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3921–3931 CrossRef CAS .F. Hu, L. Leng, M. Zhang, W. Chen, Y. Yu, J. Wang, J. H. Horton and Z. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 54146–54154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Wang, R. Tang, A. Kheradmand, Y. Jiang, H. Wang, W. Yang, Z. Chen, X. Zhong, S. P. Ringer and X. Liao, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 284, 119759 CrossRef CAS .Z. Chen, Q. Zhang, W. Chen, J. Dong, H. Yao, X. Zhang, X. Tong, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen, W. He and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704720 CrossRef PubMed .H. Su, W. Che, F. Tang, W. Cheng, X. Zhao, H. Zhang and Q. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 21108–21114 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xue, Y. Lei, X. Liu, Y. Li, W. Deng, F. Wang and S. Min, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 14083–14086 RSC .Y. Yang, F. Li, J. Chen, J. Fan and Q. Xiang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 1979–1985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Eid, M. H. Sliem, M. Al-Ejji, A. M. Abdullah, M. Harfouche and R. S. Varma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 40749–40760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, Q. Cai, A. Vasileff, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3336–3339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Shen, J. Chen, Y. Wang, C. L. Dong, F. Meng, Q. Zhang, Y. Huangfu, Z. Lin, Y. C. Huang, Y. Li, M. Li and L. Gu, Sci. Bull., 2022, 67, 520–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. H. Han, L. L. Du, M. Konarova, D. C. Qi, D. L. Phillips and J. S. Xu, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 9227–9235 CrossRef CAS .L. Y. Liu, H. Su, F. M. Tang, X. Zhao and Q. H. Liu, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 110–116 CrossRef CAS .E. Vorobyeva, V. C. Gerken, S. Mitchell, A. Sabadell-Rendon, R. Hauert, S. B. Xi, A. Borgna, D. Klose, S. M. Collins, P. A. Midgley, D. M. Kepaptsoglou, Q. M. Ramasse, A. Ruiz-Ferrando, E. Fako, M. A. Ortuno, N. Lopez, E. M. Carreira and J. Perez-Ramirez, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 11069–11080 CrossRef CAS .X. Xiao, Z. Ruan, Q. Li, L. Zhang, H. Meng, Q. Zhang, H. Bao, B. Jiang, J. Zhou, C. Guo, X. Wang and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2200612 CrossRef PubMed .Z. Zhao, W. Liu, Y. Shi, H. Zhang, X. Song, W. Shang and C. Hao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 4690–4699 RSC .F. Zhang, J. Zhang, H. Wang, J. Li, H. Liu, X. Jin, X. Wang and G. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 424, 130004 CrossRef CAS .X. D. Xiao, L. P. Zhang, H. Y. Meng, B. J. Jiang and H. G. Fu, Solar RRL, 2021, 5, 2000609 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, S. Yin, Q. Zhang, F. Cao, Y. Xing, Q. Zhao, Y. Wang, W. Xu, W. Wu and M. Wu, J. Catal., 2021, 404, 89–95 CrossRef CAS .X. Cheng, J. M. Wang, K. Zhao and Y. P. Bi, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 316, 121643 CrossRef CAS .J. Fu, L. Zhu, K. Jiang, K. Liu, Z. Wang, X. Qiu, H. Li, J. Hu, H. Pan and Y.-R. Lu, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 415, 128982 CrossRef CAS .Z. Wang, E. Almatrafi, H. Wang, H. Qin, W. Wang, L. Du, S. Chen, G. Zeng and P. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202202338 CAS .Y. Yang, G. Zeng, D. Huang, C. Zhang, D. He, C. Zhou, W. Wang, W. Xiong, B. Song, H. Yi, S. Ye and X. Ren, Small, 2020, 16, e2001634 CrossRef PubMed .P. Huang, J. Huang, S. A. Pantovich, A. D. Carl, T. G. Fenton, C. A. Caputo, R. L. Grimm, A. I. Frenkel and G. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16042–16047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. G. Liu, W. J. Hu, L. J. Yang and J. Liu, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104750 CrossRef CAS .F. Yu, T. Huo, Q. Deng, G. Wang, Y. Xia, H. Li and W. Hou, Chem. Sci., 2022, 13, 754–762 RSC .W. Liu, L. Cao, W. Cheng, Y. Cao, X. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Mou, L. Jin, X. Zheng, W. Che, Q. Liu, T. Yao and S. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9312–9317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Li, W. Li, Z. Guo, Y. Song, S. Tang, Y. Ma, X. Xing and Q. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 52560–52570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Zhang, M. I. Hussain, M. Xia and C. C. Ge, NANO, 2021, 16, 2150016 CrossRef CAS .C. Liu, M. C. Yu, H. J. Liang, Y. F. Zhou, R. A. Zhan, Y. Sun, D. X. Li, C. K. Liu and J. F. Niu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 285, 120404 CrossRef CAS .Q. Luo, Y. Li, X. Huo, L. Li, Y. Song, S. Chen, H. Lin and N. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, e2105346 CrossRef PubMed .K. Wang, L. Jiang, T. Xin, Y. Li, X. Wu and G. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 132229 CrossRef CAS .Z. Lin, Z. Q. Zhang, Y. Q. Wang, Z. M. Peng, X. X. Wang, R. Z. Wang, Y. C. Huang, F. Q. Meng, M. T. Li, C. L. Dong, Q. H. Zhang, L. Gu and S. H. Shen, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2022, 38, 1243–1250 CrossRef CAS .S. Ohn, S. Y. Kim, S. K. Mun, J. Oh, Y. J. Sa, S. Park, S. H. Joo, S. J. Kwon and S. Park, Carbon, 2017, 124, 180–187 CrossRef CAS .Y. Z. Zhang, C. Liang, H. P. Feng and W. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 446, 137379 CrossRef CAS .C. Zhou, Y. Liang, W. Xia, E. Almatrafi, B. Song, Z. Wang, Y. Zeng, Y. Yang, Y. Shang, C. Wang and G. Zeng, J. Hazard. Mater., 2023, 441, 129871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Mateen, W. C. Cheong, C. Zheng, S. H. Talib, J. Zhang, X. M. Zhang, S. J. Liu, C. Chen and Y. D. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 451, 138305 CrossRef CAS .X. W. Guo, S. M. Chen, H. J. Wang, Z. M. Zhang, H. Lin, L. Song and T. B. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19831–19837 RSC .P. Yang, S. W. Zuo, F. T. Zhang, B. Yu, S. E. Guo, X. X. Yu, Y. F. Zhao, J. Zhang and Z. M. Liu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 7327–7335 CrossRef CAS .B. Wu, R. Yang, L. Shi, T. Lin, X. Yu, M. Huang, K. Gong, F. Sun, Z. Jiang, S. Li, L. Zhong and Y. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 14677–14680 RSC .C. H. Han, R. J. Qi, R. L. Sun, K. C. Fan, B. Johannessen, D. C. Qi, S. W. Cao and J. S. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2023, 320, 121954 CrossRef CAS .S. Q. Dong, X. Chen, L. F. Su, Y. J. Wen, Y. C. Wang, Q. H. Yang, L. Yi, W. W. Xu, Q. Yang, P. L. He, Y. Q. Zhu and Z. Y. Lu, ACS Es&T Eng., 2022, 3(2), 150–164 Search PubMed .G. C. Wang, T. Zhang, W. W. Yu, R. Si, Y. F. Liu and Z. K. Zhao, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5715–5722 CrossRef CAS .L. Zeng, J. W. Chen, L. X. Zhong, W. L. Zhen, Y. Y. Tay, S. Z. Li, Y. G. Wang, L. M. Huang and C. Xue, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 307, 121154 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Ren, X. Y. Zhang, Y. Q. Liu, G. Yang, L. Qin, J. Q. Meng, Y. H. Guo and Y. X. Yang, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 5077–5093 CrossRef CAS .H. E. Kim, I. H. Lee, J. Cho, S. Shin, H. C. Ham, J. Y. Kim and H. Lee, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 4757–4764 CrossRef CAS .L. Z. Hu, T. Wang, Q. Q. Nie, J. Y. Liu, Y. P. Cui, K. F. Zhang, Z. C. Tan and H. S. Yu, Carbon, 2022, 200, 187–198 CrossRef CAS .E. Zhao, M. Li, B. Xu, X. L. Wang, Y. Jing, D. Ma, S. Mitchell, J. Perez-Ramirez and Z. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202207410 CAS .L. Zhang, R. Long, Y. Zhang, D. Duan, Y. Xiong, Y. Zhang and Y. Bi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6224–6229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Shi, Y. Huang, Y. Bo, D. Duan, Z. Wang, J. Cao, G. Zhu, W. Ho, L. Wang, T. Huang and Y. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202203063 CAS .G. Huang, Q. Niu, J. Zhang, H. Huang, Q. Chen, J. Bi and L. Wu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 131018 CrossRef CAS .Y. Cao, D. Wang, Y. Lin, W. Liu, L. Cao, X. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Mou, S. Fang, X. Shen and T. Yao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 6082–6088 CrossRef CAS .Y. Hu, Y. Qu, Y. Zhou, Z. Wang, H. Wang, B. Yang, Z. Yu and Y. Wu, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 412, 128749 CrossRef CAS .Z. X. Zeng, Y. Su, X. Quan, W. Y. Choi, G. H. Zhang, N. Liu, B. Kim, S. Chen, H. T. Yu and S. S. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104409 CrossRef CAS .J. Li, M. N. Banis, Z. Ren, K. R. Adair, K. Doyle-Davis, D. M. Meira, Y. Z. Finfrock, L. Zhang, F. Kong, T. K. Sham, R. Li, J. Luo and X. Sun, Small, 2021, 17, e2007245 CrossRef PubMed .P. Sharma, S. Kumar, O. Tomanec, M. Petr, J. Zhu Chen, J. T. Miller, R. S. Varma, M. B. Gawande and R. Zboril, Small, 2021, 17, e2006478 CrossRef PubMed .Z. X. Zeng, F. Ye, S. H. Deng, D. X. Fang, X. J. Wang, Y. F. Bai and H. Xiao, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 444, 136561 CrossRef CAS .S. Tian, Z. Wang, W. Gong, W. Chen, Q. Feng, Q. Xu, C. Chen, C. Chen, Q. Peng and L. Gu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11161–11164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. P. Yu, Y. F. Li, A. Torres-Pinto, A. P. LaGrow, V. M. Diaconescu, L. Simonelli, M. J. Sampaio, O. Bondarchuk, I. Amorim, A. Araujo, A. M. T. Silva, C. G. Silva, J. L. Faria and L. F. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 310, 121318 CrossRef CAS .W. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zong, H. Nie, L. Niu, L. An, D. Qu, X. Wang, Z. Kang and Z. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 6124–6129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Chen, B. Lei, X. Dong, H. Wang, J. Sheng, W. Cui, J. Li, Y. Sun, Z. Wang and F. Dong, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 15841–15852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Mori, T. Murakami and H. Yamashita, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 10209–10217 CrossRef CAS .F. Z. Hu, L. L. Liao, B. Z. Chi and H. M. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 436, 135271 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Pennycook, M. F. Chisholm, A. R. Lupini, M. Varela, A. Y. Borisevich, M. P. Oxley, W. D. Luo, K. van Benthem, S. H. Oh, D. L. Sales, S. I. Molina, J. Garcia-Barriocanal, C. Leon, J. Santamaria, S. N. Rashkeev and S. T. Pantelides, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2009, 367, 3709–3733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Hetherington, Mater. Today, 2004, 7, 50–55 CrossRef .Z. Y. Teng, W. N. Cai, W. Sim, Q. T. Zhang, C. Y. Wang, C. L. Su and T. Ohno, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 282, 119589 CrossRef CAS .G. Vilé, D. Albani, M. Nachtegaal, Z. Chen, D. Dontsova, M. Antonietti, N. López and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11265–11269 CrossRef PubMed .H. Zhang, J. Liu and L. Jiang, Nanotechnology, 2022, 33, 322001 CrossRef PubMed .S. Buchele, A. Yakimov, S. M. Collins, A. Ruiz-Ferrando, Z. Chen, E. Willinger, D. M. Kepaptsoglou, Q. M. Ramasse, C. R. Muller, O. V. Safonova, N. Lopez, C. Coperet, J. Perez-Ramirez and S. Mitchell, Small, 2022, 18, e2202080 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Zuo, T. Li, N. Zhang, T. Jing, D. Rao, P. Schmuki, S. Kment, R. Zboril and Y. Chai, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 7790–7798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Berlier, G. Ricchiardi, S. Bordiga and A. Zecchina, J. Catal., 2005, 229, 127–135 CrossRef CAS .W. Zhang, S. Xu, X. Han and X. Bao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 192–210 RSC .J. Y. Liu, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 34–59 CrossRef CAS .A. Corma, O. G. Salnikov, D. A. Barskiy, K. V. Kovtunov and I. V. Koptyug, Chemistry, 2015, 21, 7012–7015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Zhang, Y. Zhu, H. Asakura, B. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Zhou, Y. Han, T. Tanaka, A. Wang, T. Zhang and N. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 16100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Guo, H. Liu, D. Li, J. Wang, X. Djitcheu, D. He and Q. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2022, 12, 9373–9394 RSC .Z. P. Chen, S. Mitchell, F. Krumeich, R. Hauert, S. Yakunin, M. V. Kovalenko and J. Perez-Ramirez, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 5223–5230 CrossRef CAS .M. Y. Gao, F. Y. Tian, Z. Guo, X. Zhang, Z. J. Li, J. Zhou, X. Zhou, Y. S. Yu and W. W. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 446, 137127 CrossRef .Y. Wang, M. Wang, X. Mou, S. Wang, X. Jiang, Z. Chen, Z. Jiang, R. Lin and Y. Ding, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10506–10513 RSC .P. Zhou, X. Hou, Y. Chao, W. Yang, W. Zhang, Z. Mu, J. Lai, F. Lv, K. Yang, Y. Liu, J. Li, J. Ma, J. Luo and S. Guo, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 5898–5905 RSC .P. Liu, Z. Huang, X. Gao, X. Hong, J. Zhu, G. Wang, Y. Wu, J. Zeng and X. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2200057 CrossRef PubMed .M. Y. Gao, F. Y. Tian, X. Zhang, Y. Q. Liu, Z. Y. Chen, Y. S. Yu, W. W. Yang and Y. L. Hou, Nano Energy, 2022, 103, 107767 CrossRef CAS .L. Li, Y. Yu, S. M. Lin, W. H. Chu, D. F. Sun, Q. M. Su, S. F. Ma, G. H. Du and B. S. Xu, Catal. Commun., 2021, 153, 106294 CrossRef CAS .C. Li, X. Dong, Y. Zhang, J. Hu, J. Yuan, G. Li, D. Chen and Y. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 596, 153471 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yang, S. Zhang, L. Gu and S. Hao, Journal, 2022, 15(21), 7464 CAS .M. Kwak, J. Bok, B. H. Lee, J. Kim, Y. Seo, S. Kim, H. Choi, W. Ko, W. Hooch Antink, C. W. Lee, G. H. Yim, H. Seung, C. Park, K. S. Lee, D. H. Kim, T. Hyeon and D. Yoo, Chem. Sci., 2022, 13, 8536–8542 RSC .C. Cometto, A. Ugolotti, E. Grazietti, A. Moretto, G. Bottaro, L. Armelao, C. Di Valentin, L. Calvillo and G. Granozzi, npj 2d Mater. Appl., 2021, 5, 63 CrossRef CAS .X. Jin, R. Wang, L. Zhang, R. Si, M. Shen, M. Wang, J. Tian and J. Shi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6827–6831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. C. Huang, W. Liu, Z. H. He, C. Xiao, T. Yao, Y. M. Zou, C. M. Wang, Z. M. Qi, W. Tong, B. C. Pan, S. Q. Wei and Y. Xie, Sci. China: Chem., 2018, 61, 1187–1196 CrossRef CAS .X. Gao, W. Ma, J. Mao, C. T. He, W. Ji, Z. Chen, W. Chen, W. Wu, P. Yu and L. Mao, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 15045–15053 RSC .E. X. Yuan, M. X. Zhou, G. J. Shi, P. M. Jian and X. Hou, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 8791–8803 CrossRef CAS .Z. Chen, Y. Chen, S. Chao, X. Dong, W. Chen, J. Luo, C. Liu, D. Wang, C. Chen, W. Li, J. Li and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 1865–1870 CrossRef CAS .X. Q. Feng, J. H. Guo, S. R. Wang, Q. K. Wu and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 17885–17892 RSC .S. B. Tian, W. B. Gong, W. X. Chen, N. Lin, Y. Q. Zhu, Q. C. Feng, Q. Xu, Q. Fu, C. Chen, J. Luo, W. S. Yan, H. J. Zhao, D. S. Wang and Y. D. Li, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 5223–5230 CrossRef CAS .L. P. Liu, X. Wu, L. Wang, X. J. Xu, L. Gan, Z. C. Si, J. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. X. Liu, Y. Y. Zhao, R. Ran, X. D. Wu, D. Weng and F. Y. Kang, Commun. Chem., 2019, 2, 18 CrossRef .D. Pan, Q. Liu, F. Nichols, R. Mercado, H. L. Kuo, J. Q. Lu, F. Bridges and S. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 629, 591–597 CrossRef PubMed .H. Zhang, Y. Cao, S. Qin, Z. Yang, L. Shangguan, J. He, J. Sun and W. Lei, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 581, 152328 CrossRef CAS .W. H. Wang, N. Z. Shang, J. M. Wang, X. H. Nie, C. C. Du, X. Zhou, X. Cheng, W. Gao, X. Liu, J. Y. Huang, Y. Q. Qiao, S. T. Gao and C. Wang, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 6008–6015 RSC .W. Zhang, Q. Peng, L. Shi, Q. Yao, X. Wang, A. Yu, Z. Chen and Y. Fu, Small, 2019, 15, e1905166 CrossRef PubMed .J. Büker, X. Huang, J. Bitzer, W. Kleist, M. Muhler and B. Peng, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 7863–7875 CrossRef .X. Liu, M. Mateen, X. Cheng, D. Wu, J. Zhang, W. C. Cheong and S. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 12592–12604 CrossRef CAS .S. Z. Wang and J. L. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2023, 321, 122051 CrossRef CAS .H. Li, X. Han, J. J. Li, H. F. Guo, B. L. Lv and F. W. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2022, 328, 133045 CrossRef CAS .X. Xiao, Y. Gao, L. Zhang, J. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Q. Li, H. Bao, J. Zhou, S. Miao, N. Chen, J. Wang, B. Jiang, C. Tian and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2003082 CrossRef PubMed .J. Q. Li, S. Y. Zhao, S. Z. Yang, S. B. Wang, H. Q. Sun, S. P. Jiang, B. Johannessen and S. M. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 3029–3035 RSC .B. Yan, Y. He and G. Yang, Small, 2022, 18, e2107840 CrossRef PubMed .L. Zeng, C. H. Dai, B. Liu and C. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24217–24221 RSC .F. Yu, Q. H. Deng, H. P. Li, Y. G. Xia and W. G. Hou, Appl. Catal., B, 2023, 323, 122180 CrossRef CAS .Z. W. Chen, Y. Y. Bu, L. Wang, X. Wang and J. P. Ao, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 274, 119117 CrossRef CAS .C. Chu, Q. Zhu, Z. Pan, S. Gupta, D. Huang, Y. Du, S. Weon, Y. Wu, C. Muhich, E. Stavitski, K. Domen and J. H. Kim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 6376–6382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. N. Zhan, Y. F. Zhou, C. Liu, X. J. Wang, X. L. Sun, Y. Q. Zhu and J. F. Niu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 286, 120443 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhou, M. Yu, Q. Zhang, X. Sun and J. Niu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 440, 129724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Fang, Z. W. Chen, Y. M. Wei, S. Fang, Z. Dong, Y. P. Zhang, W. B. Li and L. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 925, 166257 CrossRef CAS .J. Bian, Y. Liao, R. Liu, X. An, C. Hu, H. Liu and J. Qu, Water Res., 2022, 218, 118465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. R. Reddy, C. V. Reddy, M. N. Nadagouda, N. P. Shetti, S. Jaesool and T. M. Aminabhavi, J. Environ. Manage., 2019, 238, 25–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. J. Chung, B. I. Lee, J. W. Ko and C. B. Park, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 1560–1565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Li, Y. Wang, C. L. Dong, Y. C. Huang, J. Chen, Z. Zhang, F. Meng, Q. Zhang, Y. Huangfu, D. Zhao, L. Gu and S. Shen, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 3633–3643 RSC .M. D. Capobianco, B. Pattengale, J. Neu and C. A. Schmuttenmaer, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 8873–8879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Xie, D. P. Wang, C. Guo, Y. Liu, Q. Rao, F. Lou, Q. Li, Y. Dong, Q. Li, H. B. Yang and F. X. Hu, Anal. Chem., 2021, 93, 4916–4923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Y. Zhang, Y. S. Fu, Q. Peng, Q. S. Yao, X. Wang, A. P. Yu and Z. W. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 394, 124822 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Yu, H. J. Liang, R. N. Zhan, C. Liu, J. Y. Guo, Y. Sun, L. Xu and J. F. Niu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 287, 120556 CrossRef CAS .J. W. Fu, L. Zhu, K. X. Jiang, K. Liu, Z. H. Wang, X. Q. Qiu, H. M. Li, J. H. Hu, H. Pan, Y. R. Lu, T. S. Chan and M. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 415, 128982 CrossRef CAS .X. H. Liu, Y. C. Deng, L. R. Zheng, M. R. Kesama, C. Tang and Y. F. Zhu, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 5517–5526 CrossRef CAS .X. Liu, D. Huang, C. Lai, L. Qin, S. Liu, M. Zhang and Y. Fu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 629, 417–427 CrossRef PubMed .Z. L. Wang, Y. F. Zhang, Y. C. Yu, M. L. Jia and X. Tao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 593, 153458 CrossRef CAS .S. An, G. Zhang, T. Wang, W. Zhang, K. Li, C. Song, J. T. Miller, S. Miao, J. Wang and X. Guo, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9441–9450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. M. Liu, F. T. He, Y. M. Lu, S. L. Wang, C. C. Zhao, S. J. Wang, X. G. Duan, H. Y. Zhang, X. L. Zhao, H. Q. Sun, J. Q. Zhang and S. B. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 453, 139833 CrossRef CAS .Y. Gu, T. Xu, X. Chen, W. Chen and W. Lu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 131973 CrossRef CAS .M. Yu, C. Liu, X. Sun, J. Lu and J. Niu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 5376–5383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zhou, W. Qin, X. Sun, Y. Zhu and J. Niu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 430, 128419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zhu, Z. Chen, Y. Gao and C. Hu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 394, 122578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Vilé, G. Di Liberto, S. Tosoni, A. Sivo, V. Ruta, M. Nachtegaal, A. H. Clark, S. Agnoli, Y. Zou, A. Savateev, M. Antonietti and G. Pacchioni, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 2947–2958 CrossRef .J. Wang, T. Heil, B. Zhu, C. W. Tung, J. Yu, H. M. Chen, M. Antonietti and S. Cao, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 8584–8593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. L. Wang, Y. F. Wang, Y. P. Feng, Y. Q. Zeng, Z. J. Xie, Q. X. Zhang, Y. H. Su, P. Chen, Y. Liu, K. Yao, W. Y. Lv and G. G. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 510–520 CrossRef CAS .Z. Ding, X. Chen, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 274–281 CAS .J. Feng, H. Gao, L. Zheng, Z. Chen, S. Zeng, C. Jiang, H. Dong, L. Liu, S. Zhang and X. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4341 CrossRef PubMed .Z. Guo, Y. Xie, J. Xiao, Z. J. Zhao, Y. Wang, Z. Xu, Y. Zhang, L. Yin, H. Cao and J. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12005–12010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Y. Li, Z. Y. Song, X. Y. Xiao, L. K. Zhang, H. Q. Huang, W. Q. Liu and X. J. Huang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 435, 129009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Sun, P. Zhang, W. Chen, K. Wang, X. Fu, T. Zheng and J. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 798–801 RSC .W. Wei, J. Q. Luo, S. J. Liu, Y. M. Zhou and J. G. Ma, J. Solid State Chem., 2022, 312, 123160 CrossRef CAS .L. Su, P. Wang, X. Ma, J. Wang and S. Zhan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 21261–21266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. B. Cao, J. Wang, J. H. Kim, Z. Guo, J. D. Xiao, J. Yang, J. J. Chang, Y. C. Shi and Y. B. Xie, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 296, 120362 CrossRef CAS .Y. Z. Zhang, X. Chen, C. Liang, L. F. Yin and Y. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 315, 121536 CrossRef CAS .X. Chen, J. Zhang, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11658–11659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. H. Liu, W. Q. Guo, Q. S. Si, W. R. Jia, S. S. Zheng, H. Z. Wang, Q. Zhao, H. C. Luo, J. Jiang and N. Q. Ren, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 446, 137277 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xiong, W. M. Sun, Y. H. Han, P. Y. Xin, X. S. Zheng, W. S. Yan, J. C. Dong, J. Zhang, D. S. Wang and Y. D. Li, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 2418–2423 CrossRef CAS .Q. Wang, C. Liu, D. M. Zhou, X. R. Chen, M. Zhang and K. F. Lin, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 439, 135002 CrossRef CAS .J. Xu, X. Zheng, Z. Feng, Z. Lu, Z. Zhang, W. Huang, Y. Li, D. Vuckovic, Y. Li, S. Dai, G. Chen, K. Wang, H. Wang, J. K. Chen, W. Mitch and Y. Cui, Nat. Sustain., 2021, 4, 233–241 CrossRef PubMed .J. Liu, H. He, Z. Shen, H. H. Wang and W. Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 429, 128398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Liu, X. Li, Z. Ma, M. Sun, M. Li, Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, Z. Tang, Y. Yao, B. Huang and S. Guo, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 10284–10291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Y. Zhao, Y. Cheng, J. P. Veder, B. Johannessen, M. Saunders, L. J. Zhang, C. Liu, M. F. Chisholm, R. De Marco, J. Liu, S. Z. Yang and S. P. Jiang, ACS Appl.
Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 5286–5297 CAS .B. Kumru, D. Cruz, T. Heil and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 9435–9443 CrossRef CAS .K. L. Wang, Y. Li, T. Sun, F. Mao, J. K. Wu and B. Xue, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 476, 741–748 CrossRef CAS .X. Li, Z. Hu, Q. Li, M. Lei, J. Fan, S. A. C. Carabineiro, Y. Liu and K. Lv, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 14195–14198 RSC .X. Lu, K. Xu, S. Tao, Z. Shao, X. Peng, W. Bi, P. Chen, H. Ding, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1462–1467 RSC .Z. Y. Wang, M. J. Chen, Y. Huang, X. J. Shi, Y. F. Zhang, T. T. Huang, J. J. Cao, W. K. Ho and S. C. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 352–361 CrossRef CAS .C. Hu, J. Hu, Z. Zhu, Y. Lu, S. Chu, T. Ma, Y. Zhang and H. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202212397 CAS .G. Zhao, W. Li, H. Zhang, W. Wang and Y. Ren, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 132937 CrossRef CAS .J. Xin, F. Li, Z. Li, J. Zhao and Y. Wang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2022, 9, 302–309 RSC .Z. Wang, W. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Yuan, Q. Wu and H. Hu, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 305, 121049 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Wu, J. M. Chen, Y. Huang, K. Feng, J. Deng, W. Huang, Y. L. Wu, J. Zhong and Y. G. Li, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 1875–1880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Liang, W. Zhang, Z. Zhao, W. Liu, J. Ye, M. Tong and Y. Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 416, 125936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. S. Zhang, X. H. Jiang, Z. A. Zhong, L. Tian, Q. Sun, Y. T. Cui, X. Lu, J. P. Zou and S. L. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 21751–21755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Huang, B. Hu, S. Zhao, S. Zhang, M. Wang, Q. Jia, L. He, Z. Zhang and M. Du, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 132933 CrossRef CAS .C. Zhu, Y. Nie, F. Cun, Y. Wang, Z. Tian and F. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 319, 121900 CrossRef CAS .Z. W. Zhao, W. Zhang, W. Liu, Y. Y. Li, J. Y. Ye, J. L. Liang and M. P. Tong, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 407, 127167 CrossRef CAS .T. Luo, X. F. Hu, Z. Z. She, J. S. Wei, X. Feng and F. Chang, J. Mol. Liq., 2021, 324, 114772 CrossRef CAS .N. K. Wagh, S. S. Shinde, C. H. Lee, J. Y. Jung, D. H. Kim, S. H. Kim, C. Lin, S. U. Lee and J. H. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118746 CrossRef CAS .C. C. Wu, X. M. Zhang, Z. X. Xia, M. Shu, H. Q. Li, X. L. Xu, R. Si, A. I. Rykov, J. H. Wang, S. S. Yu, S. L. Wang and G. Q. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14001–14010 RSC .A. Rogolino, I. F. Silva, N. V. Tarakina, M. A. R. da Silva, G. Rocha, M. Antonietti and I. F. Teixeira, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 49820–49829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. A. R. da Silva, J. C. Gil, N. V. Tarakina, G. Silva, J. B. G. Filho, K. Krambrock, M. Antonietti, C. Ribeiro and I. F. Teixeira, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 7419–7422 RSC .Y. Fan, X. Gan, H. Zhao, Z. Zeng, W. You and X. Quan, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 131572 CrossRef CAS .Y. J. Wang, D. J. Xie, G. Wang, Y. S. Wu, R. Shi, C. Zhou, X. F. Meng and T. R. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2022, 104, 107938 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Bott-Neto, T. S. Martins, L. A. Buscaglia, S. A. S. Machado and O. N. Oliveira, Jr., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 22114–22121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .I. Bilecka and M. Niederberger, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1358–1374 RSC .R. Gedye, F. Smith, K. Westaway, H. Ali, L. Baldisera, L. Laberge and J. Rousell, Tetrahedron Lett., 1986, 27, 279–282 CrossRef CAS .R. J. Giguere, T. L. Bray, S. M. Duncan and G. Majetich, Tetrahedron Lett., 1986, 27, 4945–4948 CrossRef CAS .H. Fei, J. Dong, C. Wan, Z. Zhao, X. Xu, Z. Lin, Y. Wang, H. Liu, K. Zang, J. Luo, S. Zhao, W. Hu, W. Yan, I. Shakir, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1802146 CrossRef PubMed .S. Büchele, Z. Chen, S. Mitchell, R. Hauert, F. Krumeich and J. Pérez-Ramírez, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 2812–2820 CrossRef .P. P. Huang, J. H. Huang, J. Y. Li, L. Zhang, J. He, C. A. Caputo, A. I. Frenkel and G. H. Li, ChemNanoMat, 2021, 7, 1051–1056 CrossRef CAS .G. Vilé, P. Sharma, M. Nachtegaal, F. Tollini, D. Moscatelli, A. Sroka-Bartnicka, O. Tomanec, M. Petr, J. Filip, I. S. Pieta, R. Zbořil and M. B. Gawande, Solar RRL, 2021, 5, 2100176 CrossRef .V. Ruta, A. Sivo, L. Bonetti, M. A. Bajada and G. Vile, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2022, 5, 14520–14528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Lu, J. W. Elam and P. C. Stair, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1806–1815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Suntola and J. Hyvarinen, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1985, 15, 177–195 CrossRef CAS .N. C. Cheng and X. L. Sun, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1508–1514 CrossRef CAS .S. T. Christensen, J. W. Elam, F. A. Rabuffetti, Q. Ma, S. J. Weigand, B. Lee, S. Seifert, P. C. Stair, K. R. Poeppelmeier, M. C. Hersam and M. J. Bedzyk, Small, 2009, 5, 750–757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Wenderich and G. Mul, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14587–14619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Y. Liu, X. X. Liu, D. Q. Fu, Z. R. Xie, X. L. Zou, W. R. Liu, Y. Y. Yu, J. H. Wang, H. Q. Wang, C. B. Tong, Z. M. Cheng, S. M. Wu, K. J. Ding and Y. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 318, 121896 CrossRef CAS .P. Liu, Y. Zhao, R. Qin, S. Mo, G. Chen, L. Gu, D. M. Chevrier, P. Zhang, Q. Guo, D. Zang, B. Wu, G. Fu and N. Zheng, Science, 2016, 352, 797–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Q. Zhu, T. Wang, T. Xu, Y. X. Li and C. Y. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 464, 36–42 CrossRef CAS .L. Z. Wang, R. Tang, A. Kheradmand, Y. J. Jiang, H. Wang, W. J. Yang, Z. B. Chen, X. Zhong, S. P. Ringer, X. Z. Liao, W. B. Liang and J. Huang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 284, 119759 CrossRef CAS .Y. Huang, D. Li, S. Feng, Y. Jia, S. Guo, X. Wu, M. Chen and W. Shi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202212234 CAS .L. L. Bai, H. Sun, Q. Wu and W. F. Yao, ChemCatChem, 2022, 14, e202101954 CrossRef CAS .Y. Chen, H. Zou, B. Yan, X. Wu, W. Cao, Y. Qian, L. Zheng and G. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, e2103977 CrossRef PubMed .Z. Shixuan, L. Donghao, J. Jiwei, F. Li and T. Hua, Electrochim. Acta, 2023, 437, 141543 CrossRef .J. H. Zhang, W. Yang, M. Zhang, H. J. Wang, R. Si, D. C. Zhong and T. B. Lu, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105542 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhao, Y. Sun and F. Dong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15–37 RSC .N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Mettenbörger, Y. Gönüllü, T. Fischer, T. Heisig, A. Sasinska, C. Maccato, G. Carraro, C. Sada, D. Barreca and L. Mayrhofer, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 415–427 CrossRef .Y. Li, X. Cheng, X. Ruan, H. Song, Z. Lou, Z. Ye and L. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 775–784 CrossRef CAS .I. F. Teixeira, N. V. Tarakina, I. F. Silva, N. Lopez-Salas, A. Savateev and M. Antonietti, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2022, 6, 2100429 CrossRef CAS .H. Yan, Y. Chen and S. Xu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 125–133 CrossRef CAS .S. Cao and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2101–2107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. J. Ding, X. X. Sun, Q. Wang, D. S. Li, X. Y. Li, X. X. Li, L. Chen, X. Zhang, X. Y. Tian and K. Ostrikov, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 873, 159871 CrossRef CAS .M. Ou, S. Wan, Q. Zhong, S. Zhang and Y. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 27043–27054 CrossRef CAS .Z. A. Zhong, L. S. Chen, L. S. Zhang, F. Y. Wu, X. H. Jiang, H. Y. Liu, F. R. Lv, H. Y. Xie, F. Q. Meng, L. L. Zheng and J. P. Zou, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2022, 33, 3061–3064 CrossRef CAS .C. Z. Wu, S. Y. Xue, Z. J. Qin, M. Nazari, G. Yang, S. Yue, T. Tong, H. Ghasemi, F. C. R. Hernandez, S. C. Xue, D. Zhang, H. Y. Wang, Z. M. M. Wang, S. Y. Pu and J. M. Bao, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 282, 119557 CrossRef CAS .P. An, W. Zhu, L. Qiao, S. Sun, Y. Xu, D. Jiang, M. Chen and S. Meng, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 2414–2425 RSC .C. J. Wang, J. Xie, N. Chen, W. F. Chen, P. H. Bai and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 13796–13802 CrossRef CAS .C. H. Choi, L. H. Lin, S. Gim, S. Lee, H. Kim, X. C. Wang and W. Choi, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4241–4256 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Xie, R. X. Jin, A. Li, Y. P. Bi, Q. S. Ruan, Y. C. Deng, Y. J. Zhang, S. Y. Yao, G. Sankar, D. Ma and J. W. Tang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 889–896 CrossRef CAS .T. W. He, A. R. Puente-Santiago, S. Y. Xia, M. A. Ahsan, G. B. Xu and R. Luque, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2200493 CrossRef CAS .M. Yu, H. Liang, R. Zhan, C. Liu, J. Guo, Y. Sun, L. Xu and J. Niu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 287, 120556 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, Z. Wang, T. Xia, H. Ju, K. Zhang, R. Long, Q. Xu, C. Wang, L. Song, J. Zhu, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6959–6965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Zhong, L. Chen, L. Zhang, F. Wu, X. Jiang, H. Liu, F. Lv, H. Xie, F. Meng, L. Zheng and J. Zou, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2022, 33, 3061–3064 CrossRef CAS .J. Shen, C. Luo, S. Qiao, Y. Chen, Y. Tang, J. Xu, K. Fu, D. Yuan, H. Tang, H. Zhang and C. Liu, ACS Catal., 2023, 6280–6288,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.2c05789 .M. Yang, J. Mei, Y. Ren, J. Cui, S. Liang and S. Sun, J. Energy Chem., 2023, 81, 502–509 CrossRef CAS .G. Wang, Y. Ma, T. Zhang, Y. Liu, B. Wang, R. Zhang and Z. Zhao, Small, 2023, 19, 2205758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y.-C. Huang, Y. Li, K. T. Arul, T. Ohigashi, T. T. T. Nga, Y.-R. Lu, C.-L. Chen, J.-L. Chen, S. Shen, W.-F. Pong, C.-L. Dong and W.-C. Chou, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2023, 11, 5390–5399 CrossRef CAS .D. Sun, Y. Chen, X. Yu, Y. Yin and G. Tian, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 462, 142084 CrossRef CAS .P. Zhou, F. Lv, N. Li, Y. Zhang, Z. Mu, Y. Tang, J. Lai, Y. Chao, M. Luo, F. Lin, J. Zhou, D. Su and S. Guo, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 127–137 CrossRef CAS .S. Fawzy, A. I. Osman, J. Doran and D. W. Rooney, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2020, 18, 2069–2094 CrossRef CAS .R. York and S. E. Bell, Energy Res. Soc. Sci., 2019, 51, 40–43 CrossRef .A. J. Ragauskas, C. K. Williams, B. H. Davison, G. Britovsek, J. Cairney, C. A. Eckert, W. J. Frederick, Jr., J. P. Hallett, D. J. Leak, C. L. Liotta, J. R. Mielenz, R. Murphy, R. Templer and T. Tschaplinski, Science, 2006, 311, 484–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. L. Tan, W. J. Ong, S. P. Chai and A. R. Mohamed, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 166, 251–259 CrossRef .X. X. Chang, T. Wang and J. L. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2177–2196 RSC .G. H. Dong and L. Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1160–1166 RSC .Y. Fang and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 5674–5687 RSC .G. Gao, Y. Jiao, E. R. Waclawik and A. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6292–6297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Posada-Pérez, A. Vidal-López, M. Solà and A. Poater, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 8574–8582 RSC .R. Y. Zhang, P. H. Li, F. Wang, L. Q. Ye, A. Gaur, Z. A. Huang, Z. Y. Zhao, Y. Bai and Y. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 250, 273–279 CrossRef CAS .S. Tang, X. Yin, G. Wang, X. Lu and T. Lu, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 457–462 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, Y. Song, C. Zuo, R. Li, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang and B. Wu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 625, 722–733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Ma, Z. Huang, L. Li, W. Zhang, R. Guo, R. Zhang, W. Fa, C. Han, Y. Cao, S. Yu and Y. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2023, 330, 122626 CrossRef CAS .W. Xie, K. Li, X.-H. Liu, X. Zhang and H. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2023, 35, 2208132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Luo, H. Han, X. Wang, X. Qiu, B. Liu, Y. Lai, X. Chen, R. Zhong, L. Wang and C. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2023, 328, 122495 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Luo, C. Zhang, E. Almatrafi, M. Yan, Y. Liu, Y. K. Fu, Z. W. Wang, L. Li, C. Y. Zhou, P. A. Xu, Z. F. Liu and G. M. Zeng, Appl. Mater. Today, 2021, 24, 101118 CrossRef .R. R. Jin, S. Z. Hu, J. Z. Gui and D. Liu, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2015, 36, 17–23 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, Y. Li, X. Bai, Q. Cai, C. Liu, Y. Zuo, S. Kang and L. Cui, Catal. Commun., 2016, 84, 179–182 CrossRef CAS .S. F. An, G. H. Zhang, J. Q. Liu, K. Y. Li, G. Wan, Y. Liang, D. H. Ji, J. T. Miller, C. S. Song, W. Liu, Z. M. Liu and X. W. Guo, Chin. J. Catal., 2020, 41, 1198–1207 CrossRef CAS .H. Lu, X. R. Li, F. Li, X. Q. Xu, R. Zhao, C. Y. Xiong, Q. Hu, Z. Q. Miao and M. Tian, J. Mol. Liq., 2022, 352, 118655 CrossRef CAS .Y. Oh, J. O. Hwang, E.-S. Lee, M. Yoon, V.-D. Le, Y.-H. Kim, D. H. Kim and S. O. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25438–25443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Ling, G. Z. Liao, P. Xu and L. S. Li, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 216, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .F. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Feng, Y. Zeng, Z. Xie, Q. Zhang, Y. Su, P. Chen, Y. Liu, K. Yao, W. Lv and G. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 510–520 CrossRef CAS .Y. B. Wang, X. Zhao, D. Cao, Y. Wang and Y. F. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 211, 79–88 CrossRef CAS .H. Xu, C. Qian, X. Tan, W. Xia and Y. Wu, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2022, 145, 109958 CrossRef CAS .F. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Li, X. Cui, Q. Zhang, Z. Xie, H. Liu, Y. Feng, W. Lv and G. Liu, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 6924–6933 RSC .C. Lai, D. Ma, H. Yi, M. Zhang, F. Xu, X. Huo, H. Ye, L. Li, L. Yang, L. Tang and M. Yan, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2023, 306, 122546 CrossRef CAS .Y. Gu, Z. Zhou, Z. Lin, X. Liu, T. Xu, W. Chen and W. Lu, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 455, 140759 CrossRef CAS .J. K. Lin, W. J. Tian, Z. Y. Guan, H. Y. Zhang, X. G. Duan, H. Wang, H. Q. Sun, Y. F. Fang, Y. P. Huang and S. B. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2201743 CrossRef CAS .W. H. Chu, W. M. Wang, Y. Deng and C. Peng, Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2022, 8, 2819–2842 RSC .R. P. Gaikwad, D. R. Naikwadi, A. V. Biradar and M. B. Gawande, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2023, 6, 1859–1869 CrossRef CAS .W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S. T. Yong and S. P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Sano, S. Tsutsui, K. Koike, T. Hirakawa, Y. Teramoto, N. Negishi and K. Takeuchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6489–6496 RSC .J. W. Erisman, M. A. Sutton, J. Galloway, Z. Klimont and W. Winiwarter, Nat. Geosci., 2008, 1, 636–639 CrossRef CAS .C. Smith, A. K. Hill and L. Torrente-Murciano, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 331–344 RSC .Y. Tanabe and Y. Nishibayashi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 2551–2564 CrossRef CAS .F. Jiao and B. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1805173 CrossRef PubMed .S. Zhang, Y. X. Zhao, R. Shi, G. I. N. Waterhouse and T. R. Zhang, EnergyChem, 2019, 1, 100013 CrossRef .L. Wang, M. K. Xia, H. Wang, K. F. Huang, C. X. Qian, C. T. Maravelias and G. A. Ozin, Joule, 2018, 2, 1055–1074 CrossRef CAS .Z. H. Wang, X. Hu, Z. Z. Liu, G. J. Zou, G. N. Wang and K. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10260–10278 CrossRef CAS .S. Hu, X. Chen, Q. Li, F. Li, Z. Fan, H. Wang, Y. Wang, B. Zheng and G. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 201, 58–69 CrossRef CAS .C. K. Yao, R. Wang, Z. S. Wang, H. Lei, X. P. Dong and C. Z. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 27547–27559 RSC .K. Wang, G. Gu, S. Hu, J. Zhang, X. Sun, F. Wang, P. Li, Y. Zhao, Z. Fan and X. Zou, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 368, 896–904 CrossRef CAS .J. Li, P. Liu, Y. Tang, H. Huang, H. Cui, D. Mei and C. Zhong, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 2431–2442 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhang, K. P. Rakesh, L. Ravindar and H. L. Qin, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 4790–4833 RSC .L. Q. Xiong and J. W. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003216 CrossRef CAS .S. Gisbertz and B. Pieber, ChemPhotoChem, 2020, 4, 456–475 CrossRef CAS .M. Zhang, Y. G. Wang, W. Chen, J. Dong, L. Zheng, J. Luo, J. Wan, S. Tian, W. C. Cheong, D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10976–10979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. J. Lu, J. C. Wu, B. Y. Yang, D. X. Yu, Z. Y. Yu, Y. D. Hou and J. S. Zhang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 9192–9199 CrossRef CAS .J. Ding, Z. Teng, X. Su, K. Kato, Y. Liu, T. Xiao, W. Liu, L. Liu, Q. Zhang, X. Ren, J. Zhang, Z. Chen, O. Teruhisa, A. Yamakata, H. Yang, Y. Huang, B. Liu and Y. Zhai, Chem, 2023, 9, 1017–1035 CAS .T. Zhang, D. Zhang, X. Han, T. Dong, X. Guo, C. Song, R. Si, W. Liu, Y. Liu and Z. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16936–16940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Chu, Y. Qu, A. Zada, L. Bai, Z. Li, F. Yang, L. Zhao, G. Zhang, X. Sun, Z. D. Yang and L. Jing, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2001543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Zhao, C. Y. Deng, D. Meng, H. W. Ji, C. C. Chen, W. J. Song and J. C. Zhao, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 15178–15185 CrossRef CAS .A. Vijeta, C. Casadevall, S. Roy and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 8494–8499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Wen, X. Yang, Z. Sun, J. Yang, P. Han, Q. Liu, H. Dong, M. Gu, L. Huang and H. Wang, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 230–237 RSC .C. Zhuang, W. Li, T. Zhang, J. Li, Y. Zhang, G. Chen, H. Li, Z. Kang, J. Zou and X. Han, Nano Energy, 2023, 108, 108225 CrossRef CAS .M. Zhang, C. Lai, F. Xu, D. Huang, T. Hu, B. Li, D. Ma, S. Liu, Y. Fu, L. Li, L. Tang and L. Chen, Small, 2023, 2301817 CrossRef PubMed .T. Jia, D. Meng, R. Duan, H. Ji, H. Sheng, C. Chen, J. Li, W. Song and J. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2023, 62, e202216511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Zhang, J. W. Zhao, Y. J. Lv, C. W. Huang, Y. Y. Wang, Q. Gu and Z. W. Gao, Chem. Mater., 2022, 34, 10982–10994 CrossRef CAS .G. Giannakakis, S. Mitchell and J. Perez-Ramirez, Trends Chem., 2022, 4, 264–276 CrossRef CAS .H. Hu and J. Xi, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2022, 107959,  DOI:10.1016/j.cclet.2022.107959 .G. Vilé, S. Wrabetz, L. Floryan, M. E. Schuster, F. Girgsdies, D. Teschner and J. Pérez-Ramírez, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1928–1934 CrossRef .G. Vile and J. Perez-Ramirez, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13476–13482 RSC .V. M. Akhmedov, N. E. Melnikova, V. M. Akhmedov and D. B. Tagiyev, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2022, 71, 276–282 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao, M. Zhu and L. Kang, Catal. Lett., 2018, 148, 2992–3002 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Climent, A. Corma and S. Iborra, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 1072–1133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. N. Lin, Y. X. Zhang, Y. F. Zhu, Y. P. Zou, Y. J. Hu, X. H. Du, H. S. Xie, K. Wang and Y. H. Zhou, Catal. Commun., 2020, 144, 106094 CrossRef CAS .C. Mondelli, B. Puertolas, M. Ackermann, Z. Chen and J. Perez-Ramirez, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 2859–2869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Eid, M. H. Sliem, H. Al-Kandari, M. A. Sharaf and A. M. Abdullah, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 3421–3431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Yang, X. Mao, Y. Zhang, X. Wu, L. Wang, M. Chu, C. W. Pao, S. Yang, Y. Xu and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 6022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Homlamai, T. Maihom, S. Choomwattana, M. Sawangphruk and J. Limtrakul, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 499, 143928 CrossRef CAS .C. L. Wang, B. Y. Ye, R. R. Zhou, Y. Y. Jiang and Z. Y. Hou, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2022, 5, 13601–13611 CrossRef CAS .N. Kong, X. Fan, F. Liu, L. Wang, H. Lin, Y. Li and S. T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 5772–5779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. K. Wang, S. S. Chai, P. P. Li, Y. J. Yang and X. Wang, Catal. Lett., 2022, 153, 1120–1129 CrossRef .L. W. Guo, P. P. Du, X. P. Fu, C. Ma, J. Zeng, R. Si, Y. Y. Huang, C. J. Jia, Y. W. Zhang and C. H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. L. Li, H. Yin, X. Kan, L. Y. Gan, U. Schwingenschlogl and Y. Zhao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 30069–30077 RSC .S. Wang, J. Li, Q. Li, X. Bai and J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 364–371 RSC .M. Jian, C. Zhao and W. X. Li, ChemPhysChem, 2020, 21, 2417–2425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. D. Ding, W. T. Wang, T. Jiang, B. X. Han, H. L. Fan and G. Y. Yang, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 192–200 CrossRef CAS .M. Xie, J. C. Tang, L. S. Kong, W. H. Lu, V. Natarajan, F. Zhu and J. H. Zhan, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 360, 1213–1222 CrossRef CAS .D. A. F. Gonçalves, M. V. B. Pinheiro, K. Krambrock, R. R. Resende, B. R. L. Galvão and E. Lorençon, Chem. Pap., 2022, 76, 3401–3412 CrossRef .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Guilherme F. S. R Rocha	Guilherme F. S. R. Rocha obtained his BSc in Chemistry from the University of São Paulo (USP) in 2021 and is expected to receive his MSc degree in Inorganic Chemistry in 2024 from the Federal University of São Carlos (UFSCar) under the supervision of Prof. Ivo Teixeira. His research interests include the synthesis of heterogeneous catalysts with a focus on photocatalytic applications for chemical synthesis and energy conversion.
Marcos A. R. da Silva	Marcos A. R. da Silva received his BSc in Chemistry from the Federal University of Pará (UFPA) in 2019 and obtained his master's degree in Inorganic Chemistry from the Federal University of São Carlos (UFSCar) in 2021. Currently, he is a PhD student at the UFSCar and a research fellow at Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation (Embrapa). His research focuses on the development of metal single-atoms coordinated at crystalline carbon nitrides for oxidation reactions, such as C–H functionalization, especially methane conversion to valuable chemicals.
Andrea Rogolino	Andrea Rogolino received his BSc (2020) and MSc (2022) in Chemistry from the University of Padova, Italy, where he was a fellow student at the Galilean School of Higher Education. In 2021, he was a visiting student at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces in Potsdam, Germany. He is currently a PhD candidate in the Reisner Lab at the University of Cambridge. He nurtures a strong passion for every field of Chemistry since his participation in the International Chemistry Olympiads in 2016 and 2017. His actual research interests are photo(electro)chemical devices for solar fuel production.
Gabriel A. A. Diab	Gabriel Ali Atta Diab has a BSc degree in chemistry from the University of Brasília (2021). Currently, he is a PhD candidate at the Federal University of São Carlos (UFSCar), supervised by Prof. Ivo Freitas Teixeira. His research interests focus on investigating heterogeneous photocatalysts applied to energy production, particularly in hydrogen evolution, natural gas photo-oxidation, CO2 reduction, as well as other applications in organic molecule synthesis.
Luís F. G. Noleto	Luis Fernando Guimarães Noleto majored in Chemistry at Universidade Estadual e Federal do Piauí (UESPI/UFPI, Brazil), where he investigated the photocatalytic properties of silver phosphate (Ag3PO4). He is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Ivo F. Teixeira, focusing on the development of catalysts based on crystalline carbon nitride and single-atoms, for applying in photocatalytic production of hydrogen peroxide and ammonia, as well as in the selective hydrogenation of organic compounds.
Ivo F. Teixeira	Ivo Teixeira received his BS in 2012 and his MSc in 2013 from the Federal University of Minas Gerais. He received his PhD from the University of Oxford in 2017. Between 2020 and 2022, Ivo was a Humboldt Fellow at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Potsdam, Germany). He became Assistant Professor at the Federal University of São Carlos (Brazil) in 2019, since then Ivo and 12 students under his supervision have fun every day doing science research. His research interests focus on catalysis, especially heterogeneous catalysis, single-atom catalysis, energy conversion and nanomaterials.

 	Fig. 1  (A) Nitrogen and carbon compounds synthesized by Liebig; (B) carbon nitride basic units: triazine units (top) and heptazine (or tris-s-triazine) units (down). Adapted from ref. 1 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 2  Condensation routes for carbon nitride polymerization under thermal treatment. Adapted from ref. 1 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) High-resolution TEM image of H-PHI clearly revealing lattice fringes over extended areas; (B) SAED pattern and (C) simulated SAED pattern of the [001] zone axis of H-PHI, based on a theoretical trigonal cell model depicted in (D); (E–G) cover the corresponding figures for K-PHI. Insets show the FFT confirming the 6-fold symmetry of the diffraction pattern for H-PHI and the reduced monoclinic layer symmetry for K-PHI, respectively; (H) structural model obtained from Rietveld refinement for K-PHI water molecules inside the pores were omitted for better visibility. Adapted from ref. 26 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019; (I) structure of potassium poly(heptazine imide) (K-PHI). Adapted from ref. 30 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020; PXRD pattern of (J) PCN and (K) K-PHI. Adapted from ref. 40 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A and B) High-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images and magnified regions of HRTEM with overlaps of the DFT-calculated atomic structures of Fe atoms incorporated into a five-atom ring forming a pentagon on graphene; (C and D) high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images and magnified regions of HRTEM with overlaps of the DFT-calculated atomic structures of Fe atoms incorporated into a six-atom ring forming a distorted hexagon. Adapted from ref. 23 with permission from PNAS; (E) schematic illustrations of the homogeneous and heterogeneous palladium catalysts studied in the Suzuki reaction, including Pd deposited on PCN. Adapted from ref. 28 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018; (F) CO2 methanation activity over CeO2-Supported Ru single-atoms, nanoclusters and nanoparticles. Adapted from ref. 31 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018; (G) relative TOF (calculated by the total metal content and normalized to the maximum value) alteration upon decreasing the atomic population of metal NPs (■) to SAs (Δ). Adapted from ref. 48 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 5  Typical diffractogram patterns of sodium poly(heptazine imide) (Na-PHI), lithium poly(heptazine imide) (Li-PTI) and polymeric carbon nitride (PCN).	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Ti K-edge XANES, (B) FT-EXAFS curve and (C) wavelet transform plot produced by Ti single-atoms dispersed in polymeric carbon nitride. Adapted from ref. 5 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2022; (D) Fe K-edge revealing the existence of both iron(II) and iron(III) in the catalyst. Adapted from ref. 19 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018; (E) Sb K-edge FT-EXAFS and DFT optimized model fitting, (F) FT-EXAFS, (G) XANES spectra of Sb atomically dispersed in polymeric carbon nitride. Adapted from ref. 42 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2021; (H) C K-edge and (I) N K-edge of Ag SA supported in polymeric carbon nitride revealing a new signal after the metal insertion. Adapted from ref. 46 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021; (J) Co K-edge XANES experimental of Co on PCN and the calculated for the model where the metal is twofold, fourfold coordinated to N or the same coordinated to C and N. Adapted from ref. 47 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Er L3-edge k3-weighted FT-EXAFS, (B) XANES spectra and (C) wavelet transform (WT) of high-density Er supported, (D) and (E) in situ Er L3-edge XANES spectra of high-density Er SACs during photocatalytic the CO2 reduction reaction. Adapted from ref. 15 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020; (F) K-edge Mo FT-EXAFS, (G) FT-EXAFS fitting curves and (H) optimized DFT calculation model of Mo SA on tubular carbon nitride. Adapted from ref. 35 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022; (I) operando XANES spectra at different applied voltages from the open circuit condition and (J) k3-weighted FT-EXAFS both at the Co K-edge. Adapted from ref. 39 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) AC HAADF-STEM and EDX mapping of monoatomic (Pt, Pd, Ir), (B) binary (Pt/Pd) and (C) ternary (Pt/Pd/Ir) metals atomically immobilized at carbon nitride accompanied by its intensity profile. Adapted from ref. 10 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2022; (D)–(F) AC HR-TEM with different region magnification accompanied by their intensity profile analysis with a different magnification of Co and Ru supported on a polymeric carbon nitride bimetallic catalyst. Adapted from ref. 25 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2021; (G) TEM and HR-TEM, (H) AC HAADF-STEM and (I) EDX mapping images of the loaded Pd single-atoms in PCN where it is clearly possible to see the presence of single-atom coexisting with Pd nanoparticles. Adapted from ref. 3 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 9  DRIFT spectra after CO adsorption on (A) Ni-PHI. Adapted from ref. 38 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019; (B) Pt-ZSM-5 samples with different Pt loadings; (C) time-dependent IR spectra of CO adsorbed on 2.6 wt% Pt/HZSM-5 during the oxidation process. Adapted from ref. 44 with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2015; (D) 27Al MAS-NMR spectra of the support before (black) and after (red) Pt insertion, where it is possible to visualize the reduction of the pentacoordinate Al (anchoring centre). Adapted from ref. 49 with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2009.	 

 	Fig. 10  General synthetic scheme towards CN-based SACs via post-synthetic wet impregnation (right) and direct synthesis wet co-polymerization (left). The latter technique will be discussed in detail in a separate paragraph. Adapted from ref. 12 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Scheme of the synthesis of PtSA–HCNNS (three washing cycles) and PtCL–HCNNS (one washing cycle); STEM–HAADF images of PtSA–HCNNS (B) and PtCL–HCNNS (C). Adapted from ref. 6 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic synthesis of bio-mimicking pyrrolic N-rich M–N4 single-atoms. Adapted from ref. 33 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Schematic synthesis of Pt–MCN-functionalized SnO2 nanofiber-in-tubes (FIT). (B) Dark-field STEM image of Pt–MCN-functionalized SnO2 FIT; (C) STEM–HAADF image of Pt–MCN–SnO2; (D) magnified image of the white dotted region in (C). Adapted from ref. 16 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Zn-PCN; (B) SEM image of the sponge-like Zn-PCN; (C) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms at 77 K and the corresponding pore size distribution curves (inset) of bulk carbon nitride (BCN) and Zn–PCN. Adapted from ref. 32 with permission from Springer, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Schematic diagram of the four-step synthetic protocol for the co-polymerization of CuCl2 and melamine; (B) STEM–HAADF image of Cu–CN obtained through the four-step synthesis. Adapted from ref. 8 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2020; (C) proposed scheme for the synthesis of AgTCM-mpg-CN. Adapted from ref. 20 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016; STEM–HAADF images of Pt mesoporous graphitic CN prepared by (D) wet impregnation and (E) wet co-polymerization. Please note the difference in scale bars. Adapted from ref. 12 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017; (F) scheme of the atom-confinement and coordination method to grow rare earth single-atoms on carbon nitride nanotubes grown on a melamine sponge. (G) STEM–HAADF image of Er-CN with 20.1 wt% lanthanide loading (scale bar: 200 nm) and (H) corresponding Er EDX mapping. Adapted from ref. 15 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Schematic illustration of the preparation of Ag–N2C2/CN via the supramolecular pre-assembly. Adapted from ref. 2 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020; (B) schematic illustration of the fabrication of amorphous hollow tubular g-C3N4 via the wet co-polymerization of AgNO3 and melamine. STEM–HAADF image (C) and corresponding EDS Ag mapping (D) of amorphous hollow tubular g-C3N4 synthesized as in (B). Adapted from ref. 24 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Synthetic scheme for hybrid g-C3N4/CoN4 single-atoms; (B) STEM–HAADF image of the catalyst synthesized as in (A) and (C) corresponding intensity profiles obtained in regions 1 and 2 from (B). Adapted from ref. 11 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic representation of the controlled non-thermal cation exchange method used to replace the Na+ cations in the structure of PHI with Fe3+ cations; (b) HR-TEM image of Fe–PHI (0.1 wt%) and the corresponding fast Fourier transform (left) indexed in a hexagonal lattice; (c) Annular dark-field STEM image of Fe–PHI showing metal single-atoms. Adapted from ref. 43 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 19  Atomic-resolution STEM–HAADF images of (A) 21 wt% (B) 9 wt% and (C) 4 wt% Cu1–C3N4 SACs. Scale bars: (A) 2 nm; (B) and (C) 1 nm; and (D) statistic distribution of the inter-Cu distance in the Cu1–C3N4 SACs from STEM–HAADF images. Adapted from ref. 14 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) Schematic representation of the introduction of palladium by microwave-irradiation-assisted metal deposition. Adapted from ref. 4 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017; (B) AC-STEM–HAADF images of the fresh and used Pd-SACs based on graphitic carbon nitride (GCN), poly(heptazine imide) (PHI) and poly(triazine imide) (PTI). Adapted from ref. 22 with permission from Oxford Academic, copyright 2018; (C) schematic representation of the microwave-assisted deposition of Ni on polymeric carbon nitride; (D) STEM–HAADF image of the synthesized material; and (E) intensity profiles obtained in regions 1 and 2 of the image in (B). Adapted from ref. 29 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) Schematic illustration of a single-atom Pd1/C3N4 catalyst synthesized by ALD from Pd(hfac)2 followed by treatment with formalin; (B) and (C) aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of the single-atom Pd1/C3N4 catalyst at different magnifications. Adapted from ref. 37 with permission from Springer, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 22  (A) Schematic diagram of the electric-field-assisted fabrication process for SACs; (B) STEM–HAADF images of SACs prepared using different metal atoms. Scale bars: 2 nm. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022; (C) scheme of the “chemical scissors” strategy applied to Pd deposition on polymeric carbon nitride; and (D) XRD and (E) XPS characterization of Pdh–PCN, Pd1–PCN and Pdp–PCN. Pd1–PCN clearly exhibited no signal from Pd NP or metallic atoms. Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 23  Representative ultrafast transient absorption (TA) kinetics probed at 750 nm (pump at 400 nm) for (A) g-C3N4; (B) PtSingle-Atom/g-C3N4 and (C) Pt NPs/g-C3N4. (D) Schematic model of PtSingle-Atom/g-C3N4 and photocatalytic comparison with Pt NPs/g-C3N4; (E) schematic illustration of the mechanisms which led to a longer lifetime of photogenerated electrons. Adapted with permission from ref. 21 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 24  Schematic diagram comparing the enhancement effect during the water-splitting reaction by Ag–N2C2/CN with pure CN. Adapted from ref. 2 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 25  (A) TEM and (B) HR-TEM images synthesized SA catalysts (Ni/C3N4Fs-3). (C) TEM, SEM (inset) and (D) HR-TEM of the Ni/C3N4Fs-3 catalyst modified on the surface with NiP. (E) Schematic illustration for the electron transfer mechanism where e− moves from bulk to surface aided by Ni-SA, and h+ move transversally through the C3N4 framework. Adapted from ref. 45 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2023.	 

 	Fig. 26  (A) Schematic illustration and (B) band structure of proposed reaction mechanism for overall water splitting over Zn–PCN. Adapted with permission from ref. 32 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2022.	 

g-C3N4	—	0.1 g	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA and methanol aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	0.1–4	<0.1%	100
SA–Cu–TCN	0.3 wt% Cu	0.02 g	100 mL of 15 vol% methanol aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 10600	9.2% (420 nm)	383
1 wt% Pt
Pd/C3N4	0.1 wt% Pd	0.1 g	100 mL of 20 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	H2: 728	N/A	374
U-1Ru/3DpCN	1 wt% Ru	0.025 g	50 mL of 20 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	H2: 2945.47	9.5% (420 nm)	487
CCN-SANi	0.12 wt%	0.01 g	80 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 511	N/A	312
K1Na1/pCN	5.5 wt% K	0.05 g	100 mL of 20 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>380 nm)	H2: 4561	21.8% (420 nm)	492
1.3 wt% Na
1 wt% Pt
Co–CCN/PTI	1 wt% Pt	0.05 g	30 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 3538	20.88% (425 nm)	290
0.4 wt% Co
Co1/PCN	1 wt% Co	0.05 g	100 mL of 20 vol% TEOA aqueous solution;	300 W Xe lamp (>300 nm)	H2: 9.1	3.02% (450 nm)	47
Pt/C3N4	0.32 wt% Pt	0.05 g	80 mL of 25 vol% methanol aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	H2: 14740	38.8% (435 nm)	328
NiP/C3N4Fs	3.98 wt% Ni	0.03 g	100 mL deionized H2O	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 1890	12.5% (420 nm)	45
O2: 920
Co1/2DPCN	0.8 wt% Co	0.01 g	50 mL of TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 138600	1.38% (420 nm)	380
0.75 wt% Pt
SAAg–g-CN	1 wt% Ag	0.05 g	120 mL of 25 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp	H2: 498	N/A	46
CN–0.2Ni–HO	2.2 wt% Ni	0.025 g	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp	H2: 354.9	N/A	367
Ru1-t-CN	0.78 wt% Ru	0.03 g	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (> 300 nm)	H2: 4052.1	3.8%	363
Zn–PCN	4.79 wt% Zn	0.01 g	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 35.1	N/A	32
O2: 17.3
Pt–CN	0.74 wt% Pt	0.01 g	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	30 W LED (λ = 520 nm)	H2: 34.2	0.84%	286
Pd/DN-UCN	0.16 wt% Pd	0.005 g	25 mL of 15 vol% methanol aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp	H2: 441.6	15.8% (400 nm)	324
g-C3N4–Pt2+	0.18 wt% Pt	0.1 g	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2 604.9	N/A	493
Pt/g-C3N4	1.4 wt% Pt	0.001 g	20 mL of 20 vol% methanol aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp	H2: 46.2	(400 nm)	486
O2: 18.7
Fe@g-C3N4	0.5 at% Fe	0.05 g	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 3390	6.89% (420 nm)	378
3 vol% H2PtCl4
AgTCM-mpg-CN	1 wt% Ag	0.05 g	38 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	50 white LED (>420 nm)	H2: 103	N/A	20
3% Pt
Pt/g-C3N4	0.5 wt% Pt	0.01 g	100 mL of 20 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 115080	N/A	483
Cu/CN	1.49 at% Cu	0.002 g	20 mL of 30 vol% methanol aqueous solution	LED (λ = 427 nm)	H2: 3774.3	1.37% (427 nm)	488
Mo1@CNNTs	0.53 wt% Mo	0.01 g	50 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 4861	4.88% (420 nm)	316
1 wt% Pt
GCN	0.015 wt% Ga	0.05 g	10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 9904	10.3% (380 nm)	339
Ag–N2C2/CN	3.7 wt% Ag	0.02 g	80 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 1866	N/A	2
Pt–SA/CN	0.11 wt% Pt	0.03 g	200 mL of 10 vol% methanol aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (> 300 nm)	H2: 1403	N/A	331
PA-Ni@PCN/Pt-SAC	0.22 wt% Pt	1 g	50 mL ultrapure H2O	300 W Xe lamp (>800 nm)	H2: 0.06	N/A	312
O2: 0.03
Pt–CNNT	0.05 wt% Pt	0.01 g	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 918 (TOF)	N/A	494
Al-aa_PCN	0.32 wt% Al	0.05 g	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 1190	6.2% (420 nm)	489
3 wt% Pt
Pt SAs/C3N4	0.91 wt% Pt	0.05 g	100 mL of 20 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp	H2: 11472	N/A	332
Ru–g-CN	0.24 wt% Ru	0.075 g	150 mL of 10 vol% methanol aqueous solution	Near-UV LEDs (λmax = 427 nm)	H2: 489.7	N/A	338
Pd/g-CN	0.33 wt% Pt	0.05 g	80 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	Solar simulator	H2: 6688	4% (420 nm)	256
Pt–SA–CN	0.2 wt% Pt	0.02 g	50 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 1224	N/A	484
WSA–CN–PUNS	0.33 wt% W	0.01 g	20 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 3020	4.11% (420 nm)	296
1 wt% Pt
Co–PCN	0.75 wt% Co	0.05 g	80 mL of a 0.1 M AgNO3 aqueous solution	200 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	O2: 37.3	4.69% (400 nm)	305
PCNNi	1 wt% Ni	0.03 g	80 mL of deionized H2O	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 26.6	1.52% (380 nm)	396
H2O2: 24
SAVCN	1.586 wt% V	0.02 g	TEOA aqueous solution	Four 3 W LEDs (λ = 420 nm and 495 nm)	H2: 5102 (420 nm)	17.32% (420 nm)	311
1 wt% Pt	2951 (495 nm)
SA–Pt/(g-C3N4)	8.7 wt% Pt	0.01 g	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 22650	22.5% (420 nm)	333
Co1–phosphide/PCN	0.4 wt% Co	0.02	100 mL of deionized H2O	300 W Xe lamp	H2: 410.3	3.6% (420 nm)	306
O2: 204.6
Pt–CN	0.075 wt% Pt	0.05 g	200 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp	H2: 4.0 (mmol h−1 mgPt−1)	N/A	21
SA–Cu–CN	4.26 wt% Cu	0.01 g	80 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 11230	31.6% (420 nm)	495
1 wt% Pt
Pt1–Co1/CN	0.27 wt% Co	0.03 g	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 1880	N/A	496
0.21 wt% Pt
NiN2S/SA–CN	0.74 wt% Ni	0.01 g	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 1095	4.1% (420 nm)	497
SR–g-C3N4–Ni	1.0 wt% Ni	N/A	Deionized H2O	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	H2: 26.65	N/A	498
H2O2: 23.95
Ce–SA–C3N4	0.26 wt% Ce	0.03 g	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	33500	32.6% (420 nm)	499
1.0 wt% Pt
PtII−C3N4	N/A	0.03 g	100 mL of deionized H2O	300 W Xe lamp	H2: 140	(420 nm)	285
O2: 46
PtSA–CN	1.72 wt% Pt	0.02 g	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 174500	(420 nm)	500
Co/P/CN-sc	3 wt% Pt	0.02 g	50 mL of 20 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	H2: 3740.4	N/A	307

 	Fig. 27  In situ DRIFTS spectra of CO2 interact with PtCu–crCN in different frequency ranges (A) 2500–2000 cm−1 and (B) 3200–3900 cm−1. (C) Schematic representation of CO2 reduction on PtCu–crCN. Adapted from ref. 9 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022; (D) photocatalytic activities of the dual single-atom system Mn–Co representing their synergy for CO2 reduction; (E) comparative experiment with single-atoms sites being utilized for H2O oxidation; and (F) similar comparison where samples of single-atom catalysts are tested individually for the CO2 reduction reaction. Adapted from ref. 27 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2022.	 

g-C3N4	—	0.20 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	100 mL of a 1 M NaOH aqueous solution	CH3OH: 6.28	0.18	129
C2H5OH: 4.51
O/La-CN	N/A	0.01 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	12 mL of a 3:2:1 mixture solution (CH3CN:H2O:TEOA)	CO: 92	N/A	340
CH4: 5.6
Co2+@C3N4	0.75 wt%	0.001 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	4 mL of a 4:1 (v/v) CH3CN:TEOA solution	CO: 528	0.084	303
Er1/CN-NT	20.1 wt%	0.02 g	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	4 mL deionized H2O	CO: 47.11	N/A	15
CH4: 2.5
2D TiO–CN	N/A	0.003 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	5 mL of a 3:1:1 mixture solution (CH3CN:TEOA:H2O)	CO: 283.9	N/A	511
U-ACN	N/A	0.03 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	N/A	CO: 8.68	N/A	287
CH4: 0.961
PCN–RuCu	2.44 wt% Cu	0.01 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	9 mL of a NaHCO3 (3 M) aqueous solution	CH4: 19.25	N/A	323
0.6 wt% Ru	1 mL TEOA	CO: 0.25
FeN4/K–g-C3N4	N/A	0.03 g	300 W Xe lamp (280 mW cm−2) (>420 nm)	80 mL of a 0.075 M KOH aqueous solution	CO: 20	2.7	299
g-C3N4–CoxNiy	1.26 wt% Co	0.003 g	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	3 mL of deionized H2O	CO: 13.55	N/A	512
0.32 wt% Ni	CH4: 1.68
Pd1 + NPs/C3N4	1.9 wt% Pd1+ NPs	0.02 g	300 W Xe lamp (250 mW cm−2) (>400 nm)	10 mL of deionized H2O	CH4: 20.3	2.93	360
CO: 0.8
Pt–SA/CTF-1	0.032 wt%	0.01 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	12.075 mL of a 20% TEOA aqueous solution	CH4: 4.6	0.82	330
CO: 1.5
Pt@Def-CN	1.08 wt%	0.03 g	300 W Xe lamp	0.1 mL of deionized H2O	CH4: 6.3	N/A	329
PtCu–crCN	0.32 wt% Pt	0.025 g	300 W Xe lamp	0.5 mL of deionized H2O	CO: 11.74	N/A	9
2.4 wt% Cu	CH4: 2.8
Cu–CCN	N/A	0.025 g	300 W Xe lamp	0.5 mL of deionized H2O	CO: 3.1	N/A	8
Mn1Co1/CN	3 wt% Mn	0.05 g	300 W Xe lamp (89.5 mW cm−2)	2 mL deionized H2O	CO: 47	N/A	27
1.3 wt% Co
a-Mo/C3N4	3.3 wt% Mo	0.05 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	20 mL of deionized H2O	CO: 18	N/A	510
RuSA–mC3N4	0.4 wt%	0.05 g	34 W Blue LED (500 nm > λ > 400 nm)	8 mL of 7:1 (v/v) (DMF:H2O) solution mixture	CH3OH: 250	N/A	335
Co–CN	1 wt%	0.05 g	300 W Xe lamp	80 mL of a 3:1:1 mixture solution (CH3CN:TEOA:H2O)	CO: 94.9	0.3	401
Pr1–N4O2	21.05 wt%	0.005 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	4 mL of CO2	CH3OH: 511.1	N/A	513
1 mL of deionized H2O
CuACs/CN	N/A	0.005 g	300 W Xe lamp	50 mL of a 10% TEOA aqueous solution and [Ru(bpy)3]2+	C2H4: 10.17	N/A	514
CH4: 8.95
CNNb	1.6 wt%	0.05 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	0.8 mL of deionized H2O	CO: 110.6	N/A	515
0.8 MPa of CO2	CH4: 60
Cu/CN	0.14 wt%	0.05 g	300 W Xe lamp (100 mW cm−2)	10 mL of H2O	CO: 11.21	1.32	412
0.084 g of NaHCO3	CH3OH: 1.75
0.5 mL H2SO4 (2 M)	CH4: 0.61

g-C3N4	—	0.04 g	500 W Xe lamp (36 mW cm−2) (>420 nm)	3.3 hours	RhB	100	157
Ce–CN	0.5 wt%	0.005 g	250 W HP-Na lamp (400–800 nm)	2 hours	RhB	90	517
PtSA/g-C3N4	0.6 wt%	0.025 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	4 hours	Phenol	83	336
BPA	40
4-CP	70
Y/g-C3N4	N/A	0.03 g	500 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	110 min	RhB	100	518
S-Fe/CN-4	17.7 wt%	0.025 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	10 min	MB	96	519
10 min	RhB	98
10 min	Phenol	98
15 min	MO	95
Pd/HR–g-C3N4	0.5 wt%	0.05 g	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	1 hour	HBCD	92.6	3
Ag/OKCN	3.04 wt%	0.005 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	1 hour	TC	80.4	520
Fe–g-C3N4	1 mol%	N/A	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	5 hours	PNP	55	521
10-Mo/Nv-TCN	2.01 wt%	0.05 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	1 hour	TC	94.45	35
Ba–g-C3N4 (MB20)	18.5 wt%	0.4 g L−1	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	1 hour	CBZ	99.9	441
DCF	99.9
Ag–g-C3N4	N/A	0.25 g	500 W Xe lamp (48 mW cm−2) (>420 nm)	2 hours	ACE	83.1	522
SDAg-CQDs/UCN	3 wt% Ag	0.05 g	350 W Xe lamp (290 & 420 nm)	25 min	NPX	87.5	523
1 wt% CQD
ZCB	0.3 wt%	0.02 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	1 hour	TBBPA	100	309
MCN-2	1.36 wt%	0.0135 g	350 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	40 min	TC	82	404
Ag/mpg-C3N4	N/A	0.01 g	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	1 hour	BPA	98	524
C3N4–0.25Co	0.25 wt%	0.02 g	210 W Xe Lamp (>400)	6 hours	4-Chloro-guaiacol	73.7	525
Mo1@CNNTs	0.36 wt%	0.025 g	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	1 hour	TC	97.3	316
K1Na1/pCN	5.5 wt% K	0.02 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	10 min	CIP	100	492
1.3 wt% Na
Cu−C3N4	0.6 wt%	0.02 g	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	30 min	CIP	99	321
I-FeNx/g-C3N4-5	18.2 wt%	0.025 g	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	11 min	MB	99	405
8 min	RhB	100
10 min	Phenol	98
SA-Cr/PN–g-C3N4	N/A	0.01 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	70 min	BPA	98.8	33
Ru–PHI	6.84 wt%	0.01 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	4 hours	MO	90	38
Pt–PHI	10.4 wt%	RhB
Co-pCN	1.28 wt%	0.03 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	40 min	OTC	75.7	302
PtSA–HCNNS	0.16 wt%	0.03 g	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	3 hours	HSM	85.5	6
Ag–g-C3N4 (MA)	48 wt%	0.01 g	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	30 min	NPX	100	24
Ag–CNNS	1 wt%	0.015 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	20 min	RhB	99	446
25 min	MBT	99
Al-aa_PCN	0.32 wt%	0,015 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	3 hours	4-CP	100	489
CNPd	0.08 wt%	0.08 g	300 W Xe lamp (>380 nm)	30 min	NO	92.7	326
SAVCN	1.6 wt%	0.02 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	3 hours	HCHO	80	311
SAAg/3DT-CN	2.59 wt%	0.02 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	75 min	TC	95	17
Pt–SA–CN	0.3 wt%	0.1 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	150 min	NO	96.2	484
Pd–Cv–CN	0.3 wt%	0.02 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	30 min	NO	56.3	18
AgTCM/UCN	1 wt%	0.05 g	350 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	21 min	SMT	86.4	526
W-CN	11.16 wt%	0.002 g	Solar simulator (Q-Sun Xe-1)	200 min	CBZ	96	407
FTCN	1.69 wt% Fe	0.01 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	1 hour	OTC	98	527
0.37 wt% Ti
Ni–SA/CN	0.98 wt%	0.025 g	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	1 hour	BPA	94.1	406
Fe–W–CN	0.345 wt% Fe	0.01 g	Solar simulator (Q-Sun Xe-1)	20 min	CBZ	100	528
1.484 wt% W

 	Fig. 28  Proposed mechanism for the degradation of TC over SAAg/3DT-CN. The photogenerated electrons activate O2 into ˙O2−, which may directly react with TC or instead lead to the formation of more oxygen-reactive species (H2O2 and ˙OH) and h+ directly oxidizes TC into simpler molecules. Adapted from ref. 17 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 29  Schematic representation of the photocatalytic degradation of HBCD pathways over Pd/HR–g-C3N4. Adapted from ref. 3 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 30  (A) Photocatalytic oxidation of NO by 20 mg of 0.3 wt% Pd–Cv–CN (b) Schematic representation of the mechanism of photooxidation of NO into NO2, NO2− and NO3− catalysed by Pd–Cv–CN. The radical species ˙O2− leads to the direct oxidation of NO into NO3− while ˙OH is responsible for partial oxidation of NO. Adapted from ref. 18 with permission from Elsevier, 2021.	 

 	Fig. 31  (A) Illustrative representation of the e−/h+ pair leading to the formation of Fe-oxo species on single-atom centres; (B) mechanism for the formation of highly oxidative Fe(IV)/Fe(V) sites leading to C–H oxidation. Adapted from ref. 43 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 32  (A) Acetylene conversion as a function of temperature; (B) ethylene selectivity as a function of acetylene conversion over Ni1Cu2/g-C3N4, Cu1/g-C3N4 and Ni1/g-C3N4 catalysts and (C) activity of these three samples at 160 °C. Adapted from ref. 13 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 33  Catalytic performance of Pd1/C3N4 and Pd1/graphene catalysts in the selective hydrogenation of 1,3-butene; (A) 1,3-butene conversion as a function of reaction temperature; (B) product selectivity as a function of 1,3-butene conversion over Pd1/C3N4 and (C) product selectivity as a function of 1,3-butene conversion over Pd1/graphene. Adapted from ref. 36 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 34  Yield of 4-nitro-1,1′-biphenyl as a function of time in the Suzuki–Miyaura reaction catalysed by (A) Pd1/C3N4/rGO (batch reaction), (B) Pdnano/C3N4/rGO (batch reaction). Adapted from ref. 7 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
