Metal nanoparticle photocatalysts: emerging processes for green organic synthesis  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CY02048D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CY02048D
(Perspective)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 320-338Metal nanoparticle photocatalysts: emerging processes for green organic synthesis

        
          
            Sunari 
            Peiris
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            John 
            McMurtrie
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Huai-Yong 
            Zhu
          
        
      *
      School of Chemistry, Physics and Mechanical Engineering, Science and Engineering Faculty, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD 4001, Australia. E-mail: hy.zhu@qut.edu.au
Received 
      27th November 2015
    , Accepted 9th December 2015First published on 11th December 2015AbstractMetal nanoparticle photocatalysts have attracted recent interest due to their strong absorption of visible and ultraviolet light. The energy absorbed by the metal conduction electrons and the intense electric fields in close proximity, created by the localized surface plasmon resonance effect, makes the crucial contribution of activating the molecules on the metal nanoparticles which facilitates chemical transformation. There are now many examples of successful reactions catalyzed by supported nanoparticles of pure metals and of metal alloys driven by light at ambient or moderate temperatures. These examples demonstrate these materials are a novel group of efficient photocatalysts for converting solar energy to chemical energy and that the mechanisms are distinct from those of semiconductor photocatalysts. We present here an overview of recent research on direct photocatalysis of supported metal nanoparticles for organic synthesis under light irradiation and discuss the significant reaction mechanisms that occur through light irradiation.
1. Introduction
Many syntheses of organic compounds use catalysts at elevated temperatures (thermal catalysis) to achieve higher efficiencies. Nevertheless, it will be especially valuable to drive these reactions by light irradiation at ambient temperatures, which will avoid unwanted by-products formed at elevated temperatures.1 Throughout the last decade; the area of heterogeneous photocatalysis has grown rapidly with the development of new photocatalysts, which are active in visible light and suitable for organic synthesis. Moreover, sunlight has received much attention, as it is the cleanest and most abundant energy source. Solar light is a combination of 5% UV (wavelength 200–400 nm), 43% visible (wavelength 400–800 nm), and 52% infrared (wavelength >400 nm) radiation. Given that visible and infrared light constitutes most of the available solar emission (approximately 95%),2 developing novel catalysts that exhibit high activity with irradiation in the solar spectrum is a significant challenge in photocatalysis.
Plasmonic-metal nanoparticles (PNPs) have been recognized as a novel class of material that is specifically efficient in harvesting light energy for chemical synthesis due to their intense optical absorption over a wide range of the sunlight spectrum.3–7 The characteristic feature of the PNPs is their strong interaction with resonant incident light through excitation of localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR). The energy of the incident light can be gained by the conduction electrons of the metal nanostructures. The optical properties of the PNPs strongly depend upon the size and geometry of the nanoparticle.8 This property was utilized for visible light photocatalysis to enhance the semiconductor photocatalytic activity on water splitting or dye degradation.9–11 In year 2010, we reported for the first time that gold (Au) NPs on photocatalytically inert supports could be used as photocatalysts for chemical synthesis.12 We found that nitroarenes can be directly reduced to azo aromatic compounds using photocatalysts made of Au NPs on ZrO2 at 40 °C under visible light, achieving high conversion rates and product selectivity.12 The work demonstrates the potential of direct photocatalysis of PNPs for organic synthesis. Moreover, the role of the PNPs as light energy harvesters can be utilized in alloy NPs of a plasmonic metal and a metal with intrinsic catalytic activity for the specific reaction under investigation. In these novel systems no electron transfer between the NPs and support material was observed and the metallic NPs serve as both the light absorber and host to the catalytic sites.13 Since the metal NPs serve as both light absorber and host the catalytic sites; many potential materials (insulating solids, porous solids, polymers and carbon-containing materials) could potentially be used to create better photocatalysts. It follows that coupling light harvesting and catalytic functions greatly broadens the potential applications of metal nanoparticle photocatalysis for fine chemical synthesis.12–14
The photocatalysts of Au NPs were initially used for environmental remediation via oxidation of volatile organic compounds (VOCs).14 Compared to conventional oxidation methods, which involve heating, the visible light driven catalysis process has a significant benefit as reactions can occur at ambient temperatures. For complete oxidation of VOCs to CO2 large oxidation power of the catalytic process is a priority as no product selectivity is required. However, reactions involving catalytic synthesis of fine organic chemicals often favour partially oxidized or reduced products or a specific compound from several possible products. Thus, product selectivity is at least of equal importance as a fast reaction rate. An important feature of metal NP photocatalysis is lower reaction temperatures, which in turn leads to formation of fewer side products and hence increased product selectivity. Ultimately, this will be reduces equipment costs and expenditure on energy required for the catalytic process. Since 2010, we have focused on synthesis of fine chemicals using supported metal NP catalysts under visible light radiation.12,15 During that time, a variety of new photocatalysts comprising supported metal NPs have also been developed for organic synthesis by other research groups.16
This review concentrates on direct photocatalysis using supported metal NPs for organic synthesis and the distinct mechanisms of these photocatalytic processes. We begin with a brief discussion of semiconductor photocatalysis and associated drawbacks followed by an overview of PNPs and the characteristic features of the LSPR effect in plasmonic metals. This is followed by an examination of the use of metal NP photocatalysts for organic transformations and the differences in reaction mechanisms while under light irradiation. Throughout the review we also focus on the critical mechanisms of direct light induced energetic electron transfer from the metal NP surface to the adsorbed reactant molecules. Finally, we provide some discussion about the outlook and future directions of this exciting new field.
1.1. Semiconductor photocatalysis and associated drawbacks
The discovery of water splitting on a TiO2 electrode by Fujishima and Honda in 1972 ushered in a new era for heterogeneous photocatalysis.17 Semiconductor photocatalysts such as TiO2 are promising materials for other photochemical applications too, for instance the degradation of VOCs, dye-sensitized solar cells and super-hydrophilic materials.18–21 Semiconductors are only able to absorb photons with energy greater than or equal to their specific band gap energy. The valence band electrons are excited to the conduction band by leaving holes (positively charged) in the valence band. The separated charges migrate to the particle surface and these charges (electrons and holes) can reduce and oxidize species absorbed on the solid surface. Unfortunately, due to its wide band gap (3–3.2 eV); TiO2 can only utilize ultraviolet (UV) radiation, which accounts for no more than 3–5% of the total solar energy available on the earth's surface.22,23 Generally, chemically stable semiconductors have wide band gaps while materials that have narrow bandgaps are unstable under most photocatalytic reaction conditions and as such both are limited in their practical usage.23
To develop novel photocatalysts which can catalyse reactions under the full solar spectrum, a number of approaches have been developed, such as doping TiO2 with metal ions or metal atom clusters,22,23 integrating nitrogen24 and carbon25 into TiO2 and using other metal oxides as catalyst materials.22,26,27 Nevertheless, semiconductor photocatalysts still have disadvantages, such as the high probability of electron–hole recombination, which decreases the quantum efficiency; energy lost during charge transfer (charges need to move on to the surface for interaction with the reactant molecules) and relatively low charge density on the TiO2 surface. More importantly, semiconductor photocatalysts possess a weak affinity toward many organic reactants and low surface concentrations of active sites for catalysing the reactions.13 Surface reactions are the slowest step, and take much longer than generating charges and charge migration inside the semiconductor particles. Hence, most of the light-generated charges are quenched rather than participating in reactions on the particle surface. Given that the limitations of light absorption and photon efficiency are associated with the intrinsic nature of semiconductor photocatalysts, the search is on for new materials that can work under the full solar spectrum.
1.2. Direct photocatalysis of metal nanoparticles
Metal NPs have unique properties, which are different from those of bulk materials. For example, NPs of gold and silver can intensely absorb visible light owing to the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect3,28–30 and the light absorbance depends on their particle size and shape. There is another mechanism by which metal NPs absorb light: one electron absorbs one photon.
The properties of metals can be explained reasonably well by the electron-sea model, (Fig. 1A) which defines the bonding in metals as resulting from positively charged metal atoms in fixed positions, surrounded by delocalized conduction electrons. The mobility of the electrons in the electron sea is used to explain the high electrical and thermal conductivity of metals. In a solid metal, a large number of electronic orbitals overlap, resulting in a large number of orbitals within continuous bands.
 Fig. 1  A) Schematic illustration of the electron-sea model. B) The molecular orbital energy spacings decrease as the number of interacting atoms increases. 
According to Einstein's explanation of the photoelectric effect; when a photon of incident light collides with an electron in a metal, if the photon has enough energy (i.e. greater than the work function (ϕ) of the metal) then the electron is ejected from the atom (Fig. 2). When a photon has less energy than the work function, it is unable to eject electrons, but is able to excite a metal electron to the energy levels between the vacuum and Fermi levels of the metal. The subsequent electron–electron collision generates more hot electrons, but with lower energy (as the overall energy is conserved during this relaxation process).
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of light absorption in metal NPs and the photoelectric effect. 
The collision between two electrons occurs in the order of 10 fs according to the Fermi-liquid theory.31 The energy dissipating process in the NP by electron–electron collisions continues for about 500 fs,32 and subsequent electron–phonon interaction33 completes in several picoseconds and then the NP achieves an equilibrium state with a slight temperature increase. This process is universal for the NPs of all metals under all wavelengths of irradiation when the energy exchange of the NP with the surrounding medium is ignored. We have found that light absorption by this process is more effective in driving reactions when the wavelength is shorter.13

1.2.1 LSPR – localized surface plasmon resonance. 
Localized surface plasmon resonance is another light absorption mechanism, which is observed in the visible light range for the NPs of a few metals such as Au, Ag and Cu. A localized surface plasmon is an optical phenomenon that arises when light is incident on a metal NP that is smaller than the wavelength of incident light. This produces a strong interaction between the incident electric field and the free conduction electrons of the metal NPs (Fig. 3).34
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of a localized surface plasmon resonance. 
When the frequency of the free electron oscillation is the same as that of the incident light, constructive interference results in the strongest possible oscillation as well as localized field strength. Moreover, the frequency and strength of the plasmon resonance also depends on the intrinsic dielectric properties of the metal NP, the surrounding medium and the surface polarization, which can be influenced by the particle size and shape. It is possible to modify the LSPR of metal NPs simply by synthesizing the preferred NP size and shapes.35 There are many findings on the association of the LSPR effect and NP size, and it has been reported that small Au NPs with diameter <5 nm do not show any LSPR absorption.13 Nonetheless, a very recent study shows that Au clusters of about 300 atoms (which have size <2 nm) exhibit LSPR absorption.36 This is significant because when photocatalysis takes place on the NP surface, smaller NPs have larger specific surface area and therefore more sites for reaction. On the other hand, large NPs exhibit stronger light absorption which is the driving force of photocatalytic reactions. Generally, Au NPs of 5–50 nm size exhibit a sharp absorption peak in the 520–530 nm range.37,38 The LSPR absorbance varies from element to element, for example, the extinction spectra of Au, Ag, and Cu spherical NPs with diameters of 20 nm show maxima at 530, 400, and 580 nm, respectively (Fig. 4).39 Furthermore, metal NPs can absorb the incident light passing in their vicinity at the LSPR wavelengths.40 The PNPs are thus more efficient light absorbers compared to semiconductors as they can concentrate the incident photon energy on the NPs (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 4  Surface plasmon absorption bands for Au, Ag and Cu nanoparticles.39 
 Fig. 5  A) Schematic illustration of electric fields of incident light and that created by the electron oscillations near the metal NP;40 B) the extinction cross-section and corresponding resonant wavelength for isolated metallic NPs. 
When the particles grow larger, the absorption band broadens and shifts to longer wavelengths.41,42 For Ag NPs, it is observed that there is a shift in the plasmon absorption band from 400 to 670 nm when the particle shape varied from a sphere to a cube.4,43 As the shape and/or size of the NP changes, the intensity of the electromagnetic field at the NP surface also changes. The local electromagnetic fields near the rough edges of noble metal NPs can be significantly enhanced due to these changes.28,44 In fact, the enhanced local field strength can be over 500 times greater than the applied field when the noble metal nanostructures have sharp tips, edges and concave curves, such as in nanowires, cubes, triangular plates and NP junctions.45
When two or more metal NPs are in close proximity, they can couple to generate an enhanced local electromagnetic field that is larger than that produced by one NP in isolation. The spots of the enhanced field between the NPs are called hot-spots. Finite difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations revealed that the electric field intensity of local plasmonic hot-spots can be reached that are up to 106 times larger than the incident electric field.46,47 Further, the electron–hole pair generation rate is 1000 times greater in hot-spot areas than what it generates in incident electromagnetic field.46 The LSPR absorption of metal NPs is correspondingly sensitive to the neighbouring environment, including solvent and support materials.
Both light absorption and activation of the reactants takes place on the metal NPs and it is a distinct feature of plasmonic photocatalysis systems. According to Kale et al.,48 three routes can transfer light energy into the adsorbed reactants in direct plasmonic-metal photocatalysis: 1) elastic radiative re-emission of photons, 2) non-radiative Landau damping (the excitation of energetic charge-carriers in the metal particle causes) and 3) the interaction of excited surface plasmons with unpopulated adsorbate acceptor states, inducing direct electron injection into the adsorbate, which is called chemical interface damping (CID; Fig. 6). The processes 1 and 2 are conceivably amplified due to the higher intensity of scattering light and raised electric fields near PNPs.49,50
 Fig. 6  Schematic showing the three dephasing mechanisms of oscillating surface plasmons.48 
The magnitude of the field improvement, the resonant wavelength, and the proportion of plasmon excitations that decay through these processes depend on nanostructure geometry, size, composition, dielectric environment and separation distance.29,51 The light-induced surface plasmons will ultimately decay and may produce energetic charge-carriers in the metal NPs (processes 2 and 3 above). These carriers can transfer the energy gained from irradiation to the surroundings52 or to heating the NPs.53,54 The enhanced electric field itself may also accelerate the transfer of charge carriers from the NPs. The plasmon-assisted transfer of energetic electrons into the adsorbate can facilitate chemical reactions. There are two possible ways for this charge carrier driven transformation to take place: direct and indirect (Fig. 7).55 In the case of the indirect charge transfer mechanism, the optically excited energetic charge carriers favour transfer towards the adsorbate acceptor orbitals (LUMO), which have energies closer to the Fermi level (due to the higher concentration of low energy electrons). On the other hand, in the direct charge transfer mechanism, charge transfer to adsorbate occurs via plasmon-mediated charge scattering.56 Light absorption induced NP heating may cause desorption of the reactant molecules, which has a negative effect on the reaction rate however the reaction rate can be greater at higher temperatures if desorption is not severe. Moreover, the interaction between a reactant molecule and a metal NP surface may lead to perturbations in electronic structure and create a polarizability change, which might facilitate chemical reactions.57
 Fig. 7  Indirect (a) and direct (b) charge transfer mechanisms.55 
Principally, metals have continuous electron energy levels: the conduction electrons gain energy from light irradiation and could re-distribute this to higher energy states from the lower levels. The wavelength (energy) of the incident photons regulate the maximum energetic level that the electrons can reach.58 Since there is no requirement to overcome a band gap, as there is in semiconductors, the metal NPs have absorption over a broad wavelength range from UV to infrared. They can absorb the energy of light and heat simultaneously, exciting their conducting electrons to higher energy levels. This unique property is useful when the metal NPs are used to catalyse organic reactions. Moderate heating can further assist in achieving excellent yields of product in many cases.

2. Selective oxidation reactions
Selective oxidation of compounds is of great interest for both fundamental research and commercial fine chemical production.
2.1. Alcohol oxidation
Selective oxidation of alcohols to their corresponding aldehydes/ketones, imines and esters is an important process for chemistry research and in industrial processes.59–61 These compounds serve as vital and versatile intermediates for fine chemical production,62–64 such as in perfumes, dyes, pharmaceuticals,65–67 and agrochemicals.64,68 The challenge is to develop catalytic systems that can achieve high reaction rates and product selectivity simultaneously, use green oxidation agents, such molecular oxygen and have significant tolerance of various substituted functional groups in the alcohols. Catalytic systems under heating can attain high reaction rates but high temperatures often negatively affect the product selectivity by over oxidation. Photocatalytic systems working at ambient temperature exhibit great potential for such reactions.

2.1.1 Selective oxidation and dehydrogenation of aromatic alcohols to aldehydes/ketones. 
Among aromatic aldehydes, benzaldehyde is the simplest and most widely investigated. Usually, benzaldehyde is manufactured by hydrolysis of benzyl chloride or by oxidation of toluene.69,70 However, the hydrolysis of benzyl chloride yields traces of chlorine, and the commercial oxidation of toluene is inefficient.71 Both processes produce a substantial quantity of waste. In most studies, long reaction times, high O2 pressures and also elevated temperatures are essential for the oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes.72,73 Some chlorine-free catalytic processes using the oxidants permanganate and dichromate have been employed,74–76 but they are expensive and/or toxic. Because many of the reactions are conducted at high temperatures and/or high pressures they can result in significant quantities of unwanted over-oxidized by-products.
Zhang et al. reported the use of catalysts consisting of Au NPs on zeolite supports (A, beta, Y, silicalite-1, TS-1 and ZSM-5) for the oxidation of benzyl alcohol to synthesis benzaldehyde.77 The reactions were carried out under visible light irradiation at close to ambient temperature (40 °C) and under an O2 atmosphere. Decent conversions were achieved with excellent product selectivity (99%). In contrast, much lower benzaldehyde yield (32%<) achieved under dark at the same temperature. The LSPR effect of the supported Au-NPs made a vital contribution to converting aromatic alcohols with greater selectivity. This photocatalytic process was applicable for the selective oxidation of several aromatic alcohols with different substituent groups (cinnamyl alcohol, 4-methoxybenzyl alcohol and 4-methylbezyl alcohol), demonstrating its general applicability. The zeolite support exhibited no photocatalytic activity itself. However, the zeolite supports favour adsorbing benzyl alcohol. The adsorption of benzyl-type alcohols on zeolite surfaces (zeolite Y and ZSM-5) with the interaction between the hydroxyl groups of alcohols and zeolites (Si–O–Al, SiO−, or Na+) being through hydrogen bonds.78 The Au/Y catalyst performed the best, while Au/silicalite-1 exhibited the lowest activity, with the overall order of catalytic activities being:
Au/Y > Au/TS-1 > Au/A > Au/beta > Au/ZSM-5 > Au/silicalite-1.77
In 2013, we reported that the yield by selective oxidation of aromatic alcohol to aldehyde at 45 °C under visible irradiation was excellent, 99% or above, using a catalyst of alloy NPs containing Au and Pd on ZrO2 (Au–Pd/ZrO2) with an optimal Au/Pd molar ratio of 1:1.86.79 ZrO2 support is photocatalytically inert. In the mechanism the conduction electrons of the NPs gain the absorbed light energy, generating energetic conduction electrons on the Pd surface sites, for which the reactant molecules have an affinity. The charge heterogeneity of the alloy NP surface is greater than that of Au NP or Pd NP surfaces, leading to a stronger interaction between the alloy NPs and reactant molecules.79,80 As the distribution of Pd sites and charge heterogeneity at the NPs play leading roles in the catalytic reactions; the Au/Pd molar ratio has an important influence on the catalytic performance of the alloy NP. The conversion of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde with the Au–Pd/ZrO2 catalyst is 100% (in the dark it is 44%). Good performance was also observed when the aromatic alcohol contained various additional functional groups. Enache et al. were able to get a good selectivity (96%) for the corresponding aldehydes; yet the reaction temperatures were comparably high.72 The introduction of Au to Pd improves selectivity, and they argue that the Au performs the electronic promoter role for Pd and that the active catalyst has a surface that is significantly enriched in Pd.81 The results also support the mechanism that the Au nanostructures are the antenna for light absorption and the catalytic reaction takes place on surface Pd sites as the hot electrons generated by light migrate to the surface Pd sites thus accelerating the reaction. To achieve a better benzaldehyde yield there are processes using H2O2 as a reactant and inorganic–organic hybrid materials (metal anions–organic esters) as catalyst, in which the reaction mixture is refluxing in the dark.82,83 Besides, non-plasmonic transition metals are widely used as catalysts for various catalytic reactions under heating because of their inherent affinity for organic reactants. Sarina et al. found that the Pd/ZrO2 catalyst is a very good photocatalyst for this reaction (exhibiting a benzyl alcohol conversion of 94% but 29% in the dark), while Pt/ZrO2 exhibited the poorest activity for selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol.58 The light absorption by the non-plasmonic metal NPs follows a different mechanism from that of the plasmon metal NPs as mentioned in section 1. The light absorption of alloy NP structure is usually more intense compared to that of the non-plasmonic metal NPs, but the mechanism is complicated and depends on the composition.
The reaction pathway of the photocatalytic process77,79,80 has been proposed based on the analyses of experimental results and information from the literature. An example is illustrated in Scheme 1. Sarina et al. suggested that Au–Pd alloy NPs under light irradiation drives the α-H abstraction of aromatic alcohols and consequently the transformation from alcohol into the corresponding aldehyde is possible to achieve in an oxidant free environment at ambient temperatures.80 Moreover, it was concluded that the α-H abstraction is the rate-determining step of the selective oxidation and takes place via a photocatalytic process on the surface of the supported alloy NPs. Nevertheless, photocatalytic selective oxidation can be achieved under ambient temperatures and lower oxygen pressures.80 Under visible light irradiation, the hydrogen abstraction from the α-C atom is facilitated by the excitation of NP electrons to the benzyl alcohol molecules adsorbed78,84,85 and it is the primary step of the pathway for selective oxidation of aromatic alcohols to the corresponding aldehydes or ketones.86,87 The reaction was conducted at ambient temperature on the Au/Y catalyst under argon atmosphere with 24.6% conversion of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde observed in twenty hours under visible light irradiation, while slight conversion was detected in the dark under the same conditions. The two α-H atoms on the methylene group (–CH2–) of benzyl alcohol are more active and electrochemically polarized Au-NPs readily abstracted them to form an Au–H bond.86,87 After this abstraction is completed, the subsequent abstraction of the H atom from the hydroxyl group of the transient anionic species proceeds readily producing aldehyde as the final product, while the negative charge of the transient anions returns to the alloy NPs.80,84,85 Generally, the charge is injected into the reactant adsorbed on the metal NPs and then returns to the metal NPs after reaction completion,84,85 in which molecular oxygen is the oxidant in the photocatalytic oxidation process. In contrast, molecular oxygen can scavenge the hot electrons on polarized metal-NPs to form activated O2− species.15 These active species remove hydrogen from metal–H bonds and yield water as the by-product. To validate this mechanism, the 2,2′,6,6′-tetramethylpiperidine-N-oxyl (TEMPO – a stronger hydrogen abstractor than molecular oxygen) was used and yielded hydroxylamine (TEMPOH) instead of water (benzyl alcohol:TEMPO = 1:1 molecular ratio).88 No product was detected under the controlled experiments with the zeolite Y support as the catalyst (without Au NPs) and TEMPO under otherwise identical conditions. Based on these results, it is believed that Au–H species are formed89 during the photocatalytic oxidation of benzyl alcohol, and the surface hydrogen species can be removed by activated oxygen species (or TEMPO). After the hydrogen on the NP surface reacted with molecular oxygen, the NP is able to react with alcohol and gain hydrogen from the alcohol forming Au–H species. In the meantime, the electron-deficient Au NPs are reloaded with released electrons from the adsorbed benzyl alcohol compounds which form benzyl alcohol radicals.90 Afterward, these benzyl alcohol radicals may automatically release hydrogen atoms from the hydroxyl group (–OH) to facilitate formation of the CO bond. Finally, the product benzaldehyde desorbs from the support. Conversion of 23% was obtained in 48 h with high benzaldehyde (100%) selectivity.15 When Ag/zeolite Y was used as the photocatalyst, benzyl alcohol conversion of 11% was achieved in 48 h under UV light irradiation with the product benzaldehyde (62%).91 Au–Pd alloy NPs can exhibit better performance under visible light irradiation than pure Au or Pd NPs. This is attributed to two reasons: 1) Pd sites on the alloy NPs are more active for this selective oxidation (or dehydrogenation), and 2) the surface electronic heterogeneity of the alloy NPs enhances the interaction with the reactants, which facilitates the reaction.
 Scheme 1  Proposed mechanism of aromatic alcohol oxidation over Au–Pd alloy NPs under visible light irradiation.79 


2.1.2 Oxidation of aliphatic alcohols to esters. 
Conventionally, esters are synthesized by the reaction of activated acid derivatives with alcohols.65 However, the multi-step reaction procedures used often produce great quantities of undesirable by-products. The strong acidic or basic conditions also limit the use of this methodology as not all substrates are stable under such conditions. In recent years, considerable effort has been made to develop methods for the direct synthesis of esters by oxidative esterification of aldehydes with alcohols. Usually alcohols are readily available as bulk materials, more stable than the carbonyl compounds as well as being inexpensive, less toxic, and easy to use in the laboratory.92–94 Hence, they represent attractive starting materials for large scale production and the direct conversion of alcohols into esters represents a significant advance towards green, economic and sustainable processes.95–99 The selective oxidation of alcohols usually provides the required aldehydes. However, selective oxidation of aliphatic alcohols with molecular oxygen is rather challenging, especially with no added base and under moderate reaction conditions,100 although it is highly desirable from both economic and environmental points of view. In 2015, our group reported a stable and reusable catalyst of Au–Pd alloy NPs supported on phosphate anion modified hydrotalcite suitable for the direct oxidative esterification of aliphatic alcohols.101 This is a one-pot reaction and under visible light irradiation, where we were able to achieve excellent conversion (94%) and good selectivity (76%) even without any additional base being added. Compared to the direct esterification in the dark (conversion of 62%) visible light irradiation resulted in enhanced conversion at ambient temperatures.
The proposed mechanism for the direct oxidative esterification of alcohols is depicted in Scheme 2. The oxidative esterification reaction may proceed through an oxidation of alcohol to aldehyde (step IV) followed by a condensation reaction. The alcohol molecules first adsorb on the Au–Pd alloy NP surface; as it has a strong binding affinity. The light excited hot electrons of the metal NP facilitate the cleavage of the C–H bond of the alcohol adsorbed on the NP surface79 and leads to the formation of metal alkoxide and metal hydride species (step II). Moreover, the basic sites on the surface of the support can bind the hydrogen atom of the alcohol and also facilitate the O–H cleavage on the metal surface.102 The basic surface sites should lower the activation barrier of the C–H bond of the metal alkoxide intermediate to form the aldehyde.103 Hot electrons can also enhance hydrogen abstraction from the α-H of the metal alkoxy species and transform into aldehyde (steps IV–V). The condensation reaction between the aldehyde and another molecule of alcohol results in the formation of hemiacetal intermediate (step V),104–106 which is followed by oxidative dehydrogenation to give the corresponding ester. One can further increase the efficiency of the reaction by adequate heating (over 55 °C).
 Scheme 2  Proposed mechanism for synthesis of esters from aliphatic alcohols.101 

2.2. Amine oxidation
Synthesis and applications of imines play a critical role in modern organic synthesis.107 Oxidation of secondary amines,108,109 self-coupling of amines110,111 and coupling of alcohols and amines112,113 are the alternative approaches for imine production. Generally, it requires high temperatures (around 100 °C), O2 atmosphere as well as relatively extended reaction hours (>24 h) to synthesis imines through oxidation of secondary amines.109,114 Moreover, some approaches require stoichiometric or excess amounts of strong oxidants such as o iodooxybenzoic acid, Ph(OAc)2 and MnO2 and they produce large amounts of undesired waste.115,116 Copper based catalysts,117 Al grafted MCM-41 (ref. 118) ruthenium based catalyst119 have been developed for synthesis of imines from amines.117 However, only a limited range of amines can be oxidized into imines and this at relatively high temperatures (>100 °C). Aschwanden et al. reported Au(OAc)3 anchored CeO2 catalyst can oxidize benzylamine at 108 °C at 0.98 atm O2 pressure, with a product yield (up to 89%) after 16 h.120 The elevated reaction temperatures and pressure indicate that this reaction requires demanding conditions when using supported metal NPs as the catalyst. In 2013, the selective photocatalytic oxidation of benzylamine to the corresponding imine was achieved at 45 °C on the Au–Pd/ZrO2 catalyst (optimal Au/Pd molar ratio – 1:1.86). The yield was 95% and selectivity was above 96% (yield at dark – 36%).79 The catalytic activity of Pd and the charge heterogeneity of the alloy NP enhance the efficiency of photocatalytic oxidation of amine.
Recently Sarina et al. found that the non-plasmonic transition metals NPs (Pd, Pt, Rh, and Ir) on ZrO2 exhibit good photocatalytic activity for selective oxidation of amines under visible or UV light irradiation. The Pt/ZrO2 catalyst performed the best activity (71%), while Ir/ZrO2 and Rh/ZrO2 exhibited the poorest activity (34–35%).58 In these systems, the metal NPs absorb light via the mechanism in which one photon excites one electron directly and the generated hot electrons drive the reaction. While low benzylamine conversions (17%<) resulted in the dark.
The most probable pathway for oxidative coupling of benzylamine is illustrated in Scheme 3. Initially under light irradiation, benzylamine is oxidized into benzaldehyde by the abstraction of the α-H from the –CH2– group. Afterwards, the unreacted amines connect by nucleophilic attack of these nascent aldehydes to yield the corresponding imines.121,122
 Scheme 3  Proposed mechanism for the photo oxidation of benzylamine.79 
2.3. Aldehyde oxidation
As mentioned earlier, esterification is one of the fundamental transformations in organic synthesis. Therefore, the development of novel approaches for synthesis of esters has attracted the interest of chemists owing to the extensive use of these compounds. The synthesis of ester derivatives under mild conditions comprises the stoichiometric activation of carboxylic acid as an acyl halide, anhydride, or activated ester amenable to subsequent nucleophilic substitution.65 However, these one-pot conventional approaches require the consumption of heavy-metal oxidants such as KMnO4,123 CrO3,124 and reactive hydrogen peroxide,125,126 or other transition-metal catalysts.127–132 However, active graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) catalyst shows lower yield (<34%) for esterification of benzaldehyde and alcohol under visible light radiation even with H2O2 as oxidant.126 Zhang et al. reported an exciting, important alternative transformation method for ester derivative synthesis; which converts aldehydes in mild conditions using supported Au NP photocatalyst under visible light.133 A number of substituted benzaldehydes were successfully converted to the corresponding esters in good to moderate yields. The targeted ester was isolated in 78% yield when benzaldehyde was reacted with ethanol under a visible light source in atmospheric air at room temperature. In the dark, the reaction conversion at same temperature was only 4.4%.133
The proposed mechanism for the esterification of benzaldehyde with alcohol is illustrated in Scheme 4 and is consistent with the literature where an oxidant converts a hemiacetal intermediate to the ester.134–136 The Au NP surface has a strong binding affinity towards aromatic substances; thus the benzaldehyde molecule is readily adsorbed on to the surface. The oxidative esterification reaction proceeds through a condensation reaction between benzaldehyde (I) and alcohol (II), which results in the formation of hemiacetal intermediate (III). The light excited hot electron of Au NPs facilitates a condensation step possibly through electron transfer and recombination. Moreover, the local electromagnetic fields enhanced near rough surfaces owing to LSPR effect of Au NPs increases the reactivity toward nucleophilic attack by the alcohol to give the hemiacetal. Finally, the oxidative dehydrogenations give the corresponding ester (IV). When the reactant molecules are adsorbed on the surface of Au NPs, it is possible to assist the oxidative dehydrogenation.
 Scheme 4  Proposed mechanisms for the esterification of benzaldehyde with alcohol.133 
3. Selective reduction reactions
Reduction reactions are essential in organic synthesis and biological chemistry and consequently are under intense study.137–139
3.1. Reduction and reductive coupling of nitroarenes
Aromatic azo compounds are widely used in the textile, food, polymer and pharmaceutical industries.140–142 Syntheses of azo compounds are often conducted under high pressures and at high temperatures using transition-metal reducing agents.140,142,143 However, some by-products formed from the reducing agent, are harmful to the environment.140 In 2008, Grirrane et al. reported that Au NPs/TiO2 could catalyse the production of azobenzene from nitrobenzene through a two-step and one-pot reaction at 100 °C or above.144 First, the nitroaromatic compounds are over reduced to corresponding amines under 8.8 atm pressure of H2. Secondly, the amines are oxidized to aromatic azo compounds under an atmosphere of O2 at a pressure of 4.9 atm. This is because the azo compounds are unstable under the high temperatures and high hydrogen pressures, which are required to achieve better reduction rate.141,145 In 2010 Wang et al. reduced nitrobenzene mostly to aniline over silica gel supported nickel but at higher temperatures (70–90 °C) and higher H2 pressures (19.7 atm) to achieve the results.146 In the same year, Zhu et al. discovered that Au/ZrO2 can catalyse a one-step reductive coupling reaction of aromatic nitroarenes to corresponding azo compounds at 40 °C with high yields (approximately 100%) under visible light or UV light illumination.12 Recently, Guo et al. reported that 3 wt% Cu NPs on graphene (Cu/graphene) exhibits excellent photocatalytic activity for coupling of nitroarenes under visible light and sunlight. For example, the yield of azoxybenzene from nitrobenzene is 90% at 60 °C and 96% at 90 °C and a control experiment indicated that a negligible reduction of nitrobenzene occurred in the dark (28%<).147 The study also demonstrates the possibility to drive such chemical syntheses with sunlight – the most abundant energy resource.
In the reactions described above, all reactants of the photocatalytic process are in solution phase and isopropanol performs the role of both hydrogen donor and solvent. High concentration of the reactants on the solid catalyst surface can be achieved under ambient pressure (Scheme 5). The presence of KOH improves the hydrogen release from isopropyl alcohol that is transformed into acetone. The Au-NPs are able to abstract hydrogen from isopropanol creating transient Au–H species under visible light irradiation (step II).12,89 The LSPR effect excited the electrons and those energetic electrons strongly interact with the electrophilic nitro groups in the reactant molecules, facilitating the cleavage of NO bonds by H–Au species to yield HO–AuNP species (step III). The significant role of the surface Au–H species in the reduction pathway is confirmed by adding an efficient hydrogen-abstracting reagent, in this case, 2,2′,6,6′-tetramethylpiperidine N-oxyl (TEMPO)—which can abstract hydrogen from Au surface, into the reaction system while the other experimental conditions were unchanged.148 The reduced products weren't detected. The presence of the surface Au–H species is therefore essential for the photocatalytic reaction.
 Scheme 5  Proposed mechanisms for the reductive coupling of nitrobebzene.12 
3.2. Deoxygenation of epoxides
The Deoxygenation of epoxides into alkenes is an important synthetic transformation in organic and pharmaceutical chemistry, as it allows the use of the oxirane ring as a protective group for CC double bonds.149–151 However, conventional deoxygenation requires stoichiometric reagents such as phosphines, silanes, iodides and heavy metals and produces a large amount of undesirable waste.152–156 Even in the recent literature, high temperatures and pressures were applied for conversion of styrene oxide to styrene to achieve better reaction efficiency.157,158 The proposed mechanism for the selective reduction of epoxide is also illustrated in Scheme 6. The reduction was conducted in isopropanol solvent (also the hydrogen donor), and the species with the hydrogen atom bonded to the Au NP surface possible to form and react with the epoxide molecules on the Au NPs.12,15,89 The active Au–H species attacks the epoxide bond to facilitate the deoxygenation. The hydrogen atoms of the Au–H species are able to release hydrogen to reactant molecules to form alkenes.159,160
 Scheme 6  Proposed mechanism for the selective reduction reactions.160 
3.3. Selective reduction of ketones
The selective reduction of ketones is one possible method for the preparation of alcohols which are important building blocks in the synthesis of pharmaceutical and agrochemical products as well as other important materials.161–163 Most catalysts used for hydrogenation comprise either phosphorus/nitrogen donor ligands or a combination of each type with high temperatures and pressures being required.164–167 Recently, Ke et al. reported the synthesis of benzyl ethanol from acetophenone with good selectivity (>99%) under visible light and mild reaction conditions.159,160 Under light irradiation, the Au NPs are capable of forming transient Au–H species by abstracting hydrogen from isopropanol (Scheme 6).12,89 The active Au–H species attack the CO double bonds, leading to the hydrogenation, in which the hydrogens of Au–H species are consumed and acetophenone is transformed into benzyl ethanol. No reduced products were detected in the control experiment; which was done with the use of TEMPO to confirm the key role of the Au–H species in the reduction reactions.159,160 The enhancement of the local electromagnetic fields near rough surfaces of the Au NPs, due to the LSPR effect, could also assist with activation of the double bonds of the reactant molecule.
3.4. Selective reduction of azo compounds
Bacterial strains and their enzymes are used for degradation of azo compounds via oxidation/reduction processes.168,169 Moreover, Nam et al. used iron metal to decolorize azo dyes by reduction of the azo groups, which resulted in formation of aromatic amines as products.170 However, the above methods are applied for the purpose of environmental remediation rather than chemical synthesis. Recently, it was reported that 40% (in dark – 10%) of azobenzene was reduced to hydroazobenzene in 6 h with a selectivity of 78% at ambient temperatures, under irradiation with visible light in the presence of Au NPs.160 Photocatalytic abstraction of hydrogen from isopropanol12,89 forms the transient Au–H species which attack the NN double bonds leading to the hydrogenation. None of the final reductive products were detected under the control experiment which was done with the use of TEMPO, once again confirming the significant role of the surface Au–H species in the reduction reactions.159,160,171–173
3.5. Selective reduction of alkenes and alkynes
The one-step amination of alkenes or alkynes is called hydroamination and this enables the synthesis of nitrogen containing organic compounds which are widely used in many processes in, for example, the cosmetic, pharmaceutical and agrochemical industries.171–173 This reaction offers an atom-efficient route to various nitrogen contain organic molecules and provides a convenient pathway for the synthesis of numerous important fine chemicals with limited by-product formation.172–175 The high activation barrier of hydroamination reactions demands high temperatures (generally above 100 °C) to achieve decent yields.176,177 Zhao et al. were able to synthesise 1-phenethyl-2-phenylacetylene (conversion 90% and selectivity 91%) successfully, under visible light at 40 °C in 25 h under an argon atmosphere.178
The proposed mechanism for the photocatalytic hydroamination of alkynes on the Au NP photocatalysts is illustrated in Scheme 7. The Au NPs absorb visible light due to the LSPR effect and the energetic conducting electrons of the AuNPs can migrate to the conduction band of the support (step I).179,180 The positively charged Au NPs interact with the nucleophilic aniline, forming a N-centred radical cation which would lead to initiation for the electrophilic attack of the electron rich sites of alkynes (e.g. the C atom of C–Ph) (step II). The N doping could form Ti3+ sites; which have greater coordination capability than Ti4+ sites and that makes the terminal C atom more favourable for the H addition. The interaction of the electron rich C–H bond of the terminal alkynes with lower oxidation state active Ti3+ sites might activate the alkenes. Then the N atom links to the C atom of the phenyl ring; whereas the H atom is added onto the terminal C atom of CC. The adsorption of CC on the surface is weaker than CC and the product molecules desorb from the support surface.181,182 Finally, the activated sites on the photocatalyst return to the desired initial state to start over the catalytic process.
 Scheme 7  Proposed mechanism for the photocatalytic hydroamination of alkynes.178 
4. Cross-coupling reactions
The cross-coupling reactions of mediated by organometallic compounds used for a wide range of bond forming processes, such as C–C, C–N, C–O, C–S or C–P.183 These bond forming cross coupling reactions can produce symmetrical and unsymmetrical biaryls and have been accepted as convenient one-step methods for constructing complex structures which are used in the synthesis of natural materials,184–187 bioactive products,188 agrochemicals,189 medicines190 and advanced materials.183,191–195
4.1. C–C coupling

4.1.1 Suzuki–Miyaura coupling. 
Palladium phosphine complexes are usually used as catalysts for Suzuki reactions.196,197 However, they cause major problems in purification of biaryl compounds and separation of the catalyst is challenging and leads to toxic waste.198,199 It is challenging to recycle the catalysts used in homogeneous catalytic processes, which is an important consideration for industrial applications and potential impacts on the environment.200 With heterogeneous catalysts these coupling reactions require elevated reaction temperatures and prolonged reaction times. For example, Pd NPs supported on carbon nanotubes resulted in 87–94% yield at 70–100 °C.201 Pd NPs on polystyrene-divinyl benzene polymer achieved high yield (100%) at 100 °C after 12 h.202 Recently, we found that Au–Pd alloy NPs on ZrO2 can drive the same reactions under visible light irradiation at much lower temperatures (only 30 °C) while achieving excellent yields.79,203 The best conversion achieved under light illumination at 30 °C for Suzuki–Miyaura cross coupling was 96% (Au/Pd ratio 1:1.86) and showed decent viability on a number of substrates. The contribution of thermal effect was investigated in the dark at same temperature and 37% conversion of 3-iodotoluene achieved. The combination of enhanced light absorption of alloy NPs, the improved interaction between the aryl halides and the alloy NPs, as well as the catalytic activity of the Pd being the important factors in promoting the coupling reactions.
The significant step of Suzuki–Miyaura coupling is the activation of iodobenzene on the electron-rich Pd sites on the surface of Au–Pd alloy NPs under light irradiation (as illustrated in Scheme 8). Generally, the palladium metal could activate the aryl halides and facilitate the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling.200,204 The surface charge heterogeneity is significantly enhanced by light irradiation and subsequently increases the interaction (absorption of reactant molecules on the metal NP surface) between reactant molecules and Au–Pd alloy NPs (step II). Subsequently, the aromatic borate species react with the activated aryl species on the electron-rich Pd surface sites (step III). The initial alloy surface regenerates through reductive elimination of the cross coupling product (R1Ph–PhR2 molecule) by completing the photocatalytic cycle.
 Scheme 8  Proposed mechanism for Suzuki reaction.79 


4.1.2 Stille coupling. 
The palladium-catalysed cross-coupling of organostannanes with organic halides and triflates is known as the Stille reaction.205,206 Generally, phosphine ligands in combination with palladium precursors provide effective catalysts for the reaction.207,208 However, most of the phosphine ligands are expensive, toxic and air sensitive; which places significant limits on their synthetic applications.209–211 Furthermore, to achieve higher product yields; researchers are using microwave irradiation as well as elevated temperatures.205,206,212 Recently, Xiao et al. synthesised biaryls through Stille coupling under visible light irradiation at 45 °C using Au–Pd alloy catalyst (3-methylbiphenyl yield – 81% under light irradiation, 33% in dark).213


4.1.3 Hiyama coupling. 
The Hiyama cross-coupling is an effective reaction in organic chemistry for the synthesis of unsymmetrical biphenyl derivatives. Normally, the organosilicon reagents are nontoxic, available at low cost, can be prepared easily and have good stability under a variety of reaction conditions. The Hiyama coupling reaction of trimethoxyphenylsilane with a range of aryl chlorides under microwave irradiation conditions have been studied.214 The conversion using Hiyama coupling with Au–Pd NPs on ZrO2 increased from 55% to 71% upon irradiation with incandescent light in the presence of Pd NPs on ZrO2 at the same temperature (45 °C).58,213 The temperature of the reaction mixture in the dark was kept the identical as the reaction mixture under light by a water bath but only 7% of biphenyl derivative yield resulted. The light irradiation on Au–Pd alloy NPs extensively enhanced the intrinsic catalytic activity of Pd even at lower temperatures for coupling reactions. The ability to efficiently concentrate the photon flux energy to a very small volume (by the PNPs) and to transfer this energy to the adsorbed molecules to induce their reaction (by catalytically active metal) are outstanding features of alloy NPs.


4.1.4 Sonogashira coupling. 
Among the various cross coupling reactions, the palladium/copper catalysed Sonogashira coupling of aryl halides with terminal alkynes provides a convenient method to generate aryl alkynes.215–217 Typically, Sonogashira reactions require a dry organic solvent, inert atmosphere, strong base, prolonged reaction time and a phosphine-ligated palladium complex with a copper co-catalyst.215,218 However, the copper derivatives are moisture and air sensitive and they result unwanted terminal alkyne homo-coupling through the Glaser reaction.215,218 The Pd/SNW1 (melamine-based microporous polymer) showed decent catalytic activity in copper-free Sonogashira coupling in water.219 The coupling reaction was performed in the presence of base in water at 80 °C. The 100% conversion (98% selectivity) of iodobenzene was observed in the presence of the Pd/SNW1 as a catalyst.219 Generally, the phosphine-assisted method is one of the well-established methods,220,221 which provides excellent results in the wide range of reactions. However, phosphine ligands are comparably expensive, toxic, and unrecoverable. In 2014, Sharma et al. synthesised catalyst (SBA-15–EDTA–Pd-11%) by anchoring a Pd–EDTA complex over the surface of organo-functionalized SBA-15 and achieved excellent yield (100%) at 120 °C. However, these heterogeneous catalysts used for Sonogashira coupling reactions require elevated reaction temperatures.218,222,223 Xiao et al. achieved an excellent conversion (yield – 80% under light, 10% in dark) for the Sonogashira reaction at only 45 °C under visible irradiation, using a catalyst of NP alloys of Au and Pd on ZrO2 (Au–Pd/ZrO2).213

4.2. C–N coupling

4.2.1 Buchwald–Hartwig coupling. 
The Pd catalysed Buchwald–Hartwig amination of aryl and heteroaryl halides is a prominent method for forming C–N bonds in modern synthetic chemistry.224–226 However, this chemistry often requires elevated temperatures, microwave heating, refluxing and long reaction times to occur at reasonable reaction yields.227–229 Buchwald–Hartwig coupling cannot progress in the dark except when the temperature is over 45 °C, but it can be initiated by light irradiation to enable 35–39% conversion at 45 °C.58 In contrast, Saikai et al. could achieve only 54% yield under heating the reaction mixture at 120 °C for 12 hours.229
The proposed mechanism for the cross-coupling reactions by Xiao et al. on the Au–Pd NP photocatalysts213 is illustrated in Scheme 9. The light irradiation facilitates the energetic electron transfer to the adsorbed aryl iodide molecule from the metal NP, yielding a transient negative ion species. The C–X (X = halide) bond cleavage is the rate determining step for the coupling reactions. Loss of halide atom affords either an adsorbed phenyl radical or an organometallic aryl-palladium iodide complex on the metal surface and later triggers the coupling reactions.213 However, in the mechanism for thermal catalysis it is driven through a different Pd2+ intermediate.230 The aryl halide undergoes oxidative addition to the Pd0 centre and gives unsaturated Pd2+ intermediate; which coordinates with the amine and generates tetra coordinated Pd2+. Then it is deprotonated with a base yielding anionic amido complex; which subsequently gives a 3-coordinate complex. Finally, it forms the C–N bond by coupling the aryl halide with the amine.
 Scheme 9  Schematic diagram of the pathway for the photocatalytic cross-coupling reactions.213 

5. Addition reactions
5.1. Hydrochlorination
The addition of hydrogen halides to alkenes is one of the fundamental reactions in organic chemistry.231,232 Nevertheless, this reaction is slightly limited in scope. For example, addition of hydrogen halides such as HCl only occurs at satisfactory rates in the case of strained olefins.233,234 Gaspar et al. have studied a series of hydrochlorination reactions using a Co catalyst at room temperature in ethanol solution.231 The sources of hydrogen and chloride are from PhSiH3 and paratoluene sulfonyl chloride (TsCl), respectively. The mechanism proposed by Gaspar for hydrochlorination involves olefin hydrocobaltation and the catalytic cycle is initiated by formation of a cobalt–hydride complex (Co2+/Co3+ and silane).
The catalysts of noble metal nanoparticles (Pt, Pd and Au) supported on zirconia exhibit higher activities under the irradiation of visible light for the hydrochlorination of alkenes using hydrochloric acid as the sources of chloride and hydrogen, which is regarded as a reaction that is difficult to occur under usual thermal conditions.235 The light-generated hot electrons on the surface of the noble metal NPs increase the activity of the catalyst. Under light irradiation, these hot electrons can interact with protons in the solution. The hydrogen atoms on the surface of metal NPs can readily add to the terminal carbon of the CC group in the molecule of 4-phenyl-1-butene according to the Markovnikov rule.236 A chloride or hydroxide anion in the solution can be attracted by the positively charged carbon to form the final products 4-phenylbutyl chloride or 4-phenyl-2-butenol (Scheme 10). Remarkably higher selectivity for 4-phenylbutyl chloride was observed by all the noble metal catalysts with Pd/ZrO2 having the best overall selectivity for the reaction.
 Scheme 10  Mechanisms of addition on supported noble metal catalysts under irradiation of visible light.146 
5.2. Acetalization
Acetalization of carbonyl compounds with alcohols to form acetals is one of the most common methods for protecting aldehydes and ketones in organic synthesis.237–239 Conventionally, this reaction is carried out in the presence of a homogeneous acid catalyst such as p-toluenesulfonic acid, pyridinium salts or hydrochloric acid.237–239 Although these homogeneous acids show adequate catalytic performance for acetalization reactions, they cause problems with purification of the product, large amounts of acidic and toxic wastes and corrosive reagents that lead to severe environmental pollution.240–243 Acidic ionic liquids have also been used as efficient catalysts for acetalization.238 However, a number of drawbacks of ionic liquids, such as high cost and challenging purification of end products limit the scope of practical industrial applications. Acetalization reactions showed decent performance with a high selectivity on Au supported MZSM-5 (M = H+, Na+, Ca2+, or La3+) under visible light irradiation and at 60 °C.244 In contrast, other processes employ higher temperatures238 and refluxing conditions.237,239
Kawabata et al. proposed a mechanism for acetalization reactions through hemiacetal intermediates.237 Zhang et al. suggested the plasmon-mediated catalytic mechanism for the acetalization and discussed how the LSPR effect enhances the activity of the catalyst.244 Plasmonic Au NPs which are loaded on ion-exchanged ZSM-5 zeolites (Au/MZSM-5, M = H+, Na+, Ca2+ or La3+) perform as “antennas” under light irradiation by efficiently absorbing visible light. Au NPs generate active Au(δ+,δ−) dipole moments due to the LSPR effect under visible light irradiation, at the same time the electric near-field enhancement (ENFE) also induced around the surface of Au NPs.4,7 The ENFE of Au NPs might strengthen the polarized electrostatic fields (PEF) of MZSM-5 hence facilitating the effective activation of the reactant aldehyde by stretching the CO bonds.242 The “stretched” reactants with greater molecular polarities can be activated more efficiently by active H+ catalytic centres improving the acetalization (Scheme 11).245–248
 Scheme 11  The acetalization on Au/MZSM-5 under the irradiation of visible light.244 
6. Degradation reactions
6.1. Aldehydes and alcohols
Removal of VOCs by photocatalytic treatment has drawn extensive interest as an environmentally friendly technique over the last few decades.249 Indoor air quality has attracted significant attention. Formaldehyde (HCHO) is one of the major pollutants of indoor air,249,250 and is frequently used in room decorating, plastics, paint, glue and refurbishing processes, as well as in furniture production. It is known to be carcinogenic, mutagenic and teratogenic.251,252 Catalytic oxidation is an effective approach for removing low concentrations (at the level of parts per million) of HCHO in indoor air.253 In general, elevated temperatures and high pressures are desirable for complete oxidation of formaldehyde.254 Normally, titania/titania derivatives254,255 and peroxone (ozone/hydrogen peroxide)256,257 are used under UV irradiation for catalytic degradation. Ozone forms O3−, which can directly participate in the reaction and hydroxyl radicals generated by hydrogen peroxide to enhance the photocatalysis. In 2008, our group reported that Au NPs on ZrO2 support could decrease HCHO content by 64% within 2 hours with irradiation of blue light at room temperature and pressure.14 This is the first report on direct photocatalysis of metal NPs which was conducted under practical reaction conditions using visible irradiation rather than conducted in ultra-high vacuum chambers or using lasers. In later research Au NPs on mesoporous ZrO2 nano composite (ZrO2 corporate with LAPONITE® clay) were found to be catalytically superior for oxidation of HCHO. During the catalytic oxidation of HCHO on Au/ZrO2-nanocomposite, the higher oxidation state (Au3+) of the Au is reduced to metallic Au nano crystals (Au0) and however the both the Au3+ and Au0 states are activated the HCHO oxidation.258
Many industrial wastewater streams contain high concentrations of organic pollutants which are difficult to degrade biologically. Phenol is one of the most common such pollutants and is extremely toxic to the environment and may cause harmful effects to human health even at very low concentrations. Catalytic wet air oxidation (CWAO) is a treatment for organic pollutants in the liquid phase, effectively oxidising them completely to carbon dioxide and water using air or pure oxygen.259,260 This method requires very high temperatures and O2 pressures to enhance the catalytic activity by formation of oxygen radicals, which can react with water to form hydroxyl radicals that may then oxidize phenol.259 In 2009 Zhu et al. reported oxidation of phenol in aqueous solution, a process which is potentially impossible to catalyse under visible light. The Au NPs on zeolite Y, SiO2 and ZrO2 converted 21%, 28% and 45% of phenol respectively under 120 h of UV irradiation.15 The UV light absorption results in a much greater quantity of the electron transfer from the Au NPs to the oxygen molecule than the visible light (LSPR absorption). Therefore, more positive charges are left in 5d band (lower energy levels) of the Au NPs when they are exposed to UV light and those are able to oxidize the molecules that are more challenging to oxidize such as phenol. The photocatalytic process has a significant advantage compared to the conventional oxidation with heating as it requires much less energy input to activate the reaction and it is outstanding for indoor air and waste water purification at ambient temperatures. However, the oxidation power of the metal NP photocatalysts is not as strong as TiO2, although a much larger number of charge carriers (electrons and holes) can be generated by light and the metal NPs have a better affinity for adsorption of organic molecules. From the point of view of practical applications, they cannot compete (at this stage) with TiO2 for degradation for environmental purpose, where the concentration of reactant to be decomposed is very low.
6.2. Dyes
The synthetic fabric dyes and industrial dyestuffs constitute one of the largest groups of chemicals manufactured around the world.261,262 Azo dyes and fluorone dyes constitute a significant portion in the overall category of dyestuffs and are more destructive to the environment than many other common dyes. Moreover, some of the azo dyes and fluorone dyes and their degradation products are extremely carcinogenic.263 A number of these dyes are resistant to self-photo degradation, oxidation and decay by acids and bases.264 Effective utilization of light to degrade these synthetic dyes in the presence of aqueous titania dispersions265,266 and metal doped titania264,267,268 provide attractive approaches for minimising energy resources required for environmental remediation. The dye sulforhodamine-B (SRB) can be degraded effectively by both sensitized and direct photocatalysis. Both positive holes and hydroxyl radicals are found as the oxidizing species responsible for initiating the degradation in direct photocatalysis.266 In the presence of water, the TiO2 particles absorb UV light to produce electron–hole pairs. Mainly, the dye SRB adsorbed on TiO2 is oxidized by a photogenerated hole, which is localized at the surface of the irradiated TiO2. The dye cation radicals formed combine with adsorbed molecular oxygen which results in formation of degraded fragments.266,269 Moreover, SRB water soluble dye molecules could be excited under light irradiation and the excited SRB molecules (SRB*) are able to inject their electrons into the substrate.166 This “dye sensitization” effect of the excited SRB molecules on the Au-NPs promotes the formation of O2− species. The photosensitization process under light irradiation involves initial excitation of the SRB molecules and is helpful for injecting dye electrons to the holes left in the 5sp band.91,266,270 This may combine with the LSPR effect of the AuNPs, resulting a high rate of dye degradation. Chen et al. found that dye content can be decreased by 74% within 3 hours under blue light irradiation with Ag NPs on ZrO2.91 According to Zhao et al., the platinum dopant acts as an electron sink from which molecular oxygen scavenges the electrons to yield superoxide radical anions (O2−) first and then ˙OH radicals which are known to cause the degradation of the SRB dye.270 In 2009, a study was reported describing the photo degradation of sulforhodamine B using Au@TiO2/bentonite under UV and visible light irradiation and the researchers propose that Au was photoexcited owing to the surface plasmon resonance effect and the photogenerated electrons were injected into O2 adsorbed on TiO2, which increased the production of superoxide and hydroxyl radicals.268
7. Conclusions and outlook
The discovery of direct metal NP photocatalysis was a breakthrough for fine organic chemical synthesis, particularly those that favour “green” synthesis strategies (using moderate reaction conditions, fewer additives and high chemoselectivity). The increasing numbers of papers on metal NP photocatalysis in recent years have significantly advanced knowledge in this area. The novel developments in this dynamic field have broadened the pathways for the efficient transformation of solar energy into chemical energy. In direct metal NP photocatalysis, the light harvesting and catalysing reaction can be effectively coupled on the NPs. Furthermore, these reaction systems are highly energy efficient since the intensive light absorption is by the metal NPs, and not by the solvent, the support material, the environment, or the reaction container. The hot electrons created by light irradiation are able to induce reactions of adsorbed reactant molecules at the surface of the metal NPs. The number of the hot electrons and energy distribution can be manipulated by tuning the light intensity and irradiation wavelength to optimize the reaction efficiency. Subsequently, the natural affinity of the metal NP surface to organic reactants, the high density of conduction electrons on the NP surface and the ability of the NP to couple the stimuli of light and heat to excite conduction electrons, creates a novel class of photocatalysts superior to semiconductor or composite photocatalysts for synthesis of organic compounds. In principle, this photocatalyst structure is likely to be efficient in driving various chemical reactions with sunlight (or focused sunlight), especially the reactions of organic molecules. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume there will be significant focus in the near future on the field of metal NP photocatalysts. In addition, the research on direct plasmon/non-plasmon driven photocatalysis is still in its early stages. The development of structure (size and shape) – function and composition-function relationships of the metal photocatalysis isn't fully revealed yet. A known characteristic feature of PNPs is their tunable LSPR wavelength based on particle geometry, such as composition, shape and size. In principle, it is possible to design nanostructures that can absorb the complete solar spectrum efficiently by controlling these properties through catalyst preparation. The dependence of direct plasmon-driven photocatalytic characteristics (e.g. efficiency, wavelength dependence, reaction selectivity) on the structure of the PNPs is expected to be investigated in future research. Even though some significant improvements have been made, methods and techniques need further refinement. More exciting discoveries can be expected in the pursuit of eco-friendly fine chemical synthesis, and environmental remediation protocols in the very near future.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Australian Research Council (ARC DP150102110).
References
X. Lang, X. Chen and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 473 RSC .
Z. Zuo, D. T. Ahneman, L. Chu, J. A. Terrett, A. G. Doyle and D. W. MacMillan, Science, 2014, 345, 437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7729 CrossRef CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qiao, D. Wang, L. Zuo, Y. Ye, J. Qian, H. Chen and S. He, Appl. Energy, 2011, 88, 848 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rycenga, C. M. Cobley, J. Zeng, W. Li, C. H. Moran, Q. Zhang, D. Qin and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Watanabe, D. Menzel, N. Nilius and H. J. Freund, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, Y. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. M. Arabatzis, T. Stergiopoulos, D. Andreeva, S. Kitova, S. G. Neophytides and P. Falaras, J. Catal., 2003, 220, 127 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patsoura, D. I. Kondarides and X. E. Verykios, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 64, 171 CrossRef CAS .
V. Subramanian, E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 11439 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, X. Ke, X. Yang, S. Sarina and H. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sarina, E. R. Waclawik and H. Zhu, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 1814 RSC .
X. Chen, H. Y. Zhu, J. C. Zhao, Z. F. Zheng and X. P. Gao, Angew. Chem., 2008, 120, 5433 CrossRef .
H. Zhu, X. Chen, Z. Zheng, X. Ke, E. Jaatinen, J. Zhao, C. Guo, T. Xie and D. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 7524 RSC .
P. Christopher, H. Xin and S. Linic, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 467 CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Fox and M. T. Dulay, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 341 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima, T. N. Rao and D. A. Tryk, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2000, 1, 1 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145 CrossRef .
M. Kitano, K. Iyatani, K. Tsujimaru, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, M. Ueshima, J. M. Thomas and M. Anpo, Top. Catal., 2008, 49, 24 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Litter, Appl. Catal., B, 1999, 23, 89 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Teoh, R. Amal, L. Mädler and S. E. Pratsinis, Catal. Today, 2007, 120, 203 CrossRef CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. U. M. Khan, M. Al-Shahry and W. B. Ingler, Science, 2002, 297, 2243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ikeda, M. Hara, J. N. Kondo, K. Domen, H. Takahashi, T. Okubo and M. Kakihana, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 72 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735 CrossRef CAS .
S. Eustis and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 209 RSC .
S. Link, C. Burda, Z. L. Wang and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 111, 1255 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Liz-Marzán, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 32 CrossRef PubMed .

          P. N. D. Pines, The Theory of Quantum Liquids, Benjamine, New York,  1966 Search PubMed .
S. Link and M. A. El-Sayed, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2000, 19, 409 CrossRef CAS .
S. Link and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 4212 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Willets and R. P. van Duyne, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, M. Rycenga, S. E. Skrabalak, B. Wiley and Y. Xia, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2009, 60, 167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Negishi, T. Nakazaki, S. Malola, S. Takano, Y. Niihori, W. Kurashige, S. Yamazoe, T. Tsukuda and H. Häkkinen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, R. S. Ingram, M. J. Hostetler, J. J. Pietron, R. W. Murray, T. G. Schaaff, J. T. Khoury, M. M. Alvarez and R. L. Whetten, Science, 1998, 280, 2098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yamada, K. Miyajima and F. Mafuné, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11246 CAS .
J. C. Scaiano, K. G. Stamplecoskie and G. L. Hallett-Tapley, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4798 RSC .
M. A. Garcia, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2011, 44, 283001 CrossRef .
M. M. Alvarez, J. T. Khoury, T. G. Schaaff, M. N. Shafigullin, I. Vezmar and R. L. Whetten, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 3706 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jin, Y. Cao, C. A. Mirkin, K. L. Kelly, G. C. Schatz and J. G. Zheng, Science, 2001, 294, 1901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Cushing, J. Li, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668 CrossRef CAS .
A. Henglein, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 6738 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1612 CrossRef CAS .
F. Le, D. W. Brandl, Y. A. Urzhumov, H. Wang, J. Kundu, N. J. Halas, J. Aizpurua and P. Nordlander, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Kale, T. Avanesian and P. Christopher, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 116 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, K. Bosnick, M. Maillard and L. Brus, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 9964 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kambhampati, C. M. Child, M. C. Foster and A. Campion, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 108, 5013 CrossRef CAS .

          U. Kreibig, Vollmer, Michael, Optical Properties of Metal Clusters, Springer,  1995 Search PubMed .
D. Tsukamoto, Y. Shiraishi, Y. Sugano, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Jain, X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Schuller, E. S. Barnard, W. Cai, Y. C. Jun, J. S. White and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Linic, U. Aslam, C. Boerigter and M. Morabito, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Petek and S. Ogawa, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2002, 53, 507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Petryayeva and U. J. Krull, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2011, 706, 8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sarina, H. Y. Zhu, Q. Xiao, E. Jaatinen, J. Jia, Y. Huang, Z. Zheng and H. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Corma and H. Garcia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2096 RSC .
H. Guo, M. Kemell, A. Al-Hunaiti, S. Rautiainen, M. Leskelä and T. Repo, Catal. Commun., 2011, 12, 1260 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mallat and A. Baiker, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. F. S. Barry, M. Trost and I. Fleming, Comprehensive Organic Synthesis, Pergamon, Oxford, UK,  1991 Search PubMed .

          M. Hudlicky, Oxidations in Organic Chemistry (ACS Monographs) American Chemical Society, Washington DC,  1990 Search PubMed .

          J. K. K. Roger and A. Sheldon, Metal-catalyzed oxidations of organic compounds, Academic Press, New York,  1981 Search PubMed .

          R. C. Larock, Comprehensive Organic Transformations, Wiley-VCH, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
W. G. Lloyd, J. Org. Chem., 1967, 32, 2816 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Otera, Esterification, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2003 Search PubMed .
N. Lingaiah, K. M. Reddy, N. S. Babu, K. N. Rao, I. Suryanarayana and P. S. S. Prasad, Catal. Commun., 2006, 7, 245 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mao and A. Bakac, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 4219 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, F. Blatter and H. Frei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 7951 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarina, H. Zhu, Z. Zheng, S. Bottle, J. Chang, X. Ke, J.-C. Zhao, Y. Huang, A. Sutrisno, M. Willans and G. Li, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2138 RSC .
D. I. Enache, J. K. Edwards, P. Landon, B. Solsona-Espriu, A. F. Carley, A. A. Herzing, M. Watanabe, C. J. Kiely, D. W. Knight and G. J. Hutchings, Science, 2006, 311, 362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Miedziak, Q. He, J. K. Edwards, S. H. Taylor, D. W. Knight, B. Tarbit, C. J. Kiely and G. J. Hutchings, Catal. Today, 2011, 163, 47 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Burange, S. R. Kale, R. Zboril, M. B. Gawande and R. V. Jayaram, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 6597–6601 RSC .
D. G. Lee and U. A. Spitzer, J. Org. Chem., 1970, 35, 3589 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qamar, R. B. Elsayed, K. R. Alhooshani, M. I. Ahmed and D. W. Bahnemann, Catal. Commun., 2015, 58, 34 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Zhang, X. B. Ke and H. Y. Zhu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 8048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bezouhanova, Y. Kalvachev, V. Nenova and H. Lechert, J. Mol. Catal., 1991, 68, 295 CrossRef .
S. Sarina, H. Zhu, E. Jaatinen, Q. Xiao, H. Liu, J. Jia, C. Chen and J. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sarina, S. Bai, Y. Huang, C. Chen, J. Jia, E. Jaatinen, G. A. Ayoko, Z. Bao and H. Zhu, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 331 RSC .
K. Liu, X. Yan, P. Zou, Y. Wang and L. Dai, Catal. Commun., 2015, 58, 132 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Farsani, F. Jalilian, B. Yadollahi and H. A. Rudbari, Polyhedron, 2014, 76, 102 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Nadealian, V. Mirkhani, B. Yadollahi, M. Moghadam, S. Tangestaninejad and I. Mohammadpoor-Baltork, J. Coord. Chem., 2013, 66, 1264 CrossRef CAS .
L. Brus, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Lindstrom and X. Y. Zhu, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Conte, H. Miyamura, S. Kobayashi and V. Chechik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Della Pina, E. Falletta and M. Rossi, J. Catal., 2008, 260, 384 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Yoon, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 321 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abad, P. Concepción, A. Corma and H. García, Angew. Chem., 2005, 117, 4134 CrossRef .
S. Higashimoto, N. Kitao, N. Yoshida, T. Sakura, M. Azuma, H. Ohue and Y. Sakata, J. Catal., 2009, 266, 279 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Z. Zheng, X. Ke, E. Jaatinen, T. Xie, D. Wang, C. Guo, J. Zhao and H. Zhu, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 414 RSC .
G. E. Dobereiner and R. H. Crabtree, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Guillena, D. J. Ramón and M. Yus, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 1611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. A. Watson and J. M. J. Williams, Science, 2010, 329, 635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Arita, T. Koike, Y. Kayaki and T. Ikariya, Chem. – Asian J., 2008, 3, 1479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Miyamura, T. Yasukawa and S. Kobayashi, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 776 RSC .
R. L. Oliveira, P. K. Kiyohara and L. M. Rossi, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 1366 RSC .
B. Xu, X. Liu, J. Haubrich, R. J. Madix and C. M. Friend, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zweifel, J.-V. Naubron and H. Grützmacher, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lu, Z. Du, J. Liu, H. Ma and J. Xu, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 2215 RSC .
Q. Xiao, Z. Liu, A. Bo, S. Zavahir, S. Sarina, S. Bottle, J. D. Riches and H. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. N. Zope, D. D. Hibbitts, M. Neurock and R. J. Davis, Science, 2010, 330, 74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bonn, S. Funk, C. Hess, D. N. Denzler, C. Stampfl, M. Scheffler, M. Wolf and G. Ertl, Science, 1999, 285, 1042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Barluenga, F. González-Bobes, M. C. Murguía, S. R. Ananthoju and J. M. González, Chem. – Eur. J., 2004, 10, 4206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, S. Tang and A. Lei, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1324 RSC .
M. Nielsen, H. Junge, A. Kammer and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Pina, E. Falletta and M. Rossi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 350 RSC .
J. S. M. Samec, A. H. Éll and J.-E. Bäckvall, Chem. – Eur. J., 2005, 11, 2327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhu and R. J. Angelici, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2157 RSC .
A. Grirrane, A. Corma and H. Garcia, J. Catal., 2009, 264, 138 CrossRef CAS .
L. P. He, T. Chen, D. Gong, Z. Lai and K.-W. Huang, Organometallics, 2012, 31, 5208 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Layer, Chem. Rev., 1963, 63, 489 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. Cui, F. Shi and Y. Deng, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhu, M. Lazar, B. G. Trewyn and R. J. Angelici, J. Catal., 2008, 260, 1 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hirakawa, M. Katayama, Y. Shiraishi, H. Sakamoto, K. Wang, B. Ohtani, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3797 CAS .
L. Wang, B. Chen, L. Ren, H. Zhang, Y. Lü and S. Gao, Cuihua Xuebao, 2015, 36, 19 CAS .
H. Huang, X. Ji, W. Wu, L. Huang and H. Jiang, J. Org. Chem., 2013, 78, 3774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Tayade and M. Mishra, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2014, 382, 114 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamaguchi and N. Mizuno, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 1480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Aschwanden, T. Mallat, F. Krumeich and A. Baiker, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2009, 309, 57 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lang, H. Ji, C. Chen, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lang, W. Ma, Y. Zhao, C. Chen, H. Ji and J. Zhao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 2624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abiko, J. C. Roberts, T. Takemasa and S. Masamune, Tetrahedron Lett., 1986, 27, 4537 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Garegg, L. Olsson and S. Oscarson, J. Org. Chem., 1995, 60, 2200 CrossRef CAS .
G. Qian, R. Zhao, D. Ji, G. Lu, Y. Qi and J. Suo, Chem. Lett., 2004, 33, 834 CrossRef CAS .
L. Song, S. Zhang, X. Wu, H. Tian and Q. Wei, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 9510 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bolm, J. Legros, J. Le Paih and L. Zani, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 6217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Enthaler, K. Junge and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gopinath, B. Barkakaty, B. Talukdar and B. K. Patel, J. Org. Chem., 2003, 68, 2944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Grigg, T. R. B. Mitchell and S. Sutthivaiyakit, Tetrahedron, 1981, 37, 4313 CrossRef CAS .
S.-. Kiyooka, Y. Wada, M. Ueno, T. Yokoyama and R. Yokoyama, Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 12695 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Yoo and C. J. Li, Tetrahedron Lett., 2007, 48, 1033 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Q. Xiao, Y. Bao, Y. Zhang, S. Bottle, S. Sarina, B. Zhaorigetu and H. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 19062 CAS .
N. A. Owston, T. D. Nixon, A. J. Parker, M. K. Whittlesey and J. M. J. Williams, Synthesis, 2009, 2009, 1578 CrossRef .
K. Suzuki, T. Yamaguchi, K. Matsushita, C. Iitsuka, J. Miura, T. Akaogi and H. Ishida, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1845 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Wu and C. Darcel, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2009, 2009, 1144 CrossRef .
E. Merino, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3835 RSC .
T. Mitsudome, A. Noujima, Y. Mikami, T. Mizugaki, K. Jitsukawa and K. Kaneda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Z. Su, L. He, J. Ni, Y. Cao, H.-Y. He and K.-N. Fan, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3531 RSC .

          V. Glezer, in The Chemistry of the Hydrazo, Azo and Azoxy Groups, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,  2004, ch. 19, p. 729 Search PubMed .
A. Grirrane, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Nat. Protoc., 2010, 11, 429 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. K. Hashmi and G. J. Hutchings, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7896 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Ohe, S. Uemura, N. Sugita, H. Masuda and T. Taga, J. Org. Chem., 1989, 54, 4169 CrossRef CAS .
A. Grirrane, A. Corma and H. García, Science, 2008, 322, 1661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Corma and P. Serna, Science, 2006, 313, 332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Yuan, R. Nie, Z. Hou and X. Zheng, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 4664 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, C. Hao, G. Jin, H. Y. Zhu and X.-Y. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Roth, J. C. Yoder, T. J. Won and J. M. Mayer, Science, 2001, 294, 2524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Corey and W. G. Su, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 7534 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Johnson, M. S. Plummer, S. P. Reddy and W. R. Bartlett, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 515 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Kraus and P. J. Thomas, J. Org. Chem., 1988, 53, 1395 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Arterburn, M. Liu and M. C. Perry, Helv. Chim. Acta, 2002, 85, 3225 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Gable and E. C. Brown, Synlett, 2003, 2003, 2243 CrossRef .
H. Isobe and B. P. Branchaud, Tetrahedron Lett., 1999, 40, 8747 CrossRef CAS .
T. Itoh, T. Nagano, M. Sato and M. Hirobe, Tetrahedron Lett., 1989, 30, 6387 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu and J. H. Espenson, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 1995, 103, 87 CrossRef CAS .
J. Davis and R. S. Srivastava, Tetrahedron Lett., 2014, 55, 4178 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mitsudome, Y. Mikami, M. Matoba, T. Mizugaki, K. Jitsukawa and K. Kaneda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ke, S. Sarina, J. Zhao, X. Zhang, J. Chang and H. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3509 RSC .
X. Ke, X. Zhang, J. Zhao, S. Sarina, J. Barry and H. Zhu, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 236 RSC .
H.-U. Blaser, Chem. Commun., 2003, 293–296,  10.1039/B209968N .
M. Breuer, K. Ditrich, T. Habicher, B. Hauer, M. Keβeler, R. Stürmer and T. Zelinski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. J. S. K. C. Nicolaou, Classics in Total Synthesis, Verlag Chemie, Weinheim,  1996 Search PubMed .
C. Battilocchio, J. M. Hawkins and S. V. Ley, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 2278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Doucet, T. Ohkuma, K. Murata, T. Yokozawa, M. Kozawa, E. Katayama, A. F. England, T. Ikariya and R. Noyori, Angew. Chem., 1998, 110, 1792 CrossRef .
F. Jiang, K. Yuan, M. Achard and C. Bruneau, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 10343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Noyori, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2003, 345, 15 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mahmood, A. Khalid, M. Arshad, T. Mahmood and D. E. Crowley, Crit. Rev. Biotechnol., 2015, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Russ, J. Rau and A. Stolz, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2000, 66, 1429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nam and P. G. Tratnyek, Water Res., 2000, 34, 1837 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hermanns, S. Dahmen, C. Bolm and S. Bräse, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 3692 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Müller, K. C. Hultzsch, M. Yus, F. Foubelo and M. Tada, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 3795 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Widenhoefer and X. Han, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2006, 2006, 4555 CrossRef .
M. Beller, J. Seayad, A. Tillack and H. Jiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 3368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Severin and S. Doye, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1407 RSC .
Q. Chen, L. Lv, M. Yu, Y. Shi, Y. Li, G. Pang and C. Cao, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 18359 RSC .
W. Fang, M. Presset, A. Guérinot, C. Bour, S. Bezzenine-Lafollée and V. Gandon, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 5439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, Z. Zheng, S. Bottle, A. Chou, S. Sarina and H. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2676 RSC .
D. Yang, H. Liu, Z. Zheng, Y. Yuan, J. Zhao, E. R. Waclawik, X. Ke and H. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zheng, H. Liu, J. Ye, J. Zhao, E. R. Waclawik and H. Zhu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2010, 316, 75 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, J. R. McCormick, R. F. Lobo and J. G. Chen, J. Catal., 2007, 246, 40 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, W. Pyrz, R. F. Lobo and J. G. Chen, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 333, 254 CrossRef CAS .
N. Miyaura and A. Suzuki, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 2457 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dai, N. A. Strotman and G. C. Fu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Á. Gordillo, E. de Jesús and C. López-Mardomingo, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 3517 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Murata, R. Shimazaki, S. Watanabe and Y. Masuda, Synthesis, 2001, 2001, 2231 CrossRef .
B. Sreedhar, A. S. Kumar and D. Yada, Synlett, 2011, 2011, 1081 CrossRef .
A. Pouilhes, A. F. Amado, A. Vidal, Y. Langlois and C. Kouklovsky, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2008, 6, 1502 CAS .
P. Schäfer, G. Hamprecht, M. Puhl, K.-O. Westphalen and C. Zagar, Chimia Int. J. Chem., 2003, 57, 715 CrossRef .
G. Bringmann, S. Rüdenauer, T. Bruhn, L. Benson and R. Brun, Tetrahedron, 2008, 64, 5563 CrossRef CAS .

          W. A. H. Boy Cornils, Applied Homogeneous Catalysis with Organometallic Compounds, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1999 Search PubMed .
B. M. Choudary, S. Madhi, N. S. Chowdari, M. L. Kantam and B. Sreedhar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Corbet and G. Mignani, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 2651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Suzuki, J. Organomet. Chem., 1999, 576, 147 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yin and J. Liebscher, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Billingsley and S. L. Buchwald, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zapf, R. Jackstell, F. Rataboul, T. Riermeier, A. Monsees, C. Fuhrmann, N. Shaikh, U. Dingerdissen and M. Beller, Chem. Commun., 2004, 38 RSC .
R. Martin and S. L. Buchwald, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. T. S. Phan, M. van der Sluys and C. W. Jones, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2006, 348, 609 CrossRef CAS .
Á. Molnár, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 2251 CrossRef PubMed .
V. I. Sokolov, E. G. Rakov, N. A. Bumagin and M. G. Vinogradov, Fullerenes, Nanotubes, Carbon Nanostruct., 2010, 18, 558 CrossRef CAS .
K. Karami, M. Ghasemi and N. Haghighat Naeini, Catal. Commun., 2013, 38, 10 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiao, S. Sarina, E. Jaatinen, J. Jia, D. P. Arnold, H. Liu and H. Zhu, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4272 RSC .
T. S. A. Heugebaert, S. De Corte, T. Sabbe, T. Hennebel, W. Verstraete, N. Boon and C. V. Stevens, Tetrahedron Lett., 2012, 53, 1410 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Hajipour and F. Rafiee, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2013, 27, 412 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Lee, Y. Qian, J.-H. Park, J.-S. Lee, S.-E. Shim and M.-J. Jin, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2013, 355, 1729 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Grasa and S. P. Nolan, Org. Lett., 2001, 3, 119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Weskamp, V. P. W. Böhm and W. A. Herrmann, J. Organomet. Chem., 1999, 585, 348 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Pignolet, Homogeneous Catalysis with Metal Phosphine Complexes, Plenum, New York,  1983 Search PubMed .
V. Polshettiwar, C. Len and A. Fihri, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2009, 253, 2599 CrossRef CAS .
W. Su, S. Urgaonkar, P. A. McLaughlin and J. G. Verkade, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 16433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Hajipour, N. Najafi and F. Rafiee, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2013, 27, 228 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiao, S. Sarina, A. Bo, J. Jia, H. Liu, D. P. Arnold, Y. Huang, H. Wu and H. Zhu, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1725 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, P. Li, Y. Zhang and L. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 7166 RSC .
R. Chinchilla and C. Nájera, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Garg, C. C. Woodroofe, C. J. Lacenere, S. R. Quake and B. M. Stoltz, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4551 RSC .
K. Sonogashira, J. Organomet. Chem., 2002, 653, 46 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sharma and A. P. Singh, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 2978 CAS .
M. Shunmughanathan, P. Puthiaraj and K. Pitchumani, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 666 CrossRef CAS .
C. Amatore, A. Jutand and M. A. M'Barki, Organometallics, 1992, 11, 3009 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Fleckenstein and H. Plenio, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 694 RSC .
C. Deraedt, D. Wang, L. Salmon, L. Etienne, C. Labrugère, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 303 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakane, Y. Tanioka and N. Tsukada, Organometallics, 2015, 34, 1191 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Hartwig, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Lemen and J. Wolfe, in Amination and Formation of sp2 C-N Bonds, ed. M. Taillefer and D. Ma, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg,  2013, ch. 56, vol. 46, p. 1 Search PubMed .

          A. Muci and S. Buchwald, in Cross-Coupling Reactions, ed. N. Miyaura, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg,  2002, ch. 5, vol. 219, p. 131 Search PubMed .
S. Nadri, E. Rafiee, S. Jamali and M. Joshaghani, Tetrahedron Lett., 2014, 55, 4098 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sa, M. B. Gawande, A. Velhinho, J. P. Veiga, N. Bundaleski, J. Trigueiro, A. Tolstogouzov, O. M. N. D. Teodoro, R. Zboril, R. S. Varma and P. S. Branco, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 3494 RSC .
P. Saikia, G. Sharma, S. Gogoi and R. C. Boruah, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 23210 RSC .
Y. Zhang, V. César and G. Lavigne, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2015, 2015, 2042 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gaspar and E. M. Carreira, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Kropp, K. A. Daus, S. D. Crawford, M. W. Tubergen, K. D. Kepler, S. L. Craig and V. P. Wilson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 7433 CrossRef CAS .
L. Schmerling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1946, 68, 195 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Stille, F. M. Sonnenberg and T. H. Kinstle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1966, 88, 4922 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, H. Zhu, G. Gao, C. Han, J. Wang, J. Liu, H. Lu, M. Tong and X. Liang, Catal. Lett., 2013, 144, 81 CrossRef .
G. B. S. Sergeev, V. V. Smirnov and T. N. Rostovshchikova, Russ. Chem. Rev., 1983, 52, 259 CrossRef .
T. Kawabata, T. Mizugaki, K. Ebitani and K. Kaneda, Tetrahedron Lett., 2001, 42, 8329 CrossRef CAS .
J. Miao, H. Wan, Y. Shao, G. Guan and B. Xu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2011, 348, 77 CrossRef CAS .
K.-. Shimizu, E. Hayashi, T. Hatamachi, T. Kodama, T. Higuchi, A. Satsuma and Y. Kitayama, J. Catal., 2005, 231, 131 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, D. Jiang and L. Dai, Catal. Commun., 2008, 9, 2475 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, Y. Gu, G. Song, T. Yang, L. Yang and J. Suo, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2005, 233, 121 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gupta, Sonu, G. L. Kad and J. Singh, Catal. Commun., 2007, 8, 1323 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fang, K. Gong, Q. Shi and Z. Liu, Catal. Commun., 2007, 8, 1463 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Ke, Z. Zheng, H. Liu and H. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 150, 330 CrossRef .
M. Ogura, S.-y. Shinomiya, J. Tateno, Y. Nara, M. Nomura, E. Kikuchi and M. Matsukata, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 219, 33 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, T. Willhammar, L. Wang, L. Zhu, Q. Sun, X. Meng, W. Carrillo-Cabrera, X. Zou and F.-S. Xiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, I. Čorić, S. Vellalath and B. List, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Iwamoto, Y. Tanaka, N. Sawamura and S. Namba, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 13032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, J. Zhang, L. Zhang, B. J. Turpin, C. P. Weisel, M. T. Morandi, T. H. Stock, S. Colome and L. R. Korn, Atmos. Environ., 2006, 40, 2202 CrossRef CAS .
C. Marchand, B. Bulliot, S. Le Calvé and P. Mirabel, Atmos. Environ., 2006, 40, 1336 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. O'Brien, A. G. Siraki and N. Shangari, Crit. Rev. Toxicol., 2005, 35, 609 CrossRef .
M. Haruta, A. Ueda, S. Tsubota and R. M. Torres Sanchez, Catal. Today, 1996, 29, 443 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. C. Ashok Kumar Chakraborty and W. I. Lee, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2008, 29, 494 CrossRef .
T. X. Liu, F. B. Li and X. Z. Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2008, 152, 347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kajitvichyanukul, M. C. Lu and A. Jamroensan, J. Environ. Manage., 2008, 86, 545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qi, D. Z. Sun and G. Q. Chi, J. Environ. Sci., 2007, 19, 1136 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Shen, X. Yang, S. Sheng, T. Wang, M. F. Adebajo and H. Zhu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2010, 316, 100 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Lee, B. K. Song, S. E. Jeong, D. S. Kim, T. H. Kim, Y. K. Lee, N. T. Le, M.-J. Cho and S. D. Henam, Sekiyu Gakkaishi, 2010, 53, 184 CrossRef CAS .
A. Xu, M. Yang, H. Yao, H. Du and C. Sun, Appl. Clay Sci., 2009, 43, 435 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Brown and S. C. De Vito, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 1993, 23, 249 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Tayade, P. K. Surolia, R. G. Kulkarni and R. V. Jasra, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2007, 8, 455 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, D. Li, W. Zhang, Y. Shao, T. Chen, M. Sun and X. Fu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4433 CAS .
W. Zhao, C. Chen, X. Li, J. Zhao, H. Hidaka and N. Serpone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5022 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, W. Zhao, J. Li, J. Zhao, H. Hidaka and N. Serpone, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2002, 36, 3604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, X. Li, J. Zhao, H. Hidaka and N. Serpone, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 3982 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, J. Li, W. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Wang and H. Su, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 7276 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Suyoulema, W. Wang and Sarina, Solid State Sci., 2009, 11, 2037 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu and J. Zhao, New J. Chem., 2000, 24, 411 RSC .
J. Zhao, C. Chen and W. Ma, Top. Catal., 2005, 35, 269 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  A) Schematic illustration of the electron-sea model. B) The molecular orbital energy spacings decrease as the number of interacting atoms increases.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of light absorption in metal NPs and the photoelectric effect.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of a localized surface plasmon resonance.	 

 	Fig. 4  Surface plasmon absorption bands for Au, Ag and Cu nanoparticles.39	 

 	Fig. 5  A) Schematic illustration of electric fields of incident light and that created by the electron oscillations near the metal NP;40 B) the extinction cross-section and corresponding resonant wavelength for isolated metallic NPs.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic showing the three dephasing mechanisms of oscillating surface plasmons.48	 

 	Fig. 7  Indirect (a) and direct (b) charge transfer mechanisms.55	 

 	Scheme 1  Proposed mechanism of aromatic alcohol oxidation over Au–Pd alloy NPs under visible light irradiation.79	 

 	Scheme 2  Proposed mechanism for synthesis of esters from aliphatic alcohols.101	 

 	Scheme 3  Proposed mechanism for the photo oxidation of benzylamine.79	 

 	Scheme 4  Proposed mechanisms for the esterification of benzaldehyde with alcohol.133	 

 	Scheme 5  Proposed mechanisms for the reductive coupling of nitrobebzene.12	 

 	Scheme 6  Proposed mechanism for the selective reduction reactions.160	 

 	Scheme 7  Proposed mechanism for the photocatalytic hydroamination of alkynes.178	 

 	Scheme 8  Proposed mechanism for Suzuki reaction.79	 

 	Scheme 9  Schematic diagram of the pathway for the photocatalytic cross-coupling reactions.213	 

 	Scheme 10  Mechanisms of addition on supported noble metal catalysts under irradiation of visible light.146	 

 	Scheme 11  The acetalization on Au/MZSM-5 under the irradiation of visible light.244	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
