Synthesis of ZnO inverse opals with high crystalline quality by a three-dimensional colloidal crystal template-assisted hydrothermal method over a see ...  - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CE01597B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CE01597B
(Paper)
CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 7780-7786Synthesis of ZnO inverse opals with high crystalline quality by a three-dimensional colloidal crystal template-assisted hydrothermal method over a seed layer

        
          
            Ming 
            Fu
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Haiyan 
            Zhao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dawei 
            He
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yongsheng 
            Wang
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory of Luminescence and Optical Information, Ministry of Education, Institute of Optoelectronic Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, PR China. E-mail: mfu@bjtu.edu.cn; yshwang@bjtu.edu.cn
Received 
      20th July 2016
    , Accepted 1st September 2016First published on 2nd September 2016AbstractIn this paper, zinc oxide (ZnO) inverse opal structures were fabricated on a seed layer using three-dimensional (3D) colloidal crystal templates. The 3D colloidal crystal templates hindered the diffusion of zinc ions during hydrothermal growth thereby restricting the formation of porous ZnO structures at typical Zn2+ concentrations leading to rods. Instead of porous ZnO microstructures, ZnO nanobowl films were exclusively grown using the 3D colloidal templates on the photoresist-patterned seed layer at the initial Zn2+ concentrations. 3D porous ZnO with different filling fractions were successfully created by a hydrothermal method at a Zn2+ concentration of 0.15 M with different adjuvants. The addition of sodium citrate yielded ZnO having inverse opal structures and showing variable reflection peaks according to the photonic stop band, which were controlled by the diameter of the template colloidal spheres. ZnO inverse opals prepared with sodium citrate as an adjuvant also showed superior ultraviolet photoluminescence intensity values compared to their adjuvant-free and polyethylenimine counterparts. The hydrothermal method resulted in ZnO inverse opal structures with significantly enhanced crystalline quality compared to those prepared by electrodeposition methods. ZnO inverse opals prepared by large-diameter colloidal crystal templates showed slightly better properties than those prepared using small-diameter templates. The ZnO inverse opals conformally coated by a thin layer of TiO2 were used as photoanodes for water splitting. The ZnO inverse opals prepared by the hydrothermal method showed significantly higher photocurrent values than those synthesized by electrodeposition. These ZnO inverse opals showed maximum photocurrent values of ca. 0.9 mA cm−2 comparable to the best results of other ZnO-based microstructures.
Introduction
Three-dimensional (3D) porous materials have attracted considerable attention because of their widespread application in a variety of fields.1,2 In particular, 3D structures3,4 with highly ordered morphologies have been widely used as optic,5,6 catalytic,7–9 biological,10 sensor,11,12 and electrode13–15 materials. Among the large variety of methods available for creating 3D porous structures, the colloidal crystal template method16,17 is commonly used to fabricate porous materials having highly ordered geometries. In this sense, inverse opal structures have been fabricated for a wide range of material systems using numerous methods including nanocrystal deposition,18,19 sol–gel infilling,20,21 chemical vapor deposition,22,23 and electrochemical deposition.24–27 Among these methods, electrodeposition is advantageous in that it allows complete filling of the voids surrounding a substrate when a 3D template is used. This bottom–up growth process can prevent surface channels from being inadvertently blocked which is common for vapor deposition or sol–gel filling methods (i.e., the filling process finishes before all of the interstices are filled).
The hydrothermal method of synthesizing crystals is advantageous because it can produce single crystals and create crystalline phases that are not easily formed using other methods. In addition, hydrothermal synthesis can be carried out at low temperatures, resulting in large, high-quality crystals. The hydrothermal method can form new nuclei in solution or, alternatively, grow crystals on seeded substrates. When seeded substrates are placed in solution, structures form on the existing seed layers, suggesting that microstructures grow from the substrate upward. For example, zinc oxide (ZnO) rods can be grown from seed layers.28,29 In general, crystalline structures can be formed using the seed layer-assisted hydrothermal method in a bottom–up manner similarly to the electrochemical deposition method. However, the ZnO inverse opals prepared by electrochemical deposition showed poor crystallinity. The development of a templating method involving 3D colloidal crystals employing the seed layer-assisted hydrothermal technique would provide an alternative path to inverse opal structures with better material quality. The most recent studies on hydrothermal methods using colloidal crystal templates focused primarily on applying nanoparticle coating onto the internal surfaces of the colloidal crystals.30–33 However, reports on the continuous growth of crystals using the hydrothermal method in conjunction with a colloidal crystal template are rare in the literature up to date. Herein, we study the growth of ZnO inverse opals with 3D ordered porous morphologies by a 3D polystyrene colloidal crystal template-assisted hydrothermal method. The photoluminescence and photocurrent characteristics of these materials for water splitting were also studied in an attempt to determine the material quality of the ZnO inverse opals prepared by the hydrothermal method.
Experimental
Silicon substrates were cleaned using a piranha solution (i.e., H2SO4:H2O2 solution with a 3:1 volume ratio) to remove organic contaminants. Indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates were also used for photochemical catalytic tests. Films seeded with ZnO were fabricated using a Line 420 magnetron sputtering system (Alliance Concept, France). A mixture of argon and oxygen (≥99.99% purity, 20:7 volumetric ratio) was used as the working gas. Prior to deposition, the Zn target (99.99% purity) was sputter cleaned. ZnO was subsequently coated onto the silicon substrate by sputtering, thereby creating a film with a thickness of 100 nm. The deposited seed layer was annealed at 500 °C in air for 1 h after sputtering. Then, the ZnO seed layer, positioned on top of the Si substrate, was coated with a photoresist layer when necessary. The photoresist pattern containing micro-sized holes was made using a lithography method. The photoresist layer covering the ZnO/Si substrate was subsequently covered by 3D polystyrene colloidal crystals by vertical deposition. The substrate constructs were placed perpendicularly into weighing bottles containing a dilute (0.1% by volume) polystyrene colloidal suspension and kept at 55 °C. The dilute colloidal suspension solution consisted of monodispersed microspheres modified with hydroxyl functional groups. Monodispersed microspheres with diameters of 181 nm, 238 nm, and 302 nm were used.
We also designed 3D crystal templates with a gradient thickness with the aim to check the effect of this parameter on the ZnO growth process. A more dilute colloidal suspension (0.03–0.05% by volume) was used to coat the thinner colloidal crystal films present on the ZnO/Si substrate. Colloidal crystals with a thickness gradient were formed on the substrate at several areas. The 3D colloidal crystal templates were formed on the surface of the ZnO/Si substrate regardless of the coverage of the ZnO surface by the photoresist pattern.
The hydrothermal reaction was performed at 95 °C in an aqueous solution containing 0.025–0.15 M zinc nitrate hexahydrate and an equimolar concentration of hexamethylenetetramine (HMTA). Sodium citrate at a concentration of 600 μM or 0.05 mM polyethylenimine was also added when necessary. The substrates were always placed into the aqueous solution in an upside–down manner such that the ZnO formed in solution by homogenous nucleation was not attached to the substrate, and only those ZnO deposits originating from the ZnO seeded layer remained on the substrate. With the aim to remove the photoresist and the colloidal polymer crystals, the substrate was immersed in toluene for 24 h.
The reflection spectra were obtained by using a Hamamatsu S10420-1106-01 detector equipped with a halogen/deuterium lamp, a Y-type fiber, and a monochromator. The photoluminescence (PL) spectra were obtained using a microscope at 10× magnification and a spectrometer provided with an ultraviolet fiber connected with the microscope at the position of the CMOS camera. The samples were illuminated with a 325 nm laser beam. The samples were placed on the holders of the optical microscope. The microscope (XPL-3230, Guangdong Explicit Optical Instrument) was modified into to a quartz optical system using planoconvex lens and objective lens from Daheng Tech and contained a long-pass filter at 347 nm inside. A fiber optic spectrometer (Acton InSpectrum Spectrograph with Embedded CCD, InSpectrum 150) was connected to the C-mount position of the microscope.
The morphologies of the fabricated ZnO structures were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S-4800, Hitachi, Japan) and powder X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku D/MAX-PC 2500, Cu KR).
ZnO inverse opals fabricated on ITO substrates were used as photoanodes for water splitting after being conformally coated with TiO2 by an atomic layer deposition (ALD) system (TALD-150, Wayes-Vac, China, 20 cycles) using titanium tetrachloride and water as precursors. The samples were subsequently illuminated in 0.66 mM chloroplatinic acid solutions for 10 min. Photoelectrochemical measurements were performed using a three-electrode system (CHI660A Electrochemical Workstation). The ZnO-covered ITO substrates were used as the electrodeposition working electrode, while a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) in a fused silica beaker containing a 1 M sodium sulphate solution was used as the reference electrode. The electrochemical measurements were carried out by using a potentiostatic method at 0.606 V. 300 W xenon light (CEL-HXF300) measured by a thermopile type light power meter (NP2000-2, CEL, China) was used.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a shows the colloidal crystal template-covered ITO substrates pre-coated with a seeded layer of ZnO. The hydrothermal synthesis proceeded from the existing seed layers, thereby suggesting that the microstructures grow from the substrate upward. Thus, ZnO inverse opals having compact and well-ordered geometries with different periodicities were fabricated using colloidal crystal templates made from monodispersed microspheres of different diameters. Fig. 1b shows the reflection spectra of ZnO inverse opals while varying the microsphere diameters (i.e., 181, 238, and 302 nm). Narrow reflection peaks, representing the photonic stop band of the structures, were observed in the reflection spectra of the different inverse opal samples. The photonic stop bands shifted from 420 to 575 nm while increasing the diameter of the template microspheres. The surface morphologies of the different ZnO inverse opals prepared from microspheres with varying diameters are shown in Fig. 1c–e. Fig. 1f shows the cross-section view of the ZnO inverse opals prepared from microspheres of 181 nm in diameter. The inverse opals were prepared with solid continuous film geometries and high filling fraction ratios from the bottom to the surface. Therefore, the seeded layer-assisted hydrothermal synthesis method using colloidal crystal templates can furnish ZnO inverse opal structures similarly to other bottom–up synthesis methods such as electrochemical deposition.
 Fig. 1  SEM images and reflection spectra showing the formation of ZnO inverse opals. (a) Schematic of the colloidal crystal template on the ZnO seeded layer-covered ITO substrate. (b) Reflection spectra showing the photonic stop band of the ZnO inverse opals fabricated via a hydrothermal method using colloidal crystals with monodispersed microspheres of different diameters. (c–e) SEM images of ZnO inverse opals prepared using microspheres colloidal crystals of: (c) 181 nm, (d) 238 nm, and (e) 302 nm in diameter. (f) SEM image cross-section view of ZnO inverse opals prepared using microspheres colloidal crystals of 181 nm in diameter. 
The high concentration of the zinc nitrate solution (above 0.1 M) during the hydrothermal process plays an important role in the formation of ZnO inverse opals. Thus, a substrate with seeded layers covered with colloidal crystal templates placed in a 0.025 M zinc nitrate solution resulted in the formation of a monolayer of ZnO bowl array films (Fig. 2a). The presence of 3D colloidal templates may affect ion diffusion, thereby the ZnO growth. With the aim to decrease the diffusion effects on ions during the synthesis, the area ratio of the seed films was effectively reduced using photoresist hole patterns, as shown in Fig. 2b.
 Fig. 2  Microstructures in solution containing typical concentrations of zinc nitrate over a ZnO seed layer or a photoresist hole-patterned ZnO seed layer. (a) SEM images of monolayer nanobowl arrays formed in 0.025 M zinc nitrate and HMTA solutions using colloidal templates over a ZnO seed layer. (b) Schematic showing the covering of the ZnO seed layer on the Si substrate by the photoresist patterns. (c) In the ideal cases, ZnO microrods start growing at the pores of the photoresist material and continue growing through the interstices of the colloidal crystal template. (d and e) SEM images of the ZnO microstructures obtained after removal of colloidal crystals in 0.025 M zinc nitrate and HMTA solutions at (d) low magnification and (e) high magnification. (f) Schematic showing the actual ZnO morphology achieved when the colloidal crystal template was used. 
Once the patterned photoresist was coated onto the ZnO seed layer (which is covering the Si substrate, Fig. 2b), the polymer colloidal crystals were placed on the photoresist materials. Monodispersed polystyrene microspheres modified with hydroxyl groups were used herein to increase the wettability of the 3D channels of the template crystal during the hydrothermal synthesis. In the idealized cases, ZnO is first deposited at the seed layer and subsequently grows forming rod-shaped structures in the interstices of the colloidal crystal template (Fig. 2c) during the hydrothermal process. Once the photoresist and the colloidal crystals are removed, the ZnO rods containing ordered pores may remain on the substrate.
However, the sample shown in Fig. 2d reveals that no rod structures were formed via the hydrothermal synthesis, different from what is expected from the idealized schematic represented in Fig. 2c. We found that the deposited array only contained spherical traces of ZnO induced by the photoresist pattern on the substrate (Fig. 2d). Instead of having microrod structures resulting from the colloidal crystal template, we obtained nanobowl structures with less than half the height of the template microspheres, as shown in the enlarged SEM image in Fig. 2e.
A thin ZnO film was exclusively formed on the substrate upon application of the colloidal crystals to the ZnO/Si substrate in solution.
A schematic of the resulting ZnO rods (Fig. 2f) reveals that the 3D colloidal microspheres hinder the diffusion of Zn2+ ions. Therefore, once the hydrothermal growth on the seeded ZnO layer begins, the concentration of Zn2+ ions nearby begins to decrease, the concentration of Zn2+ ions nearby decreases to a level below the growth threshold, and the rate of ZnO formation at the bottom of the 3D colloidal crystal template significantly decreases. As shown in Fig. 2d, ZnO preferentially crystallized and grew in solution outside the 3D template versus inside the 3D porous channels near the ZnO film. Thus, no ZnO structures were able to grow with a diameter larger than that of the template microspheres. Furthermore, any deposition taking place on the internal surfaces of the microspheres or outside the template was removed during the microsphere-removal step, leaving only the nanobowl film, as shown in Fig. 2e.
With the aim to know more about the ion diffusion hindering process by the colloidal crystal template, a colloidal crystal layer with a thickness gradient was used to cover the photoresist-patterned seed layer followed by the hydrothermal deposition (Fig. 3a). Under these conditions, ZnO microrod arrays were formed where the colloidal crystals were very thin. Fig. 3c shows the fabricated ZnO structures after removal of the colloidal polymer crystals and the photoresist material. ZnO microrods were deposited on the substrate N and O regions. Region M only contained pore edges and traces of the photoresist pattern. The ZnO structure morphologies are shown in Fig. 3b. No ZnO rod structures were formed in regions with thick colloidal crystal films (i.e., region M). ZnO rods contained ordered pores in region N (i.e., thin colloidal crystal film was covered). ZnO rods formed in region O (i.e., no colloidal crystal film was covered). ZnO rods were grown through the microspheres in region N which was covered by a thin layer of colloidal crystals. The deposited ZnO formed inverse opal structures at the bottom of the rods while decreasing the thickness of the colloidal crystal layer. Fig. 3d presents a typical image of the photoresist pattern in region N after removal of the templates. Several ZnO rods were formed around one pore pattern. The rods exclusively contained a few layers of pore arrays (500–1000 nm) upon interaction with the colloidal microspheres. It is reasonable to assume that no porous morphologies existed at the tips of the ZnO rods since the rods extended beyond the boundary of the colloidal template. These results reveal that 3D colloidal films with a thickness lower than 1000 nm were not effective in hindering ion diffusion compared to thicker colloidal films. Remarkably, the concentration of Zn2+ ions may still allow ZnO microrods to grow in this region, with a growth process similar to that proposed in Fig. 2c. The structures formed in region N prove that the hydrothermal technology can be used to synthesize porous structures. Furthermore, ZnO structures formed regular microrods when no colloidal crystals were present (region O). The concentration and the template effects are important parameters determining the formation of porous structures during the hydrothermal process. Thus, an increase in the concentration of Zn2+ to 0.1 M resulted in the formation of rods with porous morphologies inside the thick colloidal crystal films (Fig. 3e).
 Fig. 3  Schematics and SEM images of the ZnO microrod arrays formed using colloidal crystal templates with a thickness gradient. (a and b) Schematics (a) showing the photoresist-patterned ZnO seed layer covered with the colloidal crystal template, and (b) the fabricated ZnO arrays. (c–d) SEM images of (c) ZnO surface morphologies showing the different structures formed from region M to region O, and (d) ZnO microrods with inverse opal morphologies at the bottom of the rods in region N of panels (b) and (c). (e) SEM image of porous ZnO microrods that fully incorporated the inverse opal structures using the hydrothermal method in solution (0.075 M zinc nitrate and HMTA). 
In addition to the concentration of zinc ions, the nature of the adjuvants in the hydrothermal process was one of the important factors determining the crystalline habits of the ZnO microstructures formed. In this sense, this factor was of utmost importance for the formation of inverse opals by hydrothermal methods. The SEM images of several ZnO microstructures prepared using colloidal crystal templates during the hydrothermal process with different adjuvants while keeping the concentration of zinc ions constant (i.e., 0.15 M zinc nitrate) are shown in Fig. 4a–c. Fig. 4a presents typical ZnO microstructures prepared by using sodium citrate. Very solid ZnO porous structures having exactly the inverse shape of the colloidal templates were formed. However, the porous ZnO structures fabricated without sodium citrate (Fig. 4b) presented periodic and highly loose morphologies. The curved geometries from the template spheres were not transferred to the porous structures formed. The low filling ratios of ZnO obtained (Fig. 4b) indicated that the hydrothermal process was not effective in completely filling the interstices before growing thicker. The sodium citrate adjuvant prevented the axial growth of ZnO. Thus, ZnO was hampered to grow in lateral directions thereby fully filling the interstices, as shown in Fig. 4a. The addition of polyethylenimine into the zinc nitrate solution during the hydrothermal process can promote the axial growth of ZnO. Therefore, the utilization of polyethylenimine during the colloidal crystal template process resulted in loose macroporous structures (Fig. 4c) compared to those prepared in the absence of this adjuvant. Even though long-range ordering of pores was observed, the structures highly differed from inverse opals. Therefore, the slow growth rates of ZnO in the axial direction are also important for the fabrication of ZnO inverse opals by the hydrothermal method. Fig. 4d shows the cross-section image of ZnO structures prepared using the colloidal template method. The rod shapes were formed again when the growth thickness of the rods was greater than that of the colloidal template.
 Fig. 4  SEM images of porous ZnO microstructures prepared by a hydrothermal method in 0.15 M zinc nitrate and HMTA solutions using colloidal crystal templates. (a–c) SEM top view images of the ZnO microstructures prepared by a hydrothermal method (a) using sodium citrate as an adjuvant, (b) without using adjuvants, and (c) using polyethylenimine as an adjuvant. (d) SEM cross-section view of ZnO microstructures prepared by the hydrothermal method using colloidal crystal templates. 
The usage of adjuvants allowed to change the morphologies of the template structures while also affecting the crystalline quality of ZnO. Fig. 5a shows the PL spectra of the ZnO porous structures prepared by a hydrothermal process in different solutions. In general, the PL spectra contained two main peaks: (i) one ultraviolet peak near 375–380 nm corresponding to the intrinsic band transition, and (ii) one visible peak at 500–650 nm ascribed to oxygen vacancies. Unlike the porous ZnO structures fabricated with pure zinc nitrate and HMTA, the sample fabricated with the sodium citrate adjuvant showed a more intense ultraviolet peak than the visible peak. The ultraviolet peak of the sample fabricated with polyethylenimine was significantly less intense. Therefore, the usage of sodium citrate achieved optimum inverse opal ZnO microstructures while also providing superior crystalline quality with low number of surface defects. The crystalline quality was tightly related to the filling density of the ZnO structures via the hydrothermal method. Thus, higher filling ratios of ZnO in porous structures resulted in higher crystalline quality. Fig. 5b shows the typical PL spectra of ZnO inverse opals prepared using different colloidal templates. The inverse opals fabricated via colloidal crystal templates with larger colloidal spheres showed slightly better crystalline quality than those prepared from small spheres. This result is reasonable since ZnO with a higher surface area was produced when small colloidal sphere templates were used. Fortunately, these effects were not important compared to the homogeneity of the samples. In most areas, the PL intensity ratios between the ultraviolet and visible peaks (Iuv/Ivisible) of ZnO inverse opals were comparable to the rods prepared without using templates (Fig. 5c). Therefore, the ZnO inverse opals showed improved surface areas and a potential ability for modulation of photonic states while also maintaining the good crystalline quality of ZnO rods prepared by the hydrothermal method. The PL intensity ratio (Iuv/Ivisible) of ZnO inverse opals prepared by hydrothermal methods was much larger than those obtained by electrodeposition, as shown in Fig. 5c. Fig. 5d presents the XRD patterns of the ZnO porous structures prepared by hydrothermal methods with and without the usage of sodium citrate. Similarly to ZnO rods prepared by hydrothermal methods, both porous structures showed a strong preferred orientation corresponding to the <002> orientation of the hexagonal wurtzite ZnO phase. This preferred orientation remained unchanged regardless of the existence of colloidal templates.
 Fig. 5  PL spectra and XRD patterns of the ZnO structures formed. (a) PL spectra of ZnO prepared by hydrothermal methods using different adjuvants, (b) PL spectra of ZnO inverse opals using colloidal templates with different sphere diameters, (c) PL spectra of ZnO inverse opals using different methods and without using a template, and (d) XRD patterns of ZnO porous structures using different adjuvants. 
ZnO inverse opal structures with both large surface areas and good crystalline quality characteristics were achieved by colloidal template-assisted hydrothermal methods. Therefore, these materials possess potential for solar energy-driven water splitting processes. After the removal of the colloidal spheres from the as-prepared ZnO inverse opals by immersing them into toluene solutions, the ZnO structures were conformally coated with TiO2 by ALD methods as shown in the schematics in Fig. 6a. Pt nanoparticles were also deposited outside of the interior surfaces of the inverse opals by photochemistry bath methods in order to form a Schottky barrier and avoid electron–hole recombination in the photocatalytic process. The ZnO inverse opals prepared on the ITO substrates were used as photoanodes for a photoelectrochemical cell (PEC) operating at 0.606 V (versus SCE in sodium sulfate solutions). The 0.606 V voltage in solution at neutral pH equals 1.23 V versus reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). Fig. 6b presents the chopped photocurrent transients for the ZnO inverse-opal electrodes. The photocurrents of the ZnO inverse opals prepared by hydrothermal routes were superior to the ZnO rods prepared by similar methods and without using templates. This can be probably explained on the basis of a higher specific surface area to electrolytes and larger illumination sections for normal incident light. The results were comparable to the top photocurrent results of ZnO-based materials.34,35Fig. 6c presents the photocurrents of ZnO inverse opals with different periodicities. The inverse opal prepared using colloidal templates with microspheres of 301 nm in diameter showed the best photocurrent behavior. The superior crystalline quality of the inverse opals prepared from large microspheres may play an important role in the photocatalytic performance of these materials. In addition, the photonic stop band of the inverse opals prepared using colloidal templates with microspheres of 181 nm in diameter overlapped with the intrinsic band absorption of ZnO. The utilization of light was partially blocked by the photonic stop band. Therefore, inverse opal structures prepared from colloidal templates with microspheres of 301 nm in diameter provided the highest photocurrent density despite these materials not showing the highest specific surface ratio. The microstructures prepared by hydrothermal methods in zinc nitrate and HMTA solutions without sodium nitrate provided much lower photocurrents than those ZnO inverse opals formed using sodium nitrate, as shown in Fig. 6d. The high concentration of defects in the ZnO materials prepared without using sodium nitrate hindered the intrinsic transition of electrons.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematics showing the ALD conformally coating process of TiO2 on ZnO inverse opals using polystyrene (PS) templates. (b) Photochemical currents of ZnO in the presence and absence of colloidal templates. (c) Photocurrents of ZnO inverse opals using colloidal templates with different microsphere diameters. (d) Photocurrents of ZnO porous structures using different adjuvants. 
Conclusions
A hydrothermal method for the fabrication of ZnO inverse opal structures with high crystalline quality was demonstrated in this paper. Because the colloidal particles hindered the diffusion of zinc ions, porous ZnO structures were not readily formed on photoresist-patterned ZnO substrates in the presence of 3D colloidal crystal templates at typical Zn2+ ion concentrations producing ZnO rods. Porous ZnO rods were formed when thin colloidal crystal film templates were used, such that the colloidal microspheres were not able to effectively block ion diffusion. Porous ZnO rods with different filling fractions were successfully prepared by hydrothermal methods at Zn2+ ion concentrations of 0.15 M with different adjuvants. ZnO inverse opals having both high filling fraction and good crystalline quality were achieved upon utilization of sodium citrate. The ZnO inverse opals conformally coated with TiO2 showed good energy conversion efficiency when operating as photoanodes. Therefore, the hydrothermal method herein detailed can produce inverse opal structures in a bottom-to-top manner when using a seeded substrate, similarly to the electrodeposition route. The high-quality crystalline structures obtained by the hydrothermal method combined with a 3D template are promising materials for photonic, energy harvesting and storage, sensor, and catalysis applications.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities No. 2015YJS171, 2015JBM098 and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under grants No. 61335006, 91123025, 61378013, and 61527817.
Notes and references
T. Ohji and M. Fukushima, Int. Mater. Rev., 2012, 57, 115–131 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. A. Parlett, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3876 RSC .
A. Stein, B. E. Wilson and S. G. Rudisill, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2736 RSC .
V. V. Guliants, M. A. Carreon and Y. S. Lin, J. Membr. Sci., 2004, 235, 53–72 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Nelson, N. L. Dias, K. P. Bassett, S. N. Dunham, V. Verma, M. Miyake, P. Wiltzius, J. A. Rogers, J. J. Coleman and X. Li, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 676–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guldin, S. Huttner, M. Kolle, M. E. Welland, P. Muller-Buschbaum, R. H. Friend, U. Steiner and N. Tétreault, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2303–2309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hasegawa, S. Horike, R. Matsuda, S. Furukawa, K. Mochizuki, Y. Kinoshita and S. Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 2607–2614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Bhunia, S. K. Das, A. Dutta, A. Sengupta and A. Bhaumik, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2013, 13, 2557–2565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Y. Yang, J. Mi, X. Tan and C. Lv, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4445 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Cai, G. R. Zhang, L. L. Wang, Y. Z. Jiang, H. W. Ouyang and X. H. Zou, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2012, 100, 1187–1194 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Cao, Y. Feng, F. Yin and J. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3865–3871 CrossRef CAS .
B.-F. Ye, F. Rong, H. Gu, Z. Xie, Y. Cheng, Y. Zhao and Z.-Z. Gu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5331–5333 RSC .
H. Zhang and P. V. Braun, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2778–2783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-N. Kim and J. H. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5821–5825 CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Yu and P. V. Braun, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 277–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Stein, F. Li and N. R. Denny, Chem. Mater., 2007, 20, 649–666 CrossRef .
Y. Li, G. Duan, G. Liu and W. Cai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3614 RSC .
L. Yang, Z. Yang, W. Cao, L. Chen, J. Xu and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 11501–11504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Son, J. Wei, D. Cobden, G. Cao and Y. Xia, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3043–3050 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Galusha, C.-K. Tsung, G. D. Stucky and M. H. Bartl, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4925–4930 CrossRef CAS .
N. Haibin, W. Ming and C. Wei, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 25900–25910 CrossRef PubMed .
B. H. Juárez, P. D. García, D. Golmayo, A. Blanco and C. López, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2761–2765 CrossRef .
A. Esmanski and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1999–2010 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Park, M. Miyake, S. M. Yang and P. V. Braun, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2749–2752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yu, F. Meiser, T. Cassagneau and F. Caruso, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 177–181 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Braun and P. Wiltzius, Nature, 1999, 402, 603–604 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, Y. Yang, Z. Fu, B. Yang, L. Xia, S. Fu and F. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 1117–1121 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Feng, M. Zhang, M. Guo and X. Wang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 1500–1507 CAS .
Y. J. Lee, T. L. Sounart, J. Liu, E. D. Spoerke, B. B. McKenzie, J. W. Hsu and J. A. Voigt, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 2036–2040 CAS .
B. Duan and Q. Cao, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 64, 154–161 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Liu, N. Li, M. D. Goodman, H. G. Zhang, E. S. Epstein, B. Huang, Z. Pan, J. Kim, J. H. Choi, X. J. Huang, J. H. Liu, K. J. Hsia, S. J. Dillon and P. V. Braun, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1985–1994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Liu, J. J. Wang, J. Kim, H. L. Ning, Z. Pan, S. J. Kelly, E. S. Epstein, X. J. Huang, J. H. Liu and P. V. Braun, Small, 2015, 11, 6265–6271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Liu, H. G. Zhang, J. J. Wang, J. Cho, J. H. Pikul, E. S. Epstein, X. J. Huang, J. H. Liu, W. P. King and P. V. Braun, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7096–7101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Liu, C. Y. Nam, C. T. Black, J. Kamcev and L. H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13396–13402 CAS .
S. Hernandez, V. Cauda, D. Hidalgo, V. F. Rivera, D. Manfredi, A. Chiodoni and F. C. Pirri, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 615, S530–S537 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  SEM images and reflection spectra showing the formation of ZnO inverse opals. (a) Schematic of the colloidal crystal template on the ZnO seeded layer-covered ITO substrate. (b) Reflection spectra showing the photonic stop band of the ZnO inverse opals fabricated via a hydrothermal method using colloidal crystals with monodispersed microspheres of different diameters. (c–e) SEM images of ZnO inverse opals prepared using microspheres colloidal crystals of: (c) 181 nm, (d) 238 nm, and (e) 302 nm in diameter. (f) SEM image cross-section view of ZnO inverse opals prepared using microspheres colloidal crystals of 181 nm in diameter.	 

 	Fig. 2  Microstructures in solution containing typical concentrations of zinc nitrate over a ZnO seed layer or a photoresist hole-patterned ZnO seed layer. (a) SEM images of monolayer nanobowl arrays formed in 0.025 M zinc nitrate and HMTA solutions using colloidal templates over a ZnO seed layer. (b) Schematic showing the covering of the ZnO seed layer on the Si substrate by the photoresist patterns. (c) In the ideal cases, ZnO microrods start growing at the pores of the photoresist material and continue growing through the interstices of the colloidal crystal template. (d and e) SEM images of the ZnO microstructures obtained after removal of colloidal crystals in 0.025 M zinc nitrate and HMTA solutions at (d) low magnification and (e) high magnification. (f) Schematic showing the actual ZnO morphology achieved when the colloidal crystal template was used.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematics and SEM images of the ZnO microrod arrays formed using colloidal crystal templates with a thickness gradient. (a and b) Schematics (a) showing the photoresist-patterned ZnO seed layer covered with the colloidal crystal template, and (b) the fabricated ZnO arrays. (c–d) SEM images of (c) ZnO surface morphologies showing the different structures formed from region M to region O, and (d) ZnO microrods with inverse opal morphologies at the bottom of the rods in region N of panels (b) and (c). (e) SEM image of porous ZnO microrods that fully incorporated the inverse opal structures using the hydrothermal method in solution (0.075 M zinc nitrate and HMTA).	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of porous ZnO microstructures prepared by a hydrothermal method in 0.15 M zinc nitrate and HMTA solutions using colloidal crystal templates. (a–c) SEM top view images of the ZnO microstructures prepared by a hydrothermal method (a) using sodium citrate as an adjuvant, (b) without using adjuvants, and (c) using polyethylenimine as an adjuvant. (d) SEM cross-section view of ZnO microstructures prepared by the hydrothermal method using colloidal crystal templates.	 

 	Fig. 5  PL spectra and XRD patterns of the ZnO structures formed. (a) PL spectra of ZnO prepared by hydrothermal methods using different adjuvants, (b) PL spectra of ZnO inverse opals using colloidal templates with different sphere diameters, (c) PL spectra of ZnO inverse opals using different methods and without using a template, and (d) XRD patterns of ZnO porous structures using different adjuvants.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematics showing the ALD conformally coating process of TiO2 on ZnO inverse opals using polystyrene (PS) templates. (b) Photochemical currents of ZnO in the presence and absence of colloidal templates. (c) Photocurrents of ZnO inverse opals using colloidal templates with different microsphere diameters. (d) Photocurrents of ZnO porous structures using different adjuvants.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
