Recent developments in heterogeneous photocatalysts for solar-driven overall water splitting  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00542G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00542G
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2109-2125Recent developments in heterogeneous photocatalysts for solar-driven overall water splitting

        
          
            Zheng 
            Wang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Can 
            Li
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Kazunari 
            Domen
          
          
        
      *abd
aCenter for Energy and Environmental Science, Shinshu University, 4-17-1 Wakasato, Nagano 380-8553, Japan
bJapan Technological Research Association of Artificial Photosynthetic Chemical Process (ARPChem), 2-11-9 Iwamotocho, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-0032, Japan
cState Key Laboratory of Catalysis, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 457 Zhongshan Road, Dalian 116023, China. E-mail: canli@dicp.ac.cn
dDepartment of Chemical System Engineering, School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, 113-8656 Tokyo, Japan. E-mail: domen@chemsys.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Received 
      5th July 2018
    First published on 17th October 2018AbstractOverall water splitting based on particulate photocatalysts is an easily constructed and cost-effective technology for the conversion of abundant solar energy into clean and renewable hydrogen energy on a large scale. This promising technology can be achieved in a one-step excitation system using a single photocatalyst or via a Z-scheme process based on a pair of photocatalysts. Ideally, such photocatalysis will proceed with charge separation and transport unaffected by recombination and trapping, and surface catalytic processes will not involve undesirable reactions. This review summarizes the basics of overall water splitting via both one-step excitation and Z-scheme processes, with a focus on standard methods of determining photocatalytic performance. Various surface engineering strategies applied to photocatalysts, such as cocatalyst loading, surface morphology control, surface modification and surface phase junctions, have been developed to allow efficient one-step excitation overall water splitting. In addition, numerous visible-light-responsive photocatalysts have been successfully utilized as H2-evolution or O2-evolution photocatalysts in Z-scheme overall water splitting. Prototype particulate immobilization systems with photocatalytic performances comparable to or drastically higher than those of particle suspension systems suggest the exciting possibility of the large-scale production of low-cost renewable solar hydrogen.
Zheng Wang
Zheng Wang received his BSc degree in 2008, and MSc. degree in 2011. He obtained PhD degree from the Department of Molecular Engineering at Kyoto University in 2015. His doctoral research is photocatalytic conversion of CO2 in and by H2O over heterogeneous photocatalysts under the supervision of Prof. Tsunehiro Tanaka. Since 2015, he joined the Japan Technological Research Association of Artificial Photosynthetic Chemical Process (ARPChem) as a postdoctoral researcher and worked on overall water splitting in Prof. Kazunari Domen group at The University of Tokyo. In 2017, he moved to Prof. Kazunari Domen group in Shinshu University (Japan). He is interested in the visible-light-driven photocatalyst materials and their applications in water splitting and CO2 reduction.
Can Li
Can Li received his PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics in 1989. He was promoted to a full professor in 1993 and has been a visiting professor at the Université Pierre et Marie Curie (Paris VI), Lehigh University, the University of Liverpool, and Queensland University. He did his postdoctoral work at Northwestern University in 1994–1996. Currently, he is the head of the Solar Energy Research Division and the director of the Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy (DNL). His research interests include (1) UV Raman spectroscopy and time-resolved spectroscopy, (2) environmental and green catalysis, (3) chiral catalysis and bio-catalysis, and (4) solar energy utilization based on photo(electro)catalysis and photovoltaic cells.
Kazunari Domen
Kazunari Domen is currently a professor at The University of Tokyo and Shinshu University, Japan. He received BSc (1976), MSc (1979), and PhD (1982) honors in chemistry from the University of Tokyo. He joined Chemical Resources Laboratory at Tokyo Institute of Technology in 1982 as an assistant professor and was promoted to an associate professor in 1990 and a professor in 1996. He moved to The University of Tokyo as a professor in 2004. He has been working on overall water splitting on heterogeneous photocatalysts to produce clean and renewable hydrogen. Currently he is the team leader of Japan Technological Research Association of Artificial Photosynthetic Chemical Process (ARPChem). His research interests now include heterogeneous catalysis and materials chemistry, with particular focus on surface chemical reaction dynamics, photocatalysis, solid acid catalysis, and mesoporous materials.
1. Introduction
Solar energy is an inexhaustible, clean and renewable natural resource, and the sunlight reaching the Earth's surface on an hourly basis actually exceeds the annual global energy consumption.1,2 As a result of an increasing focus on dwindling energy resources and environmental deterioration, solar power has emerged as a promising alternative to fossil fuels. However, due to variations in the degree of sunlight reaching the planet depending on geographical location, seasons and time of day, the efficient utilization of solar energy requires that this energy be converted and stored in a cost-effective and environmentally benign fashion.1–3 Hydrogen is a potential energy carrier that is high-energy-density and carbon-free and also easily transportable. Hydrogen can release energy either through direct combustion or in a hydrogen fuel cell, with the only by-product being water. Moreover, hydrogen is an important industrial feedstock in many modern chemical processes, such as the Fischer–Tropsch reaction and ammonia synthesis. Thus, the production of hydrogen via solar-powered water splitting, so-called artificial photosynthesis, is indisputably one of the most important approaches to solar energy conversion. In this process, the energy imparted by solar radiation is stored in the chemical bonds of diatomic hydrogen, using water as the only reactant.3,4 At present, the greatest impediment to the realization of commercial solar water splitting is the requirement to produce hydrogen at a competitive cost compared to the current industrial hydrogen generation process involving the reforming of fossil fuels.5,6
Overall water splitting using particulate photocatalysts has been considered as a low-cost technology with the potential to enable large-scale solar hydrogen production, because of the ready synthesis of the associated photocatalysts as well as the simple reactor and facility designs.5–7 A technical/economic analysis has determined that a solar-to-hydrogen (STH) energy conversion efficiency of 5–10%, or even lower under some operational conditions, could allow photocatalytic overall water splitting to be economically viable for solar hydrogen production.5,6 However, the current STH values for overall water splitting using particulate photocatalysts on the laboratory scale are only approximately 1%.8 Therefore, developing highly-efficient photocatalytic overall water splitting systems are vital to achieving the STH required for scalability. Presently, successful photocatalytic systems for the decomposition of H2O into H2 and O2 are based on one of two approaches. One method involves splitting water with a single particulate photocatalyst via one-step excitation.9,10 A reliable, reproducible particulate photocatalyst functional under visible light must satisfy several principal requirements. These include having a suitable band gap and band position with sufficient driving potential. This material must also exhibit the efficient separation and transport of electron–hole pairs, surface catalytic proton reduction and water oxidation, as well as minimal photocorrosion.9,10 The alternative approach is to couple two individual photocatalysts with an electron transfer mediator to obtain two-step excitation, known as a Z-scheme process.11–13 Various visible-light-driven photocatalysts for the half reactions (either H+ reduction or H2O oxidation) are potentially applicable to Z-scheme water splitting if electron transfer from the O2-evolution photocatalyst to the H2-evolution photocatalyst can occur without reverse processes.11–13 Consequently, the rational refinement and design of photocatalyst materials is a core issue related to the construction of efficient one-step excitation or Z-scheme overall water splitting systems. Although particle suspensions are typically used to evaluate the overall-water-splitting activity of particulate photocatalysts on the laboratory scale, it is challenging to operate a suspension-type reactor on an industrial scale, because of the difficulties in receiving sufficient sunlight, and issues related to dispersing and renewing photocatalyst powders during operation. The immobilization of particulate photocatalysts onto a specific substrate is a viable, cost-effective means of achieving large scale photocatalytic overall water splitting. Therefore it is important to design fixed particulate photocatalyst systems with photocatalytic performance comparable to, or even higher, than suspension type systems.
Many reviews regarding overall water splitting based on particulate photocatalysts have been published.9–13 The present review covers the basics of one-step excitation and Z-scheme overall water splitting, and introduces standard techniques for the evaluation of photocatalytic performance. Recent advancements in the surface engineering of photocatalysts for one-step excitation overall water splitting, such as cocatalyst loading, surface morphology control, surface modification and surface phase junctions (all of which have applications to particle suspension systems), are presented. A summary of new photocatalysts that successfully promote H2-evolution or O2-evolution in Z-scheme water splitting is presented. As well, advances in the immobilization of particulate photocatalysts on substrates as a means of scaling up overall water splitting are addressed. Finally, current challenges associated with particulate photocatalyst-based overall water splitting are discussed.
2. Basics of photocatalytic overall water splitting
2.1 Thermodynamics and processes associated with one-step excitation and Z-scheme overall water splitting
With regard to Gibbs free energy values, the splitting of H2O into H2 and O2 is a thermodynamically unfavourable chemical reaction that requires an energy input to overcome an energy barrier, as shown in eqn (1): H2O → H2 + 1/2O2 ΔG0 = 237.13 kJ mol−1(1)In order to drive the water splitting reaction, a semiconductor is excited by photons having energy greater than or equal to its band gap. In this scenario, electrons move from the valence band to the conduction band while holes remain in the valence band. These photogenerated electrons and holes are capable of H+ reduction and H2O oxidation respectively, if the bottom of the conduction band is located at a more negative potential than the H+ to H2 reduction potential (0 V vs. NHE at pH = 0). In addition, the top of the valence band must be located at a value more positive than the H2O to O2 oxidation potential (1.23 V vs. NHE at pH = 0), as illustrated in Fig. 1a. Note that the potentials for reduction of H+ to H2 and oxidation of H2O to O2 are dependent on the pH value of reaction solution. Therefore, a semiconductor having a band gap larger than the thermodynamic requirement of 1.23 eV and spanning the redox potential of H2O would be a suitable candidate for one-step excitation water splitting. To increase the STH efficiency, the band gap of the semiconductor should be as narrow as possible, so as to harvest more visible light from the solar spectrum. However, narrowing the band gap can decrease the driving force that compensates for the activation energy barrier associated with the redox reaction. Accordingly, the efficient separation of photogenerated charges, the rapid transfer of charge carriers to surface sites without recombination or trapping, and the surface catalytic reaction of adsorbed species with photoexcited charges to produce H2 and O2 are all essential steps that dictate the visible-light-driven photocatalytic performance during one-step excitation water splitting. However, many factors, such as crystal structure, crystallinity, crystal size, surface structure, surface morphology, surface area, and cocatalysts, will affect the above steps.
 Fig. 1  Schematic energy diagrams of (a) one-step excitation and (b) Z-scheme overall water splitting on particulate photocatalysts. CBM: conduction band minimum; VBM: valence band maximum; Eg: band gap energy. 
Inspired by the two-stage excitation systems in the Photosystem I and Photosystem II processes occurring within green plants,1,13 Z-scheme overall splitting is an attempt to duplicate natural photosynthesis. A typical scheme includes a H2-evolution photocatalyst and an O2-evolution photocatalyst together with a shuttle redox mediator (Fig. 1b). The reduction of H+ by electrons generated in the conduction-band and the oxidation of reductive mediators by valence-band holes occur on the H2-evolution photocatalyst to produce H2 and oxidative mediators, respectively. Simultaneously, on the O2-evolution photocatalyst side, the as-oxidized mediator species are converted back to the reduced form by photogenerated electrons and O2 is generated as a result of H2O oxidation by the holes. As such, the overall water splitting is completed with a full cycle of the redox mediators. The Z-scheme photocatalytic process relaxes the stringent band gap requirements for the photocatalyst materials. It is possible to take advantage of a wide range of narrow-band-gap photocatalysts that have either a conduction band minimum higher than H+ reduction potential or a valence band maximum lower than H2O oxidation potential to build a Z-scheme system. In this manner, a large portion of visible light can be utilized by the H2-evolution and O2-evolution photocatalysts to excite electrons and holes and provide sufficient driving potentials for overall water splitting. The factors that affect the charge separation, carrier migration and surface catalytic reactions in one-step excitation water splitting by a single photocatalyst are also applicable to Z-scheme water splitting by dual photocatalysts. It is worth noting that reverse reactions, including the reduction of oxidative mediators on the H2-evolution photocatalyst and the oxidation of reduced mediators on the O2-evolution photocatalyst, can be suppressed by the appropriate design of the photocatalyst materials. In some cases, even in the absence of shuttle redox mediators, Z-scheme overall water splitting can proceed based on electron transfer through interparticle physical contact or via a solid-state electron conductor between the H2-evolution and O2-evolution photocatalysts.
2.2 Aspects of measuring photocatalytic performance
Many reviews have discussed the most appropriate experimental methods for assessing photocatalytic reactions, and accurate measurements of photocatalytic efficiency have been published.9,10,14 However, inaccurate photocatalytic activities and efficiencies for overall water splitting and half reactions using electron/hole sacrificial reagents are often reported, which may result in the misuse of certain photocatalyst materials and thus delay research progress in the field of photocatalysis. It is therefore necessary to pay particular attention to various important details during the evaluation of photocatalytic reactions.10,14 For this reason, some vital aspects of the experimental assessment of photocatalytic overall water splitting are emphasized herein.
Previous reviews have summarized the standard photocatalytic reaction systems used in conventional laboratory tests.10,14 These tests involve either internal or external irradiation photocatalytic reactors, depending on the experimental light source. The internal irradiation type reactor usually gives higher gas evolution rates because the particle suspension in the reactor is quite close to the light source and thus irradiation is efficient. The longest cut-off wavelength for the internal type is 400 nm. Because of the irregular light-intensity distribution and irradiation area, the apparent quantum yield of a photocatalyst cannot be precisely measured in this reactor. Analyses of wavelength-dependent gas evolution and quantum yield require the use of an external irradiation type reactor. The two type reactors can be set in either a gas-closed circulation system or a gas-flow system. These systems should be respectively performed under vacuum and under a flow of inert gas to avoid the intrusion of ambient air into the reactor during the reaction that can lead to incorrect estimation of the quantity of photocatalytically evolved gases. Prior to irradiation, the reaction solution is completely degassed by the application of a vacuum or by a flow of inert gas. Typically, a gas chromatograph with a thermal conductivity detector is connected to the reaction system for the on-line analysis of gaseous products. This eliminates the need to inject gaseous samples into a gas chromatograph separated from the photocatalytic reaction unit. The gas chromatograph must be carefully calibrated using standard gases that represent the gases evolved in the photocatalytic reaction, to allow for quantitative analysis.

Fig. 2 presents schematics of reliable and unreliable photocatalytic overall water splitting reaction data. The simultaneous evolution of H2 and O2 in the expected stoichiometric ratio of 2:1 and a linear increase in the evolved amounts with irradiation time provide strong evidence that H2O is decomposed into H2 and O2. Sometimes the induction period for the lower evolutions of H2 and O2 than that at the steady stage is observed, that is possibly due to the activation of photocatalyst materials or the slow diffusion of gas products at the initial irradiation time. The generation of greater amounts of H2 and O2 over a given irradiation time compared to the number of active sites on the photocatalyst also indicates a reliable photocatalytic overall water splitting process. In some cases, H2 is evolved without O2 or with less than a stoichiometric amount of O2, or the amount of H2 evolved is less than the amount of photocatalyst introduced into the reactor. Such results indicate the oxidation of sacrificial reagents and/or self-decomposition of the photocatalyst during irradiation, because the quantity of photoexcited electrons reacted in the reduction process must be identical to the amount of photoexcited holes consumed in the oxidation reaction. Therefore, it is vital to avoid any contaminations in the water splitting reaction and to ensure the concurrent evolution of H2 and O2 in repeated experimental cycles. It is worth noting that the utilization of 18O-labelled water can confirm whether the O2 evolved is originated from water or other oxygen-containing sources. In addition, the detection of N2 during a photocatalytic experiment can suggest the intrusion of ambient air or inadequate removal of dissolved air from the reaction solution. In the case of water splitting using (oxy)nitride photocatalysts, the evolution of N2 can also indicate self-oxidation of the photocatalyst. Various control experiments, such as trials without the photocatalyst or without irradiation, should be performed to confirm that the observed gas evolution actually results from photocatalysis.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustrations of the evaluation of photocatalytic activity for overall water splitting. Adapted from ref. 10 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2009 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The performance of a particulate photocatalyst during overall water splitting is primarily evaluated based on photocatalytic activity, quantum yield and STH energy conversion efficiency. Photocatalytic activity can be expressed as the amount of gas evolved over the entire course of illumination or as the average amount of gas produced per unit illumination time (the gas evolution rate). Because both are highly dependent on the experimental conditions, it is necessary to provide the light source intensity, the irradiation wavelength range, the photocatalyst amount, the reaction solution volume, the reactor type and the temperature. Normalization of the evolution rate by the photocatalyst mass (e.g., μmol h−1 g−1) is meaningless because photocatalytic activity is not proportional to the mass of the photocatalyst under a given set of reaction conditions. Rather, the relationship between the photocatalytic rate and the photocatalyst amount is determined by the specific photocatalyst material and irradiation conditions. A detailed discussion of this topic has been published.14
As discussed, due to variations in the photocatalytic reaction conditions between laboratories (especially the irradiation conditions), direct comparisons of photocatalytic activities (such as the total amounts or evolution rates of gases) across laboratories is not helpful. Thus, assessing photocatalyst performance and the present state-of-the-art in the field of photocatalytic water splitting requires both quantum yield and STH energy conversion efficiency to be reported. The quantum yield is the ratio of photons contributing to photocatalytic activity to the total absorbed photons. Due to light transmission and scattering, determining the actual number of photons absorbed by the photocatalyst is impossible. Hence, the apparent quantum yield (AQY) is used, as calculated using the following equation. (2)Here, n, R and I represent the number of electrons or holes consumed in the formation of one H2 or O2 molecule, the quantity of gas molecules evolved in a specific time interval and the number of incident photons reaching the photocatalytic system during the same time interval, respectively. The values of n for H2 and O2 evolution are 2 and 4 in one-step excitation overall water splitting, and 4 and 8 in Z-scheme overall water splitting, respectively. The AQY is strongly correlated with the wavelengths of incident photons, because a photocatalyst generally exhibits different absorption coefficients and different photocatalytic activities at each irradiation wavelength. It is therefore extremely helpful to determine the AQY as a function of irradiation wavelength.
Accurate calculation of the wavelength-dependent AQY requires the careful analysis of gas evolution rates and also the precise evaluation of the incident photon number (that is, those reaching the photocatalyst). Normally, the illuminated photocatalyst area is a function of the photocatalytic reaction system. As shown in Fig. 3a, the illuminated area in a particle suspension system is either the solution surface (Case 1) or the beam area at the top surface of the solution (Case 2). In an immobilized particulate system (Case 3), the region of the photocatalyst substrate in contact with the light beam is the illuminated area. Therefore, when determining the number of incident photons, a calibrated photodiode detector should be placed at the same distance to the lamp as the suspension surface or the particulate substrate, and should be located in the same region as the actual irradiation area during the reaction. More importantly, the lamps used in typical laboratory trials do not supply perfectly collimated illumination, which results in the non-uniform distribution of the photon flux (light intensity) over the actual irradiation area. Taking the 300 W Xe lamp (Lamp House, R300-3J) in the authors’ laboratory as an example, the geometric circular area in Fig. 3b represents the irradiated photocatalyst area provided by the Xe lamp during a reaction. This geometric area can be divided into several concentric circles in narrow intervals (as indicated by different colours), which demonstrate the distribution of the photon flux over the entire area from the centre to the boundary. The circle at the central position of each coloured domain represents the average photon flux in this domain. Fig. 3c and d show the spatially-distributed photon fluxes acquired by a grating spectroradiometer (EKO Instruments Co., Ltd., LS-100) at the positions of these circles. In Fig. 3c, the intensity of the photon flux spectrum generated by the lamp equipped with a cut-off filter (λ ≥ 420 nm) is seen to decrease gradually from the centre to the boundary of the irradiation area. The installation of a bandpass filter (λ = 418.6 nm) with the same lamp produces nearly monochromatic light having a narrow wavelength distribution around the targeted single wavelength (λ = 418.6 nm). However, the same trend in the distribution of the photon flux as obtained with the cut-off filter is observed in Fig. 3d. Therefore, it is incorrect to calculate the number of incident photons using the photon flux detected at only one or a few positions within the entire illumination area. One recommended approach is to obtain the average photon flux in every domain by measuring four positions along each circle on the coordinate axis shown in Fig. 3b, after which the total incident photons can be calculated by integrating the photon number in each domain based on the average photon flux multiplied by the domain area. Using this method, an accurate AQY can be determined, assuming the correct determination of the gas evolution rate, illumination area and relative photon number distribution.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustrations of (a) the illuminated photocatalyst area in particle suspension (Cases 1 and 2) and immobilization (Case 3) systems, and (b) the geometric area illuminated by a 300 W Xe lamp (Lamp House, R300-3J), the concentric circles with different colours indicate the spatial distribution of the photon flux. The spatial distribution of the photon flux of a 300 W Xe lamp equipped with (c) a cut-off filter (λ ≥ 420 nm) and (d) a band-pass filter (λ = 418.6 nm, full width at half maximum = 9.5 nm). These spectra were acquired with spatial intervals of 2 mm from the centre of illumination. Reproduced from ref. 8 by permission of Springer Nature. Copyright 2016 Springer Nature. 
The AQY is defined in terms of photon flux. Using the concept of photon energy, the STH energy conversion efficiency is determined from the following equation. (3)Here, R, ΔGr, Psun and S denote the rate of H2 evolution during the water splitting reaction, the Gibbs energy for the water splitting reaction (see eqn (1)), the energy flux of sunlight at the ASTM-G173 AM1.5 global tilt (100 mW cm−2) and the irradiated photocatalyst area, respectively. It is worth noting that this STH energy conversion efficiency is solely for the case that O2 is generated as the product of H2O oxidation. That is, the decomposition of H2O into H2 and O2 occurs in a stoichiometric ratio over the photocatalyst in response to irradiation with sunlight. Otherwise, the Gibbs energy for the water splitting reaction cannot be applied in the equation. Furthermore, the Gibbs energy for water splitting is dependent on the reaction temperature and pressure, the value of Gibbs energy used in the STH calculation should be adjusted according to the different experimental conditions. The STH energy conversion efficiency is universally acknowledged as the practical standard for assessing photocatalyst performance, so the light source used in the determination of STH should be one sun, typically obtained via a solar simulator (AM 1.5G). The calculations of STH energy conversion efficiency using one sun and concentrated sunlight excitation are not comparable, because the H2 evolution rates on various photocatalyst materials are not proportional to the incident light intensity.
In general, the precise determination of gas evolution, AQY and STH can permit an analysis of the actual performance of photocatalysts in one-step excitation or Z-scheme overall water splitting. Such data can therefore assist in the development of heterogeneous particulate photocatalysts.
3. Advancements in overall water splitting via particle suspension systems
3.1 One-step excitation overall water splitting
Since the first report of water splitting on a TiO2 photoelectrode in 1972,15 overall water splitting using a single particulate photocatalyst via one-step excitation has been intensively studied. Consequently, a considerable number of particulate photocatalysts that are active for one-step excitation overall water splitting under ultraviolet (UV) irradiation have been developed. These oxide photocatalysts can be classified into two main families: transition metal cations with d0 electronic configurations (such as Ti4+, Zr4+, Nb5+, Ta5+ and W6+) and typical metal cations with d10 electronic configurations (such as Ga3+, In3+, Ge4+, Sn4+ and Sb5+).9,10 In these materials, empty d orbitals and sp hybridized orbitals respectively comprise the conduction bands. In addition, the valence bands of the metal oxides primarily consist of occupied O 2p orbitals. Representative photocatalysts with d0 or d10 electronic configurations include La-doped NaTaO3 and Zn-doped Ga2O3,10 and both exhibit extremely high photocatalytic activities during overall water splitting in the deep UV region. Recently, SrTiO3 has been reported to show remarkably high activity under near-UV irradiation following various modifications,16,17 as discussed in the following section. However, UV rays (λ ≤ 400 nm) only account for 4% of the total solar energy, so the theoretical maximum STH is only 3.3% when using UV light even with a 100% quantum yield, which is insufficient for practical solar hydrogen production.
The efficient harvesting and conversion of a large portion of visible light (400 nm ≤ λ ≤ 800 nm) and infrared rays (λ ≥ 800 nm) is always the goal in the field of artificial photosynthesis. Considering the minimum photon energy thermodynamically necessary for water splitting (1.23 eV, ca. 1000 nm), it is possible to utilize the entire spectral range of visible light. To expand the range of visible light absorption, the band gap energy of photocatalysts needs to be reduced by a negative shift of the valence band level and/or a downward movement of the conduction band level. In addition, the band gap must straddle the reduction and oxidation potentials of water. Hence, a number of visible-light-responsive photocatalysts, such as WO3, BiVO4, Fe2O3 and others, are excluded as candidates for one-step excitation overall water splitting. As well, various typical visible-light-harvesting semiconductors (e.g. Si, GaAs, InP and chalcogenides) with suitable band gap positions cannot be easily applied as particulate photocatalysts for overall water splitting because they are prone to self-oxidation by photogenerated holes and corrosion by water.
As a result, the number of photocatalysts capable of visible-light-driven overall water splitting is limited. Besides the exploitation of new photocatalyst materials,18,19 the activation of well-known visible-light-responsive photocatalysts such as (oxy)nitrides and oxysulfides thus becomes important. Improving the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs along with the transportation of charge carriers towards surface sites and enhancing the surface catalysis of water reduction and oxidation are remaining challenges in the development of one-step excitation overall water splitting. Surface/interface engineering has become a fundamental strategy to obtain high performance particulate photocatalysts. Herein, recent progress in various approaches, including cocatalyst loading, surface morphology control, surface modification and surface phase junction, is presented.
Cocatalysts continue to be a topic of interest in the field of artificial photosynthesis and have been widely investigated since the discovery of this phenomenon. A cocatalyst can be vital to obtaining highly efficient overall water splitting by promoting charge separation and suppressing charge recombination by extracting photogenerated electrons and holes. The cocatalyst can also provide active sites that promote H+ reduction and H2O oxidation by lowering the respective activation energies. However, the combination of an effective cocatalyst and photocatalyst must be finely tuned in terms of energy levels and electronic structures. That is, the work functions or band levels of the cocatalysts should be in harmony with the Fermi-levels or electronic structures of the photocatalyst semiconductors. This permits the formation of a desirable junction (an Ohmic-type or Schottky-type contact) that allows charges to flow in the right direction at the interface between the semiconductor and cocatalyst.
In general, metals such as Pt, Rh, Ru, Ir and Ni can function as H2-evolution cocatalysts, whereas oxides of Co, Fe, Ni, Mn, Ru and Ir work as O2-evolution cocatalysts.9 For the majority of overall-water-splitting photocatalysts (including the oxides and (oxy)nitrides), loading a H2-evolution cocatalyst is obligatory due to an insufficient overpotential for H+ reduction than that for H2O oxidation. However, metallic promoters, when used for H2 evolution, can also accelerate the thermodynamically favourable reverse reaction in which water is formed from H2 and O2. Various bimetallic cocatalyst systems have been developed for the promotion of forward reactions with concurrent suppression of backward reactions. These include Ni/NiO core–shell structures obtained via a conventional impregnation technique followed by treatments with H2 and O2,20 Rh/Cr2O3 core–shell structures synthesized by selective photodeposition,21 and a Rh2−xCrxO3 mixture produced by a conventional impregnation approach.22 In Rh/Cr2O3 and Rh2−xCrxO3 systems, Cr oxide species kinetically prevent the evolved O2 from reaching the metal surface, thereby limiting the undesirable water formation reaction. The Rh metal in these structures can also be replaced by less expensive metals via a suitable deposition procedure.21,23 The typical photodeposition or impregnation process usually involves a loose contact between a photocatalyst and metal particle or can damage the surface of a non-oxide photocatalyst, such that metals other than Rh will become less active. Recently, overall-water-splitting activity comparable to that of Rh2−xCrxO3/GaN:ZnO under visible light was achieved with a GaN:ZnO solid solution having a minimal quantity of surface Pd nanoparticles. This was accomplished using a novel atomic layer deposition (ALD) method followed by the in situ photodeposition of Cr2O3.24 The ALD method can provide an intimate interface between the Pd nanoparticles and the GaN:ZnO, which is generally favourable for interface charge transfer. Uniform dispersion of the Pd is also obtained, which remarkably decreases the noble metal usage. It is expected that this homogeneous deposition method will be applicable to the loading of many kinds of metal nanoparticles on various particulate photocatalysts.24,25
Loading an individual O2-evolution cocatalyst can also promote the overall water splitting reaction,26–28 but the enhancement is not comparable to that using a sole H2-evolution cocatalyst in most cases. The codeposition of both H2-evolution and O2-evolution cocatalysts is a promising approach to improving the activity and stability of particulate photocatalysts, by promoting selective water oxidation via photogenerated holes.29–33 As an example, overall water splitting was realized using a polymeric graphite-like C3N4 photocatalyst29 or a crystalline poly(triazine imide)-framework-based CN polymer photocatalyst30 after the codeposition of Pt and CoOx cocatalysts, demonstrating the importance of dual cocatalysts to the design of new particulate photocatalysts. Moreover, the utilization of CoP and Pt as dual cocatalysts also accomplishes the overall water splitting on graphitic C3N4.31 In other cases, Mn3O4, RuO2 and IrO2 have been applied as O2-evolution cocatalysts and deposited together with a H2-evolution cocatalyst. Using this approach, the photocatalytic activities of GaN:ZnO and ZrO2/TaON for overall water splitting were improved compared to those with only the H2 evolution cocatalyst.32,33 It should be noted that the stability of GaN:ZnO during prolonged overall water splitting trials (over a period of 6 months) was maintained to a certain extent by the prior codeposition of an O2-evolution cocatalyst in addition to a H2-evolution cocatalyst. This codeposition helps to suppress the oxidative deactivation of GaN:ZnO by valence band holes, thereby prolonging the lifetime of the GaN:ZnO. It was also found that an Al-doped SrTiO3 photocatalyst concurrently modified with RhCrOx and CoOy cocatalysts shows a constant increment in gas evolution during a 6 h water splitting reaction, whereas the activity of RhCrOx-loaded Al-doped SrTiO3 decreased to 60% under the same conditions, as shown in Fig. 4a.7 During prolonged operation under simulated sunlight, the gas evolution rate of this photocatalyst coloaded with RhCrOx and CoOy remained almost unchanged over the initial 150 h and then gradually declined to 64% after 1000 h of illumination (Fig. 4b). Although it has been demonstrated that the dual cocatalyst tactic enhances the performance and durability of particulate photocatalysts, this technique must be carefully applied to obtain the synergistic effect of the double cocatalysts. Factors include carefully controlling the locations of the H2 and O2 evolution cocatalysts and the meticulous optimization of the loading amount of each cocatalyst. One study has confirmed that randomly-dispersed NiO on NaTaO3 cubes with exposed isotropic facets is reduced in situ to metallic Ni at reduction sites while remaining as NiO at oxidation sites. This material can thus function as a dual cocatalyst to improve the photocatalytic performance, in contrast to NiO selectively deposited only at the reduction sites of NaTaO3.34 The balance between the Ni formed in situ and the NiO, as well as their locations, are important to promoting the overall-water-splitting activity of NaTaO3. Another important finding is that the selective distribution of Pt and Co3O4 dual cocatalysts on the anisotropic surfaces of SrTiO3 nanocrystals dramatically increases the photocatalytic overall water splitting reaction.35
 Fig. 4  Time courses of overall water splitting on Al-doped SrTiO3 loaded with RhCrOx and CoOy under irradiation with a (a) 300 W Xe lamp (300 nm ≤ λ ≤ 500 nm) and (b) simulated sunlight (AM 1.5 G). Reproduced from ref. 7 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright 2017 Elsevier Inc. 
Surface morphology control is also crucial to promoting efficient charge separation and transfer in the bulk photocatalyst, as well as to suppressing charge recombination at the surface and creating a suitable local environment for cocatalyst deposition and catalytic reactions. Various surface properties, such as surface structure, facets, defects and area, are related to the morphology of the photocatalyst. The bulk properties of materials, including crystal structure, crystallinity and crystal size, also affect the surface morphology. Therefore, increasing the photocatalytic activity for water splitting requires tailoring the surface morphology by careful tuning of the fabrication method, doping technique, nanostructure design and surface treatment.
SrTiO3 is a well-known photocatalyst and has been studied with regard to the overall water splitting reaction under UV light since 1980. Recently, well-crystallized SrTiO3 with smooth crystal surfaces and uniformly-distributed small particle sizes was obtained through a SrCl2 flux-mediated Al doping procedure. This material showed an apparent quantum efficiency exceeding 30% at 360 nm, which is the highest value yet reported in this wavelength region for a powdered SrTiO3 photocatalyst.16 A novel superstructured SrTiO3 with well-defined orientation of assembled cubic nanocrystals was synthesized by topotactic epitaxy growth method and exhibited reliable performance for overall water splitting.36 The effect of exposed crystal facets on the photocatalytic activity for H2 or O2 production in the presence of sacrificial reagents has been investigated,37 and variations in photocatalytic performance have been attributed to the different surface energies and crystal structures of such facets. The main effect of exposed facets on photocatalytic activity may result from the presence of charge-accumulating sites on different facets that promote the efficient separation and collection of photogenerated charges. It has been reported that spatial charge separation can be realized on low-symmetry BiVO4 nanocrystals37 and high-symmetry SrTiO3 nanocrystals.35 Cubic phase SrTiO3 synthesized by a hydrothermal procedure showed successfully exposed isotropic facets ({001}, 6-facet SrTiO3) or anisotropic facets ({001} and {110}, 18-facet SrTiO3). Site-selective photodeposition clearly resulted in reduced Pt metal particles and oxidized Co3O4 species being respectively distributed on various anisotropic facets of the 18-facet SrTiO3 nanocrystals but randomly dispersed on all facets of 6-facet SrTiO3 nanocrystals (Fig. 5). These results indicate that the photogenerated electrons and holes separately accumulated on different exposed facets. As a result, the 18-facet SrTiO3 nanocrystals with anisotropic facets and selectively-deposited dual cocatalysts exhibited significantly enhanced photocatalytic overall water splitting compared to 6-facet SrTiO3 nanocrystals with randomly dispersed dual cocatalysts or 18-facet SrTiO3 nanocrystals with homogeneous cocatalyst deposition (see Table 1). It can be concluded that the spatial charge separation between anisotropic facets, accompanied by the separation of catalytic reduction and oxidation sites, can produce superior overall-water-splitting performance.
 Fig. 5  Engineering the morphology of SrTiO3 nanocrystals. (a–c) The morphology of 6-facet SrTiO3 nanocrystals. (d) The structure of the {001} facet of SrTiO3. (e) The transition of SrTiO3 nanocrystals from 6-facet to 18-facet. (f–h) The morphology of 18-facet SrTiO3 nanocrystals. (i) The structure of the {110} facet of SrTiO3. SEM images of 18-facet and 6-facet SrTiO3 nanocrystals with simultaneous photodeposition of Pt and Co3O4 as cocatalysts: (j) Pt-Co3O4/18-facet SrTiO3 and (k) Pt-Co3O4/6-facet SrTiO3. Adapted from ref. 35 by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Table 1 The photocatalytic overall water splitting performance of 18-facet SrTiO3 nanocrystals with cocatalysts deposited. Reproduced from ref. 35 by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry









Entry
Pt
Co3O4
H2
O2
H2/O2





a Impregnation method.
b Photodeposition method. The contents of the deposited Pt and Co3O4 are optimized to be 0.1 wt% and 0.01 wt%, respectively. The activities are normalized by the number of Pt active sites. Gas: μmol h−1 m−2.





1
—
—
0
0
—


2
Imp.a
—
1099
493
2.2


3
P.D.b
—
2083
1143
1.8


4
—
Imp
0
0
—


5
—
P.D.
0
0
—


6
Imp
P.D.
749
406
1.8


7
P.D.
Imp
1206
571
2.1


8
Imp
Imp
534
279
1.9


9
P.D.
P.D.
4089
2095
2.0




Recently, Ta3N5 nanorods selectively generated on the edges of cuboid KTaO3 were demonstrated to be active for visible-light-driven overall water splitting, because of the minimized structure defects from the surface into the interior of Ta3N5 single crystals.38 In addition, a GaN:ZnO hollow sphere material having a nanostructured morphology showed a quantum efficiency three times that of bulk GaN:ZnO.39 This effect is due to the reduced distance required for carrier diffusion to the surface and the increased surface area that permits improved exposure of the active sites in the nanoscale photocatalyst. Similarly, a hollow C3N4 polymeric sphere with spatially separated H2-evolution and O2-evolution cocatalysts on the Janus surfaces stably promoted the overall water splitting reaction.40 It has been also reported that a conjugated 2-dimensional polymer with ultrathin sheet-like structure prepared by oxidative coupling of terminal alkynes was capable of splitting water photocatalytically under visible-light irradiation.41
Surface modification is a facile but effective technique that coats a so-called protector or promoter on the photocatalyst surface. The presence of these materials on photocatalyst particles, such as oxide and oxyhydroxide species, can inhibit the formation of surface defects, stabilize the surface condition and boost surface reactions. In the case of visible-light-responsive oxynitride photocatalysts, the materials are subjected to high-temperature nitridation under a reducing NH3 gas atmosphere, thus generating surface defect states such as reduced metal cations and anion vacancies that in turn disable the ability of the material to promote the water splitting reaction. As an example, ZrO2-modified TaON made by loading ZrO2 nanoparticle on Ta2O5 before nitridation decomposes H2O into H2 and O2 in a stoichiometric ratio under visible light irradiation, whilst TaON without ZrO2 modification does not. This result demonstrates that the Zr modifier prevents Ta5+ cations at the TaON surface from being reduced during nitridation.33 Moreover, if a Ti oxide or oxyhydroxide amorphous layer that stabilizes the surface against photodegradation is applied to LaMg1/3Ta2/3O2N using a novel photodeposition method, visible-light-driven overall water splitting with little N2 evolution is observed.42,43 The photodeposition of a Nb, Ta, or Zr oxide layer can also be applied instead of a Ti oxide layer. Notably, double coating based on pre-coating with a Si oxide layer before the deposition of the metal oxide can enhance the photocatalytic activity several fold in comparison to single oxide deposition, as shown in Fig. 6.43 This presumably occurs because the photocatalyst particle surfaces are more homogeneously covered by the double coating, leading to more effective suppression of the self-oxidation and water-formation reactions.43,44 It is also possible that the hydrophilicity of the coating layer is improved by the introduction of the Si oxide, which more efficiently accelerates the desorption of less polar O2 molecules from the photocatalyst surface. Although more detailed investigations are necessary to clearly reveal the mechanism, this is the first example of overall water splitting operable at up to 600 nm based on a complete surface covering. This technique is also applicable to other unstable particulate semiconductors meant for photocatalytic overall water splitting. In addition, the modifications of Pt-loaded SrTiO345 and RhCrOx-loaded Al-doped SrTiO317 with Mo oxide species have been shown to increase the photocatalytic overall water splitting activities of these materials.
 Fig. 6  Time courses of gas production on RhCrOx/LaMg1/3Ta2/3O2N modified with various coatings: (a) TiO2, (b) Ta2O5, (c) ZrO2, (d) Nb2O5, (e) TiO2/SiO2 (f) Ta2O5/SiO2 (g) ZrO2/SiO2 and (h) Nb2O5/SiO2. Adapted from ref. 43 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. 
The term surface phase junction refers to the interface between two different phases formed on the surfaces of polymorph semiconductors. This has been demonstrated to be an efficient approach to enhancing photogenerated charge separation, which in turn improves photocatalytic activity. It has been found that photocatalytic H2 production on TiO2 following a phase transformation from anatase to rutile is closely correlated with the surface phase composition.46 Kelvin probe force microscopy has determined that a built-in electric field with a maximum value of 1 kV cm−1 is generated at the surface phase junction because of the energy band alignment between rutile and anatase. In addition, spatially-resolved surface photovoltage spectroscopy has clearly demonstrated that photogenerated electrons are transferred from the rutile to anatase phases under UV light illumination, driven by the internal electric field across the interface.47 Ga2O3 is an n-type semiconductor with several polymorphs, including α, β and γ phases. The transition of the Ga2O3 structure from the α to the β phase can be finely tuned by gradually increasing the calcination temperature. The exposure of both α and β phases on the surface along with the presence of the α phase in the bulk region produces photocatalytic overall-water-splitting activity three to seven times higher than that of the individual α-Ga2O3 or β-Ga2O3 phases (Fig. 7a and b).48 The well-defined phase junction formed on the surface of the Ga2O3 leads to ultrafast electron transfer together with long-lived photogenerated electrons (on the microsecond time-scale). Thus, the surface phase junction on Ga2O3 facilitates efficient charge separation and transfer and thus enhances the photocatalytic activity. The small difference in the band potential levels of α- and β-phase Ga2O3 (Fig. 7c) is sufficient to supply a driving force for charge separation and transfer, thus making these processes thermodynamically feasible at the surface phase junction. However, in contrast to the well-constructed interface between the α and β phases, the transformation of the Ga2O3 structure from the γ to the β phase forms a distorted and defective structure at the interface between the γ and β phases, which can create charge recombination and trapping centres, resulting in a negative effect on photocatalytic overall water splitting.49 Therefore, a smooth interfacial structure between the two phases without distortions and defects, and type II band alignment of the two phases (with close but unequal conduction band and valence band levels),49 are required to establish a functional phase junction for efficient charge separation and transfer in the overall water splitting reaction.
 Fig. 7  (a) H2 and O2 evolution activities (normalized by specific surface area) of α-Ga2O3 samples calcined at different temperatures, allowing a comparison of photocatalytic activities. The notation α + β indicates a mechanically mixed sample with a 1:1 α-Ga2O3/β-Ga2O3 ratio. (b) An HRTEM image of the α–β phase junction on Ga2O3. (c) An illustration of charge transfer across the α–β phase junction. Adapted from ref. 48 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. 
3.2 Z-Scheme overall water splitting
An alternative mean of achieving visible-light-driven overall water splitting is the Z-scheme photocatalytic process, which mimics photosynthesis. Photosystems I and II in plants can respectively harvest photons with wavelengths shorter than 700 and 680 nm. The photoinduced electrons produced in Photosystem I are used in the reduction of CO2 while the holes generated in Photosystem II oxidize H2O to release O2. The holes remaining in Photosystem I are quenched with the electrons produced in Photosystem II through a multistep electron transfer chain.
A Z-scheme model using inorganic semiconductors that reproduces natural photosynthesis was described in 1979.50 In addition, two-step photoexcitation overall water splitting in a suspension system was successfully accomplished with Pt-loaded anatase-TiO2 and non-loaded rutile-TiO2 in the presence of a IO3−/I− shuttle redox mediator.51 In such systems, H2 and O2 are separately evolved on Pt-loaded anatase-TiO2 and non-loaded rutile-TiO2. This process kinetically inhibits the water formation reaction that otherwise readily occurs during one-step excitation overall water splitting on a single photocatalyst. Since these initial reports, various narrow-band-gap semiconductors, such as Rh-doped SrTiO3, TaON, ATaO2N (A = Ca and Ba), g-C3N4, Sm2Ti2S2O5 and dye-sensitized layered H4Nb6O17 as H2-evolution photocatalysts, and WO3, BiVO4, AgNbO3, Rh,Sb-codoped TiO2, TaON and Ta3N5 as O2-evolution photocatalysts, have been investigated extensively.9,11–13 These materials are of interest because TiO2 with anatase or rutile phases absorbs only in the UV region. The fundamental concept of two-step excitation water splitting suggests that many more visible-light-responsive semiconductors could be employed to enhance the photocatalytic activity. Moreover, I, Fe, Co or Mn-based aqueous redox couples have been studied in Z-scheme water splitting system to facilitate electron transfer from the O2-evolution photocatalyst to the H2-evolution photocatalyst.9,12,13 It should be noted that the inevitable reverse reactions, including the reduction of the oxidative mediator on the H2-evolution photocatalyst and the oxidation of the reduced mediator on the O2-evolution photocatalyst, can be greatly reduced by controlling the surface properties of these semiconductors. As such, both particle interfacial electron transfer systems and solid state electron mediators have been developed to avoid the reverse reactions and improve charge transfer.8,52–54 In general, the design of efficient H2-evolution and O2-evolution photocatalysts is the primary research subject in the field of Z-scheme overall water splitting. Strategies that promote charge separation, carrier migration and surface catalytic reactions of a single photocatalyst for one-step excitation water splitting can also be applied to H2-evolution and O2-evolution photocatalysts in Z-scheme water splitting.
The (oxy)nitride semiconductors are promising candidates for H2-evolution photocatalysts in Z-scheme systems because of their excellent visible light harvesting ability, and because their band positions are suitable for H+ reduction and they exhibit good stability in aqueous solutions. It has been reported that Pt-loaded ZrO2-modified TaON acting as a H2-evolution photocatalyst, combined with PtOx-loaded WO3 and an IO3−/I− shuttle redox mediator, exhibits much higher water-splitting activity under visible light than that without ZrO2 modification.55 Similarly, the treatment of BaTaO2N with BaZrO3 forms a solid solution with a decreased density of surface defects, thus minimizing charge recombination.56 A BaZrO3–BaTaO2N solid solution with a band gap of 1.8 eV thus shows improved H2-evolution activity in an aqueous NaI solution. When combined with PtOx-loaded WO3, the activity of this material for Z-scheme water splitting in the presence of an IO3−/I− redox couple is six times higher than that obtained using unmodified BaTaO2N. The nitridation of a special Ba-rich oxide precursor prepared by a flux method gives a well-crystallized, low-defect BaTaO2N that shows much better H2-evolution activity in either the half reaction in methanol or Z-scheme overall water splitting compared to conventional BaTaO2N.57 The inhibition of charge recombination by reducing structural defects in oxynitrides via surface modification and the use of novel fabrication procedures are thus useful in Z-scheme water splitting systems. Another effective strategy to promote the performance of a H2-evolution photocatalyst in a Z-scheme system is the construction of a heterostructure between different oxynitrides. As shown in Fig. 8, a MgTa2O6−xNy/TaON heterostructure is obtained by the one-pot nitridation of a MgTa2O6-modified Ta2O5 precursor.58 The reduced structural defect density and the formation of a heterojunction allows the MgTa2O6−xNy/TaON heterostructure to effectively suppress photogenerated charge recombination and enhance spatially-separated charge transfer. Employing PtOx-loaded WO3 as an O2-evolution photocatalyst and IO3−/I− as a redox mediator, a Pt-loaded MgTa2O6−xNy/TaON H2-evolution photocatalyst exhibits drastically improved photocatalytic overall-water-splitting performance in comparison with Pt-loaded TaON, Pt-loaded MgTa2O6−xNy or a mechanical mixture (Table 2). This material has produced a benchmark AQY of 6.8% at 420 nm in a Z-scheme particle suspension system. Furthermore, creating a BaTaO2N/Ta3N5 heterostructure allowed the first-ever application of Ta3N5 as a H2-evolution photocatalyst in a Z-scheme overall water splitting under visible light irradiation.59 In addition, some labile (oxy)sulphide materials, such as CdS,60,61 ZnIn2S4,60 CuGaS2,62 Cu7S463 and La5Ti2CuS5O7,64 have been employed as building blocks for H2 evolution in visible-light-driven Z-scheme water splitting system through the appropriate material modification and system construction. There is also a report that visible-light-driven Z-scheme overall water splitting could be achieved on polymeric C2N ultrathin nanosheets as H2-evolution photocatalysts when directly combined with aza-fused microporous polymers for O2 evolution without any redox couples.65 This demonstrates the viability of applying various H2-evolution promoters to powdered Z-scheme systems.
 Fig. 8  (a and b) FESEM images of a Pt-loaded MgTa2O6−xNy/TaON photocatalyst. (c) The estimated relative band positions of the MgTa2O6−xNy/TaON heterostructure. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. 
Table 2 The photocatalytic performances of typical photocatalysts with different surface areas under visible-light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm). Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons




Entry
Photocatalysta
Surface area (m2 g−1)
Gas evolution ratesb (μmol h−1)


H2
O2





a All photocatalysts were loaded with Pt by impregnation and subsequent H2 reduction method.
b Reaction conditions: 75 mg H2-evolution photocatalyst and 150 mg PtOx–WO3 photocatalyst; 150 mL aqueous NaI solution (1.0 mM); Pyrex top-irradiation type; 300 W xenon lamp.





1
MgTa2O6−xNy
1.1
0.3
1.3


2
TaON
8.5
15.6
7.5


3
MgTa2O6−xNy/TaON-mix
6.7
23.5
12.2


4
MgTa2O6−xNy/TaON
6.9
108.3
55.3




A wide range of new materials for use as O2-evolution photocatalysts in the Z-scheme particulate system have recently been reported. As noted, Photosystem II can harvest sunlight up to about 700 nm and is able to oxidize H2O to O2 during natural photosynthesis. Thus, the integration of Photosystem II with an inorganic photocatalyst would represent an intriguing natural-artificial hybrid system. Through a self-assembly process, hydrophilic Photosystem II membranes readily interact with hydrophilic Ru-loaded Rh-doped SrTiO3 to generate a uniformly dispersed mixture in an aqueous buffer solution (Fig. 9a and b).66 This hybrid system together with a Fe(CN)63−/Fe(CN)64−electron shuttle (whose electrochemical potential is located between that of the terminal electron acceptor of Photosystem II and the valence band potential of Rh-doped SrTiO3 (Fig. 9c)), steadily splits water into H2 and O2 in the expected stoichiometric ratio under sunlight irradiation. Moreover, when the Photosystem II is connected with a CdS-based photoelectrochemical cell consisting of the two redox shuttles quinone/hydroquinone and ferricyanide/ferrocyanide, overall water splitting with an STH conversion efficiency of 0.34% is achieved.67 These results demonstrate the feasibility of photoexcited charge transfer from a biological photosystem material to an inorganic semiconductor and suggest a new route for efficient Z-scheme overall water splitting. Mixed anion compounds, including oxynitrides, oxychalcogenides and oxyhalides, are potential photocatalysts for visible-light-driven water splitting. Recently, Bi4NbO8Cl68 or Bi4TaO8Br69 oxyhalides with a single layer perovskite structure have been shown to be active O2-evolution photocatalysts in Z-scheme overall water splitting under visible irradiation, when coupled with Rh-doped SrTiO3 as a H2-evolution photocatalyst and Fe3+/Fe2+ as a redox mediator. Theoretical calculations demonstrate that the incorporation of highly-dispersed O 2p orbitals rather than Cl 3p orbitals in the valence band maximum of Bi4NbO8Cl contributes to resistance to self-oxidation by holes during photocatalytic water oxidation.68 It has also been found that H2WO4 having a wider range of visible light absorption (∼500 nm) than WO3 (∼460 nm) can promote O2 evolution in Z-scheme water splitting in conjunction with an Fe3+/Fe2+ redox couple.70 There is also a plasmon-induced Z-scheme overall water splitting system consisting of a Rh-doped SrTiO3 H2-evolution photocatalyst and a Au/TiO2 O2-evolution photocatalyst. In this system, the hot electrons in visible-light-responsive plasmonic Au nanoparticles can be transferred to Rh-doped SrTiO3 through a solid contact interface.71
 Fig. 9  (a) A bright-field microscope image of a Photosystem II-Ru and Rh-doped SrTiO3 hybrid system, and (b) a fluorescence intensity image of the same material. Scale bars: 10 μm. (c) The required band potentials for a semiconductor photocatalyst to realize electron flow from Photosystem II to the photocatalyst and proton reduction to H2. Adapted from ref. 66 by permission of Springer Nature. Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. 
4. Overall water splitting with immobilized particulate systems
To date, photocatalytic one-step excitation or Z-scheme overall water splitting has typically been demonstrated using laboratory-scale particle suspension systems. Given the limited scalability of water splitting, there are difficulties in applying particle suspension processes to industrial production. As an example, the dispersion of a large amount of particulate photocatalysts in a large amount of water before sunlight irradiation would require a substantial power supply. In addition, the separation and collection of the photocatalyst powder from the suspension for maintenance purposes would be challenging, and it is impossible for a suspension type reactor to effectively receive sunlight irradiation by tracking the movement of the sun. Therefore, the immobilization of photocatalyst powders onto a specific substrate is required to scale up overall water splitting from the laboratory to the plant scale. Problems such as the inadequate diffusion of water to photocatalyst particles and the slow desorption of gaseous products from the accumulated particle layer often reduce the photocatalyst performance in fixed particulate system relative to that of particle suspension systems. Thus, it is necessary to investigate immobilized photocatalyst systems for future applications so as to determine potential difficulties associated with practical operation.
The first attempt to fix particulate photocatalysts for one-step excitation overall water splitting involved the fabrication of a particulate panel using the well-known GaN:ZnO photocatalyst.72 A mixture of Rh2−xCrxO3-modified GaN:ZnO photocatalysts and micrometre-sized silica particles was deposited on a glass plate (5 × 5 cm) by drop-casting, after which the photocatalysts fixed on the panel exhibited overall-water-splitting activity comparable to that obtained from a suspension. The addition of silica particles plays an important role in promoting the performance of the photocatalyst panel. This effect occurs because the hydrophilic silica creates space between photocatalyst particles to facilitate the access of water to the entire photocatalyst, as well as the release of the evolved gases. Using the same fabrication method, a 1 × 1 m panel with a RhCrOx-modified Al-doped SrTiO3 particulate photocatalyst was prepared as a test module for square-meter-scale overall water splitting, as shown in Fig. 10a and b.7 The photocatalyst panel was situated in a flat reactor with an acrylic plate window and a 4 mm thick water layer, giving an STH conversion efficiency of approximately 0.4% under natural sunlight irradiation with an intensity of 65 to 75 mW cm−2. This value is comparable to the STH value obtained using suspended photocatalysts on the laboratory scale. It was also found that the water layer thickness does not affect the release of gas bubbles from the surface of the panel (Fig. 10c), regardless of varying gas evolution rates at different light intensities. In addition, the hydrophilic nature of the reactor window resulted in the smooth transport of uniformly small gas bubbles, whereas large bubbles accumulated at the inner side of the hydrophobic window (Fig. 10d and e). Unfortunately, the retention of H2 and O2 in the reactor tends to block water diffusion and creates a potential risk of explosion. It should be noted that the potential for explosive H2 and O2 mixtures in the panel reactor requires separation of the gases when the overall water splitting efficiency reaches a certain level. In any case, a panel-type reactor incorporating a particulate photocatalyst for one-step excitation overall water splitting has been shown to be applicable to large-scale solar hydrogen production.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematics of a 1 × 1 m water-splitting panel. Nine photocatalyst sheets, each 33 × 33 cm, were arrayed in the reactor and a hydrophilized acrylic plate was used as the window with a water depth of 4 mm. (b) A photograph of a 1 × 1 m Al-doped SrTiO3 photocatalyst panel. (c) Reaction time courses for a 5 × 5 cm Al-doped SrTiO3 panel for different water depths (1 and 5 mm). (d) The reaction time courses of a 5 × 5 cm Al-doped SrTiO3 panel using a hydrophilized or a hydrophobized quartz window under intense illumination with a 1 mm depth. The initial gas evolution rate was adjusted to that corresponding to a 10% STH value (3.7 mL cm−2 h−1) by increasing the light intensity, using a 1500 W Xe lamp as the light source. (e) Photographs acquired during illumination through hydrophilized and a hydrophobized windows. Adapted from ref. 7 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright 2017 Elsevier Inc. 
In a Z-scheme photocatalyst suspension system, it is of great importance to realize efficient electron transfer from the O2-evolution photocatalyst to the H2-evolution photocatalyst and to suppress reverse reactions involving redox mediators. With this aim, particulate photocatalyst sheets are designed by embedding H2-evolution and O2-evolution photocatalysts into a conductive layer.8,73,74 In this type of fixed Z-scheme system, electron transfer takes place preferentially through the conductive layer because of the intimate contact between the photocatalysts and conductive material (Fig. 11a).8 Consequently, the H2-evolution and O2-evolution photocatalyst particles connected through the conductive layer allow efficient electron transfer, which in turn enhances the photocatalytic activity for overall water splitting. The first particulate photocatalyst sheet was fabricated using La,Rh-codoped SrTiO3 and Mo-doped BiVO4 particles uniformly embedded in a Au layer by a particle transfer method (Fig. 11b and c). The effect of the contact resistance associated with a Schottky barrier (which blocks the desired charge transfer between the metallic Au layer and the semiconductor) is moderated by fine tuning the post-annealing time and temperature (Fig. 11d). As a result, an STH conversion efficiency of 1.1% together with an AQY of 33% at 419 nm was achieved with this particulate photocatalyst sheet. This represents the highest performance yet for a Z-scheme particulate overall water splitting system. The effect of reverse reactions on the water-splitting activity can be eliminated by modifying the photocatalyst sheet with Cr2O3 and amorphous-TiO2 layers. Furthermore, the use of a film of earth-abundant carbon as an O2-tolerant conducting layer enhances the activity of the photocatalyst sheet at ambient pressure, due to the much slower activation of reverse reactions on a carbon conductor than on a precious metal layer.74 The photocatalyst sheet consisting of La,Rh-codoped SrTiO3 and Mo-doped BiVO4 demonstrated overall water splitting under visible light irradiation up to 520 nm. The replacement of present-day H2-evolution and O2-evolution photocatalysts with narrow-band-gap photocatalysts is required to expand the visible light range that can be utilized and to improve the STH conversion efficiency. LaMg1/3Ta2/3O2N75 and Ga-doped La5Ti2Cu0.9Ag0.1S5O764 have been successfully employed as H2-evolution photocatalysts in particulate sheet systems, but the activity of these photocatalyst sheets need to be further increased by upgrading the quality of photocatalyst materials and changing to a suitable long-wavelength-responsive O2-evolution photocatalyst. It is believed that particulate photocatalyst sheets that immobilize Z-scheme photocatalysts on an electron transfer sublayer are a promising approach to scaling up photocatalytic overall water splitting without the need for supporting electrolytes, buffering reagents, redox couples, an applied voltage or circulation of the reaction solution.
 Fig. 11  (a) A schematic of electron transfer in overall water splitting on the Ru-modified SrTiO3:La,Rh/Au/BiVO4:Mo sheet. (b) An illustration of the preparation of a SrTiO3:La,Rh/Au/BiVO4:Mo sheet by the particle transfer method. (c) Top-view SEM and SEM-EDX elemental mapping images. (d) Dependence of the overall water splitting activity of Ru-modified SrTiO3:La,Rh/Au/BiVO4:Mo photocatalyst sheets on annealing temperature. Adapted from ref. 8 by permission of Springer Nature. Copyright 2016 Springer Nature. 
5. Conclusions
In this review, the fundamentals of one-step excitation and Z-scheme overall water splitting on particulate photocatalysts have been presented. A single photocatalyst for one-step excitation overall water splitting under visible light irradiation must meet a number of rigorous prerequisites, including having a band gap larger than 1.23 eV but smaller than 3.1 eV and that straddles the reduction and oxidation potentials of water. In contrast, photocatalysts capable of visible-light-driven water reduction or oxidation are applicable to Z-scheme overall water splitting. Photogenerated charge separation, carrier migration to surface sites and surface catalytic reactions are all essential processes in efficient one-step excitation and Z-scheme overall water splitting. This review has summarized the requirements related to the accurate evaluation of photocatalytic activity, AQY and STH energy conversion efficiency. Special attention must be paid to the precise determination of gas evolution rates, illumination area and photon flux distribution. Surface engineering approaches, including cocatalyst loading, surface morphology control, surface modification and surface phase junction strategies that have been recently applied to advanced overall water splitting using a single photocatalyst were also thoroughly described in this work. Fine tuning of the photocatalyst materials by the above approaches can effectively facilitate charge separation and transfer without recombination and trapping. Such tuning can also kinetically suppress the backward reaction for water formation, so that the activity and durability for one-step excitation water splitting are significantly improved. Due to the relaxation of thermodynamic limitations on photocatalyst materials in Z-scheme systems, a large number of visible-light-responsive materials have been successfully implemented as H2-evolution or O2-evolution photocatalysts. The promotion of electron transfer from the O2-evolution photocatalyst to the H2-evolution photocatalyst and the restriction of reverse reactions involving redox couples are crucial to achieving efficient Z-scheme overall water splitting. Compared with particle suspension systems, immobilized particulates are more readily scaled up. In addition, the fixation of a one-step excitation photocatalyst on an inert substrate or the fixation of Z-scheme photocatalysts on a conducting sublayer can retain the material's intrinsic activity or dramatically enhance the photocatalytic performance. Thus, immobilization systems provide a prototype for the large-scale production of low-cost renewable solar hydrogen and illustrate the importance of mass transfer, gas desorption and diffusion in the practical operation of such processes.
To date, the highest reproducible STH energy conversion efficiency value achieved using particulate photocatalytic system is 1.1%,8 which is far lower than values obtained with photovoltaic-electrolysis systems76 and photoelectrochemical devices.77 Considering the simple construction of industrial scale solar hydrogen production facilities based on particulate photocatalytic overall water splitting systems, an STH energy conversion efficiency of approximately 5% will be a good launching point for practical applications. Therefore, improving the efficiency of present-day narrow-band-gap photocatalysts and developing new active materials capable of harnessing red or near infrared light are still the core issues in this field. The comprehensive refinement of photocatalyst materials to emphasize surface properties and the fine tuning of reaction conditions are also indispensable. Moreover, continuous investigations regarding immobilization systems will be necessary. Overall, efforts inspired from a broad range of scientific areas will be highly desirable to allow future breakthroughs in the promotion of overall water splitting efficiency, so as to realize the “Holy Grail” of artificial photosynthesis78 as soon as possible.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Artificial Photosynthesis Project of the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO) and by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (A) (No. 16H02417), Scientific Research (C) (No. 16K06862), and Young Scientists (A) (No. 15H05494) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).
Notes and references
J. Barber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 185 RSC .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, C. Li, M. Grätzel, R. Kosteckid and S. S. Mao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7909 RSC .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Millere and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983 RSC .
D. M. Fabian, S. Hu, N. Singh, F. A. Houle, T. Hisatomi, K. Domen, F. E. Osterloh and S. Ardo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2825 RSC .
Y. Goto, T. Hisatomi, Q. Wang, T. Higashi, K. Ishikiriyama, T. Maeda, Y. Sakata, S. Okunaka, H. Tokudome, M. Katayama, S. Akiyama, H. Nishiyama, Y. Inoue, T. Takewaki, T. Setoyama, T. Minegishi, T. Takata, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Joule, 2018, 2, 509 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Q. Jia, H. Tokudome, M. Zhong, C. Wang, Z. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, Y. Li, I. D. Sharp, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17050 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC .
R. Abe, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2010, 11, 179 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1486 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Suzuki, J. Xie, O. Tomita, D. J. Martin, M. Higashi, D. Kong, R. Abe and J. Tang, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 5201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qureshi and K. Takanabe, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 158 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ham, T. Hisatomi, Y. Goto, Y. Moriya, Y. Sakata, A. Yamakata, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3027 RSC .
T. Chiang, H. Lyu, T. Hisatomi, Y. Goto, T. Takata, M. Katayama, T. Minegishi and K. Domen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2782 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, Z. Lan and X. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 5261 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Chen, H. Xu and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1801955 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Domen, S. Naito, M. Soma, T. Onishi and K. Tamaru, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1980, 0, 543 RSC .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, J. Catal., 2006, 243, 303 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, F. Zhang, J. Han, J. Zhu, M. Li, B. Zhang, W. Fan, J. Lu and C. Li, Catal. Lett., 2018, 148, 933 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhong, T. Hisatomi, Y. Kuang, J. Zhao, M. Liu, A. Iwase, Q. Jia, H. Nishiyama, T. Minegishi, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, R. Niishiro, C. Katayama, H. Shibano, M. Katayama, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Inoue, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 364 RSC .
R. Asai, H. Nemotoa, Q. Jia, K. Saito, A. Iwase and A. Kudo, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2543 RSC .
W. J. Jo, H. J. Kang, K. Kong, Y. S. Lee, H. Park, Y. Lee, T. Buonassisi, K. K. Gleason and J. S. Lee, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 13774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, Z. Lan, L. Lin, S. Lin and X. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 3062 RSC .
L. Lin, C. Wang, W. Ren, H. Ou, Y. Zhang and X. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 5506 RSC .
Z. Pan, Y. Zheng, F. Guo, P. Niu and X. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ohno, L. Bai, T. Hisatomi, K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, D. Lu and K. Domen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 4986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, Z. Li, S. Wang, R. Li, X. Zhang, Z. Liang, H. Han, S. Liao and C. Li, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2182 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mu, Y. Zhao, A. Li, S. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Wang, T. Liu, R. Chen, J. Zhu, F. Fan, R. Li and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2463 RSC .
P. Zhang, T. Ochi, M. Fujitsuka, Y. Kobori, T. Majima and T. Tachikawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, F. Zhang, D. Wang, J. Yang, M. Li, J. Zhu, X. Zhou, H. Han and C. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1432 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, Y. Inoue, T. Hisatomi, R. Ishikawa, Q. Wang, T. Takata, S. Chen, N. Shibata, Y. Ikuhara and K. Domen, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 756 CrossRef .
Y. Li, L. Zhu, Y. Yang, H. Song, Z. Lou, Y. Guo and Z. Ye, Small, 2014, 11, 871 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zheng, X. Cao and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Wan, Y. Ding, S. Wu, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, G. Zhang, Y. Xiong, X. Wu, J. Yang and H. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702428 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, T. Matsumoto, N. Shibata, Y. Ikuhara and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pan, T. Takata and K. Domen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 1854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Takata, C. Pan, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Garcia-Esparza, T. Shinagawa, S. Ould-Chikh, M. Qureshi, X. Peng, N. Wei, D. H. Anjum, A. Clo, T. Weng, D. Nordlund, D. Sokaras, J. Kubota, K. Domen and K. Takanabe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Q. Xu, Z. Feng, M. Li and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, J. Zhu, H. An, P. Yan, B. Huang, R. Chen, F. Fan and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Q. Xu, M. Li, S. Shen, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Feng, J. Shi, H. Han and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 13089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jin, X. Wang, X. Wang, M. Ju, S. Shen, W. Liang, Y. Zhao, Z. Feng, H. Y. Playford, R. I. Walton and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18221 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bard, J. Photochem., 1979, 10, 59 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abe, K. Sayama, K. Domen and H. Arakawa, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 344, 339 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sasaki, H. Nemoto, K. Saito and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17536 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iwase, Y. Ng, Y. Ishiguro, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, S. Ma, Y. Li and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4144 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, M. Higashi, D. Lu, R. Abe and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, D. Lu and K. Domen, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1026 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dong, Y. Qi, J. Cui, B. Liu, F. Xiong, X. Jiang, Z. Li, Y. Xiao, F. Zhang and C. Li, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 10707 RSC .
S. Chen, Y. Qi, T. Hisatomi, Q. Ding, T. Asai, Z. Li, S. Ma, F. Zhang, K. Domen and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 8618 CrossRef .
Y. Qi, S. Chen, M. Li, Q. Ding, Z. Li, J. Cui, B. Dong, F. Zhang and C. Li, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 437 RSC .
T. Shirakawa, M. Higashi, O. Tomita and R. Abe, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1065 RSC .
Y. Yuan, D. Chen, S. Yang, L. Yang, J. Wang, D. Cao, W. Tu, Z. Yu and Z. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21205 RSC .
A. Iwase, S. Yoshino, T. Takayama, Y. H. Ng, R. Amal and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yuan, D. Liu, N. Zhang, W. Ye, H. Ju, L. Shi, R. Long, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, T. Hisatomi, Q. Wang, S. Chen, G. Ma, J. Liu, S. Nandy, T. Minegishi, M. Katayama and K. Domen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1690 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, X. Zheng, L. Chen, Y. Xiong and H. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, J. Chen, C. Li and W. Tian, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, W. Wang, C. Ding, Z. Wang, S. Liao and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 765 RSC .
H. Fujito, H. Kunioku, D. Kato, H. Suzuki, M. Higashi, H. Kageyama and R. Abe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tao, Y. Zhao, L. Mu, S. Wang, R. Li and C. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701392 CrossRef .
H. Suzuki, O. Tomita, M. Higashi and R. Abe, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 1134 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Y. Gao, Y. Qi, A. Li, F. Fan and C. Li, J. Catal., 2017, 354, 250 CrossRef CAS .
A. Xiong, G. Ma, K. Maeda, T. Takata, T. Hisatomi, T. Setoyama, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 325 RSC .
Q. Wang, Y. Li, T. Hisatomi, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Catal., 2015, 328, 308 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Y. Suzuki, Z. Pan, J. Seo, M. Katayama, T. Minegishi, H. Nishiyama, T. Takata, K. Seki, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pan, T. Hisatomi, Q. Wang, S. Chen, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, C. Pan, T. Takata, M. Katayama, T. Minegishi, A. Kudo and K. Domen, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7188 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jia, L. C. Seitz, J. D. Benck, Y. Huo, Y. Chen, J. W. D. Ng, T. Bilir, J. S. Harris and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. May, H. J. Lewerenz, D. Lackner, F. Dimroth and T. Hannappel, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Bard and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Zheng Wang
	Zheng Wang received his BSc degree in 2008, and MSc. degree in 2011. He obtained PhD degree from the Department of Molecular Engineering at Kyoto University in 2015. His doctoral research is photocatalytic conversion of CO2 in and by H2O over heterogeneous photocatalysts under the supervision of Prof. Tsunehiro Tanaka. Since 2015, he joined the Japan Technological Research Association of Artificial Photosynthetic Chemical Process (ARPChem) as a postdoctoral researcher and worked on overall water splitting in Prof. Kazunari Domen group at The University of Tokyo. In 2017, he moved to Prof. Kazunari Domen group in Shinshu University (Japan). He is interested in the visible-light-driven photocatalyst materials and their applications in water splitting and CO2 reduction.

Can Li
	Can Li received his PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics in 1989. He was promoted to a full professor in 1993 and has been a visiting professor at the Université Pierre et Marie Curie (Paris VI), Lehigh University, the University of Liverpool, and Queensland University. He did his postdoctoral work at Northwestern University in 1994–1996. Currently, he is the head of the Solar Energy Research Division and the director of the Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy (DNL). His research interests include (1) UV Raman spectroscopy and time-resolved spectroscopy, (2) environmental and green catalysis, (3) chiral catalysis and bio-catalysis, and (4) solar energy utilization based on photo(electro)catalysis and photovoltaic cells.

Kazunari Domen
	Kazunari Domen is currently a professor at The University of Tokyo and Shinshu University, Japan. He received BSc (1976), MSc (1979), and PhD (1982) honors in chemistry from the University of Tokyo. He joined Chemical Resources Laboratory at Tokyo Institute of Technology in 1982 as an assistant professor and was promoted to an associate professor in 1990 and a professor in 1996. He moved to The University of Tokyo as a professor in 2004. He has been working on overall water splitting on heterogeneous photocatalysts to produce clean and renewable hydrogen. Currently he is the team leader of Japan Technological Research Association of Artificial Photosynthetic Chemical Process (ARPChem). His research interests now include heterogeneous catalysis and materials chemistry, with particular focus on surface chemical reaction dynamics, photocatalysis, solid acid catalysis, and mesoporous materials.
H2O → H2 + 1/2O2 ΔG0 = 237.13 kJ mol−1	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic energy diagrams of (a) one-step excitation and (b) Z-scheme overall water splitting on particulate photocatalysts. CBM: conduction band minimum; VBM: valence band maximum; Eg: band gap energy.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustrations of the evaluation of photocatalytic activity for overall water splitting. Adapted from ref. 10 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2009 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustrations of (a) the illuminated photocatalyst area in particle suspension (Cases 1 and 2) and immobilization (Case 3) systems, and (b) the geometric area illuminated by a 300 W Xe lamp (Lamp House, R300-3J), the concentric circles with different colours indicate the spatial distribution of the photon flux. The spatial distribution of the photon flux of a 300 W Xe lamp equipped with (c) a cut-off filter (λ ≥ 420 nm) and (d) a band-pass filter (λ = 418.6 nm, full width at half maximum = 9.5 nm). These spectra were acquired with spatial intervals of 2 mm from the centre of illumination. Reproduced from ref. 8 by permission of Springer Nature. Copyright 2016 Springer Nature.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 4  Time courses of overall water splitting on Al-doped SrTiO3 loaded with RhCrOx and CoOy under irradiation with a (a) 300 W Xe lamp (300 nm ≤ λ ≤ 500 nm) and (b) simulated sunlight (AM 1.5 G). Reproduced from ref. 7 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright 2017 Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 5  Engineering the morphology of SrTiO3 nanocrystals. (a–c) The morphology of 6-facet SrTiO3 nanocrystals. (d) The structure of the {001} facet of SrTiO3. (e) The transition of SrTiO3 nanocrystals from 6-facet to 18-facet. (f–h) The morphology of 18-facet SrTiO3 nanocrystals. (i) The structure of the {110} facet of SrTiO3. SEM images of 18-facet and 6-facet SrTiO3 nanocrystals with simultaneous photodeposition of Pt and Co3O4 as cocatalysts: (j) Pt-Co3O4/18-facet SrTiO3 and (k) Pt-Co3O4/6-facet SrTiO3. Adapted from ref. 35 by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 



1	—	—	0	0	—
2	Imp.a	—	1099	493	2.2
3	P.D.b	—	2083	1143	1.8
4	—	Imp	0	0	—
5	—	P.D.	0	0	—
6	Imp	P.D.	749	406	1.8
7	P.D.	Imp	1206	571	2.1
8	Imp	Imp	534	279	1.9
9	P.D.	P.D.	4089	2095	2.0

 	Fig. 6  Time courses of gas production on RhCrOx/LaMg1/3Ta2/3O2N modified with various coatings: (a) TiO2, (b) Ta2O5, (c) ZrO2, (d) Nb2O5, (e) TiO2/SiO2 (f) Ta2O5/SiO2 (g) ZrO2/SiO2 and (h) Nb2O5/SiO2. Adapted from ref. 43 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) H2 and O2 evolution activities (normalized by specific surface area) of α-Ga2O3 samples calcined at different temperatures, allowing a comparison of photocatalytic activities. The notation α + β indicates a mechanically mixed sample with a 1:1 α-Ga2O3/β-Ga2O3 ratio. (b) An HRTEM image of the α–β phase junction on Ga2O3. (c) An illustration of charge transfer across the α–β phase junction. Adapted from ref. 48 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a and b) FESEM images of a Pt-loaded MgTa2O6−xNy/TaON photocatalyst. (c) The estimated relative band positions of the MgTa2O6−xNy/TaON heterostructure. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons.	 



1	MgTa2O6−xNy	1.1	0.3	1.3
2	TaON	8.5	15.6	7.5
3	MgTa2O6−xNy/TaON-mix	6.7	23.5	12.2
4	MgTa2O6−xNy/TaON	6.9	108.3	55.3

 	Fig. 9  (a) A bright-field microscope image of a Photosystem II-Ru and Rh-doped SrTiO3 hybrid system, and (b) a fluorescence intensity image of the same material. Scale bars: 10 μm. (c) The required band potentials for a semiconductor photocatalyst to realize electron flow from Photosystem II to the photocatalyst and proton reduction to H2. Adapted from ref. 66 by permission of Springer Nature. Copyright 2014 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematics of a 1 × 1 m water-splitting panel. Nine photocatalyst sheets, each 33 × 33 cm, were arrayed in the reactor and a hydrophilized acrylic plate was used as the window with a water depth of 4 mm. (b) A photograph of a 1 × 1 m Al-doped SrTiO3 photocatalyst panel. (c) Reaction time courses for a 5 × 5 cm Al-doped SrTiO3 panel for different water depths (1 and 5 mm). (d) The reaction time courses of a 5 × 5 cm Al-doped SrTiO3 panel using a hydrophilized or a hydrophobized quartz window under intense illumination with a 1 mm depth. The initial gas evolution rate was adjusted to that corresponding to a 10% STH value (3.7 mL cm−2 h−1) by increasing the light intensity, using a 1500 W Xe lamp as the light source. (e) Photographs acquired during illumination through hydrophilized and a hydrophobized windows. Adapted from ref. 7 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright 2017 Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) A schematic of electron transfer in overall water splitting on the Ru-modified SrTiO3:La,Rh/Au/BiVO4:Mo sheet. (b) An illustration of the preparation of a SrTiO3:La,Rh/Au/BiVO4:Mo sheet by the particle transfer method. (c) Top-view SEM and SEM-EDX elemental mapping images. (d) Dependence of the overall water splitting activity of Ru-modified SrTiO3:La,Rh/Au/BiVO4:Mo photocatalyst sheets on annealing temperature. Adapted from ref. 8 by permission of Springer Nature. Copyright 2016 Springer Nature.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
