Enhanced photovoltaic performance of dye -sensitized solar cells based on ZnO microrod array/TiO 2  nanoparticle hybrid films  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2TA00811D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2TA00811D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3112-3117Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsEnhanced photovoltaic performance of dye-sensitized solar cells based on ZnO microrod array/TiO2 nanoparticle hybrid films

        
          
            Guangwu 
            Yang
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Qing 
            Wang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Chengcheng 
            Miao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhongheng 
            Bu
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Wenyue 
            Guo
          
        
      *ab
aCollege of Science, China University of Petroleum, Qingdao, 266580, PR China. E-mail: yanggw@upc.edu.cn;   Tel: +86 532 86981334
bKey Laboratory of New Energy Physics & Materials Science in Universities of Shandong, China University of Petroleum, Qingdao, 266580, PR China
cFaculty of Engineering, National University of Singapore, 117574, Singapore
Received 
      23rd October 2012
    , Accepted 22nd December 2012First published on 7th January 2013AbstractWe report in this paper a simple and cheap method for the preparation of ZnO microrod array/TiO2 nanoparticle hybrid films for applications in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs), which is achieved by screen printing TiO2 paste into the interspace of low-density ZnO microrod arrays grown on FTO glass. The as-fabricated DSCs exhibit a remarkably enhanced power conversion efficiency of 7.76%, higher than 6.57% for standard TiO2 nanoparticle based DSCs. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy analysis reveals that the electron transport, electron lifetime, effective diffusion length and the electron collection efficiency are increased, while the charge recombination is reduced, indicating that the ZnO microrod array/TiO2 nanoparticle hybrid film can be considered as a superior material to TiO2 nanoparticle in many respects.
1 Introduction
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) have recently received great attention in the past two decades because of their cost-effectiveness, high theoretical energy conversion efficiency and easy fabrication processes compared with silicon-based photovoltaic devices.1 In a standard DSC device, the sintered mesoporous film consisting of nanometer sized TiO2 particles is one of the main characteristics.2 Such film features interconnected pore networks with a large surface area that allows sufficient adsorption of dye molecules. Upon photoexcitation, the dyes inject electrons into the conduction band of the TiO2 nanoparticle film, and the electrons then diffuse through the oxide film network and are collected at the transparent electrode substrate.3,4 A record power conversion efficiency of 12.3% for small-area laboratory test DSCs has been reported by Grätzel et al. recently.5 However, the performance of DSCs is greatly limited by the electron transport in the TiO2 nanoparticle boundaries and the electron recombination losses due to the poor interconnectivity between the particles, which retards the effort of increasing the photon absorption (especially at long wavelengths) through thickening the nanoparticle film, as well as the effort of exploring new redox couples with faster kinetics.
One-dimensional (1D) nano-/microstructures may provide a solution to these challenges due to the facilitated electron transfer.6–8 ZnO nanowires, for instance, can provide faster electron transport for the injected electrons to the back contact and shorten the electron transport pathways.9–14 However, DSCs based on ZnO nanowires can only deliver a typical power conversion efficiency of 2%,11 which is mainly due to the insufficient surface area of ZnO nanowires for dye adsorption compared with TiO2 nanoparticles.
Constructing hybrid structures based on ZnO 1D nano-/microstructures and TiO2 nanoparticles to take advantage of both nanomaterials in principle should be an effective way to maintain both high electron mobility and large surface area. In 2011, Chen et al. prepared a TiO2-decorated ZnO nanorod array photoanode by a two-step approach combining hydrothermal oxidation and a sol–gel process.13 However, the TiO2 sol cannot penetrate the ZnO nanorod matrix, resulting in the TiO2 nanoparticles being dominantly situated at the array top. Compared with a standard DSC that possesses a minimum power conversion efficiency of 6%, the as-assembled DSC can only exhibit a maximum power conversion efficiency of 0.94%. In 2012, Wang et al. reported a TiO2 nanoparticle/ZnO nanowire array bi-film photoanode.14 Although the optimal DSC exhibits a high efficiency of 4.68%, the bi-film photoanode is basically two different films aligned in tandem, which is not beneficial to boost the DSC performance by combining the advantages of both ZnO 1D nano-/microstructures and TiO2 nanoparticles.
Therefore, it is most desirable to maintain both the direct pathway for fast electron transfer provided by ZnO 1D nano-/microstructures and the large surface area for sufficient dye loading offered from TiO2 nanoparticles. Herein, in this paper, we report for the first time a cheap and easy method for the preparation of ZnO microrod array/TiO2 nanoparticle hybrid films. The low-density ZnO microrod array is firstly grown on FTO glass via a seed-free hydrothermal process. TiO2 nanoparticles are then filled into the ZnO microrod array interspace by screen printing, forming a hybrid film consisting of the ZnO microrod array and TiO2 nanoparticles. Compared with standard TiO2 nanoparticle based DSCs, the hybrid film based DSCs exhibit significantly enhanced photovoltaic performance.
2 Experimental
2.1 Hydrothermal growth of low-density ZnO microrod array
FTO glasses (TEC, 15 Ω/□) are cleaned successively by acetone, ethanol, and deionized water sonication. Low-density arrays of ZnO microrods are then grown by immersing a piece of FTO glass with the conducting side face down in an aqueous solution containing 50 mM zinc nitrate (Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, reagent grade, 98%, Sigma-Aldrich) and 50 mM hexamethylenetetramine (C6H12N4, ACS reagent, ≥99.0%, Sigma-Aldrich). The hydrothermal synthesis is conducted at 88 °C for 12 h in an electric oven. After synthesis, the FTO substrates are thoroughly rinsed with deionized water and allowed to dry in ambient air.
2.2 Screen printing of TiO2 paste
The ZnO microrod array/TiO2 nanoparticle hybrid film is prepared by screen-printing the TiO2 paste (Dyesol 18NRT) onto FTO glass grown with ZnO microrod arrays several times in order to get an appropriate thickness. The printed film is then sintered in air by heating gradually to 325 °C and holding for 5 min, then 375 °C for 5 min, at 450 °C for 15 min, and finally at 500 °C for 15 min. No scattering layer and post TiCl4 treatment are employed throughout the study. The thickness of the film is determined by an Alpha-Step IQ surface profiler to be approximately 12 μm. The weight ratio of the ZnO microrod array in the hybrid film is measured by an atomic absorption spectrophotometer (contrAA 700) to be approximately 1.8%.
2.3 DSC assembly
Two types of DSCs are fabricated. One is the DSC based on pure TiO2 nanoparticle film (denoted as TP-DSC), the other is the DSC based on a ZnO microrod array/TiO2 nanoparticle hybrid film (denoted as ZR/TP-DSC). The DSCs are manufactured under identical conditions, and the assembly process is similar to that of a standard DSC reported elsewhere.15 The films are dyed by soaking for 12 h at room temperature in 0.15 mM solutions of N-719 (Dyesol) in a mixture of acetonitrile and tert-butanol (1:1 volume ratio). The Pt counter electrodes are prepared by depositing a thin layer of Pt nanoparticles onto the FTO substrates by thermal decomposition of hexachloroplatinic acid (H2PtCl6·6H2O, ACS reagent, ≥37.50% Pt basis, Sigma-Aldrich). The electrolyte used in this experiment is E008 (MPN based, 0.1 M iodine, 1 M PMII, 0.5 M NMB and 0.1 M LiTFSI).
2.4 Characterization
X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns are collected using a Rigaku D/MAX 2700 diffractometer (Japan) with Cu Kα radiation (k = 1.5418 Å) operating at 40.0 kV, 60.0 mA. The morphology of the ZnO microrod arrays and the hybrid films are characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Philips XL 30 FEG). IPCE spectra are measured with a spectral resolution of ca. 5 nm using a 300 W xenon lamp and a grating monochromator equipped with order sorting filters (Newport/Oriel). The incident photon flux is determined using a calibrated silicon photodiode (Newport/Oriel). Photocurrents are measured using an autoranging current amplifier (Newport/Oriel). Control of the monochromator and recording of photocurrent spectra are performed using a PC running the TRACQ Basic software (Newport). The current–voltage (I–V) characterization is operated using a Keithley Source Meter and the PVIV software package (Newport). Simulated AM 1.5 illumination is provided by a Newport class A solar simulator, and the light intensity is measured using a calibrated Si solar cell. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements are performed using an Autolab potentiostat/galvanostat and the Nova 1.6 software package. The cells are biased to the open-circuit photovoltage in the dark. The magnitude of the alternating signal is 10 mV, and the frequency range is from 105 to 10−2 Hz.
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Structure and morphology characterization

Fig. 1a displays the XRD patterns of the FTO glass before and after the hydrothermal growth of ZnO microrod arrays. All the diffraction peaks located at 2θ values of 20–80° agree well with hexagonal phase ZnO (JCPDS no. 80-0074) without any diffraction peaks. Compared with the powder diffraction pattern, the XRD spectra of the ZnO microrod arrays show a dominant diffraction peak corresponding to the (002) planes, which indicates that the ZnO microrods are grown with a high orientation of their c-axis perpendicular to the substrate.16
 Fig. 1  XRD patterns of the reference ZnO powers, bare FTO glass, and the ZnO microrod arrays on FTO glass (a), and the SEM images of ZnO microrod arrays grown on FTO glass (b–d: (b) the overview, (c) the magnified view, and (d) an individual ZnO microrod). 

Fig. 1b–d show the SEM images of ZnO microrods grown on FTO substrate. The ZnO microrod arrays are highly uniform over the entire surface of the FTO substrate (Fig. 1b). A magnified image of the ZnO microrod arrays shown in Fig. 1c suggests that the ZnO microrods are oriented approximately perpendicular to the surface of the substrate, aligning at a quite low density with a mean space between them of 10 μm. The length of the ZnO microrods is around 10 μm. Fig. 1d shows the morphology of an individual ZnO rod, with a mean diameter of 1 μm. As expected, the ZnO microrod possesses a well defined hexagonal prism morphology. The low-density and micro level structure of the ZnO rod array provide important morphology functions for the hybrid film. Firstly, the ZnO weight ratio is necessarily low in the hybrid film. High ZnO content (e.g., >10%) in the ZnO–TiO2 hybrid photoanode would depress the cell performance.17,18 Secondly, it provides enough interspace for TiO2 nanoparticle loading, so as to maintain a high surface area for dye loading. Thirdly, it offers a strong structure to suppress the damage caused by the screen printing.

Fig. 2a displays the XRD patterns of the pure TiO2 films and the ZnO microrod array/TiO2 nanoparticle hybrid films. It can be seen that after the screen printing, the pure anatase phase TiO2 becomes a composite of ZnO and TiO2.
 Fig. 2  XRD patterns of the pure TiO2 film and the ZnO microrod array/TiO2 nanoparticle hybrid film (a), and the SEM images of the ZnO microrod array/TiO2 nanoparticle hybrid film (b–h): ((b–d) at low magnification, (e–g) at high magnification, and (h) the cross section of the hybrid film screen printed one time only). 

Fig. 2b–h show the SEM images of the ZnO microrod array/TiO2 nanoparticle hybrid films. It can be observed that after the screen printing, TiO2 nanoparticles have been successfully filled into the interspace of the ZnO microrod arrays, forming a hybrid film consisting of ZnO microrod arrays and TiO2 nanoparticles. From the low magnification images of Fig. 2b–d, one can clearly identify the patterns of the mesh on the film surface, demonstrating the success of the screen printing technique. Close examination of Fig. 2e–g reveals that the hybrid film maintains the smooth and compact structure of the TiO2 film without any cracks, indicating the screen printing of TiO2 paste does not induce any visible structure degradation of the ZnO microrod array.
To further verify the interfacial microstructure between the ZnO microrod and the TiO2 nanoparticles in the hybrid film, screen printing of TiO2 paste is done one time only to expose the ZnO microrod array. The cross section image of the as-prepared hybrid film is shown in Fig. 2h. It can be seen that each ZnO microrod is closely and tightly surrounded by the TiO2 nanoparticles without any gaps between the ZnO microrod and the TiO2 bulk film, suggesting a desirable contact between the ZnO microrods and TiO2 nanoparticles, indicating that the TiO2 nanoparticles can be fully filled into the interspace of the ZnO microrod array, forming a uniform and integrated hybrid film of ZnO microrod arrays and TiO2 nanoparticles.
3.2 Photocurrent–voltage and energy conversion characteristics

Fig. 3 shows the comparison of the IPCE characteristics for the TP-DSC and the ZR/TP-DSC, both of which exhibit a broad photoresponse over the entire visible light range. The higher IPCE values of the ZR/TP-DSC mainly arise from reduced charge recombination resulting from the ZnO microrods which improve electron transport properties.
 Fig. 3  IPCE spectra of the TP-DSC and the ZR/TP-DSC. 

Fig. 4 shows the comparison of the I–V characteristics for the TP-DSC and the ZR/TP-DSC. The corresponding photovoltaic parameters of the cells are summarized in the inserted table. The JSC of the ZR/TP-DSC is increased by ca. 5%, in agreement with the above IPCE results. The higher VOC value of ZR/TP-DSC can be explained by the suppression of charge recombination. Based on the increased JSC and VOC, the ZR/TP-DSC achieves a higher power conversion efficiency of 7.76%, which is increased by about 18% compared with the TP-DSC.
 Fig. 4  The I–V characteristics curves of the TP-DSC and the ZR/TP-DSC. Inset shows the summarized results of the open circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current density (JSC), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (η). 
3.3 Electrochemical impedance measurements

Fig. 5 shows the Nyquist plots for the TP-DSC and the ZR/TP-DSC. The derived parameters are presented in the inserted table after the data were fitted by an appropriate equivalent circuit.19 The decrease of Rt and the increase of Rct reveal that the ZnO microrod arrays serve here not only as transport paths but also as trapping sites to prevent electrons recombining with the electrolyte, which is further verified by the increase of Cμ. The value of Cμ gives the total density of free electrons in the conduction band and the localized electrons in the trapping sites.20 Therefore, an increased electron lifetime and decreased electron transport time can be observed. The smaller electron transport time in the hybrid film than that in the standard TiO2 film indicates that electrons can be transported fastest in the hybrid film. Moreover, the values of Ln and ηec reflect the combining effects of the electron transport and the electron recombination, and the higher values of Ln and ηec exhibited by ZR/TP-DSC demonstrate that the ZnO microrod array/TiO2 nanoparticle hybrid film can enhance the photovoltaic performance of DSCs.
 Fig. 5  Nyquist plots of the TP-DSC and the ZR/TP-DSC. Inset is the summarized results of the impedance of electron transport in TiO2 (Rt), impedance of electron recombination with the electrolyte (Rct), chemical capacitance (Cμ), electron lifetime (τn), electron transport time through the film (t), effective diffusion length (Ln), and the electron collecting efficiency (ηec). 
The above experimental observations can be explained by the following: the ZnO microrod array embedded in the standard TiO2 film can facilitate faster electron transport and at the same time retard electron recombination, which is proved by the decreased electron transport time and the increased electron lifetime in the hybrid film than that in the standard TiO2 film. Thus, Ln and ηec can reach higher values in the hybrid film.

Fig. 6 schematically shows the electron transport process in the ZnO microrod array/TiO2 nanoparticle hybrid films. The generated electrons are collected by the nearest surface of the ZnO microrod, which provides a shorter pathway to the back contact and faster electron transport for the injected electrons than the twisted inter-connected TiO2 nanoparticles.
 Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of the electron transport behaviors in ZnO microrod array/TiO2 nanoparticle hybrid film. 
4 Conclusions
  (1) Low-density ZnO microrod arrays can be successfully grown on nonseeded FTO glass via a low-temperature hydrothermal method, providing important morphology functions for the hybrid film.
(2) TiO2 nanoparticles can be completely filled into the interspace of ZnO microrod arrays by a screen printing technique, forming a ZnO microrod array/TiO2 nanoparticle hybrid film.
(3) The ZnO microrod array/TiO2 nanoparticle hybrid film based DSCs exhibit a remarkably enhanced power conversion efficiency of 7.76%, higher by 18% than standard TiO2 nanoparticle based DSCs, owing to the increased electron transport, electron lifetime, effective diffusion length and electron collection efficiency and the reduced charge recombination.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province (Grant no. ZR2011EMQ003), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant no. 11CX05004A) and the Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University (IRT0759) of MOE, PRC, Shandong Province Natural Science Foundation (Grant no. ZR2011EMZ002).
Notes and references
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1861 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kalyanasundaram and M. Grätzel, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 177, 347 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6841 CrossRef .
A. Yella, H. W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Y. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W. G. Diau, C. Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, N. R. Neale, A. Miedaner and A. J. Frank, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 69 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gubbala, V. Chakrapani, V. Kumar and M. K. Sunkara, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2411 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Xu, P. H. Shin, L. L. Cao, J. M. Wu and D. Gao, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 143 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam, J. T. Hupp and M. J. Pellin, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2183 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wu, G. R. Chen, H. H. Yang, C. H. Ku and J. Y. Lai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 213109 CrossRef .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. D. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Xu, J. M. Wu, U. V. Desai and D. Gao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8122 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. Guo, Y. Q. Chen, L. Z. Liu, Y. F. Cheng, X. H. Zhang, Q. Li, M. Q. Wei and B. J. Ma, J. Power Sources, 2012, 201, 408 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Wang, Y. Wang and J. B. Li, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2012, 61, 613 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, X. F. Qian, J. Yin and Z. K. Zhu, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 3441 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pang, T. F. Xie, Y. Zhang, X. Wei, M. Yang and D. J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18417 CAS .
X. D. Gao, W. Gao, X. D. Yan, F. W. Zhuge, J. M. Bian and X. M. Li, Funct. Mater. Lett., 2009, 2, 27 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, S. Ito, M. Grätzel, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, T. Bessho and H. Imai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25210 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kern, R. Sastrawan, J. Ferber, R. Stangl and J. Luther, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 4213 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, T. N. Murakami, P. Comte, P. Liska, C. Grätzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 4613 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  XRD patterns of the reference ZnO powers, bare FTO glass, and the ZnO microrod arrays on FTO glass (a), and the SEM images of ZnO microrod arrays grown on FTO glass (b–d: (b) the overview, (c) the magnified view, and (d) an individual ZnO microrod).	 

 	Fig. 2  XRD patterns of the pure TiO2 film and the ZnO microrod array/TiO2 nanoparticle hybrid film (a), and the SEM images of the ZnO microrod array/TiO2 nanoparticle hybrid film (b–h): ((b–d) at low magnification, (e–g) at high magnification, and (h) the cross section of the hybrid film screen printed one time only).	 

 	Fig. 3  IPCE spectra of the TP-DSC and the ZR/TP-DSC.	 

 	Fig. 4  The I–V characteristics curves of the TP-DSC and the ZR/TP-DSC. Inset shows the summarized results of the open circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current density (JSC), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (η).	 

 	Fig. 5  Nyquist plots of the TP-DSC and the ZR/TP-DSC. Inset is the summarized results of the impedance of electron transport in TiO2 (Rt), impedance of electron recombination with the electrolyte (Rct), chemical capacitance (Cμ), electron lifetime (τn), electron transport time through the film (t), effective diffusion length (Ln), and the electron collecting efficiency (ηec).	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of the electron transport behaviors in ZnO microrod array/TiO2 nanoparticle hybrid film.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
