Well-controlled layer-by-layer assembly of carbon dot/CdS heterojunctions for efficient visible-light-driven photocatalysis   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA03649F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA03649F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16613-16620Well-controlled layer-by-layer assembly of carbon dot/CdS heterojunctions for efficient visible-light-driven photocatalysis†

        
          
            Na-Na 
            Chai
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hang-Xing 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chen-Xia 
            Hu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qiang 
            Wang
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Hao-Li 
            Zhang
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry (SKLAOC), College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 730000, China. E-mail: haoli.zhang@lzu.edu.cn; qiangwang@lzu.edu.cn
Received 
      19th May 2015
    , Accepted 6th July 2015First published on 6th July 2015AbstractFluorescent carbon dots have attracted great attention, but their application in photocatalysis has not been well explored. Herein we report a facile layer-by-layer method to fabricate uniform C dot/CdS heterojunction films via an electrophoretic and sequential chemical bath deposition method. Because no ligands are used, this strategy facilitates the formation of intimate interfacial contact beneficial for charge separation and transfer, which can lead to a high photocurrent density of 2.6 mA cm−2. In addition, the electron donor–acceptor heterojunction can expedite charge separation and effectively suppress electron–hole pair recombination, eventually contributing to enhanced photoelectrochemical and/or photocatalytic efficiency of the system. As a proof-of-concept, the hybrid films manifested themselves as an efficient visible-light-driven photocatalyst when applied for the reduction of nitro-benzene derivatives in the aqueous phase under low power irradiation. Our findings thus establish a new frontier on the rational design and fabrication of well-controlled hybrid films with built-in heterojunctions for solar light conversion.
Introduction
Fluorescent carbon-based nanodots have recently attracted mounting interest because of their facile preparation,1 excellent photo-2 and chemical stability and versatile applications in the opto-electronic field3,4 and biological imaging.2,3,5–7 Compared with two-dimensional (2D) zero bandgap graphene, 0-dimensional (0D) carbon dots (C dots) have an intrinsic bandgap and are more promising for photochemical reactions due to their high optical activities associated with quantum confinement and edge effects.4,8–11 Lately, C dots have been employed for photocatalytic applications owing to their adjustable size, composition and visible light response.12–14 For instance, C dot/semiconductor composites were explored for photocatalytic pollutant degradation4,8 and hydrogen evolution.15 It was suggested that a strong interfacial contact between the C dots and inorganic semiconductors facilitated efficient charge transfer and was thus beneficial for high photocatalytic activity.15
Cadmium sulfide (CdS) is a well-established semiconductor material employed for a wide range of applications, including optoelectronics, photovoltaics, photodetectors, and photocatalysis.16–24 With a bandgap of 2.4 eV, the absorption of CdS matches well with the visible regime of solar irradiation. Although they have been studied for decades, most CdS materials still suffer from poor photostability and low conversion efficiency stemming from rapid electron–hole recombination, which severely limit their further applications. Recently, researchers are making efforts for combining CdS quantum dots with various 2D nano-materials such as graphene, MoS2 and TiO2 sheets, for the purpose of achieving enhanced photoconversion efficiency and improved stability.19,21,23–31
These facts prompted us to assemble CdS with 0D C dots in order to obtain synergistic effects and hence to achieve an even better opto-electronic response. Our rationale is that the integration of C dots into CdS films could form a novel heterojunction structure, which would facilitate spatial separation of the photoinduced generated electrons and holes and prohibit exciton recombination.15,24 Hence in this work, we employed a facile LBL method to manufacture uniform C dot/CdS nano-hybrid films by electrophoretic and sequential chemical bath deposition (S-CBD).2 In comparison with conventional methods such as Langmuir–Blodgett deposition,32 vacuum filtration,33 drop casting,34 and dip coating,35 our method enables the formation of a well-controlled assembly of C dots/CdS multilayers with intimate interfacial contact, which is beneficial for charge separation and transfer. The well-controlled assembly of C dots/CdS multilayers herein demonstrated stable and superior photoelectrochemical and/or photocatalytic performance upon visible light irradiation, indicative of promising applications in the solar light conversion field.
Experimental section
Materials and characterization
All of the reagents and materials were obtained commercially, and were of analytical grade. Ultrapure water was produced by Millipore, Billerica, MA, U.S.
UV-Vis absorption spectra were recorded using a T6 UV-Vis spectrometer (Purkinje General, China). Photoluminescence spectra were recorded on a FLS920 steady/transient fluorescence spectrometer (Edinburgh Instruments, U.K.). Photoelectrochemical measurements were carried out on a CHI 660b (CHI USA) electrochemical station. The Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were obtained on a Vertex 70v FTIR spectrophotometer (BRUKER USA). X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained on a PANalytical X'Pert PRO. X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data were measured by using an Axis Ultra DLD system having an Al K source. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) studies were performed using a Hitachi S-4800 operating at 5 kV, 10 μA. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) studies were performed using a TECNAI G2 F30 (FEI) operating at 300 kV. The TEM samples were prepared by the dropwise addition of solution onto the ultra-thin carbon membrane and dried in air. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements were conducted in air by tapping-mode on an Agilent 5500 SPM. The samples were prepared by drop-casting 1 mL suspension on the freshly cleaved mica surface and dried in air.
Synthesis of C dots
The synthesis of C dots adopted a pyrolysis method similar to that reported by Liu et al.4L-Cysteine (1 g, 8.25 mmol) was added into a 25 ml beaker, and then the beaker was transferred into an electric oven and heated at 280 °C for 5 min (Fig. S3†). Thereafter, the beaker was cooled to room temperature, and the final product was collected by adding ultrapure water into the beaker and centrifuged at 8000 rpm for 5 min. The supernatant can be collected by rotary evaporation.
Synthesis of L-cysteine-capped-CdS nanoparticles
Water-solution CdS nanoparticles were synthesized according to the method reported previously.36 110 mg L-cysteine was added to 25 ml of 1 mol l−1 Tris buffer that was argon-saturated and thoroughly degassed, to the mixture 15 ml of 0.01 mol l−1 of CdCl2 aqueous solution was added, resulting in an L-cysteine/Cd molar ratio of 3:1. Then, 95 μl of 0.4 mol l−1 Na2S·9H2O solution was slowly added into the solution to afford an S/Cd molar ratio of 0.25:1. The mixed solution was stirred for 1 h at room temperature, followed by 10 min of flushing with argon to remove the unreacted sulfide. To remove L-cysteine–Cd complexes, the L-cysteine-capped-CdS (L-capped-CdS) nanoparticles were precipitated by adding cool ethanol to the reaction mixture at room temperature. The nanoparticles were dissolved in pure water, and precipitated again with cool ethanol. The resulting L-capped-CdS nanoparticles were dried overnight under vacuum at 40 °C for further experiments.
Self-assembly of the C dot/CdS multilayered films
Electrophoretic deposition was performed using a custom-built reaction equipment with three electrodes: an ITO-coated glass electrode (deposition area: 1.0 cm × 0.75 cm and the actual photocatalyst quality: 0.33 mg), a platinum electrode and a saturated calomel electrode. The ITO glasses were pre-cleaned using detergent, and then rinsed with plenty of water, followed by sonication with pure water, ethanol, acetone and isopropanol for 15 min, respectively. The C dots were then deposited onto the ITO substrate at a constant voltage of 10 V in 1 mg ml−1 C dot aqueous solution for a desired time. After electrophoretic deposition, the C dot-coated ITO glass was withdrawn from the solutions and washed with ultrapure water, and then dried in air at room temperature.
To directly synthesize CdS QDs from aqueous solution without any ligand, a sequential chemical bath deposition (S-CBD)7 method was applied. The C dot-coated ITO glass was successively immersed in four different beakers for about 30 seconds in each beaker. One beaker contained 0.05 M CdCl2 aqueous solution, and another contained 0.05 M Na2S aqueous solution, and the other two contained ultrapure water to remove excess precursor solution. Such a cycle was repeated 20 times, which produces a yellow film with a thickness of 180 nm. When the bath deposition cycle was further increased, the CdS nanosheets appeared to be aggregated on the ITO glass. Layered C dot/CdS photoelectrodes were prepared by repeating these two steps of electrophoretic deposition and S-CBD.
Photocurrent response
Photoelectrochemical measurements were carried out in a custom-made three-electrode quartz cell in which platinum wire was used as a counter electrode, a saturated calomel electrode as a reference electrode, and the ITO samples as working electrodes. An aqueous Na2S solution (0.05 M) was chosen as the electrolyte and a 500 W xenon arc lamp (at a distance of 30 cm, with a power density of 43 mW cm−2) was applied as the light source.
Photocatalytic experiments
In the photocatalytic experiment, a 3 W LED lamp equipped with a UV cutoff filter (λ > 420 nm) was used as a low energy-consuming visible light source. In a round bottom flask (25 ml), the ITO samples with an active area of around 75 mm × 100 mm were immersed into 15 mL aqueous solution (10 mg L−1) of aromatic nitro compounds along with 20 mg of HCOONH4. Before irradiation, the solution was stirred in the dark for 30 min to ensure an adsorption–desorption equilibrium between the photocatalyst and reactant. The reaction was monitored by UV-Vis spectra. The whole experimental process was conducted under a N2 atmosphere under ambient conditions.
Results and discussion
The layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly process for preparing the heterojunction films is illustrated in Scheme 1. Taking advantage of the excellent controllability of the strategy, C dots/CdS multilayers with various layer numbers and thicknesses can be conveniently constructed. In order to reveal the role of the C dots in photocatalysis, we have fabricated two other types of photoactive electrodes, including the graphene oxide (GO)/CdS multilayer and CdS thin film. The classic photocatalytic electrode of CdS is used as a reference here. Meanwhile, GO has been widely studied for various photo-electrochemical applications.37 A comparison between the GO/CdS and C dot/CdS heterojunctions fabricated under similar conditions shall help to identify which carbon-based nanomaterial is more efficient for photocatalysis applications.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the layer-by-layer assembly of C dot/CdS, GO/CdS, and pure C dot multilayered films. 
Electrostatic interactions are a key factor for manufacturing the heterojunction multilayers. The ITO substrate was hydrophilic in nature. Initially, the negatively charged C dots were electrodeposited on the surface of ITO at 10 V, and the positively charged Cd2+ ions subsequently adsorbed onto the C dot film. As a result, the negatively charged S2− ions could quickly adsorb Cd2+ ions via electrostatic interactions to form a CdS QD thin film. By repeating the above steps, the well-controlled uniform C dot/CdS QD hybrid multilayered film was constructed.
N–S-doped C dots are used in this work, as previous research has suggested that N–S-doping could significantly enhance the photoemission properties of carbon dots.2 Herein the C dot is prepared by direct carbonization of organic precursors (L-cysteine) in the solid state based on a modified procedure from previous reports.38 Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the as-synthesized C dots are shown in Fig. 1a, which are well-dispersed, and exhibit a near-spherical morphology with uniform size distribution. According to the histogram (inset Fig. 1a), the average size of the C dots is measured to be about 3.6 nm. Meanwhile, the C dot displays a lattice spacing of 0.21 nm in high resolution TEM images (Fig. 1b), consistent with the (100) lattice fringes of graphene. The AFM images further confirm the uniformity of the C dots, and indicate that the average thickness of the C dots is below 2 nm (Fig. 1c). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was employed to determine the composition of the C dots. As shown in Fig. 1d, three peaks at 533, 400, and 284 eV correspond to O 1s, N 1s and C 1s, respectively. Additional peaks at 227 and 164 eV are found in the full survey of S, which were attributed to S 2s and S 2p peaks, respectively. The observation verifies that the C dots are successfully doped with N and S elements. In addition, GO was synthesized from natural graphite using a modified Hummers method as we reported before,39,40 which has also been characterized by TEM, AFM and XPS data (Fig. 1). The TEM image of GO (Fig. S2†) reveals that the graphene oxide sheets mostly exist as large thin sheets with the width of several microns. Slight corrugations are also observed due to the extremely large aspect ratio of the sheet. The typical AFM topography image (Fig. S2b†) indicates that the contrast of platelets is very uniform except for the isolated wrinkles and protrusions, with the corresponding line profile showing a monolayer thickness of ∼1.0 nm. XPS spectra of GO in Fig. S2c† only exhibit two peaks at 533 and 284 eV, corresponding to O 1s and C 1s, respectively. No S and N signals are observed for the GO sample.
 Fig. 1  TEM images of (a and b) C dots, AFM images of (c) C-dots and (d) XPS spectra of C dots. 

Fig. 2a shows the FT-IR spectra of C dots in comparison with those of GO. Similar to GO, the distinct peaks at around 1730, 1645, 1397, and 1075 cm−1 are attributed to CO, CC stretching, C–H bending and C–O stretching modes, respectively, indicative of concomitant formation of these bonds during C dot growth. The digital image and UV-Vis absorption of the C dots and GO suspension in water are shown in Fig. 2b. The UV-Vis absorption of C dots bears certain resemblance to that of GO, extending to the visible range up to ∼600 nm, a property favourable for visible-light-driven photoactivity.
 Fig. 2  (a) FTIR spectra of C dots and GO. (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of C dots and GO. (The inset images are C dots and GO solution under visible light irradiation) (c) Photoluminescence spectra of C dots and (d) Photoluminescence spectra of CdS QDs and “CdS QDs + C dots” with increased C dot concentration under the excitation of 365 nm. (Inset image is CdS QD solution under UV light irradiation). 

Fig. 2c exhibits the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the C dots. Clearly, when the excitation wavelength varies from 340 nm to 450 nm, the PL peaks also red shift and the intensity reaches a maximum when excited at 340 nm. The excitation-dependent emission phenomena are typical for C dots, as their surface state and the size effect induce the complexity of the excited states.6
The construction of an effective heterojunction in the C dot/CdS hybrid requires the occurrence of the efficient charge transfer process. We thus examined the interplay of the individual components via steady-state fluorescence quenching in aqueous solution. The fluorescence spectra of the as-synthesized L-capped-CdS are shown in Fig. 2d. With continuous addition of C dots in the solution, the emission intensity of CdS was gradually quenched, implying a possible electron transfer process from CdS QDs to C dots. This result was also confirmed by time-resolved fluorescence spectra (Fig. S1†). The decay profiles of CdS QDs and “CdS QDs + C dots” were fitted with multiexponential curves to derive three lifetime components for each. The average fluorescence lifetime was found to decrease from ∼4 ns for CdS to ∼3 ns for “CdS QDs + C dots”, further verifying the charge transfer process between them (Table S1†). Indeed, Mott–Schottky plots41,42 estimated the conduction band (CB) edge of −0.37 V and −0.04 V (vs. NHE) for CdS QDs and C dots, respectively (Fig. S4†). The much lower-lying CB edge of C dots would render the electron transfer from CdS QDs to C dots, thus leading to an efficient charge separated state.
The film morphology of the CdS QD, GO/CdS QD and C dot/CdS multilayer films is characterized by AFM (Fig. 3). The surface of CdS thin films was lumpy as a result of too much agglomerated CdS QDs on the surface (Fig. 3a). By contrast, the two hybrid films of C dots/CdS and GO/CdS showed a uniformly distributed surface with a tightly stacked morphology (Fig. 3c and e), reflecting that grafting of C dots or GO 2D planes on the ITO substrate renders smoother CdS QD deposition. The interconnected structure between the carbon layer and CdS QDs may account for the close packing of these multilayered films. 3D AFM images of the three films illustrate even sharper contrast. As displayed in Fig. 3d and f, CdS QDs were closely and compactly assembled on the GO or C dot top layer, distinct from the morphology of the pure CdS QD film (Fig. 3b). Hence, AFM images strongly evidence the intimate integration of CdS QDs and C dots or GO via the LBL-assembly build-up.
 Fig. 3  AFM images and 3D images of (a and b) CdS QD, (c and d) (GO/CdS)6 composite films and (e and f) (C dots/CdS)6 assembled on the ITO substrate. 
As shown in Fig. 4, the SEM images of the pure CdS QD thin film (Fig. 4a–c) exhibit obvious surface defects, which would not be beneficial for transporting photogenerated electron–hole pairs. By contrast, over a large region of the substrate, the GO/CdS QD and C dot/CdS QD multilayered films with a distribution over 50 micrometres are uniformly spread on the ITO substrate by electrodeposition and S-CBD methods, and no obvious cracks are observed. Fig. 4c, f and i display cross-sectional images of the CdS QD film, GO/CdS QD film and C dot/CdS QD film, the C dot/CdS QD film being the thinnest whereas the CdS QD film is the thickest. Further SEM measurements indicated that these hybrid films became thicker with increasing deposition cycles (Fig. S5†). Among these three hybrid films, C dot/CdS QD and GO/CdS QD films exhibit rather smooth surfaces while that of the pure CdS QD film is clearly uneven as the QDs agglomerated on the ITO surface, which might potentially cause recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs of CdS, thus reducing the photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 4  Top view SEM images and cross-sectional SEM micrographs for hybrid films of (a–c) CdS QDs, (d–f) (GO/CdS)6 and (g–i) (C dots/CdS)6 assembled on the ITO substrate. 
The layered structure of C dots/CdS was probed by SEM. The optimal time of 7 seconds for the C dot layer deposition corresponds to a thickness of only 3 nm, and thus it is difficult to clearly identify a single C dot layer. However, the interface between every thicker layer of (C dots/CdS) is distinguishable. For instance, the cross-sectional image of (C dots/CdS)4 shows a discernable multilayer structure, which is distinct from that of the pure (CdS)4 layer exhibiting no obvious interfaces within the structure (Fig. S6†).
UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra were used to test the optical properties of the prepared hybrid films. It can be clearly seen from Fig. 5a that pure CdS QDs, multilayered films of GO/CdS and C dots/CdS all exhibit strong absorbance in the visible light range, with GO/CdS even exhibiting a broader absorption extending to the infrared region. For C dot/CdS films with different deposition cycles (Fig. 5b), the absorbance intensity at 500 nm rises accordingly with the cycle increase. Tauc plots obtained via the transformation based on the Kubelka–Munk function versus energy of light is shown in Fig. 5c.23 The estimated bandgaps of the composite film C dot/CdS hybrid films with assembly cycles of 3, 5, 6, 7, and 6 layers of CdS and GO/CdS films are shown to be around 2.43 eV, 2.25 eV, 2.14 eV, 2.05 eV, 2.33 eV and 1.30 eV, respectively, in Table S2.† This result indicates a bandgap narrowing with the increase of deposition cycles for the C dot/CdS hybrid film, which can be ascribed to increased interfacial interaction between CdS QDs and C dots that enhances electronic coupling. We also tested the UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of (C dots)6 and (GO)6, the absorbance intensity of (C dots)6 is higher than (GO)6 in the visible light range, this means that C dots can make full use of visible light (Fig. S7†). Fig. 6a shows the transient photocurrent response for C dot/CdS hybrid films with three deposition cycles. The only difference is the deposition time of C dots. Clearly, the film with a medium deposition time of 7 s generates the largest photocurrent. The too long deposition time leads to a thicker C dot layer, which increases photon absorption but may hinder the electron–hole pair separation from the neighbouring CdS layer and hence reduce the photocurrent of hybrid films. While the too short deposition time simply deteriorates light absorption of the layer and charge transfer with CdS. Thus it is of importance to balance photon absorption and separation of interfacial photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Specifically, the layer thickness can be roughly estimated by comparing with the C dot layer deposited on ITO with a much longer deposition time of 120 seconds, which showed a thickness of about 52 nm (Fig. S8†). Meanwhile, different stacking patterns between CdS QDs and C dots could also influence the photocurrent of these hybrid films (Fig. 6b). Consequently, a directly alternating deposition pattern between CdS and C dots, i.e., (C dots/CdS)n, is adopted in order to maximize the photocurrent output. Fig. 6c and d show transient photocurrent response for CdS QD, C dot, and (C dot/CdS QD)n (n = 3, 5, 6, 7) multilayered films under Xe lamp light irradiation (43 mW cm−2) under zero bias conditions. Obviously, the photocurrent of the C dot/CdS hybrid film was enhanced significantly compared to that of pure CdS QDs, C dot films and GO/CdS with the same number of deposition cycles. Note that the highest photocurrent density of 2.6 mA cm−2 for (C dots/CdS)6 is much higher than the values reported in relevant literature studies.16,20,22,23,43 In addition, the photocurrent density of (C dots/CdS)6 can still reach a high value of 1.25 mA cm−2 even under solely visible light irradiation (3 W LED irradiation, 15.4 mW cm−2, λ > 420 nm, Fig. S9†). The observation can be attributed to the directly alternating deposition between CdS QDs and C dots, which leads to the formation of closely interfacial contact and renders the effective transfer of the photoexcited electrons in CdS QDs to the adjacent C dot film. Hence, C dots serve as an efficient electron collector and transporter, and thus suppress recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs of CdS, in agreement with the above spectroscopic and Mott–Schottky plot evidence. In addition, the photocurrent of the C dot/CdS multilayered films increases gradually with the number of deposition cycles, reaches a maximum value of 2.6 mA cm−2 at 6 cycles, and then decreases with an even larger cycle number. This trend is possibly caused by the competition of photon absorption between CdS QDs and C dots,23,44 as is confirmed by measuring the photocurrent of composite films with different stacking methods illustrated in Fig. 6b. Fig. 6e shows the digital images of the multilayered films with different deposition cycles. With increasing layer numbers, the color gradually deepens accordingly, indicative of mounting augment in visible light absorption.
 Fig. 5  UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of (a) multilayers of pure CdS QDs, C dot/CdS hybrid films, and GO/CdS hybrid films (b) absorption of multilayered films at a wavelength of 500 nm. (c) Plot of [F(R)hν]2versus hν for these hybrid multilayered thin films. 
 Fig. 6  (a) Photocurrent–time curves of (C dots/CdS)3 with different C dot deposition times at the same three cycles. (b) Photocurrent–time curves of pure CdS QDs films, GO/CdS multilayered films and different deposition cycles of the C dot/CdS multilayered film on glass ITO substrates in 0.05 M Na2S aqueous solution under Xe light irradiation (43 mW cm−2). Applied potential: 0 V vs. SCE. (c) Transient photocurrent responses of these hybrid films in 0.05 M Na2S aqueous solution at zero bias versus Pt counter electrode under Xe light irradiation. (d) Photocurrent of multilayered films versus the number of deposition cycles. (e) Images of C dot/CdS multilayered films on glass ITO substrates. (f) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) Nyquist plots of the CdS QD film, GO/CdS and C dot/CdS multi-layered film with the same number of deposition cycles in 0.1 M Na2S aqueous solution at zero bias versus Pt counter electrode under 3 W LED light irradiation; the amplitude of the sinusoidal wave was set at 5 mV, and the frequency varied from 100 kHz to 0.05 Hz. 
We performed supplemental photoelectrochemical experiments to test the photostability of the hybrid films up to 8 days (Fig. S10†). The photocurrent of the pure CdS QD film fell significantly to about 42% of its original values after 8 days, whereas the C dot/CdS hybrid film exhibited much more stable photocurrent output with 1.7% decrease. The result indicated that the C dot layer could effectively serve as a protective coating for the CdS QDs as well. We speculate that as C dots can act as electron acceptors, the electrons from the conduction band of CdS upon photoexcitation can be efficiently immigrated to the surface of C dots. Through this electron transfer process, the photocorrosion of CdS may be curbed and the stability of (C dot/CdS)n layers is thus enhanced. The findings herein are in consistent with previous reports on the suppression of photocorrosion of photosensitizers via hybrid architectures.45,46
To further understand the superior performance of the C dot/CdS QD multilayered film over GO/CdS QDs and pure CdS QDs in enhancing the transfer of photogenerated electron–hole charge carriers, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)22,23,47 as a method to monitor the charge transfer process on the electrode and at the contact interface between the electrode and electrolyte was utilized to probe the frequency response of the electrode and electrolyte system. In Fig. 6f, the Nyquist plots show that C dot/CdS QD multilayered films have a smaller semicircle than that of GO/CdS QD films with the same number of deposition cycles, which reveals more efficient interfacial electron transfer and faster electron transport processes at the electrode–electrolyte interface for the former. The result explains that although GO/CdS films exhibit a broader absorption range, they generate a smaller photocurrent density than C dots/CdS QDs.
In summary, the enhanced photocurrent for the C dot/CdS hybrid film corroborates the role of C dots in promoting separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Additionally, integration of C dots with CdS QDs based on layer-by-layer alternating deposition is beneficial for charge separation and transfer due to the formation of intimate interfacial contact, which also contribute to the photocurrent improvement. Moreover, more efficient charge transfer of the C dot/CdS films, as disclosed by EIS, implies that they are of great potential for photocatalytic applications.
As a proof-of-concept, the C dot/CdS hybrid film was applied for photocatalytic reduction of nitro-benzene derivatives in the aqueous phase under low power visible light irradiation. Using LED lamps as light sources offers several advantages such as high photon efficiency, low electrical power, high power stability, emission in broader spectral wavelengths, and no need for cooling during long time operation.48 Photocatalytic reduction of p-nitroaniline on the C dot/CdS QD film under a 3 W LED light was presented as a typical example (Fig. S11†), which was monitored by the UV-vis light absorption spectra. Under the irradiation for 3 hours, the 380 nm absorption peak corresponding to p-nitroaniline vanished and new peaks at 300 and 240 nm appeared, indicating the formation of p-phenylenediamine. The products of this reduction reaction have also been confirmed by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). With prolonged reaction time to 6 hours, the reduction completed with a conversion rate as high as 99% (Fig. S11b†). It is noteworthy that the C dot/CdS QD hybrid film demonstrated the best performance in comparison with the GO/CdS and CdS QD film with the same number of deposition cycles, in the order of C dots/CdS > GO/CdS > CdS QDs. For example, with the same reaction time of 2.5 hours, the conversion of p-nitroaniline using photocatalyst C dots/CdS is 70%, while that of GO/CdS is 49% and for CdS QDs the number is only 24%.The result from the blank experiment under the same conditions without photocatalyst is supplied in Fig. S12.† To test the photocatalytic activity of the films on various compounds, we studied three other different reactions (Fig. 7b–d) and all obtained similar trends, i.e., C dot/CdS films exhibited the best photocatalytic performance. All of these observation point to the crucial roles of C dots in the hybrid films for photocatalysis. To study the photostability of C dots/CdS QDs, three continuous recycling measurements were performed, where the C dot/CdS QD composite film exhibited high photoactivity and good photostability (Fig. S13†). In addition, it is noteworthy that the use of the C dot/CdS QD hybrid film as a photocatalyst could avoid the tedious procedure of powder catalyst separation after photoreaction.
 Fig. 7  Photocatalytic performances of the C dot/CdS QD hybrid films were evaluated by photoreduction of nitro-aromatic compounds to their corresponding amino organics in the aqueous phase under visible light irradiation. 
Based on the above results, a schematic mechanism for C dots/CdS involved photocatalytic application is provided in Scheme 2. Upon visible light irradiation, both C dots and CdS are excited and separated electrons and holes are thus generated within each entity. The lower-lying CB edge of C dots enables the electron transfer from CdS QDs to C dots, and concomitant movement of holes in the VB of C dots to that of CdS QDs. Consequently, an efficient charge separated state is formed and the electrons thereafter lead to reduction reactions. Meanwhile, the sacrificial reagent replenishes electrons to make the photocatalytic cycle sustainable.
 Scheme 2  Proposed schematic mechanism for the C dots/CdS involved photocatalytic process. 
Conclusions
To sum up, in this work a facile LBL method is adopted to manufacture uniform C dot/CdS nano-hybrid films, which demonstrate stable and superior photoelectrochemical and/or photocatalytic performance upon visible light irradiation. It is found that the photocurrent density of the C dot/CdS hybrid film could reach 2.6 mA cm−2, which is higher than ever reported in relevant literature studies. Meanwhile, the films also showed efficient photocatalytic reduction of nitro-aromatic compounds to their corresponding amino organics in the aqueous phase under low power visible light irradiation. The significantly enhanced photoelectrochemical and/or photocatalytic efficiency of C dots/CdS was attributed to the following reasons: First, the combination of C dots with CdS forms intimate interfacial contact and facilitates charge separation and transfer; second, C dots herein act as efficient electron sinks, accepting photoinduced electrons from CdS and thus suppress electron–hole pair recombination. Last, the presence of C dots augments visible light absorption of the composites, leading to more photogenerated carriers and ultimate photocatalytic efficiency improvement. Our findings herein thus establish a new frontier on the rational design and fabrication of well-controlled hybrid films with built-in heterojunctions for solar light conversion.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program) No. 2012CB933102, National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC. 21233001, 21190034, 21073079), Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (SRFDP. 20110211130001), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities and 111 Project.
Notes and references
S. N. Baker and G. A. Baker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Dong, H. C. Pang, H. B. Yang, C. X. Guo, J. W. Shao, Y. W. Chi, C. M. Li and T. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lee, J. Ryu and J. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9995 RSC .
J. H. Shen, Y. H. Zhu, X. L. Yang and C. Z. Li, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3686 RSC .
Y. Dong, C. Chen, X. Zheng, L. Gao, Z. Cui, H. Yang, C. Guo, Y. Chi and C. M. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8764 RSC .
S. J. Zhu, Q. N. Meng, L. Wang, J. H. Zhang, Y. B. Song, H. Jin, K. Zhang, H. C. Sun, H. Y. Wang and B. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Guo, H. B. Yang, Z. M. Sheng, Z. S. Lu, Q. L. Song and C. M. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qu, M. Zheng, P. Du, Y. Zhou, L. G. Zhang, D. Li, H. Q. Tan, Z. Zhao, Z. G. Xie and Z. C. Sun, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 12272 RSC .
D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, H. Chu, J. Liu, J. Wan and M. Chen, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 16163 RSC .
K. Lingam, R. Podila, H. Qian, S. Serkiz and A. M. Rao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, B. Guo, Z. Rao, B. Zhang and J. R. Gong, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, J. Liu, Y. Yu, S. Zuo and B. Li, Carbon, 2014, 68, 718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Feng, X. Y. Tang, Y. X. Zhong, Y. W. Liu, X. H. Song, S. L. Deng, S. Y. Xie, J. W. Yan and L. S. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12635 RSC .
D. K. Chan, P. L. Cheung and J. C. Yu, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2014, 5, 689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, Y. Zhao, C. Zhou, L. Shang, Y. Peng, Y. Cao, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3344 CAS .
M. Fu, Q. Jiao and Y. Zhao, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 23242 RSC .
P. Zeng, Q. Zhang, T. Peng and X. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 21496 RSC .
L. Wu, Y. Zhang, X. Li and C. Cen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15339 RSC .
P. Chang, H. Cheng, W. Li, L. Zhuo, L. He, Y. Yu and F. Zhao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 16606 RSC .
N. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Pan, X. Fu, S. Liu and Y. J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23501 CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. X. Yu and W. D. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 12949 CAS .
Z. Ren, J. Zhang, F. X. Xiao and G. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5330 CAS .
F. X. Xiao, J. Miao and B. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Chronopoulos, N. Karousis, S. Zhao, Q. Wang, H. Shinohara and N. Tagmatarchis, Dalton Trans., 2014, 7429 RSC .
F. X. Xiao, J. Miao, H. Y. Wang and B. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12229 CAS .
K. Vignesh, R. Priyanka, R. Hariharan, M. Rajarajan and A. Suganthi, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2014, 20, 435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, F. Li, Z. Sun, L. Ma, L. Xu and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11004 RSC .
S. Kaveri, L. Thirugnanam, M. Dutta, J. Ramasamy and N. Fukata, Ceram. Int., 2013, 39, 9207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, X. Gao, L. Yu, Y. Wang, J. Ning, S. Xu and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dai, M. Xie, S. Meng, X. Fu and S. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 158–159, 382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, S. Liu, M. Q. Yang and Y. J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4309 CAS .
X. Li, G. Zhang, X. Bai, X. Sun, X. Wang, E. Wang and H. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Shi, C. Li, G. Lu, H. Bai and Y. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5856 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Mullen, L. Zhi and X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Lamprecht, I. Liashkovich, V. Neves, J. Danzberger, E. Heister, M. Rangl, H. M. Coley, J. McFadden, E. Flahaut, H. J. Gruber, P. Hinterdorfer, F. Kienberger and A. Ebner, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 434001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Cai, H. Yang, Y. Zhang and X. P. Yan, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 559, 234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Wang, Q. Wang, K. G. Zhou and H. L. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 1266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, J. Shao, C. Chen, H. Li, R. Wang, Y. Chi, X. Lin and G. Chen, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Offeman and W. S. J. Hummers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef .
N. N. Chai, J. Zeng, K. G. Zhou, Y. L. Xie, H. X. Wang, H. L. Zhang, C. Xu, J. X. Zhu and Q. Y. Yan, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 5948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, J. Wang, Y. Chen, J. Zhang, D. Duan, Y. Wang and Z. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7063 RSC .
S. Saha, G. Das, J. Thote and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Jung and M. J. Chu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9241 RSC .
I. V. Lightcap and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiong, Y. Liu, C. Cao, L. Shen, W. i. Wu, S. Liang, R. Liang and L. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6935 CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Huang, H. Ming, H. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10501 RSC .
G. Xie, K. Zhang, H. Fang, B. Guo, R. Wang, H. Yan, L. Fang and J. R. Gong, Chem.–Asian. J., 2013, 8, 2395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Eskandari, F. Kazemi and Y. Azizian-Kalandaragh, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2013, 120, 180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Tables S1 and S2 and Fig. S1–S13. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta03649fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the layer-by-layer assembly of C dot/CdS, GO/CdS, and pure C dot multilayered films.	 

 	Fig. 1  TEM images of (a and b) C dots, AFM images of (c) C-dots and (d) XPS spectra of C dots.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) FTIR spectra of C dots and GO. (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of C dots and GO. (The inset images are C dots and GO solution under visible light irradiation) (c) Photoluminescence spectra of C dots and (d) Photoluminescence spectra of CdS QDs and “CdS QDs + C dots” with increased C dot concentration under the excitation of 365 nm. (Inset image is CdS QD solution under UV light irradiation).	 

 	Fig. 3  AFM images and 3D images of (a and b) CdS QD, (c and d) (GO/CdS)6 composite films and (e and f) (C dots/CdS)6 assembled on the ITO substrate.	 

 	Fig. 4  Top view SEM images and cross-sectional SEM micrographs for hybrid films of (a–c) CdS QDs, (d–f) (GO/CdS)6 and (g–i) (C dots/CdS)6 assembled on the ITO substrate.	 

 	Fig. 5  UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of (a) multilayers of pure CdS QDs, C dot/CdS hybrid films, and GO/CdS hybrid films (b) absorption of multilayered films at a wavelength of 500 nm. (c) Plot of [F(R)hν]2versus hν for these hybrid multilayered thin films.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Photocurrent–time curves of (C dots/CdS)3 with different C dot deposition times at the same three cycles. (b) Photocurrent–time curves of pure CdS QDs films, GO/CdS multilayered films and different deposition cycles of the C dot/CdS multilayered film on glass ITO substrates in 0.05 M Na2S aqueous solution under Xe light irradiation (43 mW cm−2). Applied potential: 0 V vs. SCE. (c) Transient photocurrent responses of these hybrid films in 0.05 M Na2S aqueous solution at zero bias versus Pt counter electrode under Xe light irradiation. (d) Photocurrent of multilayered films versus the number of deposition cycles. (e) Images of C dot/CdS multilayered films on glass ITO substrates. (f) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) Nyquist plots of the CdS QD film, GO/CdS and C dot/CdS multi-layered film with the same number of deposition cycles in 0.1 M Na2S aqueous solution at zero bias versus Pt counter electrode under 3 W LED light irradiation; the amplitude of the sinusoidal wave was set at 5 mV, and the frequency varied from 100 kHz to 0.05 Hz.	 

 	Fig. 7  Photocatalytic performances of the C dot/CdS QD hybrid films were evaluated by photoreduction of nitro-aromatic compounds to their corresponding amino organics in the aqueous phase under visible light irradiation.	 

 	Scheme 2  Proposed schematic mechanism for the C dots/CdS involved photocatalytic process.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Tables S1 and S2 and Fig. S1–S13. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta03649f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
