Metal-free photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CS00313D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CS00313D
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1887-1931Metal-free photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution

        
          
            Mohammad Ziaur 
            Rahman†
*a, 
      
        
          
            Md Golam 
            Kibria
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Charles Buddie 
            Mullins
          
          
        
      *a
aJohn J. Mcketta Department of Chemical Engineering and Department of Chemistry, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712-1589, USA
bDepartment of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, University of Calgary, 2500 University Drive, NW Calgary, Alberta, Canada. E-mail: mullins@che.utexas.edu
Received 
      16th November 2019
    First published on 26th February 2020AbstractThis review focuses on the discussion of the latest progress and remaining challenges in selected metal-free photocatalysts for hydrogen production. The scope of this review is limited to the metal-free elemental photocatalysts (i.e. B, C, P, S, Si, Se etc.), binary photocatalysts (i.e. BC3, B4C, CxNy, h-BN etc.) and their heterojunction, ternary photocatalysts (i.e. BCN) and their heterojunction, and different types of organic photocatalysts (i.e. linear, covalent organic frameworks, microporous polymer, covalent triazine frameworks etc.) and their heterostructures. Following a succinct depiction of the latest progress in hydrogen evolution on these photocatalysts, discussion has been extended to the potential strategies that are deemed necessary to attain high quantum efficiency and high solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency. Issues with reproducibility and the disputes in reporting the hydrogen evolution rate have been also discussed with recommendations to overcome them. A few key factors are highlighted that may facilitate the scalability of the photocatalyst from microscale to macroscale production in meeting the targeted 10% STH. This review is concluded with additional perspectives regarding future research in fundamental materials aspects of high efficiency photocatalysts followed by six open questions that may need to be resolved by forming a global hydrogen taskforce in order to translate bench-top research into large-scale production of hydrogen.
Mohammad Ziaur Rahman
Dr Mohammad Ziaur Rahman pursued a PhD in Chemical Engineering with Prof. Shizhang Qiao at The University of Adelaide, Australia. As a postdoctoral fellow at The University of Texas at Austin, USA, he has been mentored by Prof. Charles Buddie Mullins and Prof. Adam Heller. Dr Rahman is currently working as a Researcher at Ångström Laboratory, Uppsala University, Sweden. The noble mission of his research is to facilitate the sustainable and affordable carbon neutral energy solution for the world. As such, his research is focused on the synthesis and characterization of functional nanomaterials with tailored physicochemical properties for photo(electro)catalytic energy conversion and storage. He is particularly interested in charge transport and redox dynamics at the catalytic interface to design photocatalysts with high quantum efficiency.
Golam Kibria
Dr Md Golam Kibria is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering at University of Calgary, Canada. He received MSc and PhD degrees from McMaster and McGill University, respectively. He worked as Banting Fellow at the University of Toronto. He is interested in artificial photosynthesis, nanomaterials, heterogeneous catalysis, system design, techno-economic and life-cycle analysis for sustainable synthesis of renewable fuels and feedstocks, including electro-/photo-catalysis for CO2 conversion and water splitting for sustainable energy and environment. He has published over 45 peer-reviewed articles in refereed Journals, including Science, Nature Communications, Advanced Materials, Energy and Environmental Science, Journal of American Chemical Society, 5 patents (filed) and over 50 conference presentations in the broad area of Artificial Photosynthesis. Dr Kibria is a recipient of the Academic Gold Medal, Tomlinson Doctoral fellowship from McGill University, and the Green Talents Award from the German Federal Ministry.
Charles Buddie Mullins
Professor C. Buddie Mullins received a BS in Physics from the University of Texas at Austin and a PhD in Chemical Engineering from the California Institute of Technology in 1990 under the tutelage of W. H. Weinberg. Between 1989 and 1991, he was a postdoctoral fellow in the Physical Sciences Division at the IBM Almaden Research Center working with C. T. Rettner and D. J. Auerbach. In 1991 he joined the University of Texas at Austin and is on the faculty of the McKetta Chemical Engineering Department as well as the Department of Chemistry. Mullins has interests in fundamental aspects of surface chemistry and gas–surface interactions, photocatalytic processes and materials/architectures for advanced batteries.
1. Introduction
The transformation and ongoing progress of civilization depends on our ability to harness energy beyond human and animal power, and our ability to find, extract and use energy with ever increasing dexterity. Among the available energy sources, fossil-fuels (i.e., oil, gas and coal) contribute to >85% of the world's energy production.1 To meet the global average rate of consumption of 17.2 TW, a sustainable supply of 1066 barrels of oil, 108000 cubic meters of natural gas and 250 tonnes of coal per second need to be produced.2 With the increasing world population growth rate (1.12% per year) and industrialization, the world energy demand is expected to be tripled by 2050.3 Even if the current rate of global primary energy consumption (2.1% p.a.) holds constant, it would lead to an ‘energy crisis’ situation because of faster depletion of limited fossil fuel reserves.
Additionally, emissions of toxic effluents from burning fossil fuels create anthropogenic and environmental threats, for which all living creatures and plants are affected.4 According to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), climate change represents an irreversible threat to human societies. Therefore, the Paris Agreement calls for the development of alternative net CO2 removal strategies beyond the typical options of bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS) and afforestation.
The response to this situation drives the research for renewable energy sources. It is agreed that a transition from non-renewable fossil fuels to renewable fuels is a must to minimize (or further prevent) the anthropogenic damages caused by burning fossil fuels, and to tackle the security of energy supply in a post-fossil fuels era. The production of hydrogen from H2O using solar energy is considered a viable option, provided that catalysts with the requisite activity, selectivity and durability are developed.5 Notably, hydrogen fuel burns cleanly without any CO2 or NOx release. It can also be stored, and used as, and when, required.
Two third of earth constitutes water, while the sun is an inexhaustible source of energy with an expected lifetime of 4 billion years. The earth surface receives solar energy equivalent to 90 PW which is four orders of magnitude greater than the current rate of human energy consumption.2 Therefore, producing hydrogen from water using solar energy would seemingly provide a potential low-cost option to meet the current and future energy demands.
From a consumer perspective, hydrogen is a gas much like natural gas that can be used to heat buildings and power vehicles. From an environmental perspective, hydrogen is unique among liquid and gaseous fuels in that it emits absolutely no CO2 emissions when burned. From an energy perspective, each kilogram of hydrogen contain about 2.4 times as much energy as natural gas, while it is equivalent to the energy that would be produced from burning 4 L of petrol.6 At a global level, replacing fossil fuels with carbon-free hydrogen will significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions, with estimated potential annual reductions of up to 6 billion tonnes of CO2 by 2050. Considering the benefits of hydrogen fuel, the hydrogen economy will be worth an estimated US$2.5 trillion by 2050.7 Using hydrogen in place of fossil fuels therefore offers a viable pathway to decarbonise our energy systems.
Because water and sunlight are abundant and practically inexhaustible, photocatalytic hydrogen production via water-splitting offers a truly viable alternative for green fuel production. The corner stone of photocatalytic hydrogen production is semiconductor photocatalysts that absorb solar photons and create electron–hole pairs for water redox reactions. Over four decades of research, some hundreds of photocatalyst materials have been catalogued that can be categorised into mainly two types – metal-based and metal-free. Metal-based photocatalysts have been extensively researched since 1972.8 However, a new generation of metal-free photocatalysts (MFP) is slowly but steadily emerging in parallel to widely accepted metal-based photocatalysts for water-splitting.
Metal-free photocatalysts are made out of earth abundant inexpensive materials, for example, carbon (C), nitrogen (N), oxygen (O), phosphorus (P), and sulphur (S). These elements are light weight and corrosive resistant. Therefore, appropriate combinations of these elements may result in a highly robust compounds with tuneable photophysical properties suitable for light harvesting and catalytic application. While scalable and stable performance is yet elusive with metal-based photocatalysts; metal-free photocatalysts (MFP), in this regards, hold true promise provided that they can overcome poor solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency. Among MFP, carbon nitrides have made significant progress,9–12 while other MFP (i.e. P, C, S, B, covalent organic frameworks etc.) are further behind.13–15 It is therefore very timely to assess the current progress and determine the outstanding challenges with various MFP's to devise future design strategies for achieving benchmark efficiency. This review article, in this regard, is a collaborative endeavor with leading researchers in the field, all over the world, to fill this gap.
Photocatalytic water-splitting is a blend of both fundamental and applied research. Development of a catalyst material is a cascaded process of synthesis and characterization, optimization, and understanding of charge transport and electrodynamics. This knowledge can also compatibly be exploited to develop other materials for diverse applications. Similarly, the design of a reactor and evaluation of the evolved H2 and O2 is transferrable to other catalytic processes, for example, CO2 reduction, N2 reduction etc.16 Clearly, a review on metal-free photocatalysts will provide an important knowledge-base to foster research on different materials development and understanding of the fundamental physicochemical processes for other applications, such as, solar cells, batteries, supercapacitors, sensors, and optoelectronic devices, etc.17–19
Photocatalytic water-splitting is a multidisciplinary research avenue that includes chemistry, chemical engineering, materials science, physics, nanoscience and nanotechnology. Therefore, an authoritative review would provide a wealth of knowledge for students, scientist, and engineers to learn about the current status of the field with an understanding of the issues to be resolved to create a path forward.
To the best of our knowledge, a review that has treated the large collection of metal-free photocatalysts has not yet been reported. Considering the pace of research progress, such a review is therefore very timely. We hope that a comparative study of the various metal-free photocatalysts will offer knowledge to judge, scrutinize and screen the best combination of metal-free photocatalysts for high solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency.
2. Basic concepts in photocatalysis and photocatalysts
The general field of catalysis can be divided into thermal catalysis (usually simply known as catalysis, which is not the matter of interest in this review) and photocatalysis. According to the IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry) photocatalysis is defined as “change in the rate of chemical reaction or its initiation under the action of ultraviolet, visible, or infrared radiation in the presence of a substance – the photocatalyst – that absorbs light and is involved in the chemical transformation of the reaction partners”. The reaction fulfilling this requirement is then called photocatalytic.
At the beginning of the twentieth century, scientists felt that irradiation could be a method for catalysing a reaction. Giacomo Ciamician is the first scientist who devoted a scientific effort (during 1900–1920) to understand the chemical effect of light.20 The terms photokatalyse and photocatalytisch appeared probably for the first time in the textbook Photochemie, published by Plotnikov.21 However, the development of photocatalysis as a discipline specifically began in 1970s.22,23
Catalytical transformation of a reagent (R) to product P via intermediates (I′, C′) has been depicted in Fig. 1a. In photocatalysis, the activation of R happens when the excited state (C*) of a photocatalyst transfers an electron, while in thermal catalysis, it happens through the physical step of energy transfer (see, Fig. 1b and c). In photocatalysis, electronically activated R produces an intermediate I (a radical or radical ion), which in principle can be formed also through a thermal process. C*, after transfer of the electrons, it becomes deactivated C′. The intermediate I gives the final product P (possibly through further intermediates I′) and regenerates C in the final state. The overall reaction results in the transformation of R into P by absorbed light in the presence of non-consumed C (see Fig. 1d). The entire chemical transformation R → P occurs on the lowest potential energy surface at any configuration where the chemical path in part occurs on an excited state surface (from R*, Fig. 1b). This is called photocatalysis since a new path on the ground state surface becomes accessible.24,25
 Fig. 1  (a) A thermal reaction (R → P) catalyzed by C via intermediate I′, (b) a photochemical reaction where the chemical reaction starts from the excited state surface of the reagent R*, (c) a photocatalyzed reaction where the catalyst C is active only in the excited state, but the chemical transformation of R occurs entirely on the ground state surface, and (d) C acts as a photocatalyst in the R → P reaction. Adopted with permission from ref. 24. Royal Society of Chemistry (2009). 
The change in Gibbs energy (ΔG) is another significant criterion that differs between photocatalytic and ordinary thermal catalytic reactions. ΔG could be either negative and positive. A negative ΔG implies release of energy while a positive one means absorption/storing of energy. Ordinary catalyses are limited only to reactions of negative ΔG. This is because a thermal catalyst reduces the activation energy of the chemical reaction by changing the intermediate states and thereby accelerating the reaction which proceeds spontaneously with negative Gibbs energy change. However, both situations are possible in photocatalytic reactions.26 The reason for a reaction of positive ΔG which does not proceed spontaneously is that an overall redox reaction can proceed, even if its ΔG is positive. It is just required that the reduction and oxidation steps are spatially or chemically separated; otherwise reaction between reduction and oxidation products proceeds to give no net products. Under these conditions, both Gibbs energy change for reactions of e− with oxidant (ΔGe) and h+ with reductant (ΔGh) are required to be negative, i.e. reactions by e− and h+ proceed spontaneously after photoexcitation (Fig. 2). Thermodynamic requirements for photocatalytic reaction is (i) more cathodic and anodic levels of the conduction band (CB) bottom and valence band (VB) top of photocatalyst material compared with the standard electrode potential of an oxidant and a reductant, respectively, to make Gibbs energy change of both reactions negative, and (ii) separation of reduction and oxidation by e− and h+, respectively, for both types of reaction with positive and negative ΔG.26
 Fig. 2  Gibbs-energy change in photocatalytic reactions. Adopted with permission from ref. 26. Elsevier (2010). 
3. Selection criteria for a hydrogen evolution photocatalyst
The water-splitting process is an uphill reaction with a change in Gibbs energy of ΔG = 237 kJ mol−1.27 Therefore, the minimum energy (i.e. E0 = −ΔG/nF) required for an overall water-splitting is 1.23 eV, where E0 is the electrode potential; n is the number of electrons per mole product and F is the Faraday constant in C mol−1.28 The proton reduction potential (H+/H2) is (0–0.59 pH, V vs. NHE, normal hydrogen electrode), and the water oxidation potential (O2/H2O) is (1.23–0.59 pH, V vs. NHE).29 Therefore, pure water-splitting (pH = 7) requires −0.41 V for hydrogen evolution and 0.82 V for oxygen evolution, respectively. It indicates that the semiconductor photocatalyst should have a minimum bandgap of 1.23 eV to accommodate the water-splitting reactions considering standard conditions of zero over potential and zero reorganization energies for interfacial charge transfer reactions. However, in practice, an overpotential is unavoidable for hydrogen production. Therefore, a bandgap greater than 1.23 eV is always desirable. Along with the bandgap requirements, a material needs to have a CB minimum positions at a more negative potential than the reduction potential, and the VB maximum position at a more positive potential than the oxidation potential.
4. Fundamental physicochemical processes in photocatalytic hydrogen production
Photocatalytic hydrogen production involves a series of photophysical and electrochemical processes (see Fig. 3). The photophysical process is comprised of photon absorption and charge carrier generation, and separation and transport of charge carrier to the reaction sites, while the electrochemical process includes redox reactions for water-splitting.
 Fig. 3  Three key dynamics processes (photophysical, photochemical and electrochemical) involved in water-splitting. Following excitation across the bandgap: (1) electron/hole relaxation (tens to hundreds of fs); (2) trapping of electrons/holes into trap states due to defects or surface states within hundreds of fs to tens of ps; (3) radiative and nonradiative band edge electron–hole or exciton recombination within tens of ps; (4) radiative and nonradiative trapped electron–hole or relaxed exciton recombination within hundreds of ps to a few ns; and (5) nonlinear and nonradiative exciton–exciton annihilation within hundreds of fs to tens of ps. Adopted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Under irradiation of light, a photocatalyst absorbs photons of defined wavelengths based on its intrinsic bandgap. The photon with energy equivalent or greater than the bandgap energy of the photocatalyst would have sufficient driving force to lift an electron from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB), leaving behind empty holes in the VB. Absorption of photons is accompanied by generation of excited holes and electrons. To maintain the equilibrium, excited electrons in the CB might fall back radiatively/nonradiatively to the VB, and then recombine with holes. Recombination annihilates the free electron–hole pairs. This is an unavoidable photophysical process regardless of the type of semiconductor used as a photocatalyst.30,31 Recombination is one of the critical factors responsible for low quantum efficiency of a photocatalyst.32,33
The electrons and holes that survive recombination then need to be transported to the surface where HER and OER will be taken place. The transfer of photoexcited carriers to the surface active sites might occur either by diffusion or electric fields associated with the semiconductor/electrolyte and semiconductor/cocatalyst interfaces.34
The generation of excitons occurs on a time scale below 100 fs. The average lifetime of excitons typically limited to a few hundred picoseconds. Depending on the diffusion coefficient, the electron diffusion process will last, at most, a few picoseconds whilst the corresponding transition time for holes might be below 100–300 fs.35,36 Electron and hole transport are sometimes limited by trap states associated with the semiconductors. Electron/hole diffusion coefficients decrease proportionally with the number of (deep) traps present in the catalyst particle and are created by the network morphology (porosity, secondary particle size) at interfaces of the porous material.37,38 The time scale of trapping ranges from picoseconds to milliseconds or even a fraction of a second, and always competes with the charge recombination process. Hole trapping, relaxation and transfer to surface species processes all appear to be significantly faster and occur in the pico- and nanosecond region whilst electron trapping with shorter lifetimes than a few microseconds.35,39–41 The above mentioned time scales are depicted in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Time scales of “elemental steps” occurring in a prototypical photocatalytic process. Adopted with permission from ref. 39. American Chemical Society (2012). 
5. Photocatalytic hydrogen production systems
Hydrogen can be produced through a half-reaction of water-splitting (only the reduction reaction) or overall water-splitting (both reduction and oxidation reaction simultaneously).
The half reaction of water-splitting can be realized using an appropriate sacrificial electron donor/hole scavenger, for example, triethanolamine, alcohol, etc. When the photocatalytic half reaction is carried out in an aqueous solution which contains a reducing agent, photogenerated holes in the photocatalyst material irreversibly oxidize the reducing agent instead of water. It thus enriches electrons in a photocatalyst if only the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is taking place. However, hydrogen production in the presence of sacrificial agents must not be confused to be the water-splitting process. Because water-splitting means to split water into H2 and O2 in a stoichiometric amount in the absence of sacrificial agents.
There are one-step (single-photon) and two-step (two-photon) systems available for overall water-splitting under visible light irradiation8 as shown in Fig. 5. The two photon photocatalyst systems are also known as Z-scheme processes.42
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of different photocatalytic water-splitting systems. Adopted with permission from,29 Nature Publishing Group (2017). 
The system for one-step overall water-splitting employs only one semiconductor having appropriate band-edge positions compatible with the H+/H2 and O2/H2O potentials. In a two-step system, that is, a Z-scheme water splitting system, one hydrogen evolution photocatalyst (HEP) and one oxygen evolution photocatalyst (OEP) are employed to separately evolve H2 and O2. It is to be noted that it is not a hard and fast rule for HEP and OEP photocatalysts in a Z-scheme to be independently capable for overall water-splitting. Practically, semiconductors active in either HER or OER only may be employed in this system. Therefore, the Z-scheme provides a larger driving force in alleviating the thermodynamic requirements for water splitting.
Contrary to a one step system, the photoexcited electrons and holes remain in the HEP and the OEP, respectively, in a Z-scheme system. Additionally, holes in the HEP and electrons in the OEP are recombined via an aqueous redox mediator (Fig. 5b) or a solid-state electron mediator (Fig. 5c) to complete the photocatalytic cycle in the Z-scheme system. Therefore, eight electrons are needed to complete the photocatalytic cycle in two-steps while four electrons could complete the photocatalytic cycle in a one-step system. Consequently, a one-step photoexcitation process produces two times the quantity of H2 and O2 compared with that of a two-step photoexcitation system at AQY and light absorbance values of unity.29
The Z-scheme system is prone to backward electron-transfer that makes this process kinetically more challenging than the one-step system. In addition to preventing backward electron transfer, control over the interparticle charge transfer between the HEP and OEP is also a limiting key factor for efficient overall water-splitting via the Z-scheme.
6. Trends in photocatalytic water-splitting research
In their seminal note published in Nature (1972), Fujishima and Honda demonstrated that water could be photolyzed electrochemically at an illuminated TiO2 and dark Pt electrode combination to yield H2 and O2.23 In the late 1970s, a strong push in that direction was led by Bard and his colleagues.43 They described some of the principles and applications of semiconductor electrodes in photoelectrochemical (PEC) cell and the possible uses of heterogeneous photocatalysts in designing PEC cells. Since 1980, a great research effort has been undertaken regarding the pursuit of developing highly efficient, rugged and cost effective heterogeneous photocatalysts.44
Wide bandgap metal oxides consisting of d0 (empty d orbitals) cations (i.e. Ti4+, Zr4+, Ce4+, Nb5+, Ta5+ and W6+) or d10 (filled d orbitals) cations (i.e. Zn2+, Ga3+, In3+, Ge4+, Sn4+, Sb5+, Mo6+, etc.) are considered as the effective photocatalyst for ultraviolet (UV) light in the solar spectrum.5,8 Among all, because of its appropriate energy levels to initiate the water splitting reaction, TiO2 is the most reported active photocatalyst under UV light.40 Nitrides consisting of d10 metal cations are also active water splitting photocatalysts under UV irradiation. For example, Ge3N4 and co-catalyst doped GaN are well known non-oxide powder photocatalysts.45–47
Since UV light accounts for only ∼4% of the entire solar energy spectrum,48 wide bandgap (Eg > 3 eV) photocatalysts can’t be effectively used for efficient solar energy harvesting and conversion. The bandgap engineering via metal/non-metal ion doping and visible light sensitizers are being used to enhance photon absorption of wide bandgap photocatalyst.49–55 However, the elements used for narrowing the bandgap suppress the redox potentials of photogenerated charge carriers and also serve as recombination centers for electrons and holes.51,53 The most efficient sensitizers used to date are noble metals (Au, Ag, Pt, Rh etc.). The metal nanoparticles are also widely used as cocatalysts, and Ag and Au have attracted increasing attention in plasmonic photocatalysts.56,57 However, they are expensive and thus won’t lead to large scale application in the future. The use of organic dyes as sensitizers suffers from their instability and they readily decompose under longer time irradiation. Narrow band gap semiconductor sensitizers have inherently led to the photocorrosion of the photocatalyst and for this reason, the photocatalyst eventually becomes completely ineffective.58 Hence, the development of a visible-light active photocatalyst that splits water efficiently is indispensable.
There are two types of oxide photocatalyst that could work under visible light irradiation, such as, (i) photocatalysts for H2 or O2 evolution from an aqueous solution in the presence of sacrificial agents and (ii) photocatalysts for overall water splitting. For example, WO3 is a stable photocatalyst for O2 evolution under visible light in the presence of a suitable electron acceptor.59,60 InTaO4 and YBiWO6 have been reported for overall water splitting as single photocatalyst under visible light.61–63 Photocatalysts that work only for half reactions of water splitting (only H2 or O2 evolution) can be used to construct Z-scheme systems.
Oxide photocatalysts have already been established as efficient under UV light, as discussed above. Empty d orbitals of transition metals or s, p orbitals of typical metals construct the conduction band (CB) of metal oxide photocatalyst.64 The CB lies above the water reduction potential of water (0 V vs. NHE at pH 0). The potential of the valence band (VB) which consists of O 2p orbitals (ca. +3 V) is more positive than the water oxidation potential (1.23 V).64 This makes the band gap too large to harvest visible light but suggests metal oxide photocatalysts have sufficient potential to oxidize water under visible light if appropriate band structuring is done. The approaches adapted so far for a wide band gap metal oxide to make it sensitive to visible light are (i) doping transition metals having a dn (0 < n < 10) electronic configuration, (ii) valence band control using an anion's p orbitals or the orbitals of p-block metals ions and (iii) spectral sensitization.5,8
When a wide band gap metal oxide is doped with a transition metal cation or anion, a donor or acceptor level is formed in the forbidden gap as a center for visible light absorption. But the doping has some adverse effects. It is to be noted that the dopant introduces a discrete energy level rather than an energy band in the host material which hinders the rapid migration of photogenerated carriers. Maintaining charge balance also becomes critical because dopants sometimes act as recombination centers.65,66 Therefore, the formation of the valence band by orbitals not associated with O 2p but with other element is very important for oxide photocatalysts to be able to work under visible light.67–71 The application of a visible light sensitizer in wide band gap oxide semiconductor photocatalysts has been also studied to inject electrons into the conduction band of the oxide photocatalyst to evolve H2. The organic dyes or narrow band gap semiconductors are usually exploited as sensitizers. The sensitizers must have a more negative excited state potential than the conduction band of the metal oxide photocatalyst for efficient charge injection.72,73 Another inclusion is supported oxide nanosystems (e.g. Ag/ZnO nanocomposites,74 Si/Co3O4 nanopyramid,75,76 CuO/ZnO nanorod arrays77etc.) for photoactivated H2 production.78,79
Metal sulphides are also attractive visible light driven photocatalyst. Many metal sulphide photocatalysts have been reported.80–88 The VB of sulfide photocatalysts is formed by the S 3p orbitals which are more negative than O 2p orbitals. For example, CdS is a very well-known narrow band gap (2.4 eV) visible light photocatalyst. It possesses the appropriate band levels for water reduction and oxidation in the presence of sacrificial agents.89 ZnS (3.6 eV) doped with various metal cations shows excellent photocatalytic H2 evolution performance from aqueous solutions containing S2− and/or SO32− as electron donors under visible light.90,91 Solid solutions of CdS–ZnS, AgInS2–ZnS, CuInS2–ZnS, CuInS2–AgInS2–ZnS and AgGa0.9In0.1S2 are also active for H2 evolution under visible light.81,86–88,90,92
Although sulfide photocatalysts have very suitable band levels for water splitting under visible light irradiation, they become unstable and deactivated due to photocorrosion or self-oxidation rather than evolving O2.93–95
Non-oxide compounds such as (oxy)nitrides and oxysulfides having d0 and d10 electronic configurations have been reported in ref. 96–106 as a new type of visible light driven photocatalyst for overall water splitting. The band gap narrowing of these materials results from the valence band formation by N 2p and S 3p orbitals in addition to O 2p orbitals. The absorption band of these materials is in the range 500–750 nm which corresponds to 1.7–2.5 eV for a band gap energy.5,8 (Oxy)nitrides and oxysulfides differs from materials doped with nitrogen or sulphur. These non-oxide materials are regarded as a valence band-controlled photocatalyst as the constituent anion component forms a valence band rather than a discrete impurity level. However, they are not stable in strong acids, for example, in aqua regia and hot concentrated H2SO4.51,102 In most cases, (oxy)nitrides are partially decomposed by the photogenerated holes instead of undergoing water oxidation at the initial stages of photocatalytic reaction accompanied with low level N2 evolution. However, the N2 production gets completely suppressed as the reaction progress. Although (oxy)nitrides have stable water reduction and oxidation reactions, the necessary performance for overall water splitting has yet to be achieved due to low level H2 evolution. Moreover, some of the (oxy)nitrides consisting of d0 metal cations, such as, Ti4+, Nb5+ and Ta5+ are not active for H2 or O2 evolution in the absence of sacrificial agents.101,102,107,108
Wang et al., in their seminal works reported graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) for the first time as a visible light active metal free photocatalyst for the purposes of water splitting in 2009.109 The graphitic carbon nitride is a medium band gap (2.7 eV) semiconductor with good physiochemical stability and adjustable band structure. This organic semiconductor can be prepared via a one-step polymerization of cheap feed stocks like cyanamide, urea, thiourea, melamine and dicyandiamide.11 The graphitic planes are constructed from tri-s-triazine units connected by planar amino groups.
The visible light response of g-C3N4 originates from the electron transitions from the valence band populated by N 2p orbitals to the conduction band formed by C 2p orbitals. Copolymerization of, for example, dicyandiamide with barbituric acid also extend the absorption band up to 750 nm.110 The as prepared g-C3N4 exhibited photocatalytic H2 evolution from water at wavelength >420 nm, even without using a cocatalyst.
Besides compound photocatalysts, some elemental semiconductors (i.e., Si, P, S and Se) have also shown their potential as a new class of visible light active photocatalysts.14 Among them crystalline Si (1.12 eV) has been studied extensively. But Si hasn’t become a material of interest due to its instability in aqueous solution and unsuitable band edges for redox reactions.111 Wang et al.112 first demonstrated the photocatalytic behavior of red P. They revealed that crystalline monoclinic red P could produce H2 from water. Amorphous P has a wide photon absorption range compared with crystalline P, but it has small surface area and large number of electron–hole trapping sites. However, the photocatalytic performance of P is somewhat low. Among more than 30 allotropes of elemental sulfur, recent investigations have shown α-sulfur (2.79 eV) as a promising visible light active photocatalyst.113 But it has poor hydrophilicity which weakens its photocatalytic activity. Modifying the sulfur crystal structure could possibly solve this problem. Se has amorphous and crystalline forms. The ability of amorphous Se (1.99 eV) as a photocatalyst has also been demonstrated.114 One of the drawbacks of amorphous Se is its instability with annealing temperature. As annealing temperature increases, amorphous Se begins to be converted to crystalline Se.
The elemental photocatalysts are still in the infancy stage and there are huge issues in developing them. If special strategies could develop, more exciting properties of elemental semiconductors might be explored. For example, forming heterojunctions of elemental photocatalysts or constructing heterostructures with their respective sulfides, phosphides and selenides may results in some unusual photocatalytic activities. Exploring special co-catalysts that might fit well with elemental photocatalysts may be another way to improve their performance.
The recent addition to metal-free photocatalysts are the organic materials having C–C/C–H bonds in their π-conjugated organic frame works.115–118 The timeline of key developments in photocatalysts research is shown in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Timeline of key developments in photocatalytic water-splitting. 
7. Metal-free elemental photocatalysts for hydrogen production.
In the past, much research has been directed to the development of compounds semiconductors as photocatalysts. Elemental S, P, B, Se, C, and Si are narrow to medium bandgap semiconductors. Therefore, they have the potential to be applied to photocatalytic water-splitting. Among them, only carbon dots, P, and S have been used to date as a hydrogen evolution photocatalyst. Elemental semiconductors therefore represent a new class of photocatalysts for solar energy conversion.
7.1 Boron (B)
Boron has 17 polymorphs with each having B12 icosahedral clusters as a common basic building block. Among these polymorphs, only four main polymorphs (i.e., α-tetragonal, α-rhombohedral, β-tetragonal, and β-rhombohedral boron) form under ambient conditions, while β-rhombohedral boron is the most thermodynamically stable form. β-rhombohedral boron has a bandgap of 1.5–1.6 eV, sufficient for visible light active photocatalysis. Indeed, it is photocatalytically active in generating ˙OH radicals under irradiation with visible light.119 This result encourages the exploration of the effectiveness of elemental boron for photocatalytic water-splitting. However, there are no such reports to date, to the best of our knowledge.
7.2 Carbon (C)
Because of the lack of a sufficient bandgap, elemental carbon and its derivatives (e.g., graphene) are not suitable for use as a standalone photocatalyst but instead as a cocatalyst or as a photosensitizer to a photocatalyst.120 Research has been made to widen the bandgap of carbon materials through morphological tuning and heteroatom doping. For example, carbon dots were shown to produce hydrogen at a rate of 423.7 μmol h−1 g−1 and 3615.3 μmol h−1 g−1 from pure water and from 20 vol% aqueous methanol solution, respectively, under UV-light irradiation without a co-catalyst.121 Recently, Reisner et al. reported N-doped carbon dots as a visible light active hydrogen evolution photocatalyst.122 It has been shown that nitrogen doping could increase the hole scavenging by electron donors, extending the lifetime of electrons, resulting in high charge extraction creating efficient photocatalysis.
There is a long list of graphene based photocatalysts in which graphene was used as a dopant or as one of the heterostructure components.123 However, expectedly, pristine graphene is not suitable for water-splitting. With doping heteroatoms (e.g. N, P etc.), gapless metallic graphene can be turned into a semiconductor.124,125 For example, Garcia et al.124 reported P-doped graphene with a bandgap of 2.85 eV, and demonstrated visible light hydrogen evolution with a rate of 282 μmol g−1 h−1 in the presence of a triethanolamine sacrificial electron donor and Pt co-catalysts under visible light irradiation. Interestingly, P-doped graphene was shown to exhibit about one order of magnitude greater photocatalytic activities than that of graphene oxide (GO). N-Doped graphene was also shown to be an active photocatalyst under UV- (355 nm) and visible-light (532 nm) irradiation.125
Graphene derivatives are now routinely combined with other semiconductor photocatalysts (mostly metal-based) for hydrogen evolution.126
7.3 Phosphorous (P)
Out of three allotropes (white, red, and black), red and black phosphorous were reported as hydrogen evolution photocatalysts.28,127 Elemental red-P has poor photocatalytic performance having an AQE of less than 1%. Recently, black phosphorous (BP) has gained significant interest. BP is a layered material where layers are held together by weak van der Waals interlayer interactions.128,129 It is therefore convenient to exfoliate BP nanosheets of few layers to a monolayer, known as phosphorene.128,130 Rahman et al. reviewed the fundamental properties of phosphorene and predicted its suitability as a water-splitting photocatalyst in 2016.28
In 2017, few layer BP was reported as a hydrogen evolution photocatalyst for the first time.131 The BP nanosheets showed ∼18 times greater photocatalytic performance than that of bulk BP. Yet the AQE (<0.5%) of the hydrogen evolution was poor. Hu et al.132 proposed a mechanism to improve the photocatalytic efficiency of phosphorene nanoribbons (PNRs). DFT calculations showed that pseudohalogen (CN and OCN) passivated PNRs would have the desired VBM and CBM band edges for both water oxidation and hydrogen reduction reactions. A maximum of 20% energy conversion efficiency was predicted for photocatalytic water splitting.
Recently, Tian et al. reported few-layer BP nanosheets with a hydrogen production rate of ∼0.36 μmol h−1 and ∼11.1 μmol h−1 without and with Pt (20 wt%), respectively, at 420 nm.133 Clearly, a high rate of hydrogen evolution depends on the high loading of Pt. However, it is recommended to avoid the use of Pt for low-cost hydrogen production. Pt, in this representative case, appeared unavoidable to ensure the efficient charge transfer for catalytic reactions. It indicated that BP is somewhat inactive without Pt.
To overcome the problems with poor stability, poor AQE, and over dependence on noble metal cocatalysts, Rahman et al. reported few layer BP with a record high AQE of ∼4% at 420 nm, Fig. 7.134 This unprecedented improvement in AQE was reported to stem from a low level of material oxidation that impedes the degradation of BP under ambient conditions, strong absorption of photons at the surface, and a conduction band edge position that favourably facilitates the proton reduction reaction. These BP-nanosheets also exhibited a superior performance to g-C3N4, carbon dots, and red-P under identical experimental conditions.
 Fig. 7  (a) Hypothetical schematic presentation of energy level of conduction band (ECB) and valence band (EVB) with respect to Fermi energy level (EF), showing BP-nanosheets have sufficient electronic potential to drive HER. (b) Rate of hydrogen production DI water and water-triethanolamine solution, respectively under visible light (420 nm) irradiation. (c) Cyclic hydrogen production under visible light (420 nm) irradiation for probing photocatalytic stability. (d) Wavelength dependent hydrogen production, and (e) understanding the probabilistic distribution of charge carriers through FDTD simulations. Adopted with permission from ref. 134. Royal Society of Chemistry (2018). 
The elemental red-P and BP are now routinely been used to construct heterostructure photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution.135
7.4 Sulfur (S)
Sulfur (S) is the 16th most abundant element in the earth crust.136 Sulfur has been known since ancient time, which was referred to in Genesis as brimstone (i.e., a stone that burns). The word ‘Sulfur’ was derived from sulvere (Sanskrit) and sulphur (Latin), respectively. Unlike many sulfur-containing compounds (e.g. mercaptans, thioethers, and disulfides that possess remarkably foul odours), elemental S is odourless, tasteless, and nontoxic. A commercial process for recovery of S from coal, ores, and minerals was developed by Herman Frasch in the 1890s.137 Among more than 30 allotropes of elemental S, orthorhombic S8 (α-S) is the most stable configuration at standard temperature and pressure (STP).138
The amber-colored α-S powder (Fig. 8 inset) is an intrinsic semiconductor with a bandgap that varies between 2.4 to 2.8 eV.139,140 Clearly, α-S is able to absorb visible light. The UV-Vis absorption spectrum of α-S is shown in Fig. 8. Therefore, α-S is suitable for use as a photocatalyst. However, elemental S as a standalone photocatalyst has seldom been studied, while it was extensively used in the synthesis of sulfide photocatalysts or as a dopant in both metal and metal-free photocatalysts.
 Fig. 8  (left) Schematic illustration of the unit cell of an α-S crystal constructed from S8 molecules. (right) UV-Vis absorption spectrum of α-S crystal powder. The inset is a photograph of the α-S crystal powder. Adopted with permission from ref. 140. American Chemical Society (2012). 
7.5 Selenium (Se)
Selenium (1.99 eV) has also been applied to photocatalytic ˙OH radical formation,114 but yet to be applied for water-splitting applications, to the best of our knowledge.
7.6 Silicon (Si)
Si has an indirect bandgap of around 1.1 eV. This bandgap is lower than the minimum potential required for water splitting (i.e. 1.23 eV). Additionally, the CBM lies below the proton reduction potential-inferring that Si is not suitable for hydrogen evolution reaction. This disadvantage can be overcome by applying a bias. Therefore, Si is widely used as a photoelectrode in photoelectrochemical water-splitting, while its application as a particulate photocatalyst is rather limited.27
Moreover, Bare Si, when submerged into an aqueous solution, becomes affected by the pH of solutions, forms a passive oxide layer and corrodes subsequently. The instability of Si in aqueous solution is therefore a great challenge to overcome prior to its sustainable application in water-splitting. Taking quantum size effects into account, nanoscalling would be a recommended strategy to tune the band edges to be compatible to redox levels.141 However, nanoscalling also adversely influences the instability of Si in an aqueous solution. For instance, it was demonstrated that H-terminated Si nanowires would have a higher oxidation rate with increasing pH of the solution.111
8. Metal-free binary photocatalysts for hydrogen production.
8.1 BC3
Bulk BC3 is metallic crystal with graphite-like structure, Fig. 9a. It was first synthesized through the interaction of boron trichloride with benzene at 800 °C: 2BCl3 + C6H6 → 2BC3 + 6HCl.142 Later on, BC3 was epitaxially grown on the NbB2(001) surface through a carbon-substituted technique in a boron honeycomb matrix.143,144 BC3 is a layered material of stacked sheets where the sheets are 3–4 Å apart.143 Like graphene, the nanosheets may also be peeled from stacked layers of BC3 through physical/chemical exfoliation, or single/multilayers sheets may be grown by using chemical vapor deposition or epitaxial growth methods on a suitable substrate.
 Fig. 9  (a) BC3 equilibrium structures. (b) Band structures computed by HSE06 functionals. The green dashed line in the band structure represents the Fermi level at 0 eV, and (c) band edge positions of BC3 monolayer, TiO2, g-C3N4, and holey C2N crystals. The redox potentials of H+/H2 = 0 vs. ENHE and H2O/O2 = 1.23 vs. ENHE at pH = 0 are also given as a reference. Adopted with permission from ref. 145. American Chemical Society (2018). 
Theoretical calculations suggested a bandgap of 1.83 eV for the BC3 monolayer (Fig. 9b) that is well-above the overall redox potential (1.23 eV) to be used as a water-splitting photocatalyst.145 The calculated chemical potentials of conduction-band electrons and valence-band holes of the BC3 monolayer are +0.15 and +1.98 V (vs. ENHE), respectively (Fig. 9c). If the holes in the valence-band would have a chemical potential of +1.0 to +3.5 V (vs. ENHE), it would be considered as a good oxidant. Similarly, if the electrons in the conduction-band would have a chemical potential between +0.5 to −1.5 V (vs. ENHE), it would be considered as a good reductant. To be noted, the redox potential of a normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) is ENHE = −4.5 V with respect to the absolute vacuum scale EAVS = 0 V.
Clearly, the BC3 monolayer is promising for the oxygen evolution reaction when compared to the reference potential for water-oxidation, i.e. H2O/O2 = 1.23 vs. ENHE at pH of 0. However, the calculated reduction potential (+0.15 vs. ENHE at pH = 0) of BC3 monolayer falls below the reference potential for water reduction (H+/H2) = 0 vs. ENHE at pH = 0 – meaning that it might not be suitable for the hydrogen evolution reaction. Given the uncertainty and underestimation of theoretical bandgap and band position calculations using DFT, it suggests more research in the synthesis of nanosheets of BC3 experimentally and determination of the experimental band positions.
8.2 B4C
Boron carbides consist of a α-rhombohedral structure (space group Rm) that are composed of slightly distorted B12 or B11C icosahedra at each vertex, and are connected by linear three-atom chains on the main cell diagonal in the crystallographic c-direction.146 Disordered combinations of the 12-atom icosahedra and three-atom chains (C-B-C, B-vacancy-B, C-B-B) therefore offer the possibilities to construct elementary cells with different stoichiometric compositions. Its homogeneity range extends from B4.3C at the carbon-rich limit to B∼11C at the boron-rich limit.146,147 Like other common crystalline solids, there is no unit cell representation of the whole structure of boron carbide. Rather, the structure is characterized by elementary cells.
Boron carbide is often incorrectly denoted as B4C. As has already been proven by numerous studies, the compound B4C does not exist.148 The actual chemical composition consists of the compound B4.3C and precipitated graphitic free carbon. Regardless of synthesis and compositions, boron carbides contain a small amount of free graphitic carbon.
The electronic structure of boron carbide is evolved from a completely filled valence band and high density gap states that are partly filled by electrons generated by B substituted C atoms. The Fermi level is pinned at the valence states that result in p-type semiconducting behavior.149,150 Boron carbides display dark coloration and high absorption from 310–800 nm by UV/Vis diffused reflectance spectra. The intrinsic bandgap of boron carbides was reported to be ∼2.0 eV.151,152 It implies that boron carbides might be employed as a photocatalyst for water splitting under visible light irradiation. Recent photoluminescence studies revealed the existence of a stronger excitonic level at 1.56 eV and a weaker one near 1.57 eV.151
B4.3C and B13C2 were shown to evolve hydrogen at a rate of 2.9 μmol h−1/0.2 g and ca. 0.9 μmol h−1/0.2 g, respectively, from a 25% methanol aqueous solution at 420 nm. With 2 wt% Pt, the H2 evolution rates of B4.3C and B13C2 were 6.2 μmol h−1/0.2 g and 1.6 μmol h−1/0.2 g, respectively. B4.3C and B13C2 exhibited stable H2 evolution rates for a long 100 h. Despite the fact that boron carbides contain a small amount of free graphitic carbon, the graphitic carbon was reported to be not active in photocatalytic water splitting.152
8.3 B6O
Boron suboxide (B6O), a member of α-rhombohedral boron-rich compounds, consists of eight B12 icosahedral units situated at the vertexes of a rhombohedral unit cell, whereas two oxygen atoms are located in the interstices along the (111) rhombohedral direction (see Fig. 10a and b). Hubert et al. synthesized orange-red color icosahedra B6O particles via a Mackay packing at high temperatures (1700–1800 °C) and pressures (4–5.5 GPa).153 The icosahedra B6O has a bandgap of 2.0 eV that is sufficient to be used as visible-light active photocatalyst.
 Fig. 10  (a) A part of the B6O structure showing c.c.p. packing (slightly distorted) of B12 icosahedra with O atoms (filled circles) in the close-packed layers. (b) A fragment of the β-rhombohedral boron structure. The central B12 unit is surrounded by 12 other B12 icosahedra whose centres are at the vertices of an icosahedron. Adopted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 1998, Nature Publishing Group. (c) UV-Vis spectra and (d) time course for H2 evolution by crystalline B (black), L-B6O (blue), and R-B6O (red) at >400 nm. Adopted with permission from ref. 154. Wiley-VCH (2019). 
In contrast to the high temperature (>1300 °C) and pressure (>1 GPa) synthesis of icosahedra B6O particles, Luo et al. developed a synthesis method to obtain crystalline B6O at ambient pressure and a low temperature of 90 °C, and demonstrated the activities of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution with B6O.154 They have studied two types of B6O (e.g. R-B6O and L-B6O) and compared with elemental B for H2 evolution from water under visible light irradiation. The H2 evolution rates of R-B6O, L-B6O, and crystalline B are about 5.48, 1.34, and 2.48 μmol g−1 h−1, respectively, at >400 nm in the absence of any metal cocatalysts. The absorption spectra and time dependent H2 evolution of R-B6O, L-B6O, and crystalline B are shown in Fig. 10c and d.
8.4 Boron phosphide (BP)
Boron phosphide (BP) is a III–V compound made up of covalently bonded boron and phosphorus, and has a cubic zinc blende structure. The crystal structure of BP was first investigated in 1957.155 Among the notable properties, BP is chemically highly stable and is resistant to chemical corrosion even in contact with concentrated mineral acids or aqueous alkali solution. BP is also thermally very stable as is evident from its resistance to oxidation and decomposition in air up to 800–1000 °C.156
BP has an indirect band gap of 2.0 eV.156 BP can be either p or n-type. Excess B will produce p-type, while excess P will produce n-type BP.158 The n-type BP usually shows higher charge mobility and lower resistivity than p-type. Endowed with excellent chemical, thermal, mechanical and electronic properties, BP is a material of choice for electronic devices to work in extreme conditions at high temperature and intense radiation.158 Despite its widespread use in electronic devices, BP has rarely been used in photocatalytic applications. It might due to the difficulties in materials development. Synthesis of BP requires a high-pressure flux that is difficult to be realized in many laboratories.159
Lee et al. reported a p-type BP photoelectrode for photoelectrochemical splitting of water under visible light.159 Ye et al. reported n-type BP as a photocatalyst for H2 evolution under visible light, even without loading a precious metal cocatalyst. The H2 evolution activity of bare BP was 2.0 μmol h−1 without a Pt cocatalyst, and 6.9 μmol h−1 with a Pt cocatalyst, see Fig. 11.157
 Fig. 11  Electronic properties and photocatalytic activities of BP. (a) unit cell structure, (b) Density of states (DOS), (c) bandgap calculations, (d) time course of hydrogen evolution and (e) wavelength dependent hydrogen evolution at 420 nm. Adopted with permission from ref. 157. Elsevier (2016). 
8.5 h-BN
Pristine h-BN has a bandgap >5 eV that is not suitable for being used as a photocatalyst. Therefore, its bandgap and band positions need to be adjusted to be compatible with redox potentials. Recently, S doped h-BN nanosheets (3.907 eV) were reported to be active in visible light photocatalytic hydrogen production in the presence of sacrificial electron donors and a Pt cocatalyst.160 However, at least two questions remained unanswered. Firstly, scaling down from bulk to nanosheets incurs a blue-shift in optical absorption – meaning that the nanosheets would have a larger bandgap than the bulk. Secondly, how could visible light absorption happen when the reported bandgap of 3.907 eV is not suitable for absorption of photons from visible light? Indeed, it should not be able to absorb photons beyond ∼320 nm. In our opinion, visible light absorption might stem from S that has bandgap <3.0 eV,139 and S is itself an elemental photocatalyst.140 It therefore demands more controlled measurements to conclude the actual interplay of S doping (or other heteroatoms) in the photocatalytic behavior of h-BN.
8.6 Carbon nitride (CxNy)
The history of the synthesis of the early genre of carbon nitride dates back to Liebig's melon in 1834.161 Several research groups have contributed in the development and understanding of the fundamental properties of carbon nitride over the years.11,162–165 However, the first breakthrough in using carbon nitride as a water-splitting photocatalyst happened in 2009 with the collaborative research efforts of the Domen and Antonietti groups when they reported graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) as a photocatalyst.109 In the midst of metal-based photocatalysts, g-C3N4 began a new era of metal-free photocatalysts. As might be expected, it drew unprecedented interest among researchers as evident by the hundreds of peer-reviewed publications in the subsequent years.9,10 Facile synthesis from earth abundant and inexpensive raw materials, suitable bandgaps (∼2.7 eV), exceptional stability, and non-toxicity cumulatively sparked the interest in g-C3N4.
However, pristine g-C3N4 exhibits very poor photocatalytic performance regarding hydrogen evolution with an AQE < 1% under visible light irradiation.109 Research has been directed to improve the photocatalytic performance of this exotic metal-free photocatalyst. For example, incomplete polycondensation of the precursor and structural destruction g-C3N4 nanosheets were serious problems. Rahman et al. developed a combined three-step method including co-polymerization, surface activation and exfoliation that resulted in structurally very robust and catalytically highly efficient g-C3N4 nanosheets as evidenced by a 38 fold enhancement in hydrogen production as compared to pristine g-C3N4.166 In addition to semicrystalline g-C3N4, they also engineered a sponge-like hierarchical structure of amorphous g-C3N4 (ACN) to overcome the mismatch between light-absorption and charge-collection that limited the AQE to <0.5% under visible light irradiation.167 The modified ACN exhibited 40% enhanced light-trapping and a ∼23 times longer electron lifetime that led to a new benchmark for hydrogen production with an apparent quantum efficiency (AQE) of 6.1% at 420 nm.168 Traditional fabrication methods for g-C3N4 nanosheets result in a blue shift in optical absorption, which is considered a major cause of poor efficiency. Recently, a fabrication method was demonstrated to counteract this blue-shift that resulted in a AQE of 16% at 420 nm.169
g-C3N4 is considered as a wide bandgap semiconductor for photocatalytic applications. Its absorption edge is confined to the ultraviolet and blue fraction of the solar spectrum (λ < 450 nm) which limits its photocatalytic performance. Benefits of metal and non-metal doping with various heteroatoms (e.g. Ag, Cu, Rh, Pt, Na, P, F, B, S etc.) are frequently exploited to tune the bandgap of g-C3N4 for improved visible light absorption.170 However, doped g-C3N4 suffers from the innate drawback of carrier recombination. Alternatively, surface modification using soft and hard templating, copolymerization of two or more precursors, nanostructuring of bulk material, coupling with other semiconductors/metal complexes to form heterojunctions, etc., are routinely employed to improve the photocatalytic performance of g-C3N4.171–180 These conventional techniques are already been comprehensively reviewed elsewhere.9–11,170
Beyond those above mentioned techniques, molecular tuning of the structure, compositions, and electrochemical surface states of carbon nitride were achieved by combining advanced computational quantum chemistry and nanotechnology. Research has progressed significantly regarding the in-depth mechanistic understanding of photochemical, electrochemical, and electro-optical processes in carbon nitride. Supramolecular assembly, metal-to-ligand charge transfer, surface chemical modification, construction of surface bonding states, self-sensitization, homogeneous self-modification of vacancies, stabilizing single metal atoms, monomer functionalization, etc., are some of the notable techniques for molecular tuning of the intrinsic catalytic activities of carbon nitride. We have recently reported the latest progress in molecular tuning of carbon nitride.12 In this contribution, our focus is therefore to cover the new developments in carbon nitride based photocatalysts.

8.6.1 New derivatives of carbon nitride beyond C3N4. 
Recently, tuning the band structure of g-C3N4 through self-modification of chemical structure has emerged to synthesize the carbon nitride framework with entirely new physicochemical properties for efficient photocatalytic applications. This can be done by either reducing the nitrogen content or adding extra nitrogen-rich moieties in the g-C3N4 scaffold. For the case of nitrogen reduction, the nitrogen content is reduced to an extent such that C/N > 1. Thus, the end product is a carbon rich carbon nitride which is sometimes called carbon-subnitride. Theoretically, there could be many variations in carbon-subnitride. However, C3N and C2N (1.96 eV) are the only experimentally demonstrated representatives of carbon-subnitride to date.181–183 Contrarily, upon addition of extra nitrogen such that C/N < 1, the product is a nitrogen rich carbon nitride (C3N4+x) which is sometime also called carbon supernitride. For example, Vinu et al. demonstrated the synthesis of N-rich carbon nitrides, C3N5 (2.2 eV, HER at 267 μmol h−1 at 420 nm) and C3N6 (2.25–2.5 eV, HER at 31.5 μmol h−1 at 420 nm).184,185 However, stand-alone C3N and C2N are yet to be applied for photocatalytic hydrogen production. Interestingly, Co and Ru supported C2N exhibited electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution.186,187
The carbon sub/super nitrides constitute new and different bonding structures compared with g-C3N4. For example, skeleton of C3N5 is formed from two s-heptazine units that are bridged together with an azo linkage. In contrast, g-C3N4 has three heptazine units that are linked together with tertiary nitrogen. C3N5 is attributed with extended conjugation of an aromatic π network of heptazine units compared with g-C3N4 that lead to an upward shift of the valence band maximum. Extended π-conjugation and distribution of the lone pair electrons in the N atom to the heptazine motif can reduce the bandgap significantly.
Following the report of Vinu et al., recently, Shankar et al. reported the synthesis of a C3N5 with a C/N ratio of 0.6 and an electronic bandgap of 1.76 eV by thermal deammoniation of the melem hydrazine precursor.188 Clearly, Shankar's C3N5 has an extended absorption range compared with Vinu's C3N5. However, this extended absorption range comes with a penalty in the VB band position that makes it unsuitable for water-splitting. For example, its CB edge is positioned at −0.72 V, while the VB edge is at +1.04 V vs. NHE at pH 0. Considering the proton reduction potential (0.0 V at pH 0), the CB edge is suitable for proton reduction in the presence of a sacrificial electron donor, although It is yet to be applied to photocatalytic hydrogen production. However, it is not suitable as a stand-alone catalyst for the overall splitting of water, because water oxidation (H2O/O2) requires a VB position at least at +1.23 V vs. NHE at pH 0. Nevertheless, owing to the excellent visible light absorption, C3N5 was applied as a photosensitizer to increase the photocatalytic performance of TiO2.188 Compared to C3N4, C3N5 was found to have a higher charge transfer resistance and a high rate of charge carrier recombination that are detrimental to photocatalytic performance. Clearly, intense research is needed to adjust its band positions and overcome its charge transport related problems to be suitable as a water-splitting photocatalysts.
Rahman et al. reported a topological carbon nitride (TCN) as a new type of carbon nitride with built-in polycrystalline and amorphous phases.189 In the synthesis of TCN, a new concept of ‘repairing the crystallinity of the amorphous phase’ was developed. This comes with the realization of localized photon absorption for the first time for any carbon nitride photocatalyst. This attribute is highly desirable to limit wasted photon absorption at the regions where charge carriers are most likely to undergo recombination. This research provided new understanding of entropy assisted charge carrier separation. These attributes enable cocatalyst-free hydrogen production in TCN, while other carbon nitride based photocatalysts are dependent on a precious metal (i.e. Pt) cocatalyst.


8.6.2 Dealing with bottleneck of charge transport for Pt-free hydrogen production. 
A long-standing problem with CN is its dependence on metal cocatalysts, such as platinum for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. Sluggish charge transfer kinetics and a high activation energy for proton reduction makes pristine CN dependent on a high loading of precious Pt-cocatalyst for hydrogen evolution. Recently, it was shown that the limiting factors of Pt-dependent hydrogen production could be overcome by amorphization with a mechanistic understanding of the origin of cocatalyst-free hydrogen evolution.190
Dissociation of electron–hole pairs into free electrons and holes in CN also suffers from an inherent high recombination rate.29 Conventionally, the suppression of recombination is preferentially dealt with a heterojunction but inherently depends on the precious metal cocatalyst.191 To overcome the dependency on precious metals, it has been reported that coupling two energetically optimized carbon nitrides, but with different phases in the form of a hybrid could significantly inhibit charge carrier recombination and facilitate the charge transfer processes.192,193 It was found that the potential gradient in this homojunction delocalizes electrons and holes, and increases the spatial charge separation. Therefore, this led to a high AQE of 5% for photocatalytic H2 production from water under visible light irradiation in the absence of a precious metal (e.g., Pt) cocatalyst.32
Clearly, efficient photogeneration of charge is the key for enhanced hydrogen production via water-splitting. Photogeneration implies the sequential steps of exciton generation followed by dissociation of the excitons, and finally, diffusion of excitons to the surface/interface for redox reactions.33 Excitons are Coulombically strongly bound in CN194 which makes dissociation of excitons into free electrons and holes difficult.195 In the process of exciton generation to dissociation into free charge carriers, the recombination/trapping of charge carriers is the undesired but unavoidable problem. Therefore, a predictive understanding of the relationship between charge transport related phenomena and photocatalytic performance is crucial for rational design of the photocatalyst materials. Much relevant research has been to make morphological fine-tuning from the bulk-to-nanoscale and to construct heterojunctions to deal with the charge transport problems in CN. However, there are only a few reports regarding the mechanistic understanding of charge transport phenomena in CN at the atomic level.9,191
Based on transient spectroscopy measurements, a cascade of charge transfer kinetics was found in CN196 that showed preferentially 1D diffusive hopping transport along the interplanar direction, Fig. 12.197 The dissociated excitons migrate independently between nearest neighbor monomers in a manner of diffusive hopping transport, and exciton relaxation follows a path of nonradiative decay. Recombination depends on the dimensionality (1D, 2D, 3D) of the spatial region. For higher dimension, a strong decrease in excitation density and weaker recombination prevailed.197
 Fig. 12  Light induce charge transport in CN. (a and b) Photoexcitation and generation of singlet excitons (SE), (c) rapid dissociation (<200 fs) of SE into singlet polaron pairs, (d) further dissociation into free polarons, (e) diffusive Brownian motion of free polarons, (f) recombination of free polarons, and recovery of singlet (SE) or triplet (TE) excitons. Effect of dimensionality on (g) the time-dependent luminescent flux and (h) associated excitation density. Allowed ranges of excitation densities and absorption coefficients for 1D, 2D, and 3D scenarios in (i) the diffusion-limited case and (j) domain-size-limited case. Reproduced with permission from ref. 16.197 Wiley-VCH (2015). 
Based on the charge trapping model for CN proposed by Durrant et al.198 (Fig. 13), a photogenerated electron may undergo one of the two events in the course of transition to the conduction band. It may either transit directly to the conduction band to create an emissive state (EM) or become trapped forever in deep or shallow trap states. Even if the electron succeeds in going to the conduction band from the ground state, an excited electron may fall back to the ground state (GS) and recombine with holes, or be trapped in the trap states.199 Electron trapping is inversely related to recombination. Regardless of the recombination or the trapping of electrons, it will reduce the concentration of free charge carriers, and therefore, decrease the nominal charge transfer rate.198 Consequently, there would be fewer electrons and holes to be transferred to catalytic active sites for redox reactions.
 Fig. 13  Schematic representation of (a) charge trapping model, and (b) influence of trapping on charge transfer reactions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24.198 American Chemical Society (2017). 
Singlet excitons in carbon nitride were found to be confined to the tri-s-triazine unit, and are influenced by a strong Coulombic attraction along with electron-lattice and electron–electron interactions that causes a large binding energy, greater than the thermal energy.194,200 The dissociation of the exciton requires overcoming this binding energy within its lifetime.195 Following dissociation, the excitons may also recombine and might never reach the catalytic sites.32,195 Both the photocatalytic activity and exciton dissociation are therefore statistical in nature-varying with the wavelength of the photoexcitation.201
It has been shown that if triplet-to-singlet conversion process could be attained, it would significantly enhance the HER mechanism.202 For example, triplet-to-singlet conversion would promote the availability of more electrons to be transferred to the active sites for HER by delaying carrier recombination lifetime from nanoseconds to microseconds. A half-metallic semiconductor may avail the triplet-to-singlet conversion due to spontaneous spin polarization that makes the electronic structure around the Fermi level split into spin-up and spin-down.203
DFT calculations reveal that when OH− comes in close vicinity of CN, photogenerated electrons in carbon nitride transfer to the empty molecular orbitals of OH−. Consequently, it become difficult for OH− to be oxidized to the hydroxyl radical unless sacrificial reagents are used to sweep the electrons. The sacrificial electron scavenger depletes the electrons and promotes the holes migration to OH−, and therefore, enhances the photo-oxidation reaction rate.204 As a result, the sacrificial hole/electron scavengers are now being routinely employed to suppress HER or OER. A reverse hole/electron transfer, RH(E)T process from adsorbate-to-substrate governs the efficacy of hole/electron scavengers.205 An ideal hole/electron scavenger should capture the holes from the substrate as quickly as possible and retain the captured holes/electrons as long as possible. The timescale for RH(E)T is the measure of highly efficient hole/electron scavengers.


8.6.3 Achieving AQE > 50% with visible light. 
Thermally-induced polycondensation of nitrogen-containing precursors is the most commonly used method to synthesize pristine g-C3N4. This traditional technique typically results in a g-C3N4 with lower crystallinity, poor charge transport, and therefore, moderate photocatalytic activity. Therefore, the synthesis of a fully condensed and crystalline g-CN is desirable with the vision that the improved crystallinity would reduce the defect related recombination centers for electron–hole pairs in the photocatalyst which will, in turn, enhance the photocatalytic activity.
To address this problem, a molten salt method was developed to synthesize crystalline g-CN. For example, crystalline g-C3N4 was synthesized from a preheated melamine precursor using KCl/LiCl salts, which showed impressive rates of hydrogen production from phosphate solution with an AQE of 50.7% at 405 nm.175 This high AQE was attributed with enhanced crystallinity of the extended conjugated system that reduces the density of surface defects, decreases unpaired electron density, and suppresses electron–hole pair recombination.
Antonietti and co-workers have significantly advanced the molten-salt assisted synthesis of crystalline carbon nitrides with AQE > 50% under visible light irradiation. For example, they synthesized a crystalline carbon nitride from co-condensation of urea and oxamide using KCl/LiCl that exhibited a narrow bandgap of 2.56 eV and a maximum π–π layer stacking distance of heptazine units of 0.292 nm (while it is ∼0.326 nm for pristine g-C3N4). The narrow bandgap provided extended spectral overlapping for harvesting low energy photons, while compact interlayer stacking improved the lateral charge transport and interlayer exciton dissociation. As a result, it showed hydrogen evolution with an AQE of 57% at 420 nm.172 Recently, they have also investigated the combination of different salts in the synthesis of crystalline carbon nitride and their photocatalytic performance, see Fig. 14. It was found that ionothermal synthesis of carbon nitride in NaCl/KCL salts resulted in an AQE of 60% at 420 nm.206 This is the highest AQE reported to date for any type of carbon nitride based photocatalyst.
 Fig. 14  (a) UV/Vis absorption (inset: digital photograph). (b) HOMO and LUMO positions determined by Mott–Schottky plots and UPS analysis. (c) Photocatalytic H2 evolution rates at 420 nm. Adopted with permission from ref. 206. Wiley-VCH (2018). 


8.6.4 Binary heterojunction photocatalysts. 
A binary heterojunction is comprised of two different materials. It is a purpose built and custom made structure to accommodate one or more of the followings actions: increasing the window of photon absorption from the UV to the IR, to deal with the kinetic competition between charge recombination and separation, and set band edges to be compatible to redox potentials. We discuss some notable binary heterojunctions of metal-free photocatalysts below.
Most of the metal-free heterojunction photocatalysts have been made having g-C3N4 as a base with another metal or semiconductor that is incorporated with it to form a heterostructure. For instance, g-C3N4 is composed of carbon materials, e.g., multiwalled carbon nanotubes, carbon black, or carbon nanodots etc., in which carbon materials act as a conductive material to transfer the photogenerated electrons to catalysts for H2O2 decomposition.207,208 Endowed with high conductivity, intrinsic carrier mobility, and specific surface area, graphene is also a commonly used material to promote charge transport because of the area of graphene. A graphene/g-C3N4 heterostructure photocatalyst for hydrogen evolution was reported209 for hydrogen evolution with a rate of be 451 μmol h−1 g−1 in the presence of methanol as an electron donor and Pt as a cocatalyst. In this heterostructure, the graphene was used to provide electronic conductive channels for efficient separation of the photogenerated charge carriers. For an optimal graphene content (∼1.0 wt%), graphene/g-C3N4 heterostructure photocatalysts could produce at rate that was ∼3 times greater than that of pristine g-C3N4. Recently, a sandwich of graphene–carbon nitride–graphene (titled GR–CN–GR) was reported for simultaneous photocatalytic hydrogen generation and capsule storage, Fig. 15.210 Among the carbon materials, carbon dots are used to prepare 2D/0D heterostructure photocatalyst. The carbon dots here function as a photosensitizer to expand visible light absorption regions and suppress the recombination of photo-induced carriers. A carbon dot/g-C3N4 photocatalyst exhibited hydrogen evolution at a rate of 88.1 μmol h−1 under visible light irradiation from 5 vol% methanol aqueous solution with 2 wt% Pt.211
 Fig. 15  (a) The photocatalytic (water-splitting) hydrogen evolution and capsule storage scheme: (1) photo-generated electrons (e−) and holes (h+) separating; (2) water splitting to produce protons (H+) through holes (h+) attacking; (3) protons (H+) penetrating through GR and producing H2 molecules; (4) H2 molecules are prohibited from moving out of the sandwich. (b) Charge distribution computed as Bader charge differences between GR–CN–GR sandwich. Yellow and blue bubbles represent respectively electron and hole charges with isosurface value of 0.0005, e Å−3. Adopted with permission from ref. 210. Nature Publishing Group (2017). 
While the above mentioned heterostructure photocatalysts were dependent on precious metal Pt-cocatalysts for hydrogen evolution, Han et al.212 reported an interconnected framework of mesoporous g-C3N4 nanofibers merged with in situ incorporated N-rich carbon (g-C3N4@C) that exhibited hydrogen evolution at a rate of 16885 μmol h−1 g−1 without any cocatalysts that achieved an AQE 14.3% at 420 nm. In this heterostructure of C3N4@C, excitons generated in g-C3N4 were transferred to carbon or nitrogen atoms on N-carbon where the proton reduction reaction was taking place to generate H2. This 3D porous skeleton of C3N4@C resulted in high surface area, efficient charge separation and transfer, and enhanced light-absorption. The highest AQE of 77.4% at 420 nm was reported for a metal-free heterojunction photocatalyst of P3HT/g-C3N4.
Such a high AQE was a result of wide visible light absorption, efficient charge transfer at the interface, and a suitable oxidation half-reaction caused by the sacrificial reagent.213 Other notable metal-free heterojunctions include fullerenes/carbon nitride and polytriazine/heptazine carbon nitride for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution.214–216 Beyond carbon based materials, phosphorous was also coupled with carbon nitride with broadband solar absorption from the UV to near-infrared region of the solar spectrum. For example, a red-P/g-C3N4 and BP/carbon nitride were demonstrated, respectively for hydrogen evolution in the presence of sacrificial electron donors and a Pt cocatalyst.217,218
In addition to broadband photon absorption, the phosphorus built heterojunction also provided prevention of charge trapping into deep and photocatalytically inactive trap states of g-C3N4 in which neither participate in the charge transfer reaction nor reduce electron acceptors on the surface or in solution during the photocatalytic process.198,219 Because of these highly beneficial attributes, the red P/g-C3N4 heterojunction exhibited a remarkable hydrogen production of 2565 μmol h−1 g−1.220
By exploiting the in situ bond modulation through a defect-induced self-functionalization process,221 a molecular polymer heterojunction of GCN with polyfluorene family polymers was reported with an AQE of 27%.222 This molecular heterojunction accommodates intermolecular π–π interactions, and an optimized band structure for efficient exciton dissociation and extended visible light absorption.
All of the above discussed heterojunctions are active in only hydrogen production via a half reaction of water-splitting while overall water-splitting remains great challenge. In opposition to challenging the four electron pathway for oxygen evolution, recently, a two electron pathway to release O2 from water was reported in a heterojunction of carbon dots/C3N4, where water is oxidized via a two-electron reaction to H2O2 and H2, followed by H2O2 decomposition to O2 and H2O (i.e. 2H2O → H2O2 + H2; 2H2O2 → 2H2O + O2).223 This heterojunction demonstrated overall water-splitting with a solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency of ∼2%. This is indeed a milestone achievement for a metal-free photocatalyst reported to date. Inspired by this work, a heterostructure of Cring–C3N4 was reported for hydrogen evolution via overall water-splitting.224 In this heterostructure, a strong in-built electric field that was produced by a sp2-hybridized π-conjugated system with different work functions. This internal electric field provides an intrinsic driving force for delocalization of the photocarrier around the photoexcited sites, and promotes electron–hole pair separation and transport. Additionally, high electron density around the Fermi level introduced by the carbon ring increases the photocarrier diffusion length and lifetime significantly (10 times) relative to those of pristine g-C3N4. As a result, the Cring–C3N4 heterostructure produced hydrogen at a rate of 371 μmol g−1 h−1 with an AQE of 5% at 420 nm.

9. Metal-free ternary photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution
9.1 Borocarbonitride (BCN)
BCN is different from B-, N-codoped graphene225 both from compositional and structural aspects. The electronic properties of BCN can be tuned between graphene (gapless) and BN (insulator) by varying the B:C:N ratio or by configurational changes in the structure of BCN.226
Want et al. reported BCN tubes (∼2.72 eV) as a hydrogen evolution photocatalyst. BCN tubes exhibited hydrogen evolution with an AQE of 0.32% at 405 nm.227 They recently reported a boron-rich ceramic aerogel-like 3D porous BCN photocatalyst that was synthesized by a eutectic molten salt method. The BCN aerogel showed absorption in the range of 420 to 650 nm that corresponds to an optical gap of 2.92 eV to 2.72 eV. The optimum BCN aerogel evolved hydrogen at a rate of 7.3 μmol h−1 with an AQE of 0.82% at 420 nm.228
9.2 h-BN/graphene hybrid
The BN family includes amorphous BN (a-BN), hexagonal BN (h-BN), cubic BN (c-BN), and the relatively rare wurtzite BN (w-BN).229 Among them h-BN only has a layered structure. Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), also referred to as white graphene or boronitrene, is a layered honeycomb allotrope of boron nitride.230 In contrast to ideal graphene (a gapless material), h-BN features a wide band gap (>5 eV). Because the bandgaps of these layered materials do not fall within the thermodynamic limit of water-splitting redox potentials; neither graphene nor h-BN, Individually, can be used as a photocatalyst. Therefore, bandgap engineering is the foremost issue to deal with. In this regard, merging h-BN and graphene in the same lattice to form the so-called h-BN/graphene hybrids therefore is of great research interest.230–234
Quantum chemical computations reveal that size modifications of h-BN segments confined in a given graphene host may induce dramatic electrical property variations.235,236 Interestingly, theoretical studies revealed that h-BN fragments embedded in graphene hosts may induce precisely the reverse effect on band gap related properties, that may vary from 0.7 eV to 4.0 eV.236 Additionally, when finite sections of h-BN are confined in the graphene flakes, exceptional nonlinear optical properties might emerge.
Layered BN has a structural analogue of graphite with strong in-plane bonds and weak coupling between layers. Honeycomb lattice h-BN can be thought as of graphene by substituting carbon (C) atoms in graphite with alternating boron (B) and nitrogen (N) atoms. Therefore, C, B, and N atoms can coexist as atomic sheets in a layered structure. Because, h-BN and graphene share similar lattice parameters and crystal structure, therefore, hybridization of h-BN and graphene together with the mixture of C, B and N atoms will result in a ternary B–C–N system with interesting characteristics. Boron carbonitride (BxCyNz) nanostructures may be of particular interest.231 Recently, carbon doped BN (denoted as BCN-30, Eg = 2.9 eV) was reported as a hydrogen evolution photocatalyst with an AQE value of 0.54% at 405nm in presence of Pt (3 wt%) as cocatalyst and TEoA (10 vol%) as a sacrificial electron donor.237 Theoretical studies showed that semi-hydrogenated graphitic BN sheet238 may also be a water-splitting photocatalyst. However, its synthesis and practical demonstration in water-splitting applications has yet to be proven.
BN is not much studied as a water-splitting photocatalyst. Lack of facile synthesis methods to prepare hybrid or ternary structures of the B–C–N system, and yet found effective tuning of their bandgaps for suitable photocatalysis are the remaining challenges for widespread applications. A meaningful combination of C, B and N atoms could offer different (B–C–N) layered configurations of binary and ternary compounds with different stoichiometry, such as BCN, BC2N, BC4N, BC3etc. Recent progress in synthesis of different BxCyNz nanostructures such as nanotubes and microspheres could be taken as guidance to develop photocatalyst grade BCN structures.239 Nanotubes were synthesized by Pyrolysis of the BH3–trimethylamine adduct240 or by chemical vapour deposition,241 while microspheres were produced by the reaction of low-surface area carbon spheres with urea and boric acid.242 However, these nanostructures were not demonstrated for any photocatalytic applications. Future research needs to be directed to explore this avenue.
9.3 Metal-free ternary heterojunction photocatalysts
Efficient charge transport is key for enhanced hydrogen production. In a heterojunction, due to offset of the conduction and valence bands, the band-offset facilitates delocalization of charge carriers and retards back-recombination of electron–hole pairs.243–245 A semiconductor heterojunction is therefore highly sought after in heterogeneous photocatalysis.246,247 With the plethora of inorganic semiconductors, metal-free binary heterostructure are emerging. However, metal-free ternary heterostructure (combining three materials) are rare, because of the limited number of metal-free semiconductors, hybridization constraints and intricate synthesis procedures.
Rahman et al. reported, for the first time, a ternary metal-free heterojunction photocatalyst for hydrogen production by combining GCN, ACN and rGO (reduced graphene oxide) with an AQE of 6.3% at 420 nm, see Fig. 16.248 This ternary heterojunction was built by in-plane stitching of 2D domains of GCN, ACN and rGO with similar aromatic structures that induced an intrinsic driving force for delocalization of photocarriers in photoexcited states.249 The difference in work functions induced a strong electric field for efficient charge separation.250
 Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of charge transfer process for photocatalytic hydrogen in GCN/ACN/rGO. The band offsets between GCN and ACN helps in delocalizing the electrons in conduction band of ACN while holes in valence band of GCN. rGO enhances the transfer of surface electrons to water for proton reduction. Reproduced with permission.248 Royal Society of Chemistry (2017). 
10. Organic photocatalysts
Because of the flexibility in molecular engineering and precise tuning of optoelectronic properties, organic π-conjugated polymers have emerged as a promising alternative to the widely accepted inorganic semiconductor photocatalysts.251,252 Noticeably, while inorganic photocatalysts have limited photon absorption beyond 550 nm, a new era of 600 nm-class photocatalyst begins with organic materials for solar fuel production. In 1985, for the first time, linear poly(p-phenylene)s were reported as an organic photocatalyst for H2 evolution with an apparent quantum efficiency (AQE) of 0.006% under UV-light irradiation (λ > 366 nm).253 However, the interest in polymeric photocatalysts for photocatalytic H2 evolution waned over the time due to instabilities and extremely poor AQE values. Recently, a renewed interest in this area has been noticed. Conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs), conjugated organic frameworks (COF), conjugated triazine frameworks (TzF), conjugated phosphinine frameworks (CPF), and silicate conjugate frameworks (SiCOF) are the most notable polymeric photocatalysts.11,181,182,186,189,254–271 In the following subsections, we will discuss the progress with regard to hydrogen production from polymeric photocatalysts.
10.1 COF
Covalent organic frameworks (COF) are structures that are made by stitching organic molecules together through strong covalent bonds using the principles of reticular synthesis.272 Notably, COFs are the first example demonstrating covalent bonds beyond molecules to organic solids that are entirely composed of light elements, and therefore begins the era of ‘the chemistry of the framework’.273 COFs are geometric constructs from molecules, while molecules are geometric constructs from atoms. Making covalent bonds between the molecules to form COFs, linkers (building units) and linkages (bond formed between those units upon reticulation) are essential.
Synthesis of COFs start with linkers and ends with reticulation of the linkers by stitching them with appropriate linkages to form an extended framework.274Fig. 17 illustrates the approaches of the reticular synthesis of COFs of various dimension and structure. Over the years, organic chemists have mastered the art of controlling covalent bond formation from 0D to 3D by utilizing the principles of dynamic covalent chemistry (DCC).275–279Fig. 18 represents the chronological progress in the synthesis of COFs with various dimensions. Because direct crystallization of COFs has yet to be proven feasible, reversible condensation reaction mechanisms such as the Schiff base reaction, spiro-borane condensation, Knoevenagel condensation and imide condensation, etc., are being routinely used to construct crystalline COFs.278–281 The reversibility in bond formation endures the possibilities of self-healing and error correction (i.e., if any bond formation happens in an undesired direction, the system will repair it through back reaction and bond reformation) during the crystallization.278 In DCC, a specific chemical agents are used to maintain the reversibility to render ordered COF structures with high crystallinity. COFs are mainly targeted for gas storage, however, recently it has also been considered for heterogeneous catalysis applications.
 Fig. 17  Approaches for reticular synthesis of COFs. (a and b) Reversible organic reactions used for COF construction, and (c) symmetric combinations used for 2D COF construction. Adopted with permission from ref. 278. American Chemical Society (2019). 
 Fig. 18  Chronological advancement in COF synthesis. Adopted with permission from ref. 278. American Chemical Society (2019). 
The interest in COF-based photocatalysts is increasing because of favourable physicochemical properties pertinent to photocatalytic water-splitting reactions. Light harvesting, charge transport phenomena and catalytic reactions sites can be precisely tuned by selecting appropriate molecular building blocks and their reticulation within COFs. Some of the most notable characteristics of COFs includes high structural porosity, high surface areas, crystallinity, low density, and stability regardless of the pH of oxidative and reductive environments.
These attributes facilitate the rapid diffusion of charges to the surface for increased interaction with secondary catalytic enhancers (i.e., sensitizers, electrolytes, sacrificial agents, cocatalysts etc.), enhance the lifetimes of the excited states and charge carrier mobility, suppress recombination of charge carriers, and offer high gravimetric performance.275 Therefore the modular, porous, and crystalline COFs are gradually becoming one of the most prominent metal-free photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution. Since the first demonstration of a hydrazone-based COF (TFPT-COF) as a hydrogen evolution photocatalyst in 2014,282 continuous growth in this field of research is slowly but steadily emerging (see Table 1 and Fig. 19).283–287
Table 1 List of COF based photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution




COF

E
g (eV)
Sacrificial agent
Co-catalyst
AQE
Ref.




TFT-COF
2.8
TEoA
Pt
3.9% at 420 nm

282



N3-COF
2.7
TEoA
Pt
0.44% at 450 nm

283



PTP-COF
2.1
TEoA
Pt
0.87% at AM1.5

286



N2-COF
—
TEoA
Co-1
0.16% at 400 nm

285



β- Ketoenamine COF
2.31–2.42
TEoA
Pt
1.8% at 520 nm

259



TpDTz-COF
2.07
TEoA
Nickel–thiolate
0.2% at 450 nm

287



FS-COF
1.85
Ascorbic acid
Pt
3.2% at 420 nm

268



sp2-c-COF
1.9
TEoA
Pt
—

288





 Fig. 19  Selected COFs based photocatalysts for hydrogen production. This figure has been adapted from ref. 259, 283, 287 and 288 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018, and Elsevier, copyright 2019. 
In 2015, aryl triphenyl azine COFs (Nx-COFs) were synthesized and demonstrated for H2 evolution.283 A stepwise increase in the nitrogen content of the central aromatic ring was shown to lead to a progressive increase in photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. Later on, research was extended to study the structure–property–activity relationships in such materials.286 The enhanced hydrogen evolution activity in Nx-COFs with increased nitrogen content in the central aryl ring were traced back to intrinsic electronic factors that can possibly influence the hydrogen evolution rate, such as the band gap, the absolute HOMO and LUMO levels with respect to the hydrogen evolution potential, and charge carrier delocalization in the excited state. Apart from electronic factors, the radical anion stabilization energy, crystallinity, and surface area were also found correlated with the HE activity, which are higher in the N2/N3-COFs and lower in the N0/N1-COFs. However, in depth understanding of the interplay and relative weight of the structure–property–activity relations remains elusive. While the peripheral rather than the central aryl ring in Nx-COFs were substituted with nitrogen atoms, the resulting PTP-COF also showed photocatalytic hydrogen evolution in the presence of triethanolamine as the sacrificial electron donor and a Pt co-catalyst.286 The HE rate of PTP-COF was reported to be 83.83 μmol h−1 g−1 which is comparable to that of N1-COF (90 μmol h−1 g−1), while an order of magnitude lower than that of N3-COF (1703 μmol h−1 g−1).283,286
In another study, synthesis and photocatalytic applications of novel β-ketoenamine COFs, such as TP-DTP, TP-EDDA and TP-BDDA having acetylene (−CC−) and diacetylene moieties (−CC–CC−) was reported.259 TP-BDDA showed a continuous hydrogen evolution at a rate of 324 ± 10 μmol h−1 g−1, whereas the hydrogen evolution rate for TP-DTP and TP-EDDA was 20 ± 5 μmol h−1 g−1 and 30 ± 5 μmol h−1 g−1, respectively. Higher hydrogen evolution rates for the case of TP-BDDA implies that the conjugated diacetylene moiety has an important role for enhanced activity. It was found that diacetylene moiety was responsible for the reduced bandgap, high charge career mobility, and facile migration of photogenerated excitons to the surface of the photocatalyst which was confirmed by photocurrent response measurements and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy analyses. A maximum AQE of 1.8% was obtained in TP-BDDA under the irradiation of 520 nm light. Wang et al. reported a crystalline COF based on a benzo-bis(benzothiophene sulfone) moiety (FS-COF) that showed an excellent hydrogen evolution rate up to 16.3 mmol g−1 h−1 under long-term visible irradiation in the presence of a sacrificial electron donor and 8 wt% Pt cocatalyst for at least 50 hours.268 The obtained AQE was 3.2% at 420 nm. The high quantum efficiency of FS-COF was attributed to its crystallinity, strong visible light absorption, and hydrophilic 3.2 nm mesopores.
Recently, a fully π conjugated COF (sp2 c-COF) has been synthesized for photocatalytic applications.288 The sp2 c-COF constitutes an all sp2 carbon-based tetragonal skeleton in which the conjugated 2D sheets stack to form an ordered layered structure that enables exciton migration over the framework which splits into charges at the donor–acceptor interface as demonstrated by photocurrent measurements. The π columns therefore offer a pathway for charge delocalization to prevent backward electron transfer. The sp2 c-COF has a bandgap of 1.9 eV with HOMO and LUMO levels suitable for water reduction, and is exceptionally stable in organic solvents, concentrated HCl solution, and aqueous NaOH solution (14 M). Moreover, the sp2 c-COF has a pore size of 2 nm that facilitate the trapping of Pt nanoparticles for a favourable interface between pore wall and reaction center. The sp2 c-COF is attributed with the mechanisms for light harvesting, exciton migration and splitting, electron transfer, and charge transport. Endowed with these beneficial properties, the sp2 c-COF exhibited a hydrogen evolution rate of 2120 μmol h−1 g−1 at λ ≥ 420 nm. Most notably, it is the only COF reported to date which showed some activity for oxygen evolution.
Research has also been directed toward developing earth-abundant, non-precious-metal-based co-catalysts in place of platinum to be incorporated with COFs to reduce the overpotential of H2 generation. However, coupling molecular co-catalysts into the COF while ensuring efficient light harvesting and charge-percolation processes is a great challenge. For the first time, cobaloxime co-catalysts (Co-1) have been incorporated with an azine-linked COF (N2-COF) for hydrogen evolution with an AQE of 0.027% under AM 1.5 illumination and, an AQE of 0.16% under 400 nm irradiation.285 The concern was the limited photostability whilst the catalyst often converts to an inactive form within a few hours (<6 h) of H2 evolution, possibly due to ligand decomposition or hydrogenation. Recently, a new type of cocatalyst based on a nickel–thiolate hexameric cluster was incorporated with thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole-linked COF (TpDTz-COF) as the photoabsorber in situ in water that enables long-term (70 h) H2 production in TpDTz COF at a maximum rate of 941 μmol h−1 g−1 with a maximum AQE of 0.2% at 400 nm.287 These AQE values are not impressive; however, they show the possibilities from thinking of cocatalysts beyond the commonly used Pt.
In those above reports on COF based photocatalysts, researchers have shown a tendency to compare their results with pristine g-C3N4 to claim that the reported COFs are better photocatalyst than g-C3N4. Actually, this is not the case (see ref. 7 for the latest developments in g-C3N4-based photocatalysts).7 We urge prospective authors to compare their photocatalysts in terms of quantum yield or solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency rather than hydrogen production rate. Additionally, the hydrogen production rate should not be normalized by the mass of the spent photocatalysts because the rate does not vary with the mass.12,15 For the case of carbon nitride based photocatalysts, the AQE reaches as high as 60% under visible light irradiation,206 while the COF-based photocatalysts are still struggling to overcome their inaugural AQE of 3.9%. Moreover, COFs have not yet proved active to produce H2 without an added electrocatalyst at the COF backbone. Clearly, carbon nitride based photocatalysts outweigh COFs in every aspect of synthesis, performance and stability. Therefore, the carbon nitride is more promising as a scalable photocatalyst for large-scale implementation of photocatalytic hydrogen production in the long-run.
Despite many beneficial attributes, the quantum efficiency of hydrogen yield in COFs is <4%. It infers that the plausibly beneficial physicochemical properties need to be well-orchestrated to maximize the H2 evolution efficiency. Further improvements in the photocatalytic efficiency might be achieved by an appropriate selection of building blocks and linkers for a custom made COF with controlled delocalization of the π-electron system both in the axial and in-plane direction. With this careful design, electron-rich terminal groups may facilitate the charge separation and possibly increase the excited-state lifetimes to maximize the charge separation and transport. Another avenue worth exploring is engineering the interfacial chemistry of COFs/sacrificial agents. Because COFs have not yet been observed to produce H2 without an added electrocatalyst, similarly, it also demands attention in optimization of the COF/electrocatalyst interface. Research needs to be carried out for the optimization of the kinetic overpotential associated with the charge-transfer and bond formation processes for H2 evolution in COFs. One recommended approach to accomplish this involves finding the dedicated catalytic reaction sites at the COF backbone. Currently, Pt is commonly use to trap electrons from the COFs, and to provides effective proton reduction sites for H2 formation. However, finding appropriate coordination sites for Pt on the COF backbone remains unexplored. Pt is the most celebrated cocatalyst because it is endowed with a large work function and a low Fermi level ideal for acting as an electron sink. However, platinum needs to be replaced with earth-abundant nonprecious cocatalysts. We also know little about how the pH and reaction environment affect the hydrogen evolution in COFs. Because the microstructure of the polymer, degree of its solvation, and polarity of solvent influence the charge transfer and thermodynamic driving forces for hydrogen evolution activity.289 Moreover, dielectric permittivity of solvent environment controls the population of polarons for proton reduction.290
10.2 Covalent triazine frameworks (CTFs)
CTFs are new class of metal-free photocatalysts that are endowed with the excellent stability of triazine based carbon nitrides and the functionalities of extended π-conjugated COFs. However, unlike carbon nitrides, CTFs are inherently micro-mesoporous. Although a considerable amount of research has been invested in developing different routes from high temperature to room temperature for synthesis of CTFs,165,291–295 the progress on CTF based photocatalysts was rather insignificant till 2016 evident by only few reports for hydrogen evolution.296–298 There are excellent reviews that cover the development of CTF-based photocatalysts up until 2016.251,252 We therefore limit our discussion to selected CTFs reported thereafter.206,257,258,299–302
Lotsch and co-workers made the early breakthroughs in CTF based photocatalysts,296 and reported an AQE of as high as ∼9.9% under UV-Vis light (>250 nm) irradiation.298 However, the AQE was <3.5% under visible light irradiation. To maximize the hydrogen quantum yield, CTF has been incorporated with donor–acceptor pairs and doping with heteroatoms.257,303 A series of heteroatom (N, S, O) doped CTFs (namely, CTF-N, CTF-S and CTF-O) was synthesized using fluorene analogue building blocks, Fig. 20a and b.300 The band gaps of CTF-N, CTF-S and CTF-O were calculated to be 2.17 eV, 2.47 eV and 2.67 eV, respectively. In these CTFs, the triazine rings can function as electron acceptors while the fluorene-like building blocks can act as electron donors. The benzene ring provides the bridge to transfer electrons from the donor to acceptor in a push–pull interaction. Under visible light irradiation, the excited electrons migrate from fluorene-like units (donor, blue part) to triazine rings (acceptor, green part), see Fig. 20c. Because of the narrow bandgap (extended spectral overlapping for light absorption) and better charge transfer, CTF-N exhibited an AQE value of 4.11% at 420 nm. While synthesis of CTFs is a time consuming (>20 h) process, Thomas et al. developed a technique to not only synthesize CTFs with a shorter reaction time (∼10 min), but also showed that these are highly active in hydrogen evolution as evident by an AQE of 9.2% at 450 nm.258 Cooper et al. reported the synthesis of an amorphous CTF (named as CTF-HUST) via polycondensation under mild conditions (≤120 °C, no strong acids) as opposed to the commonly used ionothermal route at high temperature and under harsh acidic conditions. CTF-HUSTs showed hydrogen evolution at a maximum rate of 2647 μmol h−1 g−1 under visible light.299
 Fig. 20  (a) Synthetic scheme of CTFs, (b) CP-MAS solid-state 13C-NMR and the digital photographs of corresponding CTFs, and (c) the path of excited electron transfer in donor–acceptor CTFs. Adopted with permission from ref. 300. Royal Society of Chemistry (2018). 
In addition to amorphous CTF-HUSTs, Tan et al. reported highly crystalline CTF-HUSTs by in situ oxidation of alcohols to aldehyde monomers.304 Crystalline CTF-HUSTs evolved hydrogen as a rate of up to 5100 μmol h−1 g−1 at 420 nm. Crystalline CTFs are comparably highly efficient than amorphous CTFs because of better electronic transport and light absorption. Research has been directed to investigate the impact of morphological features rather than structural changes. It was found that a hollow-spherical morphology of CTF could render a hydrogen evolution rate of 6040 μmol h−1 g−1 with an AQE of 4.2% at 420 nm, (see Fig. 21).305 These hollow-structures facilitate the mass transfer of guest molecules and guide the migration of photogenerated charges to enhance the collection and separation of charges on the interface.
 Fig. 21  (a) The synthetic routes of hollow CTF (CTF-HS) and bowl-like CTF (CTF-HB). (b) Reaction path. (c) Wavelength-dependent AQY for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. (d) Recycling hydrogen evolution tests with 3 wt% Pt deposited at 420 nm. Adopted with permission from ref. 305. Wiley-VCH (2019). 
In a plethora of CTF based hydrogen evolution photocatalysts, to date, only one CTF has demonstrated oxygen evolution; it was synthesized in a very mild microwave-assisted polymerization approach.306 This CTF demonstrated oxygen evolution with an AQE of nearly 4%, and hydrogen evolution with an AQE of 6% at 420 nm in the presence of sacrificial agents. This polymer holds potential for overall water splitting or to be integrated into a Z-scheme water splitting system. The performance is attributed to its well-defined and ordered structure, low carbonization, and superior band positions.
10.3 Conjugated microporous polymer (CMP)
IUPAC classified three types of porous materials according to pore size, namely, macroporous materials having pore sizes greater than 50 nm, mesoporous materials having pore sizes between 2 and 50 nm, and microporous materials having pore sizes less than 2 nm.307 The skeletons of microporous polymers are built up from organic matter connected by covalent bonds.308 Unlike crystalline COFs, CMPs bring their own set of issues because of the diverse synthetic concepts that range from metal catalyzed couplings to metal-free condensation reactions.309,310 The microporosity (pores of diameters below 2 nm) and high surface areas (>6000 m2 g−1)311 are the trademark properties of CMPs.312 The microporosity and high surface areas result from the polymerization of tectones (monomer building blocks) into the contorted molecular structures, and subsequent crosslinking of these contorted molecules. The contorted structures prohibit the space-efficient packing of polymers – therefore, creating a large free volume seen as microporosity, and the crosslinking of structures impede packing of the polymer backbone – resulting in high surface areas.309,312
The first CMPs were reported in 2007;313 however, CMP was not reported as a hydrogen evolution photocatalyst until 2015.263,314 In sharp contrast to crystalline COFs, CMPs are amorphous and show no long-range molecular order. However, this lack of order does not come as an obstacle to tune the micropore size distribution and surface area by varying the length of the rigid organic linkers as demonstrated for ordered crystalline materials.
It suggests that order is not a prerequisite for fine control over the microporous properties of organic networks. Most importantly, because CMPs are composed solely of carbon–carbon and carbon–hydrogen bonds, they are thermally more robust and chemically more stable than many COFs and MOFs.313,316 Additionally, CMPs, a subclass of hypercrosslinked polymers, may combine the well-known properties of conjugated linear polymers as well as incorporate a wide range of chemical functional groups to tune the physicochemical properties for desired applications. Moreover, linking of carbon atoms in a conjugated manner lends CMPs to the use of metal catalysis under relatively mild conditions.312 In particular, their synthesis lends itself to fine control over photophysical properties, such as the optical gap that is beneficial for photocatalytic water-splitting. Sprick et al. demonstrated CMPs, for the first time, as photocatalysts,263 and opened a new window of opportunities for systematic engineering and manipulation of the properties that are deemed essential to improve the photocatalytic efficiency of CMPs.
Sprick et al. used palladium-catalysed reactions route to prepare a series of 15 different CMPs from phenylene and pyrene building blocks (Fig. 22a). These polymers exhibited a red-shift in optical absorption as evident by decreasing bandgap from 2.95 eV to 1.94 eV with increasing the pyrene content. In addition to enabling low-energy optical excitations, the structural effects such as the formation of cyclic substructures (rings) and the strain within CMPs becomes more dominant as the pyrene component increases. The bandgaps are suitable for hydrogen evolution via water-splitting reactions under visible light irradiation. Indeed, all of the polymers promoted stable hydrogen evolution, and hydrogen evolution reaches a peak for CMPs with a bandgap of 2.33 eV (Fig. 22b). The lower photocatalytic activities of CMPs with smaller bandgaps were postulated to have enhanced recombination of separated charge carriers and increased kinetic barriers to electron transfer.
 Fig. 22  (a) Synthesis of 15 conjugated microporous polymers (CMP1 to CMP15) from a mixture of phenylene-containing (red) and pyrene-containing (blue) building blocks. (b) The optical bandgap and related rate of hydrogen evolution. Copyright 2015, Adopted with permission from ref. 315. Nature publishing Group (2018). 
Sprick's CMPs inspired other research groups to synthesize a series of microporous conjugated polymers through palladium-mediated polycondensation of chromophore monomers with biphenyl and bipyridyl comonomers. Chromophores enhance the light harvesting while comonomers provide better wettability, local ordering structure, and an improved charge separation process.317 The optical gap was shown to be tuned between 1.81 eV to 2.89 eV by varying the mole fraction of comonomers. The highest hydrogen production rate was ∼33 μmol h−1 at full-arc irradiation, while it was only ∼6.7 μmol h−1 with visible light (400 nm). The highest AQE was 0.34% at 350 nm. These results are an indication of the first demonstration of developing CMPs through copolymerization of a strong electron donor and weak electron acceptor in the same polymer chain. The rate of hydrogen production was further enhanced to 164 μmol h−1 with an AQE of 1.8% at 350 nm by loading 2 wt% of Pt cocatalyst in addition to the residual palladium that was present in the CMP network.
Other studies showed that copolymerizing the electron-withdrawing benzothiadiazole units at different positions on phenyl rings, various CMPs with defined energy-band structures and charge-transfer and charge-separation abilities could be obtained, and the effect of the molecular structure on their catalytic activity was investigated. These CMPs exhibited photocatalytic H2 evolution efficiencies up to 116 μmol h−1 with an AQE of 4.01% at 420 nm in the presence of TEoA as the sacrificial agent.319 Zhu et al. reported a series of CMPs from benzothiadiazole which had electron-donating CH3O– and electron-withdrawing F-substitutions which enable proton-coupled electron-transfer mechanisms. These CMPs showed H2 production with an AQE of 5.7% at 420 nm.320 Jiang and co-workers reported perylene-containing conjugated microporous polymers (PrCMPs) with a hydrogen evolution rate of 12.1 μmol h−1 under UV-Vis light irradiation.321
One common feature of the above discussed CMPs is their insolubility in water. Recently, water soluble dibenzo[b,d]thiophene sulfone polymers (S-CMPs) showed the highest hydrogen evolution rates of 6076 μmol h−1 g−1 (λ > 295 nm) and 3106 μmol h−1 g−1 (λ > 420 nm) with an AQE of 13.2% at 420 nm. It indicates that enhanced wettability of the material particles and its pores play a significant role in improving hydrogen evolution.267 An added candidate in this category is a newly developed CMP called PorFN, which was synthesized from a zinc–porphyrin core (Fig. 23a).318 Noted that porphyrins are the most famous derivatives of natural chlorophyll molecules with large π-conjugated macrocycles, and have a high absorbance coefficient and high degree of electron delocalization. Structurally, PorFN consists of four fluorene units connected at the meso-position via phenyl bridge groups. The π-conjugated PorFN is endowed with enhanced light absorption, electron-donating ability, and efficient charge generation and transport. Notably, PorFN showed a red emission peak at 625 nm, but completely quenched blue emission, implying it could efficiently transfer excitation energy from the fluorene arms to the porphyrin core. As per cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements, the unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level of PorFN is −0.74 V vs. the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE), which is suitable for HER (Fig. 23b). PorFN exhibited a hydrogen evolution rate of 10.8 mmol h−1 g−1 (≈TOF = 63 h−1) in simulated seawater (0.5 m NaCl, very close to the concentration of natural seawater) which was more than 50 times greater than that in pure water under 1 sun of sunlight irradiation (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). The light-driven hydrogen evolution activity of PorFN is shown in Fig. 23c–e. Interestingly, a donor (1,3,6,8-tetrabromopyrene)–acceptor (3,8-dibromophenanthroline) copolymerized CMP has been demonstrated for hydrogen evolution from deionized water, municipal water, commercial mineral water, and simulated seawater (NaCl 3 wt%).322 In the best case, it showed a hydrogen evolution rate of 42 μmol h−1 (equal to 4200 μmol g−1 h−1) with an AQE of 1.5% under visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 400 nm).
 Fig. 23  (a) Chemical structure of PorFN. (b) Energy level alignment of PorFN, chlorine ions, and TEOA at pH = 7. (c) Photocatalytic experiment results in presence of TEOA and Pt under simulated solar light (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). (d) Hydrogen evolution rate (HER) and corresponding turnover frequency (TOF). (e) Photocatalytic experiment in simulated seawater. Adopted with permission from ref. 318. Wiley-VCH (2019). 
High-efficiency CMP photocatalysts can also be made from dibenzothiophene-S,S-dioxide-based building blocks due to their planar molecular structure and strong electron-withdrawing ability.264,323,324 These photocatalyst features include a broad visible light adsorption ability, proper band gap, and efficient photogenerated electron and hole transport and separation capabilities. For example, Cooper et al. reported a family of photocatalysts produced from phenyl and dibenzothiophene-S,S-dioxide that showed a hydrogen evolution rate of 3.68 mmol h−1 g−1 with an AQE of 2.3% at 420 nm.22 Liu et al. demonstrated CMPs from fluorene and dibenzothiophene-S,S-dioxide that showed a hydrogen evolution rate of 5.04 mmol h−1 g−1 with an AQE of 2.13% at 420 nm.323 Jiang et al. reported CMPs made from dibenzothiophene-S,S-dioxide and a phenyl cross-linker with an impressive a hydrogen evolution rate of 9200 μmol h−1 g−1 with an AQE of 3.3% at 400 nm.324 Jiang et al. showed that a short-length phenyl cross-linker is the key for an improved hydrogen evolution rate. Peng et al. reported porphyrin-based CMPs that exhibited a photocatalytic H2 generation rate of 43 μmol h−1 with an AQE of 7.36% at λ = 400 nm (monochromatic light).325
More recently, it has been demonstrated that CMPs built with a donor–acceptor module by using pyrene as donor and dibenzothiophene-S,S-dioxide as an acceptor could exhibit an attractive rate of hydrogen evolution of 12986 μmol h−1 g−1 under the full-arc spectrum (>300 nm).326 Changing the substitution position of the dibenzothiophene-S,S-dioxide building block with pyrene linkers, two CMPs were synthesized, namely, thePyDOBT-1 photocatalyst with a 3,7-linking pattern that showed visible light activity with a HER rate of 8523 μmol h−1 g−1 compared to the 2,8-linked PyDOBT-2 (2650 μmol h−1 g−1), Fig. 24. It was claimed that high hydrogen production with the 3,7-linking pattern was because it could extend the conjugation degree and enhance the coplanarity of the polymer backbone, promoting photogenerated electron and hole migration along the polymer chain. Clearly, the linking pattern of the polymer skeleton plays a significant role in determining the photocatalytic performance of CMP photocatalysts. To date, the highest AQE for CMPs was reported to be 13.2% at 420 nm by Cooper et al.267
 Fig. 24  (a) Synthesis routes for PyDOBT-1 and PyDOBT-2, and (b) photocatalytic activities. Adopted with permission from ref. 326. American Chemical Society (2018). 
It should be noticed that Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions are the most celebrated technique for synthesizing carbon–carbon-linked porous polymers. However, it was argued that metal-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions are usually an expensive and unsustainable technique, and the resulted polymers are low in stability. Beyond the commonly used Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions, therefore, development of a metal-free-catalyzed carbon–carbon crosscoupling method is deemed necessary. Zhang et al.,327 recently, reported new types of olefin-bridged CMPs through the condensation of tricyanomesitylene with different linear or branched polyphenylenes using a metal-free-catalyzed carbon–carbon coupling method. An organic base-catalyzed Knoevenagel reaction was adopted to avoid possible transition-metal contamination. The synthesis scheme, optoelectronic properties and photocatalytic activities are shown in Fig. 25a–d, respectively. All of these CMPs showed hydrogen evolution activity under visible-light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) with the following order: OB-POP-1 < OB-POP-2 < OB-POP-4 < OB-POP-3 with an AQE up to 2.0% at 420 nm.
 Fig. 25  (a) Synthetic process of olefin-bridged porous organic polymers (OB-POPs), (b) UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) and photographs (inset) of prepared OB-POP-1–4, (c) OMO and LUMO band position of the polymers, and (d) wavelength-specific AQE on H2 evolution using Pt-modified OB-POP-3. Adopted with permission from ref. 327. Wiley-VCH (2017). 
CMPs are highly promising photocatalysts. To Achieve further improvement in the photocatalytic efficiency requires more research regarding these materials. In particular, we do not yet understand the complex interplay between optical gap, charge mobility, excited state lifetime, and other properties such as particle size, porosity, and surface hydrophilicity. This is compounded by the fact that there are relatively few mechanistic studies for these materials, and it is often unclear whether these polymers act as light absorbers, as catalysts, or as both. Most CMPs are rather hydrophobic and even float on water. How protons reach and are reduced on the CMP surface is not yet understood. The surface polarity of CMPs also needs to be considered.
10.4 Covalent phosphinine framework (CPF)
Hypothetically, incorporating non-metal heteroatoms (i.e. S, N, Si, P, etc.) into countless number of organic building blocks offers the possibility to fabricate numerous type of covalent organic frameworks with tailored optoelectronic properties. For example, covalent triazine-based frameworks (CTFs) and silicate organic frameworks (SiCOFs) are notable examples that incorporate S, N and Si.256,262 Recently, P has been incorporated to develop a new kind of organic framework and termed a Covalent Phosphinine Framework (CPF).261 A phosphinine (C5P)328 ring as the principle building block with the Pd-catalyzed Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction route has been used to design a π-conjugated CPF (see Fig. 26a).261 C5P contains either λ3-phosphinine (a trivalent phosphorus atom with a coordination number of 2) and λ5-phosphinine (a pentavalent phosphorus atom with a coordination number of 4). λ3-Phosphinine showed electrophilic attack or nucleophilic attack preferentially at the P atom.329 In contrast, λ5-phosphinine is more stable because of the absence of phosphorus lone pairs. However, λ5-phosphinine is susceptible to strong acids or bases that may attack the P atom during polymerization.330 Selection of appropriate phosphinine-based monomers and polymerization routes are of the utmost importance for yielding P-containing π-conjugated frameworks.
 Fig. 26  (a) Suzuki–Miyaura coupling polymerization route to CPF. (b) Solid-state UV/Vis diffuse reflectance spectrum of CPF, and (c) Kubelka–Munk plot for band gap determination. Adopted with permission from ref. 261. Wiley-VCH (2019). 
Electronically, λ5-phosphinine is flexible enough to lose an electron and be oxidized to a radical cation at a lower oxidation potential than the λ3-phosphinine.331 CPF exhibited an absorption edge at around 620 nm, which is equivalent to a direct optical band gap of 2.19 eV and an indirect optical band gap of 1.64 eV (see Fig. 26b and c). CPF was employed as a photocatalyst for hydrogen evolution under visible light (wavelength 380–780 nm) with triethanolamine as the sacrificial agent and 3 wt% Pt co-catalyst. It showed a hydrogen evolution rate of 29.3 μmol h−1 g−1 under UV and visible light (300–2500 nm).261
10.5 Linear conjugated polymers (LCPs)
Linear conjugated organic polymers are relatively less studied for light-driven water splitting. In contrast to CMPs, we here consider linear polymers that show no microporosity.
Cooper et al. reported a series of LCP is based on phenylene oligomers (SM1–SM5) and poly(p-phenylene)s (P1K, P1S) and their planarized fluorene-type analogs (FSM1–FSM3, P2–P7).264 Unlike amorphous CP-CMPs, all of these LCPs were found semi-crystalline. These LCPs showed an increasing hydrogen evolution rate with the decreasing optical gap. The FSM-type analogs exhibited a red-shift in optical absorption, and therefore a higher rate of hydrogen evolution than that of phenylene oligomers (SM1–SM5) and poly(p-phenylene)s (P1K, P1S). The ionization potentials for the fluorene oligomers are always more negative than those of the equivalent phenylene. Moreover, extended conjugation of phenylene oligomers (SM1–SM5) and poly(p-phenylene)s (P1K, P1S) with flourene offers several advantages. For example, it lowers the phenylene–phenylene torsion angle and increases rigidity, shows a higher degree of conjugation, decreases the Coulomb binding energy for dissociating electron–hole pairs and hence increases exciton dissociation yields, and increases charge carrier mobility.332,333 The low photocatalytic activity of these LCPs were attempted to be overcome by deploying co-polymerisation strategies. Because, copolymerization leads to an optimum trade-off between various properties under a specific set of catalytic conditions.334
Copolymerization was effective previously for CTFs and CMPs etc. Most notably, isostructural CTFs with 1,4-phenylene-linkers of different lengths resulted in higher hydrogen evolution activity than pristine CTFs.301 The hydrogen evolution activity of CMPs based on 1,2,4,5-connected benzene and 1,3,6,8-pyrene cores was enhance by linking with 1,4-connected phenylene linkers upon changing the phenylene fraction.263 Based on these previous successes, the effect of co-polymerisation on the hydrogen evolution activity for structurally well-defined linear ordered co-polymers of 2,5-phenylene and 2,5-thiophene building blocks (Fig. 27) was studied recently.335 Although phenylene homo-polymers as photocatalysts have been used since the mid-1980s,253 polythiophene was a recent addition to the photocatalyst family.336 Interestingly, all of the co-polymers were more active than the two homopolymers, and a maximum hydrogen evolution was observed for a co-polymer with 33 mol% thiophene content. DFT calculations revealed that the potentials of the free charge carriers and excitons in the different co-polymers increased while the driving force for the reduction of protons to hydrogen and the oxidation of sacrificial electron donors (or water) decreased significantly with increased thiophene content.301
 Fig. 27  (a) Structures of the polymer photocatalysts; (b) photographs of P1, P11–P17 in THF suspension; (c) UV-Vis reflectance spectra of P1, and P11–P17 in the solid-state; (d) photocatalytic hydrogen evolution of P1, and P11–P17. Adopted with permission from ref. 301. Royal Society of Chemistry (2018). 
Incorporating nitrogen heteroatoms in those LCPs also resulted in a better control over the driving forces for redox reactions. Consequently, LCPs exhibited a significantly increased photocatalytic performance with an AQE of 6.7% at 420 nm.337 In contrast to electron-poor heteroatoms (i.e. nitrogen), incorporation of electron-rich heteroatom monomers shows a decrease in the photocatalytic performance. Electron-rich monomer led to a red-shift in the optical gap, however, the associated reduction in driving force for sacrificial electron donor oxidation counteracts the potential gains in photocatalytic activity. Recently, a new series of LCPs exhibited hydrogen evolution with external quantum efficiencies between 0.4 and 11.6%.289 This study also investigated the influence of solvent. It was suggested that the localization of water around the polymer chain is crucial, and concluded that the polar solvent led to the production of long-lived electrons in these amphiphilic polymers for improved hydrogen evolution.
π-Conjugated polymer nanostructures (CPNs) have emerged as a new class of photocatalysts.116–118 Polypyrrole nanostructures (PPy NSs) modified with mono- and bimetallic nanoparticles of Pt, Ni, NiO exhibited photocatalytic hydrogen evolution.118 Photocatalytic activity of PPy NSs was shown sensitive to the metal loading. For example, 0.2% Pt–PPy-NSs resulted in superior activity. Modification with nickel-based nanoparticles (5% Ni–PPy-NSs) forms heterojunction for enhanced the photocatalytic performance. However, Ni leaching led to a degraded the photocatalytic activity with time. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) is a promising CPN. It has a bandgap of 1.69 eV and was demonstrated for photocatalytic water treatment without the assistance of sacrificial reagents or noble metal co-catalysts.117 These results are very impressive to explore its potential for photocatalytic hydrogen production from water.
10.6 Conjugated polymer dots (CPDs)
Polymer dots (Pdots) are derivatives of polymeric micelles with size in the range of 1–100 nm. Pdots have attracted significant attention because of its facile synthetic methods, tunable optical gaps, tunable particle size and surface hydrophilicity, relatively long excited state lifetimes etc. In particular, Pdots, owing to their large π-conjugated structures with overlapping p-orbital clouds, facilitate the free movement of electrons within the polymer backbone through tunnelling, hopping, or other related mechanisms.338,339 These attributes are desirable for a photocatalyst. Nanoprecipitation, mini-emulsion and self-assembly are the frequently used methods to prepare Pdots. The nanoprecipitation method uses miscible organic solvents, whereas mini-emulsion method employs immiscible organic solvents. Notably, the physical size of Pdots depends on the methods used to prepare them.339
Compared with traditional organic small molecules, semiconductor quantum dots and inorganic nanomaterials, Pdots exhibit a higher extinction coefficient, better photostability and chemical stability.340 Additionally, Pdots often have different reactive functional groups on their surface that can provide a platform to construct multifunctional and hybrid nanomaterials when conjugated with different chemical and biological molecules.341 Importantly, compared with inorganic nanoparticles of heavy metals and semiconductors, the Pdots are biocompatible because of hydrophobic π-conjugate backbone and amphiphilic polymer matrixes, and therefore Pdots are not toxic like heavy metals.341,342 Pdots are being widely used in imaging, as chemical sensors and in phototherapy.343,344 They are now also being used as a photocatalyst to produce hydrogen.345–348
Inspired by the beneficial properties, Tian et al. reported water-soluble Pdots based on the conjugated polymer PFBT (Fig. 28) for photocatalytic hydrogen generation that showed a hydrogen generation rate of 8.3 ± 0.2 mmol h−1 g−1 at λ > 420 nm with an AQE of 0.5% at 445 nm.347 One interesting aspect about PFBT Pdots is their resistance to evolved oxygen. Oxygen is an inevitable byproduct in water splitting that may act as an inhibitor to proton reduction reactions.349 Therefore, an oxygen-resistant catalyst is the key for sustainable hydrogen production.
 Fig. 28  Synthesis route for PFBT Pdots, and hypothetical diagram for hydrogen evolution reaction. Adopted with permission from ref. 347. Wiley-VCH (2016). 
Following the reports of PFBT Pdots, a few other Pdots have been recently reported for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution.345,346,348 Although, there is not much progress noticed in terms of quantum yield of hydrogen, Pdots are an important inclusion in the family of metal-free photocatalyst with much promise. One common feature of all of these reported Pdots are their effective extended absorption edge beyond 500 nm. This is highly desirable for harvesting low energy photons. Some Pdots are even active in harvesting photons up to 700 nm,110 and can produce hydrogen in the absence of any organic solvent or co-catalyst.345,348 Below is the state of the art progress related to Pdots as a hydrogen evolution photocatalyst (Table 2).
Table 2 Activity of recently reported polymer dots (Pdots) for sacrificial hydrogen evolution under visible light irradiation




Pdots
HER (mmol g−1 h−1) at >420 nm
AQE (%)
Ref.




Hyperbranched
0.84
0.9 at 500 nm

345



Cycloplatinized
12.7
0.4 at 515 nm

346



PFBT
8.3
0.5 at 445 nm

347



PFODTBT
50.0
0.6 at 550 nm

348





10.7 Organic heterojunction photocatalysts
Efficient charge separation and suppression of charge carriers are the rate determining fundamental steps for high efficiency hydrogen production. In fact, hydrogen evolution is proportional to the number of free electrons available in reaction sites.33,168 Among many other strategies to enhance the hydrogen evolution in a photocatalyst, efficient charge separation and transport is the most recommended one regardless of the material (i.e. crystallinity, optical, electronic properties etc.) and chemical aspects (i.e. inorganic, organic, diffusion, mass transport etc.) of the photocatalyst.169,190
A photocatalyst can sometimes suffer from a high recombination rate and poor charge separation. This problem can be overcome to a large extent by connecting two or more appropriate materials in the form of a heterojunction. Because of the band-offsets between two heterogeneous materials, it provides space for delocalization of photogenerated electrons and holes, thus avoiding recombination. Therefore, heterojunctions are the most frequently used technique to boost photocatalytic performance.33 However, only a few polymeric heterojunctions beyond carbon nitride have been reported thus far.350 Here, we discuss polymer heterojunctions beyond carbon nitride.
Bojdys et al. reported the twinned growth of a 2D/3D van der Waals (vdW) heterostructure on a copper substrate by combining a sp2 hybridized and crystalline 2D covalent triazine-based framework (TzF) with a sp2–sp hybridized and amorphous 3D triazine-based graphdiyene (TzG), Fig. 29a. This 2D/3D vdW heterostructure features promising structural motifs, such as open, porous structure and an intriguing donor–acceptor (D–A) motif having electron rich buta-1,3-diyene (D) and electron poor triazines (A). These are interesting properties for photocatalytic water splitting, and open opportunities to fabricate conjugated heterostructure by incorporating different graphdiyne, a new two-dimensional (2D) carbon with unique sp–sp2 carbon atoms, uniform pores, and highly pi-conjugated structure.351–354 This mixed dimensional heterostructure evolved hydrogen at a rate of 34 μmol h−1 g−1 without a noble metal cocatalyst.256 Despite a low hydrogen evolution rate, Bojdys et al. demonstrated a wet chemical approach in preparation of this 2D/3D vdW heterostructure in contrast to commonly used techniques, such as chemical (CVD) and physical vapor deposition (PVD) processes for preparation of 2D materials and their heterostructures.
 Fig. 29  (a) Plot of orbital coefficients for the frontier orbitals of 3D TzG (left) and 2D TzF (right) as derived from DFT calculations. The relative locations of HOMO and LUMO for the TzF/TzG heterojunction (type I) are shown in the center with the redox potential of water indicated at pH 0 and 7. Adopted with permission from ref. 256. Wiley-VCH (2017). (b) Sequential polymerization strategy toward covalently connected CTF-BT/Th. Adopted with permission from ref. 302. Wiley-VCH (2019). 
However, CVD and PVD have synthetic limits that includes uncontrolled nucleation events that limit the homogeneity and size of the crystalline domains of the obtained materials. More importantly, vapor deposition techniques are incompatible with a majority of organic synthetic molecules. It is also difficult to predict bonding patterns for speculated materials, which may require complex postsynthetic treatment to obtain the desired materials.355
Very recently, Li et al. reported a molecular heterostructure created via incorporation of benzothiadiazole (BT) and thiophene (Th) functionalities into a CTF as electron-withdrawing and electron-donating units, respectively, by the sequential polymerization of their nitrile precursors, Fig. 29b.302 Because of efficient charge-carrier-separation, it exhibited a hydrogen production rate of 6600 μmol h−1 g−1 with an AQE of 7.3% at 420 nm. This represents remarkable hydrogen evolution among the triazine-based polymer photocatalysts.
There are a large number of polymer photocatalysts that exist. Among the large pool of materials, researchers need to develop synthesis routes for creating more heterojunction photocatalysts.
10.8 Overall water-splitting with organic photocatalysts
Releasing hydrogen from water involves two simultaneous reactions, namely oxidation and reduction reactions. Research has pretty much progressed in realizing one of these two reactions while suppressing the other in the presence of appropriate sacrificial agents. However, there are very few successes in accommodating both of these reactions in fulfilling the ultimate target of overall water-splitting into its constituents, hydrogen and oxygen.356 Unfortunately, progress in overall water-splitting is rather insignificant, particularly, on polymeric based photocatalysts. The most challenging part of realizing direct water-splitting is the four-electron pathway involved in water-oxidation.
Xu et al. demonstrated overall water-splitting on CMPs nanosheets prepared by oxidative coupling of 1,3,5-tris-(4-ethynylphenyl)-benzene (TEPB) and 1,3,5-triethynylbenzene (TEB). These photocatalysts exhibited photocatalytic splitting of pure water (pH ≈ 7) into stoichiometric amounts of H2 and O2 with an AQE of 10.3% for TEPB and 7.6% for TEB at 420 nm, Fig. 30. The solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency of PTEPB and PTEB were 0.60% and 0.31%, respectively using the full solar spectrum. They also demonstrated a Z-scheme systems for overall water splitting using van der Waals heterostructures formed between nanosheets of aza-fused CMP and C2N with a STH value of 0.23% which was further increased to 0.40% using reduced graphene oxide as the solid electron mediator.357 The success behind this lies in the efficient charge separation and transport of photogenerated excitons by virtue of band alignment via heterostructuring.
 Fig. 30  Synthesis and overall water-splitting on (a) PTEPB and (b) PTEB. Adopted with permission from ref. 358. Wiley-VCH (2017). 
Among the metal-free photocatalysts, the best STH value (∼2%) in overall water-splitting under visible light was reported for metal-free CDots/C3N4.223 In contrast to the four-electron pathway, however, the overall water-splitting on CDots/C3N4 proceeded via a stepwise two-electron/two-electron process, in which H2O oxidized into H2O2 was the first step followed by dissociation of H2O2 into H2 and O2 in the second step.
10.9 Role of Pd in proton reduction reactions in polymeric photocatalysts
Linear and cross-linked conjugated polymer photocatalysts exhibited H2 evolution under visible light irradiation without any added co-catalyst at a rate comparable to that of graphitic carbon nitride with added Pt cocatalyst.263 These polymer photocatalysts are therefore attractive for cost-effective hydrogen production. However, a relatively unexplored feature of these linear and cross-linked conjugated polymers is the presence of residual Pd originating from their synthesis via Pd catalyzed polycondensation reactions, which could work as a built-in cocatalyst.263,266,317,359
Recent studies reported that the Pd catalysts used in these reactions could turn into particles via aggregation and subsequent Ostwald ripening. Metallic Pd0 cannot be removed completely from the polymer matrix using classical purification techniques.360–362 It is well-known that similar to Pt0, Pd0 is a highly active proton reduction electrocatalyst.363,364 Expectedly, the dispersed residual Pd within these polymer structures plays a significant role in H2 evolution. However, there are conflicting views in the literature in this regard. There are studies where it has been shown that there is no correlation between Pd concentration and the hydrogen evolution reaction rate for a range of CMPs,21 and in a series of LCPs containing the 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole (BT) unit.348 In those exemplary cases, it was concluded that it was not residual Pd but H-bonding from water to the N atoms on this unit that facilitated the proton reduction reaction. In contrast, a dependency of HER rate on Pd content was observed in COFs.24 However, it was argued that varying the Pd catalyst loadings might alter the network's microstructure of the polymer due to a different degree of polymerization. An unambiguous conclusion was not possible to make whether these structural changes or the residual Pd had affected the HER rate. An added problem is that the reduction of Pd mass concentration below 400 ppm (0.04 wt%) in the cross-linked structure of the polymer is difficult. Therefore, it remains a mystery whether these conjugated polymers could drive the HER without Pd or if Pd is the driving force behind accelerated HER rates.365
In a more recent study on Pd catalyzed poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-alt-benzothiadiazole) (F8BT) systems, it was concluded that Pd was essential for any observable H2 evolution.366 Based on transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS) experiments, it showed that electron transfer to protons in the aqueous phase was impeded as the Pd content was reduced. Eventually, it was reported that very low Pd concentrations (<40 ppm) were sufficient to enhance the hydrogen evolution reaction which increases linearly with increasing Pd concentration from <1 ppm to approximately 100 ppm, after which the rate begins to saturate.
Despite these studies, more intense investigations need to be carried out to clearly answer the question regarding whether conjugated polymer systems are intrinsically able to drive photocatalytic H2 production or whether they require a co-catalyst, i.e., Pd to drive the proton reduction reaction.
10.10 Screening and developing high-throughput and high efficiency polymer photocatalysts
Arguably, hydrogen production through photoreduction of water on polymer photocatalysts can be traced back to 1990.253,367,368 Since then quite a few polymeric photocatalysts have been developed for solar hydrogen production. We are yet to find a conjugate polymer photocatalyst with comparable performance to that of inorganic counter parts. However, the reported photocatalysts are only a tiny fraction out of the possible chemical space for polymer photocatalysts. Given the available large pool of monomers, reaction pathways, and reaction conditions, the number of possible photocatalysts seems literally infinite.
It makes us optimistic that by a careful combination of these variables, we may find highly efficient organic photocatalysts. High-throughput screening of many diverse co-polymers, reduce the near impossible task of sorting out the suitable polymers from an appropriate combination and permutation of variables, however, artificial intelligence could be involved in a similar way to assist in sorting out the expected data from existing data banks. Recently, an integrated computational and experimental high-throughput approach for the screening of linear polymers as hydrogen evolution photocatalysts has been reported.269 This integrated system was based on significant methodological development in computation, robotics, and automation, see Fig. 31.
 Fig. 31  (a) Conceptual frameworks. (b) Workflow for high-throughput synthesis and property screening of the conjugated polymer library. (c) Prediction and comparison of optoelectronic properties for hydrogen evolution. Adopted with permission from ref. 269. American Chemical Society (2019). 
This approach was exploited to rapidly sample chemical space and to identify high-activity photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution. Incredibly, a library of 706 candidate dibromo monomers and 9 diboronic acid/acid esters (6354 candidate co-polymers in total) was screened computationally, which explored structure–property relationships for families of closely related structures. Out of 6354 candidate co-polymers, more than 170 co-polymers were prepared and tested experimentally under photocatalytic conditions. A machine-learning model was used to predict and compare the HER, and correlate the HER with individual electronic properties of the polymer and how well it disperses in the reaction mixture.
Significantly, this data-driven approach will facilitate the development of the best-performing polymer photocatalysts in the future.
11. Limiting factors to the enhance quantum efficiency of hydrogen evolution
Three key dynamic processes, i.e., photophysical, photochemical and electrochemical processes need to be optimized for enhanced water-splitting.
A mechanistic understanding of how optical excitation contributes to the photogeneration of charge carriers is necessary for harvesting photons, and limiting the photogeneration at recombination active sites. There is clearly a lack of substantial systematic research endeavors for understanding this for the case of metal-free photocatalysts. In this regard, research therefore needs to focus on the analysis of the internal quantum efficiency as a function of photon energy to determine (i) the Coulombic binding and separation of the electron–hole pairs, (ii) the value of the band gap energy, and (iii) what fraction of photo-excitations can fully be separated for a given photon energy. Transient absorption spectroscopy and Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD) Simulations would be useful tools to investigate these phenomena.189
11.1 Improving charge transport
Light induced photodecomposition of water into H2 and O2 molecules relies on the separation of excited state electron–hole pairs and the subsequent transfer of charge carrier to the relevant redox couples. The typical excited state lifetimes are in the range of 1–100 ps.369 Unless separated within this time frame, the excited state electron–hole pairs undergo recombination with the release of captured light energy as heat or emission of a photon. It is therefore required that electron should be scavenged before the absorption of subsequent photons to sustain a multi-electron photo-redox reaction. Otherwise, the extraction of charges becomes more difficult, and imposes a limit to photocatalytic efficiency.
Most of the metal-free photocatalysts are low mobility materials, in which the kinetics of non-geminate recombination is strongly linked to the motion of charges. Additionally, these materials possess a significant disorder that could lead to unavoidable thermalization of photogenerated carriers in the heterogeneously broadened density of state distribution. Despite its general importance, knowledge about the kinetics of non-geminate recombination is not yet understood comprehensively. Researchers may employ time delayed collection field (TDCF) experiments to study the recombination of photogenerated charge on these materials.
Whether the recombination is dominant over the extraction or vice versa depends on a complex interplay among the effects of film thickness, charge transport, recombination strength and light intensity. A complete and systematic understanding of the interplay of all these factors will translate into significant improvements in the power-conversion efficiency. However, such understanding is still lacking. Detailed knowledge of the competition between charge extraction and recombination should be sought through combined time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL), transient absorption (TAS), surface photo-voltage spectroscopy, and optical pump terahertz-probe spectroscopy experiments.
It is also recommended that research be extended to understand multi-photon/electron processes that involved binding singlet fission (SF)370 and triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA-UC)371 molecules. These SF and TTA-UC processes can act as a charge separation interface. With SF and TTA-UC, a theoretical solar conversion efficiency can be increased from 33% to 48%.372,373
11.2 Understanding of sub-particle reaction mechanisms
Traditional approaches overlook inherent differences between the individual particles that make up a bulk material. It is to be noted that solid catalytic materials, even seemingly perfect crystals, contain atomic-scale imperfections at surfaces at which the reactions occur.374 Therefore, understanding of sub-particle reaction mechanisms is necessary for probing the nanoscale electrochemical efficiency and redox reactivity of photocatalysts. We therefore need a method of ‘filming’ single catalytic events in real time on a solid crystal, allowing catalytic activity to be mapped over its whole surface.375 This can be accomplished by using high-resolution fluorescence microscopy to observe a catalytic crystal at work in liquid-phase reactions.374 This approach will enable monitoring of single catalytic events in real time by observing a ‘reporter’ molecule that becomes fluorescent only after catalytic action, and this may thus beautifully map the spatial distribution of active sites over a single catalytic crystal.
By doing so, it will also be able to analyse the number of electrons that could be withdrawn from the photocatalyst as different parts of it will be selectively illuminated. From these measurements, it will be able to deduce the efficiency with which an absorbed photon at a certain location gives rise to redox reactions or to an unwanted electron–hole recombination.
11.3 Rational engineering of catalyst-cocatalyst duo for improved operation
Minimizing the amount of photocatalyst and co-catalyst is essential not only to reduce costs, but also because co-catalysts compete for photons by scattering or absorbing them.376 It should be achieved by identifying the oxidation and reduction hotspots to selectively deposit the oxygen/hydrogen evolution cocatalysts at hotspots or at regions with intrinsically low activity. These regions are currently not well-understood by researchers. The mapping of the locations of single oxidation and reduction reactions at the catalyst surface with nanometre-scale precision by using fluorogenic reactants may provide useful information.377
11.4 Improving electrocatalytic performance of a photocatalyst
The final step in water-splitting involves electrocatalytic reduction of proton and oxidation of water. Therefore, a photocatalyst should be endowed with electrocatalyst-like properties too. Enhanced HER and OER thus require the improvement of the electrocatalytic properties of a metal-free photocatalyst in terms of activity, selectivity, and durability to be comparable and compatible with that of high efficiency metal counterparts. The rational design of catalysts should be followed by in-depth understanding of the electrocatalytic reaction mechanisms involved at the molecular level through fundamental and theoretical studies of model catalysts using in situ, ex situ and operando techniques.
The electrocatalytic performance of a photocatalyst toward specific reactions is described through measuring current density (j0), overpotential (η), Tafel slope and so on. For example, the magnitude of j0 is indicative of the intrinsic charge transfer rate between an OER electrocatalyst and the reactant intermediates. The Tafel slope evaluates the relationship between j and η, as such a smaller Tafel slope means a faster reaction rate constant (i.e., a faster increase in j with a smaller change in η).
In particular, of the change in η required to produce a j of 10 mA cm−2 is a commonly used parameter for comparing the performance of various electrocatalysts.363 The geometry of the catalyst, its chemical composition and its electronic structure govern a specific reaction process.379 Toward this end, DFT would be an essential tool for defining the adsorption energies, reaction thermodynamics and activation barriers, as well as accurate identification of the active sites on the surfaces of solid catalysts.363 Unravelling the origin of reactivity should comprehensively be related to the experimentally measured specific reaction rate descriptors, for example, exchange current (i0) and turnover frequency, and the resultant activity trend (that is, volcano plot). Combined theoretical and experimental studies are therefore necessary to establish a qualitative argument with defined quantitative data to tune the materials to achieve the best catalytic activities.363,379
One of the most commonly used techniques is doping heteroatoms to tune the electro-chemical properties of the catalyst with tailored electronic properties and surface chemistry. Doping induces charge redistribution around the dopants and enhances the charge transfer process via a synergistic coupling effect. For example, it has been shown that heteroatom doped (e.g., N and S) graphene nanostructures can efficiently adjust the electron-donor properties and electrocatalytic activity of neighbouring C atoms that lead to a downshift in the valence bands of active C atoms. Heteroatom doping enhances favourable H* adsorption–desorption ability from graphene. As a result, dual-dopant doped graphene exhibits enhanced HER activity with a low onset potential and high exchange current, Fig. 32.378
 Fig. 32  (a) Atomic configurations of three dual-doped graphene. (b) The three-state free energy diagram for the pure, single- and dual-doped graphene models. (c) Polarization curves. (d) Tafel slopes. (e) Exchange current. (f) Volcano plots. Adopted with permission from ref. 378. Nature Publishing group (2016). 
Forming heterostructure/hybrid-structure between two heterogeneous materials is another widely practiced strategy to deal with charge transfer for achieving better electrocatalytic performance. For example, a hybrid structure of g-C3N4 and CNT was shown to exhibit improved electrochemical OER activities compared with the IrO2 benchmark electrocatalyst.380 Electrostatic interactions and π–π stacking of exfoliated g-C3N4 nanosheets and carbon structures were shown to cause positive charge density on the nearby sp2-hybridized C atoms that favoured the adsorption of OH−, facilitated the electron transport between the reaction intermediates and catalyst surface, and consequently improved the electrochemical OER.
The overall reaction kinetics of the HER are largely determined by the Gibbs free energy of hydrogen adsorption, . Hydrogen adsorption is too weak if , while it is too strong if .382 Both of these extreme cases may result in a poor apparent HER activity. Therefore, to make a trade-off between these values, a volcano shaped plot was developed by correlating the experimentally measured j0 and the computed .363 Such a relationship is beneficial in demonstrating the trend of HER activities. Recently, taking into account the excessive affinity of g-C3N4 nanosheets to adsorption of H* and very weak H* adsorption of N-doped graphene, a hybrid structure between g-C3N4 and N-doped graphene was demonstrated for better hydrogen evolution that is comparable to a commercial Pt/C catalyst.381 The synergetic action between g-C3N4 and N-doped graphene induced moderate adsorption–desorption behavior of hydrogen on the surface of the hybrid that resulted in overall improved hydrogen evolution kinetics, Fig. 33.
 Fig. 33  (a) N K-edge NEXAFS spectrum of g-C3N4 and C3N4@NG. (b) Interfacial electron transfer in C3N4@NG. (c) Simulated free-energy diagram at equilibrium potential. (d) Comparison of HER activities. Adopted with permission from ref. 381 Nature Publishing Group (2014). 
12. Scaling up photocatalytic system for large-scale implementation
The hydrogen based economy will only become a reality if it can be produced at scale. Globally, countries will only transition their economies to hydrogen if the volumes of hydrogen needed to do so are achievable, available and, in the long term, at price parity with other forms of fuel. Therefore, getting to scale will be a major endeavour.
The United States Department of Energy set a goal of achieving a cost of 2.00–4.00 USD kg−1 H2 by 2020 at daily AM 1.5G irradiation for 7.6 h (corresponding to 240 W m−2). The associated constraints are a photocatalytic reaction system with an STH of 10%, a lifetime of 10 years, an annual depreciation rate of 4%, and an allowable cost of 102 USD m−2.383–385
We therefore have to focus on improving the intrinsic factors of a photocatalyst (i.e., extending the spectral range of visible light absorption, enhancing photogenerated charge separation and transport, and facilitating the hydrogen and oxygen production reactions, stability etc.) to meet the external requirements (AQE, STH, modular level implementation etc.)
12.1 Performing reliable photocatalytic test and accurate reporting of hydrogen evolution and AQE
For reproducibility and benchmarking, reliable reporting of hydrogen production rate and apparent quantum yield is highly important. We recommend using AQE and/or STH values at specific wavelengths rather than gas evolution rates to compare the photocatalysts. Because gas evolution varies depending on the experimental conditions used. The gas evolution rates should be used to find the H2/O2 molar ratios to determine whether the process is an overall water-splitting or sacrificial reaction.
In the authors’ opinion, reporting the hydrogen evolution rate per gram of catalyst used (i.e. mol h−1 g−1) is misleading to justify the photonic efficiency of a given photocatalyst. Because, up to a certain limit, the hydrogen evolution rate might be proportional to a linear increase of the amount of photocatalyst. However, light absorption becomes saturated after an optimal amount of photocatalyst, Fig. 34.386 Therefore, it is recommended to report the optimal rate of hydrogen evolution (i.e. mol h−1) independent of the amount of photocatalyst used.12,386–388 The hydrogen evolution rate needs to be checked by varying the amount of photocatalyst to find out the optimal amount of photocatalyst.
 Fig. 34  Influence of amount of photocatalyst on the rate of gas evolution. Adopted with permission from ref. 386. American Chemical Society (2017). 
A report of hydrogen production rate and apparent quantum yield should be accompanied with the type of reactor used (internal or external irradiation photocatalytic reactors), intensity of light source, wavelength of light, mass of the photocatalyst, and absence/presence of sacrificial agents and cocatalyst(s). A photocatalyst suspended in an internal irradiation type reactor usually gives greater gas evolution rates than an external type because of the close proximity to the light source. However, light-intensity distribution and irradiation area are irregular in an internal type reactor. Therefore, precise determination of the wavelength dependent hydrogen evolution and AQE is difficult. The external irradiation type reactor is better suited in this case. Care must be taken to ensure that the reactor is perfectly sealed or the reaction is performed under vacuum or under a flow of inert gas to avoid the intrusion of ambient air to avoid incorrect estimation of the evolved gases. It is typically done by degassing the reaction solution completely through inert gas flow. At the same time, the gas chromatograph must be carefully calibrated using standard gases to quantify the amount of evolved gas. If N2 is detected in the gas chromatograph, it is an indication that the reaction solution was intruded by ambient air or inadequate removal of dissolved air. N2 detection in the case of (oxy)nitride photocatalysts represent the self-oxidation of the photocatalyst. For either cases, N2 evolution is not welcome in water-splitting reactions.
To confirm that hydrogen/oxygen are evolved solely through photocatalytic reactions, it is recommended to test if the (i) catalytic reactions proceed in the dark, (ii) if evolved amounts of gases increase linearly with the irradiation time, and (iii) turnover number is greater than the quantity of hydrogen present within the catalyst. In overall water splitting, H2 and O2 should be evolved with a stoichiometric ratio of 2:1 during the whole course of the catalytic reaction or past the induction period of some of the photocatalysts under light irradiation. In sacrificial hydrogen production, evolved hydrogen must be greater in quantity than the molar quantity of hydrogen (if any) present in the chemical structure of the photocatalyst. Otherwise, it represents the self-decomposition of the photocatalyst with or without proton reduction. In sacrificial oxygen evolution, it is recommended to use the oxygen isotope (i.e., 18O-labelled water, for example) to confirm that oxygen is evolved solely through water oxidation and not from other oxygen-containing sources.
There is some confusion regarding the reporting of AQE or STH. In sacrificial hydrogen evolution, for example, AQE should represent the efficiency of the hydrogen evolution photocatalyst. However, STH values should report the measure of the efficiency of overall water-splitting. It is because the calculation of STH requires use of the value of the Gibb's free energy as one of the parameters. Gibb's free energy represents the amount of energy required to decompose the H2O into H2 and O2 in a stoichiometric ratio. It means that if O2 is not generated as the product of H2O oxidation, which is true for sacrificial hydrogen evolution, the Gibb's free energy should not be used. In the calculation of the Gibb's free energy, the reaction temperature and pressure should be taken into account. To be compatible with universally standard practice, the STH value should be obtained under one sun (one sun is commonly used to report solar cell efficiency).
12.2 Design of modular photocatalyst system
Particulate photocatalysts suspended in aqueous solution are commonly used for water splitting. However, using laboratory-scale particle suspension systems limits the scalability of water splitting. Its large-scale deployment in industrial settings is a big problem. In particular, dispersing a large amount of particulate photocatalysts in a large amount of water and keeping it near homogenously suspended to avoid precipitation is a grand challenge. The added problem is the separation and collection of the photocatalyst powder from the suspension for further use, and tracking the movement of the sun in practical application. Therefore, design of a modular photocatalyst is urgently necessary for scaling up. One approach might be to deposit photocatalyst powders onto a specific substrate of specific size and dimension. As such, shallow horizontal pools or beds consisting of reactant solution and a panel-type photocatalyst would be a potential reactor for large-scale water splitting.
13. Conclusions and future perspective
In this contribution, we have reviewed the latest progress in metal-free photocatalysts for hydrogen production from water. For convenience, we have categorized the various metal-free photocatalysts into four types: elemental, binary compounds, ternary compounds and organic photocatalysts.
It is evident from current research that among the metal-free photocatalysts, carbon nitride is the most celebrated photocatalyst with AQE values greater than 60%. Carbon nitride therefore holds true promise as a next generation photocatalyst in terms of scalability, stability and selectivity. In contrast, development of elemental and organic photocatalysts is still in a nascent stage. Intensive research needs to be carried out to optimize their bulk and interfacial charge separation and transport, and electrochemical redox reactions for enhanced quantum efficiency with stable operation for long period of time.
Tuning crystal morphologies and structural features at the nanometer level would endow beneficial physicochemical properties for enhanced photocatalytic performance of nanostructured photocatalysts. Because of readily accessible and interconnected porous networks and high specific surface areas, nanostructured photocatalysts facilitate efficient light harvesting and kinetics of charge transport, adsorption of reactants, and transport of guest species to the active sites. These synergetic effects lead to significant enhancement of the photocatalytic performance. Although a great deal of research has invested in studying different nanostructures of carbon nitride, more intense research need to be warranted for other genre of metal-free photocatalysts to pin-point the structure–property relationship and their confluence on catalytic performance.
Of particular interest is organic photocatalysts for which little is known about the underlying photophysics and surface processes when immersed in an aqueous medium with or without sacrificial agents. Additionally, a well-founded and detailed understanding of the mechanism of exciton dissociation and its dependence on material parameters is still missing for polymeric photocatalysts. To promote exciton dissociation, incorporating a donor–acceptor (D–A) system may be employed.389 The liberated excess energy during the transfer of the excited donor electron to the acceptor aids in complete dissociation of the excitons.333 Exciton delocalization, as well as interfacial dipoles may also be conducive to exciton dissociation.390,391
The widely used selling point of porous conjugate polymers is their large surface area with permanent porosity (in some cases). Although, a reliable relationship between surface area and hydrogen evolution is yet to be established. Importantly, reported surface areas (in BET techniques) are measured in vacuum, while networks with low or even no apparent surface area can swell in solution. The question is how important is it to have a permanent surface area for high photocatalytic performance. It is time to ponder and ask the question – why a network whose surface area was measured in vacuum should give a reliable conclusion regarding the accessible sites in the liquid-swollen state. Answering this question seems a must when several linear, planarized, non-crosslinked and non-porous conjugated polymers have been shown better or at least comparable photocatalytic performance with microporous polymer photocatalysts.
Photocatalytic solar fuel production involves a complex series of photophysical and electrocatalytic processes. The processes involved in photocatalytic reactions can be divided into the following six components: photon absorption, exciton separation, carrier diffusion, carrier transport, catalytic efficiency, mass transfer of reactants and products. These six parameters have multiple impacts on the fundamental efficiencies. All of these parameters, despite happening at different time scales and spatial resolution, should therefore be optimized to achieve high values for the AQE.
There is no standard to judge and compare the different reported efficiencies of photocatalysts. The overall amount of hydrogen produced per unit time depends on the sample mass, reactor setup, light source and applied filters and many other parameters. Therefore, the same material can produce different values when tested in different labs. In the authors’ opinion, this problem becomes more exacerbated when the rate of hydrogen is reported in units per time and mass catalyst (mol h−1 g−1), because, hydrogen production and catalyst mass do not follow a linear relation. Reporting of the AQE values bears the same problem, and is often not measured with a reliable protocol.309
To produce hydrogen at scale, an Australian hydrogen taskforce has arisen following six questions that are believed to also be of a global concern:392 (i) what scale is needed to achieve scale efficiencies and overcome cost barriers? (ii) what approaches could most effectively leverage existing infrastructure, share risks and benefits and overcome scale-up development issues? (iii) what arrangements should be put in place to prepare for and help manage expected transitional issues as they occur, including with respect to transitioning and upskilling the workforce? How do we ensure the availability of a skilled and mobile construction workforce and other resources to support scale-up as needed? (iv) what lessons can be learned from the experience of scaling up supply chains in other industries? (v) when should the various activities needed to prepare for hydrogen industry scale-up be completed by? (vi) what measures and incentives are needed to achieve these timings?
Solar fuel production brings opportunities to avert dangerous climate change. To take stock of solar fuel initiatives, it is imperative to know—what works and why? Getting a lucid answer requires, first of all, putting our collective experience together for a comprehensive global assessment of energy-innovation programs to establish the best practices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the Robert A. Welch Foundation (Grant no. F-1436) and the United States Department of Energy, Basic Energy Sciences (Grant no. DE-FG02-09ER16119) for their generous support.
References
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 32–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, J. C. Yu, D. Xia, P. K. Wong and Y. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 8724–8732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Markard, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 628–633 CrossRef .
K. Maeda, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2011, 12, 237–268 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, B. Li, S. Peng, D. Li, S. Yang and Y. Fang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 35144–35148 RSC .
X.-S. Zhang, J.-Y. Hu and H. Jiang, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 256, 230–237 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S.-T. Yong and S.-P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wen, J. Xie, X. Chen and X. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 391, 72–123 CrossRef CAS .
F. K. Kessler, Y. Zheng, D. Schwarz, C. Merschjann, W. Schnick, X. Wang and M. J. Bojdys, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17030 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Rahman, K. Davey and C. B. Mullins, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800820 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, A. Vogel, M. Sachs, R. S. Sprick, L. Wilbraham, S. J. A. Moniz, R. Godin, M. A. Zwijnenburg, J. R. Durrant, A. I. Cooper and J. Tang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 746–760 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, P. Niu and H.-M. Cheng, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 885–892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Rahman, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1305–1322 RSC .
M. G. Kibria, J. P. Edwards, C. M. Gabardo, C. T. Dinh, A. Seifitokaldani, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1807166 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Z. Rahman and T. Edvinsson, Joule, 2019, 3, 2290–2293 CrossRef .
M. Z. Rahman and T. Edvinsson, Matter, 2019, 3, 562–564 CrossRef .
J. P. Pender, J. V. Guerrera, B. R. Wygant, J. A. Weeks, R. A. Ciufo, J. N. Burrow, M. F. Walk, M. Z. Rahman, A. Heller and C. B. Mullins, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 9279–9291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ciamician, Science, 1912, 36, 385–394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Plotnikov, Algemeine Photochemie, Walter De Gruyter, Berlin,  1936 Search PubMed .
H. Kisch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 812–847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ravelli, D. Dondi, M. Fagnoni and A. Albini, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1999–2011 RSC .
M. Fagnoni, D. Dondi, D. Ravelli and A. Albini, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2725–2756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ohtani, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2010, 11, 157–178 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Rahman, C. W. Kwong, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 709–728 RSC .
S. Chen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17050 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Rahman, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 30, 734–742 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Rahman and S. I. Khan, Mater. Renew. Sust. Energy, 2012, 1, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Rahman, Y. Tang and P. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 253902 CrossRef .
M. Z. Rahman and C. B. Mullins, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 52, 248–257 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Hisatomi, K. Takanabe and K. Domen, Catal. Lett., 2014, 145, 95–108 CrossRef .
J. E. Kroeze, T. J. Savenije and J. M. Warman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7608–7618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Enright and D. Fitzmaurice, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 1027–1035 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 3175–3194 RSC .
M. A. Henderson, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2011, 66, 185–297 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kubacka, M. Fernandez-Garcia and G. Colon, Chem. Rev., 2011, 112, 1555–1614 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Fujishima, X. Zhang and D. Tryk, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2008, 63, 515–582 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tamaki, A. Furube, M. Murai, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 416–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1486–1503 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bard, Science, 1980, 207, 139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Serpone and A. V. Emeline, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 673–677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sato, N. Saito, Y. Yamada, K. Maeda, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi, K. Domen and Y. Inoue, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4150–4151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Arai, N. Saito, H. Nishiyama, Y. Inoue, K. Domen and K. Sato, Chem. Lett., 2006, 35, 796–797 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Gueymard, Sol. Energy, 2004, 76, 423–453 CrossRef .
R. Niishiro, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 2241–2245 RSC .
Y. Sakata, Y. Matsuda, T. Yanagida, K. Hirata, H. Imamura and K. Teramura, Catal. Lett., 2008, 125, 22–26 CrossRef CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yashima, Y. Lee and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 588–593 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, N. Kikugawa and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3816–3819 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakahira, Y. Inoue, K. Iwasaki, H. Tanigawa, Y. Kouda, S. Iwabuchi, K. Kojima and M. Grätzel, Makromol. Chem., Rapid Commun., 1988, 9, 13–17 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fang, S.-W. Cao, Z. Wang, M. M. Shahjamali, S. C. J. Loo, J. Barber and C. Xue, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 17853–17861 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kowalska, O. O. Mahaney, R. Abe and B. Ohtani, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 2344–2355 RSC .
M. G. Méndez-Medrano, E. Kowalska, A. Lehoux, A. Herissan, B. Ohtani, S. Rau, C. Colbeau-Justin, J. L. Rodríguez-López and H. Remita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 25010–25022 CrossRef .
E. Bae, W. Choi, J. Park, H. S. Shin, S. B. Kim and J. S. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 14093–14101 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Darwent and A. Mills, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 2, 1982, 78, 359–367 RSC .
W. Erbs, J. Desilvestro, E. Borgarello and M. Graetzel, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 4001–4006 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zou, J. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Nature, 2001, 414, 625–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zou, J. Ye and H. Arakawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 13098–13101 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, J. Yuan, W. Shangguan and Y. Teraoka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8521–8523 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Scaife, Sol. Energy, 1980, 25, 41–54 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5029–5034 CrossRef CAS .
R. Niishiro, R. Konta, H. Kato, W.-J. Chun, K. Asakura and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17420–17426 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Kim, D. W. Hwang and J. S. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8912–8913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Kim, O. S. Becker, J. S. Jang, S. M. Ji, P. H. Borse and J. S. Lee, J. Solid State Chem., 2006, 179, 1214–1218 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu and A. Kudo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2163–2169 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, R. Nakamura and Y. Nakato, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 2499–2502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hosogi, Y. Shimodaira, H. Kato, H. Kobayashi and A. Kudo, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1299–1307 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abe, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 379, 230–235 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abe, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 166, 115–122 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Simon, D. Barreca, D. Bekermann, A. Gasparotto, C. Maccato, E. Comini, V. Gombac, P. Fornasiero, O. I. Lebedev, S. Turner, A. Devi, R. A. Fischer and G. Van Tendeloo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 15527–15537 CrossRef CAS .
D. Barreca, P. Fornasiero, A. Gasparotto, V. Gombac, C. Maccato, A. Pozza and E. Tondello, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2010, 16, 296–300 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gasparotto, D. Barreca, D. Bekermann, A. Devi, R. A. Fischer, P. Fornasiero, V. Gombac, O. I. Lebedev, C. Maccato, T. Montini, G. Van Tendeloo and E. Tondello, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19362–19365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Simon, D. Barreca, A. Gasparotto, C. Maccato, T. Montini, V. Gombac, P. Fornasiero, O. I. Lebedev, S. Turner and G. Van Tendeloo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11739–11747 RSC .
M. Cargnello, A. Gasparotto, V. Gombac, T. Montini, D. Barreca and P. Fornasiero, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 4309–4323 CrossRef CAS .
C. Maccato, D. Barreca, G. Carraro, A. Gasparotto, V. Gombac and P. Fornasiero, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2013, 230, 219–227 CrossRef CAS .
M. Matsumura, Y. Saho and H. Tsubomura, J. Phys. Chem., 1983, 87, 3807–3808 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xing, Y. Zhang, W. Yan and L. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 2018–2024 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kobayakawa, A. Teranishi, T. Tsurumaki, Y. Sato and A. Fujishima, Electrochim. Acta, 1992, 37, 465–467 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen and J. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2007, 68, 2317–2320 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zheng, X. Bu, H. Vu and P. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5299–5303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zheng, X. Bu and P. Feng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5286–5287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Tsuji, H. Kato, H. Kobayashi and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13406–13413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Tsuji, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3565–3568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Jang, P. H. Borse, J. S. Lee, S. H. Choi and H. G. Kim, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 154717 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Acar, I. Dincer and C. Zamfirescu, Int. Energy Res., 2014, 38, 1903–1920 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kakuta, K. H. Park, M. F. Finlayson, A. Ueno, A. J. Bard, A. Campion, M. A. Fox, S. E. Webber and J. M. White, J. Phys. Chem., 1985, 89, 732–734 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and M. Sekizawa, Catal. Lett., 1999, 58, 241–243 CrossRef CAS .
I. Tsuji, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1969–1975 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shangguan and A. Yoshida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 12227–12230 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shen and L. Guo, J. Solid State Chem., 2006, 179, 2629–2635 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, J. Catal., 2006, 243, 303–308 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hitoki, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1698–1699 RSC .
A. Kasahara, K. Nukumizu, G. Hitoki, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 6750–6753 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kasahara, K. Nukumizu, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 107, 791–797 CrossRef .
K. Nukumizu, J. Nunoshige, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, Chem. Lett., 2003, 32, 196–197 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, Y. Shimodaira, B. Lee, K. Teramura, D. Lu, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18264–18270 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, B. Lee, D. Lu and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2286–2291 CrossRef CAS .
B. Siritanaratkul, K. Maeda, T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 74–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ishikawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 13547–13553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ishikawa, Y. Yamada, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4442–4446 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ishikawa, T. Takata, T. Matsumura, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2637–2642 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jansen and H. P. Letschert, Nature, 2000, 404, 980–982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Abe, M. Higashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11828–11829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hara, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo and K. Domen, Catal. Today, 2004, 90, 313–317 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, K. Domen, J. D. Epping, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 441–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Peng, J. Gao, S. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Zhang and X. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3866–3871 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, W. K. H. Ng, J. C. Yu, H. Zhu, C. Li, L. Zhang, Z. Liu and Q. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111–112, 409–414 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, P. Niu, L. Yin and H.-M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9070–9073 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-D. Chiou and Y.-J. Hsu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 105, 211–219 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, A. Vogel, M. Sachs, R. S. Sprick, L. Wilbraham, S. J. A. Moniz, R. Godin, M. A. Zwijnenburg, J. R. Durrant, A. I. Cooper and J. Tang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 746–760 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, N. A. Kouamé, L. Ramos, S. Remita, A. Dazzi, A. Deniset-Besseau, P. Beaunier, F. Goubard, P.-H. Aubert and H. Remita, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 505–511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghosh, N. A. Kouame, S. Remita, L. Ramos, F. Goubard, P. H. Aubert, A. Dazzi, A. Deniset-Besseau and H. Remita, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 18002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yuan, D. Dragoe, P. Beaunier, D. B. Uribe, L. Ramos, M. G. Méndez-Medrano and H. Remita, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 268–277 RSC .
G. Liu, L. C. Yin, P. Niu, W. Jiao and H. M. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6242–6245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. M. Hutton, B. C. M. Martindale and E. Reisner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6111–6123 RSC .
P. Yang, J. Zhao, J. Wang, H. Cui, L. Li and Z. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 21332–21335 RSC .
B. C. M. Martindale, G. A. M. Hutton, C. A. Caputo, S. Prantl, R. Godin, J. R. Durrant and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6459–6463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xie, K. Zhang, B. Guo, Q. Liu, L. Fang and J. R. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3820–3839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Latorre-Sánchez, A. Primo and H. García, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11813–11816 CrossRef .
C. Lavorato, A. Primo, R. Molinari and H. Garcia, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 187–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, Y. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5792–5813 RSC .
Z. Hu, L. Yuan, Z. Liu, Z. Shen and J. C. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9580–9585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. Xu, D. Tománek and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4033–4041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, A. M. Jones, K. L. Seyler, V. Tran, Y. Jia, H. Zhao, H. Wang, L. Yang, X. Xu and F. Xia, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 517–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, T. Zhang, Z. Sun, H. Chen, J. Guan, X. Chen, H. Ji, P. Du and S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605776 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Hu, L. Lin, R. Zhang, C. Yang and J. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15429–15436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tian, B. Tian, B. Smith, M. C. Scott, Q. Lei, R. Hua, Y. Tian and Y. Liu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 4345–4350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Rahman, M. Batmunkh, M. Bat-Erdene, J. G. Shapter and C. B. Mullins, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18403–18408 RSC .
Z. Hu, Z. Shen and J. C. Yu, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 588–613 RSC .
A. B. Smith, Chem. Eng. News Archive, 2003, 81, 60 CrossRef CAS .
B. Meyer, Chem. Rev., 1976, 76, 367–388 CrossRef CAS .
B. Meyer, Chem. Rev., 1964, 64, 429–451 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Abass and N. H. Ahmad, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1986, 47, 143–145 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, P. Niu, L. Yin and H. M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9070–9073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, J. Ma, R. Long, C. Gao and Y. Xiong, Nano Today, 2017, 17, 96–116 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kouvetakis, R. B. Kaner, M. L. Sattler and N. Bartlett, Chem. Commun., 1986, 1758–1759 RSC .
H. Yanagisawa, T. Tanaka, Y. Ishida, M. Matsue, E. Rokuta, S. Otani and C. Oshima, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 177003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tanaka, Y. Kawamata, H. Simizu, T. Fujita, H. Yanagisawa, S. Otani and C. Oshima, Solid State Commun., 2005, 136, 22–25 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Liao, G. Yang and X. Zhou, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 10517–10525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Werheit, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2006, 18, 10655–10662 CrossRef CAS .
H. Werheit, T. Au, R. Schmechel, S. O. Shalamberidze, G. I. Kalandadze and A. M. Eristavi, J. Solid State Chem., 2000, 154, 79–86 CrossRef CAS .

          K. A. Schwetz and P. Karduck, Presented in part at the AIP Conf. Proc., 1991.
R. Schmechel and H. Werheit, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1999, 11, 6803–6813 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schmechel and H. Werheit, J. Solid State Chem., 2000, 154, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schmechel, H. Werheit, T. U. Kampen and W. Mönch, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 566–568 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, S. Wen, Y. Hou, F. Zuo, G. J. Beran and P. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3241–3245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hubert, B. Devouard, L. A. J. Garvie, M. O'Keeffe, P. R. Buseck, W. T. Petuskey and P. F. McMillan, Nature, 1998, 391, 376–378 CrossRef .
D. Yan, P. Liu, Q. Tao, P. Zhu, J. Liu and H. A. Luo, Solar RRL, 2019, 3, 1900014 CrossRef .
P. Popper and T. A. Ingles, Nature, 1957, 179, 1075 CrossRef CAS .
F. V. Williams and R. A. Ruehrwein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1960, 82, 1330–1332 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, P. Li, W. Zhou, T. Wang, K. Chang, H. Zhang, T. Kako, G. Liu and J. Ye, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 158–163 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takenaka, M. Takigawa and K. Shohno, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 633–637 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ju-seong, F. Akira, H. Kenichi and K. Yukinobu, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1985, 58, 2634–2637 CrossRef .
G. Zhao, A. Wang, W. He, Y. Xing and X. Xu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900062 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liebig, Ann. Pharm., 1834, 10, 1–47 CrossRef .
B. V. Lotsch, M. Doblinger, J. Sehnert, L. Seyfarth, J. Senker, O. Oeckler and W. Schnick, Chem. – Eur. J., 2007, 13, 4969–4980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Doblinger, B. V. Lotsch, J. Wack, J. Thun, J. Senker and W. Schnick, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1541–1543 RSC .
F. K. Kessler and W. Schnick, Z. Anorg. Allgem. Chem., 2019, 645, 857–862 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Bojdys, J. O. Muller, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 8177–8182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Rahman, J. Ran, Y. Tang, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2445–2452 RSC .
Y. Kang, Y. Yang, L. C. Yin, X. Kang, G. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4572–4577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Rahman, P. C. Tapping, T. W. Kee, R. Smernik, N. Spooner, J. Moffatt, Y. Tang, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702384 CrossRef .
M. Rahman, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2017, 13, 1700376 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Jiang, X. Yuan, Y. Pan, J. Liang, G. Zeng, Z. Wu and H. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 217, 388–406 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, R. Wang, M. Zhou and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8674–8677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, G. Li, Z. A. Lan, L. Lin, A. Savateev, T. Heil, S. Zafeiratos, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13445–13449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ou, P. Yang, L. Lin, M. Anpo and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10905–10910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, H. Ou, Y. Fang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3992–3996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, H. Ou, Y. Zhang and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3921–3931 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zheng, X. N. Cao and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11512–11516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, G. Zhang, X. Chen, S. Lin, L. Mohlmann, G. Dolega, G. Lipner, M. Antonietti, S. Blechert and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3183–3187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, M. Zhang, R. Q. Sun and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 10145–10149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, K. Domen, J. D. Epping, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 441–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, X. Wang, Y. Nishihara, D. Lu, M. Antonietti and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4940–4947 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mahmood, E. K. Lee, M. Jung, D. Shin, H. J. Choi, J. M. Seo, S. M. Jung, D. Kim, F. Li, M. S. Lah, N. Park, H. J. Shin, J. H. Oh and J. B. Baek, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 7414–7419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mahmood, E. K. Lee, M. Jung, D. Shin, I. Y. Jeon, S. M. Jung, H. J. Choi, J. M. Seo, S. Y. Bae, S. D. Sohn, N. Park, J. H. Oh, H. J. Shin and J. B. Baek, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Fechler, N. P. Zussblatt, R. Rothe, R. Schlogl, M. G. Willinger, B. F. Chmelka and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1287–1294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Talapaneni, G. P. Mane, D.-H. Park, K. S. Lakhi, K. Ramadass, S. Joseph, W. M. Skinner, U. Ravon, K. Al-Bahily and A. Vinu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18183–18192 RSC .
G. P. Mane, S. N. Talapaneni, K. S. Lakhi, H. Ilbeygi, U. Ravon, K. Al-Bahily, T. Mori, D. H. Park and A. Vinu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8481–8485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mahmood, F. Li, S. M. Jung, M. S. Okyay, I. Ahmad, S. J. Kim, N. Park, H. Y. Jeong and J. B. Baek, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 441–446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mahmood, S.-M. Jung, S.-J. Kim, J. Park, J.-W. Yoo and J.-B. Baek, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4860–4864 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kumar, E. Vahidzadeh, U. K. Thakur, P. Kar, K. M. Alam, A. Goswami, N. Mahdi, K. Cui, G. M. Bernard, V. K. Michaelis and K. Shankar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5415–5436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Rahman, J. Moffatt and N. Spooner, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 553–559 RSC .
M. Rahman and K. Davey, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2018, 2, 125402 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, J. Yu, C. Jiang and B. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701503 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang and J. T. Yates, Jr., Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5520–5551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, H. H. Mohamed, R. Dillert and D. Bahnemann, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2012, 13, 263–276 CrossRef CAS .
C. Merschjann, T. Tyborski, S. Orthmann, F. Yang, K. Schwarzburg, M. Lublow, M. C. Lux-Steiner and T. Schedel-Niedrig, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 205204 CrossRef .
T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736–6767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Corp and C. W. Schlenker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7904–7912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Merschjann, S. Tschierlei, T. Tyborski, K. Kailasam, S. Orthmann, D. Hollmann, T. Schedel-Niedrig, A. Thomas and S. Lochbrunner, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7993–7999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Godin, Y. Wang, M. A. Zwijnenburg, J. Tang and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5216–5224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. E. Ferry, A. Polman and H. A. Atwater, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 10055–10064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tyborski, C. Merschjann, S. Orthmann, F. Yang, M. C. Lux-Steiner and T. Schedel-Niedrig, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2012, 24, 162201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Y. Chen, R. Lu, R. Li and A. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 14904–14910 RSC .
G. Zhou, Y. Shan, Y. Hu, X. Xu, L. Long, J. Zhang, J. Dai, J. Guo, J. Shen, S. Li, L. Liu and X. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3366 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Park, E. Vescovo, H. J. Kim, C. Kwon, R. Ramesh and T. Venkatesan, Nature, 1998, 392, 794 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma, J. Feng, F. Jin, M. Wei, C. Liu and Y. Ma, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 15624–15631 RSC .
Z. Chen, Q. Zhang and Y. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5320–5324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, L. Lin, G. Li, Y. Zhang, A. Savateev, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9372–9376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, J. Li, Z. Hong, B. Shen, B. Lin and B. Gao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 8106–8113 RSC .
Z. Wu, H. Gao, S. Yan and Z. Zou, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 12013–12017 RSC .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7355–7363 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, X. Li, G. Zhang, P. Cui, X. Wang, X. Jiang, J. Zhao, Y. Luo and J. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 16049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, T. Chen, Y. Guo, Z. Zhang and X. Fang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 193, 248–258 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Han, B. Wang, J. Gao and L. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10849–10853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, B. Peng, S. Zhang and T. Peng, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 1501–1509 CrossRef CAS .
L. Song, T. Li and S. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 293–299 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jin, Y. Jia, C. Chen, X. Liu, J. Jiang, X. Chen and F. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 21497–21509 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, Z. Hou, L. Zhang, Y. Liu, Q. Gao and X. Chen, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 317–323 RSC .
M. Zhu, S. Kim, L. Mao, M. Fujitsuka, J. Zhang, X. Wang and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13234–13242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-P. Yuan, S.-W. Cao, Y.-S. Liao, L.-S. Yin and C. Xue, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 140-141, 164–168 CrossRef CAS .
R. Godin, A. Kafizas and J. R. Durrant, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2017, 2, 136–143 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jing, R. Zhu, D. L. Phillips and J. C. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703484 CrossRef .
G. Liu, G. Zhao, W. Zhou, Y. Liu, H. Pang, H. Zhang, D. Hao, X. Meng, P. Li, T. Kako and J. Ye, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 28, 1602779 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, C.-L. Dong, D. Zhao, Y.-C. Huang, X. Wang, L. Samad, L. Dang, M. Shearer, S. Shen and L. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606198 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Liu, Y. Han, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Lifshitz, S.-T. Lee, J. Zhong and Z. Kang, Science, 2015, 347, 970–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Che, W. Cheng, T. Yao, F. Tang, W. Liu, H. Su, Y. Huang, Q. Liu, J. Liu, F. Hu, Z. Pan, Z. Sun and S. Wei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3021–3026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Xia, A. Roy, D. W. Chang, J.-B. Baek and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4209–4212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. R. Rao and M. Chhetri, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1803668 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Chen and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 11988–11991 RSC .
Z. Luo, Y. Fang, M. Zhou and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6033–6037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Song, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4878–4895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pakdel, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 934–959 RSC .
A. Pakdel, X. Wang, C. Zhi, Y. Bando, K. Watanabe, T. Sekiguchi, T. Nakayama and D. Golberg, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4818–4824 RSC .
R. Nascimento, J. d. R. Martins, R. J. C. Batista and H. Chacham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 5055–5061 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin and J. W. Connell, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6908–6939 RSC .
L. Ci, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 430–435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhao, J. Wang, M. Yang, Z. Liu and Z. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 21098–21103 CrossRef CAS .
P. Karamanis, N. Otero and C. Pouchan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 11872–11885 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, C. Chen, M. Zhang, L. Lin, X. Ye, S. Lin, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7698 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, J. Zhao and J. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1858 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Kumar, K. Moses, K. Pramoda, S. N. Shirodkar, A. K. Mishra, U. V. Waghmare, A. Sundaresan and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5806 RSC .
R. Sen, B. C. Satishkumar, A. Govindaraj, K. R. Harikumar, G. Raina, J.-P. Zhang, A. K. Cheetham and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 287, 671–676 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Kim, J. Park, H. C. Choi, J. P. Ahn, J. Q. Hou and H. S. Kang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1705–1716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Raidongia, K. P. S. S. Hembram, U. V. Waghmare, M. Eswaramoorthy and C. N. R. Rao, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2010, 636, 30–35 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Cowan and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2281–2293 RSC .
G. Liu, K. Du, S. Haussener and K. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2878–2904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Roger, M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0003 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, J. Gu, J. L. Young, E. M. Miller, J. A. Turner, N. R. Neale and M. C. Beard, Science, 2015, 350, 1061–1065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Appavoo, M. Liu, C. T. Black and M. Y. Sfeir, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1076–1082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Rahman, J. Zhang, Y. Tang, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 562–571 RSC .
Y. Bai, H. Huang, C. Wang, R. Long and Y. Xiong, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1951–1964 RSC .
S. Bai and Y. Xiong, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10261–10271 RSC .
G. Zhang, Z. A. Lan and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 15712–15727 CrossRef PubMed .
V. S. Vyas, V. W.-h. Lau and B. V. Lotsch, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5191–5204 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yanagida, A. Kabumoto, K. Mizumoto, C. Pac and K. Yoshino, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1985, 474–475 RSC .
J. Mahmood, M. A. R. Anjum and J. B. Baek, Adv. Mater., 2018, 31, 1805062 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Schwarzer, T. Saplinova and E. Kroke, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 2032–2062 CrossRef CAS .
D. Schwarz, Y. Noda, J. Klouda, K. Schwarzova-Peckova, J. Tarabek, J. Rybacek, J. Janousek, F. Simon, M. V. Opanasenko, J. Cejka, A. Acharjya, J. Schmidt, S. Selve, V. Reiter-Scherer, N. Severin, J. P. Rabe, P. Ecorchard, J. He, M. Polozij, P. Nachtigall and M. J. Bojdys, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703399 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Schwarz, Y. S. Kochergin, A. Acharjya, A. Ichangi, M. V. Opanasenko, J. Cejka, U. Lappan, P. Arki, J. He, J. Schmidt, P. Nachtigall, A. Thomas, J. Tarabek and M. J. Bojdys, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 13023–13027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kuecken, A. Acharjya, L. Zhi, M. Schwarze, R. Schomacker and A. Thomas, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5854–5857 RSC .
P. Pachfule, A. Acharjya, J. Roeser, T. Langenhahn, M. Schwarze, R. Schomacker, A. Thomas and J. Schmidt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1423–1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Schwarz, A. Acharjya, A. Ichangi, Y. S. Kochergin, P. Lyu, M. V. Opanasenko, J. Tarabek, J. Vacek Chocholousova, J. Vacek, J. Schmidt, J. Cejka, P. Nachtigall, A. Thomas and M. J. Bojdys, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 194–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, J. Tarabek, R. Kulkarni, C. Wang, M. Dracinsky, G. J. Smales, Y. Tian, S. Ren, B. R. Pauw, U. Resch-Genger and M. J. Bojdys, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 53, 12342–12348 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Roeser, D. Prill, M. J. Bojdys, P. Fayon, A. Trewin, A. N. Fitch, M. U. Schmidt and A. Thomas, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 977–982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Sprick, J. X. Jiang, B. Bonillo, S. Ren, T. Ratvijitvech, P. Guiglion, M. A. Zwijnenburg, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3265–3270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Sprick, B. Bonillo, R. Clowes, P. Guiglion, N. J. Brownbill, B. J. Slater, F. Blanc, M. A. Zwijnenburg, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1792–1796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Sprick, B. Bonillo, M. Sachs, R. Clowes, J. R. Durrant, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10008–10011 RSC .
D. J. Woods, R. S. Sprick, C. L. Smith, A. J. Cowan and A. I. Cooper, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700479 CrossRef .
R. S. Sprick, Y. Bai, A. A. Y. Guilbert, M. Zbiri, C. M. Aitchison, L. Wilbraham, Y. Yan, D. J. Woods, M. A. Zwijnenburg and A. I. Cooper, Chem. Mater., 2018, 31, 305–313 CrossRef .
X. Wang, L. Chen, S. Y. Chong, M. A. Little, Y. Wu, W. H. Zhu, R. Clowes, Y. Yan, M. A. Zwijnenburg, R. S. Sprick and A. I. Cooper, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 1180–1189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, L. Wilbraham, B. J. Slater, M. A. Zwijnenburg, R. S. Sprick and A. I. Cooper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 9063–9071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Catherine M. Aitchison, R. S. Sprick and A. I. Cooper, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2490–2496 RSC .
A. Vogel, M. Forster, L. Wilbraham, C. L. Smith, A. J. Cowan, M. A. Zwijnenburg, R. S. Sprick and A. I. Cooper, Faraday Discuss., 2019, 215, 84–97 RSC .
C. S. Diercks and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2017, 355, eaal1585 CrossRef PubMed .
A. P. Côté, A. I. Benin, N. W. Ockwig, M. Keeffe, A. J. Matzger and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2005, 310, 1166 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Huang, P. Wang and D. Jiang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16068 CrossRef CAS .
T. Banerjee, K. Gottschling, G. Savasci, C. Ochsenfeld and B. V. Lotsch, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 400–409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jin, Q. Wang, P. Taynton and W. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1575–1586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Rowan, S. J. Cantrill, G. R. L. Cousins, J. K. M. Sanders and J. F. Stoddart, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 898–952 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kandambeth, K. Dey and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1807–1822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Lohse and T. Bein, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705553 CrossRef .
S. Kandambeth, A. Mallick, B. Lukose, M. V. Mane, T. Heine and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19524–19527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kandambeth, D. B. Shinde, M. K. Panda, B. Lukose, T. Heine and R. Banerjee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13052–13056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Stegbauer, K. Schwinghammer and B. V. Lotsch, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 2789–2793 RSC .
V. S. Vyas, F. Haase, L. Stegbauer, G. Savasci, F. Podjaski, C. Ochsenfeld and B. V. Lotsch, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Stegbauer, S. Zech, G. Savasci, T. Banerjee, F. Podjaski, K. Schwinghammer, C. Ochsenfeld and B. V. Lotsch, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703278 CrossRef .
T. Banerjee, F. Haase, G. Savasci, K. Gottschling, C. Ochsenfeld and B. V. Lotsch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16228–16234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Haase, T. Banerjee, G. Savasci, C. Ochsenfeld and B. V. Lotsch, Faraday Discuss., 2017, 201, 247–264 RSC .
B. P. Biswal, H. A. Vignolo-Gonzalez, T. Banerjee, L. Grunenberg, G. Savasci, K. Gottschling, J. Nuss, C. Ochsenfeld and B. V. Lotsch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 11082–11092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Jin, Z. Lan, Q. Jiang, K. Geng, G. Li, X. Wang and D. Jiang, Chem, 2019, 5, 1632–1647 CAS .
M. Sachs, R. S. Sprick, D. Pearce, S. A. J. Hillman, A. Monti, A. A. Y. Guilbert, N. J. Brownbill, S. Dimitrov, X. Shi, F. Blanc, M. A. Zwijnenburg, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant and A. I. Cooper, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4968 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Guiglion, A. Monti and M. A. Zwijnenburg, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 1498–1506 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Bojdys, J. Jeromenok, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2202–2205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Algara-Siller, N. Severin, S. Y. Chong, T. Bjorkman, R. G. Palgrave, A. Laybourn, M. Antonietti, Y. Z. Khimyak, A. V. Krasheninnikov, J. P. Rabe, U. Kaiser, A. I. Cooper, A. Thomas and M. J. Bojdys, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7450–7455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. E. Braml, L. Stegbauer, B. V. Lotsch and W. Schnick, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 7866–7873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ren, M. J. Bojdys, R. Dawson, A. Laybourn, Y. Z. Khimyak, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2357–2361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, L. Guo, S. Jin and B. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5153–5172 RSC .
K. Schwinghammer, B. Tuffy, M. B. Mesch, E. Wirnhier, C. Martineau, F. Taulelle, W. Schnick, J. Senker and B. V. Lotsch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2435–2439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bi, W. Fang, L. Li, J. Wang, S. Liang, Y. He, M. Liu and L. Wu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2015, 36, 1799–1805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Schwinghammer, S. Hug, M. B. Mesch, J. Senker and B. V. Lotsch, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3345–3353 RSC .
K. Wang, L.-M. Yang, X. Wang, L. Guo, G. Cheng, C. Zhang, S. Jin, B. Tan and A. Cooper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14149–14153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Guo, Y. Niu, H. Xu, Q. Li, S. Razzaque, Q. Huang, S. Jin and B. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19775–19781 RSC .
C. B. Meier, R. S. Sprick, A. Monti, P. Guiglion, J.-S. M. Lee, M. A. Zwijnenburg and A. I. Cooper, Polymer, 2017, 126, 283–290 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, Q. He, Y. Hu and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 8768–8772 CrossRef .
L. Li, W. Fang, P. Zhang, J. Bi, Y. He, J. Wang and W. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12402–12406 RSC .
M. Liu, Q. Huang, S. Wang, Z. Li, B. Li, S. Jin and B. Tan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11968–11972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, G. Cheng, L. Guo, B. Tan and S. Jin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904781 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, S. A. Shevlin, Q. Ruan, S. J. A. Moniz, Y. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Li, C. C. Lau, Z. X. Guo and J. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1617–1624 RSC .
K. S. W. Sing, Pure Appl. Chem., 1985, 57, 603 CAS .
A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8328–8344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Chaoui, M. Trunk, R. Dawson, J. Schmidt and A. Thomas, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3302–3321 RSC .
Y. Xu, S. Jin, H. Xu, A. Nagai and D. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8012–8031 RSC .
T. Ben, H. Ren, S. Ma, D. Cao, J. Lan, X. Jing, W. Wang, J. Xu, F. Deng, J. M. Simmons, S. Qiu and G. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9457–9460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dawson, A. I. Cooper and D. J. Adams, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2012, 37, 530–563 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Jiang, F. Su, A. Trewin, C. D. Wood, N. L. Campbell, H. Niu, C. Dickinson, A. Y. Ganin, M. J. Rosseinsky, Y. Z. Khimyak and A. I. Cooper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8574–8578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. S. Vyas and B. V. Lotsch, Nature, 2015, 521, 41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Banerjee and B. V. Lotsch, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 1175–1177 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Banerjee, T. Bennett, K. Butler, T. L. Easun, M. Eddaoudi, R. Forgan, L. Gagliardi, C. Hendon, M. Jorge, C. Lamberti, J. M. Lee, K. Leus, J. Li, W. Lin, M. Ranocchiari, N. Rosi, J. G. Santaclara, S. Shevlin, K. Svane, V. Ting, M. van der Veen, P. Van Der Voort, A. Walsh, D. Woods, O. M. Yaghi and G. Zhu, Faraday Discuss., 2017, 201, 87–99 RSC .
L. Li, Z. Cai, Q. Wu, W. Y. Lo, N. Zhang, L. X. Chen and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7681–7686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, Z. Hu, Q. Yin, C. Shu, X. F. Jiang, J. Zhang, X. Wang, J. X. Jiang, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808156 CrossRef .
C. Yang, B. C. Ma, L. Zhang, S. Lin, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester, K. A. Zhang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9202–9206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiang, X. Wang, L. Rao, P. Wang, D. Huang, X. Ding, X. Zhang, S. Wang, H. Chen and Y. Zhu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2544–2549 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, N. Mao, S. Feng, C. Zhang, F. Wang, Y. Chen, J. Zeng and J.-X. Jiang, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2017, 218, 1700049 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, Z. Liao, X. Ma and Z. Xiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 30698–30705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dai, S. Xu, W. Liu, X. Gong, M. Panahandeh-Fard, Z. Liu, D. Zhang, C. Xue, K. P. Loh and B. Liu, Small, 2018, 14, e1801839 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, X. Yang, T. Yang, Y. Zhao, F. Wang, Y. Chen, J. H. Zeng, C. Yan, F. Huang and J.-X. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8590–8596 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, J. Wang, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, R. Li and T. Peng, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 5665–5676 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, W. Ma, Y. Xu, C. Zhang, Q. Wang, T. Yang, X. Gao, F. Wang, C. Yan and J.-X. Jiang, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 9502–9508 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bi, Z.-A. Lan, S. Paasch, W. Zhang, Y. He, C. Zhang, F. Liu, D. Wu, X. Zhuang, E. Brunner, X. Wang and F. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703146 CrossRef .
G. Märkl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1966, 5, 846–847 CrossRef .
P. Tokarz and P. M. Zagórski, Chem. Heterocycl. Compd., 2017, 53, 858–860 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Le Floch, in Phosphorus-Carbon Heterocyclic Chemistry, ed. F. Mathey, Elsevier Science Ltd, Oxford,  2001, pp. 485–533 Search PubMed .

          K. Dimroth, Delocalized posphorus-carbon double bonds, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  1973 Search PubMed .
C. Schwarz, H. Bassler, I. Bauer, J. M. Koenen, E. Preis, U. Scherf and A. Kohler, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 922–925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Schwarz, S. Tscheuschner, J. Frisch, S. Winkler, N. Koch, H. Bässler and A. Köhler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 155205 CrossRef .
P. Guiglion, C. Butchosa and M. A. Zwijnenburg, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2016, 217, 344–353 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Sprick, C. M. Aitchison, E. Berardo, L. Turcani, L. Wilbraham, B. M. Alston, K. E. Jelfs, M. A. Zwijnenburg and A. I. Cooper, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11994–12003 RSC .
X. Zong, X. Miao, S. Hua, L. An, X. Gao, W. Jiang, D. Qu, Z. Zhou, X. Liu and Z. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 211, 98–105 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Sprick, L. Wilbraham, Y. Bai, P. Guiglion, A. Monti, R. Clowes, A. I. Cooper and M. A. Zwijnenburg, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 5733–5742 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, J. Ge and P. Wang, Photochem. Photobiol., 2018, 94, 916–934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Feng, C. Zhu, H. Yuan, L. Liu, F. Lv and S. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6620–6633 RSC .
J. Yu, Y. Rong, C. T. Kuo, X. H. Zhou and D. T. Chiu, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 42–56 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li and B. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6570–6597 RSC .
X. Chen, R. Li, Z. Liu, K. Sun, Z. Sun, D. Chen, G. Xu, P. Xi, C. Wu and Y. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604850 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jiang and J. McNeill, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 838–859 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pu, A. J. Shuhendler, J. V. Jokerst, J. Mei, S. S. Gambhir, Z. Bao and J. Rao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 233–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhao, L. Wang, Y. Wu, T. Yang, Y. Ding, H. G. Yang and A. Hu, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 4376–4384 CrossRef CAS .
P.-J. Tseng, C.-L. Chang, Y.-H. Chan, L.-Y. Ting, P.-Y. Chen, C.-H. Liao, M.-L. Tsai and H.-H. Chou, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7766–7772 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, R. Fernandez-Teran, L. Zhang, D. L. Fernandes, L. Tian, H. Chen and H. Tian, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12306–12310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. B. Pati, G. Damas, L. Tian, D. L. A. Fernandes, L. Zhang, I. B. Pehlivan, T. Edvinsson, C. M. Araujo and H. Tian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1372–1376 RSC .
N. Kaeffer, A. Morozan and V. Artero, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2015, 119, 13707–13713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Chen, H. Xu and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801955 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Gao, H. Liu, D. Wang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 908–936 RSC .
A. A. Zakhidov, R. H. Baughman, Z. Iqbal, C. Cui, I. Khayrullin, S. O. Dantas, J. Marti and V. G. Ralchenko, Science, 1998, 282, 897–901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Baughman, H. Eckhardt and M. Kertesz, J. Chem. Phys., 1987, 87, 6687–6699 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, Y. Li, H. Liu, Y. Guo, Y. Li and D. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3256–3258 RSC .
R. S. Weatherup, B. Dlubak and S. Hofmann, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9996–10003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, C. Li and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2109–2125 RSC .
L. Wang, X. Zheng, L. Chen, Y. Xiong and H. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3454–3458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Wan, Y. Ding, S. Wu, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, G. Zhang, Y. Xiong, X. Wu, J. Yang and H. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702428 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wang, J. Mielby, F. H. Richter, G. Wang, G. Prieto, T. Kasama, C. Weidenthaler, H. J. Bongard, S. Kegnaes, A. Furstner and F. Schuth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 8645–8648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, R. B. Nyberg and M. Jørgensen, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1313–1318 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pun, T. Diao and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8213–8221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xue, Z. Lin, C.-Y. Chiu, Y. Li, L. Ruan, G. Wang, Z. Zhao, C. Lee, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1600615 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 52–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, W. Sheng, Z. Zhuang, B. Xu and Y. Yan, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501602 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shiraishi, Y. Kofuji, S. Kanazawa, H. Sakamoto, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15255–15258 RSC .
J. Kosco, M. Sachs, R. Godin, M. Kirkus, L. Francas, M. Bidwell, M. Qureshi, D. Anjum, J. R. Durrant and I. McCulloch, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802181 CrossRef .
T. Shibata, A. Kabumoto, T. Shiragami, O. Ishitani, C. Pac and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 2068–2076 CrossRef CAS .
S. Matsuoka, H. Fujii, T. Yamada, C. Pac, A. Ishida, S. Takamuku, M. Kusaba, N. Nakashima and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 5802–5808 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Bakulin, A. Rao, V. G. Pavelyev, P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, M. S. Pshenichnikov, D. Niedzialek, J. Cornil, D. Beljonne and R. H. Friend, Science, 2012, 335, 1340–1344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Smith and J. Michl, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2013, 64, 361–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. N. Singh-Rachford and F. N. Castellano, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2560–2573 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Smith and J. Michl, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6891–6936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. J. Roeffaers, B. F. Sels, H. Uji-i, F. C. De Schryver, P. A. Jacobs, D. E. De Vos and J. Hofkens, Nature, 2006, 439, 572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Weckhuysen, Nature, 2006, 439, 548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Gamelin, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 965–967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Sambur, T.-Y. Chen, E. Choudhary, G. Chen, E. J. Nissen, E. M. Thomas, N. Zou and P. Chen, Nature, 2016, 530, 77–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16130 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
T. Y. Ma, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7281–7285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen, A. Du, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3783 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Parsons, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1958, 54, 1053–1063 RSC .
M. R. Shaner, H. A. Atwater, N. S. Lewis and E. W. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2354–2371 RSC .
L. C. Seitz, Z. Chen, A. J. Forman, B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck and T. F. Jaramillo, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1372–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983 RSC .
M. Qureshi and K. Takanabe, Chem. Mater., 2016, 29, 158–167 CrossRef .
K. Takanabe, J. Catal., 2019, 370, 480–484 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kisch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9588–9589 CrossRef CAS PubMed  ; author reply 9590–9581.
D. Schwarz, A. Acharja, A. Ichangi, P. Lyu, M. V. Opanasenko, F. R. Gossler, T. A. F. Konig, J. Cejka, P. Nachtigall, A. Thomas and M. J. Bojdys, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 11916–11921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Arkhipov, P. Heremans and H. Bässler, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 4605–4607 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Nenashev, S. D. Baranovskii, M. Wiemer, F. Jansson, R. Österbacka, A. V. Dvurechenskii and F. Gebhard, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 035210 CrossRef .
National Hydrogen Strategy, 2019.

Footnote† Current address: Department of Materials Sciences and Engineering, Ångström Laboratory, Uppsala University, Sweden.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Mohammad Ziaur Rahman
	Dr Mohammad Ziaur Rahman pursued a PhD in Chemical Engineering with Prof. Shizhang Qiao at The University of Adelaide, Australia. As a postdoctoral fellow at The University of Texas at Austin, USA, he has been mentored by Prof. Charles Buddie Mullins and Prof. Adam Heller. Dr Rahman is currently working as a Researcher at Ångström Laboratory, Uppsala University, Sweden. The noble mission of his research is to facilitate the sustainable and affordable carbon neutral energy solution for the world. As such, his research is focused on the synthesis and characterization of functional nanomaterials with tailored physicochemical properties for photo(electro)catalytic energy conversion and storage. He is particularly interested in charge transport and redox dynamics at the catalytic interface to design photocatalysts with high quantum efficiency.

Golam Kibria
	Dr Md Golam Kibria is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering at University of Calgary, Canada. He received MSc and PhD degrees from McMaster and McGill University, respectively. He worked as Banting Fellow at the University of Toronto. He is interested in artificial photosynthesis, nanomaterials, heterogeneous catalysis, system design, techno-economic and life-cycle analysis for sustainable synthesis of renewable fuels and feedstocks, including electro-/photo-catalysis for CO2 conversion and water splitting for sustainable energy and environment. He has published over 45 peer-reviewed articles in refereed Journals, including Science, Nature Communications, Advanced Materials, Energy and Environmental Science, Journal of American Chemical Society, 5 patents (filed) and over 50 conference presentations in the broad area of Artificial Photosynthesis. Dr Kibria is a recipient of the Academic Gold Medal, Tomlinson Doctoral fellowship from McGill University, and the Green Talents Award from the German Federal Ministry.

Charles Buddie Mullins
	Professor C. Buddie Mullins received a BS in Physics from the University of Texas at Austin and a PhD in Chemical Engineering from the California Institute of Technology in 1990 under the tutelage of W. H. Weinberg. Between 1989 and 1991, he was a postdoctoral fellow in the Physical Sciences Division at the IBM Almaden Research Center working with C. T. Rettner and D. J. Auerbach. In 1991 he joined the University of Texas at Austin and is on the faculty of the McKetta Chemical Engineering Department as well as the Department of Chemistry. Mullins has interests in fundamental aspects of surface chemistry and gas–surface interactions, photocatalytic processes and materials/architectures for advanced batteries.

 	Fig. 1  (a) A thermal reaction (R → P) catalyzed by C via intermediate I′, (b) a photochemical reaction where the chemical reaction starts from the excited state surface of the reagent R*, (c) a photocatalyzed reaction where the catalyst C is active only in the excited state, but the chemical transformation of R occurs entirely on the ground state surface, and (d) C acts as a photocatalyst in the R → P reaction. Adopted with permission from ref. 24. Royal Society of Chemistry (2009).	 

 	Fig. 2  Gibbs-energy change in photocatalytic reactions. Adopted with permission from ref. 26. Elsevier (2010).	 

 	Fig. 3  Three key dynamics processes (photophysical, photochemical and electrochemical) involved in water-splitting. Following excitation across the bandgap: (1) electron/hole relaxation (tens to hundreds of fs); (2) trapping of electrons/holes into trap states due to defects or surface states within hundreds of fs to tens of ps; (3) radiative and nonradiative band edge electron–hole or exciton recombination within tens of ps; (4) radiative and nonradiative trapped electron–hole or relaxed exciton recombination within hundreds of ps to a few ns; and (5) nonlinear and nonradiative exciton–exciton annihilation within hundreds of fs to tens of ps. Adopted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Time scales of “elemental steps” occurring in a prototypical photocatalytic process. Adopted with permission from ref. 39. American Chemical Society (2012).	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of different photocatalytic water-splitting systems. Adopted with permission from,29 Nature Publishing Group (2017).	 

 	Fig. 6  Timeline of key developments in photocatalytic water-splitting.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Hypothetical schematic presentation of energy level of conduction band (ECB) and valence band (EVB) with respect to Fermi energy level (EF), showing BP-nanosheets have sufficient electronic potential to drive HER. (b) Rate of hydrogen production DI water and water-triethanolamine solution, respectively under visible light (420 nm) irradiation. (c) Cyclic hydrogen production under visible light (420 nm) irradiation for probing photocatalytic stability. (d) Wavelength dependent hydrogen production, and (e) understanding the probabilistic distribution of charge carriers through FDTD simulations. Adopted with permission from ref. 134. Royal Society of Chemistry (2018).	 

 	Fig. 8  (left) Schematic illustration of the unit cell of an α-S crystal constructed from S8 molecules. (right) UV-Vis absorption spectrum of α-S crystal powder. The inset is a photograph of the α-S crystal powder. Adopted with permission from ref. 140. American Chemical Society (2012).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) BC3 equilibrium structures. (b) Band structures computed by HSE06 functionals. The green dashed line in the band structure represents the Fermi level at 0 eV, and (c) band edge positions of BC3 monolayer, TiO2, g-C3N4, and holey C2N crystals. The redox potentials of H+/H2 = 0 vs. ENHE and H2O/O2 = 1.23 vs. ENHE at pH = 0 are also given as a reference. Adopted with permission from ref. 145. American Chemical Society (2018).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) A part of the B6O structure showing c.c.p. packing (slightly distorted) of B12 icosahedra with O atoms (filled circles) in the close-packed layers. (b) A fragment of the β-rhombohedral boron structure. The central B12 unit is surrounded by 12 other B12 icosahedra whose centres are at the vertices of an icosahedron. Adopted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 1998, Nature Publishing Group. (c) UV-Vis spectra and (d) time course for H2 evolution by crystalline B (black), L-B6O (blue), and R-B6O (red) at >400 nm. Adopted with permission from ref. 154. Wiley-VCH (2019).	 

 	Fig. 11  Electronic properties and photocatalytic activities of BP. (a) unit cell structure, (b) Density of states (DOS), (c) bandgap calculations, (d) time course of hydrogen evolution and (e) wavelength dependent hydrogen evolution at 420 nm. Adopted with permission from ref. 157. Elsevier (2016).	 

 	Fig. 12  Light induce charge transport in CN. (a and b) Photoexcitation and generation of singlet excitons (SE), (c) rapid dissociation (<200 fs) of SE into singlet polaron pairs, (d) further dissociation into free polarons, (e) diffusive Brownian motion of free polarons, (f) recombination of free polarons, and recovery of singlet (SE) or triplet (TE) excitons. Effect of dimensionality on (g) the time-dependent luminescent flux and (h) associated excitation density. Allowed ranges of excitation densities and absorption coefficients for 1D, 2D, and 3D scenarios in (i) the diffusion-limited case and (j) domain-size-limited case. Reproduced with permission from ref. 16.197 Wiley-VCH (2015).	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic representation of (a) charge trapping model, and (b) influence of trapping on charge transfer reactions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24.198 American Chemical Society (2017).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) UV/Vis absorption (inset: digital photograph). (b) HOMO and LUMO positions determined by Mott–Schottky plots and UPS analysis. (c) Photocatalytic H2 evolution rates at 420 nm. Adopted with permission from ref. 206. Wiley-VCH (2018).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) The photocatalytic (water-splitting) hydrogen evolution and capsule storage scheme: (1) photo-generated electrons (e−) and holes (h+) separating; (2) water splitting to produce protons (H+) through holes (h+) attacking; (3) protons (H+) penetrating through GR and producing H2 molecules; (4) H2 molecules are prohibited from moving out of the sandwich. (b) Charge distribution computed as Bader charge differences between GR–CN–GR sandwich. Yellow and blue bubbles represent respectively electron and hole charges with isosurface value of 0.0005, e Å−3. Adopted with permission from ref. 210. Nature Publishing Group (2017).	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of charge transfer process for photocatalytic hydrogen in GCN/ACN/rGO. The band offsets between GCN and ACN helps in delocalizing the electrons in conduction band of ACN while holes in valence band of GCN. rGO enhances the transfer of surface electrons to water for proton reduction. Reproduced with permission.248 Royal Society of Chemistry (2017).	 

 	Fig. 17  Approaches for reticular synthesis of COFs. (a and b) Reversible organic reactions used for COF construction, and (c) symmetric combinations used for 2D COF construction. Adopted with permission from ref. 278. American Chemical Society (2019).	 

 	Fig. 18  Chronological advancement in COF synthesis. Adopted with permission from ref. 278. American Chemical Society (2019).	 

TFT-COF	2.8	TEoA	Pt	3.9% at 420 nm	
282

N3-COF	2.7	TEoA	Pt	0.44% at 450 nm	
283

PTP-COF	2.1	TEoA	Pt	0.87% at AM1.5	
286

N2-COF	—	TEoA	Co-1	0.16% at 400 nm	
285

β- Ketoenamine COF	2.31–2.42	TEoA	Pt	1.8% at 520 nm	
259

TpDTz-COF	2.07	TEoA	Nickel–thiolate	0.2% at 450 nm	
287

FS-COF	1.85	Ascorbic acid	Pt	3.2% at 420 nm	
268

sp2-c-COF	1.9	TEoA	Pt	—	
288


 	Fig. 19  Selected COFs based photocatalysts for hydrogen production. This figure has been adapted from ref. 259, 283, 287 and 288 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018, and Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Synthetic scheme of CTFs, (b) CP-MAS solid-state 13C-NMR and the digital photographs of corresponding CTFs, and (c) the path of excited electron transfer in donor–acceptor CTFs. Adopted with permission from ref. 300. Royal Society of Chemistry (2018).	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) The synthetic routes of hollow CTF (CTF-HS) and bowl-like CTF (CTF-HB). (b) Reaction path. (c) Wavelength-dependent AQY for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. (d) Recycling hydrogen evolution tests with 3 wt% Pt deposited at 420 nm. Adopted with permission from ref. 305. Wiley-VCH (2019).	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Synthesis of 15 conjugated microporous polymers (CMP1 to CMP15) from a mixture of phenylene-containing (red) and pyrene-containing (blue) building blocks. (b) The optical bandgap and related rate of hydrogen evolution. Copyright 2015, Adopted with permission from ref. 315. Nature publishing Group (2018).	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Chemical structure of PorFN. (b) Energy level alignment of PorFN, chlorine ions, and TEOA at pH = 7. (c) Photocatalytic experiment results in presence of TEOA and Pt under simulated solar light (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). (d) Hydrogen evolution rate (HER) and corresponding turnover frequency (TOF). (e) Photocatalytic experiment in simulated seawater. Adopted with permission from ref. 318. Wiley-VCH (2019).	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Synthesis routes for PyDOBT-1 and PyDOBT-2, and (b) photocatalytic activities. Adopted with permission from ref. 326. American Chemical Society (2018).	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Synthetic process of olefin-bridged porous organic polymers (OB-POPs), (b) UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) and photographs (inset) of prepared OB-POP-1–4, (c) OMO and LUMO band position of the polymers, and (d) wavelength-specific AQE on H2 evolution using Pt-modified OB-POP-3. Adopted with permission from ref. 327. Wiley-VCH (2017).	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Suzuki–Miyaura coupling polymerization route to CPF. (b) Solid-state UV/Vis diffuse reflectance spectrum of CPF, and (c) Kubelka–Munk plot for band gap determination. Adopted with permission from ref. 261. Wiley-VCH (2019).	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Structures of the polymer photocatalysts; (b) photographs of P1, P11–P17 in THF suspension; (c) UV-Vis reflectance spectra of P1, and P11–P17 in the solid-state; (d) photocatalytic hydrogen evolution of P1, and P11–P17. Adopted with permission from ref. 301. Royal Society of Chemistry (2018).	 

 	Fig. 28  Synthesis route for PFBT Pdots, and hypothetical diagram for hydrogen evolution reaction. Adopted with permission from ref. 347. Wiley-VCH (2016).	 

Hyperbranched	0.84	0.9 at 500 nm	
345

Cycloplatinized	12.7	0.4 at 515 nm	
346

PFBT	8.3	0.5 at 445 nm	
347

PFODTBT	50.0	0.6 at 550 nm	
348


 	Fig. 29  (a) Plot of orbital coefficients for the frontier orbitals of 3D TzG (left) and 2D TzF (right) as derived from DFT calculations. The relative locations of HOMO and LUMO for the TzF/TzG heterojunction (type I) are shown in the center with the redox potential of water indicated at pH 0 and 7. Adopted with permission from ref. 256. Wiley-VCH (2017). (b) Sequential polymerization strategy toward covalently connected CTF-BT/Th. Adopted with permission from ref. 302. Wiley-VCH (2019).	 

 	Fig. 30  Synthesis and overall water-splitting on (a) PTEPB and (b) PTEB. Adopted with permission from ref. 358. Wiley-VCH (2017).	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Conceptual frameworks. (b) Workflow for high-throughput synthesis and property screening of the conjugated polymer library. (c) Prediction and comparison of optoelectronic properties for hydrogen evolution. Adopted with permission from ref. 269. American Chemical Society (2019).	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Atomic configurations of three dual-doped graphene. (b) The three-state free energy diagram for the pure, single- and dual-doped graphene models. (c) Polarization curves. (d) Tafel slopes. (e) Exchange current. (f) Volcano plots. Adopted with permission from ref. 378. Nature Publishing group (2016).	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) N K-edge NEXAFS spectrum of g-C3N4 and C3N4@NG. (b) Interfacial electron transfer in C3N4@NG. (c) Simulated free-energy diagram at equilibrium potential. (d) Comparison of HER activities. Adopted with permission from ref. 381 Nature Publishing Group (2014).	 

 	Fig. 34  Influence of amount of photocatalyst on the rate of gas evolution. Adopted with permission from ref. 386. American Chemical Society (2017).	 
Footnote
† Current address: Department of Materials Sciences and Engineering, Ångström Laboratory, Uppsala University, Sweden.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
