From atoms to layers: in situ gold cluster growth kinetics during sputter deposition   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR34216F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR34216F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5053-5062Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsFrom atoms to layers: in situ gold cluster growth kinetics during sputter deposition†

        
          
            Matthias 
            Schwartzkopf
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Adeline 
            Buffet
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Volker 
            Körstgens
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Ezzeldin 
            Metwalli
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Kai 
            Schlage
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gunthard 
            Benecke
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Jan 
            Perlich
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Monika 
            Rawolle
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            André 
            Rothkirch
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Berit 
            Heidmann
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gerd 
            Herzog
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Peter 
            Müller-Buschbaum
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Ralf 
            Röhlsberger
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rainer 
            Gehrke
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Norbert 
            Stribeck
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Stephan V. 
            Roth
          
        
      a
aDeutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron (DESY), Notkestr. 85, D-22607 Hamburg, Germany. E-mail: Matthias.Schwartzkopf@desy.de
bUniversität Hamburg, Institut für Technische und Makromolekulare Chemie, Bundesstr. 45, D-20146 Hamburg, Germany
cTechnische Universität München, Physik Department, Lehrstuhl für Funktionelle Materialien, James-Franck-Str. 1, D-85747 Garching, Germany
dMPIKG, Department of Biomaterials, Am Mühlenberg 1, D-14424 Potsdam-Golm, Germany
Received 
      20th December 2012
    , Accepted 30th March 2013First published on 8th April 2013AbstractThe adjustment of size-dependent catalytic, electrical and optical properties of gold cluster assemblies is a very significant issue in modern applied nanotechnology. We present a real-time investigation of the growth kinetics of gold nanostructures from small nuclei to a complete gold layer during magnetron sputter deposition with high time resolution by means of in situ microbeam grazing incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (μGISAXS). We specify the four-stage growth including their thresholds with sub-monolayer resolution and identify phase transitions monitored in Yoneda intensity as a material-specific characteristic. An innovative and flexible geometrical model enables the extraction of morphological real space parameters, such as cluster size and shape, correlation distance, layer porosity and surface coverage, directly from reciprocal space scattering data. This approach enables a large variety of future investigations of the influence of different process parameters on the thin metal film morphology. Furthermore, our study allows for deducing the wetting behavior of gold cluster films on solid substrates and provides a better understanding of the growth kinetics in general, which is essential for optimization of manufacturing parameters, saving energy and resources.
Introduction
In our modern high-tech society, gold has been raised to immense relevance due to its unique optoelectronic, electrical and catalytic properties. In particular, recently developed gold nanoparticles are promising in the field of applied nanotechnology and fundamental medicine due to their size-dependent, tailorable properties.1–7 As a characteristic feature of gold, the relativistic reduction of the 5d to 6s band gap permits coherent electron movement near the Fermi level.8 The associated surface plasmons can be excited with ultraviolet light and optical properties are directly determined by size and shape of the gold nanoparticles.9–14 Furthermore, the remarkable manifold chemistry of gold cluster assemblies is of interest for fundamental research and promises various potential applications15,16 in solar cells,17–19 biosensors,20–22 reflective23 or antireflective coatings24,25 and especially in heterogeneous catalysis.26–32 In detail, the best catalytic activity of immobilized gold clusters on TiO2 was observed for cluster diameters of 2–4 nm indicating that the particle size is again a crucial parameter.26 One can follow different pathways to deposit application-specific nanoparticles, like deposition of mass-selected clusters,33,34 electrospray deposition35 or kinetically controlled reduction of Au(III) species in solutions36–39 respectively directly on substrates.22,40,41 For an efficient and controlled production of active nanostructured cluster surfaces, sputter deposition plays a very important role in industrial and nanostructural processing.42,43 In order to tune the size-dependent catalytic activity and optoelectronic properties,24–26,42–45 it is mandatory to control and therefore to understand how the growth kinetics influences the metal film morphology during sputter deposition.46–48
Direct observations of gold cluster growth and mobility have been performed by e.g. real space techniques namely in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM)49–53 and field ion microscopy (FIM).54 As a reciprocal space method, grazing incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) was introduced as a versatile surface sensitive technique to quantify post-deposition annealing kinetics of gold clusters on glass.55,56 The advanced application of microfocused synchrotron radiation created a powerful technique for in situ investigations at the nanoscale.57–60 A large variety of surface materials and fast surface processes like vapor deposition,61–66 evaporation-mediated self-assembly67–69 or adsorption phenomena under laminar flow conditions70 were investigated. μGISAXS has already been used in combination with a mobile sputter deposition chamber to investigate the growth kinetics of a metallic layer on polymer templates.71,72 Inside a diblock-copolymer film, gold is accumulated at the polystyrene (PS) parts of the microphase-separated structure due to polymer-mediated self-assembly,73 which is mainly caused by differences in surface mobility of the gold adatoms and the selective interaction with PS in that case.71 Kaune et al. were able to track the gold film growth from separated clusters to a continuous film on a conducting polymer film.72 One technique common in both studies was that alternating sputter deposition/measurement cycles were applied to deduce the metal layer growth, which cannot be considered as fully established real-time investigations.
In this article, we present to the best of our knowledge the first real-time and in situ μGISAXS investigation performed during sputter deposition. The high time resolution in the millisecond regime allows the determination of kinetics of initial nucleation and subsequent cluster growth during sputter deposition of a gold layer on an amorphous silicon oxide layer on a silicon (100) substrate. This combined study, using X-ray reflectivity (XRR), electron microscopy and μGISAXS, enables a precise investigation of the gold cluster growth kinetics under conditions advancing towards industrial manufacturing. We introduce a quantitative model solely based on geometrical assumptions to correlate the amount of deposited metal with the temporal evolution of structural and morphological parameters related to the growth of metallic layers such as cluster size and shape, correlation distance and surface coverage. This approach enables a large variety of future investigations of the influence of different process parameters on the thin metal film morphology. This information is mandatory for the adjustment of deposition parameters and a controlled tailoring of the catalytic, electrical and optical properties in nanotechnology.42,46
Experimental section
Combining grazing incidence X-ray scattering and sputter deposition
A sketch of the GISAXS geometry and the general sputter deposition process is depicted in Fig. 1. For direct current (DC) sputter deposition, a voltage is applied to two parallel electrodes at low argon (Ar) pressure resulting in a plasma discharge. Gold atoms are emitted from the target due to impacts of accelerated argon ions onto the target leading to deposition and cluster growth on the substrate. In the present investigation, a micro-focused X-ray beam at a grazing incidence angle αi enables the detection of diffuse scattering I(2θf, αf) as a function of the exit angle αf and the out-of-plane angle 2θf by any type of roughness or electron density variation in the near surface regime.74 The components of the scattering vector perpendicular and parallel to the sample surface are qz = 2π/λ(sin αi + sin αf) and qy = 2π/λsin 2θf cos αf (Fig. 1) with qx being negligible. The scattered intensity I(qy,qz) corresponds to a collective momentum transfer of an assembly of particles.57 It is proportional to the total interference function S(qy,qz) and the square of the particle form factor F(qy,qz). S(qy,qz) is the Fourier transform of the particle autocorrelation function describing the spatial arrangement of particles on the surface and F(qy,qz) is the Fourier transform of the electron density correlation function.75 Consequently, correlations perpendicular to the surface appear in the qz direction,57e.g. height of nanoparticles, roughness and layer thickness (Fig. 1). Respectively, in-plane surface structures like cluster correlation distances D or cluster radii R are observable in the qy direction (out-of-plane).57 The term “plane” refers to the plane spanned by the incoming wave vector and the surface normal. Another prominent feature in the qz direction within the scattering plane (qy = 0) is the Yoneda peak,76 which emerges at the critical angle of the surface material and can be related to its porosity.77
 Fig. 1  Scheme of the transportable ultra-high vacuum (UHV) sputter chamber in a microbeam grazing incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (μGISAXS) setup. αi denotes the angle between the incident monochromatic X-ray beam and the sample surface, αf the corresponding exit angle, and 2θf the out-of-plane angle. The direct beam position marks the origin of coordinates of the scattering vector components qy and qz. Line cuts were performed on the detected 2D data to extract information on the gold cluster morphology (H = height, R = radius, D = distance) and growth kinetics: a vertical cut along the scattering plane (red) (I(qz) at qy = 0) and horizontal cuts (green) (I(qy)). 
GISAXS setup details
The grazing incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) experiments were performed at the Micro- and Nanofocus X-ray scattering (MiNaXS) beamline P03 of the high-brilliance light source PETRA III at DESY, Hamburg.78 We used a wavelength λ = (0.960 ± 0.002) Å, a sample-to-detector distance DSD = (2750 ± 2) mm and an incident angle αi = 0.5° to obtain a clear separation between the critical angles of the involved materials (Au, Si) and the specular peak. The X-ray beam was focused to 38 μm × 19 μm (horizontal × vertical) by using an assembly of parabolic beryllium compound refractive lenses. The ultra-high vacuum sputter chamber was mounted on a goniometer (Huber) to achieve precise sample alignment. Vacuum sputter deposition of 99.999% gold (MaTecK GmbH) was performed onto pre-cleaned silicon substrates (see ESI†). Prior to each deposition experiment, the chamber was evacuated to a pressure below 5 × 10−3 μbar. The sputter deposition was performed for 150 s with Ar as the working gas at a pressure of 16.6 μbar and an applied power of 12 W. After sputter deposition a final detector image was recorded. The distance between two adjacent vertical peaks Δqz was used to determine the final film thickness with the relation δ = 2πΔqz−1 to δfinal = (32.0 ± 1.7) nm. Thus, the nominal sputter deposition rate was deduced to (0.21 ± 0.01) nm s−1. The combination of a detector with a readout time of 3.6 ms (PILATUS 300K; DECTRIS Ltd.) with the high photon flux available at MiNaXS enables the in situ and real-time investigation of gold growth kinetics during sputter deposition with high acquisition throughput (66.67 fps) as a kinetic growth movie (see ESI†). The intense direct and the reflected beams were suppressed by lead beamstops to prevent detector saturation. In order to observe early stages of sputter deposition at atomic length scales in real time, a second Pilatus 300K was set up for microbeam grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (μGIWAXS) at a sample-to-detector distance of DSD_GIWAXS = (593 ± 2) mm. The beam size for μGIWAXS was not readjusted. The illuminated area is sufficiently large to allow for statistically relevant measurements of average cluster correlation distances D within the time resolution. We still have a large enough photon density, because the amount of scattered photons scales proportionally to the scattering cross section77 (see ESI†). The in situ data were obtained during the initial 8.75 s of sputter deposition with a frame rate of 20 fps at a reduced power of 4 W corresponding to a deposition rate of (0.093 ± 0.005) nm s−1 and an effective thickness of (0.82 ± 0.04) nm.
Data analysis
Line cuts were performed on the detected 2D data to extract information on the gold cluster morphology parameter and growth kinetics (Fig. 1): a vertical cut I(qz) at qy = 0 and two horizontal cuts I(qy) at the critical angle of both materials involved, qz(Si) = 0.733 nm−1 and qz(Au) = 0.962 nm−1. Using the effective surface approximation for fitting the horizontal cuts with Lorentzian functions, the cluster correlation distance D as a characteristic length scale of the system was extracted.74,79 The temporal evolution of the Lorentzian parameters (peak position q0, amplitude, full width at half maximum [FWHM]) enables us to describe the gold cluster growth kinetics. This approach allows for extracting the relevant structural changes occurring in the gold thin film during sputter deposition. The assumptions were corroborated by complementary measurements using X-ray reflectivity (see ESI†) and field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, see ESI†) and by comparing the measured GISAXS data with a computer-based simulation performed with the IsGISAXS software (see ESI†).80
Results
Nucleation regime

Fig. 2a depicts a plot of horizontal cuts I(qy) at the critical angle of silicon and their Lorentzian fits. Fig. 2b shows all extracted fit parameters as a function of the effective layer thickness δ, which itself is calculated as the product of sputter deposition rate and time. The side peak related to the cluster correlation distance initially appears at high qy values and shifts towards smaller values with proceeding gold deposition. This shift in peak position indicates an increase of the average center-to-center distance of the existing gold clusters, mainly due to fusion phenomena of adjacent nuclei or clusters, the so-called coalescence.49,50,72 In addition to the shift of side peak positions, changes in the FWHM and the amplitude of the peak are also observed with proceeding gold deposition. The peak width is related to the distance distribution and displays the disorder of the cluster arrangement. With ongoing sputter deposition, new nuclei form between the laterally growing clusters until a critical surface coverage is reached. At an effective film thickness of δI = (0.27 ± 0.03) nm, the slope in the evolution of the peak width significantly changes and marks the nucleation threshold (Fig. 2b). At this point a change in the growth kinetics from predominant nucleation processes to coalescence of adjacent clusters takes place.81
 Fig. 2  Temporal evolution of the Lorentzian fitted Si Yoneda cuts. (a) The data points are re-binned for display and the solid lines mark the results of Lorentzian fitting. (b) Temporal evolution of the Lorentzian parameters: peak position (black rectangle), amplitude (red circle) and width (blue triangle) as a function of film thickness δ. The intersection of the green dashed lines marks the change in the growth kinetics from nucleation (I) to coalescence regime (II): nucleation threshold (NT). 
Intermediate and late stages of cluster growth
In order to analyze the subsequent cluster growth under deposition conditions on the road towards approaching industrial processing, we used μGISAXS and a higher deposition rate. Fig. 3b shows the gold cluster growth as a function of the film thickness. A broad out-of-plane peak emerges at a large scattering angle (qy = 1.6 nm−1), becomes narrower and shifts towards smaller qy values within the first few deposited nanometers. Transition from a diffusion-mediated coalescence regime to an adsorption-driven cluster growth regime can be observed from the time evolution of the FWHM (Fig. 3b). The crossover point of the FWHM at a thickness of δII = (1.33 ± 0.11) nm indicates a transition from fast increasing ordering to a slower growth of a two-dimensional (2D) cluster arrangement. The lateral cluster growth proceeds until the percolation threshold is reached at δIII = (5.5 ± 0.4) nm. The gold clusters tend to be in a close-packed arrangement equal to the metal–insulator transition state of the porous gold film.45 Henceforth, the gold clusters grow preferentially in the vertical direction due to spatial restrictions parallel to the sample surface. The mechanism can be described by a grain growth model, where one cluster grows radially into another one by the movement of grain boundaries and not by coalescence anymore.82 The overall shift in the peak position in the measured thickness interval is well described by an exponential decay (Fig. 3b) as a function of increasing layer thickness q0(δ) = y0 + A exp(−δ/δ0) with y0 = 0.26 nm−1, A = 0.93 nm−1 and δ0 = 2.29 nm.
 Fig. 3  (a) 2D map showing the temporal intensity evolution of Si horizontal cuts at qz = 0.733 nm−1. (b) Initial evolution of the peak parameter: the shift in peak position (black squares) to smaller qy values can be described by an exponential decay (yellow). The Roman numerals indicate the four different growth regimes. The development of FWHM (red circles) can be described with linear regressions for the initial and late stages of growth (green dashed lines). Diffusion threshold: blue dashed line. (c) 2D map of vertical cuts showing the temporal intensity evolution of vertical cuts at qy = 0. Additional equidistant modulations in the qz direction appear during the last stages due to a continuous vertical layer growth. Yoneda peak positions (Y(Si), Y(Au)), specular beamstop (SBS) and intermodular detector gap (IDG) are indicated. (d) Amplitudes of the Yoneda intensities (Au: red circles/yellow line, Si: black squares/green line) can be well described by a sigmoidal Boltzmann equation. 
Further kinetic information is deduced from the development of the Yoneda peak as a material-specific characteristic (Fig. 3c).76 The scattering intensity distribution in the scattering plane reveals information about the mass ratio of silicon and gold of the installed film within the X-ray penetration volume. The temporal evolution of the intensity at the critical angle of gold (Fig. 3d) can be interpreted as an increase of the surface coverage or cluster density. Basically, the intensity evolution can be well described by a Boltzmann sigmoidal function, indicating the transition of the Si/SiOx-layer to the percolated gold layer similar to phase transition phenomena.83 Due to the initial cluster formation and the large variation of electron density near the surface, the Yoneda peak intensities increase dramatically along the formation of the first 2 nm film thickness. Considering the higher order scattering terms in the distorted wave Born approximation (DWBA) theory, the intensity at the critical angle of silicon increases due to the scattering at the silicon surface before and/or after scattering at gold clusters.74,77 The probability of these additional scattering contributions will decrease with the propagation of lateral cluster growth, resulting in a decreasing slope of the silicon Yoneda intensity. The crossover point of both fitting functions is comparable to the crossover point of the width curve at (1.33 ± 0.11) nm indicating the diffusion threshold, where a transition in the growth kinetics occurs. At this layer thickness, the Yoneda peaks of both materials have equal magnitude suggesting a similar electron density. Gold becomes the dominant atom species within the X-ray penetration volume at further deposition. At the specific effective layer thickness of 2.8 nm the intensity at the critical angle of gold reaches half of its maximum. At exactly this point, the intensity at the critical angle of silicon reaches its maximum. Above this effective layer thickness, the silicon Yoneda intensity decreases slowly while the gold Yoneda intensity increases linearly until the effective film thickness reaches the cluster percolation threshold at 5.5 nm. During the last stage of gold sputter deposition a close-packed gold cluster assembly grows resulting in a constant gold Yoneda peak intensity after 9 nm and is then in accordance with a fully gold-covered substrate. The emergence of equidistant intensity modulations related to the growing average film thickness along the detector axis (qy = 0; qz > 1 nm−1) indicates layer growth (Fig. 3c).
For further investigation of the gold film after complete deposition, X-ray reflectivity (XRR) and Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FESEM) measurements were performed. An excellent agreement between XRR data and fit was obtained assuming a three-layer model consisting of a (6.2 ± 0.5) nm thick SiO2 layer covered by a (29.3 ± 0.7) nm thick bulk gold layer and an additional porous gold layer of (4.0 ± 0.6) nm with 81% voids on the top (Fig. 4a) confirming the cluster-like geometry of the topmost Au layer. The total gold film thickness of (33.3 ± 0.9) nm is in good agreement with δfinal = (32.0 ± 1.7) nm calculated from the qz modulation distance of the final GISAXS image. The FESEM images (Fig. 4b and c) show also a fully covered rough surface. The porous layer consists of round shaped gold clusters with a diameter of about 40 nm. The clusters are densely packed and their correlation distance is almost uniform, which is in good agreement with the GISAXS observations.
 Fig. 4  Morphology of the porous gold layer: (a) measured X-ray reflectivity curve of the porous gold layer after sputter deposition (circle) and fit to the data (line). Inset: density profile calculated from the fit. (b) FESEM cross-sectional view of the cleavage plane shows the porous gold layer consisting of closely packed clusters. (c) FESEM top view. 
Geometrical model of cluster growth
In order to determine quantitatively the changes in the surface morphology during gold sputter deposition, we introduce a simplified geometrical assumption to calculate real space parameters from the reciprocal space data. Due to a maximum in the interference function, the side peak in the GISAXS data indicates the mean cluster correlation distances D.56,72 Thus, the relation D ≈ 2πq0−1 holds for the fitted peak position q0 of the Lorentzian function. The model assumes uniform hemispherical clusters of radius R arranged in a 2D hexagonal lattice with the correlation distance D between the lattice points (Fig. 5a). To calculate the corresponding average radius R, one has to find the thickness δ of a homogeneous layer that contains the same volume of the material per unit area as the clustered surface. We consider the equilateral triangle of side length D that connects the centers of three adjacent hemispherical gold clusters and assume that all gold deposited on this triangular area is separated into three individual uniform clusters, which leads to the equation: (1)
 Fig. 5  Evolution of model-based morphological parameters: (a) 3D scheme of the geometrical model: virtually isosceles triangular prism of thickness δ and area AΔ between the separated hemispherical clusters of distance D and radius R. (b) Gold cluster growth during sputter deposition consists of four stages: (I) nucleation; (II) diffusion-mediated coalescence (D > 2R); (III) adsorption-mediated cluster growth until percolation threshold (D = 2R). Afterwards a dominant cluster (1) permanently grows by a movement of grain boundaries (IV; violet) at the expense of the adjacent clusters (2,3) (D < 2R). (c) Side view scheme of each stage of gold cluster growth showing the predominant processes. The black arrows indicate the movement of adatoms, clusters and grain boundaries. (d) Distance D (black) and the model-based cluster radii R (red) as a function of effective film thickness δ. Four different growth regimes (I–IV) with linear interpolated scaling laws and their transition points (dashed lines) can be distinguished. (e) 2R/D aspect ratio (black), coverage θ (red) and porosity Φ (green) as a function of δ. Diffusion threshold (blue), percolation threshold (pink; 2R/D = 1), (f) cluster density (black), ratio between gold atoms per cluster (red) and atoms located at the cluster surface (green). 
Considering the exponential fit of the peak position q0(δ) in the film thickness interval of 1 to 10 nm, one can directly estimate the mean cluster radius as a function of effective film thickness: (2)
Another decisive advantage is the calculation of the average surface coverage θ as the ratio of the areaAC = πR2/2 that is covered by the clusters within the triangular unit cell and its total area : (3)
After the system reaches the percolation threshold, one has to subtract the resulting overlap integral between the three adjacent clusters from the cluster area AC per unit cell in eqn (3).
We are furthermore able to calculate the temporal evolution of layer porosity Φ (Fig. 5d). It is calculated as the ratio of void volume Vv to the total volume of the model unit cell VΔ: (4)
The equations permit us to track the evolution of real space parameters of an idealized gold cluster growth on flat homogeneous surfaces like silicon oxide. Fig. 5b shows that the correlation distances D and the radii R both increase simultaneously with the amount of deposited gold. Four distinct growth stages, namely initial nucleation (I), diffusion-mediated coalescence (II), adsorption-driven cluster growth (III) and finally vertical growth of the gold layer based on grain growth (IV) with the already mentioned transition points can be identified.72,81 Linear interpolated scaling laws for the lateral cluster dimensions can be used to quantify the underlying fundamental physical process within a growth regime. For instance, the closer the slope dR/dδ of the curve R(δ) is to one, the lower is the influence of surface diffusion on cluster growth. Then direct adsorption of gold atoms is the rate-determining step. The slope of the curve D(δ) is related to spatial confinements of the clusters and suggests the predominant growth mode (2D/3D).
Based on the model parameters, one can follow the number of atoms per cluster by assuming that the cluster volume consists of gold atoms with a spherical radius of 0.144 nm (Fig. 5e). Furthermore, the cluster density can be deduced from half a cluster per unit cell. The significant cluster growth starts below 25 pm film thickness with 1013 clusters per cm2 composed of only (16 ± 8) gold atoms. In the nucleation stage, the number of clusters decreases tremendously while the number of cluster atoms increases. More than 50% of these cluster atoms are located on the cluster surface. During further gold deposition, this ratio and the cluster density decrease, indicating that the cluster growth occurs by permanent coalescence.84 At the percolation threshold, 3.5 × 1011 clusters per cm2 composed of approximately (1.25 ± 0.21) × 105 atoms impinge on each other. At this point, the cluster surface consists only of 6% of these atoms and the slopes of the three curves decrease in relation to a change in kinetics.
Simulation of GISAXS patterns
To further emphasize the physical relevance of our model, a simulation sequence of GISAXS patterns using the software IsGISAXS was carried out to model the temporal evolution of cluster shape and lateral dimensions (see ESI†).80

Fig. 6 shows five representative μGISAXS patterns at different film thicknesses and the corresponding simulations. Here, the parameters radius and distance were calculated from the geometrical assumptions (eqn (1)) and the exponential decay of the peak position (Fig. 2b). The agreement between data and simulation is good considering the limitations of the idealized geometric model. The main features such as position, shape and relative intensity of the different maxima can be successfully reproduced. At higher film thicknesses, the shape of the main out-of-plane peak loses its characteristic triangular curvature and the relative intensity of the cluster height modulation increases indicating the expiration of the model validity (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Representative 2D GISAXS detector images at δ = 1.5, 3, 6, 12, 24 nm (upper row ‘DATA’) and their corresponding IsGISAXS simulations (lower row ‘SIM’). Yoneda peak positions (YSi, YAu), SBS, IDG (red arrows) and scale bar are indicated. The white arrows mark the corresponding well pronounced minima and the dashed lines the side peak position. 
A comparative simulation sequence including other possible cluster geometries, namely hemisphere, full sphere, cylinder and parallelepiped, confirms the validity of the applied model within the first 10 nm film thickness. In this simulation, the Born form factor was varied and the structure factor was kept constant. The radius of hemisphere, sphere and cylinder as well as the edge length of the parallelepiped were considered to be of the same size and equal to the height of the simulated particles. The associated shape of the out-of-plane scattering with its characteristic triangular curvature approves the spheroidal geometry (Fig. 7). In particular, the intensity and amount of height modulations become more pronounced in planar geometries such as cylinders and parallelepipeds and the shape of the halo becomes more compact. This appearance is in good agreement with the scattering patterns at late stages of gold cluster growth (Fig. 6) yielding a change in generalized cluster geometry from hemispheres to cylinders.
 Fig. 7  IsGISAXS simulations of different cluster geometries at δ = 6.3 nm (upper row). A change of the scattering form factor directly influences the shape of the main out-of-plane peak and the intensity of height modulations. The characteristic curvature in the data (white triangle) indicates a spheroidal geometry. IsGISAXS simulations of spherical clusters with different surface contact angles CA (lower row). White number: angle between scattering plane and second order height maxima (dashed line). 
In order to deduce the contact angle of the spheroidal nanoclusters, the substrate-to-cluster contact angle was varied by changing the height to radius aspect ratio of a gold spheroid with constant volume. The characteristic feature in this sequence is the angle between the scattering plane and a diagonal line starting at the horizon and drawn through the second order of the first height peak (Fig. 7). This angle increases almost linearly with cluster contact angle which enables us to deduce the wetting behavior of gold on silicon oxide on the nanoscale. In comparison to the simulations, the angle in the measured GISAXS pattern of 37° suggests a contact angle of CA = (90 ± 5)° and allows the assumption of a hemispherical cluster geometry.
Discussion
From atoms to layer – general gold growth kinetics
Following our analysis of the in situ μGIWAXS/μGISAXS investigations, we verify a four-stage model to describe the growth kinetics of the gold clusters and layers on bare silicon oxide.72,81 Each stage can be characterized by a predominant surface process and its intrinsic kinetics.

I Nucleation. 
A gold atom or molecule impinging on the silicon substrate irregularly bounces laterally along the surface and gradually dissipates its kinetic energy to the substrate lattice before it is finally adsorbed.54,85 This so-called accommodation process is disturbed by partial desorption of adatoms because of the weak interaction between gold and silicon electron orbitals. The classical cluster growth can only be initialized by forming stable dimers, which serve as condensation nuclei.86 The dimers are stabilized by a triple atom collision due to conservation of energy and momentum. Since the amount of accommodated gold increases tremendously during the continuing sputter process, the chance of fast nucleation is sufficiently high within the first 0.1 nm of effective thickness.84 Here, 1013 small clusters per cm2 with an average radius of 0.45 nm and a mean distance of 3 nm can be detected (Fig. 5f). The existing stable nuclei adsorb new diffusing adatoms leading to lateral cluster growth (Fig. 5c). The fundamental driving forces behind this growth are well pronounced intra- and intermolecular interactions based on dispersive effects between 5d10-shells of adjacent gold atoms, the so-called aurophilicity.8 On the other hand the atoms at the cluster boundaries tend to increase their coordination number to gain free energy. Considering the non-wetting behavior of gold on silicon and their mismatch in the lattice constants, the cluster tries to minimize the interface to the surface resulting in hemispheroidal geometry and a three-dimensional (3D) growth well described in terms of the Volmer–Weber mode.81,87,88 After deposition of a monolayer equivalent effective thickness of δI = 0.27 nm, the surface is covered by only 25%. The model predicts clusters with 1 nm radius in 4 nm distance and the domination of the nucleation process ends. The increasing surface coverage promotes an increase in the adsorption probability of diffusing adatoms and consequently a decrease in the formation probability of new stable nuclei.


II Diffusion-mediated growth. 
Above the nucleation threshold, a self-amplified cluster growth takes place due to the continuously reduced mean free path of diffusing atoms and a simultaneously increased condensation probability on the gold-covered surface areas (Fig. 5).81,85,87 The gold supply via adsorption of adatoms and cluster migration is much higher in comparison to the direct adsorption of gold atoms from the gaseous phase resulting in a lateral growth with radially elongated cluster geometry. Moreover, small clusters are thermodynamically moving along the surface.51,54 Once two clusters come into close contact, they tend to fuse by lowering the surface free energy and saturating the coordination number of their surface atoms. Therefore, this stage is dominated by a continuous diffusion-controlled coalescence.50–52,54,56,81,86 Teo and Zhang raised the hypothesis that the formation of clusters due to the principle of self-organization and self-similarity down to the atomic level is an important step in this intermediate stage of cluster growth.89 In general, the fusion phenomena can be compared to the growth of coalescing water droplets on hydrophobic self-assembled monolayers,90 because gold–gold interaction is energetically comparable to hydrogen bonds.91,8


III Adsorption-driven growth. 
Coalescence kinetics strongly depends on the cluster size, because with increasing size the surface mobility becomes more restricted and fusion of two larger clusters becomes more time consuming.49–51 At an effective film thickness of δII = 1.33 nm, the clusters have reached a critical radius of approximately 3.3 nm. At this diffusion threshold, the clusters' mobility is significantly limited and cluster fusion processes become rarer than the fast adsorption of freely moving adatoms or atoms from the gaseous phase. Deduced from a surface coverage of more than 60%, the probability of adsorption of free moving adatoms or atoms from the gaseous phase further increases. Henceforth, diffusion-driven cluster coalescence is no longer the predominating process and will be compensated by adsorption-driven cluster growth of immobilized clusters.81,86,87 In consequence, the surface morphology becomes coarsened while the surface coverage increases.72,81


IV Grain growth. 
A new mechanism starts at an effective thickness of δIII = 5.5 nm, which marks the typical percolation threshold.24,25,44,45 At this point, the mean cluster distance equals the average diameter leading to a fractal-like cluster with high degree of long-range connectivity at a surface coverage of 90% (Fig. 5d).92 Surface mobility is now totally restricted resulting in a well pronounced grain growth process.81,82 Boundaries between closely spaced gold clusters can be considered as defects in a crystal structure, which is associated with a certain amount of free excess energy. The system replies with a thermodynamically driven relaxation to reduce these grain boundaries. Thus, the grain growth occurs by a discontinuous movement of cluster boundaries. One cluster may grow radially into another cluster, while it may be consumed from the other side (Fig. 5b). At a film thickness of 9 nm the surface is fully covered and the mean cluster diameter obviously exceeds the correlation distance. Consequently, a porous gold layer grows preferentially in the vertical direction and the cluster geometry changes to cylindrical grains due to lateral spatial limitations of the clusters.

Conclusions
The presented real-time in situ investigation allowed observation of the important parts of the temporal evolution of gold cluster morphology on flat silicon oxide surfaces during sputter deposition. The evolution of structural parameters confirms four general stages of gold cluster growth, from initial nucleation via coalescence-mediated cluster growth followed by adsorption-driven grain growth and finally vertical growth of the gold layer above the percolation threshold.72,81 We introduced a robust model based on the geometrical assumption of a 2D ideal hexagonal arrangement of gold hemispheres, which can be generally applied to any layer growth performing the Volmer–Weber mode. The calculated cluster radii and distances are in very good agreement with the results of Kaune et al.,72 where gold was deposited stepwise onto a spin-coated conducting polymer surface, indicating a general validity of the applied model for all homogeneous flat and defect-free surfaces. The results presented here are based on data taken at sputter deposition rates ranging from approximately 1 to 2 Å s−1. They show a negligible effect of deposition rates in the given deposition regime, which ensured a very good comparison between wide-angle and small-angle scattering data considering the error environment (see ESI†). However, we may speculate that deposition rates higher than 2 Å s−1 have a larger impact on the gold cluster growth kinetics in the nucleation regime caused by a supersaturation of the sample surface with adatoms and the higher occurrence of collision phenomena. Our model correlates the deposited amount of metal with the temporal evolution of structural parameters like size, distance of clusters, wetting angle and surface coverage during the deposition process, which is mandatory for the optimization of catalytic, electrical and optical properties in nanotechnology applications. For instance, one interesting result of this study indicates that an effective layer thickness of 5.5 nm is already sufficient to achieve long-range connectivity with a surface coverage of 90%. Knowledge of this value is crucial since the optical and electrical properties are drastically changed near the percolation threshold.24,25,43–45 Therefore, the results of our study are very important for an efficiently controlled manufacturing of gold clusters and layers, e.g. quantum dots or contacts in a large variety of electronic devices and circuits. This holds especially for photovoltaic applications, where a thin metal cluster layer is able to increase the light harvesting capability whereas the thickness of the gold contacts reduces energy conversion efficiency.17,18 Moreover, real-time control of the gold cluster size in the early stages of growth is of great interest since the best catalytically active gold clusters have a diameter distribution of 2–4 nm.26 This regime is reached after a sputter deposition of only 1 nm gold layer thickness, where the surface coverage is already larger than 50%. Using in situ real-time μGISAXS/μGIWAXS, we gain access to the early stages of formation of thin metallic layers. This approach allows for further investigation of temperature dependence of gold cluster growth to quantify activation energy and diffusion coefficients. A better understanding of the growth process kinetics is essential for optimization of manufacturing parameters, saving energy and such unique resources as gold.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank R. Döhrmann for his technical support at the beamline. V. K. acknowledges support within the BMBF project grant number 05K10WOA. This work was carried out at the P03 beamline of the light source PETRA III at DESY – a member of the Helmholtz Association (HGF).
Notes and references
M.-C. Daniel and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 293–346 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yeh, B. Creran and V. Rotello, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1871–1880 RSC .
R. Jin, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 343–362 RSC .
C. Kim, P. Ghosh and V. M. Rotello, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 61–67 RSC .
Y. Pan, S. Neuss, A. Leifert, M. Fischler, F. Wen, U. Simon, G. Schmid, W. Brandau and W. Jahnen-Dechent, Small, 2007, 3, 1941–1949 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, X. He, K. Wang, C. Xie, B. Zhou and Z. Qing, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2244 RSC .
J. Zheng, C. Zhou, M. Yu and J. Liu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4073–4083 RSC .
P. Pyykkö, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 116, 4512–4557 CrossRef .
N. G. Khlebtsov and L. A. Dykman, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2010, 111, 1–35 CrossRef CAS .
S. Peng, J. M. McMahon, G. C. Schatz, S. K. Gray and Y. Sun, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 14530–14534 CrossRef CAS .
D. Babonneau, S. Camelio, L. Simonot, F. Pailloux, P. Guérin, B. Lamongie and O. Lyon, Europhys. Lett., 2011, 93, 26005 CrossRef .
C. J. Orendorff, T. K. Sau and C. J. Murphy, Small, 2006, 2, 636–639 CrossRef CAS .
K. Akamatsu and S. Deki, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 1773–1777 RSC .
J. Romo-Herrera, R. Alvarez-Puebla and L. Liz-Marzán, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1304 RSC .
G. Bauer, J. Hassmann, H. Walter, J. Haglmüller, C. Mayer and T. Schalkhammer, Nanotechnology, 2003, 14, 1289–1311 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Claridge, A. W. Castleman Jr, S. N. Khanna, C. B. Murray, A. Sen and P. S. Weiss, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 244–255 CrossRef CAS .
M. Westphalen, U. Kreibig, J. Rostalski, H. Lu and D. Meissner, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 61, 97–105 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Wu, F.-C. Chen, Y.-S. Hsiao, F.-C. Chien, P. Chen, C.-H. Kuo, M. H. Huang and C.-S. Hsu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 959–967 CrossRef CAS .
B. Paci, A. Generosi, V. R. Albertini, G. D. Spyropoulos, E. Stratakis and E. Kymakis, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7452–7459 RSC .
H. Hiep, H. Yoshikawa, M. Saito and E. Tamiya, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 446–452 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, L. Zhang, H. Gong, J. Homola and Q. Yu, Small, 2011, 7, 371–376 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tabakman, Z. Chen, H. Casalongue, H. Wang and H. Dai, Small, 2011, 7, 499–505 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wolkenhauer, G.-G. Bumbu, Y. Cheng, S. V. Roth and J. S. Gutmann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 054101 CrossRef .
H. Walter, G. Bauer, R. Domnick, G. Jakopic and A. Leitner, Opt. Eng., 2006, 45, 103801 CrossRef .
B. Gompf, J. Beister, T. Brandt, J. Pflaum and M. Dressel, Opt. Lett., 2007, 32, 1578–1580 CrossRef CAS .
M. Valden, X. Lai and D. W. Goodman, Science, 1998, 281, 1647–1650 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma and S. Dai, Nano Res., 2010, 4, 3–32 CrossRef .
Y. Gao, N. Shao, Y. Pei, Z. Chen and X. Zeng, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7818–7829 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cortial, M. Siutkowski, F. Goettmann, A. Moores, C. Boissière, D. Grosso, P. Le Floch and C. Sanchez, Small, 2006, 2, 1042–1045 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, H. Qian and R. Jin, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6714–6717 RSC .
I. Green, W. Tang, M. Neurock and J. Yates, Science, 2011, 333, 736–739 CrossRef CAS .
X. Nie, H. Qian, Q. Ge, H. Xu and R. Jin, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6014–6022 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Johnson, T. Priest and J. Laskin, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 573–582 CrossRef CAS .
M. Di Vece, N. P. Young, Z. Li, Y. Chen and R. E. Palmer, Small, 2006, 2, 1270–1272 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rauschenbach, F. L. Stadler, E. Lunedei, N. Malinowski, S. Koltsov, G. Costantini and K. Kern, Small, 2006, 2, 540–547 CrossRef CAS .
J. Polte, M. Herder, R. Erler, S. Rolf, A. Fischer, C. Würth, A. F. Thünemann, R. Kraehnert and F. Emmerling, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2463–2469 RSC .
S. Deki, Y. Aoi and H. Yanagimoto, J. Mater. Chem., 1996, 6, 1879–1882 RSC .
J. Ftouni, M. Penhoat, A. Addad, E. Payen, C. Rolando and J.-S. Girardon, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4450–4454 RSC .
H. Muhammed and T. Pradeep, Small, 2011, 7, 204–208 CrossRef .
M. R. Hormozi Nezhad, M. Aizawa, L. A. Porter, A. E. Ribbe and J. M. Buriak, Small, 2005, 1, 1076–1081 CrossRef .
A. Uzun, V. Ortalan, Y. Hao, N. D. Browning and B. C. Gates, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3691–3695 CrossRef CAS .
F. Faupel, V. Zaporojtchenko, T. Strunskus and M. Elbahri, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2010, 12, 1177–1190 CrossRef CAS .
U. Schürmann, H. Takele, V. Zaporojtchenko and F. Faupel, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 515, 801–804 CrossRef .
J. Siegel, O. Lyutakov, V. Rybka, Z. Kolská and V. Svorčík, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 96 CrossRef .
M. Hövel, M. Alws, B. Gompf and M. Dressel, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 1–7 Search PubMed .
J. T. Yates and C. T. Campbell, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 911–916 CrossRef CAS .
E. Richman and J. Hutchison, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2441–2446 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cademartiri and V. Kitaev, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3435–3446 RSC .
T. Lim, D. McCarthy, S. Hendy, K. J. Stevens, S. A. Brown and R. D. Tilley, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3809–3813 CrossRef CAS .
C. Henry, C. Chapon and B. Mutaftschiev, Thin Solid Films, 1977, 46, 157–165 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Métois, K. Heinemann and H. Poppa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1976, 29, 134 CrossRef .
R. Zan, U. Bangert, Q. Ramasse and K. S. Novoselov, Small, 2011, 7, 2868–2872 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Wang and R. E. Palmer, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4947–4949 RSC .
G. Ehrlich, Surf. Sci., 1991, 246, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Levine, J. B. Cohen, Y. W. Chung and P. Georgopoulos, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 1989, 22, 528–532 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Levine, J. B. Cohen and Y. W. Chung, Surf. Sci., 1991, 248, 215–224 CrossRef CAS .
P. Müller-Buschbaum, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 376, 3–10 Search PubMed .
S. V. Roth, M. Burghammer, C. Riekel, P. Müller-Buschbaum, A. Diethert, P. Panagiotou and H. Walter, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 1935 CrossRef CAS .
D. Babonneau, S. Camelio, D. Lantiat, L. Simonot and A. Michel, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 1–12 CrossRef .
P. Müller-Buschbaum, S. V. Roth, M. Burghammer, E. Bauer, S. Pfister, C. David and C. Riekel, Physica B, 2005, 357, 148–151 CrossRef .
G. Renaud, R. Lazzari, C. Revenant, A. Barbier, M. Noblet, O. Ulrich, F. Leroy, J. Jupille, Y. Borensztein, C. R. Henry, J.-P. Deville, F. Scheurer, J. Mane-Mane and O. Fruchart, Science, 2003, 300, 1416–1419 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Kim, B. Lee, S. Lee, C. Larson, J. M. Baik, C. T. Yavuz, S. Seifert, S. Vajda, R. E. Winans, M. Moskovits, G. D. Stucky and A. M. Wodtke, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4138–4146 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yavuz, S. Lee, B. Lee, M. H. Kim, J. M. Baik, S. Seifert, S. Vajda, C. Larson, R. E. Winans, M. Moskovits, A. M. Wodtke and G. D. Stucky, Micro- and Nanotechnology Sensors, Systems, and Applications II, Proc. SPIE, 2010, 7679, 76792D-1–76792D-9 CrossRef .
A. Buffet, M. M. Abul Kashem, K. Schlage, S. Couet, R. Röhlsberger, A. Rothkirch, G. Herzog, E. Metwalli, R. Meier, G. Kaune, M. Rawolle, P. Müller-Buschbaum, R. Gehrke and S. V. Roth, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 343–346 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kaune, E. Metwalli, R. Meier, V. Körstgens, K. Schlage, S. Couet, R. Röhlsberger, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1055–1062 CAS .
B. Krause, S. Darma, M. Kaufholz, H. H. Gräfe, S. Ulrich, M. Mantilla, R. Weigel, S. Rembold and T. Baumbach, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2012, 19, 216–222 CrossRef .
S. V. Roth, G. Herzog, V. Körstgens, A. Buffet, M. Schwartzkopf, J. Perlich, M. M. Abul Kashem, R. Döhrmann, R. Gehrke, A. Rothkirch, K. Stassig, W. Wurth, G. Benecke, C. Li, P. Fratzl, M. Rawolle and P. Müller-Buschbaum, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2011, 23, 254208 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Ashley, D. R. Dunphy, Z. Jiang, E. C. Carnes, Z. Yuan, D. N. Petsev, P. B. Atanassov, O. D. Velev, M. Sprung, J. Wang, D. S. Peabody and C. J. Brinker, Small, 2011, 7, 1043–1050 CrossRef CAS .
J. Perlich, M. Schwartzkopf, V. Körstgens, D. Erb, J. F. H. Risch, P. Müller-Buschbaum, R. Röhlsberger, S. V. Roth and R. Gehrke, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2012, 6, 253–255 CrossRef CAS .
E. Metwalli, J.-F. Moulin, J. Perlich, W. Wang, A. Diethert, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11815–11821 CrossRef CAS .
E. Metwalli, S. Couet, K. Schlage, R. Röhlsberger, V. Körstgens, M. Ruderer, W. Wang, G. Kaune, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4265–4272 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kaune, M. A. Ruderer, E. Metwalli, W. Wang, S. Couet, K. Schlage, R. Röhlsberger, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 353–360 CAS .
M. M. Abul Kashem, D. Patra, J. Perlich, A. Rothkirch, A. Buffet, S. V. Roth, V. M. Rotello and P. Müller-Buschbaum, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 396–399 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Müller-Buschbaum, in Applications of Synchrotron Light to Scattering and Diffraction in Materials and Life Sciences, ed. T. A. Ezquerra, M. C. García-Gutiérrez, A. Nogales and M. Gómez, Springer, Berlin,  2009, pp. 61–89 Search PubMed .
S. Lenz, M. Bonini, S. K. Nett, M. C. Lechmann, S. G. J. Emmerling, R. S. Kappes, M. Memesa, A. Timmann, S. V. Roth and J. S. Gutmann, Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., 2010, 51, 10601 CrossRef .
Y. Yoneda, Phys. Rev., 1963, 131, 2010–2013 CrossRef .
V. Holý and T. Baumbach, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 49, 10668–10676 CrossRef .
A. Buffet, A. Rothkirch, R. Döhrmann, V. Körstgens, M. M. Abul Kashem, J. Perlich, G. Herzog, M. Schwartzkopf, R. Gehrke, P. Müller-Buschbaum and S. V. Roth, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2012, 19, 647–653 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Benecke, http://www.desy.de/~beneckeg/dpdak/,  2010.
R. Lazzari, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2002, 35, 406–421 CrossRef CAS .
I. Petrov, P. B. Barna, L. Hultman and J. E. Greene, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2003, 21, S117 CAS .
F. Ruffino, M. G. Grimaldi, C. Bongiorno, F. Giannazzo, F. Roccaforte, V. Raineri and C. Spinella, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 054311 CrossRef .
A. L. Navarro-Verdugo, F. M. Goycoolea, G. Romero-Meléndez, I. Higuera-Ciapara and W. Argüelles-Monal, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 5847 RSC .

          V. Zaporojtchenko, T. Strunskus, K. Behnke and F. Faupel, in Interface Controlled Materials, ed. M. Rühle and H. Gleiter, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2000, vol. 9, pp. 24–29 Search PubMed .
V. Zaporojtchenko, K. Behnke, A. Thran, T. Strunskus and F. Faupel, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1999, 144–145, 355–359 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Venables, G. D. T. Spiller and M. Hanbücken, Rep. Prog. Phys., 1984, 47, 399–459 CrossRef .
H. Brune, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1998, 31, 125–229 Search PubMed .
Y. Han, D. S. He, Y. Liu, S. Xie, T. Tsukuda and Z. Y. Li, Small, 2012, 8, 2361–2364 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Teo and H. Zhang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1991, 88, 5067–5071 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. López, H. A. Biebuyck, C. D. Frisbie and G. M. Whitesides, Science, 1993, 260, 647–649 Search PubMed .
A. Avramopoulos, M. G. Papadopoulos and A. J. Sadlej, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 370, 765–769 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Voss, R. B. Laibowitz and E. I. Allessandrini, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1982, 49, 1441–1444 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The full GISAXS image sequence of the experiment, the model-based IsGISAXS-simulation sequence as movie files for comparison and detailed information about sample cleaning, XRR, FESEM, IsGISAXS, comparison μGIWAXS/μGISAXS, and sampling statistics. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr34216fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Scheme of the transportable ultra-high vacuum (UHV) sputter chamber in a microbeam grazing incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (μGISAXS) setup. αi denotes the angle between the incident monochromatic X-ray beam and the sample surface, αf the corresponding exit angle, and 2θf the out-of-plane angle. The direct beam position marks the origin of coordinates of the scattering vector components qy and qz. Line cuts were performed on the detected 2D data to extract information on the gold cluster morphology (H = height, R = radius, D = distance) and growth kinetics: a vertical cut along the scattering plane (red) (I(qz) at qy = 0) and horizontal cuts (green) (I(qy)).	 

 	Fig. 2  Temporal evolution of the Lorentzian fitted Si Yoneda cuts. (a) The data points are re-binned for display and the solid lines mark the results of Lorentzian fitting. (b) Temporal evolution of the Lorentzian parameters: peak position (black rectangle), amplitude (red circle) and width (blue triangle) as a function of film thickness δ. The intersection of the green dashed lines marks the change in the growth kinetics from nucleation (I) to coalescence regime (II): nucleation threshold (NT).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) 2D map showing the temporal intensity evolution of Si horizontal cuts at qz = 0.733 nm−1. (b) Initial evolution of the peak parameter: the shift in peak position (black squares) to smaller qy values can be described by an exponential decay (yellow). The Roman numerals indicate the four different growth regimes. The development of FWHM (red circles) can be described with linear regressions for the initial and late stages of growth (green dashed lines). Diffusion threshold: blue dashed line. (c) 2D map of vertical cuts showing the temporal intensity evolution of vertical cuts at qy = 0. Additional equidistant modulations in the qz direction appear during the last stages due to a continuous vertical layer growth. Yoneda peak positions (Y(Si), Y(Au)), specular beamstop (SBS) and intermodular detector gap (IDG) are indicated. (d) Amplitudes of the Yoneda intensities (Au: red circles/yellow line, Si: black squares/green line) can be well described by a sigmoidal Boltzmann equation.	 

 	Fig. 4  Morphology of the porous gold layer: (a) measured X-ray reflectivity curve of the porous gold layer after sputter deposition (circle) and fit to the data (line). Inset: density profile calculated from the fit. (b) FESEM cross-sectional view of the cleavage plane shows the porous gold layer consisting of closely packed clusters. (c) FESEM top view.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 5  Evolution of model-based morphological parameters: (a) 3D scheme of the geometrical model: virtually isosceles triangular prism of thickness δ and area AΔ between the separated hemispherical clusters of distance D and radius R. (b) Gold cluster growth during sputter deposition consists of four stages: (I) nucleation; (II) diffusion-mediated coalescence (D > 2R); (III) adsorption-mediated cluster growth until percolation threshold (D = 2R). Afterwards a dominant cluster (1) permanently grows by a movement of grain boundaries (IV; violet) at the expense of the adjacent clusters (2,3) (D < 2R). (c) Side view scheme of each stage of gold cluster growth showing the predominant processes. The black arrows indicate the movement of adatoms, clusters and grain boundaries. (d) Distance D (black) and the model-based cluster radii R (red) as a function of effective film thickness δ. Four different growth regimes (I–IV) with linear interpolated scaling laws and their transition points (dashed lines) can be distinguished. (e) 2R/D aspect ratio (black), coverage θ (red) and porosity Φ (green) as a function of δ. Diffusion threshold (blue), percolation threshold (pink; 2R/D = 1), (f) cluster density (black), ratio between gold atoms per cluster (red) and atoms located at the cluster surface (green).	 
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 6  Representative 2D GISAXS detector images at δ = 1.5, 3, 6, 12, 24 nm (upper row ‘DATA’) and their corresponding IsGISAXS simulations (lower row ‘SIM’). Yoneda peak positions (YSi, YAu), SBS, IDG (red arrows) and scale bar are indicated. The white arrows mark the corresponding well pronounced minima and the dashed lines the side peak position.	 

 	Fig. 7  IsGISAXS simulations of different cluster geometries at δ = 6.3 nm (upper row). A change of the scattering form factor directly influences the shape of the main out-of-plane peak and the intensity of height modulations. The characteristic curvature in the data (white triangle) indicates a spheroidal geometry. IsGISAXS simulations of spherical clusters with different surface contact angles CA (lower row). White number: angle between scattering plane and second order height maxima (dashed line).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The full GISAXS image sequence of the experiment, the model-based IsGISAXS-simulation sequence as movie files for comparison and detailed information about sample cleaning, XRR, FESEM, IsGISAXS, comparison μGIWAXS/μGISAXS, and sampling statistics. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr34216f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
