Complementary behaviour of EDL and HER activity in functionalized graphene nanoplatelets   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NR08102J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NR08102J
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 1790-1800Complementary behaviour of EDL and HER activity in functionalized graphene nanoplatelets†

        
          
            Anand B. 
            Puthirath
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Sharmila 
            Shirodkar
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Minfei 
            Fei
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Abhijit 
            Baburaj
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Keiko 
            Kato
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sreehari K. 
            Saju
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ranjith 
            Prasannachandran
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Nithya 
            Chakingal
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Robert 
            Vajtai
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Boris I. 
            Yakobson
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Pulickel M. 
            Ajayan
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and NanoEngineering, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA. E-mail: ajayan@rice.edu; anandputhirath@gmail.com
bSchool of Physics, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala 695551, India
cInterdisciplinary Excellence Centre, Department of Applied and Environmental Chemistry, University of Szeged, Hungary
Received 
      19th September 2019
    , Accepted 8th December 2019First published on 9th December 2019AbstractGreen hydrogen production is a vital requirement of the upcoming hydrogen fuel-based locomotion and economy. Water electrolysis facilitated by electricity derived from renewable sources and direct solar-to-hydrogen conversion centred on photochemical and photoelectrochemical water splitting is a promising pathway for sustainable hydrogen production. All these methods require a highly active noble metal catalyst to make the water-splitting process more energy-efficient and in order to make it economical, metal-free hydrogen evolution catalysts such as graphene nanoplatelets (GNPs) are essential. Herein, we report the effect of a range of functionalizations on the catalytic properties of graphene nanoplatelets (GNPs) for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). We also account for the effect of functionalization on the strength of the electrical double layer formation on the surface of functionalized GNPs. It is observed that the catalytic activity and the electrical double layer strength are inversely related to each other. Our first-principles-based density functional theoretical (DFT) modelling unravels the origin of the observed electrocatalytic activity and its trend and the strength of the electrical double layers in terms of free energy changes during the ion absorption/desorption events on the electrode surface. Based on our observations, minimizing the electrical double layer strength is identified as an approach to improve the catalytic performance of the catalysts.
Introduction
Hydrogen evolution/oxidation reactions (HER/HOR) and oxygen reduction/evolution reactions (ORR/OER) are the fundamental electrochemical processes in fuel cells and water electrolyzers.1–3 Both devices play critical roles in the development of renewable energy conversion and storage technologies. For these electrocatalytic processes to achieve high efficiency while being commercially viable, carbon-based metal-free materials are being developed as cost-effective alternatives to traditional noble-metal and non-platinum group catalysts.4–7 Carbon materials from conventional amorphous carbon to the more recent carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and porous nanocarbons are popular because of their low cost, excellent electrical and thermal conductivity, large surface area, and mechanical/chemical strength throughout a wide potential window.1,8,9 These properties are all advantageous for designing high-performance electrocatalysts. Another unique feature of these carbon materials is that they can exist with various morphologies and have highly tunable electronic structures.10,11 This makes them an ideal platform for the design of catalysts at the atomic level. To date, many carbon-based materials with different architectures have been engineered into highly active electrocatalysts for ORR and many other reactions. These materials include low-dimensional nanostructures like CNTs, graphene, and graphitic-carbon nitride (g-C3N4), hybrids and functional carbon composites.12,13 The motivation behind these efforts is to replace precious metal electrocatalysts with low-cost alternatives for energy conversion applications. Metal-free catalysts are mostly sought after for water splitting; however, the performance of traditional precious metals is yet to be outshined.
In an electrocatalytic process, a catalyst's activity is mainly determined by its adsorption/desorption ability toward the key reaction intermediates involved in the reaction.14 Therefore, the intrinsic adsorption energy of these reaction intermediates for a range of catalysts can be correlated to a specific activity descriptor (e.g., exchange current density) in the shape of a volcano plot.15 Furthermore, the adsorption behaviour is fundamentally determined by the electronic properties of the catalyst, which can be analyzed using density functional theoretical (DFT) calculations.16 Accordingly, one could pursue highly active electrocatalysts by first engineering the electronic structure (e.g., p-band for carbons) of the material, and then optimizing its physical structure to maximize catalytic performance. The engineering of electronic structures can be achieved by introducing a secondary element or by fabricating specific defect structures in the pristine carbon framework.1 Such approaches can create active sites by either inducing electron- or spin-redistribution in the sp2-conjugated carbon matrix. The generated active sites can then be scaled up through nanostructure engineering techniques. Thus, the apparent overall performance of a catalyst can be synergistically increased by both enhanced intrinsic activity and improved physical properties (e.g., conductivity or surface area).17
On the other hand, the worldwide adoption of renewable energy in the form of solar and wind power, combined with the electrification of transportation and the proliferation of mobile devices are all contributing to the need for cost-effective, efficient electric energy storage devices in sizes varying from hand-held to grid-based.18 Batteries and supercapacitors are the most commonly used electric energy storage devices. A battery stores energy by bulk redox/intercalation reactions, while a supercapacitor stores energy through surface ion-adsorption or surface redox/intercalation reactions.19,20 Batteries possess high energy density but lack high power density, while a supercapacitor boasts high-power density due to fast surface physical and chemical processes. The global supercapacitor market was $1.2B in 2014 and, by some estimates, will grow over 20% per year to more than $7B in 2023.18 There are two core types of supercapacitors: electric double-layer capacitors (EDLCs), which store electrical energy through the formation of the electrical double layer at the electrode/electrolyte interface, while pseudocapacitors store electrical energy by reversible surface redox reaction or ion intercalation.21,22 Here too, carbon nanostructures can play a crucial role as high surface area electrodes. The electrical double layer strength in EDLCs, which determines the total capacitance, similarly depends on the cation or anion adsorption/desorption ability (affinity towards ions) of the electrode surface.
Under a non-zero electric potential, almost every solid–liquid interface possesses an electrical double layer. The strength of the electrical double layer depends on various factors such as electrode surface area, electrical conductivity, cation/anion affinity and electrolyte concentration. Eventually, the electrical double layer acts as a resistive layer against charge transfer during the catalytic action. The functionalization of the electrode could influence the electrical conductivity and cation/anion affinity. However, a systematic study to comprehend the role of functionalization and the electrical double layer on catalysis (HER/OER) is uncommon in literature. Keeping these things in mind, we have striven to determine the effect of functionalization on both electrocatalytic property and EDLC properties of graphene nanoplatelets and their functionalized versions (COOH, O+, NH2, N2, F) through experiments and DFT calculations. Based on the observations, minimizing the electrical double layer strength is hypothesized as one of the approaches to enhancing the catalytic performance of water-splitting catalysts.
Results and discussion
Structure
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of the samples are depicted in Fig. 1A, which did not reveal any crystalline sharp diffraction patterns. The broad peaks observed in the 2θ value ranges of 20–30° and 40–45° indicate the presence of amorphous phases rather than an ordered structure.23 This demonstrates that despite GNPs holding their integrity as multilayered flakes (Fig. 1C and D), the ordered interlayer structure between the constituent graphene layers, as in graphite, no longer exists. Pristine GNPs and functionalized GNPs show more or less the same XRD patterns, and confirm that the functionalization is concentrated more on the flake edges than on the basal planes.
 Fig. 1  Structural characterization of GNPs and functionalized GNPs. (A) X-ray diffraction spectra, (B) Raman Spectra, (C) Fe-SEM images of GNP powder at low to high magnification. (D) Low and high magnification TEM images of dispersed pure GNP (top) and GNP-COOH (bottom). Left and right columns show lateral and side views of the flakes, respectively. (E) The FTIR spectra of GNPs and fGNPs. Different vibrational bands present in the FTIR spectra help to identify the various functional groups present in each sample. 
The Raman spectra of GNPs and functionalized GNPs were recorded using a Renishaw microRaman operated at 532 nm excitation wavelength for samples on quartz slides. The Raman spectrum is characterized by three major bands. (i) The intensity of the D band (∼1350 cm−1) due to the first-order phonon process indicates the in-plane and edge defect density. (ii) The G band (∼1580 cm−1) is related to the zone center Raman-allowed band. (iii) The 2D band is associated with the second-order phonon process, and its shift indicates the relative GNP thickness (∼2727 cm−1 for graphite and <2700 cm−1 for graphene). The Raman spectrum of GNPs (Fig. 1B) contains a D-band, which is usually weak in the spectrum of the thick graphite samples. The full width at half-maximum (fwhm) of the D-band is 61.4 cm−1. The fwhm of the G-band is 23.1 cm−1, which is higher than that for graphite, 13.5 cm−1. The broad D- and G-bands are standard for GNPs and functionalized GNPs.24–29 Here, the G band remains intact for pristine and functionalized GNPs, while the D band intensity remains weak even for functionalized GNPs. This implies that the majority of the functionalization happens at the zigzag edges rather than the armchair edges because the armchair edges show strong D-band intensity, while the zigzag edges do not.30 The SEM micrographs of the as-prepared graphene nanoplatelets (GNPs) powder at different magnifications are depicted in Fig. 1C & S1.† A thin sheet-like morphology is well evident, and the lateral size of the GNP sheets was found to be in the range 2–5 μm. Low- and high-magnification TEM images of pristine GNP and GNP-COOH are also shown in Fig. 1D, S1 & S2.† Irrespective of their different functionalizations, pristine GNP and functionalized GNPs show similar morphologies. From several high-resolution TEM images (see ESI Fig. S2†) of pure and functionalized GNPs, the average thickness of the flakes was computed as 10 nm.
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopic measurements (Fig. 1E) were performed to gain insight into the chemical changes of the graphene nanoplates caused by different functionalizations. The absorption peaks at 3443 and 1626 cm−1 for COOH and O-functionalized samples corresponded to –OH (hydroxyl) stretching and –OH bending frequencies, respectively. A band at 1100 cm−1 was also observed for these samples, which is the signature of C–O–C vibration modes. Similarly, NH2 and CN vibrations were found at 1500 cm−1, and 1400 cm−1, respectively, for NH2 and N-functionalized GNPs. Also, an absorption peak at 1250 cm−1 corresponds to the C–F vibration mode, which is observed for F-functionalized GNPs.31,32 All other relevant vibration modes are also marked in Fig. 1E.
XPS data were collected using a PHI Quantera X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (10−9 bar) apparatus with an Al Kα X-ray source, and a monochromator (Fig. 2). Powder samples were pressed in aluminum foil. The spectra were obtained with pass energies of 140 (survey) and 25 eV (high-energy resolution). The spectral components of C signals were derived by fitting a sum of single component lines to the experimental data by nonlinear least-squares curve-fitting. All the spectra were calibrated relative to a carbon 1s peak, positioned at 285.0 eV to correct the charging effects. Deconvolution of the carbon 1s peak reveals the atomic percentage of various carbon bonds, namely, sp2 (CC bonds at ∼284.5 eV), sp3 (C–C or C–H bonds at ∼285.5 eV), and carbon oxidation/functionalization products [C–O bonds (∼286.1 eV)]. All the samples possess strong peaks of binding energy (B.E) 284.2 eV indicating the presence of sp2 C–C bonds. Other than this, a C–O band at 285.49 eV is also omnipresent in all the samples. The HOC–O bonds at 286.54 eV, OC bond at 287.79 eV, OC–NH2 bond at 287.9 eV, OC–N– bond at 284.33 eV and OC–F– bond at 285.81 eV are present in –COOH, O, NH2, N2 and F-functionalized GNPs, respectively.26,31,32 The presence of the desired functionalization in the samples was thus proved and the atomic percentage analysis from the XPS survey scan (Fig. S3†) indicated an amount of functionalization of 5% with 1.5% tolerance.
 Fig. 2  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis of pristine GNPs and functionalized GNPs. (A) Pristine GNP, (B) –COOH-functionalized GNP, (C) –O-rich GNP, (D) –NH2-functionalized GNP, (E) –N2-rich GNP, (F) –F-rich GNP. From the survey scans, the atomic percentage of carbon and different functional groups present in the samples were computed to be ∼95% and ∼5%. 
Catalysis
All the electrochemical studies were carried out at room temperature using an Autolab potentiostat. Electrochemical experiments were conducted in three-electrode systems using mercury-mercurous sulfate Hg/Hg2SO4 as the reference electrode and a graphite rod as the counter electrode. The use of the graphite electrode33 will nullify the possible effect of platinum dissolution-related activity during the LSV scans. The working electrode was a modified 3 mm glassy carbon electrode (GCE), and the electrolyte used was 0.5 M H2SO4. The working electrode was polished thoroughly by an alumina polishing pad with aluminum nanoparticle (<50 nm) paste and then sonicated in ethanol for 5 min to remove the surface impurities. After drying the electrode under an IR lamp, GNP and functionalized GNP inks were then coated on the prepared electrode. The catalyst ink was prepared by sonicating 5 mg of the material in 6 mL of water/IPA mixture (3:1) with 0.05% Nafion binder. Three microliters of this ink were dropcast on a 3 mm GCE for all electrochemical measurements. The GCE had a geometrical surface area of ∼0.07 cm2, and 85.7 μg cm−2 of the material was deposited for each analysis (loading kept constant in all the different types of samples). The modified electrodes were dried under ambient conditions. Before the electrochemical reaction studies, the electrodes were pre-activated in HER solution in a potential window of 0 V to −1 V (Hg/Hg2SO4) for 25 cycles in a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. The linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) was taken at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1.
All the plots were then converted into a reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) as a reference. It is interesting to note that the –COOH-functionalized sample showed the best catalyzing properties, followed by O+, pristine GNP, NH2, N2 and F-functionalized samples, in descending order. We have supported our observations with estimates from DFT calculations (discussed later on). The Tafel plots and Nyquist plots are depicted in Fig. 3B and C. The over-potential and exchange current density deduced from the Tafel plots are tabulated in Table 1. The change in the charge transfer resistance with functionalization was calculated by fitting the Nyquist plot data to the parallel capacitor resistor equivalent circuit with a series resistor (the equivalent circuit is given in Fig. 3C inset).
 Fig. 3  (A) Linear sweep voltammetry curves for pristine GNPs and functionalized GNPs (HER). The overpotential@10 mA cm−2 was also derived from LSV curves. (B) Tafel curves for pristine and functionalized GNPs. (C) Nyquist plots of GNPs and fGNPs are shown here, and it is clear that the charge transfer resistance follows the same trend seen in HER. 
Table 1 Over potentials and parameters derived from Tafel plots




Materials
Measurement conditions
Overpotential@10 mA cm−2 (V)
Tafel slope [mV dec−1]
Exchange current density [mA cm−2]




Pristine GNP
0.5 M H2SO4
355 mV vs. RHE
125
1.50 × 10−3


GNP-COOH
0.5 M H2SO4
220 mV vs. RHE
117
2.14 × 10−3


GNP-O+
0.5 M H2SO4
318 mV vs. RHE
130
1.36 × 10−3


GNP-NH2
0.5 M H2SO4
365 mV vs. RHE
132
5.43 × 10−3


GNP-N2
0.5 M H2SO4
380 mV vs. RHE
126
8.57 × 10−3


GNP-F
0.5 M H2SO4
430 mV vs. RHE
132
3.16 × 10−4




The charge transfer resistance value (Rct) also follows the trend seen for catalytic activity and EDLC (described in the next section). GNP-COOH has the lowest Rct value and, on the other side, GNP-F has the highest. The stability of the catalysts over time (∼18 h) was tested and was found to be stable, and the constant current density curves obtained are depicted in Fig. S5.†
Electrical double layer/supercapacitance
The electrochemical measurements were done in a conventional two-electrode set up where SS steel discs were used as current collectors, Buckman filter paper as the separator and 0.5 M H2SO4 as the electrolyte. The slurry was prepared by mixing 80% active materials, 10% conductive carbon and 10% PVDF binder using a Thinky planetary mixing unit. The slurry was applied to the current collector using a doctor blade film applicator to keep the thickness at 30 um. Cyclic voltammetry was performed on the cells at 0–0.8 V and 10 mV s−1 for 50 cycles, and the curves obtained for each functionalized sample are depicted in Fig. 4 and S5† (all the curves in one frame). The sample that showed the highest capacitance value was the –F-doped sample, followed by NH2, N2, pristine GNP, O and COOH, in descending order. Surprisingly, the supercapacitor performance is in the reverse order to the electrocatalytic performance. These two observations have led us to infer that the ion absorption capability of GNP and functionalized GNPs plays a crucial role in determining the electrocatalytic and electrical double layer properties. In the next sections, we discuss the theoretical analysis and DFT calculations in order to explain the origin of this behaviour.
 Fig. 4  Cyclic voltammetry curves (A–F) of supercapacitor devices made of pristine GNP and functionalized GNPs. All the samples show slightly distorted but ideal EDLC I–V curves, where –F-functionalized GNPs show the highest capacitance (EDL strength) and –O-functionalized GNPs show the least. This trend is just the opposite of the HER activity capability and provides a shred of experimental evidence of how the EDL strength adversely affects the catalytic activity of a probable catalyst. 
Computational methods
The Density Functional Theoretical (DFT) calculations were carried out with the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP).34,35 The exchange–correlation energy of the electrons was given by the local density approximation with Ceperley–Alder parameterization.36 The interactions between the ionic cores and electrons were described using the Projected Augmented Wave (PAW) method.37 The energy cut-off of 400 eV was used to represent the plane-wave basis set of the Kohn–Sham wavefunctions, and a vacuum of 16 Å was included in the direction perpendicular to the sheet to minimize the interaction between periodic images. The structural relaxation was carried out until the Hellman–Feynman forces on the atoms were less than 0.01 eV Å−1. The energy convergence threshold for the self-consistent step was set to 10−6 eV.
Since the exact edge termination of the GNP edges is not known, we simulated both hydrogen passivated zigzag (ZGNR) and armchair (AGNR) graphene nanoribbons. Although ZGNR edges are preferable for catalytic activity as compared to AGNR edges,38 we carried out calculations on both to understand the effects of these new functionalized groups on the catalytic activity of the edges. We considered 10-AGNR with six primitive units of graphene along the periodic direction (60 C atoms), and a 6-ZGNR with five primitive units of graphene along the periodic direction (60 C atoms). This supercell configuration simulated a maximum concentration of 1.6% of functionalization and is in similar order to our experimental observations (∼5%). The Brillouin zone integrations were sampled by 1 × 6 × 1 Monkhorst pack of k-points, where ‘x’ (along the width of the nanoribbon) and ‘z’ (perpendicular to the plane of nanoribbon) are the non-periodic directions.
The adsorption free energy (ΔGH) of hydrogen on the functional group ‘fn’ was calculated as follows:ΔGH = ΔE + ΔEZPE,ΔE = EGNR+fn+H − EGNR+fn − ½EH2,ΔEZPE = ZPEGNR+fn+H − ZPEGNR+fn − ½ZPEH2.where, EGNR+fn+H and EGNR+fn is the energy of the functionalized GNR (ZGNR or AGNR) with and without adsorbed hydrogen, respectively. EH2 is the energy of the hydrogen molecule and ΔEZPE is the zero-point energy (ZPE) difference. The equations assume the Standard Hydrogen Electrode (SHE); i.e., the gas-phase hydrogen is in equilibrium with the solvated protons and electrons.
Theoretical results and discussion
Since simulating the effect of charged ions, such as O+, observed in our experiments using DFT is quite challenging, we only considered the uncharged functional groups, F, COOH, N2 and NH2 for our study (see Fig. 5A, bottom panel, for the structures of functional groups attached). The formation energies for functionalization by F, N2, NH2 and COOH are −2.1 eV (−2.0 eV), −10.7 eV (−9.2 eV), −2.5 eV (−2.1 eV) and −2.2 eV (−2.0 eV), respectively at the ZGNR (AGNR) edges, thus confirming that zigzag edges are more reactive and easier to functionalize as compared to armchair edges. This behaviour is explained by the presence of π-electrons localized at the zigzag edge, which were replaced by stable triple bonds at the armchair edge.39,40 To quantify the catalytic activity for the hydrogen evolution reaction by these functional groups, we estimated the hydrogen adsorption free energy (ΔGH, see computational methods for discussion) at the edges, where ΔGH ∼ 0 eV corresponds to the highest activity.15 Since the catalytic activity due to the functional groups is also dependent on the distance from the group, we considered 3 sites (one attached to the functional group, and two at the C surrounding the functional group) at the ZGNR edge and 4 sites (one attached to the functional group and three at the C surrounding the functional group) at the AGNR edge, see Fig. 5C. Note that for COOH we also considered the adsorption of H at the C site of the group, making four sites of adsorption for ZGNR and five for AGNR.
 Fig. 5  Free energy diagram for the hydrogen evolution reaction at standard electrode potential for functionalization at (A) the AGNR edge and (B) the ZGNR edge. The bottom panel (C) shows the structural configuration for which ΔGH (H-adsorption free energy) is the least, in the case of functionalization by different groups. The dashed circles represent the adsorbed H atom. The AGNR and ZGNR edges are highlighted in black. Note that NH2-functionalized AGNR and COOH-functionalized ZGNR are the most catalytically active for the hydrogen evolution reaction. Colour scheme: carbon (yellow), nitrogen (blue), hydrogen (pink), oxygen (red), and fluorine (green). 
We found that the most favourable site for HER activity at the AGNR edge was at the (1) next nearest neighbouring C with H-passivation for F with ΔGH = 0.69 eV (site 4 in Fig. 5C), (2) next nearest neighbouring C without H-passivation for N2 with ΔGH = 0.19 eV (site 1 in Fig. 5C), (3) the next nearest neighbouring C with H-passivation for NH2 with ΔGH = 0.07 eV (site 4 in Fig. 5C), and (4) at COOH forming OHCOH with ΔGH = 0.55 eV (site 2 in Fig. 5C); also see Fig. 5A for the relaxed configurations. This makes NH2 more catalytically active than (>) N2 > COOH > F, and is in complete disagreement with experiments. At the ZGNR edge, the most favourable sites for HER activity are (1) at C attached to F with ΔGH = −0.5 eV; (2) at N2 with ΔGH = 0.16 eV; (3) at NH2 forming NH3 with ΔGH = 0.29 eV; (4) at COOH forming OHCOH with ΔGH = 0.06 eV (see Fig. 5B). Except for F, for which site 2 is the most favourable H adsorption site, all the other functional groups show higher activity at site 1 (see Fig. 5C). In addition, our calculations for the HER activity of pristine GNR shows that the H atom adsorbs on the H passivated C atom with ΔGH = −0.38 eV, thus making COOH the most catalytically active site followed by N2, NH2, pristine GNR and F, with decreasing catalytic activity, which is in excellent agreement with experimental observations. From our DFT results, we confirm that the origin of the catalytic activity for HER lies in the adsorption free energy of the ‘H’ at or near the functionalized sites of the zigzag edges. In order to trace the origin of the agreement between our theoretical analysis and experimental results, we have carried out charge-based analysis of all the preferred sites of functionalized AGNR and ZGNR edges. We found that for AGNR edges, the charge at the most preferred site for HER activity is larger than that in un-functionalized AGNR. On the other hand, for the ZGNR edge, the charge at the preferred adsorption site is smaller than that in pristine ZGNR. As such, we concluded that the nature of bonding and the charge deficiency at the adsorption sites (in comparison with pristine sites) are responsible for the better catalytic activity of the functionalized ZGNR edge as compared to the AGNR edge, and hence the agreement with our experimental results.
It is apparent that the catalytic activity (ΔGH) and supercapacitance (see Fig. 4) are inversely related to each other. This is because the stronger the interaction between the proton (hydrogen) and the edge, the greater will be the strength of the electrical double layer (EDL). On the other hand, if the interaction is highly repulsive, i.e. ΔGH > 0, then the polarity of the EDL is reversed (negative ions at the edge followed by protons). Therefore, F, which shows the strongest H adsorption (−0.5 eV) has the largest supercapacitance of 215.84 F g−1, whereas, ΔGH > 0 of NH2 (0.29 eV) > N2 (0.16 eV) should follow F with opposite polarity. Lastly, COOH with the weakest adsorption of H (0.06 eV) shows the least supercapacitance of 18.76 F g−1. It is important to note that, this explanation is restricted to the effects at the edges and the contribution to EDL from the surface needs to be discussed separately. Assuming the functionalization occurred only at the edges and the bulk surface more or less remains the same for all the samples, it is worth comparing the EDLC behaviour to the catalytic properties. The graph showing the variation of the catalytic and EDLC behaviour is displayed in Fig. 6. Here, GNP-NH2 shows anomalous behaviour that could be due to pseudocapacitance,41 which might contribute to the total capacitance and is not accounted for in the present model. Electrochemical surface area (ECSA) calculations were conducted to determine how functionalization affects the ECSA of the samples (Fig. S6†). Although GNP-COOH has the highest ESCA as compared to others, the ESCA values do not follow the trend observed in the catalytic action and EDLC behaviour of the samples.
 Fig. 6  Overpotential and capacitance variation of pristine GNP and functionalized GNPs. GNP-COOH shows the best in class electrocatalytic activity, while GNP-F dominates the others in capacitance. On observing the trend, it is clear that functionalization can improve one property while ceasing the other and vice versa. Overall, the best material for the electrical double-layer capacitor is the worst performer in catalysis, and the material with the best catalytic properties lost its position in the EDLC property chart. 
Conclusions
Pristine GNPs and functionalized GNPs were prepared by means of the plasma functionalization method. XRD, Raman and FTIR characterization proved that the crystallography, phonon modes and vibrational modes were due to graphene nanoplates and their functionalized versions. The surface morphologies and microscopic structures were traced using SEM and TEM, and the GNP thickness was found to be in the range of 5–15 nm. Along with FTIR spectra, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy established the presence of different functionalizations in GNPs, both qualitatively and quantitively. A systematic study of the electrocatalytic (HER) performance and electrical double layer properties of functionalized GNPs showed a mutually exclusive reverse pattern and, with the help of DFT calculations, this behaviour was correlated to the change in the free energy during the cation/proton adsorption–desorption process on the respective electrode surfaces.
Materials & methods
Materials
The samples were synthesized through plasma functionalization28,42 of graphene, which took place in a rotating drum with a central electrode that generated the plasma and a low-pressure was maintained during the process. The graphene nanoplatelets were functionalized in a gentle, environmentally friendly way at a low temperature. This procedure is unlike acid processing since it is a dry functionalization treatment where the material goes in and comes out fully dry with no risky waste stream and with less damage to the surface of the graphene nanoplatelets. The functionalization process attached functional groups to the edges and very weakly on the surfaces, providing augmented dispersion and compatibility in a range of solvents. Pristine graphene nanoplatelets were purchased from cheap-tubes Inc and used as received. Acid vapour (formic acid, Sigma, CAS Number: 64-18-6), oxygen (O2) (Airgas, 99.99% purity), ammonia (NH3) vapour (Airgas, 99.99% purity), nitrogen (N2)(Airgas, 99.99% purity) and fluorocarbon (CF4, Sigma, CAS Number: 75-73-0) were used as feed gases to produce –COOH, –O, –NH2, –N, –F functionalized GNPs, respectively. This functionalization overcame the inert nature of graphene and caused superior bonding/wetting with different bulk materials. After the initial functionalization, it was possible to further improve the functionalization and therefore, the extent of functionalization could be tuned. The as-prepared powder samples were used to make dispersions in suitable solvents by means of ultrasonication for 30–60 minutes. This procedure disassembled the clustered flakes into their thinner versions, which were used for various characterizations and experiments.
Methods
The X-ray diffraction spectra of the GNPs and fGNPs were recorded using Rigaku D/MaxUltima II Powder XRD 6 s. Raman spectra of the samples were recorded with the help of a RENISHAW in-Via Raman Microscope with 532 nm wavelength laser, and FTIR spectra specifying the molecular make-up of the samples were obtained using a Nicolet FTIR Infrared Microscope. The surface morphologies of the samples were recorded using an FEI Quanta 400 ESEM FEG scanning electron microscope, while transmission electron microscopic images were taken with a JEOL 2010 with an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. Elemental compositions and chemical environments of the ‘carbons’ in the samples were analyzed by generating XPS spectra with a PHI Quantera X-ray photoelectron spectrometer.
Author Information
ABP, SS, RV, BY ad PMA envisaged the idea and executed the project with the help of MF, AB, KK, SKS, RP and NC. All the authors contributed to the data analysis and writing.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
Anand B. Puthirath acknowledges the Science & Engineering Research Board (SERB) and Indo-US Science and Technology Forum (IUSSTF) for financial support in the form of postdoctoral fellowship. SNS and BIY would like to acknowledge the DAVinCI-Center for Research Computing at Rice University, and Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE), allocation number TG-DMR100029.
References
X. X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Noble metal-free hydrogen evolution catalysts for water splitting, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44(15), 5148–5180 RSC .
M. Jahan, Z. L. Liu and K. P. Loh, A Graphene Oxide and Copper-Centered Metal Organic Framework Composite as a Tri-Functional Catalyst for HER, OER, and ORR, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23(43), 5363–5372 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Xie, H. Zhang, S. Li, R. X. Wang, X. Sun and M. Zhou, 
            et al. Defect-Rich MoS2 Ultrathin Nanosheets with Additional Active Edge Sites for Enhanced Electrocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25(40), 5807–5813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deng, P. J. Ren, D. H. Deng, L. Yu, F. Yang and X. H. Bao, Highly active and durable non-precious-metal catalysts encapsulated in carbon nanotubes for hydrogen evolution reaction, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7(6), 1919–1923 RSC .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. H. Zhu, L. H. Li, Y. Han and Y. Chen, 
            et al. Hydrogen evolution by a metal-free electrocatalyst, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3783 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. P. Zhu, G. Chen, X. M. Xu, G. M. Yang, M. L. Liu and Z. P. Shao, Enhancing Electrocatalytic Activity for Hydrogen Evolution by Strongly Coupled Molybdenum Nitride@Nitrogen-Doped Carbon Porous Nano-Octahedrons, ACS Catal., 2017, 7(5), 3540–3547 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Xu, Y. B. Chen, W. Zhou, Z. H. Zhu, C. Su and M. L. Liu, 
            et al. A Perovskite Electrocatalyst for Efficient Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(30), 6442–6448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. S. Wang, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Electronic and Structural Engineering of Carbon-Based Metal-Free Electrocatalysts for Water Splitting, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803625 CrossRef PubMed .
B. R. Sathe, X. X. Zou and T. Asefa, Metal-free B-doped graphene with efficient electrocatalytic activity for hydrogen evolution reaction, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4(7), 2023–2030 RSC .
Y. B. Zhang, T. T. Tang, C. Girit, Z. Hao, M. C. Martin and A. Zettl, 
            et al. Direct observation of a widely tunable bandgap in bilayer graphene, Nature, 2009, 459(7248), 820–823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Gulseren, T. Yildirim and S. Ciraci, Tunable adsorption on carbon nanotubes, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87(11), 116802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Serp and B. Machado, Carbon (Nano)materials for Catalysis, RSC Catal. Ser., 2015,(23), 1–45 Search PubMed .
D. S. Yu, E. Nagelli, F. Du and L. M. Dai, Metal-Free Carbon Nanomaterials Become More Active than Metal Catalysts and Last Longer, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1(14), 2165–2173 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fu and X. H. Bao, Surface chemistry and catalysis confined under two-dimensional materials, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46(7), 1842–1874 RSC .
J. K. Norskov, T. Bligaard, A. Logadottir, J. R. Kitchin, J. G. Chen and S. Pandelov, 
            et al. Trends in the exchange current for hydrogen evolution, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152(3), J23–J26 CrossRef CAS .
E. Skulason, V. Tripkovic, M. E. Bjorketun, S. Gudmundsdottir, G. Karlberg and J. Rossmeisl, 
            et al. Modeling the Electrochemical Hydrogen Oxidation and Evolution Reactions on the Basis of Density Functional Theory Calculations (vol 114, pg 18182, 2010), J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(50), 22374 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hammer and J. K. Norskov, Theoretical surface science and catalysis - Calculations and concepts, Adv. Catal., 2000, 45, 71–129 CAS .
F. F. Nerini, J. Tomei, L. S. To, I. Bisaga, P. Parikh and M. Black, 
            et al. Mapping synergies and trade-offs between energy and the Sustainable Development Goals, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3(1), 10–15 CrossRef .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, What are batteries, fuel cells, and supercapacitors?, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104(10), 4245–4269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Puthirath, A. Baburaj, K. Kato, D. Salpekar, N. Chakingal and Y. F. Cao, 
            et al. High sulfur content multifunctional conducting polymer composite electrodes for stable Li-S battery, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 306, 489–497 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gonzalez, E. Goikolea, J. A. Barrena and R. Mysyk, Review on supercapacitors: Technologies and materials, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 58, 1189–1206 CrossRef CAS .

          S. J. S. H. S. Zein Heather Andreas, A. B. Puthirath, M. Valizadeh Kiamahalleh, P. Pattathil, P. Ragupathy and J. T. Varkey, Nanostructured Ceramic Oxides for Supercapcitor Applications, CRC Press, 27/12/2013 ed,  2014, ISBN 9781138072671 Search PubMed .
R. I. Jafri, N. Rajalakshmi and S. Ramaprabhu, Nitrogen doped graphene nanoplatelets as catalyst support for oxygen reduction reaction in proton exchange membrane fuel cell, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20(34), 7114–7117 RSC .
M. Rashad, F. S. Pan, Z. W. Yu, M. Asif, H. Lin and R. J. Pan, Investigation on microstructural, mechanical and electrochemical properties of aluminum composites reinforced with graphene nanoplatelets, Pro. Nat. Sci. Mater., 2015, 25(5), 460–470 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Chen, S. Berretta, K. Evans, K. Smith and O. Ghita, A primary study into graphene/polyether ether ketone (PEEK) nanocomposite for laser sintering, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 428, 1018–1028 CrossRef CAS .
I. Y. Jeon, H. J. Choi, S. M. Jung, J. M. Seo, M. J. Kim and L. M. Dai, 
            et al. Large-Scale Production of Edge-Selectively Functionalized Graphene Nanoplatelets via Ball Milling and Their Use as Metal-Free Electrocatalysts for Oxygen Reduction Reaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135(4), 1386–1393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Dimiev, G. Ceriotti, A. Metzger, N. D. Kim and J. M. Tour, Chemical Mass Production of Graphene Nanoplatelets in similar to 100% Yield, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(1), 274–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Bon, L. Valentini, R. Verdejo, J. L. G. Fierro, L. Peponi and M. A. Lopez-Manchado, 
            et al. Plasma Fluorination of Chemically Derived Graphene Sheets and Subsequent Modification With Butylamine, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21(14), 3433–3438 CrossRef .
I. Y. Jeon, S. Y. Bae, J. M. Seo and J. B. Baek, Scalable Production of Edge-Functionalized Graphene Nanoplatelets via Mechanochemical Ball-Milling, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25(45), 6961–6975 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Dresselhaus, A. Jorio, A. G. Souza and R. Saito, Defect characterization in graphene and carbon nanotubes using Raman spectroscopy, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2010, 368(1932), 5355–5377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hayyan, A. Abo-Hamad, M. A. AlSaadi and M. A. Hashim, Functionalization of graphene using deep eutectic solvents, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 324 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Yadav and J. W. Cho, Functionalized graphene nanoplatelets for enhanced mechanical and thermal properties of polyurethane nanocomposites, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 266, 360–367 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Dong, M. Fang, H. T. Wang, S. Yip, H. Y. Cheung and F. Y. Wang, 
            et al. Insight into the electrochemical activation of carbon-based cathodes for hydrogen evolution reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(24), 13080–13086 RSC .
G. Kresse and D. Joubert, From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to the projector augmented-wave method, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59(3), 1758–1775 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmuller, Efficient iterative
schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave basis set, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54(16), 11169–11186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Ceperley and B. J. Alder, Ground-State of the Electron-Gas by a Stochastic Method, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1980, 45(7), 566–569 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Blochl, Projector Augmented-Wave Method, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50(24), 17953–17979 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Gong, H. L. Fei, X. L. Zou, W. Zhou, S. B. Yang and G. L. Ye, 
            et al. Boron- and Nitrogen-Substituted Graphene Nanoribbons as Efficient Catalysts for Oxygen Reduction Reaction, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27(4), 1181–1186 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Jiang, B. G. Sumpter and S. Dai, Unique chemical reactivity of a graphene nanoribbon's zigzag edge, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126(13), 134701 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Koskinen, S. Malola and H. Hakkinen, Self-passivating edge reconstructions of graphene, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101(11), 115502 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. Caliman, A. F. Mesquita, D. F. Cipriano, J. C. C. Freitas, A. A. C. Cotta and W. A. A. Macedo, 
            et al. One-pot synthesis of amine-functionalized graphene oxide by microwave-assisted reactions: an outstanding alternative for supporting materials in supercapacitors, RSC Adv., 2018, 8(11), 6136–6145 RSC .
R. J. Zaldivar, J. P. Nokes, P. M. Adams, K. Hammoud and H. I. Kim, Surface functionalization without lattice degradation of highly crystalline nanoscaled carbon materials using a carbon monoxide atmospheric plasma treatment, Carbon, 2012, 50(8), 2966–2975 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: S1: SEM Analysis and S2:TEM Analysis of the samples, S3: XPS Survey spectrum of pristine and functionalized GNPS, S4: Current Stability check curves of the samples at corresponding overpotentials (∼18 h), S5: Cyclic Voltammograms of supercapacitors based on pristine and functionalized GNPs, S6: Electrochemical Surface Area of pristine and functionalized GNPs. See DOI: 10.1039/c9nr08102jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Structural characterization of GNPs and functionalized GNPs. (A) X-ray diffraction spectra, (B) Raman Spectra, (C) Fe-SEM images of GNP powder at low to high magnification. (D) Low and high magnification TEM images of dispersed pure GNP (top) and GNP-COOH (bottom). Left and right columns show lateral and side views of the flakes, respectively. (E) The FTIR spectra of GNPs and fGNPs. Different vibrational bands present in the FTIR spectra help to identify the various functional groups present in each sample.	 

 	Fig. 2  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis of pristine GNPs and functionalized GNPs. (A) Pristine GNP, (B) –COOH-functionalized GNP, (C) –O-rich GNP, (D) –NH2-functionalized GNP, (E) –N2-rich GNP, (F) –F-rich GNP. From the survey scans, the atomic percentage of carbon and different functional groups present in the samples were computed to be ∼95% and ∼5%.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Linear sweep voltammetry curves for pristine GNPs and functionalized GNPs (HER). The overpotential@10 mA cm−2 was also derived from LSV curves. (B) Tafel curves for pristine and functionalized GNPs. (C) Nyquist plots of GNPs and fGNPs are shown here, and it is clear that the charge transfer resistance follows the same trend seen in HER.	 

Pristine GNP	0.5 M H2SO4	355 mV vs. RHE	125	1.50 × 10−3
GNP-COOH	0.5 M H2SO4	220 mV vs. RHE	117	2.14 × 10−3
GNP-O+	0.5 M H2SO4	318 mV vs. RHE	130	1.36 × 10−3
GNP-NH2	0.5 M H2SO4	365 mV vs. RHE	132	5.43 × 10−3
GNP-N2	0.5 M H2SO4	380 mV vs. RHE	126	8.57 × 10−3
GNP-F	0.5 M H2SO4	430 mV vs. RHE	132	3.16 × 10−4

 	Fig. 4  Cyclic voltammetry curves (A–F) of supercapacitor devices made of pristine GNP and functionalized GNPs. All the samples show slightly distorted but ideal EDLC I–V curves, where –F-functionalized GNPs show the highest capacitance (EDL strength) and –O-functionalized GNPs show the least. This trend is just the opposite of the HER activity capability and provides a shred of experimental evidence of how the EDL strength adversely affects the catalytic activity of a probable catalyst.	 
ΔGH = ΔE + ΔEZPE,
ΔE = EGNR+fn+H − EGNR+fn − ½EH2,
ΔEZPE = ZPEGNR+fn+H − ZPEGNR+fn − ½ZPEH2.

 	Fig. 5  Free energy diagram for the hydrogen evolution reaction at standard electrode potential for functionalization at (A) the AGNR edge and (B) the ZGNR edge. The bottom panel (C) shows the structural configuration for which ΔGH (H-adsorption free energy) is the least, in the case of functionalization by different groups. The dashed circles represent the adsorbed H atom. The AGNR and ZGNR edges are highlighted in black. Note that NH2-functionalized AGNR and COOH-functionalized ZGNR are the most catalytically active for the hydrogen evolution reaction. Colour scheme: carbon (yellow), nitrogen (blue), hydrogen (pink), oxygen (red), and fluorine (green).	 

 	Fig. 6  Overpotential and capacitance variation of pristine GNP and functionalized GNPs. GNP-COOH shows the best in class electrocatalytic activity, while GNP-F dominates the others in capacitance. On observing the trend, it is clear that functionalization can improve one property while ceasing the other and vice versa. Overall, the best material for the electrical double-layer capacitor is the worst performer in catalysis, and the material with the best catalytic properties lost its position in the EDLC property chart.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: S1: SEM Analysis and S2:TEM Analysis of the samples, S3: XPS Survey spectrum of pristine and functionalized GNPS, S4: Current Stability check curves of the samples at corresponding overpotentials (∼18 h), S5: Cyclic Voltammograms of supercapacitors based on pristine and functionalized GNPs, S6: Electrochemical Surface Area of pristine and functionalized GNPs. See DOI: 10.1039/c9nr08102j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
