Defect engineering in thermoelectric materials: what have we learned?  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00347J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00347J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 9022-9054Defect engineering in thermoelectric materials: what have we learned?

        
          
            Yun 
            Zheng†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Tyler J. 
            Slade†
c, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Hu
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Xian Yi 
            Tan
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Yubo 
            Luo
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Zhong-Zhen 
            Luo
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Jianwei 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Qingyu 
            Yan
          
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Mercouri G. 
            Kanatzidis
          
          
        
      *c
aKey Laboratory of Optoelectronic Chemical Materials and Devices, Ministry of Education, Jianghan University, Wuhan 430056, China
bInstitute of Materials Research and Engineering, A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), 2 Fusionopolis Way, Innovis #08-03, Singapore 138634, Singapore. E-mail: jw-xu@imre.a-star.edu.sg
cDepartment of Chemistry, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA. E-mail: m-kanatzidis@northwestern.edu
dSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, 639798, Singapore. E-mail: alexyan@ntu.edu.sg
Received 
      12th April 2021
    First published on 17th June 2021AbstractThermoelectric energy conversion is an all solid-state technology that relies on exceptional semiconductor materials that are generally optimized through sophisticated strategies involving the engineering of defects in their structure. In this review, we summarize the recent advances of defect engineering to improve the thermoelectric (TE) performance and mechanical properties of inorganic materials. First, we introduce the various types of defects categorized by dimensionality, i.e. point defects (vacancies, interstitials, and antisites), dislocations, planar defects (twin boundaries, stacking faults and grain boundaries), and volume defects (precipitation and voids). Next, we discuss the advanced methods for characterizing defects in TE materials. Subsequently, we elaborate on the influences of defect engineering on the electrical and thermal transport properties as well as mechanical performance of TE materials. In the end, we discuss the outlook for the future development of defect engineering to further advance the TE field.
Tyler J. Slade
Tyler Slade received his PhD in Chemistry from Northwestern University, where he focused on the synthesis and characterization of thermoelectric alloys under the supervision of Prof. Mercouri Kanatzidis. His primary research interests are the electronic and phonon transport properties as well as synthesis of inorganic solids. He is currently pursuing research on topological semimetals as a postdoctoral associate at Ames Laboratory.
Jianwei Xu
Jianwei Xu is currently a Principle Scientist in IMRE, A*STAR in Singapore. He has broad research interests in various functional polymers, liquid crystals and p-conjugated polymeric materials. Currently, his research areas are mainly focused on POSS-based functional hybrid materials, electrochromic conjugated polymers, aggregation-induced emission (AIE) based materials and thermoelectric materials.
Qingyu Yan
Qingyu Yan is currently a professor in Nanyang Technology University. He finished his PhD degree from State University of New York at Stony Brook. After that, he joined Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute as a research fellow. He joined Nanyang Technological University as an Assistant Professor in early 2008 and became a Professor in 2018. Yan's research interest mainly include thermoelectric materials and energy storage materials.
Mercouri G. Kanatzidis
Mercouri G. Kanatzidis received his Chemistry diploma from the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki Greece and his PhD degree in Chemistry from the University of Iowa. He was a postdoctoral research fellow at the University of Michigan and Northwestern University. At Northwestern University he is Charles E. and Emma H. Morrison Professor and also carries a joint appointment as a Senior Scientist at Argonne National Laboratory. He is active in the field of materials design and discovery with emphasis on solar energy materials, thermoelectric materials, framework solids, and intermetallics.
1. Introduction
Thermoelectric (TE) energy harvesting is among the most promising technologies for improving the management of energy produced from traditional fossil fuels and may aid in increasing global energy efficiency and reducing the emission of carbon dioxide. Based on the Seebeck effect, thermoelectric generators (TEG) hold promise for their ability to directly convert waste heat into useful electricity. Examples of current TEG applications include but are not limited to TEG appliances designed for areas with a shortage of electricity,1 waste heat recovery from vehicles and cargo vessels,2–5 power supplies for wireless sensors and wearable devices,6,7 and the radioisotope TEG adopted in spacecrafts by NASA.8 The relatively niche market for TEG is mainly ascribed to the low TE energy conversion efficiency,9 high cost of TE materials, and slow progress of reliable module development.10 Therefore, it is essential to develop advanced-concepts, high-performance and reliable TE materials, as well as robust processing technologies to accelerate the pace of TEG applications.
The maximum power generation efficiency of a TE material, η, is defined by eqn (1), (1)where TH and TC correspond to the temperatures of the hot and cold sides, respectively.11ZTave is the device figure of merit value between TH and TC, and the dimensionless figure of merit, ZT, is defined by, ZT = S2σT/κ, where S, σ, and κ are the Seebeck coefficient, electrical conductivity and thermal conductivity of a TE material at a specific temperature (T). Materials with high ZT values across the whole operating temperature range are required to ensure favorable output power for the TEG.10 However, the adverse interdependence between the transport parameters (S, σ and κ) makes it difficult to improve any individual property without degrading the others.12 Effective approaches to increase the ZT values center upon learning how to decrease this interdependence and target either to maximize the power factor (PF = S2σ) or to decrease the thermal conductivity κ, which consists of both electronic (κe) and lattice (κL) contributions.
Recent years witnessed great successes in increasing the ZT values, from unity to over 2.0, by synergistic optimization of both electrical and thermal transport properties.13 Strategies such as band structure engineering,14 morphology manipulation,15 discovery of materials with intrinsically low κL,16 and defect engineering17 were successfully implemented, advancing the TE performance of materials. Band structure engineering is realized by controlling the alloying concentration or stoichiometry to tune the electronic band structure, energetically converge unique band extrema, or introduce resonant levels near the Fermi level. Typically, band convergence can improve Seebeck coefficient or weighted mobility in p-type lead chalcogenides,18 n-type Mg2(Si1−xSnx) solid solutions,19 and p-type Cd-doped GeTe.13 Resonant doping to raise the density of states near the Fermi level successfully enhances Seebeck coefficient in Tl-doped p-type PbTe, Al-doped n-type PbSe, In-doped SnTe,20 and Sn-doped Bi2Te3.21–24
Moreover, a myriad of advanced processing techniques have been developed to modify the microstructures of TE materials to enhance phonon scattering. Such techniques introduce defects at different lengths scales and include nanostructuring by mechanical alloying25 or spinodal decomposition,26 multiscale structural design by melt-spinning and rapid sintering,27 self-propagating high-temperature synthesis,15,28 or hot deformation.29 Finally, development of materials with intrinsically low κL offers an effective way to decouple the electron and phonon transport.16 For instance, the cubic I–V–VI2 compounds, i.e. AgSbTe2, AgBiSe2, inherently exhibit low κL due to their strong lattice anharmonicity.30 The liquid-like thermal conduction in AgCrSe2 and Cu2Se compounds furthermore gives glasslike κL and has provoked widespread investigation.31,32
Deviation of atoms from their ideal sites in the crystal structures produces defects. The prevalence of defects in crystals has important consequences, and defect engineering is crucial for controlling the physical properties of solids. For example, defect chemistry plays an important role in determining the electronic, thermal, optical, magnetic, catalytic, and mechanical properties of materials,33 and increasing attention is being directed to the application of defect engineering in the fields of catalysis,34–37 metallurgy,38,39 energy storage40,41 and energy conversion.17,42,43
Because defects strongly impact both the electronic and thermal properties of solids, defect engineering is ubiquitous in the field of thermoelectrics. Introducing point defects by doping and alloying is the historically most important and robust approach for tuning the charge carrier concentration and reducing κL (by scattering high-frequency phonons)44 Recently, vacancy-induced dislocation networks proved effective in scattering mid-frequency phonons in PbSe-based materials, leading to a significant reduction in κL.45 Furthermore, the introduction of pores or nanoinclusions in ceramics and TE materials can arrest or deflect cracks, leading to improved mechanical response.46,47 To this end, defect engineering demonstrates great potential for enhancing both TE and mechanical properties of materials. Arguably, it is the most critical part of the arsenal for optimizing the performance of the materials.
In view of the critical role of defect engineering in thermoelectrics, researchers have utilized various models to predict or validate the effects of different defects on the TE properties of materials, including Zintl compounds,48 half-Heuslers,49 CdIn2Te4,50 and BiTeI.51 For example, CdIn2Te4 was first discovered as a promising TE candidate by the high-throughput material screening method.50 The high formation energies of cation vacancies (i.e. 2.315 eV for Cd vacancy and 2.996 eV for In vacancy) estimated from theoretical calculations result in the low hole concentration in pristine CdIn2Te4. Upon a suitable amount of Cu doping, the CdIn2Te4-based compound exhibits a significant improvement in the hole concentration due to the generation of Cu vacancies (with the formation energy of 0.402 eV). Therefore, a peak ZT of above 1.0 at 875 K can be attained for Cd1.6Cu3.4In3Te8 as manifested experimentally.
In addition, high TE performance has been obtained in some p-type Zintl compounds, such as Ca5Al2Sb6, Yb14MnSb11, and CaZn2Sb2, normally ascribed to their complex crystal structures with low κL. On the other hand, despite promising conduction band structures, the n-type Zintl pnictide counterparts are rarely reported. This reflects the difficulty in preparing n-type samples, as low energy cation vacancies form readily and act as acceptor defects, resulting in self-doping with relatively large hole concentrations. Here, computational predictions may accelerate the discovery of n-type Zintl compounds (such as KAlSb4) with promising TE properties.52 Similarly, theoretical defect energy calculations helped guide the experimental achievement and understanding of n-type Mg3Sb2,53 which is emerging as one of the most exciting materials with ZTs up to ∼1.6. Moreover, the recently developed chemical replacements in structure prototype (CRISP) approach has proven “informative” in searching favourable n-type ABX Zintl candidates (A is group IA elements, B mainly refers to group IVA and IIB elements, and C is group VA elements).54 KSnBi and RbSnBi phases are predicted to be promising n-type materials with considerable electron concentrations which benefit from the formation of native acceptor defects (i.e. SnBi′ antisite defects formed under the growth condition of excess K).55 Computational approaches can therefore facilitate the determination of dominant defects and dopability of certain TE materials, providing significant promise for the exploration of new TE materials.48,55,56
Many recently published reviews summarize the advances in state-of-the-art TE materials, such as tellurides,57–63 selenides,60,64–70 sulfides,64,71 oxides,72,73 silicides,74–76 antimonides,77 half-Heusler,78,79 Zintl phases,80 clathrates,81 organics,82–87 carbon nanotubes,88,89 materials with 2D structures,90–93 and nanowire-based TE materials.94 Other comprehensive reviews discuss the strategies for optimizing the TE properties from the perspective of chemical bonding,16,95 band engineering,14 valleytronics,96 phonon transport manipulation,97 microstructure manipulation,15,98,99 panascopic approach,100 and practical applications.101–105 Some outstanding reviews serve as tutorials to guide readers how to design high-performance TE materials,9,106–109 and how to reliably measure TE performance.110
Despite the centrality of defect chemistry in the field of thermoelectrics, the recent important developments on defect engineering in thermoelectrics have, to our knowledge, not been collectively discussed. Interested readers can refer to the following reviews or perspectives on defect chemistry in TE materials,111,112 and defect engineering in V2VI3 TE materials17,113 and oxides.39 Here, we review the scientific approaches and summarize the recent advances and new insights resulting thereof in applying defect engineering to improving the TE performance and mechanical properties. First, we introduce the various types of defects categorized by dimensionality, i.e. point defects (vacancies, interstitials, antisites, and so-called discordant atoms), dislocations, planar defects (twin boundaries, stacking faults and grain boundaries) and volume defects (precipitates and voids). Second, we summarize the conventional methods to characterize these defects in TE materials. We then discuss the influences of defect engineering on the electrical and thermal transport properties, as well as the mechanical performance of TE materials (as shown schematically in Fig. 1). In the last section, we propose three major concerns related with defect stability and quantification of defects and provide some outlook.
 Fig. 1  The schematic illustration of improving TE and mechanical properties of TE materials via defect engineering. 
2. Defects and characterization methods of defects
2.1 Defects in crystals
Defects in solids can be classified based on their dimensionality. Point defects are atomic scale 0-dimensional (0D) defects including vacancies, interstitials, substitutions, Frenkel defects, Schottky defects, antisite defects, and what we recently refer to as discordant atoms. Point defects in thermoelectric materials are discussed in Section 3.1. Point defects can be introduced by adjusting the initial reaction stoichiometry or through post synthetic treatment, such as hot deformation,44 electron irradiation,114 plasma treatment,115,116 and ion implantation.117 Bi2Te3-based materials are a good example, as they can exhibit either p- or n-type conduction depending on the impurity atoms, like Sb or Se. The comprehensive review by Zhu and coworkers provides insightful information about intrinsic defects in V2VI3 TE materials.113
Dislocations are 1-dimensional (1D) defects and can be further classified into edge and screw dislocations. Edge dislocations occur when an extra half plane of atoms is inserted into the crystal. Because they are much easier to observe than screw dislocations, edge dislocations are more commonly discussed in the TE field. Hence, in the remainder of this manuscript we use “dislocations” to refer explicitly to edge dislocations. Dislocations can be introduced through liquid phase sintering, vacancy engineering, and hot deformation. According to Klemens, a high dislocation density over 1012 cm−2 is needed for the scattering of mid-frequency phonons.118
Planar defects (or 2D defects) mainly refer to grain boundaries, phase boundaries, merohedral twin boundaries, or stacking faults. Grain boundaries are the interfaces between two adjacent grains within a polycrystalline material, while phase boundaries refer to the interfaces between different phases. Interface engineering is important for optimizing both thermal and electrical transport properties of TE materials, and is generally realized by controlling the synthesis procedure by mechanical alloying, melt spinning119 and/or solution-based processes. Stacking faults and twin boundaries often emerge in materials with layered or close packed structures and are proven to be effective in reducing κL by suppressing phonon propagation.120,121 Twin boundaries have a less detrimental effect on the carrier transport due to the ordered atomic arrangement.120
Finally, examples of volume defects (3D defects) are precipitates and voids. These can be introduced in either the synthesis or post-treatment process, and two important ways to incorporate precipitates into state-of-the-art TE materials are in situ nanoinclusions and exotic second phase. We use the word exotic here in the context of being a phase chemically very unrelated to the matrix, such as graphene or carbon nanotubes incorporated into an inorganic semiconductor. The details of how these strategies are implemented is described in Section 3.4.3. Voids (or porous structures) are mainly formed during the densification process due to the shrinkage of powder materials or from air trapped inside. Both precipitates and pores can serve as additional phonon scattering centers to effectively reduce κL.
2.2 Characterization of point defects
Direct and comprehensive analysis of point defects is difficult to achieve with typical microstructure characterization techniques such as conventional powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), Raman scattering, electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), and Rutherford backscattering.122–124 In contrast, electron/neutron scattering, synchrotron X-ray diffraction and advanced electron microscopy (such as Cs-corrected high-resolution TEM and atomic resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy) make it possible to study point defects in TE materials because of their high sensitivity and/or high resolution in the detection. For example, neutrons interact with atomic nuclei while X-rays interact with electron clouds surrounding atoms, therefore neutrons are not affected by the charged electrons, and usually have higher penetration depth. Furthermore, neutrons have higher sensitivity to materials with light elements and can distinguish neighbouring elements in the periodic table, which is problematic for conventional XRD refinements.125 Powder neutron diffraction (or inelastic neutron scattering) in combination with Rietveld refinement and theoretical calculation serves as a powerful route for providing reliable site occupancies and understanding defect structures in TE materials, such as rattler modes in clathrates126,127 and Ni occupancies in Ni-substituted skutterudites.125 Recently, Mao et al. used powder neutron diffraction to demonstrate the Mg vacancies in Mg3Sb2 are primarily found on the Mg2 site, implying additional extrinsic cation dopants preferentially occupy this position, which may explain the anomalous Hall coefficients in the intrinsic samples in ref. 128. In the Y-doped Mg3+δSb1.5Bi0.5 compound, all intrinsic Mg vacancies were found to be occupied by Y and extra Mg atoms.129 Y atoms preferentially enter the Mg sites of the covalently bonded [Mg2Sb2]2− layer. Interesting, however, is a very recent and noteworthy synchrotron X-ray diffraction study by Kanno et al. showing Mg3Sb2 has a high-density of charge neutral Frenkel defects (i.e. pairs of Mg vacancies and Mg interstitials). These results challenge the consensus of n-type dopability in Mg3Sb2, which is based on overcoming the Mg off stoichiometry.130 The authors also suggest the disorder and phonon anharmonicity produced by the Frenkel defects may explain the low thermal conductivity found in these compounds. The controversial findings in Mg3Sb2-based materials underline the challenges that exist in fully characterizing point defects and the importance of integrating the use of complementary tools, such as electron scattering,49,131 synchrotron XRD,132,133 and electron probe microanalysis (EPMA).44,134
In another interesting example, vacancy-related short range order has been reported and modelled in defective half-Heusler compounds using electron scattering and Monte Carlo simulations.49,135 Coupling with EPMA, a typical non-destructive elemental analysis, fully qualitative and quantitative understanding can be realized to interpret the composition dependent point defect evolution. Furthermore, in (Bi,Sb)2(Te,Se)3 solid solutions, accurate compositional analysis by EPMA offers the ability to further optimize the TE performance, as the point defects (such as antisite defects and vacancies) in (Bi,Sb)2(Te,Se)3 show a strong dependence on the compositions.44
In view of the numerous existing reviews and widespread application of diffraction and microscopic techniques in the thermoelectric community, we defer in describing the technical principles of the above techniques. Instead, we briefly introduce two and useful tools for characterizing point defects that remain relatively underutilized in the thermoelectrics field, positron annihilation spectroscopy and deep-level transient spectroscopy).

2.2.1 Positron annihilation spectroscopy. 
Positron annihilation spectroscopy (PAS) can provide information on the relative concentration and type of point defects and vacancies with parts per-million level sensitivities,122,123,136–142 and is therefore increasingly used by researchers seeking to obtain a deeper understanding of the defects in TE materials. The advantages of PAS over other characterization techniques are inherent to its fundamental working principles, where the positively charged positrons spontaneously seek valence electrons of the atoms in the sample and annihilate, releasing gamma radiation as shown in Fig. 2(a). A positron lifetime spectrum can then be obtained from the gamma radiation after a series of signal transformations within a PAS spectrometer, as represented in detail in Fig. 2(b). Deconvolution and analysis of the obtained positron lifetime (τ) spectrum can provide characteristic information on the defects.123,136,143,144 The interested reader can refer to the paper by Tuomisto and Makkonen for a detailed review of positron annihilation characterization techniques and their theory.143
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the scattering, diffusion, and annihilation of an implanted positron within a host material.145 Copyright 2013, Maik Butterling. (b) Schematic diagram of a PAS spectrometer set up, where the 22Na source (purple sphere) is sandwiched between the sample material (blue) to maximize the quantity of emitted positrons penetrating the sample. After the resulting gamma radiation signals are detected by an assembly of fast scintillators (SC), photomultiplier tubes (PMT) and constant fraction differential discriminators (CF DISC) on each side, a positron lifetime spectrum (blue line) can be obtained through further signal conversions by a time-to-amplitude converter (TAC) and an analogue-to-digital converter (ACD). Readapted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Li et al. performed PAS measurements and calculations of the positron lifetime and density distribution in Bi0.975Cu0.975SeO and revealed a higher positron density around the Bi vacancy centers in the insulating [Bi1.95O2]2+ layers compared to the Cu vacancy centers in the conductive [Cu1.95Se2]2− layers.137 The observed improvement in σ, with minimal losses to S, was largely attributed to the interlayer charge transfer between the Bi/Cu dual vacancies. While single-vacancy defects are very useful to TE materials for their ability to strongly scatter phonons and reduce κL, they may also significantly deteriorate the charge carrier mobility μ and σ, thus dual or multiple vacancies were explored as a potential strategy to overcome the detrimental coupling between electrical and thermal transport properties.147,148
Furthermore, several groups have used PAS to explore the effect of spark plasma sintering (SPS) and the subsequent processing conditions on vacancy defects in sintered pellet samples.123,141,149 He et al. employed PAS as a sensitive probe for the vacancy defects in the grain boundary regions.123,141 While phonon scattering at the grain boundaries is usually suggested as the key reason for the low κL of nanocomposites,150–152 the contribution from the interfacial vacancies cannot be ignored, thus requiring PAS to distinguish between the two possible phonon scattering mechanisms, which would otherwise be difficult to tell apart solely by conventional microstructure characterization techniques. Through a combination of PXRD and PAS measurements on sintered Bi2Te3 nanocrystals, He et al. discerned the increase in κL with greater annealing temperatures is mostly due to the decrease in vacancy concentration at the grain interfaces. The PXRD data demonstrated the estimated average grain size of the sintered Bi2Te3 pellets remains almost unaltered with increased annealing temperature from the up to 773 K, implying grain boundary scattering is not the dominant phonon scattering mechanism. On the other hand, the PAS data showed a monotonic decrease in the I2 intensities, indicating the vacancy concentration in the interfaces drops significantly, thus leading to the conclusion that the phonons in Bi2Te3 nanocrystalline samples are primarily scattered by the interfacial vacancies rather than the interface regions themselves.123
More recent work reached a similar conclusion when increasing the sintering temperature of In2O3 nanopowders. Like in Bi2Te3, the In2O3 grains also remained relatively constant in size with increased annealing temperature, but a sharp decrease in the measured positron lifetimes τ1 and τ2 implied a recovery of monovacancies and vacancy clusters. However, the same conclusion cannot be drawn from the effect of increasing the vacuum annealing temperature of the In2O3 sintered pellets. Despite the decrease in κ and average positron lifetimes, the increasing grain size leads to an ambiguity in the determination of the dominant phonon scattering mechanism.141
In addition to vacancies, Tan et al. employed PAS to investigate LaBi substitutional point defects in n-type Bi2−xLaxO2Se. Because La is more electropositive than Bi, the LaBi defects may act as isoelectronic hole traps. As the La fraction (x) is increased from 0 to 0.04, the τ2I2 component increases linearly.139 Since τ2I2 is characteristic of positron annihilation at the negatively charged Bi vacancies, Tan et al. deduced the LaBi sites become positively charged after trapping holes and repel the injected positrons which then gather at the Bi vacancies, thus supporting the hypothesis of hole-trapping at LaBi sites.153,154 Due to the synergistic combination of the hole traps and the narrowed band gap, moderate La doping causes the electron concentration to rise by four orders of magnitude compared to the pristine Bi2O2Se.
While increasingly common, PAS is yet to be widely known or utilized in the TE field. Currently, the most common use of PAS by many researchers is for overall quantification of vacancies. The above specialized examples show that PAS can also be used to distinguish and identify the type and size of defects to better understand the charge and thermal transport properties. Together with other characterization techniques, phonon scattering mechanisms can also be elucidated from the interpretation of PAS results. The selectivity and sensitivity of the characterization technique are paramount to obtain more comprehensive information of the defects and formulate sound strategies to make further improvements in the performance of TE materials.


2.2.2 Deep-level transient spectroscopy. 
In addition, another sensitive method to probe point defects or traps in semiconductors is deep-level transient spectroscopy (DLTS) which was initially proposed by Lang in 1974.155 It is based on the measurement of high-frequency capacitance transients as a function of temperature. By applying an altered voltage on the sample, a p–n junction or Schottky barrier can be created which serves as the probe to identify deep-level impurities with respect to their activation energy, defect type and defect concentration. Therefore DLTS is capable of establishing the relationship between charge carrier concentration and point defects. It has a detection limit of 108 cm−3 for point defects.124 It is noteworthy that the conventional DLTS operated at below 400 K is suitable for monitoring defects in narrow bandgap semiconductors while a customized high-temperature DLTS can provide insight into more deep-level trapped defects in wide bandgap semiconductors.156 The main configuration of DLTS is listed in Fig. 3. In combination with these merits, this technique is promising for experimentally detecting the dopability and understanding the role and nature of defects in TE materials, in particular, thin films. This technique has not been implemented in studying thermoelectric materials. Interested readers can refer to the relevant books and references for more details.124,155
 Fig. 3  Configuration of the DLTS set-up. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2019, AIP publishing. 

2.3 Quantification of dislocations
Electron microscopy techniques such as TEM can be used to qualitatively observe dislocations in a material. By counting the number of dislocations within the selected area of interest, TEM can be used to estimate the areal dislocation density (ND) in TE materials.157,158 In order to form meaningful correlations between the macroscopically measured TE properties and ND, analysis of a larger quantity of the sample is often desired to obtain a more representative value of the concentration of these 1D defects. Therefore, the small sample size used for imaging makes macroscopic quantification of dislocations in the bulk sample impractical using TEM.
Chen et al. macroscopically estimated ND in Pb1−xSb2x/3Se and NayEu0.03Pb0.97−yTe samples using synchrotron powder X-ray diffraction (Syn-PXRD) measurements together with a modified Williamson–Hall (mWH) model.45,159 The analysis is presented in Fig. 4. Starting from the crystallite sizes and peak broadening measured by Syn-PXRD, the derived values of K and ΔK were then used in the mWH plot as indicated by eqn (2). (2)
 Fig. 4  (a) The synchrotron X-ray diffraction pattern and (b) the peak broadening analysis by the modified Williamson–Hall plot. (c) The powder XRD pattern and (d) the peak broadening analysis by the modified Williamson–Hall plots for NayEu0.03Pb0.97−yTe (y ≤ 0.05) samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
The ND values determined by the slope of the mWH plot were in good agreement with those estimated by TEM observations. While the same analysis can be performed using ordinary powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) measurements, the ND values derived by PXRD are only useful for qualitative comparisons because of the lower angular resolutions and signal/noise ratios of PXRD as compared to Syn-PXRD.160 This work revealed that ND increases with Sb content in Pb1−xSb2x/3Se (x = 0–0.07) and maximizes at Na content of y = 0.025 in NayEu0.03Pb0.97−yTe solid solutions. The increased dislocation density with incorporated aliovalent dopants in PbSe- and PbTe-based materials could be ascribed to the accelerated nucleation and multiplication processes for dislocations promoted by point defect diffusion upon annealing.161,162 As predicted by models based on the Debye–Callway approximation, dislocation scattering of mid-range frequency phonons accounts for 80–90% and ≥30% κL reductions in Na0.025Eu0.03Pb0.945Te and Pb1−xSb2x/3Se respectively, thus highlighting the significance of accurate quantification of these defects.45,159
3. Improved thermoelectric performance by defect engineering
Because defects alter the local atomic arrangement from the ideal crystal structure, they will intuitively disrupt and effect the charge and thermal transport properties of solids. One of the key parameters for understanding how a defect will impact the thermoelectric properties is its dimensionality. For example, the length scale and 0-, 1-, 2-, or 3-dimensional nature of a defect ultimately determines the frequencies of phonons that are most strongly scattered. Understanding this, one can rationally design multiscale systems that incorporate different types of defects to selectively scatter phonons with various mean free paths and provide an overall wide spectrum of phonon scattering. Such approaches can be used to produce composite materials with exceptionally low lattice thermal conductivity and high figure of merit.
Analytical descriptions of phonon scattering in thermoelectric materials are often based on the Debye–Callaway model where the theoretical κL of TE materials can be expressed as,164 (3)where  is dimensionless, ω is the phonon frequency, ħ is the reduced Planck constant, v is the average sound velocity, θD is the Debye temperature, and τC is the combined relaxation time for the various phonon scattering mechanisms. In the context of defect engineering, the relaxation time is the key parameter, and defects are introduced to enhance phonon scattering by making τC as large as possible (equivalently, to obtain a short phonon mean free path). If one assumes the different scattering processes can be treated separately, the total relaxation time is obtained by summing the reciprocal relaxation times for each type of phonon scattering according to Matthiessen's rule.165 (4)where τi refers to the relaxation time for each phonon scattering mechanism i, for example intrinsic Umpklapp and Normal phonon–phonon scattering (τU and τN), point defect scattering (τPD), grain/phase boundary scattering (τB), dislocation core scattering (τDC), dislocation strain scattering (τDS) and stacking faults scattering (τSF−1).
Defects also influence the electronic properties of materials. Most commonly, intrinsic defects such as vacancies and interstitials, or extrinsic dopants and alloy atoms are leveraged to modify the charge carrier concentration and/or electronic bandwidth. Furthermore, while higher dimensional defects such as grain boundaries and nanoinclusions often significantly reduce the thermal conductivity, they can also introduce energy barriers that impede the charge carrier mobility. As we will see in the following discussion, most defects have competing effects, and ultimately, it is important to consider the net consequences of a defect on both the electronic and thermal properties to achieve the best performance.
In the next section, we give an overview of work from the last decade that leverages defects to improve the thermoelectric properties of solids. Our discussion is categorized by the dimensionality of each type of defect, and we discuss both the advantages and problems associate with different defects. Where possible, we attempt to highlight strategies for overcoming limitations associated with each defect type to provide intuition for the best use of defects in thermoelectric materials.
3.1 Point defects
Point defects are 0-dimensional (0D) defects that are ubiquitous in real crystal lattices. Historically, point defect engineering, either by extrinsic doping/alloying or manipulating the intrinsic defects, is likely the most widely studied means of reducing the lattice thermal conductivity.
Point defect phonon scattering originates from the mass fluctuations and strain field contrast between the host atoms and defects in the lattice. Pioneering theoretical studies by Klemens,165,166 Callaway164,167 and Abeles168 modelled the effect of point defects on the lattice thermal conductivity. The relaxation time for point defect scattering is given as: (5)where V is the volume per atom, ω the phonon frequency, and v the acoustic phonon group velocity. Klemens first calculated the phonon relaxation time by taking mass fluctuations between the host atoms and defects into account.165 Abeles then incorporated strain field modification for point-defect scattering, and the parameter Γ is calculated as168 (6)where V is the volume per atom, Γ is the scattering parameter, mi is the mass of an atom,  is the average mass of all atoms, ri is the radius of an atom,  is the average radius of all atoms, fi corresponds to the fraction of atoms with mass mi and radius ri. As can be seen in the above expressions, point defects produce a relaxation time τPD proportional to ω−4, and thus are extremely effective at scattering high frequency phonons.
Early experiment work on PbTe–PbSe solid solutions169 and SiGe alloys170 demonstrates the efficacy of solid-solution alloying in reducing the phonon mean free path via enhanced phonon scattering. Following studies extend this strategy to many other TE materials, such as (Bi,Sb)2(Te,Se)3 compounds,171 and Mg2X (X = Si, Ge, Sn) solid solutions.172 The equation for Γ clearly shows the most important considerations for achieving strong point defect phonon scattering are the contrast between mass and radius between the host atoms and defects, where large differences will produce the strongest phonon scattering. This is nicely demonstrated by comparing the influence of lead chalcogenides doped on the Pb site with Bi and Sb.173,174 Because Bi and Pb are neighbours on the periodic table, there is relatively small contrast, and the lattice thermal conductivity of the Bi containing alloys is not strongly reduced by the point defects. On the other hand, Sb and Pb have disparate mass and radii, and accordingly, the κlat of Sb doped samples is strongly reduced.
The common types of point defects are illustrated in Fig. 5 for a two-dimensional lattice. In this section, we mainly focus on the intrinsic point defects, and the following presents discussion of the impacts on charge transport and phonon scattering in TE materials.
 Fig. 5  Illustration of common point defects in a two-dimensional lattice where the red and blue spheres denote cations and anions, respectively. A Schottky pair is formed by a pair of cationic and anionic vacancies. 

3.1.1 Vacancies. 
In crystals, vacancies occur when atoms are absent from crystal lattice sites that would be fully occupied in a perfect crystal. Vacancies inherently appear in all crystalline solids due to the increase in entropy from the structural disorder. According to thermodynamic equilibrium theory, the vacancy concentration complies with the relationship, NV = Nexp(−QV/kBT),(7)where Nv and N are the vacancy concentration and atomic concentration respectively, QV is the vacancy formation energy, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature. Therefore, lower vacancy formation energy and higher temperature tend to produce more vacancies. Schottky imperfections occur when a pair of oppositely charged ions leave their crystallographic sites, leaving behind vacancies. As shown in Fig. 5, cationic and anionic vacancies tend to form Schottky clusters in a stoichiometric ratio (i.e. pairs of cationic and anionic vacancies) to conserve the local charge neutrality.
Another important point defect is the Frenkel imperfection, which is a vacancy created when an atom is displaced from its initial lattice position and lodged into a neighboring interstitial space, as highlighted by the purple ellipsoid in Fig. 5. Due to the squeezing of an atom into an interstitial void and the resulting irregular coordination environment, Frenkel defects occur more easily in compounds consisting of smaller atoms (hydrogen, carbon, etc.).
In TE materials, S, σ, and κe are highly correlated and are functions of the charge carrier concentration. Conventional chemical modification intentionally introduces atomic vacancies to modulate the position of the Fermi level to optimize the carrier concentration. For example, cubic rare-earth telluride TE materials, RE3Te4 (RE = La, Ce, Pr) intrinsically host nearly metallic electron concentrations, and cation vacancies can be intentionally introduced, i.e. RE3−xTe4, to offset excess electrons in stoichiometric RE3Te4.175–178 The increase in cationic vacancies (Fig. 6a) shifts the Fermi level down to a proper position to achieve the optimized carrier concentration. The ZT values were achieved at 1.2 and 1.7 in La2.74Te4 and Pr2.70Te4, respectively179,180 (as shown in Fig. 6b).
Vacancies sometimes induce ionized impurity scattering which significantly alters the carrier transport properties. The carrier mobility μ is described as, (8)where e, τ and m* denote the electron charge, the carrier relaxation time, and the effective mass, respectively. The relaxation time τ is related with carrier energy E, temperature T, and m* via the following formula. τ ∝ ErTs(m*)t(9)where r is the carrier scattering factor, s and t are constants independent of temperature. Therefore, regulating the carrier scattering mechanism becomes another effective route to improve the carrier mobility. For example, the intrinsic Mg vacancies determine the p-type transport behaviour of Mg3Sb2.181,182 Recent efforts have been devoted to developing n-type counterparts by using excess Mg to compensate Mg vacancies.181 A typical nominal composition of Mg3.2(Sb,Bi)2 (∼6.7 at% Mg excess) is usually considered in the ball-milling and high-temperature consolidation process.181,183 Moreover, systematic research has been carried out to study the effects of hot pressing temperature and holding time on controlling the Mg vacancies in Mg3.2(Sb,Bi)2-based compounds.184
 Fig. 6  (a) Hall carrier concentration as a function of x value (i.e. vacancy concentration) in La3−xTe4 and Pr3−xTe4. Data were taken from literature.175,179 The inset presents the cubic crystal structure of La3−xTe4 at full La occupancy, where La could be replaced by Ce and Pr. Cyan and brown spheres represent lanthanum and tellurium atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2008, The American Physical Society. (b) ZT values of Pr3−xTe4, a peak ZT of 1.7 was achieved at 1200 K by tuning Pr vacancy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2018, Cell Press. 
Furthermore, phonon vacancy scattering can strongly suppress the propagation of heat-carrying phonons, thereby decreasing the lattice thermal conductivity. By alloying In2Te3 into a SnTe host matrix, the native concentration of cation vacancies increases, and the vacancies dominate the phonon transport, as shown in Fig. 7a.20 Similarly, in the SnTe–AgSbTe2 solid-solution, the concentration of Sn vacancies reaches up to 6 mol%. Here, the vacancies are suggested to soften the lattice and jointly strengthen phonon scattering to considerably reduce the lattice thermal conductivity, giving rise to a high ZT of 1.1 at 800 K.185 As shown in Fig. 7b, suppression of the lattice thermal conductivity in SnTe–AgSbTe2 can be quantitatively described by the enhanced vacancy-phonon scattering and lattice softening, as captured by the phonon-vacancy scattering lifetime τvac in eqn (10), (10)in which s2 is the phonon-vacancy scattering strength, V is the average atomic volume, ω is the phonon frequency and vg is the sound velocity.
 Fig. 7  (a) Lattice thermal conductivity, κlat as a function of doping fraction, x in (SnTe)3−3x(In2Te3)x. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2015, The American Chemical Society. (b) Temperature dependence of κlat for SnTe single crystal, SnTe polycrystal and AgSn5SbTe7. The solid lines are Debye–Callaway model calculation considering different phonon scattering mechanisms. Readapted with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
A following study on the sodium analogues, SnTe–NaPnTe2 (Pn = Sb, Bi), reported similar results. Here, alloying NaSbTe2 into SnTe nearly doubles the concentration of Sn vacancies, enhancing phonon scattering and giving a ∼6% decrease in the sound velocity to achieve glasslike lattice thermal conductivity under 0.7 W m−1 K−1 at room temperature.186 As a result, the SnTe–NaSbTe2 alloys reach high ZTs approaching 1.1–1.2 at 800–900 K. Surprisingly however, NaBiTe2 alloying does not substantially alter the vacancy concentration, and the SnTe–NaBiTe2 alloys only exhibit modest ZTs of ∼0.85 at 900 K. The SnTe–ASbTe2 (A = Ag, Na) are therefore unique systems in which enhancement of the native Sn vacancy concentration is beneficial to the thermoelectric performance owing to the significant suppression of κL by vacancy phonon scattering and lattice softening.
The above examples are all cases where vacancies are manipulated to improve the thermoelectric performance through favorably modulating the carrier density and/or strengthening phonon scattering. Yet, vacancies can often be problematic, either resulting in overdoping or by acting as carrier traps that prevent consistent or sufficient doping. For example, in PbTe, attempts to stabilize the optimal n-type electron concentration are often inconsistent, where samples with nominally identical doping level regularly exhibit different carrier concentrations. By integrating defect energy calculations and experimental compositional mapping, Male et al. demonstrated the difficulties in achieving high doping efficiency stem from deviations from the ideal stoichiometry during synthesis to give Pb vacancies, which act as acceptor defects and suppress the electron concentration.187 This work suggests that Pb-rich conditions are crucial to achieve good n-type doping efficiency. Experimentally, this can be achieved by annealing the doped samples in a slightly Pb-rich atmosphere, and this saturation annealing procedure provides a simple and robust means to reliably prepare degenerately doped n-type PbTe.
The process of combining defect energy calculations with experimental investigation of the intrinsic widths of formation is known as phase boundary mapping and is emerging as a powerful means of leveraging the intrinsic defect chemistry of thermoelectric materials to determine to optimum conditions for subsequent extrinsic doping. In addition to PbTe, such techniques led to new understanding and control over the thermoelectric properties of the Zintl compounds Mg3Sb2, Ca9Zn4+xSb9,188 Cu2HgGeTe4,189 and the half Heusler ZrNiSn.190 These studies highlight the increasingly prominent role of theory in guiding experimental establishment of optimal doping conditions in thermoelectric materials. The success of n-type Mg3Sb2 provides a particularly compelling example.
In general, Zintl antimonides are one of the classic material families where vacancies largely control and limit the thermoelectric functionality. Here, the intrinsically high density of cation vacancies normally constrains antimonides to p-type doping, despite theoretical predictions of favourable conduction band structures. Nevertheless, shortly after reports of high performance in n-type Mg3Sb2, Ohno et al. used defect energy calculations to predict that preparing Mg3Sb2 with excess Mg will suppress the Mg-vacancy electron traps and make the samples amendable to further n-type doping.53 Experiments confirmed that samples annealed in Mg-rich conditions indeed reduces the vacancy concentration, and Te-doped, Bi-alloyed Mg3+xSb2−yBiy reach n-type carrier concentrations of 1020 cm−3 and outstanding ZTs near 1.6 at 700–800 K,191–195 significantly outperforming the p-type counterparts that feature ZTs under 1. This success paired, with the relatively lower cost and toxicity of Mg and Sb compared to traditional PbTe and Bi2Te3 thermoelectrics, make Mg3Sb2 derived materials exciting additions to the field.196
As evident from the above discussion, metal chalcogenides and antimonides represent the mainstream in TE research. On the other hand, oxide thermoelectrics, such as SrTiO3,197,198 CaMnO3,199 BiCuSeO,200,201 NaxCoO2,202 Ca3Co4O9,203 and [Bi0.87SrO2]2[CoO2]1.82 (BSCO)204 are also widely investigated as promising materials with excellent thermal stability, oxidation resistance and low-toxicity constituents.72 Defect chemistry likewise provides a good means of enhancing TE properties of these materials. For instance, the electrical conductivity of SrTiO3−δ can be enhanced by controlling oxygen vacancies (acting as electron-donating defects which are pervasive in SrTiO3) under different oxygen partial pressures or highly-reducing conditions.205,206 Moreover, the incorporation of Sr vacancies in Sr1−yTi0.9Nb0.1O3−δ results in fast charge transport as manifested by the improved weighted mobility μ(m*/m0)3/2 where m0 is electron mass.206 This could be ascribed to the following reasons, (1) a slight Sr deficiency suppresses the formation of insulating defects (i.e. Ruddlesden–Popper-type planar faults and highly-defective core–shell structures with Sr enriched shells); (2) alternation of local strains induced by Sr vacancies that facilitates electron transport; and (3) Sr cations may block the electron transport based on the band structure calculation. The Sr vacancies were found to combine with oxygen vacancies to form vacancy clusters that can effectively scatter heat-carrying phonons.206 Likewise, the beneficial effects of cation and oxygen vacancies on the electrical and thermal transport properties have been reported in BiCuSeO,137 NaxCoO2,207 and CaMnO3,208 contributing to the substantial increase of overall ZT values.


3.1.2 Interstitials. 
Interstitial defects refer to crystallographic imperfections where intrinsic or foreign atoms (classified as self-interstitial and interstitial defects, respectively) encroach upon sites that are expected to be unoccupied, i.e. the interstitial positions in lattice structure, shown by red sphere in Fig. 5. The classic example is intentional introduction of interstitial defects into the void sites in skutterudites and clathrates. The interstitial filler atoms are normally alkaline, alkaline earth, and rare earth atoms that are only weakly bound in the void site and thus behave as rattlers, which introduced new low lying modes into the phonon spectrum, significantly enhancing the available phase space available for scattering and resulting in broad-spectrum resonant phonon scattering.127,209–212 Likewise, interstitial filler atoms have also been associated with reduced sound velocity in filled FeSb3 and CoSb3.127,209,213 Shi et al. adopted a multiple-filler strategy in skutterudites, giving rise to continually improved ZT values from 1.1 to 1.7 at 850 K, depicted in Fig. 8a.214
 Fig. 8  (a) ZT values in filled-skutterudites compared with typical TE materials. The inset shows the multiple fillers and skutterudite crystal structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 214. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (b) Composition dependence of the lattice thermal conductivity at 300 K for (SnTe)1−x(Cu2Te)x. Reproduced with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
Moreover, the interstitial defects also suppress the phonon transport by bringing about fluctuations in mass and lattice strain which can be described by the Debye–Callaway model. By alloying 12% Cu2Te into SnTe crystals, Pei et al.215 demonstrated the coexistence of Cu substitutional and interstitial point defects, in which the later strongly impede phonon propagation and diminish κL, as depicted in Fig. 8b. In the (SnTe)1−x(Cu2Te)x solid solution, the κL obtained at 12 mol% Cu2Te-alloyed SnTe can be as low as 0.5 W m−1 K−1 at 850 K, close to the amorphous limit (κL,min = 0.4 W m−1 K−1). Surprisingly, the interstitial point defects do not deteriorate the charge transport, and this pure thermal suppression strategy promotes the ZT from 0.4 up to 1.0. By incorporating Cu interstitial defects to scatter phonons, a record high ZT of 1.6 was achieved in the optimal composition of Sn1.03−yMnyTe(Cu2Te)0.05 (y = 0.14).216
Cationic interstitial defects are much more common than their anionic counterparts due to smaller sizes of cations and the subsequently smaller lattice distortion and strain energy required to create a cation interstitial. Furthermore, the coexistence of diverse point defects is pervasive in TE materials. By intentionally tailoring the initial stoichiometry and crystal growth conditions, the point defects anticipated to be favorable to the TE performance can be built up. However, as point defects are generally dilute and randomly distributed throughout the host matrix, it is a grand challenge to attain direct observations of the defects. Based on density functional theory (DFT), Liu et al. calculated the formation energy of point defects in Mg2X (X = Si, Ge, Sn) under both cation-rich and anion-rich conditions.217 Their calculated results demonstrate that Mg vacancies and interstitial Mg are the dominant defects, playing acceptor- and donor-like roles in charge transport. Formation of interstitial Mg is more favorable in Mg2Si compared to Mg2Ge and Mg2Sn, because of the strong electrostatic interaction of interstitial Mg with Si and smallest strain energies in Mg2Si, as depicted in Fig. 9. The interaction strength is directly depicted by the change in charge density along Mg–X chemical bonding. As illustrated in Fig. 9, the degree of charge density accumulation between interstitial Mg and X ascends from Mg2Sn to Mg2Ge and to Mg2Si, which suggests the interaction between the interstitial Mg with Si is stronger than with Ge or Sn.
 Fig. 9  Contour plot of the charge density difference of Mg65X32, (a) X = Si, (b) X = Ge, (c) X = Sn with a Mg interstitial. The dashed lines and the solid lines demonstrate charge depletion and accumulation respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 217. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 


3.1.3 Antisite defects. 
Antisite defects occur when two elements exchange atomic positions, i.e. when an atom (A) relocates to a site (B) in AB compound, or vice versa, as shown by the green ellipsoid in Fig. 5. Antisite defects commonly occur in weakly ionic or covalent crystals due to the energetic favorability of exchanging atomic sites. Especially in TE materials, antisite defects are pervasive in degenerate semiconductors that lack strongly prohibitive electrostatic repulsions. Consequently, it is crucial to understand the impact of antisite defects on the charge carrier type and concentration of TE materials.
Based on extensive and systematic research on V2VI3 binary compounds, Zhu et al. proposed a simple yet effective (χ, r) model113 where the formation energy of antisite defects EAS is strongly correlated with ionic electronegativity χ and covalent radius r. According to this model, antisite defects are more energetically favorable when cations and anions have minor discrepancies in electronegativity and covalent radius. This model provides a useful means of predicting the evolution of the dominant charge carrier type and concentration in TE materials after alloying with elements of the same group. For example, substituting Te for Se in Bi2Te3 enlarges the (χ, r) difference and, tends to increase EAS, suppress the formation of positively charged antisite defects, and diminish the hole concentration, nh.44 Conversely, reduction of the (χ, r) discrepancy, which occurs when partially substituting Bi with Sb in Bi2−xSbxTe3, facilitates the formation of antisite defects. Here, the smaller distinction of (χ, r) between Sb and Te compared to that between Bi and Te ultimately promotes nh in p-type Bi2−xSbxTe3.218–220
Similar to their prevalence and usage in V2VI3 compounds, antisite defects are also common in half-Heusler (HH) alloys, where they play significant roles in altering the band structure and phonon scattering.221 In ZrNiSn, Zr/Sn antisite defects are common due to the similar covalent radii (1.45 Å for Zr and 1.41 Å for Sn) and shrink the band gap, increase the density of states (DOS), and scatter phonons strongly, which consequently contributes to a higher power factor, lower κ and finally yields a higher ZT value, as compared to counterparts with lower concentration of antisite imperfections.222


3.1.4 Discordant atoms. 
An atom substituted in a crystal lattice is said to be discordant if its local chemistry disagrees with the implied or imposed chemistry of that particular crystal site. The atom then must choose between adopting the coordination geometry characteristic of its own intrinsic local chemistry or that imposed by the host crystal site. For example, if an atom is always found to be tetrahedral in its compounds but it is forced to occupy an octahedral site it may attempt to adopt the tetrahedral geometry. These atoms may be the correct size for the host site but they resist adopting the required coordination geometry and thus deviate from it by moving away from the ideal position. Historically, such local bonding arrangements were overlooked because X-ray diffraction only gives information on the average atomic positions. Recently however, probes of local structure including pair distribution function (PDF) and solid-state NMR coupled with theoretical simulations have provided strong evidence that many promising thermoelectric systems indeed feature local off-centering of specific atoms. Examples of discordant atoms in thermoelectric materials, and how they influence phonon scattering and electronic structure, will be discussed below.
Good examples are the alloys of PbSe with HgSe or CdSe, which both feature excellent p-type ZTs ∼ 1.6–1.7 near 950 K.223,224 While pure HgSe crystallizes in the zinc blende structure with tetrahedrally coordinated Hg, X-ray diffraction suggests HgSe and PbSe form a solid solution in which the Hg atoms rest on the octahedrally coordinated Pb sites of the rocksalt PbSe structure. Interestingly however, DFT calculations indicate the most energetically favorable position for the Hg atoms is slightly off-centered away from the anticipated octahedral geometry and toward the tetrahedral holes. This prediction is in line with chemical intuition, which anticipates Hg to prefer tetrahedral coordination. The Hg off-centering is experimentally supported by solid state NMR performed on the alloyed samples and is suggested to strengthen the phonon scattering (Fig. 10a–c), contributing to the high figures of merit reported for PbSe–HgSe. Similar DFT and NMR results strongly point towards Cd off-centering in the PbSe–CdSe alloys.224
 Fig. 10  (a) Experimental 199Hg CPMG static NMR spectra and (b) corresponding simulations for HgSe and PbSe−6%HgSe. The major peak (green) in the HgSe spectrum is attributed to Hg at the tetrahedral site within HgSe, and the small shift anisotropy (27 ppm) indicates high symmetry. Conversely, the PbSe–6%HgSe spectrum (red) shows a large shift anisotropy of 65 ppm, indicating an asymmetric bonding environment. The inset illustrates a locally distorted HgSe6 octahedron. (c) DFT calculated κlat for pure PbSe and PbSe–HgSe showing suppressed κlat when considering the Hg off-centering. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Energy profile of PbSe–GeSe as a function of atomic coordinates from the octahedral Ge substituted Pb site along the (111) direction towards the tetrahedral site. The inset shows Ge shifted away from the octahedral position. (e) DFT calculated phonon dispersion for PbSe–GeSe considering the Ge off-centering. Low-lying optical modes (marked with red dots) and suppressed phonon group velocities are found, features that are not present in calculations without the discordant Ge. Reproduced with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Discordant bonding arrangements are furthermore reported in the n-type alloys PbSe–GeSe and PbS–GeS. Like in the above alloys, DFT calculations show the Ge2+ atoms energetically prefer to lie away from the expected center of the octahedral sites because of the strong tendency of the 4s2 lone pair of electrons to stereochemically express itself (Fig. 10d). The off-centering introduces new low-lying optical phonon modes into the vibrational spectrum, both softening the lattice and enhancing the phonon scattering (Fig. 10e).225 In PbSe–GeSe, the discordant bonding results in exceptionally low lattice thermal conductivities ∼0.36 W m−1 K−1 and a peak ZT ∼ 1.5 with an outstanding ZTavg of 1.06 over 400–800 K, the highest yet reported among n- or p-type PbSe alloys.
Discordant bonding also occurs in more complex materials. CsAg5TeS2 is a newly discovered mixed anion semiconductor with unique structural chemistry. In CsAg5TeS2, the Te and S atoms occupy unique crystallographic positions, and the crystal structure moreover features heteroleptic Ag atoms in tetrahedral coordination, i.e. Ag coordinated to both Te and S (AgTe2S2).226 While single crystal X-ray diffraction studies suggest the tetragonal space group P4/mmm, pair distribution function directly shows the heteroleptic Ag atoms are locally off centered from the center of the tetrahedron to give a lower symmetry I4/mcm structure. DFT calculations suggest the discordant Ag atoms induce low frequency optical phonons which strengthen the phonon scattering and yield glasslike lattice thermal conductivities under 0.4 W m−1 K−1 at 300 K. Indeed, the experimental lattice thermal conductivities are considerably suppressed compared to those estimated from Debye–Callaway type models that do not consider the discordant nature of the heteroleptic Ag atoms. This behaviour is intrinsic to the material but from the point of view what is anticipated as the ideal structure, it represents a special type of point defect.

3.2 Dislocations
The incorporation and role of dislocations in thermoelectric materials is currently evoking great interest. For thermal transport, the influences of dislocation cores (τDC) and surrounding dislocation strains (τDs) can be estimated via, (11)and (12)where ND is the dislocation density, r is the radius of dislocation core, BD is the Burgers vector of the dislocation and γ is the Grüneisen parameter. Dislocation cores and strain fields thus give respective phonon relaxation times τDC ∝ ω−3 and τDS ∝ ω−1 and therefore can effectively scatter mid-frequency heat-carrying phonons and result in a significant reduction of κL.165,227 Currently many publications claim dislocation-induced reduction in κL without providing an estimation of dislocation density. Based on Klemens’ theory, the effective scattering of mid-frequency phonons requires the dislocation density to be larger than 1012 cm−2.118
Pei's group designed dense dislocation networks in a Pb1−xSb2x/3Se solid solution by vacancy engineering,45 in stark contrast to the dislocation-free stoichiometric alloy Pb1−xSbxSe. The dislocations are formed by collapse of the intentionally induced Pb vacancies, and the dislocation concentration can be controlled by tuning the x value in Pb1−xSb2x/3Se. Direct observations by scanning TEM (Fig. 11a) and indirect calculations from synchrotron XRD provide a consistent estimate of the dislocation density of ∼4–5 × 1012 cm−2 for the x = 0.05 sample (i.e. Pb0.95Sb0.033Se). This value is nearly an order of magnitude higher than that generated in liquid phase sintered-samples.228 As a consequence, an ultralow κL of 0.4 W m−1 K−1 was obtained (Fig. 11b), comparable to the minimum value theoretically predicted by Cahill's model. The remarkable κL reduction is mainly ascribed to the additional phonon scattering by dislocation networks, as intrinsic phonon–phonon interactions and point defect scattering cannot produce such a low κL. It is noteworthy that the presence of complex dislocations in Pb1−xSb2x/3Se makes the temperature-dependent mobility (T < 500 K) deviate from the function of μH ∼ T−2.25 normally observed in pristine n-type PbSe. Instead, the interplay of dislocation-dominated carrier scattering gives μ ∼ T1.5, similar to ionized impurity scattering. However, Pb1−xSb2x/3Se samples still exhibit a relatively high carrier mobility due to dielectric screening effects. The dense dislocation cores together with concomitant dislocation strains enhance the scattering of mid-range frequency phonons, hence contributing to outstanding ZT values of ∼1.5 at 850 K. Similar results were achieved by Lee et al., who reported low thermal conductivity for Pb1−xSbxSe and also achieved excellent ZT near 1.5 at 800 K.173
 Fig. 11  (a) TEM image showing dense dislocations in Pb0.95Sb0.033Se solid solution. The inset is the selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) image of the corresponding area. (b) Temperature-dependent lattice thermal conductivity (κL) of Pb1−xSb2x/3Se (x = 0.01, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05 and 0.07) with or without Ag doping. The grey line is taken from literature.229 Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (c) TEM image of NayEu0.03Pb0.97−yTe (y = 0.025) with dense dislocation networks. (d) Composition-dependent lattice thermal conductivity for NayEu0.03Pb0.97−yTe at 850 K. The symbols show the experimental results in the cited work163 (black) and from literature230 (green), while the curves show the model predictions (with both N- and U-process included) based on a Debye–Callaway approximation with different types of phonon scattering. Phonon scattering by dislocations has the largest contribution to the reduction in κL in this material. Dashed lines are used as visual guides only. Reproduced with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Aliovalent impurities can also be intentionally added to introduce dislocations in Na-doped Pb1−xEuxTe and Mg2Si1−xSbx compounds.163,231 Pei et al. reported a high density of dislocations in Na-doped Pb1−xEuxTe by varying the Na content, as shown in Fig. 11c.163 When the Na concentration is above 2 at% in NayEu0.03Pb0.97−yTe, both the dislocation density and number of nanoprecipitates increase. The concentration of dislocation networks reaches a maximum of (∼4 × 1012 cm−2) for y = 0.025. As a result, an extremely low κL of ∼0.4 W m−1 K−1 (Fig. 11d) and a high ZT of ∼2.2 were obtained.
Recently, Zhao and co-workers reported dense dislocations in Mg2Si1−xSbx compounds (when x > 10%) and investigated their influences on the thermal transport properties.231 Mg vacancies are formed when Sb substitution is over 10%, which introduces strong strain fluctuation into the lattice. Hence, dense dislocations and Mg vacancies together contribute to the scattering of both high- and mid-frequency phonons and give a significant decrease of κL. Hot deformation is also a promising technique to introduce dislocations in TE materials, such as Bi2Te3-based alloys29 and FeSb2 compounds.232 The combination of dislocations and other induced defects enhances the scattering of a broader part of the spectrum of phonons giving rise to the κL reduction and enhanced ZT values.
Liquid phase compaction was applied to prepare Yb-filled CoSb3 with dense dislocation arrays.119 The excess Sb partially combines with Yb to form YbSb2 impurity phase in the melting and spinning process. The YbSb2 + Sb eutectic phase can be expelled out in the hot press at 1023 K, producing dense dislocations at the grain boundaries (dislocation density ∼ 4–8 × 1010 cm−2).
Kim et al. intentionally added excess tellurium in Bi0.5Sb1.5Te3 and utilized liquid phase sintering to squeeze out the additional tellurium.228 This sintering process yielded dense dislocation arrays (density ∼ 2 × 1011 cm−2) at the grain boundaries of the Bi0.5Sb1.5Te3 compounds which exhibited a low κL of 0.33 W m−1 K−1 at 320 K. The authors ascribed the purported high ZT values of 1.86 to the effective phonon scattering by dislocation arrays. Recently, Tang and co-workers reported the same dislocation networks in anisotropic TE transport properties of Bi0.5Sb1.5Te3 alloys prepared in the same way (utilized liquid phase sintering to squeeze out the additional tellurium). However, while they measured low κL, they also found the dislocation networks in Bi0.5Sb1.5Te3 alloys do not necessarily contribute to the enhanced ZT values through κL reduction. Instead, the high performance could only be replicated using in plane electrical and out of plane thermal measurements.233 Consequently, a maximum ZT value of 1.24 was obtained at 350 K, far below the value reported by Kim and coworkers and consistent with previous works on Bi2−xSbxTe3.228 This study highlights the importance of consistent measurements for both electrical and thermal transport properties in anisotropic materials. Moreover, the effect of dislocations on the thermal conductivity of Bi2Te3-based materials should be carefully evaluated.
3.3 Planar defects
The most common planar defects in TE materials include grain boundaries (GBs), phase boundaries, twin boundaries and stacking faults, all which have significant impact on phonon and carrier transport. Here, grain boundaries refer to the interfaces between grains in polycrystalline samples, while phase boundaries are the interfaces between different phases, such as between a host matrix and secondary precipitates. Given the pronounced difference between the mean free paths of charge carriers and phonons, grain boundary engineering is an effective way to introduce interfaces and enhance the scattering of low-frequency phonons at grain boundaries, resulting in a remarkable reduction of κL.119 For grain boundaries, the scattering rate of phonons is determined by,234,235 τB−1 = v/L(13)where L denotes the grain size for grain boundary. Grain boundary scattering exhibits frequency independent phonon scattering.
In the past decades, extensive approaches have been developed to introduce nanostructures or hierarchical structures in state-of-the-art TE materials. The most popular methods include ball milling,25 melt-spinning,236 and solution-based processes.237
Ball milling processing involves mechanical alloying and mechanical grinding, which can be used to either form alloys or pulverize samples. It has been employed in preparing nanostructured SiGe alloys,238,239 half-Heuslers,240 BiCuSeO,241 Zintl compounds,181,242 metal chalcogenides25,243–246 and skutterudites.247
Melt spinning is another efficient approach to manipulate the microstructure of TE materials using kinetic control. Melt spinning is particularly suitable for preparation of metastable forms of compounds using high cooling rates of 104–107 K min−1. This technique has been advanced by Tang's group to refine microstructures and introduce nanocrystallites in state-of-the-art TE materials, such as Bi2Te3-based alloys,233,236 skutterudites248 and silicides.249,250 Melt-spun BiSbTe alloys exhibit unique microstructures that consist of 5–15 nm nanocrystals with coherent grain boundaries and nanocrystalline domains embedded in an amorphous matrix236 (as shown in Fig. 12a and b). Remarkable reductions in κL (Fig. 12c) and over 50% enhancement of ZT compared to the commercial ingot materials have been achieved.
 Fig. 12  (a and b) TEM images of melt-spun-SPS (MS-SPS) bulk materials, which display both the nanocrystalline domains and amorphous phase. (c) The lattice thermal conductivity (κL) of zone-melted (ZM) ingot, ZM-SPS, and MS-SPS bulk samples as a function of temperature. Reproduced with permission from.236 Copyright 2009, The American Institute of Physics. (d) TEM image (left) and simulated crystal structure (right) of (BiS)1.2(TiS2)2 along the [100] zone axis. The inset shows the electron diffraction pattern of the sample. (e) Temperature dependent in-plane lattice thermal conductivity of TiS2, (PbS)1.18(TiS2)2, (SnS)1.2(TiS2)2, and (BiS)1.2(TiS2)2. The black solid line indicates the minimum thermal conductivity of (BiS)1.2(TiS2)2 calculated by Cahill's model. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2012, The American Institute of Physics. 
In addition to powder metallurgy methods, solution-based synthesis has shown great potential in grain boundary engineering for TE materials.98,251,252 Solution-based routes have several advantages over solid-state synthesis, in particular low reaction temperature and facile control of microstructures. Numerous metal chalcogenide nanocrystals have been synthesized in solution, including PbTe, Cu2Se, SnSe, and Bi2Te3-based compounds. In combination with high temperature consolidation process, solution grown nanocrystals are subject to grain growth and compressed into bulk materials, thus generating a high-density of grain boundaries inside the final pellets. For instance, solvothermal-synthesized Cu2Se nanoplates have a wide distribution of lateral size from several hundred nanometers to 1 µm.253 The post-synthetic sintering process preserved the plate-like morphology and nanoscale size of the grains which enhanced the scattering of intermediate and low frequency phonons, resulting in an ultralow κL of 0.2 W m−1 K−1. In addition, because grain boundaries also can serve as barriers to scatter charge carriers, they can feasibly be used to selectively filter those with energy lower than the barrier height,254 but because the barriers will also sharply decrease the electrical conductivity, strong evidence for an overall beneficial energy filtering effects remains lacking.
As demonstrated by the above examples, grain boundaries can effectively suppress κL; however, GBs will also generally degrade the electronic transport and decrease the carrier mobility μ. In traditional thermoelectric materials such as PbTe and Bi2Te3, the tradeoff is often favorable, and small grains (high GB density) are desired to obtain the lowest κL; however, many emerging TE materials feature unusually strong charge carrier scattering from the GBs that is ultimately detrimental to the thermoelectric performance. Examples include, but are not limited to, Mg3Sb2192,255 and other Zintl antimonides,52,256–258 half-Heuslers,259,260 and PbSe–ASbSe2 (A = Na Ag) alloys.261–263
Here, despite degenerate doping levels above 1020 cm−3, the GBs are sufficiently resistive to produce anomalous thermally activated electrical conductivity and mobility at lower temperatures (generally below ∼600 K), as shown in Fig. 13a, while the Seebeck coefficient is mostly unaffected. In Mg3Sb2, the unusual temperature dependence of the conductivity was initially ascribed to ionized impurity scattering,192 which can in principle produce similar behaviour; however, later work suggested a grain boundary based scattering model can also reproduce the irregular electrical conductivity while providing a better theoretical description of the Seebeck coefficients.264 The most convincing evidence for GB scattering came from measurements on single crystals and large grain samples that demonstrated elimination of the deleterious scattering as the grain size increased, and in the case of the single crystals, lacked evidence for ionized impurity scattering down to 2 K (Fig. 13b).265,266 Similarly, large grained samples of PbSe–NaSbSe2 alloys do not show the low temperature scattering found in small grained materials (Fig. 13c).267 At a microscopic level, detailed atom probe tomography investigations of the GBs in Mg3Sb2 reveals significant (up to 5%) Mg deficiency along the interfaces.268
 Fig. 13  (a) Traces of the temperature-dependent Hall carrier mobility in several thermoelectric materials with strong grain boundary scattering, KAlSb4,52 Mg3Sb2,192 Ca3AlSb3,258 Sr3GaSb3,270 SnSe,271 PbSe–NaSbSe2,261 and Mg2Si.272 (b) Electrical resistivity of two degenerate n-type single crystals of Mg3Sb2 showing metallic behaviour down to 2 K with no evidence for ionized impurity scattering. Reproduced with permission from.266 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) Comparison of the electrical conductivities for large- and small-grained PbSe–NaSbSe2 showing elimination of the low-temperature scattering in the large-grained samples. Reproduced from ref. 267 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Demonstration of improved ZTs in single crystalline Mg3Sb2 compared to polycrystalline materials. Reproduced with permission from.261 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Recent work suggests more ionic semiconductors will in general be more prone to detrimental GB scattering owing to the weakened dielectric screening of the charge carriers.269 This is consistent with the above picture, where Zintl antimonides often show GB dominated transport, while more polarizable traditional materials like Bi2Te3 do not. In such cases, any gains owing from reduced κL in small-grained samples are overtaken from the severe increase in resistance at the grain boundaries and the overall thermoelectric performance often suffers. Even in cases where the maximum ZT is somewhat higher in small-grained materials, the suppression of the electrical conductivity, particularly at lower temperatures, generally leads to lower device ZT. The above example materials therefore represent exceptions to the widely accepted notion that small grains are preferable in thermoelectric materials. Here, large-grained microstructures may be favorable to suppress GB scattering and maintain high charge carrier mobility. Indeed large grained and/or single crystalline forms of Mg3Sb2 and SnSe are reported to show considerably better thermoelectric performance than small grained or polycrystalline counterparts, as shown in Fig. 13d for Mg3Sb2.265,273,274 Further in support of this claim, suitable processing of polycrystalline SnSe to suppress the GB scattering yielded samples with comparable figures of merit to the single crystals.275
Electrically resistive GBs can also lead to dramatic over estimations of the lattice thermal conductivity. In a recent publication, Kuo et al. demonstrated how typical use the of Wiedemann Franz law to estimate κelec and may result in significant errors when GB scattering is strong.276 When the GBs are sufficiently resistive to dominate the electrical conductivity, the usual implementation of the Wiedemann Franz law neglects heat transported by charge carriers moving through the bulk grains, leading to underestimation of the true κelec and thus overestimation of κL. In some extreme cases, such as SnSe, this leads to an obvious contradiction where the polycrystalline forms have apparently larger κL than single crystals. While SnSe is a particularly dramatic example, Kuo et al. show significant GB effects are pervasive in the TE literature, indicating care must be taken to properly estimate the electronic and lattice thermal conductivity in small grained thermoelectric materials.
While GB engineering is often a powerful means of improving the TE performance, the above works demonstrate the influence of GBs can also be malignant. As mentioned above, a simple rule of thumb available to researchers is that more ionic materials are more likely to exhibit negative effects from the GBs, whereas the GBs in polarizable materials like PbTe will largely be benign. In either case, we emphasize the importance of both properly characterizing and considering the overall contribution of the grain boundaries and engineering the proper microstructure to optimize the trade-off between κL and μ.
Lastly, stacking faults are observed in a number of TE materials. Stacking faults can scatter intermediate frequency phonons, as parametrized by the relaxation time.277 (14)where a is the lattice constant, and G3 is the number of layers in a crystal containing one stacking fault. Some thermoelectric materials where stacking faults play a prominent role are Cr2Ge2Te6,278,279 InSiTe3,279 Sb2Si2Te6,280 TiS2-based misfit-layered compounds121,281,282 PbTe–PbSnS2 composites,283 SrTiO3-based oxides,206 MgAgSb alloys,284,285etc. Wan et al. reported the natural superlattice structures in (MS)1+x(TiS2)2 (M = Pb, Sn, Bi) bulk materials121 in which the MS layers are intercalated naturally into the van der Waals gap of TiS2 and stack periodically. The resulting misfit layers can suppress phonon transport and lead to a low κL in the direction perpendicular to the layers. By controlling the stacking faults of the MS and TiS2 layers, the κL can be progressively reduced (Fig. 12d and e). Due to the high density of stacking faults, (BiS)1.2(TiS2)2 shows even lower κL than the minimum value calculated by Cahill's model at high temperature (Fig. 12e). In addition, prolonged ball milling processes and subsequent heat treatment were found to introduce high-density stacking faults in α-MgAgSb alloys that result in enhanced scattering of medium-wavelength phonons.284
3.4 Volume defects

3.4.1 
            In situ nanoinclusions. 

In situ inclusion of nanostructures is of great importance in the TE community, as the precipitates act as efficient phonon scattering centers, thus enabling efficient modulation of the thermal transport properties in various TE systems. It is particularly desirable during a nucleation and growth or spinodal decomposition process that the interface created between the two phases is as coherent as possible, a phenomenon referred to as endotaxy. This is because such an interface can effectively scatter phonons and at the same time (if there is good electronic band alignment between the two phases) easily transmit charge carriers. Traditionally, in situ nanoinclusions are naturally formed (i.e. without milling or secondary processing) using solid state phase transformations, as detailed by following techniques:
3.4.1.1 Phase separation in unstable solid solutions through spinodal decomposition. 
Precipitates effectively lower the κL of a host material if their sizes are on nanoscale.286 Phase separation can be controlled on nanometer scale in materials that undergo spinodal decomposition. As a representative example, the PbTe–PbS system exhibits a miscibility gap (Fig. 14a).291 Sufficient thermodynamic driving force for spinodal decomposition is reached when pushing the alloy far from equilibrium and into the unstable miscibility gap region. For a given isotherm over the composition range, phase segregation reduces the overall free energy of the system because of the curvature in the Gibbs free energy.287 Moreover, the precipitate morphology (e.g. size and shape) can be controlled to some extent by the nucleation and growth mechanism. Fig. 14b schematically highlights nanoscale PbS-rich stripes created by spinodal decomposition and nanocrystals of PbS precipitated in a PbTe matrix.288 Microstructural investigation indicates the in situ formed PbS leads to dense dislocations and lattice strains at the PbS/PbTe grain boundaries due to the large lattice mismatch of ∼6% between PbTe and PbS.292 Comparison of single phase and nanostructured PbTe–PbSe composites found significantly lower κL in the nanostructured forms,293 providing strong evidence that the unique nanostructure facilitates a large reduction in κL and high TE performance owing to the enhanced phonon scattering.
 Fig. 14  (a) Phase diagram of PbTe–PbS. Reproduced with permission.287 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustration of PbS precipitates in PbTe. Reproduced with permission from ref. 288. Copyright 2007, The American Chemical Society. (c) Phase diagram of PbTe–Ag2Te. Reproduced with permission from ref. 289. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic diagram of in situ oxidation in CuInTe2–ZnO and CuInTe2–In2O3 systems. Adapted with permission from ref. 290. Copyright 2018, Chinese Physical Society and IOP Publishing Ltd. 
Androulakis et al. found a very low κL ∼ 0.4 W m−1 K−1 at room temperature for the composition of 8% PbS in PbTe owing to the strong phonon scattering from acoustic impedance mismatch at interfaces, comparable to that of artificial thin film superlattice structures (∼0.33 W m−1 K−1). Such a low κL enables a high ZT value of 1.50 at 642 K.288 Girard et al. reported successful shape control of the PbS nanostructures in Na-doped PbTe–PbSe by modulating the concentrations of Na and PbS, yielding cuboctahedral PbS nanocrystals coherently embedded throughout the PbTe matrix. Here, low κL values (∼0.5 W m−1 K−1 at ∼800 K) combined with high power factor (∼2 × 10−3 W m−1 K−2 at ∼800 K) result in a maximum ZT of ∼1.8 at 800 K for 2% Na-doped PbTe–12%PbS sample.291 Wu et al. reported an even greater ZT of ∼2.3 at 923 K for a spark plasma sintered 3 at% Na-doped (PbTe)0.8(PbS)0.2 sample.294 The superior performance was attributed to the further decrease of κL (∼0.38 W m−1 K−1 at 923 K) derived from the mesostructured microstructure and the very high power factors (up to 2.65 × 10−3 W m−1 K−2 at 623 K).
In addition to the PbTe–PbSe system, the quasi-binary PbTe–GeTe295,296 is also a classic system formed by spinodal decomposition. By Sn alloying, Gelbstein et al.297 formed a periodic distribution of GeTe- and PbTe-rich phases at the micro- and nano- (down to 10 nm) scales, yielding a ∼50% reduction of the room temperature κL (∼0.8 W m−1 K−1) and a high ZT of ∼1.2 at 723 K in Ge0.5Sn0.25Pb0.25Te alloy. Further metallurgical control298 over the phase separation by spark plasma sintering and subsequent heat treatment induced sub-micron phase separated domains along with twinning and dislocation networks in PbTe–GeTe, which results in an ultralow κL of ∼0.4 W m−1 K−1 and a very high ZT of up to ∼2 at 723 K for p-type Ge0.87Pb0.13Te alloys.
Outside of the lead and/or tin chalcogenide-based alloys, spinodal decomposition has been widely utilized in other TE materials to introduce in situ nanoinclusions. Meng et al.299 observed spinodal decomposition in the skutterudite La0.8Ti0.1Ga0.1Fe3CoSb12 synthesized by a rapid solidification method (i.e. melting–spinning). In this compound, coherent La-poor and La-rich skutterudite grains with sizes of ∼200 nm were achieved, rendering a ∼30% reduction in κL (∼0.75 W m−1 K−1) and ∼50% increment in ZT (∼1.2) at 700 K compared to quenched samples. Gürth et al.300 studied the Ti1−xHfxNiSn and Ti1−xZrxNiSn half-Heusler system, which undergoes spinodal decomposition when prepared with an optimized arc melting technique consisting of an intermediate high frequency melting step, a long ball milling time, and a multi-step hot pressing. The resulting nano precipitates strongly scatter heat-carrying phonons and lead to lower κ. The ZT values reach up to ∼1 for ternary TiNiSn and ZrNiSn, and ∼1.2 for Ti0.5Zr0.5NiSn0.98Sb0.02.
Preparation of half-Heusler (HH) materials containing nanoscale precipitates of full-Heuslers (FH) coherently embedded in the bulk matrix has furthermore been demonstrated to favorably modulate both phonon scattering and charge transport properties.301 Polycrystalline samples of the HH Zr0.25Hf0.75NiSn containing 2–6 percent fractions of FH Zr0.25Hf0.75Ni2Sn nano inclusions (under 10 nm) exhibit enhanced charge carrier mobility and simultaneous reduction of κ to give significantly improved performance.302 Similar results were also achieved in composites of HH Ti0.5Hf0.5CoSb0.9Sn0.1 with the FH Ti0.5Hf0.5Co2Sb0.9Sn0.1, where the inclusion of FH nanoprecipitates in the HH matrix raises both the charge carrier mobility and thermopower as well as reducing the thermal conductivity of highly degenerate samples.303 These surprising results are ascribed to the trapping of low energy charge carriers at the HH/FH interface, lowering the net hole density and increasing the carrier relaxation time and thus mobility. Likewise, the lowered carrier concentration leads to improvement in the Seebeck coefficients. Lastly, recent work indicates growth of magnetic Ti(Ni4/3Fe2/3)Sn FH nanoparticles in a Ti0.25Zr0.25Hf0.5NiSn0.975Sb0.025 HH matrix can significantly improve the thermopower, which is suggested to be the result of interactions between the magnetic moments of the FH precipitates with the spins of itinerate electrons. This leads to charge localization and the formation of bound magnetic polarons, which may enhance the carrier effective mass and improve the thermopower.304
3.4.1.2 Precipitation from a metastable supersaturated solid solution. Nucleation and growth. 
In general, stable precipitates with good thermal stability can be achieved based on their low solubilities in the host matrix. As shown in the phase diagram of the pseudobinary PbTe–Ag2Te289 (Fig. 14c), the solubility of Ag2Te in PbTe is strongly temperature-dependent. By rationally adjusting the composition, phase separation of PbTe and Ag2Te occurs when the Ag2Te fraction is over its solubility limit. Therefore, precipitates can be grown in the host matrix without system restrictions. Using this concept, Biswas et al.305 incorporated endotaxially arranged SrTe nanocrystals (∼1–15 nm) in Na2Te doped PbTe matrix and found the SrTe has little effect on hole mobility but significant suppresses heat propagation, therefore decoupling phonon and electron transport in the system. The resulting high power factor (2 × 10−3 W m−1 K−2 at ∼800 K) and low κL (∼0.45 W m−1 K−1 at ∼800 K) led to the then highest ZT of 1.7 at 815 K for the 2% SrTe sample. Tan et al. extended this work, using a rapid quenching procedure to trap SrTe beyond its thermodynamic solubility limit of <1 mol% in PbTe. The increased alloy fraction of SrTe promotes greater convergence of L and Σ valence bands and also widens the bandgap. As a result, the non-equilibrium processing rendered much higher power factors with maximal values over 3 × 10−3 W m−1 K−2. In addition, the endotaxial SrTe nanostructures yield low κL of ∼0.5 W m−1 K−1 at 923 K in the heavily doped PbTe–SrTe system. Consequently, Pb0.98Na0.02Te–8%SrTe achieves a record high ZT value of 2.5 at 923 K.
One of the key reasons the PbTe–SrTe system attains such outstanding performance is the maintenance of high charge carrier mobility, which complements the low thermal conductivity. Unlike most nanostructured systems, where the precipitates inevitably also scatter charge carriers and reduce the carrier mobility, the mobility in nanostructured PbTe–SrTe is not strongly changed compared to the solid solutions. Biswas et al. attribute this to the relatively minor crystallographic mismatch between the cubic PbTe and SrTe, which have similar lattice constants.306 This allows for relatively facile charge transport through the PbTe–SrTe composites compared to other nanostructured PbTe based materials.
By studying nanostructured composites of p-type PbSe and PbS with numerous binary secondary phases that served as precipitates (CdQ, ZnQ, SrQ, CaQ, etc. where Q = Se, S), Zhao et al. found the best thermoelectric performance was consistently achieved in systems where the valence bands of host and precipitate phases were closely aligned, as this limits the energy barrier between phases and allows for favourable electronic transport.307–309 The extensive work on nanostructured lead chalcogenides therefore provides several crucial design principles for quality multiphase thermoelectrics. In addition to good thermal stability, one should seek secondary phases with high alignment of the crystallographic structure between host and matrix (endotaxy). Likewise, a small energetic difference between the conducting electronic band edges is desirable to maintain good charge carrier mobility.
Zhou et al.310 reported that bismuth is multifunctional in SnTe compounds. Bismuth can modulate the carrier concentration and increase the density of states effective mass of SnTe for high power factor (2 × 10−3 W m−1 K−2 at 873 K). Bismuth will also precipitate from the SnTe matrix when the doping level exceeds 4 at%. The nanoscale bismuth precipitates act as phonon scattering centers and largely reduce κL of (∼0.7 W m−1 K−1 at 873 K). Compared to pure SnTe, Sn0.94Bi0.06Te has considerably improved performance with a ZT of 1.1 at 873 K. To reduce the κL of bismuth doped SnTe without deteriorating the hole carrier mobility, Zhao et al.311 incorporated endotaxial SrTe nanostructures as phonon scattering centers. The nanostructures lower the κL from ∼1.1 W m−1 K−1 for Sn0.97Bi0.03Te to ∼0.70 W m−1 K−1 for Sn0.97Bi0.03Te–5.0% SrTe at 823 K, leading to a ZT of 1.2 at 823 K and a high average ZT of 0.7 in the temperature range of 300–823 K.
Luo et al.312 found nanoscale Ag8SnSe6 precipitates can further reduce the already ultralow κL of polycrystalline SnSe to 0.32 W m−1 K−1 at 773 K. Such a low κ along with the high power factor caused by Ag/Na dual doping achieves a peak ZT of 1.33 at 773 K with a high average ZT (ZTave) value of 0.91 in the temperature range of 423–823 K for the SnSe system. By directly incorporating excess ZnS, Luo et al.313 created nanoscale ZnS secondary precipitates with dense stacking faults in a CuInTe2 matrix. The unique precipitates result in a ∼40% reduction in κL for CuInTe2-6 mol% ZnS (∼0.42 W m−1 K−1) compared to CuInTe2 (0.72 W m−1 K−1) at 823 K. The resulting ZT value reaches ∼1.52 at 823 K for an increase of ∼90%.
Eutectic-precipitation314 is a special strategy for incorporating nanoscale submicron phases into the host TE materials. Owing to the interlaced nature of eutectic phase separation, most of the resulting products are lamellar with controllable sizes.315 In this way, Bhardwaj et al.316 prepared metallic submicron lamellar eutectic phase of Ti70.5Fe29.5 in the half-Heusler TiNiSn matrix. The incorporation of the lamellar Ti70.5Fe29.5 results in a ∼57% increase in the power factor (compared to TiNiSn) and a ∼25% reduction in κ. The ZT of the Ti70.5Fe29.5 containing samples is twice that of pristine TiNiSn. Cheng317 and Xin318et al. studied the effect of in situ grown InSb–Sb eutectic structures on the TE properties of InSb. They found the InSb–Sb eutectic melts beyond 765 K, and the obstruction of the transverse acoustic phonons drastically reduces κL. Zhang et al.319 found lamellar MnTe and particle-like MnTe2 precipitates form in Pb1−xMnxTe when the Mn content exceeds its solubility limit in PbTe. The discontinued nanometer or micrometer-sized MnTe2 precipitates act as strong phonon scattering centers, which reduce κL from ∼1.69 W m−1 K−1 for PbTe to ∼1.16 W m−1 K−1 for Pb0.94Mn0.06Te at room temperature.
It is furthermore important to consider the stability of the nanoprecipitates. For practical thermoelectric applications, it is imperative for the nano inclusions to be stable over long periods at the desired operating temperatures. An interesting example of in situ changes to the micro-nanoscale structure that occurs at relevant temperature is found in the NaPbmSbTem+2 (PbTe–NaSbTe2) alloy system. NaPbmSbTem+2 is a classic nanostructured thermoelectric material in which Na- and Sb-rich nano structures give rise to low lattice thermal conductivity and high ZT ∼ 1.6 near 700 K.320 Surprisingly, recent work demonstrated the secondary phases present in the as-cast ingots dissolve during sintering or hot pressing to give a single phase solid solution.321 The dissolution of the secondary phases causes a shift from degenerate p-type conduction to nearly intrinsic n-type charge transport, and the resulting solid-solutions have considerably poorer ZTs than the phase separated ingots. High performance can be recovered by tuning the cation stoichiometry; however, this work clearly demonstrates the need to fully characterize the thermal stability of precipitates and secondary phases in thermoelectric materials.
3.4.1.3 
              In situ nanoinclusions formed by chemical reaction. 

In situ chemical reactions (e.g. replacement, oxidation) are a new strategy to induce desired dispersed nanoinclusions within the host matrix.322 Luo et al.323 incorporated TiO2 nanoparticles, nanotubes, and nanofibers in CuInTe2. The TiO2 additives reacted with CuInTe2 during the hot pressing at the onset temperature of ∼623 K, forming well dispersed In2O3 inclusions with sizes of ∼30 nm. The presence of In2O3 nanoinclusions results in ∼33% reduction of κL (∼0.48 W m−1 K−1) compared to pure CuInTe2 (∼0.72 W m−1 K−1) at 823 K. By further alloying with ZnTe to enhance the power factor, the TiO2 nanofiber containing (CuInTe2)0.99(2ZnTe)0.01 reaches a high ZT ∼1.47 at 823 K. Furthermore, ZnO nanoparticles were incorporated into CuInTe2 to simultaneously modify its electrical and thermal transport properties.324 The reaction between ZnO and CuInTe2 leads to hole doping as Zn occupies In sites and forms of In2O3 nanoinclusions (Fig. 14d). Consequently, the power factor increases by ∼ 76% (∼1.45 × 10−3 W m−1 K−2) and the κL is reduced by 34% (0.47 W m−1 K−1), enabling the CuInTe1.99Sb0.01 + 1.0 wt% ZnO sample to achieve a record high ZT of ∼1.61 at 823 K. Ahmad325 demonstrated Y2O3 nanoparticles (average size of 60 nm) can react with SiGe to form an in situ metallic YSi2 phase which exhibits coherent grain boundaries with SiGe. The coherent grain boundaries scatter phonons but allow charge carriers to pass through, resulting in very low κ (∼0.56 W m−1 K−1 at 1100 K) without altering the power factor. As a result, a record ZT of 1.81 at 1100 K is observed, which is an increase of ∼34% compared to SiGe. Favier et al.326 observed nanosized (∼30 nm) MoSi2 inclusions in an n-type SiGe matrix. Here, the nanoinclusions were formed during sintering via an in situ reaction between the native SiGe and added molybdenum. The presence of the nanosized inclusions significantly reduces κL from 4.8 W m−1 K−1 for SiGe to 3.6 W m−1 K−1 for 1.3 vol% incorporated SiGe at 973 K, and the resulting material exhibits a ZT of ∼1.0 at 973 K.
Elsheikh et al.327 found Al atoms tend to react with Sb and form AlSb nano-inclusions in the grain boundaries instead of entering the Sb-icosahedral voids in composites of Yb0.25Co4Sb12 and Al. The AlSb inclusions are suggested to act as barriers for both low energy charge carriers and phonons, leading to a high power factor of 4.89 × 10−3 W m−1 K−2 at 650 K for Al0.1Yb0.25Co4Sb12 and a low κL of 0.6 W m−1 K−1 at 500 K for Al0.3Yb0.25Co4Sb12. The ZT was enhanced up to 1.36 at 850 K for Al0.3Yb0.25Co4Sb12. Kim et al.328 incorporated TeO2 nanoparticles into Bi0.5Sb1.5Te3. The in situ reaction between Sb and TeO2 during ball milling and spark plasma sintering resulted in the formation of Sb2O3 nanoinclusions in the samples. The Sb2O3 significantly reduces the κL by ∼23% at 300 K (∼0.44 W m−1 K−1). As a result, the Bi0.5Sb1.5Te3–3 wt%TeO2 sample achieves a ZT of 1.07 at 350 K.
Furthermore, redox engineering has been explored to introduce in situ nanoinclusions in oxide TE materials.205,329 This strategy requires cations have multiple valence states that can be easily tuned via the redox reactions with the atmosphere. For example, the incorporation of redox-sensitive Mo cations in A-site deficient Sr1−x(Ti,Mo)O3-based materials results in the Mo exsolution and the formation of Mo nanoinclusions. This is due to the chemical reactions between the secondary phases of SrMoO4 and TiO2,205SrMoO4 + TiO2 → SrTiO3 + Mo + 1.5O2,
The intrinsically high refractoriness of Mo could account for the dispersion of Mo in the nanoscale and submicron-scale located at grain boundaries. The in situ Mo nanoinclusions and atomic inhomogeneities can serve as effective phonon scattering centers, resulting in reduced κL for the obtained nanocomposites. Similarly, other metallic nanoinclusions with high melting point have also been introduced in SrTiO3-based compounds via the reduction of corresponding oxide or salt precursors.330,331


3.4.2 Exotic secondary phases. 
We refer to compounds that are chemically unrelated or inert to the primary thermoelectric matrix as exotic secondary phases. The large chemical differences between host matrix and secondary phases mean composites cannot be created via the nucleation and growth, spinodal decomposition, or the other reaction techniques described above. Exotic secondary phases are thus a distinct sub-class of volume defects that can be incorporated by physical means into TE materials to optimize their performance. Since the phonon and electron transport behaviours largely depend on the type, size distribution, and concentration of secondary phases, exotic secondary phases are expected to generate interfaces in host materials which could introduce, either fortuitously or by design, effects that enhance the scattering of both phonons and electrons. Therefore, it is critical to understand the nature of the matrix and use suitable additives.
In general, additives are chosen according to the criteria: (1) high chemical and thermal stability, i.e. they do not react with the matrix material within the operating temperature; (2) formation of a homogeneous distribution in the matrix, i.e. no obvious aggregation. To date, various exotic secondary phases have been used as fillers in state-of-the-art TE materials, such as carbon-based materials (graphene, carbon nanotubes, etc.),332–338 SiC,337,339–342 TiN,343,344 oxides,345 and single elements.233,346 These secondary phases are mainly introduced and dispersed via powder processing, specifically by mechanical alloying, which facilitates the formation of homogeneous composites. Meanwhile, the secondary phases can serve as barriers to prevent grain growth during heat treatment, such as annealing, hot pressing, and rapid sintering. This in turn increases the density of grain boundaries.
Carbon-based materials, such as carbon, graphene, carbon nanotubes, and fullerene, are emerging as attractive additives in TE materials because of their unique physical properties such as excellent electrical conductivity and good thermal stability.347–349 The type and dimensionality of carbon sources exert different effects on the electrical and thermal transport properties. Graphene and carbon nanotubes have anisotropic structures, phonons and charge carriers thus exhibit distinct transport behaviour parallel to or perpendicular to the tube/layer. Therefore, the anisotropy of the TE properties for these composites must be taken into consideration.
An interesting example is the work on Mg3Sb2 incorporated with multilayer graphene published by Lin et al., where the authors demonstrate an interfacial Seebeck coefficient, similar to the energy filtering effect, that originates in the graphene sheets segregated at the grain boundaries.350 While energy filtering is commonly invoked in the thermoelectrics literature to explain enhanced performance, rigorous evidence for a beneficial effect is scarce at best. In fact, detailed calculations indicate the typical picture of energy filtering from barriers at grain boundaries or precipitate interfaces can raise S, but also will significantly impede the carrier mobility and thus give negligible true enhancement of the power factor or figure of merit.351
In their recent work, Lin et al. use ball milling followed by hot pressing to prepare graphene-Mg3Sb2 composites. They find the graphene largely segregates to the grain boundaries, lowering the thermal conductivity across the interfaces. The increased thermal resistance at the boundaries produces an interfacial Seebeck effect, which adds to and enhances the net Seebeck coefficient. Crucially, unlike resistive Schottky barriers normally considered in the context of energy filtering, graphene has outstanding charge carrier mobility that allows relatively facile charge transport across the graphene containing boundaries. The overall result is enhanced Seebeck without major losses to the electrical conductivity, resulting in an outstanding ZT of 1.7 at 750 K in the graphene-Mg3Sb2 samples.
While we believe claims of energy filtering should generally be treated with caution, the above work provides a new perspective in which real enhancement to ZT is possible. The key requirement is to increase the thermal resistance of the interfacial region without compromising the electrical conductivity. Because graphene and other carbon-based materials are often outstanding conductors, these may represent useful materials for achieving this effect. As we discuss below, many of the examples of carbon based exotic secondary phases recently studied in thermoelectric semiconductors appear to produce energy filtering effects that are beneficial to material performance.
Recently, Zhao et al. dispersed a wide range of carbon precursors in Cu2Se, including graphite, carbon black, carbon fibers, and hard carbon.352 With addition of 0.3 wt% carbon fibers, the composite demonstrated an impressive ZT of 2.4 at 850 K. Moreover, in other notable reports, the addition of carbon-based nanomaterials such as multi-walled carbon nanotubes353,354 and carbon-coated boron nanoparticles355 plays beneficial roles in Cu2Se-based composites, which exhibited ZT > 1 in the range of 600–900 K. The authors ascribed the TE enhancement to more effective scattering of phonons at interfaces than electrons. To elaborate the role of carbon-related precursors in Cu2Se composites, more advanced experiments and calculation tools are required. The same group carried out further studies on graphene-incorporated Cu2Se composites and reported the ultra-high ZT value of 2.44 at 873 K for Cu2Se/0.15 wt% graphene composites.356 A high temperature (∼1200 °C) melting process accelerated the diffusion of Cu, Se and C atoms, while graphene nanoplates tend to aggregate to form graphite or remained unchanged. Both carbon inclusions and multi-layered graphene were found in the composites. Based on synchrotron XRD results and DFT calculations, they concluded that no solid-state reaction occurred between carbon and Cu2Se up to high temperatures. The large mismatch of phonon density of states between graphene (or graphite) and Cu2Se largely accounts for the significant reduction of κ.
In addition, Baik et al. mixed a small portion of graphene (0.1 vol%) in Bi0.5Sb1.5Te3 by ball milling,357 which simultaneously increased both the carrier concentration and mobility due to the intrinsically high carrier concentration and mobility of graphene.358 These composites have suppressed κL from the enhanced phonon scattering at interfaces and demonstrate maximum ZT of 1.13 at 360 K. The Bi0.5Sb1.5Te3/0.1 vol% graphene composites also showed good thermal stability verified by repeated cycling of the TE performance.
Besides mechanical mixing, a wet chemical method has been developed to synthesize PbTe/graphene nanocomposites (Fig. 15a).359 Graphene oxide nanosheets served as both the dispersant and growth template for PbTe nanoparticles. The PbTe nanoparticles were formed in situ, while the graphene oxides nanosheets were simultaneously reduced to graphene. The presence of graphene in the composites provides extra transport channels for electrons, resulting in significant enhancement of σ, from 2.29 × 103 S m−1 (pristine PbTe) to 3.11 × 104 S m−1 (PbTe-5 wt% graphene). Meanwhile the composites exhibited low κL and suppressed bipolar thermal conductivity at high temperature, ascribed to enhanced phonon scattering at interfaces and the increased carrier concentration. The PbTe/5 wt% graphene samples reached maximum ZT values of 0.7 at 670 K, which is approximately a six-fold increase compared to that of pristine PbTe prepared in the same manner.
 Fig. 15  (a) The SEM image of PbTe-5 wt% graphene powders. The red arrows indicate the wrinkles of graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 359. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The fracture surface shows the CNT distributed at Bi0.4Sb1.6Te3 grain boundaries. Reproduced with permission from ref. 332. Copyright 2013, The American Institute of Physics. TEM images show (c) the SiC nanodispersion in Bi0.3Sb1.7Te3 matrix, and (d) the interface between Bi0.3Sb1.7Te3 matrix and SiC nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 340. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. 
Carbon nanotubes (CNT) also have been extensively employed in TE materials for reducing κ and enhancing ZT. Recently, Kim et al. implanted CNT in Bi2Te3 powders by a novel chemical route, which led to a homogeneous dispersion of CNT in the Bi2Te3 matrix. The CNT reduced κ by promoting phonon-scattering at the Bi2Te3 interface, significantly increasing the ZT to 0.85 at 473 K.360 In addition, Yeo et al. obtained a high ZT value of 1.47 at 348 K for a (Bi0.2Sb0.8)2Te3 nanocomposite with 0.12 wt% multiwall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) via enhanced phonon scattering at the MWCNT/matrix interfaces and grain boundaries.361 Similarly, Ren et al. incorporated MWCNTs into polycrystalline Bi0.4Sb1.6Te3 through powder processing (Fig. 15b). Interestingly, the results indicate the MWCNTs not only reduced κ but also increased the flexural strength of the materials.332 For the intermediate-temperature thermoelectric PbTe, work by Khasimsaheb et al. indicate a 0.05% CNT distribution in a PbTe matrix significantly enhances σ and S above 450 K. They suggest CNTs introduce potential barriers and act as low energy filters, leading to enhanced Seebeck coefficient and maintain good mobility for high energy electrons, resulting in increased σ. We emphasize that this is however speculation at this point that needs additional experimental support. At the same time, the additional interfaces and enhanced phonon scattering facilitate ultralow κ of 0.32 W m−1 K−1 at 525 K for 0.05% CNT.362
Single crystalline SnSe shows a record high ZT of 2.6 at 923 K, attracting considerable attention and intense study in recent years.363 However, the layered structure results in poor mechanical properties and limits its applicability. As such, increasing attention is being directed at polycrystalline forms. Chu et al. found Na-doped polycrystalline SnSe/CNTs composites not only maintain high carrier concentrations of approximately 4 × 1019 cm−3 and high σ at room temperature, but also reduced κ. As a result, a ZT of ∼0.96 at 773 K was obtained for polycrystalline SnSe sample with the addition of 0.25 vol% CNTs. More importantly, the composites demonstrated superior mechanical properties and thus may be more suitable for device fabrication and practical applications. Moreover, the Vickers hardness and flexural strength of the Na-doped polycrystalline SnSe/CNTs (1.0 vol% CNTs) composites were enhanced by 59.8% and 47.9% respectively when compared to the CNTs-free sample. This study confirms that CNTs can improve TE and mechanical properties of the Na-doped SnSe polycrystalline materials.335
Fullerene (C60) is a stable nonpolar molecule with high elastic modulus. In Cu2SnSe3, C60 and C60-decorated grain boundaries were found to be effective phonon scattering sites that decreased κL. On the other hand, because the charge carrier wavelengths are larger than the size of a fullerene molecule, scattering of electrons or holes is comparatively small.364 The effect of C60 in Bi2−xSbxTe3 alloys has also been extensively studied,365–370 with results showing that fullerene molecules act as phonon blocking sites, reducing κL, and enhancing the TE performance. In addition, C60 also can efficiently reduce the κL of other TE systems including skutterudites371,372 and Cu-/Ag-based chalcogenides.364,373
Because of its high thermal stability and elastic modulus, silicon carbide (SiC) is a favorable additive in composite materials. Dispersion of ultra-fine SiC nanoparticles into a host matrix has been found to be an effective strategy for reducing κ.374 For example, a high ZT of 1.54 at 723 K was obtained for AgPb20SbTe20 with 1% SiC via reduction of κ due to the mismatched interfaces between the dispersed SiC nanoparticles and AgPb20SbTe20 matrix.375 Bathula et al. reported a high ZT of ∼1.7 at 1173 K for SiGe/SiC nanocomposites via a significant reduction in κL. This ZT value is about twice than that of pristine bulk SiGe. The dispersion with SiC nanoparticles led to a high density of nanoscale interfaces, mass fluctuations and lattice scale modulations, resulting in extensive scattering of phonons.374
In addition to enhancing the TE performance, SiC doping can also improve the mechanical properties.376–379 Yin et al. found the flexural strength, compressive strength, fracture toughness, and Vickers hardness of Mg2Si1−xSnx/SiC nano-composites were all significantly improved due to pinning effects, fiber pull-out mechanisms, and fiber bridging stemming from the nano-SiC additives. Moreover, the fracture toughness of Mg2Si1−xSnx was enhanced by ∼50% after addition of 0.8 at% of SiC nano-powders or nano-wires into the matrix. At the same time, the Mg2Si1−xSnx/SiC composite maintained excellent TE performance with maximum ZT of 1.20 at 750 K.380 Interestingly, Li et al. reported mixing a small volume (0.4 vol%, Fig. 15c) of SiC nanoparticles into the BiSbTe matrix can effectively enhance the TE performance with a high ZT of 1.33 at 373 K. It was indicated that SiC nanoparticles, which possess coherent interfaces with the matrix (Fig. 15d), can increase both S and σ. Furthermore, the dispersion of SiC nanoparticles can significantly reduce κL of BiSbTe matrix by enhancing phonon scattering and endowing the BiSbTe alloys with improved mechanical properties.381


3.4.3 Porous structures. 
In general, most researchers prefer to synthesize fully dense (or as close as possible) bulk TE materials to achieve good electrical transport and mechanical properties as well as ensure reliable and consistent measurement of the material properties. Since the densities of bulk materials usually exceeds 95% of the theoretical values, the influence of porosity on TE performance is seldom considered. Porous structures nevertheless effectively scatter low-frequency phonons and reduce the κL of TE bulk materials. However, pores may also reduce μH, resulting in degradation of σ. Therefore, it is important to control the size and distribution of pores in order to favorably control the ratio μH/κL and enhance the ZT values of the corresponding porous TE materials.382
Pores can be introduced by tuning the synthesis and processing parameters, including the composition, morphology, and size of starting materials,383–385 as well as adoption of various processing techniques.36,386–389 For instance, high-temperature consolidation processes inevitably lead to sublimation of Sb and Zn in YbZn2Sb2 compounds, thus generating in situ nanopores with a random size distribution of 50–200 nm.390 The samples with nanopore incorporation were found to have increased carrier mobility up to 191.3 cm2 V−1 s−1, about 40% increase over that of dense bulk materials. The significant increase in the carrier mobility was suggested to arise from the nanopore-induced carrier drag effect however further experimental support will be needed to better understand this issue. Moreover, in comparison to fully densified counterparts, nanoporous samples present 16% decreases in κL at room temperature, which is due to the additional phonon scattering by randomly arranged nanopores. Ascribed to decreased κL, the nanoporous samples sintered at 998 K demonstrate 46% enhancement in the maximum ZT value compared to their highly densified counterparts. The improvement mainly stems from the enhanced scattering of low-frequency phonons in nanoporous YbZn2Sb2.
Hu et al. reported a maximum ZT of 2.14 at 973 K for Cu1.98Li0.02Se prepared with in situ nanopores.388 The formation of nanopores (Fig. 16a) in Li-doped Cu2Se was proposed to be related to Li substitution, which reduces the melting point of Cu2−xLixSe. This leads to the different shrinkage rates of liquid phase and solid phase, producing nanopores. Li-doped Cu2Se exhibits a 25% decrease in κL (Fig. 16b) as compared to pristine samples. In addition to incorporating nanoporous architectures into single-phase materials, this strategy has also been applied in TE composites.385,389
 Fig. 16  (a) The fracture surface of the Cu1.98Li0.02Se bulk sample. Many nanopores can be found at grain boundaries. (b) The temperature-dependent lattice thermal conductivity of Cu2−xLixSe (x = 0–0.03) samples. The inset shows the lattice thermal conductivity as a function of Li content at 473 K and 973 K, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 388. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Cu2Se porous bulk materials prepared at 323 K (corresponding to 19.6% porosity). (d) Temperature dependence of lattice thermal conductivity (κL) for Cu2Se porous bulk materials. The calculated minimum thermal conductivity (κmin) was plotted as comparison. Reproduced with permission from ref. 391. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Recently, Wu et al. prepared nanoporous PbSe/SiO2 composites by using mechanical alloying and subsequent wet-milling followed by rapid sintering.389 The authors speculated that the porous structures are closely related to the hydrophilic behaviour and abundant surfaces of the exotic SiO2 nanoparticles. In the wet-milling process, hydroxyl compounds are adsorbed onto SiO2 nanoparticles and evaporate during the sintering process, leaving behind nanopores at the grain boundaries. Due to the additional phonon scattering at the interfaces, PbSe-0.7 vol% SiO2 composites show a maximum ZT of 1.15 at 823 K.
Despite the promise of nanopores, it remains a challenge to effectively control the pore size and porosity in bulk TE materials. Recently, Zhao et al. utilized a simple solid-state explosive reaction to prepare Cu2Se pellets with well controlled pore sizes and distributions.391 The homogeneously mixed raw elements were loaded into a graphite mold and subjected to spark plasma sintering. By interrupting the sintering process at different temperatures, the obtained pellet samples showed various porosities (5.8–19.6%) and pore sizes ranging from 20–50 nm to hundreds of nanometers. This led to the lowest κL of 0.22 W m−1 K−1 reported among low-density Cu2Se samples (with 19.6% porosity, Fig. 16c), which is lower than the theoretical value for fully dense Cu2Se based on the Cahill model, Fig. 16d. A peak ZT value of 1.9 at 973 K was reached for the Cu2Se sample with a moderate porosity of 12.3%. This study provided a time- and cost-efficient way to synthesize a high-performance bulk TE material with controllable porosity.
Moreover, upon combination with various phonon scattering centers including point defects, dislocations, and grain boundaries, high porosity (∼23%) samples of n-type Bi2Te2.5Se0.5 reached ultralow κL of 0.14 W m−1 K−1 at 513 K.384 This resulted in a peak ZT of 1.18 at 463 K, which is comparable to that of state-of-the-art Bi2Te3−xSex materials. The hollow Bi2Te2.5Se0.5 nanostructures were first synthesized by a self-templating method before being employed as starting materials for the sintering process. The nanoshells were crushed and merged into large grains while sintering at 623–673 K, leaving a high-density of pores at grain boundaries (Fig. 17a). The theoretical modeling of temperature dependent κL is presented in Fig. 17b, demonstrating an additional drop in κL with pore incorporation.
 Fig. 17  (a) TEM image of a porous Bi2.02Te2.56Se0.44 nanocomposite sintered at 400 °C; (b) theoretical modelling of the temperature dependent κL for the 350 °C-sintered BiTeSe nanocomposite. Here, B, DS, and DC denote grain boundaries, dislocation strain, and dislocation core, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 384. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) TEM image of porous silicon nanowire; (d) thermal conductivity as a function of porosity for ten different porous silicon nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 387. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Likewise, based on the collective effects of porosity, grain boundaries, pore surfaces/junctions, and dislocations, Pan et al. realized a nearly 60% decrease in κL of melt-centrifuged (Bi,Sb)2Te3 compared to a zone-melted ingot.382 During the centrifugation process, excess Te was forced out from the melt, leaving porous structures in the bulk (Bi,Sb)2Te3. This enhanced the scattering of low-frequency phonons at pore interfaces. Effective medium theory (EMT) can be used to estimate the effect of porosity on TE performance.149,392,393 Furthermore, the simultaneous management of nanopores, nanoprecipitates and point defects in Cd-doped SnTe1−xSex led to a peak ZT of over 1.5 at 900 K.394
Introduction of porosity has also been implemented in low dimensional materials to either reduce κL or increase the area of active sites for catalytic applications.36,387,395 For example, single-crystalline, porous Si nanowires (43% porosity) exhibit an ultralow κ of 0.33 W m−1 K−1 at room temperature, approaching the amorphous limit (Fig. 17c and d).387 Ju et al. employed Li-intercalation and liquid exfoliation to prepare SnSe1−xSx nanosheets, which were then subjected to hydrothermal reaction in tartaric acid, to achieve porous structures.395 Ascribed to the sulfur substitution and high porosity, SnSe0.8S0.2 nanosheets demonstrated a low κ of 0.4 W m−1 K−1 at 503 K, close to the theoretical limit κmin.
The above findings mainly discuss facile strategies to design porous TE bulk materials with significantly reduced κL and ideally almost unaffected μH. They are challenging the widely-accepted viewpoint that fully dense bulk materials are desired and that porosity generally leads to negligible gain in ZT values. Therefore, these studies pave the way for developing bulk TE materials with well-controlled pore sizes and distributions to achieve improved ZT values. Despite the lower mechanical strengths of these porous materials compared to their highly densified counterparts,391 they may exhibit higher crack-resistances and longer service lifetimes.396


3.4.4 Cellular structures. 
Cellular nanostructures are thin layers of a secondary phase that encapsulate or form “shells” around the grains of the primary thermoelectric phase. These microstructures can significantly impede phonon transport, even in materials with already intrinsically low thermal conductivity and will intuitively also impact charge transport. Despite a number of experimental and theoretical works suggesting cellular structures as a dramatic means of limiting heat transport, there are relatively few good examples successfully employed in thermoelectric materials. This is because the cellular microstructures are normally grown around nanoparticles with wet chemical techniques, and these approaches are challenging to scale up and reliably utilize in bulk thermoelectric materials.
Recently, Luo et al. demonstrated the successful preparation of bulk Sb2Si2Te6 with thin layers of Si2Te3 surrounding the grains (Fig. 18a).280 This was accomplished by first synthesizing polycrystalline Sb2Si2Te6 by ball milling followed by SPS sintering with 10 weight percent excess Te. During the sintering process, a small amount of Sb2Si2Te6 decomposes into Sb2Te3 and Si2Te3, and most of the Sb2Te3 is squeezed out with the excess liquid Te. As confirmed by TEM microscopy (Fig. 18b–d), the post-synthetic reaction during compaction leaves a thin cellular structure of Si2Te3 along the grain boundaries. As shown in Fig. 18e, the resulting Sb2Si2Te6–Si2Te3 composites exhibit significantly suppressed lattice thermal conductivity compared to the single-phase Sb2Si2Te6, which is attributed to strengthened phonon scattering by the Si2Te3 interfaces at the boundaries as well as the dense intragranular dislocations induced by high Sb vacancies. Surprisingly, the electrical conductivities of the Sb2Si2Te6–Si2Te3 samples are nearly unchanged (Fig. 18f). The authors address this result by using photoemission spectroscopy to demonstrate good valence-band alignment between the bulk Sb2Si2Te6 and Si2Te3 layer, which allows charge to flow across the interfaces with minimal scattering. The close band alignment is confirmed by photoemission spectroscopy. Ultimately, while Sb2Si2Te6 already has intrinsically promising ZT ∼ 1, the cellular structured Sb2Si2Te6–Si2Te3 achieves outstanding figures of merit approaching 1.65 at 823 K (Fig. 18g). This study therefore introduces a new in situ synthetic route to cellular microstructures in bulk thermoelectric materials. Provided the technique is generalizable, integrating these nanoscale futures may represent a novel route to significantly improving material performance.
 Fig. 18  (a) Illustration of the cellular microstructure of Sb2Si2Te6–Si2Te3 featuring a thin Sb2Te3 layer surrounding the bulk Sb2Si2Te6 grains. (b) A high-resolution TEM image of the grain boundary region. (c) and (d) are respectively selected area electron diffraction images and fast-Fourier transformed images obtained from the TEM data and confirming the bulk Sb2Si2Te6 and GB Si2Te3 phases. (e) Temperature-dependent lattice thermal conductivities, (f) electrical conductivities, and (g) ZTs of both pure Sb2Si2Te and Sb2Si2Te6–Si2Te3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 280. Copyright 2020, Cell Press. 

4. Defect engineering to enhance mechanical performance of TE materials
The various defects discussed above are primarily beneficial to the electrical or/and thermal transport properties of TE materials, which in turn boosts the maximum ZT values.397 However, most state-of-the-art TE pellets are brittle with poor mechanical properties and machinability, which restricts the development of TE module assembly and long-term operation under harsh conditions, such as thermal cycling and high temperature exposure.398 To this end, improving the mechanical properties is important and must be addressed for TEs to achieve widespread use. As such, researchers are increasingly focused on improving the mechanical properties of TE materials by microstructure manipulation and defect engineering to dissipate the crack propagation energy. The former strategy is mainly realized by reducing the distribution of grain sizes, which depends on the development of non-equilibrium process such as mechanical alloying, hot deformation, and melt spinning. The incorporation of defects, such as dislocation, micropores, nanoprecipitates, and twinning can further improve the mechanical responses. In this section, we discuss recent progress in the strengthening of mechanical properties by defect engineering.
In addition to enhancing phonon scattering, typical 3D defects such as nanoinclusions and micropores can introduce crack toughening mechanisms, including crack deflection, crack blunting, crack pinning and crack branching, and thus increase the mechanical toughness. In particular, the introduction of micropores in thermoelectric materials can promote intrinsic crack toughening via crack blunting, i.e. a growing crack tip impinges on a pore and stops propagating.46,47,399 As discussed in prior sections, melt-spinning or mechanical alloying combined with rapid sintering is frequently employed as a non-equilibrium technique to prepare high-performance TE materials, such as Bi2Te3-based alloys, skutterudites, and Zn4Sb3. Some of these nanostructured TE materials demonstrate concomitant increases in the mechanical properties as manifested by significant enhancement of hardness, compressive strength, fracture toughness, and compressive fatigue resistance.27,400 Recently, simultaneous improvement of the TE and mechanical properties were achieved in p-type Bi0.5Sb1.5Te3 fabricated by melt-spinning and plasma activated sintering (MS-PAS).27 The MS-PAS-induced hierarchical structures, including in situ formed nanoprecipitates and matrix crystals with sizes spanning from sub-microns to tens of microns, serve as crack blocking/deflecting centers (Fig. 19c and d) and lead to significant enhancement of mechanical toughness. In comparison to zone-melted ingots, MS-PAS samples exhibit ∼30% improvement of fracture toughness, as well as a six- to eight-fold enhancement in their flexural and compressive strengths, respectively, as presented in Fig. 19a and b.
 Fig. 19  (a) Fracture toughness KICvs. displacement curves for ZM and MS10 samples. Here, MS10 refers to the sample prepared with the optimum linear speed of 10 m/s. The inset shows the KIC values for ZM, MS10, and annealed MS10 samples; (b) Flexural and compressive strengths of ZM, MS10 and annealed MS10 specimens; (c) and (d) crack propagation images of MS10 samples after the KIC test, showing crack deflecting, pull-out, and crack bridging. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (e) Flexural strength and fracture toughness of CoSb2.875Te0.125/TiN composites with various TiN content. The inset shows crack deflection, crack bridging and crack branching in CoSb2.875Te0.125/1.0 vol% TiN composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 343. Copyright 2012, Elsevier. 
Moreover, mechanical alloying has been employed to disperse SiC,337,340,401 TiN,343 carbon nanotubes,332 carbon fibers,402 B4C,403 or conductive glass inclusions404 in state-of-the-art TE materials to improve their mechanical properties. The addition of a small portion of SiC nanoparticles (1–2 vol%) can enhance the fracture toughness of Mg2Si through the crack deflection mechanism.401 A significant increase of flexural strength was observed in Bi0.4Sb1.6Te3 with 0.5 wt% carbon nanotubes,332 which is ascribed to the pull-out of carbon nanotubes from the matrix. In addition, dispersing nano-TiN in CoSb2.875Te0.125 simultaneously enhanced the flexural strength and fracture toughness.343 The increased crack resistance is mainly ascribed to crack branching, crack deflection, and crack bridging mechanisms (Fig. 19e).
PbTe jointly alloyed with Ca and Ba was also recently claimed to have improved mechanical properties. P-type PbTe–SrTe are among the finest TE materials, with outstanding ZTs up to 2.5 at 923 K.397,405 Unfortunately however, the optimal doping and alloying compositions yield samples extremely prone to cracking rendering device fabrication nearly impossible. Sarkar et al. reported alloying PbTe with Ca and Ba in the place of Sr gives samples with dramatically improved mechanical toughness while retaining the high ZTs of 2.2 at 923 K.406 This could be ascribed to the lattice and precipitation hardening effects caused by low concentration metal telluride precipitates (1 mol% Ba0.5Ca0.5Te in Pb0.97Na0.03Te) and improved grain refinement (based on the Hall–Petch relation). Moreover, these semicoherent nanoprecipitates can serve as barriers to impede dislocation motion across the GBs. That said, the ultimate mechanism for the hardening remains and open question still in need of resolution. It is furthermore an interesting question whether the dual alloying approach can achieve similar hardening in other thermoelectric semiconductors. In any case, this work directly shows the choice of dopant/alloying element can have a significant impact on the mechanical properties, in addition to the charge and thermal transport behaviour. Considering the importance of sample toughness for practical TE applications, the complete impact of dopants, on both transport and mechanical behaviour, should be taken into account. In our opinion far more work is needed to be done in this area to answer some of these questions, further understand the weak mechanical properties of lead chalcogenides and how they can be improved to a level suitable for widespread thermoelectric module generators.
5. Concluding discussion and future
Defect engineering underpins all means of optimizing the performance of TE materials. Substantial attention has been paid to introducing defects of varied dimensionality and length scale into TE materials to synergistically improve the electrical, thermal and mechanical properties. Each type of defect imparts unique affects on the thermoelectric and mechanical properties in ways that can be both beneficial or costly. Because defects have competing effects, the limitations and drawbacks of each class must be taken into consideration to ensure the best performance.
In general, point defects are useful for optimizing the charge carrier concentration and scattering of high-frequency phonons. But point defects are sensitive to the synthesis and service conditions, making it difficult to precisely manipulate and control their concentrations. For instance, the high density of native vacancies normally results in overdoping in SnTe, while cation vacancies can act as acceptor states and prevent proper doping in n-type PbTe and Mg3Sb2. Similarly, while the concentration of antisite defects (SbTe′ or BiTe′) in (Bi,Sb)2Te3 compounds can be adjusted by changing the initial Bi/Sb ratio, the subsequent thermal annealing process can result in the annihilation of these antisite defects. In the case that various point defects are present in a TE material, the calculation of defect formation energies is increasingly useful for analysing which point defect dominates the intrinsic properties. This provides important guidelines for designing the best synthesis approach and for the further optimization of the thermoelectric properties.
By further incorporating 1D, 2D and/or 3D defects such as dislocations, grain boundaries and nanoprecipitates, one can induce a broad-spectrum phonon scattering and dramatically reduce the lattice thermal conductivity. Careful attention should be paid to the manipulation of the dislocation density, which must be higher than 1012 cm−2 to realize the effective phonon scattering.118 Moreover, while the success of grain boundary engineering led to a wide consensus that TE materials with small grains usually exhibit lower κL compared to those with large grains or single crystals, recent work reveals notable exceptions in Mg3Sb2 and SnSe, where electrically-resistive grain boundaries degrade the performance and also result in overestimation of κL.275,407 A useful rule of thumb for GB engineering is that more ionic materials (like Zintl antimonides) are more likely to have resistive GBs, while polarizable compounds (like PbTe or Bi2Te3) will benefit from small grains. 3D volume defects, such as nanostructures should be judiciously chosen such that they can be well dispersed throughout the host matrix and are stable with temperature. Furthermore, minimal structural mismatch and a small energetic difference between conducting electronic band extrema are needed to maintain high carrier mobility and ensure favourable electronic as well as thermal properties.
The incorporation of porous structures in TE materials can result in reduced machinability and weakened mechanical strength that causes problems for device manufacturing. In addition, the composition and size distribution of nanoinclusions should be carefully chosen and determined to minimize the mismatch of thermal expansion coefficients in between the nanoinclusions and matrix materials. Failure to do so can bring about the formation of voids and microcracks at grain boundaries which deteriorate TE and mechanical strength. Considering these defects can suppress the carrier mobility, it is critical to properly configure and control the types and concentrations of defects so that a net increase of ZT and enhanced mechanical properties is realized.
With the rapid development of defect engineering in TE materials, several concerns are particularly pertinent, as listed below.
(1) Defect stability: in practical applications, TE materials and devices often encounter complex service conditions, including exposure to high operating temperatures for extended periods of time, thermal cycling, and vibrational forces, all of which may cause defects to evolve and/or interact. Such operating conditions may change the matrix composition or the dominant scattering mechanism of phonons and charge carriers, resulting in unstable TE performance. For example, when Bi2Te3-based polycrystallites are subject to prolonged heat treatment at 573 K, the matrix becomes porous and bloated due to the inevitable sublimation of tellurium.408 Upon extended thermal exposure, Bi0.5Sb1.5Te3 alloys present degraded TE performance which is ascribed to the substantial decrease of the carrier concentration and development of porous structures. Cyclic stresses generated from thermal cycling or vibrational stress in service also impact defect stability. However, this topic has seldom been investigated in TE materials. Specifically, the stress field affects the motion of dislocations. Dislocations can evolve under cyclic stress and get pinned by grain boundaries or precipitates, leading to the increase of dislocation density and corresponding mechanical toughness. Therefore, the continued study of defect stability in TE materials is critical to developing practical modules.
(2) Characterization of defects. Defects play important roles in determining the TE transport properties and mechanical performance. Therefore, establishing the relationship between composition, microstructure, and performance of defects in each materials is a central problem in the field. Unfortunately, it is generally difficult to carry-out direct real-time observation and in situ characterization of defects as they are in the non-equilibrium states and prone to movement or transformation under different conditions. For example, when subject to thermal annealing, the intentionally incorporated vacancies in lead chalcogenides can diffuse to form vacancy clusters which then collapse into dislocations. In recent years, advanced instruments and techniques have been developed to characterize the defects in TE (and other) materials.409 Large amounts of Sn vacancies and Se interstitials have been directly observed in SnSe single crystals using aberration corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy.410 The presence of these off-stoichiometric point defects further accounts for the intrinsically ultralow lattice thermal conductivity of SnSe single crystals. Moreover, in situ TEM or SEM have realized the in situ observation of defects evolution under high temperature or mechanical forces.
(3) Defect-interface interaction: as promising TE performance has been found in nanostructured materials with a large density of interfaces, it is important to understand the interactions between defects and interfaces, which influence concentrations of different defects and therefore TE and mechanical properties.411 In general, interfaces can serve as sinks for point defects via absorption and annihilation, barriers for dislocations, as well as the storage sites for defects.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
TE materials research at NTU is supported by Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Industry Alignment Fund, Pharos ‘‘Hybrid thermoelectric materials for ambient applications’’ Program (Grant No. 1527200019). TE materials research at Northwestern (TJS, YL, ZZL, and MGK) is supported by the U.S Department of Energy, Office of Science and Office of Basic Energy Sciences for funding under award number DE-SC0014520. YZ acknowledges the support from Hubei Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 2020CFB217).
Notes and references
S. M. O'Shaughnessy, M. J. Deasy, J. V. Doyle and A. J. Robinson, Energy Sustainable Dev., 2014, 20, 1–10 Search PubMed .
J. Yang and F. R. Stabler, J. Electron. Mater., 2009, 38, 1245–1251 Search PubMed .
Y. D. Deng, Y. Zhang and C. Q. Su, J. Electron. Mater., 2015, 44, 1491–1497 Search PubMed .

          L. Wang and A. Romagnoli, 2016 IEEE 2nd Annual Southern Power Electronics Conference (SPEC), 2016, pp. 1–6.
W. He, G. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Ji, G. Li and X. Zhao, Appl. Energy, 2015, 143, 1–25 Search PubMed .
F. K. Shaikh and S. Zeadally, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 55, 1041–1054 Search PubMed .
A. R. M. Siddique, S. Mahmud and B. Van Heyst, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 73, 730–744 Search PubMed .
R. C. O’Brien, R. M. Ambrosi, N. P. Bannister, S. D. Howe and H. V. Atkinson, J. Nucl. Mater., 2008, 377, 506–521 Search PubMed .
J. He and T. M. Tritt, Science, 2017, 357, 1369 Search PubMed .
W. Liu, Q. Jie, H. S. Kim and Z. Ren, Acta Mater., 2015, 87, 357–376 Search PubMed .

          S. W. Angrist, Direct energy conversion, Allyn and Bacon, Inc., Boston,  1976 Search PubMed .
G. J. Snyder and E. S. Toberer, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 105–114 Search PubMed .
M. Hong, Y. Wang, W. Liu, S. Matsumura, H. Wang, J. Zou and Z.-G. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801837 Search PubMed .
Y. Pei, H. Wang and G. J. Snyder, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6125–6135 Search PubMed .
X. Su, P. Wei, H. Li, W. Liu, Y. Yan, P. Li, C. Su, C. Xie, W. Zhao, P. Zhai, Q. Zhang, X. Tang and C. Uher, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602013 Search PubMed .
M. K. Jana and K. Biswas, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1315–1324 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, M. Zhou and J. He, Scr. Mater., 2016, 111, 39–43 Search PubMed .
Y. Pei, X. Shi, A. LaLonde, H. Wang, L. Chen and G. J. Snyder, Nature, 2011, 473, 66–69 Search PubMed .
W. Liu, X. Tan, K. Yin, H. Liu, X. Tang, J. Shi, Q. Zhang and C. Uher, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 166601 Search PubMed .
G. Tan, W. G. Zeier, F. Shi, P. Wang, G. J. Snyder, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7801–7811 Search PubMed .
C. M. Jaworski, V. Kulbachinskii and J. P. Heremans, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 233201 Search PubMed .
J. P. Heremans, V. Jovovic, E. S. Toberer, A. Saramat, K. Kurosaki, A. Charoenphakdee, S. Yamanaka and G. J. Snyder, Science, 2008, 321, 554–557 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, H. Wang, W. Liu, H. Wang, B. Yu, Q. Zhang, Z. Tian, G. Ni, S. Lee, K. Esfarjani, G. Chen and Z. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5246–5251 Search PubMed .
J. P. Heremans, B. Wiendlocha and A. M. Chamoire, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5510–5530 Search PubMed .
B. Poudel, Q. Hao, Y. Ma, Y. Lan, A. Minnich, B. Yu, X. Yan, D. Wang, A. Muto, D. Vashaee, X. Chen, J. Liu, M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Chen and Z. Ren, Science, 2008, 320, 634 Search PubMed .
H. J. Wu, L. D. Zhao, F. S. Zheng, D. Wu, Y. L. Pei, X. Tong, M. G. Kanatzidis and J. Q. He, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4515 Search PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Q. Zhang, X. Su, H. Xie, S. Shu, T. Chen, G. Tan, Y. Yan, X. Tang, C. Uher and G. J. Snyder, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401391 Search PubMed .
X. Su, F. Fu, Y. Yan, G. Zheng, T. Liang, Q. Zhang, X. Cheng, D. Yang, H. Chi, X. Tang, Q. Zhang and C. Uher, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4908 Search PubMed .
L. Hu, Y. Zhang, H. Wu, Y. Liu, J. Li, J. He, W. Ao, F. Liu, J. Pennycook Stephen and X. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803617 Search PubMed .
D. Morelli, V. Jovovic and J. Heremans, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 035901 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, X. Shi, F. Xu, L. Zhang, W. Zhang, L. Chen, Q. Li, C. Uher, T. Day and G. J. Snyder, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 422–425 Search PubMed .
B. Li, H. Wang, Y. Kawakita, Q. Zhang, M. Feygenson, H. Yu, D. Wu, K. Ohara, T. Kikuchi and K. Shibata, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 226 Search PubMed .

          R. J. Tilley, Defects in solids, John Wiley & Sons,  2008 Search PubMed .
P. Niu, M. Qiao, Y. Li, L. Huang and T. Zhai, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 73–81 Search PubMed .
J. Hong, C. Jin, J. Yuan and Z. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606434 Search PubMed .
K. N. Dinh, P. Zheng, Z. Dai, Y. Zhang, R. Dangol, Y. Zheng, B. Li, Y. Zong and Q. Yan, Small, 2018, 14, 1703257 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang and R. Lv, J. Materiomics, 2018, 4, 95–107 Search PubMed .
G. Parande, V. Manakari, S. D. S. Kopparthy and M. Gupta, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2017, 20, 1700919 Search PubMed .
H. L. Tuller and S. R. Bishop, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2011, 41, 369–398 Search PubMed .
I. T. Lu and M. Bernardi, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 3403 Search PubMed .
W. Xu, C. Sun, K. Zhao, X. Cheng, S. Rawal, Y. Xu and Y. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 16, 527–534 Search PubMed .
D.-Y. Son, S.-G. Kim, J.-Y. Seo, S.-H. Lee, H. Shin, D. Lee and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1358–1364 Search PubMed .
M. Kumar, A. Dubey, N. Adhikari, S. Venkatesan and Q. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3134–3159 Search PubMed .
L. Hu, T. Zhu, X. Liu and X. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5211–5218 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, B. Ge, W. Li, S. Lin, J. Shen, Y. Chang, R. Hanus, G. J. Snyder and Y. Pei, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 13828 Search PubMed .

          J. B. Wachtman, W. R. Cannon and M. J. Matthewson, Mechanical properties of ceramics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York,  2009 Search PubMed .

          E. D. Case, Modules, Systems, and Applications in Thermoelectrics, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,  2012, pp. 1–29 Search PubMed .
A. Goyal, P. Gorai, S. Anand, E. S. Toberer, G. J. Snyder and V. Stevanović, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 4467–4480 Search PubMed .
K. Xia, P. Nan, S. Tan, Y. Wang, B. Ge, W. Zhang, S. Anand, X. Zhao, G. J. Snyder and T. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1568–1574 Search PubMed .
L. Xi, S. Pan, X. Li, Y. Xu, J. Ni, X. Sun, J. Yang, J. Luo, J. Xi, W. Zhu, X. Li, D. Jiang, R. Dronskowski, X. Shi, G. J. Snyder and W. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10785–10793 Search PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Sheng, L. Wu, S. Hu, J. Yang, D. J. Singh, J. Yang and W. Zhang, npj Comput. Mater., 2020, 6, 107 Search PubMed .
B. R. Ortiz, P. Gorai, L. Krishna, R. Mow, A. Lopez, R. McKinney, V. Stevanović and E. S. Toberer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4036–4046 Search PubMed .
S. Ohno, K. Imasato, S. Anand, H. Tamaki, S. D. Kang, P. Gorai, H. K. Sato, E. S. Toberer, T. Kanno and G. J. Snyder, Joule, 2018, 2, 141–154 Search PubMed .
R. Gautier, X. Zhang, L. Hu, L. Yu, Y. Lin, T. O. L. Sunde, D. Chon, K. R. Poeppelmeier and A. Zunger, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 308–316 Search PubMed .
P. Gorai, A. Ganose, A. Faghaninia, A. Jain and V. Stevanović, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1809–1818 Search PubMed .
P. Gorai, A. Goyal, E. S. Toberer and V. Stevanović, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19385–19395 Search PubMed .
A. Banik, S. Roychowdhury and K. Biswas, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6573–6590 Search PubMed .
M. Hong, Z.-G. Chen and J. Zou, Chin. Phys. B, 2018, 27, 048403 Search PubMed .
M. Karunanithy, G. Prabhavathi, A. H. Beevi, B. Ibraheem, K. Kaviyarasu, S. Nivetha, N. Punithavelan, A. Ayeshamariam and M. Jayachandran, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2018, 18, 6680–6707 Search PubMed .
S. Li, X. Li, Z. Ren and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2432–2448 Search PubMed .
J. Zhai, T. Wang, H. Wang, W. Su, X. Wang, T. Chen and C. Wang, Chin. Phys. B, 2018, 27, 047306 Search PubMed .
R. Moshwan, L. Yang, J. Zou and Z.-G. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703278 Search PubMed .
W.-D. Liu, D.-Z. Wang, Q. Liu, W. Zhou, Z. Shao and Z.-G. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000367 Search PubMed .
G. Dennler, R. Chmielowski, S. Jacob, F. Capet, P. Roussel, S. Zastrow, K. Nielsch, I. Opahle and G. K. H. Madsen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301581 Search PubMed .
C. Gayner, K. K. Kar and W. Kim, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 9, 359–376 Search PubMed .
V. Q. Nguyen, J. Kim and S. Cho, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2018, 72, 841–857 Search PubMed .
T.-R. Wei, Y. Qin, T. Deng, Q. Song, B. Jiang, R. Liu, P. Qiu, X. Shi and L. Chen, Sci. China: Mater., 2018, 62, 8–24 Search PubMed .
T.-R. Wei, C.-F. Wu, F. Li and J.-F. Li, J. Materiomics, 2018, 4, 304–320 Search PubMed .
G. Han, Z. G. Chen, J. Drennan and J. Zou, Small, 2014, 10, 2747–2765 Search PubMed .
W.-D. Liu, L. Yang and Z.-G. Chen, Nano Today, 2020, 35, 100938 Search PubMed .
Z.-H. Ge, L.-D. Zhao, D. Wu, X. Liu, B.-P. Zhang, J.-F. Li and J. He, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 227–239 Search PubMed .
K. Koumoto, Y. Wang, R. Zhang, A. Kosuga and R. Funahashi, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2010, 40, 363–394 Search PubMed .
M. Mohammed, I. Sudin, A. M. Noor, S. Rajoo, M. Uday, N. H. Obayes and M. F. Omar, Int. J. Eng. Technol., 2018, 7, 27–30 Search PubMed .
A. T. Burkov, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2018, 215, 1800105 Search PubMed .
R. Santos, S. Aminorroaya Yamini and S. X. Dou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3328–3341 Search PubMed .
W. Liu, K. Yin, Q. Zhang, C. Uher and X. Tang, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2017, 4, 611–626 Search PubMed .
X. Shi, X. Wang, W. Li and Y. Pei, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800022 Search PubMed .
J. Yu, K. Xia, X. Zhao and T. Zhu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 113001 Search PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. Mao, J. Sui and Z. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 23–44 Search PubMed .
W. Peng, S. Chanakian and A. Zevalkink, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 1744–1759 Search PubMed .

          K. Suekuni and T. Takabatake, Materials Aspect of Thermoelectricity, CRC Press,  2016, pp. 233–250 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Zhao and Z. Liang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 401–422 Search PubMed .
M. Bharti, A. Singh, S. Samanta and D. K. Aswal, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2018, 93, 270–310 Search PubMed .
Y. Du, J. Xu, B. Paul and P. Eklund, Appl. Mater. Today, 2018, 12, 366–388 Search PubMed .
H. Yao, Z. Fan, H. Cheng, X. Guan, C. Wang, K. Sun and J. Ouyang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, 1700727 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, Y. Sun, W. Xu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6829–6851 Search PubMed .
Y. Zheng, H. Zeng, Q. Zhu and J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 8858–8873 Search PubMed .
J. L. Blackburn, A. J. Ferguson, C. Cho and J. C. Grunlan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704386 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, H. Wang and B. Liu, Polymers, 2018, 10, 1196 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhou and L. D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702676 Search PubMed .
M. Markov and M. Zebarjadi, Nanoscale Microscale Thermophys. Eng., 2019, 23, 117–127 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Zheng, K. Rui, H. H. Hng, K. Hippalgaonkar, J. Xu, W. Sun, J. Zhu, Q. Yan and W. Huang, Small, 2017, 13, 1700661 Search PubMed .
J. Wu, Y. Chen, J. Wu and K. Hippalgaonkar, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800248 Search PubMed .
A. Azhar, C. Yixi, V. Venkata and V. Sreeram, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 282001 Search PubMed .
C. Chang and L.-D. Zhao, Mater. Today Phys., 2018, 4, 50–57 Search PubMed .
J. Xin, Y. Tang, Y. Liu, X. Zhao, H. Pan and T. Zhu, npj Quantum Mater., 2018, 3, 9 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, X. Zhang and Y. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705617 Search PubMed .
S. Ortega, M. Ibáñez, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, M. V. Kovalenko, D. Cadavid and A. Cabot, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3510–3528 Search PubMed .
K.-X. Chen, M.-S. Li, D.-C. Mo and S.-S. Lyu, Front. Energy, 2018, 12, 97–108 Search PubMed .
L.-D. Zhao, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 251–268 Search PubMed .
D. S. Patil, R. R. Arakerimath and P. V. Walke, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 95, 1–22 Search PubMed .
M. Haras and T. Skotnicki, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 461–476 Search PubMed .
W. Liu, J. Hu, S. Zhang, M. Deng, C.-G. Han and Y. Liu, Mater. Today Phys., 2017, 1, 50–60 Search PubMed .
H. S. Kim, W. Liu and Z. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 69–85 Search PubMed .
W. Liu, H. S. Kim, Q. Jie and Z. Ren, Scr. Mater., 2016, 111, 3–9 Search PubMed .
X. Shi, L. Chen and C. Uher, Int. Mater. Rev., 2016, 61, 379–415 Search PubMed .
X. Zhou, Y. Yan, X. Lu, H. Zhu, X. Han, G. Chen and Z. Ren, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 974–988 Search PubMed .
T. Zhu, Y. Liu, C. Fu, J. P. Heremans, J. G. Snyder and X. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605884 Search PubMed .
X.-L. Shi, J. Zou and Z.-G. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 7399–7515 Search PubMed .
T.-R. Wei, M. Guan, J. Yu, T. Zhu, L. Chen and X. Shi, Joule, 2018, 2, 2183–2188 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, C. Xiao, H. Zhu and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14810–14819 Search PubMed .
C. Zhao, Z. Li, T. Fan, C. Xiao and Y. Xie, Research, 2020, 2020, 9652749 Search PubMed .
T. Zhu, L. Hu, X. Zhao and J. He, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600004 Search PubMed .
T. Masayuki, A. Yuki and Y. Kazuki, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 335703 Search PubMed .
N. Xiao, X. Dong, L. Song, D. Liu, Y. Tay, S. Wu, L.-J. Li, Y. Zhao, T. Yu, H. Zhang, W. Huang, H. H. Hng, P. M. Ajayan and Q. Yan, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2749–2755 Search PubMed .
W. Zhao, S. Fan, N. Xiao, D. Liu, Y. Y. Tay, C. Yu, D. Sim, H. H. Hng, Q. Zhang, F. Boey, J. Ma, X. Zhao, H. Zhang and Q. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5364–5369 Search PubMed .
S. Augustine, S. Ampili, Y. Seong-Ho, K. Kang Jeung and E. Mathai, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2005, 17, 2873 Search PubMed .
P. G. Klemens, Proc. Phys. Soc., London, Sect. A, 1955, 68, 1113 Search PubMed .
X. Meng, Z. Liu, B. Cui, D. Qin, H. Geng, W. Cai, L. Fu, J. He, Z. Ren and J. Sui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602582 Search PubMed .
A. Zhang, B. Zhang, W. Lu, D. Xie, H. Ou, X. Han, J. Dai, X. Lu, G. Han, G. Wang and X. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705117 Search PubMed .
C. Wan, Y. Wang, W. Norimatsu, M. Kusunoki and K. Koumoto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 101913 Search PubMed .
W. Zheng, D. Yang, P. Bi, C. He, F. Liu, J. Shi, Y. Ding, Z. Wang and R. Xiong, J. Electron. Mater., 2017, 46, 2936–2943 Search PubMed .
H. F. He, X. F. Li, Z. Q. Chen, Y. Zheng, D. W. Yang and X. F. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 22389–22394 Search PubMed .

          Filip Tuomisto, Characterisation and Control of Defects in Semiconductors, Institution of Engineering and Technology, London, United Kingdom,  2019 Search PubMed .
M. Christensen, B. B. Iversen, L. Bertini, C. Gatti, M. Toprak, M. Muhammed and E. Nishibori, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 3148–3157 Search PubMed .
M. Christensen, F. Juranyi and B. B. Iversen, Phys. B, 2006, 385–386, 505–507 Search PubMed .
M. Christensen, A. B. Abrahamsen, N. B. Christensen, F. Juranyi, N. H. Andersen, K. Lefmann, J. Andreasson, C. R. H. Bahl and B. B. Iversen, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 811–815 Search PubMed .
J. Mao, J. Shuai, S. Song, Y. Wu, R. Dally, J. Zhou, Z. Liu, J. Sun, Q. Zhang, C. dela Cruz, S. Wilson, Y. Pei, D. J. Singh, G. Chen, C.-W. Chu and Z. Ren, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 10548–10553 Search PubMed .
S. W. Song, J. Mao, M. Bordelon, R. He, Y. M. Wang, J. Shuai, J. Y. Sun, X. B. Lei, Z. S. Ren, S. Chen, S. Wilson, K. Nielsch, Q. Y. Zhang and Z. F. Ren, Mater. Today Phys., 2019, 8, 25–33 Search PubMed .
T. Kanno, H. Tamaki, M. Yoshiya, H. Uchiyama, S. Maki, M. Takata and Y. Miyazaki, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2008469,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.202008469 .
T. Fang, K. Xia, P. Nan, B. Ge, X. Zhao and T. Zhu, Mater. Today Phys., 2020, 13, 100200 Search PubMed .
F. Qin, S. A. Nikolaev, A. Suwardi, M. Wood, Y. Zhu, X. Tan, U. Aydemir, Y. Ren, Q. Yan, L. Hu and G. J. Snyder, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 10130–10139 Search PubMed .
F. Böcher, S. P. Culver, J. Peilstöcker, K. S. Weldert and W. G. Zeier, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 3906–3914 Search PubMed .
G. Jiang, J. He, T. Zhu, C. Fu, X. Liu, L. Hu and X. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3776–3781 Search PubMed .
N. Roth, T. Zhu and B. B. Iversen, IUCrJ, 2020, 7, 673–680 Search PubMed .
C. Xiao, X. Qin, J. Zhang, R. An, J. Xu, K. Li, B. Cao, J. Yang, B. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18460–18466 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, C. Xiao, S. Fan, Y. Deng, W. Zhang, B. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6587–6593 Search PubMed .
S. Roychowdhury, M. K. Jana, J. Pan, S. N. Guin, D. Sanyal, U. V. Waghmare and K. Biswas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 4043–4047 Search PubMed .
X. Tan, J.-L. Lan, K. Hu, B. Xu, Y. Liu, P. Zhang, X.-Z. Cao, Y. Zhu, W. Xu, Y.-H. Lin and C.-W. Nan, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2018, 101, 4634–4644 Search PubMed .
R. Deng, X. Su, S. Hao, Z. Zheng, M. Zhang, H. Xie, W. Liu, Y. Yan, C. Wolverton, C. Uher, M. G. Kanatzidis and X. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1520–1535 Search PubMed .
H. F. He, B. Zhao, N. Qi, B. Wang, Z. Q. Chen, X. L. Su and X. F. Tang, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 12961–12973 Search PubMed .
M. Dutta, D. Sanyal and K. Biswas, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 7481–7489 Search PubMed .
F. Tuomisto and I. Makkonen, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2013, 85, 1583–1631 Search PubMed .
M. Guan, C. Xiao, J. Zhang, S. Fan, R. An, Q. Cheng, J. Xie, M. Zhou, B. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10411–10417 Search PubMed .

          M. Butterling, Positron Annihilation Spectroscopy at the HZDR, https://www.hzdr.de/db/Cms?pOid=35245&pNid=3581, accessed 22 July 2020.
C. Fong, A. W. Dong, A. J. Hill, B. J. Boyd and C. J. Drummond, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 17527–17540 Search PubMed .
T. Plirdpring, K. Kurosaki, A. Kosuga, M. Ishimaru, A. Harnwunggmoung, T. Sugahara, Y. Ohishi, H. Muta and S. Yamanaka, Mater. Trans., 2012, 53, 1212–1215 Search PubMed .
C.-e. Kim, K. Kurosaki, M. Ishimaru, H. Muta and S. Yamanaka, J. Electron. Mater., 2011, 40, 999–1004 Search PubMed .
Y. Gu, X. Liu, S. Huang, J. Guo, P. Bi, J. Shi, W. Zheng, Z. Wang and R. Xiong, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 21421–21427 Search PubMed .
J. Fu, S. Song, X. Zhang, F. Cao, L. Zhou, X. Li and H. Zhang, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 2159 Search PubMed .
J. S. Son, M. K. Choi, M.-K. Han, K. Park, J.-Y. Kim, S. J. Lim, M. Oh, Y. Kuk, C. Park, S.-J. Kim and T. Hyeon, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 640–647 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Yang and L. Zhu, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 024312 Search PubMed .
S. G. Bishop, B. V. Shanabrook, P. B. Klein and R. L. Henry, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1988, 38, 8469–8472 Search PubMed .
D. G. Thomas, J. J. Hopfield and C. J. Frosch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1965, 15, 857–860 Search PubMed .
D. V. Lang, J. Appl. Phys., 1974, 45, 3023–3032 Search PubMed .
S. Majdi, M. Gabrysch, N. Suntornwipat, F. Burmeister, R. Jonsson, K. K. Kovi and A. Hallén, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2019, 90, 063903 Search PubMed .
N. Peranio and O. Eibl, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2009, 206, 42–49 Search PubMed .
J.-J. Shen, T.-J. Zhu, X.-B. Zhao, S.-N. Zhang, S.-H. Yang and Z.-Z. Yin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1519–1523 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, Z. Jian, W. Li, Y. Chang, B. Ge, R. Hanus, J. Yang, Y. Chen, M. Huang, G. J. Snyder and Y. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606768 Search PubMed .
H. Cheng, C. Lu, J. Liu, Y. Yan, X. Han, H. Jin, Y. Wang, Y. Liu and C. Wu, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2017, 27, 66–73 Search PubMed .
F. C. Frank, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1957, 23, 122–127 Search PubMed .
W. G. Johnston and J. J. Gilman, J. Appl. Phys., 1960, 31, 632–643 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, Z. Jian, W. Li, Y. Chang, B. Ge, R. Hanus, J. Yang, Y. Chen, M. Huang, G. J. Snyder and Y. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606768 Search PubMed .
J. Callaway and H. C. von Baeyer, Phys. Rev., 1960, 120, 1149–1154 Search PubMed .
P. G. Klemens, Proc. Phys. Soc., London, Sect. A, 1955, 68, 1113–1128 Search PubMed .

          P. G. Klemens, in Solid State Physics, ed. F. Seitz and D. Turnbull, Academic Press,  1958, vol. 7, pp. 1–98 Search PubMed .
J. Callaway, Phys. Rev., 1959, 113, 1046–1051 Search PubMed .
B. Abeles, Phys. Rev., 1963, 131, 1906–1911 Search PubMed .
A. Ioffe, S. Airapetyants, A. Ioffe, N. Kolomoets and L. Stil’bans, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 1956, 106, 981 Search PubMed .
M. C. Steele and F. D. Rosi, J. Appl. Phys., 1958, 29, 1517–1520 Search PubMed .
H. J. Goldsmid, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 2198–2202 Search PubMed .
V. Zaitsev, E. Tkalenko and E. Nikitin, Phys. Solid State, 1969, 11, 221–224 Search PubMed .
Y. Lee, S.-H. Lo, C. Chen, H. Sun, D.-Y. Chung, T. C. Chasapis, C. Uher, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3640 Search PubMed .
J. He, J. R. Sootsman, S. N. Girard, J.-C. Zheng, J. Wen, Y. Zhu, M. G. Kanatzidis and V. P. Dravid, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8669–8675 Search PubMed .
A. May, J.-P. Fleurial and G. Snyder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 125205 Search PubMed .
A. F. May, J.-P. Fleurial and G. J. Snyder, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2995–2999 Search PubMed .
J. M. Ma, S. M. Clarke, W. G. Zeier, T. Vo, P. Von Allmen, G. Jeffrey Snyder, R. B. Kaner, J.-P. Fleurial and S. K. Bux, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10459–10466 Search PubMed .
A. F. May, M. A. McGuire, C. Cantoni and B. C. Sales, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 035135 Search PubMed .
D. Cheikh, B. E. Hogan, T. Vo, P. Von Allmen, K. Lee, D. M. Smiadak, A. Zevalkink, B. S. Dunn, J.-P. Fleurial and S. K. Bux, Joule, 2018, 2, 698–709 Search PubMed .
A. May, D. Singh and G. Snyder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 153101 Search PubMed .
H. Tamaki, H. K. Sato and T. Kanno, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10182–10187 Search PubMed .
C. L. Condron, S. M. Kauzlarich, F. Gascoin and G. J. Snyder, J. Solid State Chem., 2006, 179, 2252–2257 Search PubMed .
J. Mao, Y. Wu, S. Song, J. Shuai, Z. Liu, Y. Pei and Z. Ren, Mater. Today Phys., 2017, 3, 1–6 Search PubMed .
J. Mao, Y. Wu, S. Song, Q. Zhu, J. Shuai, Z. Liu, Y. Pei and Z. Ren, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2245–2250 Search PubMed .
G. Tan, S. Hao, R. C. Hanus, X. Zhang, S. Anand, T. P. Bailey, A. J. E. Rettie, X. Su, C. Uher, V. P. Dravid, G. J. Snyder, C. Wolverton and M. G. Kanatzidis, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 705–712 Search PubMed .
T. J. Slade, K. Pal, J. A. Grovogui, T. P. Bailey, J. Male, J. F. Khoury, X. Zhou, D. Y. Chung, G. J. Snyder, C. Uher, V. P. Dravid, C. Wolverton and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 12524–12535 Search PubMed .
J. Male, M. T. Agne, A. Goyal, S. Anand, I. T. Witting, V. Stevanović and G. J. Snyder, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1444–1453 Search PubMed .
S. Ohno, U. Aydemir, M. Amsler, J.-H. Pöhls, S. Chanakian, A. Zevalkink, M. A. White, S. K. Bux, C. Wolverton and G. J. Snyder, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606361 Search PubMed .
B. R. Ortiz, K. Gordiz, L. C. Gomes, T. Braden, J. M. Adamczyk, J. Qu, E. Ertekin and E. S. Toberer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 621–631 Search PubMed .
X. Li, P. Yang, Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, D. Qin, W. Xue, C. Chen, Y. Huang, X. Xie, X. Wang, M. Yang, C. Wang, F. Cao, J. Sui, X. Liu and Q. Zhang, Research, 2020, 2020, 4630948 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, L. Song, S. H. Pedersen, H. Yin, L. T. Hung and B. B. Iversen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 13901 Search PubMed .
J. Mao, J. Shuai, S. Song, Y. Wu, R. Dally, J. Zhou, Z. Liu, J. Sun, Q. Zhang, C. dela Cruz, S. Wilson, Y. Pei, D. J. Singh, G. Chen, C.-W. Chu and Z. Ren, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 10548–10553 Search PubMed .
H. Tamaki, H. K. Sato and T. Kanno, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10182–10187 Search PubMed .
P. Gorai, B. R. Ortiz, E. S. Toberer and V. Stevanović, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13806–13815 Search PubMed .
P. Gorai, E. S. Toberer and V. Stevanović, J. Appl. Phys., 2019, 125, 025105 Search PubMed .
J. Mao, H. Zhu, Z. Ding, Z. Liu, G. A. Gamage, G. Chen and Z. Ren, Science, 2019, 365, 495 Search PubMed .
H. Muta, K. Kurosaki and S. Yamanaka, J. Alloys Compd., 2003, 350, 292–295 Search PubMed .
S. R. Popuri, A. J. M. Scott, R. A. Downie, M. A. Hall, E. Suard, R. Decourt, M. Pollet and J. W. G. Bos, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 33720–33723 Search PubMed .
D. Flahaut, T. Mihara, R. Funahashi, N. Nabeshima, K. Lee, H. Ohta and K. Koumoto, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 084911 Search PubMed .
L. D. Zhao, D. Berardan, Y. L. Pei, C. Byl, L. Pinsard-Gaudart and N. Dragoe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 092118 Search PubMed .
G.-K. Ren, J.-L. Lan, K. J. Ventura, X. Tan, Y.-H. Lin and C.-W. Nan, npj Comput. Mater., 2016, 2, 16023 Search PubMed .
I. Terasaki, Y. Sasago and K. Uchinokura, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 56, R12685 Search PubMed .
H. Ohta, K. Sugiura and K. Koumoto, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 8429–8436 Search PubMed .
J. D. Baran, D. Kepaptsoglou, M. Molinari, N. Kulwongwit, F. Azough, R. Freer, Q. M. Ramasse and S. C. Parker, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7470–7478 Search PubMed .
A. V. Kovalevsky, K. V. Zakharchuk, M. H. Aguirre, W. Xie, S. G. Patrício, N. M. Ferreira, D. Lopes, S. A. Sergiienko, G. Constantinescu, S. M. Mikhalev, A. Weidenkaff and J. R. Frade, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 7317–7330 Search PubMed .
A. V. Kovalevsky, M. H. Aguirre, S. Populoh, S. G. Patrício, N. M. Ferreira, S. M. Mikhalev, D. P. Fagg, A. Weidenkaff and J. R. Frade, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3909–3922 Search PubMed .
P. H. Tsai, T. Norby, T. T. Tan, R. Donelson, Z. D. Chen and S. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 141905 Search PubMed .
M. Molinari, D. A. Tompsett, S. C. Parker, F. Azough and R. Freer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14109–14117 Search PubMed .
W. Li and N. Mingo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 144304 Search PubMed .
J. Yang, W. Zhang, S. Q. Bai, Z. Mei and L. D. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 192111 Search PubMed .
V. Keppens, D. Mandrus, B. C. Sales, B. C. Chakoumakos, P. Dai, R. Coldea, M. B. Maple, D. A. Gajewski, E. J. Freeman and S. Bennington, Nature, 1998, 395, 876–878 Search PubMed .
B. C. Sales, B. C. Chakoumakos, D. Mandrus and J. W. Sharp, J. Solid State Chem., 1999, 146, 528–532 Search PubMed .
M. Zebarjadi, K. Esfarjani, J. Yang, Z. F. Ren and G. Chen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 195207 Search PubMed .
X. Shi, J. Yang, J. R. Salvador, M. Chi, J. Y. Cho, H. Wang, S. Bai, J. Yang, W. Zhang and L. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7837–7846 Search PubMed .
Y. Pei, L. Zheng, W. Li, S. Lin, Z. Chen, Y. Wang, X. Xu, H. Yu, Y. Chen and B. Ge, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600019 Search PubMed .
W. Li, L. Zheng, B. Ge, S. Lin, X. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Chang and Y. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605887 Search PubMed .
X. Liu, L. Xi, W. Qiu, J. Yang, T. Zhu, X. Zhao and W. Zhang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500284 Search PubMed .
L. Hu, T. Zhu, Y. Wang, H. Xie, Z. Xu and X. Zhao, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e88 Search PubMed .
Z. Starý, J. Horák, M. Stordeur and M. Stölzer, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1988, 49, 29–34 Search PubMed .
L. Ivanova and Y. V. Granatkina, Inorg. Mater., 1995, 31, 678–681 Search PubMed .
Y. W. Chai, K. Yoshioka and Y. Kimura, Scr. Mater., 2014, 83, 13–16 Search PubMed .
P. Qiu, J. Yang, X. Huang, X. Chen and L. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 152105 Search PubMed .
J. M. Hodges, S. Hao, J. A. Grovogui, X. Zhang, T. P. Bailey, X. Li, Z. Gan, Y.-Y. Hu, C. Uher, V. P. Dravid, C. Wolverton and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 18115–18123 Search PubMed .
S. Cai, S. Hao, Z.-Z. Luo, X. Li, I. Hadar, T. P. Bailey, X. Hu, C. Uher, Y.-Y. Hu, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 200–211 Search PubMed .
Z.-Z. Luo, S. Hao, X. Zhang, X. Hua, S. Cai, G. Tan, T. P. Bailey, R. Ma, C. Uher, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid, Q. Yan and M. G. Kanatzidis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3220–3230 Search PubMed .
J. M. Hodges, Y. Xia, C. D. Malliakas, G. C. B. Alexander, M. K. Y. Chan and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 7245–7254 Search PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, S. D. Kang, Y. Tang, R. Hanus and G. Jeffrey Snyder, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 234–240 Search PubMed .
S. I. Kim, K. H. Lee, H. A. Mun, H. S. Kim, S. W. Hwang, J. W. Roh, D. J. Yang, W. H. Shin, X. S. Li, Y. H. Lee, G. J. Snyder and S. W. Kim, Science, 2015, 348, 109–114 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Pei, A. D. LaLonde and G. J. Snyder, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 9705–9709 Search PubMed .
A. D. LaLonde, Y. Pei and G. J. Snyder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2090 Search PubMed .
J. Xin, H. Wu, X. Liu, T. Zhu, G. Yu and X. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 428–436 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, C. Fu, T. Zhu, L. Hu, G. Jiang, G. Zhao, D. Huo and X. Zhao, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 184904 Search PubMed .
R. Deng, X. Su, Z. Zheng, W. Liu, Y. Yan, Q. Zhang, V. P. Dravid, C. Uher, M. G. Kanatzidis and X. Tang, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaar5606 Search PubMed .
P. Carruthers, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1961, 33, 92–138 Search PubMed .
G. Chen, T. Zeng, T. Borca-Tasciuc and D. Song, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2000, 292, 155–161 Search PubMed .
W. Xie, X. Tang, Y. Yan, Q. Zhang and T. M. Tritt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 102111 Search PubMed .
R. J. Mehta, Y. Zhang, C. Karthik, B. Singh, R. W. Siegel, T. Borca-Tasciuc and G. Ramanath, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 233–240 Search PubMed .
G. Joshi, H. Lee, Y. Lan, X. Wang, G. Zhu, D. Wang, R. W. Gould, D. C. Cuff, M. Y. Tang and M. S. Dresselhaus, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4670–4674 Search PubMed .
S. Bathula, M. Jayasimhadri, N. Singh, A. K. Srivastava, J. Pulikkotil, A. Dhar and R. C. Budhani, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 213902–213905 Search PubMed .
X. Yan, G. Joshi, W. Liu, Y. Lan, H. Wang, S. Lee, J. W. Simonson, S. J. Poon, T. M. Tritt, G. Chen and Z. F. Ren, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 556–560 Search PubMed .
F. Li, J.-F. Li, L.-D. Zhao, K. Xiang, Y. Liu, B.-P. Zhang, Y.-H. Lin, C.-W. Nan and H.-M. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7188–7195 Search PubMed .
E. S. Toberer, A. Zevalkink, N. Crisosto and G. J. Snyder, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4375–4380 Search PubMed .
B. Yu, W. Liu, S. Chen, H. Wang, H. Wang, G. Chen and Z. Ren, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 472–478 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, X. Zhang, S. Li, Z. Zhou, Y. Liu and J. Zhang, J. Electron. Mater., 2017, 46, 2629–2633 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Y. Pei, Y. Chen, B. Yuan, S. Zhang, Y. Deng, S. Gong, J. He and L.-D. Zhao, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 709, 575–580 Search PubMed .
C.-F. Wu, T.-R. Wei and J.-F. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 13006–13012 Search PubMed .
W.-S. Liu, B.-P. Zhang, L.-D. Zhao and J.-F. Li, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7526–7531 Search PubMed .
G. Tan, Y. Zheng and X. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 183904 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, Y. Zheng, X. Su, K. Yin, X. Tang and C. Uher, Scr. Mater., 2015, 96, 1–4 Search PubMed .
W. Luo, H. Li, F. Fu, W. Hao and X. Tang, J. Electron. Mater., 2011, 40, 1233–1237 Search PubMed .
W. Zheng, B. Xu, L. Zhou, Y. Zhou, H. Zheng, C. Sun, E. Shi, T. D. Fink and Y. Wu, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1498–1509 Search PubMed .
K. W. Shah, S.-X. Wang, Y. Zheng and J. Xu, Appl. Sci., 2019, 9, 1511 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, Z.-G. Chen, G. Han, M. Hong, Y. Zou and J. Zou, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 367–374 Search PubMed .
J. Martin, L. Wang, L. Chen and G. S. Nolas, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 115311 Search PubMed .
J. J. Kuo, S. D. Kang, K. Imasato, H. Tamaki, S. Ohno, T. Kanno and G. J. Snyder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 5, 59–64 Search PubMed .
A. Zevalkink, W. G. Zeier, G. Pomrehn, E. Schechtel, W. Tremel and G. J. Snyder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9121–9128 Search PubMed .
E. S. Toberer, A. Zevalkink, N. Crisosto and G. J. Snyder, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4375–4380 Search PubMed .
W. G. Zeier, A. Zevalkink, E. Schechtel, W. Tremel and G. J. Snyder, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9826–9830 Search PubMed .
Q. Qiu, Y. Liu, K. Xia, T. Fang, J. Yu, X. Zhao and T. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803447 Search PubMed .
R. He, D. Kraemer, J. Mao, L. Zeng, Q. Jie, Y. Lan, C. Li, J. Shuai, H. S. Kim, Y. Liu, D. Broido, C.-W. Chu, G. Chen and Z. Ren, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 13576–13581 Search PubMed .
T. J. Slade, T. P. Bailey, J. A. Grovogui, X. Hua, X. Zhang, J. J. Kuo, I. Hadar, G. J. Snyder, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid, C. Uher and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901377 Search PubMed .
K. F. Cai, X. R. He, M. Avdeev, D. H. Yu, J. L. Cui and H. Li, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 1434–1438 Search PubMed .
L. Pan, S. Mitra, L.-D. Zhao, Y. Shen, Y. Wang, C. Felser and D. Berardan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5149–5157 Search PubMed .
J. J. Kuo, S. D. Kang, K. Imasato, H. Tamaki, S. Ohno, T. Kanno and G. J. Snyder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 429–434 Search PubMed .
T. Kanno, H. Tamaki, H. K. Sato, S. D. Kang, S. Ohno, K. Imasato, J. J. Kuo, G. J. Snyder and Y. Miyazaki, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 033903 Search PubMed .
K. Imasato, C. Fu, Y. Pan, M. Wood, J. J. Kuo, C. Felser and G. J. Snyder, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908218 Search PubMed .
T. Slade, J. Grovogui, J. J. Kuo, S. Anand, T. Bailey, M. Wood, C. Uher, G. J. Snyder, V. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1509–1518 Search PubMed .
J. J. Kuo, Y. Yu, S. D. Kang, O. Cojocaru-Mirédin, M. Wuttig and G. J. Snyder, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900429 Search PubMed .
T. J. Slade, J. A. Grovogui, J. J. Kuo, S. Anand, T. P. Bailey, M. Wood, C. Uher, G. J. Snyder, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1509–1518 Search PubMed .
A. Zevalkink, W. G. Zeier, G. Pomrehn, E. Schechtel, W. Tremel and G. J. Snyder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9121–9128 Search PubMed .
T.-R. Wei, G. Tan, X. Zhang, C.-F. Wu, J.-F. Li, V. P. Dravid, G. J. Snyder and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8875–8882 Search PubMed .
J. de Boor, T. Dasgupta, H. Kolb, C. Compere, K. Kelm and E. Mueller, Acta Mater., 2014, 77, 68–75 Search PubMed .
M. Wood, J. J. Kuo, K. Imasato and G. J. Snyder, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902337 Search PubMed .
L.-D. Zhao, G. Tan, S. Hao, J. He, Y. Pei, H. Chi, H. Wang, S. Gong, H. Xu, V. P. Dravid, C. Uher, G. J. Snyder, C. Wolverton and M. G. Kanatzidis, Science, 2016, 351, 141–144 Search PubMed .
Y. K. Lee, Z. Luo, S. P. Cho, M. G. Kanatzidis and I. Chung, Joule, 2019, 3, 719–731 Search PubMed .
J. J. Kuo, M. Wood, T. J. Slade, M. G. Kanatzidis and G. J. Snyder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1250–1258 Search PubMed .
P. G. Klemens, Can. J. Phys., 1957, 35, 441–450 Search PubMed .
V. Carteaux, D. Brunet, G. Ouvrard and G. Andre, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1995, 7, 69 Search PubMed .
R. Lefèvre, D. Berthebaud, O. Lebedev, O. Pérez, C. Castro, S. Gascoin, D. Chateigner and F. Gascoin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19406–19415 Search PubMed .
Y. Luo, S. Cai, S. Hao, F. Pielnhofer, I. Hadar, Z.-Z. Luo, J. Xu, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid, A. Pfitzner, Q. Yan and M. G. Kanatzidis, Joule, 2020, 4, 159–175 Search PubMed .

          C. L. Wan, Y. F. Wang, Y. E. Putri and K. Koumoto, in Thermoelectric Nanomaterials: Materials Design and Applications, ed. K. Koumoto and T. Mori, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2013, pp. 157–173 Search PubMed .
C. Wan, Y. Wang, N. Wang and K. Koumoto, Materials, 2010, 3, 2606 Search PubMed .
J. He, S. N. Girard, J.-C. Zheng, L. Zhao, M. G. Kanatzidis and V. P. Dravid, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4440–4444 Search PubMed .
Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, J. Mao, W. Gao, Y. Wang, J. Shuai, W. Cai, J. Sui and Z. Ren, Acta Mater., 2017, 128, 227–234 Search PubMed .
Y. Zheng, C. Liu, L. Miao, C. Li, R. Huang, J. Gao, X. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Zhou and E. Nishibori, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 311–320 Search PubMed .
Y. Luo, J. Yang, G. Li, M. Liu, Y. Xiao, L. Fu, W. Li, P. Zhu, J. Peng and S. Gao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300599 Search PubMed .
S. N. Girard, K. Schmidt-Rohr, T. C. Chasapis, E. Hatzikraniotis, B. Njegic, E. Levin, A. Rawal, K. M. Paraskevopoulos and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 747–757 Search PubMed .
J. Androulakis, C.-H. Lin, H.-J. Kong, C. Uher, C.-I. Wu, T. Hogan, B. A. Cook, T. Caillat, K. M. Paraskevopoulos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9780–9788 Search PubMed .
Y. Pei, J. Lensch-Falk, E. S. Toberer, D. L. Medlin and G. J. Snyder, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 241–249 Search PubMed .
D. Zhang, H.-C. Bai, Z.-L. Li, J.-L. Wang, G.-S. Fu and S.-F. J. C. P. B. Wang, Chin. Phys. B, 2018, 27, 047206 Search PubMed .
S. N. Girard, J. He, X. Zhou, D. Shoemaker, C. M. Jaworski, C. Uher, V. P. Dravid, J. P. Heremans and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16588–16597 Search PubMed .
C. J. Vineis, A. Shakouri, A. Majumdar and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3970–3980 Search PubMed .
S. N. Girard, K. Schmidt-Rohr, T. C. Chasapis, E. Hatzikraniotis, B. Njegic, E. M. Levin, A. Rawal, K. M. Paraskevopoulos and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 747–757 Search PubMed .
D. Wu, L.-D. Zhao, X. Tong, W. Li, L. Wu, Q. Tan, Y. Pei, L. Huang, J.-F. Li and Y. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2056–2068 Search PubMed .
S. Gorsse, P. Bauer Pereira, R. Decourt and E. Sellier, Chem. Mater., 2009, 22, 988–993 Search PubMed .
Z. Z. Luo, X. Zhang, X. Hua, G. Tan, T. P. Bailey, J. Xu, C. Uher, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid and Q. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 1801617 Search PubMed .
Y. Gelbstein, Y. Rosenberg, Y. Sadia and M. P. Dariel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13126–13131 Search PubMed .
Y. Gelbstein, J. Davidow, S. N. Girard, D. Y. Chung and M. Kanatzidis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 815–820 Search PubMed .
X. Meng, W. Cai, Z. Liu, J. Li, H. Geng and J. Sui, Acta Mater., 2015, 98, 405–415 Search PubMed .
M. Gürth, G. Rogl, V. Romaka, A. Grytsiv, E. Bauer and P. Rogl, Acta Mater., 2016, 104, 210–222 Search PubMed .
A. Page, C. Uher, P. F. Poudeu and A. Van der Ven, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 174102 Search PubMed .
J. P. A. Makongo, D. K. Misra, X. Zhou, A. Pant, M. R. Shabetai, X. Su, C. Uher, K. L. Stokes and P. F. P. Poudeu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18843–18852 Search PubMed .
P. Sahoo, Y. Liu, J. P. A. Makongo, X.-L. Su, S. J. Kim, N. Takas, H. Chi, C. Uher, X. Pan and P. F. P. Poudeu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9419–9427 Search PubMed .
R. Lu, J. S. Lopez, Y. Liu, T. P. Bailey, A. A. Page, S. Wang, C. Uher and P. F. P. Poudeu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 11095–11103 Search PubMed .
K. Biswas, J. He, Q. Zhang, G. Wang, C. Uher, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 160 Search PubMed .
K. Biswas, J. He, Q. Zhang, G. Wang, C. Uher, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 160–166 Search PubMed .
L.-D. Zhao, S. Hao, S.-H. Lo, C.-I. Wu, X. Zhou, Y. Lee, H. Li, K. Biswas, T. P. Hogan, C. Uher, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7364–7370 Search PubMed .
L.-D. Zhao, J. He, S. Hao, C.-I. Wu, T. P. Hogan, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16327–16336 Search PubMed .
L.-D. Zhao, J. He, C.-I. Wu, T. P. Hogan, X. Zhou, C. Uher, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7902–7912 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhou, J. Yang, Q. Jiang, Y. Luo, D. Zhang, Y. Ren, X. He and J. Xin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13171–13175 Search PubMed .
L.-D. Zhao, X. Zhang, H. Wu, G. Tan, Y. Pei, Y. Xiao, C. Chang, D. Wu, H. Chi and L. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2366–2373 Search PubMed .
Y. Luo, S. Cai, X. Hua, H. Chen, Q. Liang, C. Du, Y. Zheng, J. Shen, J. Xu and C. Wolverton, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1803072 Search PubMed .
Y. Luo, Q. Jiang, J. Yang, W. Li, D. Zhang, Z. Zhou, Y. Cheng, Y. Ren, X. He and X. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 80–87 Search PubMed .
Y. Luo, J. Yang, Q. Jiang, W. Li, D. Zhang, Z. Zhou, Y. Cheng, Y. Ren and X. He, Acta Mater., 2017, 127, 185–191 Search PubMed .
Y. Luo, J. Yang, Q. Jiang, L. Fu, Y. Xiao, W. Li, D. Zhang, Z. Zhou and Y. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 709–718 Search PubMed .
A. Bhardwaj and D. Misra, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20980–20989 Search PubMed .
Y. Cheng, J. Yang, Q. Jiang, D. He, J. He, Y. Luo, D. Zhang, Z. Zhou, Y. Ren and J. Xin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5163–5170 Search PubMed .
J. Xin, Q. Jiang, Y. Wen, S. Li, J. Zhang, A. Basit, L. Shu, X. Li and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17049–17056 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Wu, J. Zhang, J. Xing and J. Luo, Acta Mater., 2016, 111, 202–209 Search PubMed .
P. F. P. Poudeu, J. D'Angelo, A. D. Downey, J. L. Short, T. P. Hogan and M. G. Kanatzidis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3835–3839 Search PubMed .
T. J. Slade, J. A. Grovogui, S. Hao, T. P. Bailey, R. Ma, X. Hua, A. Guéguen, C. Uher, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7021–7031 Search PubMed .
S. Li, J. Xin, A. Basit, Q. Long, S. Li, Q. Jiang, Y. Luo and J. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903493 Search PubMed .
Y. Luo, J. Yang, Q. Jiang, W. Li, Y. Xiao, L. Fu, D. Zhang, Z. Zhou and Y. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 37–46 Search PubMed .
Y. Luo, J. Yang, Q. Jiang, W. Li, D. Zhang, Z. Zhou, Y. Cheng, Y. Ren and X. He, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600007 Search PubMed .
S. Ahmad, A. Singh, A. Bohra, R. Basu, S. Bhattacharya, R. Bhatt, K. Meshram, M. Roy, S. K. Sarkar and Y. Hayakawa, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 282–297 Search PubMed .
K. Favier, G. Bernard-Granger, C. Navone, M. Soulier, M. Boidot, J. Leforestier, J. Simon, J.-C. Tedenac and D. Ravot, Acta Mater., 2014, 64, 429–442 Search PubMed .
M. H. Elsheikh, M. F. M. Sabri, S. M. Said, Y. Miyazaki, H. Masjuki, D. A. Shnawah, S. Naito and M. B. A. Bashir, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 5324–5332 Search PubMed .
E. B. Kim, P. Dharmaiah, K.-H. Lee, C.-H. Lee, J.-H. Lee, J.-K. Yang, D.-H. Jang, D.-S. Kim and S.-J. Hong, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 777, 703–711 Search PubMed .
G. Constantinescu, A. R. Sarabando, S. Rasekh, D. Lopes, S. Sergiienko, P. Amirkhizi, J. R. Frade and A. V. Kovalevsky, Materials, 2020, 13, 1060 Search PubMed .
D. Srivastava, C. Norman, F. Azough, M. C. Schäfer, E. Guilmeau and R. Freer, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 731, 723–730 Search PubMed .
A. V. Kovalevsky, S. Populoh, S. G. Patrício, P. Thiel, M. C. Ferro, D. P. Fagg, J. R. Frade and A. Weidenkaff, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 4466–4478 Search PubMed .
F. Ren, H. Wang, P. A. Menchhofer and J. O. Kiggans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 221907 Search PubMed .
B. Trawiński, B. Bochentyn, N. Gostkowska, M. Łapiński, T. Miruszewski and B. Kusz, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 99, 10–17 Search PubMed .
J. Lei, D. Zhang, W. Guan, Z. Ma, Z. Cheng, C. Wang and Y. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 083901 Search PubMed .
F. Chu, Q. Zhang, Z. Zhou, D. Hou, L. Wang and W. Jiang, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 741, 756–764 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Ma, B. Sun, B. Liu, H. Liu, L. Kong, B. Liu, X. Jia and X. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 715, 344–348 Search PubMed .
K. Yin, X. Su, Y. Yan, H. Tang, M. G. Kanatzidis, C. Uher and X. Tang, Scr. Mater., 2017, 126, 1–5 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, Z. Zhang, L. Geng, T. Yuan, Y. Liu, J. Guo, L. Fang, J. Qiu and S. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1307–1317 Search PubMed .
D. Liu, J. Li, C. Chen and B. Zhang, J. Electron. Mater., 2011, 40, 992–998 Search PubMed .
J. Li, Q. Tan, J. F. Li, D. W. Liu, F. Li, Z. Y. Li, M. Zou and K. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4317–4323 Search PubMed .
P. Qin, Z.-H. Ge and J. Feng, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 696, 782–787 Search PubMed .
R. Inoue, J. Nakano, T. Nakamura, T. Ube, T. Iida and Y. Kogo, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 775, 657–666 Search PubMed .
B. Duan, P. Zhai, P. Wen, S. Zhang, L. Liu and Q. Zhang, Scr. Mater., 2012, 67, 372–375 Search PubMed .
P. Wen, B. Duan, P. Zhai, P. Li and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2013, 24, 5155–5161 Search PubMed .
S.-J. Joo, J.-H. Son, B.-K. Min, J.-E. Lee, B.-S. Kim, B. Ryu, S.-D. Park and H.-W. Lee, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2016, 69, 1314–1320 Search PubMed .
S. M. K. N. Islam, M. Li, U. Aydemir, X. Shi, L. Chen, G. J. Snyder and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18409–18416 Search PubMed .
K. I. Bolotin, K. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fudenberg, J. Hone, P. Kim and H. Stormer, Solid State Commun., 2008, 146, 351–355 Search PubMed .
M. F. L. De Volder, S. H. Tawfick, R. H. Baughman and A. J. Hart, Science, 2013, 339, 535–539 Search PubMed .
A. Hirsch, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 868 Search PubMed .
Y. Lin, M. Wood, K. Imasato, J. J. Kuo, D. Lam, A. N. Mortazavi, T. J. Slade, S. A. Hodge, K. Xi, M. G. Kanatzidis, D. R. Clarke, M. C. Hersam and G. J. Snyder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4114–4121 Search PubMed .
M. Bachmann, M. Czerner and C. Heiliger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 115320 Search PubMed .
L. Zhao, S. M. K. N. Islam, J. Wang, D. L. Cortie, X. Wang, Z. Cheng, J. Wang, N. Ye, S. Dou and X. Shi, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 164–171 Search PubMed .
R. Nunna, P. Qiu, M. Yin, H. Chen, R. Hanus, Q. Song, T. Zhang, M.-Y. Chou, M. T. Agne, J. He, G. J. Snyder, X. Shi and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1928–1935 Search PubMed .
H. Tang, F.-H. Sun, J.-F. Dong, Asfandiyar, H.-L. Zhuang, Y. Pan and J.-F. Li, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 267–273 Search PubMed .
M. Li, S. M. K. N. Islam, M. Yahyaoglu, D. Pan, X. Shi, L. Chen, U. Aydemir and X. Wang, InfoMat, 2019, 1, 108–115 Search PubMed .
M. Li, D. L. Cortie, J. Liu, D. Yu, S. M. K. N. Islam, L. Zhao, D. R. G. Mitchell, R. A. Mole, M. B. Cortie, S. Dou and X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 993–1002 Search PubMed .
D. Suh, S. Lee, H. Mun, S.-H. Park, K. H. Lee, S. Wng Kim, J.-Y. Choi and S. Baik, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 67–76 Search PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706 Search PubMed .
J. Dong, W. Liu, H. Li, X. Su, X. Tang and C. Uher, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12503–12511 Search PubMed .
K. T. Kim, S. Y. Choi, E. H. Shin, K. S. Moon, H. Y. Koo, G.-G. Lee and G. H. Ha, Carbon, 2013, 52, 541–549 Search PubMed .
Y. H. Yeo and T. S. Oh, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 58, 54–58 Search PubMed .
B. Khasimsaheb, N. K. Singh, S. Bathula, B. Gahtori, D. Haranath and S. Neeleshwar, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2017, 17, 306–313 Search PubMed .
L. D. Zhao, S. H. Lo, Y. Zhang, H. Sun, G. Tan, C. Uher, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2014, 508, 373–377 Search PubMed .
D. Zhao, J. Ning, D. Wu and M. Zuo, Materials, 2016, 9, 629 Search PubMed .
V. Kulbachinskii, V. Kytin, M. Popov, S. Buga, V. Blank and P. Stepanov, AIP Conf. Proc., 2012, 1449, 283–286 Search PubMed .
N. Gothard, J. E. Spowart and T. M. Tritt, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2010, 207, 157–162 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, A. Vemishetti, J. I. Ejembi, G. Wei, B. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, S. Guo, J. Luo, C. Chepko, Q. Dai, J. Tang and G.-L. Zhao, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2016, 205, 36–39 Search PubMed .
V. A. Kulbachinskii, V. G. Kytin, M. Y. Popov, S. G. Buga, P. B. Stepanov and V. D. Blank, J. Solid State Chem., 2012, 193, 64–70 Search PubMed .
V. A. Kulbachinskii, V. G. Kytin, V. D. Blank, S. G. Buga and M. Y. Popov, Semiconductors, 2011, 45, 1194 Search PubMed .
V. D. Blank, S. G. Buga, V. A. Kulbachinskii, V. G. Kytin, V. V. Medvedev, M. Y. Popov, P. B. Stepanov and V. F. Skok, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 075426 Search PubMed .
X. Shi, L. D. Chen, S. Q. Bai, X. Y. Huang, X. Y. Zhao, Q. Yao and C. Uher, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 103709 Search PubMed .
T. Itoh, K. Ishikawa and A. Okada, J. Mater. Res., 2011, 22, 249–253 Search PubMed .
N. O. Balayeva and Z. Q. Mamiyev, Mater. Lett., 2016, 175, 231–235 Search PubMed .
S. Bathula, M. Jayasimhadri, B. Gahtori, A. Kumar, A. K. Srivastava and A. Dhar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 25180–25185 Search PubMed .
Z.-Y. Li, J.-F. Li, W.-Y. Zhao, Q. Tan, T.-R. Wei, C.-F. Wu and Z.-B. Xing, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 113905 Search PubMed .

          T. Akao, K. Uya, T. Onda and Z.-C. Chen, Proceedings of the 2012 Mechanical Engineering Conference on Sustainable Research and Innovation,  2012, vol. 4, pp. 219–223.
Y. Pan, U. Aydemir, F.-H. Sun, C.-F. Wu, T. C. Chasapis, G. J. Snyder and J.-F. Li, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700259 Search PubMed .
T. Akao, Y. Fujiwara, Y. Tarui, T. Onda and Z.-C. Chen, J. Electron. Mater., 2014, 43, 2047–2052 Search PubMed .
L.-D. Zhao, B.-P. Zhang, J.-F. Li, M. Zhou, W.-S. Liu and J. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 455, 259–264 Search PubMed .
K. Yin, X. Su, Y. Yan, H. Tang, M. G. Kanatzidis, C. Uher and X. Tang, Scr. Mater., 2017, 126, 1–5 Search PubMed .
J. Li, Q. Tan, J.-F. Li, D.-W. Liu, F. Li, Z.-Y. Li, M. Zou and K. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4317–4323 Search PubMed .
Y. Pan, U. Aydemir, J. A. Grovogui, I. T. Witting, R. Hanus, Y. Xu, J. Wu, C.-F. Wu, F.-H. Sun, H.-L. Zhuang, J.-F. Dong, J.-F. Li, V. P. Dravid and G. J. Snyder, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802016 Search PubMed .
B. Xu, M. T. Agne, T. Feng, T. C. Chasapis, X. Ruan, Y. Zhou, H. Zheng, J. H. Bahk, M. G. Kanatzidis, G. J. Snyder and Y. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605140 Search PubMed .
B. Xu, T. Feng, M. T. Agne, L. Zhou, X. Ruan, G. J. Snyder and Y. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3546–3551 Search PubMed .
W. Liu, X. Shi, R. Moshwan, M. Hong, L. Yang, Z.-G. Chen and J. Zou, Sustainable Mater. Technol., 2018, 17, e00076 Search PubMed .
B. Du, H. Li, J. Xu, X. Tang and C. Uher, J. Solid State Chem., 2011, 184, 109–114 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao, L. Yang, L. Kong, M. H. Nai, D. Liu, J. Wu, Y. Liu, S. Y. Chiam, W. K. Chim, C. T. Lim, B. Li, J. T. L. Thong and K. Hippalgaonkar, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702824 Search PubMed .
Q. Hu, Z. Zhu, Y. Zhang, X.-J. Li, H. Song and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23417–23424 Search PubMed .
C. F. Wu, T. R. Wei, F. H. Sun and J. F. Li, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700199 Search PubMed .
W.-Y. Zhao, Z. Liang, P. Wei, J. Yu, Q.-J. Zhang and G.-S. Shao, Acta Mater., 2012, 60, 1741–1746 Search PubMed .
K. Zhao, H. Duan, N. Raghavendra, P. Qiu, Y. Zeng, W. Zhang, J. Yang, X. Shi and L. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701148 Search PubMed .
T. W. Day, W. G. Zeier, D. R. Brown, B. C. Melot and G. J. Snyder, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 172103 Search PubMed .
L. P. Bulat, V. B. Osvenskii and D. A. Pshenay-Severin, Mater. Today: Proc., 2015, 2, 532–537 Search PubMed .
M. Hong, Y. Wang, S. Xu, X. Shi, L. Chen, J. Zou and Z.-G. Chen, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 1–7 Search PubMed .
H. Ju, M. Kim, D. Park and J. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3228–3236 Search PubMed .
E. Case, J. Electron. Mater., 2012, 41, 1811–1819 Search PubMed .
G. Tan, F. Shi, S. Hao, L.-D. Zhao, H. Chi, X. Zhang, C. Uher, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12167 Search PubMed .
Y. Zheng, X. Y. Tan, X. Wan, X. Cheng, Z. Liu and Q. Yan, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 2078–2089 Search PubMed .
M. E. Launey and R. O. Ritchie, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2103–2110 Search PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Q. Zhang, X. Su and X. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 40091–40098 Search PubMed .
R. Schmidt, X. Fan, E. Case and P. Sarac, J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 50, 4034–4046 Search PubMed .
S. Wan, X. Huang, P. Qiu, S. Bai and L. Chen, Mater. Des., 2015, 67, 379–384 Search PubMed .
H. R. Williams, R. M. Ambrosi, K. Chen, U. Friedman, H. Ning, M. J. Reece, M. C. Robbins, K. Simpson and K. Stephenson, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 626, 368–374 Search PubMed .
N. Satyala, J. S. Krasinski and D. Vashaee, Acta Mater., 2014, 74, 141–150 Search PubMed .
K. Biswas, J. He, I. D. Blum, C.-I. Wu, T. P. Hogan, D. N. Seidman, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 489, 414–418 Search PubMed .
S. Sarkar, X. Zhang, S. Hao, X. Hua, T. P. Bailey, C. Uher, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2593–2601 Search PubMed .
J. J. Kuo, M. Wood, T. J. Slade, M. G. Kanatzidis and G. J. Snyder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1250–1258 Search PubMed .
Y. Zheng, G. Tan, Y. Luo, X. Su, Y. Yan and X. Tang, Materials, 2017, 10, 617 Search PubMed .
H. Wu, F. Zheng, D. Wu, Z.-H. Ge, X. Liu and J. He, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 626–650 Search PubMed .
H. Tao, M. Zhou, R. Wang, K. Wang, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1801021 Search PubMed .
I. J. Beyerlein, M. J. Demkowicz, A. Misra and B. P. Uberuaga, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2015, 74, 125–210 Search PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Tyler J. Slade
	Tyler Slade received his PhD in Chemistry from Northwestern University, where he focused on the synthesis and characterization of thermoelectric alloys under the supervision of Prof. Mercouri Kanatzidis. His primary research interests are the electronic and phonon transport properties as well as synthesis of inorganic solids. He is currently pursuing research on topological semimetals as a postdoctoral associate at Ames Laboratory.

Jianwei Xu
	Jianwei Xu is currently a Principle Scientist in IMRE, A*STAR in Singapore. He has broad research interests in various functional polymers, liquid crystals and p-conjugated polymeric materials. Currently, his research areas are mainly focused on POSS-based functional hybrid materials, electrochromic conjugated polymers, aggregation-induced emission (AIE) based materials and thermoelectric materials.

Qingyu Yan
	Qingyu Yan is currently a professor in Nanyang Technology University. He finished his PhD degree from State University of New York at Stony Brook. After that, he joined Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute as a research fellow. He joined Nanyang Technological University as an Assistant Professor in early 2008 and became a Professor in 2018. Yan's research interest mainly include thermoelectric materials and energy storage materials.

Mercouri G. Kanatzidis
	Mercouri G. Kanatzidis received his Chemistry diploma from the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki Greece and his PhD degree in Chemistry from the University of Iowa. He was a postdoctoral research fellow at the University of Michigan and Northwestern University. At Northwestern University he is Charles E. and Emma H. Morrison Professor and also carries a joint appointment as a Senior Scientist at Argonne National Laboratory. He is active in the field of materials design and discovery with emphasis on solar energy materials, thermoelectric materials, framework solids, and intermetallics.
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  The schematic illustration of improving TE and mechanical properties of TE materials via defect engineering.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the scattering, diffusion, and annihilation of an implanted positron within a host material.145 Copyright 2013, Maik Butterling. (b) Schematic diagram of a PAS spectrometer set up, where the 22Na source (purple sphere) is sandwiched between the sample material (blue) to maximize the quantity of emitted positrons penetrating the sample. After the resulting gamma radiation signals are detected by an assembly of fast scintillators (SC), photomultiplier tubes (PMT) and constant fraction differential discriminators (CF DISC) on each side, a positron lifetime spectrum (blue line) can be obtained through further signal conversions by a time-to-amplitude converter (TAC) and an analogue-to-digital converter (ACD). Readapted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Configuration of the DLTS set-up. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2019, AIP publishing.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  (a) The synchrotron X-ray diffraction pattern and (b) the peak broadening analysis by the modified Williamson–Hall plot. (c) The powder XRD pattern and (d) the peak broadening analysis by the modified Williamson–Hall plots for NayEu0.03Pb0.97−yTe (y ≤ 0.05) samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 5  Illustration of common point defects in a two-dimensional lattice where the red and blue spheres denote cations and anions, respectively. A Schottky pair is formed by a pair of cationic and anionic vacancies.	 
NV = Nexp(−QV/kBT),	(7)
	(8)
τ ∝ ErTs(m*)t	(9)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Hall carrier concentration as a function of x value (i.e. vacancy concentration) in La3−xTe4 and Pr3−xTe4. Data were taken from literature.175,179 The inset presents the cubic crystal structure of La3−xTe4 at full La occupancy, where La could be replaced by Ce and Pr. Cyan and brown spheres represent lanthanum and tellurium atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2008, The American Physical Society. (b) ZT values of Pr3−xTe4, a peak ZT of 1.7 was achieved at 1200 K by tuning Pr vacancy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2018, Cell Press.	 
	(10)

 	Fig. 7  (a) Lattice thermal conductivity, κlat as a function of doping fraction, x in (SnTe)3−3x(In2Te3)x. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2015, The American Chemical Society. (b) Temperature dependence of κlat for SnTe single crystal, SnTe polycrystal and AgSn5SbTe7. The solid lines are Debye–Callaway model calculation considering different phonon scattering mechanisms. Readapted with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) ZT values in filled-skutterudites compared with typical TE materials. The inset shows the multiple fillers and skutterudite crystal structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 214. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (b) Composition dependence of the lattice thermal conductivity at 300 K for (SnTe)1−x(Cu2Te)x. Reproduced with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  Contour plot of the charge density difference of Mg65X32, (a) X = Si, (b) X = Ge, (c) X = Sn with a Mg interstitial. The dashed lines and the solid lines demonstrate charge depletion and accumulation respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 217. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Experimental 199Hg CPMG static NMR spectra and (b) corresponding simulations for HgSe and PbSe−6%HgSe. The major peak (green) in the HgSe spectrum is attributed to Hg at the tetrahedral site within HgSe, and the small shift anisotropy (27 ppm) indicates high symmetry. Conversely, the PbSe–6%HgSe spectrum (red) shows a large shift anisotropy of 65 ppm, indicating an asymmetric bonding environment. The inset illustrates a locally distorted HgSe6 octahedron. (c) DFT calculated κlat for pure PbSe and PbSe–HgSe showing suppressed κlat when considering the Hg off-centering. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Energy profile of PbSe–GeSe as a function of atomic coordinates from the octahedral Ge substituted Pb site along the (111) direction towards the tetrahedral site. The inset shows Ge shifted away from the octahedral position. (e) DFT calculated phonon dispersion for PbSe–GeSe considering the Ge off-centering. Low-lying optical modes (marked with red dots) and suppressed phonon group velocities are found, features that are not present in calculations without the discordant Ge. Reproduced with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 11  (a) TEM image showing dense dislocations in Pb0.95Sb0.033Se solid solution. The inset is the selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) image of the corresponding area. (b) Temperature-dependent lattice thermal conductivity (κL) of Pb1−xSb2x/3Se (x = 0.01, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05 and 0.07) with or without Ag doping. The grey line is taken from literature.229 Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (c) TEM image of NayEu0.03Pb0.97−yTe (y = 0.025) with dense dislocation networks. (d) Composition-dependent lattice thermal conductivity for NayEu0.03Pb0.97−yTe at 850 K. The symbols show the experimental results in the cited work163 (black) and from literature230 (green), while the curves show the model predictions (with both N- and U-process included) based on a Debye–Callaway approximation with different types of phonon scattering. Phonon scattering by dislocations has the largest contribution to the reduction in κL in this material. Dashed lines are used as visual guides only. Reproduced with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 
τB−1 = v/L	(13)

 	Fig. 12  (a and b) TEM images of melt-spun-SPS (MS-SPS) bulk materials, which display both the nanocrystalline domains and amorphous phase. (c) The lattice thermal conductivity (κL) of zone-melted (ZM) ingot, ZM-SPS, and MS-SPS bulk samples as a function of temperature. Reproduced with permission from.236 Copyright 2009, The American Institute of Physics. (d) TEM image (left) and simulated crystal structure (right) of (BiS)1.2(TiS2)2 along the [100] zone axis. The inset shows the electron diffraction pattern of the sample. (e) Temperature dependent in-plane lattice thermal conductivity of TiS2, (PbS)1.18(TiS2)2, (SnS)1.2(TiS2)2, and (BiS)1.2(TiS2)2. The black solid line indicates the minimum thermal conductivity of (BiS)1.2(TiS2)2 calculated by Cahill's model. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2012, The American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Traces of the temperature-dependent Hall carrier mobility in several thermoelectric materials with strong grain boundary scattering, KAlSb4,52 Mg3Sb2,192 Ca3AlSb3,258 Sr3GaSb3,270 SnSe,271 PbSe–NaSbSe2,261 and Mg2Si.272 (b) Electrical resistivity of two degenerate n-type single crystals of Mg3Sb2 showing metallic behaviour down to 2 K with no evidence for ionized impurity scattering. Reproduced with permission from.266 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) Comparison of the electrical conductivities for large- and small-grained PbSe–NaSbSe2 showing elimination of the low-temperature scattering in the large-grained samples. Reproduced from ref. 267 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Demonstration of improved ZTs in single crystalline Mg3Sb2 compared to polycrystalline materials. Reproduced with permission from.261 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 
	(14)

 	Fig. 14  (a) Phase diagram of PbTe–PbS. Reproduced with permission.287 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustration of PbS precipitates in PbTe. Reproduced with permission from ref. 288. Copyright 2007, The American Chemical Society. (c) Phase diagram of PbTe–Ag2Te. Reproduced with permission from ref. 289. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic diagram of in situ oxidation in CuInTe2–ZnO and CuInTe2–In2O3 systems. Adapted with permission from ref. 290. Copyright 2018, Chinese Physical Society and IOP Publishing Ltd.	 
SrMoO4 + TiO2 → SrTiO3 + Mo + 1.5O2,

 	Fig. 15  (a) The SEM image of PbTe-5 wt% graphene powders. The red arrows indicate the wrinkles of graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 359. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The fracture surface shows the CNT distributed at Bi0.4Sb1.6Te3 grain boundaries. Reproduced with permission from ref. 332. Copyright 2013, The American Institute of Physics. TEM images show (c) the SiC nanodispersion in Bi0.3Sb1.7Te3 matrix, and (d) the interface between Bi0.3Sb1.7Te3 matrix and SiC nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 340. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) The fracture surface of the Cu1.98Li0.02Se bulk sample. Many nanopores can be found at grain boundaries. (b) The temperature-dependent lattice thermal conductivity of Cu2−xLixSe (x = 0–0.03) samples. The inset shows the lattice thermal conductivity as a function of Li content at 473 K and 973 K, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 388. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Cu2Se porous bulk materials prepared at 323 K (corresponding to 19.6% porosity). (d) Temperature dependence of lattice thermal conductivity (κL) for Cu2Se porous bulk materials. The calculated minimum thermal conductivity (κmin) was plotted as comparison. Reproduced with permission from ref. 391. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) TEM image of a porous Bi2.02Te2.56Se0.44 nanocomposite sintered at 400 °C; (b) theoretical modelling of the temperature dependent κL for the 350 °C-sintered BiTeSe nanocomposite. Here, B, DS, and DC denote grain boundaries, dislocation strain, and dislocation core, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 384. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) TEM image of porous silicon nanowire; (d) thermal conductivity as a function of porosity for ten different porous silicon nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 387. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Illustration of the cellular microstructure of Sb2Si2Te6–Si2Te3 featuring a thin Sb2Te3 layer surrounding the bulk Sb2Si2Te6 grains. (b) A high-resolution TEM image of the grain boundary region. (c) and (d) are respectively selected area electron diffraction images and fast-Fourier transformed images obtained from the TEM data and confirming the bulk Sb2Si2Te6 and GB Si2Te3 phases. (e) Temperature-dependent lattice thermal conductivities, (f) electrical conductivities, and (g) ZTs of both pure Sb2Si2Te and Sb2Si2Te6–Si2Te3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 280. Copyright 2020, Cell Press.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Fracture toughness KICvs. displacement curves for ZM and MS10 samples. Here, MS10 refers to the sample prepared with the optimum linear speed of 10 m/s. The inset shows the KIC values for ZM, MS10, and annealed MS10 samples; (b) Flexural and compressive strengths of ZM, MS10 and annealed MS10 specimens; (c) and (d) crack propagation images of MS10 samples after the KIC test, showing crack deflecting, pull-out, and crack bridging. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (e) Flexural strength and fracture toughness of CoSb2.875Te0.125/TiN composites with various TiN content. The inset shows crack deflection, crack bridging and crack branching in CoSb2.875Te0.125/1.0 vol% TiN composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 343. Copyright 2012, Elsevier.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
