2016 Atomic Spectrometry Update – a review of advances in X-ray fluorescence spectrometry and its applications  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6JA90034H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6JA90034H
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2016, 31, 1706-17552016 Atomic Spectrometry Update – a review of advances in X-ray fluorescence spectrometry and its applications

        
          
            Margaret 
            West
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Andrew T. 
            Ellis
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Philip J. 
            Potts
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Christina 
            Streli
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Christine 
            Vanhoof
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Peter 
            Wobrauschek
          
        
      c
a405 Whirlowdale Road, Sheffield S11 9NF, UK. E-mail: margaretwest@blueyonder.co.uk
b8 Burgess Close, Abingdon, OX14 3JT, UK
cTuWien, Atominstitut, Stadionallee 2, 1020, Vienna, Austria
dFaculty of Science, The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, UK
eFlemish Institute for Technological Research (VITO), Boeretang 200, 2400 Mol, Belgium
Received 
      12th July 2016
    First published on 11th August 2016Contents1 Introduction and reviews2. Instrumentation2.1 Hand-held, mobile, on-line XRF techniques and planetary exploration2.2 Laboratory instruments and excitation sources2.3 Synchrotron and large scale facilities2.4 TXRF and related techniques2.5 X-ray detectors2.6 Quantification and data processing3 Applications3.1 Geological and climate change3.2 Mining and mining waste3.3 Industrial materials and consequences of industrial activity3.4 Environmental3.5 Archaeological and cultural heritage3.6 Forensic3.7 Clinical3.8 Drugs and personal care products3.9 Biological3.10 Thin films, coatings and nanomaterials3.11 Chemical state and speciationAbbreviationsReferencesAbstractThis review describes advances in the XRF group of techniques published approximately between April 2015 and March 2016. Fundamental contributions in the instrumentation sections include the development of synchrotron radiation sources, semiconductor design technology and evaluating the quality of in situ hand-held XRF results. A bench top TXRF spectrometer for the measurement of the elements from carbon to uranium is described that offers achievable detection limits that range from ng g−1 to μg g−1. The applications sections aim to give a representative overview of the range of applications that use XRF techniques with an emphasis on papers that describe technical or application innovation. Sample size investigated ranged from the planet Mercury down to nano-gram quantities of cement secreted by settlement stage barnacle larvae. The archaeological and cultural heritage section this year includes an authentic report on the use of cannabis as a filler in ancient lime plaster and heartening news that the construction of an underground parking garage in the centre of Zurich (Switzerland) unearthed the remains of seven Neolithic settlements from the 4th and 3rd millennium BC. The X-ray excitation of iron present in ancient iron-gall inks was presented as a step toward the non-invasive reading of fragile and/or unopenable documents. Feedback from readers of this review is most welcome and the review coordinator may be contacted using the email address provided.
1 Introduction and reviews
This review describes advances in the XRF group of techniques published approximately between April 2015 and March 2016 and continues the series of Atomic Spectrometry Updates in X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometry1 that should be read in conjunction with other related updates in the series.2–6
Element analysis of liquid matrices using XRF techniques often suffer from low signal-to-noise (S/N) ratios leading to the development of a range of different chemical and physical extraction techniques to overcome such problems. Moradi et al.7 offered a review of sample preparation techniques for aqueous solutions including solid-phase extraction (disc, semi-solid, particles and electrodeposition), and liquid-phase extraction (supported liquid membrane and liquid-phase micro-extraction). Trojek and Cechak8 provided an overview of analytical methods used to identify terrestrial radionuclides in samples. Particular attention was paid to the XRF analysis of materials containing uranium and thorium where scanning XRF systems provided area distributions of analytes of interest. In the USA, the National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurement provide guidance to those working with X-rays on radiation safety in occupational settings in a variety of industries and activities. Goldin and Pryor9 described work by the programme area committee covering recommendations for the development and administration of radiation safety programmes for smaller educational institutions. Requirements for self-assessment that improve radiation safety and identify and correct deficiencies are needed, plus a comprehensive process for effective investigation of radiological incidents. The work also considered sealed radioactive source controls and a report on radioactive nanomaterials that focused on gaps within current radiation safety legislation. With advancing years, analytical procedures and instrumentation develop and techniques become recognised as mature. Gore et al.10 saw the need for training the next generation of analytical X-ray professionals with advice for on-site teaching to inform the experimental design, level of sampling required and research outcomes. The challenge for educators was seen as how to inspire those in school, at undergraduate level and postgraduate researchers with appropriate tools to collect data and constrain analytical uncertainty. Xiao et al.11 described developments of atomic spectrometry in China during the past fifteen years including AES, AAS, AFS, AMS and XRF spectrometry plus a brief introduction to the hyphenated techniques used in atomic spectrometry.
2. Instrumentation
2.1 Hand-held, mobile, on-line XRF techniques and planetary exploration
Further contributions were published this year describing the development of portable and mobile XRF instrumentation and techniques. But first, it is appropriate to comment that confusion still continues over terminology with the ambiguous use of ‘portable’, ‘mobile’ and ‘hand-held’ as epithets for this category of XRF instrumentation. The most important distinguishing feature is whether instrumentation is capable of direct in situ measurement of the composition of samples ‘in the field’ or alternatively is sufficiently portable for use in a mobile or field laboratory. In this review, the originating author's terminology has been used, but readers need to be aware of potential confusion concerning the exact type of instrumentation in use. That said, Galuszka et al.12 reviewed the availability of a wide range of different field-portable instrumentation available for environmental analysis, including GC with different detectors, UV and near IR spectrophotometers, XRF and ion mobility spectrometers, electronic ‘noses’ and electronic ‘tongues’. The authors commented that in some cases, disadvantages compared with laboratory instrumentation existed in the areas of quantification, higher detection limits, lower sensitivity and the possibility of sample contamination in the field. Li et al.13 advocated the use of wavelet threshold noise filtering to reduce the noise and smooth portable XRF spectra in the determination of As, Cr, Cu, Pb and Zn for the on-site rapid screening of metals in contaminated soil. The authors claimed an improvement in accuracy following application of this approach. A new commercially available mobile system that combined the XRD with XRF techniques was evaluated by de Voorde and colleagues14 for the identification of pigments in cultural heritage artefacts. The instrument incorporated copper or molybdenum miniature X-ray tubes and a Si(PIN) detector and was tested successfully in the characterisation of lead alloy printing letters. Hagiwara et al.15 used a solid phase extraction technique for the on-site mobile XRF determination of As in drinking water. The aqueous sample (50 mL) was adjusted to pH 3 and then passed through a titanium and zirconium-loaded carbon disk, which adsorbed inorganic As (as AsIII and AsV) and organic As (as methyl, phenyl and other aromatic As compounds). Quantification was achieved over the range 0.5–5 μg L−1 with a detection limit of 0.1 μg L−1 and results were reported to be in good agreement with those from AAS. A pre-concentration technique was also employed by Lin and colleagues16 for the field determination of CdII and PbII by portable XRF spectrometry. Pre-concentration was accomplished using a composite comprising TiO2 immobilised on a cellulose film. With about 95% of the analyte ions pre-concentrated in this way, the linear calibration range was reported to be 1 to 50 μg L−1 with a detection limit of 0.7 μg L−1 (Pb) and 0.5 μg L−1 (Cd). The application of a portable TXRF spectrometer was reported by Kunimura and Amagasu17 for detecting trace amounts of Cd. The particular issue was that measurements in vacuo resulted unsurprisingly in a significant reduction in the intensity of Ar K lines that overlap Cd L lines at the 1 ng Cd level. Solid phase extraction was required to remove K from solutions containing Cd and K to provide a significant reduction in the interfering K Kα line. A proposal for the prototype of a portable μ-XRF instrument was set out by Polese and colleagues,18 incorporating a poly-capillary lens and transmission target X-ray tube. The instrument was particularly designed to excite the K lines of higher Z elements (e.g., Ag, Sn) in materials of cultural interest. The development of an ultra-miniaturised XRD/XRF instrument that had wider potential use than its primary application for the in situ mineralogical and chemical analysis of Martian soils and rocks was described by Marinangeli et al.19 The instrument comprised a radioisotope excitation source and a CCD-based detection system. For terrestrial applications, the source could easily be replaced by a miniature X-ray tube, for which the authors envisaged archaeological applications such as determining the elemental and mineralogical content of paintings and pottery. And finally, Rouillon et al.20 investigated the risk to operators from radiation exposure when measuring a range of sample matrices using four commercially available hand-held XRF instruments. The authors found that the measurements on polyethylene recorded dose rates that were 156 times higher than steel and 34 times higher than quartz sand and quartz sandstone and estimated that a worker analysing polyethylene using a hand-held XRF instrument at arms-length for 1 hour each working day for a year would receive a body dose equivalent to three to four chest X-rays. Nevertheless, the authors still considered the advantages of these instruments far outweighed the risk from low radiation exposure that was caused by X-ray scatter from samples.
In a contribution to the development of on-line techniques, O'Neil et al.21 described an in situ electrochemical XRF method for the direct identification and quantification of metals in solution. A free-standing film of boron-doped diamond acted as both X-ray window and electrode biased to electroplate metals from solution onto its surface. These metals were then excited by X-rays passing through the back side of the electrode allowing unambiguous identification of the metal present and the determination of the concentration in solution. Detection sensitivity was increased by using a wall-jet configuration to direct the flow of solution over the electrode surface and results were presented for Cu2+, Fe3+, Hg2+, Ni2+, Pb2+ and Zn2+.
This year has also seen a number of developments in novel applications. Quye-Sawyer et al.22 reviewed challenges and opportunities in the use of hand-held EDXRF instrumentation for the in situ measurement of carbonate rocks for geological characterisation. They commented that weathering can impact on measurements of Al, Ca, Mg and Ti and that researchers were advised to make measurements on fresh rock chips that were hammered from carbonate outcrops to ensure reliable results. Fleming and co-workers23 undertook a comparison between portable XRF and ICP-MS in the determination of trace elements in rice and rice products. Linear correlation was found in data for As, Cu, Fe, Mn and Zn but not in the case of Ni. Gorce and Roff24 were interested in the use of portable XRF instruments for the workplace screening of exposure to Pb and undertook a detailed assessment of Pb in dust and fumes collected by inhalable air samplers on 25 mm membrane filters. Small differences were detected between inner and outer regions of the filters using an instrument with an 8 mm diameter X-ray beam, but overall results were found to be within −28% and +38% of WDXRF data. The use of this portable XRF instrumentation for the analysis of surface wipes was also described and the authors concluded that this technique was an effective method for the immediate screening to detect occupational Pb exposure, with the potential for simultaneously determining a number of other metals.

Planetary exploration benefited from the development of a suite of over fifty planetary analogue materials by the Canadian Space Agency, as described by Cloutis et al.25 These terrestrial rocks and minerals were similar to the known or expected composition of rocks on the lunar or Martian surface and XRF spectrometry was used to measure the bulk chemistry as one of a suite of techniques employed in their characterisation. Thompson et al.26 reviewed the new generation of planetary rover instruments selected for the Mars 2020 mission designed to map mineralogical and elemental compositions in situ at microscopic scales. In particular, the authors evaluated system performance for the case study of the Planetary Instrument for X-ray Litho-chemistry (PIXL) showing that experiments on three representative samples demonstrated improved methods for on-board and ground-side automation and illustrated new astro-biological capabilities unavailable in previous planetary instruments. No doubt we shall be hearing more about this instrument in the next few years. Allwood27 provided news and topical comment on this instrument. Further results from the existing Alpha-Particle X-ray Spectrometer (APXS) on the Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity Rover in Gale Crater on Mars were presented by Berger et al.28 who provided elemental composition data on dust falling on the observation tray. The authors linked the observed enrichment in Cl, Fe and S in these samples to the amorphous component of Gale Crater soil. CheMin was a miniaturised XRD/XRF instrument based in transmission geometry and an energy-discriminating CCD detector and its use for the first X-ray diffraction measurements on Mars was reported by Bish et al.29 Data on a soil, two mudstones and a sample drilled from a sandstone revealed a complex mineralogy with contributions from the parent igneous rocks, amorphous components and several minerals related to aqueous alteration.
A number of contributions reported the composition of planetary surfaces both remotely and directly. There being no landings on Mercury the only current option is global planetary mapping of the surface using emissions from the Sun as the X-ray source and fluorescence detection from orbiting satellites. Such results were reported by Weider et al.30 for Mercury using the orbiting Messenger X-ray spectrometer, providing full maps for Al and Mg and partial maps for Ca, Fe and S, each relative to Si to reveal highly variable compositions. Global maps of the surface of the Moon were reported by Dong et al.31 obtained from the X-ray spectrometer flown on the Chang'E 2 orbiter. The authors presented global Mg/Si and Al/Si maps of the lunar surface with higher Mg/Si ratios corresponding to the mare regions, and lower ratios corresponding to the highland terrains. The on-orbit calibration of this instrument was described by Xiao et al.32 using a weak Fe55 source to evaluate energy resolution and linearity and estimating that the total calibration uncertainty after correction was within 5%. The Chang E'3 mission landed on the lunar surface during December 2013 and the major element abundances at the lunar landing site were reported by Wang and Wang33 using an Alpha Particle-induced X-ray Spectrometer instrument. The authors described the processing of spectra, including energy calibration, dead-time correction, and non-linear least squares fitting to determine major element abundances using the fundamental parameter method. From these data, it was concluded that lunar soils at the landing site were fragments of mare basalts. For the future, Naito et al.34 described the ‘Active X-ray Spectrometer’, which is one of the payload candidates for the lunar rover being considered for the future Japanese mission, Selene-2 to the Moon. This instrument comprised pyroelectric X-ray generators and a silicon drift detector designed for the determination of major, minor and some trace elements and experiments were performed to evaluate the effects of surface roughness and excitation geometry to optimise instrument design.
2.2 Laboratory instruments and excitation sources
The ongoing high degree of interest in μ-XRF spectrometry was well reflected by the publication of three reviews on that subject during the current review period. In the first review,35 the history leading up to the implementation of confocal μ-XRF spectrometry was comprehensively covered and examples were given of how this technique had been applied by the authors to the analysis of an SD memory card, reactions in liquid samples and steel corrosion by NaCl solutions. The authors also considered the use of PCA which resulted in the improvement of S/N in μ-XRF spectra, which in turn yielded improved spatial resolution in confocal μ-XRF images as well as their development of a laboratory-based μ-WDXRF spectrometer using a molybdenum target 2 to 3 kW X-ray tube and a spectrometer comprising parallel poly-capillary X-ray optics each side of the analyser crystal and a 2D X-ray detector. The resulting instrument offered excellent peak separation, as shown by the ability to resolve Ti K and Ba L lines in the same spectrum, and image acquisition times as short as 1 s. The second wide-ranging review36 concentrated on the development of confocal μ-XRF spectrometry but also usefully covered the use of confocal geometry in XAFS, μ-XRD and small angle X-ray scattering. In the case of μ-XRF spectrometry, the authors indicated that higher power laboratory sources and improved optics could lead to a spatial resolution of 0.5 μm. The use of SR sources could yield a 100 nm resolution and that the further improvement of FP algorithms for quantitative nano-XRF imaging would continue as voxel sizes reduced even further. The third review37 covered the development of poly-capillary X-ray optics and included details of the design and implementation of these important components of μ-XRF imaging systems. The authors went on to describe briefly the latest facilities for μ-XRF and XRF-CT that had been established at XLab, Frascati, Italy. An interesting paper by Hampai and co-workers38 covered in more detail the so-called RXR μ-XRF system developed at XLab for 2D and 3D μ-XRF imaging of large and heavy objects weighing up to 80 kg. The core of the system allowed up to 6 components to be mounted such that they all focused on the exact same spot at 30 mm from the surface of the mounting block. Typically, the six system components were an X-ray tube coupled to a poly-capillary lens; two detectors in confocal geometry with each connected to a poly-capillary half lens; two pointing lasers and an optical microscope coupled to a CCD camera. The 50 kV, 1 mA molybdenum target micro-focus X-ray tube was used in conjunction with a poly-capillary full lens to deliver a 50 μm spot onto the sample surface. The two ED detector channels used 30 mm2 active area SDDs, one with a beryllium window and coupled to an optimised poly-capillary half lens to cover the energy range 4 to 25 keV and a second SDD with an ultrathin polymer entrance window coupled to a half lens optimised for the energy range 800 eV to 5 keV. The impressive motion systems were either an xyz stage for experiments in air or a 6-degrees of freedom (xyzΘχφ) stage for experiments in vacuum down to 1 Pa. The air-mode stage offered μm resolution, a massive xyz range of 300, 400 and 500 mm respectively and the ability to support up to 100 kg and could be augmented with a higher precision stage offering a limited 30 mm range for the x and y axes and 20 mm for z. The effectiveness of the initial setup of this “micro on the macro” system was confirmed by XRF imaging a cultural artefact with a spatial resolution of 50 μm. The system was primarily dedicated to imaging and tomography while a second, flexible and high sensitivity system was suitable for μ-XRF spectrometry, μ-XRF-CT or the characterisation of system components and had the provision for up to three 50 W micro-focus X-ray tubes with tungsten, molybdenum or copper target materials. The latter system offered a 2D spatial resolution better than 1 μm and a 3D tomography resolution of 17 × 17 × 17 μm3. The full characteristics of an interesting X-ray tube-based laboratory μ-XRF instrument developed at University of Ghent were described by Garrevoet and colleagues.39 In order to achieve the design intent of optimum detection limits rather than the smallest beam spot, the 50 W molybdenum target micro-focus X-ray tube was coupled to a 3-segment doubly-curved crystal optic that acted both as a monochromator for the Mo Kα radiation and an X-ray optic that could produce an intense beam spot of 120 × 46 μm2 at a very usefully, long working distance of 32 mm. This source unit was paired with a 60 mm2 SDD that had an energy resolution down to 130 eV at 5.9 keV and the whole system was aimed at reducing spectrum background and increasing S/N to yield the best detection limits. Based upon 1000 s measurements of a 100 μm thick pressed pellet of NIST SRM 1577c (bovine liver powder) impressive detection limits were achieved of 400 ng g−1 or <1 pg for elements in the Z range 25 to 37. The use of monochromatic excitation greatly simplified the FP quantitative algorithms developed by the team and made the use of reverse MC simulations much simpler and faster. Accuracy of the analytical system was assessed by measurements on a stainless steel reference material, in which there were strong absorption and enhancement effects, and accuracy was good (within 2% relative) for the major elements. Accuracy for the minor elements was adversely affected by strong spectral overlaps or an inadequate detector response function. The system was used for the 2D mapping of an iron-rich meteorite and found to give results that closely matched the results from ICP-MS, although the impressive full map (based on 37 × 112 pixels, with 75 (L) × 25 (H) μm step sizes, and a dwell time of 50 s per pixel) needed some 58 hours to acquire! The authors concluded that their high S/N approach was very effective for accurate laboratory μ-XRF systems and that the possibility existed, through the use of very high power rotating anode or liquid metal jet anode X-ray tubes, to increase the incident flux a thousand fold and become compatible with some SRXRF instruments. A report by Yagi and Tsuji40 also considered the problem of spectrum background/overlap in the confocal μ-XRF measurement of Cl K lines in the presence of scattered Rh L series lines from the rhodium target X-ray tube. The authors established that a 24 μm thickness aluminium foil primary beam filter was sufficient to eliminate the scattered Rh L lines from the spectrum – a simple and practical solution that has been in place on commercially available laboratory EDXRF systems for at least 30 years. Using this approach, the authors showed how effective their confocal system was at acquiring a very useful 3D map of a steel plate being corroded in a NaCl solution. Also coming as no real surprise, a numerical design was reported41 of a poly-capillary optic that showed it to have a low vacuum conductance enabling it to be both a beam optic and a high X-ray transmission “window” between a high and a medium vacuum section of a μ-XRF system. Two combinations of poly-capillary and tapered mono-capillary X-ray optics were proposed42 in order to increase the flux available to laboratory μ-XRF systems. The use of a poly-capillary half lens to collect a significant solid angle of the X-ray tube output and produce a parallel beam at the input of a tapered mono-capillary optic was found to yield a total intensity gain of 580 into a focal spot of 58 μm. More impressively, a poly-capillary full lens was used to produce a virtual spot at the input of a tapered mono-capillary optic yielding a total gain of 14300 and a focal spot of 37 μm. Both setups were suitable for use with rotating anode X-ray tubes and the higher yield combination was suited to many types of X-ray imaging applications. The problem of secondary fluorescence (enhancement) effects in confocal μ-XRF analysis of layered structures was considered by Tsuji et al.,43 who observed the enhancement of Co K lines by the Cu K lines in a structure comprising a 5 layer stack of foils of copper-Kapton–cobalt-Kapton–copper. The authors proposed a Mosaic model for the correction of absorption effects in which the analytical volume was defined as a confocal unit cell with dimensions derived from the specific instrument setup and energy of the XRF lines of the elements in the sample. Working down from the uppermost layer, each confocal unit cell was corrected for absorption effects although it remains to be seen if this approach can be extended to the enhancement effects observed and to be expected in the Z, Z + 2 multilayer structures such as the one reported in their paper here. An interesting paper44 on the factors limiting trace element detection in modern high power μ-SRXRF systems (really nano-focus systems) described an analytical model that was suitable for estimating the total signal incident on the detector. The analytical nature of the model made it much faster than with MC codes used for this purpose. The modelled spectra were shown to be in good agreement with experimental results. Using this model and test
cases of Zn in biological samples and As in semiconductor materials, the authors established that, for thick samples, the best LOD was with the detector at 90° to the incident beam and for thin samples the best LOD was with the detector at 180°.
A study45 on the elemental inhomogeneity of a synthetic emerald made in the late 1880's used laboratory scale components to build X-ray Computed Tomography (CT) and μ-XRF imaging systems. Both systems used a micro-focus 50 W X-ray tube that was, in the case of the CT instrument, coupled to a poly-capillary half lens to create a parallel beam with minimum divergence. In the case of the μ-XRF instrument, a poly-capillary lens was coupled to the X-ray tube to generate a 50 μm beam spot on the sample and detection was by means of a 5 mm2 SDD. Using an XY sample stage, EDXRF spectra were collected over an area of 1000 × 3500 μm2 with a step size of 50 μm and dwell time of 30 s at each position, leading to a total acquisition time of almost 12.5 hours for the 1491 spectra. The team then used in-house software to extract XRF peak intensities and produce elemental maps of the emerald. There was broad agreement between the images using XCT μ-XRF and BSE images from an SEM for the chromium-rich part of the sample but the molybdenum-rich part could not be discriminated in the μ-XRF images. The team ascribed this inability to successfully map the Mo-rich area to strong absorption of the Cu K excitation radiation by the high Cr in the sample. While certainly true, the use of the Mo L lines would, in any case, be expected to reduce S/N due to their poor inherent sensitivity, attenuation by the air path and interference from the Ar K lines due to the air path. A brief paper by Deng et al.46 described the details of their feasibility study into the use of a full field XRF-CT system using a SR beamline at the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility. On the basis of the feasibility study, the authors built an XRF-CT system and reported results for the 3D mapping of Cd and I distribution in a phantom. Interestingly, the authors concluded that sensitivity of the XRF-CT system was better than that of a conventional X-ray CT scanner. In a comprehensive report47 on XRF-CT of gold NP in a phantom, the details of the authors' in-house benchtop XRF-CT system were described in full. The system comprised a conventional tungsten–rhenium rotating anode X-ray tube operated at 120 kV and at a reduced current of only 2 mA to avoid overloading the 9 mm2 active area CdTe X-ray detector used in this setup. The authors investigated the S/N of the measured Au Kβ1 line, which was partially obscured by the Compton-scattered X-ray tube lines, whereas the Au Kα lines were completely obscured. By increasing the detection angle from 60° to 90° and finally 140°, the Compton separation was sufficient to yield the required improvement in S/N and to make feasible the detection of a 2 cm diameter 0.25% m m−1 gold NP solution in a 6.4 cm diameter water phantom using a dose of 14 mGy. The authors claimed this was the highest sensitivity reported to date for a benchtop XRF-CT system and that the work formed the basis for significant future improvements in sensitivity. Perhaps reflecting the challenges for Au K line spectroscopy with tungsten target X-ray sources in XRF-CT, Bazalova-Carter48 presented in a very readable commentary, the advantages and drawbacks of using L series XRF lines for such measurements. Although potentially high sensitivity could be expected for gold and platinum L series XRF lines, the Achilles heel remained the short penetrating depth of the XRF signals leading to the conclusion that such an approach would be limited to small animal CT.
There was just one solitary and suitable paper available to review on the subject of laboratory X-ray sources. In this paper, Wang and colleagues49 recognised the fact that the compact, low power, transmission target X-ray tube used in most hand-held XRF instruments is typically used in combination with an aluminium primary beam filter to maximise S/N in the 4 to 20 keV energy range where the majority of the XRF peaks of interest lie for the most common hand-held XRF applications. Based on this observation, the authors used a MC code to model the X-ray tube output from such a tube in which the transmission target/window assembly was a thin layer of silver on aluminium rather than on the normally used beryllium foil. The simulations indicated that a transmission target/window of 2 μm silver on 0.8 mm aluminium would provide optimum performance and that the potential cost reduction by replacing beryllium with aluminium was considerable. While this modelling is interesting, it remains to be seen if the authors move on to develop a working tube and whether that tube will deliver the expected performance including long term stability from the proposed materials heated by the electron beam within the X-ray tube.
2.3 Synchrotron and large scale facilities
Synchrotron radiation sources offer some outstanding properties, including the highest brilliance, linear polarisation in the plane of the SR storage ring, and a tuneable continuum spectrum, which is orders of magnitude more intensive than any laboratory source. The spectral distribution for X-ray experiments extends from a few 100 eV to several 100 keV, and is ideally suited to a large variety of experiments. Beam sizes can be squeezed down by X-ray optics to the nm range, opening a new field for spatially resolved elemental determinations within the smallest objects and, by applying confocal X-ray optical arrangements, also in depth. Many investigations continue to be undertaken worldwide to improve beam quality, achieving ultimate geometric beam properties and enhance data analysis and interpretation procedures for the time efficient evaluation of the large quantity of spectral data, which could easily reach hundreds of terabytes from a single experiment. Taking account of all these activities, in this section of the review greater emphasis is given to fundamental developments. The more routine use of SR sources is covered, where appropriate, in the relevant applications section.
Taking a geographic perspective, we should like to start in the Far East, featuring the work of Zhang et al.,50 who described the beamline characteristics, recent developments and a few examples of scientific progress of the hard X-ray micro-focusing beamline (BL15U1) of SSRF in Shanghai, Peoples Republic of China. This beamline is dedicated to hard X-ray micro- and nano-spectro-chemical analysis encompassing the XRF, XAS, and XRD techniques. Since its commissioning in 2009, over 25000 h have been allocated for users and about 700 proposals have been executed. In the same period, an upgrading of the experimental end-station for the convenience of the users was undertaken several times. Xie et al.51 gave an impressive overview of the latest advances in X-ray imaging used for biomedical applications at beamline BL13W1, also located at SSRF (Shanghai), covering the period from 2009 to the present. The experimental station was equipped with four sets of X-ray CCD detectors of different pixel sizes (0.19–24 pm) for on-line phase contrast imaging and μ-CT imaging with spatial resolution of 0.8 μm and 1 ms temporal resolution. An in vivo μ-CT experiment for a living insect was realised in 4 s and the authors also described an XRF detector for mapping imaging and XRF μ-CT imaging with an impressive 50 pm spatial resolution. This instrumentation was used in several experimental methods including X-ray spiral μ-CT, X-ray local-μ-CT, X-ray fast μ-CT, X-ray grating-based differential μ-CT, XRF μ-CT, and X-ray quantitative μ-CT. The ability to reconstruct CT images remotely was of great value to users, who wished to process the experimental data in their offices. The beamline has offered 23145 h of beam time and a highly respectable output from 232 research papers. From the Beijing Synchrotron Radiation facility, specifically beamline (4W1A), Fu et al.52 suggested the solution to a mechanical problem that affects SR-CT when undertaken on a nanoscale. Frequently, mechanical errors in the manufacturing and assembly of the sample stage and thermal expansion during extended scanning periods causes axial vibrations that degrade measurements by imposing artifacts in the nano-CT images. Obviously, these artefacts could have a serious effect on the images of samples with complicated axial structures. The results showed that the developed method could handle random axial vibrations and needed neither measurements on a calibration phantom nor additional calibration scanning. In their paper, Cao et al.53 showed that the presence of metal inclusions containing Cu, Fe and Zn played a critical role in damage in large potassium dihydrogen phosphate optical elements caused by UV lasers. The analysis was performed by μ-SRXRF, and led to the conclusion that the metals in these inclusions were reduced quickly by interaction with the UV laser and the associated expansion was the cause of the damage. Moving on to South Korea, the sub-micrometer resolution hard X-ray microprobe system of BL8C at the Pohang Light Source was described in a paper by Sung et al.54 Because the gap of the in-vacuum undulator could be switched reproducibly, the resultant intense and brilliant hard X-ray could be used for XRF and XAFS experiments. For high spatial resolution microprobe experiments the millimeter sized X-ray beam could be focused to a micrometer size by means of a Kirkpatrick–Baez mirror system. The performance of this system was demonstrated by the combination of μ-XRF imaging and μ-XAFS of a beetle wing, indicating that the trace element distribution and chemical state of a complex structure could be measured. Last stop in the Far East is India; a new multipurpose X-ray reflectometry station was developed and augmented at the micro-focus beamline BL-16 of Indus-2 SR source as described by Das et al.55 The authors presented synchronous measurements of specular XRR and GI-XRF from thin layered structures and the performance of the reflectometer was evaluated by analysing several thin layered structures, which had different surface interface properties. The results revealed in-depth information and demonstrated the immense potential of a single reflectometer that combined measurements by XRR and GI-XRF. Using the same SR source, Mirji et al.56 reported fundamental data by determining the K-L total vacancy transfer probabilities of some 3D elements, including Cr, Cu and Zn. Excitation energies for these elements were 6.5, 10 and 11 keV respectively and the K X-ray photons were detected with a SDD having an energy resolution of 130 eV at 5.9 keV. By measuring the K-shell fluorescence yield and K X-ray intensity ratio, the K-L vacancy transfer probabilities were determined and compared with theoretical values and other experimental data. From Australia, Dimmock et al.57 reported the development of a Geant4 Monte Carlo simulation of the XRF microprobe (XFM) end-station at the Australian Synchrotron. The simulation was required to optimise the scan configuration and reconstruction algorithms and as a part of this approach a Gaussian beam model was developed. The observed spectral distributions calculated in the famous 384 pixel Maia detector, positioned in the standard backscatter configuration, were compared with those obtained from experiments performed at three different incident energies of 18.5, 11.0 and 6.8 keV. Calculations for the scatter and fluorescence regions demonstrated that the simulations successfully reproduced the scatter distributions; discrepancies were shown to occur only in the multiple-scatter tail of the Compton continuum. Synchrotron radiation-XRF allows low elemental concentrations to be measured within a sample, which was demonstrated by Bewer,58 whose interest was in maintaining biological and medical relevance of results by an emphasis on the in situ measurements of localised elemental concentrations. Because of the high sample throughput of third generation synchrotron light sources, a rapid method of quantification was needed and the author described in detail the physical FPs required to provide accurate estimates of concentration as validated by the analysis of reference standards. A fundamental problem in the great diversity of research performed at SR facilities is the lack of knowledge of the incident beam spectrum. This was investigated in a paper by Tolhurst et al.,59 who suggested a method that relied on replacing the polychromatic spectrum in a standard fundamental parameters analysis with a set of effective monochromatic photon beams. Individual beams were associated with each element and could be described by an analytical function allowing extension to elements not included in the necessary calibration measurements. This method is of general interest as the idea is equally applicable to other X-ray sources. From the Advanced Photon Source (APS) in Argonne (Illinois USA), the contribution of Heald60 discussed strategies and limitations for fluorescence detection of XAFS at high flux beamlines, concluding that inelastic scattering places a fundamental limit on detection. This limitation can be accommodated when dealing with an incoming flux of 1013 photons per s by a combination of filters with slits and solid state detectors to provide an optimised system of a good performance capable of dealing with a total count rate of an impressive 107 Hz. In another contribution from the APS, Gursoy et al.61 proposed a penalised maximum-likelihood estimation to perform hyperspectral (spatio-spectral) image reconstruction for XRF tomography. The approach minimised a Poisson based negative log-likelihood of the observed photon counts using a penalty term that had the effect of encouraging local continuity of model parameter estimates in both spatial and spectral dimensions simultaneously. The performance of the reconstruction method was demonstrated by experimental data acquired at microprobe beam line 13-ID-E from a seed of Arabidopsis thaliana. The resulting estimates of the element distribution using the proposed approach showed a significantly better reconstruction quality than the conventional analytical inversion approach. The high data compression factor reduced the data acquisition time remarkably. This technique provided the capability to reconstruct tomographically full ED spectra without compromising reconstruction artefacts that would impact on the interpretation. In the last APS paper mentioned here, Radke et al.62 dealt with the quantitative measurements of gas and liquid distributions using simultaneous XRF and radiography of both phases in an atomic coaxial spray. The beam of 10.1 keV energy excited the argon gas and two tracer elements seeded in the liquid stream. Simultaneous time-resolved X-ray radiography combined with time-averaged dual-tracer fluorescence measurements enabled corrections for the re-absorption of XRF photons for the accurate, line-of-sight averaged measurement of the distribution of the gas liquid phases originating from the atomising nozzle. In a more applied research application, Bock et al.63 used the Brookhaven National Synchrotron Light Source NSLS-II to study the cathode solubility of batteries which can lead to a decrease in unpredictable battery behavior. This was caused by transition
metal deposition on the negative electrode such that it no longer supported high currents. Negative electrodes from cells containing vanadium oxide or phosphorous oxide were analysed by μ-XRF and μ-XAS to determine the oxidation state of the metal centres resident in the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI). Based on the empirical findings, a model for the location of the metal ions in the SEI and their role in influencing the lithium ion mobility at the electrode surfaces was proposed. Finally, from the European Synchrotron Radiation facility ESRF, Martinez-Criado et al.64 reported a new state-of-the-art beamline ID16B for hard X-ray nano-analysis developed within the framework of the ESRF Phase I upgrade program. Based on a canted undulator source, this beamline provides hard X-ray nano-beams optimised mainly for spectroscopic applications including the combination of XRF, XRD, X-ray excited optical luminescence, XAS, and 2D/3D X-ray imaging techniques. Its end-station offered a spatial resolution of about 50 nm, a larger and more flexible facility for in situ experiments and monochromatic nano-beams tunable over a wider energy range of 5–70 keV. A new versatile procedure that exploits the synergy between electron microscopy and μ-SRXRD and μ-SRXRF was presented in the paper by Fahrnbauer et al.,65 which discussed the structure of the novel sulfide telluride, Pb8Sb8S15Te5. Suitable crystallites of unknown compounds could be identified by TEM and relocated and centered in a micro-focused SR beam by means of SRXRF scans. The refined structure model was confirmed by simulating high resolution TEM images of the same crystallite. The structural data were precise enough for bond-valence calculations to be undertaken, which confirmed the disordered atom distribution. The 155 m long beamline named “Nanoscopium” of Synchrotron SOLEIL in France is dedicated to scanning hard X-ray nano-probe techniques. Somogyi et al.66 stated in her contribution the aim to reach less than 100 nm resolution in the 5–20 keV energy range, thus creating a beamline for multi-technique imaging by scanning and tomography. These techniques included XRF microscopy, absorption, differential phase contrast and dark field contrast to provide simultaneous information on the elemental distribution, speciation and sample morphology. Finally it is worth mentioning that on the day of the 2016 summer solstice, June 21, MAX IV, the new synchrotron facility in Lund, Sweden, was inaugurated. Cerenius et al.,67 reported in detail the new standards in terms of emittance, best possible brilliance and coherence. MAX IV comprises two storage rings: one 1.5 GeV ring of 96 m circumference and the other 3 GeV of 528 m circumference as well as a LINAC 3 GeV, which is 300 m long. This facility has outstanding potential for ultrafast experiments approaching the femtosecond range and will allow studies of photo-induced processes in the pump-probe mode because the X-ray pulses can be synchronised to the frequency of molecular vibrations using an optical laser as the probe. As well as FemtoMAX, there are three more beamlines of interest – NanoMAX (an undulator-based hard X-ray nano-probe, 5–30 keV, with beam sizes down to 10 nm), BioMAX (of interest for macromolecular crystallography with high brilliance X-ray beams from 5 to 25 keV and 20 × 5 μm2 beam size) and finally BALDER (a hard X-ray spectroscopy beamline for EXAFS, NEXAFS and XRF dedicated for catalyst research, environmental research and biomaterials). Several more dedicated beamlines were described in the author's contribution, which is of interest for applications involving imaging, SAXS, RIXS, XPS and powder diffraction.
2.4 TXRF and related techniques
In a review article Pashkova and Revenko68 surveyed the application of TXRF spectrometry for the analysis of aqueous samples. Details of the main stages of the analytical procedures were described. Special attention was given to the sample preparation procedures, current instrumentation and potential error sources when analyzing water samples of varying compositions. Examples of matrix effects and spectral interferences as well as the analytical figures of merit were given.
A set of papers dealing with more fundamental questions is presented as follows. In an interesting paper by Ma et al.69 the remarkable success and the advantages of TXRF were mentioned, stating also that simultaneous quantitative on-line analysis of trace heavy elements is urgently required by dynamic environmental monitoring and management. The authors came to the conclusion that TXRF had the potential in this application domain, however it called for an on-line analysis scheme as well as a robust and rapid quantification method. The on-line analysis scheme included an automatic pipetting device taking a small volume from a flow cell then depositing it directly onto the sample carrier, followed by the drying process, measuring and collecting the spectral data. As a final important step also the cleaning of the carriers was included in that on-line TXRF analysis system. The so called intelligent quantification method, collected characteristic XRF lines of all existing elements and a pre-estimated background curve in the whole spectrum were used to approximate the measured spectrum. A novel hybrid algorithm was designed to solve the curve fitting problem, with offline global optimisation and fast on-line computing. Experimental results verified that simultaneous quantification of trace heavy metals was realised with the on-line TXRF analysis platform and high measurement precision was obtained. Floor et al.70 dealt with the assessment of the components contributing to the combined uncertainty budget associated with TXRF measurements. The elements Cu and Fe were added to different spiked and natural water samples and analysed by TXRF spectrometry. The results showed that an uncertainty estimate based solely on the counting statistics of the analyte XRF line was not a realistic estimation of the overall uncertainty. Sample deposition repeatability and the relative XRF sensitivity between the analyte and the internal standard were important contributions to the uncertainty budget. The uncertainty due to the instrumental repeatability and sensitivity factor could be estimated and implemented in the software, however the sample deposition repeatability varied significantly from sample to sample. Beside the lack of theoretical predictions for sample deposition the uncertainty budget could be based on repeated measurements using different reflectors, resulting in a simple approach to estimate that error. The implemented measurement procedures and the developed uncertainty estimation processes were validated from the agreement with results obtained from ICP-OES and/or reference/calculated values. A few key techniques, including TXRF, were compared in a critical paper by Polignano et al.71 for their ability to detect different metal and organic impurities in silicon. Copper, Fe, Mo and Te were chosen as examples of contaminants of different diffusion coefficients and solubility. The following techniques were compared: TXRF, recombination and generation lifetime measurement, deep level transient spectroscopy and capacitance versus voltage measurements. Elements with low diffusion coefficients were found to be critical as even a low dose resulted in non-negligible concentration in the device region, but the sensitivity per unit area for these elements was difficult to achieve with TXRF spectrometry. In the case of Cu contaminant, which has a high diffusion coefficient, it could only be measured at the oxide silicon interface by TOF-SIMS. An elegant way to study a fundamental problem in TXRF is the sample absorption shading of the gracing angle incident beam due to the sample morphology after drying. These absorption effects in TXRF are important in particular if external calibration is to be applied. Menzel et al.72 described the use of a colour X-ray camera (CXC) that enabled spatially and energy resolved XRF analysis. The absorption of the primary beam was directly visualised for μL-droplets and an array of pL-droplets printed on a silicon wafer. As expected, deposits that were hit by the primary beam first, shaded subsequent droplets, leading to a diminished XRF signal. The shading effect was quantified with enhanced precision making use of the sub-pixel analysis, which improved the spatial resolution of the camera. Measured results were compared to simulated ones showing that they matched very well within a deviation less than 10%. These errors in quantification by primary beam absorption could be accounted for in a more accurate manner. Different excitation modes for the TXRF analysis of light elements (Z ≥ 6) were compared by Prost et al.73 Elements from carbon and higher Z were analysed using a vacuum chamber that enabled the attachment of different X-ray tubes and detectors. Comparison was made of two water cooled high power X-ray tubes with chromium- and copper target and one low power air-cooled tube with a thin beryllium window, that allowed the Mo L radiation at 2.3 keV to pass through. Each setup used a SDD, with an ultrathin polymer window of 300 nm, for the analysis of standard solutions containing light elements. Detection limits were calculated and compared for the three excitation modes. It was shown that an 80 mm2 active area SDD with 25 μm beryllium window and excitation with an air cooled 40 W low power rhodium anode tube in a vacuum chamber were capable of exciting and detecting light elements efficiently. Elements from Na upwards in the periodic table could be analysed with detection limits in the ng range. A novel TXRF spectrometer, capable of performing the analysis of all elements from C to U by either K or L lines, was presented in a paper by Wobrauschek et al.74 from the Atominstitut group in Vienna. The extension of the detectable element range was achieved at low energies by excitation with a chromium-anode X-ray tube and with a special SDD with an ultrathin polymer window of 300 nm thickness. In the medium energy region (5–18 keV) a rhodium-anode X-ray tube was used. The two X-ray tubes were easily exchangeable, as they were mounted on gliding stages moving on precision rails to reach the entrance window of the vacuum chamber. The air cooled tubes, each having 35 W maximum power, were mounted together with the Peltier cooled SDD on a compact table top vacuum chamber providing a compact TXRF spectrometer with minimal external services. For easy user operation, a fully remote controlled sample changer for 12 specimens – arranged horizontally – was mounted inside the vacuum chamber, providing a sample lifting system for sample carriers of various thicknesses into the measuring position in total reflection condition. Detection limits were given for some elements. In particular; for C 150 ng, F 12 ng and Na 3 ng using chromium X-ray tube excitation; and for Sr, excited by the rhodium anode X-ray tube, an impressive 90 pg could be achieved. With 10–20 μL of sample volume, extrapolated detection limits in the ng g−1 range were achieved in terms of concentration. Dhara et al.75 presented an interesting method for the determination of In concentration levels >1 ng mL−1 in heavy water samples. Excitation was by means of a tungsten target X-ray tube coupled to a multilayer primary reflector with a bandpass covering the range 25–35 keV. Using 2 μL samples of heavy water, detection limits for In were found to be 1 ng mL−1, which was sufficiently good for this analytical task.
New methods of sample preparation have been developed to enhance the performance of TXRF spectrometry. The very active group of Misra76 reported the use of TXRF spectrometry for direct analysis of sintered and green (U,Th)O2 samples in different forms, e.g. pellets, powders and microspheres without sample dissolution. The methodology involved the transfer of a few nano-grams of the sample onto the reflector by gently rubbing the samples across the polished surface. The second technique involved taking an aliquot of slurry in collodion to the carrier, and drying it to create a thin film. Both approaches minimised the matrix effects and U determination was made with respect to Th acting as an internal standard. The TXRF results were within 5% of the expected values, also determined by biamperometry. The authors suggested this method could be extended to the determination of Pu, Th and U in other nuclear fuel materials. Evertz et al.77 reported the elemental analysis of lithium ion battery degradation products. The typical anode was of graphite, allowing transition metals that were electro deposited on a graphite anode to be investigated by TXRF spectrometry, ICP-OES and ICP-MS. Surprisingly the proposed method did not involve sample dissolution, because after cycling, each electrode was carefully washed with dimethylcarbonate to rinse electrolyte residues from the electrode surface. The TXRF results were compared with those of the standard methods with respect to recovery rate and detection limits. The authors found that TXRF yielded recoveries of 90–100% and was suitable for the analysis of battery aging products. A key benefit was avoiding the time consuming acidic digestion procedures, needed by the standard methods. A Polish–Spanish cooperation resulted in an interesting paper by Sitko et al.78 proposing a dispersive micro-solid phase extraction (DMSPE) followed by TXRF spectrometry for multi-elemental ultra-trace determination of metal ions and arsenic species in water samples. The key improvement was a novel adsorbent synthesised by grafting 3-mercaptopropyl trimethoxysilane onto a graphene oxide (GO) surface. Mercapto-modified graphene oxide (GO-SH) could be used for the quantitative adsorption of cadmium, cobalt, copper, lead and nickel ions. The suspension of GO-SH was injected into the water sample, then after filtration, the GO-SH nano-sheets with adsorbed metal ions were redispersed in a small volume of internal standard solution and deposited onto a quartz reflector. The high enrichment factor of 150 enabled detection limits of 0.11, 0.078, 0.079, 0.064, 0.054, and 0.083 ng mL−1 for CoII, NiII, CuII, AsII, CdII and PbII respectively. Such low detection limits were obtained using a benchtop TXRF system with a low power molybdenum anode X-ray tube and a SDD. Lupina et al.79 reported residual metallic contamination of transferred CVD graphene. Integration of graphene with silicon microelectronics is very appealing by offering a potentially broad range of new functionalities. Alternative materials to be integrated with the silicon platform must conform to stringent purity standards. Graphene layers grown on copper foils by CVD and transferred to silicon wafers by wet etching and electrochemical delamination methods with respect to residual sub-monolayer metallic contaminations were investigated. Regardless of the transfer method and associated cleaning scheme, TOF-SIMS and TXRF indicated that the graphene sheets were contaminated with residual metals (Cu, Fe) with a concentration exceeding 1013 atoms per cm2. These metal impurities appeared to be partially mobile upon thermal treatment, as shown by depth profiling and reduction of the minority charge carrier diffusion length in the silicon substrate. As residual metallic impurities can significantly alter electronic and electrochemical properties of graphene and can severely impede the process of integration with silicon microelectronics, the authors conclude that further progress in synthesis, handling, and cleaning was required to advance electronic and optoelectronic applications. Romero et al.80 introduced graphene membranes as novel pre-concentration platforms for chromium speciation by TXRF. Fabrication of unmodified graphene membranes for their application as selective sorptive platforms of hexavalent chromium (CrVI) were described for the first time. Multilayer graphene membranes were synthesized by drop-casting of graphene oxide (GO) onto a glass substrate followed by mild thermal reduction. As-prepared membranes were formatted to fit the measurement area of a TXRF spectrometer. Adsorption isotherm models and characterisation by TOF-SIMS indicated that adsorption sites on graphene membranes were uniformly distributed and bind CrVI as a monolayer, both by electrostatic interaction and chemisorption. The authors found that graphene membranes displayed high flexibility and became conical-shaped when immersed into stirred liquid samples. When combining graphene membrane pre-concentration and TXRF, a detection limit of 0.08 μg L−1 for CrVI was obtained. Repeatability expressed as relative standard deviation was 3% (N = 5). Two certified reference materials, i.e. CASS-4 seawater and NWTM-27.2 lake water, were used for testing accuracy. The authors concluded that the proposed method was simple, solvent-free and sensitive, being suitable for Cr speciation of water including high salinity samples. The same group81 applied a new sample preparation method successfully to the analysis of several matrices (milk, soil, sediment, cutaneous powder). Samples containing Sb and Bi were deposited onto quartz reflectors coated with immobilised palladium NP (Pd NPs), where the coating was a rather complicated chemical procedure. As a result of the high catalytic activity of the nanostructured film, trapping could be performed at ambient temperature with good efficiency. Limits of detection were 2.3 and 0.70 μg L−1 for Sb and Bi, respectively and enrichment factors 534 and 192, respectively. An interesting collodion film sample holder was tested by Kunimura et al.82 The spectrum background was low when using this sample holder, and a Cr detection limit obtained with this sample holder was comparable to that obtained with a diamond-like carbon coated quartz glass sample holder. A river water sample was measured on the collodion film sample holder, and 10.0 μg L−1 of Cr and 5.1 μg L−1 of Mn were detected. The authors concluded that collodion film sample holder could be used as a disposable sample holder for trace elemental analysis using the portable TXRF spectrometer.
Some papers this year dealt with related methods, such as GI-XRF and GE-XRF. For current and future electronic devices thin high-k layers and stacks as well as ultra-shallow dopant profiles are the technologically relevant nano-scaled systems. The characterisation of such systems presented several metrological challenges as stated in a paper by Chen et al.83 The authors suggested that GI-XRF in combination with XRR could significantly contribute to the characterisation of nano-scaled samples by improved modeling of the X-ray standing wave (XSW) field induced by the incident X-rays, which can also be confirmed by this reviewer. The group benefitted from the availability of an in-house radio-metrically calibrated instrumentation of the Physikalisch Technische Bundesanstalt, allowing for reference free quantitative in-depth analysis. The capabilities of the combined XRR-GI-XRF method were shown for several nano-scaled systems such as ultra-shallow Al dopant in Si, HfO2 and Al2O3 nano-laminates and self-assembled multilayers of organic tetralactam macrocycles. Kayser et al.84 reported NP characterisation by means of scanning free GE-XRF. As the applications of nanocrystals strongly depend on the physical dimensions (shape and size) and elemental composition the authors demonstrated that GE-XRF was an element-sensitive technique offering the potential for a reliable and accurate determination of the morphology of NPs deposited on a flat substrate. The composition, shape and average size of NPs could be determined in short time intervals, minimising their exposure to radiation. The authors emphasised that their scanning-free GE-XRF technique allowed in situ investigations of the NP systems thanks to the penetration properties of both the probe X-ray beam and the emitted XRF signal. Solid surfaces suspended in critical aqueous binary mixtures containing hydrophilic salt were recently found to exhibit anomalous interactions, and a possible mechanism was provided by the asymmetric solvation preferences of weakly and strongly hydrophilic cations and anions, respectively. Witala et al.85 reported microscopic segregation of hydrophilic ions in critical binary aqueous solvents. The authors addressed the mechanism by studying interfacial ion distributions in a critical binary mixture of water and 2,6-dimethylpyridine containing potassium chloride at temperatures below the lower critical point, using GI-XRF spectrometry from the liquid–vapour interface. The data provided direct and unambiguous experimental evidence for microscopic segregation of hydrophilic ions in critical aqueous binary mixtures, thereby supporting the important role of asymmetric ion solvation in the above mentioned anomalous force. However, the experimental data were only qualitatively reproduced by state-of-the-art theoretical calculations, demonstrating the need for a microscopic theoretical model that included asymmetric ion solvation. Tu et al.86 studied Mg–Co–Zr system by GI-XRF and GE-XRF analysis. Not very surprisingly the authors found that the introduction of a slit in the direction of the detector improved the angular resolution by a factor of two and significantly improved the sensitivity of the technique for the chemical characterisation of the buried interfaces. By observing the intensity variations of the Mg Kα and Co Lα characteristic emissions as a function of the incident (GI mode) or detection (GE mode) angle, it could be shown that the interfaces of the Si/[Mg/Co/Zr](×30) multilayer were abrupt, whereas in the Si/[Mg/Zr/Co](×30) multilayer a strong intermixing occurred at the Co-on-Zr interfaces. An explanation of this opposite behaviour of the Co-on-Zr and Zr-on-Co interfaces was given by the calculation of the mixing enthalpies of the Co–Mg, Co–Zr and Mg–Zr systems, which showed that the Co–Zr system presents a negative value and the other two systems present positive values.
2.5 X-ray detectors
The use of pixellated array X-ray detectors in a variety of X-ray imaging applications was again an active topic during the current review year although the reported research was more about X-ray imaging at high count rates in high energy physics configurations rather than laboratory EDXRF spectrometry and imaging. Nowak et al.87 described a so-called colour X-ray camera based on a 12.7 × 12.7 mm2 active area pnCCD sensor chip comprising 48 × 48 μm2 pixels in a 264 × 264 matrix. The sensor was mounted in a vacuum housing with a 50 μm-thick beryllium entrance window. Interestingly, the thickness of the pnCCD was 450 μm, which provided excellent X-ray stopping power (95% efficiency in the range from 3 to 10 keV – the lower energy limit governed by the entrance window). When the sensor chip was Peltier cooled, a very useful energy resolution of <160 eV at 5.9 keV was achieved and the frame rate for the CCD was 1 kHz, making this an attractive 2D energy dispersive detector suitable for XRF investigations. A 1:1 poly-capillary optic was used to couple the detector to the sample emission spot, allowing a relatively wide view of specimen regions with good enough counting statistics to perform real-time element mapping. The effectiveness of this X-ray detector/camera was demonstrated using SRXRF, PIXE and a laboratory EDXRF setup with a positional resolution of 45 μm being claimed by the authors across the full field view on the sample of 12 × 12 mm2 and of 5.4 μm when coupled to an 8:1 magnification optic with a viewing field of 1.5 × 1.5 mm2. The initial X-ray characterisation was reported88 of a pixellated Si(PIN) photodiode array of 48 × 48 sensors, each 130 × 130 μm2 and 500 μm thick. The sensor array was coupled to a versatile custom ASIC readout system, which was described in detail, and an application-limiting energy resolution of 661 eV at 8 keV was reported although an impressive MHz count rate could be achieved with this system designed for picosecond time resolved XRF and XRD experiments on SR beamlines. Also designed for picosecond X-ray imaging in SR X-ray experiments, a microchannel-based X-ray detector was described89 that had <100 ps time resolution and that could be fabricated in large sizes and could process 107 events per cm2 but which had no energy dispersive capability and was only suitable for high speed imaging at millimetre scale spatial resolution. More conventionally, a pixellated 300 μm thick silicon sensor array of 256 × 256 pixels on a 55 μm pitch was bump bonded to a commercially available Timepix3 readout ASIC chip.90 Details were reported of the interesting pixel by pixel energy calibration and an energy resolution of 720 eV at 10.5 keV was achieved. This device was well suited to time resolved X-ray studies as it was able to process up to 40 million hits per cm2 per second and a minimum time gap in the photon arrival time of 1.56 ns. Although not designed for energy resolution, an avalanche photodiode linear array of 64 pixels, each of 100 × 200 mm2 and on a pitch of 150 μm, was described91 and reported to be able to deliver a pulse-pair resolution time of 1 ns. Such performance made it suitable only for a limited range of SR X-ray applications and its depletion depth of only 10 μm restricts it to low energy X-ray detection only. In contrast, the segmented silicon strip detector and readout ASIC, described by Wiacek et al.92 provided an energy resolution of 380 eV at 8.04 keV and was claimed to be suitable for use in an EDXRD spectrometer down to an energy of 1.49 keV. Turning briefly to the exotic area of X-ray laser instruments, a hybrid pixel detector was characterised93 particularly for its very high count rate capability and high radiation tolerance expected to be needed in X-ray detection experiments on the European X-ray Free Electron Laser. Blaj et al.94 reviewed in detail the latest generation of high rate X-ray imaging cameras in development for the Linac Coherent Light Source at Stamford, CA, USA. Of particular interest was the custom ASICs that provided high frame rates (120 Hz to 10 kHz) and a high degree of programmable flexibility for the readout system although the energy resolution of the detector system was reported to be only around 1.6 keV at 7.5 keV, which was deemed suitable for the next stage of X-ray measurement science on these high energy physics machines. An interesting paper by Yefanov and co-workers95 addressed the problems of aligning multiple array detectors on larger scale X-ray experiments and of knowing the relative positions of all pixels in the array. The proposed method used a serial X-ray crystal diffraction method that was claimed to be simple and robust and to provide the full geometric data for the pixels in the tiled arrays increasingly used in SR X-ray experiments. Interestingly, a detector array with a difference was described96 in which an array of 15 small cylindrical proportional counters was used to cover the whole hemisphere of X-ray emission from a sample. The detector array had an overall energy resolution of 20% at 5.9 keV and an achievable total count rate of 106 cps. Although offering much reduced cost and complexity, this array offers very low performance in every other respect and is unlikely to generate further adoption. As with all X-ray detectors, an understanding of the charge generation and collection within a pixellated detector is important in the interpretation of data from the detector and in improving many aspects of the detector and readout technologies. A software framework was developed97 from the Geant4 software package for the MC modelling of the response from pixel detectors and their associated readout electronics. The authors applied the new model to the MEDIPIX readout technology, which is compatible with pixellated sensors made from a variety of materials, and found good agreement with data collected from an XRF setup.
Despite the already extensive deployment of commercial silicon drift detectors (SDD), research continued during the review period into thicker and less expensive detector designs and into more exotic devices. Matsuura and colleagues98 continued their work into so-called gated SDD (GSDD) in the search for thicker and cheaper SDD sensors, especially for use in hand-held XRF systems applied to measurements of heavy elements in environmental field investigations. The GSDD was stated to have a much simpler design leading to fewer and simpler semiconductor processing steps and, thus, a lower sensor fabrication cost. An initial GSDD of thickness 0.625 mm and active area 18 mm2 was produced and yielded an encouraging energy resolution of 145 eV at 5.9 keV when operated at −38 °C. The design concepts and electrical simulations of thicker (1.5 mm) and much larger (15 cm diameter) GSDDs were also reported by the same author99 but those devices would need significantly higher bias potential, which could have negative effects on leakage current, energy resolution and cost of the overall detector module. The significant advantages of such thicker and larger sensors for higher energy X-ray detection suggest that such designs are likely to proceed to working sensors sooner rather than later. Aurola and colleagues100 also studied less expensive and low noise semiconductor sensor fabrication techniques and proposed new designs for future planar and pixellated101 SDDs based on their simulations. To date, no actual devices have been fabricated or tested. An interesting and novel large-scale SDD designed for very high geometric collection efficiency of low energy X-rays was developed for use in SRXRF beamlines by a multi-institute Italian team and reported by Bufon et al.102 The team's previous configuration used eight conventional SDDs, with a total active area of 230 mm2, arranged in an annular geometry that collected X-rays from only 4% of the available solid angle. The new design, which was specific to an XRF beamline at the Elettra, Trieste SR source, incorporated four trapezoidal multi-sensor SDDs and was claimed to cover an impressive 40% of the available solid angle and to have an active area of 912 mm2. Each of the novel trapezoidal SDD sensors comprised 20 square and 8 triangular pixels with an individual active area of 9.5 mm2 and 4.75 mm2 respectively. An initial single sensor unit prototype was built in which the readout electronics comprised custom ASICs, high speed ADCs and a controlling FPGA all closely coupled within the measurement head in their experimental chamber. Initial measurements with a detector head temperature of −10 °C yielded an energy resolution of 217 eV at 5.9 keV and the ability to detect F K radiation. Based on these initial promising results the full four-head device was fabricated and its energy resolution was reported103 to be 158 eV at 5.9 keV and O K X-rays were capable of being detected. Energy resolution at low energy (125 eV at Mg K) was limited by the analogue multiplexing electronics and future improvements to digitise fully the readout electronics were expected to yield a significant energy resolution improvement at and below 1 keV. As it stands, however, this system already allowed much shorter acquisition times that were particularly useful for XRF imaging of sensitive biological specimens.
So-called Swept Charge Devices (SCD) are pixellated devices closely related to CCDs and while of limited interest to laboratory-based XRF systems due to their very shallow depletion depth and consequently very low X-ray stopping power, they remain of interest for compact, low power detectors used in space missions. The development of a comprehensive model to simulate charge transport in SCDs and to better understand the spectrum response of an SCD was developed by Athiray et al.104 The resulting model enabled the authors to describe all the features in an X-ray spectrum from an SCD detector sensor and to develop more robust calibration protocols. Additional reports105,106 investigated charge transfer effects before and after irradiation of an SCD to better understand the deleterious effects on detector response when bombarded under the challenging conditions considered to be more representative of those experienced on planetary space missions.
Developments in the area of cryogenic detectors remained muted during the current review period. A review107 limited to transition edge sensor (TES) micro-calorimeter systems specifically in SR facilities seems to underline the very niche nature of these devices nowadays. Their ultra-high energy resolution remains attractive for low energy XRF and other X-ray spectrometry modes, but the challenges of fabricating sufficiently large active area devices remain large and such systems are likely to remain in niche and exotic application areas that can afford the luxury and infrastructure costs that accompany them. In a valiant attempt, once more, to enable a pixellated array of TES sensors to be deployed on an electron microscope, Maehata et al.108 developed a compact dilution refrigerator claimed to be suited for that purpose. Their split cooling design was more compact when installed on the electron column than some of the previous commercially available coolers but it remains to be seen if this new approach can breathe new life into this mostly abandoned area of ultra-high energy resolution systems for deployment on laboratory-based electron microscopes. Superconducting tunnel junction (STJ) sensors are an alternative to TES micro-calorimeters but STJ sensors also have limited active area, leading Fujii and co-workers109,110 to design and fabricate a new STJ sensor array comprising up to 1000 pixels in an effective 3D arrangement that yielded an active area of 10 mm2 with minimal interference from sensor lead wiring. The reported energy resolution of the detector array was 23.8 eV at C Kα (277 eV), which is far higher than that of a TES device at <10 eV but adequate for the XAFS application described by the authors. In addition to the complexity of the sensor array itself in a pixellated STJ sensor unit, the signal processing demands are substantial, as shown by Warburton et al.,111 who also described in detail how their electronic modules could tame the complexity and provide high quality data for X-ray spectroscopists using STJ sensor array detectors.
There was only one paper available to review on other detector materials and that reported112 the design, fabrication and initial electrical and X-ray evaluation of an indium arsenide avalanche photodiode sensor. This narrow band gap device had to be cooled using liquid nitrogen and when operated at the optimum reverse bias an encouraging energy resolution of 401 eV at 5.9 keV was obtained. While the X-ray stopping power and energy resolution are attractive for higher energy X-ray applications, the cooling and other operating limitations are a real obstacle to further development and deployment.
2.6 Quantification and data processing
The number of publications in which chemometric techniques were applied to quantitative calibration in XRF spectrometry was reduced in the current review year compared with previous years. The challenge of extracting the complex L-series intensities from EDXRF spectra of REE was addressed by Kirsanov et al.,113 who used PLS regression to predict the concentrations of 6 REE (Ce, Gd, La, Nd, Pr and Sm) in solutions containing mixtures of those elements. Measurements were made with commercially available EDXRF and TXRF laboratory instruments, the EDXRF system using a rhodium target X-ray tube operated at 15 kV and the TXRF unit used a molybdenum target tube operated at 50 kV. Measurement times were 600 s for EDXRF spectra and 300 s for TXRF spectra. The authors commented on the poor S/N observed in EDXRF compared with TXRF, which should come as no surprise when the EDXRF measurements were of liquids in a conventional sample cup and where no primary beam filtration was used in an attempt to reduce background under the peaks of interest. Notwithstanding the lack of background optimisation, the spectrum overlaps in the REE K line XRF spectra are considerable and need effective peak deconvolution methods to extract net cps for quantitative analysis. The authors used 40 calibration samples covering the concentration range 10−6 to 10−3 mmol L−1 of REE mixtures and the instrument software with straightforward linear regression to establish calibration curves and then compared the results on 10 validation samples to those from their proposed method using PLS regression. In the case of the EDXRF data, the PLS regression gave reduced errors of estimation that were typically 2 to 5 times better than when using simple linear regression and for Gd errors were reduced by an order of magnitude. In the case of the TXRF results, PLS regression gave the same error of estimation for Ce and Pr but a factor of 5 improvement for the other 4 REE. Based on the results, the authors concluded that simple EDXRF spectrometry combined with PLS regression could provide equivalent precision and accuracy to TXRF spectrometry. This conclusion seems at odds with the existing literature in which TXRF spectrometry typically gives significantly lower detection limits and a much lower spectrum background. One possible contributing factor to the reported limited performance of the TXRF method was that the operating X-ray tube current was only 0.6 mA, which is far below the tens of mA typically used in laboratory TXRF systems. A comprehensive MC simulation program, MCSHAPE, developed at the University of Bologna was impressively extended114 to include the full evolution of the photon polarisation during interactions in the sample. Such a modelling tool will be of particular interest to those performing X-ray experiments at SR beamlines where the degree of polarisation of the incident beam may be very high and to those designing and optimising laboratory EDXRF systems in which X-ray tubes and polarising optics are used to improve S/B and detection limits. Although not used for quantitation per se, the use of Independent Components Analysis was proposed115 as an alternative to PCA and discriminant analysis for classification of base enamels according to their XRF analysis. The only benefit to quantitative analysis that this new algorithm might offer is a more effective way of automatically identifying the closest reference samples whose coefficients could be used to improve quantitative analysis of a matched sample.
Chuparina and co-workers116 reported a comprehensive study of the spectrum background resulting from instrument and matrix effects in WDXRF measurements for nine low Z elements in plant material samples. Synthetic samples were prepared using simple compounds mixed with pure cellulose then formed into pressed pellets on a boric acid backing and measured using a conventional, commercially available WDXRF spectrometer operated under typical conditions for low Z element measurements. The authors used a “design of experiments” approach and a 1-factor ANOVA analysis to assess results and described in detail their calculation models and assignments of the most important contributions to each background under the measured Kα line of the element of interest. The authors concluded that the most expedient way to correct for the spectrum background from any source was to use a synthetic sample of pure cellulose on a boric acid back as a blank and to measure the background from it on only one side of an analyte peak. Pavlinskii117 also considered some of the problems encountered in the measurement of low Z elements by XRF spectrometry and investigated, in particular, the effect of increasing energy of primary photons. The author reminded readers that the excitation of low Z element XRF intensity is increasingly dominated by Auger and photo electrons at the expense of lower excitation by Compton recoil electrons as the X-ray tube kV increases. Notwithstanding this reminder, it is usually the case that empirical corrections and modern day FP calculation models take these effects into account, although in the latter case the complete modelling of all photon and electron excitation modes may not be explicitly incorporated. In a rather obvious study118 of WDXRF spectrometry of fluorine-containing solid materials, it was established that while there was no chemical shift of F K lines observed in a variety of materials, there were significant absorption effects from higher Z components of the sample. The authors, unsurprisingly, found that grinding and pressing sample pellets greatly increased F K line intensity and that a correction for spectrum overlap by the L series lines from Fe and Mn was essential to improve accuracy of F determination. An EDXRF spectrometry study119 established that the use of various Compton scatter corrections for sample form and matrix effects in the determination of Hg and Pb in oxide mixtures also worked for their system in which a somewhat potent 5 Ci Am241 radioisotope source was used. The authors confirmed the accuracy of their EDXRF results by comparing them to results from a WDXRF method, although this is to be expected given the long standing use of Compton ratio corrections in a huge variety of successful XRF analyses. An interesting paper120 investigated the effect on Cr K and Hg L XRF intensities during long-term measurements of a poly(propylene) disc reference sample in an EDXRF and WDXRF system. The authors reported that, after 430 hours of irradiation in an EDXRF system, the Cr Kα/Pb Lα intensity ratio decreased but there was no significant change in the Hg Lα/Pb Lα ratio. A similar decrease in the Cr Kα/Pb Lα intensity ratio was observed after 120 hours of exposure in a WDXRF system and the authors attributed the reduced Cr Kα/Pb Lα ratio to the loss of Cr, which was introduced into the PP disc as an organometallic compound. This finding is particularly important in the case of very high flux SRXRF measurements where calibration samples need to be chosen as much for their thermal and radiation robustness as suitability for the type of application.
Given the significant and growing interest in quantitative XRF mapping/imaging, it is useful to be able to estimate the amount of time it will take to acquire an image with adequate counting statistics to suit the intended analytical purpose. This is particularly the case for in vivo measurements and other samples that may be susceptible to radiation and/or thermal damage during extended measurement times. An interesting and comprehensive paper by Santibanez and co-workers121 described their method for relating the typical 3-sigma limit of detection for an element in a particular matrix to the minimum detection time (MDT) per pixel (dwell time) for a particular element based on a proposed form of S/N ratio. The authors concentrated on in vivo measurements of the elements Cu, Fe and Pb in bone and soft tissue and made a series of phantoms to confirm the suitability of their proposed MDT method. The acquired data sets from an in-house low power EDXRF-CT system enabled the authors to build a table for each element that allowed them to establish an MDT that was analytically effective and was compatible with the principle of “As Low As Reasonably Achievable” for the X-ray dose that a human patient would receive for an effective in vivo measurement of Pb in cortical bone. Staying with detection limit estimates, Borkhodoev122 refuted the normally held view that LOD and LOQ can be simply and numerically related in XRF measurements. In a study of XRF determination of major and trace elements in mineral samples, the author demonstrated that there was no simple numerical relationship between LOD and LOQ, although it seems likely that XRF practitioners will continue to use the imperfect, but straightforward and useful concept of both LOD and LOQ being simply related to the same peak and background counting statistics. An interesting approach to correcting each pixel in an XRF tomography image for matrix absorption of L-series lines was proposed by Liu et al.123 Using their proposed algorithm, the authors reported that relative error was reduced to <14.1% and that the method was suitable for L-series XRF-CT. Finally, a method was proposed124 for what were recently established to be matrix effects in XRF holography. The authors proposed a model that was claimed to be valid for polychromatic radiation and they showed it to be useful at high energies to reduce the distortions attributed to indirect excitation at those energies.
3 Applications
3.1 Geological and climate change
XRF spectrometry continues to be very popular in the analysis of geological materials. In this context, developments in techniques for soils and other geological materials were reported by a number of workers, including Du et al.125 who evaluated the performance of field-portable XRF instrumentation for the determination of Ni in soil. The authors reported a critical value of 400 mg kg−1, above which the relative standard deviation and uncertainty of measurements changed little. The contribution to the relative uncertainty of in situ measurements from soil moisture content was estimated to be 3.77% and from particle size effects, 0.56%. Schneider et al.126 undertook a comparison between field-portable XRF spectrometry and aqua regia ICP-OES analyses of soil samples, in part to evaluate the influence of soil moisture on the XRF results. To test the influence of moisture on the XRF signal, soil samples were saturated with ultra-pure water. Results showed a high degree of linearity between ICP-OES and XRF data and the authors developed a correction based on the Beer–Lambert law to describe the apparent decrease in the XRF concentration with increasing soil moisture, claiming it was satisfactory up to moisture contents as high as 136.8%. The merging of portable XRF and near visible infrared diffuse reflectance spectrometry was shown by Wang et al.127 to be an effective way of estimating the total carbon and total nitrogen content of soils. Measurements were made on a large batch of soil samples collected from three US States and comparisons were made with laboratory results from traditional Dumas high temperature combustion methods. The concern of McIlwaine et al.128 was the reliability of XRF and aqua regia digest ICP techniques in the multi-element analysis of soils, expressing concern that XRF measurements were influenced by matrix effects and aqua regia digest solution results by the chemical form of the analyte. Their conclusions were that a choice of technique might be more important than has been appreciated, based on the observation that the techniques were more consistent in the determination of elements of geogenic origin and Pb, but less so for anthropogenic elements in rural samples. The area of interest of Orme et al.129 was in the maximum achievable resolution using μ-XRF instrumentation when scanning sediment cores that had been affected by bioturbation and physical mixing. Their samples originated from a coastal lake in the Outer Hebrides, Scotland and their conclusion was that sub-cm sampling by XRF core scanning could be beneficial in producing environmental reconstructions in many lake settings where sediments were not varved (i.e., affected by fine grain layers of sedimentary bedding). At a more sophisticated level, Li and co-workers130 investigated the application of 3D confocal μ-XRF technology based on poly-capillary lenses for the analysis of rocks and minerals, providing a description of the instrumental configuration and examples of application in measuring the composition and distribution of elements in mineral samples. Chubarov and Finkelshtein131 revisited an old chestnut, the determination of divalent iron by WDXRF based on changes in the Fe Kβ emission line intensities, preferring the ratio Kβ5/Kβ1,3 as the analytical parameter. Results for FeO in excess of 1.5% m m−1 in igneous rocks of basic and ultrabasic composition were reported to have errors below 10% relative (comparable to titrimetric analysis), although the authors admitted that results for alkaline rocks might be in excess of 50% relative. In a second contribution, Chubarov et al.132 proposed a similar technique for the determination of Mn valence states. They reported that the Mn Kβ5 and Mn Kβ′ were least affected by speciation, whereas the Mn Kβ′′ and Mn Kβx were suitable for assessing Mn speciation. The use of the Maia detector for the XRF elemental mapping of mineral deposit samples on a beam line at the Australian synchrotron was discussed by Fisher et al.133 The authors demonstrated the power of this approach by presenting case studies from orogenic gold deposits in which elemental maps that constrained chemical zonation in sulfides and associated alteration minerals could be used to decipher ore-forming processes associated with gold deposition.
In the ‘old’ days, classic geochemistry applications of XRF spectrometry simply involved routine major and trace element determinations. Nowadays, some applications have become significantly more sophisticated. Kutterolf et al.134 used μ-SRXRF and EPMA measurements on melt inclusions in volcanic tephras to examine the Br and Cl emissions from Plinian eruptions along the Central American Volcanic Arc. These are large explosive eruptions that ejected gases, aerosols and fine ash into the stratosphere with the potential to influence climate on a global scale. This study was designed to constrain the major sources of Br in a subduction zone, as well as the systematics of magmatic degassing of Br and Cl. Results indicated that every <40 years, eruptions add equivalent to 10% to the ‘equivalent effective stratospheric chlorine’ loading, whereas eruptions could double this loading every 200 years. Subducted calcareous sediment was proposed as the major source of magmatic Br. The geochemistry and thermodynamics of an earthquake was the topic of interest to Jiang and colleagues,135 who used μ-XRF elemental mapping and in situ LA-ICP-MS on samples from the Asbestos Mountain granitoid in the eastern Peninsular Ranges batholith (California, USA). In relation to the mineralogical changes that occur due to frictional heating in the shear zone of an earthquake, their conclusions were that the chemical composition of a mineral (pseudotachylite) formed in this zone could potentially be used to constrain the thermodynamic conditions in this zone as well as earthquake source mechanics. Janssen et al.136 used XRF spectrometry as one of a group of techniques used to examine another aspect of seismic activity – the sedimentary mineralogy and microstructures that were found in core samples that transected the fault zone in the Japan trench between the Pacific and North American plates. These samples were collected during the Ocean Drilling Project Expedition 343 and were topical as the fault slipped during the March 2011 Tohoku-Oki earthquake. The authors offered a detailed description of the mineralogy, lithology and microstructures found across this fault boundary. The microanalysis techniques of SRXRF spectrometry, as well as spatially-resolved XANES, were used in another multi-technique project by Petrash et al.137 to develop a hypothesis on the formation of sedimentary dolomite using samples collected from the Archipelago Los Roques (Venezuela). Their model was based on coupled Mn–S redox cycling which might promote the generation of alkalinity and thus dolomite formation in a manner similar to, or even more efficiently than bacterial sulfate reduction alone.
By far the most popular geological application of XRF these days is the analysis of sediments to provide information on environmental and climate change over geological time scales. In these applications, samples are often collected as drill cores, but core scanning XRF is almost always complemented by other techniques. There is space to feature only a small selection of this year's publications, with an emphasis on developments that extend routine applications. Thus, van der Bilt et al.138 obtained data from a number of physical, geochemical (XRF) and magnetic techniques to undertake multivariate statistical analysis to fingerprint the variability in glacier activity in the Holocene Period. Their study was based on undisturbed lake sediment samples from Lake Hajeren, Svalbard (Norway) and was designed to contribute to an understanding of the current rapid warming of the Arctic. Song and colleagues139 integrated estimates of carbonate accumulation rates based on core scanning XRF data with a resolution of 1.2 years with a 6 year resolution biomarker and magnetic records in a well-preserved shoreline core from Lake Manas (northwestern China) to reconstruct fluctuations in the level of the lake and the potential influence of variations in solar irradiance over the last millennium. Fluctuations in lake levels were linked to changes in moisture levels in the arid central Asia region, which were in turn affected by the solar (Schwabe) cycle. Two sediment records from the Rodna Mountains (northern Romanian Carpathians) were studied by Haliuc et al.140 to evaluate the role of fire in landscape dynamics over the Holocene period. X-ray fluorescence spectrometry contributed to this study, which showed that fire events in the sediment record were characterised by a magnetic signature associated with a secondary ferromagnetic assemblage, especially very fine super-paramagnetic magnetite and maghemite. The analysis of pollen, diatoms, XRF geochemistry and pigments by de Boer et al.141 provided a unique opportunity to understand how the ecosystem of the island of Mauritius responded to an extreme drought event 4200 years ago, focusing on mass mortality in the Mare aux Songes rock valley. An abrupt increase in aridity and consequent regional fires caused a shrinking water supply, progressive salinisation and the growth of toxic cyanobacteria that led to the death of 100000 s of vertebrates. Kalugin and colleagues142 used SRXRF scanning to study sediment core records of floods in Amur Bay (Sea of Japan) with a particular interest in anomalously low Br content as a marker for typhoons. This anomalous content was caused by discharges from the Razdolnaya River into the bay caused by extreme rainfall. Principal component analysis of elemental measurements by scanning XRF in recently deposited (1755–2008) sediments of the Santa Barbara Basin (California, USA) were used by Hendy and co-workers143 to demonstrate extreme rainfall to drought events over this 250 year period. Variations in the lithogenic and biogenic components were associated with El Niño events and phases of the Pacific Decadel Oscillation, whereas one of the flooding components was identified with the 1928 St Francis Dam disaster. A multi-technique approach that included μ-XRF scanning was used by Neugebauer et al.144 to analyse a core from the western margin of the Dead Sea to detect dry periods in the period 3500–2400 BC. Results were interpreted as showing that during this period, the Dead Sea experienced an overall dry climate, superimposed on which was an increased occurrence of flash floods caused by a change in synoptic weather patterns. The repeated catastrophic infill of valleys in the Nepal Himalaya caused by medieval earthquakes was the topic of interest to Schwanghart et al.,145 with XRF spectrometry ruling out local sources for the infill in favour of catastrophic fluvial aggradation and debris flow from a higher Himalayan source, more than 60 km away. In extending the sampling medium to peat, Silva-Sanchez et al.146 used the XRF, GC, MS, peat humification and FTIR techniques to examine human–environment interactions, climate change and atmospheric pollution in southern Greenland over the last 700 years. Aspects of interest included evidence of soil erosion linked to Norse (13th to 14th century) and modern (20th century) human activity and the detection of atmospheric Pb pollution, first appearing in AD 1845, peaking in the 1970s and tentatively linked to North American sources.
Turning now to XRF techniques used for the analysis of soils, Swanhart et al.147 proposed a method for the estimation of soil salinity using portable XRF instrumentation to replace traditional methods (e.g., electrical conductance) that provided limited data and required laboratory analysis. After undertaking simple and multiple regression analysis on elemental results obtained by PXRF (and some additional parameters) with electrical conductance measurements, the authors claimed that PXRF was capable of predicting soil electrical conductance with ‘reasonable’ accuracy from elemental data alone. This study was undertaken on coastal soil samples from Louisiana (USA). Portable XRF and electrical conductance were two of the measurement techniques used by Young and co-workers148 to evaluate management-induced soil salinisation on golf courses in semi-arid landscapes in Lubbock (Texas, USA) by comparison between the composition of samples from managed (i.e., well irrigated) and non-managed (i.e., non-irrigated) areas of the courses. Various salinity parameters were found to be significantly higher in the managed sites, which correlated with water quality report data. Wang et al.149 proposed the use of PXRF spectrometry for the fast monitoring of metal contamination (As, Cd, Cr, Cu, Hg, Ni, Pb, Zn) in soil by comparing with measurements by ICP-MS. The performance by PXRF instrumentation for Cr, Cu, Pb and Zn was considered to be satisfactory after correcting PXRF results to a standard method to overcome some bias when compared to ICP-MS data. The techniques of μ-SRXRF and μ-XAS were used by Voegelin et al.150 to measure the speciation of Tl in a thallium and an arsenic-rich soil developed from a mineralised carbonate rock, showing for the first time the uptake of Tl by illite mineralisation, but recommending further work on the sorption of Tl by clay minerals and manganese oxides and the resultant impact on Tl solubility in soils. The Arctic is sometimes described as a pristine environment, but the work of Nikitina et al.151 was designed to assess the ecological status and degree of contamination with metals of soils from Arctic and sub-Arctic regions represented by samples from the White Sea and Barents Sea. X-ray fluorescence analysis showed that almost all soils were found to have an ‘acceptable’ level of contamination, with accumulations in the order Co > Pb > Cu > Zn > As > Ni > V > Mn. The properties of mica-rich till soils from cold alpine regions of the Altai Mountains (Russia) were determined by a range of techniques, including XRF spectrometry by Egli et al.152 to find out whether weathering could be more intense in thermally less unfavourable conditions or whether the abundance of water was a more important factor. These measurements indicated that weathering was not limited by low temperatures in the active weathering layer but was rather controlled by soil moisture content. The μ-SRXRF technique and the BCR sequential extraction scheme were used by Proffit et al.153 to compare the extractability of Cu from natural and synthetic calcareous vineyard soil over different concentration ranges (190–6350 mg kg−1) and aging times (1 to 181 days). Over this time period, Cu was found to have been redistributed from the weakly bound acid soluble fraction to the strongly bound reducible fraction, a trend less marked in the contaminated vineyard soil. Nevertheless, the authors considered that the synthetic soil could be used to demonstrate the fractionation and evolution of Cu in vineyard soils. An extensive survey of the Br and I content of 900 Japanese soils (including tsunami deposits) was undertaken by Yamasaki et al.154 using polarised EDXRF instrumentation. The overall conclusion of this study was that these two elements behaved in a significantly different manner in terrestrial environments when compared to most other metallic elements.
The XRF method is widely used in the exploration for and characterisation of ore bodies and one of the more unusual sampling media – termite mounds – was used by Arhin et al.155 to identify pathfinder elements in the exploration for gold in the complex regolith terrain of the Lawra belt (Northwest Ghana). The reason why termite mounds were considered appropriate sampling opportunities was because the ground was masked by a ferruginous duricrust, extensive redistributed dispositional and patchy residual materials of relict and erosional units. Gold was determined by AAS using fire assay of termite mound samples and XRF spectrometry was used for the chalcophile and other selected elements. Factor analysis of these data showed that As and Zn were pathfinder elements appropriate for the identification of gold mineralisation. Gazley et al.156 described a comprehensive approach to understanding ore deposits at the Plutonic Gold Mine (Western Australia) using portable XRF spectrometry to characterise lithology and alteration. This approach involved the interpretation of a mine-site data set for over an impressive 200000 multi-element determinations. Portable XRF instrumentation was used in a case study by Le Vaillant et al.157 to detect metal enrichment in the hydrothermal nickel-arsenic-PGE halo surrounding a komatiite-hosted nickel sulfide deposit in the Yilgarn Craton, Western Australia. In a second contribution,158 laboratory XRF, portable XRF and μ-XRF instrumentation (the latter for mapping drill-core samples) were used to investigate the Ni–Cu-(PGE) sulfide ore body hosted by the Kevitsa intrusion in northern Finland, in part to test the assumption that Ni and Pt are commonly assumed to be immobile especially during low-temperature hydrothermal alteration. Results showed that the hydration and carbonation of this intrusion did not significantly affect the distribution of Ni and PGE at scales greater than a few mm, and that As and Cu were the only metals that were affected by small to large scale remobilisation (from the cm to km scale). Lawley et al.159 demonstrated that the accuracy and precision of PXRF in the analysis of drill core surfaces was sufficient to map anomalous pathfinder (As, Au, Bi, Sb, Te) element distributions in the hydrothermal footprint associated with the banded iron formation-hosted Meliadine gold deposit (Canada). The authors recognised that these PXRF measurements could be made at a fraction of the cost and time compared to conventional whole-rock analysis. Now for something completely different (as they say!), namely the centuries old Slovenian tradition of salt production in the Seovlje Salina Nature Park using the ‘petola’ – a microbial mat, a few mm thick – that covers the bottom of the crystallising salt basin. Glavas et al.160 investigated the seasonal variation in the composition of the petola, including the use of XRF spectrometry to determine the metal content. Their measurements showed that the concentration of As, Cr, Cu, Mn, Ni, Pb, Zn decreased with lower organic matter and lower pH values during the summer months and overall these and other measurements contributed to an understanding of the characteristics of the petola and the quality of the harvested natural salt. In contrast, Renock and colleagues161 used μ-XRF and ED-SEM analysis together with chemical sequential extraction methods to investigate the weathering of black shale and the release of Ba during hydraulic fracturing (used in the extraction of natural gas and petroleum). After a detailed set of experiments on three drill cores from the Marcellus Shale in Pennsylvania and New York (USA), the authors concluded that all of the Ba in produced water could be reconciled with leaching directly from the fractured rock. Although at the time of writing there is a surplus of steel production round the world, Chokshi et al.162 undertook a study using XRF, XRD, SEM and optical microscopy techniques to determine the mineralogical, morphological and textural properties of low-grade iron ore to optimise its use for iron and steel production, in circumstances when high-grade ores become depleted. Finally, practitioners in the analysis of nickel ores and nickel concentrates will be interested in the production of five new certified reference materials the preparation of which was described in a paper by Cheng et al.163 The WDXRF and ICP-OES techniques were used in their homogeneity testing.
X-ray fluorescence techniques are capable of making some important contributions to the characterisation of aquifers and ground waters and aqueous fluids, as demonstrated by Espinoza-Quinones and colleagues164 who used TXRF (for the determination of 18 elements) and ICP-OES (for the determination of B, Mg and Na) to assess the quality of ground water from the Serra Geral aquifer (Parana, Brazil) and its compliance with Brazilian environmental protection standards. In some wells, the concentrations of the elements As, Ba, Cr, Fe, Mn and Se were found to be slightly above national limits. Arsenic contamination in drinking water is a well-known problem in parts of the Indian subcontinent and Johnston et al.165 examined solid phase As and Fe speciation in an alluvial aquifer, river and hyporheic-seep sediments in the Himalayan foothills and Ganges floodplain margin. A combination of XAS, selective extraction, SEM and XRF spectrometries were used to make measurements and results elucidated the role of Fe(III) oxides and AsV/AsIII speciation in this alluvial aquifer system. Colombani et al.166 were interested in the mobility of trace elements in the saline coastal aquifer of the river Po lowland (Italy). X-ray fluorescence spectrometry contributed to the analysis of relevant sediments with other determinations being made by ion chromatography and ICP-MS. An interpretation was presented by the authors of the sources and conditions that promoted trace element mobility in this river aquifer system. In a study requiring the use of rather more sophisticated equipment, Tanis et al.167 employed a hydrothermal diamond-anvil cell to facilitate the SRXRF measurement of the mobility of Nb in rutile-saturated NaCl and NaF bearing fluids from 1 to 6.5 GPa and 300 to 800 °C. Amongst the results, relevant to the behaviour of this element in metamorphic and subduction zone environments was the observation that rutile had a moderating role on the Nb budget in this type of environment.
As examples of the characterisation of minerals, Teiber et al.168 combined the EPMA and TXRF techniques for the measurement of apatites of magmatic to hydrothermal origin in a study designed to source composition and crystallisation conditions. The authors reported that source composition, temperature and redox conditions during crystallisation, or the composition of the co-existing fluid, could influence the formation of apatite causing an overlap in element compositions in apatites from different geological environments. The authors highlighted the use of TXRF spectrometry for the determination of As, Br and Ti as offering potential for future petrological and geochemical investigations of these issues. The techniques of μ-XRF and μ-XANES contributed to a study by Egger and colleagues169 to demonstrate the role of vivianite as a major sink for phosphorus in marine sediments found in brackish coastal environments. Their studies extended previous investigations that had identified carbonate fluorapatite as fulfilling this role, focusing on sediment samples from the Bothnian Sea and identifying that the anaerobic oxidation of methane had a major role in the switching from iron oxide-bound P to vivianite. The interest of Marcus et al.170 lay in characterising the structure, reactivity and isotopic composition of iron minerals found in the South Pacific Gyre ferromanganese nodules grown over a 4 Ma period. Micro-X-ray techniques (XRF, EXAFS, XANES and XRD) were complimented by EPMA and ICP-MS to show that iron oxyhydroxides within hydrogenetic ferromanganese nodules were, from a geochemical contest, out of contact with seawater once they were covered by subsequent concentric mineral layers, so preserving trace element ratios, speciation and iron isotopic composition.
As a contribution to other studies, Lancianese and Dinelli171 continued the international interest in regional geochemical mapping by using XRF spectrometry to determine 30 elements in stream sediments collected over an area of 4125 km2 in the Romagna Apennines (Northern Apennines, Italy). The authors investigated various techniques for the presentation and interpretation of data claiming that no one method was satisfactory for this diverse area comprising towns, industrial sites, agricultural land and wooded mountainous areas. The study of McCanta et al.172 was linked to understanding the frequency, magnitude and nature of explosive volcanic eruptions for hazard planning and risk mitigation. To this end, XRF spectrometry contributed with other techniques to the scanning of International Ocean Drilling Project cores from the Caribbean Sea in the development of a new infrared spectrum parameter that allowed the non-destructive detection of tephra layers originating from volcanic eruptions in the Lesser Antilles Volcanic Arc over the last 270 ka. Sequestering carbon dioxide in geological units is a topical issue and Rathnaweera et al.173 undertook an experimental study to identify the mineralogical and microstructural changes that occurred in reservoir rocks (the Hawkesbury sandstone, Gosford Basin, New South Wales, Australia) following the injection of CO2 in deep saline aquifers. A variety of techniques contributed to this study, including XRF spectrometry and the authors reported that considerable quartz mineral corrosion and the dissolution of calcite and siderite was observed, altering the pore structure of the sandstone and initiating the propagation of cracks.
3.2 Mining and mining waste
As a contribution to the development of techniques, Guitouni174 described a method for the optimising and validation in the determination of U in phosphogypsum by WDXRF based on intensity measurements of the U Lα1-line. Inoue et al.175 explored more challenging methodology – the quantitative analysis of CO2 and loss on ignition in quicklime by XRF spectrometry. Their method was based on the determination of total loss-on-ignition (CO2 + H2O) from Compton scattering of the rhodium K line tube radiation, for which the authors claimed an accuracy of 0.15% m m−1. The carbon content was then measured directly from the C K line, using a new multilayer analyser with greatly improved background characteristics. This method provided high reliability and sample throughput compared to the conventional method of determining loss-on-ignition (by ignition at 1050 °C). The calibration of an EDXRF core scanner was described by Kelloway et al.176 for the rapid elemental profiling of coal cores at a sub-mm scale. Calibration for the elements Al, Ca, Fe, K, P, S, Si and Ti was undertaken on pressed powder pellets of reference coal samples and the effects of core curvature and surface roughness were examined to evaluate their influence on the apparent sample composition. Turning now to crude oil and petroleum, Doyle et al.177 used EDXRF spectrometry to measure the Ca, Fe, Ni, S and V content of crude oil based on direct sampling on a paper substrate. Aliquots of 20 μL of oil diluted 1:1 with toluene were placed at the centre of a 10 mm diameter filter paper, which was then sandwiched between two polypropylene film foils. The EDXRF instrument was calibrated with ASTM proficiency testing samples and fixed amounts of H, N and O were specified in the fundamental parameter matrix correction model yielding detection limits for Ca, Fe, Ni and V as low as 1 μg g−1 and for S down to 0.002% m m−1. For the rapid identification of petroleum contamination in soils, Chakraborty et al.178 proposed a new approach, combining near-IR diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (for the total petroleum hydrocarbon content) and the portable XRF technique (for elemental concentrations). A statistical analysis of the combined results provided a more reliable identification of contamination than other techniques, including the IR technique alone.
In the processing of ore material, Baba et al.179 used EDXRF as one of the techniques to evaluate the purification of Nigerian talc ore (actinolite and clinoclore) by acid leaching. As a result of this process, the Fe content was reduced from 3.75 to 0.36% m m−1 and the specific surface area (a key property of talc) was increased from 0.15 to 3.59 m2 g−1. The XRF, XRD and FTIR techniques were used by Cirak and Hosten180 to understand why colloidal suspensions in waste waters from the Kirka Borax Concentrator (Turkey) were resistant to flocculation to remove suspended material in settling tests. As a result, there were difficulties in the sustainable and environmentally acceptable operation of the concentrator. Results showed that problematic particles were rich in magnesium minerals (dolomite and trioctahedral smectite) and it was postulated that surface Mg2+ ions had very high hydration energies that tightly held water molecules so inhibiting the flocculation process. Campbell and colleagues181 examined the physical and chemical weathering of platinum grains in soil placer deposits at the Fifield platinum field (New South Wales, Australia). Their particular focus was on platinum NPs as a search strategy for new sources of this precious metal and the use of FIB-SEM and μ-SRXRF on a sectioned grain showed a fine layer of crystalline secondary Pt (up to 5 μm) overlaying more coarsely crystalline Pt–Fe alloy of primary magmatic origin. The authors concluded that nanophase-Pt could be dispersed much further from primary sources than had originally been thought and that the formation and release of Pt NPs should be incorporated into exploration geochemistry programmes. Barbosa et al.182 reported that the optimum temperature for the extraction of Li from beta-spondumene using chlorination roasting with calcium chloride was 900 °C for 2 hours. X-ray fluorescence spectrometry was one of the techniques used to characterise this process, showing that major phases remaining in the residue were CaAl2Si2O8, SiO2 and CaSiO3.
For reasons that are unclear to this reviewer, the analysis of coal and related combustion products has led to a significant number of publications in the current period, especially from China. Examples of these contributions include the work of Sun et al.,183 who measured anomalous concentrations of rare metal elements in coal from the Iqe coalfield (Qinghai Province, China). The techniques of XRF, XRD and ICP-MS were employed and it was suggested that kaolinite could be the main host for Cs, Ga, Rb and REE with accumulation processes being related to the presence of both inorganic and organic matter. Li et al.184 used XRF, XRD and SEM instrumentation to explore the slagging behaviour of low-rank coals (Shenmu bituminite and Huolinhe lignite) in a multi-stage conversion fluidised-bed gasification plant. The physical and chemical processes involved in this process were claimed to be char gasification, interaction of minerals, formation of different sized particles, formation of an initial adhesive layer and the emergence of slag. Zhu and colleagues185 considered the co-gasification of Australian brown coal with algae in a fluidised-bed reactor. Certain species of micro-algae (Dedersia tenuissima) could be co-gasified with brown coal without significant operating problems, but for other types, counter-measures were needed to avoid agglomeration and de-fluidisation during the co-gasification process. Acid mine drainage caused by the oxidation of sulfide bearing rock waste associated with coal extraction was studied by Qureshi et al.186 using XRF spectrometry and a number of other techniques for the elemental and mineralogical analysis of samples from the Lakhra coal field (Pakistan). Unsurprisingly, the authors concluded that the mild to strong acid-producing potential of these wastes had the capacity to deteriorate the quality of natural water, suggesting the need for preventative and/or acid neutralising measures. A similar set of experiments, with similar conclusions was undertaken by Aphane and Vermeulen187 based on samples from the Waterberg coalfield (South Africa), recognising that coal contributed 70% of the primary energy needs of that country. Gallardo and co-workers188 were concerned about the chemical, leaching and toxicity characteristics of coal ashes from the circulated fluidised bed of a Philippine coal-fired power plant. Measurements using XRF and XRD instrumentation showed that 99% of the As and Cr remained in the coal ash matrix and interestingly, bottom ashes were reported to be less toxic than fly ash due to the vaporisation of toxic elements during combustion and their subsequent adsorption onto the surface of fly ash. The interaction of Hg with the fine fraction of coal combustion fly ash in the flue gas stream of a simulated coal power plant was the topic for consideration by Jew et al.189 Mapping by μ-SRXRF spectrometry and XAS revealed that Hg was associated with Br and Cl bound to iron oxides and occurred as cinnabar (HgS). Fourier transform IR spectroscopy showed that HgII was bonded with organic matter and overall, results were interpreted as revealing the complex interactions between Hg and coal fly ash producing less bio-available forms of Hg than Hg present in the unreacted flue gases.
Contributions to the characterisation of mine waste and its remediation included the work of Serrano et al.,190 who used XAS along with asymmetrical-flow field-flow fractionation ICP-MS and TEM to study the speciation of As and Fe in the dispersible colloidal fraction from an arsenic-rich mine waste pile. Measurements by XAS on As and Fe showed AsV adsorbed onto nano-particulate ferrihydrite in the dispersible colloidal fraction downstream of the waste pile. Measurements by μ-XRF spectrometry indicated a strong correlation between Fe and As in phyllosilicate/Fe3+(oxy)hydroxide aggregates from the sediment pond. Overall, results showed that As might be bound to dispersible colloids that could be released from contaminated soils and transported downstream in natural systems. Schindler and co-workers191 were also interested in nano-scale processes, in this case the retention of U by altered clay surfaces in samples from a uranium mill and mine tailings at Key Lake (Saskatchewan, Canada). X-ray fluorescence spectrometry and a number of other techniques were used to characterise the chemical and mineralogical composition of phases within confined pore spaces of the clay minerals, montmorillonite and kaolinite and in the surrounding tailings material. This study had relevance to an understanding of nano-scale processes occurring between uranyl species and altered clay buffers in a potential nuclear waste repository. Huang et al.192 used XRF, FTIR and zeta potential analysis techniques to understand the mechanisms for As removal by natural ferruginous manganese ores as an effective way of As remediation. Results showed that efficient As removal onto ferruginous manganese ore depended on a combination of the oxidation of manganese, complexation with ferric hydroxide and the adsorption onto –OH radicles on the surface of the ore. The use of natural sorbent materials for the removal of metals from acidic waste waters was studied using XRF spectrometry by Popa et al.193 Their experiments were undertaken using acidic waste waters from a tailing pond at the ‘Rosia Poeni’ mining perimeter (Alba County, Romania) and measurements showed that peat was more effective than nut shells in removing Cu and Zn from these acidic waste waters. The chemical mapping of drill cores from mine waste tailings of a former Pb–Zn mine was reported by Kuhn et al.,194 whose interest lay in detecting zones of metal depletion and enrichment. These authors compared a prototype LIBS core scanner and a commercial EDXRF core scanner and reported that the EDXRF instrument showed a slightly higher predictive capability using PLS regression to compensate for matrix effects, but the advantages of LIBS were reported to be higher spatial resolution and the ability to create 2D elemental distribution images as well as phase or mineral distribution maps. However, both techniques detected metal rich layers (up to 2.2% m m−1 Cu + Pb + Zn) that were invisible to the human eye. Perhaps the best way of remediation is the reuse of waste material, as proposed by Aydogdu and Caki,195 who investigated the use of slate waste as a glaze raw material. X-ray fluorescence spectrometry was one of the techniques used to characterise the melting of slate and it was suggested that more effective glazed surfaces were formed with colorants such as CoO and Cr2O3. Using a similar strategy, Akinwumi and Booth,196 recognising that spoil waste from quarrying marble represented an environmental nuisance, investigated the effect of adding waste marble fines to lateritic clay as a soil modifier or stabiliser for road pavement layer materials or earth-building works. The properties they were interested in were plasticity, strength and permeability and the XRF and AAS techniques were used to determine chemical compositions of the product.
As an example of the industrial use of minerals, Liu and Poon197 used XRF and XRD spectrometries to investigate the physical and chemical properties of red mud (derived from aluminium refineries through the Bayer process) for its use in self-compacting cement. An enhancement in some of the properties of this cement was reported by the use of red mud as a replacement for fly ash. The behaviour of polypropylene-based nanocomposites containing an organically modified form of the mineral, montmorillonite, were investigated by Komatsu et al.198 to characterise the environmental ageing of this material, which is used in a wide range of industrial applications. The authors employed a range of techniques with XRF spectrometry used to characterise the composition of the clay minerals and ageing properties were reported to be associated with the presence of metallic ions in the montmorillonite. Tennakoon et al.199 used XRF, calorimetry and optical microscopy techniques to evaluate the potential re-use options for fly ash from low rank Australian brown coal as feedstock for the synthesis of geo-polymer binders. The authors reported that brown coal fly ash participated in the formation of geo-polymer networks rather than just behaving as a filler material. In a similar application, Ogundiran and Kumar200 demonstrated the suitability of Nigerian kaolinitic clay for the synthesis of geo-polymers at ambient temperatures. In terms of the industrial use of kaolinite, El-Sherbiny and colleagues201 used XRF spectrometry as part of a multi-technique approach to optimise modifications to this mineral for application as a paper coating. The authors observed that de-alumination of calcined kaolinite did not show improvements in coated paper quality compared to calcined kaolinite in contrast to the <2 μm kaolinite fraction, which improved paper gloss as well as other properties. The use of bottom ash from the combustion of coal to generate zeolite Na–P1 by hydrothermal synthesis under alkaline conditions was investigated by Wasem et al.202 using analytical measurements by XRD and XRF spectrometry. Results indicated that the synthesised zeolite had good potential to adsorb and so reduce the ammonia nitrogen content from industrial effluents. Sutcu et al.203 used XRF, XRD, TGA and SEM measurements to characterise fired clay bricks for use as building materials and prepared from waste marble powder. Waste marble powder was found to reduce the density of the fired brick, with an increase in porosity ratios of up to 40% when 30% waste marble was used. Although compressive strength was reduced, it still met the building industry standard. Continuing with clay bricks, Mann et al.204 investigated their use in storage facilities for radioactive waste. Using XRF and XRD spectrometries, the authors evaluated the shielding properties of local burnt-clay bricks from the Punjab (India), which showed moderate shielding capabilities (in the range 0.001–15 MeV) compared to the superior properties of clay bricks (of quality M – 0).
3.3 Industrial materials and consequences of industrial activity
Having surveyed the number of contributions published during this year's review it is a pleasure to observe that the conventional XRF technique was routinely implemented for the characterisation of many different types of materials such as catalysts, zeolites, fly ashes, etc. As many of these contributions did not highlight novel applications in the XRF methodology, they were not considered for this review. Nevertheless readers interested in additional applications can always consult our companion review covering advances in the analysis of metals, chemicals and functional materials.5
A topic of general interest is the impact of heavy metals and radioactive materials on the environment. Batuk et al.205 combined XAFS and XRF element mapping with the speciation of Pu and U in soil and concrete from Rocky Flats and in particles from soils from Chernobyl, Hanford, Los Alamos and McGuire Air Force Base and bottom sediments from Mayak, all located in USA or Russia. Four types of speciation were identified that sometimes exhibited an association with the source terms and histories of these samples. Their results demonstrated instances of novel complexity in the angstrom and μm-scale chemical speciation and reactivity of Pu and U as initially deposited but also after environmental exposure as well as occasions of unexpected behaviour in the reaction pathways over a short geological time period. The dissolution of Am, Pu and U in contaminated soil from the Nevada Test Site due to indigenous microbial activity was examined by Francis and Dodge206 by adding citric acid or glucose and incubating it under aerobic or anaerobic conditions. Their findings suggested that under the appropriate conditions, microbial activity could affect the solubility and long-term stability of Pu especially in contaminated environments. For the initial characterisation of the contaminated soil, a multi-technique approach using SR (scanning transmission X-ray microscopy, μ-XANES, μ-XRD and μ-XRF) techniques was applied, revealing that Pu was associated with Fe- and Mn-oxides and alumina-silicates, while U was observed in discrete U-containing mineral phases showing an association with Fe- and Ca-phases. The XANES measurements confirmed the presence of both UIV and UVI oxidation states. Speciation of inorganic arsenic in ambient particulate matter collected in the vicinity of a metallurgical industrial plant was performed by Tirez et al.,207 who combined XRF spectrometry for the total determination of As and HPLC-ICP-MS and XANES analysis for speciation. Good agreement was obtained between the sum of the concentrations of AsIII and AsV, determined by HPLC-ICP-MS and the total As concentration determined by XRF analysis. The average measured As concentration in PM10 during a 40 day monitoring campaign at a hot spot location near the plant was 30 ng m−3, which was far above the European target value of 6 ng m−3. During the monitoring campaign, the PM10 fraction of particulate AsIII varied between 19 and 61% and a trend towards a higher fraction of AsIII with increasing concentration of total As was observed. The identification of As species with XANES and XRD spectrometry in local PM sources confirmed the presence of Ca3Sr2(AsO4)2.5(PO4)0.5(OH), As2O3 and As2O5 species. A field-portable XRF analyser was used by Menrath et al.,208 to determine if residual lead from a once-active secondary lead smelter in Cairo, Egypt, still posed a health risk to the local residents. Measurements in 194 dwellings resulted in a mean floor dust Pb loading of 8.1 mg cm−2, although concerningly almost 10% of them had at least one floor dust wipe sample that exceeded the US EPA interior settled dust Pb level of 43.1 mg cm−2. The median Pb in paint level was 0.04 mg cm−2, moreover 17% of the dwellings had at least one interior paint sample that exceeded the US EPA standard of 1.0 mg cm−2. The mean soil Pb concentration was 458 mg kg−1, compared to only 91 mg kg−1 outside the studied area. As could be expected, the highest concentration was observed closest to the smelter. Gao et al.209 used the XRF technique to measure the total concentrations of Cd, Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn in 63 samples of construction and demolition wastes collected from chemical, metallurgical and light industries, and residential and recycled aggregates within China for risk assessment. The six most polluted samples were selected for further research using XRD and XRF spectrometry in combination with element speciation using the BCR sequential extraction. As a result of the risk assessment, samples from the electroplating factory were judged to pose a very high risk from Cr, Cu and Zn, a high risk from Ni, a medium risk from Pb, and a low risk from Cd. The samples from the zinc smelting plant presented a high risk from Zn, a medium risk from Cu, and a low risk from Cd, Cr, Ni and Pb.
The use of sophisticated XRF techniques to understand the processes related to catalysis and electrochemical material science was demonstrated in several contributions. Gianoncelli et al.210 studied the electrodeposition of Mn–Mg–Cu–polypyrrole nanocomposites, a promising, fully green novel material for Pt-free oxygen reduction electro-catalysis in fuel cells. Therefore, soft XRF elemental mapping was performed at the TwinMic beamline of the Elettra synchrotron facility (Trieste, Italy). At first, elemental mapping was performed with a 1 μm diameter spot size over areas of 80 × 40 μm2; after which, higher resolution maps (spot size and spatial resolution of 330 nm) were acquired on selected areas to better visualise the specimen morphology and element composition. The synergy of high-resolution compositional mapping with electrokinetic modelling not only provided the authors with quantitative information of large compositional distribution datasets but also yielded an unprecedented insight into the specific catalyst synthesis process. The characterisation of the Ni-cermet degradation phenomena was investigated by Ananyev et al.,211 as solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) anode Ni–YSZ substrates experience changes in their microstructure under SOFC anode operation conditions. The resistivity of Ni–YSZ cermet (nickel and 8 mol% yttria stabilised zirconia) anode substrates was monitored over 3000 h at 700 and 800 °C in a gas mixture of 80% v/v water vapour and 20% v/v hydrogen. Afterwards, the Ni-phase fraction was analysed by XRF spectroscopy using an aperture diameter of 6 mm. A cross section of the samples with a surface of 15–30 mm2 was used and the XRF measurements were carried out for virgin samples after 300, 1000 and 3000 h of exposure time. Two processes leading to the Ni–YSZ degradation were observed, namely a Ni-phase particle coarsening and a Ni volatilisation. Nakata et al.212 performed XRF imaging with a high time resolution at beamline 28XU of SPring-8 (Hyogo, Japan) to clarify the deterioration mechanism of the zinc electrode in innovative zinc-based secondary batteries during the reduction and oxidation processes. The XRF imaging was performed, with the incident X-ray energy of 9.8 keV near the Zn–K absorption edge. The cell for XRF imaging, made of acrylic (plexiglass) plates, contained a copper plate working electrode, a zinc plate counter electrode, a zinc wire reference electrode, and a 4 M KOH aqueous solution containing 0.25 M ZnO as an electrolyte. The incident X-ray beam, coming through the cell window at a grazing angle of approximately 0.25°, was focused to illuminate the area at the electrode/electrolyte interface, 10 mm in the horizontal plane along the electrode surface and vertically 1 mm towards the electrolyte. The results showed the inhomogeneous distribution of the zinc species around the electrode/electrolyte interface, indicating current constriction at the surface in the reduction process and the presence of the dissolved zinc species in the oxidation process. Kalirai et al.213 applied XRF tomography of aged fluid-catalytic-cracking catalyst (FCC) particles to get insight into metal deposition processes. Metal poison deposition in individual, intact and industrially deactivated FCC particles at two differing catalytic life-stages were investigated. Using a large-array Maia fluorescence detector, 3D multi-element imaging, at submicron resolution, was achieved. The authors found that Ca, Fe and Ni had significant concentration at the exterior of the FCC catalyst particle and were highly co-localised. As concentrations increased as a function of catalytic life-stage, the deposition profiles of Ca, Fe and Ni did not change significantly. Vanadium has been shown to penetrate deeper into the particle with increasing catalytic age. Although it has been previously suggested that vanadium is responsible for damaging the zeolite components of FCC particles, no spatial correlation was found for vanadium and lanthanum, which was used as a marker for the embedded zeolite domains. The authors concluded that although vanadium is known to be detrimental to zeolites in FCC particles, a preferential interaction did not exist between the two.
The characterisation of Pu is an essential aspect of safeguarding operations at nuclear fuel reprocessing facilities. McIntosh et al.214 demonstrated successfully a novel analysis technique called hiRX (high resolution X-ray) spectrometry for the direct measurement of Pu in spent nuclear fuel dissolver solutions. This technique was based on monochromatic WDXRF spectrometry, which provided enhanced sensitivity and specificity compared with conventional XRF techniques. A breadboard setup of the hiRX instrument was calibrated using spiked surrogate spent fuel standards prepared as dried residues. Mapping of Pu content was performed using actual spent fuels to evaluate the performance of the hiRX system. The authors were able to demonstrate the direct detection of just 39 ng of Pu. Initial quantitative results were obtained for spent fuel samples, with an error of 4–27% and a precision of 2% RSD. The limit of detection for Pu (100 s) within an excitation spot of 200 μm diameter was 375 pg. In recent years a high interest has developed in the fusion nuclear energy field, especially in producing functional materials that could withstand high temperatures and nuclear irradiation. Therefore, Lungu et al.215 reported studies of erosion/deposition on the marker tiles used in the JET reactor operating with beryllium and tungsten coated tiles, by applying μ-XRF and high energy-XRF (HEXRF) techniques. For relatively thick layers (for example more than 40 μm) high excitation energies (>100 keV) were required to generate W K characteristic lines. To calibrate the XRF instrument for W, relatively thick layers were produced using a combined magnetron sputtering and ion implantation method. Thus, calibration curves for a thickness range from 10 nm to >30 μm were generated. The HEXRF method provided sensitivity of better than 0.2 to 0.3 μm for a total thickness of the tungsten layer of about 20 μm. The authors presented results for a total of 20 JET tungsten coated carbon fibre composite samples. Dardenne et al.216 conducted an extended investigation of glass rods produced from highly radioactive waste concentrates, obtained from the Karlsruhe Vitrification Plant. A mm-sized fragment with a contact dose rate of about 590 μSv h−1 was selected for pilot XAS/XRF investigations at the INE-beamline for actinide science at the ANKA SR source (Karlsruhe, Germany). The results revealed that direct determination was possible of the speciation of possible mobile fission products Se and Tc and the oxidation state of actinide elements Am, Np, Pu and U, present as minor constituents, without any sample pre-treatment. Selenium was identified as selenite, Tc as pertechnetate, the actinides Am, Np, Pu and U, established from the XAFS data recorded at their L3 absorption edges, were present in their tri-, penta-, tetra- and hexa-valent oxidation state as expected from the oxidative conditions prevalent during the vitrification process. The speciation of trace amounts of stable Cs in dust from municipal solid waste incineration (MSWI) and sewage sludge incineration (SSI) was determined by Shiota et al.,217 who used μ-XRF and μ-XAFS at the SPring-8 facility (Hyogo, Japan). The speciation is of relevance when disposing of radionuclide-contaminated waste from the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant accident in Japan. The μ-XRF results revealed that locally produced Cs was present in MSWI and SSI dust within the particulate cluster size range of 2 to 10 μm. The μ-XAFS analysis confirmed that the speciation of Cs in MSWI dust was similar to that of CsCl, while in SSI dusts, it was similar to pollucite. Natarajan et al.218 examined the utility of plastic and glass containers instead of regular sample cups made of high density polyethylene for the EDXRF determination of U. For U solutions in plastic cups with a thin Mylar film window and unsealed plastic vials, a non-linear trend between the U Lα intensity and the U concentration was observed for concentrations above 20 mg mL−1. Based on their findings, the authors suggested that the sealed plastic vials were the best choice, as the intensity of the U X-ray peak decreased drastically when other containers were used. With these reduced intensities, a near-linear plot of intensity against the U concentration could be obtained, nevertheless in combination with a reduced precision (±5 to 20%). Considering all these facts, as reviewer, I would suggest that it might be a better option to dilute the U samples and analyse them using a limited calibration range up to 20 mg mL−1, especially to achieve better sensitivity and precision for this type of measurement. Biswas et al.219 demonstrated an EDXRF method for the determination of Fe in uranium. The effect of various parameters such as the variation of matrix concentration, detection limit, accuracy, precision, compared with other established methods was investigated. Analysis of synthetic standards as well as real samples showed that for 10 determinations, the RSD was less than 2%. The method could be used for the determination of 2.24 to 3500 μg mL−1 of Fe in uranium solutions with high accuracy and precision.
A recurrent issue in this review is the successful implementation of the XRF technique in waste management related applications. Because the brominated flame retardant hexabromocyclododecane (HBCDD) was added to Annex A of the list of persistent organic pollutants of the Stockholm Convention, production and use of HBCDD will be banned, and the recycling of HBCDD-containing foam waste will be restricted. Schlummer et al.220 presented a screening method to identify HBCDD-containing expanded and extruded polystyrene foams. The test principle was based on the fact that PolyFR (a brominated polymeric macromolecule) was not extractable, whereas HBCDD (a low molecular weight substance) was extractable. Following rapid extraction of HBCDD, the brominated flame retardant was identified and quantified via Br measurement using a hand-held XRF instrument. The method was applied successfully to 27 expanded and extruded polystyrene foam samples. Moreover, the hand-held XRF test results agreed well with HBCDD determinations using a standard laboratory method with a gas chromatograph coupled to a flame ionisation detector. For the exploitation of contaminated/dirty biomass/biomass waste, and potentially also as a tool in ascertaining the type/origin of biomass, Morgan et al.221 proved that XRF elemental analyses of the raw biomass with limited prior sample preparation worked well, bearing in mind some limitations. The performance of a commercial multi-element standardless XRF method, combined with a 4 kW WDXRF spectrometer, was evaluated by analysing five common biomass types (switchgrass, corn stover, eucalyptus, beech, and pine wood). Sample preparation involved milling the raw biomass using cutter and rotor mills (avoiding ball-milling) and cold-pressing the powdered samples into pellets using a wax binder. The elements positively detected by WDXRF spectrometry were Al, Ca, Cl, Co, Cu, Fe, K, Mg, Mn, Na, Ni, P, S, Si, Sr and Zn, and perhaps Mo. For concentrations above 25 mg kg−1, the XRF data showed a relative systematic error typically better than ±15% and a relative precision better than ±5% (typically ±1%). Quantifying elements below 25 mg kg−1 (Co, Cu, Mo, Ni, Sr, Zn) was possible in some cases, but the authors recognised the fact that a more detailed study for each specific element was required. For example, Cu could be determined down to a few mg kg−1 when applying a correction for the method bias.
Although the analysis of alloys and steel samples with the XRF technique is common practice, some contributions were still published in this review period dealing with the preparation and analysis method of these type of samples. Tian et al.222 described a WDXRF method for the determination of W over the concentration range 10.5% to 13.5% m m−1 in a tantalum-tungsten alloy. The sample was prepared by three methods, namely, borate fusion, filter paper disk, and pressed powder pellet. The effectiveness of the three methods of specimen preparation were compared and the filter paper disk method was retained as the most suitable technique for specimen preparation in view of precision, accuracy, time and cost.
A wide variety of contributions were related to the characterisation and/or the interaction processes of materials using a range of XRF techniques. Some typical examples are highlighted in this section. Devi et al.223 discussed in an interesting contribution the evaluation of the uncertainty in the determination of Pt in alumina catalysts using EDXRF spectrometry. Pressed pellets were prepared by mixing high purity alumina with microcrystalline cellulose powder in a ratio of 1:4 (w/w), and adding a known volume of Pt-standard solution. A linear calibration was obtained in the range of 0.1 to 3 mg g−1 of Pt using pellets of matrix matched reference samples. The calibration function was obtained through bivariate least squares fittings, in conjunction with a weighted regression of the residuals. The EDXRF results were compared with those obtained by INAA and ICP-OES. Analysis of variance established the statistical parity of the results obtained by all three techniques. The major contributor to uncertainty was identified as the calibration of the EDXRF spectrometer, which was manifested in terms of slope and intercept of the fitted line. Jakes et al.224 studied the molecular–scale interactions between adhesives and wood polymers in a project designed to accelerate the development of improved adhesives for advanced wood-based materials. Using the μ-SRXRF technique, the authors were able to map and quantify the infiltration of Br-labeled phenolformaldehyde (BrPF) into wood cell walls. Cell wall infiltration of five BrPF adhesives with different average molecular weights (MWs) was mapped. Nano-indentation on the same cell walls was performed to assess the effects of BrPF infiltration on cell wall hygro-mechanical properties. For the same amount of mass, lower MW BrPF adhesives were found to be more effective in decreasing moisture-induced mechanical softening. Raw coal fly ash from five Bulgarian power plants was analysed by Detcheva et al.,225 using TXRF spectrometry with gallium as internal standard. Milling of the samples for 30 min was sufficient to obtain the particle size distribution required for the analysis as slurries in Triton (TM) X-114. For the validation of the method, the certified reference material BCR-176R fly ash was used. The best accuracy and precision was obtained with a slurry concentration of 10 g L−1 and recoveries of between 90% and 110% were registered. Under optimal conditions, the elements As, Ba, Ca, Cl, Cr, Cu, Fe, K, Mn, Ni, Pb, Rb, Se, Sr, Ti, V and Zn could be determined across a wide concentration range. Calcium phosphate (CP), which spontaneously precipitates in a simulated-body fluid, gives information on the bioactivity of metallic biomaterials and therefore, Satoh et al.226 proposed a characterisation technique to determine the amount of precipitate formed on a titanium substrate. The authors showed that XRF analysis using the thin-film FP method could be adequately applied to the quantitative analysis of the CP precipitate in a simulated-body fluid immersion test. By combining XRF results with images of cross-sectional SEM, the density of the CP-precipitate layer could be estimated. Gazulla et al.227 developed a methodology for the determination of F in glasses and glazes using WDXRF spectrometry by optimising the different process stages from sample preparation to the measurement conditions. Samples were prepared as glass beads and, within a relatively short time frame, the F concentration could be determined with a quantification limit of 0.1% m m−1 and low uncertainties. The simultaneous determination of both the element composition and the ash content of carbon material (oil coke, coal coke or coal) using TXRF spectrometry was presented by Alov and Sharanov.228 The samples were mixed with a surfactant solution and Ga was added as internal standard. As well as the determination of the element composition, the ash content of the carbon materials was also deduced from these results. The ash content was estimated from the results of the elemental analysis as the sum of weight fractions of corresponding element oxides. The results of the quantitative analysis were compared with the results obtained by ICP-OES and gravimetry. For samples containing coal coke and coal, the error of the determination of the ash content was within the limits of 0.5 to 1% relative.
To conclude, an XRF set-up for the detection of foreign material inclusions on the inner surface of superconducting cavities was developed and tested by Bertucci et al.229 The XRF setup at DESY (Hamburg, Germany) detected trace elements down to a few μg for metallic impurities with characteristic lines lying in the energy range from 5 to 10 keV. The setup was customised for the geometry of 1.3 GHz TESLA-type niobium cavities and focused on the surface of the equatorial area at around 103 mm from the centre axis of the cavities with a 20 mm diameter irradiated spot. More precise localisation of inclusions could be reconstructed by means of the angular or lateral displacement of the cavity.
3.4 Environmental
During this review period, more researchers appreciated the unique features of SR excitation sources such as high brightness, polarisation and pulse properties that offer advantages over conventional spectroscopic and imaging sources. Improved detector technologies and experimental methods now enable plant scientists to investigate mineral uptake, transport and accumulation along with dynamics of cell wall structure. Workers in Canada230 encouraged those interested in such techniques to probe plant structures and explore the potential of synchrotron technologies in their mini-review on plant research and the consequences of environmental stress. Keller and colleagues231 described their work on the effect of silicon on durum wheat seedlings exposed to copper from contaminated soils. Desorption experiments, XPS analysis of the outer root surface and μ-SRXRF studies showed that Si increased the adsorption of Cu at the root surface as well as Cu accumulation in the epidermis, whilst Cu was localised in the central cylinder when Si was not applied. Similarly, Xu et al.232 used SR-based techniques to show Cu in root cross sections as a consequence of Cu transported from cortex to xylem in the roots of a Cu-tolerant plant, Elsholtzia splendens. Peng et al.233 were interested in the translocation and biotransformation of CuO NPs in rice plants. This study used μ-SRXRF spectrometry and μ-XANES systems to reveal that CuO NPs moved into the root epidermis, exodermis, and cortex, and ultimately reached the endodermis but could not easily pass the Casparian strip. However, the formation of lateral roots provided a potential pathway for NPs to enter the stele. Bulk-XANES data showed that CuO NPs were transported from the roots to the leaves, and that CuII combined with cysteine, citrate, and phosphate ligands and was even reduced to CuI. Ajiboye et al.234 noted that bio-fortification of wheat with zinc through foliar Zn application had been proposed as a strategy to increase grain Zn concentration, which could serve as a nutritional intervention in regions where dietary zinc deficiency is a concern. The authors used XRF microscopy to investigate the localisation of Zn and associated micronutrients (Cu, Fe and Mn) in cross sections of bread wheat grains fortified with foliar Zn applied at different stages of plant growth. Further work was recommended to assess Zn bioavailability in harvested whole grain wheat that had been bio-fortified through different timing of foliar Zn application. Qian et al.235 also used SR techniques to investigate possible mechanisms that control the localisation of Cu, Fe, Mn, Pb and Zn in root tissues of Typha latifolia L. collected from a contaminated wetland. Their data suggested that the mechanisms controlling metal localisation in root tissue varied with both tissue type and metals. Factor analysis showed that Cu and Zn were closely correlated to each other in the dermal tissues. The association of Cu, Mn and Zn with Fe was strong in both regular dermal tissue and iron-plaque-enriched dermal tissue, while significant (p < 0.05) correlation of Fe with Pb was only observed in tissues enriched with iron plaque. In the vascular bundles, Cu, Mn and Zn showed a strong association, suggesting that the localisation of these three elements was controlled by a similar mechanism. Iron plaque in the peripheral dermal tissues acted as a barrier for Pb and a buffer for Cu, Mn and Zn. The Casparian strip regulated the transportation of metals from dermal tissues to the vascular bundles. Yet more work on the consequences of plants growing on polluted soils was reported by researchers in Italy236 who combined XRD and SEM with SR techniques (μ-XRF and XAS). The XAS data ruled out Zn binding to organic molecules and indicated that Zn coordinated with Si atoms stored in root epidermis, led to the precipitation of amorphous Zn–silicate. These findings represented a step forward in understanding biological mechanisms and the resulting behaviour of minor and trace elements during plant–soil interaction and may have significant implications for the development of phytoremediation techniques. Grafting has been widely used in orchard management because the rootstock can make the tree more vigorous and tolerant to environmental stresses. Iron deficiency is one of the major limiting environmental factors in apple production worldwide, leading Zhang et al.237 to use μ-SRXRF spectrometry to map the location of Co, Fe, Mn, Ni and Zn in longitudinal and latitudinal root samples of Malux xiaojinensis. This showed that Fe deficiency induced a significant increase in the relative contents of five micronutrients in the epidermis and cortex. This work claimed to improve the understanding of metal adsorption processes in apple rootstock cultivation in China. Turning now to an investigation of the accumulation of As in and on roots of maize and sunflower plants, Neidhardt et al.238 used μ-SRXRF spectrometry to map the spatial distribution of As in thin sections of plant root and soil that had been regularly irrigated with As-rich groundwater. The results showed that As had mainly accumulated at the outer rhizodermis along with Fe leading the authors to conclude that thin crusts of iron hydroxides covered the roots to act as an effective barrier to As, similar to the formation of Fe plaque in rice. The consumption of rice grain grown in mercury-contaminated soil was identified as a major route of dietary Hg exposure. A team in the People's Republic of China239 determined the most effective concentration of selenite treatment that led to the least Hg accumulation in rice grain harvested from Hg-contaminated paddy fields. The distribution and chemical forms of Hg and Se in rice root were studied using XRF and XAS techniques to show that treatment with an appropriate level of Se (0.5 μg mL−1) was an efficient way of reducing Hg accumulation in rice and protecting the health of rice-dependent populations in Hg-contaminated areas. The origin of different phyto-toxicity and biotransformation of cerium and lanthanum oxide NPs in cucumber was investigated by Ma et al.240 using μ-SRXRF and XAS techniques. In the aerial parts, all the La was combined with phosphate or carboxylic groups, whilst a fraction of Ce was changed to CeIII–carboxyl complexes, implying that La2O3 acted as its ionic form, where-as CeO2 displayed the behaviour of particles or particle-ion mixtures. The authors thought that the higher dissolution of La2O3 compared to CeO2 NPs might be the reason for the significant difference in phyto-toxicity and transporting behaviours in cucumbers. The threshold for ion movements in wood cell walls was observed by Zelinka and colleagues241 using XRF microscopy. Various ions (Cl−, Cu2+, K+ and Zn2+) were injected into selected regions of 2 μm sections of wood placed in a climatic chamber with controlled relative humidity. The sub-micrometre resolution of XRF microscopy demonstrated that threshold relative humidity depended upon ionic species, cell wall layer and wood anatomical orientation. These observations supported a recently proposed percolation model of electrical conduction in wood and contributed to understanding the mechanisms of fungal decay and fastener corrosion that occur below the fibre saturation point.
Foliar diagnosis has been used for over a century as a reliable tool to assess the nutritional status of vegetable crops. In a study of sugar cane plants, the top visible dewlap leaf was selected by Guerra et al.242 to investigate the direct analysis of plant leaves by EDXRF and LIBS techniques rather than the conventional approach where samples collected in the field are pooled into a composite sample and transported to a laboratory for subsequent analysis. The EDXRF analysis was carried out by irradiating the middle section of each leaf fragment using a collimated 5 mm spot size for 50 s, allowing the determination of Ca, Fe, K, Mn, P, S and Si. Analyses of 15 fragments were found to be sufficient to attain a representative analytical response from the whole diagnostic leaf. For the LIBS investigation, which employed a substantially smaller ablation area (750 μm laser spot), the sampling strategy was defined as a 9 mm × 9 mm leaf fragment area. Cross validation between the two techniques presented high correlation coefficients, ranging from r2 = 0.8704 (P) to 0.9778 (Ca), offering a novel and promising strategy for direct and fast plant nutrition diagnosis for the in situ analysis of fresh leaves, strengthening the implementation of Precision Agriculture and Green Chemistry concepts. Barnacles are able to establish stable surface contacts and adhere underwater. Whilst the composition of adult barnacle cement has been intensively studied, far less is known about the composition of the cement of the settlement-stage cypris larva. The main challenge in studying the adhesives used by these larvae was the small quantity of material available for analysis, being in the order of nanograms. Senkbeil et al.243 used in vivo and in situ μ-SRXRF spectrometry to reveal elemental distributions during the early attachment phase of barnacle larvae and juvenile barnacles. To obtain biologically relevant information relating to the body tissues, adhesives and the shell of the organisms, an in situ sample environment was developed to allow direct microprobe investigation of hydrated specimens without pre-treatment of the samples. In eight day old juvenile barnacles, the junctions between the six plates forming the shell wall showed elevated concentrations of Br, Ca, Mn, P and Sr. Confocal measurements allowed elemental characterisation of the adhesive interface of recently attached barnacles and substantiated the accumulation of Br both at the point of initial attachment as well as within the cyprid carapace. In situ measurements of the cyprid cement established the presence of Br, Cl, Cu, Fe, I, Ni, S, Se and Zn for both species. It was hoped that the previously unrecognised presence of Br, Fe and Se in the permanent adhesive would inspire further biochemical investigations of the function of these substances. As previously mentioned Cu concentrations in agricultural soil and plants is of considerable interest. Sacristan et al.244 demonstrated that the use of a portable XRF configuration was adequate for screening copper contamination in agricultural soil. Samples of soil, roots, stems and lettuce leaves were measured by both portable and conventional laboratory methods to show that portable XRF analysers offered a faster, cheaper, non-destructive and practical alternative for the screening of soil and plants. Furthermore, Towett et al.245 emphasised the importance of understanding X-ray physics and the calibration process in developing a method for the analysis of plant matrices using portable XRF instrumentation to ensure that the collected data is of sufficient accuracy and fit for purpose.
Borgese et al.246 published a comprehensive overview of the applications of TXRF spectrometry in the field of food analysis. This technique provides simultaneous multi-element identification over a wide dynamic range of concentrations. Several different matrices may be analysed to obtain results with good precision and accuracy. The focus was placed on applications within the food quality monitoring of beverages, vegetables, fruits, cereals, animal derivatives and dietary supplements. Furthermore, this paper provided a critical outlook on the developments required to transfer these methods from research to the industrial and analytical laboratories contexts. Dalipi et al.247 considered metal release from stainless steels in simulated food contact using TXRF spectrometry. Release tests were performed on six different stainless steels (AISI 420, AISI 430, AISI 202, AISI 303, AISI 304, and AISI 316) accepted for use in food contact situations. Solutions from the contact release tests were analysed for Cr, Mn and Ni and showed that AISI 202 and AISI 430 released the lowest amount of the elements of interest. AISI 420, however, released concentrations that exceeded the limit set in the Italian regulations for these analytes. One sample was selected to test the reproducibility of TXRF measurements performed in three different laboratories around the world. Results showed that quantitative analyses by the TXRF technique satisfied the requirements of this field of application. A methodology based on the combination of dispersive micro-solid-phase extraction with TXRF spectrometry was proposed by Bahadir et al.248 for the determination of CrVI in drinking waters. Multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) modified with the anionic exchanger tricaprylmethylammonium chloride (Aliquat 336) were used as solid sorbents. After the sorption process of CrVI on the modified MWCNTs, the aqueous sample was separated by centrifugation and the loaded MWCNTs were suspended using a small volume of an internal standard solution and analysed directly by a benchtop TXRF spectrometer, without any elution step. Parameters affecting the extraction process (pH and volume of the aqueous sample, amount of MWCNTs, extraction time) and TXRF analysis (volume of internal standard, volume of deposited suspension on the reflector, drying mode, and instrumental parameters) were evaluated to test the real capability of the developed methodology for the determination of CrVI at trace levels. Using the best analytical conditions, it was found that the minimum CrVI content that could be detected in an aqueous solution was 3 μg L−1. This value was almost 20 times lower than the maximum hexavalent chromium content permissible in drinking waters, according to the World Health Organisation.
A study by Gerke et al.249 provided a physicochemical assessment of manganese deposits on brass and lead components from two fully operational drinking water distribution systems. One of the systems was maintained with chlorine; the other, with secondary chloramine disinfection. Synchrotron-based in situ μ-XANES technology was used to assess the mineralogy. In situ μ-XRF mapping was used to demonstrate the spatial relationships between Mn and potentially toxic adsorbed metal ions. The Mn deposits ranged in thickness from 0.01 to 400 μm. They were composed primarily of Mn oxides/hydroxides, birnessite (Mn3+ and Mn4+) and hollandite (Mn2+ and Mn4+), and a Mn silicate, braunite (Mn2+ and Mn4+), in varying proportions. Chromium, Fe and Sr, in addition to the alloying elements Cu and Pb, were co-located within Mn deposits. With the exception of Fe, all are related to specific health issues and are of concern to the US EPA. Rainwater analysis by SR-TXRF spectrometry was reported by Lopez et al.250 Gallium was used as an internal standard for the preparation of calibration curves for the determination of As, Ca, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, K, Mn, Ni, Pb, S, Sr, V and Zn. The quality of rainwater was assessed by comparing the concentrations of all the elements in rainwater samples with the WHO guideline values for drinking water. Factor analysis was performed to determine the sources that contributed to the element concentrations in the rainwater, and were identified as traffic pollution, vehicular emissions and contamination from metallurgical factories. The results showed the need for control of atmospheric emissions in order to preserve the quality of the rainwater. Lee et al.251 offered a novel approach for the determination of total I in water samples from a calibration curve using samples of activated carbon discs to retain pre-concentrated solutions. The durability of these discs was assessed to validate their robustness during measurement by the conventional WDXRF technique. The accuracy of the method was confirmed using ICP-MS. A simple and eco-friendly procedure252 for determining total phosphate content in surface water was developed by combining a miniaturised ion-associated complex-based pre-concentration method with EDXRF spectrometry. The method was based on indirect determination of P using Mo present in the ion-associated complex formed by 12-molybdophosphate and crystal violet thereby overcoming difficulties stemming from low fluorescence yield and low energy of P Kα radiation.
Turning now to animate samples, element determination in plankton is important for the assessment of metal contamination in aquatic environments. Until recently, it was difficult to determine the element content of rotifers or ciliates derived from natural plankton samples because of the problems in handling and separating these fragile organisms. However, Woelfl et al.253 evaluated methods for the separation of rotifers and large ciliates from natural plankton samples (μg range dry weight) and subsequent analysis of their element content using TXRF spectrometry. Plankton samples were collected from three lakes and a river in Chile, Argentina and Hungary, prepared using a method originally developed for micro-crustaceans and analysed by TXRF spectrometry following in situ micro-digestion. The method proved successful, expanding the possible use of plankton in biomonitoring of metal contamination in aquatic environments. X-ray fluorescence computed tomography is an emerging imaging technique that allows for the non-destructive reconstruction of the internal distribution of elements within a sample. The common use of X-ray excitation energies (up to approximately 20 keV) has necessitated the use of L-shell XRF for higher Z elements. In a study,254 based on high energy X-rays at BL13W1 of the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility, the authors employed high-energy excitation for tomographic imaging of the REEs in fish teeth from deep-sea sediments on the mm scale using K-shell X-ray fluorescence.

Other environmental applications published during this review period included work by McIntosh et al.255 with the laboratory-based characterisation of Pu in soil particles using μ-XRF and 3D confocal XRF spectrometries. Due to its long half-life, legacy Pu is a continuing concern for both environmental and public health following the unintentional release of radioactive materials from nuclear power plants, weapons production facilities and waste storage or disposal sites. The element composition of two distinct Pu-contaminated soil particles was revealed from 3D images of the soil samples; one external to the Fe-rich soil matrix and another co-located with Cu within the soil matrix. The size and morphology of the particles was assessed with X-ray transmission microscopy and micro X-ray CT providing complementary information. Limits of detection for a 30 μm Pu-containing particle were <15 ng for each of the XRF techniques. Researchers in Mexico256 designed and built a simultaneous system for PIXE and XRF analysis of atmospheric aerosols. Under normal conditions, both techniques have limitations regarding the atomic number range of analysed elements, due to inadequate sensitivity. Thus, considering only K-series XRF lines, PIXE was more sensitive to elements (Al to Zn) because of the strong decrease of ionisation cross sections by protons for higher Z elements. In contrast, XRF, using X-ray tube excitation, worked better for elements with atomic numbers above 26 (Fe) and up to 42 (Mo), due to the higher photoelectric cross sections. The simultaneous PIXE and XRF system offered a more uniform response for element analysis of atmospheric aerosol samples. Despite the ban in applying tri-butyl-tin (TBT) coatings on leisure boats in the late 1980s, recent studies have shown an ongoing spread of TBT from leisure boats, particularly during hull cleaning activities. Therefore, countries in the EU have adopted expensive measures to clean this wash water. A more cost-efficient measure would be to focus directly on the source, i.e. identify leisure boats with high concentrations of TBT and recommend that boat owners remove the paint. Ytreberg et al.257 developed a new application to detect concentrations (μg cm−2) of Sn indicating that the hull contained TBT paint residues. Copper and Zn were also included in this application since these metals are also used in the vast majority of today's paints. A blind test with up to four layers of TBT-, copper- and zinc-based paints showed good correlation between XRF measured area concentrations and chemically analysed concentrations. Future usage of the applications was proposed to involve identification of boat hulls in particular with high Sn concentrations and also with high Cu and Zn concentrations as regulatory management tools. Pytlakowska258 reported an EDXRF method for the determination of dispersive micro solid-phase extraction of metals as their complexes with 2-(5-bromo-2-pyridylazo)-5-diethylaminophenol using graphene oxide NPs. A new procedure for multi-element pre-concentration of metal ions, specifically CrIII, CoII, NiII, CuII, ZnII and PbII ions was described. The effects of pH, amount of graphene, concentration of complexing reagent, sample volume and sorption time were optimised. Under optimal conditions, the calibration plots covered the 2–150 ng mL−1 range for each element. The precision was lower than 4.8% and the detection limits ranged from 0.07 to 0.24 ng mL−1 with recoveries for these metal ions in water reported as being between 94.4 and 103.5%.
3.5 Archaeological and cultural heritage
X-ray fluorescence spectrometry continues to make a substantial contribution in the characterisation of a wide range of archaeological artefacts and objects of cultural heritage interest where the non-destructive and non-invasive properties of the technique can be exploited, often accompanied these days by a range of complementary techniques. Successful application depends on the development of suitable instrumentation and Vandenabeele and Donais259 reviewed the use of mobile spectroscopies in archaeometry, discussing the use of Raman, XRF, FTIR and LIBS spectrometries as well as less frequently used techniques. A new confocal μ-XRF system for in situ non-destructive analysis in the cultural heritage field was described by Laclavetine et al.260 The advantages of this instrument were evaluated in providing compositional and spatial information for the non-destructive measurement of depth profiles of pictorial layers in old paintings. Kantarelou and Karydas261 developed a simple calibration procedure for poly-capillary-based portable μ-XRF spectrometers for the reliable quantitative analysis of cultural heritage artefacts. Their approach accounted for the variations in transmission efficiency of the poly-capillary lens with design and propagated X-ray energy and was based on a fundamental parameter correction procedure. Overall accuracy was estimated to be in the range 10–15% in the analysis of a range of glass and alloy samples. Cuevas et al.262 developed a portable EDXRD/XRF system for cultural heritage applications. This instrument incorporated a set of collimators mounted on a compact manual or motorised stage that allowed independent and precise positioning of source and detector for the study of objects with complex geometry. The authors claimed advantages over the commonly used angle dispersive XRD, because of the shorter analysis times (100–600 s) required to identify the main crystalline phases and the compactness of the described polychromatic beam instrument. Recognising some analytical limitations and the challenge of performing surface analysis on potentially heterogeneous objects, Tykot263 reviewed the advantages and limitations of portable XRF instrumentation in archaeological studies of obsidian, ceramics, metals, bone and painted materials. The author contrasted on the one hand the way such instrumentation allowed the characterisation of almost any sized artefact in museums around the world with the limitations of performing surface analyses on potentially heterogeneous objects.
One of the most popular cultural heritage applications of XRF spectrometry is in the analysis of pigments, whether in paintings, murals or frescoes and this year has seen a number of developments in the design of appropriate instrumentation. Ravaud et al.264 developed a versatile XRF scanner for the elemental imaging of painted works of art. The instrumentation was based on a standard X-ray generator with a sub-millimetre collimated beam and an SDD. The motorised instrument head was designed to scan areas of up to 300 × 300 mm2 with a resolution of 0.5 mm, permitting elemental maps to be collected in a 10 hour working day and performance was illustrated by results from a painting by Leonardo da Vinci. The interest of Wrobel et al.265 lay in the development of methodologies for the correction of interlayer absorption effects in the XRF imaging of paintings to avoid uncertainties in the interpretation of acquired images due to the attenuation of characteristic X-rays from deeper paint layers. Their particular interest was in extending such corrections to spectra obtained by polychromatic excitation and in determining optimal correction parameters. For studies of paintings where it is important to exactly align images recorded using more than one technique, Conover et al.266 described a new multimodal registration and mosaicking algorithm. Innovative features of this algorithm were the use of subsets of ‘wavelet’ images to select control points and a novel method for filtering pairs of candidate control points. One of the advantages of XRF imaging of paintings is the non-destructive nature of the technique. However, accepting the ‘micro-destructive’ nature of LIBS, Alberghina et al.267 demonstrated how this competitive technique was capable of determining elements undetectable by XRF instrumentation and of revealing the stratigraphic sequence of paint layers from surface to the preparation layer.
Turning now to applications in the characterisation of pigments used in paintings of various types, many studies continued to report the palette of pigments used by artists, but going back in time, Gay et al.268 reported the palette of pigments used in Palaeolithic times to decorate rock art in the La Garma Cave (Cantabria, Spain). The authors used μ-XRF spectrometry and μ-XANES, complemented by ED-SEM analysis together with in situ measurements by hand-held XRF instrumentation to characterise the different decorative steps. The state of two wall painting panels from Pompeii (Italy) was characterised by Madariaga et al.269 using a range of techniques, including EDXRF working in situ. Their results showed that severe chemical attack by acidic gases could only be explained by the action of H2S during and just after the eruption of Vesuvius when the Roman settlement was destroyed by volcanic activity. A SR-based XRF micro-analysis (μ-XRF and μ-XANES) study was undertaken by Keune et al.270 to measure the transformation and transport of arsenic sulfide pigments in paints degraded under the influence of light. Results showed that arsenate species were spread throughout the paint system and dominated the photo-degraded paint and ground layers. Arsenite compounds were located close to the intact arsenic sulfide pigments. The authors postulated that these compounds were water soluble and were transported by water throughout the paint system – a fact that was crucial for the conservation of such paintings. Appropriate environmental conditions for the storage and display of the paintings of Henri Matisse were the subject of a multi-technique investigation by Pouyet et al.,271 who used 2D full-field XANES structure imaging, 2D μ-XRF and μ-XRD and FTIR imaging to characterise the chemical and physical alteration of cadmium yellow (CdS) pigments. As part of their interpretation, CdCO3 and CdSO4 were identified as photo-degradation products. Chrome yellow pigments in the paintings of Vincent van Gogh were the subject of a XANES and μ-XRF imaging study by Monico and colleagues,272 who showed that the photo-reduction of chromates to CrIII compounds was the cause of darkening of chrome yellow pigments in a number of paintings. One of the instrumental features of this work was the use of the Maia detector, comprising silicon diode elements which, as might be expected, significantly out-performed the limited count rate and collection solid angle capabilities of a single SDD that might be used in conventional studies. The chrome/cadmium yellow issue is not just restricted to the ‘old’ masters, as reported by Izzo and colleagues.273 Their interest lay in post-war Italian paintings, where portable XRF measurements indicated the more modern use of chrome yellow, Naples yellow and cadmium-based yellow although the authors recognised the need for molecular spectroscopic techniques to complete their studies. Dredge et al.274 demonstrated that the use of ultra-high resolution scans of a portrait of Henry VIII on an oak panel (ca. 1535) using high-definition μ-SRXRF spectrometry (conducted at 12.6 and 18.5 keV – below and above the Pb L edges) identified pigment distributions, so facilitating a new understanding of the artist's paint application. Watercolour painting does not often feature in this section, but Kogou et al.275 included XRF spectrometry (with reflectance spectroscopy, μ-Raman and optical coherence tomography) in a study of 46 19th century Chinese watercolours held at museums in London. The palette was found to comprise mainly traditional Chinese pigments, but included the synthetic pigment, Prussian Blue (made in Europe but imported into China during the 19th century) in some of the paintings. Gomez-Moron et al.276 undertook a portable XRF and XRD study of paintings on the ceilings in the Courtyard of Lions (Alhambra, Granada, Spain) to identify the palette of pigments, the unusual feature being that these images were painted on leather. The historic decorative lime plasters of the Ellora caves (in the Indian State of Maharashtra) were studied by XRF spectrometry and a range of complementary techniques by Singh et al.277 The authors reported that the lime plaster was composed of a mixture of feebly dolomitic lime binder mixed with fine to medium grained siliceous aggregates with Cannabis sativa as an organic filler – the first authentic report of the use of cannabis as a filler in ancient lime plaster.
As a contribution to an improvement in data quality in the measurement of bronze and metal artefacts, Heginbotham et al.278 described a new set of certified reference materials designed to help improve the accuracy and range of calibrations for the quantitative EDXRF spectrometric analysis of historical and prehistoric copper alloys. This set of CRMs was designated the Copper CHARM Set, (standing for Cultural Heritage Alloy Reference Material Set). Lyubomirova and colleagues279 undertook a comparison of the reliability of analytical laboratories in the measurement of two bronze artefacts comprising a flat axe (arsenic bronze) and a sickle (tin bronze). Pieces (2 g) were cut and distributed to eleven laboratories (including those using EDXRF and TXRF instrumentation) and the authors reported that the majority of methods provided comparable results (especially for the major elemental components), recommending that future studies should provide data from the analysis of an appropriate CRM to demonstrate the reporting accuracy. Monte Carlo simulations were used by Manso et al.280 to compensate for the influence of the corrosion patina in the portable XRF characterisation of a 7th century BC bronze vase from the SW Iberian Peninsula. Their investigation indicated the benefit of a two-layer MC model of the corrosion patina covering the bronze, whereas a three-layer bronze-patina-soil model proved to be too thick to allow fluorescence X-rays from the bronze substrate to exit for detection. Oonk and Spijker281 reported the development of geochemical predictive modelling in archaeology using a supervised learning approach based on the use of multi-element XRF results, to distinguish archaeological feature soils from regional background soils. In one validation area in Zeeland, 95% of the test samples were correctly classified, the main limitation being lithological differences between sites used for model training and prediction.
Further contributions in the characterisation of metallic artefacts were reported by Visco et al.,282 whose interest lay in the extent to which ancient craftsman understood the effect of and were able to control metal alloy composition to produce objects with the appropriate properties. The authors undertook chemometric data analysis on XRF results for 134 bronze archaeological objects dating from the Eneolithic Period to the end of the Bronze Age/Early Iron Age excavated from Central Italy. Homogeneous groups of objects could not be found from the chemometric analysis implying that alloy composition was not correlated with the artefacts' use. It was postulated that the convenience of recycling broken objects to produce a similar bronze alloy was widely practiced by ancient foundry men. In contrast, Valerio et al.283 reported that the composition of about 20 artefacts from the Roman occupation of the southwestern Iberian Peninsula showed a good correlation with function, based on a multi-technique approach that included μ-EDXRF spectrometry. Roman plumbing was the subject of interest of Gomes et al.,284 who used the μ-EDXRF and μ-Raman techniques to characterise the joint area of thirteen lead water pipes from Conimbriga and Augusta Emerita (Portugal/Spain). Tin-lead solder of varying composition, sometimes with other elements present (Cu and Sb), were detected. The conservation of outdoor bronze statues was of interest to Chelaru et al.,285 using XRF spectrometry and ED-SEM to show the effectiveness of wax with a corrosion inhibitor to protect the artificial patina on bronze that was exposed to simulated rain. Papadopoulou et al.286 investigated the corrosion of ancient Roman brass induced by contact with soil using a multi-technique approach, including the use of XRF spectrometry. The object had been recovered from the Tiber riverbed (Italy) and was found to have undergone multi-layer corrosion product stratification, including copper sulfide layers that were observed with the precipitation of some rarely reported basic copper and zinc phosphates. These and other corrosion products were interpreted in relation to the environmental conditions of the burial. And to bring us almost up to date, MacDonald and colleagues287 investigated a time capsule associated with a World War I monument in a Canadian urban park using XRF spectrometry to characterise the metal container and neutron radiography to verify its contents which were said to record the deaths of 1800 Canadians who died during that war. The authors emphasised the role of non-destructive techniques in the analysis and preservation of cultural heritage.
The use of the XRF technique has become routine in the characterisation of ancient coins, as reviewed by Navas et al.288 In many studies, results must be interpreted to overcome surface enrichment effects, which occur sometimes fortuitously, sometimes intentionally and sometimes the result of corrosion. Moreno-Suarez et al.289 investigated the way this problem could be overcome indirectly by the combined use of XRF spectrometry and gamma ray transmission to estimate the bulk composition of five silver Roman coins. The mysterious presence of mercury enrichment on the surface of silver coins of the Persian Emperor Khusro II (591–628) was examined using μ-XRF spectrometry by Uhlir et al.290 Following more detailed measurements using other microanalysis techniques, the authors postulated that the source of mercury might be historic medical treatments. Pessanha and colleagues291 were also interested in overcoming patina constraints in the XRF analysis of Portuguese dinheiros coins (the first Portuguese coins to be minted with a billon alloy comprising Cu alloyed with Ag). Silver K/L intensity ratios from these coins (with a corrosion layer of unknown thickness) were measured in order to choose ‘clean’ spots for quantitative analysis.
Second only to paints and pigments, the analysis of pottery and glazes represents the most popular application of XRF spectrometry in this section. Typical applications are designed to elucidate the provenance of ancient ceramics, the source of raw material from which they are made and/or the firing temperature. As an example, Miriello et al.292 used XRF, XRD and Raman spectroscopies to analyse pottery amphorae which were used to transport wine in the Mediterranean area between the first century BC and the second century AD. Comparison between results for archaeological pottery from Cariati (Calabria, Southern Italy) and those for local raw materials demonstrated the local provenance of the pottery and the proportions of local clay and sand used in its manufacture. In contrast, Bernardini and colleagues293 used a more sophisticated set of techniques (μ-XRF-CT, portable XRF combined with XRD, and optical microscopy) to investigate both the manufacturing technology and provenance of Neolithic potsherds from caves of the Trieste Karst (north-eastern Italy). They reported that many samples were made using clay-silt paste containing quartz inclusions and tempered by the addition of abundant calcite and some limestone material. Raman and EDXRF spectrometry were used by Wu et al.294 to study the over-glaze decorations on ancient Chinese Jingdezhen ceramics of the Yuan, Ming and Qing dynasties. The authors commended this combination of techniques for their ability to identify the red pigment (hematite), yellow (tin yellow), carmine (gold – at less than 0.1% m m−1) and green (bivalent copper). Evidence for an unorthodox firing sequence was presented by Cianchetta et al.295 by the use of Raman, nano- and μ-XRF spectroscopy and full field XANES to characterise a single 5th century vessel painted by the ‘Berlin painter’. Supported by laboratory replicate measurements, the authors confirmed the need for multiple firings and multiple paint applications in the manufacture of this vessel. The techniques of XRF, NAA and XRD were employed by Molera et al.296 to analyse the ceramic pastes of late 16th to early 17th century lustre pottery unearthed at Mars Llorens, Catalonia, Spain. Results indicated a Barcelonian origin. Micro-beam techniques were used to analyse glazes and lustre decoration to provide information on firing conditions.

Natural geological materials and processes are frequently found as archaeological artefacts or are often of importance in the interpretation of an archaeological site. Indeed, the importance of scientific advances in geo-archaeology over the last 20 years was reviewed by Canti and Huisman,297 emphasising advances in our understanding of formation processes, improved interpretations and developments in site preservation. In addition to helping traffic management, it is heartening to hear that the construction of an underground parking garage in the centre of Zurich (Switzerland) unearthed the remains of seven Neolithic settlements from the 4th and 3rd millennium BC. In an investigation of the associated finds, Lombardo et al.298 described the use of flint-stone fragments as ‘fire strikers’. Evidence for this use was gained from μ-XRF and Raman spectrometries and 2D chemical imaging by μ-SRXRF/μ-XRD analysis, which showed traces of iron sulfide, which was almost exclusively pyrite, on the surface of the flint-stones. The anthropogenic origin and use of flint-stones was confirmed by the discovery of pyrite nodules (which were non-native to the setting) in the same stratigraphic layer as the flint-stones. Obsidian usually features strongly in this section of the review and is illustrated this year by the work of Ebert et al.,299 whose interest lay in elucidating long-distance networks for the transport of exotic goods in Mesoamerica during the Formative Period (2000 BC to 200 AD). They used portable XRF instrumentation to analyse 465 obsidian artefacts imported to the Pacific Coast site of La Zanja (Guerrero, Mexico) and interpreted results to show that the long-distance exchange of finished obsidian blades along the coast began and continued during this early to middle formative period. In a related study, Millhauser et al.300 used portable XRF spectrometry to study obsidian artefacts from the Late Post-classic Period (1350–1520 AD) discovered in the urban centre of Tlaxcallan, Mexico, undertaking a comparison of compositions with geological samples from obsidian sources that were considered likely to have supplied Tlaxcallan. Unexpectedly, the authors findings indicated that the population of Tlaxcallan procured obsidian from sources outside the major supply networks already documented in Mesoamerica, implying that geopolitics influenced the supply of bulk materials in the ancient states of Mesoamerica. Although obsidian in prehistoric and Bronze Age contexts has received much attention, Cagno et al.301 claimed that the consumption of obsidian during the Roman imperial period has received much less attention, pointing out that the Romans developed a man-made glass of black appearance that was cheaper and easier to work as a substitute for natural obsidian. The authors' use of ED-SEM, portable XRF and Raman spectroscopies provided an effective means of distinguishing man-made glass from obsidian using techniques that could readily be used at archaeological warehouses or museum sites.
Curiosity continues in the analysis of building materials of archaeological interest. The degree of sophistication that has developed in these studies is illustrated by the work of Hormes et al.,302 who examined three different mortar samples from different construction phases of the Cathedral of Paderborn (Germany – ca. 1220 AD) using conventional XRD, SRXRF and XANES spectroscopies. As part of a detailed interpretation of the mineralogy of these samples, the authors suggested that Fe was present as Fe2O3, most probably coating quartz grains. The state of conservation and the effect of an urban atmosphere on the 5th century Guevara palace house, Segura (Basque Country, Spain) was studied using XRF, Raman and FTIR techniques by Gomez-Laserna et al.303 Perhaps not surprisingly, the main sources of decay to the façade were the effect of atmospheric pollutants, biodegradation in areas close to the main drain pipe, infiltration of water and its spread by capillary aeration leading to severe material loss by soluble salts. Gallello et al.304 were also interested in the state of conservation of buildings, studying the Apadana Hall of Persepolis (Iran) using NIR and XRF spectrometry. The authors reported major degradation of the limestone that lay outside the protective shelter due to the presence of organic compounds. A different sort of degradation was studied by Jacot-Guillarmod and colleagues.305 Stone monuments often contain metallic reinforcement, the stability and state of degradation of which determines the strength of the structure. These authors used laboratory and SR tomography techniques to investigate the overall state of corrosion of iron strengthening bars in the cathedral at Orleans (France). Overall, their results showed the multiple roles that porosity played in promoting corrosion. A related study was undertaken by Grousset et al.,306 using μ-SRXRF/μ-SRXRD mapping to assess the mechanism of degradation in iron or steel reinforcing bars in historic monuments; the concern being that corrosion leads to cracking of the binder within the monument. Laboratory experiments that included complementary ED-SEM analyses showed that iron can migrate up to 1 mm away from a metallic bar inside the pores of the binder after 44 hours of corrosion and that corrosion products in the presence of Fe2+ and Cl− ions were ultimately ferric oxyhydroxides.

Glass is another old favourite for XRF studies, illustrated this year by a portable XRF analysis of the state of preservation of historic window glass at the 300 year old Newhailes House Edinburgh (Scotland) by Kennedy et al.307 Panes of glass were classified as plant-ash fluxed glass (pre ca. 1835) and synthetic soda glass (post ca. 1835) and the authors noted a greater proportion of the latter on the lower two floors of the building indicating a higher rate of replacement partly due to mechanical damage and/or vandalism. This observation has implications for the balance between public accessibility and heritage building conservation. Complementing the studies on mortar used at Paderborn Cathedral (Germany) mentioned above, Choudhury et al.308 reported on the 3D distribution of Fe, Ca and Mn and the localised chemical form of Fe in the intact corrosion layer on an ancient stained glass sample from the Cathedral. The authors used rather sophisticated SR-based confocal XRF and X-ray absorption instrumentation that included a lithographically fabricated spoked channel detector array as the novel collection optic to improve spatial resolution and energy-independent probing volume. Results showed that both the composition and chemical form of species in this corrosion layer varied as a function of the 3D location, contrary to simple corrosion models, which assume leaching processes. Continuing with the theme of stained glass, Van der Snickt et al.309 employed a recently developed mobile macro-XRF scanning device (previously used on paintings) to investigate stained glass windows inside a conservation studio. As part of a detailed study, the authors proposed the use of Rb K versus Sr K line plots to differentiate glass type (in particular two types of potash glass and three subtypes of high lime, low alkali glass) with the advantage that this ratio is less susceptible to the effect of weathering crusts than the Ca/K correlation. In addition, macro-XRF spectrometry offered an advantage illustrated by the discovery of a green cobalt glass – a feature that had been missed in previous point analysis studies. And just to demonstrate that glass studies are not restricted to windows, Moropoulou et al.310 used XRF spectrometry as part of a multi-technique analysis of glass tesserae from Hagia Sophia, Constantinopolis (Turkey). Results showed that the tesserae were severely deteriorated with the majority comprising Early Byzantine natron glass produced in the Levant with the exception of an individual dark blue tessera that had a Byzantine Syrian origin from the Middle Byzantine period.
Turning now to the characterisation of paper, parchment and inks, Bronzato et al.311 used a multi-technique approach that included XRF to assess the state of conservation of ancient books. Their methodology was to analyse ‘wash waters’ used as a preliminary step to wash leaves of a book as part of the de-acidification treatment in a conservation workshop. The authors claimed that this analysis provided valuable information on the state of conservation and composition of the leaves of paper, as well as the degradation reactions that occurred within them. Nunes et al.312 also used a multi-technique approach that included EDXRF spectrometry to characterise six paper samples from the 20th century that contained foxing stains (a brown discolouring found on old paper). No difference was reported in Fe and Cu contents between foxed and un-foxed areas, but the latter were found to contain lower concentrations of fungi belonging to the Penicillium genus. The most holy book in Tibetan Buddhism is the Tripitaka and two samples were analysed by Gong et al.,313 again using a multi-technique approach that included EDXRF. Results showed that Fe2O3 and silver powder were used in the writing pigment, red lead was used in the paper filler and the protective layer designed to prevent the silver powder from oxidation and sulfurisation may have contained beeswax – all information germane to the conservation of this manuscript. A newly commercially available macro-XRF instrument was used in conjunction with optical coherence tomography by Targowski et al.314 to map and determine the elemental composition of illuminated initials and writing pigments in a late 16th century illuminated manuscript from the Convent of Benedictine Sisters, Lviv (Ukraine). The authors detected small (cobalt blue glass) pigment as well as changes in the composition of iron-gall pigment on different pages. X-ray phase-contrast tomography was used by Tack and co-workers315 to reveal the writing on carbonised Herculaneum scrolls, without the need to unroll the scrolls. The damage was suffered in the 79 AD Vesuvius eruption and some text was difficult to read because of interference from papyrus fibres crossing the text. However, Pb was found as an elemental constituent of the writing, rendering the text more easy to read and further investigations were carried out to determine the origin of the Pb. A fundamental development in the reading and digitisation of ancient hand-written manuscripts was claimed by Albertin and colleagues,316 using chemical analysis by XRF spectrometry and X-ray tomography to decipher words and drawings inside a closed, 200 page 18th century handwritten book. Iron present in ancient iron-gall inks was essential to provide sufficient X-ray contrast compared to modern carbon or organic inks. These results were presented as a step toward the non-invasive reading of fragile and/or unopenable documents.
The analysis of human and animal remains also contributed to archaeological studies, as shown by the work of Swanston et al.,317 who used MS and SRXRF imaging to examine the bones of 17 individuals who were buried at the Royal Naval Hospital cemetery (1793–1822) in Antigua. High levels of Hg were found in one individual and the SR technique was used to show that the Hg uptake was of biogenic, not environmental origin, possibly as a result of medical treatment for syphilis or yellow fever. Pessanha and colleagues318 also studied Hg in 18th and 19th century human remains using two different EDXRF systems (one with polarised excitation geometry and one with micro-analytical capabilities). After a detailed investigation of possible sources, the high levels of Hg in the hair of one individual was attributed to the medical use of mercury-based compounds, most likely for lice infestation. High definition elemental maps of sections of fish otoliths (ear bones) were recorded using μ-SRXRF spectrometry by Cook et al.319 Four archaeological and two modern otoliths from the Pacific Coast of South America were examined and diagenetic alterations in elemental signals were reported, although these did not affect compositions beyond a few hundred micrometres of the surface.

Other archaeometric developments included the work of Lauwers et al.,320 who evaluated the application of Raman spectroscopy and hand-held XRF analysis in the characterisation of glyptics (engraved gemstones or glass materials) from the museum ‘Quinta das Cruzes’ (Funchal, Madeira, Portugal). The XRF contribution was to show that the antique Roman glass samples were characterised with low Pb and Sn levels, in comparison with the modern specimens which could be discriminated into two groups, Pb-based and non-Pb-based. The characterisation of historic musical instruments occasionally appears in this review and this year's example was by Invernizzi et al.,321 who used XRF spectrometry as part of a non-invasive multi-technique approach to achieve a correct interpretation of the varnish spectrum of the unique ‘Hellier’ violin, which was made in 1679 by Stradivari. Results indicated the use of supposed resinous drying oil, metal-based ink for the black decorations and bone or ivory for the white decorative inlays. Although, many techniques used for the analysis of archaeological artefacts and non-invasive, XRF (and other techniques using photon or charged particle excitation) have the potential to cause radiation damage. Bertrand et al.322 reviewed the short term and long term effects caused by radiation with the aim of raising awareness and encouraging subsequent research to limit radiation side effects. A degree of sophistication is required in the analysis of artefacts composed of two or more layers especially when the objective is to determine the correct location, thickness and composition of each layer. Cesareo and co-workers323 provided the theoretical background to XRF methods used for this purpose (usually based on the different attenuation between the K and L lines of a element) with typical examples.
3.6 Forensic
The forensic detection of human remains was considered by a number of contributions this year, including Kuzel et al.,324 who evaluated the performance of traditional bench-top versus hand-held XRF spectrometry in the detection of Ca and P to differentiate skeletal from non-skeletal material. Both instruments could be used for such measurements, but the authors observed that Ca/P intensity ratios differed significantly because of differential air absorption especially affecting the P K line with small variations in measurement geometry so that comparison of Ca/P ratios for the different materials must be based on measurements made under similar analytical conditions. In a similar application, Zimmerman and colleagues325 investigated the use of hand-held XRF instrumentation to distinguish human and non-human teeth and bone from non-bone material of similar chemical composition. The authors concluded that osseous and dental tissue could be distinguished from non-bone material with a high degree of accuracy. However, bone or teeth material could not be distinguished from rock apatite or synthetic hydroxyapatite, but ivory could be distinguished from octocoral. Soon et al.326 commented that recent research had shown that restorative dental materials could be recognised by microscopy and elemental analysis (including XRF spectrometry) and explored the issues associated with identifying victims of disasters where only fragmented or incinerated material was available. The identification of cremated remains was also the subject of a study by Gilpin and Christensen327 examining the potential of XRF spectrometry to detect non-skeletal contaminants in cremated remains. Based on the detection of Al, K, P, S and Zn, the authors concluded that the XRF technique was a valid approach in the identification of the presence of such material in potentially contaminated cremated remains.
Considering now other forensic applications, Takekawa et al.328 demonstrated that SRXRF spectrometry was a highly effective technique for the forensic discrimination of aluminium wheel fragments. Measured XRF intensities were normalised to those of Ga and the Cu/Ga and Sr/Ga intensity ratios allowed the 47 studied wheel fragments to be divided broadly into two groups. The authors considered that the rich elemental information available from aluminium wheel fragments could provide important evidence in a practical forensic examination. In another automobile-related application, Ishii and colleagues329 used the SRXRF technique, together with FTIR spectroscopy for the forensic discrimination of white automotive basecoat fragments. The authors reported that fragments could be discriminated on the basis of the presence or absence of Nb, with other trace elements being useful as indicators for the further discrimination of samples.
3.7 Clinical
Synchrotron radiation, which is highly polarised and tunable, played an indispensible role in nanotoxicology studies, in which the interaction between engineered nanomaterials and biological systems is examined. In a review by Li et al.,330 the role of SR techniques was summarised in screening physicochemical characteristics, in vitro and in vivo behaviours, and eco-toxicological effects of engineered nanomaterials. Kempson et al.331 implemented ultra-fast SRXRF mapping, enabled by the Maia detector, for the large area mapping of biological material to study the fate of metals and NPs in cells, 3D tissue models and animal tissues. This technique allowed, for example, the collection of a 2.5 million pixel map in 3 hours, compared to a typical SRXRF set-up, which needed over 1 month of uninterrupted beam time. Large area scanning has, for the first time, provided statistically significant information on a sufficiently large numbers of cells to provide quantifiable data on intercellular variability in the uptake of NPs. The authors suggested that the technique might offer possibilities for imaging the localised deposition of NPs in tissues that would be highly improbable to ‘find’ by typical XRF imaging. Special attention was paid by Smulders et al.332 to the toxicological mechanisms of silver engineered NPs. The lung distribution, local concentration, co-localisation with other elements such as Cu, Fe and S, and speciation of these Ag engineered NPs were determined using μ-XRF, μ-XANES and μ-PIXE techniques, after lung exposure in mice to Ag engineered NPs. Approximately a quarter of all macrophages in the lumen of the airways contained engineered NPs. High local concentrations of Ag were detected in the lung tissue. The largest fraction of the engineered NPs was dissolved and complexed to thiol-containing molecules. Increased concentrations of Fe and Cu observed in the Ag-rich spots suggested that these molecules were metallo-thioneins. Zhang et al.333 performed a quantitative evaluation of the pulmonary micro-distribution of TiO2 NPs after intra-tracheal administration in rats of 10 mg kg−1 TiO2 NPs with a micro-sprayer. Reference samples were prepared by dropping different concentrations of Ti solutions onto glass slides or lung sections of untreated rat. The μ-XRF measurements, using a 100 μm diameter beam size, resulted in a detection limit of 6.3 ng mm−2 of TiO2. The quantitative results for TiO2 NP micro-distribution suggested that more TiO2 NPs were distributed in the right caudal and accessory lobes, which were located downstream of the administration direction of the NP suspension, and the lower portion of each lobe.
Human exposure to asbestos can cause a wide variety of lung diseases and, therefore, Pascolo et al.334 investigated whether the Fe accumulation induced by the inhaled asbestos fibres also involved Ca ion accumulation. Lung sections of asbestos-exposed mice were analysed using an extremely sensitive procedure available at two SR facilities. Elemental mapping using a 12.74 keV beam energy, performed at the XFM beamline of the Australian Synchrotron facility (Clayton, Australia), was carried out from 10 mm thick samples, to determine the distribution and the concentration of Ca, Fe and Zn. Using an energy of 1 keV for O and Fe and 1.9 keV for Mg and Si, XRF maps were collected at higher resolution (300 nm spot size) at the TwinMic beamline (Elettra-Sincrotrone Trieste, Trieste, Italy). The results showed that μ-XRF analysis was able to detect significant deposits of both Ca and Fe on the inhaled asbestos fibres and that the extent of the deposition of these ions was proportionally directly related. Moreover, Ca and Fe deposition on inhaled asbestos fibers was concomitant with the appearance of inflammatory and hyperplastic reactions.
Biocompatibility is a key issue in the development of new implant biomaterials and therefore, studies related to bone mineralisation processes remain a relevant research topic. A novel class of biodegrading Mg implants was of interest to Grunewald et al.,335 who studied the interaction between Mg degradation products and the nanoscale structure and mineralisation of bone using μ-XRF, μ-SAXS and μ-XRD techniques. The μ-XRF results reflected elevated Mg levels after Mg implant degradation, predominantly found around blood vessels and bone cells in all samples. Local Mg concentrations were in the range of 2 to 3% m m−1, in contrast to about 0.7 to 1% m m−1 in bone matrix, where the Mg implant had long degraded and Mg levels obviously had normalised. Only for the fast degrading implant type were levels of up to 15% m m−1 of Mg found at the implant interface and in the bone marrow. Fratini et al.336 aimed at providing a full comprehension of the morphology and functionality of the bio-mineralisation process by combining several high resolution X-ray scanning techniques. A qualitative and quantitative structural investigation, from the atomic to the μm length scale, was obtained for engineered bone tissues. High resolution XRPCT, performed on a bone tissue, showed the 3D distribution of the bone, the soft tissue and the scaffold. High resolution scanning μ-XRD spectrometry was able to distinguish and monitor the evolution of different phases in the regenerated bone, while in combination with the μ-XRF technique it was possible to verify the chemical evolution of the different growing phases, and to study the distribution of Ca in the regenerated bone. To prevent metal diffusion from medical implants, Bilo et al.337 showed by performing μ-XRF mapping that atomic layer deposition was a suitable coating technique for implants. In an uncoated implant, the migration of Co and Cr particles from the bare alloy into animal bone tissues was observed after just one month and the number of particles significantly increased after two months. In contrast, no metal diffusion was detected in the implant coated with TiO2. Instead, a gradient distribution of the metals was found, from the alloy surface going into the tissue. Bourgeois et al.338 performed μ-SRXRF studies to assess the initial distribution of U within cortical and trabecular bones in contaminated rats' femurs at the μm scale. Uranium was found preferentially located in calcifying zones in exposed rats and rapidly accumulated in the endosteal and periosteal area of femoral metaphyses, in calcifying cartilage and in recently formed bone tissue along trabecular bone. Furthermore, specific localised areas with a high accumulation of U were observed in regions identified as micro-vessels and on bone trabeculae.
Performing in vivo measurement of As and Se in human tissue, Fleming et al.339 tested, for the first time, the previously developed portable XRF technique using animal tissue. The model consisted of a miniature X-ray tube of 40 kV voltage and 20 mA tube current, a collimator, and a PIN diode X-ray detector. Detection limits in soft tissue of 1.00 ± 0.05 mg kg−1 for As and 0.83 ± 0.02 mg kg−1 for Se were determined from phantom calibration trials. For dosed hamsters, consistently higher concentrations of As and Se were found in the liver and gall bladder, with elevated levels also observed in the intestines. Concentrations ranged up to 26.4 ± 1.4 mg kg−1 for As and 11.8 ± 0.8 mg kg−1 for Se. The stomach and heart exhibited more moderate concentrations, while the brain, lung, and muscle demonstrated lower levels. A ratio of approximately 2.5:1 was observed for concentrations of As:Se when considering the same or similar tissue sites in dosed hamsters. In the same application, Shehab et al.340 compared the performance of a portable XRF analyser equipped with a 4 W gold anode with a benchtop system provided with a 25 W silver anode tube and a higher throughput detector type. For the portable XRF method, As and Se MDL of 0.59 ± 0.03 mg kg−1 and 0.75 ± 0.02 mg kg−1, respectively, were found for 1 min measurement times, while the MDLs for As and Se using the benchtop system were found to be 0.35 ± 0.01 mg kg−1 and 0.670 ± 0.004 mg kg−1, respectively, for 30 min measurement times. In terms of a figure of merit, allowing for dose as well as MDL, the benchtop system was found to be superior for As and the two systems were equivalent, within error, for Se. Nevertheless, it should be noted that the measurement time of the benchtop system was significantly longer than that of the portable XRF spectrometer.
A suitable method for the preparation of the cell sample for XRF imaging is a prerequisite. Finney and Jin341 described a detailed procedure for the preparation of adherent mammalian cells by chemical fixation for XRF imaging. Although they believed that, cryo-fixation followed by imaging under cryogenic temperature represented the ideal imaging modality, they were convinced that aldehyde-based chemical fixation remained useful and sometimes inevitable to overcome the fully hydrated nature of nearly all biological samples. In another contribution,342 UV germicidal irradiation was employed to decontaminate previously cryo-preserved cells under liquid nitrogen, and then investigated its effects on elemental distributions under both frozen hydrated and freeze-dried states using XRF microscopy. The results showed that contents and distributions of most biologically important elements remained nearly unchanged when compared with non-UV irradiated counterparts, even after multiple cycles of ultraviolet germicidal irradiation and cryogenic X-ray imaging. This provided a potential pathway for rendering Risk Group 2 biological materials safe for handling in multi-user cryogenic X-ray microscopes without affecting the fidelity of the results.
It is well-known that chemotherapy drugs cause side effects in women submitted to breast cancer treatment. Therefore, some studies were performed to minimise these effects. Pickier et al.343 used the μ-SRXRF technique to analyse qualitatively and quantitatively the elemental changes of Ca, Fe and Zn in the femoral head of Wistar rats caused by two different poly-chemotherapy drugs used in breast cancer treatment. The μ-XRF measurements, carried out at the XRF beamline in the Brazilian Synchrotron Light Laboratory, showed a significant decrease especially in Ca concentrations when comparing the treated groups with the control group, making the femoral head susceptible to fractures. Majer et al.344 tested the in vitro antitumor efficacy on HT-29 cells of several di-nuclear bridgings and one chelate structure of the di-rhodium(II) complex of N-protected phenylalanine derivatives. The intracellular Rh content was determined by TXRF spectrometry, while speciation studies were carried out by SR-TXRF–XANES on selected HT-29 cells incubated with di-rhodium(II) complexes and characterised by high intracellular Rh content and a low acetate ligand displacement rate. The Rh content varied between 25 and 2500 ng per 106 cells. The speciation results indicated a possible change of the molecular symmetry of the di-rhodium(II) centre or cleavage of the di-nuclear bond.
Studies of the metal distribution in different substances related to the exposure of elevated concentration of metals, remain essential. Both μ-SRXRF and confocal μ-SRXRF techniques345 were used to study the distribution of U in single human hair shafts, originated from persons that had been exposed to elevated U concentrations. The experiment, carried out at the FLUO beamline at the SR facility ANKA (Karlsruhe, Germany) was optimised to detect U with a beam size of 6.8 μm × 3 μm allowing detection down to ng g−1 levels of U in 10 s (μ-SRXRF setup) and 70 s (confocal μ-SRXRF setup) count time. It was found that the U was present in a 10 to 15 μm peripheral layer of the hair shafts. Lifetime exposure to high concentrations of CrVI in drinking water results in duodenal tumours in mice, leading Thompson et al.346 to assess whether these tumours could be the result of a direct mutagenic or genotoxic mode of action. The distribution of Cr along the length of the duodenum of mice exposed to different CrVI concentrations was measured using μ-SRXRF spectrometry. These measurements revealed the presence of strong Cr fluorescence in duodenal villi, but negligible Cr fluorescence in the crypt compartment. These findings explained the lack of aberrant nuclei in the crypts of mice exposed to CrVI. Breier et al.347 studied intradermal metal deposits in an industrial worker, employed for more than 20 years in cutting high-voltage cables without any personal protection. The 2D μ-SRXRF measurements of the intradermal deposits showed the elements Cu, Ni, Sr and Zn, to be strongly associated with the S concentrations. This association was presumably induced by complex binding between thiol groups and metal ions. Moreover, the Fe distribution patterns were quite different from those of Cu, Ni and Zn. Nevertheless, all these metals originated from the major components of the metal wires that the patient worked with in his profession. As the transdermal permeation behaviour of metal ions from a nickel allergy patch test remains unclear, SRXRF and μ-PIXE techniques were used by Sugiyama et al.,348 to visualise the time-dependent Ni permeation in mouse skin. The results indicated that maximum Ni permeation occurred after 24 h of patch treatment, and the permeated Ni content was high in the epidermis and spread into the dermis beyond the basal layer. This method might be useful to determine the appropriate solution concentration and duration of administration for the patch test.
In this next section, a few interesting applications are brought to your attention. Quantitative element analysis of bovine ovarian follicles using μ-XRF imaging was performed by Ceko et al.,349,350 thereby improving their understanding of infertility and endocrine diseases involving the ovary. The measurements which were performed at the μ-XRF beamline at the Australian Synchrotron resulted in important high-resolution information regarding the spatial distribution of the elements of interest. In both contributions, follicle histological sections from different bovine ovaries were analysed. The elements Br, Cu, Fe, Se and Zn were consistently present within the ovarian tissue with Fe, Se and Zn localised to specific structures. Statistical analysis suggested that significant elemental differences were evident between follicle groups sorted according to their health status (Br and Fe), and their size (Se). Chwiej et al.351 studied the influence of the ketogenic diet on the elemental and biochemical compositions of the hippocampal formation using μ-SRXRF and μ-SRFTIR spectroscopies. These techniques examined the accumulation and distribution of selected elements (Ca, Cu, Fe, K, P, S, Se and Zn) and biomolecules (proteins, lipids, ketone bodies, etc.). The comparison of rats fed on the ketogenic diet with rats fed on a standard laboratory diet showed changes in the hippocampal accumulation of Ca, K, P, and Zn. Moreover, the XRF results revealed that the ketogenic diet induced analogous changes in Ca and Zn hippocampal accumulations compared with those observed in the acute phase of pilocarpine-evoked status epilepticus. The possibility of using a benchtop XRF instrument (50 W, molybdenum anode X-ray tube, Si(PIN) detector) for differentiating various bovine neck tissues was explored by Lahav et al.,352 to evaluate this technique as a dedicated intra-operative XRF probe. From various histologically verified fresh neck tissues from a cow, which was chosen as the animal model, ex vivo XRF data were recorded for six trace elements Br, Fe, I, K, Rb and Zn, showing that the XRF signals from these elements was sufficient for reliable tissue differentiation. However, the authors recognised the need for additional experiments to validate the method properly.
The morphological and chemical analysis of human and bovine dentin-adhesive layers were studied by Soares and Santo,353 who used μ-EDXRF spectrometry and SEM to evaluate dentin treated with an etch and rinse adhesive (ER) and a self-etch adhesive (SE). Untreated dentin of both human and bovine did not differ in terms of Ca and P or the Ca/P ratio. Specimens treated with etch and self-etch adhesive showed reduced P content, while specimens treated with rinse adhesive showed reduced Ca and P content, when compared with untreated specimens. The Ca/P ratio was significantly higher in human-ER and bovine-ER specimens than in human-SE and bovine-SE specimens. Untreated dentin showed a homogeneous elemental distribution. However, after adhesive treatments, the surface of the dentin showed an irregular demineralisation pattern. In another study354 the effect of bleaching agents combined with regular and whitening toothpastes on the surface roughness and mineral content of the enamel was studied. Mineral content evaluation and enamel roughness were evaluated initially, after bleaching, and after tooth-brushing, using a μ-EDXRF spectrometer and profilometry, respectively. The results showed that the enamel surface roughness was influenced by bleaching and toothbrushing. Moreover, the enamel Ca/P ratio decreased after bleaching, but tooth-brushing, regardless of the dentifrice used, did not reduce the enamel mineral content. Using a portable spectrometer, Suciu et al.355 performed a preliminary standardless XRF analysis of four endodontic repair materials. In addition to Ca and Fe, the spectra evidenced Bi and Zr as major elements and Au and La as minor elements. The elements Au, Bi, La and Zr were embedded in the materials in order to make them more opaque to X-rays than the tooth. Probably, Au and La were sintered with ceramo-metallic glass micro-particles.
3.8 Drugs and personal care products
Several publications described the use of the XRF technique for the analysis of cosmetic products. A simple method for performing analysis of Pb in lipstick specimens based on TXRF spectrometry was presented by Da Silva et al.,356 who prepared lipstick specimens by melting them along with a non-ionic surfactant and an yttrium internal standard followed by homogenisation. Solid prepared samples were then finely spread directly onto a quartz reflector, and TXRF measurements were made for 900 s live time. The method was found to produce a mean LOD for Pb of 0.04 μg g−1, with precisions in the order of 11–38% RSD and recoveries for Pb between 92% and 106% (n = 8). Although the spreading technique might result in thickness variations introducing higher variances, the presented method seemed to be a valuable alternative for performing routine Pb analysis in lipstick specimens without the need for harsh digestion procedures. Mattioli et al.357 investigated the suitability of 15 clay samples used for cosmetic purposes using XRD and polarised EDXRF spectrometry, with particular focus on the trace elements to assess the possible risk to health. Most samples were green clays which were composed of interstratified illite/smectite + illite + chlorites, with considerable amounts of Ni (from 75 to 170 mg kg−1) and Sr (around 450 mg kg−1), while the other green samples were composed of illite only and were enriched in As (up to 30 mg kg−1). The almost pure smectite samples were depleted of almost all trace elements and, therefore, represented the most suitable material for commercialisation. In contrast, the white kaolinite-rich sample was notably enriched in As (36.8 mg kg−1), Ba (1589 mg kg−1), Pb (65.4 mg kg−1) and Zn (224 mg kg−1), and was thus the most potentially hazardous product for human health.
Most people in the world use personal care products on a daily basis and therefore the presence of toxic elements in those products should be avoided. A study358 was carried out to measure the concentrations of Sn in six different brands of disposable baby nappies using a radioisotope Am241 excited EDXRF spectrometer. The top sheet and adhesive tape systems were measured separately. The concentrations of Sn found in top sheet and tape system were less than 23.1 mg kg−1 and 22.4 mg kg−1, respectively. These concentrations were less than EU regulatory levels of 0.1% by weight of Sn prescribed by REACH Annex XVII No 20. The same XRF method might also be used for the determination of Sn in any organic matrix with a minimum detection limit of 1.5 mg kg−1. A portable XRF spectrometer was also used by Bairi et al.,359 for the quantification of Ti and Zn in commercial sunscreens. The main problem associated with portable XRF analysis of sunscreens was identified as the matrix effects arising from organic materials present in the sunscreens. This problem was efficiently addressed by matching the matrix in working standards of similar organic composition. The XRF method had a good coefficient of determination (r2 > 0.995) for the analysis of Ti in the range of 0.4–14.23% m m−1, and Zn in the range of 1.0–23.9% m m−1. Comparative analysis with ICP-MS was performed, showing a good correlation (r2 > 0.995) with acceptable variation (≤25%) in results between both techniques.
Elemental analyses in pharmaceuticals are performed traditionally using sensitive techniques. However, Lewen et al.360 demonstrated the use of a field-portable XRF instrument as a rapid hands-on screening tool for pharmaceutical process chemists to evaluate laboratory development samples for the Cu and Pd content, where low sensitivity was not critical. Only 2 mL of solution – for both samples and calibration standards – was enough to cover the bottom of a sample cup and provided adequate sample depth. To date, the screening method described was used successfully on over 900 samples. Another research group from the United States361 also recognised the strength of the field-portable XRF technique for detecting variations in nutrient-relevant elements in biopharmaceutical raw materials, with the advantages of limited sample handling and maintenance, and a click-of-a-button acquisition. Only the set-up of a suitable calibration line for each matrix type forms a limitation. However, only the EDXRF intensity, which is a measure of the concentration, needed to be acquired to compare lot-to-lot consistency of raw materials. When an element was found to vary and correlate to process parameters then a one-time external calibration against ICP-MS was used to relate the peak intensity to the concentration of the element of interest. Also a fairly good approximation (about 2 μg g−1) was still possible by calibrating the EDXRF system with L-glutamine reference standards. Additionally, the S/N ratio was improved by using wavelet transform analysis to reduce noise associated with the broad background “Bremsstrahlung” radiation. Chromium(III) nutritional supplements are widely consumed for their purported antidiabetic activities and, therefore, Wu et al.362 used μ-SRXRF spectrometry and XANES to show that nontoxic doses of {Cr3O(OCOEt)6(OH2)3}+ (A), a prospective antidiabetic drug that undergoes similar H2O2 induced oxidation reactions in the blood to other Cr supplements, was also oxidised to carcinogenic CrVI and CrV in living cells. Single adipocytes treated with A had approximately 1 mm large Cr hotspots containing CrIII, CrV, and CrVI species. These results strongly supported the hypothesis that the antidiabetic activity of CrIII and the carcinogenicity of CrVI compounds arose from similar mechanisms involving highly reactive CrVI and CrV intermediates, and highlighted concerns over the safety of CrIII nutritional supplements.
3.9 Biological
In this review period the XRF technique was applied to the analysis of teeth, blood samples or faeces from mammals. Nganvongpanit et al.363 described the use of hand-held XRF spectrometry for the analysis of Asian elephant teeth and compared the elemental composition of permanent teeth among 15 other species, mostly mammalian, for classification of different species. The key elemental ratios for differentiating elephant deciduous and permanent tusks were Ca/P and Ca/Zn. The considerable variation in elemental ratio data across these 15 species showed that the majority of tooth samples contained Cd and Pb as well as Ca and P, suggesting exposure to environmental contaminants. From discriminant analysis, six (dog, pig, goat, tapir, monkey, and elephant) out of 15, the species could be classified with 100% specificity. Blood samples from harbor seals (Phoca vitulina) from Helgoland (North Sea) and Anholt (Kattegat, Baltic Sea) were analysed by Kakuschke and Griesel,364 to investigate 18 essential and nonessential potentially toxic elements using ICP-MS (Al, Be, Cr, Mn, Mo, Ni and Pb) and TXRF spectrometry (As, Ca, Cu, Fe, K, P, Rb, S, Se, Sr and Zn). Interestingly, blood concentrations of nine nonessential as well as essential trace metals (Al, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Mo, Ni, Pb, Zn) were measured to be significantly lower in the offshore living seals from Helgoland and Anholt compared with results obtained from animals living close to urbanised areas, such as the Wadden Sea and Elbe estuary. This suggested that industrial emissions, sewage deposition, shipping traffic and dredging tasks might be the cause of increased metal concentrations of inshore harbor seals. Barnett et al.365 used the portable XRF technique to determine faecal concentrations of non-absorbable digesta kinetic (Co, Cr, Ti and Yb) and digestibility markers (Si) in sheep and cattle. Faecal samples were analysed with a hand-held system, equipped with a Rh tube and working at 15 kV and 55 μA, for 180 s per sample while purging the system with high purity helium. Triplicate measurements of each sample were conducted after moving the sample cup on the surface of the XRF gun. The experiments revealed that portable XRF could be considered as an alternative method for determining specific elements within faecal material with the same level of accuracy currently experienced with ICP analysis but with less sample preparation and at greatly reduced cost, both monetary and time.

Biotoxicity tests such as the zebrafish embryo toxicity test, are used to evaluate potentially harmful effects from chemical substances. Bilo et al.366 performed elemental analysis on individual zebrafish embryos using TXRF spectrometry to study Pb and Zn bioaccumulation. A suitable protocol for sample preparation and TXRF analysis was developed. At the end of fish embryo toxicity tests, zebrafish embryos exposed to Pb and Zn reference solutions or to leaching solutions of toxic and inert municipal solid waste incinerator fly ashes were analysed. A significant trend of bioaccumulation was observed for Pb with values one order of magnitude higher than those expected. To conclude, readers interested in additional applications can always consult our companion ASU review on clinical and biological materials, food and beverages.2
3.10 Thin films, coatings and nanomaterials
The trend in the previous year of a significant number of papers dealing with the characterisation of thin films in the nanometre range continued within the current review period, especially with applications in photovoltaics. Eisenhauer et al.367 used GI-XRF to analyse buried interfaces in periodically structured crystalline silicon thin-film solar cells. Three dimentional periodically textured interfaces of liquid phase crystallised silicon thin-film solar cells on glass were analysed to find the influence of functional layers (SiOx or SiOx/SiCx) – placed between glass substrate and silicon during crystallisation – on the final carbon and oxygen contaminations inside the silicon. Simulations were performed in order to estimate the incident radiation intensity on the structured surface profile considering total reflection and attenuation effects. The results indicated a much lower contamination level for SiOx compared with the SiOx/SiCx interlayers, and about 25% increased contamination when comparing structured with planar silicon layers, both correlating with the corresponding solar cell performance. Agawane et al.368 reported the fabrication of high-quality CZTS thin film solar cells offering a high power conversion efficiency by a green and simple sol–gel technique. Fine quality Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) thin films were prepared by a non-toxic, simple and economical sol–gel and spin-coating technique. The XRF studies demonstrated that all the CZTS thin films were nearly stoichiometric having Zn-rich composition. All the annealed films were further subjected to fabrication of solar cells as an SLG/Mo/CZTS/CdS/i-ZnO/AZO/Al grid. The best solar cell showed a power conversion efficiency of 3.01%. Caby, et al.369 studied annealing-induced inter-diffusion in In2O3/Ag/In2O3 structures for advanced photovoltaic applications by a combined XRR and GI-XRF analysis. It was shown that the combination of the techniques in one instrument gave insight into the material composition and the layers structure (thickness, density) as well as modifications induced by thermal annealing. As X-ray tube excited Ag- and In-L lines overlap, measurements using SR were performed to excite the In- and Ag K lines, the influence of this parameter on the sensitivity of the measurements to the structural properties was shown. De Villers et al.370 claimed that the removal of residual diiodooctane (DIO) improved photo-stability of high-performance organic solar cell polymers. The authors investigated the effects of DIO on the long-term stability of the active layer by studying the photo-degradation under ambient white light illumination of the polymer PTB7-Th in pure polymer thin films and in blend films with PC71BM. Using XRF spectrometry, they detected I in the active layer films, indicating the presence of residual DIO after casting from solution. Further, it was shown that this residual DIO dramatically decreased the photo-stability of the active layer, but fortunately film treatment either with high vacuum (10−8 Torr) for 60 min or with a high-temperature (175 °C for 30 min) thermal anneal removed this residual DIO from the film and delayed photo-degradation. The authors concluded that it was very important to remove any trace amounts of DIO from deposited films when processing polymer solar cells with DIO-containing solutions. The influence of the interface quality on magnetic properties of Fe20Ni80/Tb–Co films with uni-directional anisotropy was studied by Kulesh et al.,371 who confirmed that a titanium spacer was added to act as a barrier preventing a thermally-induced diffusion between the magnetic layers. A decrease of the angular shift between Co and Ni dependences for Fe20Ni80/Tb26Co74 and absence of any changes for the Fe20Ni80/Ti/Tb26Co74 film was revealed by GI-XRF. The authors interpreted these results as evidence of the low-temperature interface modification in the form of a diffusion-like process in the samples without titanium spacer. Parditka et al.372 investigated experimentally and by computer simulation, phase nucleation in a sharp concentration gradient and the beginning of phase growth in nickel–silicon and cobalt–silicon systems. The combination of GI-XRF and EXAFS was used for depth profiling of a-Si/Ni/a-Si (and a-Si/Co/a-Si) layers with nanometre resolution. The authors observed that a mixture of Ni and Si with a 2:1 composition ratio was formed at the interfaces during sample preparation, but its thickness was different at the a-Si/Ni and Ni/a-Si interfaces of opposite stacking. During annealing the thicker Ni2Si layer grew faster than the thinner one. Similar peculiar behaviour was observed for the a-Si/Co/a-Si system. The computer simulations showed that the thickness of the interfaces and the accelerated diffusion in the intermetallic phase could play key roles during the earliest stages of growth. Pollakowski and Beckhoff373 combined GI-XRF and NEXAFS for non-destructive speciation depth profiling of complex TiOx nano layer structures. The correlation of the material functionality and underlying chemical and physical properties was the key question for them in view of directed device development, performance, and quality control. The authors showed that the combination of GI-XRF and NEXAFS could significantly contribute to the non-destructive chemical speciation of buried thin films and interface structures. Korytowski et al.374 used specular XRR and GI-XRF to investigate the impact of phospholipid oxidation of floating monolayers on the structure perpendicular to the global plane and on the density profiles of ions near the lipid monolayer. Systematic variation of the composition of the floating monolayers unveiled changes in the thickness, roughness and electron density of the lipid monolayers as a function of molar fraction of oxidised phospholipids. The quantitative data from well-defined floating monolayers revealed how the elevation of lipid level of oxidation altered the structures and functions of cell membranes.
Several papers described the use of advanced SR-based X-ray analytical techniques with resolution in the nanometre range for material characterisation. Bozzini et al.375 working at the ELETTRA SR source investigated electrodeposition and pyrolysis of Mn/polypyrrole nanocomposites, by soft XAS and photoelectron micro-spectroscopies. Electrodeposition of Mn/polypyrrole nanocomposites has been recently shown to be a technologically relevant synthesis method for the fabrication of Oxygen Reduction Reaction (ORR) electro-catalysts. The compositional and chemical-state distribution of the as-deposited material was investigated ex situ by soft XRF mapping and μ-XAS. Shown by XRF, the spatial distribution of Mn was consistent in a rather wide range of current densities while μ-XAS revealed a mixture of Mn valencies, with higher oxidation states prevailing at higher current density states. The same group376 investigated the co-electrodeposition of ternary Mn–oxide/polpyrrole composites for ORR electro-catalysts using μ-XAS and XRF mapping. Low energy XRF spectrometry and XAS micro-spectroscopies at high spatial resolution were employed for the investigation of the co-electrodeposition of composites consisting of a PPy-matrix and Mn-based ternary dispersoids, that have been proposed as promising electro-catalysts for oxygen-reduction electrodes. Specifically, Mn–Co–Cu/PP, Mn–Co–Mg/PPy and Mn–Ni–Mg/PPy co-electrodeposits were studied. XRF maps and μ-XAS spectra yielded compositional and chemical state distributions, contributing unique molecular-level information on the pulse-plating processes. Cobalt, Mg, Mn, and Ni exhibited a bimodal distribution consisting of mesoscopic aggregates of micrometric globuli, separated by polymer-rich ridges. Within this common qualitative scenario, the individual systems exhibited quantitatively different chemical distribution patterns, resulting from specific electrokinetic and electro-sorption properties of the single components. The authors emphasised that this result represented a considerable improvement in material quality with respect to previously studied Mn/PPy and Mn-based/PPy binaries. This same active group377 also performed in situ low energy XRF and μ-XAS to study Mn–Co/PPy electrodeposition. A novel thin-layer electrochemical microcell fabricated using UV lithography, was an improved version of concepts previously developed by this group, featuring a wide optical window that allowed the extension of the range of accessible in situ micro-spectroscopy and imaging methods, including those requiring low emission take-off angles. The three-electrode design implemented in the cell enabled optimal electrochemical control. The authors claimed that the first in situ experiment employing this new cell explored the electrochemical growth of a novel Mn–Co/PPy composite that was a prospective electrocatalyst for Pt replacement in air cathodes. Morphological, compositional, and chemical-state distributions of Mn and Co co-deposited with poly-pyrrole were subsequently performed in situ as a function of time and position, yielding otherwise unachievable information regarding the electrodeposition process. Peace et al.378 characterised Cu(In1−x,Gax)Se2 (CIGS) films with varying gallium ratios. These absorber layers were deposited on molybdenum coated soda-lime glass substrates with varying gallium content (described as Ga/(In + Ga) ratios) with respect to depth. As the responsible mechanisms for the limitation of the performance of the CIGS solar cells with high Ga contents are not well understood, the goal was to investigate different properties of CIGS absorber films with Ga/(In + Ga) ratios varied between 0.29 and 0.41 (as determined by XRF spectrometry) in order to better understand the role that the Ga content has on film quality. The Ga grading in the CIGS layer had the effect of causing a higher band gap toward the surface and Mo contact while the band gap in the middle of the CIGS layer was lower. Also, a wider and larger Ga/(In + Ga) grading dip located deeper in the CIGS absorber layers tend to produce larger grains in the regions of the films that have lower Ga/(In + Ga) ratios. Moreover, it was found that surface roughness decreases from 51.2 nm to 41.0 nm with increasing Ga/(In + Ga) ratios. However, the surface roughness generally decreased if the Ga grading occurred deeper in the absorber layer.
Several papers were published within the review period dealing with NPs, nanostructured material and quantum dots, emphasising the growing importance of this topic. Short-term effects of TiO2, CeO2, and ZnO NPs on metabolic activities and gene expression of Nitrosomonas europaea were investigated by Yu et al.379 The TEM imaging and the SRXRF microscopy of the NPs impacted cells revealed the increase of the corresponding intracellular Ce, Ti, or Zn contents and suggested intracellular NP accumulation. The elevation of intracellular S contents accompanied with higher K contents implied the possible activation of thiol-containing glutathione and thioredoxin production for NP stress alleviation. The NP cytotoxicity was not always a function of NP concentration. The observed phenomenon further indicated the possible establishment of an anti-toxicity mechanism in N. europaea at the genetic level to redeem the weakened ammonia oxidation activities along with the NP aggregation effects. Tepavcevic et al.380 reported a nanostructured layered cathode for rechargeable Mg-ion batteries. Nanostructured bi-layered V2O5 was electrochemically deposited within a carbon nano-foam conductive support. As-prepared electrochemically synthesised bi-layered V2O5 incorporates structural water and hydroxyl groups, which effectively stabilises the interlayers and provides coordinative preference to the Mg2+ cation in reversible cycling. This open-framework electrode showed reversible intercalation/deintercalation of Mg2+ ions in common electrolytes such as acetonitrile. The authors employed HR-TEM and XRF imaging to understand the role of environment in the intercalation processes. A rebuilt full cell was tested by employing a high-energy ball-milled tin alloy anode in acetonitrile with Mg(ClO4)2 salt. The authors revealed effective insertion of Mg ions throughout the V2O5 structure during discharge and removal of Mg ions during electrode charging, in agreement with the electrode capacity. The authors concluded that using XRF microscopy the reversible Mg intercalation was limited by the anode capacity.
Among the various physical qualities that characterise films in the nanometre range, the thickness strongly influences their properties. Thickness measurements of V2O5nano-metric thin films deposited on the glass surface using a portable XRF instrument were reported by Lopes et al.381 The new procedure made use of the attenuation of Ca Kα from the glass. It was shown that the Ca Kα XRF intensity was proportional to film thickness in nano-metric films of V deposited on the glass surface.
3.11 Chemical state and speciation
Within the review period several publications using XANES in fluorescence mode for speciation were of interest. Janots et al.382 investigated CeIII and CeIV distribution and fractionation in a laterite profile from Madagascar using in situ XANES spectroscopy of the Ce LIII edge at the LUCIA beamline (SOLEIL synchrotron, France). The XANES spectra were acquired from bulk-rock samples as well as from specific lateritic minerals or polymineral zones of the tonalite bedrock and the three overlying weathered (A-, B-, C-) horizons. The authors concluded that Ce was not necessarily oxidised nor fractionated from other REE during weathering in lateritic conditions. This implied that CeIII and CeIV could be mobilised in aqueous fluids during weathering, possibly thanks to complexation with organic molecules, and could precipitate together with CeIII in secondary REE-bearing minerals. The consequence was that (paleo) redox reconstructions in soils and/or sediments based on Ce-anomaly in weathered rocks or minerals must be interpreted with caution. Historical glass, especially non-durable medieval glass, could undergo corrosion. This sometimes results in the formation of dark-coloured manganese-rich inclusions that reduce the transparency of the glass. The use of quantitative valence state maps established by μ-XANES was reported by the group of Janssens383 from Antwerp to study manganese browning. While unaltered bulk glass contains manganese mainly present in the +2 valence state, inside the inclusions Mn was found to be present in higher valence states (+3 to +4). Two different strategies might be considered by conservators when aiming to improve the transparency. One was based on the reduction of highly oxidised black/brown compounds using mildly reducing solutions, while the other focused more on the extraction of manganese from the inclusions by the application of chelating agents. The authors described a method for quantitative mapping of the Mn speciation inside partially corroded historical windowpanes based on XANES. The calibration of such Mn valence state maps based on the combo method, offered a fairly reliable way to determine the oxidation state. This method was used to evaluate the effect of reducing treatments on historical glass that suffered from browning, dated from the 14th century and originating from Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, UK. X-ray elemental distribution maps of glass cross-sections were recorded at different energies, while Mn K-edge spectra were used to convert these into Mn valence state maps. The authors claimed that such valence state maps allow evaluation of the effectiveness of a reducing treatment. Boesenberg, et al.384 reported the correlation between chemical and morphological heterogeneities in LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 (LNMO) spinel composite electrodes for lithium-ion batteries determined by μ-XRF spectroscopy. The high-voltage LNMO spinel has potential as a material for high-energy battery applications, despite problems of capacity fade, which is due in part to transition metal leaching that produces chemical and morphological inhomogeneity. Using fast μ-XRF spectroscopy to scan the sample at medium spatial resolution (500 nm) over mm ranges, the effects of cycling rate and state-of-charge on the elemental distribution (Ni and Mn) for LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4/carbon composite electrodes in LNMO/Li cells were visualised. By acquisition of a stack of elemental maps, charge distribution was imaged by mapping the Ni oxidation state. The authors claimed that they could show significant effects on morphology and elemental distribution, such as formation of elemental hot-spots and material erosion, becoming more pronounced at higher cycling rates. In nickel hot-spots, they observed reduced oxidation of nickel during charging. Bera and Antonio385 performed poly-nuclear speciation of trivalent cations near the surface of an electrolyte solution using XANES. Despite long-standing efforts, there is no agreed structural model for electrolyte solutions at air–liquid interfaces. The authors reported the simultaneous detection of the near-surface and bulk coordination environments of a trivalent metal cation (Eu) in an aqueous solution. Within the first few nm of the liquid surface, the cations exhibited oxygen coordination typical of inner-sphere hydration of a Eu3+ cation. Beyond that, outer-sphere ion–ion correlations were observed that were not present in the bulk electrolyte. The combination of near-surface and bulk sensitivities to probe metal ion speciation in electrolyte solutions was achieved by detecting electron-yield and XRF signals from an inverted pendant drop. The authors concluded that the results provide new knowledge about the near-surface chemistry of aqueous solutions of relevance to aerosols and ion transport processes in chemical separations and biological systems. Synchrotron-based analysis of chromium distributions in multi-crystalline silicon for use in solar cells was performed by Jensen et al.386 Chromium atoms can degrade silicon wafer-based solar cell efficiencies at concentrations as low as 1010 cm−3. The Cr distributions in multi-crystalline silicon in as-grown material and after phosphorous diffusion was investigated. The authors were able to quantify precipitate size and spatial distribution with interstitial Cr concentration and minority carrier lifetime measurements to provide insight into chromium gettering kinetics and offer suggestions for minimising the device impacts of chromium. Sorption of trivalent cerium was reported by Shin et al.387 Sorption of Ce by mixtures of synthetic Mn oxides and microbial cells of Pseudomonas fluorescens was investigated to elucidate the role of microorganisms on CeIII oxidative migration in the environment. The mixtures, upon which Ce was sorbed following exposure to solutions containing 1.0 × 10−4 or 1.0 × 10−5 mol L−1 CeIII were analysed by SEM-EDS and μ-XRF spectrometry at synchrotron facilities. A Ce L-III-edge μ-XANES spectra analysis was also performed to determine the oxidation states of Ce adsorbed to the Mn oxides and microbial cells in the mixtures. SEM-EDS and μ-XRF analyses showed that Ce was sorbed by both MnO2 and microbial cells. Nanoparticles containing cerium and phosphor were developed on the surface of the microbial cells. Analysis by XANES showed that lower fractions of CeIII were oxidised to CeIV in the mixtures containing greater amounts of microbial cells. Micro-XANES analysis revealed that Ce was present as CeIII on the microbial cells and as CeIV on Mn oxides. The authors concluded that the association of CeIII with the microbial cell surface and the formation of Ce phosphate NP are responsible for suppressing the oxidation of CeIII to CeIV in the mixtures. Apart from avoidance of waste materials, reuse is a main goal of modern waste management. Reuse of waste materials demands adequate risk assessment and reliable quantification methods considering the release potential of harmful compounds. In this context, due to its carcinogenicity, CrVI is of high eco-toxicological, human toxicological and environmental relevance. Delay et al.388 investigated chromium speciation in solid waste material and eluates by XAS and ion chromatography. In this contribution, the authors focused on the speciation of chromium in two representative solid waste materials (demolition waste material (DWM); municipal waste incineration product (MWIP)) and eluates obtained after leaching. For chromium speciation, XANES and ion chromatography coupled with IC-ICP-OES were applied. It could be observed that in spite of relatively low contents of CrVI in both solid materials (DWM: 16 ± 1 mg kg−1, MWIP: 67 ± 5 after aqua regia digestion), environmentally relevant concentrations of CrVI were released from the materials as revealed by batch and column leaching experiments. In particular, threshold values for CrVI of the German Federal Soil Protection and Contaminated Sites Ordinance were significantly exceeded. Application of XANES allowed both the determination of mobilisable CrVI directly in the solid materials and in the alkaline eluates, even at concentrations below 500 μg L−1. The results obtained were in agreement with data of leaching tests and with IC-ICP-OES measurements. The IC-ICP-OES method enabled a rapid, well-reproducible and sensitive quantification of CrVI in the eluates in the lower μg L−1 range. The authors concluded that the presented combination of independent analytical methods and mutual validation was highly powerful and was a valuable contribution for risk assessment of waste material. Price et al.389 reported in situ micro-focus CT of the composition of a single catalyst particle during hydrogenation of nitrobenzene in the liquid phase. Heterogeneous catalysis performed in the liquid phase is an important type of catalytic process which is rarely studied in situ. Using μ-XRF-CT, μ-XRD-CT in combination with XANES, the authors determined the active state of a Mo-promoted Pt/C catalyst (NanoSelect) for the liquid-phase
hydrogenation of nitrobenzene under standard operating conditions. Firstly, μ-XRF-CT and μ-XRD-CT revealed the active state of Pt catalyst to be reduced, non-crystalline, and evenly dispersed across the support surface. Secondly, imaging of the Pt and Mo distribution revealed they were highly stable on the support and not prone to leaching during the reaction. The authors concluded that this study demonstrated the ability of chemical computed tomography to image the nature and spatial distribution of catalysts under reaction conditions. Spectroscopic characterisation of the complexes between iron/manganese and natural organic matter by electron paramagnetic resonance and SR-based spectroscopic techniques was reported by Luo et al.390 The surface interaction between heavy metals and natural organic matters (NOM) substantially affects their migration and conversion in natural environments. In this paper, the chemical speciation and element mapping of Fe and Mn in reduced NOM were investigated. Micro-XRF results suggested that the scatterplots of Fe and Mn distributions at pH 11 indicate strong correlations for Mn–Fe binary metallic ions. Micro-XANES results further interpret the presence of higher Mn oxidation states at pH 11, while Fe kept trivalent in all samples. These results revealed that the surface interactions were closely related to the redox state of NOM and were beneficial for better understanding the speciation, immobilisation, transport, and toxicity of metal ions in natural waters. The group of Janssens in Antwerp391 used Cr speciation methods and IR spectroscopy to study the chemical reactivity of lead chromate-based pigments in an oil medium. Environmental factors, such as light, humidity and temperature are triggering agents for the alteration of organic and/or inorganic constituents of oil paintings. The oxidation of the organic material was favoured by increased relative humidity and temperature, whereas processes involving changes of the oxidation states of a number of inorganic pigments (e.g., vermilion, cadmium yellows, zinc yellows, chrome yellows) are mainly activated by light-exposure. In view of the optimisation of the long-term conservation and restoration strategies of paintings it is of relevant interest to establish the consequences of thermal parameters (temperature and relative humidity) on the chemical/photochemical-reactivity and the nature of the alteration products of light sensitive-pigments in oil medium. To this aim the authors proposed a multi-method analytical approach based on the combination of diffuse reflectance UV-VIS, FTIR, μ-SRXRF/μ-XANES and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopies to study the effects of different relative humidity conditions before and after light exposure on the reactivity of a series of lead chromate-based pigments [such as PbCrO4·PbO (monoclinic), PbCrO4 (monoclinic) and PbCr0.2S0.8O4 (orthorhombic)] in an oil medium. The investigation of paint models was also compared to that of a late 19th century historical orthorhombic PbCr0.4S0.6O4 oil paint. Chromium K-edge μ-XANES/μ-XRF mapping analysis and EPR spectroscopy were employed in a complementary fashion to determine the amount, nature and distribution of CrIII and CrV-based alteration compounds within the paints with μm spatial resolution. Under the employed thermal aging conditions, lead(II)-carboxylates and reduced Cr-compounds (in abundance of up to about 35% at the surface) have been identified in the lead chromate-based paints. The tendency of chromates to be reduced increased with increasing moisture levels and was favoured for the orthorhombic PbCr0.2S0.8O4 compounds. The redox process gave rise to the formation of the CrV-species in relative amounts much higher than in the equivalent paint which was exposed only to light. After light-exposure of the thermally aged paints, compounds ascribable to the oxidation of the organic binder were detected for all the types of pigments. Nevertheless, the previous thermal treatment increased the tendency toward photo-reduction of only the PbCr0.2S0.8O4 pigment. For this light-sensitive compound, the thickness variation of the reduced Cr-rich (ca. 70%) photo-alteration layer with moisture levels could be ascribed to a surface passivation phenomenon that had already occurred before photochemical aging. Nie et al.392 reported evidence of cell surface iron speciation of acidophilic iron-oxidising microorganisms in an indirect bioleaching process. While the indirect model was widely accepted in bioleaching, the evidence of cell surface iron speciation was not reported until now. The iron speciation on the cell surfaces of four typically acidophilic iron-oxidising microorganisms (AIOM) grown on different energy substrates (chalcopyrite, pyrite, ferrous sulfate and elemental sulfur (S0)) were studied in situ firstly by using μ-SRXRF and XAS spectroscopy. Results showed that the cells grown on iron-containing substrates had apparently higher surface iron content than the cells grown on S0. Both ferrous Fe and ferric Fe were detected on the cell surface of all tested AIOMs, and the FeII/FeIII ratios of the same microorganism were affected by different energy substrates. The Fe distribution and bonding state of single cell of A. manzaensis were then studied in situ by scanning soft X-ray microscopy, based on dual-energy contrast analysis and stack analysis. Results showed that the Fe species distributed evenly on the cell surface and bonded with amino, carboxyl and hydroxyl groups.
Bahadir et al.393 performed Cr speciation in water samples by dispersive liquid–liquid micro-extraction (DLLME) combined with TXRF spectrometry. Parameters affecting the extraction procedure for Cr speciation (pH, sample volume, disperser solvent, complexing agent, organic solvent, temperature) and TXRF conditions (sample volume, drying mode, measurement time, internal standardisation) were carefully evaluated to ensure the highest sensitivity for Cr determination. The authors found that the minimum CrVI content that could be detected was 0.8 μg L−1. This value was significantly lower than the maximum CrVI content permissible in drinking waters and it was better or comparable with those obtained in other published works based on the use of solid phase extraction or liquid phase micro-extraction in combination with AAS techniques. A good linearity (R2 = 0.9937) was obtained in the range of 5 to 4000 μg L−1 demonstrating the suitability of the DLLME + TXRF spectrometry for both the analysis of drinking and waste water samples. The authors emphasised the advantages of the DLLME-TXRF systems: the use of very small amounts of reagents and the simplicity and low cost of operation of the benchtop instrument (no cooling, media and gas consumption were needed). Interactions between metals and activated sludge can substantially affect the fate and transport of heavy metals in wastewater treatment plants. Therefore, it was important to develop a simple, fast and efficient method to elucidate the interaction. This was undertaken by Luo et al.394 who approached the binding between CuII and aerobic granules by a modified titration and μ-XRF spectrometry. A modified titration method with a dynamic mode was developed to investigate the binding of CuII, a typical heavy metal, onto aerobic granules. The titration results indicated that pH and ionic strength both had a positive effect on the bio-sorption capacity of the granular sludge. The μ-XRF results demonstrated that the distribution of metals on the granular surface was heterogeneous, and Cu showed strong correlations and had the same “hot spots” positions with other metal ions (e.g., Ca, Fe, Mg). Ion exchange and complexing were the main mechanisms for the bio-sorption of CuII by aerobic granules. These results would be beneficial for better understanding of CuII migration and its fate in wastewater treatment plants. Zheng et al.395 reported visible-light photo-reduction, adsorption, matrix conversion and membrane separation for ultrasensitive Cr determination in natural water by XRF spectrometry. Nano-TiO2 was immobilised onto cellulose filter paper, surface self-assembled with acid violet 43, denoted as TCP-AV, and used as a photo-catalyst, solid phase adsorbent, filter membrane, and chemical sensor. Because the UV-VIS wavelength response range of TCP-AV was expanded to 750 nm, 96.0% of CrVI could be photo-reduced to nontoxic and immobile CrIII under visible-light irradiation. After photo-transformation of CrVI, both CrVI and CrIII in natural water could be enriched onto TCP-AV with an adsorption ratio of 92.7%, which was due to the high adsorption capacity of TCP-AV (more than 4.66 mg) and the strong electric attraction between acid violet 43 (an anionic dye) and cationic CrIII. After matrix conversion and matrix effects elimination, total chromium was determined directly by XRF spectrometry. The detection limit (3σ, n = 11) was improved from about 2 mg L−1 to 0.59 g L−1. This proposed method with a linear range of 2–100 μg L−1 was successfully applied for total chromium determination in real water samples.
Abbreviations

2D/3DTwo dimensional/three dimensional
AASAtomic absorption spectrometry
ADAnno domini
ADCAnalog to digital converter
ADRAdiabatic demagnetisation refrigerator
AESAtomic emission spectrometry
AFSAtomic fluorescence spectrometry
AIOMAcidophilic iron-oxidising microorganisms
AISIAmerican Iron and Steel Institute
AMSAccelerator mass spectrometry
ANOVAAnalysis of variance
APDCAmmonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate
APSAdvanced photon source
APXSAlpha-Particle X-ray Spectrometer
ASICApplication-specific integrated circuit
ASTMAmerican Society for Testing and Materials
ASUAtomic Spectrometry Update
BCBefore Christ
BCRCommunity Bureau of Reference
BrPFBr-labeled phenolformaldehyde
BSEBack-scattered electrons
CCDCharge coupled detector
CdTeCadmium telluride
CHARMCultural Heritage Alloy Reference Material
CIGSCopper indium gallium selenide
CPCalcium phosphate
CRMCertified reference material
CTComputed tomography
CVDChemical vapour deposition
CXCColour X-ray camera
CZTSCadmium zinc telluride sulphide
DIODiiodooctane
DLLMEDispersive liquid–liquid microextraction
DMSPEDispersive micro solid-phase extraction
DWMDemolition waste material
EDEnergy dispersive
ED-SEMEnergy dispersive scanning electron microscopy
EDXRDEnergy dispersive X-ray diffraction
EDXRFEnergy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
EDXRF-CTEnergy dispersive X-ray fluorescence computed tomography
EPMAElectron probe microanalysis
EPRElectron paramagnetic resonance
EREtch and rinse
ESRFEuropean Synchrotron Radiation Facility
EUEuropean Union
EXAFSExtended X-ray absorption fine structure
FCCFluid-catalytic-cracking
FIB-SEMFocussed ion beam scanning electron microscopy
FPFundamental parameter
FPGAField programmable gate array
FTIRFourier transform infrared
GCGas chromatography
GEGrazing exit
GE-XRFGrazing exit X-ray fluorescence
GIGrazing incidence
GI-XRFGrazing incidence X-ray fluorescence
GOGraphene oxide
GO-SHMercapto-modified graphene oxide
GSDDGated silicon drift detector
HBCDDHexabromocyclododecane
hiRXHigh resolution X-ray
HEXRFHigh energy X-ray fluorescence
HPLC-ICP-MSHigh performance liquid chromatography inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
HR-TEMHigh resolution transmission electron microscopy
IC-ICP-OESIon chromatography inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry
ICPInductively coupled plasma
ICP-OESInductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry
ICP-MSInductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
INAAInstrumental neutron activation analysis
IRInfrared
JETJoint European Torus
LA-ICP-MSLaser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
LIBSLaser induced breakdown spectrometry
LNMOLithium nickel manganese oxide
LODLimit of detection
LOQLimit of quantification
MCMonte Carlo
MDLMethod detection limit
MDTMinimum detection time
MSMass spectrometry
MSWIMunicipal solid waste incineration
MWIPMunicipal waste incineration product
MWMolecular weight
NAANeutron activation analysis
NEXAFSNear edge X-ray absorption fine structure
NIRNear infrared
NISTNational Institute of Standards and Technology
NOMNatural organic matters
NPNanoparticle
ORROxygen reduction reaction
PCAPrincipal component analysis
PGEPlatinum group element
PIXEParticle-induced X-ray emission
PIXLPlanetary Instrument for X-ray Lithochemistry
PLSPartial least squares
PMParticulate matter
PPPoly(propylene)
PXRFPortable X-ray fluorescence
REACHRegistration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals
REERare earth elements
RIXSResonant inelastic X-ray scattering
RSDRelative standard deviation
SAXSSmall angle X-ray scattering
SCDSwept charge device
SDSecure digital
SDDSilicon drift detector
SESelf-etch
SEISolid electrolyte interphase
SEMScanning electron microscopy
SEM-EDSScanning electron microscopy energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry
Si(PIN)Silicon PIN detector device
S/BSignal-to-background ratio
SLGSoda lime glass
S/NSignal-to-noise ratio
SOFCSolid oxide fuel cells
SRMStandard reference material
SRSynchrotron radiation
SR-CTSynchrotron radiation computed tomography
SR-FTIRSynchrotron radiation fourier transform infrared
SR-TXRFSynchrotron radiation total reflection X-ray fluorescence
SR-TXRF-XANESSynchrotron radiation total reflection X-ray fluorescence X-ray absorption near edge structure
SRXRDSynchrotron radiation X-ray diffraction
SRXRFSynchrotron radiation X-ray fluorescence
SSISewage sludge incineration
SSRFShanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility
STJSuperconducting tunnel junction
SWSouthwest
TBTTributyltin
TCP-AVNano-TiO2 immobilised onto cellulose filter paper, surface self-assembled with acid violet 43
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
TESTransition edge sensor
TGAThermogravimetric analysis
TOF-SIMSTime-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry
TXRFTotal reflection X-ray fluorescence
UKUnited Kingdom
USUnited States
USAUnited States of America
UVUltraviolet
UV-VISUltraviolet-visible
WDXRFWavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence
WHOWorld Health Organisation
XAFSX-ray absorption fine structure
XANESX-ray absorption near edge structure
XASX-ray absorption spectroscopy
XCTX-ray computed tomography
XFMX-ray fluorescence microprobe
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRDX-ray diffraction
XRD-CTX-ray diffraction computed tomography
XRFX-ray fluorescence
XRF-CTX-ray fluorescence computed tomography
XRPCTX-ray phase contrast tomography
XRRX-ray reflectometry
XRR-GI-XRFX-ray reflectometry grazing incidence X-ray fluorescence
XSWX-ray standing waves
YSZYttria-stabilised zirconia

Z
Atomic number

References
M. West, A. T. Ellis, P. J. Potts, C. Streli, C. Vanhoof and P. Wobrauschek, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2015, 30(9), 1839–1889 RSC .
A. Taylor, M. P. Day, S. Hill, J. Marshall, M. Patriarca and M. White, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2015, 30(3), 542–579 RSC .
E. H. Evans, J. Pisonero, C. M. M. Smith and R. N. Taylor, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2015, 30(5), 1017–1037 RSC .
C. F. Harrington, R. Clough, S. J. Hill, Y. Madrid and J. F. Tyson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2015, 30(7), 1427–1468 RSC .
S. Carter, A. Fisher, R. Garcia, B. Gibson, S. Lancaster, J. Marshallf and I. Whiteside, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2015, 30(11), 2249–2294 RSC .
O. T. Butler, W. R. L. Cairns, J. M. Cook and C. M. Davidson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2016, 31(1), 35–89 RSC .
M. Moradi, Y. Yamini, J. Kakehmam and K. Ahmadi, J. Iran. Chem. Soc., 2015, 12(5), 831–838 CrossRef CAS .
T. Trojek and T. Cechak, Radiat. Prot. Dosim., 2015, 164(4), 529–532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Goldin and K. H. Pryor, Health Phys., 2016, 110(2), 101–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Gore, M. P. Taylor, R. G. Pritchard and K. A. Fryirs, Powder Diffr., 2014, 29, S8–S14 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Xiao, X. H. Wang and W. Hang, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2015, 35(9), 2377–2387 CAS .
A. Galuszka, Z. M. Migaszewski and J. Namiesnik, Environ. Res., 2015, 140, 593–603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, J. H. Wang, A. X. Lu and P. Han, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2015, 35(4), 1111–1115 CAS .
L. V. de Voorde, B. Vekemans, E. Verhaeven, P. Tack, R. De Wolf, J. Garrevoet, P. Vandenabeele and L. Vincze, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2015, 110, 14–19 CrossRef .
K. Hagiwara, Y. Koike, M. Aizawa and T. Nakamura, Talanta, 2015, 144, 788–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Lin, S. X. Li and F. Y. Zheng, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(11), 9002–9006 RSC .
S. Kunimura and K. Amagasu, ISIJ Int., 2015, 55(12), 2697–2699 CrossRef CAS .
C. Polese, S. B. Dabagov, A. Esposito, A. Liedl, D. Hampai, C. Bartuli and M. Ferretti, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2015, 355, 281–284 CrossRef CAS .
L. Marinangeli, L. Pompilio, A. Baliva, S. Billotta, G. Bonanno, M. C. Domeneghetti, A. M. Fioretti, O. Menozzi, F. Nestola, E. Piluso, M. Pondrelli, V. La Salvia, M. C. Somma, F. Tateo, P. Petrinca, C. Di Giulio and A. C. Tangari, Rendiconti Lincei. Scienze Fisiche e Naturali, 2015, 26(4), 529–537 CrossRef .
M. Rouillon, L. J. Kristensen and D. B. Gore, Appl. Spectrosc., 2015, 69(7), 815–822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. O'Neil, M. E. Newton and J. V. Macpherson, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87(9), 4933–4940 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Quye-Sawyer, V. Vandeginste and K. J. Johnston, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2015, 30(7), 1490–1499 RSC .
D. E. B. Fleming, K. A. Foran, J. S. Kim and J. R. Guernsey, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2015, 104, 217–223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Gorce and M. Roff, J. Occup. Environ. Hyg., 2016, 13(2), 102–111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Cloutis, P. Mann, M. R. M. Izawa, D. M. Applin, C. Samson, R. Kruzelecky, T. D. Glotch, S. A. Mertzman, K. R. Mertzman, T. W. Haltigin and C. Fry, Planet. Space Sci., 2015, 119, 155–172 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Thompson, D. T. Flannery, R. Lanka, A. C. Allwood, B. D. Bue, B. C. Clark, W. T. Elam, T. A. Estlin, R. P. Hodyss, J. A. Hurowitz, Y. Liu and L. A. Wade, Astrobiology, 2015, 15(11), 961–976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Allwood, Spectroscopy, 2015, 30(7), 22 Search PubMed .
J. A. Berger, M. E. Schmidt, R. Gellert, J. L. Campbell, P. L. King, R. L. Flemming, D. W. Ming, B. C. Clark, I. Pradler, S. J. V. VanBommel, M. E. Minitti, A. G. Fairen, N. I. Boyd, L. M. Thompson, G. M. Perrett, B. E. Elliott and E. Desouza, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2015, 43(1), 67–75 CrossRef .
D. Bish, D. Blake, D. Vaniman, P. Sarrazin, T. Bristow, C. Achilles, P. Dera, S. Chipera, J. Crisp, R. T. Downs, J. Farmer, M. Gailhanou, D. Ming, J. M. Morookian, R. Morris, S. Morrison, E. Rampe, A. Treiman and A. Yen, IUCrJ, 2014, 1, 514–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Weider, L. R. Nittler, R. D. Starr, E. J. Crapster-Pregont, P. N. Peplowski, B. W. Denevi, J. W. Head, P. K. Byrne, S. A. Hauck, D. S. Ebel and S. C. Solomon, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2015, 416, 109–120 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Dong, X. P. Zhang, M. H. Zhu, A. A. Xu and Z. S. Tang, Res. Astron. Astrophys., 2016, 16(1), 8 CrossRef .
H. Xiao, W. X. Peng, H. Y. Wang, X. Z. Cui and D. Y. Guo, Chin. Phys. C, 2015, 39(10), 5 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Wang, H. L. Ming, J. Ding, Z. M. Zhang, J. Q. Wang, E. H. Han and A. Atrens, Corros. Sci., 2015, 102, 469–483 CrossRef .
M. Naito, N. Hasebe, H. Kusano, H. Nagaoka, M. Kuwako, Y. Oyama, E. Shibamura, Y. Amano, T. Ohta, K. J. Kim and J. A. M. Lopes, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2015, 788, 182–187 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tsuji, T. Matsuno, Y. Takimoto, M. Yamanashi, N. Kometani, Y. C. Sasaki, T. Hasegawa, S. Kato, T. Yamada, T. Shoji and N. Kawahara, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2016, 113, 43–53 CrossRef .
T. X. Sun and X. L. Ding, Rev. Anal. Chem., 2015, 34(1–2), 45–59 CAS .
D. Hampai, S. B. Dabagov and G. Cappuccio, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2015, 355, 264–267 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hampai, A. Liedl, C. Polese, G. Cappuccio and S. B. Dabagov, X-Ray Spectrom., 2015, 44(4), 243–247 CrossRef CAS .
J. Garrevoet, B. Vekemans, S. Bauters, A. Demey and L. Vincze, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87(13), 6544–6552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yagi and K. Tsuji, X-Ray Spectrom., 2015, 44(3), 186–189 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Jiang, Z. G. Liu, W. Y. Sun, X. P. Sun, F. Z. Li, Y. Z. Ma and T. X. Sun, Vacuum, 2015, 121, 1–4 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Sun, Z. G. Liu, T. X. Sun, L. T. Yi, W. Y. Sun, F. Z. Li, B. W. Jiang, Y. Z. Ma and X. L. Ding, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2015, 802, 5–9 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tsuji, A. Tabe, P. Wobrauscheck and C. Streli, Powder Diffr., 2015, 30(2), 109–112 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, S. C. Gleber, C. Jacobsen, J. Kirz and S. Vogt, Ultramicroscopy, 2015, 152, 44–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Liedl, C. Polese, D. Hampai, G. Della Ventura, S. B. Dabagov, A. Marcelli, F. Bellatreccia and A. Cavallo, X-Ray Spectrom., 2015, 44(4), 201–203 CrossRef CAS .
B. Deng, G. H. Du, G. Z. Zhou, Y. D. Wang, Y. Q. Ren, R. C. Chen, P. F. Sun, H. L. Xie and T. Q. Xiao, Analyst, 2015, 140(10), 3521–3525 RSC .
M. Ahmad, M. Bazalova-Carter, R. Fahrig and L. Xing, IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., 2015, 34(5), 1140–1147 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Bazalova-Carter, Br. J. Radiol., 2015, 88(1055), 3 Search PubMed .
J. J. Zou, X. F. Shi, A. M. Zhu, M. T. Chen, S. J. Kao, Y. H. Wu, K. Selvaraj, P. Scholz, Y. Z. Bai, K. S. Wang and S. L. Ge, J. Asian Earth Sci., 2015, 114, 541–548 CrossRef .
L. L. Zhang, S. Yan, S. Jiang, K. Yang, H. Wang, S. M. He, D. X. Liang, L. Zhang, Y. He, X. Y. Lan, C. W. Mao, J. Wang, H. Jiang, Y. Zheng, Z. H. Dong, L. Y. Zeng and A. G. Li, Nucl. Sci. Technol., 2015, 26(6), 8 Search PubMed .
H. L. Xie, B. Deng, G. H. Du, Y. N. Fu, R. C. Chen, G. Z. Zhou, Y. Q. Ren, Y. D. Wang, Y. L. Xue, G. Y. Peng, Y. He, H. Guo and T. Q. Xiao, Nucl. Sci. Technol., 2015, 26(2), 16 Search PubMed .
J. Fu, C. Li and Z. Z. Liu, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2015, 407(25), 7647–7655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Cao, X. Ju, C. Y. Yan and C. Liu, Opt. Mater. Express, 2015, 5(10), 2201–2208 CrossRef .
N. E. Sung, I. J. Lee, K. S. Lee, S. H. Jeong, S. W. Kang and Y. B. Shin, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2015, 22, 1306–1311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Das, S. R. Kane, A. Khooha, A. K. Singh and M. K. Tiwari, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2015, 86(5), 5 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Mirji, A. S. Bennal, Krishnananda, N. M. Badiger, M. K. Tiwari and G. S. Lodha, Can. J. Phys., 2015, 93(7), 760–764 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Dimmock, M. D. de Jonge, D. L. Howard, S. A. James, R. Kirkham, D. M. Paganin, D. J. Paterson, G. Ruben, C. G. Ryan and J. M. C. Brown, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2015, 22, 354–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bewer, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2015, 347, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tolhurst, M. Barbi and T. Tokaryk, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2015, 22, 393–399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Heald, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2015, 22, 436–445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gursoy, T. Bicer, A. Lanzirotti, M. G. Newville and F. De Carlo, Opt. Express, 2015, 23(7), 9014–9023 CrossRef PubMed .
C. D. Radke, J. P. McManamen, A. L. Kastengren, B. R. Halls and T. R. Meyer, Opt. Lett., 2015, 40(9), 2029–2032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Bock, R. V. Tappero, K. J. Takeuchi, A. C. Marschilok and E. S. Takeuchi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(9), 5429–5437 CAS .
G. Martinez-Criado, J. Villanova, R. Tucoulou, D. Salomon, J. P. Suuronen, S. Laboure, C. Guilloud, V. Valls, R. Barrett, E. Gagliardini, Y. Dabin, R. Baker, S. Bohic, C. Cohen and J. Morse, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2016, 23, 344–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fahrnbauer, T. Rosenthal, T. Schmutzler, G. Wagner, G. B. M. Vaughan, J. P. Wright and O. Oeckler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54(34), 10020–10023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Somogyi, K. Medjoubi, G. Baranton, V. Le Roux, M. Ribbens, F. Polack, P. Philippot and J. P. Samama, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2015, 22, 1118–1129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cerenius, F. Hennies and P. F. Tavares, Synchrotron radiation news, 2016, 29, 34–38 CrossRef .
G. V. Pashkova and A. G. Revenko, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2015, 50(6), 443–472 CrossRef .
J. J. Ma, Y. Y. Wang, Q. Yang, Y. B. Liu and P. Shi, Sensors, 2015, 15(5), 10650–10675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Floor, I. Queralt, M. Hidalgo and E. Margui, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2015, 111, 30–37 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Polignano, D. Codegoni, S. Grasso, I. Mica, G. Borionetti and A. Nutsch, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2015, 212(3), 495–505 CrossRef CAS .
M. Menzel, O. Scharf, S. H. Nowak, M. Radtke, U. Reinholz, P. Hischenhuber, G. Buzanich, A. Meyer, V. Lopez, K. McIntosh, C. Streli, G. J. Havrilla and U. E. A. Fittschen, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2015, 30(10), 2184–2193 RSC .
J. Prost, P. Wobrauschek and C. Streli, Powder Diffr., 2015, 30(2), 93–98 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wobrauschek, J. Prost, D. Ingerle, P. Kregsamer, N. L. Misra and C. Streli, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2015, 86(8), 6 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dhara, S. S. Kumar, N. L. Misra and S. K. Aggarwal, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2015, 306(1), 231–235 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dhara, P. Prabhat and N. L. Misra, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87(20), 10262–10267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Evertz, C. Lurenbaum, B. Vortmann, M. Winter and S. Nowak, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2016, 112, 34–39 CrossRef .
R. Sitko, P. Janik, B. Zawisza, E. Talik, E. Margui and I. Queralt, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87(6), 3535–3542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lupina, J. Kitzmann, I. Costina, M. Lukosius, C. Wenger, A. Wolff, S. Vaziri, M. Ostling, I. Pasternak, A. Krajewska, W. Strupinski, S. Kataria, A. Gahoi, M. C. Lemme, G. Ruhl, G. Zoth, O. Luxenhofer and W. Mehr, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(5), 4776–4785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Romero, I. Costas-Mora, I. Lavilla and C. Bendicho, RSC Adv., 2015, 6(1), 669–676 RSC .
V. Romero, I. Costas-Mora, I. Lavilla and C. Bendicho, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2015, 107, 125–131 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kunimura, K. Nakano and T. Shinkai, ISIJ Int., 2015, 55(8), 1794–1796 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Chen, Y. Y. He, Y. Zhang and D. B. Lu, At. Spectrosc., 2015, 36(4), 153–158 CAS .
Y. Kayser, J. Sa and J. Szlachetko, Nanoscale, 2015, 7(20), 9320–9330 RSC .
M. Witala, R. Nervo, O. Konovalov and K. Nygard, Soft Matter, 2015, 11(29), 5883–5888 RSC .
Y. C. Tu, Y. Y. Yuan, K. Le Guen, J. M. Andre, J. T. Zhu, Z. S. Wang, F. Bridou, A. Giglia and P. Jonnard, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2015, 22, 1419–1425 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Nowak, A. Bjeoumikhov, J. von Borany, J. Buchriegler, F. Munnik, M. Petric, A. D. Renno, M. Radtke, U. Reinholz, O. Scharf, L. Struder, R. Wedell and R. Ziegenruckere, X-Ray Spectrom., 2015, 44(3), 135–140 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ross, M. Haji-Sheikh, A. Huntington, D. Kline, A. Lee, Y. L. Li, J. Rhee, M. Tarpley, D. A. Walko, G. Westberg, G. Williams, H. F. Zou and E. Landahl, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2016, 23, 196–205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. Adams, A. U. Mane, J. W. Elam, R. Obaid, M. Wetstein and M. Chollet, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2015, 22, 1202–1206 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Frojdh, M. Campbell, M. De Gaspari, S. Kulis, X. Llopart, T. Poikela and L. Tlustos, J. Instrum., 2015, 10, 9 Search PubMed .
S. Kishimoto, T. Mitsui, R. Haruki, Y. Yoda, T. Taniguchi, S. Shimazaki, M. Ikeno, M. Saito and M. Tanaka, J. Instrum., 2015, 10, 7 Search PubMed .
P. Wiacek, W. Dabrowski, J. Fink, T. Fiutowski, H. G. Krane, F. Loyer, A. Schwamberger, K. Swientek and C. Venanzi, J. Instrum., 2015, 10, 15 Search PubMed .
A. Allahgholi, J. Becker, L. Bianco, A. Delfs, R. Dinapoli, P. Goettlicher, H. Graafsma, D. Greiffenberg, H. Hirsemann, S. Jack, R. Klanner, A. Klyuev, H. Krueger, S. Lange, A. Marras, D. Mezza, A. Mozzanica, S. Rah, Q. Xia, B. Schmitt, J. Schwandt, I. Sheviakov, X. Shi, S. Smoljanin, U. Trunk, J. Zhang and M. Zimmer, J. Instrum., 2015, 10, 11 Search PubMed .
G. Blaj, P. Caragiulo, G. Carini, S. Carron, A. Dragone, D. Freytag, G. Haller, P. Hart, J. Hasi, R. Herbst, S. Herrmann, C. Kenney, B. Markovic, K. Nishimura, S. Osier, J. Pines, B. Reese, J. Segal, A. Tomada and M. Weaver, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2015, 22, 577–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Yefanov, V. Mariani, C. Gati, T. A. White, H. N. Chapman and A. Barty, Opt. Express, 2015, 23(22), 12 CrossRef PubMed .
R. G. Figueroa, M. Santibanez, C. N. Valdes and M. Valente, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2016, 107, 191–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schubel, D. Krapohl, E. Frojdh, C. Frojdh and G. Thungstrom, J. Instrum., 2014, 9, 10 Search PubMed .
H. Matsuura, S. Sakurai, Y. Oda, S. Fukushima, S. Ishikawa, A. Takeshita and A. Hidaka, Sensors, 2015, 15(5), 12022–12033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Matsuura, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 54(4), 5 CrossRef .
A. Aurola, V. Marochkin, M. Golovleva and T. Tuuva, J. Instrum., 2015, 10, 13 Search PubMed .
F. L. Liu, F. Wang, P. H. Liu, H. Yang and E. Meng, J. Asian Earth Sci., 2015, 110, 151–169 CrossRef .
J. Bufon, M. Ahangarianabhari, P. Bellutti, G. Bertuccio, S. Carrato, G. Cautero, S. Fabiani, G. Giacomini, A. Gianoncelli, D. Giuressi, M. Grassi, P. Malcovati, R. H. Menk, A. Picciotto, C. Piemonte, I. Rashevskaya, A. Rachevski, A. Stolfa, A. Vacchi, G. Zampa and N. Zampa, J. Instrum., 2014, 9, 7 Search PubMed .
A. Gianoncelli, J. Bufon, M. Ahangarianabhari, M. Altissimo, P. Bellutti, G. Bertuccio, R. Borghes, S. Carrato, G. Cautero, S. Fabiani, G. Giacomini, D. Giuressi, G. Kourousias, R. H. Menk, A. Picciotto, C. Piemonte, A. Rachevski, I. Rashevskaya, A. Stolfa, A. Vacchi, G. Zampa, N. Zampa and N. Zorzi, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2016, 816, 113–118 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Athiray, P. Sreekumar, S. Narendranath and J. P. D. Gow, Astron. Astrophys., 2015, 583, 8 CrossRef .
J. P. D. Gow, P. H. Smith, P. Pool, D. J. Hall, A. D. Holland and N. J. Murray, J. Instrum., 2015, 10, 12 Search PubMed .
P. H. Smith, J. P. D. Gow, P. Pool and A. D. Holland, J. Instrum., 2015, 10, 10 Search PubMed .
J. Uhlig, W. B. Doriese, J. W. Fowler, D. S. Swetz, C. Jaye, D. A. Fischer, C. D. Reintsema, D. A. Bennett, L. R. Vale, U. Mandal, G. C. O'Neil, L. Miaja-Avila, Y. I. Joe, A. El Nahhas, W. Fullagar, F. P. Gustafsson, V. Sundstrom, D. Kurunthu, G. C. Hilton, D. R. Schmidt and J. N. Ullom, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2015, 22, 766–775 CAS .
K. Maehata, N. Iyomoto, Y. Yamanaka, T. Ito, T. Hara, K. Mitsuda, N. Y. Yamasaki and K. Tanaka, J. Supercond. Novel Magn., 2015, 28(3), 1161–1165 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fujii, M. Ukibe, S. Shiki and M. Ohkubo, IEICE Transactions on Electronics, 2015, E98C(3), 192–195 CrossRef .
G. Fujii, M. Ukibe and M. Ohkubo, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 2015, 28(10), 7 CrossRef .
W. K. Warburton, J. T. Harris and S. Friedrich, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2015, 784, 236–241 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, X. Zhou, S. Zhang, J. Lees, C. H. Tan and J. S. Ng, J. Instrum., 2015, 10, 9 Search PubMed .
D. Kirsanov, V. Panchuk, A. Goydenko, M. Khaydukova, V. Semenov and A. Legin, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2015, 113, 126–131 CrossRef CAS .
V. Scot and J. E. Fernandez, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2016, 108, 53–60 CrossRef .
Y. B. Monakhova, A. M. Tsikin and S. P. Mushtakova, J. Anal. Chem., 2015, 70(9), 1055–1061 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Chuparina, A. N. Smagunova and L. A. Eliseeva, J. Anal. Chem., 2015, 70(8), 949–955 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Pavlinskii, J. Anal. Chem., 2016, 71(1), 22–26 CrossRef CAS .
J. An, J. Lee and H. O. Yoon, Microchem. J., 2015, 122, 76–81 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Uzunoglu, D. Yilmaz and Y. Sahin, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2015, 112, 189–194 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ohata and T. Kidokoro, Anal. Sci., 2015, 31(8), 855–858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Santibanez, A. Diaz and R. G. Figueroa, X-Ray Spectrom., 2016, 45(2), 92–99 CrossRef CAS .
V. Y. Borkhodoev, J. Anal. Chem., 2015, 70(11), 1307–1312 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, Y. Huang, Q. Xu, L. T. Yan, L. Li, S. L. Feng and X. Q. Feng, Chin. Phys. C, 2015, 39(3), 6 Search PubMed .
D. T. Dul and P. Korecki, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2015, 48, 542–549 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Du, M. Lei, G. D. Zhou, T. B. Chen and R. L. Qiu, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2015, 35(3), 809–813 CAS .
A. R. Schneider, B. Cances, C. Breton, M. Ponthieu, X. Morvan, A. Conreux and B. Marin, J. Soils Sediments, 2016, 16(2), 438–448 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Wang, S. Chakraborty, D. C. Weindorf, B. Li, A. Sharma, S. Paul and M. N. Ali, Geoderma, 2015, 243, 157–167 CrossRef .
R. McIlwaine, S. F. Cox and R. Doherty, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2015, 22(8), 6364–6371 CrossRef PubMed .
L. C. Orme, L. Reinhardt, R. T. Jones, D. J. Charman, I. Croudace, A. Dawson, M. Ellis and A. Barkwith, Holocene, 2016, 26(2), 235–247 CrossRef .
F. Z. Li, Z. G. Liu, T. X. Sun, L. T. Yi, W. G. Zhao, J. L. He, S. Peng, L. L. Wang, G. C. Zhao and X. L. Ding, Spectrosc. Spectr. Anal., 2015, 35(9), 2487–2491 CAS .
V. M. Chubarov and A. L. Finkelshtein, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2015, 107, 110–114 CrossRef CAS .
V. Chubarov, D. Suvorova, A. Mukhetdinova and A. Finkelshtein, X-Ray Spectrom., 2015, 44(6), 436–441 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Fisher, D. Fougerouse, J. S. Cleverley, C. G. Ryan, S. Micklethwaite, A. Halfpenny, R. M. Hough, M. Gee, D. Paterson, D. L. Howard and K. Spiers, Miner. Deposita, 2015, 50(6), 665–674 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kutterolf, T. H. Hansteen, A. Freundt, H. Wehrmann, K. Appel, K. Kruger and W. Perez, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2015, 429, 234–246 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Jiang, C. T. A. Lee, J. K. Morgan and C. H. Ross, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2016, 430, 235–248 CrossRef .
C. Janssen, R. Naumann, L. Morales, R. Wirth, D. Rhede and G. Dresen, Mar. Geol., 2015, 362, 33–42 CrossRef .
D. A. Petrash, S. V. Lalonde, G. Gonzalez-Arismendi, R. A. Gordon, J. A. Mendez, M. K. Gingras and K. O. Konhauser, Chem. Geol., 2016, 404, 27–40 CrossRef .
W. G. M. van der Bilt, J. Bakke, K. Vasskog, W. J. D'Andrea, R. S. Bradley and S. Olafsdottir, Quat. Sci. Rev., 2015, 126, 201–218 CrossRef .
M. Song, A. F. Zhou, X. N. Zhang, C. Zhao, Y. X. He, W. Q. Yang, W. G. Liu, S. H. Li and Z. H. Liu, Holocene, 2015, 25(12), 1935–1943 CrossRef .
A. Haliuc, S. M. Hutchinson, G. Florescu and A. Feurdean, Catena, 2015, 137, 432–440 CrossRef .
E. J. de Boer, M. I. Velez, K. F. Rijsdijk, P. G. B. de Louw, T. J. J. Vernimmen, P. M. Visser, R. Tjallingii and H. Hooghiemstra, Holocene, 2015, 25(5), 758–771 CrossRef .
I. Kalugin, A. Astakhov, A. Darin and K. Aksentov, Chin. J. Oceanol. Limnol., 2015, 33(6), 1489–1495 CrossRef CAS .
I. L. Hendy, T. J. Napier and A. Schimmelmann, Quaternary Int., 2016, 387, 3–12 CrossRef .
I. Neugebauer, A. Brauer, M. J. Schwab, P. Dulski, U. Frank, E. Hadzhiivanova, H. Kitagawa, T. Litt, V. Schiebel, N. Taha, N. D. Waldmann and D. S. Party, Holocene, 2015, 25(8), 1358–1371 CrossRef .
W. Schwanghart, A. Bernhardt, A. Stolle, P. Hoelzmann, B. R. Adhikari, C. Andermann, S. Tofelde, S. Merchel, G. Rugel, M. Fort and O. Korup, Science, 2016, 351(6269), 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Silva-Sanchez, J. E. Schofield, T. M. Mighall, A. M. Cortizas, K. J. Edwards and I. Foster, Quat. Res., 2016, 84(2), 159–173 CrossRef .
S. Swanhart, D. C. Weindorf, S. Chakraborty, N. Bakr, Y. D. Zhu, C. Nelson, K. Shook and A. Acree, Soil Sci., 2014, 179(9), 417–423 CrossRef CAS .
J. Young, T. K. Udeigwe, D. C. Weindorf, T. Kandakji, P. Gautam and M. A. Mahmoud, Solid Earth, 2015, 6(2), 393–402 CrossRef .
B. Wang, J. X. Yu, B. Huang, W. Y. Hu and Q. Chang, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2015, 35(6), 1735–1740 CAS .
A. Voegelin, N. Pfenninger, J. Petrikis, J. Majzlan, M. Plotze, A. C. Senn, S. Mangold, R. Steininger and J. Gottlicher, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49(9), 5390–5398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nikitina, L. Popova, J. Korobitcina, O. Efremova, A. Trofimova, E. Nakvasina and A. Volkov, Journal of Elementology, 2015, 20(3), 643–651 Search PubMed .
M. Egli, S. N. Lessovaia, K. Chistyakov, S. Inozemzev, Y. Polekhovsky and D. Ganyushkin, J.
Soils Sediments, 2015, 15(6), 1420–1436 CrossRef CAS .
S. Proffit, B. Marin, B. Cances, M. Ponthieu, S. Sayen and E. Guillon, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2015, 22(10), 7641–7652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yamasaki, A. Takeda, T. Watanabe, K. Tagami, S. Uchida, H. Takata, Y. Maejima, N. Kihou and N. Tsuchiya, Soil Sci. Plant Nutr., 2015, 61(5), 751–760 CrossRef CAS .
E. Arhin, S. Boadi and M. C. Esoah, J. Afr. Earth Sci., 2016, 109, 143–153 CrossRef .
M. F. Gazley, G. Duclaux, L. A. Fisher, C. M. Tutt, A. R. Latham, R. M. Hough, S. J. De Beer and M. D. Taylor, Geochem.: Explor., Environ., Anal., 2016, 15(2–3), 113–124 Search PubMed .
M. Le Vaillant, S. J. Barnes, M. L. Fiorentini, J. Miller, T. C. McCuaig and P. Muccilli, Econ. Geol., 2015, 110(2), 505–530 CrossRef .
M. Le Vaillant, S. J. Barnes, M. L. Fiorentini, F. Santaguida and T. Tormanen, Ore Geol. Rev., 2015, 72, 128–148 CrossRef .
C. J. M. Lawley, B. Dube, P. Mercier-Langevin, B. Kjarsgaard, R. Knight and D. Vaillancourt, J. Geochem. Explor., 2016, 155, 33–55 CrossRef .
N. Glavas, N. R. Smuc, M. Dolenec and N. Kovac, J. Soils Sediments, 2015, 15(12), 2359–2368 CrossRef CAS .
D. Renock, J. D. Landis and M. Sharma, Appl. Geochem., 2016, 65, 73–86 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chokshi, M. A. Limaye, S. K. Dutta and D. R. Lodhari, Trans. Indian Inst. Met., 2016, 69(1), 151–155 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Cheng, M. Liu, H. K. Huang, T. X. Gu, W. D. Yan and H. L. Wen, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2015, 39(2), 221–232 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. Espinoza-Quinones, A. N. Modenes, M. R. de Pauli and S. M. Palacio, Water, Air, Soil Pollut., 2015, 226(3), 12 CrossRef .
S. G. Johnston, J. Diwakar and E. D. Burton, Chem. Geol., 2016, 419, 55–66 CrossRef .
N. Colombani, M. Mastrocicco and E. Dinelli, J. Geochem. Explor., 2015, 159, 317–328 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Tanis, A. Simon, O. Tschauner, P. Chow, Y. M. Xiao, P. Burnley, C. J. Cline, J. M. Hanchar, T. Pettke, G. Y. Shen and Y. S. Zhao, Am. Mineral., 2015, 100(7), 1600–1609 CrossRef .
H. Teiber, M. A. W. Marks, A. A. Arzamastsev, T. Wenzel and G. Markl, Neues Jahrb. Mineral., Abh., 2015, 192(2), 151–167 CAS .
M. Egger, T. Jilbert, T. Behrends, C. Rivard and C. P. Slomp, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2015, 169, 217–235 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Marcus, K. J. Edwards, B. Gueguen, S. C. Fakra, G. Horn, N. A. Jelinski, O. Rouxel, J. Sorensen and B. M. Toner, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2016, 171, 61–79 CrossRef .
V. Lancianese and E. Dinelli, J. Geochem. Explor., 2015, 154, 143–155 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. McCanta, R. G. Hatfield, B. J. Thomson, S. J. Hook and E. Fisher, Geochem., Geophys., Geosyst., 2015, 16(12), 4029–4056 CrossRef .
T. D. Rathnaweera, P. G. Ranjith, M. S. A. Perera, A. Haque, A. Lashin, N. Al Arifi, D. Chandrasekharam, S. Q. Yang, T. Xu, S. H. Wanh and E. Yasar, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2015, 641, 123–137 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guitouni, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2015, 303(3), 1649–1657 CAS .
M. Inoue, Y. Yamada, M. Kitamura, N. Gotoh, N. Kawahara and M. Mantler, Powder Diffr., 2015, 30(2), 113–116 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Kelloway, C. R. Ward, C. E. Marjo, I. E. Wainwright and D. R. Cohen, Powder Diffr., 2014, 29, S28–S34 CrossRef CAS .
A. Doyle, A. Saavedra, M. L. B. Tristao and R. Q. Aucelio, Fuel, 2015, 162, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chakraborty, D. C. Weindorf, B. Li, A. A. A. Aldabaa, R. K. Ghosh, S. Paul and M. N. Ali, Sci. Total Environ., 2015, 514, 399–408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Baba, A. S. Ibrahim, R. B. Bale, F. A. Adekola and A. G. F. Alabi, Appl. Clay Sci., 2015, 114, 476–483 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cirak and C. Hosten, Powder Technol., 2015, 284, 452–458 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Campbell, F. Reith, B. Etschmann, J. Brugger, G. Martinez-Criado, R. A. Gordon and G. Southam, Am. Mineral., 2015, 100(5–6), 1236–1243 CrossRef .
L. I. Barbosa, J. A. Gonzalez and M. D. Ruiz, Thermochim. Acta, 2015, 605, 63–67 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Sun, C. L. Zhao, Y. H. Li and J. X. Wang, Acta Geol. Sin., 2015, 89(1), 229–241 CrossRef .
F. H. Li, H. L. Fan and Y. T. Fang, Energy Fuels, 2015, 29(12), 7816–7824 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Zhu, P. Piotrowska, P. J. van Eyk, D. Bostrom, C. W. Kwong, D. B. Wang, A. J. Cole, R. de Nys, F. G. Gentili and P. J. Ashman, Energy Fuels, 2015, 29(3), 1686–1700 CrossRef CAS .
A. Qureshi, C. Maurice and B. Ohlander, J. Geochem. Explor., 2016, 160, 44–54 CrossRef CAS .
V. Aphane and P. D. Vermeulen, S. Afr. J. Geol., 2016, 118(1), 55–70 CrossRef .
S. Gallardo, E. D. van Hullebusch, D. Pangayao, B. M. Salido and R. Ronquillo, Water, Air, Soil Pollut., 2015, 226(9), 11 CrossRef .
A. D. Jew, E. C. Rupp, D. L. Geatches, J. E. Jung, G. Farfan, L. Bahet, J. C. Hower, G. E. Brown and J. Wilcox, Energy Fuels, 2015, 29(9), 6025–6038 CrossRef CAS .
S. Serrano, M. A. Gomez-Gonzalez, P. A. O'Day, F. Laborda, E. Bolea and F. Garrido, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 286, 30–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schindler, C. A. Legrand and M. F. Hochella, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2015, 153, 15–36 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, C. Huang, Q. Yang, L. Wang, S. Tu and C. Zhou, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2015, 19, 1313–1317 Search PubMed .
M. Popa, R. Bostan, N. Ilie and S. Varvara, J. Environ. Prot. Ecol., 2015, 16(3), 839–849 Search PubMed .
K. Kuhn, J. A. Meima, D. Rammlmair and C. Ohlendorf, J. Geochem. Explor., 2016, 161, 72–84 CrossRef CAS .
F. Aydogdu and M. Caki, J. Aust. Ceram. Soc., 2015, 51(2), 54–62 CAS .
I. I. Akinwumi and C. A. Booth, J. Environ. Eng. Landsc. Manag., 2015, 23(2), 121–128 CrossRef .
R. X. Liu and C. S. Poon, J. Cleaner Prod., 2015, 112, 384–391 CrossRef .
L. G. H. Komatsu, W. L. Oliani, A. B. Lugao and D. F. Parra, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2016, 118, 11–15 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tennakoon, K. Sagoe-Crentsil, R. San Nicolas and J. G. Sanjayan, Construct. Build. Mater., 2015, 101, 396–409 CrossRef .
M. B. Ogundiran and S. Kumar, Appl. Clay Sci., 2015, 108, 173–181 CrossRef CAS .
S. El-Sherbiny, F. A. Morsy, M. S. Hassan and H. F. Mohamed, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2015, 12(4), 739–749 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wasem, S. C. Boer, S. Sabedot and A. C. B. da Cunha, Matéria, 2015, 20(1), 193–202 CAS .
M. Sutcu, H. Alptekin, E. Erdogmus, Y. Er and O. Gencel, Construct. Build. Mater., 2015, 82, 1–8 CrossRef .
K. S. Mann, M. S. Heer and A. Rani, Appl. Clay Sci., 2015, 119, 249–256 CrossRef .
O. N. Batuk, S. D. Conradson, O. N. Aleksandrova, H. Boukhalfa, B. E. Burakov, D. L. Clark, K. R. Czerwinski, A. R. Felmy, J. S. Lezama-Pacheco, S. N. Kalmykov, D. A. Moore, B. F. Myasoedov, D. T. Reed, D. D. Reilly, R. C. Roback, I. E. Vlasova, S. M. Webb and M. P. Wilkerson, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49(11), 6474–6484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Francis and C. J. Dodge, J. Environ. Radioact., 2015, 150, 277–285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tirez, C. Vanhoof, J. Peters, L. Geerts, N. Bleux, E. Adriaenssens, E. Roekens, S. Smolek, A. Maderitsch, R. Steininger, J. Gottlicher, F. Meirer, C. Streli and P. Berghmans, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2015, 30(10), 2074–2088 RSC .
W. Menrath, Y. Zakaria, A. El-Safty, C. S. Clark, S. M. Roda, E. Elsayed, C. Lind, J. Pesce and H. Y. Peng, J. Occup. Environ. Hyg., 2015, 12(8), 555–563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Gao, Y. L. Gu, T. Xie, G. Y. Zhen, S. Huang and Y. C. Zhao, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2015, 22(12), 9332–9344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gianoncelli, I. Sgura, P. Bocchetta, D. Lacitignola and B. Bozzini, X-Ray Spectrom., 2015, 44(4), 263–275 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Ananyev, D. I. Bronin, D. A. Osinkin, V. A. Eremin, R. Steinberger-Wilckens, L. G. J. de Haart and J. Mertens, J. Power Sources, 2015, 286, 414–426 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nakata, K. Fukuda, H. Murayama, H. Tanida, T. Yamane, H. Arai, Y. Uchimoto, K. Sakurai and Z. Ogumi, Electrochemistry, 2015, 83(10), 849–851 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kalirai, U. Boesenberg, G. Falkenberg, F. Meirer and B. M. Weckhuysen, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7(22), 3674–3682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. McIntosh, S. D. Reilly and G. J. Havrilla, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2015, 110, 91–95 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lungu, I. Tiseanu, C. Dobrea, C. Porosnicu, I. Jepu and J.-E. O. Contributors, Rom. J. Phys., 2015, 60(3–4), 560–572 Search PubMed .
K. Dardenne, E. Gonzalez-Robles, J. Rothe, N. Muller, G. Christill, D. Lemmer, R. Praetorius, B. Kienzler, V. Metz, G. Roth and H. Geckeis, J. Nucl. Mater., 2015, 460, 209–215 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shiota, M. Takaoka, T. Fujimori, K. Oshita and Y. Terada, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87(22), 11249–11254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Natarajan, N. S. Hon, M. K. Bhide and S. V. Godbole, Indian J. Chem. Technol., 2015, 22(1–2), 82–84 Search PubMed .
S. Biswas, V. H. Rupawate, K. N. Hareendran and S. B. Roy, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2015, 306(2), 543–548 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schlummer, J. Vogelsang, D. Fiedler, L. Gruber and G. Wolz, Waste Manage. Res., 2015, 33(7), 662–670 CrossRef PubMed .
T. J. Morgan, A. George, A. K. Boulamanti, P. Alvarez, I. Adanouj, C. Dean, S. V. Vassilev, D. Baxter and L. K. Andersen, Energy Fuels, 2015, 29(3), 1669–1685 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Tian, D. S. Zou, Y. C. Dai and G. P. Tang, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2015, 110, 136–138 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. R. Devi, A. C. Trupti, A. Nicy, A. A. Dalvi, K. K. Swain, D. N. Wagh and R. Verma, Anal. Methods, 2015, 7(12), 5345–5351 RSC .
J. E. Jakes, C. G. Hunt, D. J. Yelle, L. Lorenz, K. Hirth, S. C. Gleber, S. Vogt, W. Grigsby and C. R. Frihart, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(12), 6584–6589 CAS .
A. K. Detcheva, S. E. Mitsiev, P. S. Vassileva, J. H. Jordanov, M. G. Karadjov and E. Ivanova, Chem. Pap., 2015, 69(5), 650–654 CAS .
K. Satoh, M. Komata, M. Mizuhira, K. Wagatsuma and N. Ohtsu, J. Jpn. Inst. Met., 2015, 79(1), 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Gazulla, M. Rodrigo, M. Orduna and M. J. Ventura, Glass Technol.: Eur. J. Glass Sci. Technol., Part A, 2015, 56(3), 95–101 CrossRef .
N. V. Alov and P. Y. Sharanov, J. Anal. Chem., 2015, 70(12), 1480–1487 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bertucci, P. Michelato, M. Moretti, A. Navitski and C. Pagani, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2016, 87(1), 9 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Vijayan, I. R. Willick, R. Lahlali, C. Karunakaran and K. K. Tanino, Plant Cell Physiol., 2015, 56(7), 1252–1263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Keller, M. Rizwan, J. C. Davidian, O. S. Pokrovsky, N. Bovet, P. Chaurand and J. D. Meunier, Planta, 2015, 241(4), 847–860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, X. C. Chen, D. C. Duan, C. Peng, T. Le and J. Y. Shi, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2015, 22(7), 5070–5081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Peng, D. C. Duan, C. Xu, Y. S. Chen, L. J. Sun, H. Zhang, X. F. Yuan, L. R. Zheng, Y. Q. Yang, J. J. Yang, X. J. Zhen, Y. X. Chen and J. Y. Shi, Environ. Pollut., 2015, 197, 99–107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ajiboye, I. Cakmak, D. Paterson, M. D. de Jonge, D. L. Howard, S. P. Stacey, A. A. Torun, N. Aydin and M. J. McLaughlin, Plant Soil, 2015, 392(1–2), 357–370 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qian, H. Feng, F. J. Gallagher, Q. Z. Zhu, M. Y. Wu, C. J. Liu, K. W. Jones and R. V. Tappero, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2015, 22, 1459–1468 Search PubMed .
G. De Giudici, D. Medas, C. Meneghini, M. A. Casu, A. Gianoncelli, A. Iadecola, S. Podda and P. Lattanzi, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2015, 22(24), 19352–19361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Zhang, M. Chen, Z. Wang, T. Wu, Y. Wang, X. Z. Zhang and Z. H. Han, HortScience, 2015, 50(6), 801–805 CAS .
H. Neidhardt, U. Kramar, X. Tang, H. Guo and S. Norra, Chem. Erde, 2015, 75(2), 261–270 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Li, J. T. Zhao, Y. Y. Li, H. J. Li, J. F. Zhang, B. Li, Y. X. Gao, C. Y. Chen, M. Y. Luo, R. Huang and J. Li, Plant Soil, 2015, 391(1–2), 195–205 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Ma, P. Zhang, Z. Y. Zhang, X. He, Y. Y. Li, J. Zhang, L. R. Zheng, S. Q. Chu, K. Yang, Y. L. Zhao and Z. F. Chai, Nanotoxicology, 2015, 9(2), 262–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Zelinka, S. C. Gleber, S. Vogt, G. M. R. Lopez and J. E. Jakes, Holzforschung, 2015, 69(4), 441–448 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. B. Guerra, A. Adame, E. de Almeida, G. G. A. de Carvalho, M. A. S. Brasil, D. Santos and F. J. Krug, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2015, 30(7), 1646–1654 RSC .
T. Senkbeil, T. Mohamed, R. Simon, D. Batchelor, A. Di Fino, N. Aldred, A. S. Clare and A. Rosenhahn, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2015, 408(5), 1487–1496 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Sacristan, R. A. V. Rossel and L. Recatala, Geoderma, 2016, 265, 6–11 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. Towett, K. D. Shepherd and B. L. Drake, X-Ray Spectrom., 2016, 45(2), 117–124 CrossRef CAS .
L. Borgese, F. Bilo, R. Dalipi, E. Bontempi and L. E. Depero, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2016, 113, 1–15 CrossRef .
R. Dalipi, L. Borgese, A. Casaroli, M. Boniardi, U. Fittschen, K. Tsuji and L. E. Depero, J. Food Eng., 2015, 173, 85–91 CrossRef .
Z. Bahadir, V. N. Bulut, M. Hidalgo, M. Soylak and E. Margui, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2015, 107, 170–177 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Gerke, B. J. Little and J. B. Maynard, Sci. Total Environ., 2015, 541, 184–193 CrossRef PubMed .
M. L. Lopez, S. A. Ceppi, M. L. Asar, R. E. Burgesser and E. E. Avila, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2016, 113, 100–105 CrossRef .
J. Lee, J. An, J. A. Kim and H. O. Yoon, Chemosphere, 2016, 142, 72–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Pytlakowska, Clean: Soil, Air, Water, 2015, 43(11), 1475–1480 CrossRef CAS .
S. Woelfl, M. Ovari, J. Nimptsch, T. R. Neu and M. Mages, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2015, 116, 28–33 CrossRef .
P. F. Sun, B. A. Deng, G. H. Du, H. Li, W. D. Sun, J. B. Ren and T. Q. Xiao, X-Ray Spectrom., 2015, 44(6), 442–446 CrossRef CAS .
K. G. McIntosh, N. L. Cordes, B. M. Patterson and G. J. Havrilla, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2015, 30(7), 1511–1517 RSC .
J. Reyes-Herrera, J. Miranda and O. G. de Lucio, Microchem. J., 2015, 120, 40–44 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ytreberg, L. Lundgren, M. A. Bighiu and B. Eklund, Talanta, 2015, 143, 121–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Pytlakowska, Microchim. Acta, 2015, 183(1), 91–99 CrossRef .
P. Vandenabeele and M. K. Donais, Appl. Spectrosc., 2016, 70(1), 27–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Laclavetine, F. J. Ager, J. Arquillo, M. A. Respaldiza and S. Scrivano, Microchem. J., 2016, 125, 62–68 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kantarelou and A. G. Karydas, X-Ray Spectrom., 2016, 45(2), 85–91 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Cuevas, F. Bernardini, A. Gianoncelli and C. Tuniz, X-Ray Spectrom., 2015, 44(3), 105–115 CrossRef .
R. H. Tykot, Appl. Spectrosc., 2016, 70(1), 42–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ravaud, L. Pichon, E. Laval, V. Gonzalez, M. Eveno and T. Calligaro, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2016, 122(1), 7 CrossRef .
P. M. Wrobel, P. Fraczek and M. Lankosz, Anal. Chem., 2015, 88(3), 1661–1666 CrossRef PubMed .
D. M. Conover, J. K. Delaney and M. H. Loew, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2015, 119(4), 1567–1575 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Alberghina, R. Barraco, M. Brai, D. Fontana and L. Tranchina, Period. Mineral., 2015, 84(3), 569–589 Search PubMed .
M. Gay, M. Alfeld, M. Menu, E. Laval, P. Arias, R. Ontanon and I. Reiche, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2015, 30(3), 767–776 RSC .
J. M. Madariaga, M. Maguregui, K. Castro, U. Knuutinen and I. Martinez-Arkarazo, Appl. Spectrosc., 2016, 70(1), 137–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Keune, J. Mass, F. Meirer, C. Pottasch, A. van Loon, A. Hull, J. Church, E. Pouyet, M. Cotte and A. Mehta, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2015, 30(3), 813–827 RSC .
E. Pouyet, M. Cotte, B. Fayard, M. Salome, F. Meirer, A. Mehta, E. Uffelman, A. Hull, F. Vanmeert, J. Kieffer, M. Burghammer, K. Janssens, F. Sette and J. Mass, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2015, 121(3), 967–980 CrossRef CAS .
L. Monico, K. Janssens, M. Alfeld, M. Cotte, F. Vanmeert, C. G. Ryan, G. Falkenberg, D. L. Howard, B. G. Brunetti and C. Miliani, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2015, 30(3), 613–626 RSC .
F. C. Izzo, V. Capogrosso, M. Gironda, R. Alberti, C. Mazzei, L. Nodari, A. Gambirasi, E. Zendri and A. Nevin, X-Ray Spectrom., 2015, 44(4), 296–304 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dredge, S. Ives, D. L. Howard, K. M. Spiers, A. Yip and S. Kenderdine, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2015, 121(3), 789–800 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kogou, A. Lucian, S. Bellesia, L. Burgio, K. Bailey, C. Brooks and H. D. Liang, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2015, 121(3), 999–1014 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Gomez-Moron, P. Ortiz, J. M. Martin-Ramirez, R. Ortiz and J. Castaing, Microchem. J., 2015, 125, 260–265 CrossRef .
M. Singh, S. V. Kumar and S. A. Waghmare, Construct. Build. Mater., 2015, 98, 156–170 CrossRef .
A. Heginbotham, J. Bassett, D. Bourgarit, C. Eveleigh, L. Glinsman, D. Hook, D. Smith, R. J. Speakman, A. Shugar and R. Van Langh, Archaeometry, 2015, 57(5), 856–868 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lyubomirova, R. Djingova and I. Kuleff, Archaeometry, 2015, 57(4), 677–686 CrossRef CAS .
M. Manso, N. Schiavon, I. Queralt, A. M. Arruda, J. M. Sampaio and A. Brunetti, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2015, 107, 93–96 CrossRef CAS .
S. Oonk and J. Spijker, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2015, 59, 80–88 CrossRef CAS .
G. Visco, S. H. Plattner, G. Guida, S. Ridolfi and G. E. Gigante, Chem. Cent. J., 2015, 9, 17 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Valerio, E. Voracova, R. J. C. Silva, M. F. Araujo, A. M. M. Soares, A. M. Arruda and C. Pereira, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2015, 121(1), 115–122 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Gomes, P. Valerio, L. C. Alves, M. F. Araujo, A. M. M. Soares and V. H. Correia, Microchem. J., 2015, 124, 540–546 CrossRef .
J. D. Chelaru, L. Barbu-Tudoran and L. M. Muresan, Stud. Univ. Babes-Bolyai, Chem., 2015, 60(3), 151–162 Search PubMed .
O. Papadopoulou, P. Vassiliou, S. Grassini, E. Angelini and V. Gouda, Mater. Corros., 2015, 67(2), 160–169 CrossRef .
B. L. MacDonald, J. Vanderstelt, J. O'Meara and F. E. McNeill, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2016, 367, 46–52 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Navas, A. G. Asuero and A. M. Jimenez, Appl. Spectrosc., 2016, 70(1), 207–221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Moreno-Suarez, F. J. Ager, S. Scrivano, I. Ortega-Feliu, B. Gomez-Tubio and M. A. Respaldiza, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2015, 358, 93–97 CrossRef CAS .
K. Uhlir, R. Padilla-Alvarez, A. Migliori, A. G. Karydas, I. B. Mihalic, M. Jaksic, I. Zamboni, R. Lehmann, M. Stelter, M. Griesser, N. Schindel and M. Alram, Microchem. J., 2015, 125, 159–169 CrossRef .
S. Pessanha, M. Costa, M. I. Oliveira, M. E. M. Jorge and M. L. Carvalho, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2015, 119(3), 1173–1178 CrossRef CAS .
D. Miriello, A. Bloise, R. De Luca, C. Apollaro, G. M. Crisci, S. Medaglia and A. T. Grasso, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2015, 119(4), 1595–1608 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bernardini, A. Vecchiet, A. De Min, D. Lenaz, A. M. Cuevas, A. Gianoncelli, D. Dreossi, C. Tuniz and M. M. Kokelj, Microchem. J., 2015, 124, 600–607 CrossRef .
J. Wu, M. L. Zhang, J. M. Wu, Q. J. Li, J. W. Cao, Q. H. Li and H. X. Zhao, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2015, 35(5), 1266–1270 CAS .
I. Cianchetta, K. Trentelman, J. Maish, D. Saunders, B. Foran, M. Walton, P. Sciau, T. Wang, E. Pouyet, M. Cotte, F. Meirer, Y. Liu, P. Pianetta and A. Mehta, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2015, 30(3), 666–676 RSC .
J. Molera, J. Inanez, G. Molina, J. Burch, X. Alberch, M. D. Glascock and T. Pradell, Period. Mineral., 2015, 84(1), 45–63 Search PubMed .
M. Canti and D. J. Huisman, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2015, 56, 96–108 CrossRef .
T. Lombardo, D. Grolimund, A. Kienholz, V. Hubert and M. Worle, Microchem. J., 2015, 125, 254–259 CrossRef .
C. E. Ebert, M. Dennison, K. G. Hirth, S. B. McClure and D. J. Kennett, Archaeometry, 2015, 57, 54–73 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Millhauser, L. F. Fargher, V. Y. H. Espinoza and R. E. Blanton, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2015, 58, 133–146 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cagno, P. Cosyns, A. Ceglia, K. Nys and K. Janssens, Period. Mineral., 2015, 84(3), 465–482 Search PubMed .
J. Hormes, A. Diekamp, W. Klysubun, G. L. Bovenkamp and N. Borste, Microchem. J., 2015, 125, 190–195 CrossRef .
O. Gomez-Laserna, I. Arrizabalaga, N. Prieto-Taboada, M. A. Olazabal, G. Arana and J. M. Madariaga, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2015, 407(19), 5635–5647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gallello, S. Ghorbani, A. Pastor and M. de la Guardia, Sci. Total Environ., 2015, 544, 291–298 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Jacot-Guillarmod, O. Rozenbaum, V. L'Hostis, P. Dillmann, D. Neff and C. Gervais, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2015, 30(3), 580–587 RSC .
S. Grousset, F. Kergourlay, D. Neff, E. Foy, J. L. Gallias, S. Reguer, P. Dillmann and A. Noumowe, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2015, 30(3), 721–729 RSC .
C. J. Kennedy, K. R. Murdoch and A. M. Forster, Glass Technol.: Eur. J. Glass Sci. Technol., Part A, 2015, 56(2), 63–69 CrossRef .
S. Choudhury, J. Hormes, D. N. Agyeman-Budu, A. R. Woll, G. N. George, I. Coulthard and I. J. Pickering, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2015, 30(3), 759–766 RSC .
G. Van der Snickt, S. Legrand, J. Caen, F. Vanmeert, M. Alfeld and K. Janssens, Microchem. J., 2015, 124, 615–622 CrossRef .
A. Moropoulou, N. Zacharias, E. T. Delegou, B. Maroti and Z. Kasztovszky, Microchem. J., 2015, 125, 170–184 CrossRef .
M. Bronzato, P. Calvini, C. Federici, A. L. Dupont, M. Meneghetti, V. Di Marco, B. Biondi and A. Zoleo, Anal. Methods, 2015, 7(19), 8197–8205 RSC .
M. Nunes, C. Relvas, F. Figueira, J. Campelo, A. Candeias, A. T. Caldeira and T. Ferreira, Microsc. Microanal., 2015, 21(1), 63–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Gong, X. J. Bai, L. Liu and D. C. Gong, J. Cult. Herit., 2015, 16(6), 928–933 CrossRef .
P. Targowski, M. Pronobis-Gajdzis, A. Surmak, M. Iwanicka, E. A. Kaszewska and M. Sylwestrzak, Stud. Conserv., 2015, 60, S167–S177 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tack, M. Cotte, S. Bauters, E. Brun, D. Banerjee, W. Bras, C. Ferrero, D. Delattre, V. Mocella and L. Vincze, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 7 Search PubMed .
F. Albertin, A. Patera, I. Jerjen, S. Hartmann, E. Peccenini, F. Kaplan, M. Stampanoni, R. Kaufmann and G. Margaritondo, Microchem. J., 2015, 125, 185–189 CrossRef .
T. Swanston, T. Varney, I. Coulthard, G. N. George, I. J. Pickering, R. Murphy and D. M. L. Cooper, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2015, 58, 26–30 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pessanha, M. Carvalho, M. L. Carvalho and A. Dias, J. Trace Elem. Med. Biol., 2016, 33, 26–30 CAS .
P. K. Cook, M. A. Languille, E. Dufour, C. Mocuta, O. Tombret, F. Fortuna and L. Bertrand, Chem. Geol., 2016, 414, 1–15 CrossRef .
D. Lauwers, A. Candeias, A. Coccato, J. Mirao, L. Moens and P. Vandenabeele, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2016, 157, 146–152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Invernizzi, A. Daveri, T. Rovetta, M. Vagnini, M. Licchelli, F. Cacciatori and M. Malagodi, Microchem. J., 2015, 124, 743–750 CrossRef .
L. Bertrand, S. Schoder, D. Anglos, M. B. H. Breese, K. Janssens, M. Moini and A. Simon, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2015, 66, 128–145 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cesareo, G. Buccolieri, A. Castellano, R. T. Lopes, J. T. De Assis, S. Ridolfi, A. Brunetti and A. Bustamante, X-Ray Spectrom., 2015, 44(4), 233–238 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Kuzel, A. M. Christensen and S. M. Marvin, J. Forensic Sci., 2016, 61, S190–S192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Zimmerman, J. J. Schultz and M. E. Sigman, J. Forensic Sci., 2015, 60(2), 382–390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Soon, M. A. Bush and P. J. Bush, Forensic Sci. Int., 2016, 254, 1–4 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Gilpin and A. M. Christensen, J. Forensic Sci., 2015, 60(4), 974–978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Takekawa, K. Ishii, Y. Nishiwaki and K. Gamoh, Bunseki Kagaku, 2015, 64(8), 625–630 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ishii, T. Takekawa, Y. Ohmae, Y. Nishiwaki and K. Gamoh, Bunseki Kagaku, 2015, 64(12), 867–874 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Li, J. T. Zhao, Y. Qu, Y. X. Gao, Z. H. Guo, Z. L. Liu, Y. L. Zhao and C. Y. Chen, Nanomedicine, 2015, 11(6), 1531–1549 CAS .
I. Kempson, E. Smith, M. Gao, M. de Jonge and B. Thierry, J. Instrum., 2014, 9, 6 Search PubMed .
S. Smulders, C. Larue, G. Sarret, H. Castillo-Michel, J. Vanoirbeek and P. H. M. Hoet, Toxicol. Lett., 2015, 238(1), 1–6 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Zhang, N. Shinohara, H. Kano, H. Senoh, M. Suzuki, T. Sasaki, S. Fukushima and M. Gamo, J. Appl. Toxicol., 2015, 35(6), 623–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Pascolo, G. Zabucchi, A. Gianoncelli, G. Kourousias, E. Trevisan, E. Pascotto, C. Casarsa, C. Ryan, M. Lucattelli, G. Lungarella, E. Cavarra, B. Bartalesi, M. Zweyer, F. Cammisuli, M. Melato and V. Borelli, Toxicol. Lett., 2015, 241, 111–120 CrossRef PubMed .
T. A. Grunewald, H. Rennhofer, B. Hesse, M. Burghammer, S. E. Stanzl-Tschegg, M. Cotte, J. F. Loffler, A. M. Weinberg and H. C. Lichtenegger, Biomaterials, 2015, 76, 250–260 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Fratini, G. Campi, I. Bukreeva, D. Pelliccia, M. Burghammer, G. Tromba, R. Cancedda, M. Mastrogiacomo and A. Cedola, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2016, 364, 93–97 CrossRef .
F. Bilo, L. Borgese, J. Prost, M. Rauwolf, A. Turyanskaya, P. Wobrauschek, P. Kregsamer, C. Streli, U. Pazzaglia and L. E. Depero, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 359, 215–220 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bourgeois, B. Burt-Pichat, X. Le Goff, J. Garrevoet, P. Tack, G. Falkenberg, L. Van Hoorebeke, L. Vincze, M. A. Denecke, D. Meyer, C. Vidaud and G. Boivin, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2015, 407(22), 6619–6625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. B. Fleming, J. W. Groves, M. R. Gherase, G. N. George, I. J. Pickering, O. Ponomarenko, G. Langan, J. E. Spallholz, M. Alauddin, H. Ahsan, S. Ahmed and P. F. La Porte, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2015, 116, 241–247 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shehab, E. D. Desouza, J. O'Meara, A. Pejovic-Milic, D. R. Chettle, D. E. B. Fleming and F. E. McNeill, Physiol. Meas., 2016, 37(1), 145–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Finney and Q. L. Jin, J. Visualized Exp., 2015,(97), 6 Search PubMed .
Q. L. Jin, S. Vogt, B. Lai, S. Chen, L. Finney, S. C. Gleber, J. Ward, J. J. Deng, R. Mak, N. Moonier and C. Jacobsen, PLoS One, 2015, 10(2), 14 Search PubMed .
A. Pickier, C. L. Mota, A. Mantuano, C. Salata, L. P. Nogueira, A. P. Almeida, R. Alessio, G. Sena, D. Braz, C. E. V. de Almeida and R. C. Barroso, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2015, 116, 257–261 CrossRef .
Z. Majer, S. Bosze, I. Szabo, V. G. Mihucz, A. Gaal, G. Szilvagyi, G. Pepponi, F. Meirer, P. Wobrauschek, N. Szoboszlai, D. Ingerle and C. Streli, Microchem. J., 2015, 120, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
A. Israelsson, M. Eriksson and H. B. L. Pettersson, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2016, 108, 28–34 CrossRef .
C. M. Thompson, J. C. Wolf, R. H. Elbekai, M. G. Paranjpe, J. M. Seiter, M. A. Chappell, R. V. Tappero, M. Suh, D. M. Proctor, A. Bichteler, L. C. Haws and M. A. Harris, Mutat. Res., Genet. Toxicol. Environ. Mutagen., 2016, 789, 61–66 Search PubMed .
F. Breier, D. Loader, G. Wasilewicz, W. Brenner, P. Sator, R. Feldmann, A. Stella, W. Osterode, G. Falkenberg, A. Steiner and W. Jurecka, Hautarzt, 2016, 67(1), 64–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sugiyama, M. Uo, T. Wada, T. Hongo, D. Omagari, K. Komiyama, M. Oikawa, M. Kusama and Y. Mori, Bio-Med. Mater. Eng., 2016, 26(1–2), 1–8 Search PubMed .
M. J. Ceko, K. Hummitzsch, N. Hatzirodos, R. J. Rodgers and H. H. Harris, Metallomics, 2015, 7(5), 828–836 RSC .
M. J. Ceko, K. Hummitzsch, W. M. Bonner, J. B. Aitken, K. M. Spiers, R. J. Rodgers and H. H. Harris, Microsc. Microanal., 2015, 21(3), 695–705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chwiej, A. Skoczen, K. Matusiak, K. Janeczko, A. Patulska, C. Sandt, R. Simon, M. Ciarach and Z. Setkowicz, Epilepsy Behav., 2016, 49, 40–46 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Lahav, S. Shilstein, S. Shchemelinin, S. Ikher, D. Halperin, R. Chechik and A. Breskin, Phys. Med., 2015, 31(3), 233–241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. S. Soares and A. M. D. Santo, Microsc. Microanal., 2015, 21(1), 204–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Attia, V. Cavalli, A. M. D. Santo, A. A. Martin, M. B. F. D'Arce, F. H. B. Aguiar, J. R. Lovadino, M. A. do Rego, A. N. Cavalcanti and P. C. S. Liporoni, Photomed. Laser Surg., 2015, 33(7), 378–383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Suciu, E. S. Preoteasa, B. Dimitriu, O. Amza, P. Perlea, A. Raducanu, M. Tanase, B. Constantinescu, D. Stan and E. A. Preoteasa, Rom. J. Phys., 2015, 60(9–10), 1490–1500 Search PubMed .
E. Da Silva, A. M. David and A. Pejovic-Milic, X-Ray Spectrom., 2015, 44(6), 451–457 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mattioli, L. Giardini, C. Roselli and D. Desideri, Appl. Clay Sci., 2015, 119, 449–454 CrossRef .
D. Smajgl and J. Obhodas, X-Ray Spectrom., 2015, 44(4), 230–232 CrossRef CAS .
V. G. Bairi, J. H. Lim, I. R. Quevedo, T. K. Mudalige and S. W. Linder, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2016, 116, 21–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Lewen, M. Soumeillant, J. Qiu, J. Selekman, S. Wood and K. Zhu, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2015, 19(12), 2039–2044 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Mondia, F. Goh, P. A. Bryngelson, J. M. MacPhee, A. S. Ali, A. Weiskopf and M. Lanan, Anal. Methods, 2015, 7(8), 3545–3550 RSC .
L. E. Wu, A. Levina, H. H. Harris, Z. H. Cai, B. Lai, S. Vogt, D. E. James and P. A. Lay, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 55(5), 1742–1745 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Nganvongpanit, J. L. Brown, K. Buddhachat, C. Somgird and C. Thitaram, Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 2016, 170(1), 94–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kakuschke and S. Griesel, Arch. Environ. Contam. Toxicol., 2016, 70(1), 67–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Barnett, N. A. Forster, G. A. Ray, L. Li, C. N. Guppy and R. S. Hegarty, Anim. Feed Sci. Technol., 2016, 212, 35–41 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bilo, S. Moscoso, L. Borgese, M. V. Delbarba, A. Zacco, A. Bosio, S. Federici, M. Guarienti, M. Presta, E. Bontempi and L. E. Depero, X-Ray Spectrom., 2015, 44(3), 124–128 CrossRef CAS .
D. Eisenhauer, B. Pollakowski, J. Baumann, V. Preidel, D. Amkreutz, B. Rech, F. Back, E. Rudigier-Voigt, B. Beckhoff, B. Kanngiesser and C. Becker, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2015, 212(3), 529–534 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Agawane, A. S. Kamble, S. A. Vanalakar, S. W. Shin, M. G. Gang, J. H. Yun, J. Gwak, A. V. Moholkar and J. H. Kim, Mater. Lett., 2015, 158, 58–61 CrossRef CAS .
B. Caby, F. Brigidi, D. Ingerle, E. Nolot, G. Pepponi, C. Streli, L. Lutterotti, A. Andre, G. Rodriguez, P. Gergaud, M. Morales and D. Chateigner, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2015, 113, 132–137 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. T. de Villers, K. A. O'Hara, D. P. Ostrowski, P. H. Biddle, S. E. Shaheen, M. L. Chabinyc, D. C. Olson and N. Kopidakis, Chem. Mater., 2015, 28(3), 876–884 CrossRef .
N. A. Kulesh, K. G. Balymov and V. O. Vas'kovskiy, Acta Phys. Pol., A, 2015, 127(2), 525–527 CrossRef CAS .
B. Parditka, J. Toman, C. Cserhati, Z. Janosfalvi, A. Csik, I. Zizak, R. Feyerherm, G. Schmitz and Z. Erdelyi, Acta Mater., 2015, 87, 111–120 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pollakowski and B. Beckhoff, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87(15), 7705–7711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Korytowski, W. Abuillan, A. Makky, O. Konovalov and M. Tanaka, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2015, 119(30), 9787–9794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bozzini, P. Bocchetta, B. Aleman, M. Amati, A. Gianoncelli, L. Gregoratti, H. Sezen, A. Taurino and M. Kiskinova, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(37), 19155–19167 CAS .
B. Bozzini, P. Bocchetta and A. Gianoncelli, Energies, 2015, 8(8), 8145–8164 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bozzini, P. Bocchetta, A. Gianoncelli, G. Kourousias, M. Kiskinova and S. Dal Zilio, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2015, 33(3), 6 Search PubMed .
B. Peace, J. Claypoole, N. Sun, D. Dwyer, M. D. Eisaman, P. Haldar and H. Efstathiadis, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 657, 873–877 CrossRef .
R. Yu, X. H. Fang, P. Somasundaran and K. Chandran, Chemosphere, 2015, 128, 207–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tepavcevic, Y. Z. Liu, D. H. Zhou, B. Lai, J. Maser, X. B. Zuo, H. Chan, P. Kral, C. S. Johnson, V. Stamenkovic, N. M. Markovic and T. Rajh, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(8), 8194–8205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lopes, L. H. C. Amorin, L. D. S. Martins, A. Urbano, C. R. Appoloni and R. Cesareo, J. Spectrosc., 2015, 7 Search PubMed .
E. Janots, F. Bernier, F. Brunet, M. Munoz, N. Trcera, A. Berger and M. Lanson, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2015, 153, 134–148 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nuyts, S. Cagno, S. Bugani and K. Janssens, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2015, 30(3), 642–650 RSC .
U. Boesenberg, M. Falk, C. G. Ryan, R. Kirkham, M. Menzel, J. Janek, M. Froba, G. Falkenberg and U. E. A. Fittschen, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27(7), 2525–2531 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Bera and M. R. Antonio, Langmuir, 2015, 31(19), 5432–5439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Jensen, J. Hofstetter, A. E. Morishige, G. Coletti, B. Lai, D. P. Fenning and T. Buonassisi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106(20), 5 CrossRef .
S. Shin, J. Seo, H. Park and J. Park, J. Ceram. Process Res., 2015, 16(1), 89–92 Search PubMed .
M. Delay, S. Mangold, R. Sembritzki and F. H. Frimmel, Aquat. Geochem., 2015, 21(2–4), 313–329 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. T. Price, K. Geraki, K. Ignatyev, P. T. Witte, A. M. Beale and J. F. W. Mosselmans, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54(34), 9886–9889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Luo, Z. Q. Lin and G. P. Sheng, Ecotoxicology, 2015, 24(10), 2207–2212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Monico, K. Janssens, M. Cotte, L. Sorace, F. Vanmeert, B. G. Brunetti and C. Miliani, Microchem. J., 2015, 124, 272–282 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Nie, H. C. Liu, J. L. Xia, Y. Yang, X. J. Zhen, L. J. Zhang and G. Z. Qiu, Biometals, 2016, 29(1), 25–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bahadir, V. N. Bulut, M. Hidalgo, M. Soylak and E. Margui, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2016, 115, 46–51 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Luo, L. F. Wang, Z. H. Tong, H. Q. Yu and G. P. Sheng, Front. Environ. Sci. Eng., 2016, 10(2), 362–367 CrossRef CAS .
F. Y. Zheng, X. F. Lin, H. W. Yu, S. X. Li and X. G. Huang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 226, 500–505 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
2D/3D	Two dimensional/three dimensional
AAS	Atomic absorption spectrometry
AD	Anno domini
ADC	Analog to digital converter
ADR	Adiabatic demagnetisation refrigerator
AES	Atomic emission spectrometry
AFS	Atomic fluorescence spectrometry
AIOM	Acidophilic iron-oxidising microorganisms
AISI	American Iron and Steel Institute
AMS	Accelerator mass spectrometry
ANOVA	Analysis of variance
APDC	Ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate
APS	Advanced photon source
APXS	Alpha-Particle X-ray Spectrometer
ASIC	Application-specific integrated circuit
ASTM	American Society for Testing and Materials
ASU	Atomic Spectrometry Update
BC	Before Christ
BCR	Community Bureau of Reference
BrPF	Br-labeled phenolformaldehyde
BSE	Back-scattered electrons
CCD	Charge coupled detector
CdTe	Cadmium telluride
CHARM	Cultural Heritage Alloy Reference Material
CIGS	Copper indium gallium selenide
CP	Calcium phosphate
CRM	Certified reference material
CT	Computed tomography
CVD	Chemical vapour deposition
CXC	Colour X-ray camera
CZTS	Cadmium zinc telluride sulphide
DIO	Diiodooctane
DLLME	Dispersive liquid–liquid microextraction
DMSPE	Dispersive micro solid-phase extraction
DWM	Demolition waste material
ED	Energy dispersive
ED-SEM	Energy dispersive scanning electron microscopy
EDXRD	Energy dispersive X-ray diffraction
EDXRF	Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
EDXRF-CT	Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence computed tomography
EPMA	Electron probe microanalysis
EPR	Electron paramagnetic resonance
ER	Etch and rinse
ESRF	European Synchrotron Radiation Facility
EU	European Union
EXAFS	Extended X-ray absorption fine structure
FCC	Fluid-catalytic-cracking
FIB-SEM	Focussed ion beam scanning electron microscopy
FP	Fundamental parameter
FPGA	Field programmable gate array
FTIR	Fourier transform infrared
GC	Gas chromatography
GE	Grazing exit
GE-XRF	Grazing exit X-ray fluorescence
GI	Grazing incidence
GI-XRF	Grazing incidence X-ray fluorescence
GO	Graphene oxide
GO-SH	Mercapto-modified graphene oxide
GSDD	Gated silicon drift detector
HBCDD	Hexabromocyclododecane
hiRX	High resolution X-ray
HEXRF	High energy X-ray fluorescence
HPLC-ICP-MS	High performance liquid chromatography inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
HR-TEM	High resolution transmission electron microscopy
IC-ICP-OES	Ion chromatography inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry
ICP	Inductively coupled plasma
ICP-OES	Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry
ICP-MS	Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
INAA	Instrumental neutron activation analysis
IR	Infrared
JET	Joint European Torus
LA-ICP-MS	Laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
LIBS	Laser induced breakdown spectrometry
LNMO	Lithium nickel manganese oxide
LOD	Limit of detection
LOQ	Limit of quantification
MC	Monte Carlo
MDL	Method detection limit
MDT	Minimum detection time
MS	Mass spectrometry
MSWI	Municipal solid waste incineration
MWIP	Municipal waste incineration product
MW	Molecular weight
NAA	Neutron activation analysis
NEXAFS	Near edge X-ray absorption fine structure
NIR	Near infrared
NIST	National Institute of Standards and Technology
NOM	Natural organic matters
NP	Nanoparticle
ORR	Oxygen reduction reaction
PCA	Principal component analysis
PGE	Platinum group element
PIXE	Particle-induced X-ray emission
PIXL	Planetary Instrument for X-ray Lithochemistry
PLS	Partial least squares
PM	Particulate matter
PP	Poly(propylene)
PXRF	Portable X-ray fluorescence
REACH	Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals
REE	Rare earth elements
RIXS	Resonant inelastic X-ray scattering
RSD	Relative standard deviation
SAXS	Small angle X-ray scattering
SCD	Swept charge device
SD	Secure digital
SDD	Silicon drift detector
SE	Self-etch
SEI	Solid electrolyte interphase
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SEM-EDS	Scanning electron microscopy energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry
Si(PIN)	Silicon PIN detector device
S/B	Signal-to-background ratio
SLG	Soda lime glass
S/N	Signal-to-noise ratio
SOFC	Solid oxide fuel cells
SRM	Standard reference material
SR	Synchrotron radiation
SR-CT	Synchrotron radiation computed tomography
SR-FTIR	Synchrotron radiation fourier transform infrared
SR-TXRF	Synchrotron radiation total reflection X-ray fluorescence
SR-TXRF-XANES	Synchrotron radiation total reflection X-ray fluorescence X-ray absorption near edge structure
SRXRD	Synchrotron radiation X-ray diffraction
SRXRF	Synchrotron radiation X-ray fluorescence
SSI	Sewage sludge incineration
SSRF	Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility
STJ	Superconducting tunnel junction
SW	Southwest
TBT	Tributyltin
TCP-AV	Nano-TiO2 immobilised onto cellulose filter paper, surface self-assembled with acid violet 43
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TES	Transition edge sensor
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
TOF-SIMS	Time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry
TXRF	Total reflection X-ray fluorescence
UK	United Kingdom
US	United States
USA	United States of America
UV	Ultraviolet
UV-VIS	Ultraviolet-visible
WDXRF	Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence
WHO	World Health Organisation
XAFS	X-ray absorption fine structure
XANES	X-ray absorption near edge structure
XAS	X-ray absorption spectroscopy
XCT	X-ray computed tomography
XFM	X-ray fluorescence microprobe
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction
XRD-CT	X-ray diffraction computed tomography
XRF	X-ray fluorescence
XRF-CT	X-ray fluorescence computed tomography
XRPCT	X-ray phase contrast tomography
XRR	X-ray reflectometry
XRR-GI-XRF	X-ray reflectometry grazing incidence X-ray fluorescence
XSW	X-ray standing waves
YSZ	Yttria-stabilised zirconia

Z
	Atomic number

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
