Towards highly efficient photocatalysts using semiconductor nanoarchitectures  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE03447F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE03447F
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6732-6743Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsTowards highly efficient photocatalysts using semiconductor nanoarchitectures

        
          
            Hailong 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yongquan 
            Qu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tahani 
            Zeid
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Xiangfeng 
            Duan
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA. E-mail: xduan@chem.ucla.edu
bCalifornia Nanosystems Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA
Received 
      13th December 2011
    , Accepted 7th February 2012First published on 21st March 2012AbstractThe search for clean renewable energy sources is of central importance to address the ever-increasing challenges of diminishing fossil fuels and global warming. Photocatalytic processes can mimic natural photosynthesis to directly convert solar energy into chemical energy, and represent an attractive strategy for renewable energy generation and environmental remediation. Nanostructured semiconductors can play an important role in photocatalysis due to their unique structures, and chemical and physical properties. Here we present a brief overview of the recent progress in the development of semiconductor nanostructure based photocatalysts. In particular, we focus our discussions on four essential problems that dictate the performance of a photocatalyst material: visible light absorption for efficient solar energy harvesting, efficient charge separation and transportation, effective cocatalysts for efficient charge utilization, and photoelectrochemical stability for robust photocatalysis. Challenges, potential solutions, and recent efforts to address each one of these problems are discussed. Lastly, we finish the perspective with the discussion of a recent concept of using freestanding photoelectrochemical nanodevices as a potential solution to a new generation of highly efficient and stable photocatalysts.Hailong ZhouHailong Zhou is currently working as a Camille and Henry Dreyfus Environmental Chemistry Postdoctoral Fellow in Prof. Xiangfeng Duan's group at the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles. He obtained his BS and MS at Shandong University in 1999 and 2002, respectively. He received his PhD degree in physics at the National University of Singapore in 2008. Currently, his research mainly focuses on the III–V nanostructures for next generation green solar energy source.Xiangfeng DuanXiangfeng Duan currently holds a position of Assistant Professor and Howard Reiss Career Development Chair at the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, and is a Camille and Henry Dreyfus Environmental Chemistry Mentor. He received his BS degree in chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 1997, and MA degree in chemistry and PhD degree in physical chemistry from Harvard University in 1999 and 2002, respectively. He was a Founding Scientist and Manager of Advanced Technology at Nanosys Inc. from 2002 to 2008. Dr Duan joined UCLA in 2008, where his research focuses on nanoscale integration of dissimilar materials with distinct compositions, structures and properties to create a new generation of integrated material systems with unique functions or unprecedented performance.

Broader context
As we are facing increasing challenges of diminishing fossil fuels and global warming in the new century, there is increasing interest in developing an efficient and stable photocatalyst system that can facilitate the direct conversion of solar energy into chemical energy in the form of storable chemical fuel. An effective photocatalyst requires close integration of a light harvesting antenna with two distinct redox catalysts. Among many different systems, semiconductor nanostructure based photocatalysts have attracted considerable attention due to their unique structural, optical, and chemical properties. The making of a highly efficient and stable photocatalyst requires a systematic design and optimization of a sequence of multiple critical steps, including light harvesting, charge generation, separation, transportation, and utilization. Although significant efforts have been devoted to optimizing each one of these steps, few studies have treated these problems coherently and systematically. Very often, the optimization of one parameter could lead to the degradation of the other. In this perspective, we highlight the recent progress in exploring semiconductor nanostructures for the development of next generation highly efficient photocatalysts, and discuss the fundamental strategies to enhance the photocatalytic activity and photoelectrochemical stability.

1. Introduction
Seeking clean, renewable and green energy sources is a significant challenge confronting us in the new century. Total worldwide annual primary-energy consumption was 532.8 exajoules (532.8 × 1018 J, equal to average energy consumption rate of 17.7 terawatts, TW = 1012 W) in 2008. It is expected to approach 770 exajoules (25.6 TW) by the year 2035 due to the growing global production and population.1 More than 80% of the energy consumption in the USA (year 2009) originates from fossil fuels, which include oil, coal, and natural gas, as shown in Fig. 1. Nuclear power and the renewable energy resources contribute <20%.1 With the continued fossil fuel consumption and the associated greenhouse gas emission, there is an increasing concern about its impact on climate change. Thus, the development of green, renewable energy sources is of central importance to address the future global demand of a carbon-neutral energy cycle.
 Fig. 1  The diagram shows the percentage of the energy supplied from different sources in US.1 
Among various renewable energy resources, solar energy represents the ultimate renewable source. The total solar energy irradiating on the earth is about 120000 TW a year. Properly harnessed, less than 0.02% of the solar energy is sufficient to entirely replace the total energy consumption originated from fossil fuels and nuclear power today. However, to date, it remains a significant challenge to efficiently harvest and convert solar energy in a way that is economically competitive with the energy produced from fossil fuels or nuclear power. As a result, urgent breakthroughs are required in both fundamental science and applied technologies to enable a highly efficient and economic approach for harnessing solar energy.
Within the central theme of making use of solar energy, there are three critical challenges that must be addressed. These challenges include solar energy harvest, conversion and storage. Use of a photovoltaic device, in which the solar energy is directly converted into electricity, is the most popular way to make use of solar energy today. This approach effectively addresses the problems of solar energy harvest and conversion, but does not address the problem of energy storage. In particular, considering that the electricity generated from photovoltaic devices is highly variable depending on the time and the weather of the day or the season, it is imperative to develop an efficient strategy for energy storage. An alternative strategy to harness solar energy is photocatalytic solar fuel generation, in which a photo-assisted electrochemical process directly converts abundant raw materials (e.g., water and carbon dioxide) into hydrogen, oxygen or other energetic organic species that can serve as chemical fuels.2–4 This strategy to directly convert solar energy into chemical energy in the form of chemical fuel effectively addresses all three problems, solar energy harvest, conversion and storage, at once, and therefore can bypass the difficulties of storing electricity generated in conventional photovoltaic cells.
Honda and Fujishima first demonstrated the photo-assisted decomposition of water into hydrogen and oxygen using a semiconductor TiO2 based electrochemical cell in 1972.5 Since then, the semiconductor photocatalyst assisted solar water splitting has attracted considerable attention throughout the scientific community due to its significant potential to resolve the environmental and energy issues. In general, an effective photocatalyst requires close integration of three essential components, including a light harvesting antenna, a reduction catalyst and an oxidation catalyst (Fig. 2). In this regard, nanostructured materials have emerged as the novel photocatalysts to harvest solar energy because of their unique structural, optical, and chemical properties.6–18 Diverse structures such as nanoparticles, porous nanospheres, nanotubes, nanorods, and nanowires have been explored and shown to exhibit many desirable characteristics for effective photocatalysis such as efficient and tunable optical absorption, large surface areas, short charge carrier diffusion lengths and low reflectivity. In addition, many hybrid nanostructures have been synthesized, such as metallic cluster decorated semiconductor nanocrystals, dye sensitized nanoparticles, quantum dots in nanowires, and core–shell nanowires, which further enrich the flexibility to design a new generation of photocatalysts with improved conversion efficiency.19–22 In this perspective, we highlight the recent progress in exploring semiconductor nanostructures for the development of next generation highly efficient and stable photocatalysts, and discuss the fundamental strategies required to enhance the photocatalytic activity and the photoelectrochemical stability. In general, the related research on the photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical (PEC) energy conversion is not included in this review, but interested readers can refer to the other excellent reviews on the relevant topics.23
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of an efficient photocatalyst illustrates the requirement of close integration of three critical components, including a light harvesting antenna, reduction catalyst and oxidation catalyst. 
2. Fundamental challenges of semiconductor photocatalysis
A semiconductor photocatalyst can absorb the incoming light (photon energy above the bandgap of the semiconductor) and then convert the photon energy into chemical energy. The process of the energy transmission can be roughly divided into four different stages (Fig. 3).24 Stage I is photoexcitation, at which the absorption of photons excites the negatively charged electrons from the valence band to the conduction band and creates the positively charged holes in the valence band to form electron (e−)–hole (h+) pairs, transforming the catalyst into the photoexcited state. Stage II is the charge separation and transportation, at which the electron–hole pairs are separated and subsequently transferred to their active sites on the surface of a cocatalyst/photocatalyst. In parallel to stage II, in stage III charge recombination can also occur, where a fraction of the photogenerated electrons and holes radiatively or nonradiatively recombine, or are trapped by the defects in the bulk material and/or on the surface of the photocatalyst. Stage IV is the photoassisted redox reaction, at which the electrons and holes on the active sites of the cocatalyst/photocatalyst surface act as reducing and oxidizing agents to drive the desired reduction and oxidation chemistry, respectively.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustrating the mechanism for photocatalytic process on TiO2 coupled with cocatalysts for redox reactions. (b) TEM image of the Au loaded TiO2 obtained by the deposition–precipitation method. (Adapted with permission from ref. 24 © Copyright 2006 Nature Publishing Group.) 
Solar water splitting, photoreduction of CO2 and photocatalytic detoxification of organic pollutants are three major potential applications of photocatalysis. Despite significant efforts, most photocatalysts available to date can only function in the ultraviolet (UV) or near UV regime with limited efficiency due to a number of intertwined limiting factors including a mismatch between the semiconductor bandgap and the solar spectrum, inefficient charge separation and transport, and deleterious semiconductor degradative side reactions that lead to material instability. Here, we use solar water splitting as an example to highlight the primary challenges in designing a highly efficient and stable photocatalyst. Solar water splitting is a thermodynamically uphill reaction, which requires about 237.2 kJ mol−1 of the Gibbs free energy change (ΔG) to split one molecule of water into H2 and 1/2 O2 under standard conditions (room temperature and 1 atm).25 According to the Nernst equation, the photocatalytic water splitting can be considered as an oxidation–reduction process and this ΔG corresponds to ΔE = −1.229 V per electron transferred. To drive this reaction using solar energy, the photocatalyst needs a bandgap energy at least above 1.229 eV (about 1008 nm in wavelength or shorter). The total amount of generated hydrogen and oxygen atoms is mainly determined by the number of excited electrons involved in the redox reactions at the photocatalyst/water interface. Any process that can allow more efficient generation, separation and transportation of the excited electrons and holes to the surface of the photocatalysts is considered useful for improving the photocatalytic efficiency. Similarly, any process that consumes excited electrons and holes should be minimized in order to optimize the efficiency of hydrogen generation.
In stage I, only photons with energy above the bandgap of the photocatalyst can be absorbed; thus, a match between the bandgap and solar spectrum must be considered to maximize the total light absorption. For example, oxide semiconductors such as TiO2, ZrO2,26 ZnO,27,28 and KTaO329 can be explored for direct water splitting. However, these materials are typically limited by their wide bandgaps, leading to a poor absorption of solar energy (only absorbing in the UV region, less than 5% of solar energy). Beyond the width of the bandgap, the levels of the conduction and valence bands should also be considered for overall solar water splitting reaction. The conduction band edge has to be above (more negative than) the reduction potential of the H+/H2 redox pair (0 V under NHE), while the valence band edge should be below (more positive than) the oxidation potential of the O2/H2O redox pair (1.23 V). Band levels of several semiconductor materials are shown in Fig. 4, with the redox potential for proton reduction and water oxidation highlighted with green and red dashed lines, respectively. In general, these two potential levels have to be within the bandgap of a chosen semiconductor material for effective overall water splitting reaction to proceed. The redox potential of the water splitting reaction can be shifted with a change in the pH value (−0.059 V/pH, pH = 7 shown in Fig. 4),30 which allows a slight flexibility in the semiconductor band edge levels. Overall, the bandgap of the semiconductor photocatalyst needs to be engineered to satisfy both a high absorption of solar energy as well as the sufficient built-in potential for a direct water splitting reaction. There is generally a tradeoff between these two requirements, as a smaller bandgap is usually more desired for efficient solar absorption and a larger bandgap is more desired for sufficient built-in potential for the water splitting reaction.
 Fig. 4  Bandgaps and redox potentials, using the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) as a reference, for several semiconductors. 
Stages II and III take place simultaneously. Charge recombination and separation/migration processes are two key competing processes that largely determine the internal quantum efficiency of a photocatalyst. For higher photocatalytic efficiency, the electron–hole pairs should be efficiently separated and rapidly transported to the active redox sites for the desired chemistry. The recombination is often facilitated by crystalline defects. Therefore, a better crystallinity with few defects can usually minimize the trapping states and recombination sites, resulting in an increased efficiency in the usage of the photogenerated carriers for desired photoreactions. From these perspectives, photocatalysts with smaller sizes (or in porous and hollow structures) are also often desired, since the distance between the photoinduced charges and the reaction sites becomes shorter, which can consequently reduce the probability for recombination.
Stage IV, the redox chemistry, is greatly affected by the surface properties, such as active sites and surface area. Even if the photo-generated electrons and holes possess thermodynamically sufficient potential for water splitting, they may not be effectively used for proton reduction or water oxidation reactions if there are no proper catalysts to reduce the activation energy (overpotential) to facilitate hydrogen and oxygen evolution. Inorganic or biomimetic cocatalysts, such as Pt, Au, and many enzymes are usually used to introduce active sites and reduce the redox overpotential for H2 and O2 evolution. Lastly, the free electrons and holes are highly reductive and oxidative. If these free carriers cannot be effectively consumed for desired photochemistry, they can often reduce or oxidize the semiconductor photocatalyst itself, leading to a complete deactivation and disintegration of the photocatalyst.
In the following sections, we review the recent efforts in photocatalyst development and describe several general strategies to improve the photocatalyst efficiency and stability. We will discuss (1) the bandgap engineering of the photocatalysts to satisfy the requirements for both efficient solar energy absorption and sufficient built-in potential for redox reactions; (2) heterostructured junctions with internal built-in electrical potential to effectively direct electron–hole separation and transportation; (3) the integration with a proper cocatalyst to reduce the redox overpotential; and (4) the electrochemical stability of the photocatalyst. Since the photocatalytic reactions proceed through a complicated sequence of multiple competing processes, the understanding of the kinetics and dynamics of the photocatalytic reactions is essential to determine the key efficiency limiting steps and establish the rational strategies for the rapid development of highly efficient and stable photocatalytic systems.
3. Efficient solar energy absorption
Titania (TiO2) is the most widely explored photocatalytic material largely due to its low cost, high chemical stability and relatively high catalytic efficiency.31 Indeed, it has been consistently demonstrated that TiO2 based photocatalysts can be used to effectively drive the water splitting reaction in many cases. However, a serious limitation of TiO2 based photocatalysts is its large bandgap (Eg > 3 eV). It can only absorb photons with light wavelengths shorter than about 400 nm in the UV or near-UV wavelength regime, which accounts for less than 5% of the total solar energy irradiation through the atmosphere to the sea level (Fig. 5).32 Therefore, although TiO2 based photocatalysts can function as effective photocatalysts, they cannot be used for effective solar energy harvesting and conversions. Significant challenges remain in developing a visible light driven photocatalyst with high efficiency and chemical stability.
 Fig. 5  Spectral distribution of the solar photon irradiation based on the AM1.5 global data; the curve is based on the American Society for Testing and Materials Terrestrial Reference.32 
To this end, considerable effort has been placed on improving the solar absorption of the photocatalysts. Overall, three typical approaches have been explored for the enhanced light absorption in the visible light region, which include: (1) chemical doping of TiO2, such as incorporation of additional metal or nonmetal species (e.g., nickel, vanadium, chromium, platinum, nitrogen, tungsten, fluorine, sulfur, etc.);5,33,34 (2) the exploration of alternative narrow bandgap semiconductor photocatalysts, such as Si,35 InP,36 CdSe,37 and GaZnON;38,39 and (3) the loading of the visible light sensitizer, such as organic dye, metal nanoparticles, or a narrow bandgap semiconductor. Several excellent reviews already exist with a detailed description of the chemical doping of TiO2, the development of alternatives to TiO2, and the surface sensitization.40
Recently, Chen et al. developed an interesting approach to significantly enhance the visible light absorption (up to ∼1200 nm) by intentionally creating a disordered shell of several atomic layers of nanophase TiO2 using a hydrogenation method (Fig. 6)41 to create a so-called “black TiO2.” The disorder-engineered black TiO2 exhibited a higher efficiency of the visible-light-driven photocatalysis compared to traditional white TiO2. About 0.2 ± 0.02 mmol of hydrogen gas can be generated by the black TiO2 loaded with 0.6 wt% Pt in a 1:1 water–methanol solution, which is about two orders of magnitude greater than the yields of most semiconductor photocatalysts reported previouly.42 Soon after, Y. Li and co-workers obtained a solar-to-hydrogen efficiency of ∼1.63% by using hydrogen treated TiO2 nanowires for photoelectrochemical water splitting, which is the best value for a TiO2 photoanode.43
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the band structure and electronic density of states of a semiconductor in the form of a disordered nanocrystal with dopant incorporation. (b and c) are HRTEM images of TiO2 nanocrystals before and after hydrogenation, respectively. (d) Spectral absorbance of the white and black TiO2 nanocrystals. The inset enlarges the absorption spectrum in the range from approximately 750 nm to 1200 nm. (e) Comparison of solar-driven photocatalytic activity of the black TiO2 nanocrystals against that of the white TiO2 nanocrystals under the same experimental conditions. (f) Cycling measurements of hydrogen gas generation through direct photocatalytic water splitting with disordered, black TiO2 under simulated solar light. (Adapted with permission from ref. 41 © Copyright 2011 Science.) 
A great number of new photocatalytic materials have been proposed as potential substitutes of TiO2; many of them follow two possible ways. One is searching for native semiconductors with a bandgap covering the visible light region; α-Fe2O3 (hematite), CdS, BiVO4, and Ag3PO4 are well known native visible-light-driven photocatalysts. The other is the solid solutions of photocatalysts with the same crystal structure. Since 2005, Domen's group has systematically studied the GaN–ZnO solid solutions for photocatalytic purposes,38,39 which have been demonstrated split water into hydrogen and oxygen under visible light irradiation.94 The GaxZn1−xNyO1−y has a bandgap of 2.7 eV (13% of ZnO), which is smaller than both ZnO (3.2 eV) and GaN (3.4 eV). The narrow bandgap is induced by the strong p–d coupling between the N 2p and Zn 3d states, which shifts the valence band edge without affecting the conduction band edge. Similarly, the solid solutions of CdS–ZnS, AgInS2–ZnS, CuInS2–ZnS, AgInS2–CuInS2, and CuInS2–AgInS2–ZnS were also designed and synthesized,42 which showed active photocatalytic activity for H2 evolution from aqueous sulfide and sulfite solutions under visible light irradiation.
Narrower bandgap semiconductors, dye molecules, and/or metal nanoparticles are widely used as the sensitizers on the surface of photocatalysts to capture additional visible or infrared light and consequently enhance the photocatalytic efficiency. The narrow bandgap semiconductors (e.g., CdSe,44,45 ZnSe,46 PbS,47 AgI,48,49 and InP,50etc.) have been investigated as the sensitizers for wide bandgap semiconductors (e.g., TiO2, ZnO, and ZnS, etc.) for the visible light driven photocatalysts. In this framework, both semiconductors have different energy levels for their corresponding conduction and valence band. Only the narrow bandgap sensitizer can be excited to generate electrons in their conduction band under the visible light irradiation. For an efficient electron transfer between the sensitizer and photocatalyst, the energy level of the conduction band of the photocatalyst must be lower than that of the sensitizers. Thus, the electrons created in sensitizers are subsequently injected into the photocatalyst conduction band to perform a reduction reaction. If the energy level of the valence band of the sensitizer is higher than that of the photocatalyst, the photoinduced holes are localized inside the sensitizer. In this heterostructure, several advantages can be obtained: (1) an enhanced visible light absorption; (2) a more effective charge separation; (3) a rapid charge transfer to catalyst; and (4) a longer lifetime of the charge carriers. Several semiconductor sensitizers with a narrow bandgap were shown in Fig. 7,24,51–55 which have been proven to enhance the solar energy harvesting efficiency in the visible light region. The standard preparation methods to load these narrow bandgap semiconductors on the wide bandgap photocatalysts are usually chemical reduction, photodeposition, and sol–gel techniques.
 Fig. 7  (a) HRTEM of Au–CdS/TiO2. (b) TEM micrographs of SnO2/α-Fe2O3 (nanocube). (c) SEM image of CeO2/TiO2. (d) TEM images of a Pt tipped CdS nanorod with an embedded CdSe seed; the inset is a schematic illustration of the multicomponent nanoheterostructure. (e) TEM image of CdS nanoparticles coated inside the TiO2 nanotubes; the inset is a schematic showing the structure of CdS filled TiO2 nanotubes. (f) TEM image of PbS/TiO2 nanotubes. (a adapted with permission from ref. 24 © Copyright 2006 Nature Publishing Group. b and d adapted with permission from ref. 51 and 53 © Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. c adapted with permission from ref. 52 © Copyright 2010 Elsevier. e and f adapted with permission from ref. 54 and 55 © Copyright 2008 and 2009 American Chemical Society.) 
Organic dye molecules have also been employed as sensitizers for semiconductor photocatalysts due to their active light absorption in the visible wavelength regime.56,57 The dye-sensitizers used for solar cell and photocatalytic reactions have attracted more and more attention because of their stability, low cost, and high efficiency.58–60 The dye-sensitized solar cell usually involves the excitation of the organic dye followed by the charge transportation from the dye to the photocatalysts. An energy conversion efficiency of above 11% has been achieved in the dye-sensitized solar cell, and the electron-transfer step resembles that in photocatalysis.57
The dyes can be used by themselves or loaded onto wide bandgap photocatalysts for solar water splitting and CO2 photoreduction.61 Electronically excited states of the dyes are formed once they absorb photon energy, and the light induced electrons are soon injected into the conduction band of the photocatalysts. The electrons received by the photocatalysts can be consumed by the redox reactions, while the oxidized dye molecules are subsequently reduced and regenerated by receiving electrons from the electron donors in the solution (Fig. 8).62 In this case, sacrificial electron donors such as EDTA, I3−/I−, and triethanolamine (TEA) are often needed. The photogenerated electron transfer between the organic dye and the photocatalyst is the most important step that determines the overall solar conversion efficiency.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of dye-sensitized hydrogen production from water. (b) Schematic illustration of hydrogen evolution by the dye-sensitized K4Nb6O17 nanoscroll with the electron transfer path. (Adapted with permission from ref. 62 © Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.) 
Lastly, some metal nanoparticles, with surface plasmon induced absorption in the visible light region, could also be loaded on the surface of wide bandgap photocatalysts (e.g., TiO2) to enhance their light harvesting efficiency.63,64 The surface plasmon resonance is created by the coherent oscillation of the metal conduction band electrons upon excitation by irradiating light. A dipolar oscillation of all the electrons induces strong absorption of the electromagnetic energy when its frequency becomes in resonance with the electron oscillation. The frequency of the surface plasmon absorption highly depends on the size and morphology of the metal nanoparticles, as well as their dielectric environment. For most metals such as In, Sn, Pb, and Cd, the plasmon frequency lies in the UV region with a broad and poor absorption band, while noble metals such as Cu, Ag, and Au exhibit a strong visible-light plasmon resonance.65 The tunable plasmonic absorption bands of various Au and Ag nanostructures throughout the visible range make them ideal candidates for enhancing photocatalytic absorption and efficiency. Several examples of the enhanced photocatalysis using metal nanoparticles are shown in Fig. 9.66–69
 Fig. 9  (a) Dark field scanning TEM image of the Ag/P25–TiO2 composite. (b) SEM image of gold nanoparticles attached to titania nanotubes. (c) TEM image of Au nanoparticles on CdS nanorods. (d) A photodiode photocatalyst with Au/Ag core/shell nanorods on the surface. (a, c, and d adapted with permission from ref. 66, 68, and 69 © Copyright 2010, 2009, and 2011 American Chemical Society. c adapted with permission from ref. 67 © Copyright 2009 Royal Chemical Society.) 
4. Separation and transportation of the photogenerated charge carriers
Another critical factor determining photocatalysis efficiency is the separation and transportation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Achievement of a high photocatalytic activity demands the efficient separation of the electron–hole pairs as well as the rapid charge transportation to their proper active sites for the desired redox reactions. At same time, charge recombination either on the way to the surface or on the surface of photocatalysts must be minimized. In this section, we will review the primary strategies and achievements for the efficient separation and transportation of photogenerated charges.
The formation of semiconductor heterostructure (formed by the direct contact of semiconductors A and B) is an effective approach to promote charge separation for improved photocatalytic activity. In general, the semiconductor heterostructures can be divided into three different types: straddling bandgap (type-I), staggered bandgap (type-II) or broken bandgap (type-III), as shown in Fig. 10. Considering a type-II band alignment, the energy gradient existing at the interfaces tends to spatially separate electrons and holes on different sides of the heterojunction, where electrons may be confined to one side and holes to the other. The spatially localized charges in the type-II nanostructures should make these materials more suitable for photocatalytic applications. Such semiconductor heterostructures can easily integrate small and wide bandgap materials to drive water oxidation/reduction processes simultaneously via multiple combinations.
 Fig. 10  Schematic energy band diagram of three types of semiconductor heterojunctions categorized by band alignments. 
The semiconductor p–n junction is another effective architecture for the highly efficient charge separation and transportation. In general, when the p- and n-type semiconductor materials are in contact, they form a p–n junction with a space-charge region at the interfaces due to the diffusion of electrons and holes, and thus create a built-in electrical potential that can direct the electrons and holes to travel in the opposite direction (Fig. 11).70 When the p–n heterojunction is irradiated with photon energy higher or equal to the bandgaps of the photocatalysts, the photogenerated electron–hole pairs can be quickly separated by the built-in electric field within the space charge region. Driven by the electric field, the electrons are transferred to the conduction band of the n-type semiconductors and the holes to the valence band of the p-type semiconductors.
 Fig. 11  Schematic diagram showing the energy band structure and electron–hole pair separation in the p-type NiO/n-type ZnO heterojunction. (Adapted with permission from ref. 70 © Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.) 
Metal–semiconductor contacts with a potential offset have also been explored to facilitate the separation and transportation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs.71 In a way much similar to the semiconductor junctions, the potential offset at a metal–semiconductor contact can create a space charge region and a built-in potential to drive the separation and transportation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. The eventual impact of metal–semiconductor contacts is however much more complicated due to other possible contributions of metal clusters, such as co-catalyst effect, plasmonic resonance effect and charge trapping effect.
5. Redox cocatalysts for efficient charge utilization
The redox cocatalyst is an important factor determining the eventual efficiency of the photocatalytic process because it dictates the efficiency in the utilization of photogenerated charges for actual redox reactions. Due to the limitation of the activation energy (overpotential), the photo-generated and separated electrons and holes may not be effectively utilized for the desired reduction or oxidation reaction without proper cocatalysts to decrease the overpotential. Inorganic or biomimetic cocatalysts, such as Pt, Au, and many enzymes are widely used to reduce the redox overpotential.72–75
In general, the cocatalysts can be broadly classified into two groups: reduction catalysts and oxidation catalysts, and more specifically for the water splitting reaction: hydrogen evolution catalysts and oxygen evolution catalysts. The hydrogen evolution catalysts usually consist of noble metals (e.g., Au, Ru, Pd, Ag, and Pt) and their binary and ternary alloys. In particular, Pt was found to be one of the most efficient hydrogen evolution cocatalysts,76 with a Gibbs free energy of hydrogen adsorption (ΔGh) close to zero.77 Other non-noble metal materials such as MoS2 were also found to be an effective hydrogen evolution catalyst with the catalytic activity comparable to and in some case even higher than that of Pt.78 Moreover, incomplete cubane [Mo3S4]4+ clusters,79 molecular molybdenum catalysts,80 and amorphous MoS3,81 have also been shown to be effective hydrogen evolution catalysts. Another important group of hydrogen evolution catalysts comes from the first-row transition metal (e.g., Ni and Co) complexes.82–87 The oxygen evolution catalysts generally consist of transition metal oxides (e.g., Ru, Pt Ir, Co, and Mn oxides). For the water oxidation reaction, the protons resulted from the hydrogen cleavage can significantly lower the pH in the vicinity of the oxidation site, which can lead to the corrosion of the oxide catalysts itself, particularly under low pH condition. A recently developed self-healing catalyst, the cobalt phosphate catalyst, can mitigate this problem to operate in simple buffered aqueous solutions over a wide pH range.88 Ir and Ru oxides show good performance for oxygen evolution under both acidic and alkaline conditions, and LaNiO3 shows the best performance in alkaline media. Manganese oxide clusters were also reported to exhibit good oxygen evolution activity.89 Molecular complexes containing the transition metals Ru, Mn, Co and Ir have also shown promoted activity for oxygen evolution.90–93
Although it is obvious that the effective integration of the redox cocatalysts can play a rather important role in the efficiency and stability of photocatalytic systems, little systematic effort has been made for this problem to date, largely due to the difficulties in selectively integrating the reduction and oxidation catalysts with the designed architecture to facilitate the desired charge transfer process. An enhanced photocatalytic activity is expected by loading both reduction and oxidation cocatalysts, compared to photocatalysts modified with only a single cocatalyst. Aided by the cocatalysts, the charge carriers are eventually consumed on the interfaces of cocatalysts/solution. The spatially separated redox active sites can effectively avoid the back reaction, which is an essential issue for photocatalytic water splitting. Doman and coworkers recently reported the solar water splitting by loading Mn3O4 nanoparticles as an O2 evolution cocatalyst and Rh/Cr2O3 core–shell nanoparticles as an H2 evolution cocatalyst, as shown in Fig. 12.94 The bi-cocatalysts loaded GaN:ZnO is demonstrated for the simultaneous production of H2 and O2 with a quantum yield of 1% under visible light.
 Fig. 12  (a) A proposed reaction mechanism for visible-light-driven overall water splitting. (b) HRTEM image of GaN:ZnO modified with Mn3O4 and Rh/Cr2O3 (core/shell) nanoparticles. (Adapted with permission from ref. 94 © Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.) 
6. Reliability of the photocatalysts
Chemical stability is the most critical issue of semiconductor photocatalysts dispersed in an aqueous solution under light irradiation. Photocorrosion, degradation of the photocatalyst under light irradiation, is considered the main reason for the instability of photocatalysts. Photocatalytic reactions usually happen under some rather harsh conditions with a combination of highly oxidative, highly reductive, and highly acidic or highly basic environment. The photodegradation can occur either by the reduction reaction involving photogenerated electrons, or by the oxidation reaction involving photoinduced holes, or by a simple acidic and basic dissolution process. Some of the oxides and most of the typical semiconductors (e.g., ZnO, ZnS, CdS, etc.)95,96 are susceptible to corrosion under these conditions and therefore can hardly be explored as candidates for effective photocatalysts. For example, the reaction of photogenerated charges with media solution can dramatically alter the pH value in the vicinity of the localized catalysts. At a critical pH, the hydronium ion content will be enough to protonate the catalyst itself, resulting in corrosion. For instance, ZnO under UV light irradiation is known to dissolve readily. This susceptibility significantly decreased the photocatalytic activity of ZnO in aqueous solutions and prevented the further application of ZnO as an effective photocatalyst.
Tremendous efforts have been made to improve the photostability using various methods. For example, the stability of some photocatalysts was found to increase in the presence of certain inorganic sacrificial reagents, such as the S2−/SO32− system. In the photocatalytic reactions, photoinduced holes would preferentially oxidize the S2−/SO32− system to Sn2−/SO42− and avoid the etching process on the photocatalysts themselves. Therefore, the S2−/SO32− mixture is widely used as an electron donor to promote the photocatalytic activity and stability for hydrogen production from water.97–99 In addition, core–shell structures with an inert oxide or polymer shell are developed to suppress the photocorrosion, as shown in Fig. 13.100,101 Pal et al. prepared silica-coated CdS nanoparticles via a size-selective photoetching method and demonstrated that the CdS/SiO2 core–shell nanoparticles suspended in a methanol aqueous solution can be used for hydrogen production.102
 Fig. 13  (a) TEM micrograph of ZnO–core/SiO2–shell composite nanoparticles. (b) TEM image of CdS/TiO2 core–shell nanocomposite. (a adapted with permission from ref. 100 © Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. b adapted with permission from ref. 101 © Copyright 2010 Elsevier.) 
7. Towards the rational design of freestanding photoelectrochemical nanodevices as highly efficient photocatalysts
A photocatalytic process involves many steps including light harvesting, charge generation, separation, transportation, and utilization. Significant efforts have been devoted to optimize each one of these processes, which has led to the development of a wide range of materials and architectures for effective photocatalytic systems. On the other hand, most studies to date have treated these problems separately, and the optimization of one parameter can often lead to the degradation of the other. In a very rare case, all these processes have been considered as a whole picture. Considering the multiple-step nature of the photocatalytic process, it is important to consider the entire process in order to develop a highly efficient and stable photocatalyst.
To this end, we have recently reported a rational strategy to design a new generation of freestanding photoelectrochemical nanodevices as highly efficient and stable photocatalysts.103 In this design, we essentially integrate one or more nanoscale photovoltaic devices with two distinct redox nanocatalysts in a single nanostructure to enable highly efficient photocatalysts. Specifically, one (or more) photodiode (p–n or Schottky diode) can be synthetically integrated with two redox nanocatalysts in a single nanowire heterostructure, with the entire structure encased in an insulating shell except the redox nanocatalysts that are exposed for redox reactions (Fig. 14). Here photo-excitation of the photodiodes generates electron–hole pairs that are efficiently separated by the built-in electric potential across the diode. The separated electrons and holes can then quickly travel to the redox nanocatalysts to facilitate proton reduction or water oxidation reaction.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of a freestanding photoelectrochemical nanodevice consisting of a p–n photodiode with two integrated redox nanocatalysts in a single nanostructure to function as a highly efficient and stable photocatalyst. (b) A schematic illustration of a multi-heterojunction nanowire that integrates multiple p–n diodes with two metal catalysts. With this system, two (or more) photons may be used for each electron redox reaction, and therefore to simultaneously ensure enough energy for direct water splitting and excellent absorption overlap with the solar spectrum, in a way like natural photosynthesis. 
With the seamless integration of multiple functional components in a single nanostructure and precise control of the materials interfaces, this design of photocatalyst offers several key advantages over conventional ones: (1) the internal built-in potential can facilitate efficient electron–hole separation and transportation; (2) the one-dimensional morphology and the insulating shell ensure that the electrons and holes are only directed towards the redox nanocatalysts for the desired redox reactions, and therefore minimize non-productive charge consumption by recombination or undesired side reactions on semiconductor surface; (3) multiple photodiodes can be integrated in series to step-up the electron energy and therefore simultaneously ensure sufficient electrochemical potential for direct water splitting and good absorption overlap with the solar spectrum (Fig. 14b), much like the natural photosynthesis that always uses two photons to drive each electron reaction; and (4) the encapsulation of the semiconductor portion in a protective insulating shell prevents direct electrochemical reactions on the semiconductor surface to ensure the electrochemical stability, and therefore allows flexible selection of semiconductor materials that better match the solar spectrum for efficient solar energy harvesting and conversion.
This idealized photocatalyst design can be realized in a multi-heterojunction nanowire, in which all functional components are closely integrated in a single nanowire. To this end, we have recently reported a proof-of-concept device based on the Pt/n–Si/n+–Si/Ag heterostructure that integrates a nanoscale metal–semiconductor Schottky photodiode (Pt/n–Si) with two metal catalysts (Ag and Pt) in a single nanowire to form a prototype of the photocatalysts described above (Fig. 15). Here a Schottky diode is formed between Pt and n–Si due to a large work function difference, while a nearly Ohmic contact can be achieved between the heavily doped Si (n+–Si) and Ag due to the high doping concentration and much smaller work function difference. The whole heterostructure nanowire was encased in a protective insulating shell with the two metallic ends exposed for redox reactions, and each nanostructure functions as a complete standalone photoelectrochemical cell. Specifically, photoexcitation of the silicon section creates electron–hole pairs that quickly dissociate into separated electrons and holes due to the internal built-in electrical potential in the Pt/n–Si Schottky diode. Then the separated electrons and holes migrate in the opposite directions toward the two ends of the diodes for desired reduction reaction on Ag and oxidation reaction on Pt, respectively (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  Schematic illustration and band diagram of a rationally designed metal–semiconductor–metal heterojunction nanodevice as a highly efficient photocatalyst. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 103 © Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.) 
The multi-heterojunction nanowires can be synthesized using various approaches including metal nanocluster catalyzed chemical vapour deposition, electro-deposition in a porous membrane, colloid chemistry synthesis24,104,105 or chemical etching of bulk structures.106–110 In our initial studies, silicon nanowire arrays were synthesized via a method combining colloidal nanolithography with deep reactive ion etching.111 The formation of Pt/Si heterojunctions involves selective drilling of nanoholes into the Si nanowires and electro-deposition of Pt inside the nanoholes. The second metal, Ag, was deposited at the other end of the nanowire through a self-catalyzed photo-reduction reaction. A transmission electron microscopy image clearly shows three distinct sections of a Pt–Si–Ag nanowire heterostructure (Fig. 16b). Photovoltaic studies on individual Pt–Si nanowire heterojunctions show clear photovoltaic response with an estimated internal quantum efficiency (QE) of 60–95%, demonstrating high photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (Fig. 16c and d).
 Fig. 16  (a) SEM images of Pt-filled Si nanowires. (b) TEM image of a Pt/Si/Ag nanowire diode photocatalyst. (c) Schematic illustration of a Pt/Si nanowire photovoltaic device. (d) I–V data obtained in the dark (black) and under 1 sun of irradiation (red). (Adapted with permission from ref. 103 © Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.) 
Photocatalytic studies have shown that these integrated nanowire heterostructures can be used to facilitate a wide range of thermodynamically downhill or uphill reactions, including the photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes (Fig. 17a) and the reduction of metal ions and carbon dioxide using visible light (Fig. 17b). In addition, Pt/Si/Ag nanowire diodes were also prepared by our group through a similar process including the formation of silicon nanowire arrays by wet chemical etching. The Pt/Si/Ag diodes exhibit highly efficient photocatalytic activity for the photodegradation of indigo carmine and 4-nitrophenol, and photoconversion of formic acid into hydrogen and carbon dioxide (Fig. 17c).112 With the protection of the silicon oxide shell, these heterostructured photocatalysts also exhibit exceptional photoelectrochemical stability that was not previously possible (Fig. 17d). Together, these initial studies for the first time demonstrated the integration of multiple distinct functional components into a single nanostructure to form a standalone photoelectrochemical nanodevice, to enable a photocatalyst that is both efficient and stable throughout the entire solar spectrum. It can thus open a rational avenue to the design and synthesis of a new generation of photoelectrochemical nanosystems with unprecedented efficiency and stability, and will have a broad impact in areas including environmental remediation, artificial photosynthesis and solar fuel production. However, it should be noted that the built in potential (∼0.3 eV) of this initial system is not enough for direct water splitting or CO2 reduction (≫1.23–1.34 eV); alternative larger bandgap materials or multijunction must be explored to address this critical challenge. Additionally, it would also be important to explore various redox catalysts to facilitate the electron transfer process, reduce overpotential and increase the efficiency of the photocatalytic redox reactions.88,113
 Fig. 17  Photocatalytic properties of Pt/Si/Ag heterostructure photocatalysts. (a) Photodegradation of indigo carmine (IC) with Pt/Si/Ag photodiodes dispersed in a 100 μM IC aqueous solution. The degradation was characterized by the ratio of the measured IC concentration to the original concentration. The square and triangular symbols represent the photodegradation reaction of IC with and without Pt/Si/Ag photodiodes. (b) Photocatalytic reduction of CO2 into formic acid by hydrogen. (c) Hydrogen production based on the oxidation of formic acid catalyzed by Pt/Si/Ag photodiodes. (d) Photocatalytic stability of the Pt/Si/Ag photodiodes in the IC degradation reaction. (a and b adapted with permission from ref. 103 © Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. c and d adapted with permission from ref. 112 © Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.) 
8. Summary and outlook
In summary, we have discussed the general strategies and recent progress to address four critical problems in developing highly efficient and stable photocatalysts: (1) the bandgap engineering of the photocatalysts to satisfy not only high absorption of solar energy but also the sufficient built-in potential for redox reactions; (2) heterostructured junctions with built-in electrical potential to effectively drive the separation and transportation of the electron–hole pairs; (3) the integration with proper cocatalysts for lower redox overpotential at the respective active sites; and (4) the electrochemical stability of the photocatalyst.
In general, photocatalysis involves a complicated sequence of multiple synergistic or competing steps, including light harvesting, charge generation, separation, transportation, recombination and utilization. Although significant effort has been devoted to optimize each one of these processes, which has led to the development of a wide range of materials and architectures for effective photocatalytic systems, few studies have treated these problems coherently. Very often, the optimization of one parameter could lead to the degradation of the other. It remains a significant challenge to distinguish which factor(s) dominates the overall photocatalytic activity, and it is important to address these problems together. New insights are required to design the light absorption, charge separation and transfer processes and the integration with redox cocatalysts. Rational design of the photocatalyst with the consideration of the whole process could facilitate the creation of highly effective photocatalysts. Semiconductor nano-architectures that integrate multiple functional components in the nanoscale could allow efficient charge generation, separation, transportation and utilization to enable a new generation of highly efficient photocatalysts. In a specific example, we have discussed a freestanding photoelectrochemical nanodevice that consisted of a p–n junction nanowire with a protecting shell and two exposed redox cocatalysts, which represents an interesting design for a highly efficient and stable photocatalyst.
Acknowledgements
H.Z. and X.D. are grateful to Camille and Henry Dreyfus Foundation for financial support through the Camille and Henry Dreyfus Postdoctoral Program in Environmental Chemistry. X.D. acknowledges support by the NIH Director's New Innovator Award Program, part of the NIH Roadmap for Medical Research, through Grant 1DP2OD004342-01.
Notes and references

          Energy Information Administration, Annual Energy Outlook and International Energy Outlook, US Dept of Energy, Washington, DC,  2011 Search PubMed .
J. R. Bolton, Science, 1978, 202, 705–711 CAS .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1890–1898 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Roy, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1259–1278 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bard, Science, 1980, 207, 139–144 CAS .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 269–277 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. D. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS .
O. Hayden, R. Agarwal and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 352–356 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, C. J. Barrelet, F. Capasso and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2929–2934 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, M. L. Geier and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2005, 310, 462–465 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Kelzenberg, D. B. Turner-Evans, B. M. Kayes, M. A. Filler, M. C. Putnam, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 710–714 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, T. J. Kempa and C. M. Lieber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 16–24 RSC .
G. Dukovic, M. G. Merkle, J. H. Nelson, S. M. Hughes and A. P. Alivisatos, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4306–4311 CrossRef CAS .
G. Menagen, J. E. Macdonald, Y. Shemesh, I. Popov and U. Banin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17406–17411 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schierhorn, S. W. Boettcher, S. Kraemer, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3262–3267 CrossRef CAS .
A. Luque, A. Marti and A. J. Nozik, MRS Bull., 2007, 32, 236–241 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, L. A. Archer and Z. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3987–4019 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Korzhak, N. I. Ermokhina, A. L. Stroyuk, V. K. Bukhtiyarov, A. E. Raevskaya, V. I. Litvin, S. Y. Kuchmiy, V. G. Ilyin and P. A. Manorik, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 198, 126–134 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, T. Sasaki, Y. Shimizu and N. Koshizaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14755–14762 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Wang, C. J. Summers and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1215–1218 CrossRef CAS .
J. Manassen, D. Cahen, G. Hodes and A. Sofer, Nature, 1976, 263, 97–100 CrossRef CAS ; M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef ; M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef ; A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef ; A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 115–164 RSC ; P. V. Kamat, K. Tvrdy, D. R. Baker and J. G. Radich, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6664–6688 CrossRef .
H. Tada, T. Mitsui, T. Kiyonaga, T. Akita and K. Tanaka, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 782–786 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bard and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 531–533 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. Tian, J. A. Voigt, J. Liu, B. Mckenzie, M. J. Mcdermott, M. A. Rodriguez, H. Konishi and H. Xu, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 821–826 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sakthivel, B. Neppolian, M. V. Shankar, B. Arabindoo, M. Palanichamy and V. Murugesan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 77, 65–82 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishihara, H. Nishiguchi, K. Fukamachi and Y. Takita, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 1–3 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nozik, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1978, 29, 189–222 CrossRef .
A. Fujishima, X. Zhang and D. A. Tryk, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2008, 63, 515–582 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gueymard, Sol. Energy, 2004, 76, 423–453 CrossRef .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401–425 CrossRef CAS .
J. Choi, H. Park and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 783–792 CAS .
Z. Kang, Y. Liu, C. H. A. Tsang, D. D. D. Ma, X. Fan, N.-B. Wong and S.-T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 661–664 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohmori, H. Mametsuka and E. Suzuki, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2000, 25, 953–955 CrossRef CAS .
R. Costi, G. Cohen, A. Salant, E. Rabani and U. Banin, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2031–2039 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, T. Takata, M. Hara, N. Saito, Y. Inoue, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8286–8287 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Tryk, A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2363–2376 CrossRef CAS ; D. Li, H. Haneda, N. K. Labhsetwar, S. Hishita and N. Ohashi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 401, 579–584 CrossRef ; A. L. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef ; J. Zhang, Y. Wu, M. Xing, S. A. K. Leghari and S. Sajjad, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 715–726 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
G. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Tang, X. Yang, R. C. Fitzmorris, C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3026–3033 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ho and J. C. Yu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 247, 268–274 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kongkanand, K. Tvrdy, K. Takechi, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4007–4015 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ning, H. Tian, C. Yuan, Y. Fu, H. Qin, L. Sun and H. Ågren, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1536–1538 RSC .
R. Brahimi, Y. Bessekhouad, A. Bouguelia and M. Trari, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 194, 173–180 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, J. Guo, J. Qu and X. Hu, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 4982–4987 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, Z. Guo, J. Han, X. Zhao, Q. Zhao and S.-J. Kim, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 8351–8357 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Nedeljković, O. I. Mićić, S. P. Ahrenkiel, A. Miedaner and A. J. Nozik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 2632–2639 CrossRef .
M. Niu, F. Huang, L. Cui, P. Huang, Y. Yu and Y. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 681–688 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cao, Y. Li, C. Wang, L. Wei, C. Shao and Y. Liu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2010, 45, 1406–1412 CrossRef CAS .
L. Amirav and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1051–1054 CrossRef CAS .
S. Banerjee, S. K. Mohapatra, P. P. Das and M. Misra, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6784–6791 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ratanatawanate, Y. Tao and K. J. Balkus, Jr, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10755–10760 CAS .
F. Chen, Z. Deng, X. Li, J. Zhang and J. Zhao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 415, 85–88 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. D. Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, T. Bessho and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16835–16847 CrossRef CAS .
B. ÓRegan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
P. Wang, Q. Dai, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Forsyth, D. R. MacFarlane and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13590–13591 CrossRef CAS .
N. Robertson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1012–1014 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 8–13 CrossRef .
K. Maeda, M. Eguchi, W. J. Youngblood and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6770–6778 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moores and F. Goettmann, New J. Chem., 2006, 30, 1121–1132 RSC .
A. M. Schwartzberg and J. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10323–10337 CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7729–7744 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wodka, E. Bielanska, R. P. Socha, M. E. Wodka, J. Gurgul, P. Nowak, P. Warszynski and I. Kumakiri, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1945–1953 CAS .
M. Abd Elmoula, E. Panaitescu, M. Phan, D. Yin, C. Richter, L. H. Lewis and L. Menon, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4483–4487 RSC .
G. Menagen, J. E. Macdonald, Y. Shemesh, I. Popov and U. Banin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17406–17411 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qu, R. Cheng, Q. Su and X. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16730–16733 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, C. Shao, X. Li, C. Wang, M. Zhang and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2915–2923 CAS .
V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943–4950 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato, K. Asakura and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3082–3087 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., 2006, 118, 7970–7973 CrossRef .
Z. Zou, J. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Nature, 2001, 414, 625–627 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bao, L. Shen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 110–117 CrossRef CAS ; H. Yan, J. Yang, G. Ma, G. Wu, X. Zong, Z. Lei, J. Shi and C. Li, J. Catal., 2009, 266, 165–168 CrossRef .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jorgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Norskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zong, H. Yan, G. Wu, G. Ma, F. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7176–7177 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, B. L. Abrams, P. C. K. Vesborg, M. E. Bjçrketun, K. Herbst, L. Bech, A. M. Setti, C. D. Damsgaard, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl, S. Dahl, J. K. Norskov and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 434–438 CrossRef CAS .
H. I. Karunadasa, C. J. Chang and J. R. Long, Nature, 2010, 464, 1329–1333 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Tang, D. C. Grauer, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, V. K. Yachandra, L. Amirav, J. R. Long, J. Yano and A. P. Alivisatos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10203–10207 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fisher and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 7361–7363 CrossRef CAS .
M. Razavet, V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 4786–4795 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, B. M. Cossairt, B. S. Brunschwig, N. S. Lewis and J. C. Peters, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4723–4725 RSC .
O. Pantani, S. Naksar, R. Guillot, P. Millet, E. Anxolabéhère-Mallart and A. Aukauloo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9948–9950 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Bigi, T. E. Hanna, W. H. Harman, A. Chang and C. J. Chang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 958–960 RSC .
A. Le Goff, V. Artero, B. Jousselme, P. D. Tran, N. Guillet, R. Métayé, A. Fihri, S. Palacin and M. Fontecave, Science, 2009, 326, 1384–1387 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiao and H. Frei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1018–1027 CAS .
D. Duonghong, E. Borgarello and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 4685–4690 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, M. K. Brennaman, P. G. Hoertz, A. O. T. Patrocinio, N. Y. M. Iha, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1954–1965 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Ellis, J. A. Gilbert, Jr, W. R. Murphy and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 4842–4843 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Dismukes, R. Brimblecombe, G. A. N. Felton, R. S. Pryadun, J. E. Sheats, L. Spiccia and G. F. Swiegers, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1935–1943 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, A. Xiong, T. Yoshinaga, T. Ikeda, N. Sakamoto, T. Hisatomi, M. Takashima, D. Lu, M. Kanehara, T. Setoyama, T. Teranishi and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4096–4099 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. V. Pleskov and Y. Y. Gurevich, in Semiconductor Photoelectrochemistry, ed. P. N. Bartlett, Plenum, New York,  1986 Search PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
S. Shen and L. Guo, Mater. Res. Bull., 2008, 43, 437–446 CrossRef CAS .
A. Boudjemaa, R. Bouarab, S. Saadi, A. Bouguelia and M. Trari, Appl. Energy, 2009, 86, 1080–1086 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hirai, Y. Nomura and I. J. Komasawa, J. Nanopart. Res., 2003, 5, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, T. Tsuzuki, L. Sun and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 957–960 CAS .
S. Vaidya, A. Patra and A. K. Ganguli, Colloids Surf., A, 2010, 363, 130–134 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pal, T. Torimoto, K. Iwasaki, T. Shibayama, H. Takahashi and B. Ohtani, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 18670–18674 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qu, L. Liao, R. Cheng, Y. Wang, Y.-C. Lin, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1941–1949 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Milliron, S. M. Hughes, Y. Cui, L. Manna, J. Li, L. W. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2004, 430, 190–195 CrossRef CAS .
L. Manna, E. C. Scher, L.-S. Li and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7136–7145 CrossRef CAS .
K. Q. Peng, Y. J. Yan, S. P. Gao and J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 127–132 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Qu, L. Liao, Y. J. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4539–4543 CrossRef CAS .
F. Patolsky, G. F. Zheng and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Protoc., 2006, 1, 1711–1724 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Holmes, K. P. Johnston, R. C. Doty and B. A. Korgel, Science, 2000, 287, 1471–1473 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Pena, J. K. N. Mbindyo, A. J. Carado, T. E. Mallouk, C. D. Keating, B. Razavi and T. S. Mayer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7458–7462 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Morton, G. Nieberg, S. F. Bai and S. Y. Chou, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 345301 CrossRef .
Y. Qu, T. Xue, X. Zhong, Y. Lin, L. Liao, J. Choi and X. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3005–3011 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Hailong Zhou	Hailong Zhou is currently working as a Camille and Henry Dreyfus Environmental Chemistry Postdoctoral Fellow in Prof. Xiangfeng Duan's group at the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles. He obtained his BS and MS at Shandong University in 1999 and 2002, respectively. He received his PhD degree in physics at the National University of Singapore in 2008. Currently, his research mainly focuses on the III–V nanostructures for next generation green solar energy source.
Xiangfeng Duan	Xiangfeng Duan currently holds a position of Assistant Professor and Howard Reiss Career Development Chair at the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, and is a Camille and Henry Dreyfus Environmental Chemistry Mentor. He received his BS degree in chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 1997, and MA degree in chemistry and PhD degree in physical chemistry from Harvard University in 1999 and 2002, respectively. He was a Founding Scientist and Manager of Advanced Technology at Nanosys Inc. from 2002 to 2008. Dr Duan joined UCLA in 2008, where his research focuses on nanoscale integration of dissimilar materials with distinct compositions, structures and properties to create a new generation of integrated material systems with unique functions or unprecedented performance.

Broader context
As we are facing increasing challenges of diminishing fossil fuels and global warming in the new century, there is increasing interest in developing an efficient and stable photocatalyst system that can facilitate the direct conversion of solar energy into chemical energy in the form of storable chemical fuel. An effective photocatalyst requires close integration of a light harvesting antenna with two distinct redox catalysts. Among many different systems, semiconductor nanostructure based photocatalysts have attracted considerable attention due to their unique structural, optical, and chemical properties. The making of a highly efficient and stable photocatalyst requires a systematic design and optimization of a sequence of multiple critical steps, including light harvesting, charge generation, separation, transportation, and utilization. Although significant efforts have been devoted to optimizing each one of these steps, few studies have treated these problems coherently and systematically. Very often, the optimization of one parameter could lead to the degradation of the other. In this perspective, we highlight the recent progress in exploring semiconductor nanostructures for the development of next generation highly efficient photocatalysts, and discuss the fundamental strategies to enhance the photocatalytic activity and photoelectrochemical stability.


 	Fig. 1  The diagram shows the percentage of the energy supplied from different sources in US.1	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of an efficient photocatalyst illustrates the requirement of close integration of three critical components, including a light harvesting antenna, reduction catalyst and oxidation catalyst.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustrating the mechanism for photocatalytic process on TiO2 coupled with cocatalysts for redox reactions. (b) TEM image of the Au loaded TiO2 obtained by the deposition–precipitation method. (Adapted with permission from ref. 24 © Copyright 2006 Nature Publishing Group.)	 

 	Fig. 4  Bandgaps and redox potentials, using the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) as a reference, for several semiconductors.	 

 	Fig. 5  Spectral distribution of the solar photon irradiation based on the AM1.5 global data; the curve is based on the American Society for Testing and Materials Terrestrial Reference.32	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the band structure and electronic density of states of a semiconductor in the form of a disordered nanocrystal with dopant incorporation. (b and c) are HRTEM images of TiO2 nanocrystals before and after hydrogenation, respectively. (d) Spectral absorbance of the white and black TiO2 nanocrystals. The inset enlarges the absorption spectrum in the range from approximately 750 nm to 1200 nm. (e) Comparison of solar-driven photocatalytic activity of the black TiO2 nanocrystals against that of the white TiO2 nanocrystals under the same experimental conditions. (f) Cycling measurements of hydrogen gas generation through direct photocatalytic water splitting with disordered, black TiO2 under simulated solar light. (Adapted with permission from ref. 41 © Copyright 2011 Science.)	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) HRTEM of Au–CdS/TiO2. (b) TEM micrographs of SnO2/α-Fe2O3 (nanocube). (c) SEM image of CeO2/TiO2. (d) TEM images of a Pt tipped CdS nanorod with an embedded CdSe seed; the inset is a schematic illustration of the multicomponent nanoheterostructure. (e) TEM image of CdS nanoparticles coated inside the TiO2 nanotubes; the inset is a schematic showing the structure of CdS filled TiO2 nanotubes. (f) TEM image of PbS/TiO2 nanotubes. (a adapted with permission from ref. 24 © Copyright 2006 Nature Publishing Group. b and d adapted with permission from ref. 51 and 53 © Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. c adapted with permission from ref. 52 © Copyright 2010 Elsevier. e and f adapted with permission from ref. 54 and 55 © Copyright 2008 and 2009 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of dye-sensitized hydrogen production from water. (b) Schematic illustration of hydrogen evolution by the dye-sensitized K4Nb6O17 nanoscroll with the electron transfer path. (Adapted with permission from ref. 62 © Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Dark field scanning TEM image of the Ag/P25–TiO2 composite. (b) SEM image of gold nanoparticles attached to titania nanotubes. (c) TEM image of Au nanoparticles on CdS nanorods. (d) A photodiode photocatalyst with Au/Ag core/shell nanorods on the surface. (a, c, and d adapted with permission from ref. 66, 68, and 69 © Copyright 2010, 2009, and 2011 American Chemical Society. c adapted with permission from ref. 67 © Copyright 2009 Royal Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic energy band diagram of three types of semiconductor heterojunctions categorized by band alignments.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic diagram showing the energy band structure and electron–hole pair separation in the p-type NiO/n-type ZnO heterojunction. (Adapted with permission from ref. 70 © Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) A proposed reaction mechanism for visible-light-driven overall water splitting. (b) HRTEM image of GaN:ZnO modified with Mn3O4 and Rh/Cr2O3 (core/shell) nanoparticles. (Adapted with permission from ref. 94 © Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) TEM micrograph of ZnO–core/SiO2–shell composite nanoparticles. (b) TEM image of CdS/TiO2 core–shell nanocomposite. (a adapted with permission from ref. 100 © Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. b adapted with permission from ref. 101 © Copyright 2010 Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of a freestanding photoelectrochemical nanodevice consisting of a p–n photodiode with two integrated redox nanocatalysts in a single nanostructure to function as a highly efficient and stable photocatalyst. (b) A schematic illustration of a multi-heterojunction nanowire that integrates multiple p–n diodes with two metal catalysts. With this system, two (or more) photons may be used for each electron redox reaction, and therefore to simultaneously ensure enough energy for direct water splitting and excellent absorption overlap with the solar spectrum, in a way like natural photosynthesis.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic illustration and band diagram of a rationally designed metal–semiconductor–metal heterojunction nanodevice as a highly efficient photocatalyst. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 103 © Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) SEM images of Pt-filled Si nanowires. (b) TEM image of a Pt/Si/Ag nanowire diode photocatalyst. (c) Schematic illustration of a Pt/Si nanowire photovoltaic device. (d) I–V data obtained in the dark (black) and under 1 sun of irradiation (red). (Adapted with permission from ref. 103 © Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 17  Photocatalytic properties of Pt/Si/Ag heterostructure photocatalysts. (a) Photodegradation of indigo carmine (IC) with Pt/Si/Ag photodiodes dispersed in a 100 μM IC aqueous solution. The degradation was characterized by the ratio of the measured IC concentration to the original concentration. The square and triangular symbols represent the photodegradation reaction of IC with and without Pt/Si/Ag photodiodes. (b) Photocatalytic reduction of CO2 into formic acid by hydrogen. (c) Hydrogen production based on the oxidation of formic acid catalyzed by Pt/Si/Ag photodiodes. (d) Photocatalytic stability of the Pt/Si/Ag photodiodes in the IC degradation reaction. (a and b adapted with permission from ref. 103 © Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. c and d adapted with permission from ref. 112 © Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.)	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
