Feeding a sustainable chemical industry: do we have the bioproducts cart before the feedstocks horse?  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7FD00173H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7FD00173H
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2017, 202, 11-30Feeding a sustainable chemical industry: do we have the bioproducts cart before the feedstocks horse?

        
          
            Bruce E. 
            Dale
          
        
      
Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48910, USA. E-mail: bdale@egr.msu.edu
Received 
      8th June 2017
    , Accepted 11th July 2017First published on 11th July 2017AbstractA sustainable chemical industry cannot exist at scale without both sustainable feedstocks and feedstock supply chains to provide the raw materials. However, most current research focus is on producing the sustainable chemicals and materials. Little attention is given to how and by whom sustainable feedstocks will be supplied. In effect, we have put the bioproducts cart before the sustainable feedstocks horse. For example, bulky, unstable, non-commodity feedstocks such as crop residues probably cannot supply a large-scale sustainable industry. Likewise, those who manage land to produce feedstocks must benefit significantly from feedstock production, otherwise they will not participate in this industry and it will never grow. However, given real markets that properly reward farmers, demand for sustainable bioproducts and bioenergy can drive the adoption of more sustainable agricultural and forestry practices, providing many societal “win–win” opportunities. Three case studies are presented to show how this “win–win” process might unfold.
How we got here: a very brief history of sustainable bioproducts and bioenergy
The current sustainable bioproducts effort descends from the “farm chemurgic” movement in the United States during the mid-1930s.1,2 U.S. farms produced vastly more agricultural commodities than Americans could consume, and as a result, agricultural prices were depressed. The four U.S. Department of Agriculture Regional Laboratories were established to develop industrial uses of agricultural materials, increase demand for crop products and raise crop prices to benefit rural economies. Raising crop prices and strengthening rural economies were explicit policy goals. Since then, many bioproducts have been developed but have had to compete against inexpensive, entrenched petroleum-based products, and market penetration has been slow in most cases.
Crop yields have continued to grow, leading to increased U.S. emphasis on exporting its crop commodities, including through various food aid projects. A serious unintended consequence of this food aid is that domestic agriculture in the countries receiving aid has sometimes been undermined.3 Since agriculture is the most basic economic activity of many countries, whole societies have also been undermined. Driven by corn surpluses, U.S. sugar tariffs enabled the high fructose corn syrup (HFCS) sweetener industry. A serious unintended consequence of the flood of HFCS has been increased obesity and diabetes, both of which are directly linked to over-consumption of HFCS.4,5
I raise these issues to point out the fact that there are serious unintended consequences of not finding good industrial uses of our agricultural products. It is neither necessary nor wise to use all agricultural output to produce food and feed.
This Faraday Discussion is devoted to supplying feedstocks for biobased products. A little simple arithmetic is sufficient to reveal an uncomfortable fact about biobased products relative to feedstock supply.
In recent years, the U.S. corn crop has averaged about 14 billion bushels per year, or roughly 356 million tonnes per year. The amount of available starch increases by about 1.0 percent per year as corn yields continue to increase, or about 2.67 million tonnes of “new starch” per year. The Cargill–Dow wet milling plant in Blair, Nebraska, produces about 127000 tonnes per year of polylactic acid (PLA) from corn starch at about 90% yield. Thus, the total demand of the Blair plant for corn starch to make PLA represents about 5% of one year’s increase in the corn crop.
Corn and the other grains can meet just about any conceivable market demand for biobased products made from starch or sugar. There is really no reason to look elsewhere for feedstocks, except for a multitude of sustainability concerns. I will return to this subject later in this paper, but in the meantime, we will focus on agricultural oversupply. As we have seen, the demand for biobased products cannot, by itself, change the problem of agricultural oversupply. Agriculture needs other markets. And by far the largest of these markets is energy.
Using agriculture to produce modern energy has been underway for decades. In the early 1970s, a series of oil supply restrictions began that raised oil prices four fold in just a few years. One result was increased U.S. policy and legislation that encouraged increased blending of gasoline with corn-based ethanol. That effort has continued, with ups and downs, and about 56.8 million cubic meters of ethanol are currently blended with gasoline in the US, roughly 10% of all gasoline used. Most recently, corn ethanol production rose from about 6.1 million cubic meters per year in 2000 to 50.3 million cubic meters per year in 2010.6 This was truly exponential growth with a doubling time of about 3.0 years, as shown in Fig. 1. Ethanol use now consumes about 35–40% of the U.S. corn crop. There will not be any more rapid doublings of American corn ethanol production, given the competing uses for the crop. A different model is needed to continue to grow ethanol or other biofuels in the U.S.
 Fig. 1  Recent growth of corn ethanol production in the United States. 
A similar situation unfolded in Brazil in the 1970s when greatly increased oil prices essentially wiped out the country’s hard currency reserves, causing social disruption and a lot of hardship. Brazil turned to its sugarcane industry to produce ethanol to substitute for imported oil. From 1975 to 2007, the Brazilian ethanol program grew from about 0.6 million cubic meters per year to 18 million cubic meters per year.7 Today, about 25% of all motor fuel consumed in Brazil is ethanol and all gasoline there is blended with some ethanol.
However, growth in sugarcane ethanol production has slowed greatly. The primary reason is that Brazilian ethanol is a coproduct of cane sugar and the global markets for sugar are saturated. Like the U.S., Brazil needs a different model for ethanol production from cane in order to continue to grow.
Thus, agricultural markets and energy markets, especially petroleum markets, are increasingly intertwined. Let’s consider now some lessons from the petroleum industry. (Note: hereafter I will refer to all energy derived from agriculture or forestry as “bioenergy”, regardless of whether the fuels are solids, liquid biofuels or gases.)
Emergence of the petrochemical industry—some lessons for us
The past century can rightly be called the Age of Oil. World oil consumption grew from about 20 million tonnes per year in 1900 to nearly 4000 million tonnes per year in 2005—a 200 fold increase.8 The economic activity enabled by oil consumption also greatly increased both human wealth and the human population over the last century. But the Age of Oil is winding down. Fig. 2 shows the total world liquid fuels production, including biofuels, deepwater oil, oil from tight shales, and tar sands oil. Production of conventional (cheap) oil has been flat since about 2005 in spite of trillions of dollars spent to explore for new oil fields. We apparently cannot produce cheap oil any faster than we are now producing it. All growth in oil supply has been from higher cost and more environmentally-problematic resources.
 Fig. 2  Historical growth of the petroleum industry worldwide. Image reproduced with permission from ©John Wiley and Sons, 2014 (ref. 8). 
The bioproducts industry often seeks to replace petroleum-derived chemicals and materials. It may be instructive therefore to understand how the petrochemical industry emerged. The answer is clear. Petrochemicals grew out of the established petroleum refining industry—not the other way around. The same thing will probably occur for commodity bioproducts also: a robust bioproducts industry will most likely be built on robust bioenergy systems. The large corn wet mills producing multiple products are one example. We do not see commodity bioproducts (such as PLA) made in a dedicated plant. They are produced as coproducts in a large integrated biorefinery.
Why is this so? Important reasons include access to feedstock at marginal cost and very large scale, availability of supporting technical talent under one roof, sharing of expensive utilities including co-generation plants and wastewater treatment plants, access to internal capital for investment, and the marketing prowess and vertical integration of big firms. While I can imagine a specialty bioproduct being produced in a dedicated, smaller plant, I cannot imagine a commodity bioproduct being made anywhere other than in a large-scale biorefinery.
Since the existing markets for materials and chemicals have been largely satisfied, the bioproduct newcomers must adapt themselves to the existing market realities. Unless the bioproducts industry can offer totally new products, with greatly superior properties, there is no reason to use biobased products unless they cost much less than the products they are seeking to replace. Otherwise, drop-in replacements, with strong cost advantages, will be preferred over new products. Fortunately, one superior property that bioproducts might offer is sustainability.
So I argue that increased demand for sustainable bioenergy will pull commodity bioproducts along with it. I do not see the opposite trend occurring, in spite of much hopeful thinking in this regard. The experience of Amyris and other would-be cellulosic biofuel companies is relevant. They encountered the hard realities of the marketplace and especially the reality of scale, and are either defunct or have refocused themselves as specialty bioproducts companies.
If this is true, then to scale up bioproduct commodities we must first scale up bioenergy production and/or make bioproducts along with bioenergy commodities, as corn wet mills are currently doing. We must therefore understand why energy generally, and bioenergy in particular, is so critical to our past, present and future. Why do we need and use so much energy?
Energy, bioenergy and prosperity
All economic activity requires energy. The more energy is used, the more economic activity. As a result, the energy consumption rate (power) is strongly and positively correlated with annual gross domestic product (annual rate of wealth production). The developed world owes its prosperity to massive use of energy, about 85% of which is from non-renewable fossil fuels.8
More comprehensive measures of prosperity, such as the United Nations Human Development Index (HDI), show the same relationship. The more power a society consumes, the greater that society’s wealth and the greater its citizens’ opportunities to develop their human potential. Fortunately, the relationship between power consumption and HDI is not linear: human well-being does not increase continually with increased power consumption. Instead the HDI ‘saturates’ (achieves a near maximum level) at a power consumption of about 5.0 kilowatts,9 as shown in Fig. 3. We do not have to consume unlimited power to achieve our human potential, but we must consume a great deal of it.
 Fig. 3  Human development index versus per capita power consumption. Image reproduced with permission from ©John Wiley and Sons, 2014 (ref. 9). 
Since societies become more prosperous as they consume more power, at least up to the saturation power level, they will very likely become less prosperous as they consume less power. Higher oil prices and higher fossil energy prices generally (as all fossil energy sources are depleted) will eventually put most developing and developed countries on the wrong side of the power = prosperity equation. Most countries and most people will become inexorably poorer, less educated, and less healthy as there is less energy to do work and thereby generate wealth.
Is this to be our fate or the fate of our children and grandchildren?
No. Not if we think clearly and act wisely now. The good news is that there is abundant renewable energy potential to provide much more than ‘saturation power’ for every person on the planet. The sun provides about 100000 terawatts of renewable power. Just 0.05% of this amount is sufficient to provide saturation power for 10 billion human beings.
Most affluent individuals in the prosperous developed world, if they think about energy at all, focus on greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs) caused by fossil energy use. Unfortunately, these prosperous people do not connect the dots. They do not understand the connection between their energy use and their prosperity. They are living in an artificial world in which the cost of energy bears very little relation to the value of energy in promoting human well-being.
In contrast, the impoverished citizens of the developing world desperately need to use more energy to improve their lives. They understand this. But if the developing world commits itself to fossil energy, it is committing itself to a dead end. Fossil fuels will become too expensive or too polluting (or both) in not many decades. Both the developed and the developing world must find another way.
We require renewable, low carbon energy if we are to enjoy sustainable, long-term prosperity. Bioenergy can provide many of the desired renewable, low carbon energy services. Only high energy density liquid fuels can supply some critical energy services, such as aviation, long-haul trucking, and ocean shipping. As a result, the consensus view of five independent analyses, as summarized in Fig. 4, is that approximately 25% of total energy services (about 138 exajoules of primary energy per year) must be provided by bioenergy10 to restrain global temperature increases.
 Fig. 4  Bioenergy contribution required to restrain global temperature changes under five different scenarios. Image reproduced with permission from ©American Chemical Society, 2014 (ref. 10). 
The geographically-distributed nature of bioenergy can help ensure that the wealth derived from bioenergy production and use will be more equitably distributed than is currently the case with fossil fuels. Properly produced and used, bioenergy can be sustainable. So, considered from the viewpoints of both the prosperous minority and the impoverished majority, we must have renewable energy, on a very large scale, if we are to enjoy both climate security and sustainable prosperity. The renewable energy transition is not an option. It is essential.
The truly sobering reality is that energy transitions take decades and cost trillions of dollars.11 There is a lot of wishful thinking about the ability of renewable energy technologies to rapidly achieve large scale penetration of the energy markets. Whatever our experience in growth rates of cell phones and other gadgets, the experience from implementing new energy systems tells us something much different. This transition to renewable energy is going to take a long time and it will be very expensive.
So we need demonstrated lower cost technologies with potentially high growth rates. I will provide more information about the absolutely critical importance of high growth rates below.
Now, back to the bioenergy theme. Why must about 25% of all renewable energy be derived from bioenergy? Compared with solar, wind and other renewable energy technologies, biomass seems unique in four ways: (1) it is both the energy collector and the energy storage system (both the solar collector and the battery), (2) it is the only source of high energy density liquid fuels so essential to our wealth and prosperity, (3) it is the only large-scale energy carrier capable of sequestering carbon (taking net carbon from the atmosphere), and (4) it is relatively low cost. Taken as a whole, these features of biomass mean bioenergy will play a key role in future energy systems.
Another feature of bioenergy is less obvious. Because of its energy storage capabilities, bioenergy can provide dispatchable power to balance the intermittent supply of electricity from solar and wind. In addition to being intermittent, solar and wind technologies provide power at very low cost at peak production. They thereby undercut the price of baseload power sources and wreck existing electricity markets, undermining the very industry they need to be able to grow and contribute to a prosperous low-carbon future.12
We have abundant evidence that the world does not lack the ability to produce food. “Food versus fuel” is apparently logical and emotionally compelling. It is also dead wrong. The problem that we have struggled with for almost 100 years is that there is insufficient demand for agricultural products. Energy services can provide by far the largest demand for agricultural and forestry materials.
People are hungry because they are poor. They are poor because they do not have sufficient access to energy services. Wealth is produced by using energy. Therefore, the best way to attack hunger is to attack poverty by increasing access to energy, including bioenergy. Poor people, as long as they remain poor, will be unable to afford the abundant food which we can produce.
Land and bioenergy/bioproducts: must we really choose between food and fuel?
It is commonly assumed that current agricultural land cannot be used sustainably to increase agricultural output. This is incorrect. Double cropping (also called “sequential cropping”) could be applied on much of the U.S. and world cropland and would improve environmental performance (increase soil fertility, improve water holding capacity, reduce erosion, reduce runoff of agricultural chemicals, etc.) while substantially increasing total per hectare output without increasing the amount of land under cultivation.
Farmers in much of the world are not double cropping in significant numbers because there is no current market demand for the additional biomass they would generate. Increased production of bioenergy and bioproducts could provide such a demand. Even without significant double cropping, existing croplands are continuing to increase productivity. The trend in the US and the EU over the past couple of decades has been to steadily reduce the amount of land under cultivation while total farm output increases.
It is likewise assumed that food and bioenergy production are necessarily in opposition. This is also wrong. For example, the major source of animal feed protein worldwide is soybean meal. But soybeans are a relatively land-inefficient source of protein. When corn or other grains are fermented to ethanol, a high protein residue called distillers grains is produced and is a valuable animal feed protein. Excess yeast from the biofuel fermentation process is another protein source that can integrate sustainable food and bioenergy systems.
Likewise, a cellulosic biofuels industry can coproduce animal feeds by producing leaf protein concentrates from double crops or by pretreating cellulosic biomass to increase its digestibility by animals and for biofuel production.13,14 The biomass pretreatment option is discussed in detail below in the case studies. In many places around the world, there are huge tracts of unproductive pasture land. With increased bioenergy demand and better management practices, the productivity of these pasture lands could be greatly increased, more carbon could be fixed and more employment provided in rural areas around the world.
No matter how much data and reasoning are provided to show the contrary, many people are conditioned to think that using land to produce bioenergy is wrong. So here are some questions that might be asked.
Is the only morally acceptable use of arable land to grow the cheapest possible food for human beings? If so, then we should eliminate consumption of beer, wine and other spirits, also chocolate, tea, coffee and tobacco, thereby freeing up that land for increased food production. Tens of millions of acres worldwide are devoted to these crops. Likewise, all domestic pets, companion animals and recreational animals such as horses should be euthanized (and then eaten). Many millions of acres currently provide food for these animals that should be going to human beings instead. All golf courses should close immediately and be converted to farms. All parks of all kinds and all outdoor recreation areas with arable land should close, and start growing food. All family yards and flower gardens, of any size, ought to be converted to growing food.
This is ridiculous, of course. In fact, the world is not short of land, and we are not short of ingenuity and innovations that can coproduce bioenergy, bioproducts, food, and animal feed, while improving environmental outcomes. Two specific innovations discussed below are: (1) coproducing animal feeds and bioenergy, and (2) making more efficient, more sustainable use of existing agricultural land to produce bioenergy.
Reconciling the four big drivers affecting bioenergy and bioproducts: environmental benefits, energy security, food security and rural prosperity
All four of these drivers affecting bioenergy and bioproducts matter, but they vary in relative importance by time and place and product. Put another way, the stakeholders/interested parties are not the same at all times and places.
How can these different drivers be reconciled? I argue that they can be reconciled through more efficient and more sustainable land use. To apply this general principle to specific, real systems, we must first identify and then exploit opportunities to improve how land is used to produce bioenergy and bioproducts.
How might this lofty goal be realized in the real world?
Here are three case studies as examples. In the first, we see how improving the sugar yield by pretreatment of cellulosic biomass increases the value of biomass for both animal feed and bioenergy/bioproduct applications. In the second, the near-term availability of millions of tonnes of underutilized sugarcane leaves and tops may enable new models for bioenergy production from sugarcane in Brazil. Last, an emerging paradigm called Biogasdoneright™ is explored to coproduce bioenergy, bioproducts and food on underutilized croplands.
Case 1: overcoming the recalcitrance and logistics problems of cellulosic biomass to provision commodity markets
Lignocellulosic biomass is the most abundant renewable plant material on earth with a total annual production of about 50 billion metric tonnes, against roughly 4 billion tonnes of petroleum mined each year. About 4 billion tonnes per year of this biomass is crop residues, the direct and widely available by-product of crop production. Cellulose is the major constituent in lignocellulosic biomass (30 to 55%) followed by hemicelluloses, which constitute about 15–35%, lignin (6 to 30%), and a small amount of pectins.14 Cellulose and hemicellulose are complex sugar polymers, thus accessing and utilizing these sugars will enable many bioproduct commodities as well as some forms of bioenergy.
In principle, it seems that it should not be difficult to utilize cellulosic biomass to provision a renewable chemicals and fuels industry. After all, biomass is abundant, inexpensive and contains high concentrations of the desired molecules. In practice, there is a key technical problem and also a crucial supply chain problem to solve before cellulosic biofuels can achieve the needed scale.
The primary technical challenge is overcoming the ‘recalcitrance’ of cellulosic biomass: that is, the cost-effective conversion of biomass into useful sugars. There are literally hundreds of ways of overcoming biomass recalcitrance, but the important question is: at what cost? Basic science can help, but this is primarily an economic problem and must be addressed using system-wide economic tools. The most promising approaches to overcoming recalcitrance (there are comparatively few) need to be thoroughly compared using system-wide metrics, such as cost, yield, concentration and rate.9,15 Clean, easy to process, inexpensive sugars from cellulosic biomass are also essential to achieve many of the low-cost, sustainable bioproducts we seek.
There is also a supply chain problem. Three years ago I noted that we had built approximately the first 0.1 percent of the cellulosic ethanol capacity we hope ultimately to establish.16 But that industry is not growing. Fig. 5 shows the growth of the cellulosic biofuels industry in the United States—both cellulosic ethanol and cellulosic biogas. It is instructive that cellulosic biogas has achieved about one hundred times the total energy produced compared to cellulosic ethanol. Why has biogas grown so remarkably over the same time period that cellulosic ethanol has not grown?
 Fig. 5  Recent history of the production of cellulosic ethanol and cellulosic biogas in the United States. 
Several reasons suggest themselves. The existing U.S. biogas industry is based on wastes such as landfills and manure. Thus, the logistics issues are largely solved for biogas. The raw materials are available on useful scales in well-defined locations. Second and third, the natural gas pipeline infrastructure is extensive and vehicles to use natural gas as a fuel already exist. Fourth and fifth, the technologies to produce biogas and to upgrade raw biogas into pipeline quality renewable natural gas are well-developed, patent-free and relatively low cost.
Broadly speaking, cellulosic ethanol in the U.S. does not enjoy any of these advantages. The logistics issues are not solved. Except for southern yellow pine, one cannot place a future contract for one million tons per year of cellulosic biomass of a defined quality to be delivered to a defined location for a defined price. The pipelines to transport ethanol are not available, largely for ownership reasons rather than technical constraints. Corn ethanol currently occupies most of the available “room” for cellulosic ethanol in the motor fuel pool. And the technologies to produce cellulosic ethanol have not enjoyed the “learning at scale” advantages that biogas, corn ethanol and gasoline have enjoyed.
Another problem is that those who manage the land, the foresters, farmers and others, are not currently organized to supply cellulosic feedstocks. Without their active participation, we will not get the scale we need. Without scale, the costs will not come down as they must. Interestingly, increased farmer participation is so important that if farmers are paid more for their biomass there may be little or no impact on the resulting cellulosic ethanol cost.17 This is because increased farmer participation leads to shortened supply chains, with reduced transportation costs, and also to larger biorefineries, with better economies of scale. The result is little or no effect on the overall cost to manufacture ethanol. This interesting phenomenon is summarized in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Doubling the price paid to farmers for cellulosic biomass increases the size of the cellulosic ethanol industry and the associated greenhouse gas benefits by nearly ten fold. Image reproduced with permission from ©John Wiley and Sons, 2014 (ref. 17). 
This surprising result reminds us that not all aspects of renewable bioenergy and bioproducts will be like their petroleum counterparts, particularly in the feedstock supply chains. The reality is that cellulosic biomass does not travel or store well. It is bulky, combustible and degradable. Also, biomass is produced over extensive land areas and must be aggregated at some scale before it can be used. Raw cellulosic biomass has no large, well-established markets to help provide feedstocks for bioenergy production in the way that the large corn market enabled the rapid growth of the corn ethanol industry.
In fact, an “ideal” cellulosic biomass would have properties similar to those of corn. An ideal cellulosic biomass would be dense, stable, storable, shippable, ready for conversion to fuels and other products and would have alternative uses to help create scale. Will such a “corn-like” cellulosic biomass exist any time soon?
Perhaps. Years ago I invented a biomass pretreatment process for bioenergy production called ammonia fiber expansion or AFEX™. AFEX™ treats cellulosic biomass with hot, concentrated ammonia. Minimal degradation of sugars occurs during AFEX™, avoiding the loss of yield and inhibition of fermentation that many pretreatments cause.18 After the ammonia is removed and recovered, the treated biomass gives much higher biofuel yields and also becomes a much better cattle feed.14 By mass, the ruminant animal feed market is approximately six times greater than the human food market in the U.S. Therefore, there is a large existing market for animal feeds that can help undergird and support the development of a cellulosic bioenergy/bioproducts industry. Importantly, the ability to coproduce food and fuel using AFEX™ addresses the “food vs. fuel” controversy for related bioenergy systems.19
Because of its relatively low capital investment costs, it is likely that AFEX™ can be practised in distributed processing facilities, near where the biomass is produced. These facilities, called “depots”, could be owned wholly or in part by farmers or other rural interests and thereby provide opportunities for rural economic growth.20,21 Finally, because of physical and chemical changes in the biomass caused by AFEX™, it is easy and inexpensive to produce stable, dense biomass pellets from AFEX™-treated biomass.22 These dense pellets can be handled and stored by conventional grain handling equipment, thereby enabling supply chain development for cellulosic bioenergy. AFEX™ is now being scaled up for commercial applications by MBI (Lansing, Michigan, USA).
The AFEX™ process has much to offer the emerging cellulosic bioenergy industry, including the potential to coproduce cellulosic ethanol and purified lignin streams as potential feedstocks for biobased aromatics. Lignin may be the only means of providing such aromatics at scale. If so, it will be critical to generate these aromatic streams in a biorefinery where they are available at scale, relatively reactive and “clean”, i.e. suitable for further conversion and processing without extensive clean up.
Case 2: cane leaf matter in Brazil—millions of tons of “new” cellulosic biomass with nowhere to go
The sugarcane plant consists of three major parts, the stalk, the juice (mostly sucrose) and the leaves and tops, each roughly having the same mass. The stalk and the leaves/tops are cellulosic materials. Thus, nearly two thirds of the mass of the plant is cellulosic biomass. Previously, the cane field was burned prior to harvest to remove the leaves and tops and facilitate harvesting. Open field burning has now been outlawed because of air quality issues, making millions of tons per year of “new” cellulosic biomass residue potentially available for other uses, including animal feeds, environmental services and conversion to bioenergy.
The cane leaf and top fraction is becoming available at the same time that Brazil is seeking new models for converting sugarcane to useful products. World sugar markets are clearly oversupplied and the opportunities for further growth of ethanol coproduced with sugar are limited. What other models might be available for further expansion? Two approaches are being explored.
In the first approach, sucrose is fermented to ethanol and/or biobased products, and the cellulosic parts of the plant are converted to second generation biofuels such as cellulosic ethanol and/or burned to produce electricity which is exported to the grid.23 This is an energy/bioproducts scenario only. In the second approach, parts of the plant are used to produce ruminant animal feeds, while the remainder is converted to energy products. This is a food and fuel scenario, and is of particular interest in this paper.
Livestock production is the world’s largest user of land resources, with grazing land and cropland dedicated to the production of animal feeds representing about 80% of all agricultural land use world-wide. The global figure is similar for the U.S., as shown in Fig. 7—about 80% of U.S. land devoted to food production is actually used to produce animal feeds.
 Fig. 7  Land use patterns in the lower 48 United States. Image reproduced with permission from ©John Wiley and Sons, 2014 (ref. 8). 
In the Brazilian context, Brazil has the second biggest cattle herd in the world, with about 210 million head in 2015, distributed over 167 million hectares (Mha) of pasture. These animal numbers include beef cattle in extensive, intensive and feedlot systems as well as dairy cattle. In general, Brazilian livestock production has low average productivity because pastures are not managed to increase productivity, few inputs are used and newer technologies have not been adopted.
Integration of bioenergy and livestock production can improve land use in Brazil, since more intensive livestock production systems can maintain, or even increase, food production while reducing land use. It is thereby possible to expand cropland for bioenergy production without displacing food crops or livestock production, which otherwise might cause clearing of forests.13 The Brazilian Center for Bioethanol Technology (CTBE, Campinas, Brazil) is about to begin a large scale modeling and experimental project to optimize various potential integrated systems for sustainable production of food and bioenergy by taking advantage of the synergies between the sugarcane production chains for both first and second generation liquid biofuels, beef cattle and other crops (e.g. corn, energy cane and soybean).
Preliminary calculations indicate that this approach is very promising. The cane leaves and tops, perhaps upgraded by pretreatments such as AFEX™, might provide sufficient nutrients for beef cattle to permit one ha of land in sugarcane to provide equivalent nutrients to displace four ha of land currently in pasture. If so, then the country could greatly expand the production of first and second generation biofuels, while actually shrinking the total land required to meet human needs for food and fuel. If successful, this approach might be used elsewhere to increase the efficiency of food and fuel production, while shrinking the human planetary footprint.
But if biomass is to be converted at a very large scale to bioenergy, bioproducts and perhaps animal feeds, those who grow the biomass must participate at scale. And that is not happening.
Case 3: Biogasdoneright™ in Italy—an emerging farmer-led effort to produce sustainable bioenergy and bioproducts
If farmer participation in the bioenergy/bioproducts value chain is so important, what will it take to motivate farmers to participate more in this emerging industry? Obviously, greater market access for their products, especially energy products, because of the size of the energy markets, would help greatly. Here is one example.
During the past two years, I have become well-acquainted with an innovative farm-based, farmer-led bioenergy system now emerging in Italy.24 Energy market access was established in 2007 by a feed-in tariff for renewable electricity provided by the Italian government. As a result, more than 1000 Italian farms organized as the Italian Biogas Consortium (CIB) are producing about 1.4 gigawatts of new renewable electricity using a set of principles called Biogasdoneright™ (BDR), as outlined in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  Biogasdoneright™: system outline. Image reproduced with permission from ©John Wiley and Sons, 2016 (ref. 24). 
These systems are based on biogas produced by anaerobic digestion (AD) of animal and agricultural wastes in addition to purpose-grown energy crops. The biogas is combusted on farms and the electricity exported through the electric grid. These energy crops are double crops, also called sequential crops. Sequential crops are additional crops grown after the main food/feed crop is harvested. Food production continues as before; thus there is no food versus fuel issue and no indirect land use change (ILUC).
Farmers recycle the soluble and solid nutrients as well as stabilized, recalcitrant carbon from the anaerobic digesters onto their land. This recycle loop significantly reduces purchased fertilizer inputs, while also building soil organic matter by carbon sequestration. Farm profitability, soil fertility and overall environmental performance are improved. The logistics issue of cellulosic bioenergy is solved because all of the processing takes place on the farm. Scale is achieved because the system can be (and has been) widely replicated on many farms. New, stable jobs are created, about 12000 jobs thus far.

Fig. 9 illustrates how bioenergy crops are grown in those periods during which the land was previously left idle. These bioenergy crops are harvested, ensiled on farm to preserve them, and then fed to the digester along with locally-available wastes and residues. Thus, the previously “wasted” land resource, and waste organic material are now used more productively and with greater environmental benefits than they were prior to bioenergy production, a “win–win” arrangement.25
 Fig. 9  A sequential cropping system using Biogasdoneright™ principles. Image reproduced with permission from ©John Wiley and Sons, 2017 (ref. 25). 
The greenhouse gas benefits of the BDR approach are impressive. Fig. 10 shows three different configurations of BDR, using primarily energy crops as a feedstock, or primarily manure, or primarily agrowaste residues. These three configurations achieve between −335 and 25 grams of total carbon dioxide equivalents per megawatt hour compared to fossil fuel-based electricity consumed in the EU. While no biomethane is currently produced by the CIB, the projected GHG emissions of biomethane (renewable natural gas) are −36 to 10 grams of carbon dioxide per megajoule (MJ) compared to their fossil natural gas counterpart.
 Fig. 10  Three different configurations for Biogasdoneright™ and their sources of greenhouse gas emissions. Image reproduced with permission from ©John Wiley and Sons, 2017 (ref. 25). 
Biogasdoneright™ is a scalable, low cost bioenergy system with carbon capture and storage (BECCS). How scalable is it? The growth history of the Italian biogas industry is summarized in Fig. 11 where it is compared with the growth history of the German solar industry and also the world solar and wind energy production. As with the growth of the U.S. corn ethanol industry, this is true exponential growth. In fact, with a demonstrated doubling time of about 14 months, the growth of the BDR system is the fastest demonstrated growth of renewable energy to the gigawatt scale that I am aware of, faster than global wind and solar energy, and even faster than German solar energy consumption.
 Fig. 11  Comparing the growth rates of renewable energy consumption: global wind and solar plus German solar and Italian biogas. 
Why am I so concerned about exponential growth? Because of the huge worldwide need for energy to underpin human prosperity and the need to scale up all renewable energy quickly in the face of declining fossil fuel supplies and increasing environmental damage from their use.
The Italian government is expected soon to announce new policies to maximize the potential of biogas as a transportation and heating fuel. This will involve upgrading the biogas to biomethane, essentially renewable natural gas, and injecting it into the natural gas grid. Natural gas has long been used as a transportation fuel in Italy, so much of the necessary infrastructure for distributing, refueling and driving with biomethane, renewable natural gas, is already in place. Thus, the Italian biogas/biomethane industry may be in for another rapid growth spurt.
What can we learn from the Biogasdoneright™ experience?
First, it is possible to grow bioenergy production very rapidly under favorable circumstances. The factors that seemed to play the biggest role in the success of BDR include: (1) energy market access under terms that allowed the farmers to go to local lenders and get the loans necessary to buy the capital equipment, (2) readily available, proven anaerobic digestion (AD) conversion technology, (3) short supply chains—the farmer controls all aspects of the harvesting, transport and processing of the biomass, and (4) recycle of nutrients and carbon makes the land more fertile, more resistant to flooding and drought, and also reduces the farmer’s out-of-pocket costs significantly.
Second, the logistical advantages of on-farm production and processing of the biomass are critical. It simply would not be possible to move the raw, wet biomass feedstock for AD very far without significant cost penalties. Instead of moving bulky materials to a distant biorefinery, an energy-dense product (electricity) is exported through an existing infrastructure and all of the bulky, wet materials are handled on-farm.
The importance of market access cannot be overstated. The farmers involved in the BDR movement could not have received the loans necessary to build out the infrastructure without guaranteed markets for their electricity. If bioenergy is to compete effectively with fossil fuels, there must be market access on terms that permit biofuel producers, including farmers, to compete. As renewable fuel providers gain experience and scale, the costs will come down and the industry will grow, hopefully in time to offset the inevitable decline of fossil fuels in the coming decades.
Finally, the farmers involved in BDR also produce grains, oilseeds and other crops that are good feedstock candidates for bioproducts. Because of the way they are produced, these commodities have unique sustainability advantages. Their GHG emissions in particular will be much lower than conventionally-produced grains and oilseeds, but they will also improve water quality and biodiversity compared with conventional agricultural feedstocks. Bioproducts made from these crop commodities grown in BDR systems are good candidates for “green” labeling and promotion. Likewise the electricity generated via BDR systems is “green power” which can and should be used in the production of biobased products.
Feedstocks and platform molecules
I believe the key feedstocks include crop residues, such as corn stover and sugarcane leaf matter, as well as energy crops, especially if the residues and energy crops are grown in sequential cropping systems on existing agricultural land using improved sustainability practices such as those exemplified by Biogasdoneright™. Given the much smaller amounts of feedstock required for bioproducts compared to bioenergy, agricultural commodities such as corn, wheat and soybeans, as well as other crop commodities grown on farms employing BDR principles are sustainable feedstocks. They can and should be used for bioproducts. Lignin represents perhaps the only source of renewable aromatic feedstocks for biobased products, but the conversion of native lignin to finished products is daunting.
As far as platform molecules are concerned, these would certainly include starches, sugars and oils, as long as the feedstocks from which these molecules are derived are sustainably produced. Based on my experience with BDR, I would have to add two more “platform molecules” that I might not have considered previously. These are electricity and biomethane. We need to consider renewable electricity as a platform “molecule” in our bioproducts, both as a process utility and also for the reducing power it can provide to make bioproducts.
Conclusions and an exhortation
My entire career has been devoted to producing sustainable biofuels from plant matter. Because of the strong relationships between biofuels and agriculture, I am necessarily concerned about food production and all the links between energy and agriculture.
We take the modern world for granted. However, the amenities (wealth, education, healthcare, mobility, etc.) enjoyed by people in the prosperous nations depend on consuming huge amounts of energy, about 85% of it from fossil resources: oil, coal, and natural gas. The Human Development Index (HDI) is a composite measure of prosperity, and includes metrics for health, education, and living standards. Prosperity is strongly and positively correlated with power consumption. Assuming that HDI is a reasonable surrogate for prosperity, human prosperity rises very rapidly as power consumption increases and then levels off or “saturates” at a power consumption of about 5 kW per capita.
These are sobering numbers. The total world power consumption is currently about 17 terawatts (TW). We will soon have 8 billion people on planet earth. If all 8 billion people were to consume 5 kW, that would total 40 TW, about two and a half times the current power consumption from all sources. However, most of humankind currently consumes much, much less than 5 kW. For most of humankind, their daily reality is poverty caused by a lack of access to energy services.
This should be unacceptable to all of us—a relative few enjoying abundant energy and the resulting prosperity (for a bit longer, at least), while the mass of humankind is mired in poverty because they lack abundant energy.
I believe it is deeply irresponsible to think that fossil fuels can or should provide over twice the power that they currently do. A society built on non-renewable power is simply unsustainable. It cannot continue. It will not continue. A global society built on fossil energy will become increasingly fragile and perilous as fossil energy is depleted. We must have renewable power, many terawatts of it and soon, if we are to enjoy the prosperity that abundant energy provides. Renewable energy is therefore not an option; it is essential if more people, now and in the future, are to achieve their potential as human beings.
I believe that renewable energy, especially bioenergy, will bring along with it many opportunities for sustainable bioproducts. This was the experience with petroleum refining and petrochemicals. For many reasons, I think it is unlikely that commodity bioproducts will emerge without large scale bioenergy. Indeed, current commodity bioproducts are coproduced with bioenergy.
There are many renewable sources of electricity, especially solar and wind power. These can provide heating, cooling, lighting and some mobility services. However, only bioenergy, due to its high energy density, offers a complete renewable replacement for petroleum in all mobility applications, including agriculture. Since we must have renewable energy, and we must have food, it is essential that we find ways to integrate food production with renewable energy production, including bioenergy—not in competition with each other but to their mutual benefit. And we must do so in ways that are environmentally, economically, and socially sustainable.
This is an enormous challenge. It is the primary technical and social challenge around which my research and thinking are oriented. For bioenergy, we must greatly increase the efficiency and sustainability with which we use land. The three case studies outlined here give some idea of the potential for this approach. We can do this. We must do this.
Acknowledgements
Professor Dale gratefully acknowledges support by Michigan State University AgBioResearch and by the USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA).
Notes and references
M. R. Finlay, Old Efforts at New Uses: A Brief History of Chemurgy and the American Search for Biobased Materials, J. Ind. Ecol., 2004, 33–46 Search PubMed .
D. E. Wright, Agricultural Editors Wheeler McMillen and Clifford V. Gregory and the Farm Chemurgic Movement, Agr. Hist., 1995, 69(2), 272–287 Search PubMed .

          C. W. Dugger, U.S. aid hurts instead of helps, charity says; Group declines funds for African farmers, in The International Herald Tribune, Malela, Kenya,  2007 Search PubMed .
R. E. Kavey, How sweet it is: sugar-sweetened beverage consumption, obesity, and cardiovascular risk in childhood, J. Am. Diet. Assoc., 2010, 110(10), 1456–1460 CrossRef PubMed .
F. B. Hu and V. S. Malik, Sugar-sweetened beverages and risk of obesity and type 2 diabetes: epidemiologic evidence, Physiol. Behav., 2010, 100(1), 47–54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          U.S.E.I. Administration, Table 10.3 Fuel Ethanol Overview, D.o. Energy,  April 2017, p. 155 Search PubMed .
J. Goldemberg, S. T. Coelho and P. Guardabassi, The sustainability of ethanol production from sugarcane, Energy Policy, 2008, 36(6), 2086–2097 CrossRef .
B. E. Dale and R. G. Ong, Design, implementation, and evaluation of sustainable bioenergy production systems, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2014, 8(4), 487–503 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Dale and R. G. Ong, Energy, wealth, and human development: why and how biomass pretreatment research must improve, Biotechnol. Prog., 2012, 28(4), 893–898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Dale, 
            et al., Take a closer look: biofuels can support environmental, economic and social goals, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48(13), 7200–7203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Kramer and M. Haigh, No quick switch to low-carbon energy, Nature, 2009, 462, 568–569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Staff, Clean Energy’s Dirty Secret, in The Economist, London, England,  2017 Search PubMed .
A. Egeskog, 
            et al., Integrating bioenergy and food production—A case study of combined ethanol and dairy production in Pontal, Brazil, Energy Sustainable Dev., 2011, 15(1), 8–16 CrossRef CAS .
M. Blümmel, Opportunities from second-generation biofuel technologies for upgrading lignocellulosic biomass for livestock feed, CAB Rev., 2014, 9(041), 1–8 Search PubMed .
L. Tao, 
            et al., Process and technoeconomic analysis of leading pretreatment technologies for lignocellulosic ethanol production using switchgrass, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102(24), 11105–11114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Dale, A New Industry Has Been Launched: The Cellulosic Biofuels Ship (Finally) Sails, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2015, 9, 1–3 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim and B. E. Dale, All biomass is local: The cost, volume produced, and global warming impact of cellulosic biofuels depend strongly on logistics and local conditions, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2015, 9(4), 422–434 CrossRef CAS .

          S. P. Chundawat, B. Bals, T. Campbell, L. Sousa, D. Gao, M. Jin, P. Eranki, R. Garlock, F. Teymouri, V. Balan and B. Dale, Primer on Ammonia Fiber Expansion Pretreatment, in Aqueous Pretreatment of Plant Biomass for Biological and Chemical Conversion to Fuels and Chemicals, ed. C. E. Wyman,  2013, pp. 169–200 Search PubMed .
B. E. Dale, 
            et al., Biofuels done right: land efficient animal feeds enable large environmental and energy benefits, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44(22), 8385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Bals and B. E. Dale, Developing a model for assessing biomass processing technologies within a local biomass processing depot, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 106, 161–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. L. Eranki, B. D. Bals and B. E. Dale, Advanced Regional Biomass Processing Depots: a key to the logistical challenges of the cellulosic biofuel industry, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2011, 5(6), 621–630 CrossRef CAS .
B. Karki, 
            et al., Physical characteristics of AFEX-pretreated and densified switchgrass, prairie cord grass, and corn stover, Biomass Bioenergy, 2015, 78, 164–174 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. D. B. Leite, 
            et al., Sugarcane: a way out of energy poverty, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2016, 10(4), 393–408 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Dale, 
            et al., Biogasdoneright™: An innovative new system is commercialized in Italy, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2016, 10(4), 341–345 CrossRef CAS .
L. Valli, 
            et al., Greenhouse gas emissions of electricity and biomethane produced using the Biogasdoneright™ system: four case studies from Italy, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2017 DOI:10.1002/bbb.1789 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Recent growth of corn ethanol production in the United States.	 

 	Fig. 2  Historical growth of the petroleum industry worldwide. Image reproduced with permission from ©John Wiley and Sons, 2014 (ref. 8).	 

 	Fig. 3  Human development index versus per capita power consumption. Image reproduced with permission from ©John Wiley and Sons, 2014 (ref. 9).	 

 	Fig. 4  Bioenergy contribution required to restrain global temperature changes under five different scenarios. Image reproduced with permission from ©American Chemical Society, 2014 (ref. 10).	 

 	Fig. 5  Recent history of the production of cellulosic ethanol and cellulosic biogas in the United States.	 

 	Fig. 6  Doubling the price paid to farmers for cellulosic biomass increases the size of the cellulosic ethanol industry and the associated greenhouse gas benefits by nearly ten fold. Image reproduced with permission from ©John Wiley and Sons, 2014 (ref. 17).	 

 	Fig. 7  Land use patterns in the lower 48 United States. Image reproduced with permission from ©John Wiley and Sons, 2014 (ref. 8).	 

 	Fig. 8  Biogasdoneright™: system outline. Image reproduced with permission from ©John Wiley and Sons, 2016 (ref. 24).	 

 	Fig. 9  A sequential cropping system using Biogasdoneright™ principles. Image reproduced with permission from ©John Wiley and Sons, 2017 (ref. 25).	 

 	Fig. 10  Three different configurations for Biogasdoneright™ and their sources of greenhouse gas emissions. Image reproduced with permission from ©John Wiley and Sons, 2017 (ref. 25).	 

 	Fig. 11  Comparing the growth rates of renewable energy consumption: global wind and solar plus German solar and Italian biogas.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
