Ag 2 Cu 2 O 3 – a catalyst template material for selective electroreduction of CO to C 2+ products   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE01100B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE01100B
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2993-3006Ag2Cu2O3 – a catalyst template material for selective electroreduction of CO to C2+ products†

        
          
            Nemanja 
            Martić
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Christian 
            Reller
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chandra 
            Macauley
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Mario 
            Löffler
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Andreas M. 
            Reichert
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Thomas 
            Reichbauer
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kim-Marie 
            Vetter
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bernhard 
            Schmid
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            David 
            McLaughlin
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Paul 
            Leidinger
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            David 
            Reinisch
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Christoph 
            Vogl
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Karl J. J. 
            Mayrhofer
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Ioannis 
            Katsounaros
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Günter 
            Schmid
          
        
      *a
aSiemens Gas and Power GmbH & Co. KG, SE NEB TP COS, Freyeslebenstr. 1, 91058 Erlangen, Germany. E-mail: guenter.schimd@siemens.com
bDepartment of Materials Science & Engineering, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Cauerstr. 5, 91058 Erlangen, Germany
cHelmholtz Institute Erlangen-Nürnberg for Renewable Energy (IEK-11), Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Egerlandstr. 3, 91058 Erlangen, Germany
dDepartment of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Immerwahrstr. 2a, 91058 Erlangen, Germany
eCatalysis Research Center, Technical University of Munich (TUM), Ernst-Otto-Fischer-Str. 1, 85748 Garching, Germany
Received 
      8th April 2020
    , Accepted 29th June 2020First published on 30th July 2020AbstractAlthough recent years have brought significant progress within the field of electrochemical conversion of CO2 and CO to value-added chemicals, many more challenges need to be overcome for this technology to be implemented on an industrial level. Rational design of catalyst materials that would enable selective production of desired products at industrially relevant current densities (>200 mA cm−2) is most certainly one of them. Here, we introduce Ag2Cu2O3, a mixed-metal oxide, as a starting template material for efficient electroreduction of CO to C2+ products. By combining results from electrochemical real-time mass spectrometry (EC-RTMS), XRD and XPS we confirmed the template nature of Ag2Cu2O3 and in situ formation of a fully reduced CuAg bimetallic material during the first minutes of electrolysis. Electrochemical screening of the catalyst revealed significantly varying product distributions when CO2 (CO2RR) and CO (CORR) where used as feed gases. During CORR, a faradaic efficiency close to 92% towards C2+ products at 600 mA cm−2 was achieved. On the other hand, during CO2RR, CO was found to be the main product under all tested current densities, reaching a maximum faradaic efficiency of 68%. XPS valence band spectra of the bimetallic surface originating from Ag2Cu2O3 showed that its d-band electronic structure is noticeably different compared to metallic Ag and Cu, a finding we link to the observed product distributions. Finally, additional microscopy characterization techniques were used to investigate the observed surface reconstruction of the catalyst material under reaction conditions.

Broader context
In an effort to battle the already visible effects of anthropogenic-induced global warming, our society is currently undertaking a challenging transition towards CO2 emission-free technologies. Being burdened with very energy- and emission-intensive processes for the production of important feedstock chemicals (e.g. ethylene), the chemical industry, besides the energy and transport sector, is one of the largest emitters of greenhouse gases. Renewable energy-powered electrosynthesis of value-added chemicals via electrochemical reduction of CO2 and CO holds great potential for addressing this issue by giving the chemical industry an opportunity to drastically decrease its dependence on fossil-based carbon sources, both as feedstock and fuel. However, in order for this technology to be considered for a scale-up, a suitable catalyst which would facilitate the conversion of CO2 and CO towards desired chemicals has to be developed. Copper, as the only transition metal capable of reducing CO2 and CO to hydrocarbons an oxygenates, has been under a constant spotlight among researchers. Up to now, it has been shown that more than 15 different products are able to form on copper surfaces during CO2 electroreduction, with the addition of hydrogen, formed through the parasitic hydrogen evolution reaction. To avoid cost-intensive, downstream product separation, modification of the copper catalyst so that it only favors certain reaction pathways, which lead to value-added products, while at the same time suppressing hydrogen formation, is of great importance. One of the approaches to tailor the reactivity of copper active sites is to change their immediate surrounding by introducing guest elements. This study presents a silver-copper mixed-metal oxide, Ag2Cu2O3, as an initial template material, from which the catalytically active, bimetallic surface is formed through in situ reduction during electrolysis. Incorporating Cu and Ag within the same crystal lattice allowed for a uniform spatial distribution of these two elements on an atomic level; thus, maximizing the synergetic catalytic effect. Ag2Cu2O3 is tested for both CO2 and CO reduction reaction and the obtained product distributions are discussed in the scope of observed geometric and electronic effects.

Introduction
Electrochemical conversion of CO2 (CO2RR) to value-added chemicals represents a promising option for utilizing waste CO2 emissions and mitigating the chemical industry's dependence on fossil fuel feedstocks. At present, the chemical industry relies on energy-intensive processes which leave a considerable carbon footprint to produce chemicals such as ethylene and ethanol.1 Establishing renewable electrosynthesis of these value-added chemicals could give the chemical industry an opportunity to take a radical shift and move away from using a part of their carbon-based feedstock as fuel. Instead, the energy needed for these processes would be supplied from carbon-neutral, renewable energy sources (e.g. solar and wind) in the form of electrons. In this way, by utilizing the energy form renewable sources, CO2 can be electrochemically converted into valuable hydrocarbons and oxygenates in a much more “eco-friendly” and sustainable way compared to corresponding processes in classical petrochemistry.
Currently, CO2 to CO technologies are already being developed for industrial level application. Recently, our partners and we showed a process sequence that demonstrates how syngas produced in a renewable energy powered CO2 electrolyser can be utilized by a downstream fermentation module to produce valuable multi-carbon oxygenates.2 Such a decentralized industrial plant would possess a potential capacity to produce 10.000 tonnes of butanol and/or hexanol per year. Since CO was found to be the key intermediate that is subsequently reduced to different value-added chemicals during CO2RR,3 direct electrochemical CO reduction (CORR) has been suggested as another viable route for the production of valuable hydrocarbons and oxygenates. However, in order to make direct electrosynthesis of these chemicals possible, further catalyst development is needed to overcome the challenge of C–C coupling and improve the selectivity towards C2+ products.
Copper has always received special attention from researchers working in the field of electrochemical CO2/CO reduction as being the only transition metal with the capability to form products requiring more than 2e− transfers.4 However, bulk copper catalysts possess several limitations, such as poor selectivity toward specific valuable C2+ products, high overpotentials, low activity due to limited surface area, deactivation issues, and faradaic efficiency (FE) losses caused by the competing hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). To overcome these limitations, researchers have employed different techniques. One of the most common approaches is nanostructuring where the selectivity and electrochemical activity of the catalyst material can be influenced by increasing the electrochemically active surface area and the density of low coordinated active sites, or introducing variations in preferential faceting.5–8 A fitting example for this can be found in oxide-derived copper (OD-Cu) catalysts where an electrochemical reduction of a starting bulk oxide material causes a noticeable reconstruction of the pristine catalyst's surface.9–11 The selectivity of copper-based catalysts can be additionally influenced by particle size effects,12,13 surface functionalization14–17 and support effect.18,19
Recently, introduction of guest metals and formation of Cu-based bimetallic systems started receiving increased attention from the research community as an additional method to modify the electrochemical performance of copper-based catalyst materials.20 Depending on the guest metal, Cu-based bimetallic catalysts can show increased activity towards HER,21,22 CO production23,24 or C2+ product formation.25 Typical guest metals which have so far been combined with Cu to promote selectivity towards C2+ products are: Au, Ag and Zn. As monometallic catalysts, these three metals are known for their ability to produce CO with high faradaic efficiencies while at the same time suppressing the unwanted HER.26 Presence of these guest metals within the Cu-based bimetallic systems enables a tandem catalytic approach27 to CO2RR reduction via CO spillover mechanism.28,29 Based on this mechanism, CO produced at the co-catalyst (Au, Ag or Zn) active sites is proposed to spillover to a neighboring Cu atom where it would undergo further reduction. Besides enabling the CO spillover mechanism, the introduction of guest metals opens up possibilities to tune the d-band electronic structure of copper active sites. As indicated by the d-band model, this is of particular importance since the strength by which the key CO2RR and CORR intermediates bind to the surface active sites is directly correlated to the occupancy of antibonding states.30 In addition to electronic effects, introduction of guest metals can influence the atomic arrangement of active sites and therefore also affect the electrochemical performance of bimetallic catalysts.23
So far, the investigated Cu-based bimetallic systems have been limited to different types of alloys (bulk, surface and near surface alloys), co-sputtered thin films, core–shell particles, monometallic surfaces supported on a different metal, guest metal modified surfaces and physical mixtures of different metals (for more information see ref. 31). Common traits shared by the mentioned systems are phase-segregation and/or absence of uniform distribution of two elements throughout the pristine catalyst material. In our work, we present a straightforward approach where, within the starting catalyst material, a uniform spatial distribution of Cu and Ag can be achieved on an atomic level. This is accomplished by following a facile synthesizing route to obtain Ag2Cu2O3 (Ag21+Cu22+O3), a silver–copper mixed-metal oxide, where the distribution of Cu and Ag is defined by their predetermined positions within the crystallographic lattice. This compound shares the same paramelaconite-type crystal structure as Cu4O3 (Cu21+Cu22+O3). In our previous work32 we investigated a Cu4O3-rich electrocatalyst that was able to reach a faradaic efficiency of 61% for C2+ products at a current density of 300 mA cm−2. By synthesizing Ag2Cu2O3, a material where silver monovalent ions are introduced to occupy the crystallographic positions of copper monovalent ions within the paramelaconite-type crystal lattice (see inset in Fig. 1a), we hypothesized the rate of C–C coupling and selectivity towards C2+ products could be additionally promoted. This design principle proved to be effective since we were able to achieve a partial current density of 550 mA cm−2 for C2+ products with a maximum faradaic efficiency of 91.7% under CORR conditions. To better understand the improved C2+ product selectivity we measured XPS valence band spectra of our catalyst material and found out that the catalyst's surface electronic structure is different compared to those of metallic silver and copper. We propose that this change in the strength by which the intermediates (e.g. *CO, *OCHO and *COOH) bind to surface active sites might be one of the reasons for the observed product distribution. Furthermore, by employing a combination of real-time product detection, ex situ XRD and XPS measurements, we provide strong evidence that Ag2Cu2O3 is not the active catalyst but rather acts as a well-defined template for in situ formation of fully reduced bimetallic catalytic surface. This opens up new routes in catalyst development where different mixed-metal oxides can be employed as starting template materials for obtaining different, fully reduced, bimetallic catalytically active structures.
 Fig. 1  Characterization of the pristine Ag2Cu2O3 powder. (a) PXRD pattern of the synthesized Ag2Cu2O3 powder. The insert displays the crystal structure of Ag2Cu2O3 outlined in a unit cell, where Ag1+ is shown as turquoise spheres, Cu2+ as dark blue spheres and oxygen ions as green spheres. All the peaks corresponding to Ag2Cu2O3 were identified in accordance to the database patterns extracted from the International Centre for Diffraction Data (PDF® 89-6378). (b) SEM image of the Ag2Cu2O3 pristine powder. (c) STEM energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) elemental mapping of the Ag2Cu2O3 pristine powder showing the distribution of elemental Cu, Ag and O within the particles. (d) XPS spectra of Cu 2p3/2 and Ag M3N4,5N4,5 regions for a pristine Ag2Cu2O3 powder. The Cu 2p3/2 core level of Ag2Cu2O3 is compared to three standard samples: metallic Cu, Cu2O and CuO. Similarly, the Ag M3N4,5N4,5 Auger spectral region of Ag2Cu2O3 was compared to Ag, Ag2O and AgO. (e) Raman spectrum of the synthesized Ag2Cu2O3 powder. 
Results
Synthesis and characterization of the catalyst material
The catalyst powder composed out of phase-pure Ag2Cu2O3 material was synthesized at room-temperature by alkaline coprecipitations of a mixed solution of copper(II) nitrate and silver nitrate (see Methods).33 The phase purity of the synthesized material was confirmed using powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD), as depicted in Fig. 1a. The crystal structure of Ag2Cu2O3 is shown as an insert in Fig. 1a and consists of alternating, edge-sharing, planar CuO4 squares units, which are interconnected with linearly coordinated O–Ag–O units. The structure possesses two nonequivalent oxygen atoms: O1 which is coordinated to two Ag and two Cu atoms, and O2 which is coordinated to four Cu atoms. Interatomic distance and angles for Ag2Cu2O3 are given in Table S1 (ESI†), and compared to Ag2O and CuO. To investigate the particle size and morphology of the obtained powder, we carried out scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements. The obtained images showed that the powder consists of elongated rod-like particles with a width of 50–200 nm and a length varying from 0.5–2.5 μm (Fig. 1b, Fig. S1, ESI†). Scanning TEM energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) elemental mapping demonstrated that Ag and Cu were uniformly dispersed within the particles (Fig. 1c). This is expected considering the Ag2Cu2O3 crystal structure where Ag and Cu ions have designated crystallographic positions in the lattice (Fig. 1a, inset). Additionally, SEM in combination with focused ion beam (FIB) was used to image the cross section of the Ag2Cu2O3 particles (Fig. S1, ESI†) which revealed that the particles possess a closed, inner-porous structure. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was employed to investigate the surface chemical composition of the Ag2Cu2O3 powder. As expected, the analysis of the Cu core level (Cu 2p3/2) and the Ag Auger region (Ag M3N4,5N4,5) showed that the surface of the bimetallic oxide is simultaneously comprised of divalent copper (Cu2+) and Ag-species in a positive oxidation state (Fig. 1d).34,35 Finally, the Raman spectrum of the powder (Fig. 1e) shows characteristic signals for Ag2Cu2O3 at approx. 311 cm−1, 496 cm−1 and 546 cm−1, which is in good agreement with previous measurements.36 Oxide materials with a paramelaconite-type crystal structure have been known to easily degrade when exposed to an excitation laser during Raman measurements.37 We performed additional control measurements to ensure this is not the case with our sample (Fig. S2, ESI†).
Electrochemical characterization of Ag2Cu2O3 under CO2RR and CORR conditions

Low current density experiments on solid glassy carbon substrates. 
All initial electrochemical CO2RR evaluations were performed in CO2-saturated bicarbonate electrolyte using a custom-built electrolysis cell (for more information see Methods and Fig. S3, ESI†) equipped with a catalyst-coated glassy carbon substrate as working electrode. Steady-state potentiostatic electrolysis experiments covering the potential range from −0.65 V to −1.20 V versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE), were performed. Gas and liquid-phase products were detected and quantified using an online gas chromatograph (GC) and headspace-GC/MS respectively, which allowed us to create an overview of the CO2RR product distribution across the examined potentials (Fig. S4, ESI† and Fig. 2a). A total of 11 different CO2RR products were detected: carbon monoxide, methane, formate, ethylene, ethanol, acetate, n-propanol, allyl alcohol, acetone, acetaldehyde and propionaldehyde. Current densities with respect to geometric area, measured during electrochemical screening of the catalyst at 8 different potentials are shown in Fig. 2b.
 Fig. 2  Potentiostatic electrochemical characterization of Ag2Cu2O3 (coated on a glassy carbon substrate) complemented with product analysis. (a) Faradaic efficiency for H2 and major detected CO2RR products as a function of the potential measured at the cathode (WE). Overview of all detected CO2RR products can be found in Fig. S4 (ESI†). (b) Current density measured for eight different potentials as a function of time. The greater degree of noise which can be seen for measurements performed at more negative potentials can be attributed to intense gas bubble formation and bubble detachment from the cathode. 
At all tested potentials more positive than −1.05 V versus RHE, CO was the main product, reaching a maximum faradaic efficiency (FE) of 56% at −0.76 V versus RHE. On the other hand, HER was the dominant cathodic process at potentials more negative than −1.05 V versus RHE. Besides CO, other major products detected were formate, methane and ethylene. Previous studies using a similar electrochemical cell design to ours have also reported increased hydrogen formation at potentials more negative than −1.05 V versus RHE which was attributed to CO2 mass transport limitations.38,39 In such experimental setups, the reaction rates and current densities of CO2RR are severely limited by the CO2 mass transfer from the bulk of the electrolyte to the active sites on the electrode's surface. This is primarily due to the low solubility (4 × 10−2 mol L−1) and a low diffusion coefficient (1.6 × 10−3 mm2 s−1) of CO2 in water-based electrolytes under ambient conditions.40,41
Finally, in order to also investigate the activity of Ag2Cu2O3 towards CORR, the potentiostatic screening experiments were repeated using CO as feed gas instead of CO2. However, under all tested potentials the competing HER was the primary process taking place at the electrode's surface (Fig. S5, ESI†). This is to be expected due to the combination of our electrode's high ECSA (estimated via electrochemical double-layer capacitance (Cdl) measurement, roughness factor 31, Fig. S6, ESI†) and the extremely limited solubility of CO (ca. 30 times lower compared to CO2) in water-based electrolytes which causes rapid depletion of available CORR reactant species at the surface active sites once the reaction starts. Under such heavy CO mass transport limitations, only four CORR products were detected: methane, ethylene, ethanol and acetate. Even highly optimized batch-type reactors with improved CO mass transport struggle to achieve FECOR larger than 60% at potentials more negative than −0.4 V versus RHE.38


High current density experiments on carbon-based gas diffusion layers. 
In an effort to characterize the electrochemical performance of Ag2Cu2O3 for CO2RR and CORR, without having these processes limited by mass transport issues, we utilized an electrochemical flow cell (for details see Methods and Fig. S7, ESI†) equipped with a Ag2Cu2O3-coated gas diffusion layer (GDL) as cathode. High porosity and partial hydrophobicity of the gas diffusion electrodes (GDE) allow the formation of a special three-phase interface between the catalyst, feed gas and the electrolyte which is of utmost importance for an efficient CO2RR (or CORR) process. Employing such a GDE design enables an abundant feed gas supply to the catalyst's active sites, which successfully eliminates diffusion limitations and permits performance testing at industrially relevant current densities. All experiments have been performed in CO2-saturated 1 M CsHCO3 electrolyte. A typical spray-coated catalyst layer used for experiments was found to be highly porous and between 2 and 3 μm thick (Fig. S7, ESI†). Saturation of the catalyst surface with the feed gas enabled efficient suppression of the unwanted HER at current densities ≥200 mA cm−2 to below 4.5% and 9% FE for CO2RR and CORR, respectively (Fig. S8, ESI†). Thus, the CO2RR and CORR faradaic efficiencies have been improved compared to their respective experiments in the batch-type reactor which used a catalyst coated glassy carbon solid electrode.
By analyzing the product distributions of two reduction reactions (CO2 and CO) one can observe significant differences. They are primarily visible in the increased selectivity towards C2+ products and the accompanying decrease in C1 product formation for CORR, compared to CO2RR (Fig. 3a and b). The main C1 product for CO2RR, unrelated to the applied current density, was CO with FE between 55% and 68%. This is not surprising considering the presence of Ag active sites (1:1 ratio with Cu) which are principally selective towards CO.42 The observed HER suppression can also, in part, be attributed to the presence of Ag since this metal is known to possess a lower HER activity compared to Cu.43 The maximum observed FE for C1 CO2RR products was 69.7%. A striking difference was observed during CORR testing, where FE for C1 products never reached values higher than 0.45%. Combined suppression of HER and C1 product formation during CORR enables reaching faradaic efficiencies up to 91.7% for C2+ products with a partial current density of 550 mA cm−2. The maximum FE of 93.4% for C2+ CORR products was achieved in experiments performed at 400 mA cm−2. In the case of CO2RR the highest FE for C2+ products was 40.5% with a partial current density of 122 mA cm−2. For better referencing, these results have been compared to the electrochemical performance (both CO2RR and CORR) of a commercially available Cu2O powder which was tested under identical experimental conditions (Fig. S9, ESI†). The first thing, which is easily noticeable, is that the bimetallic surface originating from Ag2Cu2O3 suppresses hydrogen formation in a significantly more efficient way compared to the Cu surface originating form Cu2O. For example, during CO2RR at 500 mA cm−2 the FE for H2 is approximately 20 times lower when Ag2Cu2O3 is used as the starting catalyst material compared to Cu2O. When comparing FE for C2+ products, the monometallic copper surface originating from Cu2O shows higher values when CO2 is used as a feed gas. In contrast, when CO is used, the bimetallic surface possesses a clear advantage over the monometallic copper surface.
 Fig. 3  Galvanostatic electrochemical characterization of Ag2Cu2O3 in a flow cell. Comparison of potential measured at the cathode and faradaic efficiencies for C1 products, C2+ products and hydrogen obtained during (a) CO2RR and (b) CORR at different current densities. The values shown in the graphs are average values obtained from at least three independent experiments for each tested current density. (c) Detailed overview of detected CO2RR and CORR products and their respective faradaic efficiencies for experiments performed at 400 mA cm−2. (d) Partial current densities for ethanol, ethylene and acetate plotted against the potential measured at the cathode for both CO2RR and CORR. (e) CO2RR gas product selectivity during prolonged operation (3 days) in 1 M CsHCO3 at a constant current density of 300 mA cm−2. 

Fig. 3c gives a more detailed overview of the products, which were detected during CO2RR and CORR at a constant current density of 400 mA cm−2. In both cases the main C2+ product was ethanol. From the presented graph, it can be also seen that the high selectivity for ethanol was accompanied by high FEs for ethylene and acetate during CORR, which was not the case for CO2RR. This was found to be true for all tested current densities (Fig. S10, ESI†). Partial current densities for the three mentioned products plotted against the potential measured at the cathode can be seen in Fig. 3d. Additional minor CO2RR and CORR products which were detected included: methane, methanol, formate, n-propanol, allyl alcohol and acetone. The trends for all other detected products are given in the ESI† (Fig. S11). Interestingly, no traces of aldehyde species have been detected even though the low-current, potentiostatic screening of the catalyst showed that Ag2Cu2O3 promotes the formation of acetaldehyde and n-propionaldehyde as minor products (detected using headspace-GC/MS). It was hypothesized that aldehyde species can polymerize and precipitate out of the solution under alkaline conditions found within the hydrodynamic boundary layer near the cathode.44 This would explain why classic 1H-NMR, which we employed to analyze the liquid products obtained from the flow cell experiments, would have difficulties detecting lower concentrations of aldehydes, as previously reported.44,45 Furthermore, it has been shown that, under alkaline conditions, acetaldehydes are prone to undergo a “Cannizzaro-type” disproportionation, forming ethanol and acetate.45–49 Due to much higher rates of OH− formation in experiments where a flow-cell was used, it is possible that the acetaldehyde was completely disproportionated into ethanol and acetate, which could offer an additional explanation regarding the high faradaic efficiencies observed for these products and absence of acetaldehyde in the 1H-NMR spectrum.
Besides selectivity and activity, stability is another important descriptor when it comes to evaluating the performance of electrocatalysts for CO2RR. To test the Ag2Cu2O3, we performed an endurance electrolysis experiment at a constant current density of 300 mA cm−2 and monitored the gas products using an online gas chromatograph (Fig. 3e). Over the course of more than three days, the catalyst material showed only a minor increase in hydrogen formation, where FE for hydrogen increased from 3% to 6%. This suggests that no major performance degradation happened during this time. When analyzing the change in FE for CO and ethylene during the length of the electrolysis, it is clearly visible that there is a change in selectivity after 10 hours. The FE for CO begins to rise and reaches a maximum value of 73% after 65 hours, while at the same time FE for ethylene continuously drops with a rate of ca. 0.1% per h. In order to better understand the observed time-dependent change in product selectivity, post-electrolysis GDEs were characterized using SEM and TEM. The microscopy characterization of the post-electrolysis GDE revealed structural changes on the surface of catalyst particles. As can be seen from the SEM image (Fig. 4a and Fig. S12, ESI†), irregularly shaped nanoparticles formed on the surface of the rod-like catalyst particles during electrolysis. We found that this process occurs at all tested current densities (Fig. S13, ESI†) and that it intensifies with increasing electrolysis time (Fig. S14, ESI†). The complementary STEM EDX elemental mapping qualitatively showed that the in situ formed nanostructures are Ag (Fig. 4b). Taking these pieces of information together, we propose that the observed change in product selectivity (Fig. 3e) is related to the in situ Ag-enrichment of the catalyst's surface which is an ongoing process during electrolysis. Formation of CO intensifies due to a larger number of exposed Ag-rich surface active sites, while on the other hand, the selectivity for ethylene drops due to covering of the original Cu active sites.
 Fig. 4  (a) SEM image of a post-electrolysis GDE after being exposed to a constant current density of 400 mA cm−2 for 1 h. (b) HAADF-STEM image of a single catalyst particle combined with EDX elemental maps of Ag (green) and Cu (blue) The white arrows within the HAADF image point to the in situ formed surface nanostructures. (c) Ex situ surface valence band XPS spectra belonging to reference copper and silver foils, and the fully reduced post-electrolysis catalyst samples which were characterized after being exposed to reaction conditions for 10 min and 48 h. 
In addition to CO2RR, stability of the catalyst material was tested under CORR conditions as well. At a constant current density of 300 mA cm−2, a stable performance of seven hours was observed (Fig. S15, ESI†). By employing post-electrolysis microscopy and EDX analysis of the electrodes, evidence of strong surface reconstruction and formation of Cu-rich, urchin-like agglomerates were found. This finding was, together with the observed degradation of the anion-exchange membrane after exposure to high current densities and highly alkaline conditions (buffer breakage during CORR) for a prolonged period of time, correlated with the catalyst's decreased stability during CORR, in respect to CO2RR (for more details see ESI† and Fig. S16 and S17). Further work needs to be invested to increase the long-term performance by preventing the bimetallic surface reconstruction during CORR. One possible way to do this it to protect the catalyst with a thin, porous, carbon-based layer.50


Investigation of the catalyst's surface electronic structure using high-resolution surface valence band XPS measurements. 
Besides geometric effects such as the atomic arrangement of the active sites,23 electronic effects are an equally important contributor to the specific catalytic activity and selectivity of different materials tested as catalysts for CO2RR and CORR.51 The electronic effects are related to the electronic structure of the catalyst surface, which in turn determines the binding strength by which the intermediates bind to the catalytic active sites.52 In the case of transition metals, the binding strength of adsorbates to an active site is primarily defined by the d-band electronic structure of the metal surface itself. An experimentally determinable parameter which can be used to describe the interaction intensity between transition metal surfaces and reaction intermediates (such as *CO, *OCHO and *COOH) is the location of the d-band center (Ed).52,53
Having this in mind, we sought to better understand the observed product distribution of Ag2Cu2O3, by performing high-resolution surface valence band XPS measurements of a fully reduced Ag2Cu2O3, together with reference samples of metallic Ag and Cu. The surface valence band XPS spectra of mentioned materials are shown in Fig. 4c. The measured Ed (−5.36 eV) for Ag indicates a lower *CO binding energy, thus making Ag more selective towards CO formation compared to Cu which has its Ed (−3.30 eV) positioned much closer to the Fermi level (EF). DFT calculations have also shown that CO binds approximately three times weaker to Ag compared to Cu.54 The experimentally determined position of Ed for metallic copper suggests a stronger binding of key CO2RR/CORR and HER intermediates to the copper active sites, compared to Ag. As it turns out, the strength by which the *CO and *H species bind to copper is optimal for stabilizing both intermediates and enabling successive protonation of adsorbed *CO which is a necessary step towards formation of hydrocarbons.55 This makes copper the only transition metal capable of reducing CO2 and CO to products requiring more than two electron transfers. The measured Ed (−3.86 eV) for our post-electrolysis (10 min), bimetallic catalyst is located in between the Ed values measured for metallic Cu and Ag. The observed Ed downshift (−0.56 eV) for the bimetallic material, in respect to Ed for metallic Cu, is accompanied by a CO2RR product distribution that is different from the monometallic Cu surface originating from in situ reduced Cu2O (see Fig. S9, ESI†). As previously shown in Fig. 3a, the main detected CO2RR product was CO, followed by a low FE for C2+ products. This is not surprising since the measured d-band electronic structure of the bimetallic catalyst corresponds to a weaker bonding of CO2RR and HER intermediates to its surface, thus favoring CO formation. Previous studies investigating bimetallic materials have also shown that formation of CO2RR products which requires more than two electron transfers is severely hindered when the d-band center is noticeably downshifted in respect to pure metallic copper.23,51 When comparing the surface valence band XPS spectra for the two post-electrolysis bimetallic samples, it can be seen that during prolonged (48 h) exposure to electrolysis conditions Ed downshifted from −3.86 eV to −3.97 eV. This fits very well with the increased CO formation that was observed during our stability test (Fig. 3e). We propose that the observed change in the electronic structure of the surface is linked to the in situ reconstruction and Ag-enrichment of the catalyst surface (Fig. 4a and b).


Phase stability of Ag2Cu2O3 during electrochemical reduction of CO2. 
Whenever oxide materials are utilized as catalyst for electroreduction of CO2, a question is raised: is the oxide the active catalyst itself or does it function as a mere template from which the real active sites are derived in situ? Keeping this question in mind, we employed electrochemical real-time mass spectrometry (EC-RTMS)56 to monitor hydrogen, methane and ethylene formation during the first minutes of electrolysis to investigate the role of Ag2Cu2O3. The detection of CO was not possible due to the complications introduced by CO2 fragmentation. To address these changes, different cell and electrode configuration, softer ionization, and matrix calibration and deconvolution, would be required.57 Due to its high temporal resolution, EC-RTMS allows for the detection of gas products in real-time which would not be possible using the conventional gas chromatography approach (additional information regarding EC-RTMS can be found in the ESI† and Fig. S18). The electrochemical evaluation was then followed by post-electrolysis XRD and XPS characterization (ex situ) of the catalyst to gain insight into the changes that occur on the material itself.
A constant current density of 45 mA cm−2 was applied after holding the open circuit potential for 2 min, and the potential measured at the cathode was monitored as a function of time for the next 250 seconds (Fig. 5a). In parallel to the electrochemical data, mass spectrometry data for hydrogen, methane and ethylene were recorded using an electron ionization quadrupole mass spectrometer (EI-QMS). As can be seen from the gray highlighted area (I) in Fig. 5a (solid black line), once a current density of 45 mA cm−2 was applied, the necessary potential measured at the cathode gradually turned more negative with passing time. After 75 s, a sharp decrease in the potential was measured, followed by a stabilization at approximately −0.8 V versus RHE, which is seen in the green highlighted area (II) of Fig. 5a. By analyzing the mass spectrometry data corresponding to area (I) of the graph, it is clearly visible that no hydrogen (solid blue line), or ethylene (solid green line) signals could be detected in the initial 75 s of electrolysis. The formation of hydrogen and ethylene started only after the sharp decrease in the potential was measured (border of area I and II). Interestingly, reproducing the electrolysis experiment using the same sample showed an immediate potential stabilization after applying the reductive current (dashed black line) and product detection (dashed blue and green lines for hydrogen and ethylene, respectively). Under the given potential no methane was detected. This is in accordance with the results obtained during the initial screening of the catalyst powder (Fig. 2a).
 Fig. 5  Phase stability of Ag2Cu2O3 under CO2RR conditions. (a) The applied current density (45 mA cm−2), measured potential at the cathode and resulting signals for ethylene and hydrogen are shown versus time. The graph is divided into two highlighted areas. The first area highlighted in gray (I) corresponds to the initial 75 s of electrolysis where reduction of Ag2Cu2O3 is more energetically favourable in respect to CO2RR and HER under given conditions. The second area, highlighted in green (II), marks the completion of the initial oxide reduction and start of CO2RR and HER. (b) Ex situ XRD patterns of post-electrolysis samples from the experiments which were interrupted at different times. Patterns obtained in the first 65 s of electrolysis, corresponding to the gray highlighted area (I), indicate presence of oxide phases (Ag2Cu2O3 and Cu2O). Pattern belonging to a sample (90 s) measured after the reduction event, corresponding to the green highlighted area (II), confirms that the initial oxide material has been fully reduced. Example of a deconvoluted XRD pattern (50 s) can be found in the ESI† (Fig. S21). 
When current is passed through the electrochemical cell, the supplied electrons can be consumed to drive three different processes at the cathode: hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), CO2RR and the reduction of the silver-copper mixed-oxide. Since no hydrogen, methane or ethylene were detected in the first 75 s (area I) of the electrolysis, we hypothesize that the available electrons have been exclusively used to drive the reduction of Ag2Cu2O3. Previous theoretical and experimental works have also provided indications that the reduction of a starting oxide catalyst is both energetically and kinetically more favorable compared to HER and CO2RR.58–61 Hence, the starting potential observed at the beginning of electrolysis would correspond to driving the more energetically favorable Ag2Cu2O3 reduction at low overpotential (area I). The sharp decrease of the potential occurs only when the oxide phase is completely reduced, and the supplied electrons are available to drive the more energetically demanding (higher overpotential) CO2RR. To test our hypothesis, we performed additional electrolysis experiments which were interrupted at different times. The post-electrolysis cathode samples from the interrupted measurements were characterized via ex situ XRD. This allowed us to observe the phase changes taking place within the catalyst material during the first 250 s of the electrolysis, as can be seen in Fig. 5b. The presented XRD spectra provide proof that the observed sharp increase of the potential measured at the cathode corresponds to the formation of a completely reduced bimetallic material originating from Ag2Cu2O3. The peaks characteristic for Ag2Cu2O3 disappear from the spectra of samples measured after 75 s and are replaced by two broad peaks centered at ca. 38.5° and 43.4°. The first peak at ca. 38.5° is characteristic for the Ag(111) reflection. The second peak, when deconvoluted, reveals the presence of two peaks at approx. 43.1° and 44.3° which correspond to Cu(111) and Ag(200) reflections, respectively (Fig. S19, ESI†). Presence of peaks characteristic for the fcc structures of both Ag and Cu indicates that a certain degree of in situ phase segregation occurred during CO2RR. This is in line with the Cu–Ag phase diagram which shows that there is no Cu and Ag bulk miscibility at temperatures below 200 °C.62 Even though a bimetallic material system is formed in the first minutes of CO2RR, the distribution of Cu and Ag remains highly uniform throughout the material (Fig. S20, ESI†), confirming the template character of the starting mixed metal oxide.
The bimetallic surface formed through in situ reduction of Ag2Cu2O3 was further confirmed via ex situ XPS measurements. The XPS spectra of Cu 2p and Ag M3N4,5N4,5 regions belonging to samples measured after 75 s show signals characteristic for metallic Cu and Ag (Fig. S22, ESI†), thereby supporting the previously discussed XRD results. As an additional means to investigate the oxidation state of silver after electrolysis, we calculated the modified Auger parameter (α′) as the sum of the Ag 3d5/2 binding energy and the Ag M4N4.5N4.5 kinetic energy (Table S2, ESI†). The α′-Ag of a pristine Ag2Cu2O3 sample was 724.4 eV which suggests that Ag is in an oxidized state, mainly as Ag1+. The value of α′-Ag for the post-electrolysis sample rose to 725.5 eV, which is a good indication that the oxidized silver got reduced to metallic silver after exposure to CO2RR electrolysis conditions. To analyze the oxidation state of copper, we calculated the F-parameter (ratio of the Cu 2p3/2 intensity to the intensity of the shake-up satellite peak at approx. 941.0 eV) values for our catalyst material before and after electrolysis. F-Parameter of a pristine sample equaled 2.6 which is close to the value of fully oxidized copper(II) oxide (2.1). On the other hand, the value for the F-parameter increased to 8.1 for the post-electrolysis sample indicating significant reduction.
By combining the obtained mass spectrometry data with the corresponding ex situ XRD and XPS measurements, it is clear that no CO2RR products form until Ag2Cu2O3 is completely reduced. Thus, we can conclude that the starting silver–copper mixed-oxide phase is not the catalyst itself. It rather acts as a template material from which the real catalytically active, bimetallic surface is formed through in situ reduction during the first minutes of electrolysis.

Discussion
When it comes to CO2RR on CuAg bimetallic surfaces, both Ag and Cu active sites participate in CO2 reduction. During CO2RR Ag sites actively reduce CO2 to *CO species. These species can then migrate to neighboring copper sites via surface diffusion where they will be further reduced (spillover effect), or they can desorb from the catalyst surface in the form of CO, diffuse through the electrolyte and escape into the gas phase. Certain previous CO2RR investigations have exploited the mentioned CO spillover effect in order to show increased selectivity towards C2+ products. For example, using the electrodeposition approach, Hoang et al.25 prepared CuAg alloy films containing only 6% Ag. The best reported results for CO2RR was 85% FE for C2+ products under a moderate potential measured at the cathode of −0.7 vs. RHE and a total current density of 310 mA cm−2. However, there are also opposite examples where CuAg materials have shown preferential formation of CO during CO2RR. Namely, Choi et al.63 have also electrodeposited dendritic Ag–Cu catalysts with Ag content varying between 57 and 84%. In their case, CO was found to be the main CO2RR product and the CO faradaic efficiency scaled with increasing Ag content. At the same time, C2+ product formation was suppressed. CO2RR results presented here, where the ratio of Cu and Ag is 1:1 due to the initial crystal structure of the template material, have also shown CO as the main CO2RR product detected under all investigated current densities. Based on these examples, it can be suggested that the amount of Ag within the CuAg-based catalysts directly influences their product distributions by altering the electronic structure of the catalytic surface. Doping Cu with small amounts of Ag, like in the case of Hoang et al.,25 will results in only minor modification of the Cu host material's d-band structure, allowing it to keep, or enhance, its intrinsic property to favor formation of C2+ products during CO2RR. In the case of Choi et al.63 and our work, the amounts of Ag combined with Cu dominate the catalytic properties of the bimetallic catalysts. This can be best seen in the valence band measurements shown in Fig. 4c, where the position of the d-band center is shifted significantly away from a monometallic Cu surface. Hence, such bimetallic surfaces bind the *CO intermediate with decreased intensity, allowing their easier desorption and formation of CO as the main CO2RR product. A very good example for this effect can been seen in the study performed by the Smith group51 where different amounts of Au were added to Cu in order to modify the d-band electronic structure and weaken the binding energy of *CO. By doing so, Smith et al. were able to manipulate the selectivity towards CO in between those typical for Cu and Au.
We conclude that shifting the bimetallic d-band center to values much lower compared to the ones typical for monometallic Cu is not an efficient strategy for promoting selectivity towards C2+ products during CO2RR on CuAg surfaces. However, in the case of CORR, this approach has enabled reaching FE for C2+ products close to 92% (Fig. 3). Even though Ag atoms are not able to further reduce the feed gas during CORR, and thereby do not actively participate in the reduction reactions, their presence within the material changes the immediate surrounding of Cu active sites. Consequently, this affects how the key reaction intermediates bind to the active sites (both in terms of binding intensity and geometry) and, therefore, influence which products will be formed. Up until now, there have been several proposed mechanism that could potentially explain the effect Ag has on CORR when introduced to a Cu matrix. For example, computational studies investigating Cu materials doped with Ag discovered that such bimetallic systems offer the lowest activation energy for C1–C1 and C1–C2 coupling (C2+ product formation) compared to other Cu-based bimetallic materials64 (e.g. Au-doped Cu, Ru-doped Cu or Pd-doped Cu). Due to the difference in the atomic radii of Ag and Cu certain level of surface strain is introduced to the structure. Previous works have shown that strain effects, together with ligand effects, influence the electronic structure of surface active sites in bimetallic materials.30 The differences in the d-band structure of Cu active sites within the Cu–Ag bimetallic systems compared to Cu active sites in pure Cu monometallic systems65,66 is directly correlated to observed variations in their respective CORR product distributions. Moreover, shifting the d-band center away from the Fermi level (as shown in this work) decreases the strength by which the bimetallic surface binds *H, leading to a significantly lower HER activity compared to monometallic Cu surfaces (see Fig. S9, ESI†). Hence, more surface active sites and electrons are available for the production of C2+ products. Additionally, due to uniform distribution of Ag and Cu on an atomic level within the catalyst, it is possible that Ag acts as an electron acceptor of Cu. This would also change the electronic structure of Cu active sites and thus change the binding energy of intermediates necessary for C2+ product formation. Cu possesses a higher electron chemical potential than Ag which makes the electron transfer form Cu to Ag thermodynamically favorable.67 Other studies have confirmed such electron transfers.68,69
Finally, in order to better reference the results presented within this work, a performance comparison to the current state-of-the-art Cu and CuAg catalyst systems for high-rate CORR is presented in Table S3 (ESI†). As can be seen, the bimetallic catalyst presented here reached the second highest faradaic efficiency for C2+ products while also placing among the top three catalytic systems in terms of reported C2+ partial current density so far.
Conclusion
In summary, following an alkaline coprecipitation route we synthesized Ag2Cu2O3, a mixed-metal oxide with a paramelaconite-type crystal structure, and for the first time investigated this material as a catalyst for CO2RR and CORR. Combining real-time product detection (EC-RTMS) with material characterization methods such as XRD and XPS, we show that Ag2Cu2O3 is not the active catalyst phase since no product formation was detected until the mixed-metal oxide was completely reduced. Only after the in situ formation of a fully reduced bimetallic surface, products such as ethylene were detected. These results clearly demonstrate that Ag2Cu2O3 is only a starting template material, and not the catalyst itself. Product distributions obtained from CO2RR and CORR experiments showed considerable difference. Under all tested current densities, CO was found to be the main product for CO2RR, reaching faradaic efficiencies between 55% and 68%. However, in the case of CORR, the product distribution shifted to C2+ products and a faradaic efficiency of 91.7% at 600 mA cm−2 was achieved. The XPS valence band measurements showed that the in situ formed Ag–Cu bimetallic catalyst possesses a different surface electronic structure compared to metallic Ag and Cu reference samples, a finding we connected with the observed product distributions. The mixed-metal oxide template approach presented here shows that using materials where Cu and other guest metals (Ag in the case of this work) are mixed on an atomic level, by simply occupying their designated crystallographic positions in the lattice, can promote the selectivity towards value-added products.
Experimental
Ag2Cu2O3 synthesis
NaOH (2.43 g, 0.06 mol) was dissolved in H2O (20 mL) and poured in a 150 mL three-neck round-bottom flask. Cu(NO3)2 (3.87 g, 16 mmol) and AgNO3 (2.72g, 16 mmol) were dissolved in H2O (10 mL). The resulting solution was added dropwise under vigorous stirring. A dark green precipitate formed instantly. After complete addition, the material stuck to the flask wall was washed down into the reaction suspension with approximately 20 mL of H2O. A constant stream of argon was passed through the reaction flask during the whole procedure to avoid formation of carbonates during precipitation and aging. This step is of crucial importance to obtain a phase-pure powder. After 2 h of stirring, additional H2O (60 mL) was added. Over the curse of the next 4 h the precipitate continuously darkened to almost black. Upon completion of the reaction, the particles were allowed to settle, after which the mother liquor was decanted. The solid was washed with ethanol (2 times, 50 mL) and H2O (3 times, 50 mL). The washing liquor of the last washing was checked for neutral pH. The solid precipitate was then collected by filtration and dried for 12 h at 70 °C. The H2O used in the synthesis and washing procedures was Type 1 ultrapure water purified using the Milli-Q® Integral water purification system.
Material characterization
Microscopy characterizations performed within the scope of this work have been done using the scanning electron microscope (SEM, ZEISS Crossbeam 540, FEG) and the transmission electron microscope (TEM, 200 kV JEOL JEM-2200FS). For preparing the TEM samples, a standard in situ lift of procedure with a FEI STRATA dual-beam focused ion beam (FIB)-SEM was employed. Protective layers of platinum were deposited before extracting the TEM sample. A Bruker D2 PHASER diffractometer (Cu K radiation, scan rate of 0.02° s−1) was used to collect PXRD data. A Quantera II instrument (Physical Electronics Inc., Chanhassen, USA) was used to perform X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements. A sample spot of approximately 200 × 200 μm2 was irradiated with monochromated Al Kα X-rays (1486.6 eV) originating from a source operating at 15 kV and 50 W. The referencing of the binding energy scale was done in respect to C 1s core-level at 284.8 eV. The copper oxide reference samples (Cu2O and CuO) were bought from Sigma-Aldrich (≥99.99% and ≥99.999% purity, respectively). Ag2O and AgO were obtained from VWR (≥99.99% and ≥98% purity, respectively). In order to minimize the exposure to air, the oxide samples were handled in an inert atmosphere of a glove box form where they were transferred to the XPS vacuum chamber. Metallic Cu0 and Ag0 samples provided by the manufacturer of the instrument were sputter cleaned and used for reference measurements.
Electrode preparation

Gas diffusion electrode. 
A gas diffusion layer (GDL) (Freudenberg H23C2) which contains a micropourous carbon black layer and a fiber based PTFE bounded back bone was used as catalyst support. Catalyst ink was prepared by dispersing 45 mg of catalyst powder in 2.5 mL of 1-propanol. Additionally, 115 μL of Sustainion XA-9 ionomer (dioxide materials) was added to the catalyst ink as binder. The ink was sonicated for 30 minutes. The GDE was then prepared by air-brushing the prepared catalyst ink on top of the 30 cm2 GDL. After air-brushing, the GDE was left to dry overnight a room temperature and was electrochemically tested the next day. The electrode samples were weighed before and after catalyst deposition to determine the catalyst loading. The catalyst loading was determined to be approx. 1 mg cm−2.


Solid electrode. 
Glassy carbon plates (Hochtemperatur-Werkstoffe GmbH, Germany) were used as substrate. The catalyst was deposited via air-brushing using the same ink formulation as for the GDEs. The catalyst loading was kept at 1 mg cm−2.

Electrochemical characterization and measurements

Flow cell experimental setup. 
The electrolysis investigations were carried out in a stacked three compartment flow cell (Fig. S7, ESI†) purchased from ElectroCell (Micro Flow Cell). The cathode and anode compartments which contained the catholyte and anolyte were separated by an anion exchange membrane (Fumasep, FAB-PK-130). The third compartment (CO2 and CO gas chamber) was located behind the cathode chamber and separated from the catholyte with a GDE (2 cm2) which served as a cathode. Electrolytes were pumped in two separate cycles (catholyte and anolyte) through the cell. 1 M CsHCO3 (100 mL) was used as both catholyte and anolyte. All electrolyte solutions were prepared with ultra-pure water (18.2 MΩ cm, MilliQ Millipore system). Electrolyte flow was controlled using a peristaltic pump (Ismatec ECOLINE VC-MS/CA8-6) which kept the flow constant at 30 mL min−1. CO2 gas (Air Liquide, 99.995%) was used without further purification. It was continuously supplied to the flow cell at atmospheric pressure, at a constant flow rate of 100 mL min−1 for all electrolysis experiments. CO (Linde, 99.997%) gas was also used without further purification with a constant flow rate of 70 mL min−1 for all electrolysis experiments. The gas flow was controlled with a mass flow controller (Bronkhorst). The cell was fitted with an Ag/AgCl (3 M KCl) reference electrode. The pH value of the catholyte was monitored throughout the experiment using a pH electrode (Metrohm). For all measurements the cathode was connected as working electrode. As anode, a Ti sheet coated with Ir-MMO (iridium-mixed metal oxide) obtained from ElectroCell was used in all experiments. For the long-term (74 h) electrolysis experiment, a slightly different flow cell configuration was used. The catholyte and anolyte were no longer separated. 1 M CsHCO3 was used as electrolyte (500 mL). After every cycle the electrolyte was mixed once again enabling the continuous balancing of cations, anions, pH and water in the system throughout the experiment. Additionally, the gas exit on the cathode site of the cell was closed which meant that the CO2 was continuously being pushed through the GDE during the experiment. This way, GDE flooding effect was minimized. All electrochemical measurements were conducted on a Metrohm Autolab PGSTAT302N potentiostate-galvanostate. All measurements were performed without iR-drop compensation. The obtained Ag/AgCl electrode potentials were converted to the RHE scale using the following equation:ERHE = EAg/AgCl + 0.21 V + 0.0591 × pH


Batch-type electrolyzer with a solid working electrode. 
An in-house built electrolyzer (Fig. S3, ESI†) was used for electrochemical CO2RR and CORR. The two-compartment cell was made from PTFE and the working and counter electrode sides were separated by a bipolar membrane (Fumasep). The working electrode was Ag2Cu2O3 spray-coated on a glassy carbon plate and a geometric area of 1 cm2 was exposed to the electrolyte. A 3 M Ag/AgCl electrode (BASi) was used as reference electrode. The counter electrode was an Ir-MMO rod (Metakem). The catholyte volume was 12 mL electrolyte while the anolyte volume was 6 mL. The electrolyte was permanently flushed with humidified CO2 (4.8, Air Liquide) with 30 sccm controlled by a mass flow controller (Bronkhorst). CO2RR was performed in 0.05 M K2CO3 (99.997+%, Puratronic, Alfa Aesar) and CORR in 0.1 M CsHCO3 (≥99.99%, metal basis, Alfa Aesar) prepared with ultrapure water (18.2 MΩ cm, total organic level below 4 ppb; PURELAB flex Dispenser, Elga). Electrochemical experiments were controlled by a potentiostat (Reference 600, Gamry) and conducted at room temperature. The potentials collected versus Ag/AgCl were converted versus reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). Potentiostatic electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was used to compensate for the solution resistance (Ru). Typical measurements were as followed: EIS-CV-EIS-Chronoamperometry-EIS. Ru was determined by each EIS and 90% of that value was applied for positive feedback compensation for the following measurement. The remaining 10% were post-corrected using the average of the Ru values obtained from the prior and subsequent EIS. The initial CV was used to reduce the oxides and started at open circuit potential and stopped at the potential which was also applied for the subsequent 75 min chronoamperometry. In total three cycles were performed. Each experiment was repeated two times and the reported current density per applied potential is the average value obtained during these two chronoamperometries.


Electrochemical reactor used for EC-RTMS measurements. 
The sandwich type cell consists of two compartments, one for the working electrode and another one for the counter electrode, separated by a proton conductive membrane. A reference electrode (BASi, West Lafayette, USA) is inserted from the side into the working electrode compartment. A deactivated fused silica glass capillary (Trajan Scientific Europe Ltd., Ringwood, Australia) hits on the working electrode under an angle of approximately 20° to extract electrolyte containing product species from the close proximity of the electrode.

CO2RR and CORR product analysis

Flow cell experimental setup. 
A Thermo Scientific Trace 1310 gas chromatograph (GC) equipped with two thermal conductivity detector (TCD) channels was used to analyze gas samples taken after 1 h of electrolysis. During the long-term (74 h) measurement the output gas from the flow cell was directly supplied to the GC and measured in an online mode. A micropacked GC column (Shincarbon™, Restek) using helium as carrier was used to separate the hydrocarbons and a 5 Å mol-sieve column (Restek), using argon as carrier gas, was used to measure the H2 values. Liquid products sampled after 1 h of electrolysis were analyzed using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). The water suppression 1H NMR spectra where measured using a Bruker Avance 400 (400 MHz) NMR spectrometer (Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA). A 300 μL of the post-electrolysis electrolyte sample was mixed with 250 μL of D2O solution and 50 μL of the internal standard (60 mM solution of potassium fumarate). Accumulation of 64 scans for each spectrum was done. A 4 s D1-delay was used to ensure total spin relaxation after each pulse. Faradaic efficiencies (FE) corresponding to gas and liquid products were calculated using the following equation:  where F is the Faraday constant, I is the current, Q is the charge, e is the number of electrons transferred, t is the electrolysis time and n is the amount of product in moles.


Batch-type electrolyzer with a solid working electrode. 
The electrolyzer was coupled to an online GC (Arnel engineered Clarus 580 GC, PerkinElmer) and automatic injections were done at an interval of 19 min to detect gaseous products. Products in the liquid phase were collected after chronoamperometry and quantified in an GC/MS (Clarus 580 coupled to Clarus SQ8T, both PerkinElmer) or in an ion chromatograph (Dionex 5000+, Thermo Fisher). The obtained peak areas were used to calculate the product concentrations, faradaic efficiencies and partial current densities.


EC-RTMS. 
The liquid stream coming out from the reactor's cathode chamber is forwarded to a custom-made degasser to separate the gas from the liquid electrolyte. The gases permeate through the wall of a tube membrane based on Teflon AF 2400 (Biogeneral, Inc., San Diego, USA) and are subsequently analyzed in an electron impact quadrupole mass spectrometer for real-time information.

Author contributions
N. M., C. R. and G. S. conceived the idea behind this work. N. M., B. S. and C. V. performed the catalyst synthesis. N. M., C. R. and K. M. V. carried out the XRD measurements. M. L. performed the XPS and EC-RTMS measurements. C. M. and D. M. did microscopy characterization. N. M. and A. R. perform the electrochemical CO2RR and CORR measurements, supported by D. R. P. L. and K. M. V. carried out Raman measurements. N. M. and T. R. did the NMR measurements and data analysis. All authors discussed the results. N. M. wrote the manuscript. K. J. J. M., I. K. and G. S. supervised the work, helped to edit and revise the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) for funding part of this work within the “FONA framework program and CO2-WIN funding measure” in Project PhasKat under contract number 033RC028A.
References
M. Ghanta, D. Fahey and B. Subramaniam, Appl. Petrochem. Res., 2014, 4, 167–179 CrossRef CAS .
T. Haas, R. Krause, R. Weber, M. Demler and G. Schmid, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 32–39 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kortlever, J. Shen, K. J. P. Schouten, F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. M. Koper, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4073–4082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hori, A. Murata and R. Takahashi, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1989, 85, 2309 RSC .
Z. Gu, H. Shen, L. Shang, X. Lv, L. Qian and G. Zheng, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800121 CrossRef .
H. Mistry, A. S. Varela, S. Kühl, P. Strasser and B. R. Cuenya, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16009 CrossRef CAS .
C. Reller, R. Krause, E. Volkova, B. Schmid, S. Neubauer, A. Rucki, M. Schuster and G. Schmid, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602114 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Z. Wang, C.-T. Dinh, J. Li, A. Ozden, M. Golam Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C.-S. Tan, C. M. Gabardo, M. Luo, H. Zhou, F. Li, Y. Lum, C. McCallum, Y. Xu, M. Liu, A. Proppe, A. Johnston, P. Todorovic, T.-T. Zhuang, D. Sinton, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 98–106 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7231–7234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Li, J. Ciston and M. W. Kanan, Nature, 2014, 508, 504–507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lum and J. W. Ager, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 86–93 CrossRef CAS .
A. Loiudice, P. Lobaccaro, E. A. Kamali, T. Thao, B. H. Huang, J. W. Ager and R. Buonsanti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5789–5792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Reske, H. Mistry, F. Behafarid, B. Roldan Cuenya and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6978–6986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, F. Zhang, X. Kang and S. Chen, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2019, 13, 40–46 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Han, R. Kortlever, H.-Y. Chen, J. C. Peters and T. Agapie, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 853–859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Xie, B. Y. Xia, Y. Li, Y. Yan, Y. Yang, Q. Sun, S. H. Chan, A. Fisher and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1687–1695 RSC .
L. Sun, V. Reddu, A. C. Fisher and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 374–403 RSC .
J. Yuan, J.-J. Zhang, M.-P. Yang, W.-J. Meng, H. Wang and J.-X. Lu, Catalysts, 2018, 8, 171 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, R. Peng, D. K. Hensley, P. V. Bonnesen, L. Liang, Z. Wu, H. M. Meyer, M. Chi, C. Ma, B. G. Sumpter and A. J. Rondinone, ChemistrySelect, 2016, 1, 6055–6061 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Birhanu, M.-C. Tsai, A. W. Kahsay, C.-T. Chen, T. S. Zeleke, K. B. Ibrahim, C.-J. Huang, W.-N. Su and B.-J. Hwang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800919 CrossRef .
N. Todoroki, N. Yokota, S. Nakahata, H. Nakamura and T. Wadayama, Electrocatalysis, 2016, 7, 97–103 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, B. Luo, R. Long, C. Wang and Y. Xiong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4134–4138 RSC .
D. Kim, J. Resasco, Y. Yu, A. M. Asiri and P. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, Y. Wang, D. Liu, H. Liu, C. Qian, H. He and J. Yang, Carbon Energy, 2020, 1–9 Search PubMed .
T. T. H. Hoang, S. Verma, S. Ma, T. T. Fister, J. Timoshenko, A. I. Frenkel, P. J. A. Kenis and A. A. Gewirth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5791–5797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hori, H. Wakebe, T. Tsukamoto and O. Koga, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 1833–1839 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Morales-Guio, E. R. Cave, S. A. Nitopi, J. T. Feaster, L. Wang, K. P. Kuhl, A. Jackson, N. C. Johnson, D. N. Abram, T. Hatsukade, C. Hahn and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 764–771 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, H. Zhang, X. Guo, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, D. Ren and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 18704–18714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, X. Chang, J. G. Chen, W. A. Goddard, B. Xu, M.-J. Cheng and Q. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3340 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Kitchin, J. K. Nørskov, M. A. Barteau and J. G. Chen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 156801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, S. B. Scott, X. Liu, A. K. Engstfeld, S. Horch, B. Seger, I. E. L. Stephens, K. Chan, C. Hahn, J. K. Nørskov, T. F. Jaramillo and I. Chorkendorff, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 7610–7672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Martić, C. Reller, C. Macauley, M. Löffler, B. Schmid, D. Reinisch, E. Volkova, A. Maltenberger, A. Rucki, K. J. J. Mayrhofer and G. Schmid, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 1901228, 1–10 Search PubMed .
E. M. Tejada-Rosales, J. Rodriguez-Carvajal, N. Casan-Pastor, P. Alemany, E. Ruiz, M. S. El-Fallah, S. Alvarez and P. Gomez-Romero, ChemInform, 2003, 34, 103–108 CrossRef .
M. C. Biesinger, Surf. Interface Anal., 2017, 49, 1325–1334 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Svintsitskiy, E. M. Slavinskaya, T. Y. Kardash, V. I. Avdeev, B. V. Senkovskiy, S. V. Koscheev and A. I. Boronin, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 510, 64–73 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Liu, PhD dissertation, Université Grenoble Alpes,  2017.
D. S. Murali and A. Subrahmanyam, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2016, 49, 375102 CrossRef .
L. Wang, S. A. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, M. Orazov, C. G. Morales-Guio, X. Liu, D. C. Higgins, K. Chan, J. K. Nørskov, C. Hahn and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7445–7454 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050–7059 RSC .
K. Hara, A. Kudo and T. Sakata, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 391, 141–147 CrossRef .
J. J. Carroll, J. D. Slupsky and A. E. Mather, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1991, 20, 1201–1209 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Hori, Modern Aspects of Electrochemistry, Springer New York, New York, NY,  2008, pp. 89–189 Search PubMed .
E. R. Cave, C. Shi, K. P. Kuhl, T. Hatsukade, D. N. Abram, C. Hahn, K. Chan and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3035–3040 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bertheussen, Y. Abghoui, Z. P. Jovanov, A. S. Varela, I. E. L. Stephens and I. Chorkendorff, Catal. Today, 2017, 288, 54–62 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bertheussen, A. Verdaguer-Casadevall, D. Ravasio, J. H. Montoya, D. B. Trimarco, C. Roy, S. Meier, J. Wendland, J. K. Nørskov, I. E. L. Stephens and I. Chorkendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1450–1454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Clark and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7012–7020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. A. Geissman, Organic Reactions, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2nd edn,  2011, pp. 94–113 Search PubMed .
Y. Y. Birdja and M. T. M. Koper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2030–2034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Schmid, C. Reller, S. Neubauer, M. Fleischer, R. Dorta and G. Schmid, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 161 CrossRef .
C. Dinh, T. Burdyny, M. G. Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C. M. Gabardo, F. P. García de Arquer, A. Kiani, J. P. Edwards, P. De Luna, O. S. Bushuyev, C. Zou, R. Quintero-Bermudez, Y. Pang, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2018, 360, 783–787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, M. Ma, L. Wu, M. Valenti, D. Cardenas-Morcoso, J. P. Hofmann, J. Bisquert, S. Gimenez and W. A. Smith, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 16546–16555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, J. Rossmeisl and C. H. Christensen, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 37–46 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Hammer and J. K. Norskov, Nature, 1995, 376, 238–240 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. Li, C. Dong, Y. Feng, J. Yang, H. Liu and X. Du, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2763–2767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Peterson, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Nørskov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1311–1315 RSC .
P. Khanipour, M. Löffler, A. M. Reichert, F. T. Haase, K. J. J. Mayrhofer and I. Katsounaros, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7273–7277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Bondue and M. T. M. Koper, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 113842 CrossRef .
L. Mandal, K. R. Yang, M. R. Motapothula, D. Ren, P. Lobaccaro, A. Patra, M. Sherburne, V. S. Batista, B. S. Yeo, J. W. Ager, J. Martin and T. Venkatesan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8574–8584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Eilert, F. S. Roberts, D. Friebel and A. Nilsson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1466–1470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Scott, T. V. Hogg, A. T. Landers, T. Maagaard, E. Bertheussen, J. C. Lin, R. C. Davis, J. W. Beeman, D. Higgins, W. S. Drisdell, C. Hahn, A. Mehta, B. Seger, T. F. Jaramillo and I. Chorkendorff, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 803–804 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lum and J. W. Ager, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 551–554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kawecki, T. Knych, E. Sieja-Smaga, A. Mamala, P. Kwasniewski, G. Kiesiewicz, B. Smyrak and A. Pacewicz, Arch. Metall. Mater., 2012, 57, 1261–1270 CAS .
J. Choi, M. J. Kim, S. H. Ahn, I. Choi, J. H. Jang, Y. S. Ham, J. J. Kim and S. K. Kim, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 299, 37–44 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Wang, T. T. Zhuang, C. T. Dinh, J. Li, D. H. Nam, F. Li, C. W. Huang, C. S. Tan, Z. Chen, M. Chi, C. M. Gabardo, A. Seifitokaldani, P. Todorović, A. Proppe, Y. Pang, A. R. Kirmani, Y. Wang, A. H. Ip, L. J. Richter, B. Scheffel, A. Xu, S. C. Lo, S. O. Kelley, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–7 CrossRef .
D. Higgins, M. Wette, B. M. Gibbons, S. Siahrostami, C. Hahn, M. Escudero-Escribano, M. García-Melchor, Z. Ulissi, R. C. Davis, A. Mehta, B. M. Clemens, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1990–1999 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Gibbons, M. Wette, M. B. Stevens, R. C. Davis, S. Siahrostami, M. Kreider, A. Mehta, D. C. Higgins, B. M. Clemens and T. F. Jaramillo, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 1819–1827 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, Y. Li, H. Zhou, X. Zhong, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 9505–9510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, F. Che, M. Liu, C. Zou, Z. Liang, P. De Luna, H. Yuan, J. Li, Z. Wang, H. Xie, H. Li, P. Chen, E. Bladt, R. Quintero-Bermudez, T. K. Sham, S. Bals, J. Hofkens, D. Sinton, G. Chen and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 974–980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, M. Mensi, E. Oveisi, V. Mantella and R. Buonsanti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2490–2499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee01100bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Broader context
In an effort to battle the already visible effects of anthropogenic-induced global warming, our society is currently undertaking a challenging transition towards CO2 emission-free technologies. Being burdened with very energy- and emission-intensive processes for the production of important feedstock chemicals (e.g. ethylene), the chemical industry, besides the energy and transport sector, is one of the largest emitters of greenhouse gases. Renewable energy-powered electrosynthesis of value-added chemicals via electrochemical reduction of CO2 and CO holds great potential for addressing this issue by giving the chemical industry an opportunity to drastically decrease its dependence on fossil-based carbon sources, both as feedstock and fuel. However, in order for this technology to be considered for a scale-up, a suitable catalyst which would facilitate the conversion of CO2 and CO towards desired chemicals has to be developed. Copper, as the only transition metal capable of reducing CO2 and CO to hydrocarbons an oxygenates, has been under a constant spotlight among researchers. Up to now, it has been shown that more than 15 different products are able to form on copper surfaces during CO2 electroreduction, with the addition of hydrogen, formed through the parasitic hydrogen evolution reaction. To avoid cost-intensive, downstream product separation, modification of the copper catalyst so that it only favors certain reaction pathways, which lead to value-added products, while at the same time suppressing hydrogen formation, is of great importance. One of the approaches to tailor the reactivity of copper active sites is to change their immediate surrounding by introducing guest elements. This study presents a silver-copper mixed-metal oxide, Ag2Cu2O3, as an initial template material, from which the catalytically active, bimetallic surface is formed through in situ reduction during electrolysis. Incorporating Cu and Ag within the same crystal lattice allowed for a uniform spatial distribution of these two elements on an atomic level; thus, maximizing the synergetic catalytic effect. Ag2Cu2O3 is tested for both CO2 and CO reduction reaction and the obtained product distributions are discussed in the scope of observed geometric and electronic effects.


 	Fig. 1  Characterization of the pristine Ag2Cu2O3 powder. (a) PXRD pattern of the synthesized Ag2Cu2O3 powder. The insert displays the crystal structure of Ag2Cu2O3 outlined in a unit cell, where Ag1+ is shown as turquoise spheres, Cu2+ as dark blue spheres and oxygen ions as green spheres. All the peaks corresponding to Ag2Cu2O3 were identified in accordance to the database patterns extracted from the International Centre for Diffraction Data (PDF® 89-6378). (b) SEM image of the Ag2Cu2O3 pristine powder. (c) STEM energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) elemental mapping of the Ag2Cu2O3 pristine powder showing the distribution of elemental Cu, Ag and O within the particles. (d) XPS spectra of Cu 2p3/2 and Ag M3N4,5N4,5 regions for a pristine Ag2Cu2O3 powder. The Cu 2p3/2 core level of Ag2Cu2O3 is compared to three standard samples: metallic Cu, Cu2O and CuO. Similarly, the Ag M3N4,5N4,5 Auger spectral region of Ag2Cu2O3 was compared to Ag, Ag2O and AgO. (e) Raman spectrum of the synthesized Ag2Cu2O3 powder.	 

 	Fig. 2  Potentiostatic electrochemical characterization of Ag2Cu2O3 (coated on a glassy carbon substrate) complemented with product analysis. (a) Faradaic efficiency for H2 and major detected CO2RR products as a function of the potential measured at the cathode (WE). Overview of all detected CO2RR products can be found in Fig. S4 (ESI†). (b) Current density measured for eight different potentials as a function of time. The greater degree of noise which can be seen for measurements performed at more negative potentials can be attributed to intense gas bubble formation and bubble detachment from the cathode.	 

 	Fig. 3  Galvanostatic electrochemical characterization of Ag2Cu2O3 in a flow cell. Comparison of potential measured at the cathode and faradaic efficiencies for C1 products, C2+ products and hydrogen obtained during (a) CO2RR and (b) CORR at different current densities. The values shown in the graphs are average values obtained from at least three independent experiments for each tested current density. (c) Detailed overview of detected CO2RR and CORR products and their respective faradaic efficiencies for experiments performed at 400 mA cm−2. (d) Partial current densities for ethanol, ethylene and acetate plotted against the potential measured at the cathode for both CO2RR and CORR. (e) CO2RR gas product selectivity during prolonged operation (3 days) in 1 M CsHCO3 at a constant current density of 300 mA cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) SEM image of a post-electrolysis GDE after being exposed to a constant current density of 400 mA cm−2 for 1 h. (b) HAADF-STEM image of a single catalyst particle combined with EDX elemental maps of Ag (green) and Cu (blue) The white arrows within the HAADF image point to the in situ formed surface nanostructures. (c) Ex situ surface valence band XPS spectra belonging to reference copper and silver foils, and the fully reduced post-electrolysis catalyst samples which were characterized after being exposed to reaction conditions for 10 min and 48 h.	 

 	Fig. 5  Phase stability of Ag2Cu2O3 under CO2RR conditions. (a) The applied current density (45 mA cm−2), measured potential at the cathode and resulting signals for ethylene and hydrogen are shown versus time. The graph is divided into two highlighted areas. The first area highlighted in gray (I) corresponds to the initial 75 s of electrolysis where reduction of Ag2Cu2O3 is more energetically favourable in respect to CO2RR and HER under given conditions. The second area, highlighted in green (II), marks the completion of the initial oxide reduction and start of CO2RR and HER. (b) Ex situ XRD patterns of post-electrolysis samples from the experiments which were interrupted at different times. Patterns obtained in the first 65 s of electrolysis, corresponding to the gray highlighted area (I), indicate presence of oxide phases (Ag2Cu2O3 and Cu2O). Pattern belonging to a sample (90 s) measured after the reduction event, corresponding to the green highlighted area (II), confirms that the initial oxide material has been fully reduced. Example of a deconvoluted XRD pattern (50 s) can be found in the ESI† (Fig. S21).	 
ERHE = EAg/AgCl + 0.21 V + 0.0591 × pH

 		 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee01100b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
