Porous carbon nanoarchitectonics for the environment: detection and adsorption  - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CE00872F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CE00872F
(Highlight)
CrystEngComm, 2022, 24, 6804-6824Porous carbon nanoarchitectonics for the environment: detection and adsorption

        
          
            Biswa Nath 
            Bhadra
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Lok Kumar 
            Shrestha
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Katsuhiko 
            Ariga
          
        
      *ac
aWPI Research Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan. E-mail: BHADRA.Biswanath@nims.go.jp; SHRESTHA.Lokkumar@nims.go.jp; ARIGA.Katsuhiko@nims.go.jp
bDepartment of Materials Science, Faculty of Pure and Applied Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1, Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8573, Japan
cGraduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8561, Japan
Received 
      25th June 2022
    , Accepted 9th September 2022First published on 12th September 2022AbstractAs a post-nanotechnology concept, nanoarchitectonics has attracted much attention in recent years. Nanoarchitectonics is used to architect functional materials and systems from nanounits through the fusion of nanotechnology with other fields. Nanoporous carbon materials can be regarded as successful products of nanoarchitectonic approaches. High capabilities in structural regulations and modification of material nature would lead to various functional performances, especially in environmental usage. This review summarizes the recent progresses in the field of metal-free porous carbons nanoarchitectonics, mainly derived from metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and fullerene self-assembled nanostructures. The preparation methods for both the MOF-derived and fullerene crystals-derived nanostructured carbons without metal species are explained in detail. Moreover, the applications of such carbons for environmental remediation through the adsorption of contaminants of emerging concern and detection of volatile organic compounds, especially with the quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) technique, are summarized. Importantly, innovative ideas or trends will be suggested for future research in these fields.
1. Introduction
1.1. Background: nanoarchitectonics
The development of our society is heavily dependent on the progress of materials science. Advanced materials science can develop materials that perform the desired functions based on combined efforts from chemical fields such as organic chemistry,1–3 inorganic chemistry,4–6 polymer chemistry,7–9 coordination chemistry,10–12 supramolecular chemistry,13–15 and biochemistry.16–18 Furthermore, various functional materials can also be created by integrating them.19–21 Progress in materials science has been made to solve various problems such as energy,22–24 environment,25–28 and biomedical29–31 issues. In particular, environmental issues that affect our daily lives have attracted deep interest, and a variety of materials have been developed to solve environmental problems.
For example, the detection of toxic biological substances such as microcystin-LR (microcystin-leucine arginine), which is considered as one of the most toxic and harmful freshwater toxins, was conducted through the application of nanomaterials to biosensing technologies and microchip devices.32 The electrooxidation of target substances such as ammonia is done from the viewpoint of energy and environmental applications through the nanostructurization of earth-abundant transition metals to effective catalysts.33 For detection and separation purposes, carbon-based nanomaterials such as graphene, carbon nanotubes, and fullerenes have been actively used.34
These examples show that it is not based only on the intrinsic performance of the materials themselves but also on the control of its nanostructure. It has been realized that the control of the nanostructure has become even more important due to the rapid advancement of nanotechnology. Nanotechnology has demonstrated its power to observe the atomic and molecular level35–37 and elucidate their specific phenomena and properties.38–40 Furthermore, it has become possible to observe elementary processes involved in material design and fabrication, such as molecular motions,41,42 reaction behaviors,43,44 and nucleation at the nanolevel.45,46 For further development, nanotechnology should be classified into a new concept. As a post-nanotechnology concept, nanoarchitectonics has attracted much attention in recent years.47 As nanotechnology was originated by Richard Feynman,48,49 nanoarchitectonics was proposed by Masakazu Aono.50,51 Nanoarchitectonics is used to architect functional materials and systems from nanounits (atoms, molecules, and nanomaterials) through the fusion of nanotechnology with other fields, including organic chemistry, supramolecular chemistry, materials science, microfabrication technology, and biotechnology (Fig. 1).52,53
 Fig. 1  Outline of nanoarchitectonics methodology as a post-nanotechnology concept. 
More specifically, in the nanoarchitectonics concept, selecting or combining unit processes of atomic/molecular manipulation, chemical/physical material transformation, self-assembly/self-organization, structural control by external fields, nano/microfabrication, biological manipulation, etc., creates functional material systems from nanoscale units atoms, molecules, and nanomaterials.54–56 Since this principle is universal and general, it can be applied to a wide range of materials and purposes.57–59 All materials are originally composed of atoms and molecules. Therefore, nanoarchitectonics is, in principle, applicable to all materials. In analogy to the theory of everything in physics,60 it could be called the method for everything in material science.27 In fact, the nanoarchitectonics concept has been applied in various fields.61–64 The environmental field is one of the promising applications. Sensing hazardous substances,65,66 their removal,67,68 and bio-related care69,70 are also targets of nanoarchitectonics.
Nanoarchitectonics has several characteristics. It often combines equilibrium processes, such as self-assembly,71–73 with artificial nonequilibrium processes, such as the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) method74–77 and layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly,78–81 resulting in the fabrication of hierarchical structures. It can be said that nanoarchitectonics is a methodology that is more suitable for creating highly functional material systems with hierarchical structures.82 In addition, because nanoscale processes have a certain degree of ambiguity inherent to them, such as thermal fluctuations, stochastic distributions, and quantum effects, nanoarchitectonics does not simply add elementary processes but works to harmonize them,83,84 thus providing an advantage in developing dynamic and flexible functions.85–87
Although nanoarchitectonics can provide huge opportunities in materials synthesis, the best typical example to reflect the essence of nanoarchitectonics is the synthesis of various nanoporous materials.88,89 Nanoporous materials are synthesized by template synthesis via self-assembly, dimension-controlled complex formation, and chemical reactions to have a precise pore structure at the nanolevel but in bulk size quantities. They have been actively studied as mesoporous materials,90,91 metal–organic frameworks (MOFs),92–94 and covalent organic frameworks (COFs).95–97
Sol–gel synthesis provides various porous materials such as macroporous silicone materials that are useful for various applications, including materials separation media and heat insulation.98 Mesoporous silica is a typical nanoporous material usually obtained by template synthesis with self-assembled nanoarchitecture, which is known to be useful for various environmental applications.99 Hybrid porous materials prepared from MOF-type precursors with silica aerogels have been used for the adsorption of BTX compounds (benzene, toluene, and m-xylene).100 Because MOF–aerogel hybrids include metal species, they have been used for catalysis, including CO2 fixation reactions.101 High regulation capability and the dynamic feature of nanospaces provided by MOFs102 have been researched for various fundamental phenomena such as polymer inclusions103 and charge manipulations.104 Not limited to fundamental research areas, MOF materials are actively used for environment-related applications such as the detection of Hg(I) and Hg(II) ions105 and CO2/C2H2 separation.106 As the covalent version of MOF materials, COF materials have recently been paid much attention.107,108 They are often synthesized as thin films at interfacial regions, and various kinds of applications are also expected with new types of polymer materials.109,110
Among various porous materials, nanoporous carbons and related materials have been recently used in various applications, especially in environmental fields. Some of them can be obtained from biomass, including biological wastes, as ecofriendly synthesis. Porous biochar materials prepared from bamboo powders as very cheap sources were used for the one-pot cascade conversion of cellulose to sorbitol upon immobilization with P and Ru elements.111 Porous carbon materials derived from lignocellulose112 and nitrogen-doped porous carbon microtubule materials from waste biomass113 were used for capacitive deionization. High CO2 adsorption performance with a good CO2/N2 selectivity was achieved simply using porous nitrogen-doped activated carbon monoliths.114 Nanoporous carbon materials derived from Washnut seeds with huge surface areas115 and carbon materials doped with O–N–S having multiscale pores116 were utilized for supercapacitor applications. Not limited to biomass sources, nanoporous carbon materials can be obtained from various sources. Some of them are highly capable of removing complex chemical contaminants including inorganic, organic, and radioactive contaminants.117 The other nanocarbons such as fullerenes and graphene have been used as sources for porous carbon syntheses. Mesoporous carbon tubes synthesized from macaroni fullerene crystals118 and two-dimensional mesoporous C60/carbon hybrid materials119 were subjected to applications for supercapacitors and lithium-ion batteries. Efficient performance in supercapacitor usages was also reported for hydrated mesoporous graphene nanoribbons.120 Material conversions between porous materials are also an effective way to nanoarchitect functional porous carbon materials. Nitrogen-doped nanoporous carbon materials were fabricated through the thermal conversion of triazine-based COF materials for capacitor performances.121 Flexible microsupercapacitors were prepared with porous carbon materials derived from MOF (zeolitic imidazolate framework-8) with the aid of electrophoretic deposition.122
As seen in the abovementioned examples, nanoporous carbon materials can be regarded as successful products of nanoarchitectonic approaches. They can be nanoarchitected from various sources, including abundant cost-effective biomass. High capabilities in structural regulations and modification of materials natures such as doping would lead to various functional performances, especially in environmental usages. Therefore, in this review article, we summarize the recent developments of environment-related applications by nanoarchitected porous carbon materials. First of all, the general background for nanoporous carbon materials is briefly explained in the next section.
1.2. Background: nanoporous carbon
Nanostructured porous carbons are very interesting when they have controllable structures, tunable porosities, customizable surface chemistry, high surface area, high stability, and low cost. Such carbons are useful in a wide variety of applications such as electrocatalysts, energy storage/conversion, fuel cells, carrier for drug delivery, adsorbents for impurities in water/fuel, and sensing of volatile organic compounds (VOCs).123–130
Highly porous carbons are generally obtained from various precursors, including biomasses and polymers, via high-temperature carbonization and activation131–136 in addition to the nanocasting method. The hard templating nanocasting method requires an additional step to remove the templated materials to get the well-structured porous carbon.137,138 The carbons, particularly with ordered pore structures, obtained by the nanocasting templated route generally show superior performance than the commercially available activated carbons. As an alternative to the nanocasting method using biomasses and polymeric precursors, MOFs were used as the precursor for highly porous carbons.139–148 Carbons derived from a wide variety of MOFs have large specific surface areas, controlled pore sizes, different morphologies, and are automatically functionalized with heteroatoms, which can be regarded as advantages to the routine templated synthesis of carbons. Although conversion of MOFs into carbons is a kind of template procedure, it does not always require additional etching (e.g., minerals acid), which was essentially required in the classical nanocasting route.137,138,149 However, depending on the component of the MOFs and carbonization condition, doping of heteroatoms such as metals, metal oxides, and nonmetals (N, O, B, S, etc.) can be varied. Notably, the MOF-derived carbons doped with metals or metal oxides resulted in low porosity and low specific surface area. In contrast, MOF-derived metal-free carbons have huge surface area and exclusive pore architectures, which could be obtained via the suitable selection of MOFs and controlled carbonization or some other additional process.
Moreover, self-assembled fullerene nanostructures and carbons derived from them were also found to show unique physicochemical features with remarkable prospects.150,151 Self-assembled nanostructures based on fullerene have no metallic species and thereby can be converted into metal-free carbon by a single-step carbonization without any additional treatment. These metal-free nanostructured porous carbons were recognized as remarkable adsorbent/sensor materials for resolving various environmental issues.
There are several reviews on MOF-derived porous carbons139–147 and fullerene nanostructures,152–156 however, a comprehensive review on MOF- and fullerene-derived metal-free carbons with controlled nanoarchitectures and high surface area and their use in adsorption and sensing is lacking. In this review, we mainly emphasize on the current developments of highly porous MOF- and fullerene-derived metal-free carbons, their production methods, and potential applications in the fields of adsorption, especially in the liquid phase (aqueous and non-aqueous medium), and VOC sensing related to environmental remediation. Fig. 2 illustrates an overview of the current studies in the relevant fields.
 Fig. 2  An illustration of the overview of the porous carbon nanoarchitectonics for environment. 
2. Preparation of MOF- and fullerene-derived metal-free carbons
High-temperature carbonization, also termed as pyrolysis, is one of the commonly used methods to get highly porous and metal-free carbon having fascinating structural features using different precursors, especially MOF- and fullerene-based nanostructures. The physicochemical properties of the resulting porous carbons usually depend on the properties (e.g., structures, morphology, and chemical components) of precursor materials, carbonization conditions (e.g., temperature, time, atmosphere, and ramping rate), and post-treatment (e.g., by mineral acid, base, and salts) methods. Such metal-free porous carbons are often decorated with a wide variety of functional groups such as oxygen-containing acidic (e.g., phenolic-hydroxyl groups, carboxyl groups, and carbonyl groups) and/or nitrogen-containing neutral/basic (pyrrolic nitrogen, pyridinic nitrogen, graphitic nitrogen, and nitrogen oxides) functionalities, which are especially helpful for adsorption. This chapter includes the details of fabrication methods for highly porous metal-free carbon from MOFs and fullerene nanostructures.
2.1. Preparation of MOF-derived metal-free carbon
MOF-derived metal-free carbons may widen the collection of carbon materials with high surface area, controlled pore structures, and morphologies. There are two main methods for fabricating MOF-derived metal-free carbons: (i) direct carbonization of MOFs, and (ii) carbonization of MOFs loaded with secondary components. The carbonization of MOFs usually produced carbons consisting of metallic species such as metals or metal oxides that were leached out via post-treatment with strong acid to get the metal-free carbons. However, acid washing was not always mandatory, especially for Zn-based MOFs (see below). Moreover, the chemical activation of MOF-derived carbons by a strong base (KOH) or salt of alkaline earth metals (e.g., KNO3, NaCl, etc.) or oxidizing reagent (e.g., Na2S2O8) could control the pore architecture and surface functionality of MOF-derived metal-free carbons. Fig. 3 presents the general preparation methods for MOF-derived metal-free carbons. The details of each method, including the examples, are explained in the following sections.
 Fig. 3  Representation of the synthesis routes for preparing MOF-derived metal-free carbons. 

2.1.1. Direct carbonization of MOFs. 
Many MOFs are recognized to be useful precursors for the preparation of highly porous metal-free carbons. Usually, the crystalline structures of MOFs are broken upon carbonization, and hierarchical carbons with disordered graphitic (with sp2-bonded carbons) phases appear in the obtained porous carbons. The crystal morphology, as well as micropores in MOF-derived carbons, were mostly retained, and the meso and macropores were generated partly via the formation of defects in MOFs due to their unique structural legacy.
Among a wide variety of MOFs, Zn-based MOFs are perfect for the preparation of metal-free carbons, generally with a high surface area.142 This is because the constituent Zn metals of the used Zn-MOFs are usually converted into ZnO and carbon, then the produced ZnO was reduced into metallic Zn via carbon reduction, and metallic Zn can be evaporated during high-temperature pyrolysis due to its low boiling point (907 °C). The removal of metallic Zn by a high-temperature carbonization resulted in highly porous metal-free carbons. However, the incomplete removal of the produced ZnO or Zn was seen for the case of low-temperature pyrolysis or using a bulk amount. In such cases, the remaining ZnO or Zn species can be removed by washing with acid. Moreover, depending on the composition of the organic ligand of the Zn-MOFs, N- or other non-metal-doped functionalities can be attained.
Zn-based MOFs, constructed with different ligands, such as ZIF-8, ZIF-7, ZIF-11, ZIF-68, ZIF-69, MAF-6, MAF-5, MAF-32, MOF-5, MOF-2, IRMOF-3, Zn-BTC, MOF-74, JUC-160, and Bio-MOF-1 (as shown in Scheme 1) are commonly used as precursors for metal-free carbons. They are composed of a variety of organic ligands (single or mixed), Zn/C ratio, pore structures, morphologies, and crystal sizes, and resulted in a wide range of carbons nanostructures including sheet, rod, cube, and polyhedral, having different pore structures. The carbonization conditions and treatment processes often control the surface area, porosity, and component of the resulting carbon.
 Scheme 1  An illustration of the crystal structures of commonly used Zn-based MOFs for metal-free carbons. Constituent ligands are also shown besides every MOF structure. 
Chaikittisilp et al. reported the production of carbons from commercial ZIF-8 via carbonization in the temperature range from 600 °C to 1000 °C, followed by acid treatment.157 The carbons obtained at 600 °C had a very low surface area (24 m2 g−1; close to nonporous structures) even after acid treatment, which was much lower than that of the carbonized ZIF-8 (790 m2 g−1) without acid treatment, indicating that a carbonization temperature of 600 °C was insufficient to form carbons from the ZIF-8. However, the surface areas of acid-treated carbons increased from 520 m2 g−1 to 1100 m2 g−1 as well as enlarged the pore sizes by increasing the carbonization temperature from 700 °C to 1000 °C, as can be understood from the N2-sorption isotherms (Fig. 4a) and pore size distribution curves (Fig. 4b). Bai et al. observed very similar results using synthesized ZIF-8 nanocrystals as a precursor, followed by acid treatment, for the metal-free carbons.158 Moreover, as demonstrated by Abbasi et al.,159 Bhadra et al.,160 and Ahmed et al.,161 there is an optimum temperature (1000 °C) for the carbonization of ZIF-8 to realize the highest porosity without any acid treatment.
 Fig. 4  (a) Nitrogen sorption isotherms and (b) respective pore size distribution curves of the carbons derived from the direct carbonization of ZIF-8 at different temperatures; (c) effect of carbonization times on the BET surface area of bio-MOF-1 derived carbons and (d) BJH pore size distributions of the obtained BMDCs; and (e) SEM and (f) TEM images of the carbons derived from ZIF-8 with (e-1 and f-1) small, (e-2 and f-2) intermediate-sized, and (e-3 and f-3) large-sized particles. Panels (a and b) are reprinted with permission from ref. 157, copyright 2012 Royal Society of Science, panels (c and d) are reprinted with permission from ref. 163, copyright 2018 Elsevier and panels (e and f) is reprinted with permission from ref. 164, copyright 2013 Royal Society of Science. 
In addition, carbonization times play an important role in the textural properties of the resulting carbons.162,163 Bhadra et al. reported a relationship between the BET surface area and carbonization time (Fig. 4c) and BJH-pore size distribution curves (Fig. 4d),163 using BioMOF-1 as a precursor, which clearly revealed that the carbonization time of 12 h was the best choice to obtain the materials with the highest surface area, largest total pore (1.14 cm3 g−1) and mesopore volumes (0.78 cm3 g−1), but with the smallest micropore volume. The particle size of the precursor MOFs did not have a noticeable effect on the morphology/shape of the resulting carbons however had an important role in the physicochemical properties, as demonstrated in several studies using MOFs with a variety of sizes.164–167 For instance, ZIF-8 nanocrystals with sizes ranging from the nano to micrometer scale yielded carbons with similar shapes (Fig. 4e), however, with increased surface area from the larger ZIF-8 sizes.164 Similarly, larger MOF-5, a typical carboxylate MOF with millimeter size, yielded hierarchical carbons with a higher surface area than the micron-sized MOF-5.166 Cao et al. also observed no change in the morphology of ZIF-7 with varied morphologies of spheres, rods, or polyhedra after carbonization at 800 °C.168 Besides, a nanosized mixed-ligand ZIF (JUC-160) interestingly yielded carbons with higher porosity than that obtained from micron-sized JUC-160.167 Overall, the resulting nanoporous carbons retained their parent morphology, although they partially shrunk and deformation was observed for some of the MOFs under certain condition, especially at high temperature, long-time carbonization, and post-treatment with acid (e.g., HF or HCl) or base (e.g., KOH). Unlike the nanoporous carbons enriched with micropores obtained from ZIFs, nanoporous carbon cubes having high mesopores and macropores were obtained from MOF-5 (as called IRMOF-1)169 and IRMOF-3.170
On the other hand, MOFs composed of other metals (Al, Co, Zr, Mn, etc.) rather than Zn also provided nanoporous metal-free carbons with different shapes via the direct carbonization of the MOFs constructed with respective metal ions, followed by acid treatment. For example, Yamauchi et al. reported square box-pipe shaped carbons with very high surface area (5000 m2 g−1) and total pore volume (4.3 cm3 g−1) by the carbonization of Al-MOF (Al(OH)(1,4-NDC)·2H2O; Al-PCP).171 The high porosity was achieved after the treatment of the carbonized Al-MOF with an acid (HF). Other MOFs including MIL-53(Al)-NH2,172 MIL-100(Al),173 MOF-253(Al),174 ZIF-67(Co),175 UiO-66(Zr),176,177 and Mn-MOF ([Mn(BDC)0.5(H2O)3])178 also resulted in highly porous metal-free carbons with different morphologies, which are relevant to the morphologies of the parent MOFs, after the removal of the produced metal oxide (e.g., Al2O3, ZrO2) or metal (e.g., Co) species from the carbonized MOFs.


2.1.2. Carbonization of MOFs loaded with a secondary precursor. 
Metal-free carbons were also obtained from the carbonization of MOFs incorporated with secondary sources of carbon and other heteroatoms (especially non-such as like N, B, P, and S). The loading of secondary species into the large pores or voids of the MOFs, prior to carbonization, was found to be an effective method to overcome the drawbacks of the carbonization of single MOFs, including the insufficiency of carbons and anisotropic shrinkage of MOFs upon high-temperature carbonization, as well as to decorate the carbons with the desired heteroatom(s). Based on the component of the studied MOFs and targeted properties in the resulting carbons, the secondary precursors were selected. They are usually a variety of organics, such as furfuryl alcohol (FA), 1H-1,2,3-triazole, tannic acid, 1,4-benzene di-boronic acid, ionic liquids (ILs), glucose, ethylene glycol, glycerol, xylitol, melamine, and urea, especially for the metal-free carbons. The molecular dimensions of the guest materials should be considered for their well-incorporation or well-fit into the voids of MOFs to get the controlled nanoarchitectonics of MOF-derived carbons. There are a number of strategies to incorporate secondary species into MOFs that can be categorized as (a) physical mixing, (b) incipient wetness, (c) wet impregnation, (d) ship-in-bottle, and (e) in situ incorporation, as illustrated in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  An illustration to show the methods including (a) physical mixing, (b) incipient wetness, (c) wet impregnation, (d) ship-in-bottle, and (e) in situ incorporation for the loading of the second precursor into MOFs prior to carbonization. 
Xu et al. reported the carbonization of FA-loaded MOF-5, which was prepared via the incipient wetness route (Fig. 5b),179 where FA was polymerized into the MOF upon low-temperature heating under atmospheric conditions, which resulted in a metal-free carbon with a large porosity. A similar impregnation strategy was employed by them180 and others181,182 to incorporate a second precursor into the MOF. The method was found to be effective even without post-heating or polymerization of FA prior to the carbonization. For example, FA-incorporated Zn-BTC (a typical nonporous MOF) was carbonized directly and yielded the metal-free carbons with surface areas of about 518 to 1455 m2 g−1,183 where FA not only increased the yield of carbon but also increased the surface area. Moreover, FA-loaded Al-PCP, via the wet impregnation method (Fig. 5c), produced fibrous carbons with a similar morphology to the pristine or carbonized Al-PCP, where the surface area increased with an increase in FA loading.184 Other organics such as CCl4, glycerol, ethylenediamine, and phenolic resin were also used as the secondary source of carbons,185–187 confirming the viability of this technique to obtain MOF-derived carbons. However, morphology duplication in the carbons obtained from MOF-loaded (especially MOF-5) with the second precursor was inferior to the carbons obtained from pristine MOFs, especially when the used MOFs were unstable under humid/treated conditions. On the other hand, the carbonization of FA-loaded ZIF-8, an MOF with high stability, yielded morphology-controlled metal-free carbons with large surface area (3405 m2 g−1).187 Banerjee et al. reported how the morphology of MOF-derived carbons can be controlled via the suitable selection of MOFs and secondary precursors.188 They selected three mixed ligand ZIFs (e.g., ZIF-68, ZIF-69, and ZIF-70) having the same (GME) topological structures; however, because of different porosity and different morphologies of the host ZIFs, the obtained carbons (via carbonization after FA loading) had different porosity ranging from microporous to mesoporous with different morphologies. Cao and coworkers tested the effect of different secondary sources on the properties of MOF-derived carbons.189–191 Among a variety of sources, i.e., urea, glucose, ethylene glycol, glycerol, xylitol, melamine, and FA, they found glucose as the most promising secondary source because of its capability of reducing the loss of N-species from the ZIFs by pre-melting and in situ polymerization during the carbonization.69 Although metal-free porous carbons could be obtained by the carbonization of a simple mixture of MOF and secondary component (Fig. 5a), the porosity, homogeneity, and coherency in the morphology was rather inferior than the wet-impregnation method.
Ionic liquids (ILs) were also used as secondary precursors to incorporate into MOFs for obtaining nanostructured porous carbons. For example, IL@MIL-100Al (where, 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium dicyanamide as an IL) was prepared by the wet impregnation method, and the carbonization of the IL@MIL-100Al produced a highly porous N-enriched metal-free carbon after the removal of the inorganic species (Al2O3) by acid washing.192 In addition, Ahmed et al. reported “ship-in-bottle” strategy to incorporate IL into the pores of ZIF-8, as shown in Fig. 5d,193 in which IL was prepared inside the ZIF pores from its precursors. The resulting IL@ZIF-8 was subjected to carbonization that yielded N-enriched (up to 12.4 wt%) porous carbon having a high surface area (1421 m2 g−1) and high degree of graphitization. The incorporation of 12% IL and 1000 °C were the optimized conditions to get the best materials in terms of surface area and N content. A similar method was followed to incorporate IL into Al-PCP that resulted in fibrous carbon with a high surface area (2084 m2 g−1) and high N content (5.2%), where IL contributed as the potential N source since the pristine Al-PCP is free of N.194
Bhadra et al. reported the in situ incorporation (Fig. 5e) of secondary precursor (e.g., melamine) to get metal-free carbon dodecahedrane with increased N-content using MAF-6 as a representative Zn-MOF.195 Typically, acid-treated melamine suspension in ethanol was added together with Zn2+ solution in aqueous ammonia into a previously prepared 2-ethylimidazole solution in ethanol and cyclohexane mixed solvent under vigorous stirring. The melamine@MAF-6 composites were produced after the continued stirring of the mixture for about 20 min. The in situ loading method was better to incorporate/distribute melamine into the MAF-6 pores/structures, which resulted in well-distributed, N-enriched, and highly porous carbon compared to the simple wet impregnation method.196,197 P-co-doped N-containing hierarchical carbon was prepared by a two-step carbonization method.198 N-doped carbon was firstly prepared by the carbonization of ZIF-8, and then the second carbonization was carried out after mixing H3PO4 (as an external P-source) with the obtained carbon.
Chemical activation is one of the well-known techniques to engineer the physicochemical properties of carbons. Scheme 2 presents the chemical reactions and a four-step mechanism that involves the chemical activation of carbons, especially when KOH is used as an activating agent. MOF-derived carbons were also modified by chemical treatment using different chemicals, including KOH, KNO3, NaCl, and Na2S2O8, which yielded highly porous and functionalized carbons. KOH activation is usually conducted in a two-step carbonization method. The pristine MOFs were carbonized first to convert them into carbon, followed by mixing with KOH and carbonization again to enhance the porosity of the obtained carbons in the first step, followed by washing with acid after the second carbonization.158,199–201 For instance, two step carbonizations (where KOH was mixed before the second carbonization) of ZIFs (e.g., ZIF-8, ZIF-68, and ZIF-69) yielded highly improved surface areas of the primary ZIF-derived carbons.199 Moreover, second step KOH activation often has a dramatic effect on the crystal morphology of MOF-derived carbons, for example, MOF-74(Zn) derived carbon-rod was converted into porous graphene nanoribbon upon thermal KOH activation.202 An et al. introduced an alternative technique, single-step carbonization, for KOH activation (as illustrated in Fig. 6),203 in which KOH was first incorporated into the MOFs, and then carbonized to produce highly porous carbon after acid washing. The porosity was prominently changed (from micro to hierarchical) by the incorporation of KOH into MAF-6 in a single-step carbonization method. In particular, carbons with surface area up to 3123 m2 g−1 was obtained from the carbonization of KOH-loaded MAF-6, where the simple carbonization of pristine MAF-6 yielded a surface area of 1484 m2 g−1. KOH activation usually appeared to be efficient to increase the surface area. However, sometimes, it would have a negative impact on the surface area and quantity of N-doping. Cation exchange strategy was employed to incorporate K+ using KNO3 salt (different from KOH) into the Bio-MOF-1, and finally, K+@Bio-MOF-1 was carbonized, which also yielded metal-free carbons with hierarchical porosity.204 Furthermore, hierarchically porous carbon nanosheets decorated with carbon polyhedron were fabricated by the carbonization of the mixture of ZIF-8 and molten NaCl under nitrogen atmosphere.205 After washing the inorganic impurities with HCl, the materials showed higher BET surface areas, defects, and hydrophilicity compared to the carbon polyhedrons obtained from ZIF-8. Recently, Jhung and co-workers reported the oxidative modification of MOF-derived carbons obtained by the carbonization of a typical Zn-based MOF, MAF-6.206,207 The chemical oxidation of MAF-6-derived carbons by Na2S2O8 was found to be very effective for creating various oxygen functionalities in the carbon.
 Scheme 2  General (a) chemical reactions and (b) mechanism for the KOH activation of carbon. 
 Fig. 6  Schematic for preparing porous carbon with increased surface area and porosity by post-incorporation of KOH into an MOF. The panel is reprinted with permission from ref. 203, copyright 2018 Elsevier. 

2.2. Preparation of fullerene-derived metal-free carbons
Fullerenes are zero-dimensional molecules. However, they can be self-assembled into higher one-dimensional, two-dimensional, and three-dimensional nanostructures.208,209 They usually have high symmetries and extended π-conjugation systems that lead them to have unique physicochemical properties. Tremendous effort was devoted to discover new strategies to get various self-assembled nanostructures with tailored functionality and thereby have been explored in a wide variety of fields, including biomedicine, optics, spintronics, semiconductors, and electronics.152–155,210,211 In addition, the applicability of fullerene nanostructures could be increased (in the field of solar cells, supercapacitors, hydrogen storage, photocatalysts, and sensing)212,213 by increasing the surface areas and synergistic interactions or generating multiple functionalities by introducing well-defined mesoporous architectures, which is usually difficult to realize using conventional materials. As a consequence, along with a wide variety of prospects of the fullerene self-assembled nanostructures, they were carbonized to achieve metal-free carbons with highly ordered morphology, hierarchical porosity, and high surface area. Fig. 7 illustrates the two common strategies that are employed to convert fullerene nanostructures into the corresponding carbons, and each technique was explained in detail with suitable examples.
 Fig. 7  General strategies for preparing fullerene-derived metal-free carbons. 
Shrestha et al. first reported the direct conversion (Fig. 7; route A) of self-assembled one-dimensional fullerene nanorods and nanotubes into nanoporous carbon nanorods and nanotubes, respectively, by carbonization at a very high-temperature (up to 2000 °C) under vacuum.214 One-dimensional fullerene nanorods and fullerene nanotubes were first prepared using the liquid–liquid interface precipitation method. The interface between a saturated C60 solution in mesitylene and isopropyl alcohol yielded one-dimensional fullerene nanotubes, while nanorod was obtained by replacing the isopropyl alcohol with tert-butyl alcohol. The high-temperature heat treatment of the prepared fullerene nanostructures yielded a new family of nanoporous carbons with robust sp2-carbon frameworks having graphitic walls and a π-conjugation system, retaining the one-dimensionality of the parent fullerene nanorods and nanotubes. The obtained nanoporous carbon nanorods and carbon nanotubes had a very high effective surface area of 1600 m2 g−1 and 1650 m2 g−1, respectively. Mesoporous graphitic carbon microtubes were fabricated to follow a very similar strategy using mesoporous crystalline fullerene (C70) microtubes as a precursor.215 First, mesoporous fullerene (C70) tubes were prepared by ultrasonic liquid–liquid interfacial precipitation procedure using C70 solution in 1,2-dichlorobenzene and isopropyl alcohol at 15 °C under sonication, followed by adequate washing with isopropyl alcohol for the complete removal of 1,2-dichlorobenzene. Mesoporous carbons with cubes212 and nanosheets or microbelt216 morphologies were also obtained from the respective self-assembled fullerene nanostructures.
Lu and co-workers developed a series of carbon nanostructures, such as carbon sheets,217 carbon nanofibers,218,219 and carbon microrods.220 The morphologies of the self-assembled fullerene structures were retained as usual and a wide range of pores and defects were created upon high-temperature carbonization. For instance, two-dimensional mesoporous carbon sheets enriched with defect sites were prepared by the thermal annealing of fullerene microsheets obtained by the liquid–liquid interfacial precipitation of C60.217
The composite of fullerene self-assembled structure with other materials (Fig. 7; route B) can also lead to nanostructured carbons with enriched functionality. One-dimensional fibrous carbon with abundant defects and a large specific surface area (∼1017 m2 g−1) was obtained by the thermal pyrolysis of a composite of a one-dimensional self-assembled C60 fiber with a 2D reduced graphene oxide sheet.219 Heteroatom function was added to the carbon by composing the secondary material into the fullerene self-assembled structures before thermal treatment.
Moreover, Song et al. reported the formation of nitrogen-doped ultrathin carbon films, called fullerphene nanosheets, by the thermal annealing of a bottom-up assembled fullerene C60-ethylenediamine and C70-ethylenediamine thin films.221 As presented in Fig. 8, homogeneous fullerene-EDA assembled films with controllable dimensions were fabricated at the water/m-xylene interface, transferred onto other substrates such as silicon wafer, and annealed for a certain time to get the carbon films. Interestingly, fullerphene derived from C60-ethylenediamine films had a higher surface area (∼5.7 times) compared to the C70-ethylenediamine-derived fullerphene. Moreover, the developed ultrathin carbon films exhibit a hierarchical porosity at their surfaces, which, in addition to the surface area and doped N-species, would have a great potential of its function.
 Fig. 8  Illustration of the bottom-up fabrication of the fullerphene film. (a) Self-assembly of the monolayer fullerene-EDA film at the water/m-xylene interface and b) a representation of the morphology of the self-assembled fullerene-EDA film before and after (fullerphene film) the carbonization at 700 °C in the inert atmosphere of nitrogen. Panels (a and b) are reprinted with permission from ref. 221, copyright 2022 Wiley Online Library. 
A wide variety of metal-free carbon nanostructures, such as carbon tubes, carbon spheres, carbon fibers, and carbon rods, were developed, in which the morphologies of the parent fullerene self-assembled structures were retained even after carbonization at a high-temperature. The type of fullerene (C60 or C70 or a mixture of C60 and C70) and solvent type/compositions are usually different from each other to obtain the desired fullerene nanostructures. Heteroatom-doped functionality could be achieved via the systematic incorporation of heteroatom sources into the self-assembled nanostructures. The defect sites and edges in the nanostructured porous carbon are of great importance for their functions and can be increased during the doping of heteroatoms because they reside in the carbon skeleton and generate more defects and edges.
3. Environmental applications of MOF- and fullerene-derived metal-free carbons
Metal-free carbons, derived from MOFs and fullerene, with high surface area, hierarchical pores and confined shapes and functionality, are promising materials in various fields. They showed considerable prospects in environmental remediation, particularly for the adsorption of contaminants in water and liquid fuels and detecting volatile organics in the atmosphere. Here, we summarize the liquid phase adsorption of contaminants from water and fuel and the detection of VOCs in air using metal-free carbons derived from MOFs and fullerenes.
3.1. Liquid phase adsorption
Nowadays, liquid phase adsorption refers to a widely studied method in environmental fields such as the decontamination of water and fuel because of its simple and low-cost operation.222–226 Traditional adsorbents, such as silica and zeolite, have drawbacks, including low adsorption capacity and slow adsorption rate.227,228 MOF and fullerene-derived metal-free carbons have become promising adsorbents because of their heteroatom dopants, high surface area, and ample pore sizes.142,143,229 Here, we summarize the liquid phase adsorption, corresponding mechanisms (Fig. 9), and removal of pollutants from water and fuel by MOF and fullerene-derived metal-free carbon-based nanomaterials (Table 1).
 Fig. 9  Representation of possible adsorption mechanisms over the nanostructured porous carbon. 
Table 1 MOF and fullerene-derived metal-free carbons for adsorption in water and fuels, and VOC detection by the QCM technique. Used precursor materials, carbonization condition, textural properties, and performance in the respective application are summarized




Materials
Precursor MOF
Carbonization temp. (°C)
Carbonization time (h)
BET surface area (m2 g−1)
Application
Remarks
Ref.




CZIF600
ZIF-8
600
6
625
Adsorption of MB in water
• 1000 °C is the optimum temp. to get the highest porosity

159



CZIF1000
1000
1043
• Higher surface area and pore volume of CZIF1000 resulted in higher MB uptake


CZIF1200
1200
819


PCDM-800
ZIF-8
800
8
885
Adsorption of IBP and DCF in water
• 1000 °C is the optimum temp. to get the highest porosity

160



PCDM-1000
1000
1855
• H-bonding as the main interactions for high IBP and DCF removal


PCDM-1200
1200
1590


MDC-800
ZIF-8
800
5
943
Adsorption of SMX from water
• 1000 °C is the optimum temp. to get the highest porosity

161



MDC-1000
1000
1964
• Highly effective in SMX removal by H-bonding as the main interaction


MDC-1200
1200
1635


MDC-4 h
MAF-6
1000
4
1502
Adsorption of ASWs in water
• The optimum carbonization time to get the highest porosity

162



MDC-6 h
6
1525
• MDC-6 h is the most remarkable adsorbent for ASW due to high heteroatom (O and N) functionalities


MDC-12 h
12
1610


MDC-24 h
24
1882


MDC-36 h
36
1683


BMDC-6 h
Bio-MOF-1
1000
6
1078
Adsorption of BPA from water
• Post treatment with HCl

163



BMDC-12 h
12
1449
• There is the optimum carbonization time to get the highest porosity


BMDC-24 h
24
1365
• H-bonding in addition with hydrophobic and π–π interactions are responsible for high BPA removal


Small-size carbon
Small-size ZIF-8
800
5
1160
QCM sensing of VOCs
• Post treatment with HF

164



Middle-size carbon
Middle-size ZIF-8
1390
• Small-sized carbon showed superior uptake and a faster response for toluene


Large-size carbon
Large-size ZIF-8
1610


PCP-500
Al-PCP
500
5
320
QCM sensing of VOCs
• Post treatment with HF

171



PCP-600
600
2400
• 1000 °C is the optimum temp. to get the highest porosity


PCP-700
700
1600
• Superior efficiency and high selectivity for the detection of aromatic VOCs


PCP-800
800
5500


MDC-1000
IL@ZIF-8(0%)
1000
10
1802
Adsorption in water and n-octane
• 12% resulted in good porosity and higher N doping

193



IMDC-1000(4%)
IL@ZIF-8(4%)
1321
• H-bonding between doped N-sites and adsorbates was the main driving force for high adsorption


IMDC-1000(8%)
IL@ZIF-8(8%)
1256


IMDC-1000(12%)
IL@ZIF-8(12%)
1421


CD@AlPCP
AlPCP
800
6
2357
Adsorption in water and n-octane
• Post treatment with HF

194



CDIL(0.5)@AlPCP
IL(0.5)AlPCP
2084
• IL leads to reduced surface area and increased N-doping


• H-bonding is the main mechanism for adsorption


MDC6M(0)
MLM(0)@MAF-6
1000
4
1383
Adsorption of herbicides from water
• Post treatment with HCl

195



MDC6M(25)
MLM(25)@MAF-6
1403
• MLM leads to increased surface area and N-doping


• H-bonding was the main mechanism for adsorption


NPC
ZIF-8 and H3PO4
900
2
1475
Adsorption of SCCs a model fuel
• Post treatment with HCl

198



P-NPC-1000
ZIF-8 and H3PO4
1000
1614
• Hierarchical porosity and heteroatom (N and P) dopants make the material efficient for SCC capture


CDM-6-1000
MAF-6
1000
6
1484
Adsorption of PPCPs in water
• Post treatment with HCl

203



CDM-6 K-1000
MAF-6/KOH = 1:1
3123
• Hydrophobic and highly porous carbon was obtained in the presence of KOH


HT-FNR
FNR
2000
—
1600
QCM sensing of VOCs
• Nanoporous carbon material with graphitized frameworks

214



HT-FNT
FNT
1650
• π–π interaction was the main mechanism for high sensitivity/selectivity of aromatic molecules


Fullerphene-C60
C60-EDA
700
2
655
QCM sensing of VOCs
• Remarkable sensitivity/selectivity for formic acid

221



• N-doped species predominantly influence the achievement of single-carbon-atom-level molecular discrimination


CDM-74
MOF-74(Zn)
1000
6
1395
Adsorption of CECs in water
• Post treatment with HCl

240



• H-bonding interaction had a vital role in high adsorption efficiency


CDM-4
MAF-4
800
6
1176
Adsorption of CECs in water
• Post treatment with HCl

244



CDM-5
MAF-5
938
• CDM-6 had the highest surface area and showed the highest efficiency for adsorbing organics from water


CDM-6
MAF-6
1642
• H-bonding was the main mechanism


MDC-900
Zn-iTPA
900
4
1074
Adsorption of MB in water
• MDC-1000 showed remarkable MB uptake

245



MDC-1000
1000
1338
• Electrostatic interaction played the most vital role in high MB capture


MOF-NPC
MOF-5
530
8
473
Adsorption of Cu2+
• The MOF-NPC was highly efficient for Cu2+ uptake

247






3.1.1. Adsorption in aqueous medium. 
Because of the enormous consumption of a wide variety of toxic chemicals for the betterment of our living, worldwide surface water is randomly contaminated with different organics, such as pharmaceuticals, personal care products, plasticizers, and dyes, as well as toxic metal ions. The adsorptive removal of these contaminants from water has been widely studied using various porous materials, including AC,230,231 zeolites,232–234 and MOFs225,235–238 so far. This section summarizes the adsorptive purification of water by MOF and fullerene-derived metal-free carbons.
For example, Huang et al. firstly used the ZIF-8-derived carbons for the adsorptive removal of ciprofloxacin antibiotics from water.239 The materials had a surface area of 750 m2 g−1 and showed a remarkable adsorption capacity (Q0 = 416 mg g−1) for ciprofloxacin, where electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions were suggested as the main mechanisms for ciprofloxacin adsorption. In recent years, Jhung and coworkers extensively studied the liquid-phase adsorption of a wide range of adsorbates from both aqueous and non-aqueous solutions using MOF-derived carbons obtained from a series of Zn-based MOFs. The prepared carbon materials were highly fascinating in the removal of contaminants of emerging concern (CECs), including toxic herbicides, plasticizers, hydrocarbons, pharmaceuticals, and personal care products, from water via adsorption.160–163,193–195,240–243 For instance, they found ZIF-8-derived carbon as an efficient adsorbent for the removal of pharmaceuticals such as ibuprofen, diclofenac sodium, and sulfamethoxazole, as shown in Fig. 10a–c.160,161 The high adsorption capacity or high Q0 for ibuprofen (320 mg g−1), diclofenac sodium (400 mg g−1), and sulfamethoxazole (435 mg g−1) could be understood by the dominant role of oxygen-containing acidic functional groups. Moreover, metal-free carbons derived from MAF-6 were demonstrated as highly efficient adsorbents for a series of organics, including pharmaceuticals and personal care products,243 polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs),241 and artificial sweeteners162 from water. The adsorption capacities of the studied adsorbates were not only dependent on the properties of the adsorbates but also relied on the properties (surface area, pore size distribution, heteroatom functionality, hydrophobicity, graphitization, etc.) that largely depended on the pyrolysis conditions (e.g., temperature and time). For instance, carbons obtained from MAF-6 by carbonization under mild conditions (low-temperature and short-time) were enriched with heteroatom dopants, and thereby found to be highly effective for the adsorption of organics having hydrogen-bonding sites. In contrast, carbons prepared under harsh carbonization conditions (high-temperature and longtime) were more effective in adsorbing polyaromatic hydrocarbon from water. Furthermore, they utilized the fibrous and N-enriched carbon materials prepared from Bio-MOF-1 (a N-enriched MOF) for the adsorption of a wide variety of CECs (from acidic to basic in nature) from water. The materials were found to be highly efficient for adsorbing bisphenol-A (Q0 = 710 mg g−1),163 clofibric acid (Q0 = 540 mg g−1), and atenolol (Q0 = 550 mg g−1)242 from water. Bhadra et al. reported a rod-shaped mesoporous carbon derived from MOF-74(Zn) for the adsorption of N,N-diethyl-3-methylbenzamide (DEET; an active ingredient in insect repellents) along with other organic pollutants from water.240 The material was highly competitive for DEET adsorption with a high capacity (Q0 = 340 mg g−1). These MOF-derived carbons were found to be readily reusable without noticeable performance loss for several cycles.
 Fig. 10  Relative performance for the removal of various organic CECs from water over a time range from 0 to 12 h with different adsorbents. Figures a–c showed the effect of time on the adsorption of (a) diclofenac, (b) ibuprofen, and (c) sulfamethoxazole over activated carbon, ZIF-8, and ZIF-8 derived carbon (MDC-1000). Figures d–f showed the effect of time on the adsorption of (d) atrazine, (e) ibuprofen, and (f) sulfamethoxazole over activated carbon, MDC-1000, and ionic liquid (IL, 12 wt%)-loaded ZIF-8-derived carbon (IMDC-100012%). Panels (a and b) are reprinted with permission from ref. 160, copyright 2017 Elsevier, panel c is reprinted with permission from ref. 161, copyright 2018 Elsevier and panels (d–f) are reprinted with permission from ref. 193, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Metal-free carbons enriched with N-dopants, obtained by the carbonization of MOFs incorporated with secondary organics (e.g., IL and melamine), were applied in liquid-phase adsorptions for a better understanding of the role of the N-sites of the carbons in adsorption from both aqueous and non-aqueous solutions. Ahmed et al. observed that the carbon obtained from the IL(12%)@ZIF-8 (12 wt% of IL) showed noticeably higher adsorption of organic CECs, including atrazine, diuron, and 2,4-D from water (Fig. 10d–f)193 than the ZIF-8-derived carbon, even though the surface area of the IMDC (1421 m2 g−1) was lower than that of the second one (1802 m2 g−1). For instance, the adsorption capacity of atrazine (an herbicide) over IMDC was about 1.2 times (Q0vs. Q0 = 208 mg g−1vs. 173 mg g−1) that of the ZIF-8 derived carbon. The positive role of N species in the IMDC was further demonstrated by investigating the adsorption of diuron and 2,4-D from water.244 The effect of N-heteroatoms in a graphitized mesoporous carbon on the liquid-phase adsorption was further studied using two different carbons derived from Al-PCP (a MOF without N) and IL-incorporated AL-PCP (IL@Al-PCP).194 Similar to the results obtained for IMDC, the IL@Al-PCP-derived carbon showed a remarkable adsorptive performance for the removal of PPCPs from water. Here, IL(0.5)@Al-PCP-derived carbons showed about 1.5 times higher adsorption capacity than that of the carbon obtained from pristine Al-PCP for the adsorption of p-chloro-m-xylenol and triclosan. The adsorptive removal of nitroimidazole antibiotics from water was studied using porous carbons derived from melamine-incorporated MAF-6 (melamine was loaded by the wet-impregnation method). The N-content was increased, and the adsorption performance was also noticeably improved by the contribution of the doped N-species. However, Bhadra et al. compared the efficiency of the method for the loading of melamine into the MAF-6 (e.g., post-loading or wet-impregnation method vs. in situ incorporation method) by studying the removal of three herbicides having nearly similar chemical structures from water using a series of nitrogen-enriched carbon obtained from melamine@MAF-6.195 The melamine@MAF-6-derived carbons always showed superior performance than the pristine MAF-6-derived carbon; however, importantly, the nitrogen-enriched carbon, derived from melamine-loaded MAF-6 via the in situ method, was highly efficient for adsorption, especially herbicides, from water because of the abundant nitrogen content with high dispersion. Moreover, the carbons obtained via in situ KOH activation of MAF-6 (ref. 203) and carbonization of NaCl-incorporated ZIF-8 (ref. 205) showed superior adsorption capacity for different organics.
Karimi et al. reported the removal of methylene blue (a typical dye) from water using the carbon material prepared by the carbonization of MOF-5 at different temperatures.245 They observed that the material obtained at 1000 °C had excellent specific surface area (1337.9 m2 g−1) and pore volume (0.72 cm3 g−1), and showed a remarkable adsorption capacity for MB (Q0 = 2724 mg g−1), which was much higher compared to that of the materials obtained at 900 °C and 800 °C. ZIF-8-derived carbon obtained at 1000 °C also showed superior MB uptake compared to the carbons obtained at 800 °C and 1200 °C because of the high surface area and large pore volume.159 N-enriched porous carbons, obtained from ZIF-8/dicyandiamide, and ZIF-8/sucrose, were also employed for the removal of methylene blue from water. The materials obtained from ZIF-8/dicyandiamide had higher N-content and surface area (1796.5 m2 g−1) than the carbon derived from ZIF-8/sucrose and ZIF, thereby showing the best MB uptake. Carbon obtained by carbonizing the formaldehyde resin/ZIF-8 also showed remarkable efficiency for the removal of MB and rhodamine B from water.246 Recently, oxy-functionalized carbon obtained via the post-treatment (oxidation) of MAF-6-derived carbon showed remarkable performance in the adsorption of small cationic dyes such as MB and acid blue from water.207 Because of the increased –COOH, the adsorption capacity for small cationic dyes was increased due to the possible electrostatic interaction between the negative surface and the positive dyes. Therefore, not only specific surface area but heteroatom functionality is also equally important for the high performance to capture organics from water.
In addition to the adsorption of a wide variety of organic pollutants, MOF-derived metal-free carbon-based nanomaterials were also used for the removal of toxic metal ions from wastewater. Bakhtiari et al. observed the MOF-5-derived nanoporous carbons as a remarkable material for removing Cu (1071 mg g−1) ions from water.247 Moreover, metal-free carbon obtained from UiO-66 showed a superb efficiency and high stability in removing hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)) from water (Q0 = 198.04 mg g−1) after polyaniline coating.177


3.1.2. Adsorption in non-aqueous medium. 
The adsorptive purification of fuel contaminated with various nitrogen and sulfur-containing compounds is an ideal example of liquid-phase non-aqueous medium adsorption. Generally, the model fuel was prepared by dissolving the nitrogen- and sulfur-containing compounds into n-alkanes (e.g., n-heptane and n-octane). Nitrogen and sulfur-containing compounds were removed by adsorbing them over various adsorbents. Different kinds of porous materials, including porous carbon, were found to be effective for adsorption in non-aqueous medium. Metal-free carbons having unique functionality, especially heteroatom dopants, showed good performance in fuel purification via the adsorption of nitrogen and sulfur-containing compounds, although conventional carbons were less effective for adsorption in non-aqueous medium because of their hydrophobic characteristics.248 Herein, we summarized the potential of MOF-derived metal-free carbons, both the as-obtained and postmodified ones, for adsorptive fuel purification, as summarized in Table 1.
Liu et al. firstly utilized ZIF-8-derived metal-free N-doped carbon for the adsorption of dibenzothiophene (DBT) from model fuel solutions (n-hexane or n-hexane/p-xylene = 90%/10%).249 The materials exhibited promising performance in DBT sorption from the model fuel solution with the adsorption capacity (Q0) of 26.7 mg sulfur over one gram of adsorbent. However, the DBT uptake decreased by ∼17% when p-xylene was added as a co-solvent in n-hexane. Later, Jhung and co-workers investigated the performance of a series of MOF-derived carbons in the adsorption of a wide range of nitrogen and sulfur-containing compounds from model fuel solutions.193,194 They found that the N-enriched carbons obtained from IL-loaded ZIF-8 and IL-loaded Al-PCP had much better adsorption capacity than the carbons obtained from ZIF-8 and Al-PCP, respectively. For instance, the adsorption capacity of IL-loaded ZIF-8-derived carbon for indole, quinoline (typical nitrogen containing compounds), and dibenzothiophene (typical sulfur containing compounds) were ∼2 times, 1.2 times, and 1.5 times, respectively, to that over the ZIF-8 derived carbon, as presented in Fig. 11. Similarly, IL(0.5)@Al-PCP-derived carbons again showed better performance for the adsorption of indole, quinoline, benzothiophene, and dibenzothiophene than N-free carbon prepared by the carbonization of pristine Al-PCP. Lu and Qiu et al. also observed that heteroatoms (N and P)-decorated carbon prepared using ZIF-8 exhibited a remarkable adsorption capacity for dibenzothiophene (60.16 mg S per g) with 32% improved performance than only N-doped carbon (45.41 mg S per g).198 Based on their investigations, it can be suggested that the adsorptive performance mostly relied on the N (or O) and P species together with the porosity and surface area, where H-bonding, acid–base interaction, and polar–polar interaction were suggested as the main mechanism for the high adsorption of nitrogen and sulfur compounds in a non-aqueous medium.
 Fig. 11  Adsorption of (a) IND, (b) QUI, and (c) DBT from n-octane at 25 °C with respect to time-activated carbon, ZIF-8, MDC-1000, and ionic liquid (IL,12 wt%)-loaded ZIF-8-derived carbon (IMDC-1000(12%)). Panels (a–c) are reprinted with permission from ref. 193, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Therefore, nanostructured carbons having both heteroatom functionality and high surface area might be a suitable way to get highly competitive adsorbent materials in the liquid phase toward environmental remediation by the purification of water and fuel.

3.2. Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) sensing
VOCs are chemicals that vaporize readily at room temperature and atmospheric pressure because of their relatively high vapor pressure. Due to the widespread sources of VOC emissions, including natural origins or anthropogenic activities, they can have a severe negative impact on both the indoor and outdoor air quality.250–252 Moreover, VOCs are regarded as markers of explosives, fruit ripening, insect infestation, and more.253–255 In particular, specific VOCs in waste and body fluids such as blood, urine, sweat, breath, and feces can be markers of diseases and health conditions.256–258 Therefore, the early detection and monitoring of VOCs in the surroundings are assumed to be useful in a variety of research areas, including health management, environmental monitoring, agriculture, and food quality control. Numerous materials and methods have been developed for VOC sensing.259 Porosity and heteroatom functionality was assumed to be one of the most important factors, especially for the QCM sensor for VOCs discrimination. Metal-free porous carbons are of huge interest because of their high surface area, a wide range of porosity, low cost, and, therefore, are assumed to be superior materials for QCM sensors. This section includes the recent progresses on the QCM sensor for the detection of VOCs using metal-free porous carbons based on MOFs and fullerenes.

Fig. 12a illustrates the general strategy of the QCM sensor for VOC detection. An electrode (e.g., Au electrode) was first modified with the tested materials, then gas vapor was exposed to the electrode in a vacuum chamber that was connected with an oscillator. Finally, the frequency shift of the QCM sensor was recorded with a computer in which the higher the frequency shift, the higher the sensing efficiency. Yamauchi and co-workers first attempted to utilize the high surface area and large pore volume of an MOF(Al-PCP)-derived nanoporous carbon for sensing a wide range of VOCs.171 The PCP-800 (obtained at 800 °C and HF treatment) showed different sensitivity toward frequency shifts for different gases in the order toluene > benzene > cyclohexane > hexane > formaldehyde > methanol > acetonitrile > acetone > water (Fig. 12b). Notably, the PCP-800-modified QCM sensor had a higher affinity for aromatic hydrocarbons, such as benzene and toluene, compared to the aliphatic analogues (e.g., cyclohexane and hexane). Moreover, PCP-800 had almost two-times the frequency of that of the amorphous activated carbon for benzene with good repeatability (Fig. 12c). The efficient diffusion of aromatic hydrocarbons explained the observed high selectivity and sensitivity for aromatic hydrocarbons via π–π interaction with graphitic carbon frameworks and the high surface area of PCP-800. Later, they observed the effect of the particle size of ZIF-8-derived carbons rather than the surface area, on the sensing of a typical aromatic hydrocarbon sensing.164 The ZIF-8/GO composite-derived 3D hollow graphitic carbon frameworks (HGCF) also showed high efficiency in QCM nanosensors for the detection of volatile aromatic hydrocarbons.260 The HGCF showed higher efficiency in discriminating aromatic hydrocarbons than the carbon polyhedron derived from the ZIF-8. The incorporation of GO in ZIF-8 prior to carbonization resulted in π-electron-rich nanospaces into the HGCF heterostructure. At the same time, ZIF-8-derived carbon had low sp2-graphitized carbon, and therefore, π–π interactions between aromatic hydrocarbons and a π-conjugation system of the carbons can be assumed as the main interaction for the high efficiency of the HGCF.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the general QCM sensor for VOCs; (b) QCM frequency shifts of the PCP-800 film caused by exposure to various vaporized gases and (c) QCM frequency shifts upon benzene adsorption into (red line) the PCP-800 film and (blue line) active carbon film; (d) time-dependent frequency shifts (Δf) of fullerphene-C60, (e) sensing performance of C60-EDA and fullerphene-C60 electrodes by exposure to various vaporized gases and (f) the repeatability test for the sensing of formic acid vapor over the fullerphene-C60-modified QCM electrode. Panels (b and c) are reprinted with permission from ref. 171, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society and panels (d–f) are reprinted with permission from ref. 221, copyright 2022 Wiley Online Library. 
Fullerene-based nanostructured porous carbons were also employed to fabricate QCM-based nanosensors and are found to be very effective for the selective detection of toxic VOCs. For instance, Shrestha et al. examined the QCM sensing of a wide range of VOCs with one-dimensional carbon nanotubes derived from fullerene nanotubes.214 The nanoporous carbon nanotube showed a remarkable sensitivity and selectivity, especially for aromatic molecules, such as benzene and toluene. The π-rich electron of the graphitic carbon frameworks of the nanotube might interact effectively with aromatic solvents via the π–π interaction, and accessible pores allowed their easy and free diffusion, which resulted in a QCM sensor with high selectivity toward aromatic molecules.
Recently, Song et al. developed single-carbon-atom level molecular discrimination of a QCM nanosensor with an N-doped 2D nanoporous fullerphene.221 The fullerphene-modified QCM sensor showed excellent selectivity toward formic acid over many other VOCs, very high sensitivity with remarkable frequency shift (around 21k), and outstanding repeatability through another exposure to and the absence of formic acid vapor. Pyrrolic (N-5) and quaternary nitrogen (N-Q) sites of fullerphene were assumed to exhibit noncovalent interactions with the carboxylic acid vapors that allowed the selective and repetitive adsorption and desorption of the acids with low molecular weights. In particular, the response of the fullerphene film for formic acid (smallest carboxylic acid) was 19 times higher than with acetic acid (larger molecular dimension), which clearly indicated the importance of molecular dimensions of the analyte acid rather than only on the acidity of the carboxylic acid. Besides, hierarchical pores in the 2D fullerphene were optimum to facilitate the diffusion of formic acid and possible intermolecular interactions between spatially-confined formic acid molecules combinedly contributed to the high sensitivity and selectivity for formic acid over a wide variety of VOCs.
Metal-free porous carbons derived from MOFs and fullerene nanostructures with confined structural morphology, high surface area, wide porosity, heteroatom functionality, and sp2-enriched carbons have a great potential in VOC sensing. However, the potential of these materials for VOC sensing still remain to be explore, especially using the QCM technique.
Conclusions
In recent years, nanoarchitectonics has been attracting attention as the post-nanotechnology concept. Nanoarchitectonics is the methodology for constructing functional materials and systems using nanounits. Nanoporous materials synthesized from nanounits such as molecular ions through molecular self-assembly, metal–organic complex formation, template synthesis, and material transformation are typical examples of successful nanoarchitectonics. In particular, nanoporous carbon has potential applications in the energy and environmental fields. This review article summarizes the recent advances in the field of nanoarchitectonics of metal-free porous carbons, especially those derived from MOFs and fullerene self-assembled nanostructures. The methods for preparing metal species-free MOFs and fullerene-derived nanostructured carbons have been described in detail. The examples are diverse and hold promise for the further development of applications. A significant advantage of nanoporous materials is that they can be synthesized in bulk quantities by simple methods while having pore structures with nanoscale structural precision. This characteristic makes them very useful when the target has a certain mass-scale, such as in environmental remediation.
In the latter part of this review, we also presented examples for the detection of volatile organic compounds using QCM technology by immobilizing these nanoporous carbons on a device electrode. This is just one possible application involving nanoporous material devices. Combining nanoporous materials with various device structures will lead to the purification of the bulk environment and the development of technologies for the detection of microscopic environmental factors. Thus, it is essential to synthesize nanoporous carbons, develop their functions, and organize them rationally using nanoarchitectonics. The science and technology of nanoporous carbon materials will have a paradigm shift from simple synthesis to nanoarchitectonics.
Author contributions
All the authors together prepared this highlight manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This study was partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP20H00392, JP20H00316, JP21H04685, JP21F50068, and JP20K05590.
Notes and references
G. Povie, Y. Segawa, T. Nishihara, Y. Miyauchi and K. Itami, Science, 2017, 356, 172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, K. Ikemoto, T. M. Fukunaga, T. Koretsune, R. Arita, S. Sato and H. Isobe, Science, 2019, 363, 151 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Au and Z. Xie, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 879 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zeng, N. Chena and W. Xie, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 851 RSC .
N. López-Salas and M. Antonietti, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 2822 CrossRef .
D. Wu, K. Kusada, Y. Nanba, M. Koyama, T. Yamamoto, T. Toriyama, S. Matsumura, O. Seo, I. Gueye, J. Kim, L. S. R. Kumara, O. Sakata, S. Kawaguchi, Y. Kubota and H. Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 3365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-G. Yu, M.-M. Gan, S. Baia and Y.-F. Han, CrystEngComm, 2019, 21, 4673 RSC .
V. Percec and Q. Xiao, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 900 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yashima and K. Maeda, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 2637 CrossRef CAS .
L.-J. Chen, H.-B. Yang and M. Shionoya, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2555 RSC .
T. Stolar and K. Užarević, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 4511 RSC .
K. Ariga and M. Shionoya, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 839 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, H. Ito, J. P. Hill and H. Tsukube, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5800 RSC .
S. Datta, Y. Kato, S. Higashiharaguchi, K. Aratsu, A. Isobe, T. Saito, D. D. Prabhu, Y. Kitamoto, M. J. Hollamby, A. J. Smith, R. Dalgliesh, N. Mahmoudi, L. Pesce, C. Perego, G. M. Pavan and S. Yagai, Nature, 2020, 583, 400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kato, M. Gupta, D. Yamaguchi, K. P. Gan and M. Nakayama, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 357 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ghosh, L. P. Datta and T. Govindaraju, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2020, 11, 124 CrossRef CAS .
X.-L. Dai, J.-M. Chen and T.-B. Lu, CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 5292 RSC .
Y. R. Kamimura and M. Kanai, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 1045 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, N. Morimoto, L. Jiang, S. Kawahara, T. Noritomi, H. Yokoyama, K. Mayumi and K. Ito, Science, 2021, 372, 1078 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yamashita, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 209 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsumoto, S. Maruyama and K. Kaminaga, CrystEngComm, 2022, 24, 2359 RSC .
D. Guo, R. Shibuya, C. Akiba, S. Saji, T. Kondo and J. Nakamura, Science, 2016, 351, 361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dong and G. M. Koenig, Jr., CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 1514 RSC .
A. Yoshino, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2022, 95, 195 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ajoyan, P. Marino and A. J. Howarth, CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 5899 RSC .
H. Woo, K. Seo, Y. Choi, J. Kim, M. Tanaka, K. Lee and I. Choi, Appl. Sci., 2021, 11, 10640 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chapman, E. Ertekin, M. Kubota, A. Nagao, K. Bertsch, A. Macadre, T. Tsuchiyama, T. Masamura, S. Takaki, R. Komoda, M. Dadfarnia, B. Somerday, A. T. Staykov, J. Sugimura, Y. Sawae, T. Morita, H. Tanaka, K. Yagi, V. Niste, P. Saravanan, S. Onitsuka, K.-S. Yoon, S. Ogo, T. Matsushima, G. Tumen-Ulzii, D. Klotz, D. H. Nguyen, G. Harrington, C. Adachi, H. Matsumoto, L. Kwati, Y. Takahashi, N. Kosem, T. Ishihara, M. Yamauchi, B. Baran Saha, Md. A. Islam, J. Miyawaki, H. Sivasankaran, M. Kohno, S. Fujikawa, R. Selyanchyn, T. Tsuji, Y. Higashi, R. Kirchheim and P. Sofronis, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2022, 95, 73 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yuan, F. Li, K. Li, J. Liu, J. Li, S. Zhang, Q. Jia and H. Zhang, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 1142 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, M. Naito, Q. Ji and D. Payra, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 4890 RSC .
H. Cabral, H. Kinoh and K. Kataoka, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 2765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Komiyama, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 1478 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pang, Y. Lai, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, X. A. Conlan, C. J. Barrow and W. Yang, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2020, 93, 637 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kitano, M. L. Ooi, T. Yamamoto, S. Matsumura and M. Yamauchi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 1292 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kanao, T. Kubo and K. Otsuka, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2020, 93, 482 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sugimoto, P. Pou, M. Abe, P. Jelinek, R. Pérez, S. Morita and Ó. Custance, Nature, 2007, 446, 64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, K. Müllen and A. Narita, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2020, 93, 490 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. C. Bacilla, Y. Okada, S. Yoshimoto, M. K. Islyaikin, O. I. Koifman and N. Kobayashi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 34 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kimura, K. Miwa, H. Imada, M. Imai-Imada, S. Kawahara, J. Takeya, M. Kawai, M. Galperin and Y. Kim, Nature, 2019, 570, 210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kazuma, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2020, 93, 1552 CrossRef CAS .
T. Itoh and Y. S. Yamamoto, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 1566 RSC .
W.-H. Soe, M. Kleinwächter, C. Kammerer, G. Rapenne and C. Joachim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 22625 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shimizu, D. Lungerich, J. Stuckner, M. Murayama, K. Harano and E. Nakamura, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2020, 93, 1079 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kawai, O. Krejčí, T. Nishiuchi, K. Sahara, T. Kodama, R. Pawlak, E. Meyer, T. Kubo and A. S. Foster, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaay8913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kratish, T. Nakamuro, Y. Liu, J. Li, I. Tomotsuka, K. Harano, E. Nakamura and T. J. Marks, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 427 CrossRef .
J. Xing, L. Schweighauser, S. Okada, K. Harano and E. Nakamura, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3608 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Harano, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 463 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Nanoscale Horiz., 2021, 6, 364 RSC .
R. P. Feynman, Eng. Sci., 1960, 23, 32 Search PubMed .
M. Roukes, Sci. Am., 2001, 285, 48 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Q. Ji, J. P. Hill, Y. Bando and M. Aono, NPG Asia Mater., 2012, 4, e17 CrossRef .
W. Chaikittisilp, Y. Yamauchi and K. Ariga, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2107212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ariga, Q. Ji, W. Nakanishi, J. P. Hill and M. Aono, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 406 RSC .
K. Ariga, K. Minami, M. Ebara and J. Nakanishi, Polym. J., 2016, 48, 371 CrossRef CAS .
M. Komiyama, K. Yoshimoto, M. Sisido and K. Ariga, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2017, 90, 967 CrossRef .
K. Ariga, T. Mori, T. Kitao and T. Uemura, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905657 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shen, J. Song, C. Sevencan, D. Tai Leong and K. Ariga, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2022, 23, 199 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Ariga, Q. Ji, T. Mori, M. Naito, Y. Yamauchi, H. Abe and J. P. Hill, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6322 RSC .
M. Komiyama, T. Mori and K. Ariga, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2018, 91, 1075 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tirayaphanitchkul, K. Imwiset and M. Ogawa, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 678 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Laughlin and D. Pines, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2000, 97, 28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ariga and R. Fakhrullin, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2022, 95, 774 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ishihara, J. Labuta, W. V. Rossom, D. Ishikawa, K. Minami, J. P. Hill and K. Ariga, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 9713 RSC .
A. H. Khan, S. Ghosh, B. Pradhan, A. Dalui, L. K. Shrestha, S. Acharya and K. Ariga, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2017, 90, 62 CrossRef .
J. Kim, J. H. Kim and K. Ariga, Joule, 2017, 1, 739 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Anal. Sci., 2021, 37, 1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. AL-Refai, A. A. Ganash and M. A. Hussein, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2022, 32, 713 CrossRef CAS .
N. Boukhalfa, M. Darder, M. Boutahala, P. Aranda and E. Ruiz-Hitzky, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 122 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chand, M. Sharma and V. Krishnan, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 292, 121032 CrossRef CAS .
S. Moon, B. K. Yoon and J. A. Jackman, Langmuir, 2022, 38, 4606 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Martins, E. Deffune, O. N. Oliveira Jr. and M. L. de Moraes, Colloids Surf., B, 2022, 214, 112447 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hata, T. Sawada and T. Serizawa, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 6344 RSC .
K. Ariga, M. Nishikawa, T. Mori, J. Takeya, L. K. Shrestha and J. P. Hill, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2019, 20, 51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Akutagawa, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 1400 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Y. Yamauchi, T. Mori and J. P. Hill, Adv. Mater., 2021, 25, 6477 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Ariga, T. Mori and J. Li, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 3585 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 7158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. N. Oliveira Jr., L. Caseli and K. Ariga, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 6459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Decher, Science, 1997, 277, 1232 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rydzek, Q. Ji, M. Li, P. Schaaf, J. P. Hill, F. Boulmedais and K. Ariga, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 138 CrossRef CAS .
M. Akashi and T. Akagi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 1903 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Y. Lvov and G. Decher, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 4097 RSC .
K. Ariga, X. Jia, J. Song, J. P. Hill, D. T. Leong, Y. Jia and J. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Aono and K. Ariga, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 989 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 208 RSC .
K. Ariga, T. Mori and J. P. Hill, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ariga, J. Li, J. Fei, Q. Ji and J. P. Hill, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1251 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, L. Li, J. Tang, M. Komiyama and K. Ariga, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2020, 93, 581 CrossRef CAS .
T. Morishita, T. Tsumura, M. Toyoda, J. Przepiórski, A. W. Morawski, H. Konno and M. Inagaki, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2690 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Salunkhe, Y. V. Kaneti and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Kankala, Y.-H. Han, J. Na, C.-H. Lee, Z. Sun, S.-B. Wang, T. Kimura, Y. S. Ok, Y. Yamauchi, A.-Z. Chen and K. C.-W. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907035 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Benu, J. Earnshaw, A. Ashok, K. Tsuchiya, I. Saptiama, B. Yuliarto, V. Suendo, R. R. Mukti, N. Fukumitsu, K. Ariga, Y. V. Kaneti and Y. Yamauchi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 502 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, W. Zhang, Y. Jiao, Y. Xu and H. Lin, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 624, 119101 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qutaish, J. Lee, Y. Hyeon, S. A. Han, I.-H. Lee, Y.-U. Heo, D. Whang, J. Moon, M.-S. Park and J. H. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 547, 149134 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takahashi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 2602 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Côté, A. I. Benin, N. W. Ockwig, M. O'Keeffe, A. J. Matzger and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2005, 310, 1166 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Guan, Q. Fang, Y. Yan and S. Qiu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2022, 55, 1912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Geng, T. He, R. Liu, S. Dalapati, K. T. Tan, Z. Li, S. Tao, Y. Gong, Q. Jiang and D. Jiang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8814 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hayase, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 2210 CrossRef CAS .
B. Singh, J. Na, M. Konarova, T. Wakihara, Y. Yamauchi, C. Salomon and M. B. Gawande, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2020, 93, 1459 CrossRef CAS .
P. Azhagapillai, A. A. Shoaibi and C. Srinivasakannan, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 1609 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, X. Bai, L. Shao, X. Zhai, F. Fan, Y. Li and Y. Fu, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 2477 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hosono, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 60 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hosono and T. Uemura, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 2139–2148 CrossRef CAS .
H. Miyasaka, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 2929 CrossRef CAS .
M.-X. Zheng, C. Yao, W. Xie, Y.-H. Xu and H. Hu, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 2133 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cui, Y. Xie, Y. Ye, Y. Shi, B. Liang and B. Chen, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 2698 CrossRef CAS .
M. Matsumoto, L. Valentino, G. M. Stiehl, H. B. Balch, A. R. Corcos, F. Wang, D. C. Ralph, B. J. Mariñas and W. R. Dichtel, Chem, 2016, 4, 308–317 Search PubMed .
Y. Hara and K. Sakaushi, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 6341 RSC .
D. Jiang, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 1215 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bai, D. Wang and L.-J. Wan, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 1090 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mao, S. Chen, Q. Zhang, L. Yang, F. Wan, D. Jiang, M. Xiong, C. Zhang, Y. Liu and Z. Fu, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2020, 93, 1026 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lu, X. Xu, S. Zhang, L. Pan, Y. Wang, S. M. Alshehri, T. Ahamad, M. Kim, J. Na, Md. S. A. Hossain, J. G. Shapter and Y. Yamauchi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2020, 93, 1014 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sheng, X. Xu, Y. Wu, X. Zhang, P. Lin, K. Eid, A. M. Abdullah, Z. Li, T. Yang, A. K. Nanjundan and Y. Yamauchi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 1645 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Alabadi, H. A. Abbood, A. S. Dawood and B. Tan, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2020, 93, 421 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Shrestha, R. Chaudhary, R. G. Shrestha, T. Shrestha, S. Maji, K. Ariga and L. K. Shrestha, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 565 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, W. Chen, R. Zhang and Y. Ren, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 1705 CrossRef CAS .
G. Singh, J. M. Lee, G. Kothandam, T. Palanisami, A. H. Al-Muhtaseb, A. Karakoti, J. Yi, N. Bolan and A. Vinu, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 1232 CrossRef CAS .
S. Maji, R. G. Shrestha, J. Lee, S. A. Han, J. P. Hill, J. H. Kim, K. Ariga and L. K. Shrestha, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 1502 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Baskar, A. M. Ruban, J. M. Davidraj, G. Singh, A. H. Al-Muhtaseb, J. M. Lee, J. Yi and A. Vinu, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 133 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Saito, M. Ashizawa and H. Matsumoto, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2020, 93, 1268 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kim, T. Shiraki and T. Fujigaya, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2020, 93, 414 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Henzie, T. Park, J. Wang, C. Young, H. Xie, J. W. Yi, J. Li, M. Kim, J. Kim, Y. Yamauchi and J. Na, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2020, 93, 176 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Benzigar, S. N. Talapaneni, S. Joseph, K. Ramadass, G. Singh, J. Scaranto, U. Ravon, K. Al-Bahily and A. Vinu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2680 RSC .
A. Casanova, J. Iniesta and A. Gomis-Berenguer, Analyst, 2022, 147, 767 RSC .
A. Sanati, M. Jalali, K. Raeissi, F. Karimzadeh, M. Kharaziha, S. S. Mahshid and S. Mahshid, Microchim. Acta, 2019, 186, 773 CrossRef CAS .
S. Feng, J. Lu, K. Wang, D. Di, Z. Shi, Q. Zhao and S. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 435, 134886 CrossRef CAS .
S. Joseph, G. Saianand, M. R. Benzigar, K. Ramadass, G. Singh, A. I. Gopalan, J. H. Yang, T. Mori, A. H. Al-Muhtaseb, J. Yi and A. Vinu, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2021, 5, 2000169 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qutaish, S. A. Han, Y. Rehman, K. Konstantinov, M.-S. Park and J. H. Kim, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2022, 23, 169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Duan, H. Sun and S. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 678 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zheng, X. Lin, X. Zhang, D. Wu and K. Matyjaszewski, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907006 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sevilla, P. Valle-Vigõn and A. B. Fuertes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2781 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Jalilov, Y. Li, J. Tian, J. M. Tour, A. S. Jalilov, Y. Li, J. Tian and J. M. Tour, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1600693 CrossRef .
M. Sevilla, G. A. Ferrero and A. B. Fuertes, Carbon, 2017, 114, 50 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Huang, Y. F. Liu, X. X. Wu and J. J. Cai, New Carbon Materials, 2019, 34, 247 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Shao, S. Mei, Y. Lu, M. Zhang, J. K. Sun, K. Matyjaszewski, M. Antonietti and J. Yuan, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 9363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, K. Nango, L. Bao, T. Li, M. D. M. Hasan and C. Z. Li, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 1128 RSC .
E. Maruccia, M. A. O. Lourenço, T. Priamushko, M. Bartoli, S. Bocchini, F. C. Pirri, G. Saracco, F. Kleitz and C. Gerbaldi, Mater. Today Sustainability, 2022, 17, 100089 CrossRef .
A. H. Lu and F. Schüth, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1793 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Wei, L. Zou, H.-F. Wang, Y. Wang, Q. Xu, Y.-S. Wei, L. Zou, H.-F. Wang, Y. Wang and Q. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2003970 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, S. Zheng, L. Jin, Y. Li, P. Geng, H. Xue, H. Pang and Q. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800716 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, L. Yang, L. Yan, G. Wang and A. Liu, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 391, 69 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. Bhadra, A. Vinu, C. Serre and S. H. Jhung, Mater. Today, 2019, 25, 88 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, W. Gu, L. Zhou, L. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Liu and J. Lei, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 131503 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Hu, Q. Yang and J. Cai, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 4238 RSC .
W. Chaikittisilp, K. Ariga and Y. Yamauchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14 RSC .
C. Wang, Y. V. Kaneti, Y. Bando, J. Lin, C. Liu, J. Li and Y. Yamauchi, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 394 RSC .
H. F. Wang, L. Chen, H. Pang, S. Kaskel and Q. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1414 RSC .
P. Behera, S. Subudhi, S. P. Tripathy and K. Parida, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 456, 214392 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Huang, Y. F. Liu, X. X. Wu, J. J. Cai, M. Sevilla, G. A. Ferrero, A. B. Fuertes, A. S. Jalilov, Y. Li, J. Tian, J. M. Tour, A. S. Jalilov, Y. Li, J. Tian, J. M. Tour, M. Sevilla, P. Valle-Vigõn and A. B. Fuertes, Carbon, 2017, 114, 50 CrossRef .
R. G. Shrestha, L. K. Shrestha and K. Ariga, C, 2021, 7, 73 CAS .
S. Maji, L. K. Shresth and K. Ariga, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 2146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ariga and L. K. Shrestha, Materials, 2020, 13, 2280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tan, Y. Jiang, L. B. Sun, X. Q. Liu, K. Albahily, U. Ravon and A. Vinu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23978 RSC .
A. V. Baskar, M. R. Benzigar, S. N. Talapaneni, G. Singh, A. S. Karakoti, J. Yi, A. H. Al-Muhtaseb, K. Ariga, P. M. Ajayan and A. Vinu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2106924 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Babu, H. Möhwald and T. Nakanishi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4021 RSC .
L. Bao, T. Xu, K. Guo, W. Huang and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2200189 CrossRef .
W. Chaikittisilp, M. Hu, H. Wang, H. S. Huang, T. Fujita, K. C. W. Wu, L. C. Chen, Y. Yamauchi and K. Ariga, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7259 RSC .
F. Bai, Y. Xia, B. Chen, H. Su and Y. Zhu, Carbon, 2014, 79, 213 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Abbasi, E. Shamsaei, S. K. Leong, B. Ladewig, X. Zhang and H. Wang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 236, 28 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. Bhadra, I. Ahmed, S. Kim and S. H. Jhung, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 314, 50 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ahmed, B. N. Bhadra, H. J. Lee and S. H. Jhung, Catal. Today, 2018, 301, 90 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Song, B. N. Bhadra, N. A. Khan and S. H. Jhung, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 260, 1 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. Bhadra, J. K. Lee, C. W. Cho and S. H. Jhung, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 343, 225 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Torad, M. Hu, Y. Kamachi, K. Takai, M. Imura, M. Naito and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2521 RSC .
L. Zhang, Z. Su, F. Jiang, L. Yang, J. Qian, Y. Zhou, W. Li and M. Hong, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6590 RSC .
G. Srinivas, V. Krungleviciute, Z. X. Guo and T. Yildirim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 335 RSC .
Y. Pan, M. Xue, M. Chen, Q. Fang, L. Zhu, V. Valtchev and S. Qiu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 1112 RSC .
Q. Wu, J. Liang, J. D. Yi, D. L. Meng, P. C. Shi, Y. B. Huang and R. Cao, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 7211 RSC .
S. J. Yang, T. Kim, J. H. Im, Y. S. Kim, K. Lee, H. Jung and C. R. Park, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 464 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Jeon, R. Sharma, P. Meduri, B. W. Arey, H. T. Schaef, J. L. Lutkenhaus, J. P. Lemmon, P. K. Thallapally, M. I. Nandasiri, B. P. McGrail and S. K. Nune, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7214 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, J. Reboul, S. Furukawa, N. L. Torad, Q. Ji, P. Srinivasu, K. Ariga, S. Kitagawa and Y. Yamauchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, H. Zhao, T. Zhang, X. Yan, Y. Yuan, H. Zhang, H. Zhao, D. Zhang, G. Zhu and X. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11666 RSC .
A. Aijaz, J. K. Sun, P. Pachfule, T. Uchida and Q. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13945 RSC .
X. Li, B. Zhang, Y. Fang, W. Sun, Z. Qi, Y. Pei, S. Qi, P. Yuan, X. Luan, T. W. Goh and W. Huang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 4266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, J. Tang, R. R. Salunkhe, Z. A. Alothman, M. S. A. Hossain, V. Malgras and Y. Yamauchi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2017, 90, 939 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, W. Zeng, Y. Chen, T. Su, Q. Zhong, L. Gong and Y. Liu, Carbon Lett., 2022, 32, 875 CrossRef .
Y. Lai, F. Wang, Y. Zhang, P. Ou, P. Wu, Q. Fang, Z. Chen and S. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 378, 122069 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kong, J. Zhu, W. Shuang and X. H. Bu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801515 CrossRef .
B. Liu, H. Shioyama, T. Akita and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, H. Shioyama, H. Jiang, X. Zhang and Q. Xu, Carbon, 2010, 48, 456 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Zhu and Q. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5468 RSC .
J. Juan-Alcañiz, J. Gascon and F. Kapteijn, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10102 RSC .
I. A. Khan, M. Choucair, M. Imran, A. Badshah and M. A. Nadeem, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 13344 CrossRef .
L. Radhakrishnan, J. Reboul, S. Furukawa, P. Srinivasu, S. Kitagawa and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1225 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, H. Wang, Q. Gao and H. Guo, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3599 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yuan, J. Chen, S. Tan, N. Xia and Y. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1191 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bai, X. Jiang, C. Wu, X. Gao, Y. Su, K. Ding and Z. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2018, 223, 150 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pachfule, B. P. Biswal and R. Banerjee, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 11399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, L. K. Wang, G. Wang, M. R. Gao, J. Ge, W. J. Yuan, Y. H. Shen, A. J. Xie and S. H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 4095 RSC .
P. Zhang, F. Sun, Z. Shen and D. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12873 RSC .
S. Zhong, C. Zhan and D. Cao, Carbon, 2015, 85, 51 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aijaz, T. Akita, H. Yang and Q. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6498 RSC .
I. Ahmed, T. Panja, N. A. Khan, M. Sarker, J. S. Yu and S. H. Jhung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 10276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sarker, H. J. An, D. K. Yoo and S. H. Jhung, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 338, 107 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. Bhadra, H. J. Lee and S. H. Jhung, Environ. Res., 2022, 204, 111991 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sarker, S. Shin and S. H. Jhung, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 378, 120761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. He, G. Chen, Y. Zhou, Y. Yu, L. Li, S. Hao and B. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3822 RSC .
P. Lu, M. Yin, J. Chen, Q. Wang, C. Ye and T. Qiu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 132458 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, W. Xia, W. Guo, L. An, D. Xia and R. Zou, Chem. – Asian J., 2013, 8, 1879 CrossRef CAS .
A. Almasoudi and R. Mokaya, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 22, 146 RSC .
A. J. Amali, J. K. Sun and Q. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1519 RSC .
P. Pachfule, D. Shinde, M. Majumder and Q. Xu, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. An, B. N. Bhadra, N. A. Khan and S. H. Jhung, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 343, 447 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, Y. Zhao, S. Mu, Y. Wang, C. Jiang, Q. Liu, Q. Fang, M. Xue and S. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9544 RSC .
D. Chen, S. Wang, Z. Zhang, H. Quan, Y. Wang, Y. Jiang, M. J. Hurlock and Q. Zhang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2020, 7, 1205 RSC .
M. M. H. Mondol and S. H. Jhung, Fuel, 2022, 307, 121764 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hossain, M. M. H. Mondol and S. H. Jhung, Chemosphere, 2022, 303, 134890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, L. K. Shrestha and K. Ariga, Molecules, 2021, 26, 4636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Neal and T. Nakanishi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 1769 CrossRef CAS .
K. Minami, J. Song, L. K. Shrestha and K. Ariga, Appl. Mater. Today, 2021, 23, 100989 CrossRef .
T. Akiyama, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2019, 92, 1181 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bairi, S. Maji, J. P. Hill, J. H. Kim, K. Ariga and L. K. Shrestha, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12654 RSC .
J. P. Hill, R. G. Shrestha, J. Song, Q. Ji, K. Ariga and L. K. Shrestha, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 1347 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Shrestha, R. G. Shrestha, Y. Yamauchi, J. P. Hill, T. Nishimura, K. Miyazawa, T. Kawai, S. Okada, K. Wakabayashi and K. Ariga, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bairi, R. G. Shrestha, J. P. Hill, T. Nishimura, K. Ariga and L. K. Shrestha, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13899 RSC .
Q. Tang, P. Bairi, R. G. Shrestha, J. P. Hill, K. Ariga, H. Zeng, Q. Ji and L. K. Shrestha, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 44458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xu, D. Yu, Z. Du, W. Huang and X. Lu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 10811 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, P. Wei, N. Chen, J. Han and X. Lu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2021, 27, 1423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He, Z. Guo, K. Guo, T. Akasaka and X. Lu, C, 2022, 8, 13 CAS .
Z. He, P. Wei, T. Xu, Z. Guo, J. Han, T. Akasaka, K. Guo and X. Lu, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 473 RSC .
J. Song, T. Murata, K.-C. Tsai, X. Jia, F. Sciortino, R. Ma, Y. Yamauchi, J. P. Hill, L. K. Shrestha and K. Ariga, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 9, 2102241 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sasai, T. Fujimura, H. Sato, E. Nii, M. Sugata, Y. Nakayashiki, H. Hoashi, C. Moriyoshi, E. Oishi, Y. Fujii, S. Kawaguchi and H. Tanaka, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2022, 95, 802 CrossRef CAS .
M.-m. Zhan and Y. Hong, Curr. Pollut. Rep., 2022, 8, 113 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tian, C. Zhang, D. Huang, R. Wang, G. Zeng, M. Yan, W. Xiong, C. Zhou, M. Cheng, W. Xue, Y. Yang and W. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 389, 123423 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Yoo, B. N. Bhadra and S. H. Jhung, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 403, 123655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. O. Ighalo, P.-S. Yap, K. O. Iwuozor, C. O. Aniagor, T. Liu, K. Dulta, F. U. Iwuchukwu and S. Rangabhashiyam, Environ. Res., 2022, 212, 113123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Huang, W. Deng, L. Zhang, D. Yang, Q. Gao, Z. Tian, L. Guo and T. Ishihara, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2020, 302, 110204 CrossRef CAS .
M. Barczak, R. Dobrowolski, P. Borowski and D. A. Giannakoudakis, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2020, 299, 110132 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, C. Chen, W. Shen, H. Quan, S. Chen, S. Xie, X. Luo and L. Guo, Adv. Powder Technol., 2017, 28, 1769 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dbrowski, P. Podkościelny, Z. Hubicki and M. Barczak, Chemosphere, 2005, 58, 1049 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Y. Yin, M. K. Aroua and W. M. A. W. Daud, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2007, 52, 403 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tao, H. Kanoh, L. Abrams and K. Kaneko, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Abazari, S. Sanati, A. Morsali, A. Slawin and C. L. Carpenter-Warren, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 14759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang and Y. Peng, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 156, 11 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Khan and S. H. Jhung, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 325, 198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Van De Voorde, B. Bueken, J. Denayer and D. De Vos, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5766 RSC .
S. Rojas and P. Horcajada, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, H. Wang, X. Yuan, J. Zhang and J. W. Chew, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 404, 213116 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, X. Zhang and Y. Huang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 321, 711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. N. Bhadra, D. K. Yoo and S. H. Jhung, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 504, 144348 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. Bhadra, J. Y. Song, S. K. Lee, Y. K. Hwang and S. H. Jhung, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 344, 1069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. N. Bhadra and S. H. Jhung, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 270, 102 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. Bhadra and S. H. Jhung, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 340, 179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sarker, I. Ahmed and S. H. Jhung, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 323, 203 CrossRef CAS .
H. Karimi, M. A. Heidari, H. B. M. Emrooz and M. Shokouhimehr, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2020, 108, 107999 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, L. Yu, J. Cai and L. Zhang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2021, 313, 110840 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bakhtiari and S. Azizian, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 16954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. N. Bhadra, K. H. Cho, N. A. Khan, D. Y. Hong and S. H. Jhung, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 26620 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, X. Zhang, L. Wang and G. Liu, AIChE J., 2014, 60, 2747 CrossRef CAS .
C. He, J. Cheng, X. Zhang, M. Douthwaite, S. Pattisson and Z. Hao, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 4471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Brown, M. R. Sim, M. J. Abramson and C. N. Gray, Indoor Air, 1994, 4, 123 CrossRef CAS .
B. Szulczyński and J. Gębicki, Environments, 2017, 4, 21 CrossRef .
F. Mustafa and S. Andreescu, Foods, 2018, 7, 168 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. McGinn, Z. A. Lamport and I. Kymissis, ACS Sens., 2020, 5, 1514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wasilewski and J. Gębicki, Microchem. J., 2021, 164, 106025 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Broza, P. Mochalski, V. Ruzsanyi, A. Amann and H. Haick, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Broza and H. Haick, Nanomedicine, 2013, 8, 785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Amor, M. K. Nakhleh, O. Barash and H. Haick, Eur. Respir. Rev., 2019, 28, 190002 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Khatib and H. Haick, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 7080 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Torad, B. Ding, W. A. El-Said, D. A. El-Hady, W. Alshitari, J. Na, Y. Yamauchi and X. Zhang, Carbon, 2020, 168, 55 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Outline of nanoarchitectonics methodology as a post-nanotechnology concept.	 

 	Fig. 2  An illustration of the overview of the porous carbon nanoarchitectonics for environment.	 

 	Fig. 3  Representation of the synthesis routes for preparing MOF-derived metal-free carbons.	 

 	Scheme 1  An illustration of the crystal structures of commonly used Zn-based MOFs for metal-free carbons. Constituent ligands are also shown besides every MOF structure.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Nitrogen sorption isotherms and (b) respective pore size distribution curves of the carbons derived from the direct carbonization of ZIF-8 at different temperatures; (c) effect of carbonization times on the BET surface area of bio-MOF-1 derived carbons and (d) BJH pore size distributions of the obtained BMDCs; and (e) SEM and (f) TEM images of the carbons derived from ZIF-8 with (e-1 and f-1) small, (e-2 and f-2) intermediate-sized, and (e-3 and f-3) large-sized particles. Panels (a and b) are reprinted with permission from ref. 157, copyright 2012 Royal Society of Science, panels (c and d) are reprinted with permission from ref. 163, copyright 2018 Elsevier and panels (e and f) is reprinted with permission from ref. 164, copyright 2013 Royal Society of Science.	 

 	Fig. 5  An illustration to show the methods including (a) physical mixing, (b) incipient wetness, (c) wet impregnation, (d) ship-in-bottle, and (e) in situ incorporation for the loading of the second precursor into MOFs prior to carbonization.	 

 	Scheme 2  General (a) chemical reactions and (b) mechanism for the KOH activation of carbon.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic for preparing porous carbon with increased surface area and porosity by post-incorporation of KOH into an MOF. The panel is reprinted with permission from ref. 203, copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  General strategies for preparing fullerene-derived metal-free carbons.	 

 	Fig. 8  Illustration of the bottom-up fabrication of the fullerphene film. (a) Self-assembly of the monolayer fullerene-EDA film at the water/m-xylene interface and b) a representation of the morphology of the self-assembled fullerene-EDA film before and after (fullerphene film) the carbonization at 700 °C in the inert atmosphere of nitrogen. Panels (a and b) are reprinted with permission from ref. 221, copyright 2022 Wiley Online Library.	 

 	Fig. 9  Representation of possible adsorption mechanisms over the nanostructured porous carbon.	 

CZIF600	ZIF-8	600	6	625	Adsorption of MB in water	• 1000 °C is the optimum temp. to get the highest porosity	
159

CZIF1000	1000	1043	• Higher surface area and pore volume of CZIF1000 resulted in higher MB uptake
CZIF1200	1200	819
PCDM-800	ZIF-8	800	8	885	Adsorption of IBP and DCF in water	• 1000 °C is the optimum temp. to get the highest porosity	
160

PCDM-1000	1000	1855	• H-bonding as the main interactions for high IBP and DCF removal
PCDM-1200	1200	1590
MDC-800	ZIF-8	800	5	943	Adsorption of SMX from water	• 1000 °C is the optimum temp. to get the highest porosity	
161

MDC-1000	1000	1964	• Highly effective in SMX removal by H-bonding as the main interaction
MDC-1200	1200	1635
MDC-4 h	MAF-6	1000	4	1502	Adsorption of ASWs in water	• The optimum carbonization time to get the highest porosity	
162

MDC-6 h	6	1525	• MDC-6 h is the most remarkable adsorbent for ASW due to high heteroatom (O and N) functionalities
MDC-12 h	12	1610
MDC-24 h	24	1882
MDC-36 h	36	1683
BMDC-6 h	Bio-MOF-1	1000	6	1078	Adsorption of BPA from water	• Post treatment with HCl	
163

BMDC-12 h	12	1449	• There is the optimum carbonization time to get the highest porosity
BMDC-24 h	24	1365	• H-bonding in addition with hydrophobic and π–π interactions are responsible for high BPA removal
Small-size carbon	Small-size ZIF-8	800	5	1160	QCM sensing of VOCs	• Post treatment with HF	
164

Middle-size carbon	Middle-size ZIF-8	1390	• Small-sized carbon showed superior uptake and a faster response for toluene
Large-size carbon	Large-size ZIF-8	1610
PCP-500	Al-PCP	500	5	320	QCM sensing of VOCs	• Post treatment with HF	
171

PCP-600	600	2400	• 1000 °C is the optimum temp. to get the highest porosity
PCP-700	700	1600	• Superior efficiency and high selectivity for the detection of aromatic VOCs
PCP-800	800	5500
MDC-1000	IL@ZIF-8(0%)	1000	10	1802	Adsorption in water and n-octane	• 12% resulted in good porosity and higher N doping	
193

IMDC-1000(4%)	IL@ZIF-8(4%)	1321	• H-bonding between doped N-sites and adsorbates was the main driving force for high adsorption
IMDC-1000(8%)	IL@ZIF-8(8%)	1256
IMDC-1000(12%)	IL@ZIF-8(12%)	1421
CD@AlPCP	AlPCP	800	6	2357	Adsorption in water and n-octane	• Post treatment with HF	
194

CDIL(0.5)@AlPCP	IL(0.5)AlPCP	2084	• IL leads to reduced surface area and increased N-doping
• H-bonding is the main mechanism for adsorption
MDC6M(0)	MLM(0)@MAF-6	1000	4	1383	Adsorption of herbicides from water	• Post treatment with HCl	
195

MDC6M(25)	MLM(25)@MAF-6	1403	• MLM leads to increased surface area and N-doping
• H-bonding was the main mechanism for adsorption
NPC	ZIF-8 and H3PO4	900	2	1475	Adsorption of SCCs a model fuel	• Post treatment with HCl	
198

P-NPC-1000	ZIF-8 and H3PO4	1000	1614	• Hierarchical porosity and heteroatom (N and P) dopants make the material efficient for SCC capture
CDM-6-1000	MAF-6	1000	6	1484	Adsorption of PPCPs in water	• Post treatment with HCl	
203

CDM-6 K-1000	MAF-6/KOH = 1:1	3123	• Hydrophobic and highly porous carbon was obtained in the presence of KOH
HT-FNR	FNR	2000	—	1600	QCM sensing of VOCs	• Nanoporous carbon material with graphitized frameworks	
214

HT-FNT	FNT	1650	• π–π interaction was the main mechanism for high sensitivity/selectivity of aromatic molecules
Fullerphene-C60	C60-EDA	700	2	655	QCM sensing of VOCs	• Remarkable sensitivity/selectivity for formic acid	
221

• N-doped species predominantly influence the achievement of single-carbon-atom-level molecular discrimination
CDM-74	MOF-74(Zn)	1000	6	1395	Adsorption of CECs in water	• Post treatment with HCl	
240

• H-bonding interaction had a vital role in high adsorption efficiency
CDM-4	MAF-4	800	6	1176	Adsorption of CECs in water	• Post treatment with HCl	
244

CDM-5	MAF-5	938	• CDM-6 had the highest surface area and showed the highest efficiency for adsorbing organics from water
CDM-6	MAF-6	1642	• H-bonding was the main mechanism
MDC-900	Zn-iTPA	900	4	1074	Adsorption of MB in water	• MDC-1000 showed remarkable MB uptake	
245

MDC-1000	1000	1338	• Electrostatic interaction played the most vital role in high MB capture
MOF-NPC	MOF-5	530	8	473	Adsorption of Cu2+	• The MOF-NPC was highly efficient for Cu2+ uptake	
247


 	Fig. 10  Relative performance for the removal of various organic CECs from water over a time range from 0 to 12 h with different adsorbents. Figures a–c showed the effect of time on the adsorption of (a) diclofenac, (b) ibuprofen, and (c) sulfamethoxazole over activated carbon, ZIF-8, and ZIF-8 derived carbon (MDC-1000). Figures d–f showed the effect of time on the adsorption of (d) atrazine, (e) ibuprofen, and (f) sulfamethoxazole over activated carbon, MDC-1000, and ionic liquid (IL, 12 wt%)-loaded ZIF-8-derived carbon (IMDC-100012%). Panels (a and b) are reprinted with permission from ref. 160, copyright 2017 Elsevier, panel c is reprinted with permission from ref. 161, copyright 2018 Elsevier and panels (d–f) are reprinted with permission from ref. 193, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Adsorption of (a) IND, (b) QUI, and (c) DBT from n-octane at 25 °C with respect to time-activated carbon, ZIF-8, MDC-1000, and ionic liquid (IL,12 wt%)-loaded ZIF-8-derived carbon (IMDC-1000(12%)). Panels (a–c) are reprinted with permission from ref. 193, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the general QCM sensor for VOCs; (b) QCM frequency shifts of the PCP-800 film caused by exposure to various vaporized gases and (c) QCM frequency shifts upon benzene adsorption into (red line) the PCP-800 film and (blue line) active carbon film; (d) time-dependent frequency shifts (Δf) of fullerphene-C60, (e) sensing performance of C60-EDA and fullerphene-C60 electrodes by exposure to various vaporized gases and (f) the repeatability test for the sensing of formic acid vapor over the fullerphene-C60-modified QCM electrode. Panels (b and c) are reprinted with permission from ref. 171, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society and panels (d–f) are reprinted with permission from ref. 221, copyright 2022 Wiley Online Library.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
