Hybrid micro-/nano-structures derived from metal–organic frameworks: preparation and applications in energy storage and conversion  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CS00426A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CS00426A
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2660-2677Hybrid micro-/nano-structures derived from metal–organic frameworks: preparation and applications in energy storage and conversion

        
          
            Xiehong 
            Cao
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Chaoliang 
            Tan
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Melinda 
            Sindoro
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Hua 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *b
aCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology, 18 Chaowang Road, Hangzhou 310014, China. E-mail: gcscaoxh@zjut.edu.cn; caoxiehong@gmail.com
bCenter for Programmable Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798, Singapore. E-mail: hzhang@ntu.edu.sg; hzhang166@gmail.com;  Web: http://www.ntu.edu.sg/home/hzhang/
Received 
      2nd June 2016
    First published on 18th April 2017AbstractMetal–organic frameworks (MOFs), an important class of inorganic–organic hybrid crystals with intrinsic porous structures, can be used as versatile precursors or sacrificial templates for preparation of numerous functional nanomaterials for various applications. Recent developments of MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures, constructed by more than two components with varied functionalities, have revealed their extensive capabilities to overcome the weaknesses of the individual counterparts and thus give enhanced performance for energy storage and conversion. In this tutorial review, we summarize the recent advances in MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures. The synthetic strategies for preparing MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures are first introduced. Focusing on energy storage and conversion, we then discuss their potential applications in lithium-ion batteries, lithium–sulfur batteries, supercapacitors, lithium–oxygen batteries and fuel cells. Finally, we give our personal insights into the challenges and opportunities for the future research of MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures.
Xiehong Cao
Prof. Xiehong Cao received his BE degree in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Zhejiang University, China (2008). He completed his PhD with Prof. Hua Zhang at the School of Materials Science and Engineering in Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (2013). After working as a Research Fellow in the same group, he joined Zhejiang University of Technology (China) as a “Qianjiang Scholar” and a special-term Professor in the “Thousand Talent Program” of Zhejiang Province in 2015. His current research includes the synthesis of two-dimensional nanomaterials (e.g. graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides) and their applications in energy, the environment, sensors, etc.
Chaoliang Tan
Chaoliang Tan received his BE and ME degrees in Applied Chemistry from Hunan University of Science and Technology (China) in 2009 and South China Normal University (China) in 2012, respectively. He then moved to the School of Materials Science and Engineering of Nanyang Technological University (Singapore) where he completed his PhD study under the supervision of Professor Hua Zhang in 2016. Since then, he has been working as a Research Follow in the same group. His research interests focus on the synthesis, characterization and applications of ultrathin two-dimensional nanomaterials (e.g. transition metal dichalcogenides) and their functional heterostructures/composites.
Melinda Sindoro
Melinda Sindoro received her BSc in Chemistry and Biological Chemistry from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, in 2010. She just completed her PhD in Materials Chemistry (2016) with a focus on metal–organic frameworks and colloidal assembly at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. She is now a Research Fellow in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Nanyang Technological University, working with Professor Hua Zhang on novel nanomaterials.
Hua Zhang
Prof. Hua Zhang obtained his BS and MS degrees from Nanjing University in 1992 and 1995, respectively, and completed his PhD with Prof. Zhongfan Liu at Peking University in 1998. As a Postdoctoral Fellow, he joined Prof. Frans C. De Schryver's group at Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (Belgium) in 1999, and then moved to Prof. Chad A. Mirkin's group at Northwestern University in 2001. After he worked at NanoInk Inc. (USA) and Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (Singapore), he joined the Nanyang Technological University in July 2006. His current research interests focus on the synthesis of ultrathin two-dimensional nanomaterials (e.g. metal nanosheets, graphene, metal dichalcogenides, metal–organic frameworks, etc.) and their hybrid composites for various applications in nano- and biosensors, clean energy, (opto-)electronic devices, catalysis, and water remediation; controlled synthesis, characterization and application of novel metallic and semiconducting nanomaterials, and epitaxial growth of heterostructures; etc.

Key learning points
(1) The unique advantages of preparation of hybrid micro-/nano-structures by using MOFs as precursors.
(2) The unique advantages of hybrid micro-/nano-structures in energy storage and conversion applications compared to other kinds of nanostructures.
(3) Summary of the typical MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures and their general synthesis methods.
(4) Summary of the performance of MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures in various energy storage and conversion applications.
(5) Demonstration of the performance enhancement through the rational design of MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures.

1. Introduction
Hybrid micro-/nano-structured materials have played an essential role in high-performance energy storage and conversion applications, such as rechargeable batteries, supercapacitors, and fuel cells.1 Despite their complexity, these multicomponent structures hold great potential to overcome the weaknesses of the individual counterparts. Such a unique feature of hybrid-structured materials, along with unrestricted selection of components with different properties, offers an intelligent way to optimize the performance for specific applications.2 To date, a variety of hybrid micro-/nano-structures have been successfully prepared through various synthetic approaches.1–3 Precursors and sacrificial templates are normally required to construct some sophisticated hybrid structures, which are difficult to be achieved via conventional methods.1 Recently, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), an important class of porous inorganic–organic hybrid crystals, have attracted intensive interest and been utilized as versatile precursors/sacrificial templates for the preparation of various hybrid micro-/nano-structures with complex compositions/structures and predetermined functionalities.3–6
MOFs are constructed via coordination bonds between metal ions/clusters and organic ligands. To date, more than 20000 MOFs with diverse compositions, crystal structures, and morphologies have been reported.7 The unique chemical constitution of MOFs allows the facile tuning of their microstructures and properties through the proper selection of metal ions and/or ligands as the building blocks, making MOFs promising for a variety of applications, including gas adsorption/separation, catalysis, and energy storage/conversion.7 Importantly, in recent years, MOFs have been proven to be versatile precursors or sacrificial templates for the synthesis of functional micro-/nano-materials, such as metal compounds (e.g. metal oxides/sulfides/carbides),8 carbon nanomaterials,9 and their hybrids.10 Generally, the preparation of MOF-derived materials relies on a thermolysis process under a certain atmosphere (e.g. argon, nitrogen, air) at an elevated temperature. The equipment for this process normally involves a high-temperature furnace that is able to afford the decomposition temperature of MOFs (e.g. 500–900 °C), as well as a gas supply system. Such ordinary requirements for the synthetic process offer an opportunity for the massive preparation of MOF-derived materials for industrial applications.
The simple synthesis of MOFs makes the subsequent preparation of MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures convenient, and provides a facile way to design their structural complexity, composition uniformity, and reproducibility. One of the most fascinating advantages of MOFs is their unique composition, in which a regular arrangement of metallic and organic components is presented within the crystalline structures of MOFs. This usually leads to a uniform distribution of different components (e.g. metal nanoparticles and carbon) in the subsequently obtained MOF-derived hybrid structures. Moreover, the presence of organic ligands in MOFs enables the formation of carbon-based nanomaterials, such as amorphous and graphitic carbons11,12 after the calcination process without introducing external carbon sources. Besides, some MOFs with organic ligands containing nitrogen (e.g. methyl imidazole) can generate nitrogen-doped carbon nanomaterials after thermolysis,9 resulting in the enhancement of the electrical conductivity and electrochemical activity of the resulting nanomaterials.
Another appealing advantage of using MOFs as precursors for the preparation of hybrid micro-/nano-structures is their ability to afford nanoporous structures with a uniform pore size, high porosity and controllable morphologies, such as porous carbon or metal oxide nanostructures. The porous structures normally result from the decomposition of organic ligands or the vaporization of the metal content of MOFs at elevated temperatures.13 Note that the pore size of MOF-derived materials can be finely tuned by rationally designing the MOF precursors (e.g. composition and morphology) and extrinsically controlling the thermolysis process (e.g. annealing temperature/time, heating rate, and/or gas atmosphere). Besides, most MOF-derived materials are capable of preserving morphologies similar to their corresponding MOFs under appropriate annealing parameters.9,13,14 Given all the aforementioned advantages, several MOF-derived materials with diverse morphologies and structures have been prepared in recent years, with the aim of realizing optimal performance in certain applications, e.g. energy storage and conversion. It is worth pointing out that a large number of hybrid micro-/nano-structures with complex compositions, structures and functions, have also been achieved by using MOFs as precursors/templates. These MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures usually exhibit enhanced properties as compared to their individual counterparts due to the synergistic effect among different components, making them attractive for high-performance energy storage/conversion applications.
Although several review articles have summarized MOF-derived materials and their applications,15–17 they only categorized MOF-derived materials according to their compositions, such as MOF-derived metallic compounds, porous carbons and/or their composites. Given that the performance of hybrid micro-/nano-materials is highly affected by their structures, compositions and preparation approaches, we believe that offering a focused review to summarize these newly emerged MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures with sophisticated architectures and/or multiple components is of great importance for future development of MOF-derived materials. This would help researchers to obtain a deep understanding of the indispensable function of each component within MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures, as well as the strategies for the design and preparation of these hybrid micro-/nano-structures for high-performance energy storage/conversion applications.
In this tutorial review, we aim to provide a detailed and comprehensive overview of what has been achieved in the preparation of various hybrid micro-/nano-structures based on the versatile MOF-based precursors/templates, as well as their promising applications in energy storage and conversion. This review gives a brief introduction of the general synthetic strategies of various MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures, followed by summarizing their applications in energy storage and conversion, including lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries, supercapacitors, lithium–oxygen (Li–O2) batteries, and fuel cells. Finally, the review is concluded with some personal insights into the future directions in this fascinating research field.
2. MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures: structures, compositions and preparation strategies
Benefiting from the advantageous features of MOFs, numerous MOF-derived hybrid materials with various micro-/nano-structures and compositions, such as porous hybrid polyhedrons, quasi-two-dimensional (quasi-2D) structures, MOF-derived material-coated substrates, spherical/non-spherical hollow materials, and hierarchical carbon structures, have been successfully prepared in recent years through various synthetic approaches (Fig. 1 and Table 1). Owing to their unique structures as well as the enhanced properties arising from synergistic effects among the components, MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures have shown promising applications in energy storage/conversion, catalysis and environment-related areas. This section describes the structures, compositions and general preparation methods for MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures with emphasis on their appealing properties and unique functions.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of diverse types of MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures based on their components as well as distinctive structures. (b–e) Typical examples of various reported MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures. (b and c) TEM images of Ni–Fe binary oxide nanobox (b) and cube-in-box hollow structures (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM image of porous Co3O4 sheet-coated 3D nickel foam. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Inc. (e) TEM image of a 2D nitrogen-doped carbon–CoS1.097 composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Table 1 Summary of various MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures as well as their preparation strategies and applications




MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structure
Preparation method
Application
Ref.





Binary components



2D CoS1.097/N-doped carbon hybrid
Calcination of 2D PPF-3 sheets with sulfur
Supercapacitor

25



N-doped porous carbon/graphene hybrid
Calcination of pre-synthesized ZIF-8/GO hybrid followed by removal of Zn
ORR

24



CuO@NiO multilayer hollow sphere
Cation exchange of pre-synthesized Cu–BTC MOFs followed by calcination
LIB

21



Carbon/sulfur porous hybrid polyhedron
Calcination of ZIF-8 followed by melt-diffusion process to embed sulfur
LIB

13



ZrO2- or Al2O3-coated LiCoO2 particle
Coating UIO-66 or MIL-53 on LiCoO2 followed by calcination
Li–S battery

43



Porous NiCo2O4/NiO hollow dodecahedron
Solvothermal treatment of ZIF-67 followed by calcination
LIB

19



Porous carbon/sulfur hybrid nanoplate
Calcination of MOF-5 followed by melt-diffusion process to embed sulfur
Li–S battery

40



Carbon/ZnO QD hybrid
Calcination of IRMOF-1
LIB

10



ZnO- or Fe2O3-coated 3D graphene network

In situ growth of ZIF-8 or MIL-88-Fe on 3D graphene network followed by calcination
Photocatalyts, LIB

29



Ball-in-ball structured metal oxide hybrids (CuO/ZnO, Co3O4/ZnO, CuO/Co3O4, NiO/Co3O4)
Cation exchange of pre-synthesized MOFs followed by calcination
NIL

22



N-Doped graphene sheet/graphene tube hybrid
Preparation of MOF–DCDA–iron acetate hybrid followed by calcination at 800–1100 °C
Li–O2 battery

28



Onion-like carbon/Fe3C hybrid


β-NiS NP-porous carbon hybrid
Calcination of MOF-74 in H2/Ar followed by hydrothermal treatment
LIB

39



rGO-Wrapped MoO3 porous structure
Preparation of GO/Mo–MOF hybrid followed by calcination
Supercapacitor

37



Porous carbon/selenium hybrid sphere
Calcination of Ni-BTC followed by the acid wash and melt-diffusion process to embed selenium
Li–S battery

42



Porous NiCo2O4/Co3O4 nanowire
Preparation of ZIF-67-coated cobalt carbonate hydroxide nanowire followed by the reaction with Ni(NO3)2 and then calcination
Supercapacitor

32



ZnO- or Co3O4-coated nickel foam/carbon fiber
Deposition of Zn- or Co–MOFs on nickel foam/carbon fiber followed by calcination
LIB

30



Fe2O3@NiCo2O4 porous nanocage
Preparation of Co3[Fe(CN)6]2@Ni3[Co(CN)6]2 core–shell nanocube followed by calcination
LIB

31








Ternary and more components



Porous ZnO/ZnFe2O4/C octahedron
Synthesis of Fe-doped MOF-5 followed by calcination
LIB

3



Fe2O3@TiO2/Pt octahedron
Calcination of pre-synthesized TiO2-coated MIL-101 followed by deposition of Pt NPs
Photocatalytic hydrogen generation

41



N-Doped Fe/Fe3C@C/rGO core–shell-structured hybrid
Preparation of GO–Prussian blue hybrid followed by calcination
ORR

35



ZnO@ZnO QD/C core–shell nanorod array-coated carbon cloth
Deposition of ZnO nanorod on carbon cloth followed by in situ growth of ZIF-8 on ZnO and calcination process
LIB

5



rGO-Wrapped C–Co–S hybrid polyhedron
Calcination of ZIF-64 followed by coating GO and melt-diffusion process to embed sulfur
Li–S battery

6



Yolk–shell ZnO/Ni3ZnC0.7/C hybrid microsphere
Calcination of pre-synthesized Zn–MOF/Ni hybrid
LIB

34



Core–shell structured ZnO/ZnCo2O4/C porous hybrid sphere
Preparation of core–shell structured ZnCo–MOF hybrid followed by calcination
LIB

33





2.1 Structures and compositions of MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures

2.1.1 Structures of MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures. 
Porous hybrid polyhedrons are one of the most typical structures of MOF-derived hybrid materials, such as porous carbon–ZnO quantum dot (QD) hybrids10 and microporous carbon–sulfur hybrid polyhedra.13 Benefiting from their unique compositions and structures, most MOFs can be converted into hybrid materials composed of a metal compound (or metal) and carbon via a simple annealing process. The formation of porous structures in MOF-derived hybrids is normally attributed to the decomposition of crystalline MOF structures, leading to the generation of numerous void spaces.
As an attractive class of active materials for high-performance energy storage/conversion devices, hollow materials with spherical or non-spherical structures can effectively elevate the volume expansion and promote the structural stability of electrode materials, leading to a long cycle life. Using MOFs as precursors provides a novel and efficient way to create a variety of hybrid materials with hollow microstructures, such as ZnO/ZnFe2O4/C octahedra,3 CuO/Cu2O polyhedra,18 NiCo2O4/NiO dodecahedra,19 and CoFe2O4 nanocubes.20 Particularly, by rationally designing the composition of MOFs as well as carefully tuning their subsequent calcination process, hollow hybrid materials with more complex structures,21–23 such as multi-shelled hollow spheres,22 and cube-in-box hollow structures (Fig. 1c),23 have also been prepared in relatively convenient ways.
Importantly, ultrathin nanosheets with quasi-2D structures, possessing extraordinary features of large surface areas and a high density of edge sites, are promising materials for a variety of applications. MOF-derived 2D hybrids with ultrathin thickness and sheet-like morphology can be achieved by coating MOF films on a graphene template, followed by a calcination process and acid wash to remove the metallic ingredient.24 Recently, 2D MOF nanosheets have also been used as precursors for the preparation of hybrid materials.25,26 For example, a 2D CoS1.097–carbon nanocomposite was prepared by the calcination of a porphyrin paddlewheel framework-3 (PPF-3) nanosheet (Fig. 1e), which was then used as a supercapacitor electrode.25 In addition, by using a 2D Cu(HBTC)-1 nanosheet with a thickness of ∼6 nm as a precursor, a copper oxide-based hybrid sheet was obtained.26 Benefiting from the unique structure-dependent properties of MOF-derived 2D hybrids, it is highly possible to achieve their further enhanced performances in certain applications through optimization of their structures. Since the metal ions/clusters of 2D MOF nanosheets normally can be replaced by other ones to form new types of 2D MOFs, more MOF-derived 2D hybrids could be prepared using the formed new 2D MOF nanosheets as the precursors/templates.
Carbon-based micro-/nano-structures have been intensively studied for numerous applications due to their unique properties (e.g. good electrical conductivity, and chemical inertness under ambient conditions), as well as various available techniques to engineer the intrinsic chemical/physical properties of carbon materials, such as morphology, crystalline structure, surface functional groups, and electronic structure. Interestingly, hierarchical carbon micro-/nano-structures, including carbon nanotube frameworks27 and graphene sheet/graphene tube nanocomposites,28 have also been successfully prepared by simply annealing the corresponding MOFs or MOF-based hybrids under proper experimental conditions.
Moreover, many substrate-supported MOF derivatives have been prepared by deposition of MOFs on certain substrates (e.g. carbon-based substrate and nickel foam) followed by a calcination process.5,29,30 This is a convenient and effective way to prepare MOF-derived hybrids with a hierarchical structure, which can be directly used as electrodes for energy storage/conversion applications.


2.1.2 Compositions of MOF-derived hybrid materials. 
MOF-derived carbon-based hybrids, including the hybrids of carbon with metal, metal oxide or metal carbide particles, are one of the most typical bi-component MOF-derived hybrid materials, which have been intensively studied and have exhibited promising applications in energy storage and conversion. Moreover, MOF-derived binary metal oxide structures and hierarchical carbon nanocomposites with diversified compositions, morphologies or functionalities are particularly interesting for a variety of applications.
Owing to their unique properties, metal oxides are attractive materials in many research fields. The integration of binary metal oxides with different functionalities to form a hybrid structure might afford extraordinary chemical/physical properties as well as synergistic effects between the two components, leading to enhanced performance in certain applications. Utilizing MOFs as precursors/templates provides an effective and interesting way to prepare bi-component metal oxide hybrids,21,23,31,32 such as CuO@NiO,21 and NiO/Co3O4 hybrid spheres.22 As shown in Table 1, binary metal oxide hybrids were usually obtained by calcination of pre-synthesized bimetallic MOFs, or deposition of MOFs on metal oxides followed by thermal treatment.
Other interesting MOF-derived bi-component hybrid structures are the ones composed of carbon materials with varied structures, dimensions or morphologies, such as porous carbon/graphene sheet hybrids,24 and graphene tube/graphene sheet nanocomposites.28 Due to the aforementioned unique features of carbon materials as well as various available methods to engineer their structures and intrinsic properties, it is of great importance to develop all-carbon hybrids via MOF precursors/templates for high-performance energy storage/conversion applications.24,27,28
In addition, numerous MOF-derived micro-/nano-structures with three or more components, such as hollow ZnO/ZnFe2O4/C hybrid octahedra,3 core–shell structured ZnO/ZnCo2O4/C hybrids,33 and yolk–shell structured ZnO/Ni3ZnC0.7/C hybrid microspheres (Fig. 2a and b),34 have also been reported recently. It is worth mentioning that each component in the MOF-derived hybrids possesses an essential and unique function. Therefore, a rational arrangement of these components within the hybrid structure could stimulate a synergetic effect among them, thus leading to the enhancement of the overall properties of the hybrids. As a typical example, Li et al. demonstrated a complex MOF-derived hybrid structure composed of four components, i.e. rGO sheets, Co nanoparticles (NPs), carbon polyhedra and sulfur (Fig. 2c–g).6 Although multiple steps are required for the preparation of this hybrid, i.e. rGO/C–Co–S, each component plays an indispensable and special role in the hybrid. Briefly, the porous nature of carbon matrix along with the formed Co–S bonding can effectively trap the incorporated sulfur species. The rGO sheets not only improved the electrical conductivity of the hybrid, but also served as a physical barrier to prevent dissolution of the polysulfides formed during the Li–S battery test. Owing to the unique feature of each component and the synergetic effects among them, the prepared rGO/C–Co–S hybrid exhibited enhanced properties compared to the individual counterparts, making the hybrid promising for high-performance Li–S battery cathodes. Similarly, the rGO-coated Fe/Fe3C@C porous nanobox reported by Chen and coworkers also demonstrated the essential role of hybrid micro-/nano-structures and the synergetic effect among the four components in enhancing the electrocatalytic activity in the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).35
 Fig. 2  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of yolk–shell structured ZnO/Ni3ZnC0.7/C hybrid microspheres derived from Zn–MOF/Ni. Inset in (a): Schematic illustration of the ZnO/Ni3ZnC0.7/C hybrid microsphere. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the preparation procedure of rGO/C–Co–S hybrids derived from ZIF-67. (d) SEM, (e and f) TEM, and (g) elemental mapping images of the rGO/C–Co–S hybrids. Reproduced with permission from ref. 6. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Inc. 

2.2 Preparation strategies for MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures
The preparation of various MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures is mainly based on the following three strategies (Fig. 3): (1) preparation of MOFs with predesigned composition/morphology followed by a calcination process; (2) hybridization of MOFs with other materials followed by a calcination process; (3) calcination of MOFs followed by post-treatment.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the general preparation strategies from MOFs to their derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures: (1) preparation of MOFs with predesigned composition/morphology followed by a calcination process; (2) hybridization of MOFs with other materials followed by a calcination process; (3) calcination of MOFs followed by post-treatment. 

2.2.1 Preparation of MOFs with predesigned composition/morphology followed by a calcination process. 
In order to control the morphologies and properties of the obtained MOF-derived micro-/nano-structures, a relatively simple method is to calcinate MOFs with pre-designed compositions/structures. After thermal treatment, the MOFs are normally converted to mixtures of carbon, metal carbides or metal oxides, resulting in the formation of hybrids with pre-designed features. Many synthetic approaches, such as the cation exchange process,21,22 hydro-/solvo-thermal treatment19,33 and self-assembly,36 have been used to prepare MOFs with pre-designed compositional and structural features. For example, a hollow ZnO/ZnFe2O4/C hybrid octahedron with a porous shell was successfully obtained after a one-step annealing process of Fe-doped MOF-5 crystals under N2 atmosphere.3 The Fe-doped MOF-5 crystal was prepared by a refluxing method based on the reaction of Fe(acac)3, Zn(NO3)2, terephthalic acid and poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP) in a mixed solvent of dimethylformamide (DMF) and ethanol. Similarly, ZnO/Ni3ZnC0.7/C hybrid microspheres were prepared based on a similar strategy by thermal treatment of Ni-doped Zn–MOFs (Fig. 2a and b).34 By changing the solvothermal reaction conditions, both yolk–shell and solid structured ZnO/Ni3ZnC0.7/C hybrids have been successfully produced. Since the compositions of MOFs can be easily altered through various methods, such as cation exchange and hydrothermal processes, a variety of other MOF-derived hybrid micro-nanostructures with multiple components can be obtained through simple calcination of these MOFs with pre-designed compositions.
The cation exchange process is an effective way to introduce a secondary metal element into MOFs and obtain bimetallic MOFs without altering the primary morphologies of the MOFs. The resulting bimetallic MOFs can be then transformed into MOF-derived hybrids with binary components after subsequent thermal treatment. This synthetic strategy has been widely used in the preparation of yolk–shell and multi-shell structured MOF-derived nanomaterials.21,22 For example, a CuO@NiO hybrid microsphere with a unique ball-in-ball structure was prepared by using a Ni–MOF sphere as the precursor (Fig. 4a).21 Briefly, the Ni–MOF sphere was first synthesized by the reaction of 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid (H3BTC) and Ni(NO3)2 in a micro-wave reactor. After a cation exchange reaction of Ni–MOF with Cu(NO3)2, a bimetallic MOF was formed (Cu–Ni-BTC, Fig. 4b), which contained mixed Ni and Cu ions in its crystalline structure. A hollow CuO@NiO hybrid microsphere with multiple shells was obtained after thermal treatment of Cu–Ni-BTC in air (Fig. 4c). It is worth mentioning that due to the limited ion exchange rate, the CuO@NiO hybrid microsphere exhibited a unique elemental gradient, i.e. the concentration of Ni element increased from the outer layer to the core (Fig. 4d). The formation of such a multilayer microsphere structure could be attributed to the heterogeneous decomposition of MOFs, which is a result of the temperature gradient from the outer layer to the core during the annealing process. This phenomenon is similar to that observed in the formation of many yolk–shell structures. In other words, the outer surface of the MOFs decomposed first and formed the metal oxide shell before the inner part. Due to the different decomposition temperatures of the Cu- and Ni–organic compounds within the bimetallic MOF crystal, a stepwise decomposition and formation of metal oxide layers occurred at elevated temperatures, resulting in the formation of a ball-in-ball CuO@NiO structure. In addition, multi-shell CuO/ZnO, Co3O4/ZnO, and NiO/Co3O4 hybrid microspheres have also been prepared through similar cation exchange reactions of Co- or Zn-based MOFs followed by a calcination process.22 Obviously, numerous other types of binary metal oxide hollow nanostructures can be produced through the preparation of bimetallic MOFs followed by a calcination process.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of CuO@NiO hybrid microspheres with multiple shells from Cu–Ni-organic frameworks (Cu–Ni-BTC). (b and c) TEM images of the Cu–Ni-BTC (b) and CuO@NiO hybrid microspheres (c). (d) Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) spectrum obtained from different layers of CuO@NiO, indicating different Ni concentrations from the outer layer to inner core of the CuO@NiO hybrid microspheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 


2.2.2 Hybridization of MOFs with other materials followed by a calcination process. 
Preparation of MOF-based hybrids followed by a calcination process is an effective way to obtain MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures with multiple functionalities. To date, a number of MOF-based hybrids, e.g. MOF–carbon24,35,37 and MOF–metal oxide hybrids,5,31 have been prepared by various synthetic approaches, such as template-assisted methods,24,29,30,32 ball-milling,38 and incorporation of small molecules into the pores of MOFs.28 The resultant MOF-based hybrids served as versatile precursors/templates for the production of various MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures.
The template-assisted method is powerful in creating complex structures, and has been used in the preparation of MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures. The rational combination of MOFs with various carbon nanostructures, such as one-dimensional (1D) carbon nanotubes/fibers, 2D graphene sheets, and three-dimensional (3D) porous carbons, enables the preparation of MOF-based hybrids with various morphologies, hierarchically porous nanostructures, and enhanced electrical conductivity. After thermal treatment of MOF–carbon hybrids, the resulting MOF-derived materials directly contact the conductive substrate, and are promising materials for a wide range of applications, such as active materials in electrochemical systems.29,30
As a typical example, an N-doped porous carbon-coated reduced graphene oxide (rGO) sheet with a sandwich-like structure was prepared by in situ growth of a ZIF-8 film on a GO sheet, followed by the calcination of the ZIF-8/GO hybrid under Ar gas at 650–950 °C, and then washing in acid to remove the metallic Zn ingredient.24 Interestingly, it was revealed that the PVP additive enabled the homogenous growth of the ZIF-8 film on the GO sheet. This might be due to the amide carbonyl groups of PVP, which increased the adhesive force between GO and the ZIF-8 precursor (i.e. Zn2+ ions and 2-methyl imidazole (2-MeIM)), facilitating the uniform nucleation of ZIF-8 crystals on the surface of GO. Note that the uniform and complete coating of ZIF-8 crystals on GO sheets is essential for the formation of a direct contact between the derived porous carbon and rGO, facilitating effective electron transport between these two components. The resulting porous carbon-based hybrid with a quasi-2D microstructure exhibited an ultrahigh surface area (911 m2 g−1), making it attractive for a variety of surface-dependent applications, such as supercapacitors and electrocatalysts. Importantly, it is expected that a number of MOF-derived novel hybrid micro-/nano-structures could be obtained based on the aforementioned synthetic strategy using MOFs and 2D materials as building blocks.
As another typical example, our group recently reported the preparation of MOF-derived porous metal oxide-coated 3D graphene composites (Fig. 5).29 Briefly, ZIF-8 or MIL-88-Fe crystals were first grown on a HNO3-treated 3D graphene network (3DGN) through in situ growth (Fig. 5a–c). The prepared MOF–3DGN hybrids were then subjected to a two-step annealing processes under argon and air, respectively, leading to the formation of ZnO/3DGN (Fig. 5d and e) or Fe2O3/3DGN composites (Fig. 5f). The resulting composites exhibited unique hierarchically porous structures containing both nanopores and macro-pores, which originated from the metal oxide nanostructures and 3DGN, respectively. In addition, the metal oxide/3DGN composites still possessed a high surface area (e.g. 335 m2 g−1 for the ZnO/3DGN composite). Importantly, the size of the porous ZnO structures coated on 3DGN can be tuned by controlling the experimental conditions for the growth of ZIF-8 crystals on 3DGN. This work offers a controllable method to achieve decoration of porous metal oxide nanostructures without aggregation on conductive substrates, which could also be extended to other types of porous metal oxide–carbon hybrids. Interestingly, the obtained ZnO/3DGN and Fe2O3/3DGN composites can be bent without structural collapse (Fig. 5g and h), indicating their excellent mechanical strength and flexibility. It is worth mentioning that the abundant oxygen-containing functional groups on the surface of 3DGN generated by acid treatment are beneficial for the adsorption of metal ions and organic ligands to facilitate the growth of MOFs. The acid treatment is also important to achieve a uniform growth of MOFs on 3DGN and enhance their interaction.
 Fig. 5  (a–c) SEM images of the ZIF-8/3DGN composite (a and b) and MIL-88-Fe/3DGN composite (c). (d) SEM image of the ZnO/3DGN composite. Insets in (c and d): Low-magnification SEM images of the MIL-88-Fe/3DGN composite (c) and the ZnO/3DGN composite (d). (e) TEM image of porous ZnO structures shown in (d). (f) SEM image of the Fe2O3/3DGN composite. Inset: high-magnification SEM image of the Fe2O3/3DGN composite. (g and h) Photographs of the ZnO/3DGN (g) and Fe2O3/3DGN composites (h). Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2014, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Moreover, the in situ growth of MOFs on their corresponding metal compound structures is another attractive way to simplify the construction of MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures.32 For example, after thermal treatment of the ZIF-8-coated ZnO nanorod, a ZnO nanorod@ZnO QD–carbon hybrid with a core–shell structure was easily obtained.5 Here, the ZnO nanorod acted not only as the substrate, but also as the precursor for the growth of the ZIF-8 crystal. Owing to the strong interfacial interaction between MOF derivatives and the metal oxide substrate, an efficient electron transport pathway can be created in the prepared hybrids, leading to the enhanced performance in energy storage/conversion applications. Since the features of each component, e.g. morphology, structure and composition, within a MOF-derived hybrid can be predicted based on its corresponding individual counterpart, using MOF-based hybrids as precursors/templates provides a feasible and controllable way to achieve high-performance hybrid micro-/nano-structures with required properties.


2.2.3 Calcination of MOFs followed by post-treatment. 
MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nanostructure can also be obtained through calcination of MOFs followed by post-treatment, in which the calcinated MOFs serve as building blocks that can be incorporated with other functional materials to form more complex hybrid structures. Many approaches have been developed for the post-treatment of calcination products of MOFs, such as further transformation of the compositions of calcinated MOFs,39 incorporation of other materials into the porous structures of calcinated MOFs,13,40 and decoration of the surface of calcinated MOFs with other species.41 Typically, metal compound–carbon hybrids, such as a NiS–carbon hybrid,39 can be simply obtained by the hydro-/solvo-thermal treatment of MOF-derived metal–carbon hybrids under proper reaction conditions. More interestingly, many MOF-derived porous carbon materials can serve as hosts to further load secondary substances (e.g. sulfur,13,40 and selenium42) to form hybrid structures. For example, a Se-embedded porous carbon hybrid sphere has been prepared through calcination of Ni-BTC MOFs followed by post-treatment (Fig. 6).42 The calcinated Ni-BTC MOFs were first washed by acid to remove Ni to produce porous carbon spheres, which were then subjected to a melt-diffusion process to incorporate Se to obtain the Se–carbon hybrid sphere (Fig. 6a). Based on such a synthetic approach for MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nanostructures, the original morphologies of the calcinated MOFs can be extensively preserved after the post-treatment (Fig. 6b–g). Note that the numerous currently existing material processing techniques, such as mechanical mixing, electrostatic adsorption, electrophoretic/spray deposition, and spin coating, can also be applied to the post-treatment of calcinated MOFs, creating more complex micro-/nano-structures. It can be expected that a variety of novel hybrid micro-/nanostructures with improved properties or predetermined functions will emerge using MOF-derived materials as the building blocks.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation procedure of Se-porous carbon sphere hybrids by melt-diffusion treatment of MOF-derived carbon spheres. (b–g) TEM images of MOF-derived porous carbon spheres (b–d), and Se-porous carbon sphere hybrids (e–g). The arrows in (c and f) indicate the pores of the MOF-derived carbon spheres (c) and the pores embedded with Se NPs (f), respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to the preparation strategies presented in Fig. 3, the rational combination of several synthetic methods is also feasible to obtain MOF-derived hybrid materials with complex structures and multiple components, such as rGO/C–Co–S (Fig. 2c–g),6 and Fe2O3@TiO2/Pt nanocomposites.41 The synthetic approaches for these MOF-derived hybrid structures normally involve multiple steps. Take the Fe2O3@TiO2/Pt nanocomposite as an example; it was prepared by first coating a TiO2 layer on a MIL-101 crystal followed by calcinating the hybrid structure to obtain the Fe2O3@TiO2 composite, which was then reacted with K2PtCl4 to deposit Pt NPs.41 When the nanocomposite was used as a photocatalyst for hydrogen production, each component of the prepared Fe2O3@TiO2/Pt nanocomposite possessed a unique function. As is known, TiO2 is a photocatalyst that only absorbs ultraviolet (UV) light. The combination of Fe2O3 and TiO2 provided an Fe2O3@TiO2 hybrid with a broad absorption window from the UV to visible light regions. The incorporation of Pt NPs facilitated the formation of hydrogen on the surface of the Fe2O3@TiO2 hybrid, leading to further enhanced photocatalytic activity. Obviously, MOFs can not only serve as promising precursors/templates for preparation of various MOF-derived hybrid materials, but also act as versatile building blocks to hybridize with other functional materials to construct sophisticated hybrid structures, which normally generates novel functions and unique properties. Such advantageous features of MOFs associated with the smart design of synthetic approaches for MOF-derived hybrid materials could open up infinite opportunities for the rapid development of novel materials or structures which can be used for a wide range of applications.

3. Applications
Compared to individual counterparts, hybrid micro-/nano-structures can achieve significantly enhanced performance in a given application through the synergistic effect among the components with rationally designed properties. Generally, there are several advantages of using MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures for energy storage and conversion. (1) Most MOF-derived materials exhibit micron-scale structures, which are assembled from diverse nano-sized components. Micron-scale structures are normally tolerant to the aggregation problem as compared to the nano-sized counterparts, which largely preserves the pristine properties of the nanomaterials. (2) When used as electrodes for rechargeable batteries, the interior spaces of MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures can effectively accommodate the large volumetric expansions induced by intercalation/de-intercalation of electrolyte ions. (3) MOF-derived porous structures can not only reduce the diffusion length of electrolyte ions by improving the contact effectiveness between electrode and electrolyte, but also provide more active edge sites for the redox reaction. (4) Some components of MOF-derived hybrid structures (e.g. carbon and metal) with high electrical conductivity can improve the performance of the obtained hybrids by enhancing the charge transfer efficiency. Especially, the components with special 3D architectures, such as 3D graphene networks, nickel foams and carbon fiber papers, not only have a large surface area, but also directly serve as current collectors with 3D connected electron pathways.
In this section, the energy storage and conversion applications of various MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures are discussed with emphasis on: (1) how to optimize the performance of MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures by rational design of their compositions, morphologies and hierarchical structures; and (2) the advantages of MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures for energy storage and conversion as compared to other kinds of nanostructures.
3.1 Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs)
LIBs are one of the most important and widely used energy storage devices in our daily life, playing an indispensable role in portable electronic devices, laptops, and electrical vehicles. Electrode materials are one of the key elements that determine the overall performance of LIBs. Therefore, enormous effort has been devoted to the design and preparation of novel materials or materials with unique structures as LIB electrodes. The intrinsic porous structure of MOFs, with most being microporous with a pore size of <2 nm, enables the reversible insertion/removal of Li+ ions and preserves the structural integrity of the MOFs during the charge/discharge process. Moreover, lithium storage can also be achieved by the interaction between the MOF ligands and Li+ ions, leading to increased capacity. These features make MOFs potential candidates for LIB electrodes. However, low capacity and poor cycling stability have been observed with MOF-based electrodes due to their instability during the conversion reaction with Li+ ions, as well as the poor electrical conductivity. Fortunately, MOF-derived materials, including carbon materials, metal oxides and their composites, have been demonstrated to be excellent electrodes for LIBs. For example, a ZnO QD-porous carbon hybrid obtained by calcination of IRMOF-1 crystals delivered a high specific capacity of ∼1200 mA h g−1 at a current density of 75 mA g−1.10 Moreover, a reversible capacity of 911 mA h g−1 was achieved on the mesoporous α-Fe2O3 with a spindle-like structure after 50 charge/discharge cycles at a rate of 200 mA g−1, which was prepared from the MIL-88-Fe precursor.14 Even at a high charge/discharge rate of 10 A g−1, a capacity of 424 mA h g−1 still remained, indicating the good rate capability of this MOF-derived Fe2O3 electrode. The excellent performance of this MOF-derived electrode could be attributed to its unique porous micro-/nano-structure, which enhances the electrode activity and accommodates the volume change of the active material during cycling. Besides, the surface/interface Li storage may also contribute to the high reversible capacity.
Importantly, MOF-derived materials with more complex structures and compositions have been developed and used for LIBs in recent years. In particular, hollow structured nanomaterials have been prepared by using MOFs as precursors. For example, a binary metal oxide hybrid microsphere with multiple shells (CuO@NiO) was prepared by using a Cu–Ni bimetallic MOF as the precursor.21 Benefiting from such a unique structure and chemical composition, the CuO@NiO hybrid microsphere exhibited a reversible capacity of ∼1000 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles (Fig. 7a), higher than the theoretical capacities of both CuO (674 mA h g−1) and NiO (718 mA h g−1).21 In comparison, the electrode of NiO microspheres derived from the Ni-BTC MOF exhibited a rapid decay of the specific capacity after 70 charge/discharge cycles, which was only ∼150 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles. The enhanced performance could be mainly attributed to the improved structural stability of the CuO@NiO hybrid microsphere. The lithium insertion voltages for the two metal oxides are different (i.e. ∼1.2 V for CuO and ∼0.7 V for NiO, Fig. 7b and c), leading to the reactions with Li+ ions occurring at different times. In other words, a stepwise lithium insertion process occurred within the binary metal oxide hybrid. This effectively eliminated the mechanical stress within the CuO@NiO hybrid, because the non-reacted component can act as a temporary buffer for the volumetric expansion of the reacted one. Therefore, the pulverization problem of the electrode material was extremely prevented, leading to high electrochemical stability and long cycle life. This work may provide a general way to fabricate porous metal oxides with binary components for high-performance LIBs. Besides MOF-derived hollow spheres, other non-spherical hollow structures have also been successfully prepared from MOF-based precursors/templates and then used for LIBs, such as a CuO/Cu2O hollow polyhedron,18 a Ni–Fe binary oxide nanobox and a cube-in-box hollow structure,23 and a NiCo2O4/NiO hollow dodecahedron.19
 Fig. 7  (a) Cycling performances of the CuO@NiO hybrid and NiO microspheres derived from Cu–Ni-organic frameworks and Ni-BTC MOFs, respectively. (b) Cycle voltammogram (CV) profile and (c) charge–discharge curve in the 1st cycle of the CuO@NiO hybrid microspheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
It is worth mentioning that hierarchically structured electrode materials can also be obtained through the deposition of MOFs on conductive substrates followed by calcination. This fabrication strategy eliminates the requirement for an additional binder, carbon additive, or current collector, which is suitable for fabrication of lightweight energy storage devices due to the reduced total mass and the increased energy density of the cell. The typical examples of such MOF-derived hybrid structures include the Fe2O3-coated 3DGN,29 porous ZnO sheet-coated 3D nickel foam30 and ZnO nanorod@ZnO QD/carbon-coated carbon cloth.5 Compared to the common copper current collector, the relatively low density (ca. 0.65 and 10 mg cm−2 for 3DGN and copper current collector, respectively) and high mechanical strength of 3DGN also make the metal oxide-coated 3DGN promising for flexible and portable energy storage devices.29
Additionally, MOF-derived porous carbons can effectively improve the performance of LIBs when coated onto other active materials (e.g. Si and metal oxides). Owing to the advantages of electrical conductivity and mechanical flexibility of carbon materials, the resultant hybrid electrode materials with improved structural stability can greatly accommodate the volume change during the charge/discharge process, leading to a long cycle life and a high rate capability. More recently, MOF-derived materials have also been investigated as cathode materials for LIBs with enhanced performance. For example, Wang and coworkers demonstrated that the UiO-66-derived ZrO2 served as an effective protection layer for the cathode material of LiCoO2 to improve its rate capability.43 The resultant ZrO2@LiCoO2 hybrid cathode delivered a reversible capacity of 148 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 2325 mA g−1 after 100 cycles. In contrast, the capacity of bare LiCoO2 rapidly decreased to ∼20 mA h g−1. Interestingly, the hybrid cathode also exhibited a reversible capacity of 132 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 55 °C, indicating good thermal stability. Such enhanced performance of the hybrid cathode could be attributed to the improved structural stability due to the ZrO2 coating, which effectively alleviated the volume change of LiCoO2.
3.2 Lithium–sulfur batteries (Li–S batteries)
Li–S batteries have a high energy density (2500 W h kg−1) and theoretical specific capacity (1675 mA h g−1) and rely on cheap and environmentally friendly sulfur cathode materials.40 Therefore, Li–S batteries are considered as promising alternatives to the conventional LIB-based energy storage devices. However, the development of Li–S batteries, in its current stage, is restricted by the well-known problem of the “shuttle effect”, which originates from the dissolution of intermediate products (i.e. polysulfides) in the organic electrolyte, leading to the de-activation of the electrodes as well as poor cycling performance. To solve this problem, developing novel materials or materials with unique structures, which can effectively trap the polysulfides during charge/discharge process, is of great importance. Porous carbon materials have drawn intensive attention as host materials for Li–S batteries due to their ability to anchor polysulfides through chemical bonding or physical interactions. MOF-derived carbon materials have shown high surface area, hierarchically porous structures and good electrical conductivity, making them attractive candidates for Li–S batteries.
As a typical example, Xu et al. first demonstrated that sulfur-encapsulated porous carbon nanoplates delivered a high initial discharge capacity of 1177 mA h g−1 at a low rate of 167.5 mA g−1.40 The hybrid cathode exhibited an excellent cycling performance with a reversible capacity of ∼730 mA h g−1 after charging and discharging at 837.5 mA g−1 for 50 cycles. Later on, Low and coworkers further revealed that the performance of MOF-derived carbon–sulfur hybrid cathodes in Li–S batteries is affected by the sulfur concentration within the hybrid and the type of electrolyte.13 The carbon–sulfur hybrid electrodes with sulfur concentrations of 43 and 63 wt%, respectively, exhibited distinct charge–discharge profiles, suggesting different electrochemical reactions taking place in the two electrodes. More recently, lithium–selenium (Li–Se) batteries have also been developed based on MOF-derived porous carbon spheres.42 Note that Se possesses much higher electrical conductivity compared to S at room temperature (1 × 10−5vs. 5 × 10−30 S cm−1),42 which can increase the electron transportation rate of the cathode material. The prepared carbon–Se hybrid electrode delivered an initial specific capacity of 588.2 mA h g−1 at 337.5 mA g−1, close to the theoretical capacity of Se (675 mA h g−1).42 Additionally, a reversible capacity of ∼250 mA h g−1 was also obtained for the hybrid electrode after 500 charge/discharge cycles at 337.5 mA g−1, corresponding to a decay rate of 0.08% per cycle.
Generally, the excellent performance of MOF-derived carbon–sulfur (selenium) hybrid cathodes should be attributed to the porous carbon nanostructures that contain abundant micropores with high surface area. For example, the hierarchically porous carbon nanoplates derived from MOF-5 show an ultrahigh surface area of 1645 m2 g−1 and a large pore volume of up to 1.18 cm3 g−1.13 This unique structure not only acted as an effective host to immobilize polysulfides, but also created an electrically conductive matrix for rapid electron transportation. In addition, the micropores within the hybrids also greatly accommodated the volumetric change of the electrode materials, leading to much enhanced cycling properties. Therefore, further improved performance of Li–S (Se) batteries might be achieved by optimization of the sulfur (selenium) content, pore size distribution and electrical conductivity of MOF-derived hybrid cathodes.
3.3 Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors are one of the most promising energy storage devices with unique features, such as fast charge rate, long cycle life, and high power density. Based on the electrode/electrolyte interface-dominant charge-storage mechanism, the performance of supercapacitors is highly reliant on the surface area and electrical conductivity of electrode materials. It is not surprising that MOFs with high surface area have been investigated in supercapacitor applications in the past few years.44 Owing to their unique porous structures and convenient preparation methods, MOF-derived materials are also attractive as high-performance supercapacitor electrodes, since they are able to provide effective contact between the electrode and electrolyte. For example, nanoporous carbon, prepared through calcinating a mixture of furfuryl alcohol and MOF-5 crystals, exhibited an ideal capacitor behavior with a specific capacitance of ∼100 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1.11 Moreover, many MOF-derived hybrid materials composed of carbon and faradaic electrode materials, such as a porous Fe3O4–carbon composite,45 a nanoporous Co3O4–carbon hybrid,46 and a nitrogen-doped carbon–CoS1.097 hybrid,25 have also been developed and used as electrode materials for supercapacitors. Benefiting from the synergistic effect of different components, these MOF-derived hybrid electrodes exhibited high specific capacitance and energy density.
To improve the electrical conductivity of MOF-derived electrode materials, we developed a conductive wrapping strategy, i.e. the Mo–MOF was wrapped by a GO film and subjected to a subsequent two-step annealing process to obtain a porous rGO/MoO3 composite (Fig. 8a).37 As evidenced by TEM images and Raman mapping (Fig. 8b and c), the rGO film with a thickness of ∼20 nm was coated on the porous MoO3 nanostructure, which not only acted as a conductive shell but also enhanced the mechanical strength of the obtained rGO/MoO3 composite. Moreover, the rGO films could also interconnect with each other to form a large electrically conductive network, which is beneficial for the improvement of the rate capability of the composite electrode. After assembling the rGO/MoO3 composite into an all-solid-state flexible supercapacitor, the fabricated device delivered a high specific capacitance of 404 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1. The flexible supercapacitor devices also exhibited good electrochemical and structural stabilities under varied bending statuses (Fig. 8d and e), which benefited from the unique micro-/nano-structure of the rGO/MoO3 composite. As shown in Fig. 8f, three supercapacitor devices that are connected in series can successfully light a light-emitting diode (LED), suggesting the potential application of the rGO/MoO3 composite in flexible energy storage devices. It is worth mentioning that the formation of the GO-wrapped Mo–MOF composite could be attributed to the interaction of the MOF and surface functional groups of GO. Therefore, this conductive wrapping strategy could be applicable to the preparation of other GO-wrapped MOF composites and their corresponding MOF-derived porous micro-/nanostructures, which can be used for high-performance energy storage applications.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration for the preparation procedure of the rGO-wrapped MoO3 porous structures (rGO/MoO3 composites). (b) TEM image of the rGO/MoO3 composite, indicating the rGO layers and porous structure of the composite. (c) Optical microscopy image and the corresponding Raman mappings of the rGO/MoO3 composite, indicating the coating of an rGO film on the MoO3 structure. (d) Schematic illustration showing the configuration of the fabricated all-solid-state flexible supercapacitors based on the rGO/MoO3 composites. (e) CV curves of the flexible supercapacitor under different bending states. Inset: photograph of a bent supercapacitor device (L = 4.3 cm). (f) Photograph of a red LED turned ON by a bent tandem cell fabricated through the connection of three supercapacitor devices in series. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2015, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
With a comprehensive understanding of the essential role of carbon in improving the performance of MOF-derived hybrid structures as well as the unique features of 2D materials, our group recently reported the preparation of a 2D square-like nitrogen-doped carbon–CoS1.097 hybrid, which is based on the precursor of an ultrathin 2D PPF-3 nanosheet with a thickness of ca. 12–43 nm (Fig. 9a and b).25 The resulting 2D carbon–CoS1.097 hybrid with a lateral size of ∼1.4 μm and a thickness of ∼24.5 nm is composed of numerous CoS1.097 NPs (∼10 nm) which are uniformly dispersed in the carbon matrix (Fig. 9c). Such an ultrathin nanostructure can not only provide plenty of exposed active sites which are directly connected to electrical conductive carbon networks, but also enable the effective contact of the electrolyte to both faces of the hybrid, leading to a short diffusion path length and enhanced performance. As expected, when used as the supercapacitor electrode, the 2D carbon–CoS1.097 hybrid showed a specific capacitance of 360.1 F g−1 at a current density of 1.5 A g−1, which is 33 times higher than that of the counterpart electrode derived from the PPF-3 bulk MOF crystal (Fig. 9d and e), suggesting the advantage of the electrode material with 2D morphology. Note that the 2D carbon–CoS1.097 hybrid contained a limited amount of CoS1.097 (only 21.0 wt%). Obviously, an improved supercapacitor performance of the hybrid electrode could be obtained at an optimized ratio of carbon to CoS1.097, which can be achieved through a rational design of 2D MOF compositions and appropriate heat treatment conditions.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation procedures of the 2D MOF (PPF-3) nanosheets and 2D square-like nitrogen-doped carbon–CoS1.097 (CoSNC) nanocomposites, respectively. (b and c) TEM images of PPF-3 nanosheets (b) and 2D CoSNC nanocomposites (c). (d) Charge–discharge curves of the 2D CoSNC nanocomposite electrodes. (e) Specific capacitance at different current densities for 2D CoSNC nanocomposite and bulk CoSNC composite electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
3.4 Other energy storage and conversion applications
In addition to the aforementioned applications, many MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures have also shown high activities in catalytic reactions, such as the ORR, oxygen evolution reaction (OER), and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). These reactions are essential for some energy storage and conversion devices, including lithium–oxygen (Li–O2) batteries and fuel cells.27,47–50 MOF-derived ORR catalysts, especially heteroatom-doped carbon materials and metal-/metal compound-carbon hybrids, are highly expected to be alternatives to conventional noble metal catalysts (e.g. Pt/C), because of their simple preparation process, low production cost, and improved catalytic stability. As is well known, the properties of materials are somehow dependent on their morphologies. Recent research has further demonstrated that the morphology of a catalyst plays an important role in improving its catalytic properties for the ORR.27,28 Using a cage-containing MOF as the precursor, Li et al. prepared a hybrid catalyst composed of graphene sheets and graphene tubes, which was used as a cathode for Li–O2 batteries.28 The used MOFs with a large cage size of 1.8 nm were prepared by using 4,6-tris(4-pyridyl)-1,3,5-triazine as a ligand. Such special structural feature of the cage-containing MOFs facilitated the subsequent incorporation of foreign substances, i.e. dicyandiamide (DCDA) and iron acetate, inside their pores to form the MOF-based hybrid, which was then used as the precursor for the preparation of varied carbon-based catalysts. After the subsequent calcination process of the obtained MOF-based hybrid at different temperatures, three carbon-based nanostructures with diverse morphologies, i.e. the onion-like carbon/Fe3C hybrid, N-doped carbon tubes and N-doped graphene sheet/graphene tube hybrid, were prepared. The formation of these graphitic carbon nanostructures can be attributed to the following factors: (1) the organic ligands and DCDA within the MOF hybrid served as the carbon sources; (2) the decomposition of the MOF hybrid generated Fe/Fe3C, which acted as the catalyst. When used as an ORR catalyst, the performance of the N-doped graphene sheet/graphene tube hybrid is higher than that of the other two prepared carbon-based nanostructures (i.e. the onion-like carbon/Fe3C hybrid and the N-doped carbon tube), which is also comparable to that of the Pt/C catalyst. Notably, this hybrid catalyst also exhibited a high half-wave potential in alkaline electrolyte (E1/2, 0.88 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode, RHE). The N-doped graphene sheet/graphene tube hybrid catalyst was further used as a cathode material, and then assembled in a Li–O2 battery using LiPF6 in tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether (TEGDME) as the electrolyte. The fabricated cell delivered a high initial discharge capacity up to 5300 mA h g−1 (calculated based on the mass of catalyst), as well as a good cycling stability with 73% capacity retention after 50 cycles at a relatively high current density of 400 mA g−1, suggesting the potential application of MOF-derived catalysts for Li–O2 batteries.
More recently, Xia et al. developed a facile method to synthesize a nitrogen-doped CNT hollow framework using ZIF-67 as the precursor (NCNTFs, Fig. 10).27 Note that the H2 atmosphere used in the calcination process played an essential role in the formation of CNTs, which enhanced the catalytic activity of the MOF-derived Co species for the formation of graphitic carbon nanostructures (Fig. 10a–c). On the contrary, the calcination of ZIF-67 without H2 only produced carbon-based materials with low graphitization degree (Fig. 10d), which is in agreement with the observations of many other related reports using ZIF-67 as the precursor for carbon materials. Moreover, the organic ligand of ZIF-67, i.e. 2-MeIM, also served as a carbon source for the growth of CNTs. The resultant nanomaterial was then used as an ORR catalyst, exhibiting a high half-wave potential (0.87 V, Fig. 10e), a smaller Tafel slope (64 mV dec−1) and an electron transfer number close to 4, superior to the conventional Pt/C catalyst. The resulting CNT framework also possessed an excellent catalytic stability, exhibiting 96% retention of its initial current density after testing for 100000 s (Fig. 10f).
 Fig. 10  (a and b) SEM and (c) TEM images of the nitrogen-doped CNT hollow frameworks derived from ZIF-67 (NCNTFs). (d) SEM image of the calcinated ZIF-67 in the absence of H2, indicating that the H2 atmosphere plays an important role in the synthesis of CNTs using MOFs as precursor. (e) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves at a rotation rate of 1600 r.p.m., and (f) chronoamperometric response at 0.6 V for the Pt/C catalyst and NCNTFs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 
Generally, the good ORR performance of the aforementioned two MOF-derived carbon hybrid structures could be attributed to their unique morphologies and structures. First, the unique carbon networks, which were constructed by the entangled graphitic carbons (i.e. CNTs and graphene), offered efficient electron transportation pathways to the hybrid catalysts. Second, these MOF-derived hierarchically porous structures possessed a large surface area (e.g. 513 m2 g−1 for the CNT framework27), which provided a high density of active sites for the ORR, leading to enhanced catalytic performances. Third, the unique compositions and crystalline structures of the MOFs also enabled the uniform dispersion of heteroatoms in the resultant carbon-based hybrid structures, which further enhanced the catalytic properties. Fourth, in comparison to amorphous carbon materials, graphitic carbon usually possesses high mechanical strength, resulting in good structural stability and cycling performance. It is worth mentioning that the residual metallic species in the MOF-derived CNT hollow framework might also partially contribute to the overall catalytic properties. Importantly, using MOF-based materials as the precursors/templates, hierarchical graphitic carbon nanostructures can be obtained. This straightforward preparation strategy can also be extended to other kinds of MOF-based precursors/templates, opening up numerous options to synthesize various novel carbon-based catalysts with enhanced performance. For the future research in this area, introduction of other heteroatoms, such as sulfur and boron, into the MOF-derived carbon structures could tune the electronic structures and the density of active sites, leading to further improved performance of Li–O2 batteries and fuel cells.
Obviously, a number of recently developed MOF-derived hybrid materials have shown promising potential in energy storage and conversion applications, which can be attributed to their unique hybrid micro-/nano-structures. For example, when used as a battery electrode, the void space in MOF-derived hollow spherical or non-spherical structures can effectively eliminate the volume change during the charge/discharge process, leading to a long cycle life. MOF-derived 2D hybrids with ultrathin thickness normally have a high density of surface sites, which are quite active for redox reaction or catalytic processes, such as the OER, ORR and HER. This feature makes MOF-derived 2D hybrids promising for application in supercapacitors and Li–O2 batteries. Owing to the unique chemical/physical properties of carbon nanomaterials, MOF-derived hierarchical carbon micro-/nano-structures are highly attractive for the construction of electrode materials for various energy storage/conversion applications. Substrate-supported MOF derivatives enable the simple fabrication of MOF-derived electrodes with controlled structures, which can be directly used for various applications, such as LIBs, Li–S batteries and supercapacitors. It is expected that more MOF-derived hybrid materials with novel structures and functions can be synthesized through rationally designing MOF-based materials and finely controlling their thermolysis process.
4. Conclusion
Owing to the current demand for high-performance energy storage and conversion applications, the development of advanced materials as electrodes or catalysts is of great importance. Recent research progress in MOF-related materials has demonstrated the powerful capability of utilizing MOF-based materials as precursors or scarifying templates for the preparation of various novel materials or materials with unique structures. To date, numerous MOF-derived materials with various compositions, morphologies, structures, properties and functionalities have been successfully produced and then used for a wide range of applications. MOF-derived materials are attractive candidates for electrode materials of high-performance rechargeable batteries. For example, MOF-derived carbon materials possessing high porosity and uniform pore size distribution can lead to a fast electron/mass transfer rate. The porous metal compounds derived from MOFs are able to greatly eliminate the volumetric expansion and pulverization problem.
MOF-derived hybrids with more complicated micro-/nano-structures have also been demonstrated in recent years, which are normally composed of more than two components assembling in different hierarchical levels. Within such kind of hybrids, each component has as special role and/or possesses a unique function, which can overcome the drawbacks of the individual counterparts and generate a synergistic effect for enhanced performance. Typically, MOF-derived metal oxide–carbon hybrids with hierarchically porous structures possess a number of appealing features, including electrical conductivity, a short diffusion path length for electrolyte ions, and structural stability. Due to their promising features, MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures have been intensively used in energy storage and conversion devices, such as LIBs, supercapacitors and fuel cells. Importantly, MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures are also suitable for many other applications, including solar cells, thermoelectric devices, piezoelectric devices, and water purification.
Previous studies have proven that MOFs can serve as versatile building blocks for the preparation of various materials, which might be difficult to be achieved by using other methods. Compared to conventional synthetic approaches for porous materials, especially those with multiple components or complicated hierarchical structures, using MOFs as precursors/templates has enormous advantages. First, the preparation process for MOF-derived porous materials is convenient and scalable. Second, the structures and compositions of the obtained MOF-derived products can be easily controlled. Third, a uniform distribution of each component in the prepared MOF-derived hybrid structures can be achieved. It can be expected that through rationally designing the preparation procedures or combining various mature synthetic technologies (e.g. wet- and dry-chemical methods), plenty of novel MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures with predetermined functionalities and properties will emerge, which can be used for a variety of applications.
Undoubtedly, rapid progress has been made in the preparation and application of MOF-derived materials over the past few years. However, this research field is still under development. More effort is required to realize the practical usage of MOF-derived micro-/nano-structures. Several challenges and possible research directions for future work in this area are described as follows. (1) Most of the reported studies are conducted by choosing existing and common type of MOFs, such as the ZIF and MIL series, as precursors/sacrificial templates, followed by investigating the properties of the resultant MOF-derived structures and their applications. However, MOFs with exclusively designed features are of great importance to realize the precisely controlled properties, functionalities and performance of MOF-derived structures. (2) Previous works have indicated that synthetic parameters strongly affect the compositions, structures and morphologies of the resultant MOF-derived hybrid nanomaterials. Therefore, a systematic investigation on revealing the relationship between the properties and structures of prepared MOF-derived materials is very important, and will direct the preparation of high-performance MOF-derived materials. Following this, the development of efficient synthetic routes with the capability of precisely manipulating features of MOF-derived materials is also important. (3) As for research using MOF-based hybrids (e.g. MOF–graphene hybrids) as the precursors/templates for MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures, an in-depth understanding of the interfacial interactions between MOFs and the other components is also very important, since it could provide guidance to optimize the synthetic process of MOF-based hybrids for enhanced performance. (4) Although MOF-derived hybrid materials have shown promising applications in energy storage and conversion, their volumetric energy densities are relatively low. This limitation mainly results from their porous structures with low density. To solve it, optimization of electrode processing techniques, such as engineering the microstructure and ratio of components within the hybrid electrode, is expected to increase the packing density without deteriorating the performance.
Acknowledgements
X. C. is thankful for the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51602284) and the “Thousand Talent Program” and “Qianjiang Scholars” program of Zhejiang Province in China. This work was supported by MOE under AcRF Tier 2 (ARC 19/15, no. MOE2014-T2-2-093; MOE2015-T2-2-057; MOE2016-T2-2-103) and AcRF Tier 1 (2016-T1-001-147; 2016-T1-002-051), and NTU under Start-Up Grant (M4081296.070.500000) in Singapore.
References
A. L. Mohana Reddy, S. R. Gowda, M. M. Shaijumon and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5045–5064 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Huang, C. Tan, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2185–2204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zou, X. Hu, Z. Li, L. Qie, C. Hu, R. Zeng, Y. Jiang and Y. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6622–6628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Ma, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13925–13931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, S. Hou, H. Zhang, W. Zeng, F. Yan, C. C. Li and H. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2400–2405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, C. Li, X. Ge, J. Ma, Z. Zhang, Q. Li, C. Wang and L. Yin, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 15–26 CrossRef CAS .
H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2013, 341, 1230444 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, H. B. Wu, S. Madhavi, H. H. Hng and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17388–17391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zheng, Y. Yang and Q. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Yang, S. Nam, T. Kim, J. H. Im, H. Jung, J. H. Kang, S. Wi, B. Park and C. R. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7394–7397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, H. Shioyama, H. Jiang, X. Zhang and Q. Xu, Carbon, 2010, 48, 456–463 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pachfule, D. Shinde, M. Majumder and Q. Xu, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 718–724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Wu, S. Wei, L. Zhang, R. Xu, H. H. Hng and X. W. Lou, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 10804–10808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, R. Cao, S. Jeong and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4988–4991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xia, A. Mahmood, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1837–1866 CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Han, X. Feng, J. Zhou, P. Qi and B. Wang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 307, 361–381 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Z. Song, X. Li, Q. Sun, N. Cheng, S. Lawes and X. Sun, Energy Storage Materials, 2016, 2, 35–62 CrossRef .
L. Hu, Y. Huang, F. Zhang and Q. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4186–4190 RSC .
C. Sun, J. Yang, X. Rui, W. Zhang, Q. Yan, P. Chen, F. Huo, W. Huang and X. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8483–8488 CAS .
H. Guo, T. Li, W. Chen, L. Liu, X. Yang, Y. Wang and Y. Guo, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 15168–15174 RSC .
W. Guo, W. Sun and Y. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11462–11471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cho, Y. H. Lee, H. J. Lee and M. Oh, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1720–1723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Cai, B. Liu, D. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Liu, B. Qu, X. Duan, Q. Li and T. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 183–192 CAS .
H. X. Zhong, J. Wang, Y. W. Zhang, W. L. Xu, W. Xing, D. Xu, Y. F. Zhang and X. B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14235–14239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Cao, M. Zhao, Y. Yu, B. Chen, Y. Huang, J. Yang, X. Cao, Q. Lu, X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, C. Tan and H. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6924–6927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhan and H. C. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3268–3281 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Xia, Y. Yan, N. Li, H. B. Wu, X. W. Lou and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15006 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, P. Xu, W. Gao, S. Ma, G. Zhang, R. Cao, J. Cho, H.-L. Wang and G. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1378–1386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, B. Zheng, X. Rui, W. Shi, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1404–1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Fang, J. Zhou, C. Liang, A. Pan, C. Zhang, Y. Tang, X. Tan, J. Liu and S. Liang, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 57–65 CrossRef CAS .
G. Huang, L. Zhang, F. Zhang and L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5509–5515 RSC .
D. Yu, B. Wu, L. Ge, L. Wu, H. Wang and T. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10878–10884 CAS .
X. Ge, Z. Li, C. Wang and L. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26633–26642 CAS .
Y. Zhao, X. Li, J. Liu, C. Wang, Y. Zhao and G. Yue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6472–6480 CAS .
Y. Hou, T. Z. Huang, Z. H. Wen, S. Mao, S. M. Cui and J. H. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400337 CrossRef .
J. Wei, Y. Feng, Y. Liu and Y. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22300–22310 CAS .
X. Cao, B. Zheng, W. Shi, J. Yang, Z. Fan, Z. Luo, X. Rui, B. Chen, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4695–4701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Han, P. Qi, S. Li, X. Feng, J. Zhou, H. Li, S. Su, X. Li and B. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8057–8060 RSC .
Z. Wang, X. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Cui, H. Pan, Z. Wang, B. Chen and G. Qian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7912–7916 CAS .
G. Xu, B. Ding, L. Shen, P. Nie, J. Han and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4490–4496 CAS .
K. E. deKrafft, C. Wang and W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2014–2018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, C. Dai, M. Jia, D. Liu, S. Bao, J. Jiang, M. Xu and C. M. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 16063–16070 CAS .
P. Qi, Y. Han, J. Zhou, X. Fu, S. Li, J. Zhao, L. Wang, X. Fan, X. Feng and B. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12391 RSC .
K. M. Choi, H. M. Jeong, J. H. Park, Y. B. Zhang, J. K. Kang and O. M. Yaghi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7451–7457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Meng, W. Chen, L. Zhao, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Y. Fu, F. Geng, J. Yu, X. Chen and C. Zhi, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 133–140 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Salunkhe, J. Tang, Y. Kamachi, T. Nakato, J. H. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6288–6296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Wu, B. Y. Xia, L. Yu, X. Y. Yu and X. W. Lou, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, F. Sun, Z. Xiang, Z. Shen, J. Yun and D. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 442–450 CAS .
S. Ma, G. A. Goenaga, A. V. Call and D. J. Liu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 2063–2067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Proietti, F. Jaouen, M. Lefevre, N. Larouche, J. Tian, J. Herranz and J. P. Dodelet, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 416 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Xiehong Cao
	Prof. Xiehong Cao received his BE degree in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Zhejiang University, China (2008). He completed his PhD with Prof. Hua Zhang at the School of Materials Science and Engineering in Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (2013). After working as a Research Fellow in the same group, he joined Zhejiang University of Technology (China) as a “Qianjiang Scholar” and a special-term Professor in the “Thousand Talent Program” of Zhejiang Province in 2015. His current research includes the synthesis of two-dimensional nanomaterials (e.g. graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides) and their applications in energy, the environment, sensors, etc.

Chaoliang Tan
	Chaoliang Tan received his BE and ME degrees in Applied Chemistry from Hunan University of Science and Technology (China) in 2009 and South China Normal University (China) in 2012, respectively. He then moved to the School of Materials Science and Engineering of Nanyang Technological University (Singapore) where he completed his PhD study under the supervision of Professor Hua Zhang in 2016. Since then, he has been working as a Research Follow in the same group. His research interests focus on the synthesis, characterization and applications of ultrathin two-dimensional nanomaterials (e.g. transition metal dichalcogenides) and their functional heterostructures/composites.

Melinda Sindoro
	Melinda Sindoro received her BSc in Chemistry and Biological Chemistry from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, in 2010. She just completed her PhD in Materials Chemistry (2016) with a focus on metal–organic frameworks and colloidal assembly at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. She is now a Research Fellow in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Nanyang Technological University, working with Professor Hua Zhang on novel nanomaterials.

Hua Zhang
	Prof. Hua Zhang obtained his BS and MS degrees from Nanjing University in 1992 and 1995, respectively, and completed his PhD with Prof. Zhongfan Liu at Peking University in 1998. As a Postdoctoral Fellow, he joined Prof. Frans C. De Schryver's group at Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (Belgium) in 1999, and then moved to Prof. Chad A. Mirkin's group at Northwestern University in 2001. After he worked at NanoInk Inc. (USA) and Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (Singapore), he joined the Nanyang Technological University in July 2006. His current research interests focus on the synthesis of ultrathin two-dimensional nanomaterials (e.g. metal nanosheets, graphene, metal dichalcogenides, metal–organic frameworks, etc.) and their hybrid composites for various applications in nano- and biosensors, clean energy, (opto-)electronic devices, catalysis, and water remediation; controlled synthesis, characterization and application of novel metallic and semiconducting nanomaterials, and epitaxial growth of heterostructures; etc.

Key learning points
(1) The unique advantages of preparation of hybrid micro-/nano-structures by using MOFs as precursors.
(2) The unique advantages of hybrid micro-/nano-structures in energy storage and conversion applications compared to other kinds of nanostructures.
(3) Summary of the typical MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures and their general synthesis methods.
(4) Summary of the performance of MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures in various energy storage and conversion applications.
(5) Demonstration of the performance enhancement through the rational design of MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of diverse types of MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures based on their components as well as distinctive structures. (b–e) Typical examples of various reported MOF-derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures. (b and c) TEM images of Ni–Fe binary oxide nanobox (b) and cube-in-box hollow structures (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM image of porous Co3O4 sheet-coated 3D nickel foam. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Inc. (e) TEM image of a 2D nitrogen-doped carbon–CoS1.097 composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 


Binary components

2D CoS1.097/N-doped carbon hybrid	Calcination of 2D PPF-3 sheets with sulfur	Supercapacitor	
25

N-doped porous carbon/graphene hybrid	Calcination of pre-synthesized ZIF-8/GO hybrid followed by removal of Zn	ORR	
24

CuO@NiO multilayer hollow sphere	Cation exchange of pre-synthesized Cu–BTC MOFs followed by calcination	LIB	
21

Carbon/sulfur porous hybrid polyhedron	Calcination of ZIF-8 followed by melt-diffusion process to embed sulfur	LIB	
13

ZrO2- or Al2O3-coated LiCoO2 particle	Coating UIO-66 or MIL-53 on LiCoO2 followed by calcination	Li–S battery	
43

Porous NiCo2O4/NiO hollow dodecahedron	Solvothermal treatment of ZIF-67 followed by calcination	LIB	
19

Porous carbon/sulfur hybrid nanoplate	Calcination of MOF-5 followed by melt-diffusion process to embed sulfur	Li–S battery	
40

Carbon/ZnO QD hybrid	Calcination of IRMOF-1	LIB	
10

ZnO- or Fe2O3-coated 3D graphene network	
In situ growth of ZIF-8 or MIL-88-Fe on 3D graphene network followed by calcination	Photocatalyts, LIB	
29

Ball-in-ball structured metal oxide hybrids (CuO/ZnO, Co3O4/ZnO, CuO/Co3O4, NiO/Co3O4)	Cation exchange of pre-synthesized MOFs followed by calcination	NIL	
22

N-Doped graphene sheet/graphene tube hybrid	Preparation of MOF–DCDA–iron acetate hybrid followed by calcination at 800–1100 °C	Li–O2 battery	
28

Onion-like carbon/Fe3C hybrid
β-NiS NP-porous carbon hybrid	Calcination of MOF-74 in H2/Ar followed by hydrothermal treatment	LIB	
39

rGO-Wrapped MoO3 porous structure	Preparation of GO/Mo–MOF hybrid followed by calcination	Supercapacitor	
37

Porous carbon/selenium hybrid sphere	Calcination of Ni-BTC followed by the acid wash and melt-diffusion process to embed selenium	Li–S battery	
42

Porous NiCo2O4/Co3O4 nanowire	Preparation of ZIF-67-coated cobalt carbonate hydroxide nanowire followed by the reaction with Ni(NO3)2 and then calcination	Supercapacitor	
32

ZnO- or Co3O4-coated nickel foam/carbon fiber	Deposition of Zn- or Co–MOFs on nickel foam/carbon fiber followed by calcination	LIB	
30

Fe2O3@NiCo2O4 porous nanocage	Preparation of Co3[Fe(CN)6]2@Ni3[Co(CN)6]2 core–shell nanocube followed by calcination	LIB	
31




Ternary and more components

Porous ZnO/ZnFe2O4/C octahedron	Synthesis of Fe-doped MOF-5 followed by calcination	LIB	
3

Fe2O3@TiO2/Pt octahedron	Calcination of pre-synthesized TiO2-coated MIL-101 followed by deposition of Pt NPs	Photocatalytic hydrogen generation	
41

N-Doped Fe/Fe3C@C/rGO core–shell-structured hybrid	Preparation of GO–Prussian blue hybrid followed by calcination	ORR	
35

ZnO@ZnO QD/C core–shell nanorod array-coated carbon cloth	Deposition of ZnO nanorod on carbon cloth followed by in situ growth of ZIF-8 on ZnO and calcination process	LIB	
5

rGO-Wrapped C–Co–S hybrid polyhedron	Calcination of ZIF-64 followed by coating GO and melt-diffusion process to embed sulfur	Li–S battery	
6

Yolk–shell ZnO/Ni3ZnC0.7/C hybrid microsphere	Calcination of pre-synthesized Zn–MOF/Ni hybrid	LIB	
34

Core–shell structured ZnO/ZnCo2O4/C porous hybrid sphere	Preparation of core–shell structured ZnCo–MOF hybrid followed by calcination	LIB	
33


 	Fig. 2  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of yolk–shell structured ZnO/Ni3ZnC0.7/C hybrid microspheres derived from Zn–MOF/Ni. Inset in (a): Schematic illustration of the ZnO/Ni3ZnC0.7/C hybrid microsphere. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the preparation procedure of rGO/C–Co–S hybrids derived from ZIF-67. (d) SEM, (e and f) TEM, and (g) elemental mapping images of the rGO/C–Co–S hybrids. Reproduced with permission from ref. 6. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the general preparation strategies from MOFs to their derived hybrid micro-/nano-structures: (1) preparation of MOFs with predesigned composition/morphology followed by a calcination process; (2) hybridization of MOFs with other materials followed by a calcination process; (3) calcination of MOFs followed by post-treatment.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of CuO@NiO hybrid microspheres with multiple shells from Cu–Ni-organic frameworks (Cu–Ni-BTC). (b and c) TEM images of the Cu–Ni-BTC (b) and CuO@NiO hybrid microspheres (c). (d) Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) spectrum obtained from different layers of CuO@NiO, indicating different Ni concentrations from the outer layer to inner core of the CuO@NiO hybrid microspheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a–c) SEM images of the ZIF-8/3DGN composite (a and b) and MIL-88-Fe/3DGN composite (c). (d) SEM image of the ZnO/3DGN composite. Insets in (c and d): Low-magnification SEM images of the MIL-88-Fe/3DGN composite (c) and the ZnO/3DGN composite (d). (e) TEM image of porous ZnO structures shown in (d). (f) SEM image of the Fe2O3/3DGN composite. Inset: high-magnification SEM image of the Fe2O3/3DGN composite. (g and h) Photographs of the ZnO/3DGN (g) and Fe2O3/3DGN composites (h). Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2014, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation procedure of Se-porous carbon sphere hybrids by melt-diffusion treatment of MOF-derived carbon spheres. (b–g) TEM images of MOF-derived porous carbon spheres (b–d), and Se-porous carbon sphere hybrids (e–g). The arrows in (c and f) indicate the pores of the MOF-derived carbon spheres (c) and the pores embedded with Se NPs (f), respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Cycling performances of the CuO@NiO hybrid and NiO microspheres derived from Cu–Ni-organic frameworks and Ni-BTC MOFs, respectively. (b) Cycle voltammogram (CV) profile and (c) charge–discharge curve in the 1st cycle of the CuO@NiO hybrid microspheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration for the preparation procedure of the rGO-wrapped MoO3 porous structures (rGO/MoO3 composites). (b) TEM image of the rGO/MoO3 composite, indicating the rGO layers and porous structure of the composite. (c) Optical microscopy image and the corresponding Raman mappings of the rGO/MoO3 composite, indicating the coating of an rGO film on the MoO3 structure. (d) Schematic illustration showing the configuration of the fabricated all-solid-state flexible supercapacitors based on the rGO/MoO3 composites. (e) CV curves of the flexible supercapacitor under different bending states. Inset: photograph of a bent supercapacitor device (L = 4.3 cm). (f) Photograph of a red LED turned ON by a bent tandem cell fabricated through the connection of three supercapacitor devices in series. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2015, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation procedures of the 2D MOF (PPF-3) nanosheets and 2D square-like nitrogen-doped carbon–CoS1.097 (CoSNC) nanocomposites, respectively. (b and c) TEM images of PPF-3 nanosheets (b) and 2D CoSNC nanocomposites (c). (d) Charge–discharge curves of the 2D CoSNC nanocomposite electrodes. (e) Specific capacitance at different current densities for 2D CoSNC nanocomposite and bulk CoSNC composite electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a and b) SEM and (c) TEM images of the nitrogen-doped CNT hollow frameworks derived from ZIF-67 (NCNTFs). (d) SEM image of the calcinated ZIF-67 in the absence of H2, indicating that the H2 atmosphere plays an important role in the synthesis of CNTs using MOFs as precursor. (e) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves at a rotation rate of 1600 r.p.m., and (f) chronoamperometric response at 0.6 V for the Pt/C catalyst and NCNTFs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
