Recent progress in the development of bimetallic photocatalysts for hydrogen generation  - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3DT52319E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3DT52319E
(Perspective)
Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 16243-16254Recent progress in the development of bimetallic photocatalysts for hydrogen generation

        
          
            Yvonne 
            Halpin
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mary T. 
            Pryce
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sven 
            Rau
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Danilo 
            Dini
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Johannes G. 
            Vos
          
          
        
      *a
aSRC for Solar Energy Conversion, School of Chemical Sciences, Dublin City University, Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland. E-mail: han.vos@dcu.ie
bAnorganische Chemie I, Universität Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany
cDepartment of Chemistry, University of Rome “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy
Received 
      23rd August 2013
    , Accepted 26th September 2013First published on 1st October 2013AbstractIn this contribution recent developments in the design and application of bimetallic photocatalysts for the generation of hydrogen via intramolecular processes are assessed. The basic concepts of such assemblies are discussed together with an overview of the factors and molecular issues that affect their potential as photocatalysts. Issues that so far have limited progress are discussed and suggestions for future directions are made.Yvonne HalpinYvonne Halpin obtained a Bachelor of Science degree in Chemical and Pharmaceutical Science in 2006 and in 2010 a PhD from Dublin City University on the electrochemical and spectroscopic analysis of a series of iron, ruthenium and osmium complexes with applications in hydrogen production and molecular electronics. She is at present working as a Postdoctoral Fellow on the development of commercially viable carbon neutral methods for hydrogen generation.Mary T. PryceMary Pryce obtained a BSc in Analytical Science from DCU in 1991. A PhD (1991–1994) was subsequently obtained in Organometallic Photochemistry. Post doctoral studies were carried out during 1995 and 1996 at the University of Milan in the area of asymmetric synthesis. Joined the School of Chemical Sciences at DCU in 1997, and is currently employed as a Senior Lecturer. Current research projects focus on; Hydrogen generation, CO2 reduction, CO-releasing molecules, porphyrin chemistry, and organometallic photochemistry.Sven RauSven Rau studied chemistry at the Friedrich-Schiller-University of Jena and Dublin City University. He obtained his Diploma in chemistry in 1997 and his PhD in 2000. Following his habilitation in 2007, he moved to the Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg in 2008. Since 2011, he leads the institute for materials and catalysis at the university Ulm. His research interests are focused on the synthesis and characterization of photoredoxactive metal complexes their applications as photochemical molecular devices in light driven catalytic conversions, interaction with surfaces and living matter.Danilo DiniDanilo Dini obtained his PhD in Materials Science at the University of Rome “La Sapienza” (Italy). He held postdoctoral positions in the Institut fur Physikaliche Chemie of Max-Planck-Institut in Berlin (Germany) with Prof. G. Ertl, and in the University of Tuebingen (Germany) with Prof. M. Hanack. After a period as a researcher at Dublin City University (Ireland) in the group of Prof. J. G. Vos, he joined the University of Rome “La Sapienza” (Italy) holding a position as Assistant Professor at the Department of Chemistry. His main research interests are photoelectrochemistry, photophysics of conjugated molecular materials and solar energy conversion devices. He has authored 90 peer-reviewed articles in international journals.Johannes G. VosHan Vos is Emeritus Professor of Inorganic Chemistry at Dublin City University. His research efforts are in the design of supramolecular systems containing transition metal complexes. Of particular interest are the synthesis, photophysical and electrochemical properties of dinuclear and polymeric ruthenium and osmium polypyridyl complexes both in solution and when immobilised on solid substrates. The applications of such compounds as optical and electrochemical sensors and in molecular electronics are investigated. At present his research is directed towards the development of novel environmentally friendly sustainable energy sources using photocatalytic and electrocatalytic pathways.
Introduction
Man-made climate change is now recognised as one of the biggest challenges facing mankind. The continuing use of fossil fuels is leading to ever increasing levels of CO2, recently passing the 400 ppm level. The realisation of this has led to the establishment of the UN driven Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Kyoto Protocol in 1997. Since then EU and G8 leaders agreed in 2009 that CO2 emissions must be cut by 80% by 2050. This will require, for example, 95% decarbonisation of the road transport sector and fuel cell vehicles based on hydrogen will be required as part of the transport mix. Therefore, the volume of hydrogen required will increase substantially. This approach has led to the concept of the “hydrogen economy” where the use of energy will not result in CO2 emissions as is the case today. At present carbon neutral hydrogen generation is too expensive however, and in a recent study “A portfolio of power-trains for Europe: a fact based analysis”,1 it is estimated that fuel-cell systems costs will decrease by 90% by 2020. Currently most hydrogen is produced from fossil fuels by Steam Methane Reforming and Coal Gasification.2 The process produces large amounts of CO2 and to make this method environmentally friendly carbon capture is required, which will in turn increase the production costs of hydrogen. At present a small amount (4%) is produced by electrolysis of water but its production costs are several times that of the steam reforming method as expensive metals such as platinum are used. Nevertheless the use of hydrogen in transport applications has been championed by the EC driven “Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking Task Force”, mostly driven by industry, and in California, Germany, Italy, Japan and Australia hydrogen pilot projects have been carried out successfully.3 However, in order to develop a hydrogen based economy, novel environmentally friendly carbon neutral methods for hydrogen generation are urgently required.
Many different approaches are advocated as options for energy sources for the future, ranging from nuclear, to wind and wave power, all with concomitant advantages and disadvantages. However, in terms of the potential amount of energy that can be delivered solar energy stands apart, as in one hour enough solar energy hits the earth's surface to supply the amount consumed through human activity for one year. Although only a small fraction of this energy can be captured, that small fraction represents an important part of our future energy requirements.4 Existing technologies such as photovoltaic cells are well established for energy production, providing solutions at a local level. The prevalent crystalline silicon based solar cells are being augmented by the Grätzel type cell, developed two decades ago. The design of which is based upon a molecular approach where a light absorbing dye is immobilised on a nanocrystalline TiO2 electrode surface to generate a light driven electrical current.5 However, the conversion of light into electrical current has an inherent disadvantage, as is the case for wind and wave technologies in that the energy produced has to be used instantly. Thus the next step in the development of an economy that can rely on sustainable energy production is the development of a technology that can store solar energy. A potential method to achieve this is to mimic nature6 by converting light energy directly into chemical energy, which can be stored. This realisation has led to the development of novel technologies, capable of producing “solar fuels” such as hydrogen from water or CO and formic acid, by solar driven CO2 reduction.
Semiconductors, such as TiO2 and related non-molecular nanomaterials are known photocatalysts for the reduction of CO27 and the generation of hydrogen8 from water. However, their large band gap does not allow for efficient light absorption in the visible part of the solar spectrum. Since the late 1970s there has been increasing interest in the use of molecular components as solar dyes absorbing in the visible part of the spectrum. In these studies the intermolecular approach was taken where mixtures of a light absorbing moiety and a catalytic centre are utilised to produce solar fuels. In these systems the photosensitiser is irradiated and electron transfer from the excited state of the sensitiser to the catalytic centre occurs. Sacrificial electron donors such as triethylamine (TEA) are added to regenerate the dye (see Fig. 1).9 Extensive studies have shown that the catalytic activity of these systems is often limited by the stability of the molecular components.10 Another drawback in these intermolecular systems is the efficiency, which is inevitably limited by diffusion processes required to bring the sensitiser and the catalytic centre close enough to ensure the occurrence of the electron transfer step. More recently the intramolecular option has been considered and this has led to the development of a wide range of bimetallic complexes that act as intramolecular photocatalytic centres as shown in Fig. 1 and 2. Since 2006 investigations focussed on both inter- and intramolecular assemblies have attracted much attention and the results of these studies have been documented in a number of recent reviews.11
 Fig. 1  Intermolecular versus intramolecular photocatalytic hydrogen production from water. PS = photosensitiser, S = sacrificial agent. 
 Fig. 2  Basic mechanism of photocatalytic hydrogen production with 1 as photocatalyst. 
The aim of this perspective is to assess progress in intramolecular photocatalysis since our Dalton Transactions review in 2007,12 and focus on issues which should be considered when developing intramolecular photocatalytic assemblies for solar fuel production. Examples of important issues are the design and synthesis of such intramolecular assemblies, since the electronic properties controlling vectorial electron transfer from the sensitiser to the catalyst are central components. This means that the molecular components in the assembly should be chosen with care. The importance of the relationship between the bridging and peripheral ligands and the excitation wavelength will be discussed. The composition of the photocatalytic solution and the involvement of the sacrificial agents are also included. A number of results obtained in our laboratories are discussed and compared with those reported in the literature. Where appropriate, comparisons with intermolecular systems will be made. The structures of the compounds discussed in this overview are shown in Fig. 3. Another important factor to consider is whether the hydrogen is generated by the intramolecular assembly or in an intermolecular manner via decomposition of the photocatalysts into separate components.
 Fig. 3  Structures of photocatalysts 1–15 discussed in the text. Precursors are the photosensitisers without the catalytic centres attached and when cited these are indicated with “Xa”, where X is 1–15. TON values are after 18 hours unless otherwise stated. * See text. 
Understanding and optimising photocatalytic behaviour

Experimental conditions. 
In recent years many photocatalytic studies have been carried out,11–14 with the aim of identifying the role played by each component in the intramolecular assembly and the parameters effecting optimisation of the photocatalytic performance. The light source used in these experiments is normally chosen to correspond to the lowest energy band in the UV/Vis spectrum of the sensitiser. The amount of hydrogen produced is usually reported in turnover numbers (TON), or as a turnover frequency (TOF). For the examples discussed from our group photocatalytic experiments were carried out in acetonitrile containing a photocatalyst concentration of 4 × 10−5 M in the presence of 2.15 M TEA as the sacrificial agent and between 0–15% water. The amount of hydrogen obtained was determined by gas chromatography and is the average of three independent measurements.


Design features. 
As outlined in our previous review12 the reasoning behind the investigation of dinuclear photocatalysts for the photogeneration of hydrogen, is the potential of such assemblies to engage in intra- rather than inter-molecular electron transfer processes. The compound [(tbbipy)2Ru(tpphz)PdCl2](PF6)2 (1), where tbbipy = 4,4′-di-tert-butyl-2,2′-bipyridine and tpphz = tetrapyrido[3,2-a:2′,3′-c:3′′,2′′-h:2′′′,3′′′-j]phenazine (see Fig. 2) has been studied in great detail and represents the first example of a photocatalyst of this type13 and will be used as a reference. This compound typically produces hydrogen in acetonitrile containing 10% water with a TON of 210 over an 18 hour period using a 470 nm LED radiation source.
To ensure that such an assembly is capable of producing hydrogen, efficient electron transfer has to occur from the light absorbing ruthenium centre to the palladium moiety that acts as the catalytic centre. As outlined above, a sacrificial agent, e.g. TEA, is required to re-reduce the light absorbing Ru centre and allows the next excitation to take place. The overall process can be described as shown in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  Proposed pathway for photocatalytic hydrogen generation. B = bridging ligand, S = solvent. 
It is important to realise that sacrificial agents such as TEA can create problems and may participate in the photocatalytic system since they decompose after the initial electron transfer and produce both protons and electrons in dark reactions as shown in Scheme 2 below.
 Scheme 2  Decomposition pathway of TEA after electron donation to the sensitiser. 
During the decomposition process two protons and one further electron are produced. The formation of these reactive species may be at least partially responsible for the decomposition of the photocatalytic assemblies.
The intramolecular approach discussed here assumes that the ability of the processes outlined in Scheme 1 and Fig. 2 to yield significant amounts of hydrogen will depend on the rate of electron transfer from the light absorbing centre to the catalytic Pd moiety. The approach taken to achieve efficient vectorial electron transfer is that the bridging ligand, tpphz (B), has a lower π* energy level than the peripheral ligand (tbbipy in this case) which will generate a downhill energy gradient from the excited state located on the ruthenium centre to the catalytic Pd centre. For this reason a phenazine based bridging ligand was introduced. However, when taking this approach one needs to take into account a fast back reaction.
To obtain further information concerning the electronic properties of compound 1 detailed investigations have been carried out on the photophysical properties of this compound, including time resolved resonance Raman and picosecond (ps) transient absorption studies.14 These measurements were carried out in CH3CN and in the absence of a sacrificial agent in order to evaluate the photophysical properties of the assembly under non-catalytic conditions. An overview of the dynamics of electron-excitation transfer processes as evaluated by our study is given in Scheme 3.
 Scheme 3  Electron transfer dynamics of 1 and its precursor complex 1a. Localisation of the photoexcited electron is illustrated by shaded areas. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14. 
This scheme shows a comparison of the photophysical behaviour of the mononuclear precursor complex 1a and the dinuclear photocatalyst 1. In both compounds the initially populated singlet metal-to-ligand charge-transfer excited states (1MLCT) are based on the tbbipy/phenanthroline moieties. This first excited state successively undergoes relaxation to a 3MLCT state, which is located on the phenanthroline part of tpphz bridging ligand. For both compounds the formation of the phenanthroline-centred 3MLCT state from the initially populated mixture of singlet states takes place within 1.2 ps for the precursor 1a and 0.8 ps for compound 1. However, there is a considerable difference in the decay of this triplet excited state. The decay time for 1a is 240 ps, while for 1 a decay time of 5 ps is observed. This decay is assigned to a transition from the equilibrated phenanthroline-centred 3MLCT to an intra-ligand-charge-transfer (ILCT) state localised on the phenazine unit. These data show that the Pd(II) centre significantly influences the electronic structure of the bridging ligand by creating a significantly higher driving force for the formation of the phenazine-centred ILCT state. For 1 this state further decays over 310 ps giving rise to the population of a long-lived ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT) state on the Pd(II) centre, the decay of which was not observed on the time range accessible. The presence of the excited electron on the phenazine part of the bridging ligand is confirmed by electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy. The final reduction of the Pd(II) centre was expected to coincide with the dissociation of a Cl− anion. This was supported by the observation that the catalytic activity of 1 is completely inhibited by the addition of Cl− to the catalytic mixture during catalysis and by DFT calculations.13 Further confirmation for the interaction of the Pd centre with the excited state of the bridging ligand is the fact that while for the precursor complex emission is observed at 650 nm with a lifetime of 240 ns, for 1 a relatively weaker emission at the same wavelength with a lifetime of <20 ns is noted. These results demonstrate that the compound behaves as expected on the basis of the principles of the molecular design chosen.
An important observation from the above section is that two different excited states localised either on the bridge or on the peripheral ligands, are involved in the initial absorption processes. Scheme 3 displays that upon initial light absorption of the peripheral ligands a fast population of the phenanthroline bridge orbitals occurs. This behaviour is expected if we consider the structural features of the complex 1 we have designed: the excited state on the bridging ligand is at lower energy with respect to the excited state localised on the peripheral ligands. This leads to a number of questions: first, how the photocatalytic efficiency of a particular compound is affected by the wavelength of excitation and, secondly, how important is the nature of the peripheral ligands? These issues will be addressed in the following sections.


Wavelength dependence. 
As outlined above, the photophysical behaviour of 1 indicates that upon light absorption the first populated excited state is located on the peripheral ligands. Moreover, the reaction pathway requires that population of the bridge takes place to allow for the photoinduced electron transfer to the catalytic centre. However, whether this intramolecular electron transfer process is efficient or not depends not only on the difference between the excited state energies of the peripheral and bridging moieties but also on the strength of their electronic coupling. The effect of the excitation wavelength on the hydrogen generation was assessed using model compound 1 and the iridium compounds 5 and 6.
In the case of compound 1 the light source was varied systematically from 400 to 530 nm. Fig. 4 shows that although the TON values obtained were highest when the irradiation wavelength approached the absorption maximum of the peripheral ligand, the values obtained at lower energies of excitation are considerably higher than expected from simple considerations based exclusively on the values of extinction coefficients at that wavelength.15 This figure shows the dependency of the catalytic activity (TON) on the irradiation wavelength, together with the MLCT absorption spectrum and the oscillator strength of 1 calculated by time-dependent DFT. This figure shows that in the range 450 to 550 nm the extinction coefficient tails off more steeply than the TON values (Fig. 4, left). Thus, the catalytic activity of 1 does not strictly follow the absorption spectrum. This becomes even more evident when the TON values are converted into a catalytic efficiency spectrum, Φ(λ), which was calculated from the ratio of the TON values to the extinction coefficient. Fig. 4b shows that Φ(λ) increases with increasing wavelength in the range between 400 and 530 nm. According to this, the absorption of photons with lower energy leads to a higher catalytic activity than the absorption of high energy photons. The explanation for this behaviour is the wavelength dependence of the localisation of the initially and predominantly populated MLCT state as outlined below.
 Fig. 4  (A) Absorption spectrum of 1 in acetonitrile (—), TON spectrum (●), and the calculated oscillator strengths of the Sn states (grey). (B) Efficiency spectrum Φ(λ) of the photon-to-hydrogen conversion of the catalytic process calculated as the ratio of the TON values to the extinction coefficient. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15. 
Considering that direct population of the bridge takes place at lower wavelengths, it appears that the catalytic efficiency is strongly correlated with the electron density located on the bridging ligand. Thus one way of optimising a photocatalyst, is ensuring that light absorption leads to direct population of a high portion of bridging ligand-localised excited states at all incident wavelengths, especially since polychromatic sunlight is regarded as our future energy source. This might be realised by exchanging the terminal tbbpy-ligands for ligands, such as bibenzimidazoles, possessing high energy 1MLCT states, that do not participate in the first excited process, but do stabilise a ruthenium(II) centre. These experiments show that by manipulation of the irradiation wavelength, different parts of the molecule can be excited, i.e. either bridging ligand or peripheral ligands and that this can have important consequences for the capacity of the compound to generate hydrogen.
Another example of a wavelength dependent photocatalytic process was observed for Ir(III) based compounds 5 and 6.16 The greater ligand-field stabilisation energy of the third row elements imparts an important advantage to Ir(III) complexes over Ru(III). For a second row element, direct population of the triplet metal centred (3MC) excited state can result in ligand expulsion followed by decomposition, which is not the case for the Ir(III) based analogues.17 Consequently, Ir(III) compounds should exhibit greater stability as photosensitisers. This increased photostability is observed for a range of iridium complexes acting as photocatalysts for the photogeneration of hydrogen through an intermolecular mechanism of excitation transfer in the studies conducted by Bernhard and co-workers.18,19 Surprisingly, very few single component systems based on iridium have been studied for the photocatalytic production of hydrogen through an intramolecular approach. Examples are Ir–Co systems of Sakai20 and Artero21 that are discussed in the catalytic centre section below.
In the iridium studies carried out by Bernhard and co-workers,18,19 visible light was used for the irradiation of the reaction mixtures. This is somewhat surprising since Ir(III) complexes generally exhibit only a weak absorption in the visible region, while in the UV region much higher extinction coefficients are observed. For example, the electronic properties of Ir(III) cyclometallated complexes are characterised by strong ligand-based transitions in the UV region that may be inter- or intra-ligand in character, while in the visible part of the electronic spectrum, weak MLCT bands between 400 and 500 nm are observed. To investigate whether irradiation into the stronger ligand-based UV transitions would yield higher TONs, compounds 5 and 6 were irradiated by us at both 470 and 350 nm under the same experimental conditions.16 Importantly, for both compounds 5 and 6 the TON values obtained under 350 nm irradiation were 65 and 16, respectively. However, upon irradiation at 470 nm TON values of 308 and 254 were obtained for compounds 5 and 6, respectively. This is unexpected since the extinction coefficients of the intramolecular Ir–Pd compound 6 at 470 nm is 1760 M−1 cm−1 while at 350 nm the extinction coefficient is significantly larger with 36312 M−1 cm−1. For the analogous Pt analogue 5 the molar extinction coefficients of 1350 and 22290 M−1 cm−1 were determined. This observation shows that TON values do not necessarily increase with the probability of the electronic transitions.
The data obtained may, therefore, suggest that excitation of the intra and inter ligand based transitions does not lead to efficient electron transfer from the photosensitiser to the catalytic centre, while electron transfer is observed upon population of MLCT states based on the bridge. The transitions which have so far not been considered are those involving the catalytic centres. The Pd centre present in compound 6 has a similar coordination environment as [Pd(ppy)Cl2]2, where ppy stands for phenylpyridine. For ppy based Pd compounds MLCT based electronic absorptions are observed around 350 nm with extinction coefficients of about 4000 M−1 cm−1.22 The analogous Pt compound has similar absorption features in the same region.23 To further investigate these surprising observations the location of the low-energy excited states of the Λ-isomer of compound 5 was analysed using time dependent DFT. These calculations indicate that 470 nm irradiation is likely to populate the lowest energy singlet and/or triplet excited states where electron density is moved from the Ir centre (including the cyclometallated ligands) towards the pyridylbipyridyl bridging ligand and to a lesser extent towards the Pd centre. Thus, the Pd centre would be a better reducing agent following excitation at this wavelength. In contrast, following irradiation at 350 nm, a transition within the Pd MLCT set of states should take place with electron transfer occurring from the PdCl2 moiety towards the bridging ligand. Such an electron drift would diminish the reducing ability of the Pd centre and support the variation in TON with excitation wavelength. This study is extremely important since it shows that when selecting a suitable excitation wavelength for photocatalytic studies the choice should not simply be made on the basis of the transition with the highest extinction coefficient, but should also consider the nature of the electronic transition. The computational results also explain the increased TON values observed upon irradiation at 350 nm for the intermolecular compounds 5a and 6a as discussed below, since in these cases no Pd or Pt based ligand based transitions are present in the photosensitiser.16


Nature of the peripheral ligands. 
The wavelength dependent behaviour of compound 1 discussed above suggests that direct population of 3MLCT states on the bridging ligand, a process expected to occur at shorter wavelength than that for the excitation of peripheral ligands, leads to increased efficiency in hydrogen generation. The reduced efficiency of the photon-to-hydrogen conversion Φ(λ) (see Fig. 4) via direct population of excited states based on peripheral ligands, suggests that the decay of the peripheral ligands excited state to the ground state competes with electron transfer from the peripheral to the bridging ligand. Such behaviour may be related to unfavourable electronic coupling needed for populating the bridge-based orbitals, or to the slow quenching by the sacrificial agent. This suggests that an increase in catalytic efficiency can be obtained by manipulating the nature of the peripheral ligands. Interestingly, such behaviour is observed for compounds 7 and 8 shown in Fig. 3.24 The absorption features of the two compounds are not significantly different. The bridge utilised, which contains a pyrazine unit, has the lowest MLCT state based most probably on the bridging ligand, and is observed at about 530 nm.25 When R = H, no hydrogen evolution was observed. However, upon the introduction of an ester group a TON of 400 was obtained after 18 h irradiation. This observation suggests that esterification results in the formation of peripheral ligands with better π-acceptor properties. This will lead to a lowering of the π*-energy levels of these peripheral ligands and an enhanced electronic coupling with the bridging ligand.


Nature of the bridging ligand. 
In the supramolecular bimetallic assemblies under discussion the choice of the bridging ligand is central to efficient hydrogen generation and careful consideration of its electronic properties and the distance between the light harvesting centre and the catalytic region is therefore necessary. The electronic properties of the bridging ligand are for example strongly dependent on its shape as observed for compounds 9 and 10 (Fig. 3) For compound 9 a TON value of 130 after 18 hours irradiation was obtained (Fig. 5), whereas compound 10 produced no hydrogen.26 This difference in behaviour was attributed to the location of the LUMO. Resonance Raman and DFT calculations indicate that for compound 9 this orbital is based on the bridging ligand, while for 10 it is based mainly on the bipy ligands and the Ru centre. This latter arrangement does not favour electron transfer from the sensitiser to the catalyst. In addition to that, the considerably shorter lifetime of the excited state of 10 compared to 9 (>10 vs. 100 ns) could represent another contributing factor.26
 Fig. 5  Time-dependence of the TON for H2 evolution in the presence of 10% water for compound 9 (blue) and its precursor 9a with [Pd(CH3CN)2Cl2] in a (1:1) ratio (red). 
Similar studies involving a change in bridging ligands have been carried out by Rau and co-workers.27 Structural modifications of the bridging ligand of 1 were considered and the photocatalytic properties of compounds 2 and 3 were investigated. For 2, the phenanthroline moiety was brominated and as a result a TON value of 69 was obtained after 18 h of irradiation. For compound 3 the pyrazine ring of tpphz was replaced by an acridine moiety and a value of 139 was found. This compares with a value of 210 for compound 1 under the same conditions (acetonitrile with 10% water and 2 M TEA). This variation in TONs shows that even relatively small structural modifications of the bridging ligand can result in a considerable difference in photocatalytic behaviour.


The nature of the catalytic centre. 
So far the discussion has centred on catalytic centres based on Pd or Pt. In this section some alternative options are considered. Brewer and co-workers have investigated compounds 11 and 12 (see Fig. 3) using an assembly able to act as a 2-electron collector. The trinuclear species consists of two ruthenium centres as the light absorbers and a rhodium electron collector/catalytic centre.28 In their studies they investigated the effect of changing the nature of the halide on the Rh catalytic centre. The photophysical properties of compounds 11 and 12 indicate that the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) is Ru based and dπ in nature, while the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital having dσ* character is located on the Rh centred bridge of the assembly. This orientation of the molecular orbitals results in a low lying Ru → Rh metal-to-metal charge transfer (3MMCT) excited state and the Rh centre takes on the role of electron acceptor in the molecule. Following electron transfer from Ru to the Rh metal centre, Rh+ is formed and it is this species which is responsible for hydrogen generation, halide loss being central to the catalytic process. The results obtained show that replacement of Cl− (11) with Br− (12) did not result in significant photocatalytic activity as the TON value only increased from 28 for the chloride to 38 for the bromide containing compound after 4 hours of irradiation. However, in later studies they observed greatly improved TONs for the bromide containing compound after changing the catalytic conditions. By changing the solvent from acetonitrile to DMF, increasing the headspace, purging the system of hydrogen and by increasing the concentration of the sacrificial agents the TONs for hydrogen formation increased to 280 after 19.5 h and a value of 820 was found after 50 h.28
Artero and co-workers have carried out detailed investigations on the potential of Co centres as catalysts for hydrogen generation.21 Such an approach is important since one of the drivers in the design of economically viable photocatalytic systems for hydrogen generation from solar power is the cost and availability of the molecular components. The authors critically examined the effect of structural variation on the catalytic efficiency for hydrogen generation by systematic manipulation of the bridging ligand and the nature of the photosensitiser. In these studies they varied the molecular compositions of the bridge as well at the peripheral ligands and investigated compounds 13–15 (see Fig. 3). The Ru–Co complexes exhibit catalytic activity for the photochemical production of hydrogen. In such complexes, the pyridine ring of the bridging ligand, either (4-pyridine)oxazolo-[4,5-f]phenanthroline (14) or (4-pyridine)imidazolo-[4,5-f]phenanthroline) (13) is axially coordinated to a cobaloxime centre. A TON of 56 after 4 h (and 103 after 15 h when a 350 nm UV cut-off filter was used) was reported for 14 in acetone using Et3NHBF4 as the proton source. Altering the structure of the bridge in 14, by the replacement of the oxazolo moiety with an imidazolo unit to form compound 13, led to a TON of 104 after 4 h under the same conditions. Thus the nature of the bridge influences directly the capacity of the photocatalyst for generating hydrogen. This was further confirmed by examining the photocatalytic activity of individual Ru and cobaloxime units, which demonstrated no hydrogen was detected in the absence of the bridging ligand. Therefore, the bridging ligand facilitates electron transfer from the Ru photoactive centre to the catalytic cobaloxime centre either through bonds or by an outer-sphere mechanism. An investigation of the iridium analogue (15) of the Ru compound (13), under the same catalytic conditions yielded an enhanced hydrogen production, with a TON of 210 after 15 h. This study elegantly demonstrates how first row transition metals, when coupled with a suitable light harvesting unit, can produce photocatalytic devices that are economically viable for use in the photocatalytic generation of molecular hydrogen.
The Ir–Co assembly 4 was considered by Sakai et al.20 Using visible light irradiation for 8 hours a TON value of 20 was reported for this compound. Based on NMR and electronic absorption spectroscopy, the authors suggested that compound 4 forms by self-assembly (the Ir/Co ratio used was 3:1). The TON values are given with respect to the Co concentration. This value dropped to 10 for the corresponding multicomponent system using the model compounds [Ir(ppy)2(bipy)]+, and [Co(bipy)3]3+. It is noteworthy that the bridge utilised is not conjugated and thus is not expected to promote intramolecular electron transfer.


Is the nature of the photocatalytic process intra- or intermolecular?. 
There has been concern in the literature whether the intramolecular systems, in particular those containing Pd moieties as catalytic centres, are acting as supramolecular assemblies or that hydrogen is generated by colloids formed after the decomposition of the intramolecular assembly.29,30 In the latter case the process would be inter- rather than intramolecular in nature. To investigate this issue we have carried out a number of comparative experiments with the ruthenium species 8avs.8 and 9avs.9 (see Fig. 3).26 The difference between the amounts of hydrogen produced by the intra- and intermolecular experiments carried out for the ruthenium based compound 9 and a mixture of its precursor 9a are 125 and 70, respectively, following 8 hours of irradiation (see Fig. 5). No induction period was observed and hydrogen production accelerates reaching the highest productivity after ca. 3.5 h for compound 9, and ca. 5.5 h for the mixture of its precursor in the presence of [Pd(acetonitrile)2Cl2]. The time dependent behaviour is very different with the intramolecular compound having a higher efficiency with respect to the bimolecular mixture, thus indicating that the intramolecular mechanism is the most efficient route for hydrogen generation, and that decomposition leading to colloid formation, does not represent an important contributing factor for producing hydrogen. Artero and co-workers, using cobalt catalysts, also observed higher TONs with the intramolecular mechanism with respect to the corresponding intermolecular route.21 For compound 8 a different behaviour was observed. For the intramolecular compound, a TON of 400 is observed after 18 h of irradiation, whereas the bimolecular mixture gave a similar value of 450 under the same conditions.24 These results suggest that in both cases intermolecular photocatalysis is observed or that the dinuclear compound 8 is formed in situ. Further studies are required to better understand the behaviour observed with this bridging ligand.
Intermolecular experiments were also carried out using the iridium compound 5a.16 At 350 nm the 1:1 mixtures of 5a with [Pt(CH3CN)2Cl2], and 5a with [Pd(CH3CN)2Cl2] yielded at 350 nm TON values of 117 and 124 respectively, while at 470 nm values of 166 and 245 were obtained. The values obtained at 350 nm are higher than those obtained with the photocatalyst 5 and 6. This could be due to the absence of the Pd or Pt based MLCT states present in the bimetallic compounds that limit the photocatalytic processes at that wavelength of analysis. This observation is a strong indication that at 350 nm the “inter- and intramolecular” reactions follow a different mechanism, where for the intramolecular case using the bimetallic compounds 5 and 6 the formation of hydrogen is reduced by the presence of Pd or Pt based MLCT states. These states are absent in the intermolecular case. The values obtained for the intermolecular approach at 470 nm are similar to those obtained for compound 5 and 6 that display values of 308 and 254, respectively. From these values no clear pattern can be deduced about the mechanism that controls hydrogen formation at 470 nm.16


Kinetic considerations. 
The search for effective intramolecular photocatalytic devices has mainly been driven by the argument that electron transfer between the photosensitiser and the coordinatively bound catalytic centre will be faster with respect to what is observed in the intermolecular case.12,13 As a result of that observation higher efficiencies for hydrogen production are expected via the intramolecular route. In the intermolecular case physical diffusion is required and electron transfer between the photoexcited photosensitiser PS* and the catalyst requires high frequency of reactive collisions.31 The results discussed above show that in most cases the intramolecular photocatalytic process leads to TON values higher than those determined in the analogous intermolecular investigations. However, the improvement is generally less than an order of magnitude. Kinetic measurements have the potential to offer critical insights into the overall process in photocatalytic hydrogen generation for both inter- and intramolecular approaches. To date only a limited number of kinetic studies have been reported for the intramolecular case. To assess the importance of the electron transfer rates between the photosensitiser and the catalyst in the overall photocatalytic process, some typical examples will be considered. The discussion will mainly be concerned with electron transfer from the photosensitiser to the catalytic centre.
A good example of a kinetic study on intermolecular systems was carried out by Hamm and co-workers who demonstrated how time resolved IR spectroscopy can be used to determine electron transfer and the quenching rate for a number of rhenium carbonyl photosensitisers with Co(III) glyoxime as catalyst.32,33 The reaction pathways and associated rate data obtained in DMF are outlined in Scheme 4,34 where [Re(NCS)(CO)3bipy] acts as the PS, [Co(dmgH)2] (dmgH2 = dimethylglyoxime) as the catalytic centre, while TEOA acts as the sacrificial agent and [HTEOA][BF4] as the hydrogen donor. Following excitation of the rhenium complex, a 3MLCT based excited state is generated, which undergoes reductive quenching in the presence of TEOA with kq = 9.7 × 107 M−1 s−1. This step is followed by electron transfer (k1 = 1.3 × 108 M−1 s−1) to the cobalt centre (CoII → CoI). The lifetime of the reduced species, PS− varies from 8.9 to 2.7 μs when the concentration of the CoII catalyst is increased from 1 to 3 mM. Following this electron transfer step the cobalt centre is protonated (CoI → CoIII_H). The formation of this cobalt hydride intermediate leads, via a bimolecular reaction, to the generation of H2. This latter reaction is of second order in cobalt (k3 = 25 M−1 s−1) and represents the rate limiting step. Interestingly, this rate is similar to that reported by Espenson et al. who investigated the generation of hydrogen using a hydridocobaloxime.35 They observed two different catalytic processes with variable concentration of the reactants. At high H+ and low cobaloxime concentrations a pseudo first order rate constant of 6 × 10−3 s−1 was observed while at higher concentrations for the hydridocobaloxime a second order process with a rate of 2 × 102 M−1 s−1 was observed. For the rhenium-based system time-resolved infrared spectroscopy confirmed that photo-oxidised TEOA generates a second reducing equivalent (see Scheme 4) which can be transferred to [Re(NCS)(CO)3bipy] (k2e− = 3.3 × 108 M−1 s−1) if no Co(dmgH)2 is present. TONs of 6000 for H2 production with respect to rhenium were observed, while TON values with respect to cobalt never exceeded 1000. This indicates decomposition of the Co(dmgH)2 catalyst. Similar kinetic data have been reported for other systems.36 The fact that the electron transfer process is second order indicates that this process is dependent also on the concentration of the catalyst. Assuming a concentration of 10−4 M for the catalytic centre, a first order rate constant for electron transfer between the two components of 104–105 s−1 is obtained.
 Scheme 4  Reaction scheme for intermolecular photocatalytic hydrogen generation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. 
To the best of our knowledge, no kinetic studies on the photocatalytic generation of hydrogen by intramolecular assemblies have been reported and this discussion will concentrate on the data shown in Scheme 3. This scheme indicates the photophysical properties of 1 and 1a.14 The initial absorption of photons by the photoactive moiety of the multifunctional system leads to the formation of the charge-separated state necessary for the generation of hydrogen. Intramolecular electron transfer does not require thermal collisions between the PS* and the catalytic centre and is thus mainly controlled by the electronic properties of the bridging ligand, the photosensitiser and the catalytic centre. The kinetic data demonstrate sequential electron transfer from the excited photosensitiser (RuII) over the tpphz bridge to the catalytic PdII centre within a few nanoseconds.14 In successive studies Rau and co-workers reported the photocatalytic properties for compound 3. Transient studies indicated that photoinduced intraligand charge-transfer dynamics takes place on the sub-ps timescale. This is in stark contrast to the mononuclear building block 3a where photoinduced charge-transfer from the photoactive Ru-unit to the catalytically active Pd-centre occurred on the sub-ns timescale.27b
This brief and by no means exhaustive discussion indicates that for intramolecular photocatalytic systems the first order rate constant for electron transfer from the photosensitiser to the catalytic centre is in the order of 1010–1011 s−1 and is considerably faster than the first order rate constant observed for intermolecular systems where rates of 103–105 s−1 are commonly found. However, the turnover numbers observed for the intramolecular assemblies do not reflect these differences in electron transfer rates. It seems clear that other factors strongly affect the photocatalytic processes. These may include photophysical parameters such as the lifetime and quantum yield of the photoexcited PS* molecule (see below) and its collisional deactivation, the nature of the catalytic cycle (it may result in first or second order dependence and is generally slow for the intermolecular case), and quenching rates by sacrificial agents.36 A phenomenon specific of the intramolecular process which should also be considered in more detail is the possibility of back electron transfer from the photoinduced charge-separated state with the restoration of the ground state. Here, the nature of the bridging unit plays a crucial role since, ideally, it should promote electron transfer in a unidirectional fashion and exclusively to the catalytic moiety. For this reason non-conjugated bridging ligands have been adopted. It is however unclear whether this leads to increased efficiency.11i
A clear example of the importance of the lifetime of the excited state is reported by McCormick et al.37 for the intermolecular hydrogen generation using modified rhodamine and a cobalt based glyoximate. These researchers obtained increased TON values when a modified rhodamine molecule was used as a photosensitiser and Co(III)-dimethylglyoximate as catalyst for H2 production. When in rhodamine the O atom was substituted with S or Se, turnover frequencies (TOF) were 0, 1700 and 5500 h−1, respectively. In this system the 3PS excited state is >1000 times longer than the singlet state (0.12–2.5 ns), and is sufficiently long lived to facilitate bimolecular electron transfer which is required for the completion of H2 formation. The ΦH2 yields are 0%, 12.2% and 32.8% respectively for these dyes and correlate directly with the quantum yields for singlet oxygen generation, ΦO2. The ΦO2 yields are 0.05, 0.17 to 0.67 for rhodamines with O, S and Se, respectively, as heteroatoms. The increase of TOF values with the increase of the atomic weight of the heteroatom of rhodamine is very impressive and determines the efficiency of the photosensitiser. These increases are explained by assuming that in case of the S and Se compounds the PS* is located on a triplet excited state, while for the O compound population of a singlet excited state is expected. It is worth noting that the lifetimes obtained vary between 1–2 ns. These values are still very short when compared to inorganic photosensitisers such as Ru and Ir complexes and it is somewhat surprising that such short lifetimes yield such high efficiencies. Previously the group reported increased TONs for hydrogen formation in a xanthene dye when H was replaced with a halide. This was attributed to enhanced intersystem crossing (ISC) promoted by the heavy atom effect.38

Concluding remarks
In this overview the central assumption made in the design of intramolecular catalysts is the need for bridging ligands that allow interaction between the photosensitiser and the catalytic centre. This was also the starting point of our Frontier Paper in 2007. The use of non-conjugated bridging ligands has also been suggested on the basis that this would prevent a fast back reaction.11i This may indeed be the case for systems discussed here, but there is no direct evidence to support this. The results obtained show that interaction between the photosensitiser and the catalytic centre occurs and that this is a necessary step for the production of H2. For the bimetallic photocatalysts a reduced emission lifetime with respect to that observed for the precursors suggests that communication between the photosensitiser and the catalytic centre is taking place. Further evidence is obtained from changes in spectroscopic features such as absorption or emission spectra. It is also important to note that TONs show a clear dependence on the nature of the bridge as well as the peripheral ligands. These observations show that it is not only important to tune the energies of bridging ligands with those of the peripheral ligands but also optimise their electronic coupling. This creates a range of additional parameters that should be considered in the optimisation of the electronic interaction in the bimetallic compounds.
An important observation is that for the intermolecular hydrogen generation by the rhenium compound in Scheme 4, the rate determining step is not associated with electron transfer between the sensitiser and the catalyst, but with hydrogen formation at the catalytic centre, which has a second order rate constant of 25 M−1 s−1. Therefore, for intramolecular systems like those considered here, the electron transfer processes involving the photosensitisers are not rate limiting. To allow further advances in this area there is an immediate need for detailed kinetic and photophysical studies on a wide range of assemblies to identify the rate determining step of the intramolecular mechanism.
One of the crucial points is represented by the possibility that when certain dinuclear assemblies are used, hydrogen is not generated by the bimetallic compound but by uncoordinated Pd moieties in the colloids formed upon decomposition of the assembly. In a similar manner, the weak coordination strength of first row transition metals such as cobalt raises the question of how crucial is the de-coordination of such metal centres. In some of the compounds discussed above Pd colloids do form, but the results obtained thus far suggest that their formation is based upon decomposition of the compounds, at a stage where hydrogen formation decreases. Interestingly the behaviour of compound 8a indicates that with such a precursor the photocatalyst 8 is obtained by self-assembly of its mononuclear precursor and the Pd salt in solution.24 This observation together with loss of chloride for compound 1 are a reminder that often the compounds used in catalytic processes are often pre-catalysts rather than catalysts themselves. Further evidence for intramolecular behaviour is obtained from the analysis of the photocatalytic behaviour of compound 9. This compound shows that the time dependence and TON values for hydrogen formation are different in passing from the intra (9) to the intermolecular case (9a), with hydrogen obtained in the intramolecular case, indicating that hydrogen generation is intra- rather than intermolecular in nature.26 Further research on this issue is taking place at present but the results discussed above show that intramolecular photocatalysis is the main contributor to hydrogen generation.
Another important issue is the stability of the compounds. In the majority of the photocatalytic systems investigated the stability of reactants is limited, irrespective of whether the inter- or intramolecular approach is taken, the exception being the Ir type compounds investigated by Bernhard and co-workers.17,18 It is not always clear what the driving force for the decomposition of the photocatalysts is, i.e. whether this is photochemical in nature or related to formation of radical cations by the sacrificial agent as shown in Scheme 2. The recent results obtained in our laboratories indicate that the sacrificial agents play an important role in the decomposition of the photocatalyst. It was found that while photocatalysts such as 1 are photostable in acetonitrile for 8 hours, while in the presence of sacrificial agents such as TEA the photostability is much reduced.39 Similar behaviour is observed for other systems the decomposition of which is accompanied by the formation of colloids. Apart from the loss of the catalysts from the bridging ligand one may also expect photochemically induced changes in the photosensitiser. These might include ligand loss or chemical rearrangements in the peripheral or the bridging ligand. Such processes are found in the photosynthesis modules in plants but in nature repair mechanisms exist. The introduction of preventative steps or an effective repair mechanism need to be developed to further stabilise the supramolecular assemblies.
In recent reviews extensive11 TON values for a wide range of inter- and intramolecular systems have been reported and conclusions have been drawn concerning the efficiency of the approaches taken. However, the assessment of the photocatalytic potential of the various photocatalytically active compounds and mixtures is quite problematic since the experimental parameters used in the literature vary widely. Important variables include the nature of the proton carrier (for example, water or Et3NHBF4), the solvent used, pH, the nature and concentration of the sacrificial agent, its optical absorption properties, the optical absorption properties of the catalytic centre in the ground and the reduced state.40 In addition, variations in the reaction procedures such as the type of light source used, the wavelength range and the irradiation duration, the geometry and volume of the photoreactor, and the volume of the head space need to be taken into account. A typical example of the importance of parameters such as the size of the headspace and the solvent are the results of Brewer and co-workers discussed above. Finally, it is important to note the potential effect of sacrificial agents on the photocatalytic processes via dark reactions; for example, it was found that a mixture of DMF, water and TEA produces formic acid without any irradiation.41 In addition, the need for sacrificial agents is a serious problem that limits studies in this area. The utilisation of sacrificial agents prevents the development of a sustainable, carbon neutral energy producing photocatalytic technology based on the principles used so far. Ultimately, the most suitable solution is the immobilisation of photocatalysts on active surfaces for creating photocatalytic or photoelectrocatalytic devices which do not rely on sacrificial materials.
In conclusion, the effectiveness of the photocatalytic system under investigation depends on a wide range of factors, and this at present prohibits a meaningful comparison between inter- and intramolecular photocatalytic mechanisms of H2 formation. Therefore, more studies are needed where detailed kinetic analyses are carried out for well-defined photocatalytic cycles using systematic variations of the experimental conditions.
Acknowledgements
This research is supported by the SFI under grants no. 07/SRC/B1160 and 08/RFP/ CHE1349 and the German Research Association (DFG SFB 583, SR and GRK 1626; MPG). DD acknowledges the financial support from the University of Rome “LA SAPIENZA” through the program Ateneo 2012 (protocol no. C26A124AXX).
References

          http://www.zeroemissionvehicles.eu A portfolio of power-trains for Europe: a fact based analysis.

          NREL Technical report NREL/TP-581-40605
         .
Building the global hydrogen economy: Technologies and opportunities, BCC Research, May 2010.

  (a) N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 52 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res, 2000, 33, 269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun, L. Hammarström, B. Åkermark and S. Styring, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2001, 30, 36 RSC .
I. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637 CrossRef .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. M. Lehn and J. P. Sauvage, Nouv. J. Chim., 1977, 1, 449 CAS ; 
  (b) E. Amouyal, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1995, 38, 249 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. J. Eisswein and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4022 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-F. Chan, M. Chou, C. Creutz, T. Matsubara and N. Sutin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 369 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) E. Fujita, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1999, 185, 373 CrossRef ; 
  (b) A. J. Morris, G. J. Meyer and E. Fujita, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1983 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9268 RSC ; 
  (d) K. Sakai and H. Ozawa, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2007, 251, 2753 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) S. Losse, J. G. Vos and S. Rau, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2492 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) V. Artero, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou and M. Fonecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7238 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) H. Ozawa and K. Saki, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2227 RSC ; 
  (h) A. Inagaki and M. Akita, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 1220 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (i) H. Takeda and O. Ishitani, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 346 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (j) W. T. Eckenhoff and R. Eisenberg, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 13004 RSC ; 
  (k) M. Schulz, M. Karnahl, M. Schwalbe and J. G. Vos, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 1682 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (l) P. D. Frischmann, K. Mahata and F. Wurther, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1847 RSC .
S. Rau, D. Walther and J. G. Vos, Dalton Trans., 2007, 915 RSC .
S. Rau, B. Schäfer, D. Gleich, E. Anders, M. Rudolph, M. Friedrich, H. Görls, W. Henry and J. G. Vos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tschierlei, M. Presselt, C. Kuhnt, A. Yartsev, T. Pascher, V. Sundström, M. Karnahl, M. Schwalbe, B. Schäfer, S. Rau, M. Schmitt, B. Dietzek and J. Popp, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 7678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tschierlei, M. Karnahl, M. Presselt, B. Dietzek, J. Guthmüller, L. Gonzalez, M. Schmitt, S. Rau and J. Popp, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Soman, G. Singh Bindra, A. Paul, R. Groarke, J. C. Manton, F. M. Connaughton, M. Schulz, D. Dini, C. Long, M. T. Pryce and J. G. Vos, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 12678 RSC .
R. J. Watts and J. van Houten, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1974, 96, 4334 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Goldsmith, W. R. Hudson, M. S. Lowry, T. H. Anderson and S. Bernhard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Lowry and S. Bernhard, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 7970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Sk. Jasimuddin, T. Yamada, K. Fukuju, J. Otsuki and K. Sakai, Chem. Commun., 2012, 46, 8466 RSC .

  (a) A. Fihri, V. Artero, M. Razavet, C. Baffert, W. Leibl and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 564 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. Fihri, V. Artero, A. Pereira and M. Fontecave, Dalton Trans., 2008, 5567 RSC .
C. A. Craig and R. J. Watts, Inorg. Chem., 1989, 28, 309 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kobayashi, S. Masaoka and K. Sakai, Photochem. Photobiol., 2009, 8, 196 RSC .
G. Singh Bindra, M. Schulz, A. Paul, S. Soman, R. Groarke, J. Inglis, M. T. Pryce, W. R. Browne, S. Rau, B. J. Maclean and J. G. Vos, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 10812 RSC .
J. Hirschmann, G. Singh Bindra, S. Soman, A. Paul, R. Groarke, M. Schulz, M. T. Pryce, W. R. Browne, S. Rau and J. G. Vos, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 10545 RSC .
G. Singh Bindra, M. Schulz, A. Paul, R. Groarke, S. Soman, J. L. Inglis, W. R. Browne, M. Pfeffer, S. Rau, B. J. MacLean, M. T. Pryce and J. G. Vos, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 13050 RSC .

  (a) C. Kuhnt, M. Karnahl, S. Rau, M. Smitt, B. Dietzek and J. Popp, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 2101 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Karnahl, C. Kuhnt, F. W. Heinemann, M. Schmitt, S. Rau, J. Popp and B. Dietzek, Chem. Phys., 2012, 393, 65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. Elvington, J. Brown, S. M. Arachchige and K. J. Brewer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10644 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Elvington and K. J. Brewer, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 5242 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) S. M. Arachchige, J. Brown and K. J. Brewer, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 197, 13 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) K. Rangan, S. M. Arachchige, J. R. Brown and K. J. Brewer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 410 RSC ; 
  (e) S. M. Arachchige, R. Shaw, T. A. White, V. Shenoy, H.-M. Tsui and K. J. Brewer, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Du, J. Schneider, L. Fan, W. Zhao, U. Patel, F. N. Castellano and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lei, M. Hedlund, R. Lomoth, H. Rensmo, O. Johansson and L. Hammarström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. G. Gray, A. S. Veige and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Guttentag, A. Rodenburg, C. Bachmann, A. Senn, P. Hamm and R. Alberto, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 334 RSC .
M. Guttentag, A. Rodenberg, R. Kopelent, B. Probst, C. Buchwalder, M. Brandstätter, P. Hamm and R. Alberto, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2012, 59 CrossRef CAS .
B. Probst, A. Rodenberg, M. Guttentag, P. Hamm and R. Alberto, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 6453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chao and J. H. Espenson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 129 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. V. Krishnan, B. S. Brunschwig, C. Creutz and N. J. Sutin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 2005 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) E. D. Cline, S. E. Adamson and S. Bernhard, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 10378 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) P. Du, J. Schneider, G. Luo, W. W. Brennessel and R. Eisenberg, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 4952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. McCormick, B. D. Calitree, A. Orchard, N. D. Kraut, F. V. Bright, M. R. Detty and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lazarides, T. McCormick, P. Du, G. Luo, B. Lindley and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. M. Y. Ahmed, PhD Thesis, Dublin City University,  2011 .
L. E. Roy, G. Scalmani, R. Kobayashi and E. R. Batista, Dalton Trans., 2009, 6719 RSC .
A. Paul, D. Connolly, M. Schulz, M. T. Pryce and J. G. Vos, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 1977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Yvonne Halpin	Yvonne Halpin obtained a Bachelor of Science degree in Chemical and Pharmaceutical Science in 2006 and in 2010 a PhD from Dublin City University on the electrochemical and spectroscopic analysis of a series of iron, ruthenium and osmium complexes with applications in hydrogen production and molecular electronics. She is at present working as a Postdoctoral Fellow on the development of commercially viable carbon neutral methods for hydrogen generation.
Mary T. Pryce	Mary Pryce obtained a BSc in Analytical Science from DCU in 1991. A PhD (1991–1994) was subsequently obtained in Organometallic Photochemistry. Post doctoral studies were carried out during 1995 and 1996 at the University of Milan in the area of asymmetric synthesis. Joined the School of Chemical Sciences at DCU in 1997, and is currently employed as a Senior Lecturer. Current research projects focus on; Hydrogen generation, CO2 reduction, CO-releasing molecules, porphyrin chemistry, and organometallic photochemistry.
Sven Rau	Sven Rau studied chemistry at the Friedrich-Schiller-University of Jena and Dublin City University. He obtained his Diploma in chemistry in 1997 and his PhD in 2000. Following his habilitation in 2007, he moved to the Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg in 2008. Since 2011, he leads the institute for materials and catalysis at the university Ulm. His research interests are focused on the synthesis and characterization of photoredoxactive metal complexes their applications as photochemical molecular devices in light driven catalytic conversions, interaction with surfaces and living matter.
Danilo Dini	Danilo Dini obtained his PhD in Materials Science at the University of Rome “La Sapienza” (Italy). He held postdoctoral positions in the Institut fur Physikaliche Chemie of Max-Planck-Institut in Berlin (Germany) with Prof. G. Ertl, and in the University of Tuebingen (Germany) with Prof. M. Hanack. After a period as a researcher at Dublin City University (Ireland) in the group of Prof. J. G. Vos, he joined the University of Rome “La Sapienza” (Italy) holding a position as Assistant Professor at the Department of Chemistry. His main research interests are photoelectrochemistry, photophysics of conjugated molecular materials and solar energy conversion devices. He has authored 90 peer-reviewed articles in international journals.
Johannes G. Vos	Han Vos is Emeritus Professor of Inorganic Chemistry at Dublin City University. His research efforts are in the design of supramolecular systems containing transition metal complexes. Of particular interest are the synthesis, photophysical and electrochemical properties of dinuclear and polymeric ruthenium and osmium polypyridyl complexes both in solution and when immobilised on solid substrates. The applications of such compounds as optical and electrochemical sensors and in molecular electronics are investigated. At present his research is directed towards the development of novel environmentally friendly sustainable energy sources using photocatalytic and electrocatalytic pathways.

 	Fig. 1  Intermolecular versus intramolecular photocatalytic hydrogen production from water. PS = photosensitiser, S = sacrificial agent.	 

 	Fig. 2  Basic mechanism of photocatalytic hydrogen production with 1 as photocatalyst.	 

 	Fig. 3  Structures of photocatalysts 1–15 discussed in the text. Precursors are the photosensitisers without the catalytic centres attached and when cited these are indicated with “Xa”, where X is 1–15. TON values are after 18 hours unless otherwise stated. * See text.	 

 	Scheme 1  Proposed pathway for photocatalytic hydrogen generation. B = bridging ligand, S = solvent.	 

 	Scheme 2  Decomposition pathway of TEA after electron donation to the sensitiser.	 

 	Scheme 3  Electron transfer dynamics of 1 and its precursor complex 1a. Localisation of the photoexcited electron is illustrated by shaded areas. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Absorption spectrum of 1 in acetonitrile (—), TON spectrum (●), and the calculated oscillator strengths of the Sn states (grey). (B) Efficiency spectrum Φ(λ) of the photon-to-hydrogen conversion of the catalytic process calculated as the ratio of the TON values to the extinction coefficient. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15.	 

 	Fig. 5  Time-dependence of the TON for H2 evolution in the presence of 10% water for compound 9 (blue) and its precursor 9a with [Pd(CH3CN)2Cl2] in a (1:1) ratio (red).	 

 	Scheme 4  Reaction scheme for intermolecular photocatalytic hydrogen generation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
