Sustainable materials for off-grid battery applications: advances, challenges and prospects  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0SE01338B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0SE01338B
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 310-331Sustainable materials for off-grid battery applications: advances, challenges and prospects

        
          
            Paula 
            Navalpotro
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Elizabeth 
            Castillo-Martínez
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Javier 
            Carretero-González
          
          
        
      *c
aIMDEA Energy, Av. Ramón de la Sagra 3, 28935, Móstoles, Spain. E-mail: paula.navalpotro@imdea.org
bFaculty of Chemistry, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
cInstitute of Polymer Science and Technology, ICTP-CSIC, Madrid, Spain. E-mail: jcarretero@ictp.csic.es
Received 
      7th September 2020
    , Accepted 24th November 2020First published on 24th November 2020AbstractThe implementation of sustainable batteries coupled to renewable energy conversion systems in off-grid, poor and remote communities will overcome some of the technological challenges for electrification, such as the difficult geographical and cost accessibility, improving their modest technical capabilities and making the full system ecofriendly. Besides, their application to power off-grid “structures and facilities” requiring a large amount of energy (>50 kW) such as heavyweight carriers (e.g. boats and trucks) and for instance those located far away from the main grid such as small-size islands and mines, will have an immediate impact on the decrease of greenhouse gas emissions to the atmosphere. Herein we present an overview of recent efforts to develop green and advanced electrode and electrolyte materials for future sustainable batteries. Further, we will also highlight both current second-life and end-of-life battery disposal sustainable strategies that are applied towards a zero-carbon future.Paula NavalpotroPaula Navalpotro Molina is Chemical Engineer and holds a Master degree in Renewable Energies. She got her PhD in Electrochemistry, Science and Technology from Autónoma University of Madrid in 2018. She is currently working as postdoctoral researcher at Electrochemical Processes Unit of IMDEA Energy. Her research focuses on the development of new redox electrolytes with organic active materials and their application in novel designs of electrochemical energy storage devices such as membrane-free redox flow batteries.Elizabeth Castillo-MartínezElizabeth Castillo Martínez did her PhD in Solid State Chemistry at Universidad Complutense de Madrid in 2008. After post-doctoral stays at Alan G. MacDiarmid NanoTech Institute in Texas, CIC energiGUNE and the University of Cambridge she is currently assistant professor in Inorganic Chemistry at Universidad Complutense de Madrid. Her research is focused on the development and understanding of electrode materials for Energy Storage applications such as lithium, sodium and potassium ion batteries.Javier Carretero-GonzálezJavier Carretero-González is a Ramón y Cajal Fellow at the Polymer Science and Technology Institute of the Spanish Research Council. He is currently working on new functional materials for sustainable energy applications, along with the implementation of advanced characterization tools for understanding the operation mechanisms in these energy materials systems. He holds a bachelor's degree in chemistry from Universidad Complutense de Madrid (2002) and a PhD degree in science from Universidad Nacional a Distancia (2009).
Introduction
Nowadays, electricity has become a basic need for human beings. However, 13% of the world's population1 still cannot access it nor the social progress that it entails. This percentage is drastically increased until 49% when referred to the population in rural areas of least developed countries (according to the UN classification).
Supplying energy in isolated and remote areas (off-grid) just by extending the existing electricity network is usually unfeasible due to the cost of the facilities, since it is often not only a matter of distance but also natural barriers may prevent it. Therefore, it is crucial to solve this situation in off-grid communities as well as to provide energy to all isolated facilities that require it, such as tourist facilities, telecommunication towers, agricultural and mining industries, naval vessels or aerospace utilities.
On the other hand, the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and harmful pollutant agents into the atmosphere, produced by fossil fuel combustion in industrialized countries, should be a priority action to mitigate climate change and associated diseases. For all these reasons, the application of more effective, safer and environmentally friendly methods of electricity generation and storage are needed globally.
The implementation of renewable energy sources such as solar or wind is a feasible and self-sufficient solution for electricity production in off-grid systems. However, these energy sources are weather-dependent and fluctuating. To ensure reliable energy supply and mitigate their intermittency, electrochemical energy storage devices stand out as the most suitable technologies due to their modularity and flexibility. Their integration in the daily energy demand and their coupling to renewable energy systems are schematically represented in Fig. 1a and b, respectively.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of typical photovoltaic solar energy production and battery combination for a grid or off-grid system. (b) Schematic representation of a renewable off-grid system with battery energy storage. (c) Scheme of a sodium-ion battery and its components. (d) Schematic drawing showing the shape and components of various battery configurations: cylindrical, pouch and coin. 
Among electrochemical energy storage devices, batteries excel due to their versatility. However, the transition from fossil fuels to low-carbon emitting technologies will provoke an increase in batteries demand and consequently in the production of their raw materials. Thus, according to Sovacool et al. outlook, the production of lithium, cobalt, and vanadium of 2017 should be incremented by 965%, 585%, and 173%, respectively, by 2050.2 Therefore, the substitution of some of these currently used materials in devices and the seeking of alternatives must be a priority in the next years.
In this review, the sustainable battery technologies suitable for off-grid applications will be revised by keeping a laser-sharp focus on improvements and the latest progress related to the active materials and the different strategies used by researchers for their development. Also, other aspects linked to the sustainability of batteries including recycling and reusing will be discussed. Batteries for portable electronic devices and nano off-grids with small power storage requirements (<10–50 kW) will not be covered since they are not in the scope of this study despite some of these chemistries proposed for large scale storage could also be made into smaller power storage facilities. Finally, current challenges and prospects about material compositions, performance and stability will be mentioned together with the main conclusions of this review.
Present-day battery technology for storing electricity from renewable sources: pros and cons
Secondary batteries are one of the most versatile energy storage systems.3 Owing to the existence of a vast range of battery chemistries4 and technologies, these electrochemical systems can reversibly store an enormous amount of energy (∼200 W h kg−1-referred to the battery pack) by choosing the right combination between the materials of their main components and the cell configuration. In a battery, the main components are the electrodes (cathode and anode) and the electrolyte (Fig. 1c). These components can be arranged in different cell shapes and configurations (Fig. 1d) determined by the selected technology. Thus, batteries will easily adjust the power and energy needs of an electrical power plant by choosing the appropriate cell configurations and then by assembling them into modules of different size coupled to solar panels and windmills for large-scale energy storage.
Other advantages of batteries are: (i) they are not geographically dependent like other methods of energy storage such as dams where electricity is generated by water falling; (ii) low maintenance and (iii) long-cycle life.
Depending on the battery technology, the charging/discharging processes have different characteristics. In general, for a configuration such as that shown in Fig. 1c, during the discharge process, cations are extracted from the anode transported throughout the electrolyte and intercalated into the cathode. While the ions move through the electrolyte, electrons flow through an external circuit from the anode to the cathode. This process is reversed on the charge. Different parameters should be considered in the characterization of battery performance such as capacity, cell voltage, efficiency and cycle-life. However, for systems that are intended for both domestic and large-scale usage, safety and cost must be considered along with those technical parameters. The main types of batteries currently used for house and large-scale electricity storage are lead–acid batteries, lithium-ion and to a lesser extent vanadium-redox flow batteries. The lead–acid battery5 shows quite limited charging power capability, relatively short-cycle life (500–2000 cycles) and poor performance at high temperatures, which makes this technology not suitable for stationary energy storage applications. Moreover, lead is a highly toxic element, and while Pb plates are easy to recycle, small-grained lead in the electrolyte often ends up in the ground, therefore this technology should be replaced by one based on more sustainable chemistry.
Lithium-ion batteries exhibit higher volumetric and gravimetric energies (70–200 W h kg−1 and 200–500 W h L−1)6 than lead–acid up (30–40 W h kg−1 and 60–100 W h L−1) referred to the battery pack, high power capability, long-cycle and calendar lifetime (8000 cycles and 20 years with 1 charge per day), as well as operation over a wide temperature range (−20 °C to 55 °C). Nevertheless, the current high-energy density lithium-ion battery technology is expensive and non-sustainable due to the presence of scarce and costly metals in the electrode composition such as lithium, cobalt, and nickel.2 Another disadvantage of these batteries is the presence of flammable organic solvents, that have the potential risks of an explosion as well as the subsequent emission of toxic gases such as hydrogen fluoride from the decomposition of fluorinated lithium salts in the electrolyte composition.7 For this reason, a battery management system that ensures battery protection during operation to avoid an overvoltage, overcharging as well as the increase of temperature is also incorporated in cell stacks.
Redox flow batteries (RFBs)8,9 were first built in the 1940s10 and have the characteristic of being the unique technology that can decouple energy and power since the active species are dissolved into the electrolyte and are not part of the solid electrode. This characteristic makes them suitable for stationary energy storage including community storage solutions and large village electrification. Since their invention, a limited number of redox-active materials11 mainly metal salts,12 corrosive halogens, and low-molar-mass organic compounds13,14 have been investigated as active electrolyte materials. The most developed and widespread ones are the so-called all-vanadium RFB15 and zinc–bromine RFB.16 These RFBs contain highly corrosive chemicals and the electroactive materials are expensive, scarce and toxic (e.g. metals like vanadium). Moreover, only a few membrane materials,17 such as costly Nafion®, have been considered for RFBs until very recently.
Additionally, as mentioned previously the availability and long-term access to metal resources has to be considered since it poses constraints on the development of lithium-ion-based18 and vanadium-based RFB.3,19 Because the available lithium, cobalt and vanadium ores are concentrated only in few countries their cost is subject to fluctuations (e.g. the price of vanadium increased by 10 times from 2016 to 2019).20 Besides, in terms of Cumulative Energy Demand (CED) which is how much energy that has been used to produce the battery, more than 1100 MJ is needed to make a 1 kW h Li-ion battery,21 resulting in the emission of about 225 kg of CO2 as much as consuming 96 liters of gasoline.22 Although these numbers may vary, depending on the manufacturer's country.23 In fact, the major contributor to the environmental problem caused by the manufacturing of the battery components is the supply of copper (50 tons of CO2/ton of Cu) and aluminum (20 tons of CO2/ton of Al) as current collectors for the anode and the cathode, respectively, plus the required cables or the battery management system.24 Although the CO2 generated by battery manufacturing is undesirable, materials production is the main contributor to the energy cost of producing a battery system.4 Besides, the transfer of developments in materials, cell design, and processes from lab scale to production scale remains a challenge due to a large number of consecutive process steps and the significant impact of material properties, electrode compositions and cell designs on processes.25 Fortunately, battery packs have dropped their price considerably in the past ten years, making promising vehicle electrification by using batteries.26
Therefore, preventing or reducing the use of non-environmentally friendly materials precursors and manufacturing material's routes is a high impact strategy to solve and face these issues as ascertained by Lansink's ladder (Fig. 2). Second-life batteries could make battery technology more sustainable in terms of eco-friendliness of charging source when coupled to renewable energies and also improve environmental concerns over end-of-life battery disposal. For example, repurposing retired electric vehicle (EV) batteries for secondary applications postpones their recycling phase that entails costs and inevitable pollution.28,29 Extending the battery life also contributes to reducing waste and resource exploitation.
 Fig. 2  The Lansink's ladder concept of waste hierarchy and a schematic representation of batteries' circular economy.27 
Separation, disposal, and recycling of the various and valuable materials comprising the above-mentioned batteries are other challenges to overcome. The battery disposal is not currently regulated or standardized in most of the countries around the world, although legislation has been already implemented in some regions30 for some types of batteries (e.g. the lead–acid automotive batteries are recycled close to 100% in the European Union).31 This lack of regulation, along with the low environmental awareness of users, have provoked that numerous batteries have been abandoned in communities of remote areas, calcined releasing CO2 and other toxic gases to the atmosphere or even buried leaching toxic metals to the phreatic zone in aquifers.32 Recycling of lithium-ion batteries is especially complicated and has not been standardized yet.33 Nowadays, different methods are applied based on low efficient processes with a high environmental footprint, such as shredding or pyrometallurgical processes applied to nickel and cobalt recovery. Thus, the establishment of a unique recycling protocol based on an automated disassembly that can accomplish the requirements to create a battery circular economy (Fig. 2) is highly desirable but difficult. Besides, the recycling of Li-ion batteries is mainly focused on the recovery of cobalt, nickel, and copper, since these are the most economically valuable elements. Other compounds are not recovered even if it is technically possible to do so, because it is economically unattractive.34
Sustainable batteries for the future
In order to attain sustainable electrochemical energy storage, we should target the creation of reliable long-cycle life systems and the use of safe and abundant materials with a low cost and carbon footprint production system. In order to achieve this goal, in the SET plan on “Batteries for e-mobility and stationary storage” of the European Commission the target for stationary energy storage in terms of life time and cost is 0.05 € kW−1 h−1 cycle−1 and at least 10000 cycles and 20 years life time for 2030.35
To develop advanced electrode and electrolyte materials, electrodes based on redox-active organic and polymeric compounds that might ultimately have been prepared and/or extracted from renewable biomass appears to be one attractive solution.36–41 Most of them, do not contain costly and unfriendly metals and are profuse all over the earth.42 These characteristics become even more important when thinking in the scalability and wide implementation of these devices around the world, since the forecast for battery production suggests a constant increment in the next years.43 The application of new and more efficient biomass recycling methods along with the use of mild temperatures and aqueous media for the synthesis of biodegradable electrode materials will mitigate the emission of greenhouse gases such as CO2 as well as the amount of generated residues having an enormous beneficial impact on the environment. Finally, by combining renewable energy generation technologies with more eco-friendly storage systems (batteries) it will be possible to bring clean electricity directly to people's homes even in remote places where there is no grid connection.44
As it was mentioned above, batteries including lithium-ion, lead–acid and vanadium flow batteries show promise and suitable characteristics for grid-scale storage, but they are still far from meeting the grid's storage needs such as low cost, long cycle life, reliable safety and reasonable energy density for cost and footprint reduction. Currently, among the most promising low-cost and sustainable battery technologies that can be operated in grid/off-grid systems are sodium ion, proton, and organic-based redox flow batteries. The application of abundant and renewable materials as electrodes and electrolytes for the creation of environmentally friendly batteries will be described in the following sections. Until now, in this introduction, when comparing different battery chemistries, we have referred to energy densities in the battery pack. In the following, when comparing different active materials for each battery chemistry, we will refer to capacities and energy densities with respect to the weight or volume of the active material alone (unless otherwise indicated) since this is how values are typically given in scientific literature because the weight of the rest of the battery components are considered to be the same for a specific type of battery.
Na-ion batteries
Research on sodium ion batteries is advancing fast45 towards lowering the cost of the batteries so they can be applied for storing large amount of renewable energy. Sodium-ion batteries are “without a doubt the most appealing alternative to lithium-based battery technology, from the point of view of sustainability”.46 The interest is extensive due to the following reasons: (i) the high abundance and ubiquitous distribution of sodium; (ii) similar energy density than lithium; (iii) copper current collector can be replaced by lighter aluminium, diminishing the penalty in the gravimetric energy density on going from lithium to sodium; (iv) expected rising cost of lithium because of the raising long-term demand.47,48
Numerous inorganic compounds, mainly oxides, phosphates, and alloys of Na with group IV and V elements of the periodic table have been assessed as electrodes for Na+ ion storage.49,50 Although most of them have shown gravimetric capacity and cycle life comparable to those evidenced by their lithium analogues, still some issues related to kinetic limitations during Na+ ion intercalation as well as cost remain unsettled. Organic electrode materials (hopefully derived from recycling biomass) have recently seen an upsurge (Fig. 3a), which have been extensively reviewed.51 In the following we describe different “sustainable” chemistries deployed in Na-ion batteries.
 Fig. 3  (a) Polymeric materials studied as electrodes in Na-ion batteries that operate through Na+ ion insertion extraction, plotted with their voltage or reaction vs. the year in which their electrochemical activity was evaluated. Biopolymers are marked with hatched lines. PA (polyacetylene),72 PPP (poly-para-phenylene),72 PAQS (poly anthraquinoilsulfide), PI (polyimides),52 PDS (poly(diphenylaminesulfonic acid sodium)),53 PS (poly-Schiff bases),81 P(AQ-PI) (poly-anthraquinone-poly-imide), PBQS (poly-benzoquinoyl sulfide), HA (humic acid),54 Na2PDS, PDA (polydopamine),55 PV-TPNa poly(2-vinylterephthalate sodium salt)80, COF (covalent organic framework)86, PS-PEO (poly-Schiff-poly-ethyleneoxide),83 lignin/PEDOT (lignin/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) composite);102 (b) example of the typical strategy deployed to decrease the solubility of organic materials and improve their processability. 
Cathode materials

Quinone-based polymers. 
Quinone-based materials have been studied as organic positive-electrode material (Fig. 3a) since the conjugated quinone moiety undergoes a two-electron redox reaction56 which should lead to a high discharge capacity at relatively high voltages vs. Li or Na plating.57–59 Because polymerization is one of the strategies deployed to minimize issues related to the solubility of organic electrode materials (Fig. 3b), the introduction of the quinone redox moieties along the macromolecular backbone has led to interesting results, making the implementation of these materials quite promising in future batteries. Redox-active polymers containing conjugated quinone redox moieties have recently shown exceptional electrochemical performance in protic media too.60 In this sense, lignin biopolymer, which is the most abundant aromatic polymer on earth and is also a by-product of the pulp industry, can reversibly store two electrons and two protons by using the redox chemistry of the catechol groups located in its macromolecular structure.61,62 In fact, primary lithium-ion batteries based on hydrolysis of this renewable and abundant biopolymer as positive electrode material composite containing carbon have been also developed.63 Hybrid polymer electrodes such as PEDOT/lignin composites have also been studied as cathode material for sodium-ion batteries. With ionic liquid electrolyte these deliver a maximum capacity of 70 mA h g−1 at 25 mA g−1.64 With these liquid electrolytes biohybrid electrodes containing natural lignin and PEDOT conjugated polymer showed reversible discharge capacities of 74 mA h g−1, at C/20 (4 mA g−1) rate, in the voltage range between 1 V to 4.5 V, with peak values of 159 mA h g−1. These properties make natural lignin–PEDOT hybrid material a suitable organic positive electrode in Li- and Na-ion batteries.
Several other organic materials have been proposed to operate as cathodes in sodium-ion batteries. Nonetheless, in most of the cases, these materials that lack sodium ions operate via anion insertion, instead of cation extraction at high voltages. Therefore, rather than being cathodes for Na-ion batteries, they would be deployed in what is being properly called dual ion batteries.65,66 Dual ion batteries are being intensively investigated because of their potential high voltages, however, some issues such as very likely electrolyte depletion are hindering their commercialization and there are no commercial prototypes to date.

Anode materials
Carbon is still considered one of the most sustainable electrode materials for anodes in Na-ion batteries.67,68 While it certainly meets many of the criteria for sustainability, such as abundance and low-cost raw materials, its production mostly requires annealing at high temperatures under inert atmosphere, which is energetically costly. Therefore, we are not considering carbons as the sustainable target materials unless other less energetic production routes are envisaged, and we are focusing our interest in organic-based polymer materials. A summary of the organic electrodes deployed as anodes for sodium-ion batteries can be found in several reviews.69,70 Some of the most relevant aspects are detailed next. Achieving the low voltage required for an energy-efficient organic anode material containing aromatic rings requires breaking aromaticity during battery charge (alkali ion intercalation during reduction at the negative electrode) that is then recovered with an energy release during battery discharge (alkali ion deintercalation along with electrode material oxidation at the negative electrode).

Conjugated conducting polymers. 
Shortly after the discovery of conducting polymers71 polyacetylene and polyphenylene were investigated as anodes for Na-ion batteries showing interesting low voltages of insertion with good first cycle reversibility.72 Indeed the prototype Li-ion battery built by 2019 Nobel Laureate Dr Akira Yoshino used polyacetylene as anode, however the low real density of the polymer and its low chemical stability prevented its commercialization.73 Interesting strategies for the preparation of advanced anode materials containing conjugated polymers as conducting functionality have been developed recently, such as the one-step solid-state in situ thermal polymerization of silicon-polymer nanocomposites.74 Some of these strategies could be also adopted for Na-ion anode materials in order to improve the electrochemical properties.


Organic-based carboxylates. 
Among organics compounds, sodium salts of conjugated and/or aromatic carboxylic acids have shown a favorable low voltage of insertion (∼0.3 V vs. Na+/Na), with reversible capacities above 250 mA h g−1.75 The main hurdle remains to be the first cycle coulomb efficiency, as low as 50% in most cases, which goes up to 91% in benzenediacrylates.76 This promising result is however achieved at the expense of efficiencies below 99% even after 40 cycles and capacity fading, which points to little electrolyte decomposition in the first cycle, but inefficient SEI layer formation with sodium salts of sulfonamide in carbonated electrolytes. Introducing a third carboxylate group in a single aromatic ring does not increase capacity,77 while increasing the conjugation leads to the expected voltage raise,78 not desired for anode material. Replacement of some O by S in thiocarboxylates yields ultra-high capacities (up to 450 mA h g−1) at a slightly increased voltage of reaction.79 Incorporation of the active molecule into a polyvinyl backbone leads to increase capacity retention.80


Organic-based polymeric materials containing nitrogen functionalities: Schiff-bases, azo and triazole-based materials. 
Electroactive polymeric Schiff bases are optimum candidates for being used as anode materials. The redox entity comprising two Schiff base groups attached to a phenyl ring (–NCH–Ar–HCN–) have been reported to be active for sodium-ion storage (Ar = aromatic group) both in polymers81 as well as in salts hybridized with carboxylate end groups.82 These organic compounds can be produced via a condensation reaction between non-conjugated aliphatic or conjugated aromatic diamine blocks with terephthalaldehyde units (Fig. 3a). Crystalline polymeric Schiff bases can electrochemically store more than one sodium atom per azomethine group at the low potentials that are suitable for anodes in Na-ion batteries (between 0 and 1.5 V versus Na+/Na). The redox potential can be tuned through conjugation of the polymeric chain and by electron injection from donor substituents in the aromatic rings. Reversible capacities of up to 350 mA h g−1 are achieved when the carbon mixture is optimized with carbon additives. Interestingly, the “reverse” configuration (–CHN–Ar–NHC–) is not electrochemically active, though isoelectronic. Hybrid carboxylate/Schiff base units show voltages of reaction intermediate between the two end members, however, discrete molecules are produced and easier processability is not achieved.82 The introduction of ethylene oxide groups in the polymer backbone in the form of Jeffamine® (–NH2–PEO–NH2–), enables the production of self-binding polymeric electrodes which can be cast onto copper and aluminum current collectors.83 Controlling the ratio of Jeffamine® allows retaining the electrochemical performance of the parent polymeric electrodes. This strategy of adding Jeffamines to impart some solubility or adhesion has been applied not only in anodes, but also in polymeric cathodes, and electrolytes.84
When an azo instead of an imine group links aromatic rings, slightly lower, more favorable, voltages for sodium insertion than with the corresponding Schiff base counterparts were achieved.85 Besides, hierarchically porous triazole-based polymers such as 2D-covalent organic frameworks (COFs) have also shown electrochemical activity at very low voltages suitable to operate as an anode in Na-ion batteries.86 The spherical morphology (nanospheres) along with the large internal surface area could be responsible for relatively high coulombic efficiency values and gravimetric capacities above 200 mA h g−1. The mechanism of the reaction has not been clarified, however, given the voltage of reaction, the electrochemical activity is likely due to the presence of the Schiff base functionalities rather than the triazine units. In the area of framework materials, many metal–organic frameworks have also been proposed as electrodes in NaIBs (and even more in LIBs). Actually, from the point of view of synthesis methodology (room temperature in water) some MOFs could also be a good option for making sustainable Na-ion batteries.87 However, here one should also consider which are the metals involved, and while so far Fe and Mn are the less costly, most abundant and less toxic, the reported performance in Fe-MOFs is not appealing,88 other than that reported in very stable cyanide based ligand Prussian Blue cathode materials.89,90

Big hopes in K-ion batteries
Following the trend of developing batteries based on alkali-ions more abundant than lithium, potassium ion batteries (K-IBs) holds promise to become the main grid storage technology replacing toxic Pb–acid batteries, lower energy density Na-IBs and more costly Li-IBs, (despite recent cost reduction).91 The main potential advantages of K-IBs over Na-IBs and Li-IBs are: (i) that K (8th more abundant element in earth crust) is 1000 times much more abundant than Li (33rd) and relatively close to Na (6th), being both K and Na worldwide spread; (ii) the low voltage of potassium plating (similar to lithium) could enable KIBs with higher energy density than NIBs; (iii) aluminum current collectors can also be used on the anode as they do not alloy92 with all the already mentioned advantages; (iv) low cost of many potassium salts as they are sometimes the precursor for the preparation of Li and/or Na ion salts; for example LiFSI or NaFSI can be prepared through metathesis reactions from KFSI;93 (v) cathode materials based on sustainable Prussian Blue type phases show “long” term performance with high efficiency90,94 and (vi) faster kinetics. Given the larger size of potassium ions vs. Na or Li, they have smaller charge density and K+-solvent interactions are much weaker than the equivalent Na+ or Li+-solvent interactions. Therefore, their solvation energies are lower, which enables faster kinetics of charge transfer at the electrode–electrolyte interphase.95 However, these weak ion–solvent interaction results in a lower solubility of the potassium salts, with respect to lithium or sodium salts, which still can be overcome by selecting large delocalized anions, FSI− or TFSI− rather than ClO4− or PF6−, with low lattice energies.
For all the above-mentioned advantages, and considering the knowledge transfer from LIB technology to NIB and KIBs, one would expect K-IB to be the preferred choice for large-scale electrochemical energy storage applications. Nonetheless K-IBs are still at a very early stage of development, and they also have some disadvantages with respect to LiIBS and NaIBs, such as the lower solubility of the salts. The higher atomic mass of potassium vs. lithium or sodium can translate into lower specific capacities; nonetheless the final energy density also depends on the voltage, which can be more favourable for K than for Na. The low melting point of potassium (63.5 °C), which initially could seem an issue, has been turned into an easy way of self-healing potassium dendrites triggered by a small current.96 However the very high reactivity of potassium metal would prevent their use in any large-scale application unless a way of taming its reactivity is devised, which would bring a decrease in energy density. Therefore, the quest for an alternative anode material with low volumetric expansion is key to the development of these batteries. Finally, very little is known about the composition and stability of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI). Establishing the anode and electrolyte materials is likely to occur in parallel, since the composition and stability of the SEI, which critically influences performance, not only depends on salt, solvent and additives of the electrolyte, but also on the voltage at which the anode material reacts, on its volumetric expansion and its surface composition and ability to form covalent bonds with the decomposition products of the electrolyte. While progress in the development of alternative cathodes for higher energy density KIBs as well as many anodes is being made, the star anode-electrolyte composition remains elusive.
Still the most sustainable NIB or KIB will be that based on aqueous electrolyte, thus the development of aqueous electrolytes with kinetically expanded electrochemical stability window97 is regarded with much interest.
Proton-based batteries
Merging the knowledge of hydrogen fuel-cell systems and battery technology led to sustainable proton batteries. The concept of proton flow battery was proposed in 2014.98 For instance, hydrogen ion systems with a voltage of 1.0 V–1.5 V can be competitive with lithium-ion batteries, if based on electrode materials with a high gravimetric and/or volumetric capacity.99 In this direction, developing proton-based energy storage and conversion devices by using carbon-rich compounds such as organic molecules and polymers combined with low-dimensional crystalline nanocarbons including graphene and carbon nanotubes is attractive and challenging.100,101 For example, novel redox active bi and terpolymers, containing quinone-amine functionalities in the blocks and wired by nanocarbons have been synthesized and studied as negative electrodes for electrochemical proton storage.102 The aromatic diamine showed an additional reversible redox reaction, between the nitrogen atoms conjugated with the quinone molecule and the hydrogen ions. The incorporation of conductive carbon nanofillers with specific dimensionality provided an additional and straightforward strategy to maximize both the electron conductivity and the proton storage capacity of the polymers. Homogeneous dispersion of nanocarbon and the redox polymer particles was essential to maximize the proton storage capacity by creating an intimate polymer–carbon interphase. These low-cost redox polymers reached up to 230 mA h g−1 and 75 μA h cm−2 at 0.08 A g−1 in an aqueous-based electrolyte, paving the way for the use of these materials in thin-film devices for technologies such as grid solar energy storage.
Emanuelsson and co-workers proposed another example of proton battery based on organic redox-active materials in 2017.99 In that proof of principle, conducting polymers, PEDOT, functionalized with quinone pendant groups were used as electrode active materials to develop an all-organic proton battery (Fig. 4). Since the quinones undergo the redox reaction at potentials at which the PEDOT backbone is conductive, the electrodes do not need any conducting additive. The electrolyte contains a proton donor and acceptor with pyridinium and pyridine, which makes possible the quinone/hydroquinone redox reactions and avoids the proton reduction in the battery cell.
 Fig. 4  Proton battery concept with all-organic electrode materials. 
Recently, the same group reported a facile processing method to prepare high efficiency polymer electrodes from a redox active trimer compound for all-organic proton batteries.103 The new approach allowed the application of traditional, up-scalable layering techniques with 100% utilization of the precursor material thus minimizing material losses. The battery shows good cycling stability (85% after 500 cycles), withstands rapid charging, with full capacity (60 mA h g−1) reached within 100 seconds, allowing for direct integration with photovoltaics, and retains its favorable characteristics even at −24 °C. The smart strategy presented by the Swedish group opens large design options and opportunities to develop sustainable plastic batteries.
A similar strategy of copolymerizing Jeffamines with electroactive groups such as perylene polyimide has resulted in soluble copolymers that can be directly casted into the current collectors.104 The perylene polyimides with oligoether groups have been assessed as potential anode candidates for high power aqueous polymer batteries. Perylene-based polyimide presents a redox reaction at −0.55 V vs. Ag/AgCl and stable cycle life at high current density (600 °C) for 2000 cycles. Besides, an all-organic cell consisting of perylene polyimide–polyether as the anode (negative electrode) and PEDOT–lignin biopolymer composite as the cathode (positive electrode) has an output voltage of 1.0 V. The full-cell delivers 40 mA h g−1 discharge capacity at 100 °C with 85% capacity retention and above 93% coulombic efficiency for 800 cycles.
Using the hydrogen atom as the vector for charge storage was already attempted in the old Ni–metal hydride batteries, but the species is not the same. While proton batteries store cations (H+), in metal-hydride batteries it is the hydrogen anion, the hydride, (H−) that is stored. This apparently small difference in the species being stored (just two electrons) is behind the fundamental difference of these two battery types, while protons are ubiquitous and can be formed and found in many media including water, and many organic molecules, hydrides are formed only with quite electropositive metals (e.g. La, Ni of M–H batteries). The result is that M–H batteries, are usually based on scarce and expensive elements such as nickel compounds for positive electrode, and intermetallic hydrides containing lanthanum or rare earths as hydrogen-absorbing material and negative electrode, therefore this chemistry is far from being considered sustainable.
Redox flow batteries
Redox flow batteries are optima candidates for the storage of clean electricity from intermittent energy sources. Generally, redox flow batteries are composed of two electrolytes containing dissolved electroactive species that are continuously pumped from two external tanks into a reactor stack where the active species are reduced or oxidized exchanging electrons through the external circuit. Ions migrate through an ion-selective polymer membrane to balance the charges. Present-day chemistries used in the redox flow batteries exhibit solubilities going from close to 2 mol L−1 for vanadium-based redox chemistry (1.26 V; 25–40 W h kg−1)105 usually containing as supporting electrolyte a concentrated protic acid (i.e. sulphuric acid, H2SO4) in water – to 8 mol L−1 for the second most common Zn–bromine hybrid systems (aqueous–organic electrolyte) (1.85 V; 80 W h kg−1).106 However, some of the electroactive materials used in these aqueous redox flow cells are expensive, scarce, and toxic (e.g. metals like vanadium). Moreover, they require costly Nafion® membranes, which impose a large internal resistance and still cross contamination, cannot be completely avoided. Future flow battery technology demands not only high-energy density systems that can extend their lifetime, but also the introduction of new chemistries from cheaper and safer earth abundant materials. In addition, from the authors' point of view, the redox chemistry should be performed in aqueous solutions in order to limit flammability and environmental concerns of organic solvents. Thus, the following section will be focused on the recent progress on redox flow batteries with organic active species in aqueous electrolytes as well as in new strategies capable of skipping the use of Nafion® membranes (Fig. 5). Moreover, production routes of the electrode materials with zero CO2 emissions will be crucial from a sustainability perspective.
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of different redox flow batteries configurations. Positive and negative electrolyte flow streams are generally referred to as the “Catholyte” and “Anolyte”, respectively. Standard cell voltage is determined by the difference between the 2 half redox reactions in each electrode. (a) Conventional liquid configuration. (b) Polymer-based flow battery. (c) Symmetric configuration: the same redox-active analyte in each tank. (d) Membrane-less. 
Organic-based aqueous redox flow batteries

Quinone-based electrolyte. 
Quinone compounds have been widely investigated as redox species since they display attractive characteristics in solution: fast charge transfer reaction and fast kinetics. In addition, the functionalization of the molecules allows for tuning different properties such as redox potential and solubility.107,108 An approach to develop a metal-free aqueous RFB was reported by Huskinson et al.109 They proposed a hybrid organic–inorganic cell with an oxidized 9,10-anthraquinone-2,6-disulphonic acid as anolyte and Br2/Br− as catholyte. The exhibited cell voltage was 0.86 V. Facing the limitation of using harmful species such as bromine, a number of quinone derivatives were investigated as possible low-cost organic materials. In this sense, a fully organic cell was almost simultaneously published based on anthraquinone-2,6-disulphonic acid and 1,2-benzoquinone-3,5-disulphonic acid as anolyte and catholyte, respectively.110 After that publication different RFB studies have been reported based on quinone redox chemistry in acid media.111,112 In order to eliminate the acidic media, and moving towards a less corrosive electrolyte, in 2015, an alkaline quinone battery was reported.113 In this case the quinone species in the catholyte were replaced by an organometallic compound, ferricyanide ion (0.4 M) and a dihydroxyanthraquinone (0.5 M) was used in the anolyte. The battery exhibited stable round-trip energy efficiency of 84% when cycled with an OCV of 1.2 V, which can be further increased by functionalizing of the anthraquinone. Since then, different quinone RFBs active at basic pH have been also reported exhibiting high performance and long lifetime.114–118 Alkaline media offers some advantages with respect to acid solutions, such as being less corrosive and shifting the thermodynamic potentials of proton-dependent reactions to more negative values. However, the use of such high pH solutions may cause safety and environmental concerns as well due to its causticity. In a step further towards reducing safety concerns in 2019, the electrochemical performance of few RFB based on quinones active in neutral and close to neutral aqueous solutions has been investigated.119–122 In the majority of them, the anolyte is based on a functionalized anthraquinone. Jin et al.121 screened a series of PEG (polyethylene glycol)-substituted anthraquinones and synthesized a highly water-soluble species (2.2 M, close to the solubility of vanadium species in very acidic VRFB) that significantly decreased the volume of the electrolyte needed. They demonstrated a volumetric capacity of 80.4 A h L−1. Ji et al.120 used a functionalized anthraquinone with phosphonate groups in aqueous solution at pH 9. The modification maintained an OCV of 1 V and improved the lifetime of the battery with a low capacity fade rate (5% per year). Hu et al. employed a quite simple synthesis method119 to prepare an anthraquinone-based diammoniun salt with 1.9 M solubility in water. However, the full battery results were demonstrated with a 0.75 M solution since the reduced species precipitate in more concentrated solutions.
In spite of the versatility that the chemical functionalization of quinone molecules can offer in the design of redox-active electrolyte materials, it has been observed that stability, solubility and redox potential usually go against each other. In some cases, the incorporation of new groups into the structure to increase the solubility can limit the lifetime or shift the redox potential unfavourably.123 Bearing in mind this, the study of the degradation mechanism and the byproducts is getting more importance118,124,125 in the design of new materials that can show all the desirable properties.
The characteristic ketone functional group of quinones is electron withdrawing, hence, the CC bond can react easily with nucleophiles. Thus, the rational design of molecules is of outstanding relevancy in order to avoid some of the degradation pathways such as: Michael addition,122 epoxidation, nucleophilic attack123 dimerization126 and tautomerization.127 Both chemical and electrochemical degradation processes along with the crossover of active species are often the main reasons behind the capacity fade observed in battery cyclability tests.
The selection of low-cost, highly-water soluble reversible redox pairs with fast kinetics and showing a high number of electrons transferred per formula unit is critical to meet the market requirements. Fig. 6 shows some of the most studied analytes in aqueous redox flow batteries. As it is indicated some of them exhibit activity at neutral pH or close to neutral pH values assuring the safety of the battery.
 Fig. 6  Chemical structure of the different organic molecules studied as active species in aqueous redox flow batteries at different pH. Solubilities are specified in brackets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130 Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
In this sense, Table 1 collects a series of reported redox pairs along with their performance at neutral or close to neutral pH in aqueous redox flow batteries. Common characteristics in most of them are the use of NaCl as supporting salt, cell voltage higher than 1.2 V and energy efficiencies during cycling performance around 65%. More specific details are discussed below.
Table 1 Comparison of battery performance of different RFB reported working at neutral pH or near to neutral pHa




Anolyte
Catholyte
Conc. (M)
Cell voltage (V)
Cycles (at mA cm−2)
CE (%)
EE (%)
Disch. capacity (A h L−1)
Cap. retent. (%)
Ref.





a MV: 1,1′-dimethyl-4,4′-bipyridinium; lawsone: 2-hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone; BTMAP-Vi: bis(3-trimethylammonio)propyl viologen; [(NPr)2TTz]Br4: 4,4′-(thiazolo[5,4d]thiazole-2,5-diyl)bis(1-(3-(trimethylammonio)propyl)pyridin-1-ium)tetrabromide; BTMAP-Fc: bis((3-trimethylammonio)propyl)ferrocene; [(Me)(NPr)V]Cl3: 1-methyl-1′-[3-(trimethylammonio)propyl]-4,4′-bipyridinium trichloride; FcNCl: (ferrocenylmethyl)trimethylammonium chloride; BPP-Vi: 1,1′-bis(3-phosphonopropyl)-[4,4′-bipyridine]-1,1′-diium dibromide; DPPEAQ: (((9,10-dioxo-9,10-dihydroanthracene-2,6-diyl)bis(oxy))bis(propane-3,1-diyl))bis(phosphonic acid).





MV
OH-TEMPO
0.5 M in 1.5 M NaCl
1.25
100 (60)
99
62
8.5
89

131



Lawsone
OH-TEMPO
0.1 M in 1 M NaCl
1.3
215 (15)
97
—
0.95
99

122



BTMAP-Vi
NMe-TEMPO
0.5 M in 2 M NaCl
1.38
500 (60)
99
60
8.5
97

132



[(NPr)2TTz]Br4
NMe-TEMPO
0.2 M in 2 M NaCl
1.44
300 (40)
99
68.6
4.2
90

133



MV
NMe-TEMPO
2 M in 1.5 M NaCl
1.4
100 (80)
99
65
38.3
90

134



BTMAP-Vi
BTMAP-Fc
1.3 M in water
0.748
250 (50)
99
65
16
99

135



[(Me)(NPr)V]Cl3
FcNCl
0.5 M in 2 M NaCl
1.39
50 (60)
99
63
12
91

136



MV
FcNCl
0.5 M in 2 M NaCl
1.05
700 (60)
99
60
11
91

137



Diquat
FcNCl
0.5 M in 1.5 M NaCl
1.12
100 (5)
98
84
8
80

138



BPP-Vi
K4Fe(CN)6
1 M in 14 M NH4OH
0.9
290 (40)
99
85
26
99

139



DPPEAQ
K4Fe(CN)6
0.5 M
1
480 (100)
99
65
26
99

120







TEMPO and viologen derivatives. 
TEMPO (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine 1-oxyl) and viologen derivatives (Fig. 6) have been usually coupled each other as active species (Table 1) in scientific publications based on neutral aqueous organic RFB,129,131,132,134,136 due to their fast kinetics and high solubility in aqueous solution (up to 2.3 M in NaCl). Functionalization of TEMPO materials is frequently based on the incorporation of a hydrophilic group in position number 4 in order to increase its solubility in water. 4-Hydroxy-TEMPO was the first derivative reported but it suffers from side reactions with pH variations.128 Thus, the hydroxy group was replaced by ammonium groups and the theoretical cell voltage was increased up to (≈1.4 V) using N,N,N-2,2,6,6-heptamethylpiperidinyl oxy-4-ammonium chloride (TEMPTMA) and methyl viologen (MV) solutions for the catholyte and anolyte, respectively.132,133 Due to these improvements, the theoretical energy density was increased up to 53.7 W h L−1 that compares favourably with common vanadium RFBs. In addition, the demonstrated energy density during cycling was (50.8 W h L−1) which is quite promising. A long cyclability test (1000 cycles) for TEMPO-MV based systems has been recently reported by Liu et al.129 Cycling was performed at 40 mA cm−2 with 0.1 M concentrated electrolytes and showed a 92% of capacity utilization, energy efficiency (EE) of 65% and 99.993% per cycle capacity retention. Increasing the concentration of electrolytes up to 1.5 M and the applied current density (100 mA cm−2) did not cause a significant decrease in the EE and capacity retention values (53 and 95%, respectively), however the number of reported cycles was limited to 250. The authors noted that a modification of the membrane that makes possible to decrease its resistance and its permeability would allow for increasing the power density and capacity retention rate.
Viologen based anolytes have been also coupled in few studies with iron-based organometallic materials135,136,140 due to their high solubility in water, especially when they are functionalized: (bis((3-trimethylammonio)propyl)ferrocene, BTMAP-Fc), 1.9 M; ((ferrocenylmethyl)trimethylammonium chloride, FcNCl), 4.0 M; ammonium ferricyanide ((NH4)3[Fe(CN)6], 1.9 M). Remarkably, the BTMAP-Fc electrolyte can be cycled even without any supporting salt. In all of these publications the authors highlighted the good capacity retention exhibited by these systems (>99.96% per cycle), which they attributed to the stability of active materials.
With respect to the stability/reversibility aspects, viologen and its derivatives usually can exchange 2 electrons, (one in each reaction: MV2+ ↔ MV+˙ ↔ MV0) and exhibit good solubility in water (≈2 M).141 However, the solubility of the neutral state MV0 in aqueous solutions is low142 and therefore the redox reaction between MV+˙ and MV0 is usually avoided and, only the reaction between MV2+ and MV+˙ is considered. Nevertheless, it has been demonstrated that MV0 solubility can be increased by functionalization as reported by Leo Liu's group.133,136 Regarding their stability, it should be also noted that viologen reduced species display high instability in the presence of oxygen, which imposes difficulties in the operation conditions of the battery.143 It should be also mentioned that the replacement of viologen species by other organic materials is desirable due to its toxicity, which can compromise sustainability. However, it has been incorporated in this review since it is a material made of earth-abundant elements and the research community has dedicated important efforts to its study.

Other organic redox species
As mentioned above, most of the published works related to aqueous based organic RFB are based on quinone, TEMPO and viologen compound families. Nevertheless, other interesting organic species have been also proposed as anolyte active materials such as alloxazines143 and phenazines.144 Lin et al. proposed a rational design based on theoretical modelling to avoid the side effect that alloxazine can suffer in aqueous media. Orita et al. studied the effect of the pH on the stability of this kind of molecules. Hollas et al. performed a virtual screening of the stability and effect of different functional groups on the phenazine molecule. Most of these molecules were tested in alkaline media and paired with K4Fe(CN)6. This organometallic species is the most common catholyte material used in alkaline organic RFB since it has demonstrated high stability at basic pH values.145

Polymer aqueous redox flow battery. 
The use of polymers as redox materials reduces the crossover and allows for using commercially available cellulose-based dialysis membranes as separators (Fig. 5b). In addition, the use of aqueous solutions of NaCl as supporting electrolyte makes safer and lowers battery cost in comparison with the RFB based on acidic solutions and expensive membranes. However, the main disadvantage of this approach is that the solubility of the polymers is usually lower than the solubility of the redox active molecules which limits the energy density. In addition, although a highly soluble main polymer chain was used, the concentration of redox active units is still limited by the number of available link-sites in the main chain. In 2015 Janoschka et al.146 reported a polymer redox flow battery based on soluble redox active polymers with TEMPO and viologen moieties. The cell exhibited a voltage of 1.1 V. The solubility of the active polymers employed gave a capacity of 10 A h L−1 and an energy density of 8 W h L−1.
With the aim of using sustainable, renewable and low-cost materials, Mukhopadhyay et al.147 reported a flow cell in which the catholyte is based on lignin, an abundant and renewable biopolymer. However, toxic Br2 was still used as active species in the anolyte. Regarding the lignosulfonate material, it uses the redox chemistry of quinone and exchanges two electrons and two protons per quinone unit at 0.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) in protic media. Unfortunately, the battery performance was not satisfactory, since limitations in the reactants mass transport and low discharge voltage were observed.
In 2019, Hatakeyama-Sato et al.148 used hydrophilic organic redox polymer nanoparticles as active species in both electrolytes. The polymer nanoparticles (≈40 nm) were chemically functionalized with TEMPO-, viologen-, or diazaanthraquinone units. This strategy allowed for exceeding the limitation of the solubility of the corresponding dissolved species. Thus, making a suspension of particles the concentration of redox active units reaches 1.5 M. The cycling performance was tested over only 50 cycles using TEMPO-substituted particles and diazaanthraquinone-substituted particles. On a negative note, it showed a 20% decrease in coulombic efficiency after 40 cycles probably caused by self-discharge process due to water splitting. However, the capacity retention keeps constant over cycles because of the successful size exclusion effect to avoid the crossover. Yan et al.149 used a similar strategy with even larger particles (1200–2700 nm) to develop a polymer particle suspension battery. In this system, an aqueous polymer particulate suspension was studied as electrolyte material. This concept could be also denominated as a kind of semisolid redox flow battery and it also makes possible the application of insoluble materials to redox flow batteries. The particulates were based on polyhydroquinone and polyimide which are polymer with the active sites on the main-chain instead of being at the pendant groups. An important aspect to be improved in these materials is their rheological properties when highly concentrated suspensions are employed, since they can decrease the overall efficiency of the system.


Symmetric aqueous redox flow batteries. 
Besides the polymer-based electrolytes strategy, other approaches have been studied to solve the electrolyte contamination issues due to crossover through the membrane. Similarly, to the concept used in all-vanadium RFB in which the crossover cannot cause a total and critical contamination of the electrolytes just a misbalance in species concentration, a new concept of redox flow battery has been investigated called “symmetric” RFB (SRFB) (Fig. 5c). In such battery the active specie for both electrolytes is a single molecule that can exhibit three redox states and undergo the catholyte and anolyte half reactions.
Based in this approach in 2016, Carretero-González et al. reported the preparation of highly-water soluble organic salts containing both electron–proton donor (hydroxyl or nitrogen) and acceptor (carbonyl) groups in the same conjugated organic skeleton that exhibit three redox states. The change between states is due to the addition/removal of 2e−/2H+ each, which can be accessed in the electrochemical stability window of the aqueous electrolyte.150 Enhanced solubility (up to 1.6 M) was achieved by adding sulphonic groups to the carbon ring of the flat molecules and then by replacing Na+ by a larger hydrophilic organic cation such as tetrakis (hydroxyethyl)-ammonium [N(CH2CH2OH)4]+ or tetrakis(hydroxymethyl)-phosphonium [P(CH2OH)4]+. These groups are non-chelatable and very hygroscopic while the salts maintain a reversible charge transfer and a large electrochemical potential window in dilute acid (0.1 M HClO4) for anthraquinones or in neutral pH buffered aqueous solution for indigos. The corresponding pure salts melt even near ambient temperature. These findings imply that the same electroactive material could be used as catholyte and anolyte in a 1 V symmetrical redox flow cell at neutral or close to neutral pH, with all its advantages in terms of cell corrosion and membrane requirements.
In the same vein of developing aqueous SRFB, a new strategy for synthetizing bipolar redox active materials was the preparation of “combi-molecules”. Such materials combine, by covalent bonding, a catholyte-type redox active unit with an anolyte-type redox active unit within the same molecule. Winsberg et al.151 prepared a combi-molecule by binding TEMPO with phenazine and triethylene glycol (TEG) as linker moiety. The resulting flow battery exhibits a high coulombic efficiency (99%) during 1850 cycles at 4 mA cm−2 with diluted electrolytes (10 mM), in which the eventual crossover does not cause any contamination. However, the voltage drop between charge and discharge processes reduces the energy efficiency of the battery significantly. Janoschka et al. also studied the combination of TEMPO and viologen in a single molecule (VIOTEMP) as bipolar material to assemble a “pole-less” aqueous RFB.152 Nevertheless the solubility of reduced species limits the capacity and the application of this RFB.
Other study to apply bipolar molecules in neutral aqueous RFB was reported by Zhu et al. recently.153 The new material combines ferrocene with viologen species and was used as unique active material in both electrolytes. The bipolar activity was demonstrated by changing the polarity in the cell and exhibiting high symmetry. The long-term stability test over 4000 cycles at 100% depth of discharge is the largest reported in organic redox flow batteries and showed a capacity retention of 75%, however the applied current density was still moderate (10 mA cm−2) and should be increased to compete with conventional redox flow batteries. Postmorten analysis demonstrated high stability of the molecule since its structure remains unchanged. The capacity decay was attributed to aging of the membrane and the current collectors.


Membraneless/membrane-free redox flow batteries. 
As mentioned above, in order to replace the expensive and poor performing ion exchange membranes by porous separators, several strategies are being pursued such as the use of active polymers or symmetrical configurations, leading to lower cost battery systems. In this sense, the total elimination of the membrane or any separator was also investigated. The so-called membraneless or membrane-free RFBs have been proposed following different approaches: hybrid, microfluidic and immiscible biphasic systems (Fig. 5d).
• Hybrid RFBs are based on a metal electrode in one side of the battery and flowing electrolyte in the other side. Although, pioneering works154–157 have been reported in which the Zn anode is paired with an organic redox material in aqueous solution, a challenge still to be faced is the space inside the cell that can be occupied by the metal deposits during operation. These systems are a novel “green” alternative, nevertheless the decoupling of energy and power densities, the main characteristic of RFB, is not possible with this configuration.
• Microfluidic RFBs rely on laminar flow of both liquid electrolytes to keep them separated without any physical barrier. Some examples of this technology based on the vanadium species158,159 are published. Recently, a microfluidic redox battery based on non-toxic dihydroxyquinone and ferro/ferricyanide redox pairs was proposed by Karakurt et al.160 In addition, an interesting aspect is that this flow battery can be integrated into wearable electronics since it is flexible, thus its energy and power outputs are limited due to its microscale.
• Very recently a new approach for membrane-free RFB has been put forward by Navalpotro et al. based on the use of immiscible electrolytes with organic redox active species. The concept is not limited to aqueous/nonaqueous electrolytes combinations where it can seem straightforward. The use of harmful organic solvents can be totally avoided by the new application of aqueous biphasic systems as electrolytes.161,162 This concept, in addition to the elimination of the membrane, would eliminate the associated limitations of using a metal electrode, laminar flow or microscale systems. However, it is at a very early stage and further development in needed.
In general, there are still several hurdles to be solved for organic aqueous redox flow batteries. The development of suitable materials that fulfil as many requirements as possible is crucial to drive progress towards a cost-effective and environmentally friendly redox flow battery system. Research is focused on different strategies to: (i) improve electrochemical and chemical stability and reduce crossover contamination leading to enhanced capacity retention and lifetime. (ii) Increase the active material solubility and cell voltage to achieve higher capacity and energy density. (iii) Reduce the battery cost by replacing/avoiding expensive materials. (iv) Design materials considering its sustainability and toxicity.
These recent developments open new routes towards implementable and sustainable redox flow batteries.

Sustainable polymer electrolyte materials for all-solid state batteries
All solid-state batteries,163,164 where electrodes and electrolytes are in the solid state (instead of flammable organic liquid solvents) might not drop in efficiency at operation temperatures slightly above room temperature. Besides, solid electrolytes are mandatory in high energy density batteries, which contain a Li metal anode, however they can also be deployed in Li-ion batteries with improved safety. Generally, ion conduction in polymers requires lower activation energy than in ceramic (inorganic) membranes where high charge density ions move through a crystal structure instead of a disordered polymer network. Therefore, polymeric ion conductors are able to operate at lower temperatures (typically 60 °C–100 °C for a H+ ion conductor) than oxide membranes (250 °C–550 °C).165 Polymeric ion conductors are easy to process at large scales contrary to the frequent complexity found in ceramics, where expensive precursors react through time and energy consuming solid-state reaction procedures followed by multiple grinding, and high-temperature calcination (≥1000 °C) steps.166 In addition, polymers are indeed robust, lightweight, can be shaped to suit the requirements of the application and they are more resistant to flammability than liquid electrolytes containing organic solvents.
In 1978, Prof. Michel Armand167,168 proposed the first polyethylenoxide (PEO)/lithium (Li) dry solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) system (∼10−4 S cm−1 at 40 °C–60 °C) for lithium batteries. In general, in a dry and solid polymer conductor, the polymer is the solvent and the ions moves between exchange sites.169 (Fig. 7a) Moreover, lithium transfer is thought to occur mostly through the amorphous regions of the polymer, since conductivity results have been explained in terms of the diffusional segmental movements of the polymeric chains.170 Still, issues such as above room temperature operation (60 °C–100 °C), the presence of crystalline domains in the polymer with low ion conductivity and polymer degradation has proved very tricky to commercialize these systems. Regarding sodium ion polymer electrolytes, despite ceramics show the highest Na+ ionic conductivities among solid-state electrolytes for Na-ion batteries (up to 2 × 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature),171 polymeric electrolytes172 showed improved mechanical properties with enhanced conductivity173 upgraded electrode–electrolyte interphase174 and easier processability.175 Na+ ions move through segmental motion of the amorphous polymer chains at low salt concentrations, whereas at high concentrations mobile ions can diffuse along the polymer chain since polymer and ion motion are uncoupled. Among the different strategies to enhance ion conductivity in polymer electrolytes and their mechanical properties are the following: (i) anion design: the design of new anions with higher negative charge delocalization will increase the ion conductivity in the polymer matrix by decreasing the ion pairing. In addition, it would be desirable due to safety issues, if these new anions possessed low fluorine content while retaining high electrochemical stability versus lithium metal. Usually electrolyte formulations contain dissolved fluorinated salts in highly flammable solvents with flash points near RT. If the temperature in the electrolyte increase rapidly a short-circuit causing “thermal runaway” might happen. Then, a high risk of fire or explosion results along with the release of toxic fluoro-organic compounds, i.e., bis(2-fluoroethyl)-ether176 and even hydrogen fluoride.177
 Fig. 7  (a) Scheme of the different layer components of the Li-polymer battery. (b) Chemical structure of the single-ion conductor triblockcopolymer P(STFSILi)-b-PEO-b-P(STFSILi) proposed as a low-cost and safe electrolyte for lithium-metal-based batteries. 
A recent improvement in the development of low-cost salts includes the synthesis of a fluorine-free salt with a highly performing salt anion, tricyanomethanide [–C(CN)3]. The salt anion was shown to form a homogeneous, stable and ionically conductive passivation layer in comparison to the state-of-the-art fluorinated TFSI-based electrolytes; (ii) addition of plasticizers will increase the mobility of the polymer chains and then the ion conductivity. The use of bulky and “flexible” anions will increase the conductivity in polymer electrolytes as a result of the salt acting as an effective plasticizer. For example, the sodium bis(trifluoromethane sulfonyl)imide (NaTFSI) salt acts as an effective plasticizer decreasing the crystallinity in the PEO, and facilitating Na+ conduction and increasing the transport number since also the TFSI anions interact strongly with the polymer matrix and their mobility is significantly reduced.;178 (iii) polymer electrolyte nanocomposites. The incorporation of surface-modified nanoparticles will alter the Lewis acid–base interactions between the cations and the anions as well as between the metal ions and the polymer chains. This will provoke an increase in the ion conductivity and also increase the mechanical strength of the polymer matrix. Ceramic–polymer nanocomposites can also improve the conductivity of the polymer electrolytes decreasing the degree of crystallinity in the polymer matrix while enhancing the mechanical stability. The conductivity is especially improved when the conduction takes place via an interphase of a polymer–ceramic bicontinuous composite;179 (iv) designing single-ion conducting block-copolymer electrolytes with the anion covalently anchored to the alternating block-copolymer chain. Such co-polymers exhibited superior ion conductivity and mechanical properties.180 This new class of polymer salts overcomes the above limitations, evidencing ion transport numbers close to the unity (with conductivity values of 1.3 10−5 S cm−1 at 60 °C), excellent mechanical properties and an electrochemical stability window beyond 5 V; (v) functionalization of already existing available polymers. Single-ion conducting polymer electrolytes based on blends of PEO with respectively functionalized poly (acrylic acid) and ethyl cellulose have been developed.181,182 Both polymers were functionalized by anion of lithium salt LiTFSI, reaching conductivities of 1.77 × 10−5 S cm−1 measured at 80 °C and 5.2 × 10−5 S cm−1 measured at 70 °C for PEO/PA-LiTFSI and PEO/ethylcellulose-LiTFSI SPEs, respectively.
The use of natural, biodegradable and abundant polymers as solid electrolyte materials is an excellent opportunity to boost the solid polymer electrolyte field towards more environmentally friendly and safe batteries. In this sense, biopolymers such as chitin, chitosan, cellulose and polypeptides have been studied as solid proton conductors. For instance, microcrystalline cellulose (Cell) with “imidazole (Im) dopant” was successfully synthesized.183 The thermal properties and proton conductivity of Cell-Im were determined and compared with that of pure microcrystalline cellulose. It was found that the Cell-Im exhibits close to four orders of magnitude higher conductivity than a pure cellulose sample, up to approximately 2 × 10−6 S cm−1 at 160 °C under anhydrous conditions. The anhydrous hybrid proton conductor consisting of polyglutamic acid (poly(Glu)) and polyhistidine (poly(His)), showed a proton conductivity of 1.4 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 180 °C under anhydrous conditions.184
Technical challenges and bottlenecks
The sustainability should be a fundamental aspect in the future batteries along with the further improvement of the technical parameters such as energy and power density, stability and life span. The use of naturally occurring inorganic compounds might be also applied in sustainable batteries. Pyrite (FeS2) has been regarded as one of the most promising electrode materials for sodium ion batteries owing to its high theoretical capacity and low cost. Behind these desirable characteristics is the need of getting affordable and eco-friendly energy storage materials (Fig. 8). To achieve this goal several challenges should be faced and some technical aspects need to be solved. In the following section, we highlight the critical aspects that need to be considered.
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of the important technical parameters and aspects related to the sustainability that should be considered in the development of future batteries. 
Energy density
Further enhancement of the energy density by increasing the capacity of the active material is a technical challenge that should be faced in the innovative sustainable materials. In organic and polymeric systems, the redox active centers often constitute a small wt% of the total mass of the electrode.
Moreover, performance is very often well below the theoretical limits, with parts of the electrode remaining inactive due to incomplete ion or electron wiring. It has been demonstrated that improving the utilization and/or theoretical capacity provides more significant energy density increment than trying to enlarge the cell voltage.185 In order to increase the specific capacity of the organic materials, structural modifications like increasing the number of redox active sites in the molecule or monomer, increasing the electronic conductivity, increasing the surface area and replacing O atoms by S atoms that have higher electron delocalization are some strategies among others related to the design of the material.186 Current studies are focusing on the enhancement of the cycle life of FeS2 electrodes in sodium ion batteries by using organic-based electrolytes that can react with polysulfides creating a stable solid electrolyte interphase that could prevent the loss of elements. For that, a designed nano FeS2@C composite have been synthesized to limit the shuttling effects. As a result, in a large operating voltage range of 0.01–3 V, it shows high capacity (about 600 mA h g−1) and good cyclic performance with ether-based electrolyte.187
Power density
The power density is also an important factor to be enhanced in next generation green batteries. Besides improving the energy density, an essential factor in this matter is the rate performance. Achieving fast kinetics and high conductivity in the electrode material can enhance the power density. One strategy for getting fast electron transfer is by introducing conductive units and extending the conjugated structure in the materials design of analytes or by reducing charge density and desolvation energy in liquid electrolyte–solid electrode designs. In addition, the non-active components involved in the electrode composition, such as conductive additives, binders and current collectors, should be also carefully selected.
Non-active components play a significant role in the electrode performance and subsequently in the final device.
• Conductive additives are usually employed in the manufacture of electrode composites, especially when the active material does not exhibit good electronic conductivity, as in redox active polymeric materials. The incorporation of large amounts of these additives can decrease the gravimetric energy density of the final device. Thus, the study of carbonaceous materials like carbon nanotubes or vapor grown carbon fibers is important since they allow reducing the weight contribution of the electrode.
• Binders are used to strengthen the electrode mechanical properties and to improve the contact between the active material and the current collector. As a rule, the amount of binder incorporated into the electrode does not exceed 10 %wt, and it have been demonstrated that it can have a significant impact in the overall performance of the battery.188 The most commonly used binders are fluorinated polymers such as poly(vinylidene difluoride) (PVdF). This compound requires the use of toxic organic solvents such as NMP, so its replacement by naturally abundant, cheap and environmentally friendly binders is greatly needed. Carboxymethylcellulose has emerged a greener candidate that is cheaper, renewable and water-soluble and it has demonstrated good performance in batteries189 even beyond that of PVdF for Na-ion batteries.190 However more research is needed to make it suitable for a wider implementation in battery technologies.
Conductive polymers are advantageous candidates for the so-called multifunctional binders since they can eliminate the need of conductive additives because they are already organic conductors. In order to incorporate them as binders in the electrode manufacture, their molecular structure has been tuned by introducing functional groups to provide them with several functions such as high electronic conductivity, good mechanical ductility and adhesion.191
A strategy to increase the power density is the hybridization of the electrochemical cell architectures by using asymmetric electrode material compositions. It might be applied in situations where both high energy and power densities are needed such as hybrid electric trucks and boats and comparable sort of power necessity-based devices.192,193 A recent theoretical study has also shown that instead of developing a new battery to meet the required specifications of a battery pack, different batteries can be combined to construct a hybrid battery module to simultaneously achieve both high power and high energy densities in a single system. To investigate the feasibility of battery hybridization concept, a circuit-based hybrid battery model similar to physics-based, blended-electrode model was developed.194 Both hybrid systems mark new approaches to the much-needed pollution free, long lasting and proficient energy-storing performance.
Stability and lifespan
In RFB technology where the active materials are dissolved, the search of new organic materials should consider the need to find a trade-off between the main characteristics of the material: solubility, stability, specific capacity and redox potential, since usually an enhancement in one of these properties is achieved to the detriment of the other. For this purpose, a rational materials design by using computational tools can be really advantageous and helpful.196,197 Among all these properties, the study of the stability of the reduced and oxidized species stands out as one of the most important because many of the side reactions and degradation pathways, which cause capacity decay and low material utilization, are still unknown for most of the materials, even for those mostly deployed. In addition, the crossover contamination is another cause of capacity fading in current studies that can be evaluated by simulation software.198
The evolution of the structure and dynamics of the different sustainable redox active electrode and electrolyte materials after (ex situ) and during (in situ) cycling will allow the identification of the atomic and molecular structures kinetically favored at each state of charge to determine the reaction (charge storage) and failure mechanisms. For that, the development of advanced characterization tools is crucial to improve battery materials to respond to the demands for higher efficiency, longer lifetime, and lower cost in the future (Fig. 9).199
 Fig. 9  Schematic representation of two in situ NMR setups. (a) On-line setup. (b) Operando setup. Reproduced with permission from ref. 195 Copyright © 2020 Springer-Nature. 
Considering these aspects in the next section future considerations will be commented.
Prospects
The future eco-friendly batteries should be sustainable in all steps of their “life period” from their initial manufacture to the end-of-life processes. In this regard, important aspects must be considered such as the energy needs for production, the “bio” nature of the chosen materials precursors, the implementation of a green chemistry in the preparation routes of their components, their disposal, reutilization and recycling at the end of the operation time. All these issues have to be planned and solved as well as the new needs for fulfilling the emerging application requirements (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Schematic representation: (a) desirable energetics of battery production; (b) end-of-life process: reusing; (c) recycling materials in battery production. 
Energetic cost of the battery production
The origin of the energy employed in the battery's manufacture industry is a very important aspect to be considered when evaluating their environmental footprint since the production of batteries is a very energy intense process. If this energy supply for the manufacturing processes of the battery materials comes entirely from renewable sources, its impact on global warming could be reduced by about 60%.200 This goal can be achieved in some cases by replacing heat supplied by combustion with electrical heating (Fig. 10a). In materials synthesis, it can be also more environmentally friendly to supply the energy needed for the reaction through electrochemistry.201 Besides, if one of the chemical precursors is a greenhouse gas such as CO2, the carbon footprint of the whole process might become negative.202
Bio-inspired materials
There is a growing interest in the scientific community on designing biologically inspired materials and battery designs due to the obvious sustainability of the natural processes and organizations such as the human-body structure. Recently, many bio-inspired components and materials applied in electrochemical energy storage devices have been reported such as self-healing electrolytes,203 muscle-like electrodes,204 spine-based designs,205 pteridine redox materials.206 Besides, structural analogues of minerals – natural stable inorganic solids have been explored as electrode materials.207
Biodegradable materials, those that can be decompound in simple compounds such as CH4, N2, CO2 just by the action of microorganisms, are being intensively studied for medical applications, however just few reports have been published about its application in electrochemical energy storage devices.208,209 The development of this kind of materials can help in the progress towards sustainable devices and totally green batteries.
End-of-life processes
The development of “in situ” methods to monitor batteries state of health could provide useful information to extend their lifespan and thus, reduce their environmental impact.210 The improvement of monitoring systems can help to better determine the “health” of the battery, which may allow the self-repair of the deteriorated components or to give a second life to those batteries. Re-using can contribute to a more efficient use of resources since it increases the lifespan of the batteries. Batteries that had lost 80% of the initial capacity are considered not suitable for very demanding applications, however they can be deployed in other less power intense “second-life” applications such as grid storage (Fig. 10b). In this sense, the development of a battery management system that can provide useful information about the state of health of the battery through reliable mathematical methods is greatly needed.211 Proper scenarios and effective business models for electrical vehicle (EV) battery reusing are crucial to commercialize the “post-vehicle” markets of retired batteries and generate alternative revenue streams which could also contribute to EV price reduction for customers.
Recycling processes
The design of new materials and chemistries for battery applications as well as the engineering of the battery should be linked to enable recycling of those materials and devices (Fig. 10c). For example, the recycling process of lead–acid batteries is well regulated and established in industrialized regions/countries, however in less developed countries where it is not well regulated, it causes health issues in the industry workers and people who lives nearby;210 One advantage of sodium vs. lithium ion batteries is that sodium does not alloy with aluminum at any voltage and therefore it can be used as current collector in both electrodes (cathode and anode). Designs of batteries with Na3V2(PO4)3 cathode and metallic sodium as anode or symmetric batteries with also Na3V2(PO4)3 anodes deposited on bipolar aluminum plates enables 98% wt solid percent recycling, with 100% recovery of active material and more than 99 wt% of aluminum.212 The only losses being the metallic sodium (if used) along with the carbon conductive additive and the polymer binder. RFBs have the advantage of having a simple and flexible design in which each component can be independently removed, thus this technology is easier to recycle than any battery composed of solid electrodes including the lithium-ion one.213
The future battery design should follow a strategy that makes the recycling processes affordable and easy; therefore, it is desirable for the batteries of a specific type to be as uniform as possible. Among the different possible routes are: standardizing formats and materials and non-use of hazardous materials.214–216 Although out of the materials scientists, chemists and engineers' control, implementing policies that give the battery manufacturers the ownership (and thus responsibility) of the batteries, which are only rent to the individual users, is another way of supporting and encouraging battery recycling from another perspective. Especially if made of low-cost materials, battery recycling may not be economically efficient, but will be a must with large-scale systems. Hence, control through battery rentals should be seek.
Conclusions
The use of earth abundant and renewable materials is encouraging for the future development of environmentally friendly, safe and affordable energy storage. The implementation of sustainable batteries to store the solar/wind energy at reasonable costs will give the opportunity to bring clean electricity to remote communities and isolated areas by development of off-grids. Among the different battery technologies, some of them can meet the requirements to achieve these future objectives. In this review, the latest results regarding sustainable materials (mostly organic or polymeric which are synthesized through non energy intensive processes) for Na-ion, proton-based batteries, redox flow batteries and all solid-state batteries were gathered including the future considerations and current bottlenecks in their development. In addition, critical aspects for batteries sustainability such as recycling and reusing are also reviewed.
Many efforts have been done in the development of new materials that allow improving battery characteristics that are of seminal importance (voltage, energy density, capacity, rate performance and stability during cycling) as have been reviewed in this work. However, there are other features that usually do not capture the battery researchers and developer's attention, such as sustainability, reusing and recycling of the proposed new materials and configurations and deserve attention. As pointed out in this work, these aspects are of fundamental relevance since without progress in these fields, the future demand for batteries could not be covered and the damage to the environment might be irremediable. The integration of these aspects in current investigations will contribute to further developments and innovative devices that will require a firm commitment from researchers, manufacturers, legislators and users.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
P. N. thanks the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation through the SUSBAT project (RTI2018-101049-B-I00, MCI-AEI/FEDER, UE). E. C. M. acknowledges financial support through a H2020 Marie Skłodowska Curie Individual Fellowship (H2020-MSCA-IF-2016 747449) and the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation through the ANOKIB project (RTI2018-094550-A-I00). J. C. G. acknowledges support from the Spanish Ministry of Economy, Industry, and Competitiveness (MINECO) through a Ramon y Cajal Fellowship (RYC-2015-17722), the Retos Project (MAT2017-86796-R, AEI/FEDER/UE), the PTI-FLOWBAT project (Ref. No.: 201980E101) from the Spanish Research Council (CSIC) and the AESCA-CYTED project (Ref. No.: 201980E101). Finally, we thank Vincent Castillo-Carretero for being an inspiration and motivation.
References

Access to electricity, rural (% of rural population) – Least developed countries: UN classification, https://datos.bancomundial.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.RU.ZS?locations=XL Search PubMed.
B. K. Sovacool, S. H. Ali, M. Bazilian, B. Radley, B. Nemery, J. Oktaz and D. Mulvaney, Science, 2020, 367, 30–33 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS .
D. Larcher and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19–29 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. May, A. Davidson and B. Monahov, J. Energy Storage, 2018, 15, 145–157 CrossRef .
T. Chen, Y. Jin and H. Lv, 
            et al.
          , Trans. Tianjin Univ., 2020, 26, 208–217 CrossRef .
A. Hammami, N. Raymond and M. Armand, Nature, 2003, 424, 635–636 CrossRef CAS .
M. Skyllas-Kazacos, M. H. Chakrabarti and M. Saleem, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, R55–R79 CrossRef CAS .
A. Z. Weber, M. M. Mench, J. P. Meyers, P. N. Ross, J. T. Gostick and Q. Liu, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2011, 41, 1137–1164 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Kangro, German Patent, DE 914264,  1949 .
J. Noack, N. Roznyatovskaya, T. Herr and P. Fischer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9776–9809 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, A. E. S. Sleightholme, Y. Li and L. T. Thompson, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 2312–2315 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lin, Q. Chen, M. R. Gerhardt, W. Valle, R. G. Gordon, M. J. Aziz and M. P. Marshak, Science, 2015, 349, 1529–1532 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lin, R. Gómez-Bombarelli, A. Aspuru-Guzik, M. J. Aziz and R. G. Gordon, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16102 CrossRef CAS .
M. Skyllas-Kazacos, M. Rychcik, R. G. Robins, A. G. Fane and M. A. Green, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 1057–1058 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nguyen and R. F. Savinell, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2010, 19, 54–56 CrossRef CAS .
H. Prifti, A. Parasuraman, S. Winardi, T. M. Lim and M. K. Skyllas-Kazacos, Membranes, 2012, 2, 275–306 CrossRef CAS .
M. Duduta, B. Ho, V. C. Wood, P. Limthongkul, V. E. Brunini, W. C. Carter and Y.-M. Chiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 511–516 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Barnhart and S. M. Benson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1083–1092 RSC .

          https://www.vanadiumprice.com/
        .

Analysis of the climate impact of lithium-ion batteries and how to measure it. Commissioned by Transport & Environment By Hans Eric Melin, Circular Energy Storage,  2019 Search PubMed.

          https://www.epa.gov/energy/greenhouse-gas-equivalencies-calculator
        .

          M. Philippot, G. Alvarez, E. Ayerbe, J. Van Mierlo and M. Messagie, Eco-Efficiency of a Lithium-Ion Battery for Electric Vehicles: Influence of Manufacturing Country and Commodity Prices on GHG Emissions and Costs, Batteries,  2019, vol. 5, p. 23 Search PubMed .
D. A. Notter, M. Gauch, R. Widmer, P. Wager, A. Stamp, R. Zah and H.-J. Althaus, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 6550–6556 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kwade, W. Haselrieder, R. Leithoff, A. Modlinger, F. Dietrich and K. Droeder, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 290–300 CrossRef .
B. Nykvist and M. Nilsson, Nat. Clim. Change, 2015, 5, 329–332 CrossRef .

          A. Lansink, Tweede Kamer, 1979–1980, Rijksbegroting voor het jaar, 1980, Hoofdstuk XVII,  1980, p. 15800, nr.21 Search PubMed .
N. Jiao and S. Evans, Procedia CIRP, 2016, 40, 250–255 CrossRef .
R. Madlener and A. Kirmas, Energy Procedia, 2017, 105, 3806–3815 CrossRef .

Directive 2006/66/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 September 2006 on batteries and accumulators and waste batteries and accumulators, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legalcontent/EN/TXT/?uri=LEGISSUM:l21202 Search PubMed.

Motive Power Batteries report, EUROBAT,  2017, https://www.eurobat.org/images/news/publications/final_eurobat_motive_power_report_lores.pdf Search PubMed.
S. Feron, R. R. Cordero and F. Labbe, Sustainability, 2017, 9, 1825 CrossRef .
G. Harper, R. Sommerville, E. Kendrick, L. Driscoll, P. Slater, R. Stolkin, A. Walton, P. Christensen, O. Heidrich, S. Lambert, A. Abbott, K. Ryder, L. Gaines and P. Anderson, Nature, 2019, 575, 75–86 CrossRef CAS .

Report on Raw Materials for Battery Applications Brussels, Commission staff working document,  2018, 245 final, https://ec.europa.eu/transparency/regdoc/rep/10102/2018/EN/SWD-2018-245-F1-EN-MAIN-PART-1.PDF Search PubMed.

Action 7 of the SET Plan on Batteries for e-mobility and stationary storage, https://setis.ec.europa.eu/system/files/integrated_set-plan/action7_issues_paper.pdf Search PubMed.
M. Arbabzadeh, J. X. Johnson, G. A. Keoleian, P. G. Rasmussen and L. T. Thompson, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 1046–1055 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liedel, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2110–2141 CrossRef CAS .
C. Friebe, A. Lex-Balducci and U. S. Schubert, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 4093–4115 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot, J. Gaubicher, S. Renault, L. Dubois, Y. Liang and Y. Yao, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120(14), 6490–6557 CrossRef CAS .
X. Júdez, L. Quiao, M. Armand and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4008–4015 CrossRef .
S. Muench, A. Wild, C. Friebe, B. Häupler, T. Janoschka and U. S. Schubert, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 9438–9484 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, L. Lv, Y. Guo, Y. Fu, Q. Shao, T. Wu, S. Guo, K. Sun, X. Guo, E. K. Wujcik and Z. Guo, Polymer, 2017, 128, 12–23 CrossRef CAS .

          I. Tsiropoulos, D. Tarvydas and N. Lebedeva, Li-ion batteries for mobility and stationary storage applications - Scenarios for costs and market growth, EUR 29440 EN, Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg,  2018, ISBN 978-92-79-97254-6 Search PubMed .

          http://www.azuri-technologies.com/
        .
V. Palomares, M. Casas-Cabanas, E. Castillo-Martínez, M. H. Han and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2312–2337 RSC .
C. P. Grey and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 45–56 CrossRef .
J. B. Goodenough, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 14–18 RSC .
G. Crabtree, Nature, 2015, 526, S92 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Slater, D. Kim, E. Lee and C. S. Johnson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 947–958 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, M. Dahbi and S. Komaba, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11636–11682 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, Y. Lu and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 1601792 CrossRef .
H. G. Wang, S. Yuan, D.-l. Ma, X.-L. Huang, F.-L. Meng and X.-B. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 4, 1301651 CrossRef .
Y. F. Shen, D. D. Yuan, X. P. Ai, H. X. Yang and M. Zhou, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 49, 5–8 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, J. Yin, X. Zhao, C. Wang and X. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14708 RSC .
T. Liu, K. C. Kim, B. Lee, Z. Chen, S. Noda, S. S. Jang and S. W. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 205–215 RSC .
M. Quan, D. Sanchez, M. F. Wasylkiw and D. K. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12847–12856 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yao, H. Senoh, T. Sakai and T. Kiyobayashi, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2011, 6, 2905–2911 CAS .
Z. Song, Y. Qian, X. Liu, T. Zhang, Y. Zhu, H. Yu, M. Otani and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 4077–4086 RSC .
H. Kim, J. E. Kwon, B. Lee, J. Hong, M. Lee, S. Young Park and K. Kang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7258–7264 CrossRef CAS .
R. Emanuelsson, M. Sterby, M. Strømme and S. Martin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(13), 4828–4834 CrossRef CAS .
G. Milczarek, Electroanalysis, 2007, 19, 1411–1414 CrossRef CAS .
G. Milczarek and O. Inganäs, Science, 2012, 335, 1468–1471 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Gnedenkov, D. P. Opra, S. L. Sinebryukhov, A. K. Tsvetnikov, A. Y. Ustinov and V. I. Sergienko, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2013, 17, 2611–2621 CrossRef CAS .
N. Casado, M. Hilder, C. Pozo-Gonzalo, M. Forsyth and D. Mecerreyes, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 1783–1791 CrossRef CAS .
R. Thangavel, K. Kaliyappan, D.-U. Kim, X. Sun and Y.-S. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7122–7130 CrossRef CAS .
T. Placke, A. Heckmann, R. Schmuch, P. Meister, K. Beltrop and M. Winter, Joule, 2018, 2, 2528–2550 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Stevens and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1271–1273 CrossRef CAS .
D. Saurel, B. Orayech, B. Xiao, D. Carriazo, X. Li and T. Rojo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1703268 CrossRef .
M. Muñoz-Márquez, D. Saurel, J. L. Gómez-Cámer, M. Casas-Cabanas, E. Castillo-Martínez and T. Rojo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700463 CrossRef .
T. B. Schon, B. T. McAllister, P.-F. Lia and D. S. Seferos, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6345–6404 RSC .
A. G. Mac Diarmid, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 2581–2590 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Shacklette, J. E. Toth, N. S. Murthy and R. H. Baughman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1985, 132, 1529 CrossRef CAS .

          https://www.asahikasei.co.jp/asahi/en/r_and_d/interview/yoshino/pdf/lithium-ion_battery.pdf
        .
M. McGrawa, P. Kolla, B. Yao, R. Cook, Q. Quiao, J. Wu and A. Smirnova, Polymer, 2016, 99, 488–495 CrossRef .
L. Zhao, J. Zhao, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, Z. Zhou, M. Armand and L. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 962 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Mihali, S. Renault, L. Nyholm and D. Brandell, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 38004 RSC .
A. Tripathi, Y. Chen, H. Padhy, S. Manzhos and P. Balaya, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1801030 CrossRef .
C. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Fang, M. Zhou, L. Liang, S. Singh, H. Zhao, A. Schober and Y. Lei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3124–3130 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, J. Wang, Y. Zheng, J. Li, X. Han, G. He and Y. Du, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15334–15338 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yamamoto, N. Yabuuchi and M. Miyasaka, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, A434–A438 CrossRef CAS .
E. Castillo-Martínez, J. Carretero-González and M. Armand, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 5445–5449 CrossRef .
M. López-Herraiz, E. Castillo-Martínez, J. Carretero-González, J. Carrasco, T. Rojo and M. Armand, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3233–3241 RSC .
N. Fernández, P. Sánchez-Fontecoba, E. Castillo-Martínez, J. Carretero-González, T. Rojo and M. Armand, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 311–319 CrossRef .
I. Aldalur, M. Armand and H. Zhang, Batteries Supercaps, 2020, 3, 30–46 CrossRef CAS .
C. Luo, G.-L. Xu, X. Ji, S. Hou, L. Chen, F. Wang, J. Jiang, Z. Chen, Y. Ren, K. Amineand and C. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2018, 57, 2879–2883 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Patra, S. K. Das, A. Ghosh, K. Anish Raj, P. Moitra, M. Addicoat, S. Mitra, A. Bhaumik, S. Bhattacharya and A. Pradhan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16655–16663 RSC .
J. Park, M. Lee, D. Feng, Z. Huang, A. C. Hinckley, A. Yakovenko, X. Zou, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10315–10323 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Sava Gallis, H. D. Pratt III, T. M. Anderson and K. W. Chapman, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13764–13770 RSC .
Y. Lu, L. Wang, J. Cheng and J. B. Goodenough, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6544–6546 RSC .

          M. J. Piernas-Muñoz and E. Castillo Martínez, Prussian Blue Based Batteries, Springer briefs,  2018, ISBN 978-3-319-91488-6 Search PubMed .
B. Nykvyst and M. Nilsson, Nat. Clim. Change, 2015, 5, 329–332 CrossRef .
S. Komaba, T. Hasegawa, M. Dahbi and K. Kubota, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 60, 172–175 CrossRef CAS .
M. Beran, J. Príhoda, Z. Zák and M. Cernik, Polyhedron, 2006, 25, 1292–1298 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shadike, D.-R. Shi, T. Wang, M.-H. Cao, S.-F. Yang, J. Chen and Z.-W. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6393–6398 RSC .
M. Okhoshi, Y. Yamada, S. Komaba, A. Yamada and H. Nakai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A54–A60 CrossRef .
P. Hundekar, S. Basu, X. Fan, L. Li, A. Yoshimura, T. Gupta, V. Sarbada, A. Lakhnot, R. Jain, S. Narayanan, Y. Shi, C. Wang and N. Koratkar, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 5588–5594 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, Y. Lu, C. Zhao, L. Liu, J. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Shen, J. Zhao, X. Yu, H. Li, X. Huang, L. Chen and Y.-S. Hu, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 495–503 CrossRef CAS .
J. Andrews and S. S. Mohammadi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 1740–1751 CrossRef CAS .
R. Emanuelsson, M. Sterby, M. Strømme and M. Sjödin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4828–4834 CrossRef CAS .
S. Heidari, S. S. Mohammadi, A. S. Oberoi and J. Andrews, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 6197–6209 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nueangnoraj, T. Tomaia, H. Nishihara, T. Kyotani and I. Honma, Carbon, 2016, 107, 831–836 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Navarro-Suárez, J. Carretero-González, N. Casado, D. Mecerreyes, T. Rojo and E. Castillo-Martínez, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 836–842 RSC .
C. Strietzel, M. Sterby, H. Huang, M. Strømme, R. Emanuelsson and M. Sjödin, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 2–10 CrossRef .
G. Hernández, N. Casado, A. M. Zamarayeva, J. K. Duey, M. Armand, A. C. Arias and D. Mecerreyes, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 7199–7205 CrossRef .
K. Lourenssen, J. Williams, F. Ahmadpour, R. Clemmer and S. Tasnim, J. Energy Storage, 2019, 25, 100844 CrossRef .

          G. P. Rajarathnam and A. M. Vassallo, The Zinc/Bromine Flow Battery: Materials Challenges and Practical Solutions for Technology Advancement, Springer-Verlag Singapur,  2016, ISBN: 978-981-287-646-1 Search PubMed .
P. S. Guin, S. Das and P. C. Mandal, Int. J. Electrochem., 2011, 2011, 816202 Search PubMed .
M. Quan, D. Sanchez, M. F. Wasylkiw and D. K. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129(42), 12847–12856 CrossRef CAS .
B. Huskinson, M. P. Marshak, M. R. Gerhardt, X. Chen, A. A. Guzik, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, Nature, 2014, 505, 195–198 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, L. H. Burkhardt and S. R. Narayanan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A1371–A1380 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hoober-Burkhardt, S. Krishnamoorthy, B. Yang, A. Murali, A. Nirmalchandar, G. K. S. Prakash and S. R. Narayanan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A600–A607 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Lantz, S. A. Shavalier, W. Schroeder and P. G. Rasmussen, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 7893–7902 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lin, Q. Chen, M. R. Gerhardt, L. Tong, S. B. Kim, L. Eisenach, A. W. Valle, D. Hardee, R. G. Gordon, M. J. Aziz and M. P. Marshak, Science, 2015, 349, 1529–1532 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, L. Tong, D. P. Tabor, E. S. Beh, M. -A. Goulet, D. D. Porcellinis, A. Aspuru-Guzik, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702056 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, S. Lu, S. Chen, H. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Xiang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2469–2474 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Kwabi, K. Lin, Y. Ji, E. F. Kerr, M.-A. Goulet, D. D. Porcellinis, D. P. Tabor, D. A. Pollack, A. Aspuru-Guzik, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, Joule, 2018, 2, 1894–1906 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Z. Yang, Y. Wang, P. Zhao, W. Yan, G. Zhu, L. Ma, B. Yu, L. Wang, G. Li, J. Liu and Z. Jin, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2404–2409 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tong, M.-A. Goulet, D. P. Tabor, E. F. Kerr, D. D. Porcellinis, E. M. Fell, A. Aspuru-Guzik, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1880–1887 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hu, J. Luo, M. Hu, B. Yuan and T. L. Liu, Angew. Chem., 2019, 58, 16629–16636 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ji, M. -A. Goulet, D. A. Pollack, D. G. Kwabi, S. Jin, D. D. Porcellinis, E. F. Kerr, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900039 CrossRef .
S. Jin, Y. Jing, D. G. Kwabi, Y. Ji, L. Tong, D. D. Porcellinis, M.-A. Goulet, D. A. Pollack, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1342–1348 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hu, H. Lan, X. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Liu, H. Wang and L. Guo, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 19, 62–68 CrossRef .
K. Wedege, E. Dražević, D. Konya and A. Bentien, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 39101 CrossRef CAS .
M.-A. Goulet, L. Tong, D. A. Pollack, D. P. Tabor, S. A. Odom, A. Aspuru-Guzik, E. E. Kwan, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 8014–8019 CAS .
A. Murali, A. Nirmalchandar, S. Krishnamoorthy, L. Hoober-Burkhardt, B. Yang, G. Soloveichik, G. K. S. Prakash and S. R. Narayanan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, A1193–A1203 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Carney, S. J. Collins, J. S. Moore and F. R. Brushett, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4801–4810 CrossRef CAS .
E. Drazevic, C. Szabo, D. Konya, T. Lund, K. Wedege and A. Bentien, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4745–4754 CrossRef CAS .
A. Orita, M. G. Verde, M. Sakai and Y. S. Meng, J. Power Sources, 2016, 321, 126–134 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, M. C. Goulet, L. Tong, Y. Liu, Y. Ji, L. Wu, R. G. Gordon, M. J. Aziz, Z. Yang and T. Xu, Chem, 2019, 5, 1861–1870 CAS .
S. Gentil, D. Reynard and H. H. Girault, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2020, 21, 7–13 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, X. Wei, Z. Nie, V. Sprenkle and W. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501449 CrossRef .
B. Hu, Y. Tang, J. Luo, G. Grove, Y. Guo and T. L. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6871–6874 RSC .
J. Luo, B. Hu, C. Debruler and T. L. Liu, Angew. Chem., 2018, 57, 231–235 CrossRef CAS .
T. Janoschka, N. Martin, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Angew. Chem., 2016, 55, 14427–14430 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Beh, D. D. Porcellinis, R. L. Gracia, K. T. Xia, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 639–644 CrossRef CAS .
C. DeBruler, B. Hu, J. Moss, X. Liu, J. Luo, Y. Sun and T. L. Liu, Chem, 2017, 3, 961–978 CAS .
B. Hu, C. D. Bruler, Z. Rhodes and T. L. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1207–1214 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Z. Yang, V. Murugesan, E. Walter, A. Hollas, B. Pan, R. S. Assary, I. A. Shkrob, X. Wei and Z. Zhang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2533–2538 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jin, E. M. Fell, L. Vina-Lopez, Y. Jing, P. W. Michalak, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000100 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, B. Hu, C. Debruler, Y. Bi, Y. Zhao, B. Yuan, M. Hu, W. Wu and T. L. Liu, Joule, 2019, 3, 149–163 CrossRef CAS .

          National Library of Medicine (US) and National Center for Biotechnology Information, PubChem Compound Summary for CID 15938, Paraquat dichloride, Bethesda (MD),  2004, cited 2020 Nov. 17, available from https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Paraquat-dichloride Search PubMed.
L. Striepe and T. Baumgartner, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 16924 CrossRef CAS .
A. Orita, M. G. Verde, M. Sakai and Y. S. Meng, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13230 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hollas, X. Wei, V. Murugesan, Z. Nie, B. Li, D. Reed, J. Liu, V. Sprenkle and W. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 508–514 CrossRef CAS .
T. Páez, A. Martínez-Cuezva, J. Palma and E. d. Ventosa, J. Power Sources, 2020, 471, 228453 CrossRef .
T. Janoschka, N. Martin, U. Martin, C. Friebe, S. Morgenstern, H. Hiller, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Nature, 2015, 527, 78–81 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mukhopadhyay, J. Hamel, R. Katahira and H. Zhu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5394–5400 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hatakeyama-Sato, T. Nagano, S. Noguchi, Y. Sugai, J. Du, H. Nishide and K. Oyaizu, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2019, 1, 188–196 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yan, C. Wang, J. Tian, G. Zhu, L. Ma, Y. Wang, R. Chen, Y. Hu, L. Wang, T. Chen, J. Ma and Z. Jin, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2513 CrossRef .
J. Carretero-González, E. Castillo-Martínez and M. Armand, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3521–3530 RSC .
J. Winsberg, C. Stolze, S. Muench, F. Liedl, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 976–980 CrossRef CAS .
T. Janoschka, C. Friebe, M. D. Hager, N. Martin and U. S. Schubert, ChemistryOpen, 2017, 6, 216–220 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, F. Yang, Z. Niu, H. Wu, Y. He, H. Zhu, J. Ye, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 417, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
J. Winsberg, T. Janoschka, S. Morgenstern, T. Hagemann, S. Muench, G. Hauffman, J.-F. Gohy, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2238–2243 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Leung, T. Martin, A. A. Shah, M. A. Anderson and J. Palma, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 14270–14273 RSC .
J. Winsberg, C. Stolze, A. Schwenke, S. Muench, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 411–416 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chang, D. Henkensmeier and R. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3193–3197 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ferrigno, A. D. Stroock, T. D. Clark, M. Mayer and G. M. Whitesides, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 12930–12931 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lee, M.-A. Goulet and E. Kjeang, Lab Chip, 2013, 13, 2504–2507 RSC .

          I. Karakurt, J. Elwood, X. Li, L. Beker, E. Sweet, W. Cai and L. Lin, 19th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems (TRANSDUCERS), Kaohsiung,  2017, pp. 1820–1823 Search PubMed .
P. Navalpotro, C. M. S. S. Neves, J. Palma, M. G. Freire, J. A. P. Coutinho and R. Marcilla, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800576 CrossRef .
P. Navalpotro, C. Trujillo, I. Montes, C. M. S. S. Neves, J. Palma, M. G. Freire, J. A. P. Coutinho and R. Marcilla, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 26, 400–407 CrossRef .
J. Janek, W. G. Zeier, J. Janek and W. G. Zeier, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16141 CrossRef .
M. Armand, Solid State Ion., 1994, 69, 309–319 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. C. Cleghorn, X. Ren, T. E. Springer, M. S. Wilson, C. Zawodzinski, T. A. Zawodzinski and S. Gottesfeld, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1997, 22, 1137–1144 CrossRef CAS .
R. Naderi, A. Gurung, Z. Zhou, G. Varnekar, K. Chen, J. Zai, X. Qian and Q. Qiao, Adv. Sustain. Syst., 2017, 1(8), 1700043 CrossRef .

          M. B. Armand, J. M. Chabagno and M. Duclot, Second International Meeting on Solid Electrolytes, St. Andrews,  1978, p. 651 Search PubMed .

          M. B. Armand, J. M. Chabagno and M. J. Duclot, Fast Ion Transport in Solids, ed. P. Vashishta, J. N. Mundy and G. K. Shenoy, North Holland Publishers, Amsterdam,  1979, p. 131 Search PubMed .

          F. M. Grey, Polymer electrolytes, RSC Materials Monographs,  1997 Search PubMed .
D. T. Hallinan Jr. and N. P. Balsara, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2013, 43, 503–525 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, S. Song, C. Xu, N. Hu, J. Molenda and L. Lu, Nano Materials Science, 2019, 1, 91–100 CrossRef .
M. Armand, Adv. Mater., 1990, 2, 278–286 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bouchet, S. Maria, R. Meziane, A. Aboulaich, L. Lienafa, J.-P. Bonnet, T. N. T. Phan, D. Bertin, D. Gigmes, D. Devaux, R. Denoyel and M. Armand, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 452–457 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choudhury, S. Stalin, D. Vu, A. Warren, Y. Deng, P. Biswal and L. A. Archer, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4398 CrossRef .
F. González, O. Garcia-Calvo, P. Tiemblo, N. García, E. Fedeli, T. Thieu, I. Urdampilleta and A. Kvasha, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 070519 CrossRef .
A. Hammami, N. Raymond and M. Armand, Nature, 2003, 424, 635–636 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Sloop, J. K. Pugh, S. Wang, J. B. Kerr and K. Kinoshita, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, A42–A44 CrossRef CAS .
A. Boschin and P. Johansson, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 175, 124 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bae, Y. Li, J. Zhang, X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Shi, J. B. Goodenough and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 5, 2096–2100 CrossRef .
R. Bouchet, S. Maria, R. Meziane, A. Aboulaich, L. Lienafa, J. P. Bonnet, T. Phan, D. Bertin, D. Gigmes, D. Devaux, R. Denoyel and M. Armand, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 452–457 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Youcef, B. Orayech, J. M. Lopez del Amo, F. Bonill, D. Shanmukaraj and M. Armand, Solid State Ionics, 2020, 345, 115168 CrossRef CAS .
M. Piszcz, O. Garcia-Calvo, U. Oteo, J. M. Lopez del Amo, C. Li, L. M. Rodriguez-Martinez, H. B. Youcef, N. Lago, J. Thielen and M. Armand, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 255, 48 CrossRef CAS .
I. Smolarkiewicz, A. Rachocki, K. Pogorzelec-Glasser, R. Pankiewicz, P. Ławniczak, A. Łapiński, M. Jarek and J. Tritt-Goc, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 155, 38–44 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yamada and Y. Moritani, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 144, 168–173 CrossRef CAS .
X. Judez, L. Qiao, M. Armand and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4008–4015 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, Q. Zhang, L. Li, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Chem, 2018, 4, 2786–2813 CAS .
S. Qi, L. Mi, K. Song, K. Yang, J. Ma, X. Feng, J. Zhang and W. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123(5), 2775–2782 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Chou, Y. Pan, J. Z. Wang, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 20347–20359 RSC .
S. S. Jeong, N. Böckenfeld, A. Balducci, M. Winter and S. Passerini, J. Power Sources, 2012, 199, 331–335 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zarrabeitia, E. Castillo-Martínez, J. M. López del Amo, A. Eguía-Barrio, M. A. Muñoz-Marquez, T. Rojo and M. Casas-Cabanas, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 378–387 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, X. Zhou and G. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 2642–2652 CrossRef CAS .
A. Muzaffar, M. B. Ahamed, K. Deshmukh and J. Thirumalai, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 101, 123–145 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, M. F. El-Kady, J. Sun, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, M. Zhu, H. Wang, B. Dunn and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 9233–9280 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim and S. Jung, Energy Res., 2018, 42, 4383–4394 CrossRef .
E. W. Zhao, T. Liu, E. Jónsson, J. Lee, I. Temprano, R. B. Jethwa, A. Wang, H. Smith, J. Carretero-González, Q. Song and C. P. Grey, Nature, 2020, 579, 224–228 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Tabor, R. Gómez-Bombarelli, L. Tong, R. G. Gordon, M. J. Aziz and A. Aspuru-Guzik, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12833 RSC .
D. P. Tabor, R. Gomez-Bombarelli, L. Tong, R. G. Gordon, M. J. Aziz and A. Aspuru-Guzik, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12833–12841 RSC .
K. W. Knehr, E. Agar, C. R. Dennison, A. R. Kalidindi and E. C. Kumbur, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1446–A1459 CrossRef CAS .
O. Pecher, J. Carretero-González, K. J. Griffith and C. P. Grey, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 213–242 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ager-Wick Ellingsen, G. Majeau-Bettez, B. Singh, A. Kumar, S. L. Ole Valøen and A. H. Strømman, J. Ind. Ecol., 2014, 18, 113–124 CrossRef .
W. R. Leow, Y. Lum, A. Ozden, Y. Wang, D. Nam, B. Chen, J. Wicks, T. T. Zhuang, F. Li, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2020, 368, 1228–1233 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Dinh, T. Burdyny, G. Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C. M. Gabardo, F. P. García de Arquer, A. Kiani, J. P. Edwards, P. De Luna, O. S. Bushuyev, C. Zou, R. Quintero-Bermudez, Y. Pang, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2018, 360, 783–787 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choi and G. Wang, Chem, 2017, 3, 388–389 CAS .
Y. Li, M. Q. Wang, Y. Chen, L. Hu, T. Liu, S. Bao and M. Xu, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 10, 10–15 CrossRef .
G. Qian, B. Zhu, X. Liao, H. Zhai, A. Srinivasan, N. J. Fritz, Q. Cheng, M. Ning, B. Qie, Y. Li, S. Yuan, J. Zhu, X. Chen and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704947 CrossRef .
J. Hong, M. Lee, B. Lee, D. H. Seo, C. B. Park and K. Kang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5335 CrossRef CAS .
O. Yakubovich, N. Khasanova and E. Antipov, Minerals, 2020, 10, 524 CrossRef .
C. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Dai, J. Song, Y. Yao, Y. Gong, I. Kierzewski, J. Xie and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 538–545 RSC .
J. P. Esquivel, P. Alday, O. A. Ibrahim, B. Fernández, E. Kjeang and N. Sabaté, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700275 CrossRef .
C. Grey and J. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2107, 16, 45–56 CrossRef .
X. R. Kong, A. Bonakdarpour, B. T. Wetton, D. P. Wilkinson and B. Gopaluni, IFAC-PapersOnLine, 2018, 51, 667–671 CrossRef .
T. Liu, Y. Zhang, C. Chen, Z. Lin, S. Zhang and J. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1965 CrossRef .

          Science for Environment Policy, Towards the battery of the future, Future Brief 20. Brief produced for the European Commission DG Environment by the Science Communication Unit, UWE, Bristol,  2018 Search PubMed .
M. Arbabzadeh, J. X. Johnson, G. A. Keoleian, P. G. Rasmussen and L. T. Thompson, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 1046–1055 CrossRef CAS .
K. Richa, C. W. Babbitt and G. Gaustad, J. Ind. Ecol., 2017, 21, 715–730 CrossRef .
L. Ahmadi, A. Yip, M. Fowler, S. B. Young and R. A. Fraser, Sustain. Energy Technol. Assess., 2014, 6, 64–74 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Paula Navalpotro	Paula Navalpotro Molina is Chemical Engineer and holds a Master degree in Renewable Energies. She got her PhD in Electrochemistry, Science and Technology from Autónoma University of Madrid in 2018. She is currently working as postdoctoral researcher at Electrochemical Processes Unit of IMDEA Energy. Her research focuses on the development of new redox electrolytes with organic active materials and their application in novel designs of electrochemical energy storage devices such as membrane-free redox flow batteries.
Elizabeth Castillo-Martínez	Elizabeth Castillo Martínez did her PhD in Solid State Chemistry at Universidad Complutense de Madrid in 2008. After post-doctoral stays at Alan G. MacDiarmid NanoTech Institute in Texas, CIC energiGUNE and the University of Cambridge she is currently assistant professor in Inorganic Chemistry at Universidad Complutense de Madrid. Her research is focused on the development and understanding of electrode materials for Energy Storage applications such as lithium, sodium and potassium ion batteries.
Javier Carretero-González	Javier Carretero-González is a Ramón y Cajal Fellow at the Polymer Science and Technology Institute of the Spanish Research Council. He is currently working on new functional materials for sustainable energy applications, along with the implementation of advanced characterization tools for understanding the operation mechanisms in these energy materials systems. He holds a bachelor's degree in chemistry from Universidad Complutense de Madrid (2002) and a PhD degree in science from Universidad Nacional a Distancia (2009).

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of typical photovoltaic solar energy production and battery combination for a grid or off-grid system. (b) Schematic representation of a renewable off-grid system with battery energy storage. (c) Scheme of a sodium-ion battery and its components. (d) Schematic drawing showing the shape and components of various battery configurations: cylindrical, pouch and coin.	 

 	Fig. 2  The Lansink's ladder concept of waste hierarchy and a schematic representation of batteries' circular economy.27	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Polymeric materials studied as electrodes in Na-ion batteries that operate through Na+ ion insertion extraction, plotted with their voltage or reaction vs. the year in which their electrochemical activity was evaluated. Biopolymers are marked with hatched lines. PA (polyacetylene),72 PPP (poly-para-phenylene),72 PAQS (poly anthraquinoilsulfide), PI (polyimides),52 PDS (poly(diphenylaminesulfonic acid sodium)),53 PS (poly-Schiff bases),81 P(AQ-PI) (poly-anthraquinone-poly-imide), PBQS (poly-benzoquinoyl sulfide), HA (humic acid),54 Na2PDS, PDA (polydopamine),55 PV-TPNa poly(2-vinylterephthalate sodium salt)80, COF (covalent organic framework)86, PS-PEO (poly-Schiff-poly-ethyleneoxide),83 lignin/PEDOT (lignin/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) composite);102 (b) example of the typical strategy deployed to decrease the solubility of organic materials and improve their processability.	 

 	Fig. 4  Proton battery concept with all-organic electrode materials.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of different redox flow batteries configurations. Positive and negative electrolyte flow streams are generally referred to as the “Catholyte” and “Anolyte”, respectively. Standard cell voltage is determined by the difference between the 2 half redox reactions in each electrode. (a) Conventional liquid configuration. (b) Polymer-based flow battery. (c) Symmetric configuration: the same redox-active analyte in each tank. (d) Membrane-less.	 

 	Fig. 6  Chemical structure of the different organic molecules studied as active species in aqueous redox flow batteries at different pH. Solubilities are specified in brackets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130 Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 


MV	OH-TEMPO	0.5 M in 1.5 M NaCl	1.25	100 (60)	99	62	8.5	89	
131

Lawsone	OH-TEMPO	0.1 M in 1 M NaCl	1.3	215 (15)	97	—	0.95	99	
122

BTMAP-Vi	NMe-TEMPO	0.5 M in 2 M NaCl	1.38	500 (60)	99	60	8.5	97	
132

[(NPr)2TTz]Br4	NMe-TEMPO	0.2 M in 2 M NaCl	1.44	300 (40)	99	68.6	4.2	90	
133

MV	NMe-TEMPO	2 M in 1.5 M NaCl	1.4	100 (80)	99	65	38.3	90	
134

BTMAP-Vi	BTMAP-Fc	1.3 M in water	0.748	250 (50)	99	65	16	99	
135

[(Me)(NPr)V]Cl3	FcNCl	0.5 M in 2 M NaCl	1.39	50 (60)	99	63	12	91	
136

MV	FcNCl	0.5 M in 2 M NaCl	1.05	700 (60)	99	60	11	91	
137

Diquat	FcNCl	0.5 M in 1.5 M NaCl	1.12	100 (5)	98	84	8	80	
138

BPP-Vi	K4Fe(CN)6	1 M in 14 M NH4OH	0.9	290 (40)	99	85	26	99	
139

DPPEAQ	K4Fe(CN)6	0.5 M	1	480 (100)	99	65	26	99	
120


 	Fig. 7  (a) Scheme of the different layer components of the Li-polymer battery. (b) Chemical structure of the single-ion conductor triblockcopolymer P(STFSILi)-b-PEO-b-P(STFSILi) proposed as a low-cost and safe electrolyte for lithium-metal-based batteries.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of the important technical parameters and aspects related to the sustainability that should be considered in the development of future batteries.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic representation of two in situ NMR setups. (a) On-line setup. (b) Operando setup. Reproduced with permission from ref. 195 Copyright © 2020 Springer-Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic representation: (a) desirable energetics of battery production; (b) end-of-life process: reusing; (c) recycling materials in battery production.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
