Bioinspired smart asymmetric nanochannel membranes  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00688H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00688H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 322-356Bioinspired smart asymmetric nanochannel membranes

        
          
            Zhen 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Liping 
            Wen
          
          
        
      *bcd and 

        
          
            Lei 
            Jiang
          
          
        
      bcd
aBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), Key Laboratory of Green Printing, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China
bKey Laboratory of Bio-inspired Materials and Interfacial Science, Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: wen@mail.ipc.ac.cn
cUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China
dKey Laboratory of Bio-inspired Smart Interfacial Science and Technology of Ministry of Education School of Chemistry and Environment, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P. R. China
Received 
      26th September 2017
    First published on 4th January 2018AbstractBioinspired smart asymmetric nanochannel membranes (BSANM) have been explored extensively to achieve the delicate ionic transport functions comparable to those of living organisms. The abiotic system exhibits superior stability and robustness, allowing for promising applications in many fields. In view of the abundance of research concerning BSANM in the past decade, herein, we present a systematic overview of the development of the state-of-the-art BSANM system. The discussion is focused on the construction methodologies based on raw materials with diverse dimensions (i.e. 0D, 1D, 2D, and bulk). A generic strategy for the design and construction of the BSANM system is proposed first and put into context with recent developments from homogeneous to heterogeneous nanochannel membranes. Then, the basic properties of the BSANM are introduced including selectivity, gating, and rectification, which are associated with the particular chemical and physical structures. Moreover, we summarized the practical applications of BSANM in energy conversion, biochemical sensing and other areas. In the end, some personal opinions on the future development of the BSANM are briefly illustrated. This review covers most of the related literature reported since 2010 and is intended to build up a broad and deep knowledge base that can provide a solid information source for the scientific community.
Zhen Zhang
Zhen Zhang is currently a PhD candidate in Physical Chemistry at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS) under the supervision of Prof. Lei Jiang. He received his BS degree in Materials Chemistry (2013) from the Department of Chemistry, Jilin University, and then he joined Prof. Lei Jiang's group in 2013. His current scientific interests are focused on bioinspired asymmetric smart nanochannel membranes for intelligent ion transport control and energy conversion.
Liping Wen
Liping Wen is a Professor at the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, CAS (TIPC). He received his PhD in Physical Chemistry from the Institute of Chemistry, CAS under the supervision of Prof. Lei Jiang. Since 2010, he has worked as an Associate Professor in ICCAS. In 2011, he went to the Tokyo Institute of Technology as a visiting scholar. In 2015, he moved to the TIPC and was appointed as a Professor in 2016. He was the winner of the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in China. Prof. Wen's current scientific interests are mainly focused on the construction and application of bioinspired asymmetric smart nanochannel/nanopore membranes in the environmental, health, energy, and desalination fields.
Lei Jiang
Lei Jiang is a Professor at the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (TIPCCAS) and Beihang University. He is also an academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Academy of Sciences for the Developing World, and National Academy of Engineering, USA. He received his Bachelor's and Master's degrees from Jilin University, and PhD from the University of Tokyo. He worked as a post-doctoral fellow with Prof. Akira Fujishima and then as a senior researcher in the Kanagawa Academy of Sciences and Technology with Prof. Kazuhito Hashimoto. In 1999, he joined the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences as part of the Hundred Talents Program. In 2015, he and his group moved to TIPCCAS. His scientific interests focus on bio-inspired, smart, multi-scale interfacial materials with superwettability.
1. Introduction
The biological ion channels embedded in plasma membranes are generally asymmetric in the physical channel structure, chemical composition, ionization residue distribution, and wettability.1–3 They have three basic characteristic features, namely, ionic selectivity, ionic gating, and ionic rectification, which are associated with a wide spectrum of biological roles such as energy conversion (Fig. 1a) and perception sensing (Fig. 1b).4–6 For example, the electric eel is capable of generating significant bio-electricity from the salt content in fluids utilizing the highly selective and rectified ion channels.7 In the past decade, the efficiency of the biological ion channels in fulfilling these ionic transport features in this subtle way has been a source of inspiration for scientists to mimic these processes using synthetic bioinspired smart asymmetric nanochannel membrane (BSANM) systems.8,9 It is a promising research field that has elicited significant interest in the interdisciplinary fields of chemistry, materials science, bioscience, and nanotechnology.10–12 Understanding the transport properties of BSANM could provide basic guidance to simulate the ionic transport processes in living bodies, which would open up broad application prospects of BSANM systems in many fields such as energy conversion (Fig. 1c) and biochemical sensing (Fig. 1d).13–20
 Fig. 1  Biological asymmetric ion channels play crucial roles in many physiological processes including energy conversion (a) and perception sensing (b). In (a) the electric eel can generate considerable bio-electricity from the salt content in fluids utilizing the highly selective and rectified ion channels; in (b) the olfaction perception is implemented by the opening of the specific ion channels in response to external odorant molecules. Inspired by the delicate design of channel structures and functionality, the artificial counterpart–BSANM system can be constructed using 0D, 1D and 2D bulk material based fabrication methodologies, which shows wide application prospects in many fields such as energy conversion (c) and biochemical sensing (d), etc. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society, and ref. 20, copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. 
The generic design strategy for constructing BSANM is shown in Fig. 2; one core principle is to build the asymmetry factors into either the membrane system (built-in factors) or the membrane environment (external factors). The built-in factors generally refer to nanochannel geometry, surface charge distribution, chemical composition, and wettability, whereas the external factors mainly refer to the gradients of any kind such as pH, electrolyte concentration, pressure, and electrolyte condition.21–25
 Fig. 2  A generic strategy to construct the BSANM system. One core principle is to build the asymmetry factors into either the membrane system (built-in factors) or the membrane environment (external factors). The built-in factors generally refer to the nanopore geometry, surface charge distribution, chemical composition, and wettability, while the external factors mainly refer to the gradients of any kind such as pH, electrolyte concentration, pressure, and electrolyte condition. 
In detail, after material selection, we can fabricate various symmetric/asymmetric nanochannel membranes using 0D, 1D, 2D, or bulk material-based fabrication methodologies. For the BSANM system, the ionic transport is mainly governed by the interaction between the transmembrane ions or molecular species and the functional groups on the inner walls such as carboxyl or amino groups.26–30 Thus, if the material itself has functionality concerns, BSANM can be constructed directly by using the membrane with asymmetric geometry or by integrating external asymmetry into the membrane environment.31 This route is very constrained as the material selection and the corresponding functionality are limited. Obviously, when the materials have restrictions, artificial functionalization of the interior surfaces of nanochannels is in high demand. This indirect approach is suitable for varieties of symmetric and asymmetric, functional and non-functional nanochannel membranes, which constitutes a primary approach to render the system “smart”.32,33
The above-mentioned strategy mainly covers the homogeneous membrane. Very recently, the heterogeneous membranes (i.e. the hybrid membrane with two or more chemical compositions) are attracting more and more research attention due to its simplicity and potential applications in the construction of BSANM systems.34 Built-in asymmetry can be readily obtained by the simple hybridization of symmetric/asymmetric homogeneous membranes. Furthermore, the heterogeneous materials are more fascinating, since they might display novel functions that are different from those of the individual materials.35 This field is just beginning to emerge in recent years and more and more related literature is published continuously.
Herein, we carefully demonstrate the state-of-the-art development of the BSANM system, and the discussion is focused on the construction methodologies based on raw materials with diverse dimensions (i.e. 0D, 1D, 2D, and bulk). The review is organized into five sections: first, we give a brief introduction of the BSANM and the generic construction strategy; then, we give a comprehensive overview of construction methodologies of the BSANM system including homogeneous membrane and heterogeneous membrane systems. Notably, with regard to the homogeneous membrane system, many nanochannel or nanopore membranes with symmetric structure are also introduced because they would become “asymmetric” through the advanced functionalization protocols or the hybridization approaches. The third section introduces in detail the basic properties of the BSANM, which are associated with its particular chemical and physical structures. The fourth section presents an overview of the applications of the BSANM including energy conversion, biochemical sensing, and others. Finally, we give some personal opinions on future development of the BSANM system.
2. Construction
In the following section, we summarize the construction methodologies of the BSANM system in two parts: homogeneous membrane and heterogeneous membrane systems, mainly from the point of the dimension of the selected material. Following the strategy, the various symmetric/asymmetric, functional/non-functional membranes and the corresponding functionalization protocols are summarized in the first part. In the second part, the heterogeneous BSANM system is summarized according to the classification in the first part.
2.1 Homogeneous membrane

2.1.1 0D nanomaterial-based homogeneous membranes. 
0D nanomaterials generally refer to the materials whose length, width, and height are all within the scope of the nanometer scale. Recently, 0D nanomaterials, for example, molecules or molecular clusters, nanoparticles (NP) or water droplets, have received great attention due to the feasibility in constructing nanochannel membranes.36–39 We can either use the gaps of stacked 0D nanomaterial such as NP array, or apply the 0D material array such as NP and water droplet as a template to prepare well-defined porous membranes. Also, with regard to the molecules, the self-assembly technique can be adopted.
Arranging nanoparticles for gap-formed nanochannels. 
Originally, NPs such as silica colloidal crystals were developed for the preparation of photonic materials due to their special light manipulating properties. The packed NPs assemble densely into a close-packed face-centered cubic (fcc) lattice containing numerous interconnected three dimensional gaps, which constitute the well-defined nanochannels.40–42 In 2005, Zharov et al. reported this new type of nanoporous membrane with gated ionic and molecular flux based on silica colloidal membranes assembled on a hydrophilic solid support using a vertical deposition technique (Fig. 3a and b).43 The three adjacent NPs in the same plane form a gap (light red area) whose area is defined as the same as the area of the circle with a radius r (Fig. 3c), which can be calculated from the equation below:  
 Fig. 3  SEM images of the supported silica colloidal crystal membrane: (a) top view (scale bar: 4 μm), (b) cross-section view (scale bar: 4 μm); reproduced with permission from ref. 43, copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. (c) The gap (light red area) formed by three adjacent NPs in the same plane has an area equivalent to a circle (blue dotted line) with a radius r; reproduced with permission from ref. 45, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of the processes that occur upon heating and cooling of PNIPAM brushes modified silica colloidal crystal membrane; reproduced with permission from ref. 47, copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
The variable R refers to the radius of the NP, which means that the size of the nanopore can be controlled precisely in a broad range by varying the size of the selected NP.44,45 Furthermore, various functional groups can be easily introduced by chemically modifying the surface silanol groups through nucleophilic silylation reactions. Zharov's group further demonstrated the preparation of silica colloidal crystal based nanochannel membranes with pH, light, temperature, and ionic strength regulated gating properties via modifying the amino groups,43 spiropyran-amines,46 poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) brushes,47 and sulfonic groups.48 For example, the surface polymerization process results in the formation of 12 nm thick PNIPAM brushes that block a large portion of the nanopore volume. As shown in Fig. 3d, the polymer brushes shrink to the pore walls upon increasing the temperature, providing a larger volume for ion or molecule diffusion. Park et al. investigated the unidirectional ionic transport through an asymmetric NP network membrane.49 Li et al. also conducted research based on suspended NP crystal membranes.50,51 Recently, Li's group integrated the NP crystal membrane into a nanofluidic reverse electrolysis device to harvest the energy stored in the salinity gradient.52 Moreover, various applications such as nanofiltration, separation, sensing and fuel cells are also anticipated due to their ordered pore structure and mechanical durability.
Templating for nanochannels. 
The templating methodology that essentially involves the replication of the inverse structure of the structure-directing templates is also a simple and versatile technique for the formation of nanochannel membranes.53–55 Ordered porous membranes have been prepared successfully by easily tuning the size and shape of the selective templates, similar to the principle of preparing plastic bottles using predesigned molds (Fig. 4a).56 The templating generally contains three steps: (1) infiltration or adsorption of the raw materials into interstitial voids of the templates; (2) in situ polymerization or solidification of the distributed raw materials; (3) selective removal of the templates. 0D materials, for example NPs, can be used as templates as they can assemble densely into a close-packed structure.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the 0D nanomaterial based templating method to prepare well-defined porous membranes. (b and c) SEM images of a well-ordered PC template; reproduced with permission from ref. 55, copyright 2008 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d and e) SEM images of as-prepared PPy porous membrane in oxidation state (d) and neutral state (e); reproduced with permission from ref. 57, copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
Our group reported an electrically tunable polypyrrole (PPy) porous membrane with switchable stopband, conductivity, and wettability using photonic crystals (PC) template (Fig. 4a).57 The PC nanoparticle, poly(styrene–methyl methacrylate–acrylic acid) (poly(St–MMA–AA)), with an average diameter of ca. 440 nm is composed of a hydrophobic PSt core and hydrophilic PMMA–PAA shell. The well-ordered PC template prepared from the core–shell latex suspension shows a face-centered cubic close-packed (111) plane arrangement (Fig. 4b and c). The pyrrole (Py) dissolved in 0.1 M sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate solution is then infiltrated into the PC template by an electrodeposition method performed in a three electrode electrochemical cell. For a successful templating method, the raw materials should be compatible with the surface properties of the selected templates. In this work, the selection of the PC nanoparticle with PMMA–PAA shell is necessary because the numerous carboxyl groups existing in the shell can interact with the amide groups of Py, which facilitates the permeation of Py suspension and the following electrodeposition process. If not, the surface of the templates must be modified to render the compatibility or introduce reaction sites for the electrodeposition process. During the subsequent template removal process, the PPy framework is robust enough to withstand the high interfacial energy and strong capillary actions that lead to the pore formation, generating a well-ordered porous membrane. As shown in the SEM images of Fig. 4d, the variation of as-prepared PPy membrane from the oxidation state to the neutral state upon insertion of lithium ion results in an increase in the sphere void size by about 30–50 nm, and a decrease in the wall thickness by about 20 nm.
The breath figures (BFs) methodology, a particular templating method based on water droplets, was first described by Francois58 and can also be used to prepare nanochannel membranes based on various polymers and different macromolecular architectures.59,60 The approach is simple and does not require high-tech equipment and post-removal treatment.61 The as-prepared membranes generally possess a honeycomb structure of ordered hexagonally packed pores with available sizes ranging from hundreds of nanometer to tens of micrometers (i.e., over almost three orders of magnitude), which depends on the size of the water droplets.
In a typical BFs process, a polymer solution from a volatile solvent is cast onto a substrate under high humidity environment (Fig. 5a). During the fast solvent evaporation, water droplets condense as spheres at the cold surface of the evaporating polymer solution.62 Then, the adjacent water droplets self-assemble into hexagonally packed arrays to lower the free energy, favoured by the Bénard–Marangoni convection arising in a solution presenting a thermal gradient.63 In order to stabilize the water droplets and prevent their coalescence, the polymer may precipitate at the polymer/water interface. Then, the ordered water droplets array will sink into the polymer solution and the honeycomb porous membrane will form after the complete evaporation of the water and polymer solution in a few minutes (Fig. 5b).64
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the experimental setup for the BFs method. (b) Mechanism of the BFs method; reproduced with permission from ref. 59, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c–e) SEM images of the top side, bottom side, and cross-section side of the as-prepared ordered microporous membranes templated by the BFs method. (f) SEM of the membrane after transfer onto a metal mesh; reproduced with permission from ref. 65, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Based on this method, Wan et al. prepared a well ordered porous membrane with amphiphilic block copolymer polystyrene-block-poly(N,N-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate) (PS-b-PDMAEMA).65 The carbon disulfide solution of block copolymer molecule (1 g mL−1) was used as casting solution and the relative humidity was controlled above 70%. As shown in Fig. 5c–e, the as-prepared membrane exhibits a periodic structure ordered through pores. The water droplet sinking process, which can be controlled by varying the cast solution concentration and air flow speed, is well adjusted to control the pore size ranging from 1 to 5 μm. Furthermore, this membrane can be transferred onto metal mesh and used for size-selective separation (Fig. 5f). Our group also demonstrated the preparation of an ordered honeycomb structure surface using BFs for liquid reprography.36 The BFs method has been successfully used over the past twenty years, however, reducing the pore sizes below 100 nm is still challenging. The smallest size for a water droplet was calculated to be 10 nm at room temperature. Shimomura et al. obtained a comparable size of about 20 nm, but at the cost of forming disordered pores.66 To date, the preparation of ordered honeycomb membranes with pore size below 100 nm has not yet been reported.
Molecule self-assembly for nanochannels. 
The molecule self-assembly methodology that can be used to prepare nanochannel membranes generally refers to self-assembly based on block copolymers (BCP). The BCP self-assembly has been developed as one of the best strategies for the preparation of porous polymers with well-defined mesopore structures.67–70 BCP can be regarded as hybrid macromolecules consisting of two or more chemically distinct homopolymer chains covalently linked together at one or more junction points.71,72 Large thermodynamic incompatibility exists between different polymer chains due to the initial immiscibility. In order to minimize the contact energy between the segments of the copolymer, BCPs can undergo phase separation via self-assembly in both the bulk phase and thin films.73–75 Because of the connectivity of polymer chains, the microphase separation is generally restricted to the nanometer scale, which results in different membrane morphologies such as sphere, cylinder, gyroid, and lamellae structures with domain sizes about 5–100 nm.76–78 These morphologies are associated with many factors such as mass fraction, the choice of casting solvent, wettability of the substrate, and annealing conditions.79–81
Iyoda et al. reported a free-standing BCP membrane with visualized high-density straight nanochannels filled with poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO).82 A photocrosslinkable liquid-crystalline block copolymer molecule consisting of PEO and polymethacrylate (PMA), bearing stilbene mesogens (Stb) in the side chains, PEO114-b-PMA(Stb)52 was first synthesized. To prepare the free-standing BCP membrane, a thin layer of cellulose acetate (CA) was coated on a silicon wafer beforehand by a spin-coating method (Fig. 6a). The BCP membrane was spin-coated above the sacrificial CA membrane, followed by thermal annealing at 190 °C for 2 h under vacuum to form the high-density visualized straight nanochannels. The annealed BCP membrane was further stabilized by UV irradiation to cross-link the Stb mesogens in the side chains of the PMA(Stb). The wafer was then immersed in acetone to dissolve the CA layer and partially exfoliate the BCP membrane. After transferring it into water, the BCP membrane was exfoliated completely and floated on the water (Fig. 6b). The AFM image of the cross-linked BCP membrane shows an ordered porous structure with perpendicular cut-through nanochannels of PEO (Fig. 6c). These high-density hydrophilic PEO channels can be used for molecular permeation and show wide application prospects in nanofluidic science. Russell's group also conducted research on the micro-separated BCP porous membranes.83,84 Notably, the nanochannels derived from the direct BCP assembly without post-treatment are generally called ion-cluster channels, which are filled with polymer chains and demonstrate low water permeability. Many approaches, including selective etching of the sacrificial component by light or acid, the use of additives, and confined swelling induced surface reconstruction can be used to transform the polymer-filled channels into hollow pores.85
 Fig. 6  (a) Flow diagram for the preparation of the BCP membrane with straight hydrophilic PEO channels. (b) The exfoliated BCP membrane is free-standing and can float on the water (scale bar: 2 cm). (c) AFM images of the surface and cross-section of the as-prepared BCP membrane; reproduced with permission from ref. 82, copyright 2011, John Wiley and Sons. 
Additionally, BCPs can also serve as a template to prepare ordered polymeric and inorganic mesoporous membranes86,87 with small and uniform pore sizes in the range of 3–10 nm and large BET surface areas88 in which sacrificial BCPs self-assemble with added prepolymers (or polymer precursors) to form a supramolecular complex through various noncovalent interactions.89 The prepolymers are then cross-linked to stabilize the framework structure, followed by the selective removal of the sacrificial BCP components to form ordered mesoporous materials.90 In general, the BCPs are amphiphilic and the cross-linked prepolymer framework should be highly stable.
For example, Zhao et al. reported a simple and reproducible way to fabricate mesoporous polymer and mesoporous carbon, which includes a solvent evaporation induced organic–organic self-assembly method, followed by a careful high temperature carbonization process.91 The commercial amphiphilic triblock copolymers PEO-b-PPO-b-PEO and the resol phenol/formaldehyde are used as templates and precursors, respectively. Notably, the choice of the resol as a precursor is crucial because there are a large number of hydroxyl groups within the resol that can interact with the PEO segment in the BCP template through the formation of hydrogen-bonds to form supramolecular mesostructures.92 A rigid three-connected covalently bonded zeolite-like framework can be obtained by simple thermopolymerization of the resol at low temperatures around the triblock copolymer. The photographic image of untreated FDU-15 in Fig. 7b shows that it is a transparent and soft film, implying a homogeneous organic–organic composite. The amphiphilic BCP surfactant can be selectively removed by solvent extraction assisted oxidation, or calcination at about 400 °C under nitrogen atmosphere, forming ordered mesoporous polymers. As shown in Fig. 7c, the FDU-15 calcined at 350 °C shows well-ordered hexagonal arrays of mesopores, displaying a body-centered cubic (Im3m) structure. Furthermore, homologous carbon frameworks can be readily transformed from the same mesoporous polymers by carbonization at 900–1400 °C under nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. 7d). In general, the mesostructures are associated with many factors such as resin species, molecular weight of the resin, solution acidity, self-assembly temperature, amphiphilic properties of the selected BCP, and the mass ratio of resin to template;93–95 by simply adjusting the mass ratio of resin to template, 2D hexagonal (p6mm) mesostructures were also readily prepared. The major bottleneck for developing a wider range of mesoporous polymer lies in the difficulty in balancing the interactions between the prepolymers and the BCP templates during the organic–organic self-assembly process. Various mesoporous architectures have been widely applied in nanofluidics.96–98
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the procedure for preparing mesoporous carbon frameworks. (b) After thermopolymerization, a free-standing organic-organic composite membrane is obtained. (c and d) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images of the FDU15 and c-FDU15 calcined at 350 °C (c) and 1400 °C (d), respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91, Copyright 2005 John Wiley and Sons. 
Phase inversion for nanochannels. 
Phase inversion, first reported by Loeb, which has been employed commercially in the field of membrane science, can also be used to prepare nanochannel membranes with a dense skin layer above an asymmetric supporting layer.99 For example, in the wet phase inversion process, which is also known as nonsolvent induced phase separation (NIPS), the as-cast polymer solution composed of at least one polymer and at least one good solvent is immersed in a nonsolvent coagulation bath; the solvent and nonsolvent must be miscible.100,101 The polymer liquid dispersion can then be transformed into a solid membrane with a very thin, dense skin layer atop a disordered substructure through liquid–liquid phase separation trigged by diffusive exchange of the solvent and nonsolvent. This method can be used in a controlled manner to form various morphologies, which can be affected by the selection of solvent-nonsolvent system, the composition of casting solution, the additives in the polymer solution or the nonsolvent bath, the membrane casting conditions, and the introduction of some additional steps such as evaporation or annealing, etc.102–105
Strathmann et al. found that varying the precipitation rate produced membranes with “sponge-like” or large “finger-like” structures, where the former exhibited high salt rejections and low water fluxes, and the latter exhibited low salt rejections and high water fluxes.106 Shi et al. investigated the effect of surface functionalization on the membrane property. They reported zwitterionic ultrafiltration membranes based on tertiary amine-modified polyethersulfone (PES).107 The functionalized PES membrane bearing numerous cationic tertiary amine groups and anionic sulfonic groups displayed superior anti-protein-fouling properties and desirable ultrafiltration performance. The water and dimethyl formamide (DMF) solvent system was selected and polyethylene glycol (PEG) additives were added as pore-forming agents.108 The untreated PES was used as a control group and the corresponding casting solution contained equal amounts of PES, but higher amounts of PEG to keep the transmembrane permeation flux in the same magnitude. The as-prepared membranes both displayed the typical asymmetric structures (Fig. 8a and b). The top layer of the unmodified PES membrane is thicker than that of the zwitterionic membrane, which can be ascribed to the larger amount of pore-forming agent, PEG.109 The higher PEG concentration increases the solution viscosity, which would slow down the solvent-nonsolvent exchange rate to form a thicker top layer. They also found that the permeability of the membrane can be easily tuned by varying the ion concentration in water coagulation bath.
 Fig. 8  (a and b) Cross-section SEM images of two asymmetric membranes formed by an unmodified PES (a) and a tertiary amine-modified PES (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 107; copyright 2008, Elsevier. 
Typical membranes formed by NIPS display a disordered polymer network with graded porosity ranging from nanometers to micrometers. Recently, scientists combined the conventional NIPS technique with BCP self-assembly to unite graded porosity across multiple length scales. This approach is also known as SNIPS110,111 and has been widely used to prepare hierarchically porous membranes with periodic, ordered mesoscopic pores.112 In 2007, Peinemann et al. first reported this SNIPS process based on a diblock copolymer poly(styrene)-block-poly(4-vinyl-pyridine) (PS-b-P4VP).113 The as-prepared membrane was about 90 μm in thickness and displayed a thin layer with 200–300 nm thickness and well-ordered cylindrical pores (diameter ∼33 nm) on top of a sponge-like layer. A mixture of DMF and tetrahydrofuran (THF) was used as the casting solvent and water was used as the nonsolvent. Firstly, the 200 μm thick liquid membrane was cast on a glass plate using a doctor blade. The polymer solution was homogeneous in the initial stage (Fig. 9a). In the first ten seconds, as the solvent, mainly THF, starts to evaporate from the membrane surface, a gradient of solvent concentration normal to the membrane surface is established. The polymer concentration at the membrane surface is the highest and microphase separation occurs absolutely, guiding the formation cylindrical domains into the still highly swollen bottom layer (Fig. 9b). After immersing the membrane into the nonsolvent system, the solvent and nonsolvent start to exchange. Notably, in contrast to the traditional NIPS process, here, the non-solvent is preferentially guided through the P4VP filled cylindrical domains because the water is more compatible with the swollen P4VP domains than with the swollen PS domains. The formation of the hollow cylindrical mesoscopic pores perpendicular to the surface is mainly ascribed to this particular solvent exchange process. Under this ordered porous thin layer, the polymer concentration is relatively low, which leads to the precipitation of the BCP, similar to the traditional NIPS process (Fig. 9c). They also found that the as-prepared membrane showed good water permeability. Based on their breakthrough, many subsequent research efforts have been made toward improving membrane functionality through the selection of diblock copolymer systems. For example, Müller et al. reported a double stimuli-responsive asymmetric porous membrane based on the PS-b-PDMAEMA. The membrane behaves as an asymmetric superstructure with fascinating pH-temperature responsive properties.114
 Fig. 9  Schematic of the formation mechanism of the asymmetric hierarchically porous membrane through a SNIPS process. The as-prepared membrane shows a layer of well-ordered cylindrical mesoscopic pores perpendicular to the membrane surface atop a disordered sponge-like bottom layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113; copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group. 


2.1.2 1D nanomaterial based homogeneous membrane. 
Recently, the assembly of 1D nanomaterials into macroscopic nanochannel membrane has been gaining wide attention and has become an active research area of materials science.115–117 Some 1D materials, for example, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), have initial nanochannels that can be directly used to construct nanochannel membranes.118 However, a considerable number of 1D materials such as inorganic nanowires119 and organic nanofibers120 generally do not have the initial pore structure, which constitutes another primary approach to constructing 1D nanomaterial based nanochannel membranes using stacked gaps as transport channels. Similar to the 0D nanomaterial, 1D nanomaterial can be used as a template.
Aligning nanowire/nanofiber for inner-core-formed nanochannels. 
CNT, a classical 1D nanomaterial with high performance in many areas, is drawing more and more attention due to its applications in nanofluidic science.121 The fluid transport inside the CNT is nearly frictionless and the ionic current is about 2 orders of magnitude larger than the bulk value, which can be ascribed to its unique surface structure, nanoscale diameter, and microscale lengths. CNT can be assembled into nanofluidic devices in the form of both isolated channels and membranes.122,123 Hinds et al. reported aligned multiwalled CNT membranes and investigated the particular molecular transportation through the CNT cores.124 Firstly, the aligned multiwalled CNT array grows on a quartz substrate by a Fe-catalyzed chemical vapor deposition process at 700 °C (Fig. 10a). Then, the PS solution of toluene (wt 50%) exhibiting high wettability with CNTs is filled into the interspace between the CNTs. After drying for four days under vacuum (70 °C), the free-standing polymer fixed membrane is obtained by removing the substrate using hydrofluoric acid (HF) (Fig. 10b and c). Fig. 10d shows the pore size distribution data with a peak of 6 ± 2 nm obtained from a low temperature (∼77 K) N2 desorption experiments. This pore size distribution is consistent with the single CNT inner-core diameter, which confirms the premise of an aligned CNT membrane structure.
 Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of the high degree of vertical alignment of the as-grown multiwalled CNTs on quartz wafer (scale bar: 50 μm). (b and c) Schematic of the polymer filled free-standing CNTs membrane and the corresponding SEM images of the cross-section (scale bar: 2.5 μm). (d) The pore size distribution data of the aligned CNT membrane obtained from a low temperature (∼77 K) N2 desorption experiments. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124; copyright 2004 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Interweaving nanowire/nanofiber for gap-formed nanochannels. 
The method mentioned above involves the direct use of the initial core of the CNT as the nanochannels; we can still employ the surface of the outer walls. Interweaving 1D nanomaterial such as CNT, inorganic nanowires, and organic nanofibers may form a mesh structure with interconnected open pores of high porosity, large surface-to-volume ratio, and flexibility.125 Smalley et al. reported a free-standing “bulky paper” composed of tangled SWNTs.126 The SWNTs are prepared by the laser-oven method that can produce a large quantity of nanotubes within a relatively short time. In order to purify the as-prepared SWNTs, which have a substantial fraction of nanoscale impurities including spheroidal fullerenes and amorphous carbon, the sample is refluxed in 2.6 M nitric acid and resuspended in water (pH 10) with Triton X-100 surfactant. Finally, the “bulky paper” is prepared by the suspension filtration through a mixed cellulose ester hollow fibers membrane with pore size about 200 nm. Moreover, Pasquali et al. reported a scalable approach to preparing high-performance carbon nanotube transparent films using a large-area dip coating method.116
In the last two decades, as nanotechnology developed, a diverse range of 1D nanowires with unique properties and high qualities has been accessible with the help of synthetic efforts.127 Recently, the research attention has been gradually shifting from nanowire synthesis and characterization toward nanowire integration to meet the real-world application requirement.128 Yu et al. reported a free-standing Pt-nanowire membrane via a multistep templating route.119 Sun et al. reported a novel hierarchical multifunctional TiO2 nanowire ultrafiltration membrane with high-performance in permeability, concurrent photocatalytic oxidation, separation, antifouling and antibacterial capabilities using a multistep filtration method.129 The porous membrane is composed of a supporting layer and a functional layer formed by the interwoven ultrafine TNW10 (Fig. 11a, diameter: 10 nm) and large TNW20 (Fig. 11b, diameter: 20–100 nm), respectively. The two types of nanowires with different dimensions are prepared by a traditional hydrothermal synthesis method.130 The TNW20 suspension is firstly filtered under vacuum through a glass filter to form a supporting membrane. Thereafter, a functional layer is formed atop the supporting layer by vacuum filtration of the TNW10 suspension. Before calcination at 550 °C, a hot press process is conducted to achieve compaction by pressurizing the membrane under 5 bars at 120 °C on a hot press. The pore sizes of two layers conjugated by the TNW10 and TNW20 are 10–25 nm and 50-150 nm, respectively. As shown in Fig. 11c, the as-prepared TiO2 membrane exhibits a white color and has a high surface porosity with an effective pore size of around 20 nm.
 Fig. 11  (a and b) TEM images of the TNW10 and TNW20 nanowires prepared by hydrothermal synthesis. They can both form porous membranes of randomly oriented nanowires, which can provide numerous gaps as transport channels. (c) Optical images of the as-prepared nanowire membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129; copyright 2009, John Wiley and Sons. 
Templating for nanochannels. 
Similar to the templating method using 0D nanospheres, 1D nanomaterials such as nanotube arrays can also be used as a template to fabricate porous membranes. For example, Schmuki et al. reported a self-organized intrinsically conducting polymer PPy nanochannel membrane based on a 1D TiO2 nanotube templating technique.131 The ordered sacrificial TiO2 nanotube template was formed at an anodizing voltage of 30 V, and the tube diameter as well as the tube center to center distance could both be electrochemically tuned over a broad range (Fig. 12a and d). The polymer was then deposited from an ionic-surfactant-solution in the space between the tube walls by an electropolymerization method. Notably, the polymer is also likely to be deposited on the surface and inside the pores. By optimizing the electropolymerization conditions, the PPy can be selectively filled into the space between the tube walls, forming a stable linked polymer network in the TiO2 matrix (Fig. 12b and e). The self-organized, mechanically stable PPy nanochannel membrane was obtained by selectively dissolving the TiO2 matrix using HF (Fig. 12c and f). By controlling the structure parameters of the sacrificial TiO2 template, the diameter of the PPy nanochannel can be controlled from 40 to 160 nm with a wall thickness ranging from 10 to 40 nm. This design strategy is also feasible with other polymers for the desired application request.
 Fig. 12  (a) The ordered TiO2 nanopore array prepared by an anodizing method. (b) The intrinsically conducting polymer PPy is selectively deposited in the space between pore walls. (c) By dissolving the TiO2 matrix with HF, a self-organized PPy nanopore membrane is obtained. (d–f) The corresponding SEM images of the as-grown TiO2 nanotube array (d), TiO2/PPy composite (e) and the as-prepared porous PPy membrane (f). Reproduced with permission from ref. 131; copyright 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.1.3 2D nanomaterial based homogeneous membrane. 
2D nanomaterials such as mono- or few-layer graphene,132,133 boron nitride (BN)134 and molybdenum disulfide (MoS2)135,136 can also be used to construct the nanochannel membranes; this generally includes two routes: (1) directly drilling or sculpturing for nanochannels; (2) stacking nanosheets for interlayer-spacing-formed nanochannels.
Directly drilling or sculpturing for nanochannels. 
We can directly drill or sculpture nanopore using advanced ion and electron beams drilling and sculpting techniques.137–140 These fabrication techniques commonly need sophisticated material processing steps and expensive experimental setup such as TEM. Relevant reviews have been published with regard to these techniques;141,142 here, we just use electron beam sculpting as an example to illustrate the strategy of the nanochannel membrane fabrication technique based on ultrathin 2D nanomaterials.
For example, Radenovic et al. reported atomically thin MoS2 nanopores with high resolution for DNA translocation.143 As shown in Fig. 13a, the few layer or monolayer 2D MoS2 nanopore membrane is suspended on the supporting 20 nm thick SiNx chip with square-shaped window, which is fabricated in a standard procedure using anisotropic KOH etching, followed by electron beam drilling performed in a JEOL 2200FS TEM operated at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. The electrical field to drive DNA translocation is applied by a pair of Ag/AgCl electrodes located in two reservoirs separated by the nanopore membrane. Fig. 13b shows the low-magnification TEM image of the open SiNx window (marked by the black circle) successfully covered by a MoS2 layer and the TEM-drilled MoS2 nanopore (Fig. 13c). Similarly, Yu et al. and Golovchenko et al. also fabricated nanopore membranes based on 2D graphene144 (Fig. 13d) and BN145 materials (Fig. 13e), respectively.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the MoS2 nanopore membrane suspended on a SiNx window to detect DNA translocation. (b and c) SEM images of the SiNx window covered by a free-standing MoS2 membrane (b) (marked by a black circle), followed by nanopore formation by TEM drilling (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 143; copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (d and e) TEM image of the nanopores drilled by TEM in 2D graphene (d) and BN membranes (e). Reproduced with permission from ref. 144, copyright 2010, Nature Publishing Group, and ref. 145, copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons. 
Stacking nanosheets for interlayer-spacing-formed nanochannels. 
The second route is the construction of layered nanofluidic transport channels based on 2D nanomaterials. 2D nanosheets with high aspect ratios can be readily reassembled into “bulk paper” with a lamellar microstructure by filtration or casting,146,147 yielding continuous interstitial space with uniform size and orientation, which can provide interlayer spacings as mass transport channels.148–151 This approach is scalable and suitable to many 2D nanomaterials such as graphene oxide and clay minerals.152,153 The width of these 2D channels is comparable to the dimensions of the selected 2D sheets and can be adjusted in a broad range from half a nanometer to several nanometers. This kind of 2D nanomaterial based lamellar membrane has been studied extensively in the aspects of optoelectronic, mechanical, and electrochemical properties etc., while the investigations on their ionic transport properties are just recently emerging.154–156
For example, Huang et al. reported a free-standing paper-like membrane with numerous 2D layered nanofluidic proton transport channels based on 2D vermiculite nanosheets.157 The as-prepared membrane has excellent chemical and thermal stability due to the selected clay material. Each layer of the vermiculite compound is composed of one Mg-based octahedral sheet sandwiched between two tetrahedral silicate sheets (Fig. 14a). The negative surface charges on the sheets are balanced by cations and are responsible for keeping the interlayer spacing. Notably, the interlayer cations and the degrees of hydration of the same interlayer differ in the vermiculite compound, which would result in the nonuniformity of the interlayer spacing in the vermiculite paper membrane. A two-step ion exchange method is used to replace the interlayer cations with the same Li+. The partially exfoliated vermiculite flakes by thermal expansion are soaked under reflux for 24 h in saturated sodium chloride solution and 2 M lithium chloride solution successively. Fig. 14b shows the SEM image of the chemically exfoliated 2D vermiculite nanosheets with lateral sizes ranging from a few microns to tens of microns. The nanosheet is only a few layers thick, as shown in the AFM image (Fig. 14c) and the corresponding height profile (Fig. 14d). The chemically exfoliated vermiculite layers are then filtered through a porous anodic alumina membrane to form a paper-like flexible membrane (Fig. 14e) with lamellar microstructure (Fig. 14f). X-ray diffraction (XRD) reveals the uniform interlayer spacing after the chemical exfoliation process (Fig. 14g). They also demonstrated this kind of paper-like membrane with interlayer spacing channels based on negatively charged graphene oxide nanosheets.158 Recently, our group reported a layered graphene hydrogel membrane formed by the chemically converted graphene.159 Unlike the graphene oxide membrane with an interlayer spacing below 1 nm,158,160 the graphene hydrogel membrane has a ultra-large interlayer spacing of ca. 10 nm and hydrophobic nature.
 Fig. 14  (a) One Mg-based octahedral sheet sandwiched between two tetrahedral silicate sheets constitute the basic unit of vermiculite crystal, and the interlayer cations are responsible for keeping the interlayer spacing. (b) SEM image of the chemically exfoliated vermiculite nanosheets (scale bar: 50 μm). (c) AFM image of an individual vermiculite nanosheet and the corresponding height profile (d). (e) Optical image of the free-standing paper-like membrane based on a 2D vermiculite nanosheet (scale bar: 1 cm). (f) Cross-section SEM image of the vermiculite paper-like membrane (scale bar: 1 μm). (g) XRD of the unexfoliated vermiculite and the reconstructed vermiculite membranes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157; copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 


2.1.4 Bulk material based homogeneous membrane. 
As mentioned above, advanced ion and electron beam drilling and sculpting techniques can directly produce nanopores in the ultrathin 2D substrates. However, these techniques are constrained with thick bulk materials such as inorganic mica flakes, metal foils, and organic polymer films.161 In this section, we introduce several typical nanochannel fabrication techniques based on bulk materials. Due to the macro-visibility, these techniques have many advantages such as simplicity and strong feasibility, offering promising prospects for real-world applications.
Track-etching for nanochannels. 
The track-etching technique has been a main route to preparing the nanochannel membrane, due to its simplicity and controllable channel geometries. In general, latent ion tracks can be formed directly in a dielectric material by heavy ion bombardment of total kinetic energy in the GeV range. The as-prepared cylindrical latent track with a diameter of several nanometers differs from the track-free regions in bonding and density, and extends along a straight line through the materials. This latent track can be used as the reaction point for the preparation of nanochannels. For example, Siwy and coworkers demonstrated a tracked etching method to fabricate versatile nanoporous silicon nitride (SiN) membranes.162 The SiN membrane is firstly irradiated with high energetic heavy ions to form the damaged tracks. The etching process is performed in a beaker filled with 150 °C concentrated H3PO4. When only one side of the SiN membrane is in contact with the etching solution, conical shaped nanopores can be formed. The small opening of the conical nanopores can be precisely controlled through regulating the etching time. Also, the double-conical nanopores can be fabricated when both sides of the SiN membrane are in contact with the etching solution. Previously reported ultrathin nanochannel membranes are mainly fabricated by ion and electron techniques that generally need expensive experimental setup (for example, TEM) and sophisticated operation processes. Very recently, our groups reported the fabrication of an ultrathin nanopore membrane based on bulk mica using the track-etching technique, followed by mechanical exfoliation.163
Geometries of the nanochannels based on inorganic materials are commonly very constrained. This is not the case with organic material. The ion track etching technique based on commercial polymer membranes such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polyimide (PI) and polycarbonate (PC) has been investigated intensively.164–166 In the following discussion, we use the PET membrane as a typical example to elaborate this technique. As shown in Fig. 15a, as the etching process continues, the geometry of the as-prepared nanochannel mainly relies on the relationship between the bulk etching velocity (vbulk) and track etching velocity (vtrack), which refers to different etching dynamics processes. Generally, the higher the vtrack, the more cylindrical the nanochannel is. The etching equipment is shown in Fig. 15b. In order to monitor the etching process in real time, a voltage of 1 V is applied across the membrane. A sudden current jump can be observed when the nanochannel is etched open. If both chambers of the cell are symmetrically filled with etchants, the resulting nanochannels also have a symmetric geometry including cylindrical structures, cigar structures, and double-conical structures which are related by many factors such as etchant species, etchant concentration and temperature.167 Nanochannels with asymmetric geometry such as conical structure, bullet-like structure, and funnel-like structure can be fabricated by the asymmetrical etching method (Fig. 15c).18,168,169 For example, to prepare the conical nanochannel, etching only proceeds from one side and the stopping reagent in another chamber can neutralize the etchant as soon as the nanochannel is etched open.170,171
 Fig. 15  Ion track etching technique based on commercial polymer membranes. (a) The geometry of the as-prepared nanochannel is governed by the relationship between vbulk and vtrack. (b) Schematic of the symmetrical and asymmetrical etching equipment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164; copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) By varying the etching conditions, nanochannels with different geometries can be obtained (scale bar 200 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 171; copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. 
Electrochemical oxidization for nanochannels. 
The electrochemical oxidation is a popular method to prepare ordered porous metallic oxide membranes with metals such as Al, Ti, Zr, Nb, W, Ta, and Hf. For Al, it has been investigated for decades that porous anodic alumina membranes with pore densities as high as 1011 pores per cm2 can be formed in acidic electrolytes.172 The pore size and density can be precisely controlled by varying the oxidation voltage and the solution composition.173 The porous anodic alumina membrane has been widely used as PC structures, templates to prepare nanowire/nanotube/nanodot array, ultrafiltration devices, photoabsorbers, and nanofluidic devices.174–177 The most widely used method to fabricate the porous anodic alumina membrane with cylinder nanochannels is the two-step oxidation method first reported by Masuda.178
Based on this approach, our group developed an ionic diode membrane using asymmetric branched alumina nanochannels prepared by a modified two-step anodization process that the number of branches can be controlled by the voltages.179 The aluminium foil is used as the anode and the graphite plate is used as the counter electrode. The 0.3 M oxalic acid solution is used as the electrolyte. Firstly, the aluminium foils are anodized under a voltage of 50 V. Then the resulting porous-oxide layer is then removed by immersing the as-prepared membrane in a 0.5 M phosphoric acid and 0.2 M chromic acid mixture at 60 °C. The anodization and treatment processes mentioned above are the same for all products. The second anodization process includes another 2 h of anodizing in the same conditions and mono-, bi-, tri-, or tetra-branched alumina nanochannels can be formed by gradually reducing the anodizing voltage (Fig. 16). Besides the branched alumina nanochannel, other types of alumina such as bone-shaped180 and triangle-shaped181 can also be fabricated with some special procedures for different applications.
 Fig. 16  SEM images of the mono-, bi-, tri-, or tetra-branched alumina nanochannel membranes prepared by a modified two-step anodization process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179; copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
Hydrogel for nanochannels. 
Hydrogels can absorb large amounts of water and swell, forming cross-linked polymer-based networks with three-dimensional structures.182 The hydrogel can be prepared by monomer crosslinking and the chemical and physical properties of the gels can be readily tuned by selecting monomer species with appropriate crosslinkers and initiators.183 Also, hydrogels can be made by artificial neutral polymers such as polyvinyl alcohol (PVA),184 and natural polymers such as agarose.185 The three-dimensional hydrogel networks provide numerous ionic transport routes.186 Thus, the hydrogel can be regarded as a particular type of nanofluidic transport membrane.187–191
As an example, Velev et al. reported an electrochemical diode based on a natural agarose hydrogel membrane atop a SiO2 nanofilm that can adjust the ionic flow through the gel in response to external voltage (Fig. 17).192,193 To prepare the gel membrane, commercial agarose is added to pure water and boiled on a hot plate under stirring. The hot agarose solution is filled into the 5 mm-diameter hole of a PDMS spacer and cooled to a solid gel. A standard thermal oxidation method is used to deposit the SiO2 layer (∼170 nm thick) onto an n-doped Si substrate electrode. The as-prepared gel membrane is placed on this SiO2 layer and then covered by a fluorine-doped tin oxide electrode.
 Fig. 17  An electrochemical diode based on a gel/SiO2 interface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 192; copyright 2010, John Wiley and Sons. 
Very recently, polyelectrolyte hydrogels194 consisting of charged matrix network swollen with ionic solution have gained wide attention due to their broad applications in ion-exchange media, soft actuators, and biosensors. Due to the strong interaction between the migratory ions and the fixed charges of the polymer network, polyelectrolyte hydrogels can be used as excellent ionic conductors.195 By various synthetic approaches, polyelectrolyte hydrogels can also be endowed with various environmental stimuli responsiveness such as pH,196 temperature,197 light,198 glucose,199 antigens,200 enzymes,201 and electrical potential,202etc., which can open up new applications in nanofluidic science.203
As mentioned before, when the materials meet restrictions, artificial functionalization of the interior surfaces of nanochannels becomes highly demanded. This indirect approach is suitable for varieties of symmetric and asymmetric, functional and non-functional nanochannel membranes, which constitutes a primary approach to rendering the system “asymmetric”. Table 1 summarizes the commonly used functionalization techniques to build BSANM, which generally involves two common categories: asymmetric functionalization (A) and symmetric functionalization (S).204
Table 1 Various functionalization protocols to construct the BSANM systema




Methods
Membrane
Category (S/A)
Substance
Ref.





a Abbreviations: S, symmetric functionalization; A, asymmetric functionalization; C4CE, 1,3-dipropargylaza-p-tert-butyl calix[4]crown; APMIB, 1-aminopropyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide.





Electroless deposition
PC, PET, BCP
S
Au, Cu, Ni, Pd, Ag

205



Ion sputtering
PET
A
Au, Pt

206 and 207



Atomic layer deposition
SiN, BN, AAO, BCP, PET
A/S
Oxide, metal

208–211



Vapor-deposition
PC, PET
A/S
Au, SiO2, polymer

212 and 213



Plasma grafting
BCP, PET
A
Polymer brushes

214–216



Chemical grafting
Graphene, PET, PI
A/S
Spiropyran, C4CE, photoalkali, APMIB

217–219



Electrostatic self-assembly
Si, PET, PI
A/S
Polyelectrolyte

220–223



Amphiphilic self-assembly
PET
A/S
Amphipols

224



Living polymerization
AAO, PET, PI
A/S
Polymer brushes

225–228



Electrical polymerization
AAO, PET
A/S
Conducting polymer

229–231



Self-polymerization
All substrates
S
Dopamine

232



Doping
Hydrogel, PES
S
Polyelectrolyte, molecular sieve

233






2.2 Heterogeneous membrane
Besides the single-channel proteins, the living organisms also have many multiple-channels that refer to the composite channels formed by the bridging of two isolated channels in two adjacent cells. Typical examples include gap junction channels, which are in charge of the cell-to-cell communications.234 The structure of the gap junction channels offers us inspiration to construct the artificial counterparts (i.e. heterogeneous membrane system) by associating two or more synthetic homogeneous membranes. The heterogeneous membranes can be constructed by using solely 0D materials,45,235 1D materials,236 2D materials, bulk materials,233,237,238 or the combination of these materials.13,229,239–251 In the following section, recent achievements concerning the heterogeneous membrane systems are summarized according to the classification of the part 2.1.

2.2.1 0D nanomaterial based heterogeneous membrane. 
Arranging nanoparticles for heterogeneous membranes. 
0D materials such as NP can be used to construct homogeneous nanochannel membranes with varying pore sizes.252 By using the advanced fabrication and functionalization techniques, the NP membrane can be endowed with different functionalities.253–256 However, the as-prepared NP membrane is mainly symmetric. Xiang et al. reported a free-standing asymmetric bilayered NP superlattice nanosheet membrane based on PS ligand-stabilized Au NPs.45 The Au NPs equipped with thiol-functionalized PS can not only provide the nanosheet with excellent mechanical strength, but versatile charged groups. The bilayered NPs are prepared by a liquid-air interface-mediated self-assembly process257 demonstrated as follows: a droplet of the Au NP chloroform solution is firstly dropped on a convex shaped water droplet atop a porous supporter copper grid. Due to the low surface extension energy of the organic solvent on water, the PS ligand-stabilized NPs will steadily disperse on the water surface and form a thin monolayer.258 After the water is completely evaporated, a free-floating Au NP sheet is obtained. A subsequently manipulation cycle will result in the formation of bilayered Au NP superlattice nanosheet membranes. The configured gap can act as a nanofluidic transport channel whose geometry is simplified to a conical shape. The ionic transport property can be well modulated by varying the Au NP size and tailoring the surface chemistry.
Li et al. reported a nanofluidic heterogeneous diode membrane composed of sequentially packed hydroxyl-modified and amino-modified NP arrays.235 A silicon wafer with double inverse-pyramid shaped micropores prepared by symmetric KOH etching was used as the supporter for the nanoparticle assembly (Fig. 18a). The monodispersed NP suspensions were sequentially loaded into the micropores from two sides and formed hexagonally packed NP arrays through the evaporation induced self-assembly process (Fig. 18b). The bipolar diode NP array was packaged using two PDMS replicates reversibly bonded with the silicon substrate. The fluid transport through the hybrid membrane can be simplified into numerous cylindrical arrays with opposite surface charge distribution. They also propose that this bipolar NP array can be used as a promising platform for biosensing.
 Fig. 18  (a) A nanofluidic diode prepared by sequentially assembling hydroxyl-modified and amino-modified NP arrays into a silicon micropore wafer. (b) The NP array formed by evaporation induced self-assembly shows a close packed structure with numerous adjacent pore gaps as nanochannels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235; copyright 2010, AIP Publishing. 
Molecule self-assembly for heterogeneous membranes. 
Using the molecule self-assembly technique, scientists have fabricated various functional homogeneous membranes based on BCP. Due to the functional richness of the polymer segments, the channels of the BCP membranes can undergo environment stimulating changes such as steric hindrance, wettability, and surface charge, and it is easier to build all these asymmetric factors into one piece of membrane by simple hybridization. For example, our group reported a BCP based heterogeneous membrane using two novel synthesized BCPs consisting of PEO and PMA bearing chalcone (Chal) mesogens in the side chains: PEO114-b-PMA(rChal)57 (BCP-1), PEO272-b-PMA(Chal)97 (BCP-2).259 Both BCPs can form porous membranes with high-density visualized straight channels of PEO domains with different pore sizes of 5.3 ± 1.4 nm and 10.2 ± 2.1 nm. The hybridization of these two membranes with different sizes would provide a configured asymmetric nanochannel. Since the PEO domains are neutral, the plasma grafting technique is applied to modify a stimulus-responsive molecule, poly(vinylpyridine) (PVP), which can provide the heterogeneous membrane controllable rectification effect. As shown in Fig. 19a, a 100 nm thick sacrificial layer of CA that could be dissolved away using acetone was pre-coated on a silicon wafer by a spin coating method. Then, 4 wt% chloroform solution of BCP-1 was spin cast on the CA coated substrate, followed by annealing at 80 °C for 24 h under vacuum and photo-crosslinking under UV irradiation (313 nm) to form membrane-1. Similarly, membrane-2 was formed by the same annealing and photo-crosslinking process. The heterogeneous membrane can be readily exfoliated to form a free-standing membrane by immersing the substrate in acetone solvent (Fig. 19b).
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of the fabrication procedure for the block copolymer membrane based heterogeneous membrane. (b) Optical image of the free-standing heterogeneous membrane after complete exfoliation. (c) In-plane profiles of PEO114-b-PMA(rChal)57, PEO272-b-PMA(Chal)97 and the corresponding asymmetric hybrid membranes. (d–f) 2D GISAXS images of PEO114-b-PMA(rChal)57, PEO272-b-PMA(Chal)97 and the corresponding asymmetric hybrid membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 259; copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
The 2D grazing incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) experiment was performed to examine the nanostructures and orientations of the as-prepared heterogeneous membranes. As shown in Fig. 19c, the in-plane scattering profile contains characteristic scattering peaks of the hexagonally packed cylinder structure with relative scattering vector lengths from the specular reflection position of 1, (3)1/2, (4)1/2, and (7)1/2. And the peaks at 2θf = 0.22263° and 0.3158° correspond to d-spacings of 32.536 nm and 22.12 nm, which is consistent with the center to center distance of the PEO cylinders for the PEO272-b-PMA(Chal)97 and PEO114-b-PMA(rChal)57, respectively. These observations indicate the successful construction of a bilayer structure without destroying the structure of each layer. Fig. 19d–f shows the GISAXS images obtained from the hexagonally arranged cylinder domains of the monolayers of PEO272-b-PMA(Chal)97, PEO114-b-PMA(rChal)57, and the corresponding heterogeneous membranes. The bright dots on each side of the in-plane profiles fit very well with the peaks shown in Fig. 19c.
The above hybrid membrane does not have initial functional groups, and its functionality strongly depends on the unstable plasma modification process, which results in relatively low functionality. In order to increase the mechanical strength and the functionality of the device, our group developed an inorganic/organic hybrid heterogeneous membrane with initial functional groups composed of a BCP membrane, polystyrene-b-poly(4-vinylpyridine) (PS-b-P4VP), and a porous anodic alumina membrane.239


2.2.2 1D nanomaterial based heterogeneous membranes. 
The various 1D materials can be assembled into paper-like membranes using either initial cores or stacked gaps as nanofluidic transport channels; the as-prepared membranes are generally symmetric. Very recently, the interwoven nanowire membrane has gained considerable interest due to its simplicity in constructing heterogeneous membrane systems. The abundant chemical composition and surface chemistry make it easier to build asymmetry by selecting two types of nanowires with predefined functionalities.260
Wang's group reported biomimetic multifunctional nanochannels based on heterogeneous nanowire membranes composed of MnO2 and CaWO4.236 A variety of biological ion channels such as passive channels, pH-gated, and voltage-gated nanochannels have been successfully mimicked with this single piece of membrane directly or electronically by employing its tunable asymmetric wettability (Fig. 20a). Biomimetic passive channels can be realized because of the initial charged hydrophilic bilayer. When the CaWO4 layer is changed to the hydrophobic state (contact angle: 145.3° ± 0.3°) and while the MnO2 layer is kept in the hydrophilic state (contact angle: 46.7° ± 0.7°), analogous channels with pH gated ionic transport properties come into effect. Furthermore, voltage-gated channels can be easily obtained when both layers are in the hydrophobic state (contact angle of CaWO4 and MnO2 layer are 141.3° ± 0.3° and 157.6° ± 2.0°, respectively).
 Fig. 20  (a) The schematic of the heterogeneous nanowire membrane composed of an oleophilic CaWO4 nanowire membrane and a hydrophilic MnO2 nanowire membrane with equal diameters. (b) Optical images of the front (left, CaWO4) and back side (right, MnO2) of the heterogeneous membrane. (c) Cross-section SEM image of the heterogeneous membrane shows an obvious membrane boundary. (d) The as-prepared membrane is intrinsically hydrophilic and demonstrates good permeation in different regions. (e) The stacked nanowire gaps can act as ion transport channels with pore size distribution centered at 17 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 236; copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. 
The heterogeneous membrane is prepared by a facile sequential suction filtration method. The oleophilic CaWO4 nanowires with diameters of ∼30 nm and the hydrophilic MnO2 nanowires with the same diameters were synthesized and dispersed in solution beforehand.261 The free-standing MnO2 membrane was first formed by suction filtration on a filter paper. Then, the top layer CaWO4 nanowire membrane was formed in a subsequent filtration process. After drying in air, a free-standing hybrid membrane was peeled off from the filter paper and the corresponding SEM image of the cross-section displayed the two membranes having a substantial equivalent thickness of approximately 50 μm (Fig. 20b and c). The as-prepared membrane was intrinsically hydrophilic and demonstrated good water permeation in different regions (Fig. 20d). The stacked nanowires can provide numerous gaps that can act as ion and water transport channels. The BET surface area test (24 m2 g−1) confirmed a porous nanostructure with a pore size distribution of approximately 17 nm (Fig. 20e). Furthermore, the pore size and length can be easily regulated by varying the size and dosage of the nanowires. This work demonstrates a basic paradigm for constructing heterogeneous membrane systems based on versatile 1D nanowires, which would open up new routes to constructing BSANM system.


2.2.3 Bulk material based heterogeneous membranes. 
Electrochemical oxidization for heterogeneous membranes. 
The electrically insulating solid oxide materials such as Al2O3, SiO2, and NiO are great candidates for constructing the heterogeneous BSANM system. In general, the oxide nanochannels are hydrophilic due to their association with water molecules through the charge–dipole effect.262 Thus, creating asymmetric surface charge distribution becomes very crucial in constructing oxide based heterogeneous BSANM systems. To realize this goal, we can arrange the oxide materials with different isoelectric points (pI) such as the pattern of the Al2O3 surface with a pI about 8–9, and the SiO2 surface with a pI about 2–3.
Guo et al. systematically investigated the ionic current rectification, breakdown, and switching in heterogeneous nanochannels composed of patterned SiO2 and Al2O3 surfaces.262 Wu et al. reported a generic strategy to fabricate heterogeneous nanofluidic diode membranes using the anodic oxidation method, followed by a pattern transfer process.237 The low stress SiN membrane above the silicon window was used as a supporting layer for further possessing. The amorphous silicon and aluminum thin layers were deposited onto the SiN membrane successively (Fig. 21a). The porous alumina layer with an average pore diameter of about 22 nm was firstly obtained by a traditional oxidation process (Fig. 21b), and can serve as a local etch mask of the subsequent pattern transfer process based on the Cl2 reactive ion etching technique. Since the etching of Si is anisotropic, the alumina structures on the top layer can be transferred into the bottom layer Si. The SEM image of the etched bottom layer is shown in Fig. 21c, which is quite different from the Al2O3 layer. The diameter of the pores in the etched Si layer are about 18 nm and only 2% of the alumina pores can be transferred successfully, resulting in a lower pore density about 8 μm−2, compared with that of about 400 μm−2 for the Al2O3 layer. They proposed that the pores in the bottom layer are mainly transferred from the large pores in the top Al2O3 layer and the porosity can be regulated by changing the etching conditions or the thickness of the bottom layer. Finally, the supporting LS SiN was selectively etched to release the heterogeneous membrane. In electrolyte solution at physiological pH range, the as-prepared heterogeneous membrane with negatively charged SiO2 layer and positively charged Al2O3 layer can function as a nanofluidic diode. They also reported a field effect modulated nanofluidic diode based on an Al2O3/WO3 heterogeneous membrane.263
 Fig. 21  (a) Flow chart for the fabrication of the SiO2/Al2O3 heterogeneous membrane, composed of a negatively charged SiO2 layer and a positively charged Al2O3 layer. (b and c) SEM images of the top Al2O3 layer (b) and bottom Si layer (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 237; copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Track-etching for heterogeneous membranes. 
The track-etched technique has been widely adopted to prepare various inorganic and organic porous membranes with various pore geometries. Among these, the commercial PET membrane shows great advantages because it is low-cost, flexible, and easy to prepare and modify. Our group demonstrated a novel and simple design nanofluidic diode heterogeneous membrane by stacking two commercial track-etched PET nanochannel membranes together.238 The hybrid membrane demonstrated the cooperative effect of pH-dependent ion transport. Two PET membranes with cylinder nanochannels and diameters of 80–90 nm and 190–200 nm were selected to construct the BSANM system. As shown in Fig. 22, two kinds of hybrid membrane can be obtained by tailoring the pore diameter or changing the surface chemistry through histine functionalization. The two membranes were wetted beforehand and placed on top of each other using the flat sides, to avoid the trapping of air bubbles. Notably, the two membranes were not matched perfectly in the axial direction, due to the existence of a thin liquid membrane of 2–3 μm during the stacking process. The liquid membrane can serve as communicating vessels to connect adjacent and non-coaxial nanochannels of two PET membranes, which can largely reduce the practical blockage to ionic transport caused by the off-axis connection. This heterogeneous BSANM can conduct larger ionic current compared with the corresponding homogeneous system, which makes it more immune to the influence of current fluctuation. We propose that more delicate ionic transport properties can be achieved by arranging PET membranes with different geometries and surface groups.
 Fig. 22  Schematic of the track-etched nanochannel membrane based heterogeneous membrane exhibiting either an asymmetric geometry or an asymmetric surface charge distribution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 238; copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Hydrogels for heterogeneous membranes. 
The polyelectrolyte hydrogels have a generally symmetric membrane and can be used as excellent ionic transporters. They have a variety of charged matrix networks that can be regulated by various synthesis and doping processes. Thus, polyelectrolyte hydrogels are great candidates for constructing heterogeneous BSANM systems by rationally arranging gel layers with different chemical and physical properties. Velev's group reported a hydrogel based heterogeneous nanofluidic diode membrane composed of two oppositely charged polyelectrolyte doped hydrogel layers (Fig. 23a).233 The agarose gel can reversibly melt and solidify, depending on the environment temperature. To render the neutral hydrogel ionic network charges, a negatively charged molecule, sodium polystyrenesulfonate (PSS), and a positively charged molecule, poly(diallyl dimethylammonium chloride) (PDAC) were selected. Firstly, the PSS solutions (3.5, 7.0, and 14.0 wt%) and PDAC solutions (2.5, 5.0, and 10.0 wt%) were mixed with agarose (2.0 wt%) solution, respectively, and the mixed solution was boiled on a heating stage under continuous stirring. After solidification of the agarose gels containing the polyelectrolytes, they were cut into cylindrical slabs. Two PDMA reservoirs adhered to the Pt electrode were used to hold the gel and form a bipolar interface.
 Fig. 23  (a) A polyelectrolyte gel based nanofluidic diode membrane. Two pieces of agarose gel doped with two oppositely charged polyelectrolytes are combined together. Reproduced with permission from ref. 233; copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of the soft matter diode membrane composed of EGaIn, PEI polyelectrolyte gel and PAA polyelectrolyte gel. (c) An image of the ionic diode membrane constructed entirely from soft matter. Reproduced with permission from ref. 264; copyright 2012, John Wiley and Sons. 
Inspired by the soft material devices in nature, nanofluidic devices composed entirely of soft materials are very fascinating. Although great developments have been made by substituting the soft gel for liquid electrolyte, the electrodes used in those devices are still rigid. The eutectic gallium indium (EGaIn) with low viscosity and high electrical conductivity could be a promising alternative. Velev's group further described a new class of diodes constructed entirely from soft materials using EGaIn as electrode (Fig. 23b).264,265 Generally, a less conductive thin skin of gallium oxide will spontaneously form on the surface of EGaIn.266 This native layer is electrical potential sensitive and can be formed or removed by changing the bias direction. The all soft matter membrane was fabricated by the combination of EGaIn, polyethylene imine (PEI) polyelectrolyte gel and polyacrylic acid (PAA) polyelectrolyte gel. The two gel layers were combined using two PDMS spacers as before. Particularly, two pieces of EGaIn filled Tygon tubes were inserted from the bottom of the two PDMS spacers (Fig. 23c). They proposed that this soft nanofluidic device could find broad applications in neuromorphic systems, bio-embeddable smart particles and biomimetic devices.

3. Properties
The biological ion channel can achieve three different ionic transport properties including ionic selectivity, ionic gating, and ionic rectification.1 The implementation of these functions is crucial to various living processes. As an artificial analogue, the BSANM system is also capable of realizing these delicate transport functions. In the following section, we will summarize the basic properties of the BSANM system, which is associated with the particular physical and chemical structures.
3.1 Ion/molecule selectivity
Ionic selectivity is a basic characteristic of the biological ion channel. Most transport proteins need to get certain ions/molecules across the membrane while at the same time excluding others. The ability of biological ion channels to “feel” certain ions/molecules relies on the specific binding sites asymmetrically distributed along the channel inner walls. Inspired by the selectivity of biological pore proteins, artificial asymmetric nanochannel membranes with analogous ability to selectively transport specific types of ions/molecules can be fabricated by modifying the corresponding functional molecules.267,268
Cations exist widely in living organisms and often influence normal bodily functions. For example, Na+ is able to regulate the blood volume, blood pressure and osmotic equilibrium in humans. K+ participates in the transmission of electrical signals in the nervous system and modulates the activity of muscles. To date, many kinds of cation selective bioinspired asymmetric nanochannel membranes have been prepared, such as K+,269 Ag+,270 Hg2+,271 Zn2+,272,273 Pb2+,274 Ca2+,275 and Fe3+.276 Our group developed a biomimetic potassium-selective membrane based on a G-quadruplex DNA modified PET nanochannel (Fig. 24a).269 The G-quadruplex DNA will undergo a conformational change after specific binding of the potassium ion, accompanied by the change in the effective pore size, which will lead to the nonlinear response to potassium ions at concentrations ranging from 0 to 1500 μM. Similar to cations, anions also play crucial roles in human bodies. The anions participate in 70% of all enzymatic reactions. Inspired by nature, many anion-selective nanochannel membranes have been reported.277–279 For example, our group developed the first anion selective asymmetric membrane by immobilizing the fluorion (F−) responsive molecule 4-aminophenylboronic acid (APBA) onto the inner wall of a single PI nanochannel (Fig. 24b). The system shows excellent responsive reversibility and stability towards F−. By increasing the concentration F−, the immobilized APBA can form three negatively charged tetrahedral fluoride adducts with different wettabilities, which could significantly influence the transmembrane ionic current. Very recently, Azzaroni et al. reported a polyamine modified asymmetric nanochannel and found that the addition of phosphate ions can change the surface charge of the channels from the negative state to the positive state and thus tune the ionic transport characteristics.280
 Fig. 24  Ion/molecule selectivity. (a) A potassium selective nanofluidic device based on a G4 DNA modified single conical PET nanochannel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 269; copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (b) The first fluorine selective nanochannel membrane based on an APBA functionalized single conical PI nanochannel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 277; copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) A smarter multi-ion selective asymmetric membrane that can respond to K+ and H+ simultaneously. Reproduced with permission from ref. 281; copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. (d) The first small molecule (H2O2) responsive asymmetric membrane based on a horseradish peroxidase (HRP) enzyme modified conical PET nanochannel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 284; copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (e) Chiral recognition of L-histidine based on a beta-cyclodextrin-modified single PI nanochannel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 286; copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (f) A D-glucose selective asymmetric membrane based on a GOx enzyme modified single conical PET nanochannel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 290; copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematic of the graphene asymmetric oxide–aptamer–nanochannel membrane that can selectively bond ATP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 291; copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) An asymmetric nanochannel containing mAb F26G3 at the tip side, which can selectively bond rDPGA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 and 268; copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Some smarter systems that can respond to two or more types of ions simultaneously were also reported. For example, we prepared a multi-ion selective asymmetric membrane by modifying the K+ responsive G4 DNA molecule and H+ responsive C4 DNA molecule on the two sides of a single cigar-like PET nanochannel, respectively (Fig. 24c).281 Besides ion selective asymmetric membranes, inorganic molecule such as CO2282,283 and H2O2284,285 (Fig. 24d), organic molecules such as amino acids,286–288 histamine289 and glucose290 (Fig. 24e and f), and biomolecules such as ATP291 and protein14 (Fig. 24g and h) selective asymmetric membranes can also be prepared following the principle.
3.2 Ionic gating
Ionic gating is also a basic characteristic of the biological ion channel.292–294 When the cell feels external stimuli, the corresponding ion channels may undergo changes to be opened and closed to adapt to the environment.295,296 As is also the case for the BSANM system, when the BSNAM is in contact with external stimuli, the “off” and “on” states of ion conduction can be intelligently regulated. During the past few years, rapid progress in developing BNSAM systems that exhibit pH,297–300 temperature,301–303 light,304–308 ion species309–313 and electric field212,263 regulated ionic gating has been achieved.
Our group developed a pH gated nanofluidic device by modifying a proton-driven DNA molecular motor onto the inner wall of a single conical PET nanochannel using the chemical grafting method (Fig. 25a).314 The pH sensitive DNA molecules could undergo conformational changes between a densely packed rigid quadruplex i-motif structure at pH 4.5 and a loosely packed single-stranded and more negatively charged structure at pH 8.5, which ultimately affects the ionic current. The rigid quadruplex i-motif structure decreases the effective diameter of the nanochannel leading to a decrease in ionic current, while the negatively charged loose packed structure will enhance the whole conductance. Azzaroni et al. also demonstrated a temperature responsive single PET nanochannel by grafting a temperature responsive PNIPAM using atomic free radical polymerization (ATRP).301 When they increased the temperature above the LCST of the PNIPAM, the polymer brushes changed from the swollen state to the collapsed state, which enlargened the effective diameter and resulted in an increase in ionic current (Fig. 25b).315 Compared with pH and temperature, light can be regulated to achieve the accurate response of a precise region.316 In 2004, Brinker et al. demonstrated azobenzene modified nanoporous membranes capable of photoregulation of mass transport.306 Afterwards, Smirnov et al. reported a light-controlled valve with switching ability for the transport of water and ions based on a photochromic spiropyran functionalized nanopore.307 Recently, our group developed a photo-induced, and chemical-driven, smart-gating nanochannel (Fig. 25c). The C4 DNA was modified onto the channel walls and the malachite green carbinol base (MGCB) was added into the solution. Under UV irradiation, the MGCB emitted OH− and lowered the proton concentration in the system, which triggered the conformational change of the DNA motor from the i-motif form to a single-strand structure. The single-strand structure possessed more negative charges, thus leading to an increase in ionic current.304
 Fig. 25  Ionic gating. (a) A pH gated single conical shaped nanochannel obtained by modifying a proton-driven DNA molecular motor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 314; copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. (b) Thermally nanoactuated macromolecular ionic gates based on a PNIPAM modified single conical nanochannel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 301; copyright 2009, John Wiley and Sons. (c) A chemically driven conical nanochannel based on photoinduced pH change in the environmental solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 304; copyright 2012, John Wiley and Sons. (d) Engineered ionic gates based on sodium and potassium activated nanochannels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 309; copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) Field effect modulated nanofluidic diode membrane based on an Al2O3/W heterogeneous membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 263; copyright 2013, AIP Publishing. (f) A poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide-co-acrylic acid) brush modified single conical PET nanochannel with temperature and pH dual-responsive ionic gating properties. Reproduced with permission from ref. 318; copyright 2010, John Wiley and Sons. (g) Light and pH dual-driven ionic gate based on an 8-hydroxypyrene-1,3,6-trisulfonate functionalized single conical PET nanochannel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171; copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. (h) pH- and voltage-gated control of ionic conduction based on a DNA-modified conical PET nanochannel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 321; copyright 2014, American Chemical Society and ref. 268, copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Inspired by the biological ion channels whose ion conduction can be well-regulated by Na+ and K+, we reported a Na+ and K+ activated ionic gate by modifying the nanochannel with 4′ aminobenzo-15-crown-5 and 4′-aminobenzo-18-crown-6, which can specifically associate with Na+ and K+, respectively, according to the size of the cation and the crown ether cavity (Fig. 25d).309 The presence of Na+ switches the Na+ activated gate between the “off” and “on” states of ion conduction, and the presence of K+ controls selective cation and anion conduction through the K+ activated gate.
The electrical potential is a particular stimulus as it is non-contact, tunable, and can act over a short time scale. In 2009, Siwy's group developed an ionic field effect transistor based on single conical nanopores with an insulated gold gate.212 By changing the gating potential, the ion conduction can be changed from a rectifying behavior to the almost linear behavior seen in cylindrical nanopores. Recently, Wu et al. demonstrated a field effect modulated nanofluidic diode membrane based on the Al2O3/WO3 heterogeneous membrane whose ion conduction behavior can be efficiently modulated by an external electrical potential exerted on the WO3 walls (Fig. 25e).263 In addition to the nanochannels exhibiting single-stimulus activated ionic gating, nanochannels exhibiting multi-stimuli (Fig. 25e–g) activated ionic gating such as pH & salt,317 pH & T,318 pH & light,171,319,320 pH & voltage,321 and pH & T & sugar322 were also reported.
3.3 Ionic rectification
Rectification is of great significance due to its relevance to biological ion channels.323–325 The ionic rectification generally refers to the ionic current being preferentially conducted in one direction at a bias of one polarity and is inhibited in the opposite direction at the bias of the opposite polarity, which can be realized by the broken symmetry.326–330 Among the three basic properties, ionic rectification is the essential characteristic of the BSANM system because the introduction of asymmetric built-in (i.e. geometry, surface charge, chemical composition, and wettability) and external (i.e. pH gradient, electrolyte concentration gradient, and pressure gradient) factors can both contribute to the ionic rectification.331,332
For example, the ionic rectification can be realized by breaking the symmetry of the electrochemical potential via the pore geometry,333,334 which was achieved with surface-charged conical polymer nanochannels whose diameter of the small side was comparable to the Debye length (Fig. 26a). Siwy et al. proposed a ratchet model to reveal the underlying mechanism.335 Besides geometry induced rectification, asymmetric surface charge induced ionic rectification is more remarkable. Daiguji et al. first proposed that a symmetric nanochannel with opposite surface charge distribution would exhibit much higher rectification than that generated using asymmetric geometry, solely because remarkable ionic enrichment and depletion effects can be created in the junction upon switching the external bias (Fig. 26b).336 This behavior is analogous to that of semiconductor bipolar diodes in principle. Notably, the ionic rectification can be strengthened by the two factors synergistically. As shown in Fig. 26c, Siwy et al. demonstrated an asymmetric conical PET nanochannel patterned with opposite surface charge, which can rectify ionic current with rectification ratio of about several hundred.337
 Fig. 26  Ionic rectification. (a) Asymmetric geometry induced ionic rectification. Reproduced with permission from ref. 335; copyright 2006, John Wiley and Sons. (b) Asymmetric surface charge distribution induced ionic rectification. Reproduced with permission from ref. 336; copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. (c) Surface charge and geometry synergistically induced ionic rectification. Reproduced with permission from ref. 337; copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. (d) Wettability induced ionic rectification. Reproduced with permission from ref. 216; copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (e) Molecule blockage induced ionic rectification. Reproduced with permission from ref. 338; copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (f) pH gradient induced ionic rectification. Reproduced with permission from ref. 330; copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (g) Concentration gradient induced ionic rectification. Reproduced with permission from ref. 342; copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (h) Pressure gradient induced ionic rectification. Reproduced with permission from ref. 343; copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Besides the geometry and charge distribution, the wettability gradient existing in a confined zone can also contribute to the ionic rectification. As we know, the wettability gradient is widely existent in biological ion channels such as the KcsA potassium channel, which is responsible for its high selectivity and delicate rectification. Inspired from nature, our group developed a bioinspired asymmetric responsive system by selectively grafting PNIPAAm and PAA on the two ends of an hourglass-shaped nanochannel.216 The system behaves distinct ionic rectifying properties when the PNIPAAm chains are in the hydrophilic state and PAA chains are in the hydrophobic state (Fig. 26d).
The ionic rectification can also be achieved by molecule blockage. Martin's group reported a nanofluidic diode based on a DNA modified Au nanotube (Fig. 26e).338 The ionic rectification derived from the electrophoretic insertion of the DNA chains into and out of the small opening of the nanochannel under different external bias. On the positive bias, the voltage will drive the DNA chains to occlude the mouth of the nanotube, resulting in a large decrease in ionic current. Other asymmetric factors such as pH gradient,339–341 concentration gradient,342 and pressure gradient343 can also induce the ionic rectification and are shown in Fig. 26f–h, respectively.
4. Applications
4.1 Energy conversion
Due to the energy crisis, harvesting clean energy such as solar energy and salinity gradient energy directly from the ambient environment has gotten the attention of the public and the inventors.19,344,345 During the past decades, numerous efforts from interdisciplinary fields of material science, chemistry, and nanotechnology have been made to design efficient harvesting devices to capture these types of energy.346–349 BSANM has great potential in high-performance photovoltaic conversion, salinity gradient power generation, and pressure-driven energy conversion devices.350

4.1.1 Photovoltaic conversion. 
The harvesting of endless solar energy is of current interest around the world.351,352 Recently, our group reported a photovoltaic conversion system based on a conical PET nanochannel array (Fig. 27a).353 The electrolyte solution was 2-mercaptoethane sulfonic acid (MES)–NaOH buffer solution with pH about 6.5. The photosystem II (PSII) complexes354 were selected as the photocurrent sources and were added to the anode side. The light-induced concerted proton–electron transfer in PSII and the ionic rectification of the conical nanochannels are the key reasons for the generation of photocurrents. Upon illumination of the PSII in the anode side, the splitting of water occurs:3542H2O → 4H+ + O2 + 4e−
 Fig. 27  (a) Schematic of the photovoltaic conversion system based on an asymmetric conical nanochannel membrane. The photosystem II protein complexes are added into the anode chamber to convert the light into electric energy. (b) There is no photocurrent generation in the absence of the PSII. Reproduced with permission from ref. 353; copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. 
The photo generated electrons are transferred to the electrode and the protons are incorporated by the mobile anions in the chamber solution, which causes the depletion of anions and the accumulation of excessive cations on the anode side. Also, on the cathode side, the following reactions may occur:O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH− or 2H+ + 2e− → H2
These two reactions both lead to the depletion of cations and the accumulation of excessive anions in the cathode chamber. The conical nanochannel membrane will confine the ionic flow, which finally contributes to the generation of the light-induced ionic potential across the multi-pore membrane (Fig. 27b). The photo induced ionic current is associated with the permeability area, channel direction, and surface charge.
Biological plasma membranes with embedded ion pumps and ion channels can act as capacitors with charging and discharging functions. Recently, Xiang et al. reported an artificial light-powered bio-capacitor based on an inorganic/inorganic hybrid heterogeneous membrane.240 The silica nanoparticles modified with different charges were coated onto the porous alumina membrane by a vacuum assisted method. The proton-pump protein proteorhodopsin (pR)355 deposited photoelectric electrode was used as the photo-induced capacitor charging source. Upon light illumination, a transient proton flow was generated, which resulted in a passive ionic flow across the hybrid nanochannel membrane.356 Actually, the hybrid membrane performs charging and discharging functions. The chitosan-modified nanoparticle coated membrane shows the optimal photocurrent extension, which is the result of many kinds of comprehensive factors such as nanochannel ion selectivity and spatial steric effects.


4.1.2 Salinity gradient power generation. 
Among the numerous sustainable energies, the energy existing in the fluidic system that generally refers to the salinity difference between the solutions with different concentrations has elicited considerable interest to the scientific communities.357–360 In 2010, our group developed a concentration-gradient-driven energy harvesting system based on an asymmetric membrane with a single-ion-selective PET conical nanochannel (Fig. 28a).361 The high concentration was placed on the base, and the low concentration was placed on the tip, which can guarantee the good cation selectivity of the system.362 Driven by the concentration gradient, the cations diffuse through the nanochannel spontaneously.363 Part of the Gibbs free energy from the concentration gradient can be converted into electric energy by means of the net diffusion current. The maximum power output can achieve 26 pW for an individual nanochannel, which is sufficient to power a micro biomedical implant device (Fig. 28b). Moreover, by minimizing the ion transport resistance through decreasing the channel length, Feng et al. achieved an estimated power density of up to 106 watts per square metre using a single-layer MoS2 nanopore.364
 Fig. 28  (a) Energy harvesting under a concentration gradient using a homogeneous membrane with a single conical PET nanochannel. (b) The maximum power output from an individual nanochannel can reach 26 pW. Reproduced with permission from ref. 361; copyright 2010, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Energy harvesting under concentration gradient using a heterogeneous membrane composed of a porous PET membrane and a porous BCP membrane. (d) When mixing 0.5 M and 0.01 M NaCl, the maximum output power density can achieve 0.35 W m−2, which is quite considerable for the heterogeneous membrane with such a low pore density. Reproduced with permission from ref. 13; copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Very recently, our group also developed a reverse electrodialysis system based on an anion-selective heterogeneous membrane composed of a porous PET membrane with conical nanochannels and a porous BCP (PS-b-P4VP) membrane (Fig. 28c).13 A major improvement is the introduction of the particular asymmetric bipolar structure into the energy harvesting process. It is well known that the concentration polarization that widely exists in the traditional ion exchange membrane based reverse electrodialysis process seriously restricts the output power density. In our system, this unfavorable polarization effect can be eliminated by rational design of the channel structure and surface charge pattern. In the electrolyte testing conditions, the BCP channel was positively charged and the PET channel was negatively charged, which formed an asymmetric bipolar structure. Under a concentration gradient from the BCP to PET side, the transmembrane anion will not be enriched in the low-concentration PET side, due to the electrostatic effect, in contrast to the symmetric structure and positively charged pore openings of traditional membranes.365 The maximum output density can achieve 0.35 W m−2, which outperforms many commercial ion exchange membranes (Fig. 28d). This value can be further improved by optimizing the membrane composition, increasing the porosity, and decreasing the membrane thickness. Recently, by decreasing the thickness to 500 nm using a self-supported BCP based hybrid membrane, an enhanced power density of up to 2.04 W m−2 was achieved.366


4.1.3 Pressure-driven energy conversion. 
The hydrostatic energy existing in the flowing fluid is also an exploitable power. A pressure-driven fluid flow through a surface-charged nanochannel will induce a flow of counter charges in the electric double layer, generating a so-called streaming current and streaming potential that can drive a resistance load in external circuits. Over the past years, great advances in nanofluidic pressure-driven energy conversion have been made by Dekker,367 Daiguji,368 and Yang,369etc. For example, Dekker et al. reported the generation of streaming currents in individual rectangular silica nanochannels with heights as small as 70 nm experimentally and theoretically.370 They found the streaming current is sensitive to the polarity of the surface charge and increases with channel height. Also, the streaming current drops at higher electrolyte concentration and becomes constant at salt concentrations below 10 mM KCl. Furthermore, they reported that the estimated maximum electrokinetic energy conversion efficiency can achieve about 12% for the LiCl electrolyte.371
Compared with 1D nanochannels, 2D layered nanochannels offer ultrafast ion and fluid transport, which is capable of generating high-throughput of ionic flux. Recently, our groups explored the generation of streaming current based on a layered graphene hydrogel membrane (GHM).159 The maximum streaming conductance density can approach 16.8 μA cm−2 bar−1. This nanofluidic generator can be used for harvesting energy from footsteps or monitoring the heartbeat based on the ability to create both continuous and pulse-shaped ionic current signals in response to intermittent pressure inputs. Furthermore, other 2D layered materials are also applicable for this strategy. The reported pressure-driven energy conversion nanofluidic devices are all based on symmetric systems. Szymczyk et al. theoretically investigated the pressure-driven ionic transport through nanochannels with asymmetric surface charge distribution and found that the asymmetric system exhibits a higher salt rejection rate.372 The future applications of BSANM in the pressure-driven energy conversion are quite fascinating.

4.2 Biochemical sensing
There have been major efforts to apply bioinspired asymmetric membranes for biochemical sensing, which could contribute to the development of next-generation bioanalytical and diagnostic tools. In general, there exist two kinds of sensing principles in which the detection signal is based on the change in the magnitude of the transmembrane ionic current: sensing by the volume exclusion effect and sensing by the electrostatic effect.30,373–377

4.2.1 Sensing by volume exclusion effect. 
The first class is mainly based on the volume exclusion effect.378–380 When a single molecule analyte, for example DNA, passes through a nanochannel driven by means of an electric field, the cross-section of the nanochannel will decrease due to the analyte's presence. Since the transmembrane ionic current is proportional to the effective pore size, a transient decrease of current signal could be measured.381–383 If the size of the molecule is comparable to that of the nanochannel, a complete blockage will occur. The current blockage duration is associated with the chemistry, structure, and length of the analyte.384–390
Meller's group reported a nanopore–nanofiber mesh (NP–NFM) heterogeneous membrane for detecting double-stranded DNA (dsDNA).391 In traditional nanopore based DNA sensors, the resolution and accuracy are seriously constrained by the relatively short translocation time because of the existence of inherent electrical noise with similar bandwidths.392 Meller and co-workers claimed that the coating of the low-density, high-surface-area NFM is capable of slowing the translocation speeds by two orders of magnitude or more, which can largely increase the detection resolution and efficiency. The membrane was prepared by electrospinning copolymer blends of poly(ε-caprolactone) and poly-(glycerol monostearate-co-ε-caprolactone) (PCL:PCG-C18)393 onto the SiNx nanopore membrane drilled by a tightly focused TEM electron beam (Fig. 29a). After NFM coating, a broader spread in the DNA translocation time was observed (Fig. 29b). The dwell time of a large fraction of the events falls between 0.5 and 10 ms and the histogram of the event duration changed from a unimodal to bimodal distribution (Fig. 29c). These observations can be ascribed to the interaction between the NFM and DNA prior to and during the translocation, which can largely reduce its translocation speed. The method using polymer coating to control the biomolecule translocation may find applications in many fields such as sequencing, gene expression, and genotyping.394 Recently, Edel et al. developed a single-molecule dielectrophoretic trapping method that can achieve ultra-low sensing concentration.395
 Fig. 29  (a) Schematic of the heterogeneous membrane composed of the SiN nanopore membrane and a nanofiber mesh, which can be used for DNA molecule detection. Representative current traces for 1000 bp dsDNA passing through a bare nanopore (NP) and a 7:3 PCL:PGC-C18 NP–NFM coated pore (b), and the histograms of the event duration displaying unimodal and bimodal distribution, respectively (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 391; copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 


4.2.2 Sensing by electrostatic effect. 
The second class is mainly based on the electrostatic effect.289,396,397 The inner wall of a nanochannel will be decorated with various recognition molecules for different analytes beforehand.398,399 The analyte, for example streptavidin, passing through the nanochannel will specifically bind to the site through electrostatic principles, and a change in the current–voltage curve will be observed when the system reaches the steady-state. Thus, this method is also defined as a “steady-state” approach.
In 2005, Martin's group demonstrated a prototypical protein biosensing platform based on biofunctionalized conical gold nanotubes. By attaching the different molecular-recognition agents such as biotin, protein-G, and an antibody to the protein ricin, three types of sensors for streptavidin, immunoglobulin, and ricin were developed.400 Afterwards, Azzaroni et al. reported an alternative strategy that enables the facile functionalization of the inner channel walls by taking advantage of the existing functional groups to create specific streptavidin sensors.401 The PAH is a positively charged bifunctional macromolecular ligand that can interact with the negatively charged carboxyl groups on the pore walls through electrostatic assembly and expose the mobile specific bind sites in the nanochannels (Fig. 30a). Fig. 30b shows the current–voltage characteristics of a nanochannel before and after PAH modification. The rectifying behavior gets reversed after modification as the channel wall transforms from negatively charged to positively charged, which can change the predominant counter-ion species and result in the inversion of the current rectification. After adding streptavidin into the solution, a drastic decrease in the rectified ionic current is observed (Fig. 30c), which is ascribed to the steric blockage of the bioconjugate formed by specific binding. Compared with the volume exclusion effect based sensors that require the fine-tuning of the nanochannel size for various kinds of analytes, this approach based on the electrostatic effect is more versatile and powerful because it is not limited by nanochannel size and the detection signal is commonly very stable.
 Fig. 30  (a) Schematic of the streptavidin sensor based on a conical PET nanochannel. The nanochannel is modified by a bimolecular recognition ligand PAH through electrostatic immobilization. (b) I–V curves of the system before and after ligand modification. (c) I–V curves of the system after selective binding streptavidin. Reproduced with permission from ref. 401; copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 

4.3 Other applications
Newly developed separation techniques based on the BSANM system functioning in a similar manner to the biological counterparts that use size, charge and hydrophobicity as the three key separation elements, offer substantial benefits due to less energy consumption and high separation efficiency.402,403 Peinemann et al. developed a high-performance protein separation device based on an asymmetric BCP membrane (PS-b-P4VP) formed by SNIPS.404 They achieved a high selectivity of about 9.5 in separating BSA-BHb, which is impossible using the current commercially available membranes because of their identical molecular weights. The asymmetric BCP membrane is composed of a thin layer of ordered perpendicular cylindrical channels, several hundred nanometers thick, with uniform pore size and a sponge-like layer with larger pores. The inner walls of the pores are full of pyridine groups (pKa ∼ 5.2) and can be protonated to generate positive charge or deprotonated to become neutral when the solution acidity changes. At the same time, the two proteins are also pH sensitive and can be positively charged or negatively charged depending on their pI values. The pI of BSA (pI ∼ 4.7) is lower than that of BHb (pI ∼ 7.0). Furthermore, the hydrophilic to hydrophobic ratio of amino acids and the molecular shape are also different for the two proteins. Such a high-performance separation ratio is due to the cooperation effect of these factors, namely, surface charge effect, wettability, and molecular shape.405
As a basic element of integrated electric circuits, the solid-state semiconductor diodes and transistors that regulate the flow of electrons/holes have been widely used in almost all the electronic elements in our daily life. Actually, the transport of mobile ions in a confined nanochannel is similar to the transport of electrons in solid-state semiconductor devices;406 they resemble each other in many ways. Analogous to semiconductor diodes and transistors, ionic diodes and ionic transistors also represent the key building blocks for the ionic circuits.407 Many scientists have proposed the possibility of the application of the BSANM system in ionic circuits, which would open up new ways to regulate, detect, concentrate, and separate ions and molecules in electrolyte solutions.408,409 Ali et al. reported a logic gate based on polyprotic acid chains modified conical PET nanochannels.410 The ionic rectification of the nanochannel can be selectively tuned, depending on the charged properties of the immobilized polyprotic acid chains whose pKa values are about 4.5 and 7.7. Particularly, they demonstrate the implementation of a logic gate by arranging two identical nanochannels together. Besides the applications mentioned above, the BSANM can also be applied in water purification411–414 and artificial pumps.214,415–418
5. Conclusions
This review summarizes the recent development of BSANM, building up a broad and deep knowledge base that can provide a solid information source for the scientific community. A strategy for designing and constructing BSANM is proposed. To construct the BSANM, the core principle is to build asymmetry into either the membrane system (i.e. built-in factors) or the membrane environment (i.e. external factors). Mainly from the dimensions of the materials, we summarize the construction methodologies of the BSANM system based on homogeneous and heterogeneous membranes. We also introduce the basic properties of the BSANM including ionic selectivity, ionic gating and ionic rectification, which are associated with particular chemical and physical structures. These unique properties will open up practical applications in many fields such as energy conversion, biochemical sensing and others.
Without a doubt, the investigation on BSANM is far from complete. Many functional materials such as multitudinous metal–organic framework membranes, inorganic nanowire membranes, organic nanofiber membranes, ultrafiltration membranes and 2D materials based heterogeneous membranes have hardly been explored, although their potentials are highly anticipated,115,419–425 and new membrane materials are continually emerging. At the same time, the full potential of bioinspired asymmetric membranes in many application areas is promising. For example, in the salinity gradient power generation field, a single pair of stacking asymmetric membrane modules that can generate thousands of watts per square meter or more by mixing sea water and river water is not far-reaching. Taken together, the futures of the BSANM are only limited by the imagination.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2017YFA0206904, 2017YFA0206900), the National Natural Science Foundation (21625303, 51673206, 21434003, 91427303), and the Key Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (KJZD-EW-M03, QYZDY-SSW-SLH014).
References
E. Gouaux and R. Mackinnon, Science, 2005, 310, 1461–1465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. García-Giménez, A. Alcaraz, V. M. Aguilella and P. Ramírez, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 331, 137–142 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Doyle, Science, 1998, 280, 69–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Gotter, M. A. Kaetzel and J. R. Dedman, Comp. Biochem. Physiol., 1998, 119A, 225–241 CrossRef CAS .
A. Taruno, V. Vingtdeux, M. Ohmoto, Z. Ma, G. Dvoryanchikov, A. Li, L. Adrien, H. Zhao, S. Leung, M. Abernethy, J. Koppel, P. Davies, M. M. Civan, N. Chaudhari, I. Matsumoto, G. Hellekant, M. G. Tordoff, P. Marambaud and J. K. Foskett, Nature, 2013, 495, 223–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Ying, J. Zhang, R. Gao and Y. T. Long, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13154–13161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu and D. A. Lavan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 666–670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hou, W. Guo and L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2385–2401 RSC .
B. Su, Y. Tian and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1727–1748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Burns, A. Seifert, N. Fertig and S. Howorka, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 152–156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zan and Q. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2099–2147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, S. Wang and L. Jiang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17036 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, X. Y. Kong, K. Xiao, Q. Liu, G. Xie, P. Li, J. Ma, Y. Tian, L. Wen and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14765–14772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Vlassiouk, T. Kozel and Z. Siwy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8211–8220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xie, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 59–71 CrossRef .
L. Lin, J. Yan and J. H. Li, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 10546–10551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, Y. Liu, J. Yan, X. S. Wang and J. H. Li, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 334–340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Gomez, P. Ramirez, J. Cervera, S. Nasir, M. Ali, W. Ensinger and S. Mafe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 073701 CrossRef .
J. Gao, W. Guo, D. Feng, H. Wang, D. Zhao and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12265–12272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wei, V. Gatterdam, R. Wieneke, R. Tampé and U. Rant, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 257–263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Constantin and Z. S. Siwy, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2007, 76, 041202 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Vlassiouk, S. Smirnov and Z. Siwy, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1589–1602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. White and A. Bund, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 2212–2218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Plett, W. Shi, Y. Zeng, W. Mann, I. Vlassiouk, L. A. Baker and Z. S. Siwy, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 19080–19091 RSC .
K. Wu, Z. Chen, J. Li, X. Li, J. Xu and X. Dong, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 3358–3363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, L. Mei, Y. Su, L. Yeh, X. Zhang and S. Qian, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 229, 305–314 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mei, L. H. Yeh and S. Qian, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 7449–7458 RSC .
R. T. Perera, R. P. Johnson, M. A. Edwards and H. S. White, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 24299–24306 CAS .
C. Duan and A. Majumdar, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 848–852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao and C. Martin, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8266–8272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Lan, C. Kubeil, J. Xiong, A. Bund and H. S. White, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 2726–2734 CAS .
M. Ali, I. Ahmed, P. Ramirez, S. Nasir, C. M. Niemeyer, S. Mafe and W. Ensinger, Small, 2016, 12, 2014–2021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, J. J. Xu, H. Y. Chen and X. H. Xia, Sci. China: Chem., 2012, 55, 453–468 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, Z. Hu, Z. Liu, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 424–431 CrossRef CAS .
R. X. Yan, W. J. Liang, R. Fan and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3820–3825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Heng, J. Li, M. Li, D. Tian, L. Fan, L. Jiang and B. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7241–7248 CrossRef CAS .
E. Barry, S. P. McBride, H. M. Jaeger and X. M. Lin, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, P. P. Zhu, P. Y. Xin, W. Si, Z. T. Li and J. L. Hou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2999–3003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Su, M. Zhang, W. Si, Z. T. Li and J. L. Hou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14678–14682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Zharov and A. Khabibullin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 440–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Choi, K. Kwon, D. Kim and J. Park, Lab Chip, 2015, 15, 168–178 RSC .
Y. Liu, R. Che, G. Chen, J. Fan, Z. Sun, Z. Wu, M. Wang, B. Li, J. Wei, Y. Wei, G. Wang, G. Guan, A. Elzatahry, A. Bagabas, A. Al-Enizi, Y. Deng, H. Peng and D. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500166 Search PubMed .
M. Newton, A. Bohaty, H. S. White and I. Zharov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7268–7269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Choi, K. Kwon, S. J. Lee, D. Kim and J. Park, Lab Chip, 2015, 15, 1794–1798 RSC .
S. Rao, K. Si, L. Yap, Y. Xiang and W. L. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11218–11224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Bohaty, M. R. Newton and I. Zharov, J. Porous Mater., 2010, 17, 465–473 CrossRef CAS .
O. Schepelina and I. Zharov, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 12704–12709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Smith and I. Zharov, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 2650–2654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Choi, C. Wang, G. T. Chang and J. Park, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2189–2197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Y. Wang, W. Wang and Z. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 102105 CrossRef .
Y. Lei, F. Xie, W. Wang, W. Wu and Z. Li, Lab Chip, 2010, 10, 2338–2340 RSC .
W. Ouyang, W. Wang, H. Zhang, W. Wu and Z. Li, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 345401 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Wang, Y. Cao, Y. Feng, F. Yin and J. P. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3865–3871 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, W. Yan, H. Yang, B. Liu and H. Q. Li, Polymer, 2008, 49, 5446–5451 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Wen, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Song, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2262–2267 RSC .
A. Thomas, F. Goettmann and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 738–755 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, J. Wang, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3554–3556 CrossRef CAS .
G. Widawski, M. Rawiso and B. Francois, Nature, 1994, 369, 387–389 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhang, H. Bai and L. Li, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 9801–9868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Y. Mao, D. Wang, Q. Qu, G. Yang and X. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 683–690 RSC .
M. Hernández-Guerrero and M. H. Stenzel, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 563–577 RSC .
P. Escalé, L. Rubatat, L. Billon and M. Save, Eur. Polym. J., 2012, 48, 1001–1025 CrossRef .
U. Bunz, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 973–989 CrossRef CAS .
A. Muñoz-Bonilla, M. Fernández-García and J. Rodríguez-Hernández, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 510–554 CrossRef .
L. S. Wan, J. W. Li, B. B. Ke and Z. K. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 95–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yabu and M. Shimomura, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5231–5234 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Nunes, A. R. Behzad, B. Hooghan, R. Sougrat, M. Karunakaran, N. Pradeep, U. Vainio and K. Peinemann, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3516–3522 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yoo, J. H. Kim, M. Shin, H. Park, J. H. Kim, S. Y. Lee and S. Park, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500101 Search PubMed .
Y. Gu and U. Wiesner, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 6153–6159 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Yu, X. Qiu, N. Moreno, Z. Ma, V. Calo, S. P. Nunes and K. V. Peinemann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13937–13941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. H. Schacher, P. A. Rupar and I. Manners, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7898–7921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Q. Song, T. Hoheisel, H. Sai, Z. Li, J. Carloni, S. Wang, R. E. Youngman, S. P. Baker, S. M. Gruner, U. Wiesner and L. A. Estroff, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 838–847 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Ross, K. K. Berggren, J. Y. Cheng, Y. S. Jung and J. B. Chang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4386–4396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Aissou, M. Mumtaz, G. Fleury, G. Portale, C. Navarro, E. Cloutet, C. Brochon, C. A. Ross and G. Hadziioannou, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 261–265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Kim, M. J. Misner and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4851–4856 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. C. He, W. H. Xing, F. B. Li, L. Tong, Z. Q. Chen, X. Z. Liao and M. Steinhart, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2068–2072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gu, Z. Liu, I. Gunkel, S. T. Chourou, S. Hong, D. L. Olynick and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5688–5694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ahn, S. Park, S. W. Kim, P. J. Yoo, D. Ryu and T. P. Russell, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11745–11752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Kim, S. M. Park and W. D. Hinsberg, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 146–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gu, I. Gunkel, A. Hexemer and T. P. Russell, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 3373–3381 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gu, I. Gunkel, A. Hexemer, W. Gu and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 273–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yamamoto, T. Kimura, M. Komura, Y. Suzuki, T. Iyoda, S. Asaoka and H. Nakanishi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 918–926 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gunkel, X. Gu, Z. Sun, E. Schaible, A. Hexemer and T. P. Russell, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2016, 54, 331–338 CrossRef CAS .
J. Choi, J. Huh, K. R. Carter and T. P. Russell, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7915–7925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 1401–1408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Feng, Y. Lv, Z. Wu, Y. Dou, L. Han, Z. Sun, Y. Xia, G. Zheng and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15148–15156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Robbins, P. Beaucage, H. Sai, K. W. Tan, J. Werner, J. Sethna, F. DiSalvo, S. Gruner, R. Dover and U. Wiesner, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501119 Search PubMed .
K. Kailasam, Y.-S. Jun, P. Katekomol, J. D. Epping, W. H. Hong and A. Thomas, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 428–434 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, W. Lu, J. Dai, L. Bourgeois, N. Hao, H. Wang, D. Zhao and P. A. Webley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 10101–10105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fan, S. Huh, R. X. Yan, J. Arnold and P. D. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 303–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Meng, D. Gu, F. Zhang, Y. Shi, H. Yang, Z. Li, C. Yu, B. Tu and D. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7053–7059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Chu and H. D. Wu, Polymer, 2000, 41, 101–109 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Meng, D. Gu, F. Zhang, Y. Shi, L. Cheng, D. Feng, Z. Wu, Z. Chen, Y. Wan, A. Stein and D. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4447–4464 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, Y. Liang, X. Yang, C. Zou, Z. Li, G. Lv, X. Zeng and R. Fu, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 2967–2969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yoon, M. Chang and J. Jang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 431–436 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Soler-Illia and O. Azzaroni, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1107–1150 RSC .
A. Brunsen, A. Calvo, F. J. Williams, G. J. Soler-Illia and O. Azzaroni, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 4328–4333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Alberti, G. J. Soler-Illia and O. Azzaroni, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 6050–6075 RSC .
G. Guillen, Y. Pan, M. Li and E. Hoek, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 3798–3817 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Ghosh, B. H. Jeong, X. F. Huang and E. M. V. Hoek, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 311, 34–45 CrossRef CAS .
E. Shamsaei, Z. Low, X. Lin, Z. Liu and H. T. Wang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54, 3333–3340 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Low, A. Razmjou, K. Wang, S. Gray, M. Duke and H. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 460, 9–17 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, Y. Su, C. Li, Q. Shi, X. Ning and Z. Jiang, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 318, 405–412 CrossRef CAS .
N. Meng, Z. Wang, Z. Low, Y. Zhang, H. T. Wang and X. W. Zhang, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2015, 147, 364–371 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Koros and C. Zhang, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 289–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Strathmann, K. Kock, P. Amar and R. W. Baker, Desalination, 1975, 16, 179–203 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shi, Y. Su, W. Zhao, C. Li, Y. Hu, Z. Jiang and S. Zhu, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 319, 271–278 CrossRef CAS .
W.-L. Chou, D.-G. Yu, M.-C. Yang and C.-H. Jou, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2007, 57, 209–219 CrossRef CAS .
A. Idris and L. K. Yet, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 280, 920–927 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dorin, H. Sai and U. Wiesner, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 339–347 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Yu, X. Qiu, S. Nunes and K. V. Peinemann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10072–10076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Dorin, W. A. Phillip, H. Sai, J. Werner, M. Elimelech and U. Wiesner, Polymer, 2014, 55, 347–353 CrossRef CAS .
K. V. Peinemann, V. Abetz and P. F. Simon, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 992–996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schacher, M. Ulbricht and A. Müller, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1040–1045 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Liu, H. W. Liang and S. H. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4770–4799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mirri, A. Ma, T. Hsu, N. Behabtu, S. Eichmann, C. Young, D. Tsentalovich and M. Pasquali, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9737–9744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, J. Liu, H. Guo and X. Tong, Mater. Lett., 2015, 139, 55–58 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, W. Choi, J. Han and M. Strano, Science, 2010, 329, 1320–1324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Liang, X. Cao, F. Zhou, C. H. Cui, W. J. Zhang and S. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1467–1471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, N. Wang, L. Wang, H. Dong, Y. Zhao and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3207–3212 CAS .
E. Secchi, S. Marbach, A. Niguès, D. Stein, A. Siria and L. Bocquet, Nature, 2016, 537, 210–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pang, J. He, J. Park, P. Krstić and S. Lindsay, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7277–7283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guerin, D. Tsamados, H. Le Poche, J. Dijon and A. Ionescu, Microelectron. Eng., 2012, 97, 166–168 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Hinds, N. Chopra, T. Rantell, R. Andrews, V. Gavalas and L. Bachas, Science, 2004, 303, 62–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Liang, X. Cao, W. J. Zhang, H. T. Lin, F. Zhou, L. F. Chen and S. H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3851–3858 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, A. Rinzler, H. Dai, J. Hafner, R. Bradley, P. Boul, A. Lu, T. Iverson, K. Shelimov, C. Huffman, F. Rodriguez-Macias, Y. Shon, T. Lee, D. Colbert and R. Smalley, Science, 1998, 280, 1253–1256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Liu, J. Xu, H. W. Liang, K. Wang and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7420–7425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Liang, Q. F. Guan, L. F. Chen, Z. Zhu, W. J. Zhang and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5101–5105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, T. Zhang, J. Ng and D. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3731–3736 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. H. Pan, A. J. Du, W. Fu, D. D. Sun and J. O. Leckie, Water Res., 2009, 43, 1179–1186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kowalski and P. Schmuki, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8585–8587 RSC .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
J. Wilson, L. Sloman, Z. He and A. Aksimentiev, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4830–4838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Golberg, Y. Bando, Y. Huang, T. Terao, M. Mitome, C. Tang and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2979–2993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Zhan, Z. Liu, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Small, 2012, 8, 966–971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, X. Yu, Z. Li, U. Paik and X. W. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600021 Search PubMed .
A. J. Storm, J. H. Chen, X. S. Ling, H. W. Zandbergen and C. Dekker, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 537–540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Lo, T. Aref and A. Bezryadin, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 3264–3267 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, D. Stein and C. McMullan, Nature, 2001, 412, 166–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Schneider, Q. Xu, S. Hage, S. Luik, J. Spoor, S. Malladi, H. Zandbergen and C. Dekker, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2619 Search PubMed .
C. Dekker, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 209–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Deng, M. Li, Y. Wang and Z. Liu, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2015, 60, 304–319 CAS .
K. Liu, J. Feng, A. Kis and A. Radenovic, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2504–2511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Garaj, W. Hubbard, A. Reina, J. Kong, D. Branton and J. A. Golovchenko, Nature, 2010, 467, 190–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, B. Lu, Q. Zhao, J. Li, T. Gao, Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, Z. Fan, F. Yang, L. You and D. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4549–4554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, H. Bai, G. Lu, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5856–5857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, O. C. Compton, G. H. B. Dommett, R. S. Ruoff and S. T. Nguyen, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4153–4157 CrossRef CAS .
M. Miansari, J. Friend, P. Banerjee, M. Majumder and L. Yeo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 21856–21865 CAS .
H. Liu, H. Wang and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 249–254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cheng, G. Jiang, C. J. Garvey, Y. Wang, G. P. Simon, J. Z. Liu and D. Li, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501272 Search PubMed .
B. Radha, A. Esfandiar, F. C. Wang, A. P. Rooney, K. Gopinadhan, A. Keerthi, A. Mishchenko, A. Janardanan, P. Blake, L. Fumagalli, M. Lozada-Hidalgo, S. Garaj, S. J. Haigh, I. V. Grigorieva, H. A. Wu and A. K. Geim, Nature, 2016, 538, 222–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Kim, J. Luo, R. Cruz-Silva, L. Cote, K. Sohn and J. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2867–2873 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ballard and G. Rideal, J. Mater. Sci., 1983, 18, 545–561 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Koltonow and J. Huang, Science, 2016, 351, 1395–1396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Abraham, K. S. Vasu, C. D. Williams, K. Gopinadhan, Y. Su, C. T. Cherian, J. Dix, E. Prestat, S. J. Haigh, I. V. Grigorieva, P. Carbone, A. K. Geim and R. R. Nair, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 546–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Qin, D. Liu, G. Wang, D. Portehault, C. J. Garvey, Y. Gogotsi, W. Lei and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6314–6320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Shao, K. Raidongia, A. R. Koltonow and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7602 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Raidongia and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16528–16531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, C. Cheng, Y. Wu, Y. Jiang, J. Gao, D. Li and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6064–6068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, L. Cote and J. X. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1356–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gierak, Microelectron. Eng., 2007, 84, 779–783 CrossRef CAS .
I. Vlassiouk, P. Y. Apel, S. N. Dmitriev, K. Healy and Z. S. Siwy, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 21039–21044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, J. Gao, W. Guo and L. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14149–14152 RSC .
L. Wen, Y. Tian, J. Ma, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 4027–4042 RSC .
Q. H. Nguyen, M. Ali, S. Nasir and W. Ensinger, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 485502 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Guo, E. W. Hall, R. Schirhagl, H. Mukaibo, C. R. Martin and R. N. Zare, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 558–561 RSC .
M. Ali, S. Nasir and W. Ensinger, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3454–3457 RSC .
K. Xiao, P. Li, G. Xie, Z. Zhang, L. Wen and L. Jiang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 55064–55070 RSC .
K. Xiao, G. Xie, Z. Zhang, X. Y. Kong, Q. Liu, P. Li, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3345–3350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Gomez, P. Ramirez, J. Cervera, S. Nasir, M. Ali, W. Ensinger and S. Mafe, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xiao, G. Xie, P. Li, Q. Liu, G. Hou, Z. Zhang, J. Ma, Y. Tian, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6560–6565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ono, M. Saito and H. Asoh, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 51, 827–833 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee and S. J. Park, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7487–7556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Brumlik and C. R. Martin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 3174–3175 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, L. Hu, N. Liu, Z. Yang, X. Lou, T. Zhai, H. Li and F. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 460–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, D. Ji, B. Zhu, P. Zhang, J. Xu, Q. Gan, Z. Yu and J. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501227 Search PubMed .
J. Lee, T. Laoui and R. Karnik, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 317–323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Masuda and K. Fukuda, Science, 1995, 268, 1466–1468 CAS .
Y. Kong, X. Fan, M. Zhang, X. Hou, Z. Liu, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7931–7936 CAS .
T. T. Xu, F. T. Fisher, L. C. Brinson and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1135–1139 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nielsch, J. Choi, K. Schwirn, R. B. Wehrspohn and U. Gosele, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 677–680 CrossRef CAS .
I. Tomatsu, K. Peng and A. Kros, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2011, 63, 1257–1266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Chen, N. Shiraishi, H. Satokawa, A. Kakugo, T. Narita, J. P. Gong, Y. Osada, K. Yamamoto and J. Ando, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 4588–4596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kagata, J. P. Gong and Y. Osada, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 4596–4601 CrossRef CAS .
T. Murosaki, T. Noguchi, A. Kakugo, A. Putra, T. Kurokawa, H. Furukawa, Y. Osada, J. P. Gong, Y. Nogata, K. Matsumura, E. Yoshimura and N. Fusetani, Biofouling, 2009, 25, 313–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sampath, N. Choudhury and A. Shukla, J. Chem. Sci., 2009, 121, 727–734 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pozuelo, V. Compañ, J. M. González-Méijome, M. González and S. Mollá, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 452, 62–72 CrossRef CAS .
C. Peng and A. Chauhan, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 399-400, 95–105 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, R. Luo and K. Y. Lam, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 289, 284–296 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Ho and R. A. Dryfe, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12757–12765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Morales, I. Podolsky, R. W. Mailen, T. Shay, M. D. Dickey and O. D. Velev, Micromachines, 2016, 7, 98 CrossRef .
H. J. Koo, S. T. Chang and O. D. Velev, Small, 2010, 6, 1393–1397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Koo and O. D. Velev, Biomicrofluidics, 2013, 7, 31501 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, Q. An, T. Liu, Q. Zhao, W. Hung, K. Lee and C. Gao, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 452, 73–81 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Han, K. B. Kim, J. H. Bae, B. J. Kim, C. M. Kang, H. C. Kim and T. D. Chung, Small, 2011, 7, 2629–2639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Turner and Y. L. Cheng, J. Membr. Sci., 1998, 148, 207–222 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yoshida, K. Uchida, Y. Kaneko, K. Sakai, A. Kikuchi, Y. Sakurai and T. Okano, Nature, 1995, 240–242 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mamada, T. T. Tanaka, D. Kungwatchakun and M. M. Irie, Macromolecules, 1990, 23, 1517–1519 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kabilan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2005, 2, 1602–1610 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Miyata, N. Asami and T. Uragami, Nature, 1999, 399, 766–769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mano, F. Mao and A. Heller, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2005, 574, 347–357 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tanaka, I. I. Nishio, S. T. Sun and N. S. N. S. Ueno, Science, 1982, 218, 467–469 CAS .
S. Wu, T. Braschler, R. Anker, F. Wildhaber, A. Bertsch, J. Brugger and P. Renaud, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 477, 151–156 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hou, H. Zhang and L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5296–5307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Harrell, Z. S. Siwy and C. R. Martin, Small, 2006, 2, 194–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, X. Hou and L. Jiang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 656, 231–236 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hou, H. Dong, D. Zhu and L. Jiang, Small, 2010, 6, 361–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, E. I. Gillette, X. Chen, A. J. Pearse, A. C. Kozen, M. A. Schroeder, K. E. Gregorczyk, S. B. Lee and G. W. Rubloff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 1031–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sheng, L. Wang, C. Wang, X. Wang and J. Xue, Biomicrofluidics, 2014, 8, 052111 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Li, L. Li, X. Liao and Y. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 385-386, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
M. Weber, B. Koonkaew, S. Balme, I. Utke, F. Picaud, I. Iatsunskyi, E. Coy, P. Miele and M. Bechelany, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 16669–16678 CAS .
E. B. Kalman, O. Sudre, I. Vlassiouk and Z. S. Siwy, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 394, 413–419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Asatekin and K. K. Gleason, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 677–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, X. Hou, L. Zeng, F. Yang, L. Li, D. Yan, Y. Tian and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16102–16110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hou, Y. Liu, H. Dong, F. Yang, L. Li and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2440–2443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hou, F. Yang, L. Li, Y. Song, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11736–11742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, X. Hou, J. Wang, Y. Tian, X. Fan, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2424–2428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Nie, Y. Sun, F. Zhang, M. Song, D. Tian, L. Jiang and H. Li, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5859–5865 RSC .
J. Ji, Q. Kang, Y. Zhou, Y. Feng, X. Chen, J. Yuan, W. Guo, Y. Wei and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603623 CrossRef .
H. Alem, F. Blondeau, K. Glinel, S. Demoustier-Champagne and A. Jonas, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 3366–3372 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ali, B. Yameen, J. Cervera, P. Ramírez, R. Neumann, W. Ensinger, W. Knoll and O. Azzaroni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8338–8348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Marmisollé and O. Azzaroni, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9890–9918 RSC .
E. Maza, J. S. Tuninetti, N. Politakos, W. Knoll, S. Moya and O. Azzaroni, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 29935–29948 RSC .
G. Pérez-Mitta, L. Burr, J. S. Tuninetti, C. Trautmann, M. E. Toimil-Molares and O. Azzaroni, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1470–1478 RSC .
S. Ma, J. Liu, Q. Ye, D. Wang, Y. Liang and F. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8804–8814 CAS .
B. Yameen, M. Ali, R. Neumann, W. Ensinger and O. Azzaroni, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2788–2793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tagliazucchi, O. Azzaroni and I. Szleifer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12404–12411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. Gilles, M. Tagliazucchi, O. Azzaroni and I. Szleifer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 4789–4798 CAS .
Q. Zhang, Z. Liu, K. Wang and J. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2091–2098 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pérez-Mitta, W. A. Marmisollé, C. Trautmann, M. E. Toimil-Molares and O. Azzaroni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15382–15385 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Pérez-Mitta, W. A. Marmisollé, C. Trautmann, M. E. Toimil-Molares and O. Azzaroni, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700972 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Pérez-Mitta, J. S. Tuninetti, W. Knoll, C. Trautmann, M. E. Toimil-Molares and O. Azzaroni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6011–6017 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Cayre, S. Chang and O. D. Velev, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10801–10806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Bennett, M. D. Purdy, K. A. Baker, C. Acharya, W. E. McIntire, R. C. Stevens, Q. Zhang, A. L. Harris, R. Abagyan and M. Yeager, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 8770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lei, W. Wang, W. Wu and Z. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 263102 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, Y. Yang, Z. Zhang, P. Wang and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1071–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, F. Wildhaber, O. Vazquez-Mena, A. Bertsch, J. Brugger and P. Renaud, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5718–5723 RSC .
Z. Meng, Y. Chen, X. Li, Y. Xu and J. Zhai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7709–7716 CAS .
Z. Zhang, X. Y. Kong, K. Xiao, G. Xie, Q. Liu, Y. Tian, H. Zhang, J. Ma, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 144–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rao, S. Lu, Z. Guo, Y. Li, D. Chen and Y. Xiang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5846–5850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Z. Meng, J. Zhai and L. Heng, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3552–3555 RSC .
L. Wang, H. Zhang, Z. Yang, J. Zhou, L. Wen, L. Li and L. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 6367–6373 RSC .
K. Han, L. Heng, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 12318–12323 RSC .
H. Wang, Q. Liu, W. Li, L. Wen, D. Zheng, Z. Bo and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3606–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, Y. Hu, Y. Liang, B. Kong, J. Zhang, J. Song, Q. Bao, G. Simon, S. P. Jiang and H. T. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5768–5777 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, G. Xie, K. Xiao, X. Y. Kong, P. Li, Y. Tian, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9613–9619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lu, Z. Guo, Y. Xiang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9851–9856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Yao, J. Zeng, P. F. Zhai, Z. Z. Loa, Y. X. Cheng, J. D. Liu, D. Mo, J. L. Duan, L. X. Wang, Y. M. Sun and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11000–11008 CAS .
A. B. Farimani, P. Dibaeinia and N. R. Aluru, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 92–100 Search PubMed .
H. C. Yang, J. Hou, V. Chen and Z. K. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13398–13407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. B. Aaronson, D. P. He, E. Madrid, M. A. Johns, J. L. Scott, L. Fan, J. Doughty, M. A. S. Kadowaki, I. Polikarpov, N. B. McKeown and F. Marken, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 871–875 CrossRef CAS .
A. Syed, L. Mangano, P. Mao, J. Han and Y.-A. Song, Lab Chip, 2014, 14, 4455–4460 RSC .
S. Onclin, B. J. Ravoo and D. N. Reinhoudt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6282–6304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Joshi, D. Bargteil, A. Caciagli, J. Burelbach, Z. Xing, A. Nunes, D. Pinto, N. Araújo, J. Brujic and E. Eiser, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600881 Search PubMed .
H. X. Lin, L. Chen, D. Y. Liu, Z. C. Lei, Y. Wang, X. S. Zheng, B. Ren, Z. X. Xie, G. D. Stucky and Z. Q. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2828–2831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, X. S. Zheng, B. Ren, R. Wang, J. Zhang, N. S. Xia and Z. Q. Tian, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1463–1469 RSC .
K. C. Ng, I. B. Udagedara, I. D. Rukhlenko, Y. Chen, Y. Tang, M. Premaratne and W. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 925–934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, J. Fu, K. C. Ng, Y. Tang and W. Cheng, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 4742–4746 CAS .
L. Wen, K. Xiao, A. V. Sainath, M. Komura, X. Y. Kong, G. Xie, Z. Zhang, Y. Tian, T. Iyoda and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 757–763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Liu, H. W. Liang and S. H. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4770–4799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2880–2881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Cheng and L. J. Guo, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 575–584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, F. Wildhaber, A. Bertsch, J. Brugger and P. Renaud, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 213108 CrossRef .
J. H. So, H. J. Koo, M. D. Dickey and O. D. Velev, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 625–631 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Koo, J. H. So, M. D. Dickey and O. D. Velev, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3559–3564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Dickey, R. C. Chiechi, R. J. Larsen, E. A. Weiss, D. A. Weitz and G. M. Whitesides, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1097–1104 CrossRef CAS .
I. Vlassiouk, S. Smirnov and Z. Siwy, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1978–1985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hou and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3339–3342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hou, W. Guo, F. Xia, F. Nie, H. Dong, Y. Tian, L. Wen, L. Wang, L. Cao, Y. Yang, J. Xue, Y. Song, Y. Wang, D. Liu and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7800–7805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gao, P. Li, Y. Zhang, K. Xiao, J. Ma, G. Xie, G. Hou, Z. Zhang, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Small, 2015, 11, 543–547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, Z. Zhang, L. Wen, J. Ma, Y. Zhang, W. Liu, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10679–10681 RSC .
Y. Tian, X. Hou, L. Wen, W. Guo, Y. Song, H. Sun, Y. Wang, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1682–1684 RSC .
Y. Q. Zhang, R. Zhou, Z. J. Zhao, X. Y. Kong, G. H. Xie, Q. Liu, P. Li, Z. Zhang, K. Xiao, Z. P. Liu, L. P. Wen and L. Jiang, ChemPhysChem, 2017, 18, 253–259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shang, Y. Zhang, P. Li, J. Lai, X. Y. Kong, W. Liu, K. Xiao, G. Xie, Y. Tian, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 5979–5981 RSC .
M. R. Powell, M. Sullivan, I. Vlassiouk, D. Constantin, O. Sudre, C. C. Martens, R. S. Eisenberg and Z. S. Siwy, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 51–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ali, S. Nasir, Q. H. Nguyen, J. K. Sahoo, M. N. Tahir, W. Tremel and W. Ensinger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17307–17314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, K. Xiao, L. Wen, Y. Dong, G. Xie, Z. Zhang, Z. Bo and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12292–12299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xie, K. Xiao, Z. Zhang, X. Kong, Q. Liu, P. Li, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13664–13668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, L. Wen, K. Xiao, H. Lu, Z. Zhang, G. Xie, X. Y. Kong, Z. Bo and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3181–3186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Pérez-Mitta, W. A. Marmisollé, A. G. Albesa, M. E. Toimil-Molares, C. Trautmann and O. Azzaroni, Small, 2017 DOI:10.1002/smll.201702131 .
M. Y. Liu, H. C. Zhang, K. Li, L. P. Heng, S. T. Wang, Y. Tian and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 25, 421–426 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, X. Sui, S. Guan, J. Zhai and L. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1851–1855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Shang, G. H. Xie, X. Y. Kong, Z. Zhang, Y. Q. Zhang, W. Tian, L. P. Wen and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603884 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ali, M. N. Tahir, Z. Siwy, R. Neumann, W. Tremel and W. Ensinger, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 1673–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ali, I. Ahmed, S. Nasir, P. Ramirez, C. Niemeyer, S. Mafe and W. Ensinger, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19541–19545 CAS .
C. Han, X. Hou, H. Zhang, W. Guo, H. Li and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7644–7647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xie, W. Tian, L. Wen, K. Xiao, Z. Zhang, Q. Liu, G. Hou, P. Li, Y. Tian and L. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3135–3138 RSC .
Z. Sun, F. Zhang, X. Zhang, D. Tian, L. Jiang and H. Li, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4823–4826 RSC .
M. Ali, P. Ramirez, I. Duznovic, S. Nasir, S. Mafe and W. Ensinger, Colloids Surf., B, 2017, 150, 201–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hou, H. Zhang, G. Xie, K. Xiao, L. Wen, S. Li, Y. Tian and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19131–19135 CAS .
X. Zhu, B. Zhang, Z. Ye, H. Shi, Y. Shen and G. Li, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 640–643 RSC .
V. Maingi, M. Lelimousin, S. Howorka and M. Sansom, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11209–11217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wen and L. Jiang, Sci. China: Chem., 2011, 54, 1537–1546 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, W. Wang, R. Xie, X. J. Ju and L. Y. Chu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 460–475 RSC .
A. Seifert, K. Gopfrich, J. R. Burns, N. Fertig, U. F. Keyser and S. Howorka, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1117–1126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7049–7064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Andrieu-Brunsen, S. Micoureau, M. Tagliazucchi, I. Szleifer, O. Azzaroni and G. Soler-Illia, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 808–821 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brunsen, C. Díaz, L. I. Pietrasanta, B. Yameen, M. Ceolín, G. J. Soler-Illia and O. Azzaroni, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3583–3592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, R. C. Fang, J. Hou, H. C. Zhang, Y. Tian, H. T. Wang and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3022–3029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Zhao, J. M. Janot, E. Balanzat and S. Balme, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 3484–3490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yameen, M. Ali, R. Neumann, W. Ensinger, W. Knoll and O. Azzaroni, Small, 2009, 5, 1287–1291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, W. Guo, J. Cheng, Y. Liu, J. Li and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 962–967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, Y. Sun, F. Zhang, M. M. Song, D. M. Tian and H. B. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5294–5298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wen, J. Ma, Y. Tian, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Small, 2012, 8, 838–842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Wang, A. K. Bohaty, L. Zharov and H. S. White, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13553–13558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, D. R. Dunphy, P. Atanassov, S. D. Bunge, Z. Chen, G. P. López, T. J. Boyle and C. J. Brinker, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 551–554 CrossRef CAS .
I. Vlassiouk, C. D. Park, S. A. Vail, D. Gust and S. Smirnov, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1013–1017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xiao, X. Kong, Z. Zhang, G. Xie, L. Wen and L. Jiang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2016, 26, 31–47 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, K. Xiao, L. Wen, H. Lu, Y. Liu, X. Y. Kong, G. Xie, Z. Zhang, Z. Bo and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11976–11983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ali, I. Ahmed, P. Ramirez, S. Nasir, J. Cervera, C. M. Niemeyer and W. Ensinger, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8583–8590 RSC .
P. Li, X. Y. Kong, G. Xie, K. Xiao, Z. Zhang, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Small, 2016, 12, 1854–1858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, J. Ma, Y. Sun, I. Boussouar, D. Tian, H. Li and L. Jiang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 3227–3233 RSC .
D. Wang, Y. Zhang, M. Wang, Y. Dong, C. Zhou, M. A. Isbell, Z. Yang, H. Liu and D. Liu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3944–3948 RSC .
F. Xia, W. Guo, Y. Mao, X. Hou, J. Xue, H. Xia, L. Wang, Y. Song, H. Ji, Q. Ouyang, Y. Wang and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8345–8350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, H. Xia, F. Xia, X. Hou, L. Cao, L. Wang, J. Xue, G. Zhang, Y. Song, D. Zhu, Y. Wang and L. Jiang, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 859–864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, X. Fan, Q. Wang, S. Hou, H. Wang, J. Zhai and X. Meng, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 63652–63659 RSC .
K. Huang and I. Szleifer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6422–6430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, H. Xia, L. Cao, F. Xia, S. Wang, G. Zhang, Y. Song, Y. Wang, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3561–3567 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wen, Q. Liu, J. Ma, Y. Tian, C. Li, Z. Bo and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6193–6198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. N. Liu, C. Li, T. C. Zhang, R. Z. Hou, Z. P. Xiong, Z. Y. Li, B. M. Wei, Z. K. Yang, P. C. Gao, X. D. Lou, X. Z. Zhang, W. Guo and F. Xia, Small, 2017, 13, 1600287 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Buchsbaum, G. Nguyen, S. Howorka and Z. S. Siwy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9902–9905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Zheng, S. Zhao, S. H. Cao, S. L. Cai, X. H. Cai and Y. Q. Li, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 433–439 RSC .
Z. S. Siwy and S. Howorka, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 1115–1132 RSC .
V. Gomez, J. Cervera, S. Nasir, M. Ali, W. Ensinger, S. Mafe and P. Ramirez, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 62, 29–33 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ramirez, V. Gomez, C. Verdia-Baguena, S. Nasir, M. Ali, W. Ensinger and S. Mafe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 3995–3999 RSC .
L. J. Cheng and L. J. Guo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 923–938 RSC .
S. Nasir, M. Ali, P. Ramirez, V. Gómez, B. Oschmann, F. Muench, M. N. Tahir, R. Zentel, S. Mafe and W. Ensinger, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12486–12494 CAS .
J. P. Hsu, S. T. Yang, C. Y. Lin and S. Tseng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 4576–4582 CAS .
T. S. Plett, W. J. Cai, M. Le Thai, I. V. Vlassiouk, R. M. Penner and Z. S. Siwy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 6170–6176 CAS .
W. Guo and Y. Tian, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2834–2846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Haywood, A. Saha-Shah, L. A. Baker and S. C. Jacobson, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 172–187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Daiguji, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 901–911 RSC .
M. A. Alibakhshi, B. Liu, Z. Xu and C. Duan, Biomicrofluidics, 2016, 10, 054102 CrossRef PubMed .
D. He, E. Madrid, B. D. Aaronson, L. Fan, J. Doughty, K. Mathwig, A. M. Bond, N. B. McKeown and F. Marken, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11272–11278 CAS .
Z. S. Siwy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 735–746 CrossRef CAS .
H. Daiguji, Y. Oka and K. Shirono, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2274–2280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Vlassiouk and Z. Siwy, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 552–556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Harrell, P. Kohli, Z. Siwy and C. Martin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15646–15647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, W. Guo, Y. B. Xie, X. W. Wang, J. M. Xue and Y. G. Wang, Radiat. Meas., 2009, 44, 1119–1122 CrossRef CAS .
E. Madrid, Y. Rong, M. Carta, N. B. McKeown, R. Malpass-Evans, G. A. Attard, T. J. Clarke, S. H. Taylor, Y. T. Long and F. Marken, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10751–10754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Rong, Q. L. Song, K. Mathwig, E. Madrid, D. P. He, R. G. Niemann, P. J. Cameron, S. E. C. Dale, S. Bending, M. Carta, R. Malpass-Evans, N. B. McKeown and F. Marken, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 69, 41–45 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, W. Guo, Y. Wang and L. Jiang, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 2194–2199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Lan, D. A. Holden and H. S. White, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13300–13303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wen, Y. Tian, Y. Guo, J. Ma, W. Liu and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2887–2893 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Logan and M. Elimelech, Nature, 2012, 488, 313–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Crittenden and H. S. White, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4503–4505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, S. J. Kim and D. Kim, Energy, 2013, 51, 413–421 CrossRef CAS .
A. Siria, P. Poncharal, A. L. Biance, R. Fulcrand, X. Blase, S. T. Purcell and L. Bocquet, Nature, 2013, 494, 455–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. D. Wang, M. S. H. Boutilier, P. R. Kidambi, D. Jang, N. G. Hadjiconstantinou and R. Karnik, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 509–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wen, X. Hou, Y. Tian, F. Q. Nie, Y. Song, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1021–1024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wen, X. Hou, Y. Tian, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2636–2642 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian and L. Jiang, Sci. China: Chem., 2011, 54, 603–610 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Meng, H. Bao, J. Wang, C. Jiang, M. Zhang, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2329–2334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Yehezkeli, R. Tel-Vered, J. Wasserman, A. Trifonov, D. Michaeli, R. Nechushtai and I. Willner, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 742 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Bamann, E. Bamberg, J. Wachtveitl and C. Glaubitz, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2014, 1837, 614–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Chu, C. W. Yen and M. A. El-Sayed, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 26, 620–626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Y. Yip, D. A. Vermaas, K. Nijmeijer and M. Elimelech, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 4925–4936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, C. Duan, Y. Chen and A. Majumdar, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2010, 9, 1215 CrossRef CAS .
J. Veerman, M. Saakes, S. J. Metz and G. J. Harmsen, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 327, 136–144 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Vermaas, J. Veerman, M. Saakes and K. Nijmeijer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1434–1445 CAS .
W. Guo, L. Cao, J. Xia, F. Q. Nie, W. Ma, J. Xue, Y. Song, D. Zhu, Y. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1339–1344 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yeh, C. Chang and R. Yang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 2705–2714 RSC .
W. Sparreboom, A. van den Berg and J. C. Eijkel, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 713–720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Feng, M. Graf, K. Liu, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Dumcenco, M. Heiranian, V. Nandigana, N. R. Aluru, A. Kis and A. Radenovic, Nature, 2016, 7615, 197–200 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Długołęcki, A. Gambier, K. Nijmeijer and M. Wessling, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 6888–6894 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, X. Sui, P. Li, G. Xie, X. Y. Kong, K. Xiao, L. Gao, L. Wen and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8905–8914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. H. van der Heyden, D. Bonthuis, D. Stein, C. Meyer and C. Dekker, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1022–1025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Daiguji, P. Yang, A. Szeri and A. Majumdar, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2315–2321 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chang and R. Yang, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2009, 9, 225–241 CrossRef .
F. H. van der Heyden, D. Stein and C. Dekker, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 116104 CrossRef PubMed .
F. H. van der Heyden, D. Bonthuis, D. Stein, C. Meyer and C. Dekker, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2232–2237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Szymczyk, H. Zhu and B. Balannec, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 1214–1220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Howorka and Z. Siwy, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2360–2384 RSC .
S. German, L. Luo, H. S. White and T. Mega, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 703–711 CAS .
G. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Han, S. Zhou and X. Guan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2867–2877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deamer, M. Akeson and D. Branton, Nat. Biotechnol., 2016, 34, 518–524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Yusko, B. R. Bruhn, O. M. Eggenberger, J. Houghtaling, R. C. Rollings, N. C. Walsh, S. Nandivada, M. Pindrus, A. R. Hall, D. Sept, J. Li, D. S. Kalonia and M. Mayer, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 360–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiu, I. Vlassiouk, Y. Chen and Z. S. Siwy, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 4917–4925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Plesa, N. van Loo, P. Ketterer, H. Dietz and C. Dekker, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 732–737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Plesa, S. W. Kowalczyk, R. Zinsmeester, A. Y. Grosberg, Y. Rabin and C. Dekker, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 658–663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Lan, D. A. Holden, B. Zhang and H. S. White, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 3840–3847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Feng, K. Liu, R. D. Bulushev, S. Khlybov, D. Dumcenco, A. Kis and A. Radenovic, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 1070–1076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiu, I. Vlassiouk, P. Hinkle, M. E. Toimil-Molares, A. J. Levine and Z. S. Siwy, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3509–3517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, Y. Lin, R. C. Qian, Y. L. Ying, W. Si, J. Sha, Y. Chen and Y. T. Long, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5230–5233 RSC .
S. German, T. Hurd, H. S. White and T. Mega, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7186–7194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. N. Miles, A. P. Ivanov, K. A. Wilson, F. Dogan, D. Japrung and J. B. Edel, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 15–28 RSC .
M. Belkin, S. H. Chao, M. Jonsson, C. Dekker and A. Aksimentiev, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10598–10611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cao, Y. L. Ying, Z. L. Hu, D. F. Liao, H. Tian and Y. T. Long, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 713–718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Li, Y. B. Zheng and R. N. Zare, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 993–997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Howorka, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 619–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Squires, J. S. Hersey, M. W. Grinstaff and A. Meller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16304–16307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Venkatesan and R. Bashir, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 615–624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Yohe, J. D. Freedman, E. J. Falde, Y. L. Colson and M. W. Grinstaff, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3628–3637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Branton, D. Deamer, A. Marziali, H. Bayley, S. A. Benner, T. Butler, M. Di Ventra, S. Garaj, A. Hibbs, X. Huang, S. B. Jovanovich, P. S. Krstic, S. Lindsay, X. S. Ling, C. H. Mastrangelo, A. Meller, J. S. Oliver, Y. V. Pershin, M. Ramsey, R. Riehn, G. V. Soni, V. Tabard-Cossa, M. Wanunu, M. Wiggin and J. A. Schloss, Nat. Biotechnol., 2008, 26, 1146–1153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Freedman, L. M. Otto, A. P. Ivanov, A. Barik, S. H. Oh and J. B. Edel, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Jagerszki, R. E. Gyurcsanyi, L. Hofler and E. Pretsch, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1609–1612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Boussouar, Q. J. Chen, X. Chen, Y. L. Zhang, F. Zhang, D. M. Tian, H. S. White and H. B. Li, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 1110–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ali, V. Bayer, B. Schiedt, R. Neumann and W. Ensinger, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 485711 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Duan, M. A. Alibakhshi, D. K. Kim, C. M. Brown, C. S. Craik and A. Majumdar, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7476–7484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Siwy, L. Trofin, P. Kohli, L. A. Baker, C. Trautmann and C. R. Martin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5000–5001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ali, B. Yameen, R. Neumann, W. Ensinger, W. Knoll and O. Azzaroni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16351–16357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lin, B. Zhang, Q. Yang, F. Yan, X. Hua and B. Su, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 7821–7827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Park, J. Kamcev, L. M. Robeson, M. Elimelech and B. D. Freeman, Science, 2017, 356, eaab0530 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Qiu, H. Yu, M. Karunakaran, N. Pradeep, S. Nunes and K. V. Peinemann, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 768–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. N. Savariar, K. Krishnamoorthy and S. Thayumanavan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 112–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. B. Kalman, I. Vlassiouk and Z. S. Siwy, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 293–297 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ramirez, J. Cervera, M. Ali, W. Ensinger and S. Mafe, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 698–705 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cervera, P. Ramirez, S. Mafe and P. Stroeve, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 4504–4511 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cervera, P. Ramirez, V. Gomez, S. Nasir, M. Ali, W. Ensinger, P. Stroeve and S. Mafe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 253701 CrossRef .
M. Ali, S. Mafe, P. Ramirez, R. Neumann and W. Ensinger, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11993–11997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393–398 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fujiwara and T. Imura, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5705–5712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cuartero, G. A. Crespo and E. Bakker, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 8084–8089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Werber, C. O. Osuji and M. Elimelech, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16018 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, P. Ramiah Rajasekaran and C. R. Martin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4637–4643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, G. A. Crespo, G. Mistlberger and E. Bakker, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 202–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, X. Y. Kong, G. Xie, P. Li, K. Xiao, L. P. Wen and L. Jiang, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600689 Search PubMed .
M. G. Afshar, G. A. Crespo and E. Bakker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8110–8113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Qi, Q. He, Q. Zhang, Q. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876–1902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2008, 320, 1170–1171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Dong and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2283–2307 RSC .
Z. Y. Jiang, H. L. Liu, S. A. Ahmed, S. Hanif, S. B. Ren, J. J. Xu, H. Y. Chen, X. H. Xia and K. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4767–4771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Madrid, M. A. Buckingham, J. M. Stone, A. T. Rogers, W. J. Gee, A. D. Burrows, P. R. Raithby, V. Celorrio, D. J. Fermin and F. Marken, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2792–2794 RSC .
H. B. Wu and X. W. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaap9252 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Meng, B. Gui, D. Yuan, M. Zeller and C. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600480 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Zhen Zhang
	Zhen Zhang is currently a PhD candidate in Physical Chemistry at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS) under the supervision of Prof. Lei Jiang. He received his BS degree in Materials Chemistry (2013) from the Department of Chemistry, Jilin University, and then he joined Prof. Lei Jiang's group in 2013. His current scientific interests are focused on bioinspired asymmetric smart nanochannel membranes for intelligent ion transport control and energy conversion.

Liping Wen
	Liping Wen is a Professor at the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, CAS (TIPC). He received his PhD in Physical Chemistry from the Institute of Chemistry, CAS under the supervision of Prof. Lei Jiang. Since 2010, he has worked as an Associate Professor in ICCAS. In 2011, he went to the Tokyo Institute of Technology as a visiting scholar. In 2015, he moved to the TIPC and was appointed as a Professor in 2016. He was the winner of the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in China. Prof. Wen's current scientific interests are mainly focused on the construction and application of bioinspired asymmetric smart nanochannel/nanopore membranes in the environmental, health, energy, and desalination fields.

Lei Jiang
	Lei Jiang is a Professor at the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (TIPCCAS) and Beihang University. He is also an academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Academy of Sciences for the Developing World, and National Academy of Engineering, USA. He received his Bachelor's and Master's degrees from Jilin University, and PhD from the University of Tokyo. He worked as a post-doctoral fellow with Prof. Akira Fujishima and then as a senior researcher in the Kanagawa Academy of Sciences and Technology with Prof. Kazuhito Hashimoto. In 1999, he joined the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences as part of the Hundred Talents Program. In 2015, he and his group moved to TIPCCAS. His scientific interests focus on bio-inspired, smart, multi-scale interfacial materials with superwettability.

 	Fig. 1  Biological asymmetric ion channels play crucial roles in many physiological processes including energy conversion (a) and perception sensing (b). In (a) the electric eel can generate considerable bio-electricity from the salt content in fluids utilizing the highly selective and rectified ion channels; in (b) the olfaction perception is implemented by the opening of the specific ion channels in response to external odorant molecules. Inspired by the delicate design of channel structures and functionality, the artificial counterpart–BSANM system can be constructed using 0D, 1D and 2D bulk material based fabrication methodologies, which shows wide application prospects in many fields such as energy conversion (c) and biochemical sensing (d), etc. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society, and ref. 20, copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  A generic strategy to construct the BSANM system. One core principle is to build the asymmetry factors into either the membrane system (built-in factors) or the membrane environment (external factors). The built-in factors generally refer to the nanopore geometry, surface charge distribution, chemical composition, and wettability, while the external factors mainly refer to the gradients of any kind such as pH, electrolyte concentration, pressure, and electrolyte condition.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  SEM images of the supported silica colloidal crystal membrane: (a) top view (scale bar: 4 μm), (b) cross-section view (scale bar: 4 μm); reproduced with permission from ref. 43, copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. (c) The gap (light red area) formed by three adjacent NPs in the same plane has an area equivalent to a circle (blue dotted line) with a radius r; reproduced with permission from ref. 45, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of the processes that occur upon heating and cooling of PNIPAM brushes modified silica colloidal crystal membrane; reproduced with permission from ref. 47, copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the 0D nanomaterial based templating method to prepare well-defined porous membranes. (b and c) SEM images of a well-ordered PC template; reproduced with permission from ref. 55, copyright 2008 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d and e) SEM images of as-prepared PPy porous membrane in oxidation state (d) and neutral state (e); reproduced with permission from ref. 57, copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the experimental setup for the BFs method. (b) Mechanism of the BFs method; reproduced with permission from ref. 59, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c–e) SEM images of the top side, bottom side, and cross-section side of the as-prepared ordered microporous membranes templated by the BFs method. (f) SEM of the membrane after transfer onto a metal mesh; reproduced with permission from ref. 65, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Flow diagram for the preparation of the BCP membrane with straight hydrophilic PEO channels. (b) The exfoliated BCP membrane is free-standing and can float on the water (scale bar: 2 cm). (c) AFM images of the surface and cross-section of the as-prepared BCP membrane; reproduced with permission from ref. 82, copyright 2011, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the procedure for preparing mesoporous carbon frameworks. (b) After thermopolymerization, a free-standing organic-organic composite membrane is obtained. (c and d) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images of the FDU15 and c-FDU15 calcined at 350 °C (c) and 1400 °C (d), respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91, Copyright 2005 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a and b) Cross-section SEM images of two asymmetric membranes formed by an unmodified PES (a) and a tertiary amine-modified PES (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 107; copyright 2008, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic of the formation mechanism of the asymmetric hierarchically porous membrane through a SNIPS process. The as-prepared membrane shows a layer of well-ordered cylindrical mesoscopic pores perpendicular to the membrane surface atop a disordered sponge-like bottom layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113; copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of the high degree of vertical alignment of the as-grown multiwalled CNTs on quartz wafer (scale bar: 50 μm). (b and c) Schematic of the polymer filled free-standing CNTs membrane and the corresponding SEM images of the cross-section (scale bar: 2.5 μm). (d) The pore size distribution data of the aligned CNT membrane obtained from a low temperature (∼77 K) N2 desorption experiments. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124; copyright 2004 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a and b) TEM images of the TNW10 and TNW20 nanowires prepared by hydrothermal synthesis. They can both form porous membranes of randomly oriented nanowires, which can provide numerous gaps as transport channels. (c) Optical images of the as-prepared nanowire membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129; copyright 2009, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The ordered TiO2 nanopore array prepared by an anodizing method. (b) The intrinsically conducting polymer PPy is selectively deposited in the space between pore walls. (c) By dissolving the TiO2 matrix with HF, a self-organized PPy nanopore membrane is obtained. (d–f) The corresponding SEM images of the as-grown TiO2 nanotube array (d), TiO2/PPy composite (e) and the as-prepared porous PPy membrane (f). Reproduced with permission from ref. 131; copyright 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the MoS2 nanopore membrane suspended on a SiNx window to detect DNA translocation. (b and c) SEM images of the SiNx window covered by a free-standing MoS2 membrane (b) (marked by a black circle), followed by nanopore formation by TEM drilling (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 143; copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (d and e) TEM image of the nanopores drilled by TEM in 2D graphene (d) and BN membranes (e). Reproduced with permission from ref. 144, copyright 2010, Nature Publishing Group, and ref. 145, copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) One Mg-based octahedral sheet sandwiched between two tetrahedral silicate sheets constitute the basic unit of vermiculite crystal, and the interlayer cations are responsible for keeping the interlayer spacing. (b) SEM image of the chemically exfoliated vermiculite nanosheets (scale bar: 50 μm). (c) AFM image of an individual vermiculite nanosheet and the corresponding height profile (d). (e) Optical image of the free-standing paper-like membrane based on a 2D vermiculite nanosheet (scale bar: 1 cm). (f) Cross-section SEM image of the vermiculite paper-like membrane (scale bar: 1 μm). (g) XRD of the unexfoliated vermiculite and the reconstructed vermiculite membranes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157; copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 15  Ion track etching technique based on commercial polymer membranes. (a) The geometry of the as-prepared nanochannel is governed by the relationship between vbulk and vtrack. (b) Schematic of the symmetrical and asymmetrical etching equipment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164; copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) By varying the etching conditions, nanochannels with different geometries can be obtained (scale bar 200 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 171; copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 16  SEM images of the mono-, bi-, tri-, or tetra-branched alumina nanochannel membranes prepared by a modified two-step anodization process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179; copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  An electrochemical diode based on a gel/SiO2 interface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 192; copyright 2010, John Wiley and Sons.	 


Electroless deposition	PC, PET, BCP	S	Au, Cu, Ni, Pd, Ag	
205

Ion sputtering	PET	A	Au, Pt	
206 and 207

Atomic layer deposition	SiN, BN, AAO, BCP, PET	A/S	Oxide, metal	
208–211

Vapor-deposition	PC, PET	A/S	Au, SiO2, polymer	
212 and 213

Plasma grafting	BCP, PET	A	Polymer brushes	
214–216

Chemical grafting	Graphene, PET, PI	A/S	Spiropyran, C4CE, photoalkali, APMIB	
217–219

Electrostatic self-assembly	Si, PET, PI	A/S	Polyelectrolyte	
220–223

Amphiphilic self-assembly	PET	A/S	Amphipols	
224

Living polymerization	AAO, PET, PI	A/S	Polymer brushes	
225–228

Electrical polymerization	AAO, PET	A/S	Conducting polymer	
229–231

Self-polymerization	All substrates	S	Dopamine	
232

Doping	Hydrogel, PES	S	Polyelectrolyte, molecular sieve	
233


 	Fig. 18  (a) A nanofluidic diode prepared by sequentially assembling hydroxyl-modified and amino-modified NP arrays into a silicon micropore wafer. (b) The NP array formed by evaporation induced self-assembly shows a close packed structure with numerous adjacent pore gaps as nanochannels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235; copyright 2010, AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of the fabrication procedure for the block copolymer membrane based heterogeneous membrane. (b) Optical image of the free-standing heterogeneous membrane after complete exfoliation. (c) In-plane profiles of PEO114-b-PMA(rChal)57, PEO272-b-PMA(Chal)97 and the corresponding asymmetric hybrid membranes. (d–f) 2D GISAXS images of PEO114-b-PMA(rChal)57, PEO272-b-PMA(Chal)97 and the corresponding asymmetric hybrid membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 259; copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) The schematic of the heterogeneous nanowire membrane composed of an oleophilic CaWO4 nanowire membrane and a hydrophilic MnO2 nanowire membrane with equal diameters. (b) Optical images of the front (left, CaWO4) and back side (right, MnO2) of the heterogeneous membrane. (c) Cross-section SEM image of the heterogeneous membrane shows an obvious membrane boundary. (d) The as-prepared membrane is intrinsically hydrophilic and demonstrates good permeation in different regions. (e) The stacked nanowire gaps can act as ion transport channels with pore size distribution centered at 17 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 236; copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Flow chart for the fabrication of the SiO2/Al2O3 heterogeneous membrane, composed of a negatively charged SiO2 layer and a positively charged Al2O3 layer. (b and c) SEM images of the top Al2O3 layer (b) and bottom Si layer (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 237; copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic of the track-etched nanochannel membrane based heterogeneous membrane exhibiting either an asymmetric geometry or an asymmetric surface charge distribution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 238; copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) A polyelectrolyte gel based nanofluidic diode membrane. Two pieces of agarose gel doped with two oppositely charged polyelectrolytes are combined together. Reproduced with permission from ref. 233; copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of the soft matter diode membrane composed of EGaIn, PEI polyelectrolyte gel and PAA polyelectrolyte gel. (c) An image of the ionic diode membrane constructed entirely from soft matter. Reproduced with permission from ref. 264; copyright 2012, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 24  Ion/molecule selectivity. (a) A potassium selective nanofluidic device based on a G4 DNA modified single conical PET nanochannel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 269; copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (b) The first fluorine selective nanochannel membrane based on an APBA functionalized single conical PI nanochannel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 277; copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) A smarter multi-ion selective asymmetric membrane that can respond to K+ and H+ simultaneously. Reproduced with permission from ref. 281; copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. (d) The first small molecule (H2O2) responsive asymmetric membrane based on a horseradish peroxidase (HRP) enzyme modified conical PET nanochannel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 284; copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (e) Chiral recognition of L-histidine based on a beta-cyclodextrin-modified single PI nanochannel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 286; copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (f) A D-glucose selective asymmetric membrane based on a GOx enzyme modified single conical PET nanochannel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 290; copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematic of the graphene asymmetric oxide–aptamer–nanochannel membrane that can selectively bond ATP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 291; copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) An asymmetric nanochannel containing mAb F26G3 at the tip side, which can selectively bond rDPGA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 and 268; copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  Ionic gating. (a) A pH gated single conical shaped nanochannel obtained by modifying a proton-driven DNA molecular motor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 314; copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. (b) Thermally nanoactuated macromolecular ionic gates based on a PNIPAM modified single conical nanochannel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 301; copyright 2009, John Wiley and Sons. (c) A chemically driven conical nanochannel based on photoinduced pH change in the environmental solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 304; copyright 2012, John Wiley and Sons. (d) Engineered ionic gates based on sodium and potassium activated nanochannels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 309; copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) Field effect modulated nanofluidic diode membrane based on an Al2O3/W heterogeneous membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 263; copyright 2013, AIP Publishing. (f) A poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide-co-acrylic acid) brush modified single conical PET nanochannel with temperature and pH dual-responsive ionic gating properties. Reproduced with permission from ref. 318; copyright 2010, John Wiley and Sons. (g) Light and pH dual-driven ionic gate based on an 8-hydroxypyrene-1,3,6-trisulfonate functionalized single conical PET nanochannel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171; copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. (h) pH- and voltage-gated control of ionic conduction based on a DNA-modified conical PET nanochannel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 321; copyright 2014, American Chemical Society and ref. 268, copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  Ionic rectification. (a) Asymmetric geometry induced ionic rectification. Reproduced with permission from ref. 335; copyright 2006, John Wiley and Sons. (b) Asymmetric surface charge distribution induced ionic rectification. Reproduced with permission from ref. 336; copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. (c) Surface charge and geometry synergistically induced ionic rectification. Reproduced with permission from ref. 337; copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. (d) Wettability induced ionic rectification. Reproduced with permission from ref. 216; copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (e) Molecule blockage induced ionic rectification. Reproduced with permission from ref. 338; copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (f) pH gradient induced ionic rectification. Reproduced with permission from ref. 330; copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (g) Concentration gradient induced ionic rectification. Reproduced with permission from ref. 342; copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (h) Pressure gradient induced ionic rectification. Reproduced with permission from ref. 343; copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 
2H2O → 4H+ + O2 + 4e−

 	Fig. 27  (a) Schematic of the photovoltaic conversion system based on an asymmetric conical nanochannel membrane. The photosystem II protein complexes are added into the anode chamber to convert the light into electric energy. (b) There is no photocurrent generation in the absence of the PSII. Reproduced with permission from ref. 353; copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons.	 
O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH− or 2H+ + 2e− → H2

 	Fig. 28  (a) Energy harvesting under a concentration gradient using a homogeneous membrane with a single conical PET nanochannel. (b) The maximum power output from an individual nanochannel can reach 26 pW. Reproduced with permission from ref. 361; copyright 2010, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Energy harvesting under concentration gradient using a heterogeneous membrane composed of a porous PET membrane and a porous BCP membrane. (d) When mixing 0.5 M and 0.01 M NaCl, the maximum output power density can achieve 0.35 W m−2, which is quite considerable for the heterogeneous membrane with such a low pore density. Reproduced with permission from ref. 13; copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Schematic of the heterogeneous membrane composed of the SiN nanopore membrane and a nanofiber mesh, which can be used for DNA molecule detection. Representative current traces for 1000 bp dsDNA passing through a bare nanopore (NP) and a 7:3 PCL:PGC-C18 NP–NFM coated pore (b), and the histograms of the event duration displaying unimodal and bimodal distribution, respectively (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 391; copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Schematic of the streptavidin sensor based on a conical PET nanochannel. The nanochannel is modified by a bimolecular recognition ligand PAH through electrostatic immobilization. (b) I–V curves of the system before and after ligand modification. (c) I–V curves of the system after selective binding streptavidin. Reproduced with permission from ref. 401; copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
