Fuel  cells based on electrolyte and non-electrolyte separators  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01202A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01202A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2986-2992Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsFuel cells based on electrolyte and non-electrolyte separators

        
          
            Bin 
            Zhu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Rizwan 
            Raza
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Haiying 
            Qin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qinghua 
            Liu
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Liangdong 
            Fan
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Energy Technology, Royal Institute of Technology, KTH Stockholm, SE- 10044, Sweden. E-mail: binzhu@kth.se;   Tel: +004687907403
bDepartment of Physics, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology Lahore, 54000, Pakistan
Received 
      21st February 2011
    , Accepted 18th May 2011First published on 29th June 2011AbstractIn the long-history of fuel cell R&D, the electrolyte is an essential part in a three-component configuration because it separates the anode and cathode to realize the fuel cell’s functions. We report here non-electrolyte separator fuel cells (NEFCs) compared with electrolyte based fuel cells (EBFCs). The NEFC consists of single- or dual-components based on mixed ionic and semi-conductors but with no electrolyte separator. A maximum power density of 680 mW cm−2 has been achieved by the NEFC at 550 °C. The NEFCs exhibit performances comparable to, and in some cases even better than, those of conventional EBFCs. The design of NEFCs, new material functionalities and device performances may contribute to new fuel cell R&D.

Broader context
A fuel cell is a highly efficient and environmentally-friendly energy conversion technology. Since its invention in 1839, all fuel cells have been built by using three components – an electrolyte, an anode and a cathode with the electrolyte as the core part. The liberation from the constraints of electrolytes in a single component device has created a revolutionary way to construct a more efficient, ultra-low cost and simple fuel cell, signifying a new era for fuel cell R&D and science. This single component is based on advanced fuel cell technology using functional nanocomposite materials (NANOCOFC). The two-phase nanocomposite method employs nano-particles to develop a multifunctional component by integrating electronic (n/p) and ionic conductors. In this way, one single-component can realize all functions and reactions on site more efficiently than the conventional way. This new device works without an electrolyte, and all processes occur at particle surfaces/interfaces in the single component. This streamlined design can thus realize more cost effective fuel cells and accelerate the arrival of a hydrogen economy. This new field has also brought about other new opportunities for highly efficient electrolysers and solar cell devices, indicating new multidisciplinary research with high impacts on energy and environmental science.

1. Introduction
Since the birth of fuel cells (FCs) in 1839,1 FCs have been constructed with three functional components: anode, electrolyte and cathode. The electrolyte plays a key role with multiple functions, such as being an electron conduction insulator; gas tight to prevent gas permeability and an ion transport membrane to realize FC functions. However, the electrolyte-based FCs require a complex device structure and components that are stable and compatible. In addition, the interfaces between the electrolyte and the electrodes (anode and cathode) produce major polarization losses.2–4 Thus the electrolyte acts as a bottleneck that limits the improvement of fuel cell performance and thus delays its commercialization.
Much effort has been put into developing new alternative electrolyte materials for solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) in order to decrease operating temperatures and costs.5–7 We have contributed to the development of SOFCs operated at low temperatures (300–600 °C)7–9 using nanocomposites for advanced fuel cell technology (NANOCOFC) http://www.nanocofc.com. Many new functional nanocomposites have been developed with successful applications for low temperature solid oxide fuel cells (LTSOFCs).9–11
In our latest development, we have made a breakthrough by constructing a functioning one-component FC.12 By removing the constraints of the electrolyte and its associated complex multi-layered structures, we have realized non-electrolyte-separator fuel cells (NEFCs). We constructed the NEFC by using just a single-component without an electrolyte separator. Actually, a dual design with two components NEFC is also possible. Fig. 1 illustrates schematics for conventional electrolyte-based fuel cells (EBFCs) with three components (anode, electrolyte and cathode) and NEFCs using one single component and dual components, respectively.
 Fig. 1  Schematics of a conventional FC configuration (a) and configurations for the single-component NEFC device (b) and the dual-component NEFC device (c). 
In this study, we performed comparison studies between EBFCs and NEFCs. The EBFCs demand three component materials for the anode (mixed electronic and ionic conducting material), the electrolyte (pure ionic conductor) and the cathode (mixed electronic and ionic conducting material). While in NEFCs, there is only one or two components which are mixtures of two types of materials: one is a semi-conductor and the other is an ionic conductor. Various semiconducting (n and p types) metal oxides were investigated, mainly based on transition elements, e.g. Ni, Cu, Zn, Fe, Co etc. The ionic conducting materials were ionic doped ceria, such as Gd3+ or Sm3+ doped ceria (GDC or SDC) and their nanocomposites.
2. Experimental
2.1 Materials preparation and characterization
The LiNiCuZn oxides were prepared by a slurry method. Li2CO3, NiCO3·3Ni(OH)2·4H2O, Cu2(OH)2CO3 and ZnCO3 were mixed in a weight ratio of 1:1.4:0.4:0.8. The mixture was dissolved into an appropriate amount of 1 M HNO3 solution with stirring and heating at 150 °C for 1 h to form a sol type slurry. The slurry was then sintered at 800 °C for 2 h to obtain LiNiCuZn oxide material. The resulting material was further treated by adding 5–10 wt% Fe(NO3)3·6H2O solution and heating to dryness. Finally, it was sintered at 700 °C for 1 h before use.
The ionic conducting materials of (Na/K)2CO3–Ce0.8Sm0.2O2−δ (NKSDC) were prepared by a one-step co-precipitation method.11 Stoichiometric amounts of Ce(NO3)3·6H2O and Sm(NO3)3·6H2O were mixed and dissolved in deionized water to form a 0.5 M solution with stirring at 80 °C. Potassium–sodium carbonate (molar ratio 1:1) mixture solution (0.5 M) was used as a precipitation agent and added into the above Sm–Ce-nitrate solution with a molar ratio, (Ce3+ + Sm3+):CO32− = 1:2 under vigorous stirring. Extra amounts (moles) of carbonate were used on purpose to retain some carbonate in the final product, in the same way as in the preparation of NSDC.11 The precipitate was washed three times in deionized water, then filtrated and dried in an oven at 120 °C overnight. Finally, the dried material precursor was sintered in air at 800 °C for 2 h. The resulting material was ground completely to obtain homogenous NKSDC nanocomposite powders before investigation.
Ba0.6Sr0.4Co0.85Fe0.15O (BSCF)–SDC composite was prepared by a wet route chemical method. Stoichiometric amounts of BaCO3, Sr(NO3)2, Co(NO3)2·6H2O and Fe(NO3)2·9H2O were mixed and dissolved into 200 ml deionized water to form a solution. Then 10% oxalic acid (weight percent) was added and stirred for 10 min. A mixture of Ce(NO3)3·6H2O and Sm(NO3)3·6H2O in molar ratio of Ce:Sm = 4:1 was added into the above solution and stirred at 80 °C continuously until dryness. The dried powders were sintered at 800 °C for 4 h in air. The amount of Sm0.2Ce0.8O2-x (SDC) in the composites was 40 wt% in the final BSCF–SDC products.
The crystal structure of materials was identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD) with a Rigaku-D/Max-3A diffractometer using Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). The microstructure was investigated by a Zeiss Ultra 55 field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) combined with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX).
2.2 Fuel cell fabrications and measurements
The synthesized LiNiCuZn(Fe)-oxide and NKSDC were mixed with a weight ratio of 1:1.5. The mixture was further heated at 700 °C for 1 h and then pressed uniaxially with a 100–300 MPa load to form a tablet type of the single-component NEFC, on which both end surfaces were pasted with silver paste as a current collector.
For the dual-component NEFCs, the above LiNiCuZn(Fe)-oxide/NKSDC mixture was the anode and the BSCF–SDC as the cathode were directly pressed layer by layer at 100–300 MPa into tablets in a dual-component configuration. Silver pastes were also used on both sides as current collectors.
For comparison to the single-component NEFC, EBFCs were constructed using the same materials as the NEFC for both anode and cathode materials, and used NKSDC as the electrolyte. EBFCs were constructed by using NKSDC as the electrolyte, LiNiCuZn(Fe)-oxide/NKSDC as the anode and BSCF–SDC as the cathode. The anode, electrolyte and cathode were placed into the die layer by layer and pressed to form a tablet with a diameter of 1.3 cm. Both ends of the EBFC tablet were pasted with silver paste as a current collector. All the above fabricated tablet FCs had sizes of 1.3 cm in diameter and 0.08–0.10 cm in thickness.
Fuel cell characterizations were performed using a computerized instrument (L43 Inc, Tianjin, China) over the temperature range of 400–550 °C. Hydrogen and air were supplied in the range of 80–110 ml min−1 under 1 atm pressure on each side of the cells.
2.3 AC Impedance spectra and conductivity measurements
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed using a VERASTA2273 (Princeton Applied Research, USA) analyzer under the open circuit voltage from 0.01 mHz to 1 MHz with an amplitude of 10 mV at various temperatures, both in air or H2 atmosphere. The curve fitting was made using ZSimpWin software (Princeton Applied Research, USA).
3. Results and discussions
3.1 XRD analysis

Fig. 2 displays the XRD results for the prepared materials. The result for the ionic conductor of NKSDC is shown in Fig. 2a, it contains only a cubic fluorite structure of CeO2 (JCPDS 34-0394), which suggests that Sm3+ is doped into CeO2. Sodium and potassium carbonates were not detected by XRD. The carbonate could form an amorphous background in the same situation, as in the SDC–Na2CO3 case.13 The final NKSDC is considered as a kind of the SDC–carbonate composite. Fig. 2b shows the XRD pattern of LiNiCuZn(Fe)–NKSDC. It can be seen from Fig. 2b that there is a mixture of NKSDC and LiNiCuZn(Fe) oxides. The latter can be further identified from a detailed XRD analysis as a mixture of LiFeO2, Ni0.95Cu0.05O and ZnO.
 Fig. 2  (a) The XRD pattern for NKSDC, (b) the XRD pattern for LiNiCuZn(Fe) oxide–NKSDC, (c) the XRD pattern for SDC–BSCF. 

Fig. 2c shows the XRD pattern for BSCF–SDC. It is a mixture of SDC, BaO and CoO. Fe and Sr may be doped into CoO or the BaO phase without relevant diffraction patterns because the calculated lattice parameters of CoO and BaO in the BSCF–SDC are smaller than their standard values for CoO (JCPDS: 70-2855, cubic, cell = 4.22 Å) and BaO (JCPDS: 74-1228, cubic, cell = 5.496 Å). Thus the BSCF–SDC is suggested as a composite of SDC and metal oxides of CoO–BaO doped by Fe and Sr, respectively. In this case, the synthesizing temperature of 800 °C is not high enough to make a final perovskite structure for BSCF, as previously reported.14,15
3.2 SEM results
We further investigated the microstructure of the single-component materials. Fig. 3a shows a SEM picture of NKSDC. It can be seen that the material is on a nanometre scale with a homogeneous particle size distribution. The average particle size is about 28 nm. EDX analysis confirmed the existence of Na, K, C, Sm, Ce and O elements. Fig. 3b is a cross sectional view of the LiNiCuZn(Fe)–NKSDC single-component device. It shows also a homogenous distribution. There are no clear interfaces between NKSDC and LiNiCuZn(Fe). EDX analyses for selected areas of the sample show them all having similar element compositions. This may suggest that both NKSDC and LiNiCuZn(Fe) form percolating phases with a homogenous distribution among different materials.
 Fig. 3  (a) A SEM image of the NKSDC (b) a SEM image of the cross-section of the LiNiCuZn (Fe) oxide–SDC single component device. 
3.3 Electrochemical impedance analysis

Fig. 4 shows EIS obtained for single component device from both air and hydrogen (H2) atmospheres, respectively, at 550 °C. These impedance spectra have been modeled with an equivalent circuit shown in Fig. 4. The dotted curve indicates the experimental results and the bold line represents the simulated results. From the equivalent circuit, L (inductance) is the effect of the stainless tube from the testing device. There exist different conductance mechanisms, including electron, oxygen ion, and proton in the single-component NEFC. In the O2 atmosphere R1 denotes ohmic resistance, mainly caused by oxygen ions and electrons; in this case, the ohmic resistance contains both electron and ion contributions; R2Q and R3Q denote charge transfer and mass transfer, respectively. In the H2 atmosphere, R1 denotes ohmic resistance for protons, oxygen ions and electrons due to introducing protons from H2; R2Q and R3Q denote charge transfer and mass transfer, respectively. From the EIS result (Fig. 4), it may be concluded that: i) proton conductance mixed with electron conductance (in H2) is faster than oxygen ion conductance mixed with electron conductance (in air) in terms of ohmic resistance results; ii) the polarization loss from the cathode condition (air) is also larger than that from the anode (H2), in other words, H2 oxidation is more easily catalyzed than O2 reduction. The small intercepts of the semicircle portion at the real axis and the lower resistance in H2 than in air indicates functional anode reactions are fast kinetic processes. This implies that our materials have a high catalytic activity toward the hydrogen oxidation reaction.
 Fig. 4  Electrochemical impedance spectra obtained for the LiNiCuZn(Fe) oxide–NKSDC single component from both H2 and air atmospheres at 550 °C. 
3.4 Fuel cell results

Fig. 5 shows the I–V and I–P characteristics of single-component NEFC in comparison to EBFC. Fig. 6 shows the performances of the dual-component NEFC in comparison to the EBFC. It can be seen from Fig. 5 and 6 that the open circuit voltages (OCVs) of NEFCs reach above 1.0 V, the same as those of EBFCs. The dual-component NEFC displayed slightly lower but comparable performances compared with the EBFCs, and a power output near 600 mW cm−2 has been achieved at 550 °C. The single-component NEFC showed even better performance than that of the EBFCs. A maximum power density of 680 mW cm−2 is obtained for the single-component NEFC.
 Fig. 5  
I–V and I–P characteristics of the single component NEFC using the LiNiCuZn(Fe)–NKSDC (A) and conventional EBFC (a) operated at 550 °C. 
 Fig. 6  
I–V and I–P characteristics of the dual component NEFCs using the LiNiCuZn(Fe)–NKSDC as the anode and BSCF–SDC as the cathode and conventional electrolyte-based FCs, The operating temperature is 550 °C. 

Fig. 7 displays further performances for the single-component NEFC operated at different temperatures. As the temperature increases from 430 to 550 °C, the maximum power output is greatly enhanced from about 300 to 680 mW cm−2.
 Fig. 7  
I–V and I–P characteristics for the NEFC using the LiNiCuZn(Fe)–NKSDC single-component, obtained at various temperatures. 
It is well known that in EBFCs, reactions are realized through the following processes:
For the H+ conducting electrolyte case, at anode: H2 → 2H+ + 2e−(1) at cathode: ½O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O(2)
For the O2− conducting electrolyte case, at anode: H2 + O2− → H2O + 2e−(3) at cathode: ½O2 + 2 e− → O2−(4)
In both cases, the overall reaction is: H2 + ½O2 → H2O(5)
In the NEFC case, the reactions may be described as below: at H2 contacting side: H2 → 2H+ + 2e−(6) at air (O2) side: ½O2 + 2e− → O2−(7) overall reactions: H2 + ½O2 → 2H+ + O2−(8a) 2H+ + O2− → H2O(8b)
Combining eqn (8a) and (8b), we get: H2 + ½O2 → H2O(9)
The final overall reaction is the same as for the EBFC, implying that the NEFC realizes the same functions as the EBFC. However, eqns (6)–(8) indicate the differences between EBFC and NEFC from the following aspects:

i) in the NEFC case, H2 and O2 can be catalyzed to form H+ and O2− at both sides contacting with H2 and air (O2), respectively, see eqns (6) and (7). This is because of a) the bi-catalyst function of single- or dual-component(s) toward H2 and O2 to produce H+ and O2− simultaneously; b) co-ionic conduction of H+ and O2− for ceria–carbonate composite electrolytes.16–18 While in EBFCs, only one process of H+ and O2−, either formed at the anode or cathode side, as seen from the above eqns (1) and (4), which is determined by either a proton or oxygen ion conducting electrolyte that conducts sole H+ or O2−, respectively.

ii) Electron transfer and electricity generation in the NEFC can be completed directly between the H+ and O2− ions without ion transportation through the electrolyte separator. While the H+ or O2− transport through the electrolyte separator is critical for EBFCs in order to react with O2 (for the H+ electrolyte case) or H2 (for the O2− case) to complete the FC reactions for power generation;

iii) eqn (9) is actually realized by two steps (eqns (8a) and (8b)) involving H+ and O2− formation and reaction, then the NEFC can directly convert the chemical energy of H2 and O2 (via H+ and O2−) to electricity without the bulk-electrolyte process.12 However, it is impossible to generate the electricity without ion transportation via an electrolyte-separator in EBFCs, as discussed above.
Since the ceria–carbonate electrolytes possess H+ and O2− conduction,9,11,16,17 the NKSDC used in a single component can conduct both H+ and O2− through interfaces or surfaces of particles. In addition, proton conduction has also been observed in some metal oxides, typically nickel oxide and zinc oxide.19–22
This suggests that H+ conduction exists in the single component device and supports the above proposed reactions/mechanisms. Indeed, in our recent durability test for the single component device under discharging, water has been observed at the air contacting side.
The interfacial and surface conduction may strongly assist the NEFC reaction mechanisms. The use of surface migration of ions in fuel cells was proposed by van Gool23 several decades ago and thus it is possible to use a porous electrolyte to improve fuel cell performance by making use of the surface migration of H+ and O2−.
3.5 The physics of the device working principle and relevant fundamental issues
A critical concern or fundamental issue is electronic short circuiting and current pathway. How can the NEFC without the electrolyte separator realize a charge separation and avoid electronic short circuiting problems? Our observation is that NEFCs show similarities to dye solar cells, where a mixture of semiconductors and ion conductors are also used.24 The charge and phase separations for the electronic and ionic conductions/phases without short circuiting problems have already been realized in solar cells based on a p–n junction.25 The key here is that the single-component or dual components used for the NEFCs possess both n and p type semi-conductivities.
It is known that NiO normally has a p-type conductivity that can be enhanced by doping, e.g. using Li+ doped NiO.26,27 On the other hand, ZnO is a structurally stable and good n-type semiconductor whose electronic conductivity can easily be enhanced by many orders of magnitude by employing very low doping levels (up to 3 at.%) of Ni.28,29 Thus a p–n junction may be formed within the LiNiCuZn(Fe) materials to keep an effective charge separation, just like the solar cell principle. Fig. 8 displays a schematic of the device working principles. As observed by SEM in the above Fig. 3b, NKSDC and LiNiCuZn(Fe) form percolating paths among different phases. It can thus guarantee both ionic (H+ and O2−) and electronic (n and p) conduction in a continuous network throughout the component to support current passing ways and continuous outputs; the electrons and holes do not pass through the component(s) but move to the corresponding current collectors (silver) because of the p–n function and its device principle, the same as in the solar cell.
 Fig. 8  The NEFC device’s new working principles beyond the fuel cell. 
From a microstructure aspect, there is a key difference between EBFCs and NEFCs. In EBFCs a dense electrolyte separator layer is a critical requirement to achieve the necessary separation between the anode and cathode to prevent gas permeability. But it is the general characteristic of NEFCs that needs a certain porous structure in order to realize FC reactions more effectively to achieve high performances. It can be seen from Fig. 3b that the single-component NEFC has a porous structure with a pore size at several tens to hundreds of nm. The porous electrolytes may have some advantages for fuel cells, as previously reported.30–36
But a critical issue may be raised on safety assuming that penetration or diffusion of H2 and O2 through the device may lead to an explosion. However, common knowledge tells us that H2 and O2 in mesoporous media do not result in combustion due to a quenching effect. The quenching distance for the H2–O2 combustion is 1 mm.37,38 This means that below 1 mm the H2 and O2 are actually not combusted. In our case, the fuel cell reaction occurred at nm–μm level, far below 1 mm. Therefore, the processes are safe. Indeed, after having carried out hundreds of tests we have never found any safety or combustion problems for the NEFC devices with the reported porous components.
Finally, the conversion efficiency on the NEFC is also considered. We carried out a comparison study between the EBFCs and NEFCs with regard to the energy conversion efficiency. We see some potential advantages by removing the electrolyte and two relevant interfaces of the EBFCs: anode/electrolyte and electrolyte/cathode. This may make the NEFCs conversion more efficient without the limitations imposed by the electrolyte and its associated two interfaces. Even better device performance has been achieved for the single component NEFC than that of the conventional EBFC. Fig. 5 may support this.

Fig. 9 shows calculations on the NEFC device efficiency by comparison with the EBFC with removal of the electrolyte. The calculations are based on the following considerations and conditions: i) anode and cathode activations and concentrations are assumed to be the same for the EBFC and NEFC, just removing the contribution of the electrolyte to the voltage/efficiency loss; ii) the same current efficiency (or fuel and oxidant utilization) and theoretical efficiency (or delta G/delta H) for EBFC and NEFC. The overall efficiency equals to voltage efficiency/current efficiency/theoretical efficiency. In this case, up to 18% higher overall efficiency can be gained in the NEFC compared to that of the EBFC as shown in Fig. 9. Further theoretical studies (mechanism, modelling, analysis for kinetics, diffusion, single cell, stack, CHP etc.) of the NEFC will be promising research areas that require more delicate contributions in ongoing research.
 Fig. 9  Calculation of efficiency for the NEFCs compared to the conventional electrolyte based FCs. 
4. Conclusions
In this paper we have reported NEFC devices using new functional materials based on both ionic and semi-conductors to realize fuel cell processes in an integrated and simple way. We have compared single- or dual-component NEFCs with EBFCs using an anode, an electrolyte and a cathode, including aspects of electrochemistry, device mechanisms/reactions and performance, as well as other relevant fundamental issues. It shows that, apart from demonstrating promising advantages concerning simplicity and cost, the NEFC may also be able to improve the energy conversion efficiency compared to the EBFC. According to the NEFC working principle as a reactor that can make a direct H+ and O2− reaction to realize electricity generation, we can expect to achieve even higher efficiencies.
The NEFC, a radical new development, indeed needs more basic studies, particularly regarding the detailed material functionalities and mechanisms, as well as scientific understanding, which may open up new research fields. The non-electrolyte or electrolyte-free concept may lower the current FC commercial barrier by taking away the electrolyte bottleneck and contribute to a breakthrough in FC commercialization. Our hope is that the NEFC technology will be part of the next generation of energy technologies so urgently needed for the future. It is believed that more detailed studies on materials and functionalities/mechanisms will soon open up this field, which can have a great potential leading to a new FC R&D strategy.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Swedish Innovation System (VINNOVA), Swedish Research Council (VR)/Swedish agency for international cooperation development (Sida) and the Division of Heat and Power Technology, KTH through KIC Innoenergy project.
Notes and references
W. R. Grove, Philos. Mag. Ser. 2, 1839, 314, 127 Search PubMed .
B. Steele and A. Heinzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 345 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. H. Steele, J. Mater. Sci., 2001, 36, 1053 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Wilson, W. Kobsiriphat, R. Mendoza, H. Y. Chen, J. M. Hiller, D. J. Miller, K. Thornton, P. W. Voorhees, S. B. Adler and S. A. Barnett, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 541 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hibino, A. Hashimoto, T. Inoue, J. Tokuno, S. Yoshida and M. Sano, Science, 2000, 288, 2031 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Andersson, S. I. Simak, N. V. Skorodumova, I. A. Abrikosov and B. Johansson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 3518 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhu, Int. J. Energy Res., 2009, 33, 1126 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhu, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 11, 1 Search PubMed .
B. Zhu, Int. J. Energy Res., 2006, 30, 895 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, X. Wang, S. Li, M. S. Toprak, B. Zhu and M. Muhammed, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1640 CrossRef CAS .
R. Raza, X. Wang, Y. Ma, X. Liu and B. Zhu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 2684 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhu, Y. Ma, X. Wang, R. Raza, H. Qin and L. Fan, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 225 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Ma, R. Raza, M. Muhammed and B. Zhu, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1617 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Shao and M. H. Sossina, Nature, 2004, 49, 170 CrossRef .
X. Sun, S. Li, J. Sun, X. Liu and B. Zhu, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2007, 2, 462 CAS .
B. Zhu, I. Albinsson, C. Andersson, K. Borsand, M. Nilsson and B. E. Mellander, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 495 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Z. Mao, Z. Liu and C. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2601 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Ma, S. Li, A.-H. Kashyout, B. Zhu and M. Muhammed, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 2754 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, L. Li and G. Li, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 712–717 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tao, Q. Wu, Z. Zhan and G. Meng, Solid State Ionics, 1999, 124, 53–59 CrossRef CAS .

          J.-C. Giron, Electrochemical device, United States Saint-gobain, Vitrage (Courbevoie, FR), 6277523,  2001 .
T. Norby, Solid State Ionics, 1990, 40/41, 857–862 CrossRef .
W. V. Gool, Philips Res. Rep., 1965, 20, 81 Search PubMed .
M. Grätzel and B. O'Regan, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef .
J. Katayama, K. Ito, M. Matsuoka and J. Tamaki, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2004, 34, 687 CrossRef CAS .
D. I. Michael, D. B. Buchholz, W. H. Alexander, P. H. C. Robert and J. M. Tobin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 8, 2783 Search PubMed .
H. P. Rooksgyi and M. W. Vernon, Br. J. Appl. Phys., 1966, 17, 1227 CrossRef .
S. K. Mandal, A. K. Das and T. K. Nath, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 144105 CrossRef .
Ü. Özgür., Ya. I. Alivov, C. Liu, A. Teke, M. A. Reshchikov, S. Doğan, V. Avrutin, S.-J. Cho and H. Morkoç, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 041301 CrossRef .
E. Perry Murray, T. Tsai and S. A. Barnett, Nature, 1999, 400, 649 CrossRef .

Fuel Cells: Modern Processes For The Electrochemical Production Of Energy, ed. G. Grueneberg, W. Vielstich, D. J. G. Ives, Wiley-Interscience, New York, USA,  1965, p. 374 Search PubMed .
Q. Liu, F. Zhao, X. Dong, C. Yang and F. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17262 CAS .
M. Kuhn and T. Napporn, Energies, 2010, 3, 57 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yano, A. Tomita, M. Sano and T. Hibino, Solid State Ionics, 2007, 177, 3351 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hibino, S. Wang, S. Kakimoto and M. Sano, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 317 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoon, H. Kim, B. Park, S. Nam, J. Han, T. Lim and S. Hong, J. Fuel Cell Sci. Technol., 2006, 3, 83 CrossRef CAS .
G. Veser, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2001, 56, 1265 CrossRef CAS .

          F. A. Williams, Combustion theory, Benjamin/Cummings, Menlo Park, CA,  1985 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
A fuel cell is a highly efficient and environmentally-friendly energy conversion technology. Since its invention in 1839, all fuel cells have been built by using three components – an electrolyte, an anode and a cathode with the electrolyte as the core part. The liberation from the constraints of electrolytes in a single component device has created a revolutionary way to construct a more efficient, ultra-low cost and simple fuel cell, signifying a new era for fuel cell R&D and science. This single component is based on advanced fuel cell technology using functional nanocomposite materials (NANOCOFC). The two-phase nanocomposite method employs nano-particles to develop a multifunctional component by integrating electronic (n/p) and ionic conductors. In this way, one single-component can realize all functions and reactions on site more efficiently than the conventional way. This new device works without an electrolyte, and all processes occur at particle surfaces/interfaces in the single component. This streamlined design can thus realize more cost effective fuel cells and accelerate the arrival of a hydrogen economy. This new field has also brought about other new opportunities for highly efficient electrolysers and solar cell devices, indicating new multidisciplinary research with high impacts on energy and environmental science.


 	Fig. 1  Schematics of a conventional FC configuration (a) and configurations for the single-component NEFC device (b) and the dual-component NEFC device (c).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The XRD pattern for NKSDC, (b) the XRD pattern for LiNiCuZn(Fe) oxide–NKSDC, (c) the XRD pattern for SDC–BSCF.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) A SEM image of the NKSDC (b) a SEM image of the cross-section of the LiNiCuZn (Fe) oxide–SDC single component device.	 

 	Fig. 4  Electrochemical impedance spectra obtained for the LiNiCuZn(Fe) oxide–NKSDC single component from both H2 and air atmospheres at 550 °C.	 

 	Fig. 5  
I–V and I–P characteristics of the single component NEFC using the LiNiCuZn(Fe)–NKSDC (A) and conventional EBFC (a) operated at 550 °C.	 

 	Fig. 6  
I–V and I–P characteristics of the dual component NEFCs using the LiNiCuZn(Fe)–NKSDC as the anode and BSCF–SDC as the cathode and conventional electrolyte-based FCs, The operating temperature is 550 °C.	 

 	Fig. 7  
I–V and I–P characteristics for the NEFC using the LiNiCuZn(Fe)–NKSDC single-component, obtained at various temperatures.	 
at anode: H2 → 2H+ + 2e−	(1)
at cathode: ½O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O	(2)
at anode: H2 + O2− → H2O + 2e−	(3)
at cathode: ½O2 + 2 e− → O2−	(4)
H2 + ½O2 → H2O	(5)
at H2 contacting side: H2 → 2H+ + 2e−	(6)
at air (O2) side: ½O2 + 2e− → O2−	(7)
overall reactions: H2 + ½O2 → 2H+ + O2−	(8a)
2H+ + O2− → H2O	(8b)
H2 + ½O2 → H2O	(9)

 	Fig. 8  The NEFC device’s new working principles beyond the fuel cell.	 

 	Fig. 9  Calculation of efficiency for the NEFCs compared to the conventional electrolyte based FCs.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
