Luminescent organometallic poly(aryleneethynylene)s: functional properties towards implications in molecular optoelectronics   - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B711478H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B711478H
(Perspective)
Dalton Trans., 2007, 4495-4510Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsLuminescent organometallic poly(aryleneethynylene)s: functional properties towards implications in molecular optoelectronics†

        
          
            Wai-Yeung 
            Wong
          
          
        
      
Department of Chemistry and Centre for Advanced Luminescence Materials, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong, P. R. China
Received 
      26th July 2007
    , Accepted 17th August 2007First published on 6th September 2007AbstractThis article highlights recent progress in the development of rigid-rod metallopolyyne polymers of late transition metals which can exhibit easily tunable luminescent and electronic properties. Considerable focus is placed on the design strategies towards the tuning capability of phosphorescence emission color and optical bandgap of this class of luminescent metallopolymers, and the evaluation of their suitability as emitters in light-emitting applications, optical power limiters for sensor protection and semiconductors in organometallic photovoltaic cells. An effective approach based on structural modification of the spacer group can be devised to achieve the full-color phosphorescence emission spanning almost the whole visible spectrum and to tune the material properties of these functional organometallic polymers. The major advances, ongoing challenges and future perspectives of this research frontier are also discussed.Wai-Yeung WongWai-Yeung Wong was born in Hong Kong. He obtained a B.Sc.(Hons.) degree in 1992 from the University of Hong Kong, and went on to complete his Ph.D. there in 1995 under the supervision of Prof. Wing-Tak Wong. After his postdoctoral stay at Texas A&M University in 1996 under the direction of Prof. F. Albert Cotton, he worked with Profs. The Lord Lewis and Paul R. Raithby at the University of Cambridge in 1997 as a Croucher Research Fellow. He joined the Hong Kong Baptist University as an Assistant Professor in 1998 and is currently a Professor of Chemistry. He has authored over 200 research/review papers and book chapters. His current research interests lie in the field of functional metallopolymers, luminescent metal-organic materials for optoelectronics and photonics, metal alkynyls, carbon-rich organometallics and X-ray crystallography. He is currently an Editorial Board member of the Journal of Inorganic and Organometallic Polymers and Materials and the Chairman of the Hong Kong Chemical Society.
1. Introduction
Inclusion of transition metal elements into macromolecular organic scaffolds allows the hybridization of the interesting physical characteristics of metal complexes such as electronic, optical and magnetic properties with the solubility and processability inherent to carbon-based polymers.1–5 Within the framework of synthetic metal-containing polymers, rigid-rod transition metal σ-acetylide polymers, or polymetallaynes in short, have spurred tremendous global interest at the forefront of many metallopolymer investigations.6
The development of synthetic methodologies towards transition metal acetylide oligoynes and polyynes of the form trans-[–M(L)2CC(R)CC–]n (L = auxiliary ligands, R = spacer unit) has shown much progress in the past few decades following the initial reports by Hagihara et al. in the 1970s on the synthesis of polymeric Pt and Pd acetylides,7 accompanied by the subsequent synthetic extension to polyynes of groups 8 and 10 based on bis(stannane)s as the diyne comonomer.8 The synthesis of linear polyynes supported by different metal groups has also developed rapidly through the work of Gladysz,9 Lapinte,10 Bruce,11 Che,12 Yam,13 Adams14 and others.15 These main-chain organometallic oligomeric and polymeric functional materials are famous for their unique properties such as electrical conductivities, luminescence, nonlinear optical properties, liquid crystallinity, chemosensing and photovoltaic effect.1–6 The prototype for much of this work is trans-[–Pt(PBu3)2CC(p-C6H4)CC–]n. To date, a large series of soluble Pt derivatives incorporating various conjugated carbocyclic and heteroaromatic ring systems have been prepared.1,6 The advances in chemical synthesis have resulted in a library of application-oriented conjugated polymers of this kind that can display diverse photophysics and materials properties.
With reference to the Jablonski energy level diagram in a simple photoluminescence (PL) system, there are two radiative decay processes upon the absorption of photons by a molecule from the ground S0 state, viz., fluorescence (S1
				→ S0) and phosphorescence (T1
				→ S0). The relative positions of the lowest singlet (S1) and triplet (T1) excited states strongly affect the intersystem crossing (ISC) rate into the triplet manifold. This provides a major nonradiative decay mechanism for organic systems, thereby reducing the PL efficiency in purely fluorescent molecules.16,17 It is thought that triplet excitations play a vital role in optical and electrical processes within conjugated organic polymers with direct implications for their technological applications in optoelectronics and photonics.18 While it is important to chemically tune the singlet–triplet energy gap, a vast body of Pt metallopolyynes have been extensively employed to explore the triplet excited states in conjugated polymers directly in which the presence of heavy metals can increase the spin–orbit coupling (SOC), thus enabling the spin-forbidden triplet emission to become partially allowed.19 This line of research can also provide a versatile avenue towards phosphorescence emission color tuning in these materials that would better meet the target of full-color flat-panel displays and low-cost lighting sources. In another context, researchers have paid growing attention to the exploitation of conjugated organic polymers in plastic solar cells.20 Generally, novel materials with lower bandgaps (Eg) need to be developed to improve the coverage of the solar spectrum and consequently improve the photovoltaic cell efficiency. So, much effort has been made to optimize the spectral response of polymer photovoltaic cells by extending the absorption to longer wavelengths. Typically, in the design of polymer solar cells, the HOMO and LUMO levels of the polymer are critical parameters, and the lowering of Eg for the polymer is predicted to result in enhanced performance. However, the photovoltaic application of metallopolyynes has been largely hampered by their wide bandgaps and most of the Pt polyynes compare unfavourably with those of some conjugated organic polymers comprising alternating electron donor (D) and acceptor (A) units (Eg <1 eV).21 Hence, new synthetic strategies for creating metallopolyynes of low Eg would be desirable. A concise consideration and a good compromise of the triplet photophysics and the associated bandgap in the polymer are essential in the design of highly efficient and wavelength-tunable luminescent and photovoltaically-active materials. While there are numerous reports regarding experimental and theoretical investigations on the energy levels of S1 and T1 states in metallopolyynes to date,19 there are no literature precedents to critically elucidate the trade-off problems for phosphorescence efficiency/optical bandgap and the optical nonlinearity/transparency. This perspective will review our efforts in addressing these issues and providing an overview of the functional properties and applications of metallopolyynes. These discussions are supplemented with new developments and highlights from the recent literature.
2. Design concepts
The synthetic structural modification to produce metal polyynes of variable Eg and T1 energy states can be achieved through variation of the types of metal groups and their auxiliary ligands, and the central spacer units.6,19 The nature of the excited states of the Pt polyynes can thus be manipulated easily by deliberate chemical synthesis.
In accordance with the energy gap law for the triplet excited states in Pt-containing conjugated polymers, the nonradiative decay rate (knr)P from the triplet state increases exponentially with decreasing triplet–singlet energy gap according to the expression (knr)P
				∝ exp(−CΔES–T), where ΔES–T is the energy gap for the T1–S0 transition and C is a term controlled by the molecular parameters and vibrational modes.22 There is always a trade-off between the bandgap and the rate of phosphorescence in such metallopolymeric systems. In other words, a high-bandgap polymer with a high T1 state will normally favour the observation of triplet emission whereas the low-gap congener will probably not be phosphorescent even at low temperatures. There is a strong dependence of the phosphorescence radiative decay rates (kr)P on the structural and temperature variations of such macromolecules. A comprehensive account of the effect of the central spacer group on the degree of π-conjugation as well as the spatial extent of the S1 and T1 states of these metal polyynes is clearly necessary. We will discuss here the trade-off optimization problem between the phosphorescence parameters (such as emission wavelength, quantum yield (ΦP), (kr)P and (knr)P) and optical gaps. The pros and cons on the use of conjugated versus non-conjugated spacers in these metal polyyne systems will be described. Exploration of these metallopolymers for a plethora of optoelectronic applications will be presented.
3. Synthetic modifications of platinum(II) metallopolyynes
Since the pioneering work on the prototype compound P1 spaced by the phenylene ring,7 there has been a large body of literature information in the scientific community on the syntheses, chemical attributes, spectroscopic and structural aspects, material properties as well as potential uses of organometallic polyyne polymers of the late transition metals (especially Pt).6 As summarized in Fig. 1, 2, 3, the spacers adopted can range widely from common organic carbocyclic rings (P1–P23, P74 and P75) to various heterocyclic moieties (P24–P50) and even the inorganic units such as some main group (P51–P73) or transition metal elements (P12, P22 and P23). These polymers show good air and moisture stability which permits handling of the materials in the solid state for extended periods of time. Despite the large body of work on phosphine-stabilized rigid-rod organometallic acetylide polymers of group 10 metals, relatively little was known about materials bearing trans-oriented nitrogen donor ligands probably due to the insolubility problem. However, the first example of a Pt(II) alkynyl polymer stabilized by 4-(1-butylpentyl)pyridine ligands P75 has been reported; the long alkyl chain acts as the solubilizing group.23
 Fig. 1  Chemical structures of platinum(II) polyyne polymers P1–P23.24–40 
 Fig. 2  Chemical structures of platinum(II) polyyne polymers P24–P50.41–56 
 Fig. 3  Chemical structures of platinum(II) polyyne polymers P51–P75.58–61 
4. Structure–property–function relationships
4.1 Control of optical bandgap versus phosphorescence efficiency

4.1.1 Effect of enhanced π-conjugation. 
With the phenylene spacer in P1, the delocalization of electrons along the polymer chain can be maintained by the π-conjugation between the orbitals of the metal and ligand. Doubling the number of CC units on each side of phenylene ring in P2 leads to a red shift in the phosphorescence wavelength with respect to P1 and P12.12 A similar shift of ∼0.12 eV also applies to P3 as we double the number of phenyl rings.26 Pt(II) acetylide polymers P4 and P5 show very different phosphorescence energies, depending on the number of acetylenic units.27 The substitution of the acetylenic linkage in P5 with a phenylene spacer reduces the extent of π-conjugation.
Synthetic derivatization to the oligothiophene system is equally appealing as a versatile step towards highly π-conjugated polymetallaynes. With increasing chain length of the thiophene segment, the Eg value of P24–P26 decreases and the emission features are shifted to lower energy because of an increased delocalization of π-electrons along the polymer chain.41 However, this reduction in Eg from P24 to P26 becomes less significant as the number of thienyl rings increases. The singlet peaks appear at 2.85, 2.44, 2.28 eV for P24–P26, respectively. Such singlet transitions involve mixed ligand–metal orbitals, dominated either by the intraligand HOMO–LUMO π–π* transition or charge-transfer type transition. At 18 K, the triplet bands are found at 2.05, 1.67 and 1.53 eV for P24–P26, respectively, lying at 0.75–0.80 eV below the S1 level (Fig. 4). The relative intensity of this triplet emission drops rapidly along the series P24 > P25 > P26. The energy of the triplet emission also experiences a red shift when more thiophene rings are added to the ligand, suggesting that the triplet excited state should be extended over three or more thiophene rings. Such shift of triplet emission energy observed in P24–P26 is consistent with the computational results on the evolution of the triplet excitation energy in purely organic oligothiophene systems.62,63
 Fig. 4  Spatial extent of the lowest excited states for P24–P26. 
The preparative routes to P28 with a 2,5-diethynylpyridine moiety and its stable quaternized counterpart P29 have been developed.44,45 Quaternization of the pyridyl nitrogen leads to a strong bathochromic shift in the UV-Vis absorption spectrum due to improved π-conjugation and an increase in the emission quantum yield. The dependence of ISC and the spatial extent of singlet and triplet excited states in P1, P24 and P28 as a function of π-electron delocalization in the spacer group (i.e.P24 > P1 > P28) was carefully examined. From their optical absorption and PL data, conjugation is increased but the ISC rate is reduced by the electron-rich thiophene ring relative to the phenylene unit, whereas the opposite trend was observed for the electron-deficient pyridine group (Fig. 5).45 Hence, the T1 state remains strongly localized and the Tn state is strongly delocalized, even more than the delocalized S1 state. A series of oligopyridine-linked Pt(II) polyynes P30–P33 can be compared to those for P28.46 For P30, the inclusion of a second pyridine unit shifts Eg to the red by 0.1 eV relative to P28, but to the blue by 0.3 eV relative to P31–P33. This agrees with the fact that P30 with the alkynyl groups at the 5,5′-positions is fully conjugated, whereas in P31–P33, the alkynyl units at the 6,6′- or 6,6″-positions can hinder conjugation between the pyridyl rings. There is no fluorescence but only the phosphorescence band at 10 K for the kinked polyynes P31 and P32. The reduced conjugation in P31 and P32 shifts the triplet peaks to the blue by 0.3 eV as compared to P30. Hence, polyynes P31 and P32 constitute a class of materials with high-energy T1 states with reduced (knr)P.
 Fig. 5  A wide spectrum of Eg values (in eV) for Pt polyynes with different spacer groups. 


4.1.2 Effect of fused rings. 
For Pt(II) polyynes containing naphthalene and anthracene condensed carbocyclic systems P6 and P7, the use of fused-ring spacers is a powerful strategy to produce low-bandgap conjugated polymers.24 These electron-rich rings create strong intramolecular interactions between the Pt units and conjugated organic groups along the polyynyl backbone. Eg decreases as the size of the aromatic spacer increases (Fig. 5), owing to the greater π-delocalization within the anthryl group as compared to the phenylene spacer but there is no evidence of observing any phosphorescence in thin films of P7.
The work has also been extended to the Pt polyynes with thienothiophene and dithienothiophene entities.64 The self-rigidification of these cores due to the fused ring system and the delocalized π-systems extending over the fused rings offer an attractive way to tune their functional properties. The Eg value is related more closely to the conjugation length through the oligothiophene system rather than whether the thiophene is fused or not.
The effect of aggregation or interchain interaction on the triplet state in Pt polyynes was addressed by comparing P1 with the sterically bulky pentiptycene-bridged congener P8. The interchain interaction is prevented by the pentiptycene unit in P8 and its photophysics is dominated by the intrachain triplet excitons.28


4.1.3 Effect of π-conjugation interruption. 
With reference to the energy gap law, it is advantageous to work on phosphorescent polymers with high-energy triplets to avoid competition with nonradiative decay. Various approaches have been successfully adopted to enhance the phosphorescence emission efficiency. The excited-state transitions can be tuned by localizing electron density in discrete regions of the molecule or by partially destroying ligand aromaticity. The sp3-carbon site of the diphenylfluorene group in P21 is an effective conjugation-interrupter to limit the conjugation length in metal polyynes, leading to materials with high Eg and high-energy T1 states with a unique strong phosphorescence band at 11 K.38 The hindered conjugation in P21 shifts the triplet band to the blue by 0.45 eV as compared to P3. The order of ISC efficiency is P21 > P3
						≈
						P1. The heavy-atom effect of Pt can increase the (kr)P value by 4 orders of magnitude with respect to the typical organic molecules and the presence of the diphenylfluorene unit can also speed up (kr)P with respect to P1.
Complementary to the (hetero)aromatic or carbon-rich spacer unit, recent work regarding the exploitation of some main group elements in the buildup of polymetallaynes has also proliferated. The degree of electronic conjugation roughly follows the order P5
						≥
						P24 > P1 > P28 > P51, indicating that acetylene and thiophene units are better electron-transmitters than the silyl unit. Although the sp3-silicon unit is generally not as good as the sp- or sp2-carbon structural motif in facilitating electronic conjugation, the inclusion of conjugation-interrupting silyl units is good for improving the phosphorescence properties of these conjugated compounds, with the energy of S1 state higher for P51 than the others. The reduced conjugation in P51 shifts the phosphorescence to the blue by 0.06 and 0.38 eV, respectively, as compared to P1 and P24. These results, in conjunction with the computational data, have facilitated and expedited the design of active phosphorescent polymers.57 We also note a very high efficiency of triplet emission for P52, with the S1–T1 crossover efficiency in the order of P52 > P12.30 The ratio of integrated intensities of phosphorescence to fluorescence is greater than unity for P52 but is less than unity for P12 (Fig. 6). Work was then extended to the metallopolyynes with the heavier group 14 germanium element of even lower ionization energy than silicon. Polyplatinaynes derived from oligo(fluorenyleneethynylenegermylene)s (P56, P57, P60, P61, P64 and P65) serve this purpose and can display very high (kr)P values.59 Inclusion of a conjugation-breaking sp3-Ge linker into the organic bridge can limit the effective conjugation length and trigger the triplet light emission by taking advantage of the heavy-atom effect of Ge atoms. The T1 energy does not vary much with the oligomer chain length in P53–P69, indicating that the T1 state is confined to a single repeat unit. Alternation of the R group would not affect this strong confinement. Insertion of a conjugation hindered GeR2 group into these polymers shifts the phosphorescence to the blue relative to P14. The measured ΦP values are relatively insensitive to the oligomer chain length but they notably change with the ER2 group (E = Si, Ge). The GeMe2 systems (ΦP
						∼43–45%) are about twice as phosphorescent as the GePh2 congeners (ΦP
						∼17–20%). However, substitution of GePh2 by the lighter SiPh2 reduces ΦP by almost half (ΦP
						∼10–13%). The (kr)P values at 20 K are (2.1–3.5) × 105 s−1 for P56, P60 and P64 and (1.3–1.7) × 105 s−1 for P57, P61 and P65. Relative to P14 ((kr)P
						∼4.4 × 104 s−1), insertion of the germylene bridge can significantly boost (kr)P by ∼10 times. In this way, the heavy-atom effect of the Pt and Ge atoms combined with conjugation interruption by the latter can greatly increase (kr)P values by ca. 5 orders of magnitude relative to common organic molecules.
 Fig. 6  The absorption and PL spectra of P12, P52 and P70–P73. The absorption spectra are the higher energy dotted lines measured at 290 K. PL spectra were taken at both 290 (dashed lines, in CH2Cl2) and 20 K (solid lines, as thin films). For P73, the PL spectrum (dash dotted line) as a thin film at 290 K is also included. 
We continue to develop novel systems to circumvent the problem of the triplet state being nonemissive at room temperature by using polymers with some non-π-conjugated group 16 chalcogen units P70–P73.61 These materials have an attractive combination of the physical, optical and mechanical properties of their constituents, and harvesting of organic triplet emissions can be accomplished under ambient conditions. They were found to have large Eg values and high-energy T1 states. Relative to P3 (λabs = 372 nm in CH2Cl2), it was shown that the non-π-conjugated chalcogen unit between the two phenyl rings hinders conjugation and causes a blue shift in the absorption wavelength (λabs = 343–361 nm for P70–P73). Incorporation of the group 16 conjugation-interruptors in the Pt polyynes results in (kr)P values of (5.4–8.1) × 104 s−1 which are more efficient relative to P14 by ∼1 order of magnitude. We readily observe a stronger phosphorescence over fluorescence in a solid film of P73. The emission maxima depend greatly on the nature of the chalcogenide ligand. With our long-term interest to render the detection of triplet emission at room temperature, this work certainly represents an important milestone for achieving this goal. Encouragingly, the use of main group 14 and 16 segments greatly boosts (kr)P and one could readily observe room-temperature phosphorescence for P52 and P70–P73 relative to P12 (Fig. 6). The results are significant in obtaining comparable orders of magnitude for (knr)P and (kr)P which are rarely the case for the more π-conjugated polymetallaynes.

Fig. 7 displays the energy level scheme for the lower-lying excitations for P52 and P70–P73. The measured S1–T1 gaps fall within ∼0.7 ± 0.l eV in each case.65 The one with the diphenylether linkage has the highest T1 state, which exceeds that of the sulfide analogue owing to the higher degree of conjugation for the more polarizable S over O atoms. Similar to the absorption features, hindered conjugation by using different group 16 element units shifts the phosphorescence to the blue as compared to P3 with the largest blue shift (ca. 0.48 eV) for P70. But, ΦP does not vary much with the type of main group units.
 Fig. 7  Electronic energy level diagram of Pt polyynes with group 14 and 16 main group elements based on absorption and PL data. Dashed lines represent the levels for P3. The S0 levels are arbitrarily shown to be of equal energy and all energy values are quoted in eV. 
By changing from a trans- to a cis-configured Pt(II) unit (i.e. from P16 to P74), the conjugation chain in P74 is disturbed (λabs = 364 nm for P74versus 391 nm for P16), resulting in a stronger triplet emission at room temperature (Fig. 8).39,40 However, the solubility of P74 notably decreases relative to P16, resulting in a lower molecular weight.
 Fig. 8  PL spectra for P16 and P74 in CH2Cl2 at 290 K. 


4.1.4 Effect of fluorene/carbazole ring functionalization. 
In recent years, fluorene derivatives and their oligomers, which constitute an important class of π-conjugated organic materials because of their excellent chemical, thermal and photochemical stabilities as well as the ease of structural tuning to adjust the electronic and morphological properties, have been extensively explored in various domains of optoelectronic and photonic applications.66 They contain a rigid planar biphenyl unit, ensuring a high degree of conjugation, and hence improving the luminescence efficiency of the materials as compared to the p-phenylene derivatives. A list of fluorene-based polyplatinaynes P13–P23 have been investigated and by changing the substituents at the C-9 position of fluorene ring, the optoelectronic properties of these metal-containing polymers can be chemically modified. These materials can display a variety of colors and Eg values in the solid state (Fig. 9).31–40 Hence, the energy of the S1 state varies significantly with the nature of the fluorene ring and is highest for P13, P14 and P16. The inductive influence of strongly electron-withdrawing moieties in P19 will lower the S1 state significantly.
 Fig. 9  Comparison of platinum(II) diethynylfluorene-based polyynes. 
Among the heterocyclic derivatives, the carbazole ring has emerged as a vital building block in the synthesis of many optoelectronic materials.66a,67 Synthetically, the carbazole unit can be substituted at the 3- and 6- positions to yield poly(3,6-carbazole) derivatives, as well as covalently linked to other molecular moieties. The nitrogen atom can also be easily substituted with a wide variety of functional groups to help polymer solubility and to tune the optical and physical properties (i.e. the HOMO level can be engineered by different substituted carbazole moieties). We have recently widened our scope to form a new series of platinum carbazole–acetylide polymers P41–P47 that would limit the effective conjugation length. It was shown that the S1 state extends over more than one repeat unit while the T1 state remains localized to less than one repeat unit. The Eg values measured for P41–P47 are high at 3.06–3.23 eV. The carbazole unit can trigger high-energy triplet states and enhance the ISC rate.33 We have also studied P15 and P42 with a more extended acetylenic chain in the spacer relative to P14 and P41.34,52 The molecular functional properties such as absorption and PL can be tuned by changing the length of the acetylenic chain between the metal and the spacer group. Upon increasing the CC chain length from one to two (i.e.P14versusP15 and P41versusP42), we note the following trends: (i) the energy of the S1 state reduces; (ii) the energy of triplet emission decreases rapidly; (iii) the S1–T1 energy gap remains constant at 0.7 ± 0.1 eV; (iv) in accordance with the energy gap law, the phosphorescence efficiency is reduced with decreasing T1 energy as a result of increasing nonradiative recombination sites. The dependence of Eg as a function of the acetylenic chain length in the fluorene-derived platinaynes was probed by both optical spectroscopy and computational calculations in which an inverse square law was established, analogous to those for linear oligomers of polyene, poly(paraphenylene)s and poly(paraphenylenevinylene)s.68


4.1.5 Effect of a donor–acceptor structural motif. 
A new family of Pt(II) polyynes functionalized with substituted 1,4-diethynylbenzene derivatives P9–P11 were synthesized and optically characterized by absorption and PL studies.29 It is interesting to see that the relative intensity of the triplet emission increases strongly with the electronegative fluorine content in such a system.
Relative to P13, the lowest energy absorption in P19, with two strong electron-accepting cyano groups, exhibits an exceptionally large red shift, signaling the importance of donor–acceptor (D–A) interaction in this class of polymetallaynes,37 as has been successfully exploited in the literature for the production of low-bandgap organic polymers.21 The Eg value of 1.58 eV for P19 represents the lowest bandgap reported among polyplatinaynes so far. We note that electron-withdrawing substituents at the periphery induce a greater electronic effect on narrowing Eg of these polymers than electron-donating groups. The presence of significant D–A interaction also results in a low Eg at 2.10 eV for a novel heterobimetallic polymer P20.32
Because of the mixed D–A features of the thiazole ring (generally regarded as a hybrid of the thiophene and pyridine groups) as compared to the thienyl analogue, a luminescent bithiazole-bridged polyyne P27 was also made showing a reduced Eg value at 2.35 eV.43 For P27, the absorption peaks show a notable spectral red shift as compared to P25, due to the electron-withdrawing property of the imine nitrogen atoms. No phosphorescence band was detected, however, for P27 even at low temperatures.
A series of Pt polyynes P34–P36 functionalized with quinoline, quinoxaline and benzothiadiazole units can provide a good platform to study the relationship between the S1 and T1 excited states and the electronegativity of the spacer groups.47 The absorption spectra of P34–P36 reveal substantial D–A interactions between the Pt center and the conjugated spacer. Both the fluorescence and phosphorescence as well as the absorption bands decrease in energy with increasing electronegativity of the ligands along the series from P34 to P36. That is, the more electron-withdrawing the spacer is, the smaller the Eg. The triplet excited state properties of a range of polyynes including P1 and P34–P36 were examined as a function of Eg by means of optical steady-state and time-resolved spectroscopy. The S1–T1 energy gap is, however, independent of the spacer with the T1 state of 0.7 ± 0.1 eV below the S1 state.48 With decreasing Eg, the lifetimes and intensities of phosphorescence are dramatically reduced and the (knr)P value increases exponentially with decreasing T1–S0 gap. The soluble blue polymer containing the thieno[3,4-b]pyrazine spacer P37 was similarly designed, which shows a very low bandgap of 1.77 eV, thanks to the push-pull interaction between the electron-donating metal-alkyne and the electron-withdrawing thieno[3,4-b]pyrazine unit.49
Two interesting Pt polyynes P38 and P39 consisting of both thienyl and pyridyl rings in the heterocycle are also known.50 The Eg for P38 and P39 are 2.67 and 2.55 eV, respectively, which can be compared to the gaps of 2.55 and 2.40 eV for P25 and P26, and the corresponding blue shifts of 0.12 and 0.15 eV are consistent with a reduction in the D–A interaction between the metal and ligand.
For the soluble silole-containing polyplatinayne P48, the Eg value is impressive at 2.10 eV, again due to the intramolecular D–A interaction between the electron-rich metal-ethynyl unit and the electron-poor silole ring,55 and it is significantly lowered by ca. 1.0 eV relative to P52 (ca. 3.10 eV).30 Polyyne P48 is luminescent with the singlet emission at 537 nm but no room temperature triplet emission was detected over the measured spectral window.
We recently prepared a novel 4,7-di-2′-thienyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-spaced Pt polyyne P40 with a strong visible absorption and low bandgap (Eg = 1.85 eV) due to the unique D–A features.51 This polymer is thermally and air stable and organic-soluble. Another series of low-bandgap polymers P49 and P50 with electron-deficient acridone units was also reported recently.56 Polymer P50 has Eg of 2.10 eV which is greatly lowered compared to that for P49 (2.60 eV). Tuning of Eg is accomplished by modification of the acridone ring based on cyano substitution. The strong intramolecular charge-transfer (ICT) in P50 confers upon this push-pull polymer a very low bandgap and this has opened a versatile avenue to narrow-gap metal-containing copolyynes.


4.1.6 Effect of a metal group. 
Without any literature precedent, we contend that group 12 heavy mercury atom, with its two-coordinate linear geometry and propensity to facilitate SOC, should be equally attractive for harvesting the energy of triplet excitons. However, low solubility and intractability of mercury-alkynyl compounds is often a key obstacle for purification and spectroscopic characterization of conjugated mercury(II) σ-acetylide polymers. A recent work on the first examples of a series of soluble well-defined high-molecular-weight d10 mercury(II) polyyne polymers with 9,9-dialkylfluorene spacers P76–P78 was described (Fig. 10a), which render ligand-based phosphorescence through efficient ISC by ligation to Hg(II) ion.69 They exhibit excellent film-forming properties and their good solubilities in solvents such as CH2Cl2 and CHCl3 make them readily solution-processable. The fact that only an intractable off-white solid P79 can be obtained suggests the crucial role of installing alkyl solubilizing groups to remedy the solubility issues in organometallic Hg(II) polyynes. Solid-state aggregation phenomenon was also found in the polymer thin films of these materials.69,70
 Fig. 10  (a) Structures of P76–P79 and (b) absorption and PL spectra of P76–P78. 
The absorption energies and Eg values are insensitive to the nature of R groups on the fluorene ring. At 11 K, strong triplet emissions arising from 3(ππ*) excited states of the parent organic chromophores appear at ∼570–590 nm for P76–P78. The S1–T1 crossover efficiency follows the order P78 > P77 > P76 (Fig. 10b). The S1–T1 gaps lie within the range of 0.73–0.79 eV, matching well with the S1–T1 separation of 0.7 ± 0.l eV for similar π-conjugated Pt(II) and Au(I) polyynes.12,19 While we observe a red-shift of absorption and emission bands in P76–P78 after adding the Hg(II) ion, there is only a weaker electronic interaction between the metal fragment and the π-conjugated organic groups as compared to their Pt(II) congeners, in line with the theoretical computations.71 The phosphorescence rate is P16 > P77.39 The role of metal center can be described as weak delocalization coupled with strong localization along the organometallic polymer chain. Both S1 and T1 excited states of the polymer are localized mainly on the conjugated ligand group.71


4.1.7 Effect of temperature. 
Temperature has a great impact on the phosphorescence intensity of a metallopolyyne. As the temperature is cooled from 290 K to 77 K or below, we detect virtually no fluorescence band but only the organic-based phosphorescence band at the lower-lying spectral regime in many cases, especially for those with high-energy T1 states. Interpretation of the emission assignment can be made from the observed temperature dependence of the PL data.19 In each case, when the temperature is lowered, the 3(ππ*) triplet emission band increases sharply in intensity, which is characterized by a well-resolved vibronic structure with most weight in the 0–0 vibrational peak. We consider the strong dependence of the triplet exciton to arise from the fact that it is a long-lived triplet excited state and as such is more sensitive to thermally activated nonradiative decay mechanisms.

4.2 Emission color tuning of phosphorescent metallopolyynes
It is an important issue to obtain a full-color emission spectrum for the phosphorescence of our polymetallaynes for practical uses. The results of optical investigations showed that the HOMO, LUMO and Eg of these polyplatinaynes can easily be modified or tuned by using various central aryl cores that include carbocyclic, heterocyclic and inorganic main group chromophores showing various extent of π-conjugation. In essence, we are able to tune the triplet emission wavelength of the polyyne from blue to red simply by changing the structure of the spacer (Fig. 11), although these emissions are only easily observed at low temperatures in a variety of cases. As a result, their emission bands in the solution or in the frozen state can cover the full UV-Vis spectrum from 462 to 832 nm. The large Stokes shifts of these triplet emissions from the dipole-allowed absorptions, together with their long emission lifetimes in the microsecond range are indicative of their triplet parentage, and they can thus be ascribed to the 3(ππ*) states of the metalated conjugated units. On the other hand, Eg can vary over a wide range of 1.58–3.70 eV in the polymetallaynes reported and accordingly, the T1 levels are tunable from 1.49 to 2.68 eV, essentially spanning the whole visible spectrum and even extending to the near-IR regime. Recent results also found that further conjugation interruption with the use of the CH2 unit in some Pt(II)-based metallaynes can shift the phosphorescent maximum even to the purple–blue region peaking at 410 nm.72 Our findings can thus provide a practical approach to design and tune the color emission of efficient and potentially useful triplet-light-emitting polymeric materials.
 Fig. 11  Phosphorescence spectra of polyplatinaynes exhibiting a full visible color spectrum. 
4.3 Functional properties and optoelectronic applications
Organometallic materials are of particular interest in applications that demand light emission, for example as the active materials in light-emitting diodes (LEDs), optical sensors and sensor protectors.39,73 This interest derives from the fact that incorporation of heavy metals into an organic conjugated framework can elicit significant influence on their electronic and optical properties. In light of this, the search for new metalloorganic functional materials suitable for optoelectronic applications continues to attract much current attention as they have the potential to act as new systems for electronically important materials in various domains. The use of conjugated organic polymers in LEDs and photovoltaic devices has attracted immense current interest due to their ability to be easily processed and fabricated into thin films, fibers and other forms.74 If such spin-processable materials can also provide optoelectronic functional roles, they would offer a very attractive route for the development of devices which have a necessarily large area (e.g. displays, photovoltaic cells, etc.). However, much less work has been focused on the utilization of metallopolyynes to date in these areas and studies along this direction thus form a critical part of the research framework. Metallopolyynes can indeed be used for a multitude of optoelectronic applications as illustrated below.

4.3.1 Light-emitting devices. 
The current worldwide interest in electroluminescence using conjugated polymers (e.g. poly(p-phenylenevinylene), PPV) is largely driven by the perceived potential for the low-cost fabrication of large-area LEDs through simple processing methods. In such devices, light emission arises from radiative decay of singlet excitons, created by electron-hole recombination within the polymer layer. Triplet excitons are also produced (either by direct recombination of the charge carriers, or indirectly, through intersystem crossing from the singlet to the triplet manifold) but are not utilized for harvesting the triplet energy. The characterization of both the singlet and triplet excitations is thus of prime importance for understanding the mechanisms of LEDs based on conjugated polymers and thereby improving their macroscopic emission characteristics. However, the ultimate efficiency of LEDs is largely controlled by the fraction of triplet states generated or harvested since spin statistics suggest a ratio of 3 : 1 for the generation of nonemissive triplet to emissive singlet excitons.75 Recent progress has shown that metal-containing complexes should, in principle, be superior to fluorescent substrates for small-molecule organic LED applications.75 One of the key developments in the modern organic LED technology is the discovery of the electrophosphorescence which lifts the upper limit of the internal quantum efficiency of the usual fluorescent dopant-based devices from 25% to nearly 100%. Since the triplet states constitute the majority of electrogenerated excited states, the successful use of the triplet manifold to produce light should undoubtedly increase the overall device efficiency. Transition metal-containing polyynes were widely employed as a research vehicle for studying the triplet excited states in conjugated polymers directly in which the heavy metals increase SOC, rendering the phosphorescence allowed.19 Thus, in contrast to hydrocarbon conjugated polymers, the triplet excited state is readily accessible to experimentation. The emitting properties of Pt polyynes have recently been successfully applied in the development of electroluminescent devices. Electrophosphorescence from the T1 state can be observed for a polymer LED in a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PPS/P35/Ca:Al (ITO = indium tin oxide, PEDOT = poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene), PSS = poly(styrenesulfonate)).18b The average singlet generation fraction of 57 ± 4% for P35 was determined, suggesting that a spin-dependent process, favoring singlet formation, predominates in the polymer film. The value is more than double the value expected from simple spin statistics and is above the lower limit for the singlet generation fraction of 35–50% measured for PPV derivatives. The results demonstrate that singlets are favored over triplets and recombination of holes and electrons is spin-independent.


4.3.2 Photovoltaic and solar cells. 
In recent years, the photoconducting properties of conjugated polymers have received increasing attention because of their potential to replace inorganic semiconductors in the development of photodetectors. Both polymers P28 and P29 are non-conductors in the undoped state but become semiconducting upon doping with iodine vapor (σ = 2.5 × 10−3 and 3.4 × 10−3 S cm−1 for P28 and P29, respectively). This is consistent with the enhanced π-electron delocalization in P29 upon quaternization of pyridine in P28.44b Preliminary studies on the surface photovoltage spectroscopy and photoelectric effect of some nanohybrid Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) films consisting of organometallic polyynes and diynes of Pt and Hg together with tungsto(molybdo)phosphoric heteropolyacids and octadecylamine have been reported recently.76 These metal acetylides allow a delocalized electron transfer in the π-conjugated bond system, leading to electrical conductivity in the LB film. Such an organic–organometallic–inorganic multifunctional assembly could give rise to new ultrathin materials for the realization of practical molecular devices.
We have studied the photocurrent action of some Pt(II) polyynes. It was shown that P24–P26 are good photoconductors in suitably fabricated configurations.41 The photocurrent spectra of the Au/P24/Al, ITO/P25/Al and ITO/P26/Al photocells show two peaks, one at the absorption onset [2.92 (P24), 2.64 (P25) and 2.43 eV (P26)] and the other at higher energies [3.81 (P24), 3.56 (P25) and 3.38 eV (P26)]. The second photocurrent peaks are probably due to absorption into the higher-lying absorption bands. Polymers P24–P26 show a short-circuit quantum efficiency of ∼0.04% at the first photocurrent peak, which is a common value for single-layer devices. We observe no great difference in the maximum photocurrent quantum efficiencies (PCQE) with variation of the thiophene content. The PCQE of the second peak is different among P24–P26 and is very sensitive to air.41 The photocells show open-circuit voltages at the first peak of 0.50, 0.75 and 0.47 V and fill-factors of 0.32, 0.35 and 0.30 for P24–P26, respectively. The longer lived triplet excitons can migrate to dissociation centers and can thus contribute to the photogeneration of charge carriers. The presence of air can increase the photocurrent in the P24-based cell by enhancing exciton dissociation in the polymer film but it is reduced after annealing under vacuum. Such an event can be recycled.77 While the low-bandgap polymer P37 is not phosphorescent in the visible wavelength region, it can still show an unusually high PCQE of up to 1% at 400 nm for single-layer photovoltaic cells in air. A photocell in a single-layer structure of ITO/P52/Al was also fabricated with 0.01% efficiency,30 a typical value for single-layer devices that is also comparable to that for the ITO/P1/Al cell.78 Similar to P1, the excited states are mostly strongly bound triplet excitons upon photoexcitation and these are confined to one monomer unit, while quantum efficiencies of ∼1–2% could be achieved for these cells with the addition of 7 wt.% of C60.79 The photoconductive properties of the fluorene-derived polymers P14, P18 and P19 were similarly studied by the single-layer photocells using ITO as the anode and Al as the cathode. These polymers showed moderate photoconductivity. A PCQE of ∼0.01% was estimated in each case, which does not change much with variation of the central fluorene ring.33,37 Likewise, P41 was also shown to be a photoconducting material in a single-layer architecture with a PCQE of ∼0.01%.33
With the increasing gas price and public concern over global climate change, people pay more attention to using solar cells to capture sunlight and power our life. For instance, solar panels can be used for power generation in residential solar home kits, outdoor solar lighting and commercial solar kits. Harvesting energy directly from sunlight using photovoltaic technology is thus increasingly recognized as a low-cost alternative for renewable energy sources to solve the energy crisis.80 However, making electricity from the most plentiful of these sources (i.e. the sun) can be expensive due to the high price of producing traditional silicon-based solar cells. Another viable route is to utilize cheap semiconducting polymers or other related conjugated organic materials to fabricate devices for the conversion of solar energy to electricity, but broad applications of polymer solar cells are currently limited by the low power conversion efficiency (PCE) as compared to that of inorganic semiconductors.74b–74e One important key to making efficient polymer solar cells is interpenetrating electron donating and accepting components at the nanometer scale, producing bulk heterojunction solar cells. So, electrons and holes can be separated from each other and then rapidly transported towards electrodes. The bulk heterojunction polymer solar cells are typically made by sandwiching a thin film of photoactive materials between two electrodes such as ITO and aluminium. The interpenetrated photoactive materials are made simply by dissolving polymer and another component (mostly electron-accepting fullerene derivatives) in the same solvent and then casting a blend. Because in the two conductors the highest occupied energy levels of the electrons are different, electrons will flow from the conductor with highest energy electrons to that with the lowest energy electrons (that is, from the aluminium to the ITO in this case) until they reach the same chemical potential. The charge that builds up in the two electrodes generates an electric field across the semiconductor. The polymer (i.e. electron donor) behaves as the photosensitive part which absorbs the sunlight and releases electrons to the second semiconductor (electron acceptor). The hole can then travel in the donor semiconductor to the negative electrode and the electron can travel in the accepting semiconductor to the positive electrode (Fig. 12). The resulting current and voltage can be used to do work or charge a battery. In order to get high efficiency in bulk-heterojunction cells, several key issues must be optimized: (1) light absorption efficiency within the solar spectrum; (2) exciton diffusion to a donor–acceptor interface; (3) photoinduced charge separation; and (4) carrier collection by the cell electrodes.
 Fig. 12  A model and a schematic energy diagram of the bulk heterojunction solar cell. 
To date, the best performing polymer for the fabrication of bulk heterojunctions is poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) but it only absorbs a part of the visible light, which limits the utility of sunlight.81 Therefore, efforts have been made to design better polymers to improve coverage of the solar spectrum and hence boost the cell efficiency by extending the absorption to longer wavelengths, increasing the absorption coefficients and optimizing the charge transport for forming efficient blends with fullerenes in bulk heterojunction cells. Theoretical calculations predict that lower-bandgap polymers are needed for high efficiency devices.82 Yet, none of these lower-bandgap organic polymers lead to stable, highly efficient systems and they all failed to reach the efficiency of P3HT-based cells.83
Although recent advances are largely based on conjugated organic polymers of various sorts, one possible approach which is not commonly explored involves putting metals into organic polymers. Although organometallic donor materials are commonly used in small-molecule solar cells in which the successful development of the Grätzel-type cell owes much to this work,84 soluble π-conjugated organometallic polyyne polymers have rarely been used in polymer solar cells until recently.51,77–79,85 We found that transition metals are playing a major role in this relatively new and expanding realm.
The real breakthrough came recently from our work in organometallic photovoltaic cells based on P40. The bulk heterojunction cells consisting of the strongly-absorbing metallopolyyne and [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) exhibit substantial photovoltaic responses, which outperform the majority of solar cells made from the state-of-the-art organic polymers and comparable to the best reported efficiencies of fully optimized devices based on P3HT.51 A lower bandgap contributes to a wide solar spectral coverage so that highly efficient polymer solar cells based on a bulk heterojunction of P40 and PCBM could be obtained which showed an average power-conversion efficiency of 4.1%, even without annealing or the use of spacer layers needed to achieve comparable efficiency with P3HT. The design rationale is that a conjugated polyyne is formed by a regular alternation of D- and A-like moieties, possibly separated by neutral parts. If the D and A regions are extended through the Pt center and alkynyl units, we have a case similar to the inorganic n-i-p-i superlattice quantum-well structures, causing a reduction of Eg.86 We observed that the extinction coefficient of the P40–PCBM blend is higher above 550 nm, leading to improved absorption of the incident solar radiation. The P40–PCBM blends give comparable hole and electron mobilities as revealed by the time-of-flight technique and space-charge limited current modelling. As a result, P40–PCBM blends exhibit balanced charge transport, as required for efficient solar cell performance, and the mobility data are comparable to those measured in P3HT–PCBM cells with optimal (1 : 1) blend ratio. The generally good solubility of Pt polyynes over their purely organic poly(heteroaryleneethynylene)s favours the utilization of the former polymers in the advance of polymer photovoltaic devices. The novel approach reported here can provide a useful avenue to PCE enhancement by extending the absorption to longer wavelengths and metal incorporation without the need or involvement of the triplet excitons in the high-efficiency energy conversion which was recently believed to be a good way of making efficient polymer solar cells. A recent report shows an external quantum efficiency of ∼9% in P24–PCBM bulk heterojunction cells, resulting in a power conversion efficiency of only 0.27%.85 It absorbed only in the blue–violet spectral region with a maximum efficiency at 400 nm, and consequently the efficiency was low due to low coverage of the solar spectrum, although the charge separation was shown to occur via the triplet state of the polymer. Therefore, the design of polymers for photovoltaic applications should consider not only lowering Eg but also increasing the absorption coefficient of the polymer. We anticipate that the performance of these devices can be improved by device optimization, as well as further chemical modifications of these metallized systems. More efficient than most other organic devices, it turned out to be a prototype for cheap, large-area cells.


4.3.3 Optical power limiters. 
With the rapid advance of laser technology in the photonic era, the damage of human eyes, optical sensors, and sensitive optical components caused by exposure to sudden intense laser pulses has stimulated us to search for effective optical power limiting (OPL) materials exhibiting high solubility, fast response speed, good linear transparency and high linear transmission.87 Optical power limiters are devices that strongly attenuate optical beams at high intensities while exhibiting higher transmittance at low intensities. Such devices are useful for the protection of human eyes and other delicate optical sensors from high power laser beams. To date, most eye protection devices have made use of materials that absorb light strongly at certain wavelengths. Whilst they protect the eye from strong laser light, they also block any light of the same wavelength the wearer may wish to see. Organic materials are of current interest for their fast response speed and large optical nonlinearities.87 At present, materials practically employed for optical power limitation are largely small molecules,87b,88 and metallophthalocyanines and metalloporphyrins are amongst the most effective optical limiters, in which the heavy-metal effect increases SOC and significantly magnifies the OPL response by enhancement of the ISC from S1 to T1 states, thereby giving greater access to the highly absorbing triplet-state manifold.89 However, their poor solubility and thus the technical difficulties in fabricating relevant devices have hindered their practical applications so far. The deep colors of fullerenes, phthalocyanines and porphyrins caused by their largely π-conjugated structures would also pose severe limitations on their use in practical devices because there are always inevitable absorption bands in the visible light region. However, the absorption of visible light by any OPL materials will disfavor the use of these compounds for the protection of human eyes, because the absorption will cause vision loss to some extent. In other words, these materials with good nonlinearity behavior usually only feature very poor optical transparencies. To our knowledge, related studies for metal-aryleneethynylene copolymers remain very sparse.
Recent investigations of the nonlinear transmittance of a series of solution-processable and tractable polymetallaynes of Pt and their mixed-metal analogues show that they are excellent OPL to nanosecond laser pulses at 532 nm with outstanding optical transparency/nonlinearity trade-offs.36,39,40 Our materials are highly transparent at 532 nm with absorption coefficients <2 mol dm−3 cm−1. The OPL behavior of selected Pt polyynes was investigated by the Z-scan technique. Polyynes P14, P17, P19, P25, P27 and P41 have OPL performance comparable or superior to those of the state-of-the-art reverse saturable absorption dyes such as fullerene C60 and metallophthalocyanine dyes (Fig. 13).36 The structural influence of the aryl linker groups on the OPL has been studied in detail.
 Fig. 13  The open aperture Z-scan results for selected polyplatinaynes at the same linear transmittance (To) of 82%, demonstrating the good OPL performance of these Pt polyynes. 
Examination of the photophysical and theoretical data suggests that these polyplatinaynes essentially follow two different OPL mechanisms (Fig. 14), which may be attributed to their structural and electronic variations.36 Both the absorption of triplet and ICT states can contribute to the enhancement of OPL properties for these materials. For polymers such as P14, P16 and P41, it is the triplet excited-state absorption that contributes to the OPL action. The stronger OPL response of P14 compared to P41 can be attributed to its higher triplet yield, consistent with the PL data. For P17, P19, P25 and P27, there is no obvious triplet emission in their respective PL spectrum at room temperature and their OPL effect was shown to be induced by the absorption of the ICT state.
 Fig. 14  Energy level diagrams for the five-leveled reverse saturable absorption (RSA) optical-limiting mechanisms for polyplatinaynes. 
Currently, a key practical issue is to consider how the critical optical nonlinearity/transparency trade-off problem can be tackled. In order to further improve the transparency window of P16, it is necessary to get rid of the dragged absorption tail behind 400 nm by reducing the π-conjugation. Copolymerization of a Hg unit into the Pt polyyne will endow better transparency to the material and offer almost no impairment to the OPL properties of the parent polymer (Fig. 15 and 16).39,40 Such a Pt–Hg copolymer will shorten the conjugation length of the chromophore, resulting in a higher energy T1 level accompanied by an increase in ΦP. This is also partly indicated by the lower fluorescence quantum yield (ΦF) of P23 compared with that of P16. Pertaining to the reverse saturable absorption (RSA) mechanism, we note that the contribution of increased ΦP of P23 to OPL can compensate for the loss in OPL due to interruption of conjugation by Hg and hence P23 still shows comparable OPL to that of P16. Yet, P23 has an improved optical transparency window (λabs = 386 nm for P23versus 399 nm for P16) (Fig. 15). Using an analogous conjugation-breaking strategy to increase ΦP by engineering the PtP2(CzCAr)2 geometry from trans to cis in the zig-zag polyyne P74,39,40 the conjugation chain is markedly disturbed (λabs = 364 nm for P74). Remarkably, P74 shows almost the same OPL as that of P16 (Fig. 16), indicating that the negative effect caused by conjugation-interruption to OPL can be retrieved effectively by the positive contribution of increased ΦP. This was supported by the much stronger triplet emission at 298 K (Fig. 8) and much lower ΦF for P74 compared with that of P16. Experimentally, the general order of OPL enhancement with respect to different transition metal ions is: Pt(II) >Au(I) >Hg(II) >Pd(II).39
 Fig. 15  Transparency region for selected platinum polyynes and some benchmark optical limiters (CuPc-tBu4 = Cu(II)-tetrakis(tert-butyl)phthalocyanine; Zn-TPP = Zn(II)-tetrakis(4-phenyl)porphyrin). 
 Fig. 16  Comparison of the OPL responses of P16, P23 and P74 with some benchmark optical limiters at To = 92%. 
The optical-limiting thresholds for the polymetallaynes range from 0.06 to 0.15 J cm−2 (excluding P22) whose features approach those necessary for a practical device (Table 1). These thresholds are close to those of the best InPc and PbPc dyes (To = 84%) currently in use. The performance of reverse saturable absorbers can be quantitatively compared using the figure of merit factor σex/σo, where σex and σo are the effective excited-state and ground-state absorption cross sections, respectively. RSA occurs when the cross section of the excited state is larger than that of the ground state. It is clear that our highly transparent metallopolymers are efficient optical limiters with sizable σex/σo values (e.g. 18.16–20.81 at 532 nm), which exceed by a factor of about 5 that of the benchmark C60. These figures are also remarkably higher than those of typical metal phthalocyanines.
Table 1 Comparison of the OPL performance of selected polymetallaynes with some state-of-the-art materials




OPL materials

F
th/J cm−2a

T
o (%)b

L/mmc

σ
ex/σod





a Optical-limiting threshold.
b Linear transmittance.
c Sample thickness.
d 
σ
ex/σo = ln Tsat/ln To, where σex is the effective excited-state absorption cross section, σo is the ground-state absorption cross section, Tsat is the transmittance at the saturation fluence.
e Not reported.
f (R)-tetrakis(2-methoxy-1,1′-binaphthalen-2′-oxy)copper phthalocyanine.





PbPc(β-CP)4
0.07
62

e


e



CuPc(pentyloxy)8
0.30
68
10
4.18


(R)-TMBO-CuPcf
0.3
76
1
5


CuPc-tBu4
0.10

e


e


e



CuPc-tBu4
0.13
86
1
6.20


C60
0.18
55
2

e



C60
0.19
84
1
3.89



P14

0.056
82
1
19.24



P16

0.07
92
1
19.07



P17

0.063
82
1
18.16



P19

0.13
82
1
6.37



P22

0.35
92
1
3.90



P23

0.08
92
1
18.32



P25

0.085
82
1
9.27



P27

0.12
82
1
7.60



P41

0.15
82
1
5.00



P74

0.08
92
1
18.62



P77

0.11
92
1
20.81




We also observe the OPL of these Pt polyynes to be enhanced after the insertion of heavy metal ions to their organic polyyne chains. In other words, two strategies can be adopted to enhance the OPL of poly(aryleneethynylene)s. One is to use the heavy metal effect to increase the triplet yield through SOC while the second is to create suitable D–π–A components in the conjugation path to facilitate the formation of ICT state.

5. Conclusions and prospects
All in all, organometallic poly(aryleneethynylene) derivatives based on some heavy metal salts have been recognized for their exciting photophysical properties, structural variability and potentially important industrial applications. They can show high quantum yields and be used to sample triplet emission from soluble and processable materials. By a judicious choice of the ligand structure, we can fine-tune the phosphorescence wavelength (or phosphorescence energy) effectively to fulfil the various light-emitting requirements but the pursuit of strongly phosphorescent Pt polyynes under ambient conditions still actively persists. They are very valuable not only from an academic standpoint but also have ample applications as sensor protectors and as converters for light/electricity signals. A significant portion of these organometallic materials can serve as an inspiration for others in the future construction of novel optoelectronic and photonic materials. Particularly, a new avenue to capture sunlight for power generation utilizing this class of soluble metallated conjugated polymers possessing high light absorptivity and low bandgap sheds light on this direction. Such work will certainly bring bulk heterojunction polymer photovoltaic devices closer to commercialization. However, lower bandgaps are generally attained at the expense of other important properties (e.g. excited-state lifetime and phosphorescence intensity). These conflicting issues must be balanced before further predictions can be made about the real practical applications. In practice, matching of materials to achieve an improved solar spectrum coverage is also complicated by the need for different processing conditions, different charge transport properties, and different morphologies of bulk heterojunctions for different polymer materials. A possible solution to this problem would be the invention of a class of polymers with tunable functional properties and work in this exciting area is worthy of further study. We believe that there is still much to be expected from this research frontier. Significant developments are also expected in the applications of metallopolyynes as chemical sensors or probes and possibly even as the active constituent of other nano-sized photonic devices. Indeed, it may be possible, and would be very gratifying, to see the promise of these organometallic polyynes leading to a variety of established technologies.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong SAR (Grant no. HKBU 2026/07P) and the Hong Kong Baptist University (FRG/06-07/II-63) is gratefully acknowledged. The author is also indebted to his postgraduate students, postdoctoral associates and collaborators whose names appear in the references. Technical support from Dr Cheuk-Lam Ho is also sincerely acknowledged.
References

          I. Manners, Synthetic Metal-Containing Polymers, Wiley, Weinheim, Germany,  2004 Search PubMed .

  (a) P. Nguyen, P. Gómez-Elipe and I. Manners, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1515 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. A. Williams, A. J. Boydston and C. W. Bielawski, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 729 RSC .
B. J. Holliday and T. M. Swager, Chem. Commun., 2005, 23 RSC .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2002, 23, 995 CrossRef CAS .
V. W.-W. Yam, J. Organomet. Chem., 2004, 689, 1393 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Long and C. K. Williams, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 2586 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Fujikura, K. Sonogashira and N. Hagihara, Chem. Lett., 1975, 1067 CAS ; 
  (b) K. Sonogashira, S. Takahashi and N. Hagihara, Macromolecules, 1977, 10, 879 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. Takahashi, M. Kariya, T. Yatake, K. Sonogashira and N. Hagihara, Macromolecules, 1978, 11, 1063 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. J. Davies, B. F. G. Johnson, M. S. Khan and J. Lewis, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1991, 187 RSC ; 
  (b) Z. Atherton, C. W. Faulkner, S. L. Ingham, A. K. Kakkar, M. S. Khan, J. Lewis, N. J. Long and P. R. Raithby, J. Organomet. Chem., 1993, 462, 265 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) B. F. G. Johnson, A. K. Kakkar, M. S. Khan and J. Lewis, J. Organomet. Chem., 1991, 409, C12 CrossRef CAS .
S. Szafert and J. A. Gladysz, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 4175 CrossRef CAS .
F. Paul and C. Lapinte, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 178–180, 427 .
P. J. Low and M. I. Bruce, Adv. Organomet. Chem., 2004, 50, 231 .

  (a) H. Y. Chao, W. Lu, Y. Li, M. C. W. Chan, C. M. Che, K. K. Cheung and N. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14696 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. Lu, H.-F. Xiang, N. Zhu and C.-M. Che, Organometallics, 2002, 21, 2343 CrossRef CAS .
V. W.-W. Yam, Chem. Commun., 2001, 789 RSC .

  (a) R. D. Adams, B. Qu, M. D. Smith and T. A. Albright, Organometallics, 2002, 21, 2970 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. D. Adams, B. Qu and M. D. Smith, Organometallics, 2002, 21, 3867 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) R. D. Adams, O. Kwon, B. Qu and M. D. Smith, Organometallics, 2001, 20, 5225 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) U. H. F. Bunz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1996, 35, 969 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. H. Chisholm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1991, 30, 673 CrossRef ; 
  (c) T. Ren, Organometallics, 2005, 24, 4854 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Brédas, J. Cornil and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 447 CAS .

  (a) 
Primary Photoexcitations in Conjugated Polymers: Molecular Exciton vs. Semiconductor Band Model, ed. N. S. Sariciftci, World Scientific, Singapore,  1997 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) 
Handbook of Conducting Polymers, ed. T. A. Skotheim, J. R. Reynolds and R. L. Elsenbaumer, Marcel Dekker, New York,  2nd edn, 1998 Search PubMed .

  (a) R. H. Friend, R. W. Gymer, A. B. Holmes, J. H. Burroughes, R. N. Marks, C. Taliani, D. D. C. Bradley, D. A. Dos Santos, J. L. Brédas, M. Lögdlund and W. R. Salaneck, Nature, 1999, 397, 121 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. S. Wilson, A. S. Dhoot, A. J. A. B. Seeley, M. S. Khan, A. Köhler and R. H. Friend, Nature, 2001, 413, 828 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. Köhler, J. S. Wilson and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 701 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) C. Adachi, M. A. Baldo, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 5048 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) X. Gong, J. C. Ostrowski, G. C. Bazan, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger, M. S. Liu and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 45 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Wong and C.-L. Ho, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2006, 250, 2627 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4533 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Roncali, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 173 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Karikomi, C. Kitamura, S. Tanaka and Y. Yamashita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 6791 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Wilson, N. Chawdhury, M. R. A. Al-Mandhary, M. Younus, M. S. Khan, P. R. Raithby, A. Köhler and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 9412 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Adams, S. L. James and P. R. Raithby, Chem. Commun., 1997, 2155 RSC .
M. S. Khan, M. R. A. Al-Mandhary, M. K. Al-Suti, F. R. Al-Battashi, S. Al-Saadi, B. Ahrens, J. K. Bjernemose, M. F. Mahon, P. R. Raithby, M. Younus, N. Chawdhury, A. Köhler, E. A. Marseglia, E. Tedesco, N. Feeder and S. J. Teat, Dalton Trans., 2004, 2377 RSC .

  (a) R. D. Markwell, I. S. Butler, A. K. Kakkar, M. S. Khan, Z. H. Al-Zakwani and J. Lewis, Organometallics, 1996, 15, 2331 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Lewis, M. S. Khan, B. F. G. Johnson, T. B. Marder, H. B. Fyfe, F. Wittmann, R. H. Friend and A. E. Dray, J. Organomet. Chem., 1992, 425, 165 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, S.-Y. Poon and W.-Y. Wong, J. Organomet. Chem., 2005, 690, 5036 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. G. Johnson, A. K. Kakkar, M. S. Khan, J. Lewis, A. E. Dray, R. H. Friend and F. Wittmann, J. Mater. Chem., 1991, 1, 485 RSC .
X. Zhao, T. Cardolaccia, R. T. Farley, K. A. Abboud and K. S. Schanze, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 2619 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Khan, M. R. A. Al-Mandhary, M. K. Al-Suti, T. C. Corcoran, Y. Al-Mahrooqi, J. P. Attfield, N. Feeder, W. I. F. David, K. Shankland, R. H. Friend, A. Köhler, E. A. Marseglia, E. Tedesco, C. C. Tang, P. R. Raithby, J. C. Collings, K. P. Roscoe, A. S. Batsanov, L. M. Stimson and T. B. Marder, New J. Chem., 2003, 27, 140 RSC .
W.-Y. Wong, C.-K. Wong, G.-L. Lu, A. W.-M. Lee, K.-W. Cheah and J.-X. Shi, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 983 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lewis, P. R. Raithby and W.-Y. Wong, J. Organomet. Chem., 1998, 556, 219 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Wong, W.-K. Wong and P. R. Raithby, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1998, 2761 RSC .
W.-Y. Wong, G.-L. Lu, K.-H. Choi and J.-X. Shi, Macromolecules, 2002, 25, 3506 CrossRef .
L. Liu, W.-Y. Wong, S.-Y. Poon, J.-X. Shi, K.-W. Cheah and Z. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1369 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Khan, M. R. A. Al-Mandhary, M. K. Al-Suti, B. Ahrens, M. F. Mahon, L. Male, P. R. Raithby, C. E. Boothby and A. Köhler, Dalton Trans., 2003, 74 RSC .
G.-J. Zhou, W.-Y. Wong, D. Cui and C. Ye, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5209 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Wong, K.-H. Choi, G.-L. Lu and J.-X. Shi, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2001, 22, 461 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Wong, L. Liu, S.-Y. Poon, K.-H. Choi, K.-W. Cheah and J.-X. Shi, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 4496 CrossRef CAS .
G.-J. Zhou, W.-Y. Wong, C. Ye and Z. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 963 CrossRef CAS .
G.-J. Zhou, W.-Y. Wong, Z. Lin and C. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6189 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chawdhury, A. Köhler, R. H. Friend, W.-Y. Wong, J. Lewis, M. Younus, P. R. Raithby, T. C. Corcoran, M. R. A. Al-Mandhary and M. S. Khan, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 110, 4963 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lewis, N. J. Long, P. R. Raithby, G. P. Shields, W.-Y. Wong and M. Younus, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1997, 4283 RSC .
W.-Y. Wong, S.-M. Chan, K.-H. Choi, K.-W. Cheah and W.-K. Chan, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2000, 21, 453 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. A. Bunten and A. K. Kakkar, J. Mater. Chem., 1995, 5, 2041 RSC ; 
  (b) K. A. Bunten and A. K. Kakkar, Macromolecules, 1996, 29, 2885 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chawdhury, A. Köhler, R. H. Friend, M. Younus, N. J. Long, P. R. Raithby and J. Lewis, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 722 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Khan, M. R. A. Al-Mandhary, M. K. Al-Suti, A. K. Hisahm, P. R. Raithby, B. Ahrens, M. F. Mahon, L. Male, E. A. Marseglia, E. Tedesco, R. H. Friend, A. Köhler, N. Feeder and S. J. Teat, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 2002, 1358 RSC .
M. S. Khan, M. K. Al-Suti, M. R. A. Al-Mandhary, B. Ahrens, J. K. Bjernemose, M. F. Mahon, L. Male, P. R. Raithby, R. H. Friend, A. Köhler and J. S. Wilson, Dalton Trans., 2003, 65 RSC .
J. S. Wilson, A. Köhler, R. H. Friend, M. K. Al-Suti, M. R. A. Al-Mandhary, M. S. Khan and P. R. Raithby, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 7627 CrossRef CAS .
M. Younus, A. Köhler, S. Cron, N. Chawdhury, M. R. A. Al-Mandhary, M. S. Khan, J. Lewis, N. J. Long, R. H. Friend and P. R. Raithby, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 3036 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Khan, M. R. A. Al-Mandhary, M. K. Al-Suti, N. Feeder, S. Nahar, A. Köhler, R. H. Friend, P. J. Wilson and P. R. Raithby, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 2002, 2441 RSC .
W.-Y. Wong, X.-Z. Wang, Z. He, A. B. Djurišić, C.-T. Yip, K.-Y. Cheung, H. Wang, C. S. K. Mak and W.-K. Chan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 521 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, W.-Y. Wong, S.-Y. Poon and K.-W. Cheah, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2005, 15, 555 CAS .
L. Liu, W.-Y. Wong, J.-X. Shi and K.-W. Cheah, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2006, 44, 5588 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, W.-Y. Wong, J.-X. Shi, K.-W. Cheah, T.-H. Lee and L. M. Leung, J. Organomet. Chem., 2006, 691, 4028 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Wong, C.-K. Wong, S.-Y. Poon, A. W.-M. Lee, T. Mo and X. Wei, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 376 CrossRef CAS .
W.-C. Chow, G.-J. Zhou and W.-Y. Wong, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2007, 208, 1129 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Wong, C.-K. Wong, G.-L. Lu, K.-W. Cheah, J.-X. Shi and Z. Lin, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 2002, 4587 RSC .
W.-Y. Wong, S.-Y. Poon, J.-X. Shi and K.-W. Cheah, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2006, 44, 4804 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Wong, S.-Y. Poon, A. W.-M. Lee, J.-X. Shi and K.-W. Cheah, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2420 RSC .
W.-Y. Wong, S.-Y. Poon, J.-X. Shi and K.-W. Cheah, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2007, 17, 189 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Poon, W.-Y. Wong, K.-W. Cheah and J.-X. Shi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 2550 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cornil, D. Beljonne, D. A. dos Santos, Z. Shuai and J. L. Brédas, Synth. Met., 1996, 78, 209 CrossRef CAS .
D. Beljonne, J. Cornil, J. L. Brédas and R. H. Friend, Synth. Met., 1996, 76, 61 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, B. Ahrens, N. Feeder, P. R. Raithby, S. J. Teat and M. S. Khan, Dalton Trans., 2005, 874 RSC .

  (a) D. Hertel, S. Setayesh, H. G. Nothofer, U. Scherf, K. Mullen and H. Bässler, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 65 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. P. Monkman, H. D. Burrows, L. J. Hartwell, L. E. Horsburgh, I. Hamblett and S. Navaratnam, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 1358 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) W.-Y. Wong, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 971 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Neher, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2001, 22, 1365 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) B. Tsuie, J. L. Reddinger, G. A. Sotzing, J. Soloducho, A. R. Katritzky and J. R. Reynolds, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 2189 RSC ; 
  (d) K.-T. Wong, Y.-Y. Chien, R.-T. Chen, C.-F. Wang, Y.-T. Lin, H.-H. Chiang, P.-Y. Hsieh, C.-C. Wu, C. H. Chou, Y. O. Su, G.-H. Lee and S.-M. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 11576 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) W.-Y. Wong, G.-J. Zhou, X.-M. Yu, H.-S. Kwok and B. Z. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 838 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) X.-M. Yu, H.-S. Kwok, W.-Y. Wong and G.-J. Zhou, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5097 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) W.-Y. Wong, G.-J. Zhou, X.-M. Yu, H.-S. Kwok and Z. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 315 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) N. D. McClenaghan, R. Passalacqua, F. Loiseau, S. Campagna, B. Verheyde, A. Hameurlaine and W. Dehaen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5356 CrossRef ; 
  (b) P. Kunda, K. R. Justin Thomas, J. T. Lin, Y.-T. Tao and C.-H. Chien, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 445 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. R. Justin Thomas, J. T. Lin, Y.-T. Tao and C.-W. Ko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 9404 CrossRef ; 
  (d) W.-Y. Wong, C.-L. Ho, Z.-Q. Gao, B.-X. Mi, C.-H. Chen, K.-W. Cheah and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7800 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Liu, S. Jiang, K. Glusac, D. H. Powell, D. F. Anderson and K. S. Schanze, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 12412 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Onipko, Y. Klymenko and L. Malysheva, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 107, 7331 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) 
            I. N. Levine, Quantum Chemistry, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA,  4th edn, 1991, ch. 16, p. 554 Search PubMed .
W.-Y. Wong, L. Liu and J.-X. Shi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4064 CrossRef CAS .
U. H. F. Bunz, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1605 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liao, J. K. Feng, L. Yang, A. M. Ren and H. X. Zhang, Organometallics, 2005, 24, 385 CrossRef .
C.-L. Ho and W.-Y. Wong, J. Organomet. Chem., 2006, 691, 395 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) E. Holder, B. M. W. Langeveld and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1109 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P.-T. Chou and Y. Chi, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2006, 3319 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) P.-T. Chou and Y. Chi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 380 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) P. L. Burn, S.-C. Lo and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1675 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) M. A. Baldo, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Pure Appl. Chem., 1999, 71, 2095 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) A. de Bettencourt-Dias, Dalton Trans., 2007, 2229 RSC ; 
  (g) R. C. Evans, P. Douglas and C. J. Winscom, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2006, 250, 2093 CAS ; 
  (h) J. M. Bedlek-Anslow, J. P. Hubner, B. F. Carroll and K. S. Schanze, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 9137 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) R. Vestberg, R. Westlund, A. Eriksson, C. Lopes, M. Carlsson, B. Eliasson, E. Glimsdal, M. Lindgren and E. Malmström, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 2238 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Kraft, A. C. Grimsdale and A. B. Holmes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 402 CrossRef ; 
  (b) F. Hide, M. A. Diaz-Garcia, B. J. Schwartz and A. J. Heeger, Acc. Chem. Res., 1997, 30, 430 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324 CrossRef ; 
  (e) C. Winder and N. S. Saricftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1077 RSC .

  (a) P. K. H. Ho, J. S. Kim, J. H. Burroughes, H. Becker, S. F. Y. Li, T. M. Brown, F. Cacialli and R. H. Friend, Nature, 2000, 404, 481 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Cao, I. D. Parker, G. Yu, C. Zhang and A. J. Heeger, Nature, 1999, 397, 414 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) V. Cleave, G. Yahioglu, P. Le Barny, R. H. Friend and N. Tessler, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 285 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. A. Baldo, D. F. O'Brien, Y. You, A. Shoustikov, S. Sibley, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 1998, 395, 151 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) M. A. Baldo, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2000, 403, 750 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Liu, G.-S. Zhang, S.-Z. Liu, W.-H. Ai, C.-M. Zhang, Z.-L. Du and W.-Y. Wong, Acta Chim. Sin., 2005, 24, 2194 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) L. Liu, W.-H. Ai, M.-J. Li, S.-Z. Liu, C.-M. Zhang, H.-X. Yan, Z.-L. Du and W.-Y. Wong, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1704 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chawdhury, M. Younus, P. R. Raithby, J. Lewis and R. H. Friend, Opt. Mater., 1998, 9, 498 CrossRef CAS .
A. Köhler, H. F. Wittmann, R. H. Friend, M. S. Khan and J. Lewis, Synth. Met., 1994, 67, 245 CrossRef .
A. Köhler, H. F. Wittman, R. H. Friend, M. S. Khan and J. Lewis, Synth. Met., 1996, 77, 147 CrossRef .

  (a) S. E. Shaheen, D. S. Ginley and G. E. Jabbour, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 10 CAS ; 
  (b) K. W. J. Barnham, M. Mazzer and B. Clive, Nature, 2006, 5, 161 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Y. Kim, S. H. Kim, H. H. Lee, K. Lee, W. Ma, X. Gong and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 572 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Reyes-Reyes, K. Kim and D. J. Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 083506 CrossRef ; 
  (c) Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. M. Tuladhar, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Giles, I. McCulloch, C. S. Ha and M. Ree, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 197 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CAS .

  (a) M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. Zhang, W. Mammo, L. M. Andersson, S. Admassie, M. R. Andersson and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2169 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Hou, Z. Tan, Y. Yan, Y. He, C. Yang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4911 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. Mühlbacher, M. Scharber, M. Morana, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudiana and C. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2884 CrossRef .

  (a) N. Robertson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2338 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Grätzel, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6841 CrossRef .
F. Guo, Y.-G. Kim, J. R. Reynolds and K. S. Schanze, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1887 RSC .
E. E. Havinga, W. Haeve and H. Wynberg, Synth. Met., 1993, 55–57, 299 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. W. Tutt and T. F. Boggess, Prog. Quantum Electron., 1993, 17, 299 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. W. Spangler, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 2013 RSC .

  (a) L. W. Tutt and A. Kost, Nature, 1992, 356, 225 CrossRef ; 
  (b) B. Z. Tang and H. Y. Xu, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 2569 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. W. Perry, K. Mansour, I.-Y. S. Lee, X. L. Wu, P. V. Bedworth, C.-T. Chen, D. Ng, S. R. Marder, P. Miles, T. Wada, M. Tian and H. Sasabe, Science, 1996, 273, 1533 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. McEwan, K. Lewis, G.-Y. Yang, L.-L. Chng, Y.-W. Lee, W.-P. Lau and K.-S. Lai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 863 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† In memory of my mentor, Prof. F. Albert Cotton, for his great contributions to inorganic chemistry throughout his life.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2007
Table Content:
Wai-Yeung Wong	Wai-Yeung Wong was born in Hong Kong. He obtained a B.Sc.(Hons.) degree in 1992 from the University of Hong Kong, and went on to complete his Ph.D. there in 1995 under the supervision of Prof. Wing-Tak Wong. After his postdoctoral stay at Texas A&M University in 1996 under the direction of Prof. F. Albert Cotton, he worked with Profs. The Lord Lewis and Paul R. Raithby at the University of Cambridge in 1997 as a Croucher Research Fellow. He joined the Hong Kong Baptist University as an Assistant Professor in 1998 and is currently a Professor of Chemistry. He has authored over 200 research/review papers and book chapters. His current research interests lie in the field of functional metallopolymers, luminescent metal-organic materials for optoelectronics and photonics, metal alkynyls, carbon-rich organometallics and X-ray crystallography. He is currently an Editorial Board member of the Journal of Inorganic and Organometallic Polymers and Materials and the Chairman of the Hong Kong Chemical Society.

 	Fig. 1  Chemical structures of platinum(II) polyyne polymers P1–P23.24–40	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical structures of platinum(II) polyyne polymers P24–P50.41–56	 

 	Fig. 3  Chemical structures of platinum(II) polyyne polymers P51–P75.58–61	 

 	Fig. 4  Spatial extent of the lowest excited states for P24–P26.	 

 	Fig. 5  A wide spectrum of Eg values (in eV) for Pt polyynes with different spacer groups.	 

 	Fig. 6  The absorption and PL spectra of P12, P52 and P70–P73. The absorption spectra are the higher energy dotted lines measured at 290 K. PL spectra were taken at both 290 (dashed lines, in CH2Cl2) and 20 K (solid lines, as thin films). For P73, the PL spectrum (dash dotted line) as a thin film at 290 K is also included.	 

 	Fig. 7  Electronic energy level diagram of Pt polyynes with group 14 and 16 main group elements based on absorption and PL data. Dashed lines represent the levels for P3. The S0 levels are arbitrarily shown to be of equal energy and all energy values are quoted in eV.	 

 	Fig. 8  PL spectra for P16 and P74 in CH2Cl2 at 290 K.	 

 	Fig. 9  Comparison of platinum(II) diethynylfluorene-based polyynes.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Structures of P76–P79 and (b) absorption and PL spectra of P76–P78.	 

 	Fig. 11  Phosphorescence spectra of polyplatinaynes exhibiting a full visible color spectrum.	 

 	Fig. 12  A model and a schematic energy diagram of the bulk heterojunction solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 13  The open aperture Z-scan results for selected polyplatinaynes at the same linear transmittance (To) of 82%, demonstrating the good OPL performance of these Pt polyynes.	 

 	Fig. 14  Energy level diagrams for the five-leveled reverse saturable absorption (RSA) optical-limiting mechanisms for polyplatinaynes.	 

 	Fig. 15  Transparency region for selected platinum polyynes and some benchmark optical limiters (CuPc-tBu4 = Cu(II)-tetrakis(tert-butyl)phthalocyanine; Zn-TPP = Zn(II)-tetrakis(4-phenyl)porphyrin).	 

 	Fig. 16  Comparison of the OPL responses of P16, P23 and P74 with some benchmark optical limiters at To = 92%.	 


PbPc(β-CP)4	0.07	62	
e
	
e

CuPc(pentyloxy)8	0.30	68	10	4.18
(R)-TMBO-CuPcf	0.3	76	1	5
CuPc-tBu4	0.10	
e
	
e
	
e

CuPc-tBu4	0.13	86	1	6.20
C60	0.18	55	2	
e

C60	0.19	84	1	3.89

P14
	0.056	82	1	19.24

P16
	0.07	92	1	19.07

P17
	0.063	82	1	18.16

P19
	0.13	82	1	6.37

P22
	0.35	92	1	3.90

P23
	0.08	92	1	18.32

P25
	0.085	82	1	9.27

P27
	0.12	82	1	7.60

P41
	0.15	82	1	5.00

P74
	0.08	92	1	18.62

P77
	0.11	92	1	20.81
Footnote
† In memory of my mentor, Prof. F. Albert Cotton, for his great contributions to inorganic chemistry throughout his life.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2007
