Adsorbed carbon nanomaterials for surface and interface-engineered stable rubidium multi-cation perovskite solar cells   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR06812C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR06812C
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 773-790Adsorbed carbon nanomaterials for surface and interface-engineered stable rubidium multi-cation perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Md Arafat 
            Mahmud
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Naveen Kumar 
            Elumalai
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Mushfika Baishakhi 
            Upama
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dian 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Leila 
            Zarei
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Vinicius R. 
            Gonçales
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Matthew 
            Wright
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Cheng 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Faiazul 
            Haque
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Ashraf 
            Uddin
          
        
      a
aSchool of Photovoltaic and Renewable Energy Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia. E-mail: mdarafat.mahmud@unsw.edu.au; n.elumalai@unsw.edu.au
bSchool of Chemistry, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
Received 
      13th September 2017
    , Accepted 22nd November 2017First published on 27th November 2017AbstractThe current work reports the simultaneous enhancement in efficiency and stability of low-temperature, solution-processed triple cation based MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 (MA: methyl ammonium, FA: formamidinium, Rb: rubidium) perovskite solar cells (PSCs) by means of adsorbed carbon nanomaterials at the perovskite/electron transporting layer interface. The quantity and quality of the adsorbents are precisely controlled to electronically modify the ETL surface and lower the energy barrier across the interface. Carbon derivatives namely fullerene (C60) and PC71BM ([6,6]-phenyl C71 butyric acid methyl ester) are employed as adsorbents in conjunction with ZnO and together serve as a bilayer electron transporting layer (ETL). The adsorbed fullerene (C60-ZnO, abbreviated as C-ZnO) passivates the interstitial trap-sites of ZnO with interstitial intercalation of oxygen atoms in the ZnO lattice structure. C-ZnO ETL based PSCs demonstrate about a 19% higher average PCE compared to conventional ZnO ETL based devices and a nearly 9% higher average PCE than PC71BM adsorbed-ZnO (P-ZnO) ETL based PSCs. In addition, the interstitial trap-state passivation with a C-ZnO film upshifts the Fermi-level position of the C-ZnO ETL by 130 meV, with reference to the ZnO ETL, which contributes to an enhanced n-type conductivity. The photocurrent hysteresis phenomenon in C-ZnO PSCs is also substantially reduced due to mitigated charge trapping phenomena and concomitant reduction in an electrode polarization process. Another major highlight of this work is that, C-ZnO PSCs demonstrate a superior device stability retaining about 94% of its initial PCE in the course of a month-long, systematic degradation study conducted in our work. The enhanced device stability with C-ZnO PSCs is attributed to their high resistance to aging-induced recombination phenomena and a water-induced perovskite degradation process, due to a lower content of oxygen-related chemisorbed species on the C-ZnO ETL. The intricate mechanisms behind the efficiency and stability enhancement are investigated in detail and explained in the context of enhanced surface and interfacial electronic properties.
1. Introduction
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have demonstrated unprecedented potential in the photovoltaic industry, with a certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) soaring up to as high as 22.10%1 of late. In particular, low-temperature processed PSCs2–10 have paved the way for mass commercial production of perovskite devices in a roll-to-roll process with flexible substrates. In this regard, PSCs incorporating a solution processed ZnO electron transport layer (ETL) offer a facile, cost-effective device fabrication pathway.3,8–13 However, due to a relatively open, hexagonal close-packed lattice structure of ZnO, its (ZnO's) unoccupied octahedral sites act as defect states (as deep as 0.2 eV below the conduction band14) within its bandgap, which act as recombination centers for the photo-generated electrons from the perovskite conduction band and thus affects the device performance adversely.15 To overcome this issue with a low temperature processed ZnO ETL, trap-state passivation of ZnO films has been reported by metal doping16–20 or by the insertion of a secondary organic ETL layer [PCBM ([6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester)]21 between ZnO and the perovskite layer as a means of interfacial engineering. However, the metal–oxide doped ZnO ETL based PSCs demonstrate significantly high photo-current hysteresis phenomena,16–18 which obstruct the reliable comprehension of their device performance under actual operating conditions.22 In this regard, the reported dual-layer PCBM-ZnO ETL21 based PSC is an interesting device, since a fullerene derivative like PCBM has been reported to minimize hysteresis phenomena by virtue of trap state passivation at the perovskite/ETL interface.23–25 Nevertheless, the reported bilayer PCBM-ZnO based PSC21 demonstrates a relatively low PCE (highest PCE: 12.20%). In this regard, a dual-layer fullerene (C60)-ZnO ETL appears to be a promising prospect, since a fullerene ETL demonstrates an order of magnitude higher electron mobility (PCBM: 6.1 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1, C60: 1.60 cm2 V−1 s−1) and nearly 7 times higher conductivity (PCBM: 3.2 × 10−4 S cm−1, C60: 2.3 × 10−3 S cm−1) compared to the PCBM ETL.23 Moreover, the more densely-packed fullerene structure is anticipated to promote more efficient intermolecular charge transport26 in conjunction with the ZnO ETL in a PSC, which (ZnO) also exhibits a substantially high electron mobility (200–300 cm2 V−1 s−1).27
However, to date, most of the perovskite studies incorporating C60 as an ETL have deposited the fullerene layer either via thermal evaporation26,28–34 or by using the sputtering deposition technique.35 Both these techniques necessitate sophisticated machinery, increase the concomitant fabrication cost and most importantly are not favorable with a roll-to-roll process for mass commercial production. Thus, a solution-processed route to C60 ETL deposition can offer a facile and lucrative device fabrication pathway for PSCs. So far, only two perovskite studies have reported solution-processed C60 as an ETL in PSCs: one with a p–i–n (inverted) perovskite device structure36 and the other with a n–i–p (normal) layer structure.37 Nonetheless, the p–i–n PSCs are more prone to inferior device stability, compared to their n–i–p counterparts, owing to the hygroscopic nature of PEDOT:PSS [poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-poly(styrenesulfonate)]38 or the substantially high hydrophilic nature of polythiophene,32 commonly used as HTLs in such (p–i–n) device structures. On the other hand, the reported solution-processed C60 ETL with n–i–p PSC structures37,39 demonstrate a relatively low PCEs, mostly due to the formation of an imperfect layer and pin-holes, when C60 is deposited on the bare fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) surface.37 Even for a C60 layer deposited via thermal evaporation, it has been reported that the perovskite grain growth becomes more favorable on top of a fullerene ETL, when it (C60) has a base layer [polyethylenimine ethoxylated (PEIE) in their case34] underneath it (C60), that (the base layer) isolates the C60 layer from direct contact with an indium tin oxide (ITO)/glass substrate.34 In this regard, the implementation of a solution-processed bilayer fullerene-ZnO ETL seems to be an interesting prospect, since ZnO exhibits substantially higher electron mobility27 than any organic layer like PEIE. Simultaneously, ZnO can also serve as a base layer for the overlying C60 film, inhibiting its direct contact with the ITO/glass substrate for more favorable perovskite grain growth on top of the fullerene layer. It is also worth mentioning that, although the fullerene-ZnO dual ETL layer remains uninvestigated in case of PSCs, hybrid fullerene-ZnO buffer layers40,41 have been reported to enhance the photovoltaic performance of organic solar cells (OSCs), as compared to pristine ZnO based OSCs. Therefore, it is an intriguing prospect to delve into the photovoltaic performance, charge transport mechanism,42,43 inherent electrode polarization process and concomitant photo-current hysteresis44 and device aging phenomena45 of low temperature processed devices, incorporating a solution processed fullerene-metal oxide dual layer as an ETL.
In this work, we have reported a low-temperature, solution-processed fullerene-ZnO dual layer ETL for the fabrication of a highly efficient [highest PCE: 16.03%], triple cation based MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 (MA: methyl ammonium, FA: formamidinium, Rb: rubidium) PSC, having full temperature and process compatibility with flexible substrates for the roll-to-roll process. The photovoltaic performance, hysteresis and aging phenomena of the dual layer ETL based PSCs have been compared with conventional dual-layer fullerene derivative (PC71BM)-ZnO ETL and pristine ZnO ETL devices. The reported dual layer fullerene-ZnO ETL based PSCs outperform their counterparts in terms of both photovoltaic performance and device stability. Adding to these merits, the fullerene-ZnO bilayer ETL also contributes to minimizing the photo-current hysteresis, prevalent in low-temperature processed metal oxide ETL based PSCs. In our work, enhanced device performance and suppressed hysteresis phenomena with a fullerene-ZnO bilayer ETL have been investigated with elemental analysis from X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), material workfunction determination with ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS), microstrain and dislocation density analysis from X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectral fitting, perovskite surface morphology and topology analysis, as well as charge transport and trap-assisted recombination characterization by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and Mott–Schottky analysis. A systematic, month-long degradation study of the fabricated devices has been conducted, which demonstrates the superior device stability of fullerene-ZnO ETL based PSCs. The enhanced device stability with the reported bilayer ETL has been investigated with Mott–Schottky characterization of the aged device and surface hydrophilicity of the concerned ETL films.
2. Experimental details
2.1. Device fabrication
Patterned ITO/glass substrates were washed with soapy (Hellmanex III) water, DI water, acetone and 2-propanol in a cycle of 10 minutes for each step. A low temperature (140 °C) processed sol–gel ZnO film was deposited on an ITO/glass substrate according to our previous work.15,46 For a bilayer fullerene-ZnO ETL, 10 mg ml−1 fullerene (C60) in 1,2-dichlorobenzene was spin-coated over the ZnO layer at different spin-coating speeds and the films were dried at 80 °C for five minutes. For a bilayer PCBM-ZnO reference device, 10 mg ml−1 [6,6]-phenyl C71 butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) in chlorobenzene was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 30 s and the films were dried in the same manner as for bilayer fullerene-ZnO films. For all the devices, a precursor solution for the MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 perovskite was prepared using an appropriate amount of PbI2, MAI, FAI and RbI powder in an anhydrous DMF (N,N-dimethylformamide) solvent and the precursor solution was stirred on a hotplate at 70 °C for 24 hours. The perovskite precursor solution was filtered with a 0.45 μm polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) filter and deposited on the ETL-coated substrates by the nucleation-aided gas-assisted method.47 Then, the substrates were annealed at 100 °C for 10 minutes on a hotplate by the restricted volume solvent annealing (RVSA) method.48 A precursor solution for a hole transporting layer (HTL) was prepared using 73.3 mg ml−1 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) in chlorobenzene and the solution was doped with 17.5 μL bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium (Li-TFSI) (520 mg ml−1 in acetonitrile) and 28.8 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine (4-TBP) for an enhanced p-type conductivity. The HTL layer was spin-coated on the perovskite film with 3000 rpm for 30 s. Afterwards, a 100 nm Ag layer was deposited on the HTL coated substrate by thermal evaporation (vacuum level: 1 × 10−6 mbar, evaporation rate of 2 Å s−1). A metal shadow mask was used during the thermal evaporation to fix the device area to be 4.5 mm2.
2.2. Device characterization
The photovoltaic performance of the PSCs was measured with a Keithley 2400 source meter under simulated sunlight of 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5G), which (illumination) was calibrated with a national renewable energy laboratory (NREL) certified reference solar cell. A black, non-reflective aperture (4.5 mm2) mask was used over the cells to ensure there is no overestimation in the device short current density, pertaining to the device active area. XPS characterization was performed using an ESCALAB250Xi machine (Thermo Scientific, UK) with a background pressure of 2 × 10−9 mbar using a monochromated AlKα (hν = 1486.68 eV) anode (120 W, 13.8 kV, 8.7 mA). UPS analysis was conducted with an ESCALAB250Xi machine using the He I photon line (hν = 21.22 eV) of a He discharge lamp under ultra-high vacuum (UHV) conditions (4 × 10−10 mbar). An ultraviolet visible near infra-red (UV-vis-NIR) spectrometer (PerkinElmer Lambda 950) was used for optical characterization of the films. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was conducted with CuKα radiation with a step-scanning size of 0.02 degrees. Surface morphology and topology were analyzed using Carl Zeiss AURIGA cross beam scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and Bruker Dimension ICON SPM atomic force microscopy (AFM) machine, respectively. A Ramé-hart contact angle goniometer (model 200) was used to perform the contact angle measurement and DROPimage advanced software was used to determine the corresponding contact angles. The impedance analysis was conducted with an Autolab PGSTAT-30 impedance analyzer. The frequency range was varied from 0.1 Hz to 1 MHz. A low alternating current (AC) oscillating amplitude (20 mV) was used to keep the response linear.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Device performance
Solution-processed pristine ZnO, bilayer C60-ZnO and bilayer PC71BM-ZnO films were implemented as ETLs in conjunction with triple cation MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 perovskites as photo-active material in an n–i–p PSC structure. For further referencing to these ETLs, we will term ZnO, bilayer C60-ZnO and bilayer PC71BM-ZnO films as ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETLs and the corresponding devices as ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs, respectively. So, the overall perovskite device structures are ITO/ZnO, C-ZnO or P-ZnO ETL/MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag (Fig. 1(A)). The optimization study conducted in this work demonstrates that the most optimum device performance with a C-ZnO ETL is attained with a fullerene ETL layer of ∼35 nm (Table S1†), along with an optimized 45 nm sol–gel ZnO film, as demonstrated in our earlier work.15,43Table 1 tabulates the average as well as the best performance of the fabricated ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO devices in both the FB-SC (forward bias to short circuit) and SC-FB (short circuit to forward bias) directions at a scan rate of 0.05 V s−1. The average values have been presented with the respective standard deviation values of ten samples from a random batch.
 Fig. 1  (A) General schematic representation of the fabricated PSCs (ZnO, C-ZnO and L-ZnO devices), J–V curves (both FB-SC and SC-FB directions at 0.05 V s−1) of the best performing (B) ZnO, (C) C-ZnO and (D) P-ZnO devices. 
Table 1 Average and best photovoltaic performance with ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs in both FB-SC (forward bias to short circuit) and SC-FB (short circuit to forward bias) directions at a scan rate of 0.05 V s−1. The average values are presented with the corresponding standard deviation values of ten samples from a random batch




Device
Average/best
Open circuit voltage, VOC (mV)
Short circuit current density, JSC (mA cm−2)
Fill factor, FF (%)
Efficiency (%)
Series resistance, RS (Ω cm2)
Shunt resistance RSh (Ω cm2)




ZnO
Average
962.57 ± 4.71
21.53 ± 0.14
63.93 ± 0.49
13.25 ± 0.15
7.83 ± 0.31
1457 ± 77


Best (FB-SC)
959.21
21.81
64.59
13.51
7.43
1366


Best (SC-FB)
837.39
21.25
60.60
10.78
9.09
1980


C-ZnO
Average
1013.98 ± 7.40
22.14 ± 0.08
70.19 ± 0.50
15.76 ± 0.13
6.28 ± 0.11
1785 ± 54


Best (FB-SC)
1027.53
22.07
70.67
16.03
6.30
1031


Best (SC-FB)
956.79
22.05
70.40
14.85
6.35
1031


P-ZnO
Average
979.32 ± 3.16
22.37 ± 0.06
66.20 ± 1.30
14.50 ± 0.31
7.24 ± 0.33
1700 ± 79


Best (FB-SC)
980.47
22.36
68.38
14.99
6.80
1827


Best (SC-FB)
958.37
22.39
64.41
13.82
9.14
1661




From Table 1, C-ZnO PSCs demonstrate the highest average PCE among the three devices, while ZnO devices show the lowest. The average PCE of C-ZnO PSCs is about 19% higher than ZnO devices (ZnO PSC: 13.25%, C-ZnO PSC: 15.76%), while the corresponding (average PCE of C-ZnO device) value is nearly 9% higher with reference to P-ZnO PSCs (P-ZnO PSC: 14.50%). All the fabricated PSCs demonstrate good reproducibility, as comprehended from the statistical box-charts shown in Fig. S1,† depicting the variation in the J–V parameters (VOC, JSC, FF and PCE) of the fabricated devices. The J–V parameters of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO devices are also tabulated in Tables S2, S3 and S4,† respectively for facilitating numerical comparison. The J–V curves of the best performing ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs in both the FB-SC and SC-FB scan directions (scan rate: 0.05 V s−1) are presented in Fig. 1(B), (C) and (D), respectively. As observed qualitatively, both the C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs exhibit lower photo-current hysteresis compared to the ZnO device, which will be investigated quantitatively in the subsequent section. From Table 1, the best performing C-ZnO device demonstrates a PCE of 16.03% in the FB-SC direction, whereas the corresponding values for ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs are 13.51% and 14.99%, respectively. Although, the PCE attained in our work is relatively lower compared to the high temperature TiO2 ETL based PSCs reported by Grätzel et al.,49 the fabrication method of our PSC is fully compatible with a flexible substrate for future possible production in the roll-to-roll process.
We have also measured the stabilized PCEs of the best performing ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs at the maximum power point (MPP), since the stabilized PCE at the MPP is a key yardstick for the comprehension of device performance of PSCs exhibiting hysteresis phenomena.22,50 Fig. S2(A), S2(B) and S2(C)† depict the stabilized PCE and stabilized current density of the best performing ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO devices at the MPP, respectively as a function of time. The corresponding values of the stabilized current density and PCE are also listed in Table S5.† As observed from Fig. S2 and Table S5,† the C-ZnO PSC exhibits the highest stabilized efficiency of the three devices under study (ZnO: 12.83%, C-ZnO: 14.31% and P-ZnO: 14.31%), while the ZnO device demonstrates the lowest. The stabilized current density of the C-ZnO PSC is slightly low compared to the P-ZnO device, whereas the smallest value is again demonstrated by the ZnO PSC (Table S5†). Here, it is worth mentioning that all the stabilized efficiencies at the MPP are within the range of 94%–95% of the PCE value obtained in the FB-SC scan direction, which are consistent with the earlier perovskite studies.51,52 We have also characterized the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) (Fig. S3†) of the three PSCs in our study. From the IPCE curves presented in Fig. S3,† the integrated short-circuit current densities (JSC) of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs are 21.44 mA cm−2, 21.67 mA cm−2 and 22.12 mA cm−2, respectively, which match closely with the JSC values attained from the J–V measurement (Table 1).
As comprehended from average and stabilized PCE characterization studies of the fabricated PSCs, C-ZnO PSCs outperform both ZnO and P-ZnO devices. Quantitative analysis of average J–V data (Table 1) reveals that the higher average PCE attained with C-ZnO PSCs mostly originates from the substantial enhancement in average VOC and FF values in them (C-ZnO PSCs) compared to the ZnO and P-ZnO devices, since the average JSC values are not significantly different in the three devices. From Table 1, ZnO PSCs demonstrate the lowest average values for all the three J–V parameters, indicating that the bilayer ETL approach (either with fullerene or a fullerene derivative as a secondary ETL) can effectively boost the photovoltaic performance of pristine ZnO ETL based PSCs. However, the C-ZnO ETL demonstrates more efficient implementation of the bilayer ETL concept, compared to the conventional P-ZnO ETL, along with a ZnO ETL. In subsequent sections, we have presented the results from a series of systematic characterization studies to find out the underlying mechanisms behind the enhanced device performance with C-ZnO PSCs.
3.2 Material and optical characterization of ETL films
The deposited ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETL films have been investigated with XPS elemental analysis to study the surface modification of pristine ZnO films due to the deposition of a secondary fullerene or PC71BM ETL film on top of it (ZnO). Fig. 2(A), (B) and (C) depict the de-convoluted Gaussian sub-peaks and the envelope curve of the high resolution O1s XPS spectra of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETL films, respectively. The corresponding peak binding energies, peak width and elemental atomic percentage for the three ETL films are tabulated in Tables S6, S7 and S8,† respectively. From Fig. 2(A)–(C) and Tables S6–S8,† it can be comprehended that the core-level peak positions of the O1s spectra shift to higher binding energy for the C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETL films compared to the ZnO film. A similar shift in the core-level peak positions of the Zn2p XPS spectra is also observed for the C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETL films, with reference to the ZnO film (Fig. S4†). The shift of the O1s and Zn2p peak positions to higher binding energy in the C-ZnO and P-ZnO films indicates that more oxygen atoms occupy the interstitial ZnO sites53 in these two ETL films compared to the pristine ZnO film, in which (interstitial) sites can otherwise act as trap-centres14 for photo-generated charge carriers from the perovskite.15 The shift in the O1s and Zn2p peak positions for the C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETL films also hints towards possible variation in their Fermi-level positions,54 compared to the ZnO film. To investigate the material work-function of the ETL films, we have conducted UPS measurement of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO films on an ITO/glass substrate. Fig. 2(D) shows the evolution of secondary electron edges for ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETL films on the ITO/glass substrate from UPS characterization. As observed from Fig. 2(D), the work-functions of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO on the ITO/glass substrate are 3.80 eV, 3.67 eV and 3.71 eV, respectively. The up-shift in the Fermi-level positions for both the C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETL films indicate a better n-type conductivity55 of these two ETL films compared to the ZnO film. In general, the Fermi-level is a combined property of charge carriers and it is strongly modified by energetic disorder in the material.56 Despite being an inorganic semiconductor, low-temperature processed ZnO does not have a well-defined quasi Fermi-level because of the gap tail states induced by intrinsic trap states.57,58 Thus, the up-shift in the Fermi-level position for the C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETL films indicates that the intrinsic trap states of the ZnO ETL films are passivated in bilayer ETL films, which can be attributed to the increase in oxygen atoms in the interstitial ZnO sites, as described earlier. However, it is worth mentioning that the C-ZnO ETL film demonstrates a 40 meV upshift in the work-function with reference to the P-ZnO film, which hints towards a higher n-type conductivity of the C-ZnO film than the P-ZnO film.
 Fig. 2  Deconvoluted Gaussian subpeaks and the envelop curve of the high resolution O1s XPS spectra for (A) ZnO, (B) C-ZnO and (C) P-ZnO ETL, (D) evolution of the secondary electron edge for ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO films on an ITO/glass substrate from ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurement, deconvoluted Gaussian subpeaks and the envelop curve of the high resolution C1s XPS spectra for (E) C-ZnO and (F) P-ZnO ETL. 
To investigate the enhanced n-type conductivity of the C-ZnO film, we can refer back to the de-convoluted Gaussian sub-peaks of the O1s XPS spectra of the ETL films (Fig. 2(A)–(C)). All the ETL films exhibit a main (O1s A) and a shoulder peak (O1s B), pertaining to O1s XPS spectra. In general, the O1s A peak is associated with the oxygen atoms bonded with the nearest Zn atoms (Zn–O bond) in the ZnO lattice,59 while the O1s B peak is correlated with the oxygen vacancies (VO) or oxygen deficient regions in ZnO.60 However, in the P-ZnO ETL film, an additional peak (O1s C) is found at a binding energy of 533.43 eV. Moreover, the additional peak (O1s C) in the P-ZnO ETL corresponds to the presence of chemisorbed species like surface hydroxyl (–OH), carbonate (–CO3), adsorbed H2O.61 From Fig. 2(C), the integrated intensity area ratio 60 for the P-ZnO ETL is 0.3126, whereas, the corresponding values for ZnO and C-ZnO ETL films are effectively zero, since no significant O1s C Gaussian sub-peak can be found by the de-modulation of the respective O1s spectra for these two films (ZnO and C-ZnO ETLs). Therefore, although the P-ZnO film facilitates interstitial trap-state passivation of the pristine ZnO film, the ZnO surface modification with PC71BM increases the chemisorbed surface species on the P-ZnO ETL film. The chemisorbed surface species are likely to reduce the electron mobility59 in the P-ZnO ETL, which can be attributed to the lower n-type conductivity of the P-ZnO ETL, compared to the C-ZnO ETL, as demonstrated by UPS measurement (Fig. 2(D)).
To further investigate the higher n-type conductivity of the C-ZnO ETL with reference to the P-ZnO ETL, we have also investigated the relative amount of carbon-based functional groups for each of these films. Fig. 2(E) and (F) depict the de-convoluted Gaussian sub-peaks and the envelop curve of high resolution C1s XPS spectra. Both C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETL films demonstrate four sub-peaks (C1s A, C1s B, C1s C and C1s D), pertaining to C1s XPS spectra. Additionally, the P-ZnO film exhibits a shake-up satellite peak, π → π* (C1s B, C1s C and C1s D, characteristic of aromatic carbon structures)62 at a binding energy of 290.8 eV. In general, C1s A, C1s B, C1s C and C1s D XPS sub-peaks refer to non-oxygenated sp3 hybridized carbon (C–C), a hydroxyl/phenol group bonded to carbon (C–OH), an epoxy/ether group (C–O–C) and carboxylate carbon (OC–OH),62,63 respectively. From the elemental analysis of C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETL films (Tables S7 and S8†), the P-ZnO film demonstrates a higher amount of hydroxyl/phenol (C-ZnO: 4.26%, P-ZnO: 5.48%) and epoxy/ether (C-ZnO: 1.15%, P-ZnO: 1.25%) functional groups, compared to the C-ZnO film. The higher amount of these functional groups on the P-ZnO ETL film can also contribute to lower conductivity63 of the P-ZnO film compared to the C-ZnO film. Here, it is worth mentioning that because of a higher carbon to oxygen ratio (C/O) in the P-ZnO ETL (as comprehended from the XPS survey curves shown in Fig. S5†), the peak intensity of non-oxygenated sp3 hybridized carbon (C1s A) is significantly higher than the rest of the demodulated Gaussian subpeaks (C1s B, C1s C, C1s D and C1s E) in the P-ZnO ETL. Therefore, we have presented a zoomed view of these sub-peaks in the inset of Fig. 2(F).
Another interesting observation from the O1s spectra of the ETL films is that the integrated intensity area ratio 59 for P-ZnO is relatively higher (P-ZnO ETL: 0.4936, C-ZnO ETL: 0.4804) than C-ZnO ETLs, which denotes that the oxygen vacancies are higher in P-ZnO ETLs compared to C-ZnO ETLs, which can act as trapping-centres for the photo-generated carriers. Based on these results, the enhanced n-type conductivity and trap-state passivation of the ZnO layer with the C-ZnO ETL film can be explained with a schematic illustration, presented in Scheme 1. Scheme 1(A) illustrates the ZnO lattice structure, showing the intrinsic defect sites (interstitials or vacancies), which can act as trap-states for the charge carriers from the photo-active perovskite film. When C60 or PC71BM is deposited on the ZnO film, the increased interstitial oxygen atoms passivate the trap states (Scheme 1(B) and (C)). However, for the P-ZnO ETL, the contents of chemisorbed species like hydroxyl or carbonate and functional groups like phenol or ether are relatively high (Scheme 1(C)) compared to the C-ZnO ETL (Scheme 1(B)). Therefore, the n-type property of the C-ZnO ETL is higher than the ZnO or P-ZnO ETL, which is exhibited by its relatively large up-shift in the Fermi-level position, compared to the other two ETLs. The enhanced trap-state passivation in the C-ZnO ETL is correlated with reduced charge-carrier recombination64 in the C-ZnO device, which ensures a higher average VOC value and a higher PCE with it (C-ZnO PSC), compared to the ZnO and P-ZnO ETL devices (Table 1). Moreover, the superior n-type conductivity of the C-ZnO ETL also ensures superior charge extraction from the perovskite layer, which is evident from the higher dark injection current (dark forward current)65 in the forward bias region (applied bias >0.7 V)66 of the C-ZnO device compared to the ZnO and P-ZnO devices (Fig. 3(A)). The higher dark injection current in the C-ZnO device is also consistent with its smaller average series resistance value RS (ZnO: 7.83 Ω cm2, C-ZnO: 7.83 Ω cm2 and P-ZnO: 6.28 Ω cm2) compared to the ZnO and P-ZnO devices (Table 1). Therefore, the C-ZnO device demonstrates enhanced charge extraction properties and a higher average fill factor (FF) value than ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs. We have further investigated the charge extraction properties and the trap-assisted recombination phenomena of the fabricated devices using impedance spectroscopy, which will be discussed elaborately in the subsequent section.
 Scheme 1  (A) shows wurtzite ZnO lattice structure for the pristine ZnO ETL, depicting the interstitial defect states, which can act as charge trapping sites during the operation of perovskite solar cells. The corresponding work-function value is 3.80 eV. (B) demonstrates the ZnO lattice structure for the C-ZnO ETL. The secondary fullerene ETL film passivates the interstitial trap-sites of ZnO films with interstitial intercalation of oxygen atoms. Due to this trap state passivation, the n-type conductivity of the C-ZnO ETL film is higher and this demonstrates a 130 meV upshift in the Fermi-level position, relative to the ZnO ETL. (C) illustrates the ZnO lattice structure in the case of P-ZnO ETL. Similar to fullerene, the secondary PC71BM film passivates the interstitial trap states; however, the content of chemisorbed species on the P-ZnO ETL surface is much higher compared to the C-ZnO ETL. Due to these chemisorbed species, the electron mobility and n-type conductivity of the P-ZnO film are relatively lower than the C-ZnO ETL, with its (P-ZnO ETL's) Fermi-level position located at 3.71 eV (the symbols EVAC, EC, EF and EV refer to vacuum level, conduction band, Fermi-level and valence band, respectively). 
 Fig. 3  (A) Dark I–V of ZnO, C-ZnO and L-ZnO PSCs, (B) UV-visible absorption spectra of MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 perovskite films on ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETLs on top of the ITO/glass substrate, (C) XRD patterns of MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 perovskite films fabricated on top of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETL films (on ITO/glass substrate) showing the major diffraction peaks and the corresponding crystal orientation, (D) relative normalized peak intensity and crystallite size of the perovskite films fabricated on top of three ETL films from the XRD spectral peak analysis. 
We have also conducted optical characterization of the deposited ETL films using ultraviolet-visible near-infrared (UV-vis-NIR) spectrometry. Fig. 3(B) shows the UV-visible absorption spectra of MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 perovskite films on ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETLs on top of the ITO/glass substrate. As observed from Fig. 3(B), MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 perovskite films on ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETLs demonstrate nearly identical absorption spectra, which is consistent with the fact that the average JSC values of the three PSCs are not significantly different from J–V characterization (Table 1). This also demonstrates that all the three ETLs (ZnO, C-ZnO, and P-ZnO) act as highly transmitting thin film layers to ensure maximum light absorption in the photo-active perovskite films. The optical bandgaps of the ETL films have also been determined from the respective Tauc plots presented in Fig. S6.† The slightly low optical bandgaps with dual layer ETL films (ZnO: 3.31 eV, C-ZnO: 3.27 eV, P-ZnO: 3.21 eV) are consistent with the relatively low transmittance (and hence slightly high absorbance) of the dual-layer films compared to the ZnO ETL film.
3.3 Material, surface morphology and topology characterization of perovskite films
On top of the ETL films, MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 perovskite films were fabricated in an identical manner. Fig. 3(C) shows the XRD patterns of perovskite films on ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETL films. For all the perovskite films, the presence of the (110), (202), (220), (310), (224) and (314) characteristic diffraction peaks ensures the construction of a tetragonal perovskite structure.67,68Fig. 3(D) presents the relative normalized peak intensity and crystallite dimensions (calculated from the Debye Scherrer equation69) of the perovskite films from XRD spectral fitting. The corresponding numerical values are tabulated in Table S9† for a quantitative comparison. To facilitate the relative comparison, the thickness of all the films and the experimentation setup (X-ray radiation intensity and substrate size) were kept identical, so that the same volume fraction was considered for each XRD measurement. As observed from Fig. 3(D) and Table S9,† the material crystallinities of the perovskite layers over the three ETL films are not substantially different. However, the crystallite dimensions for the perovskite on the C-ZnO ETL film are higher, compared to the perovskite films on the ZnO or P-ZnO ETL film, pertaining to all the characteristic perovskite peaks. In particular, with respect to the (110) and (314) diffraction peaks, the crystallite dimensions of the perovskite on the P-ZnO ETL film are notably smaller than those of the same (perovskite) on ZnO and C-ZnO ETL films. To further probe into this, we have investigated the grain size and surface morphology of the perovskite layers on top of three different ETL films using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging (Fig. 4). As comprehended from Fig. 4, the perovskite grain size on the P-ZnO ETL film is relatively small compared to those (perovskites) on the other two ETL films, which is consistent with the reduced crystallite dimensions of the perovskite/P-ZnO film from XRD spectral fitting (Fig. 3(D)). Complying with the XRD spectral fitting data, the perovskite film on the C-ZnO ETL also shows a relatively large grain compared to that (perovskite) on the ZnO film. In this regard, we have conducted surface hydrophilicity characterization of the ETL films, since the perovskite grain growth can be impacted by the hydrophilicity of the underlying layer, on which the perovskite film grows.70Fig. 5(A), (B) and (C) show the contact angles of water droplets on ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETL films, respectively. The contact angle measurement was performed at two different spots of the respective surfaces for confirming the accuracy of characterization. Table S10† lists the values of the contact angles on three different ETL films in both left and right directions. From Table S10,† the average values of the contact angles on the ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETL films are (23.6 ± 2.8)°, (34.1 ± 0.2)° and (73.2 ± 1.2)°, respectively. In general, the high surface tension dragging force (STDF) of a hydrophilic surface causes heterogeneous perovskite nuclei distribution64 on the surface, leading to the formation of smaller perovskite grains on it. Accordingly, since the C-ZnO ETL is less hydrophilic compared to the ZnO ETL, the perovskite grain size is larger on the C-ZnO ETL compared to that on the ZnO ETL. However, despite being more hydrophobic compared to the ZnO or C-ZnO ETL, the P-ZnO ETL demonstrates the growth of much smaller perovskite grains on top of it (P-ZnO ETL). This phenomenon can be attributed to the observations from earlier perovskite studies,17,71 which have reported that the inter-particle connectivity71 of perovskite grains and thus their size can be adversely affected by the presence of residual impurities or functional species17 on the underlying film. In accordance with that, we hypothesize that the higher content of chemisorbed species and functional groups on the P-ZnO ETL film leads to lower inter-particle connectivity of the perovskite grain during its growth. This results in the growth of smaller perovskite grains on the P-ZnO ETL film, even though it is more hydrophobic compared to the ZnO and C-ZnO films. Generally, the ionized donor–acceptor pair (DAP) recombination is lower in a large grain-sized perovskite film, due to the large distance between ionized DAP and high acceptor and donor binding energy.72 Therefore, significant enhancement in the average VOC value of C-ZnO PSCs (Table 1) can also be contributed to reduced DAP recombination in perovskites on the C-ZnO film. Conversely, although the P-ZnO film aids the interstitial trap state passivation of the ZnO layer, the DAP recombination is expected to be higher in the small grain-sized perovskite on the P-ZnO film, which leads to a reduced VOC and lower PCE in the P-ZnO PSC, with reference to the C-ZnO device. The large grain size of the perovskite on the C-ZnO film also contributes to a reduced number of grain boundaries in it, which lowers the series resistance, RS of the C-ZnO PSC, compared to the P-ZnO device, owing to a lower inter-particle contact resistance.73 This also contributes to enhanced FF and PCE values in the C-ZnO device compared to the P-ZnO device. The reduction in the series resistance value for the L-ZnO device is consistent with an earlier study73 which reports that the reduced number of grain boundaries in the large grain-sized perovskite (perovskite on the L-ZnO ETL in our case) lowers the series resistance of a PSC owing to a lower inter-particle contact resistance.73 However, it is worth mentioning that we can observe some localized pinholes in the perovskite on top of the P-ZnO and C-ZnO ETL films, while it is not demonstrated with the ZnO ETL layer underneath (Fig. 4). Thus, it is anticipated that the addition of a secondary organic ETL layer (PCBM or C60) along with a metal oxide (ZnO) ETL may have introduced some localized pin-holes in the perovskite film; however, they (localized pin-holes) do not pose any significant adverse effect on the photovoltaic performance of the fabricated PSCs, as comprehended from the enhanced power conversion efficiency (PCE) attained with C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs, compared to ZnO PSCs (Table 1).
 Fig. 4  Top view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 perovskite on top of (A), (B) ZnO, (C), (D) C-ZnO and (E), (F) P-ZnO ETL films. 
 Fig. 5  Contact angle of water droplets on (A) ZnO, (B) C-ZnO and (C) P-ZnO ETL films. 
We have also investigated the surface topography of the perovskite films by atomic force microscopy (AFM) characterization. Fig. 6(A), (B), 6(C), (D) and 6(E), (F) present the two and three dimensional AFM images of MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 perovskite films on top of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETLs, respectively. The average and root mean square (RMS) surface roughness of the fabricated perovskite films are tabulated in Table S11.† The RMS surface roughness of the perovskite films on both the bi-layer ETL films is lower (perovskite/ZnO: 16.80 nm, perovskite/C-ZnO: 12.90 and perovskite/P-ZnO: 12.80 nm) compared to the identically fabricated perovskite on the ZnO film. The reduced surface roughness of the perovskite on bilayer ETL films is an implication towards lower leakage current15,74 in the corresponding PSCs (C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs) compared to the ZnO device. From the dark I–V curves presented in Fig. 3(A), the ZnO device indeed exhibits higher leakage current compared to C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs under reverse bias. Hence, the reverse dark saturation current density (J0) in the ZnO device is relatively larger than that in the other two PSCs. In general, the VOC of a photovoltaic device can be expressed as:75 (1)where k, T and q refer to the Boltzmann constant, temperature and elementary charge, respectively. As evident from eqn (1), a higher J0 value in the ZnO device leads to reduced VOC and thus lower PCE values in them, as compared to C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs. Here, it is worth mentioning that the leakage current in the C-ZnO PSC is lower than the P-ZnO device (applied bias <−0.5 V), which conforms with the higher average shunt resistance RSh value in the C-ZnO device, with reference to the P-ZnO PSC from light J–V measurement (Table 1). However, the variation in the leakage current between the C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs is an interesting observation, since both the perovskite films on C-ZnO and P-ZnO demonstrate nearly identical surface roughness. Therefore, to probe further into the variation in leakage current between the C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs, we have calculated the microstrain and dislocation density76 of the perovskite films on the ETL films from XRD spectral fitting. Fig. 7(A) depicts the variation in microstrain and dislocation density, respectively, among the perovskite films underneath the three HTL films in our study. Table S9† tabulates all these XRD fitting values for numerical comparison. As observed from Fig. 7(A) and Table S9,† the perovskite on the C-ZnO ETL demonstrates relatively low microstrain values, pertaining to the (110) and (314) characteristic peaks, compared to the perovskites atop the other two ETL films. In general, for nano-crystalline structures like perovskites, microstrain refers to the quantitative measure of the local deviation of perovskite atoms with reference to their equilibrium position in the crystalline lattice, caused by the presence of porosities or point defects76 and expressed mathematically as follows:77 (2)where ε, θ and β denote microstrain, Bragg diffraction angle and full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the film diffraction peak at a diffraction angle of 2θ, respectively. Thus, the high film porosities or point defect concentrations for the (110) and (314) perovskite peaks on the P-ZnO ETL can be attributed to the lower inter-particle connectivity76 of its perovskite grain, due to the presence of residual impurities in the underlying P-ZnO ETL film. Along with microstrain, the dislocation density values associated with the (110) and (314) perovskite peaks are also higher in the P-ZnO ETL. Usually, dislocation density quantifies the imperfection in the crystalline lattice, pertaining to the misplacement of the lattice in one part of the crystalline structure with reference to the other and is expressed by Williamson and Smallman's equation:78 (3)where δ, n and d refer to dislocation density, mathematical factor (value being unity for the minimum dislocation density11) and individual crystallite, respectively. The higher dislocation for the (110) and (314) perovskite peaks on the P-ZnO ETL can be attributed to the increased interfacial grain-boundary regions in the perovskite film due to its (perovskite's) small sized grains. Thus, although perovskite films on both C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETL films demonstrate significantly low surface roughness compared to the perovskite on the ZnO ETL the high microstrain and dislocation with perovskite/P-ZnO cause more film porosity and dislocation in it, compared to the perovskite/C-ZnO film. As a result, the C-ZnO PSC demonstrates relatively low leakage current, compared to the P-ZnO device, which explains more efficient charge extraction and enhanced average FF and PCE values in the former device than the latter.
 Fig. 6  Two and three dimensional atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of the MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 perovskite on top of (A), (B) ZnO, (C), (D) C-ZnO and (E), (F) P-ZnO ETL films. 
 Fig. 7  (A) Microstrain and dislocation density of perovskite films fabricated on top of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETL films from the XRD spectral peak analysis, (B) Nyquist plots of ZnO and L-ZnO devices at 920 mV bias in the dark (the inset shows the equivalent electronic circuit used to fit the experimental data to extract various electronic parameters of the device), (C) recombination resistance and (D) recombination lifetime of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs as a function of applied bias, (E) Mott–Schottky curves of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO devices at 10 kHz frequency in the dark, (F) capacitive response of the fabricated PSCs as a function of frequency at zero external bias in the dark. 
3.4 Charge transport characteristics
To delve further into the charge transport properties of the fabricated devices, we have performed EIS analysis of the devices.79,80Fig. 7(B) shows the Nyquist plots of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO devices at an applied bias of 920 mV in the dark. The experimental data were fitted with an equivalent electronic circuit model (the inset of Fig. 7(B)) previously reported with a perovskite device.12,15,81 The equivalent circuit model comprises of a series resistance, RSE along with two parallel R–C components. From the equivalent circuit, the symbols RSE, RC, CC, RRec and CRec denote the resistance originating from the wire connection and metal contact, contact resistance at the perovskite/ETL or perovskite/HTL interface, bulk capacitance, recombination resistance and recombination capacitance, respectively. Table 2 lists the fitted values of various electronic parameters extracted from the Nyquist plots shown in Fig. 7(B). As observed from Table 2, the contact resistance, RC in the ZnO PSC is the highest of the three devices (ZnO device: 33.12 Ω cm2, C-ZnO device: 13.99 Ω cm2, P-ZnO device: 28.62 Ω cm2), while that for the C-ZnO PSC is the lowest. Since the perovskite/HTL (Spiro-OMeTAD) interface for all the three devices remain constant, any variation in the contact resistance value can be attributed to the perovskite/ETL interface.12 Thus, a lower RC value in the C-ZnO device confirms the superior charge transport properties15,43 from the MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 perovskite to the C-ZnO ETL, which is consistent with the enhanced n-type property of the C-ZnO ETL, compared to the other two ETLs in our study. Reduced contact resistance (RC) of the P-ZnO PSC from EIS analysis is also congruent with its lower series resistance (RS) value43 and the enhanced FF and PCE values from the J–V curve. In contrast, ZnO PSCs demonstrate a significantly high contact resistance, which is correlated with the reduced electron selective properties of the ZnO ETL owing to its high intrinsic trap state distribution. P-ZnO PSCs demonstrate a contact resistance value in between the values of ZnO and C-ZnO devices, which is due to a trade-off between interstitial trap state passivation of the ZnO surface and reduction in its electron mobility because of chemisorbed species on the P-ZnO ETL.
Table 2 Fitted values of different electronic parameters from the Nyquist plots of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs at a bias of 920 mV in the dark




Device

R
SE (Ω cm2)

R
C (Ω cm2)

R
Rec (Ω cm2)

C
C (nF cm−2)

C
μ (nF cm−2)




ZnO
2.33
33.12
64.35
20.22
105.56


C-ZnO
2.91
13.99
108
24.89
206.22


P-ZnO
2.78
28.62
85.05
30.22
130.89




Alongside the lowest contact resistance, the C-ZnO PSC also demonstrates the highest recombination resistance, RRec (ZnO device: 64.35 Ω cm2, C-ZnO device: 108 Ω cm2, P-ZnO device: 85.05 Ω cm2) among the three devices under study. Since, in the dark, the charge carrier is injected from the external voltage supply only, the higher recombination resistance for C-ZnO PSCs is correlated with the suppressed charge trapping at the defect or dislocation states82 present in the bulk of the perovskite or at the interfaces between the perovskite and C-ZnO. Thus, the suppressed charge trapping phenomena in C-ZnO PSCs can be attributed to the interstitial trap state passivation in the C-ZnO ETL film by interstitial oxygen atoms and mitigated microstrain and dislocations in the perovskite film on the C-ZnO ETL. As a result, the photo-generated electrons from the perovskite film are less likely to be affected by trap-assisted recombination phenomena and are more efficiently collected by the ZnO/ETL cathode in the C-ZnO PSC, which contributes to its enhanced device performance. To delve further into the recombination phenomena of the fabricated devices, we have calculated the recombination lifetime81 of the PSCs as a function of an applied bias. Fig. 7(C) and (D) depict the variation in recombination resistance and recombination lifetime of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs as a function of an applied bias. The respective numerical values are tabulated in Table S12.† From Fig. 7(C), (D) and Table S12,† the C-ZnO PSC demonstrates the highest recombination resistance and recombination lifetime value compared to the other two PSCs, irrespective of an applied bias. In general, recombination lifetime quantifies the extent of charge recombination phenomena in a PSC and can be mathematically expressed as:81 τRec = RRecCRec.(4)
Thus, the highest recombination lifetime of C-ZnO PSCs indicates that the recombination pathways of photo-generated charge carriers from the perovskite to respective electrodes are substantially suppressed81 in the C-ZnO device, compared to the ZnO or P-ZnO device. To probe further into the trap-assisted recombination phenomena in the fabricated devices, we have conducted the Mott–Schottky characterization of our fabricated PSCs to calculate their respective flat-band potentials (VFB), which provide significant insight into the trap-assisted recombination phenomena of the PSCs.79Fig. 7(E) depicts the Mott–Schottky curves of ZnO, C-ZnO and L-ZnO devices at a frequency of 10 kHz in the dark. From Fig. 7(E), flat-band potentials of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO devices are 0.92 V, 1.08 V and 1.05 V, respectively. In general, flat-band potential can be defined as the potential required to compensate the energetic difference between the quasi Fermi-level of the perovskite and that of the ETL/cathode electron selective contact79 and can be mathematically expressed as: VFB = EFn − EP(5)where EFn and EP correspond to the quasi Fermi-level of the ETL/cathode contact and perovskite film, respectively. According to eqn (5), the flat-band potential of a PSC is a function of any spatial variation in the Fermi-level position64 of the ETL or perovskite. Scheme 2 demonstrates a schematic presentation of the spatial variation of the quasi Fermi-level position of the ETL films and the concomitant effect on flat-band potential and VOC in ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs, using an energy band diagram of a typical n–i–p PSC structure. As demonstrated earlier, the C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETL films demonstrate an up-shift of 130 meV (Scheme 2(B)) and 90 meV (Scheme 2(B)), respectively, with reference to the pristine ZnO ETL (Scheme 2(A)) due to interstitial trap-state passivation of the underlying ZnO surface. Therefore, according to eqn (5), the flat-band potential in the C-ZnO PSC is found to be the highest, which is followed by P-ZnO and ZnO PSCs, respectively. In principle, the VOC of a PSC can be defined as the energetic offset between the quasi Fermi-level of the ETL/cathode contact, EFn and the quasi Fermi-level of the HTL/anode contact, EFp (Scheme 2) and can be mathematically expressed as:83 VOC = EFn − EFp.(6)
 Scheme 2  A schematic presentation of the spatial variation of the quasi Fermi-level position of the ETL films and the concomitant effect on flat-band potential and VOC of PSCs from an energy band diagram. For ZnO PSCs (A), the energetic offset between the Fermi-level position of the ZnO ETL and perovskite is 0.92 V, while the corresponding Fermi-level offset between the ZnO ETL and Spiro-OMeTAD HTL is 0.96 V. Thus, the flat-band potential (VFB1) and open circuit voltage (VOC1) in ZnO PSCs are 0.92 V and 0.96 V, respectively. Due to the up-shift in the Fermi-level position for the C-ZnO ETL, the flat-band potential (VFB2) and open circuit voltage (VOC2) in C-ZnO PSCs are 1.08 V and 1.01 V, respectively (B). For the P-ZnO ETL, the presence of chemisorbed species downshifts the Fermi-level with respect to the C-ZnO ETL, resulting in its (P-ZnO PSC's) flat-band potential (VFB3) and open circuit voltage (VOC3) being 1.05 V and 1.01 V, respectively (the symbols EFn, EP and EFp denote the Fermi-level of ETL, perovskite and HTL, respectively). 
Since the HTL film (Spiro-OMeTAD) remains constant for all the device structures (Scheme 2), the enhanced VOC in C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs can be attributed to the upshift of the quasi Fermi-levels of C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETLs, with reference to the ZnO ETL, according to eqn (6). As a result, C-ZnO PSCs demonstrate superior photovoltaic performance compared to the ZnO and P-ZnO devices.
3.5 Photocurrent hysteresis
As qualitatively observed from the J–V curves of the fabricated PSCs (Fig. 1(B)–(D)), all the PSCs exhibit some degree of photo-current hysteresis. To determine the degree of hysteresis quantitatively, we have calculated the hysteresis index (HI)9,22 of the devices using the following formula: (7)where JFB-SC(VOC/2) and JSC-FB(VOC/2) denote current densities at an applied bias of half the open circuit voltage (VOC/2) in the FB-SC and SC-FB directions, respectively. Table S13† lists the hysteresis indices of ZnO, C-ZnO and L-ZnO devices. As observed from Table S13,† both C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs exhibit lower HI values (ZnO device: 0.016, C-ZnO and P-ZnO device: 0.003) compared to ZnO devices, denoting that the degree of hysteresis is less9,84 in P-ZnO and C-ZnO devices. To investigate the variation in photo-current hysteresis of the fabricated devices, we have conducted frequency-dependent capacitive responses of the fabricated devices (Fig. 7(F)). In general, the low frequency region (0.1–1 Hz) of the capacitive spectra provides substantial insight into the electrode polarization process44 in PSCs, which is associated with the photo-current hysteresis in them. For PSCs, electrode polarization is linked with the slow kinetics of migrating ions44,50 to the outer electrodes, which causes an alteration in the local electric field of PSCs.44 This alteration in the local electric field corresponds to a large capacitance value in the low frequency region of the capacitive spectra.44 The additional low frequency capacitance modulates the time required for attaining the steady-state condition in each scan direction during J–V characterization, which causes photocurrent hysteresis in PSCs.44,85 As observed from Fig. 7(F), both C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs demonstrate smaller low-frequency (0.1–1 Hz) capacitance compared to ZnO devices. The smaller low frequency capacitance values in C-ZnO and P-ZnO devices indicate a suppressed electrode polarization process in them and explain the low photo-current hysteresis phenomenon44,85 compared to ZnO PSCs. The suppressed electrode polarization process in C-ZnO and P-ZnO devices can be attributed to the intrinsic trap-state passivation at perovskite/ETL interfaces in them, compared to ZnO PSCs; since fullerene reacts with the mobile ions in the perovskite to form a fullerene halide radical86 that reduces the photo-current hysteresis by suppressing the electric-field induced ion migration.87 Nevertheless, the presence of some J–V hysteresis even in fullerene based PSCs can be attributed to the possible partial dissolution of the PCBM or C60 ETL in DMF, as reported in a previous perovskite literature study.37 A partial solubility of PCBM or C60 in the DMF solvent has been reported to cause an intermixing problem between the perovskite layer and the underlying PCBM88 or C6037 film. However, since the film thickness of the PCBM or C60 ETL film is about 40 nm, in accordance with the finding of a recent perovskite study by Ha et al.,34 it is expected that the molecular characteristic of fullerene or its derivatives remains intact, even if about ∼10 nm of the ETL film is affected by its (ETL film's) partial dissolution with DMF.34 Besides, PCBM or C60 ETL based PSCs demonstrated reasonable photovoltaic performance and reduced photo-current hysteresis in our case, which denotes that the partial dissolution of the PCBM or C60 ETL with DMF did not substantially affect the PSC device performance. This observation was also consistent with some recent perovskite studies.34,35
3.6 Device stability
We have conducted a systematic degradation study of the fabricated devices to assess the device stability.45 The un-encapsulated ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO devices were stored for 30 days in a N2 filled glovebox in the dark73,89,90 and the photovoltaic performance was measured regularly under humidity-controlled, ambient conditions [relative humidity (RH) level: 35%–40%]. Fig. 8(A), (B), (C) and (D) illustrate the normalized PCE, VOC, JSC and FF values, respectively, of the fabricated devices from the day of fabrication up to 30 days. Day wise PCE, VOC, JSC, and FF values of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO devices are tabulated in Tables S14, S15 and S16,† respectively.
 Fig. 8  Normalized device performances of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO devices as a function of sample storage time in a N2 filled glove box: (A) normalized PCE, (B) normalized VOC, (C) normalized JSC and (D) normalized FF. All the J–V parameters were obtained in the FB-SC (forward bias to short-circuit) scan direction with a scan rate of 0.05 V s−1, (E) Mott–Schottky curves of aged (30 days) ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO devices at 10 kHz frequency in the dark. 
As observed from Fig. 8(A), the C-ZnO device demonstrates the highest device stability, retaining about 94% of its initial PCE even after a month, whereas the P-ZnO PSC maintains nearly 88% of the commencing efficiency over the same time period. On the other hand, the ZnO device exhibits the lowest device stability among the three devices, with its PCE dropping down to about 81% of initial PCE in the course of the month-long degradation study. Thus, the C-ZnO PSC exhibits about 16% higher device stability compared to ZnO devices and nearly 7% higher device stability than the P-ZnO PSC. With regard to device stability, it is notable that, since we have fabricated the perovskite layer using the restricted volume solvent annealing (RVSA) method,48 the perovskite film demonstrates a higher tolerance against thermal decomposition on the alkaline ZnO surface, as reported in previous literature.91,92 This contributes to enhanced photovoltaic performance and device stability of the fabricated PSCs, compared to earlier ZnO ETL based PSCs.92 From Fig. 8(A)–(D) and Tables S14–S16,† the superior device stability with C-ZnO PSCs originates mostly from higher normalized JSC and VOC values retained in it, compared to ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs since all the three devices demonstrate a normalized FF value, close to unity, in the course of the degradation study.
To comprehend the enhanced device stability with C-ZnO PSCs, we have conducted the Mott–Schottky characterization of the aged (30 days) PSCs (Fig. 8(E)) to investigate the trap-assisted charge recombination phenomena of the devices. From Fig. 8(E), the flat-band potentials for aged ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs are 0.82 V, 1.07 V and 1.04 V, respectively. Thus, as compared to the fresh device (Fig. 7(E)), the aged ZnO PSC demonstrates a 100 mV decline in its flat-band potential, whereas the corresponding reductions for both aged C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs are 10 mV. Thus, the trap-assisted recombination phenomenon becomes more severe in the ZnO PSC with aging,79 as compared to the aged C-ZnO and P-ZnO devices. As a result, the aged ZnO PSC demonstrates lower normalized VOC values (ZnO PSC: 90%, C-ZnO: 97%, P-ZnO: 96%) compared to the aged C-ZnO and P-ZnO devices in the device aging process.
Apart from VOC, higher trap-states distribution at the perovskite/ETL interface of the aged ZnO device also leads to its lower normalized JSC value (ZnO PSC: 92%, C-ZnO: 97%, P-ZnO: 94%) compared to the C-ZnO and P-ZnO devices. In general, with the aging process, the trapped charges distort the perovskite structure electrostatically,33 which leads the water molecules to penetrate more easily into the perovskite structure. The higher hydrophilicity of the ZnO film (Fig. 5) also accelerates the moisture penetration process93 in the perovskite film. As a result, charges, regardless of the polarity, trapped in the defect sites in ZnO PSCs can deprotonate the organic molecules (MA or FA)33 of the MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 perovskite structure, which is expected to accelerate the water induced irreversible perovskite degradation process94 in the ZnO device. Therefore, the perovskite degradation process and concomitant decline in the normalized JSC value is more rapid in the ZnO PSC. In contrast, due to the lower hydrophilicity of the C-ZnO ETL film and reduced charge trapping phenomena in the aged C-ZnO PSC, the normalized JSC value is higher in the aged C-ZnO device, as compared to the aged ZnO PSC. In this regard, a lower normalized JSC value in the aged P-ZnO device, compared to the aged C-ZnO PSC, is an important observation since with aging, the moisture absorption is expected to be lower in the P-ZnO ETL film than in the C-ZnO ETL due to its (P-ZnO ETL) less hydrophilicity (Fig. 5). However, the lower normalized JSC value in the aged P-ZnO device can be attributed to the increased oxygen-related chemisorbed species (hydroxyl, adsorbed O2etc.) on the P-ZnO ETL surface as oxygen has been reported to worsen the perovskite degradation process,33,95 even in the presence of a small amount of moisture due to the scavenging effect of oxygen.33 Thus, even though the P-ZnO ETL absorbs a lower content of moisture than the C-ZnO ETL in the aging process, the stronger synergetic effect of chemisorbed oxygen species33 on the moisture-induced perovskite degradation process leads to a more rapid downfall in the normalized JSC value in the aged P-ZnO device compared to the C-ZnO device. Therefore, C-ZnO PSCs demonstrate enhanced device stability compared to ZnO or P-ZnO devices.
4. Conclusion
In conclusion, we have reported a solution-processed bilayer fullerene-ZnO ETL (C-ZnO ETL) for the fabrication of highly efficient (highest PCE: 16.03%) triple cation based MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 PSCs, having full temperature compatibility with flexible substrates. The secondary fullerene ETL film passivates the interstitial trap-sites of the ZnO film with interstitial intercalation of oxygen atoms in the ZnO lattice structure. The interstitial trap-state passivation with the C-ZnO film also upshifts the Fermi-level position of the C-ZnO ETL by 130 meV, compared to the ZnO ETL, which contributes to its (C-ZnO ETL's) enhanced n-type conductivity. In contrast, a conventional PCBM-ZnO bilayer ETL (P-ZnO ETL) has been found to exhibit lower n-type conductivity, compared to the C-ZnO ETL, owing to the increased chemisorbed species and functional groups on the surface of the P-ZnO ETL. The charge transport characterization conducted in our work shows that P-ZnO PSCs demonstrate the lowest contact resistance, the highest recombination resistance, recombination lifetime and flat-band potential of the three devices, which ensure that the charge extraction property is more enhanced and the trap-assisted recombination phenomenon is more suppressed in P-ZnO PSCs. As a result, C-ZnO PSCs exhibit about 19% higher average PCE compared to the ZnO device and nearly 9% higher average PCE than P-ZnO PSCs. C-ZnO PSCs also demonstrate a suppressed photo-current hysteresis phenomenon in it, which has been found to be correlated with the reduced electrode polarization process due to the trap-state passivation at the perovskite/ETL surface. C-ZnO PSCs also retain about 94% of its initial PCE during the course of the degradation study, while the corresponding values for P-ZnO and ZnO PSCs are 88% and 81% of the commencing efficiencies. The enhanced device stability with the C-ZnO PSC has been found to be correlated with its mitigated aging-induced recombination phenomena and a favourably sluggish water-induced perovskite degradation process, due to the lower content of oxygen-related chemisorbed species on the C-ZnO ETL. Thus, the reported low temperature processed C-ZnO ETL appears to be a promising electron selective contact for the mass production of highly efficient, stable and flexible substrate based perovskite solar cells compatible with roll-to-roll device processing and device scalability.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support provided by Future Solar Technologies Pty. Ltd for this research work. L. Z. and V. R. G. acknowledge ARC for the Australian Laureate Fellowship (FL150100060) attributed to Scientia Prof. J. Justin Gooding (School of Chemistry, UNSW-Sydney). The authors would also like to acknowledge the endless support from the staff of Photovoltaic and Renewable Energy Engineering School, Electron Microscope Unit (EMU) and Solid State and Elemental Analysis Unit under Mark Wainwright Analytical Centre, UNSW.
References
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tan, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, F. P. García de Arquer, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Yuan, B. Zhang, Y. Zhao, F. Fan, P. Li, L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, Z.-H. Lu, Z. Yang, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2017, eaai9081 Search PubMed .
Q. An, P. Fassl, Y. J. Hofstetter, D. Becker-Koch, A. Bausch, P. E. Hopkinson and Y. Vaynzof, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 400–408 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. Meng, Y. Yang, G. Xu, Z. Hong, Q. Chen, J. You, G. Li, Y. Yang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Park, J.-Y. Kim, H. J. Son, C.-H. Lee, S. S. Jang and M. J. Ko, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 208–215 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yin, P. Chen, M. Que, Y. Xing, W. Que, C. Niu and J. Shao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3630–3636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Shin, W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, J. H. Suk, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Park, J. S. Kim, W. M. Seong and S. I. Seok, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mahmood, B. S. Swain and A. Amassian, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500568 CrossRef .
R. T. Ginting, E.-S. Jung, M.-K. Jeon, W.-Y. Jin, M. Song and J.-W. Kang, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 569–576 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 133–138 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Mahmud, N. K. Elumalai, M. B. Upama, D. Wang, F. Haque, M. Wright, C. Xu and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 167, 70–86 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, J. Yang and T. L. Kelly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17116–17122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Mahmud, N. K. Elumalai, M. B. Upama, D. Wang, B. Puthen-Veettil, F. Haque, M. Wright, C. Xu, A. Pivrikas and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 167, 87–101 CrossRef CAS .
M. Smirnov, A. P. Rambu, C. Baban and G. I. Rusu, J. Adv. Res. Phys., 2010, 1, 021011 Search PubMed .
M. A. Mahmud, N. K. Elumalai, M. B. Upama, D. Wang, K. H. Chan, M. Wright, C. Xu, F. Haque and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 251–264 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Mahmud, N. K. Elumalai, M. B. Upama, D. Wang, M. Wright, T. Sun, C. Xu, F. Haque and A. Uddin, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 86108–86125 RSC .
X. Zhao, H. Shen, Y. Zhang, X. Li, X. Zhao, M. Tai, J. Li, J. Li, X. Li and H. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7826–7833 CAS .
J. Song, E. Zheng, L. Liu, X.-F. Wang, G. Chen, W. Tian and T. Miyasaka, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2640–2647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Mahmud, N. K. Elumalai, M. B. Upama, D. Wang, A. M. Soufiani, M. Wright, C. Xu, F. Haque and A. Uddin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33841–33854 CAS .
M. Arafat Mahmud, N. Kumar Elumalai, M. Baishakhi Upama, D. Wang, V. R. Gonçales, M. Wright, J. Justin Gooding, F. Haque, C. Xu and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 172–186 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, G. Kim, T. K. Kim, S. Kwon, H. Back, J. Lee, S. H. Lee, H. Kang and K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17291–17296 CAS .
N. K. Elumalai and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 157, 476–509 CrossRef CAS .
P.-W. Liang, C.-C. Chueh, S. T. Williams and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402321 CrossRef .
Y. Fang, C. Bi, D. Wang and J. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 782–794 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Upama, N. K. Elumalai, M. A. Mahmud, D. Wang, F. Haque, V. R. Gonçales, J. J. Gooding, M. Wright, C. Xu and A. Uddin, Org. Electron., 2017, 50, 279–289 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoon, S. M. Kang, J.-K. Lee and M. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2262–2266 CAS .
A. K. Chandiran, M. Abdi-Jalebi, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2261–2268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sun, Y. Li, W. Yan, H. Peng, S. Ye, H. Rao, Z. Zhao, Z. Liu, Z. Bian and C. Huang, Chin. J. Chem., 2017, 35, 687–692 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Q. Dong, Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2359–2365 CAS .
L. E. Polander, P. Pahner, M. Schwarze, M. Saalfrank, C. Koerner and K. Leo, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081503 CrossRef .
H. Hu, K. Wong, T. Kollek, F. Hanusch, S. Polarz, P. Docampo and L. Schmidt-Mende, Molecules, 2016, 21, 542 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yan, Y. Li, Y. Li, S. Ye, Z. Liu, S. Wang, Z. Bian and C. Huang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 2474–2480 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ahn, K. Kwak, M. S. Jang, H. Yoon, B. Y. Lee, J.-K. Lee, P. V. Pikhitsa, J. Byun and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ha, H. Kim, H. Lee, K.-G. Lim, T.-W. Lee and S. Yoo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 161, 338–346 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pisoni, F. Fu, T. Feurer, M. Makha, B. Bissig, S. Nishiwaki, A. N. Tiwari and S. Buecheler, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13639–13647 CAS .
P.-W. Liang, C.-C. Chueh, S. T. Williams and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402321 CrossRef .
K. Wojciechowski, T. Leijtens, S. Siprova, C. Schlueter, M. T. Hörantner, J. T.-W. Wang, C.-Z. Li, A. K. Y. Jen, T.-L. Lee and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2399–2405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Abdulrazzaq, S. E. Bourdo, M. Woo, V. Saini, B. C. Berry, A. Ghosh and A. S. Biris, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27667–27675 CAS .
B. L. Watson, N. Rolston, K. A. Bush, T. Leijtens, M. D. McGehee and R. H. Dauskardt, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25896–25904 CAS .
T. Hu, L. Chen, K. Yuan and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 9194–9203 RSC .
Y.-H. Chao, Y.-Y. Huang, J.-Y. Chang, S.-H. Peng, W.-Y. Tu, Y.-J. Cheng, J. Hou and C.-S. Hsu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20382–20388 CAS .
A. Guerrero, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, Y. S. Kang, T. J. Jacobsson, J.-P. Correa-Baena and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 8023–8032 CAS .
M. A. Mahmud, N. K. Elumalai, M. B. Upama, D. Wang, M. Wright, K. H. Chan, C. Xu, F. Haque and A. Uddin, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 222, 1510–1521 CrossRef CAS .
O. Almora, I. Zarazua, E. Mas-Marza, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1645–1652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, M. Wright, N. K. Elumalai and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 147, 255–275 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Mahmud, N. K. Elumalai, M. B. Upama, D. Wang, F. Haque, M. Wright, K. Howe Chan, C. Xu and A. Uddin, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2016, 10, 882–889 CrossRef .
F. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, W. Huang, M. Xiao, I. Benesperi, S. Rubanov, Y. Zhu, X. Lin, L. Jiang, Y. Zhou, A. Gray-Weale, J. Etheridge, C. R. McNeill, R. A. Caruso, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y.-B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
C. Manspeaker, P. Scruggs, J. Preiss, D. A. Lyashenko and A. A. Zakhidov, J. Phys. Chem.
C, 2016, 120, 6377–6382 CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, aah5557 Search PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T.-W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ma, S. Huang, X. Wen, M. A. Green and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502202 CrossRef .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Zhao, K. Huang, S. Z. Deng, N. S. Xu and J. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 270, 82–89 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Min, S. Cho, S.-H. Lee, D.-Y. Cho, W. G. Park, J. G. Chung, E. Lee, J. C. Lee, B. Anass, J. H. Lee, C. S. Hwang and S.-J. Oh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 201907 CrossRef .
H. P. Kim, A. R. b. M. Yusoff, H. J. Lee, S. J. Lee, H. M. Kim, G. J. Seo, J. H. Youn and J. Jang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 323 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1950–1964 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Boix, J. Ajuria, I. Etxebarria, R. Pacios, G. Garcia-Belmonte and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 407–411 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Elumalai and A. Uddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 391–410 CAS .
Y. Jung, W. Yang, C. Y. Koo, K. Song and J. Moon, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5390–5397 RSC .
S. U. Awan, S. K. Hasanain, M. F. Bertino and G. H. Jaffari, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 103924 CrossRef .
R. K. Singhal, A. Samariya, S. Kumar, Y. T. Xing, U. P. Deshpande, T. Shripathi, S. N. Dolia and E. B. Saitovitch, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2010, 207, 2373–2386 CrossRef CAS .
A. Morais, J. P. C. Alves, F. A. S. Lima, M. Lira-Cantu and A. F. Nogueira, J. Photonics Energy, 2015, 5, 057408 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kakavelakis, T. Maksudov, D. Konios, I. Paradisanos, G. Kioseoglou, E. Stratakis and E. Kymakis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602120 CrossRef .
W. Yang, Y. Yao and C.-Q. Wu, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, 095502 CrossRef .
L. Jian-Feng, Z. Chuang, Z. Heng, T. Jun-Feng, Z. Peng, Y. Chun-Yan, X. Yang-Jun and F. Duo-Wang, Chin. Phys. B, 2016, 25, 028402 CrossRef .
J. Carrillo, A. Guerrero, S. Rahimnejad, O. Almora, I. Zarazua, E. Mas-Marza, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502246 CrossRef .
M. Lv, X. Dong, X. Fang, B. Lin, S. Zhang, J. Ding and N. Yuan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 20521–20529 RSC .
X. Guo, C. McCleese, C. Kolodziej, A. C. S. Samia, Y. Zhao and C. Burda, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 3806–3813 RSC .
H. Oh, J. Krantz, I. Litzov, T. Stubhan, L. Pinna and C. J. Brabec, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2194–2199 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bi, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Conings, L. Baeten, T. Jacobs, R. Dera, J. D'Haen, J. Manca and H.-G. Boyen, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081505 CrossRef .
J. Chen, T. Shi, X. Li, B. Zhou, H. Cao and Y. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 053302 CrossRef .
C.-H. Chiang and C.-G. Wu, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2666–2672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, K. Wang, P. Du, T. Meng, X. Yu, S. Z. D. Cheng and X. Gong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1153–1159 CAS .

          M. A. Green, Solar cells: operating principles, technology, and system applications, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., USA,  1982 Search PubMed .
M. A. Mahmud, N. K. Elumalai, M. B. Upama, D. Wang, V. R. Goncales, M. Wright, C. Xu, F. Haque and A. Uddin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 21033–21045 RSC .
F. Haque, K. S. Rahman, M. A. Islam, M. J. Rashid, M. Akhtaruzzaman, M. M. Alam, Z. A. Alothman, K. Sopian and N. Amin, Chalcogenide Lett., 2014, 11, 189–197 CAS .
D. Pathinettam Padiyan, A. Marikani and K. R. Murali, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2003, 78, 51–58 CrossRef .
A. Guerrero, J. You, C. Aranda, Y. S. Kang, G. Garcia-Belmonte, H. Zhou, J. Bisquert and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 218–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pockett, G. E. Eperon, T. Peltola, H. J. Snaith, A. Walker, L. M. Peter and P. J. Cameron, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3456–3465 CAS .
Z. Zhu, C.-C. Chueh, F. Lin and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600027 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Aprilia, P. Wulandari, V. Suendo, Herman, R. Hidayat, A. Fujii and M. Ozaki, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 111, 181–188 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ryu, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. Chan Kim, W. S. Yang, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2614–2618 CAS .
R. S. Sanchez, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, J.-W. Lee, N.-G. Park, Y. S. Kang, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2357–2363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2927–2934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, A. Buin, A. H. Ip, W. Li, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Yuan, S. Jeon, Z. Ning, J. J. McDowell, P. Kanjanaboos, J.-P. Sun, X. Lan, L. N. Quan, D. H. Kim, I. G. Hill, P. Maksymovych and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Meng, J. You, T.-F. Guo and Y. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 155–165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Qiu, J. P. Bastos, S. Dasgupta, T. Merckx, I. Cardinaletti, M. V. C. Jenart, C. B. Nielsen, R. Gehlhaar, J. Poortmans, P. Heremans, I. McCulloch and D. Cheyns, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2466–2472 CAS .
C.-G. Wu, C.-H. Chiang, Z.-L. Tseng, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2725–2733 CAS .
Y. Kato, L. K. Ono, M. V. Lee, S. Wang, S. R. Raga and Y. Qi, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500195 CrossRef .
J. Yang, B. D. Siempelkamp, E. Mosconi, F. De Angelis and T. L. Kelly, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4229–4236 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, Q.-D. Yang, J. Xiao, Q. Xue, H.-W. Li, Z. Guan, H.-L. Yip and S.-W. Tsang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19986–19993 Search PubMed .
C. Tian, K. Kochiss, E. Castro, G. Betancourt-Solis, H. Han and L. Echegoyen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7326–7332 CAS .
J. Zhao, B. Cai, Z. Luo, Y. Dong, Y. Zhang, H. Xu, B. Hong, Y. Yang, L. Li, W. Zhang and C. Gao, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Niu, W. Li, F. Meng, L. Wang, H. Dong and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 705–710 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr06812cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (A) General schematic representation of the fabricated PSCs (ZnO, C-ZnO and L-ZnO devices), J–V curves (both FB-SC and SC-FB directions at 0.05 V s−1) of the best performing (B) ZnO, (C) C-ZnO and (D) P-ZnO devices.	 

ZnO	Average	962.57 ± 4.71	21.53 ± 0.14	63.93 ± 0.49	13.25 ± 0.15	7.83 ± 0.31	1457 ± 77
Best (FB-SC)	959.21	21.81	64.59	13.51	7.43	1366
Best (SC-FB)	837.39	21.25	60.60	10.78	9.09	1980
C-ZnO	Average	1013.98 ± 7.40	22.14 ± 0.08	70.19 ± 0.50	15.76 ± 0.13	6.28 ± 0.11	1785 ± 54
Best (FB-SC)	1027.53	22.07	70.67	16.03	6.30	1031
Best (SC-FB)	956.79	22.05	70.40	14.85	6.35	1031
P-ZnO	Average	979.32 ± 3.16	22.37 ± 0.06	66.20 ± 1.30	14.50 ± 0.31	7.24 ± 0.33	1700 ± 79
Best (FB-SC)	980.47	22.36	68.38	14.99	6.80	1827
Best (SC-FB)	958.37	22.39	64.41	13.82	9.14	1661

 	Fig. 2  Deconvoluted Gaussian subpeaks and the envelop curve of the high resolution O1s XPS spectra for (A) ZnO, (B) C-ZnO and (C) P-ZnO ETL, (D) evolution of the secondary electron edge for ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO films on an ITO/glass substrate from ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurement, deconvoluted Gaussian subpeaks and the envelop curve of the high resolution C1s XPS spectra for (E) C-ZnO and (F) P-ZnO ETL.	 

 	Scheme 1  (A) shows wurtzite ZnO lattice structure for the pristine ZnO ETL, depicting the interstitial defect states, which can act as charge trapping sites during the operation of perovskite solar cells. The corresponding work-function value is 3.80 eV. (B) demonstrates the ZnO lattice structure for the C-ZnO ETL. The secondary fullerene ETL film passivates the interstitial trap-sites of ZnO films with interstitial intercalation of oxygen atoms. Due to this trap state passivation, the n-type conductivity of the C-ZnO ETL film is higher and this demonstrates a 130 meV upshift in the Fermi-level position, relative to the ZnO ETL. (C) illustrates the ZnO lattice structure in the case of P-ZnO ETL. Similar to fullerene, the secondary PC71BM film passivates the interstitial trap states; however, the content of chemisorbed species on the P-ZnO ETL surface is much higher compared to the C-ZnO ETL. Due to these chemisorbed species, the electron mobility and n-type conductivity of the P-ZnO film are relatively lower than the C-ZnO ETL, with its (P-ZnO ETL's) Fermi-level position located at 3.71 eV (the symbols EVAC, EC, EF and EV refer to vacuum level, conduction band, Fermi-level and valence band, respectively).	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Dark I–V of ZnO, C-ZnO and L-ZnO PSCs, (B) UV-visible absorption spectra of MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 perovskite films on ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETLs on top of the ITO/glass substrate, (C) XRD patterns of MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 perovskite films fabricated on top of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETL films (on ITO/glass substrate) showing the major diffraction peaks and the corresponding crystal orientation, (D) relative normalized peak intensity and crystallite size of the perovskite films fabricated on top of three ETL films from the XRD spectral peak analysis.	 

 	Fig. 4  Top view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 perovskite on top of (A), (B) ZnO, (C), (D) C-ZnO and (E), (F) P-ZnO ETL films.	 

 	Fig. 5  Contact angle of water droplets on (A) ZnO, (B) C-ZnO and (C) P-ZnO ETL films.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 6  Two and three dimensional atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of the MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 perovskite on top of (A), (B) ZnO, (C), (D) C-ZnO and (E), (F) P-ZnO ETL films.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Microstrain and dislocation density of perovskite films fabricated on top of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO ETL films from the XRD spectral peak analysis, (B) Nyquist plots of ZnO and L-ZnO devices at 920 mV bias in the dark (the inset shows the equivalent electronic circuit used to fit the experimental data to extract various electronic parameters of the device), (C) recombination resistance and (D) recombination lifetime of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO PSCs as a function of applied bias, (E) Mott–Schottky curves of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO devices at 10 kHz frequency in the dark, (F) capacitive response of the fabricated PSCs as a function of frequency at zero external bias in the dark.	 

ZnO	2.33	33.12	64.35	20.22	105.56
C-ZnO	2.91	13.99	108	24.89	206.22
P-ZnO	2.78	28.62	85.05	30.22	130.89
τRec = RRecCRec.	(4)
VFB = EFn − EP	(5)
VOC = EFn − EFp.	(6)

 	Scheme 2  A schematic presentation of the spatial variation of the quasi Fermi-level position of the ETL films and the concomitant effect on flat-band potential and VOC of PSCs from an energy band diagram. For ZnO PSCs (A), the energetic offset between the Fermi-level position of the ZnO ETL and perovskite is 0.92 V, while the corresponding Fermi-level offset between the ZnO ETL and Spiro-OMeTAD HTL is 0.96 V. Thus, the flat-band potential (VFB1) and open circuit voltage (VOC1) in ZnO PSCs are 0.92 V and 0.96 V, respectively. Due to the up-shift in the Fermi-level position for the C-ZnO ETL, the flat-band potential (VFB2) and open circuit voltage (VOC2) in C-ZnO PSCs are 1.08 V and 1.01 V, respectively (B). For the P-ZnO ETL, the presence of chemisorbed species downshifts the Fermi-level with respect to the C-ZnO ETL, resulting in its (P-ZnO PSC's) flat-band potential (VFB3) and open circuit voltage (VOC3) being 1.05 V and 1.01 V, respectively (the symbols EFn, EP and EFp denote the Fermi-level of ETL, perovskite and HTL, respectively).	 
	(7)

 	Fig. 8  Normalized device performances of ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO devices as a function of sample storage time in a N2 filled glove box: (A) normalized PCE, (B) normalized VOC, (C) normalized JSC and (D) normalized FF. All the J–V parameters were obtained in the FB-SC (forward bias to short-circuit) scan direction with a scan rate of 0.05 V s−1, (E) Mott–Schottky curves of aged (30 days) ZnO, C-ZnO and P-ZnO devices at 10 kHz frequency in the dark.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr06812c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
