CuInSe 2 ultrathin nanoplatelets: novel self-sacrificial template-directed synthesis and application for flexible photodetectors   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CC34727J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CC34727J
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9162-9164Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsCuInSe2 ultrathin nanoplatelets: novel self-sacrificial template-directed synthesis and application for flexible photodetectors†

        
          
            Wentuan 
            Bi
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Min 
            Zhou
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhengyu 
            Ma
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hanyang 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jiabing 
            Yu
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yi 
            Xie
          
        
      *
      Division of Nanomaterials and Nanochemistry, Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Science at Microscale, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, P.R. China. E-mail: yxie@ustc.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-551-3606266;   Tel: +86-551-3603987
Received 
      2nd July 2012
    , Accepted 23rd July 2012First published on 24th July 2012AbstractNon-layered chalcopyrite-type CuInSe2 nanoplatelets, with thickness down to 2 nm, have been synthesized for the first time. The ultrathin nanoplatelets are of benefit for low-cost and high performance flexible photodetectors.
Solar energy is gaining considerable interest as one of the most abundant and renewable natural energies. Energy conversion devices which harvest energy directly from sunlight are highly promising in this sector.1,2 Currently, considerable efforts are being devoted to developing flexible optoelectronics devices which satisfy people’s requirements for portability, ultrathinness and low cost in high-level integrated electronic systems.3 Cost-effective designs are crucial for accelerating the commercialization of these devices. Up to the present, the use of ultrathin plastic substrates can partly reduce production costs.4 However, it is the light-harvesting active layers that account for the main cost. Hence, employing ultrathin light-harvesting active layers would be a noteworthy approach to reduce costs realistically, and in turn enable the mechanical deformability of devices. Moreover, fascinating physical and chemical phenomena, such as quantum confinement5 or surface effects,6 have been explored in ultrathin nanomaterials owing to their unique anisotropic structures. Therefore, the synthesis of ultrathin nanomaterials indeed provides an effective way to engineer the band gap energy and surface states of the light-harvesting active layers.
Chalcopyrite-type Cu(In,Ga)Se2 based solar cells have yielded the highest conversion efficiencies among all the thin-film photovoltaic devices.7 The high absorption coefficients of Cu(In,Ga)Se2 make it possible to thin the light-harvesting active layers further, yet without significant energy loss. However, ultrathin chalcogenide nanoplatelets with chalcopyrite crystal structure have not been achieved primarily because of the non-layered structure, which is lacking in intrinsic driving forces for two-dimensional (2D) anisotropic growth.
In recent years, template-directed synthesis has emerged as a highly effective approach to develop new types of nanostructures. A systematic structural comparison of CuSe and CuInSe2 demonstrates that the lattices of CuSe and CuInSe2 match well and the Se atomic arrangements in (001)CuSe and (112)CuInSe2 are similar. Both factors facilitate the epitaxial growth process of CuInSe2 on CuSe templates. Herein, based on the above conjecture, we highlight a controllable route to synthesize ultrathin non-layered chalcopyrite-type CuInSe2 nanoplatelets via a cation exchange reaction. Different from the cation exchange process reported before,8 the highly anisotropic CuSe nanoplates with (001) facets exposed are used as effective structural and self-sacrificial templates to manipulate the thickness of ultrathin CuInSe2 nanoplatelets. The thickness of the obtained nanoplatelets is accurately 2 nm. Simultaneously, inspired by the fact that the as-prepared ultrathin nanoplatelets provide large interface area for charge separation and migration, we design flexible photodetectors with a mixed ink of CuInSe2 nanoplatelets and poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT). The heterogeneously integrated photodetectors show fast photoresponse and bending stability. The cost-effective design also paves a practical way to manufacture high performance flexible optoelectronic devices for solar energy conversion.
In this study, CuInSe2 nanoplatelets were synthesized by heating a mixture of the reactants to a designated reaction temperature in air (see ESI†). The phase of the as-synthesized nanoplatelets was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), as shown in Fig. 1A. All the peaks can be well assigned to the chalcopyrite phase CuInSe2 (JCPDS 40-1487). The enhanced relative intensity of the (112) peak of the sample treated by vacuum-filtration indicates that the (112) facets have been preferentially exposed. X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis demonstrates that all three elements are in their expected oxidation states (Fig. S1, ESI†). The thickness of the as-obtained nanoplatelets was measured by tapping mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) as shown in Fig. 1B. Of note, the thickness of the synthetic ultrathin nanoplatelets is only 2 nm. Fig. 1C shows a well defined Tyndall light scattering observed in the transparent colloidal suspension of ultrathin CuInSe2 nanoplatelets. The suspension is very stable and no aggregation can be observed upon standing for more than a month. From transmission electron microscopy (TEM) observations in Fig. 1D, the whole sample is comprised of nanoplatelets with lateral dimensions varying between 30 and 50 nm. A top view high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image is shown in Fig. 1E, in which the continuous lattice fringes of about 0.21 nm and the angle 60° consist well with those of the (20) and (20) facets respectively. The quasi-hexagonal-shaped Fourier transform is a typical feature of the reciprocal lattice projected along the [221] zone axis, revealing that the as-obtained nanoplatelets are highly oriented. The irregular contrast and non-uniform lattice fringes indicate that the nanoplatelets are mostly curly. This is likely due to the large ratio of lateral size to longitudinal size of the ultrathin nanoplatelets. The curly feature is also in accordance with the formation process of the CuInSe2 nanoplatelets. The fringe spacing of 3.4 Å in the side view HRTEM image matches well with the interplanar spacing of the {112} planes of the CuInSe2 and the acute angle 71° is consistent with the angle between (112) and (11), further demonstrating that the ultrathin nanoplatelets are preferentially exposed (112) facets. The thickness of the nanoplatelets can be directly observed from the side view HRTEM image (Fig. 1F). It clearly shows that the sample is accurately 2 nm, which consists of sextuple interplanar spacing of the {112} planes.
 Fig. 1  (A) XRD patterns of the untreated nanoplatelets (1) and a sample treated by vacuum-filtration (2). (B) Tapping mode AFM image of the CuInSe2 nanoplatelets. (C) The Tyndall effect of the synthetic ultrathin nanoplatelets dispersed in cyclohexane. (D) Typical TEM image at low magnification. (E) Top view HRTEM image and the corresponding Fourier transform. (F) Side view HRTEM image. Inset: the schematic illustration of the lamellar stacking of the synthetic nanoplatelets. 
The successful preparation of ultrathin CuInSe2 nanoplatelets has confirmed the feasibility of template-directed synthesis in developing ultrathin nanomaterials with a non-layered structure. In the present case, a systematic structural comparison of CuSe and CuInSe2 indicates that the lattices match well. More specifically, the discrepancies between {110}CuSe (d = 1.974 Å) and {220}CuInSe2 (d = 2.046 Å), {110}CuSe (d = 1.974 nm) and {204}CuInSe2 (d = 2.051 Å) are calculated to be only 3.6% and 3.9% respectively. Moreover, as shown in Fig. 2A, the Se atomic arrangements in (001)CuSe and (112)CuInSe2 are similar. The Se atomic arrangement in (001)CuSe is comprised of parallelograms 3.94 Å in side length and 60° in angle. And Se atoms in (112)CuInSe2 are structurally arranged in two types of quadrangle with similar side lengths and angles. The lattice match and similarity of Se atomic arrangements facilitate the epitaxial growth of CuInSe2 nanoplatelets with (112) facets preferentially exposed on the (001) facets of CuSe nanoplates via a cation exchange process. The unique crystal structure of hexagonal CuSe, which contains weakly banded Se–Se, turns out to be crucial for the formation of the 2D anisotropic CuInSe2 nanoplatelets. As illustrated in Fig. 2B, CuSe is regarded as an effective structural template to manipulate the thickness of these ultrathin nanoplatelets. Based on the AFM and HRTEM observations, we can conclude that CuInSe2 nanoplates constituted of sextuple interplanar spacing of the {112} planes, a repeating unit in the [221] direction, can be obtained by transforming a CuSe unit cell.
 Fig. 2  (A) Se atomic arrangements in (001)CuSe and (112)CuInSe2. (B) Schematic illustration of the structural transformation in the formation process of ultrathin CuInSe2 nanoplatelets. 
To confirm our conjecture and further investigate the growth process of ultrathin CuInSe2 nanoplatelets, a series of samples were collected at different reaction times with other experimental conditions unchanged. Fig. S3G (ESI†) shows the XRD pattern of the products obtained at 140 °C during the heating process. The diffraction peaks match well with the hexagonal CuSe (JCPDF 65-3562) and the unreacted Se powder (JCPDF 65-1876). The enhanced (002) peak in the XRD pattern and the corresponding HRTEM, SEAD (Fig. S3, ESI†) demonstrate that the CuSe nanoplates are preferentially exposed (001) facets. As illustrated in Fig. S3D (ESI†), hexagonal CuSe nanoplates with relatively high surface area-to-thickness ratio were formed at the initial stage. When the reaction temperature was raised, both hexagonal CuSe and chalcopyrite phase CuInSe2 (JCPDS 40-1487) can be found in the XRD pattern as shown in Fig. S3H (ESI†). During this stage, CuInSe2 nanoplatelets were epitaxially grown on the (001) facets of CuSe nanoplates via a cation exchange process. The highly anisotropic CuSe nanoplates exacerbated the discrepancies between internal and external reaction rates, creating more distortions and strains. As shown in Fig. S3F (ESI†), with the cation exchange reaction going on, more and more distortions and strains sourced from lattice mismatch caused the longitudinal expansion along the c-axis, leading to the splitting of Se–Se band ultimately. CuInSe2 nanoplatelets with lateral dimensions varying from 30 to 50 nm peeled down from CuSe nanoplates owing to the disturbance from stirring and ultrasonication.
It is well known that the quantum confinement effect provides a generic approach to tune the band gap energy in nanocomposite systems. Here a one-dimensional quantum confinement effect of the ultrathin CuInSe2 nanoplatelets is confirmed from the UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectrum (Fig. 3A). A significant blue-shifted absorption band edge is observed in comparison with bulk CuInSe2. The band gap is calculated to be 2.27 eV. Meanwhile, we obtain the highly oriented assembled thin films by vacuum-filtration. As shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†), the thin films with different thickness can be transferred from a mixed cellulose esters membrane toward a quartz substrate easily. The facile transfer of the ultrathin nanoplatelet thin films will indeed expand the applications in solar energy conversion.
 Fig. 3  (A) UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectrum of the ultrathin CuInSe2 nanoplatelets dispersed in cyclohexane. Inset: the calculated band gap. (B) Schematic illustration of a photoresponse device. (C) Dark current and photocurrents at different incident light densities. (D) The on/off switching of the heterogeneous device under flat and bent states. (E) Photocurrent measured as a function of incident light density at a bias voltage of 0.4 V. (F) Magnified plots of the circled area in (D), inset: digital photos of the flat and bent states of a photoresponse device. 
Printed electronics are expected to facilitate cost-effective, foldable electronics for applications in flexible displays, smart labels, energy-storage devices and so on.9 2D nanomaterials are newly emerging as noteworthy and promising candidates for printed electronics.10 To qualify its promising application in flexible photodetectors, we fabricated a device constructed with a mixed ink of CuInSe2 nanoplatelets and P3HT, the schematic illustration of which is shown in Fig. 3B. The gap width and electrode length are 15 μm and 2 cm, respectively. The flexible photodetectors exhibit fast photoresponse, which is shorter than that of the previously reported CuInSe2 nanocrystal-based photodetectors.11 Upon illumination with a 455 nm laser, the conductance increases by approximately two orders of magnitude at an illumination intensity of 18 mW cm−2 (Fig. 3C). The photocurrent exhibits a strong dependence on light intensity, demonstrating a power dependence of ∼0.83 (i.e., I ∼ P0.83). The exponent is close to 1, indicating a low density of trap states.12 As shown in Fig. 3D and F, the on/off switching ratio reaches approximately 15 at an incident light density of 18 mW cm−2 and a bias voltage of 0.4 V. Of note, the photoresponse time, which is defined as the time required for the current to increase from 10% to 90% of Imax, is as low as 1.7 s.13 The dynamic response tests show negligible influence under severe bending, indicating that severe bending would not decrease the responsiveness of the overall flexible device.
In heterogeneous photodetectors, the ultrathin nanoplatelets create an effective path for charge transfer due to the lack of ligands in the in-plane dimensions.14 Meanwhile, nanoplatelets with atomic thickness are embedded in the interconnected polymer network, leading to a large interface area for charge separation and migration. Simultaneously, the staggered energy level of CuInSe2 nanoplatelets and P3HT diminishes the inefficient charge hopping.15 These advantages contribute to the fast photoresponse of the flexible photodetectors. In addition, the flexible devices were fabricated by solution-casting at room-temperature, which enables the large-scale fabrication of low-cost and high performance flexible optoelectronic devices.
In summary, based on the structural similarity between CuSe and CuInSe2, we proposed a self-sacrificial template-directed synthesis of non-layered chalcopyrite-type CuInSe2 nanoplatelets with thickness down to 2 nm. These nanoplatelets show a sharp blue-shifted absorption band edge as a result of one dimensional quantum confinement. The fast photoresponse declares that the process of charge separation/migration has been optimized in the heterogeneously integrated photodetectors. The heterogeneous devices also pave a practical way to fabricate flexible optoelectronic devices for solar energy conversion.
This work was financially supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (No. 2009CB939901), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 11079004, 90922016 and 10979047).
Notes and references
B. Tian, X. Zheng, T. J. Kempa, Y. Fang, N. Yu, G. Yu, J. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2007, 449, 885 CrossRef CAS .
G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 391 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1897 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaltenbrunner, M. S. White, E. D. Głowacki, T. Sekitani, T. Someya, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 770 CrossRef .
Z. Li and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6578 CrossRef CAS .
H. Peng, W. Dang, J. Cao, Y. Chen, D. Wu, W. Zheng, H. Li, Z.-X. Shen and Z. Liu, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 281 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, E. Lotter, S. Paetel, R. Wuerz, R. Menner, W. Wischmann and M. Powalla, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 894 CAS .
J. Xu, C. S. Lee, Y. Tang, X. Chen, Z. Chen, W. Zhang, S. T. Lee, W. Zhang and Z. Yang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1845 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Rogers, Z. Bao, K. Baldwin, A. Dodabalapur, B. Crone, V. R. Raju, V. Kuck, H. Katz, K. Amundson, J. Ewing and P. Drzaic, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2001, 98, 4835 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, X. Sun, C. Wu, L. Peng, C. Lin, S. Hu, J. Yang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17832 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Min, G. D. Moon, J. Park, M. Park and U. Jeong, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 465604 CrossRef .
K. Heo, H. Lee, Y. Park, J. Park, H.-J. Lim, D. Yoon, C. Lee, M. Kim, H. Cheong, J. Park, J. Jian and S. Hong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2173 RSC .
X. Fang, Y. Bando, M. Liao, T. Zhai, U. K. Gautam, L. Li, Y. Koide and D. Golberg, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 500 CrossRef CAS .
C. Schliehe, B. H. Juarez, M. Pelletier, S. Jander, D. Greshnykh, M. Nagel, A. Meyer, S. Foerster, A. Kornowski, C. Klinke and H. Weller, Science, 2010, 329, 550 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Wang, F. Cao, Y. Guo and L. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12218 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, XPS spectrum, evolution process for the ultrathin CuInSe2 nanoplatelets, TEM and HRTEM images of the synthetic CuSe nanoplate. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cc34727jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (A) XRD patterns of the untreated nanoplatelets (1) and a sample treated by vacuum-filtration (2). (B) Tapping mode AFM image of the CuInSe2 nanoplatelets. (C) The Tyndall effect of the synthetic ultrathin nanoplatelets dispersed in cyclohexane. (D) Typical TEM image at low magnification. (E) Top view HRTEM image and the corresponding Fourier transform. (F) Side view HRTEM image. Inset: the schematic illustration of the lamellar stacking of the synthetic nanoplatelets.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Se atomic arrangements in (001)CuSe and (112)CuInSe2. (B) Schematic illustration of the structural transformation in the formation process of ultrathin CuInSe2 nanoplatelets.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectrum of the ultrathin CuInSe2 nanoplatelets dispersed in cyclohexane. Inset: the calculated band gap. (B) Schematic illustration of a photoresponse device. (C) Dark current and photocurrents at different incident light densities. (D) The on/off switching of the heterogeneous device under flat and bent states. (E) Photocurrent measured as a function of incident light density at a bias voltage of 0.4 V. (F) Magnified plots of the circled area in (D), inset: digital photos of the flat and bent states of a photoresponse device.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, XPS spectrum, evolution process for the ultrathin CuInSe2 nanoplatelets, TEM and HRTEM images of the synthetic CuSe nanoplate. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cc34727j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
