Fabrication of anisotropically arrayed nano-slots metasurfaces using reflective plasmonic lithography   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NR05153C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NR05153C
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18805-18812Fabrication of anisotropically arrayed nano-slots metasurfaces using reflective plasmonic lithography†

        
          
            Jun 
            Luo‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Bo 
            Zeng‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Changtao 
            Wang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Ping 
            Gao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kaipeng 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mingbo 
            Pu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jinjin 
            Jin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zeyu 
            Zhao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiong 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Honglin 
            Yu
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Xiangang 
            Luo
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Optical Technologies on Nano-Fabrication and Micro-Engineering, Institute of Optics and Electronics, Chinese Academy of Science, P.O. Box 350, Chengdu 610209, China. E-mail: lxg@ioe.ac.cn
bKey Laboratory of Optoelectronic Technology and Systems, Ministry of Education, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400030, China. E-mail: hlyu@cqu.edu.cn
Received 
      31st July 2015
    , Accepted 9th October 2015First published on 12th October 2015AbstractNanofabrication technology with high-resolution, high-throughput and low-cost is essential for the development of nanoplasmonic and nanophotonic devices. At present, most metasurfaces are fabricated in a point by point writing manner with electron beam lithography or a focused ion beam, which imposes a serious cost barrier with respect to practical applications. Near field optical lithography, seemingly providing a high-resolution and low-cost way, however, suffers from the ultra shallow depth and poor fidelity of obtained photoresist patterns due to the exponential decay feature of evanescent waves. Here, we propose a method of surface plasmonic imaging lithography by introducing a reflective plasmonic lens to amplify and compensate evanescent waves, resulting in the production of nano resist patterns with high fidelity, contrast and enhanced depth beyond that usually obtained by near field optical lithography. As examples, a discrete and anisotropically arrayed nano-slots mask pattern with different orientations and a size of 40 nm × 120 nm could be imaged in photoresist and transferred successfully onto a metal layer through an etching process. Evidence for the pattern quality is given by virtue of the fabricated metasurface lens devices showing good focusing performance in experiments. It is believed that this method provides a parallel, low-cost, high-throughput and large-area nanofabrication route for fabricating nanostructures of holograms, vortex phase plates, bio-sensors and solar cells etc.
Introduction
Recently, artificial structures characterized with nano critical dimension have attracted a great deal of research interest as inspired by a variety of extraordinary and unique behaviours of light interaction with subwavelength structures, such as extraordinary optical transmission (EOT),1 perfect imaging,2,3 perfect light absorption,4,5 optical cloaks,6 anomalous reflection and refraction,7,8 polarization converters,9,10 photonic spin hall effect,11etc. These fascinating effects are believed to provide the novel physical basis for the next generation of photonic devices, for instance, ultra-thin flat lenses,12–14 vortex phase plates,15–17 meta-holograms,18,19 and plasmonic metasurface devices.20,21
Correspondingly, there has been an increasing demand for low cost, large area and parallel nanofabrication equipments and technologies, due to the fact that the commonly employed electron beam lithography (EBL) and focused ion beam (FIB) techniques operated in a point by point writing manner are expensive and inefficient, and greatly restrict pattern size. Nano-imprint lithography seems to offer a high-throughput and low cost method, but it needs further improvement for massive practical applications due to problems such as defect control, alignment and yield.22 The conventional optical lithography with i-line or g-line mercury lamps, however, has been suffering from the resolution diffraction limit of about half of light wavelength. The lithography equipments with a short light wavelength — deep ultraviolet lithography (DUV) and extreme ultraviolet lithography (EUV) — which are the foundations of integrated circuits manufacture, would not be promising candidates to solve the issues of cost and complexity.23,24
Some investigations have been made to explore the sub-wavelength resolving capability of evanescent waves in near field optical lithography.25–27 Unfortunately, the ultra shallow depth and poor fidelity of optical lithography patterns in the near field region pose obstacles for practical applications, mainly due to the exponential decay feature of evanescent waves. In recent years, a super lens simply composed by a metal film was proposed and demonstrated to realize super resolution imaging, through surface plasmons resonance amplifying evanescent waves.28 Deep subwavelength resolution lithography using a plasmonic lens has been reported and shows potentially promising access to low cost nano fabrication.28–30 But similar obstacles, such as shallow depth and poor fidelity of the obtained resist patterns, are encountered for plasmonic lithography due to the evanescent feature of surface plasmons, and lithography patterns with greatly reduced fidelity are commonly observed in plasmonic lithography experiments.28–30
In this work, the aforementioned issues of poor fidelity, low contrast and ultra small pattern depth in conventional near field optical lithography and plasmonic lithography are greatly relieved by introducing a reflective plasmonic lens. It is demonstrated both in simulations and experiments that discontinuous sub-diffraction patterns with nano critical dimension are obtained with good fidelity, high contrast and depth of pattern profiles, going beyond conventional near field lithography. The method is further successfully employed to fabricate metasurface structures with anisotropically arrayed nano-slots which show good focusing performance in experiments, as evidence for the pattern quality. It is believed that this method, as a parallel, low-cost, high-throughput and large-area nanofabrication technique, would find potentially promising applications in a variety of nanostructures employed in color filters, holograms, bio-sensors and solar cells etc.
Results and discussion
The surface plasmonic imaging lithography structure with a reflective silver lens is shown in Fig. 1a. This structure consists of a chrome (Cr) mask, an air-spacer layer, a photoresist (PR) layer and a reflective silver (Ag) lens. The Cr mask and PR layer are separated by the air-spacer layer. The reflective Ag lens is coated on a quartz substrate. The permittivities of the Cr mask, εCr = −8.55 + 8.96i, the Ag film, εAg = −2.168 + 0.358i, and the PR layer, εPR = 2.59, were obtained by spectroscopic ellipsometry. The thicknesses of the Cr mask, PR and reflective Ag lens are 40 nm, 30 nm and 50 nm, respectively, which were mainly determined during optimization (see ESI, Fig. S1†). We choose a 10 nm air-gap between mask and resist, as an approximation for close proximity lithography operation, by applying air pressure in the experiment.31 As a typically representative nanophotonic nanostructure, the Cr mask was designed to be comprised of anisotropic nano-slot arrays with parabolic phase distributions to focus the helicity-dependent plane wave into a spot,12–14 and its top view is shown in Fig. 1b.
 Fig. 1  (a) The schematic of the imaging lithography structure with reflective silver lens. (b) The top view of the Cr mask with 2D nano-slot arrays and parabolic phase distributions. The size of the nano-slots is 40 nm × 120 nm, and the period is 200 nm. 

Fig. 2a–f show the simulated results of anisotropic nano-slot arrays mad using the surface plasmonic lithography structure with or without reflective plasmonic lens. The numerical simulations are performed with the finite integrate technology (FIT) method based on CST Microwave Studio. A plane wave in the normal direction with natural polarization (i-line) was produced in simulations by applying incoherent x and y polarization used to illuminate the SP lithography structure in order to excite uniformly surface plasmons. For the structure with the reflective Ag lens, the electric-field intensity distributions at 15 nm above the Ag–PR interface are shown in Fig. 2a, and the imaging patterns in the PR layer closely resemble the pattern of the mask as illustrated in the local magnified graph of Fig. 2a. The results in Fig. 2b are a control case of near-field lithography where the reflective Ag lens is replaced by silicon dioxide (SiO2). Compared with the results of Fig. 2a, the imaging patterns with greatly rounded and enlarged width in the direction perpendicular to the slot aperture demonstrate the extreme distortions and poor fidelity in Fig. 2b. As shown in Fig. 2c, nearly invariant intensity distributions in the photoresist along the depth direction could effectively guarantee exposure depth for the reflective plasmonic Ag lens lithography. This point can be further proved by the approximate overlapped curves (z = 0 nm and 15 nm) in Fig. 2e. The decaying characteristics of evanescent waves can be compensated and enhanced by the coupling effect between light through the mask and the reflective lens.31–34 The enhanced effect of the reflective plasmonic lens could be described by the metasurface-assisted imaging model.34 In contrast to the reflective plasmonic lens, the rapid decaying intensity profiles for the near-field optical lithography in Fig. 2d and f could not effectively deliver optical images with sufficient resolution, fidelity and exposure depth.
 Fig. 2  (a) Calculated electric field intensity distributions at 15 nm above the reflective Ag–PR interface for two orthogonal linear polarization light illumination. (b) Control simulation result where the reflective Ag slab is replaced by SiO2. The inset maps in (a) and (b) are the local magnified graph of the blue dash line region. (c) and (d) are the cross-section electric field intensities profiles in the xz plane at the positions of white dashed line depicted in the inset map of (a) and (b). The light intensity distributions at different z positions, at z = 0 nm (blue), 15 nm (red), and 30 nm (green) in PR are plotted in (e) and (f). 
To make a quantitative analysis of the results of Fig. 2e and f, the intensity contrast of images is defined as C = (Imax − Imin)/(Imax + Imin), where Imax and Imin are the maximum and minimum electric-field intensity at a specific PR depth position. For the position z = 30 nm, 15 nm and 0 nm in the PR, the contrast in Fig. 2e is larger than 0.92, 0.82 and 0.83, respectively. For the plasmonic lithography structure without Ag reflective slab, the contrasts at z = 30 nm, 15 nm and 0 nm in Fig. 2f are 0.9, 0.68, and 0.5, respectively. The intensity contrast at the variant z position for the reflective plasmonic lens lithography demonstrates a lower decaying rate in comparison with the lithography structure without reflective Ag lens. The simulated results illustrate that the reflective Ag lens could compensate and amplify the evanescent waves in the PR so that the imaging quality of resist pattern, in terms of contrast, fidelity and aspect profile depth, can be remarkably improved.
To analyze the effect of the air gap on the imaging quality, we calculated the electric field distribution of a single nano-slot plasmonic lithography structure with periodic boundary condition using incoherent x and y polarization in FIT simulation. The electric-field intensity distribution at the Ag–PR interface is shown in Fig. 3a when air gap is 10 nm, and the control result is shown in Fig. 3b. For the structure with or without reflective Ag lens, the contrast would decrease for a larger air gap due to evanescent waves decaying as shown in Fig. 3c. For the reflective plasmonic structure, the intensity contrast in Fig. 3c is larger than 0.7 in the air-gap from 0–20 nm; meanwhile the ratio between the size D1 and D2 is about 1:2 in Fig. 3d, which suggest that the structure with the reflective lens exhibited a large tolerance of the air-gap. Nevertheless, for the structure without the reflective Ag lens, the ratio between the size D1 and D2 close to 1:1, as shown in Fig. 3d, illustrates poor fidelity and an ultra small tolerance of the air-gap. Therefore, by adding the reflective plasmonic lens, the contrast and fidelity of the imaging pattern, and the tolerance of air-gap can be improved significantly in comparison with the structure without the reflective Ag lens.
 Fig. 3  (a) Calculated electric field intensity distributions at the Ag–PR interface using incoherent x and y polarization light illumination when the air gap is 10 nm. (b) The control simulation result in the SiO2–PR interface where the reflective Ag slab is replaced by SiO2. (c) The intensity contrast C1 and C2 versus size of the air gap for the structure with and without the reflective Ag slab. The intensity C1 and C2 are calculated for the typical Ag–PR and SiO2–PR interface along the direction y = 0 nm and x = 0 nm (black dashed line in (a) and (b)). (d) The size D1 and D2 of nano-slot versus air gap for the structure with and without the reflective Ag slab. The size of D1 and D2 are calculated for the image contour (0.4 intensity level) at the Ag–PR and SiO2–PR interface (black solid curve in (a) and (b)). 
Experimental
Lithography experiment
First of all, the Cr film with 40 nm thickness was deposited on the fused quartz substrate by magnetron sputtering (DE 500, TE technology). Afterwards, the anisotropic nano-slots were milled by a Focused Ion Beam (FIB)/scanning electron microscope (SEM) dual-beam system (FEI Helios Nanolab 650, @30 KV accelerating voltage). The SEM photograph of the Cr mask with anisotropic nano-slot arrays is shown in Fig. 4a. The size of the patterned region is 6.2 μm × 6.2 μm, the size of the nano-slot is about 45 (±5) nm × 125 (±5) nm, and the period is 200 nm. The imaging lithography structure with a reflective plasmonic lens in Fig. 1a was used in this experiment. A silver layer with 50 nm thickness was deposited on the fused quartz substrate as the reflective plasmonic lens by thermal evaporation equipped with a crystal thickness monitor for rate determination. As the surface roughness would perturb the surfaces plasmon modes and increase the scattering loss resulting in diminishing resolution,30,35,36 a germanium layer (∼1 nm thickness) was introduced beneath the silver layer to grow an ultrasmooth silver film. The atomic force microscope (AFM) measured surface roughness as root-mean-square (RMS) and the peak-to-valley difference (PV) for the reflective Ag slab, which were 0.68 nm and 6.5 nm, respectively (see ESI, Fig. S2†). 30 nm photoresist was subsequently spin-coated on the silver layer at 4000 revolutions per minute for 30 s, and then baked at 100 °C for 5 min to drive off residual solvent. The surface roughness RMS and PV of the PR layer are 0.32 nm and 2.7 nm, respectively (see ESI, Fig. S2†). The effect of surface topography on imaging patterns is discussed in detail (see ESI, Fig. S3†).
 Fig. 4  (a) The SEM photograph of the mask pattern with nano-slot arrays, the size of the nano-slot is 45 (±5) nm × 125 (±5) nm. (b)–(d) The SEM image of the photoresist of the pattern at the typical exposure times of 20 s, 30 s and 40 s (scale bar, 200 nm). The optimized exposure time was 30 s. (e) Control experiment result without the Ag lens with the same photoresist thickness, exposure condition and development time. (f) The size of D1 and D2 of resist pattern vary with exposure time. 
The plasmonic lithography was performed under a conventional i-line lithography system, and applying air pressure (∼0.3 MPa) to assure mask and resist spin coated onto silica wafer in vacuum proximity. The uniform flux was 1.8 mW cm−2. Then the optical image recorded on the resist was developed for 40 s in a mixed solution of AR 300 (ALLRESIST GMBH, Strausberg) and deionised water with the volume ratio of 1:1. Field-emission SEM (SU8010, Hitachi) was used to characterize the morphology of photoresist pattern.
To obtain the optimal photoresist patterning, the exposure time ranged from 20 s to 40 s. The typical SEM images of the recorded photoresist results for the exposure time 20 s, 30 s and 40 s are provided as shown in Fig. 4b–d. The control experiment result was exposed under the same conditions (exposure time 40 s) in as shown in Fig. 4e, and the photoresist patterns with greatly rounded nano-slots with enlarged widths are completely distorted and have no anisotropy, which would destroy the focusing effect for the designed metasurface. The reflective plasmonic lens lithography with short exposure time (20 s) in Fig. 4b illustrates the photoresist patterns with weak anisotropy, while the line edge roughness and residual photoresist can be observed due to the low exposure dose. With the increase of exposure time (25 s, 28 s), the line edge roughness becomes smaller, meanwhile residual photoresist is reduced. For the exposure time of the 30 s, the photoresist patterns with anisotropic array are more uniform and keep better imaging fidelity as shown in Fig. 4c. Although the longer exposure time (40 s) results in smaller line edge roughness and less residual photoresist, some photoresist patterns would connect to each other upon the larger exposure dose as shown in Fig. 4d. Therefore, we chose the exposure time of 30 s as the optimized exposure results. The size of D1 and D2 of the PR pattern vary with exposure time as shown in Fig. 4f. The size of D1 and D2 would increase for the longer exposure time. The sub-diffraction patterns with critical dimension below 50 nm are obtained under the exposure time of 20 s. The PR patterns in Fig. 4b–e suggest that the evanescent wave amplified by the silver reflector has a great influence on the imaging process.
Further etching transfer has been performed for the fabrication of the silver metalens, and the method of ion beam etching (IBE) was employed to transfer the photoresist pattern into the bottom silver layer. The schematic diagram of the transfer process is indicated in Fig. 5a. The cross section of the PR layer and Ag slab was obtained by means of an ion milling instrument as shown in Fig. 5b (see ESI for details†). Here, the etching rate of silver was about 12 nm per minute while that of photoresist was about 10 nm per minute in IBE etching. The SEM image of the fabricated silver metalens is shown in Fig. 5c. It is clearly seen that photoresist pattern succeeds in transferring to the silver layer. The size of the nano-slot is about 75 (±10) nm × 150 (±10) nm. Due to the IBE selectivity between silver and resist (∼1.2:1), the thickness of the fabricated silver metalens is about 35 nm, which is larger than the skin depth of metal (silver) and could ensure a good focusing effect.
 Fig. 5  (a) The schematic diagram of the pattern transfer by IBE process. (b) The SEM of the cross-sectional view of the fabricated PR and reflective Ag lens (scale bar, 100 nm). (c) The photograph of the fabricated metalens after the IBE process under the optimized exposure time of 30 s (scale bar, 200 nm). 
The reflective plasmonic lens provides a way to get sub-diffraction optical images of nano patterns, with resolution and fidelity beyond the limitation of conventional near field lithography. But the finally generated patterns are greatly affected by the exposure, developing and etching processes following the optical imaging process. Fortunately, the pattern distortions in lithography are usually controllable by developing appropriate materials and optimizing process parameters.37 Furthermore, a size shrinkage of about 10 nm occurs in the following IBE etching process due to the shadowing effect,38 which is good news for pattern transfer. So, the shape and size of the slots in the mask could be further optimized to reduce proximity effect and get smaller critical dimensions of the generated patterns.
We further transfer discrete and anisotropic patterns by the multilayer etching process as illustrated in Fig. 6a. The bottom silver layer (50 nm), middle SiO2 layer (20 nm) and top silver layer (50 nm) were thermally evaporated on the fused quartz substrate in sequence. The cross section of the PR–Ag–SiO2–Ag layer is demonstrated in Fig. 6b (see ESI for details†). The hard-mask film stack consisting of the top silver layer and SiO2 layer was applied to transfer the pattern into the bottom silver layer.39,40 First, the photoresist pattern was transferred into the top silver layer by means of the IBE, and the corresponding SEM image of the pattern after the IBE process is shown in Fig. 6c. Subsequently, with the protection of the silver mask layer, reactive ion etching (RIE) was employed to transfer the pattern into the SiO2 layer. CHF3 was utilized as the etching gas with a flow rate of 20 sccm (stand cubic centimeter per minute) and the etching pressure was 1 Pa while RF power was 10 W. The etching process lasted for 130 s. The very slow etching rate of silver in the RIE process results in the consumption of the top silver film being below 5 nm, so the remaining thickness of the top silver film is about 30 nm. Fig. 6d reveals the prepared hard-mask film stack composed of silver and SiO2 after the RIE process. Finally, The IBE selectivity of silver and silica was 2:1. As a result, the total thickness of the hard-mask film stack (∼30 nm silver and 20 nm silica) was sufficient to transfer the pattern into 50 nm thick bottom silver layer by the IBE method. Finally the Ag metalens of 50 nm thickness over a thin silica layer was successfully fabricated as illustrated in Fig. 6e. The size of the nano-slot is about 75 (±10) nm × 150 (±10) nm. Employing a multilayer etching process could increase the thickness of the obtained metasurfaces. In addition, it is reasonable to believe that other materials, such as gold, aluminium and Si, could be transferred as metasurfaces devices by reflective plasmonic lens lithography. It is worth mentioning that all photoresist patterns in our experiments were achieved with the same mask, so reflective plasmonic lens lithography could offer a high-throughput and low-cost method to fabricate a series of nanostructure arrays with identical optical responses.
 Fig. 6  (a) The schematic diagram of the pattern transfer by the hard-mask process. (b) The SEM of the cross-sectional view of the PR–Ag–SiO2–Ag layers. (c)–(e) The corresponding SEM images of the pattern after IBE, RIE and IBE processes (scale bar, 200 nm). 
The method presented in this paper has some limitations. One is that the ratio between mask pattern and resist pattern is 1:1, thus making mask fabrication somewhat inconvenient. The other limitation is associated with the extra etching steps for pattern transfer to functional layer, mainly due to the existence of silver film beneath the resist layer. In spite of these limitations, the method provides a parallel, low cost, large area and super resolution lithography method for the fabrication of nano structures. It is possible to improve the lithography resolution by some efforts. For instance, the reduction of spacer and resist thickness would deliver enhanced contrast and further shrinkage of resolvable critical dimension, as seen in Fig. 3c.
Optical measurement experiment
The anisotropically arrayed nano-slots metasurfaces fabricated by reflective plasmonics lens lithography can focus the helicity-dependent plane wave into a spot, and the optical principle is shown in the ESI, Fig. S4.† To characterize the optical features of the fabricated metalens by reflective plasmonics lens lithography, the schematic of the measurement system is demonstrated in Fig. 7a. A linear polarizer (P1) and a quarter wave plate (QWP1) are placed in front of the sample to generate the desired circularly polarized light illumination. A conventional optical microscope with a 100× objective lens was placed on the back of the sample and another convex lens positioned in front of the charge-coupled device (CCD) to magnify and capture the images. The second linear polarizer (P2) and quarter wave plate (QWP2) pair is positioned in the optical path in order to eliminate background light with same handedness and collect only cross-polarization light with opposite handedness. The stage resolution along the vertical direction (z-axis) was 0.25 μm, the sample under test was mounted on the microscope stage with the metasurface side up. By changing the height of the stage in increments of 0.25 μm, we obtained intensity images at different distances from the metasurface on the transmission side.
 Fig. 7  (a) The schematic of the optical measurement setup. (b)–(e) The cross sections intensity distribution for the circularly polarized light with 633 nm wavelength, experimental intensity distributions in the xy plane (b) and in the xz plane (c), simulated intensity distributions in the xy plane (d) and in the xz plane (f). The inset maps in (b) and (c) show intensity distributions along the x-axis and z-axis. The white and red curves represent the results of simulation and experiment, respectively. (f)–(i) The cross sections intensity distribution for the circularly polarized light with 532 nm wavelength, experimental intensity distributions in the xy plane (f) and in the xz plane (g), simulated intensity distributions in the xy plane (h) and in the xz plane (i). 
We measured the focusing property of the fabricated metalens with 50 nm thickness in visible light. Fig. 7b–i show the results of measurement and simulation for the circular polarized incident light with wavelengths of 633 nm and 532 nm. The full widths at half maximum (FWHM) and the depth of focus (DOF) are shown in the inset maps in Fig. 7b and g, and c and g, respectively. In comparison with the simulation, the obvious divergence of measured focus pattern is the slight increase of lateral focus size. For instance, the measured FWHM at 633 nm is 465 nm, a bit larger than the designed result of 398 nm. Similar phenomena could be observed for the case of light with a wavelength of 532 nm. The widened focus size, we believe, could be mainly attributed to fabrication errors of metasurface structures. This point could be seen from the slot size influence analysis (please see ESI, Fig. S5†), which shows that a slot size deviation of ±10 nm would result in ∼20° error of phase and ∼3% error of efficiency value. On the other hand, the deviation does not bring significant influence to the depth of focus. The measured DOF results agrees with those from simulations, and the slight difference in Fig. 7c and g could be ignored, considering the finite stage increment of 0.25 μm in the measuring process.
The focusing efficiency of the fabricated metalens is estimated by the ratio between the power of the cross-polarized transmitted light and the total incident light power. In theory, the maximum efficiency for a transmission type single-layer metasurface is 25% due to the limit of polarization conversion.41 But the focusing efficiency of the designed metalens with 50 nm thickness is only about 15% for light with a wavelength of 633 nm, and 9.7% for light with a wavelength of 532 nm, mainly influenced by the low transmission of a single hole, light absorption in metal etc. The measured focusing efficiency (∼11% for 633 nm and 5% for 532 nm) is a bit smaller, due to the fabrication errors such as width increase and shape degradation etc. Also the thickness of the metalens shows great influence, as shown in the ESI, Fig. S6,† where metalens sample fabrication with a single etching step and 35 nm thickness shows smaller efficiencies of ∼8% (633 nm) and ∼3% (532 nm). In spite of the low efficiency presented here, it is believed that the reflective metalens would deliver much higher efficiency (>80%).15,42
Conclusions
In this work, we have demonstrated a novel approach for the high throughput nanofabrication of artificial metasurface structures by plasmonic imaging lithography. Employing a reflective plasmonic lens could amplify and compensate evanescent waves, and then relieve the issues of poor fidelity, low contrast and ultra small pattern depth which are present in conventional near field optical lithography. As examples, anisotropically arrayed nano-slots metasurfaces could be fabricated by further single-layer and multi-layer transfer etching processes. The metalens with anisotropically arrayed nano-slots showed good focusing performance in experiments as representative evidence for the achievable pattern quality. Plasmonic reflective lens lithography offers a scheme of nano-fabrication with high resolution and low cost due to applicable resist materials and conventional light sources. In addition, it is believed that this method, as a parallel, low cost, and large area nano fabrication process, would find potentially promising applications in the fabrication of a variety of flat metasurfaces structures employed in color filters, meta-holograms, vortex phase plates, surface plasmon polariton couplers, bio-sensors and solar cells etc.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Na Yao and Zuojun Zhang for fruitful discussions. This work was supported by the 973 Program of China (no. 2013CBA01700) and the National Natural Science Funds (no. 61138002).
Notes and references
T. W. Ebbesen, H. Lezec, H. Ghaemi, T. Thio and P. Wolff, Nature, 1998, 391, 667–669 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Shelby, D. R. Smith and S. Schultz, Science, 2001, 292, 77–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Luo and L. Yan, IEEE Photonics J., 2012, 4, 590–595 CrossRef .
N. Landy, S. Sajuyigbe, J. Mock, D. Smith and W. Padilla, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 207402 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Feng, M. Pu, C. Hu and X. Luo, Opt. Lett., 2012, 37, 2133–2135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Pendry, D. Schurig and D. R. Smith, Science, 2006, 312, 1780–1782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yu, P. Genevet, M. A. Kats, F. Aieta, J.-P. Tetienne, F. Capasso and Z. Gaburro, Science, 2011, 334, 333–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. Hao, M. Qiu, S. Zouhdi, J. K. W. Yang and C.-W. Qiu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12303–12309 RSC .
M. Pu, P. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Zhao, C. Huang, C. Wang, X. Ma and X. Luo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 131906 CrossRef .
N. K. Grady, J. E. Heyes, D. R. Chowdhury, Y. Zeng, M. T. Reiten, A. K. Azad, A. J. Taylor, D. A. Dalvit and H.-T. Chen, Science, 2013, 340, 1304–1307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yin, Z. Ye, J. Rho, Y. Wang and X. Zhang, Science, 2013, 339, 1405–1407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ni, S. Ishii, A. V. Kildishev and V. M. Shalaev, Light: Sci. Appl., 2013, 2, e72 CrossRef .
X. Chen, L. Huang, H. Mühlenbernd, G. Li, B. Bai, Q. Tan, G. Jin, C.-W. Qiu, S. Zhang and T. Zentgraf, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1198 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Tang, C. Wang, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, M. Pu, X. Li, P. Gao and X. Luo, Laser Photonics Rev., 2015 DOI:10.1002/lpor201500182 .
M. Pu, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, X. Li, X. Ma, C. Hu, C. Wang, C. Huang and X. Luo, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-F. Chen, C.-T. Ku, Y.-H. Tai, P.-K. Wei, H.-N. Lin and C.-B. Huang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2746–2750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pu, X. Li, X. Ma, Y. Wang, Z. Zhao, C. Wang, C. Hu, P. Gao, C. Huang, H. Ren, X. Li, F. Qin, J. Yang, M. Gu, M. Hong and X. Luo, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500396 Search PubMed .
L. Huang, X. Chen, H. Mühlenbernd, H. Zhang, S. Chen, B. Bai, Q. Tan, G. Jin, K.-W. Cheah and C.-W. Qiu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2808 Search PubMed .
X. Ni, A. V. Kildishev and V. M. Shalaev, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2807 Search PubMed .
J. Lin, J. B. Mueller, Q. Wang, G. Yuan, N. Antoniou, X.-C. Yuan and F. Capasso, Science, 2013, 340, 331–334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Luo, M. Pu, X. Ma and X. Li, Int. J. Antennas Propag., 2015, 2015, 204127 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Chou, P. R. Krauss and P. J. Renstrom, Science, 1996, 272, 85–87 CAS .
A. K. Bates, M. Rothschild, T. M. Bloomstein, T. H. Fedynyshyn, R. R. Kunz, V. Liberman and M. Switkes, IBM J. Res. Dev., 2001, 45, 605–614 CrossRef .
R. H. Stulen and D. W. Sweeney, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 1999, 35, 694–699 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alkaisi, R. Blaikie and S. McNab, Microelectron. Eng., 2000, 53, 237–240 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alkaisi, R. Blaikie, S. McNab, R. Cheung and D. Cumming, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 3560–3562 CrossRef CAS .
R. Blaikie, M. Alkaisi, S. McNab, D. Cumming, R. Cheung and D. Hasko, Microelectron. Eng., 1999, 46, 85–88 CrossRef CAS .
N. Fang, H. Lee, C. Sun and X. Zhang, Science, 2005, 308, 534–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Taubner, D. Korobkin, Y. Urzhumov, G. Shvets and R. Hillenbrand, Science, 2006, 313, 1595–1595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chaturvedi, W. Wu, V. Logeeswaran, Z. Yu, M. S. Islam, S. Wang, R. S. Williams and N. X. Fang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 043102 CrossRef .
P. Gao, N. Yao, C. Wang, Z. Zhao, Y. Luo, Y. Wang, G. Gao, K. Liu, C. Zhao and X. Luo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 093110 CrossRef .
M. D. Arnold and R. J. Blaikie, Opt. Express, 2007, 15, 11542–11552 CrossRef .
C. Wang, P. Gao, Z. Zhao, N. Yao, Y. Wang, L. Liu, K. Liu and X. Luo, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 20683–20691 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Luo, Sci. China: Phys., Mech. Astron., 2015, 58, 594201 CrossRef .
H. Liu, B. Wang, L. Ke, J. Deng, C. C. Choy, M. S. Zhang, L. Shen, S. A. Maier and J. H. Teng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3777–3783 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, B. Wang, L. Ke, J. Deng, C. C. Chum, S. L. Teo, L. Shen, S. A. Maier and J. Teng, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1549–1554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, H. Jung, S. Kim, J. Jang, J. Lee and J. Hahn, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 19296–19309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gokan and S. Esho, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 1981, 18, 23–27 CrossRef .
S. Chhajed, W. Lee, J. Cho, E. F. Schubert and J. K. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 071102 CrossRef .
T. Ghoshal, R. Senthamaraikannan, M. T. Shaw, J. D. Holmes and M. A. Morris, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7743–7750 RSC .
F. Monticone, N. M. Estakhri and A. Alù, Phys. Rev. Lett, 2013, 110, 203903 CrossRef .
A. Pors, M. G. Nielsen, R. L. Eriksen and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 829–834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Permittivities measured by spectroscopic ellipsometry, optimizing the thickness of film, the effect of surface topography on the imaging quality, the detail of Fig. 5b and 6b, the optical principles of anisotropic arrayed nano-slots metasurfaces, and the results of measurement and simulation of a fabricated metalens with a thickness of about 35 nm. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr05153c‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) The schematic of the imaging lithography structure with reflective silver lens. (b) The top view of the Cr mask with 2D nano-slot arrays and parabolic phase distributions. The size of the nano-slots is 40 nm × 120 nm, and the period is 200 nm.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Calculated electric field intensity distributions at 15 nm above the reflective Ag–PR interface for two orthogonal linear polarization light illumination. (b) Control simulation result where the reflective Ag slab is replaced by SiO2. The inset maps in (a) and (b) are the local magnified graph of the blue dash line region. (c) and (d) are the cross-section electric field intensities profiles in the xz plane at the positions of white dashed line depicted in the inset map of (a) and (b). The light intensity distributions at different z positions, at z = 0 nm (blue), 15 nm (red), and 30 nm (green) in PR are plotted in (e) and (f).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Calculated electric field intensity distributions at the Ag–PR interface using incoherent x and y polarization light illumination when the air gap is 10 nm. (b) The control simulation result in the SiO2–PR interface where the reflective Ag slab is replaced by SiO2. (c) The intensity contrast C1 and C2 versus size of the air gap for the structure with and without the reflective Ag slab. The intensity C1 and C2 are calculated for the typical Ag–PR and SiO2–PR interface along the direction y = 0 nm and x = 0 nm (black dashed line in (a) and (b)). (d) The size D1 and D2 of nano-slot versus air gap for the structure with and without the reflective Ag slab. The size of D1 and D2 are calculated for the image contour (0.4 intensity level) at the Ag–PR and SiO2–PR interface (black solid curve in (a) and (b)).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The SEM photograph of the mask pattern with nano-slot arrays, the size of the nano-slot is 45 (±5) nm × 125 (±5) nm. (b)–(d) The SEM image of the photoresist of the pattern at the typical exposure times of 20 s, 30 s and 40 s (scale bar, 200 nm). The optimized exposure time was 30 s. (e) Control experiment result without the Ag lens with the same photoresist thickness, exposure condition and development time. (f) The size of D1 and D2 of resist pattern vary with exposure time.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The schematic diagram of the pattern transfer by IBE process. (b) The SEM of the cross-sectional view of the fabricated PR and reflective Ag lens (scale bar, 100 nm). (c) The photograph of the fabricated metalens after the IBE process under the optimized exposure time of 30 s (scale bar, 200 nm).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The schematic diagram of the pattern transfer by the hard-mask process. (b) The SEM of the cross-sectional view of the PR–Ag–SiO2–Ag layers. (c)–(e) The corresponding SEM images of the pattern after IBE, RIE and IBE processes (scale bar, 200 nm).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The schematic of the optical measurement setup. (b)–(e) The cross sections intensity distribution for the circularly polarized light with 633 nm wavelength, experimental intensity distributions in the xy plane (b) and in the xz plane (c), simulated intensity distributions in the xy plane (d) and in the xz plane (f). The inset maps in (b) and (c) show intensity distributions along the x-axis and z-axis. The white and red curves represent the results of simulation and experiment, respectively. (f)–(i) The cross sections intensity distribution for the circularly polarized light with 532 nm wavelength, experimental intensity distributions in the xy plane (f) and in the xz plane (g), simulated intensity distributions in the xy plane (h) and in the xz plane (i).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Permittivities measured by spectroscopic ellipsometry, optimizing the thickness of film, the effect of surface topography on the imaging quality, the detail of Fig. 5b and 6b, the optical principles of anisotropic arrayed nano-slots metasurfaces, and the results of measurement and simulation of a fabricated metalens with a thickness of about 35 nm. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr05153c
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
