Simultaneous enhancement of charge generation quantum yield and carrier transport in organic solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TC02133B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TC02133B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10799-10812Simultaneous enhancement of charge generation quantum yield and carrier transport in organic solar cells†

        
          
            Ardalan 
            Armin
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Pascal 
            Wolfer
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Paul E. 
            Shaw
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mike 
            Hambsch
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fatemeh 
            Maasoumi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mujeeb 
            Ullah
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Eliot 
            Gann
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Christopher R. 
            McNeill
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Li
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Zugui 
            Shi
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Paul L. 
            Burn
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Paul 
            Meredith
          
        
      a
aCentre for Organic Photonics & Electronics (COPE), School of Mathematics and Physics and School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane 4072, Australia. E-mail: a.armin@uq.edu.au; p.burn2@uq.edu.au
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia
cInstitute of Materials Research and Engineering, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore 117602
Received 
      15th July 2015
    , Accepted 15th September 2015First published on 24th September 2015AbstractBulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells and photodiodes require optimised active layer structures for both charge carrier photo-generation and extraction to occur efficiently. The most efficient polymer:fullerene devices comprising narrow optical gap donor polymers invariably have a high fullerene fraction. In such circumstances photo-generated carrier extraction is compromised, as charge transport is often unbalanced with electron transport in the fullerene dominating. In this current work we study the high efficiency blend system poly(2,5-{2-octyldodecyl}-3,6-diketopyrrolopyrrole-alt-5,5-{2′,5′-di[thien-2-yl]thieno[3,2-b]thiophene}) (DPP–DTT):phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM). We show that by manipulating the packing of the (DPP–DTT) chains, large hole mobilities >0.02 cm2 V−1 s−1 can be obtained in a simple polymer-only diode. More importantly, when blended with PC70BM in a 1:3 ratio the hole mobility was found to increase to 0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1. This is the first case of a polymer:fullerene solar cell where the charge carrier transport is limited by the electron mobility of the fullerene rather than the hole mobility of the donor material. Photophysical measurements reveal that the charge generation quantum yield is also enhanced when the DPP–DTT chains are optimally packed. The simultaneous improvement of the charge transport properties and charge generation quantum yield delivers an order of magnitude increase in the power conversion efficiency.
Introduction
Organic solar cells (OSCs) based on an electron “donor” and “acceptor” blend have developed rapidly during the last decade with power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) now above 10%.1–3 The simplest device architecture featuring an interface between electron accepting and electron donating (macro)molecules is based on a bilayer structure, which is sandwiched between two electrodes. However, the relatively short exciton diffusion length in organic semiconducting materials,4,5 leads to the situation where the active layer thicknesses have to be less than that required for efficient light harvesting, and hence bilayer OSCs typically have relatively low PCEs. An alternative approach is where the active compounds are co-deposited to form a bi-continuous network.6,7 In the case of polymer-based OSCs the “donor” and “acceptor” combination is often deposited from the same solution to form a so-called bulk heterojunction (BHJ). If processed appropriately, such polymer-based solar cells exhibit a spontaneously formed nano-scale structure, with a large interface between the donor and acceptor phases. The power conversion efficiencies of these cells significantly exceed that of bilayer structures.8
Polymer-based BHJ solar cells are relatively simple to fabricate but complex in terms of the underlying mechanisms of carrier generation and extraction in relation to film structure. Although many studies have been performed to elucidate these structure–property relationships there is still a lack of understanding in areas such as the charge transfer state dissociation,9,10 effect of spin,11 effect of incident photon excess energy,12–14 and the donor–acceptor nano-morphology.15–17 Despite this complexity, the overall external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the solar cell can be simply defined in terms of photo-physical and charge collection efficiencies and written as EQE = ηaηCGηCC,(1)where, ηa is the photon absorption efficiency, ηCG the efficiency of free charge carrier generation [which incorporates exciton dissociation efficiency to charge transfer (CT) states or free charge carriers, and the efficiency of CT state dissociation to free polarons], and ηCC is the charge carrier collection efficiency, i.e., how efficiently the free polarons can be collected at the electrodes. In BHJs, all three efficiencies (ηi) depend on the structure/morphology of the BHJ active layer (junction), which includes the characteristic size of the donor and the acceptor phases/interfaces,18 the purity of the individual phases,19 and the packing within those phases.20 Therefore, film structure strongly impacts charge carrier mobilities via altering of the percolation paths, as well as charge carrier recombination via confinement of the carriers in the domains of the separate phases. Consequently, optoelectronic phenomena in BHJ solar cells are quite complex. For example, free electrons and holes can interact at the many interfaces which are present in a bulk heterojunction donor/acceptor blend. This makes the evaluation of the recombination processes significantly more complicated in these structures relative to bilayers. As a consequence, the relationship between film structure and transport physics is of critical importance in the search for ever more efficient BHJ solar cells, and has been the subject of considerable efforts. For example, film structure or morphology have been manipulated by changing the donor polymer molecular weight,2,21 thermal annealing post junction deposition,22 solvent annealing,23 and using processing additives. The latter method, which is relevant to this current work, has not only been used in polymeric18,24,25,26 but also non-polymeric27,28 BHJ systems. A well-known example is poly({4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl}{3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl}):[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PTB7:PC70BM), where addition of a small amount of the high boiling point additive 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) can result in substantially increased device efficiencies.24 This improvement has also been shown for other polymeric systems where addition of small amounts of 1,2-dichlorobenzene (DCB) can have a similar effect.33 However, at this time there is not a single solvent combination that is universal for all polymer-based OSCs, with each new material having to be optimised empirically.
Narrow optical gap copolymers such as poly[N-9′′-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4,7-di-2-thienyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT),30 poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta [2,1-b;3,4-b′]dithiophene)-alt-4,7(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCPDTBT),31 and those based on the diketopyrrolo-pyrrole (DPP) unit18,25,29,32,33 have attracted significant attention as donor materials for BHJ solar cells. Such copolymers require large fullerene fractions in the blend for the OSC to operate efficiently. We have recently shown that in the most efficient devices comprised of PCDTBT:PC70BM blends (80 wt% of the fullerene) efficient charge generation can occur but the mobility is 100 times imbalanced (the electron being faster) leading to the requirement for thin junctions (<100 nm).34 Conversely, in devices with fullerene loadings that result in balanced electron and hole mobilities, the device efficiency is inferior and in particular the internal quantum efficiency is low suggesting a poor free carrier generation yield. A recent publication by Gélinas et al.10 suggested that a large fullerene loading in polymer:fullerene blends results in band-like states in fullerene aggregates that aid CT-state dissociation via relatively long-range electron wavefunction delocalization. The large fullerene fraction appears particularly important in the recently emerging branch of donor/acceptor copolymers containing a DPP moiety. High efficiency solar cells have been reported with large fill factors and PCEs even in thick junctions.21,33 It has been suggested that the large field-effect mobility of these polymers is related to the (semi) ordering of the molecules in thin films,35,36 and that this to a certain extent could positively impact solar cell performance.
In this paper, we report a study on BHJ solar cells that incorporate poly(2,5-{2-octyldodecyl}-3,6-diketopyrrolopyrrole-alt-5,5-{2′,5′-di[thien-2-yl]thieno[3,2-b]thiophene}) (DPP–DTT) as the donor material. DPP–DTT was developed for high performance field-effect transistors (FETs), having hole mobilities of up to 10 cm2 V−1 s−1 in that configuration.35 More recently this polymer has been shown to give OSCs with good efficiency.21 In this work, we show the performance of DPP–DTT:PC70BM BHJ devices is strongly dependent on the molecular weight of the polymer and processing solvents. The role solvent composition plays in the fullerene and DPP-based polymer aggregation and film formation has recently been investigated by Franeker et al.26 We extend this by investigating the optoelectronic properties of DPP–DTT:PC70BM as a model system to understand the reason behind the PCE enhancement upon changing the molecular weight and solvent composition. We use a combination of structural, electrical and photophysical measurements to link polymer chain orientation with transport and photo-generation efficiencies. In particular, we show that a large hole mobility can be obtained in DPP–DTT diodes when the polymer chains are oriented in an edge-on packing via solvent annealing. We also show that adding 75 wt% PC70BM to the polymer film has no detrimental impact on the hole mobility but actually increases it by approximately an order of magnitude. Photoinduced absorption spectroscopy (PIAS) measurements reveal that in DPP–DTT:PC70BM blends, the charge generation is also dependent on the molecular weight of the polymer and the processing solvent. Polymer solar cells using DPP–DTT:PC70BM blends are unique as they are the first examples of polymer:fullerene BHJ devices in which the hole mobility is greater than the fullerene electron mobility. Hence, they are promising for the development of efficient thick-junction organic solar cells if alternative higher mobility (non-fullerene) acceptors can be created.
Results
Solar cell characteristics
In a first step, DPP–DTT:PC70BM BHJ solar cells with 240 ± 30 nm thick (corresponding to the second interference absorption peak) active layers were prepared from two different DPP–DTT molecular weights, referred to as low w = 50 kDa and high w = 350 kDa (see Experimental for details). It is important to note that the polydispersities of the two polymers were similar (PDI ∼ 2.8). For the first set of devices the two materials were co-dissolved in chloroform (CF) in a DPP–DTT:PC70BM ratio of 1:3 by weight. Typical current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics and external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) of these devices are shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b). Both low and high w polymer blends delivered low photocurrents and EQEs (<12%). The solar cell performance parameters of the devices are summarized in Table 1 (averages of 12 devices and relevant statistics). The low boiling point of CF led to a rapid evaporation process and drying of the film during spin-coating. To change the kinetics of the film drying process, 7% DCB was added to the CF. The resultant J–V and EQE characteristics of these devices (again representative data) are shown in Fig. 1(c) and (d). Whereas photocurrent and PCE of the low w polymer blend did not improve significantly, a substantial improvement was observed for the high w polymer blend. An average PCE of 5.8% was achieved for devices with a 220 nm thick active layer. However, our best devices had efficiencies up to 6.8% upon fine optimization of the thickness (see ESI†, Fig. S1). We and others have previously shown that narrow optical gap polymer:acceptor blends often exhibit spectrally featureless IQEs.9,12,37 In contrast, the DPP–DTT:PC70BM devices have two distinct IQE regions that correspond to differences in the charge generation efficiencies for photoinduced hole transfer (acceptor excitation – Channel II) and electron transfer (donor excitation – Channel I).13 The spectral shape of the EQE here is then influenced by the non-flat (step-like) IQE in addition to optical interference within the low finesse cavity of the solar cell. However, the key point is that the overall magnitude of the EQE is substantially different for the high w polymer blends spin-coated from CF and CF–DCB.
 Fig. 1  Current density–voltage (J–V) curves and external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra for high and low w DPP–DTT:PC70BM solar cells spin-coated from a CF solution (a) and (b), respectively, and from a CF–DCB solution (c) and (d), respectively. The integrated EQE is in agreement with short circuit current within 10% error. The thickness of the active layer for all devices was 240 ± 30 nm. All data are representative of multiple devices. 
Table 1 Performance parameters of DPP–DTT:PC70BM solar cells cast from CF and CF–DCB solutions. Averages are presented with accompanying statistics from 12 devices (standard deviation of the mean indicated in the brackets)




Sample type

d [nm]

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [V]
FF
PCE [%]




High w:PC70BM CF/7%DCB
220(20)
15.5(0.5)
0.65(0.00)
0.58(0.02)
5.8(0.3)


High w:PC70BM CF
220(20)
1.8(0.1)
0.56(0.02)
0.68(0.02)
0.7(0.1)


Low w:PC70BM CF/7%DCB
240(30)
1.8(0.1)
0.66(0.00)
0.45(0.03)
0.5(0.1)


Low w:PC70BM CF
240(50)
1.6(0.1)
0.41(0.01)
0.52(0.02)
0.3(0.1)




The significant enhancement in solar cell performance of the high w polymer blend from the CF–DCB solution and difference with the low w blends could originate either from an improved charge generation efficiency, charge carrier collection efficiency or a combination of both. We now investigate the film structure, viscosities of the solutions from whence the films were cast, and describe the photophysical and charge transport measurements undertaken to elucidate the origin in the differences of the efficiency.
Physical properties – Viscosity and intermolecular interactions
To get a more comprehensive picture of polymer–polymer interchain interactions in DPP–DTT solutions, temperature-dependent viscosity measurements were performed. For these experiments, DCB was selected as the solvent for two main reasons: first, CF has a higher vapour pressure than DCB and when used in a mixture it evaporates more rapidly meaning that the intermolecular interactions that lead to the formation of the final interconnected networks during film formation can be considered to effectively occur in DCB; and second, the interactions were found to be most pronounced in solutions with DCB due to aggregate formation starting at relatively low concentrations. The aggregated state represents a polymer chain arrangement in between that of the solid state (films) and solution (in CF or CF–DCB). Fig. 2(a) and (b) show the relative viscosities of DPP–DTT depending on solution concentration and temperature for the high w and low w polymers, respectively. Both concentration and temperature were found to have a strong effect on the solution viscosity for the high w polymer. This behaviour is characterised by a significant increase in the viscosity upon either increasing the solution concentration or decreasing the solution temperature. This observation is an indication of the presence of strong intermolecular interactions, already effective at relatively low concentrations.38 That is, the high w polymer chains interact stronger and sooner during spin-coating leading to an extended interconnected network. A similar effect was not present in solutions of the low w polymer and only a moderate sensitivity to the concentration and solution temperature was observed. Moreover, the relative viscosity of the high w polymer dissolved in DCB was found to be strongly dependent on the cooling rate of the solution from elevated temperature (>80 °C) to ambient (∼25 °C), whereas the effect for the low w polymer was negligible (Fig. 2(c)). This phenomenon was first observed by Wolfer et al.38 in high molecular weight PCDTBT and is indicative of strong intermolecular interactions between the polymer chains. The cooling-rate-dependent viscosity of the high w polymer supports the presence of strong interchain interactions that facilitate formation of an interconnected network during spin-coating to form the film.
 Fig. 2  Relative viscosity of high (a) and low (b) w DPP–DTT solutions (in DCB) versus temperature and concentration. (c) Relative viscosity for DPP–DTT solutions (in DCB) having undergone a fast cooling or slow cooling process from 140 °C. There are significant differences between fast cooled and slow cooled solutions in the case of high w DPP–DTT, while the effect is much less pronounced in case of the low w polymer. (d) Molecular structures of PCDTBT and DPP–DTT. 
Physical properties – grazing incident wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS)
Having ascertained that there were significant differences in the solution properties of the polymers of different molecular weights, we next studied the film structures using GIWAXS. Measurements were carried out on both the low and high w DPP–DTT polymers and their blends from CF and CF–DCB solutions (8 samples). The GIWAXS patterns are shown in Fig. 3(a–h). The polymer component of the neat films was found to be more crystalline with up to four orders of alkyl stacking reflections and more pronounced π-stacking than the corresponding blend films. In addition, the molecular orientation in films of the high w polymer featured a strong solvent sensitivity (alkyl stacking highly in-plane/face-on with CF, alkyl stacking highly out-of-plane/edge-on with addition of DCB). Fig. 3(i–l) show the one-dimensional profiles in- and out-of-plane (corresponding to vertical and horizontal scattering, respectively) for the full set of samples. For the high w polymer films fabricated from CF solution, π-stacking was found to be predominantly out-of-plane with a minor but detectable degree of in-plane ordering. The high w neat polymer films processed from CF–DCB featured a predominantly in-plane π-stacking orientation with no observable out-of-plane π-stacking peak. As with the alkyl stacking, this indicates a face-on orientation from films processed with CF, and an edge-on orientation for films processed with a CF–DCB mixture. The low w samples appear to crystallize more readily, especially when deposited from chloroform and show a pronounced edge-on character when processed either from CF or CF–DCB. For the CF–DCB blend the scattering patterns of the low w and high w samples are rather similar. In Table 2 a more detailed analysis from peak fitting the GIWAXS data is presented. There are a number of important conclusions we can draw from this data, and these are as follows: (i) considering the details of the stacking behaviour from Table 2, we can conclude that CF–DCB causes a higher degree of orientational order, i.e., the full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) of the orientation distribution is smaller in comparison to that for CF alone; (ii) PC70BM is clearly affecting the packing behaviour of the high w polymer, lowering both the alkyl spacing and out of plane π-stacking distance in films cast from both solvents; (iii) adding DCB to the processing solution of the high w polymer switches alignment from predominantly face-on to predominantly edge-on, both with and without PC70BM; (iv) the low w films have longer coherence lengths along the alkyl stacking direction compared to high w, perhaps the result of the higher molecular weight polymer having a higher degree of hindrance that stops the formation of extended crystals; and (v) both DCB and PC70BM decrease alkyl stacking as well as the total amount of π-aggregation in films of the low w polymer. It must, however, be noted that recent work36 has shown that long-range microstructural order as revealed by GIWAXS does not necessarily correlate with local aggregate order as revealed by optical techniques. Thus while the low w polymer may show superior long range order it does not necessarily possess superior short range order such as backbone planarity and interchain coupling.
 Fig. 3  (a–h) 2D GIWAXS patterns of the neat high w polymer film spin-coated from CF (a), CF–DCB (b), and as a blend with PC70BM from CF (c) and CF–DCB (d), as well as neat films of low w polymer spin-coated from CF (e), CF–DCB (f), and as a blend with PC70BM from CF (g) and CF–DCB (h). 1D plots of scattering intensity of the blend (i and k) and neat (j and l) films out-of-plane (i and j) and in-plane (k and l). 
Table 2 Fitting results for the GIWAXS patterns as shown in Fig. 2. The uncertainties are specified in brackets




Molecular weight
High w
Low w


Neat
PC70BM blend
Neat
PC70BM blend




Solvent
CF
CF–DCB
CF
CF–DCB
CF
CF–DCB
CF
CF–DCB


Orientational width FWHM [deg]
23.6(2)
16.7(1)
26(1)
20(4)
23.4(1)
16.8(3)
28.5(3)
15.4(1)


Out of plane alkyl spacing [nm]
1.953(3)
1.973(1)
1.926(3)
1.876(2)
1.970(1)
1.957(6)
1.97(1)
1.944(2)


Out of plane alkyl coherence length [nm]
4.65(7)
10.9(1)
6.3(1)
5.88(7)
12.5(1)
10.7(4)
8.6(5)
13.8(3)


Out of plane alkyl peak area [AU]
273(8)
757(9)
122(3)
208(4)
805(9)
586(20)
420(20)
200(5)


In plane alkyl spacing [nm]
2.031(4)
2.19(1)
1.997(3)
2.049(7)
2.017(4)
2.020(3)
2.039(2)
2.019(1)


In plane alkyl coherence length [nm]
7.5(2)
5.2(1)
9.7(2)
6.7(2)
10.1(3)
8.5(2)
10.4(1)
15.1(2)


In plane alkyl peak area [AU]
125(5)
27(2)
24.6(4)
27(3)
37(2)
5.6(2)
19.0(4)
10.5(1)


Out of plane π-stacking spacing [nm]
0.391(1)


0.368(1)
0.366(1)
0.396(1)
0.371(8)
0.362(1)
0.389(1)


Out of plane π-stacking coherence length [nm]
2.9(2)


1.39(6)
1.40(8)
1.63(5)
1.7(2)
1.57(6)
7.1(7)


Out of plane π-stacking peak area [AU]
70(5)


138(8)
128(9)
90(4)
42(10)
667(3)
1.0(1)


In-plane π-stacking spacing [nm]
0.388(4)
0.38(1)




0.383(1)
0.388(1)


0.391(1)


In plane π-stacking coherence length [nm]
4(2)
3.4(8)




2.2(2)
4.8(2)


5.8(7)


In plane π-stacking peak area [AU]
4(3)
6(5)




25(9)
2.9(2)


2.2(6)




Photophysical properties – optical absorption
The film absorption spectra for the two w polymers and their blends (as thin films on glass) cast from CF and CF–DCB solvents are shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b). It can be clearly seen that neat films of the low w polymer have a lower absorption coefficient (factor of three) than the high w polymer independent of the solvent used. In addition, the long wavelength absorption feature (600–900 nm) is broader for the low w films. In high w polymer and blend films, sharper peaks are observed with two small shoulders at ∼700 nm and ∼800 nm for films prepared from both CF and CF–DCB. Moreover, the long wavelength peak is red shifted in the films spin-coated from CF compared with CF–DCB. This is indicative of the previously observed differences in the packing characteristic length (e.g., π–π stacking) of the polymer chains resulting in different interchain coupling strengths. Micrographs of the low and high w polymer films and their blends from CF–DCB solution are shown in Fig. 4(c) under unpolarized and polarized light. In the case of the low w polymer, distinct microstructural features were observed both for the neat polymer and blend films characteristic of a long-range liquid crystalline like morphology.
 Fig. 4  UV-Vis spectra of high and low w DPP–DTT polymer films (a) and their blend with PC70BM (b). Films were spin-coated from CF and CF–DCB. (c) Optical micrographs of low w and high w DPP–DTT films (top) and of DPP–DTT:PC70BM 1:3 w/w blends (bottom). Distinct microstructural features were observed for low w DPP–DTT. Addition of PC70BM to the polymer was found to significantly reduce the characteristic domain size. No corresponding features were observed in high w DPP–DTT films. The polarizer-analyzer system for polarized micrographs is indicated with white arrows. 
Having characterised the neat polymer and blend properties as a function of processing conditions, and mapped the resultant optical properties, we next turned to an analysis of the charge generation and extraction efficiencies.
Photophysical properties – photoinduced absorption spectroscopy (PIAS)
As described in the previous section, the absorption spectra shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b) are indicative of aggregation and possible differences in polymer chain packing consistent with the GIWAXS and solution viscosity observations. To probe this further, we first performed quasi-steady state PIAS on the blends to detect the presence of long-lived photo-excitations, such as polarons. The energetic distribution of such photoexcitations (and thereby their photoinduced absorption spectral shape) is dependent on the polymer chain packing, which can affect the relative balance between intra-and-inter-chain polarons.
In Fig. 5(a) the PIA spectra are presented for films of low and high w DPP–DTT processed from CF and CF–DCB solutions. For the high molecular weight DPP–DTT:PC70BM blend, similar spectra were obtained for both films cast from CF and CF–DCB, which is in agreement with spectra previously reported for DPP–DTT using charge modulation spectroscopy and PIAS.39 For both high w blends, three features in the PIA signal were observed. The low energy peak (∼0.8 eV) corresponds to charge delocalization over the individual polymer chains (intrachain transport) as clarified by Xu et al.39 by DFT calculations in combination with unipolar carrier absorption. The higher energy feature at 1.3 eV corresponds to charges delocalized over co-facially packed polymer chains, i.e., the donor site of one polymer chain (DPP unit) interacts with the donor site of another chain or the corresponding interaction of two acceptor units (DTT). The 1.3 eV peak is sharper in the case of films from CF–DCB and blue shifted in line with the differences in the absorption spectra of Fig. 4(a). This represents the onset of the ground state bleach signal, and again suggests stronger coupling between the polymer chains. An additional peak was observed by Xu et al.39 in unipolar devices at 1 eV, which corresponds to staggered polymer chain packing, i.e., the donor moiety of one chain interacts with the acceptor moiety of another chain. However, in PIAS measurements this peak is broadened compared with that measured in unipolar diodes by charge modulation spectroscopy by Xu et al. In films of the high w blends the relative ratios of the spectral features are different, with the CF-cast films showing a greater contribution to the signal from the interchain (staggered) polarons. In the case of the low molecular weight blends the PIA spectrum is broad and featureless, which suggests a higher degree of disorder than found in the high w films. This is surprising because the micrographs and GIWAXS both indicate that the low w DPP–DTT is more crystalline than the high w. This discrepancy can be partly explained by the fact that PIAS is a quasi-steady state measurement and therefore the measured signal is biased towards long-lived states. Hence, if polarons are predominantly generated in amorphous regions and cannot diffuse within their limited lifetime to the energetically preferable crystalline phase,16 the measured signal will reflect this, which we propose is the case here.
 Fig. 5  (a) Photoinduced absorption (PIA) spectra of high and low w DPP–DTT:PC70BM films spin-coated from CF and CF–DCB solvents. Distinct spectral features can be observed in the high w case. Each peak is associated with a specific polymer chain packing according to ref. 39 as marked on the figure. (b) Power dependent PIA signal for the high and low w DPP–DTT:PC70BM films. The high w DPP–DTT:PC70BM spin-coated from CF–DCB shows a much larger signal corresponding to a higher free polaron population. 
Photophysical properties – power dependent PIAS
To compare charge generation in the blends independently of charge carrier collection efficiency we compared the power dependence of the PIA signal for the high and low w DPP–DTT:PC70BM blend from CF and CF–DCB with the results shown in Fig. 5(b). Such measurements provide an estimate of charge generation efficiency although cannot be used to quantitatively compare different blends since the intensity of the PIA signal is proportional to both the charge generation quantum yield and the charge carrier lifetime. The low w blends exhibit lower PIA signal amplitudes compared to the high w blends as seen from the offset in the log-plot, which is consistent with the low photocurrent observed in the devices (see Fig. 1) and the large-scale phase separation in the blends [see Fig. 4(c)]. We find charge generation [Fig. 5(b)] several times enhanced for CF–DCB films compared with CF-only films consistent with the device efficiency observations.
Metal–insulator–semiconductor charge extraction with linearly increasing voltage (MIS-CELIV)
The PIAS results are consistent with the device and optical absorption measurements in that they point to enhanced photo-generation in blends of high w DPP–DTT. The question that now needs to be addressed is whether the charge transport properties and extraction efficiencies are enhanced at the same time. It is first important to note in considering this question that the individual carrier mobilities in a blend can differ significantly from those in the neat materials. This is mainly due to morphological issues including phase separation, nano- and micro-scale crystallinity, polymer chain packing and ordering, and electrical doping. It is also essential to understand both the slower and faster carrier mobilities in a BHJ system under the relevant operational conditions (architecture, field, junction thickness, carrier density). Whereas the slower carrier mobility limits charge collection efficiency40 through the formation of space charges,21 the faster carrier mobility also plays a role in the probability of opposite charges meeting in space thereby affecting the non-geminate (bimolecular) recombination rate.41 However, it has until recently proven very challenging to measure both mobilities in a diode configuration close to operational conditions, particularly in relation to junction thickness. Recently, we reported an injection charge extraction with linearly increasing voltage (i-CELIV) technique42 in metal–insulator–semiconductor diodes (MIS-CELIV)34 to measure electron and hole mobilities in devices that are very close to operational solar cells. This technique enables selective investigation of the electron and hole mobilities in BHJs and is therefore particularly useful for blend optimization and structure–property analysis. MIS-CELIV methodology details were reported elsewhere34 and are also summarised for convenience in the ESI† and Fig. S2.
We first applied MIS-CELIV to thin films of the high w DPP–DTT polymer deposited from CF–DCB. In Fig. 6(a) the MIS-CELIV current transients are shown for a hole-only device (see ESI† for details) when the MoOx/Ag electrode is initially set to be positive at different applied offset voltages to inject holes. From the measurement we obtained a hole mobility of 0.02 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is amongst the highest mobilities measured in a diode configuration for a semiconducting polymer. We also measured the mobility in a field effect transistor (FET) configuration (Table 3) and obtained mobility values 2 orders of magnitude larger. The differences between diode and FET mobilities are typically due to differences in the direction of charge carrier transport and the resulting density and anisotropy in transport pathways. It must be noted that we obtained zero electron mobility for the high w DPP–DTT deposited from CF–DCB using MIS-CELIV, even when large offset voltages and different low work function electrodes were used. In this case, a flat displacement current similar to the one obtained for zero offset voltage (no injection/extraction) was obtained (see ESI† Fig. S3). To confirm the MIS-CELIV results, we measured the space charge limited current in a unipolar DPP–DTT device with the structure Ag/MoOx/DPP–DTT/MoOx/Ag. By applying Mott–Gurney's law, the same mobility as determined with MIS-CELIV was obtained, which confirms the validity of the results. More importantly, high w films of DPP–DTT from CF–DCB showed unipolar space charge limited current [Fig. 6(b)] with two logarithmic slopes, of 1 and 2, at low and high voltages, respectively, with a cross over point41,43 (Vc) that corresponds to a doping level of the order 1014 cm−3. Importantly, the SCLC data can be fitted without considering the electric field (Poole Frenkel) and carrier density dependent charge carrier mobility (Gaussian disorder model). This implies that hole transport is nearly trap-free and occurs via the highly ordered polymer chains. To further support this conclusion we have plotted the transfer characteristics of a high w DPP–DTT FET in p-channel (hole transport) as shown in Fig. 6(c). It is evident that the square root of the source–drain current is linear versus the gate voltage, the turn on voltage is nearly zero, and there is only a very small hysteresis observed; all indicative of trap-free charge transport.
 Fig. 6  (a) MIS-CELIV current transients for a hole-only diode containing high w DPP–DTT deposited from a CF–DCB solution at different applied offsets. The experimental details to calculate the mobility are marked in the figure. (b) Space charge limited current (SCLC) for the same DPP–DTT deposited from CF–DCB solutions. A high charge carrier mobility of 0.02 cm2 V−1 s−1 is obtained from both MIS-CELIV and SCLC. The doping density is found to be of the order 1014 cm−3. (c) Transfer characteristics of DPP–DTT FET in p-channel mode. (VDS = 100 V). 
Table 3 Charge-carrier mobilities (in units of [cm2 V−1 s−1]) in neat and blended DPP–DTT with PC70BM films as measured by MIS-CELIV for diodes and in a field effect transistor (FET) architecture in the saturation regime. The MIS-CELIV current transients and transfer/output characteristics are shown in the ESI. The numbers in the brackets indicate the calculated uncertainty of the measurements where possible




Sample type

μ
h diode

μ
e diode

μ
h OFET

μ
e OFET




High w CF/7%DCB
2(1) × 10−2
∼0
2
1


High w CF
2(1) × 10−3
2(1) × 10−5
1
0.35


Low w CF/7%DCB
2(1) × 10−4
4(2) × 10−5
0.1
1 × 10−2


High w: PC70BM CF/7%DCB
2(1) × 10−1
1.1(0.5) × 10−3
0.1
0


High w: PC70BM CF
3(1) × 10−2
1.7(0.5) × 10−3
—
—


Low w: PC70BM CF/7%DCB
3(2) × 10−5
3(1) × 10−4
10−3(1)
0




With the MIS-CELIV data for high w DPP–DTT fabricated from CF–DCB solution in hand, we then turned our attention to the charge carrier mobilities of the other film variations including those based on the low w DPP–DTT and the blends. The mobility values measured for low and high w DPP–DTT and the respective blends with PC70BM are shown in Table 3 (note transients are shown in Fig. S4 to S8 for diodes and FETs in the ESI†). In addition, the charge transport characteristics of films of the high w DPP–DTT spin-coated from CF were explored. In contrast to the films of high w DPP–DTT fabricated from CF–DCB, bipolar charge transport was observed with the diode hole mobility 10 times lower. The bipolarity and decreased hole mobility of the CF-cast samples are most likely related to differences in the polymer chain packing when compared with CF–DCB as suggested from the absorption and PIA spectra. With only CF as the solvent the polymer films dry very quickly, reducing the time the polymer chains have to reorganize. This is in contrast to a much slower drying process in the presence of DCB. In general the low w polymer showed lower electron and hole mobilities compared to the high w species in both neat films and blends with PC70BM.
Discussion
Vertical transport through edge-on and face-on oriented polymers in neat films
As presented in Table 3, we observed bipolar charge transport in high w neat polymer diodes processed from a CF solution. The addition of DCB to the solvent resulted in an increase in hole mobility by an order of magnitude, i.e., from 0.002 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 0.02 cm2 V−1 s−1. At the same time, negligible electron mobility was observed. The transition from bipolarity to unipolarity in CF-cast to CF–DCB-cast diodes can be assigned to changes in the film structure and polymer chain spacing. As seen in the GIWAXS results in Fig. 3 and Table 2 the high w polymer films cast from CF–DCB are highly oriented with predominantly edge-on packing of the aromatic units, resulting in π-stacking with an in-plane orientation. However, there are two possibilities for lamella packing in this case: cofacial dimers (with the acceptor moiety of one DPP unit interacting with another DPP from an adjacent polymer chain, and the same for the donor moiety DTT); and staggered dimers with one DPP packed and interacting with a DTT from an adjacent polymer chain. However, from the PIA spectrum in Fig. 5(a), the peak associated with staggered packing is less pronounced. This means the π-stacking is predominantly of the form of interpolymer DPP–DPP and DTT–DTT interactions for both CF–DCB- and CF-cast high w DPP–DTT films. In such a packing configuration it is expected that electrons (whose wave functions are more localised on the DPP as the electron accepting unit) will be less delocalised across the lamella structure (perpendicular direction with respect to the substrate) because of the hindrance of the alkyl chains – placed on the DPP moiety – negatively impacting electron transport in the direction although the horizontal π-stacking should remain unhindered as seen from the high FET mobility. However, this analysis is not a quantitative predictor of whether transport should be better or worse in any configuration as the absolute positioning of the alkyl groups are not fully known, but clearly in this case there is a preferred orientation which delivers enhanced hole and suppressed electron transport leading to unipolarity of the high w DPP–DTT films spin-coated from CF–DCB. In contrast, for the CF-cast high w polymer diodes bipolar transport is observed. As seen from Table 3, an electron mobility can be measured for this case, which is however, 100 times less than that of the holes. Face-on orientation is dominant in this case and therefore, alkyl chains will not effectively hinder the π-stacking (donor to donor and acceptor to acceptor) in the vertical direction and that allows for electrons to be transported vertically.
To understand the increase in hole mobility of the high w polymer upon addition of DCB to the CF solvent, the π-stacking length must be taken into account. Table 3 shows that the packing of the polymer chains in the film is tighter for high w when spin-coated from CF–DCB than CF. Closer packing implies more efficient coupling of the DTT moieties between adjacent polymer segments.
Field effect versus diode mobility
From the results presented in Table 3, significant differences between diode and field effect mobilities are evident. In general, comparison of mobilities derived from FET and diode configurations is not straightforward due to substantial differences in the charge transport direction, charge density and possible vertical phase separation between donor and acceptor.44 In our measurements for DPP–DTT and its blends with PC70BM, those differences are of critical importance. For example, in high w DPP–DTT films spin-coated from a CF solution almost balanced carrier mobilities (∼1 cm2 V−1 s−1) were measured using the FET architecture, while a 100 times imbalanced bipolar electron/hole mobilities were observed in the diodes. This is evidence for substantial anisotropy in charge transport pathways where polymer chains are packed differently as shown in Fig. 3. While adding DCB changes the diode mobility dramatically, e.g., it increases the hole mobility by an order of magnitude and completely hinders the electron transport (μe ∼ 0), the FET mobilities stay bipolar and increase only slightly. As mentioned earlier, GIWAXS and PIAS results suggest that in CF–DCB cast films the polymer chains are co-facially packed in predominantly edge-on orientation. Under such circumstances one might expect the alkyl chains to hinder the vertical electron transport. However, for horizontal transport in FETs, both electrons and holes can be transported via the horizontal π-stacking of the dimers.
Another structural difference that can cause differences between FET and diode mobilities is vertical phase separation. It must be noted that the X-ray experiments provide information about the bulk, and not about the film structure at the interface with the substrate at which the FET charge transport channel is formed. The same statement is valid for blends with PC70BM where FETs show zero electron mobility as opposed to the diodes. This possibly originates from the accumulation of the polymer at the interface with a face-on orientation such that the carriers experience polymer packing similar to that found in the high w films spin-coated from CF–DCB, i.e., lateral interchain electron transport hindered by the side chains on the DPP moiety.
Charge carrier transport and charge generation efficiency in the blends
We now discuss the blend systems and address the substantial improvement in device performance in the high w blend cast from a CF–DCB solution. In this regard, we first need to consider the causes of the inefficiency of charge generation and transport observed for the low w blends and the high w blend spin-coated from CF. In the low w blends, as seen from the GIWAXS data in Table 2 (π-stacking peak area) and the micrographs in Fig. 4(c), the degree of crystallinity of the film is larger than that observed for the high w polymer. However, the tendency to form extended liquid crystalline domains on the micrometre scale is unlikely to be beneficial for charge generation in devices. Furthermore, charge generation and transport appear to be occurring in the less ordered semi-amorphous region between the crystallites since the spectral signature of packed polymer chains is not observed in the PIA spectrum (cf. the high w blends). As such the long-lived species appear to be localised in the semi-amorphous phase rather than in the crystallites. Semi-amorphous transport pathways thus hinder carrier transport and reduce mobility.
From the absorption spectra of the blend films in Fig. 4(b) it can be seen that the sharper spectral features of the neat high w polymer are also present in the blend films. In particular, the layer cast from CF–DCB exhibits more distinct sub-peaks at 650 and 700 nm, i.e., there is similar polymer chain packing in the blends and neat polymer films. The sharper cofacial PIA peak of the blend spin-coated from CF–DCB at 1.3 eV also supports the proposition that there is a greater degree of order in that case. We have already described the charge transport differences in the high w polymer films spin-coated from CF and CF–DCB solutions. The GIWAXS results shown in Table 2 indicate that the addition of PC70BM decreases the 100 spacing and π–π stacking distance and thus accounts for the observed increase in the hole mobility by an order of magnitude for the high w blends from both CF and CF–DCB. The electron mobility in the blends spin-coated from both CF and CF–DCB is, however, dominated by PC70BM with a value on the order of 1 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is consistent with previously reported values.21,34
Enhanced intermolecular interactions in high w system induced by DCB
Our results reflect the dependence of the film structure on the solvent and w resulting in different optoelectronic properties of the polymer and blend films. The last remaining question to be answered is why a small amount of DCB can dramatically change the film structure, in particular for the high w polymer. For other polymeric systems, the addition of small amounts of a high boiling solvent to a lower boiling point solvent has been shown to be beneficial for device performance. Therefore, the above question is important, as it is not yet clear what mechanisms govern the enhanced optoelectronic properties of films deposited from mixed solvents. Our experiments show that DCB is a poor solvent for the high w DPP–DTT polymer as it can only dissolve the polymer at elevated temperature. Upon cooling solutions down to room temperature, aggregate formation is observed and over time the polymer precipitates out of the solution. The same phenomenon has also been observed for high w PCDTBT.38 In Fig. 2(a) and (b) we presented the relative solution viscosities of high and low w DPP–DTT solutions in DCB versus temperature and concentration. The solution viscosity of the high w polymer was highly sensitive to concentration and temperature. As the temperature rises, the relative viscosity goes down and the absorption shoulder near 800 nm disappears (Fig. S9, ESI†), confirming the formation of aggregates (and/or entangled long polymer chains) in the DCB solution at room temperature. Therefore, the addition of a small quantity of DCB to CF, had a significant effect on the optoelectronic film properties and the ultimate film morphology because an interconnected network could be formed during the spin-coating of the film. As indicated by Fig. 2(a), the viscosity of the solution increases dramatically from very low concentrations (∼1.5 mg mL−1) where a transition from a dilute (or possibly semi-dilute unentangled) to a semi-dilute (entangled) solution was observed. In addition to concentration, the degree of solution aggregation can also be controlled by temperature. In contrast to the high w polymer, the low w DPP–DTT only features a slight aggregation dependence on both concentration and temperature. It is thus clear that addition of a small amount of DCB to CF promotes solution aggregation, which in part delivers the enhanced chain stacking in film.
Conclusions
In summary we have shown that the efficiency of DPP–DTT:PC70BM solar cells can be enhanced significantly upon increasing the molecular weight of the polymer and introducing a high boiling point solvent. In this particular system, we found that the performance enhancement is due to improvements in charge generation quantum yield and transport. This improvement was correlated with the nano-scale film structure revealed by GIWAXS. Importantly, it was observed that a high fullerene loading of 75 wt% did not compromise hole transport for the high w polymer but rather improves it, and a record high hole mobility of 0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1 was obtained in diode devices cast from a CF–DCB solvent. This blend combination appears to be unique in the sense that the charge carrier collection is limited by fullerene electron transport rather than polymer hole transport. This work again highlights the complexity of the relationship between molecular structure, processing conditions, film structure and performance in bulk heterojunction organic solar cells, and counters the traditional view that transport is always limited by the donor component in a polymer:fullerene blend. It also reemphasizes the need for thorough structural investigations for other polymer:fullerene blends to eventually gain a comprehensive understanding of the structure–property relationships in bulk heterojunction solar cells.
Experimental
Materials
Two batches of the DPP–DTT polymer were synthesized based on the methodology described in detail in the literature.35 Molecular weights were as follows: high molecular weight (n = 125 kDa, w = 350 kDa and PDI = 2.8) and low molecular weight (n = 20 kDa, w = 50 kDa and PDI = 2.5). PC70BM was purchased from American Dye Source and used without purification.
Solar cell fabrication
Solutions of high w DPP–DTT blended with PC70BM (1:3 by weight) in CF and CF–DCB (93:7 vol%) were prepared at a total concentration of 24 mg mL−1. The solution was heated to 60 °C and then cooled to ambient temperature. The same method was used to prepare the solution of the low w DPP–DTT at a total concentration of 40 mg mL−1. ∼15 Ω sq−1 indium tin oxide coated glass substrates (Xinyan) patterned by photolithography were pre-cleaned using Alconox (detergent) solution and a soft cloth before being sonicated in sequence with Alconox, de-ionized water, acetone and 2-propanol for 10 min each. Substrates were 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm with 6 pixels of 0.2 cm2 each. The cleaned substrates were coated with a 25 ± 5 nm layer of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) purchased from Heraeus (Clevios P Al4083), by spin-coating at 5000 rpm for 60 s. The PEDOT:PSS layer was baked for 10 min at 170 °C. After that, DPP–DTT:PC70BM films were deposited from the solutions described above on top of the PEDOT:PSS layer in a nitrogen atmosphere with oxygen and water concentration of <5 ppm. The spin speeds were 2000 and 1000 rpm, respectively, for high and low w DPP–DTT. This yielded 220 nm thick films that match the second interference absorption peak. The thicknesses were measured by a Veeco Dektak 150 profilometer.
Organic solar cell characterization
Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were acquired in a nitrogen atmosphere using a Keithley 2400 Source Measure Unit under simulated Air Mass 1.5 Global (AM 1.5 G) 1000 W m−2 illumination (as determined by an NREL-certified photodiode with a KG5 filter) provided by an Abet Sun 2000 Solar Simulator. EQEs were measured with a QEX7 setup from PV Measurements Inc., using a calibrated photodiode. The integrated EQEs were within ±10% of the short circuit current as a self-consistent measure of system calibration. 12 pixels on 2 separate substrates were tested for each variation. Pixel size was 0.2 cm2. The current density–voltage characteristics were measured in a 2-wire configuration.
Transistor fabrication and current–voltage measurement
The OFET devices used in this study were fabricated on a highly n-doped silicon wafer with a gate dielectric comprised of a 400 nm SiNx and a 150 nm spin-coated layer of poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) (w = 120 kDa). A 100 nm thick layer of high or low w DPP–DTT was deposited with a spin speed of 1000 rpm for 60 seconds onto the PMMA layer using a solution concentration of 4 mg ml−1 in a 7% v/v mixture of chlorobenzene (99.9%, anhydrous) and chloroform (99.9%, anhydrous). The Au–Au or Au–Al source–drain electrodes were deposited through a shadow mask to form interdigitated top electrodes. In the case of the Au–Al source–drain electrodes two complementary shadow masks were used to form interdigitated hole-injecting and electron-injecting electrodes by vacuum evaporation. The hole-injecting electrode was deposited by evaporating a 50 nm thick Au layer. The electron injecting electrode was deposited by evaporating a 60 nm thick Al layer.
Electrical characterization of the devices was performed using an Agilent B1500A Semiconductor Device Analyzer and an SA-6 Semi-Auto Probe station. The transistor electrical output and transfer characteristics were recorded to determine the device parameters.
The charge carrier mobility and threshold voltage were calculated from the transfer characteristics in the saturation regime, using the equation:  where Ids is the source–drain current, W is the channel width, L is the channel length, μ is the field-effect mobility of charge carriers, Ci is the geometric capacitance of the dielectric, Vg is the gate voltage and Vth is the threshold voltage. The capacitance of the SiNx/PMMA dielectric layer was estimated by adding the capacitance of the two layers in series to find the total capacitance.
Optical absorption and photoinduced absorption spectroscopy
Optical absorption measurements were performed with either a Varian Cary 5000 or Agilent Cary 60 UV-Vis spectrophotometer with films spin-coated on glass. All photoinduced absorption measurements were performed with the samples in a cryostat in a helium atmosphere at 77 K. The 442 nm output from a Kimmon HeCd CW laser was modulated at 180 Hz with a mechanical chopper and used to pump the sample. The power of the pump beam was varied with neutral density filters. The output from a halogen lamp was passed through a monochromator and focused onto the sample to give the probe beam. A mask with a ∼1.2 mm diameter hole was used for both aligning the overlapping beams and defining the measurement area. The transmitted probe beam was guided into a second monochromator with mirrors and the signal was measured with amplified Si (Thorlabs PDA100A) and InGaAs (Thorlabs PDA20CS) detectors. Phase-sensitive lock-in (Stanford Research System SR530 amplifier) techniques were used with the phase set to the value that gave the maximum fluorescence signal from the sample. A long pass filter at the entrance slit of the second monochromator was used to block the scattered pump beam.
MIS-CELIV devices and measurements
Metal–insulator–semiconductor diode devices were prepared on 1.3 cm × 1.3 cm ITO substrates (Kintec) cleaned with the same procedure as described for the solar cells. Each substrate had three pixels (0.04 cm2 each); smaller than the standard solar cells to minimize the RC-characteristic time of the circuit in transient measurements. A 70 nm layer of magnesium fluoride (MgF2) was then evaporated under a 10−6 mbar vacuum. The DPP–DTT:PC70BM and DPP–DTT layers were spin-coated on the top of the MgF2 layer. For electron-only devices an aluminum electrode (100 nm) and for hole-only devices a MoOx (5 nm)/Ag (50 nm) electrode were evaporated on the semiconductor layer by thermal evaporation under similar vacuum conditions as for the solar cells. For the MIS-CELIV measurements a delay generator (Stanford Research System DG535) and an arbitrary waveform generator (Agilent 33250A) were used to generate and synchronize the CELIV triangle pulse controlled using a purpose written Labview code. The pulse shape had adjustable voltage slope and offset. The offset was such that the aluminium electrode was negatively biased to inject electrons and MoOx/Ag electrode was positively biased to inject holes. The transient signal was recorded by a digital storage oscilloscope (LeCroy Waverunner A6200) via a load resistance of 100 ohms. MIS-CELIV was performed in vacuum at a level of 0.1 mbar. More details on MIS-CELIV can be found in ref. 34 as well as in the ESI.†
GIWAXS
All grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering was collected at the SAXS/WAXS beamline45 of the Australian Synchrotron, Australia. 9 keV X-rays were aligned parallel to the surface of each sample, by use of a Si crystal analyser, allowing absolute grazing angles to be determined to milli-degree accuracy. Critical angles of ∼0.13 degrees were found experimentally by taking exposures at 0.005 degree increments from 0.1 to 0.2 degree incident angles, and choosing the exposure with the highest intensity. The detector distance and beam centre were determined by a silver behenate scattering standard. The detector was the hybrid pixel detector Pilatus 1M.46 Three 1 second exposures were collected at slightly different detector positions and combined in post processing to create a single scatter plot, thereby removing the gaps between modules of the detector. Data was reduced and analysed with a modified version of Nika.47
Solution viscosity measurements
Kinematic viscosities were determined using an Ostwald Micro Viscometer with a viscometer constant of 0.075 at 20 °C. For viscosity measurements performed at elevated temperatures, the viscometer constant was calibrated with 1,2-ethanediol. For measurements conducted at 20 °C, the viscometer was immersed in a temperature controlled water bath. For experiments performed in the temperature range between 40 and 140 °C, the viscometer was placed in a temperature controlled and thermally insulated oil bath. Solutions were allowed to equilibrate at the preset temperature for 15 min prior to analysis and viscosity values were averaged over 5 runs.
Optical light microscopy
Optical micrographs and polarized optical micrographs were obtained with an Olympus BX61 microscope operated in transmission mode. No additional processing was applied to the images.
Acknowledgements
PLB is a Vice Chancellor's Research Focused Fellow, and PM is an Australian Research Council Discovery Outstanding Research Award Fellow. PW would like to thank the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) for an Advanced Researcher Fellowship (PA00P2_145395). PES is supported by an Australian Research Council Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DE120101721). FM is funded by a University of Queensland International Postgraduate Research Scholarship. We acknowledge funding from the University of Queensland (Strategic Initiative – Centre for Organic Photonics & Electronics). CRM and EG acknowledge funding from the Australian Research Council (FT100100275, DP 130102616). This work was performed in part at the Queensland node of the Australian National Fabrication Facility (ANFF) – a company established under the National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy to provide nano and microfabrication facilities for Australia's researchers. This Program has also been supported by the Australian Government through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA) Australian Centre for Advanced Photovoltaics. Responsibility for the views, information or advice expressed herein is not accepted by the Australian Government. This research was undertaken in part on the SAXS/WAXS beamline at the Australian Synchrotron, Victoria, Australia.
References
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2014, 22, 701 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Zhao, Z. Li, C. Mu, W. Ma, H. Hu, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade and H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Chen, C. Cui, Y. Q. Li, L. Zhou, Q. D. Ou, C. Li, Y. Li and J. X. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Menke and R. J. Holmes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 499 CAS .
P. E. Shaw, A. Ruseckas and I. D. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CAS .
G. Yu and A. J. Heeger, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 78, 4510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Shaheen, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, F. Padinger, T. Fromherz and J. C. Hummelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Vandewal, S. Albrecht, E. T. Hoke, K. R. Graham, J. Widmer, J. D. Douglas, M. Schubert, W. R. Mateker, J. T. Bloking and G. F. Burkhard, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gélinas, A. Rao, A. Kumar, S. L. Smith, A. W. Chin, J. Clark, T. S. van der Poll, G. C. Bazan and R. H. Friend, Science, 2014, 343, 512 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Rao, P. C. Chow, S. Gélinas, C. W. Schlenker, C. Z. Li, H. L. Yip, A. K. Y. Jen, D. S. Ginger and R. H. Friend, Nature, 2013, 500, 435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Armin, Y. Zhang, P. L. Burn, P. Meredith and A. Pivrikas, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Armin, I. Kassal, P. E. Shaw, M. Hambsch, M. Stolterfoht, D. M. Lyons, J. Li, Z. Shi, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Di Nuzzo, L. Koster, V. S. Gevaerts, S. C. Meskers and R. A. Janssen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400416 Search PubMed .
J. A. Bartelt, Z. M. Beiley, E. T. Hoke, W. R. Mateker, J. D. Douglas, B. A. Collins, J. R. Tumbleston, K. R. Graham, A. Amassian and H. Ade, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Noriega, J. Rivnay, K. Vandewal, F. P. Koch, N. Stingelin, P. Smith, M. F. Toney and A. Salleo, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. Treat, J. A. N. Malik, O. Reid, L. Yu, C. G. Shuttle, G. Rumbles, C. J. Hawker, M. L. Chabinyc, P. Smith and N. Stingelin, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ma, J. R. Tumbleston, L. Ye, C. Wang, J. Hou and H. Ade, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Venkatesan, N. Adhikari, J. Chen, E. C. Ngo, A. Dubey, D. W. Galipeau and Q. Qiao, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1011 RSC .
J. R. Tumbleston, B. A. Collins, L. Yang, A. C. Stuart, E. Gann, W. Ma, W. You and H. Ade, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Armin, M. Hambsch, P. Wolfer, H. Jin, J. Li, Z. Shi, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401221 Search PubMed .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, Y. Yao, H. Yang, V. Shrotriya, G. Yang and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Collins, Z. Li, J. R. Tumbleston, E. Gann, C. R. McNeill and H. Ade, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bartesaghi, M. Turbiez and L. J. A. Koster, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 3191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. van Franeker, M. Turbiez, W. Li, M. M. Wienk and R. A. Janssen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. K. Kyaw, D. H. Wang, C. Luo, Y. Cao, T. Q. Nguyen, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301469 Search PubMed .
J. A. Love, S. D. Collins, I. Nagao, S. Mukherjee, H. Ade, G. C. Bazan and T. Q. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, P. You, J. Li, J. Li, C.-S. Lee, B. S. Ong, C. Surya and F. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1463 CAS .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupre, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. photon., 2009, 3, 297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mühlbacher, M. Scharber, M. Morana, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudiana and C. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2884 CrossRef PubMed .
K. H. Hendriks, G. H. Heintges, V. S. Gevaerts, M. M. Wienk and R. A. Janssen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, A. Furlan, K. H. Hendriks, M. M. Wienk and R. A. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Armin, G. Juska, M. Ullah, M. Velusamy, P. L. Burn, P. Meredith and A. Pivrikas, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300954 Search PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Zhao, H. S. Tan, Y. Guo, C. A. Di, G. Yu, Y. Liu, M. Lin, S. H. Lim and Y. Zhou, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 754 Search PubMed .
H. Zhong, J. Smith, S. Rossbauer, A. J. White, T. D. Anthopoulos and M. Heeney, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3205 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; Z. Fei, P. Boufflet, S. Wood, J. Wade, J. Moriarty, E. Gann, E. L. Ratcliff, C. R. McNeill, H. Sirringhaus and J.-S. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6866 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Armin, M. Velusamy, P. Wolfer, Y. Zhang, P. L. Burn, P. Meredith and A. Pivrikas, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 173 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wolfer, A. Armin, A. Pivrikas, M. Velusamy, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 71 RSC .
H. Xu, Y. Jiang, J. Li, B. S. Ong, Z. Shuai, J. Xu and N. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 6835 CAS .
L. Koster, V. Mihailetchi and P. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 052104 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Armin, G. Juska, B. W. Philippa, P. L. Burn, P. Meredith, R. D. White and A. Pivrikas, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Armin, M. Velusamy, P. L. Burn, P. Meredith and A. Pivrikas, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 083306 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, B. de Boer and P. W. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Staniec, A. J. Parnell, A. D. Dunbar, H. Yi, A. J. Pearson, T. Wang, P. E. Hopkinson, C. Kinane, R. M. Dalgliesh and A. M. Donald, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Kirby, S. T. Mudie, A. M. Hawley, D. J. Cookson, H. D. Mertens, N. Cowieson and V. Samardzic-Boban, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2013, 46, 1670 CrossRef CAS .
C. Broennimann, E. Eikenberry, B. Henrich, R. Horisberger, G. Huelsen, E. Pohl, B. Schmitt, C. Schulze-Briese, M. Suzuki and T. Tomizaki, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2006, 13, 120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ilavsky, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2012, 45, 324 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5tc02133bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
EQE = ηaηCGηCC,	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Current density–voltage (J–V) curves and external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra for high and low w DPP–DTT:PC70BM solar cells spin-coated from a CF solution (a) and (b), respectively, and from a CF–DCB solution (c) and (d), respectively. The integrated EQE is in agreement with short circuit current within 10% error. The thickness of the active layer for all devices was 240 ± 30 nm. All data are representative of multiple devices.	 

High w:PC70BM CF/7%DCB	220(20)	15.5(0.5)	0.65(0.00)	0.58(0.02)	5.8(0.3)
High w:PC70BM CF	220(20)	1.8(0.1)	0.56(0.02)	0.68(0.02)	0.7(0.1)
Low w:PC70BM CF/7%DCB	240(30)	1.8(0.1)	0.66(0.00)	0.45(0.03)	0.5(0.1)
Low w:PC70BM CF	240(50)	1.6(0.1)	0.41(0.01)	0.52(0.02)	0.3(0.1)

 	Fig. 2  Relative viscosity of high (a) and low (b) w DPP–DTT solutions (in DCB) versus temperature and concentration. (c) Relative viscosity for DPP–DTT solutions (in DCB) having undergone a fast cooling or slow cooling process from 140 °C. There are significant differences between fast cooled and slow cooled solutions in the case of high w DPP–DTT, while the effect is much less pronounced in case of the low w polymer. (d) Molecular structures of PCDTBT and DPP–DTT.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a–h) 2D GIWAXS patterns of the neat high w polymer film spin-coated from CF (a), CF–DCB (b), and as a blend with PC70BM from CF (c) and CF–DCB (d), as well as neat films of low w polymer spin-coated from CF (e), CF–DCB (f), and as a blend with PC70BM from CF (g) and CF–DCB (h). 1D plots of scattering intensity of the blend (i and k) and neat (j and l) films out-of-plane (i and j) and in-plane (k and l).	 


Solvent	CF	CF–DCB	CF	CF–DCB	CF	CF–DCB	CF	CF–DCB
Orientational width FWHM [deg]	23.6(2)	16.7(1)	26(1)	20(4)	23.4(1)	16.8(3)	28.5(3)	15.4(1)
Out of plane alkyl spacing [nm]	1.953(3)	1.973(1)	1.926(3)	1.876(2)	1.970(1)	1.957(6)	1.97(1)	1.944(2)
Out of plane alkyl coherence length [nm]	4.65(7)	10.9(1)	6.3(1)	5.88(7)	12.5(1)	10.7(4)	8.6(5)	13.8(3)
Out of plane alkyl peak area [AU]	273(8)	757(9)	122(3)	208(4)	805(9)	586(20)	420(20)	200(5)
In plane alkyl spacing [nm]	2.031(4)	2.19(1)	1.997(3)	2.049(7)	2.017(4)	2.020(3)	2.039(2)	2.019(1)
In plane alkyl coherence length [nm]	7.5(2)	5.2(1)	9.7(2)	6.7(2)	10.1(3)	8.5(2)	10.4(1)	15.1(2)
In plane alkyl peak area [AU]	125(5)	27(2)	24.6(4)	27(3)	37(2)	5.6(2)	19.0(4)	10.5(1)
Out of plane π-stacking spacing [nm]	0.391(1)	
	0.368(1)	0.366(1)	0.396(1)	0.371(8)	0.362(1)	0.389(1)
Out of plane π-stacking coherence length [nm]	2.9(2)	
	1.39(6)	1.40(8)	1.63(5)	1.7(2)	1.57(6)	7.1(7)
Out of plane π-stacking peak area [AU]	70(5)	
	138(8)	128(9)	90(4)	42(10)	667(3)	1.0(1)
In-plane π-stacking spacing [nm]	0.388(4)	0.38(1)	
	
	0.383(1)	0.388(1)	
	0.391(1)
In plane π-stacking coherence length [nm]	4(2)	3.4(8)	
	
	2.2(2)	4.8(2)	
	5.8(7)
In plane π-stacking peak area [AU]	4(3)	6(5)	
	
	25(9)	2.9(2)	
	2.2(6)

 	Fig. 4  UV-Vis spectra of high and low w DPP–DTT polymer films (a) and their blend with PC70BM (b). Films were spin-coated from CF and CF–DCB. (c) Optical micrographs of low w and high w DPP–DTT films (top) and of DPP–DTT:PC70BM 1:3 w/w blends (bottom). Distinct microstructural features were observed for low w DPP–DTT. Addition of PC70BM to the polymer was found to significantly reduce the characteristic domain size. No corresponding features were observed in high w DPP–DTT films. The polarizer-analyzer system for polarized micrographs is indicated with white arrows.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Photoinduced absorption (PIA) spectra of high and low w DPP–DTT:PC70BM films spin-coated from CF and CF–DCB solvents. Distinct spectral features can be observed in the high w case. Each peak is associated with a specific polymer chain packing according to ref. 39 as marked on the figure. (b) Power dependent PIA signal for the high and low w DPP–DTT:PC70BM films. The high w DPP–DTT:PC70BM spin-coated from CF–DCB shows a much larger signal corresponding to a higher free polaron population.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) MIS-CELIV current transients for a hole-only diode containing high w DPP–DTT deposited from a CF–DCB solution at different applied offsets. The experimental details to calculate the mobility are marked in the figure. (b) Space charge limited current (SCLC) for the same DPP–DTT deposited from CF–DCB solutions. A high charge carrier mobility of 0.02 cm2 V−1 s−1 is obtained from both MIS-CELIV and SCLC. The doping density is found to be of the order 1014 cm−3. (c) Transfer characteristics of DPP–DTT FET in p-channel mode. (VDS = 100 V).	 

High w CF/7%DCB	2(1) × 10−2	∼0	2	1
High w CF	2(1) × 10−3	2(1) × 10−5	1	0.35
Low w CF/7%DCB	2(1) × 10−4	4(2) × 10−5	0.1	1 × 10−2
High w: PC70BM CF/7%DCB	2(1) × 10−1	1.1(0.5) × 10−3	0.1	0
High w: PC70BM CF	3(1) × 10−2	1.7(0.5) × 10−3	—	—
Low w: PC70BM CF/7%DCB	3(2) × 10−5	3(1) × 10−4	10−3(1)	0

 		 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5tc02133b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
