Influence of the nature of the anchoring group on electron injection processes at dye–titania interfaces   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CP05638A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CP05638A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 29389-29401Influence of the nature of the anchoring group on electron injection processes at dye–titania interfaces†

        
          
            Imane 
            Arbouch
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            David 
            Cornil
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yasser 
            Karzazi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Belkheir 
            Hammouti
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Roberto 
            Lazzaroni
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Jérôme 
            Cornil
          
        
      *b
aLaboratoire de Chimie Analytique Appliquée, Matériaux et Environnement (LC2AME), Faculté des Sciences, Université Mohammed Premier, B. P. Box 4808, 60046 Oujda, Morocco
bService de Chimie des Matériaux Nouveaux, Université de Mons, Place du Parc 20, B-7000 Mons, Belgium. E-mail: Jerome.CORNIL@umons.ac.be
Received 
      17th August 2017
    , Accepted 16th October 2017First published on 17th October 2017AbstractWe report (time-dependent) density functional theory calculations characterizing the changes in the electronic and optical properties of oligothiophene dyes when grafted on a titania surface via a carboxylic acid or catechol moiety as anchoring group, in relation to their use in dye-sensitized solar cells. The broadening of the LUMO level of the compounds upon adsorption has been extracted from the computed electronic structures and used to estimate electron injection times into the conduction band of the oxide. The strongly coupled carboxylic-containing dyes lead to faster electron injection times compared to catechol-substituted dyes. This difference is ascribed to the electron–donating character of the catechol moiety that polarizes the dye LUMO away from the dye@titania interface. The absorption spectra simulated at the TD-DFT level indicate that the grafted carboxylic–thiophene dyes undergo an indirect injection mechanism (type I) in which an intramolecular excitation is created before the charge is transferred to titania. In contrast, catechol dyes with a short conjugation length for the thiophene backbone are type II sensitizers exhibiting a direct injection mechanism leading to a direct photoexcitation from the dye HOMO to the titania conduction band. A mixed character prevails for the injection in the case of catechol dyes containing a longer oligothiophene chain.
I. Introduction
Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSC) have attracted a great deal of interest in the recent years and are currently playing a crucial role as one of the leading emergent photovoltaic technologies for low cost power production.1–3 A typical n-type DSSC is based on semiconductor nanoparticles (typically, TiO2, or, less commonly, ZnO) coated by a layer of organometallic complexes or organic dyes which act as sensitizer. When solar radiation is absorbed, the photoexcited electrons in the dye are transferred to the conduction band of the semiconductor and then migrate towards the anode; the oxidized dye is regenerated by either a liquid electrolyte redox couple (typically iodide/triiodide I−/I3−) or a (solid state) hole-transporting material; this redox pair is in turn regenerated at the counter-electrode. The most efficient DSSCs employing liquid I−/I3− electrolyte are those sensitized by ruthenium dyes with a power conversion efficiency of almost 12%4 whilst organic sensitizers have been shown to outperform ruthenium dyes when used with ferrocene or cobalt-based electrolyte.5–7 More importantly, the use of organic–inorganic perovskite materials has improved the DSSC performances with unprecedented certified power conversion efficiency exceeding 20%.8,9 The organic dyes present however several advantages: (i) they have a much lower production cost without any concern about limited resources because they do not contain any noble metal such as Ru; (ii) organic sensitizers are more prone to chemical derivatization; and (iii) they have large absorption coefficients associated to intramolecular π–π* transitions. The thermodynamic limit of efficiency (the Shockley–Queisser limit) for single junction solar cells is 32%; however, the efficiency of actual dye sensitized solar cells is still around 12%10 due to various loss processes, mainly charge recombination (back transfer) at the dye@semiconductor interface or with the electrolyte and the decay of the dye excited state.11,12
A determining process in the operation of DSSCs is the electron injection from the dye molecule adsorbed on the nanoparticle surface to the conduction band of the semiconductor. Experimentally, the rates of such electron transfer processes have been measured for some dyes such as ruthenium complexes,13 perylene derivatives,14 coumarin dyes15,16 and pyridine derivatives17,18 using various techniques such as infrared and visible transient absorption spectroscopy,19 resonant photoemission,20 Raman spectroscopy,15 fluorescence up-conversion spectroscopy21 and two-photon photoemission spectroscopy.22,23 These measurements show that electron injection takes place on a few-femtosecond time scale in many systems13–24 whilst the recombination process occurs in a time frame of hundred picoseconds to nanoseconds.15,25 Theoretically, computing accurate electron transfer rates is challenging due to the difficulty of predicting the alignment of the energy levels of the dye with respect to the conduction band of the semiconductor.26,27
In DSSCs, two types of electron injection mechanism from the dye to the semiconductor may be operative28 (Fig. 1). The first mechanism (type I) occurs via a photoexcitation to a dye excited state, from which an electron is transferred to the TiO2 conduction band (not necessarily directly to the conduction band edge). The second mechanism (type II) is a direct electron injection from the dye HOMO to the titania conduction band edge under photoexcitation without any involvement of the intramolecular dye excited states.28–30 This mechanism is associated to the appearance of new low-energy and weak bands in absorption spectra. An intermediate mechanism in which both the indirect and direct mechanisms coexist in the same dye has also been suggested.28 The type II mechanism should give rise to a more efficient electron injection to the semiconductor because it occurs directly from the dye HOMO to the semiconductor conduction band. The drawbacks are: (i) the low oscillator strength associated to such charge-transfer transitions due to the different spatial localization of the initial and final electronic levels involved in the transition;31 and (ii) a facilitated back-electron transfer (recombination process) from the lowest excited charge-transfer states since the same electronic levels are involved in the excitation and recombination processes.32 This limits the efficiency of the type II mechanism with respect to the type I mechanism. The design of new dyes that provide a rapid and efficient electron injection requires a comprehensive understanding of the fundamental elements that control the electron injection process. In this regard, a systematic design of the interface between the dye and the semiconductor through a modification of the nature of the anchoring group might significantly affect the electron injection rates.
 Fig. 1  Scheme showing type I and type II photoinjection in a DSSC. 
Perylene adsorbed on titania was often used as a working horse for studying the electron transfer mechanism in DSSCs systems either experimentally or theoretically.33,34 Different anchoring groups that bound perylene to titania were investigated, for instance sulfonic acid, thioformic acid, carboxylic acid, phosphonic acid and catechol. It was found that the electron injection rate can be slowed down by several orders of magnitude by using different anchoring groups.26,34 Moreover, the observed differences between the computed electron injection rates can be largely ascribed to the difference in the electronic couplings between the dye and the semiconductor, as mediated by the anchoring group. Interestingly, catechol was found to be the anchoring group yielding the fastest injection (0.47 fs)35 due to the strong coupling given by the two hydroxyl groups directly linked to the aromatic core of the dye, with a binding strength similar to that of a carboxylic acid, i.e., the most used anchoring group. In terms of injection mechanisms, TDDFT calculations have shown that perylenes adsorbed onto a TiO2 surface can present a type I or II mechanism, depending on the nature of the anchoring group.36
The potential of oligothiophene derivatives as dyes adsorbed on TiO2 surfaces has been demonstrated.37 Particularly, it has been shown that the use of donor-free oligothiophene dyes leads to a high open circuit voltage whilst maintaining a sizable short-circuit current in solid-state DSSCs.38 In this context, we have recently investigated at the theoretical level the adsorption of oligothiophene derivatives of increasing length via a carboxylic acid anchoring group on a titanium dioxide anatase (101) model surface. It has been shown that the adsorption promotes a partial pinning effect for the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of the dye, i.e., a LUMO energy level alignment with respect to the TiO2 conduction band edge (CBE) weakly sensitive to the oligothiophene chain length, in contrast to the situation prevailing for the isolated oligomers.39 A strong implication of this pinning effect is that the optical absorption properties of the dye can be very different in solution versus when grafted on the oxide surface. In this paper, we extend the previous theoretical work to compare the impact of two different anchoring groups, namely carboxylic acid and catechol, on the evolution of the electronic and optical properties of oligothiophene derivatives grafted onto a titania model cluster, with the aim of shedding light on the energy level alignment and the electron injection process. The results are organized in three sections. In the first section, we study the electronic structure in the ground state for the isolated dyes and cluster. In the second section, we analyze the interfacial electronic interactions between the dye and the semiconductor; the electronic density of states of the interfaces are analyzed and the electron injection times are estimated. Since there are no available experimental data for the oligothiophene derivatives under study, we also consider in this Section the case of perylene dyes adsorbed on TiO2via catechol or a carboxylic acid in order to make direct comparison with experimental data and assess the quantitative character of our theoretical approach. Finally, the optical response of the different structures is explored using the TD-DFT method to get an insight into the possible injection mechanisms.
II. Theoretical methodology
1. Electronic structure calculations
The selected dyes are oligothiophenes with an increasing number (n) of monomer units. They are terminated by either catechol or carboxylic acid as anchoring group (Fig. 2). These two different structures will enable us to investigate the influence of the anchoring group on the changes in the electronic and optical properties of oligothiophene dyes upon grafting on titania model clusters.
 Fig. 2  Chemical structures of the TiO38O76 cluster (left panel) and molecular dyes investigated (right panel). 
There are three possible contact geometries that the dyes may adopt when adsorbed onto a TiO2 surface: (1) a bridging bidentate structure, where the two oxygen atoms of the catechol or carboxylic group are bonded to two different titanium atoms on the surface, while the hydrogen atom(s) is (are) transferred to nearby oxygen atoms on the surface; (2) a chelating bidentate structure, where both oxygen atoms are bonded to the same titanium atom on the surface; (3) a monodentate structure, where only one of the oxygen atoms is bonded to a titanium atom on the surface. Fig. 3 shows a schematic representation of those geometries. On the one hand, Redfern et al. carried out a theoretical study of catechol adsorption on anatase TiO2 and determined that, on a stoichiometric anatase TiO2 surface, catechol adsorbs in a bridging bidentate geometry while a chelating bidentate structure is favored when adsorption occurs at a defect site.40 On the other hand, it has been shown that organic dyes with a carboxylic acid tethering group usually bind on the titanium oxide surface in a bidentate bridging mode.41,42 Therefore, the bidentate geometry will be adopted here for all investigated systems.
 Fig. 3  (left) Schematic representation of the three possible binding structures that catechol may adopt on a TiO2 surface. (right) Schematic representation of the four possible binding structures that a carboxylic acid may adopt on TiO2. 
The anatase titanium dioxide (101) surface was modeled as described in ref. 43 and 44. The (TiO2)38 cluster model is obtained by properly cleaving the TiO2 bulk structure to expose the (101) surface.45 This cluster is stoichiometric, neutral, non-polar and constituted by two TiO2 layers with alternating rows of five- and six-fold coordinated titanium sites. The choice of the (TiO2)38 cluster model was driven by the fact that it nicely reproduces the electronic characteristics of TiO2 nanoparticles.43
In this study, we have optimized the ground-state geometry of the isolated dyes at the Density Functional Theory (DFT) level using the B3LYP functional and a 6-311G(d) basis set. The bare TiO2 cluster and the grafted systems were fully optimized by means of the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) PBE functional46 and a double-zeta basis set, using the Amsterdam Density Functional (ADF) package.47 Adopting the same methodology as in our previous investigations,39 the electronic structure of the grafted systems was next computed by single-point calculations on these optimized geometries using a standard B3LYP/6-311G* protocol via Gaussian 09.48 The UV absorption spectra were simulated by using the TD-DFT formalism, adopting the same hybrid B3LYP functional and a 6-311G* basis set.
2. Analysis of interfacial electronic interactions
The adsorption energies were calculated by computing the difference between the total energy of the grafted systems versus the bare (TiO2)38 cluster plus the isolated dye in the gas-phase geometry: E[ads] = E[TiO2,dye] − E[TiO2] − E[dye](1)
To analyze the electronic coupling strength of a given molecular orbital and estimate the electron injection time from this electronic level of the dye to the titania substrate, the Newns–Anderson approach for adsorbates on surfaces was used.49 In this framework, the electronic coupling is estimated by the extent to which an adsorbate MO level gets broadened upon interaction with the substrate. In order to quantify the broadening as well as the energy shift of a given electronic level, a nonlinear fitting procedure of the PDOS (Projected Density of states) has been implemented; this procedure is described below for the LUMO level, which is of prime relevance for this study. First, an energy interval is selected within which the molecular orbitals in the complex exhibit the signature of the shape of the LUMO in the isolated adsorbate. The interval is selected so that the adsorbate PDOS contributions sum to one orbital . Specifically, a molecular orbital of the full system, ψi, is expressed as a linear combination of n atomic orbitals, χAj centered on a given atom A, and with expansion coefficients cij (2)
The portion of the orbital located on the adsorbate is taken to be pi, which is given in first approximation (due to the neglect of the overlap terms) by the sum of the squares of the atomic orbital coefficients that are located on the dye atoms.50 (3)
For the selected energy range, the calculated orbital energies, εi, in the grafted system are weighted by the adsorbate PDOS contributions, pi, to obtain a weighted average calculated energy, ELUMO(ads): (4)
The induced energy shift is calculated by: ΔE = ELUMO(ads) − ELUMO(free ads)(5)
The values of the ELUMO(free ads) are obtained from electronic structure calculations on the free dyes. Subsequently, a quantitative estimate of the width of the LUMO(ads) broadening is obtained from the calculated weighted deviation values of the selected set of PDOS contributions: (6)
These results are then used to construct Lorentzian distributions, ρLUMO, with width ħΓ centered at ELUMO(free ads).49 (7)
The estimated electron transfer time is obtained from the LUMO broadening through the time-energy uncertainty relation: τ = ℏ/ℏΓ(8)
In convenient numerical units, it becomes τ (fs) = 658/ℏΓ (meV)(9)
III. Results and discussion
1. Isolated dyes and TiO2 cluster
The band gap in bulk anatase TiO2 is 3.2 eV while a band gap of 3.35 eV has been reported for 2.4 nm TiO2 particles.51 This difference originates from the quantum confinement effects that increase the band gap for clusters of a few nanometers in diameter. The (TiO2)38 cluster has a diameter of 1.2 nm, which is about half that of the experimentally studied clusters so that their band gap is expected to be larger than 3.35 eV. Our calculated band gap for the (TiO2)38 cluster is 4.2 eV. This value is in good agreement with the results of Lundqvist et al.52 who have reported a band gap of 4.38 eV for the (TiO2)38 cluster at the Density Functional Theory (DFT) level using B3LYP/VDZ single point calculations on the PW/VSZ optimized structure.
The position of the conduction band minimum (CBM) of TiO2 measured by inverse photoemission spectroscopy is 3.8–4.6 eV below the vacuum level.51 In our calculations, the CBE is located at −3.6 eV, very close to the experimental range. The calculated valence band edge (VBE) is located at −7.8 eV, in good agreement with the experimental values, i.e., 7.5–8.0 eV below the vacuum level.51
In the case of oligothiophenes, since the initial photoexcitation primarily involves a transition from the HOMO to the LUMO levels, we mainly focus on these two frontier electronic levels. Several theoretical studies53 have already shown that increasing the oligomer size leads to a lowering of the lowest optical excitation energy, associated for Tn dyes with a stabilization of the LUMOs and destabilization of the HOMOs (Fig. 4); the same trends are found here. The HOMO and LUMO of the Tn-carboxylic dyes are deeply stabilized in comparison to those of Tn-catechol dyes, due to the acceptor character of the carboxyl group compared to the donor character of hydroxyl groups.54 The shifts are less pronounced when increasing the oligomer size due to the spatial dilution of the wavefunction, thus reducing the impact of the terminal anchoring group. Interestingly, the LUMO wavefunctions for Tn-catechol dyes feature a small weight on the anchoring group and are polarized away from it due to the donor character of the substituent. In contrast, the LUMO of the Tn-carboxylic dyes expands over the anchoring group due its acceptor character. For similar reasons, the HOMO wavefunctions of the Tn-catechol dyes are quite delocalized over the whole molecule, including the anchoring group (Fig. 5, left), while those of the Tn-carboxylic dyes are polarized away from the anchoring group. This opposite behavior lets us foresee very different electronic couplings for a given level at the titania@dye interface.
 Fig. 4  HOMO and LUMO energy levels for isolated Tn-catechol dyes (left) and isolated Tn-carboxylic acid dyes (right). The edge of the TiO2 conduction and valence bands are also shown, as calculated at the B3LYP level for the cluster. 
 Fig. 5  Shape of the HOMO and LUMO of the T5-catechol dye (left) and the T5-carboxylic dye (right). 
2. Interfacial electronic interactions
The adsorption energies for the investigated dyes are collected in Table 1. When increasing the number of thiophene rings, the adsorption energy decreases for both catechol and carboxylic acid as anchoring group. Interestingly, oligothiophene dyes are found to bind substantially more to the anatase (101) surface via the catechol than via the carboxylic acid. In order to assess the role of the sole anchoring group on the adsorption energy, we have also computed the adsorption energy for catechol and formic acid alone. The calculated adsorption energies of 33(47) kcal mol−1 for the T1-carboxylic (T1-catechol) dyes are comparable to the adsorption energies of the anchoring group alone (37 kcal mol−1 and 51 kcal mol−1 for formic acid and catechol, respectively).
Table 1 Adsorption energies for Tn dyes grafted on the TiO2 cluster. Values for formic acid and catechol are also presented for comparison




Dyes

E
ads (kcal mol−1)
Dyes

E
ads (kcal mol−1)




Formic acid
−37
Catechol
−51


T1-carb
−33
T1-cat
−47


T2-carb
−32
T2-cat
−44


T3-carb
−28
T3-cat
−40


T4-carb
−24
T4-cat
−36


T5-carb
−21
T5-cat
−33




In agreement with previous findings,55 these results indicate that the binding strength of the sole anchor group to the substrate provides a good indication of the binding of larger molecules using that anchoring group.
We have also quantified the amount of charge transferred between the Tn dyes and the TiO2 cluster upon grafting. To do so, we have compared the Mulliken partial charges carried by the deprotonated free dye, which has one negative charge on the carboxylic acid (and two on the catechol) and the dye part of the corresponding grafted system, see Table 2. The calculated charge transfer of 1.13–1.15 |e| and 0.49–0.51 |e| from Tn-catechol and Tn-carboxylic to the TiO2 surface, respectively, compares well to the charge transfer between the anchoring group alone and the TiO2 cluster, with 1.16 |e| for catechol and 0.47 |e| for formic acid. This result shows that the anchoring group is sole responsible for the amount of charge transferred between the dye and the substrate. The charger transfer between Tn-catechol dyes and the titania substrate is about twice larger than that prevailing for the Tn-carboxylic dyes; this is readily ascribed to the strong interaction between the oppositely charged Tn-catechol dyes (−2 |e|) and the two titanium atoms on the surface (+2 |e|), as demonstrated also by the larger adsorption energy of the Tn-catechol dyes. Interestingly, increasing the number of thiophene rings leads to a slight decrease in the charge transfer for Tn-catechol dyes, conversely to the Tn-carboxylic dyes where the charge transfer slightly increases when extending the conjugation length. Although the variations are small, a possible explanation can be related to the variation of the Mulliken electronegativity of the Tn dyes (defined as ). Indeed, as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†), when we extend the conjugation length for isolated carboxylic dyes, the Mulliken electronegativity decreases and the charge transfer increases when the molecules are adsorbed on TiO2. Conversely, for Tn-catechol dyes, when extending the conjugation length, the Mulliken electronegativity tends to increase and leads to a smaller amount of charge transfer. In other words, increasing the number of thiophene rings for catechol dyes decreases the donor character of catechol and hence the charge transfer while increasing the number of thiophene rings for carboxylic dyes increases the donor character of carboxylic dyes and therefore increases the interfacial charge transfer.
Table 2 Mulliken charges (in |e|) for Tn dyes before and after grafting and amount of charge transferred between the Tn dyes and TiO2 cluster. Values for formic acid and catechol are also presented for comparison






Dye alone
Dye grafted

Δ (alone–grafted)




Formic acid
−1
−0.53
−0.47


T1-carb
−1
−0.51
−0.49


T2-carb
−1
−0.50
−0.50


T3-carb
−1
−0.49
−0.51


T4-carb
−1
−0.49
−0.51


T5-carb
−1
−0.49
−0.51


catechol
−2
−0.85
−1.16


T1-cat
−2
−0.85
−1.15


T2-cat
−2
−0.86
−1.14


T3-cat
−2
−0.86
−1.14


T4-cat
−2
−0.87
−1.13


T5-cat
−2
−0.86
−1.14




In Fig. 6, we have illustrated the electron density changes taking place upon adsorption for T2-carboxylic, T5-carboxylic, T2-catechol and T5-catechol dyes. The electron density change is determined as the density difference between the grafted systems and the isolated fragments. We choose as fragments the deprotonated dye (negatively charged) and the protonated titania (positively charged). We can also clearly visualize from Fig. 6 that the amount of charge transferred between the Tn-catechol dyes and titania is larger than that between the Tn-carboxylic dyes and titania.
 Fig. 6  Electron density changes upon grafting on titania for the T2-carboxylic, T5-carboxylic, T2-catechol and T5-catechol dyes. Blue surfaces identify regions in which the electron density decreases whereas zones of density accumulation are marked by purple surfaces. 
As illustrated in Fig. 4, the HOMO level of all Tn dyes lies energetically in the bandgap region of the titania semiconductor. A comparison of the energetic positions of the HOMOs of Tn dyes before and after grafting is shown in Fig. 7. In both cases, the HOMO levels are stabilized when the molecules are grafted due to the charge transfer from the molecule to the oxide; however, a chain size evolution similar to that observed in the isolated molecules prevails. As displayed in Fig. 8, the HOMOs for all Tn dyes are readily identifiable as a single molecular level with a negligible mixing between the dye and the titania cluster, thus reflecting an overall weak interaction at the interface.
 Fig. 7  HOMO energy levels for the isolated and grafted Tn-catechol dyes (left) and for the isolated and grafted Tn-carboxylic dyes (right). 
 Fig. 8  Shape of the HOMO and LUMO+84 of the grafted T2-catechol dye and HOMO and LUMO+11 of the grafted T2-carboxylic dye. 
This result can be interpreted in the framework of the Newns–Anderson model indicating that when a discrete level (here the HOMO) lies outside the continuum (here the valence band), that molecular orbital hardly hybridizes with the continuum band states.
The electronic coupling strength governing the electron transfer rate at the dye/oxide interface is expected to be largely determined by the interaction between the LUMO orbital of the dye and the conduction band for an indirect injection mechanism. To investigate this interaction in more detail, we have analyzed the projected density of states on the dye molecule, as described above, to estimate the position of the dye LUMO level and the extent to which that orbital mixes with the electronic states of the substrate.
The LUMO levels of all anchored dyes are in resonance with the conduction band and are expected to strongly interact with the titania conduction band, as manifested by the broadening of the dye LUMO into a large number of unoccupied states. The results in Fig. 9 show that, when going from isolated to grafted dyes, a slight lowering (around 0.3 eV) of the LUMO level is observed for Tn-catechol dyes while a larger shift is noticed for Tn-carboxylic dyes (up to 0.8 eV). To understand this different behavior, we have also displayed in Fig. 8 the shape of the electronic levels in the complex exhibiting the largest signature of the LUMO of T2. The LUMO+84 of the T2-catechol dye (with 31% of electron density localized on the dye molecule) is located at −1.85 eV and the LUMO+11 of T2-carboxylic dye (with 17% of electron density on the dye) at −3.11 eV. The LUMOs of the grafted dyes have the same orbital shapes as in the isolated dyes: the LUMOs of Tn-catechol dyes are polarized away from the dye@semiconductor interface owing to the donor character of catechol while the LUMOs of the grafted Tn-carboxylic dyes expand over the anchoring group, thus rationalizing the larger shifts observed for the carboxylic dyes.
 Fig. 9  LUMO energy levels for the isolated and grafted Tn-catechol dyes (left) and for the isolated and grafted Tn-carboxylic dyes (right). We also report the energy of the conduction band edge in all cases. 
Additional information on the interaction between the Tn dyes and the titania cluster can be extracted from the calculated partial density of states (PDOS) of both the grafted Tn-catechol and Tn-carboxylic dyes, as illustrated in Fig. 10.
 Fig. 10  Total density of states for the clean (TiO2)38 cluster and partial density of states for the grafted Tn-catechol dyes (left) and Tn-carboxylic dyes (right). The black solid line corresponds to the TiO2 partial DOS, the red line corresponds to the dye partial DOS. The dashed lines correspond to the position of the LUMO levels for isolated Tn dyes. 
For Tn-carboxylic dyes, the LUMO position of the isolated dyes is lower in energy than those of the Tn-catechol dyes and it only weakly varies with chain size going from T2 to T5, i.e., a signature of pinning effect. Moreover, the broadened LUMO is the first peak above the conduction band edge, in contrast to the catechol dyes for which a band tail lies at lower energy, especially for the short oligomers. This tail is made of electronic levels strongly localized on the cluster with only a small molecular contribution around the anchoring group. Such “mixed states” will have strong implications for the injection mechanisms, vide infra. The shift of the LUMO level when going from the isolated molecule to the complex is not only related to the strength of the interfacial electronic coupling but also to the density of states in resonance in the titania cluster. The number of the acceptor states for electron in titania does change when increasing the chain size of the Tn dyes, as illustrated in Fig. 10 by the position of the dashed lines highlighting the LUMO level energy in the isolated systems.

Fig. 9 also reveals an upshift of the CBE by 0.20 eV for Tn-carboxylic dyes whilst no significant upshift is noticed for the Tn-catechol dyes (less than 0.05 eV). Besides, the CBE upshift in Tn-carboxylic dyes increases when extending the conjugation length (from 0.08 eV for formic acid to 0.20 eV for T5-carboxylic), in line with the increased charge transfer between the Tn-carboxylic dyes and titania. It has been previously shown from calculations performed on a (TiO2)38 cluster that a proton transferred on the titania surface induces a down shift of the CB edge, while grafting the deprotonated molecule induces an upshift as a result of ground-state charge-transfer and electrostatic effects.56 The slight upshift calculated for the Tn-catechol dyes might thus be explained by the interplay between these two counter acting effects which appear to cancel each other, with the transfer of two protons to the titania surface in the case of Tn-catechol dyes in contrast to one proton transferred in the case of Tn-carboxylic dyes. It is worth stressing that this shift of the CBE might be affected by the finite-size of the cluster, an issue beyond the scope of the present paper.
The interaction between the LUMO dye and the titania conduction band not only translates into an energy shift but also into a level broadening depending on the extent to which the dye LUMO orbital mixes with the substrate conduction band states. The dye LUMO broadenings obtained from the fitting procedure described in the Methodology section are collected in Table 3.
Table 3 LUMO energy (dye alone), LUMO energy (dye grafted), energy shift (ΔE), LUMO broadening (ħΓ), and injection times to the titania conduction band







E
LUMO (dye alone) (eV)

E
LUMO (dye grafted) (eV)
ΔE (eV)

ħΓ (meV)

τ (fs)




T1-carb
−1.75
−2.72
0.97
220
3.0


T2-carb
−2.14
−3.04
0.90
125
5.3


T3-carb
−2.33
−3.12
0.79
96
6.8


T4-carb
−2.43
−3.23
0.80
40
16.4


T5-carb
−2.5
−3.27
0.77
35
18.9


T1-cat
−0.96
−1.22
0.26
25
26.8


T2-cat
−1.52
−1.86
0.34
30
22.0


T3-cat
−1.84
−2.18
0.34
38
17.1


T4-cat
−2.03
−2.29
0.26
29
22.6


T5-cat
−2.16
−2.47
0.31
39
17.0




The results obtained for T2-catechol and T2-carboxylic are also graphically represented in Fig. 11 as Lorentzian distributions, ρLUMO, with width ħΓ centered at ELUMO(dye).
 Fig. 11  LUMO PDOS plots for T2-carboxylic and T2-catechol grafted on (TiO2)38. Black lines: dye orbital (PDOS) contributions. Red curves: Lorentzian fitted curves, ρLUMO, with parameters from Table 3. The heights of the Lorentzian curves have been scaled to facilitate the comparison between the PDOS line and Lorentzian curves. 
Although the PDOS calculated from the electronic structure is composed of a finite number of states that do not essentially follow a simple Lorentzian distribution, a visual comparison of the fitted Lorentzian function with the plot of the individual PDOS contributions shows that the fitting broadly captures trends.
From the results in Table 3, a large broadening is found for Tn-carboxylic dyes, reflecting the strong dye@titania coupling already evidenced by the significant shift of the level upon grafting. Conversely, Tn-catechol dyes display a small broadening resulting from a weak mixing between the dye LUMO and titania CB states. Fig. 12 demonstrates that the amplitude of the energy shift of the LUMO upon grafting is clearly correlated to the extent of the LUMO level broadening.
 Fig. 12  LUMO energy shift vs. broadening for Tn-carboxylic and Tn-catechol dyes. 
As a result, the computed injection times are generally smaller with the Tn-carboxylic dyes compared to the Tn-catechol dyes.
It is worth noticing that increasing the number of thiophene rings for the Tn-carboxylic dyes leads to a decrease in the broadening and hence to an increase in the injection time; the injection time for T1-carboxylic is 6 times shorter than that for T5-carboxylic. This can be rationalized by the progressive dilution of the LUMO wavefunction, thus reducing the electronic density over the anchoring group. In contrast, a different behavior is observed for the Tn-catechol dyes; the injection time for T5-catechol dye is smaller than that for T1-catechol, and the injection times do not appear to be extremely sensitive to the number of thiophene rings. As a matter of fact, the calculated injection time for the T1-catechol dye is only a factor 1.5 larger than the T5-catechol dye. In an attempt to seek for an explanation for the different behaviors of catechol versus carboxylic acid, we analyze the factors that affect the injection times. Two crucial parameters have to be examined: the energy of the dye virtual orbital assigned as the injection energy and the dye LUMO weight on the anchoring group. These two parameters can be easily tuned by varying the functional groups in the dyes.
Since varying the injection energy affects the injection time by changing the number of acceptor states available for the electron, the injection time is plotted against the density of states in the titania surface in Fig. 13 (left). Increasing the density of the acceptor states in the case of Tn-carboxylic dyes leads to an increase in the injection time so that the Tn-carboxylic dyes with the largest density of acceptor states are surprisingly the slowest dyes for injection. In order to understand this behavior, we have analyzed the impact of the second parameter affecting the injection time by plotting in Fig. 13 (right) the injection time against the LUMO weight on the carboxylic acid. As illustrated in Fig. 13, extending the conjugation length increases the available DOS but decreases at the same time the LUMO weight on the anchoring group (thus implying an increase in the injection time). It thus appears that the injection times for carboxylic dyes rely more strongly on the LUMO weight over the anchoring group rather than on the available DOS.
 Fig. 13  (left) Injection times vs. density of states on titania for Tn-carboxylic dyes (black squares) and Tn-catechol dyes (red triangles). (right) Injection times vs. LUMO weight on the anchoring group for Tn-carboxylic dyes and Tn-catechol dyes. 
Conversely, the Tn-catechol dyes show a different behavior, with no clear correlation between the LUMO weight on the anchoring group and the injection time and between the injection time and the density of acceptor states.
Previous studies have also investigated the impact of different anchoring groups on the injection times by using perylene as a sensitizer.33,34 In view of the lack of experimental values for the injection times associated to Tn dyes, we apply now the same methodology to perylene dyes with the aim of comparing our results with: (i) those obtained for the Tn dyes; and (ii) measured injection times for perylene dyes to assess the quantitative character of our predictions. In Fig. 14, we present the chemical structures and shapes of the LUMO for the investigated perylene systems.
 Fig. 14  Chemical structure of the investigated perylene dyes: perylene with catechol (Pe-cat) and with carboxylic acid (Pe-carb) (left). Shape of the LUMO of the perylene-catechol dye and the perylene-carboxylic dye. The carboxylic acid and catechol anchoring groups were considered to bind to the TiO2 substrate in a bidentate geometry, as previously done. 
As illustrated in Table 4, the calculated adsorption energies of 53 kcal mol−1 and 37 kcal mol−1 for Pe-cat and Pe-carb, respectively, show that perylene binds to titania in a stronger way via catechol than via carboxylic acid, as it is the case for Tn dyes. The calculated energies are also comparable to the energies of adsorption for the anchoring group alone, with 51 kcal mol−1 and 37 kcal mol−1 for catechol and formic acid, respectively. This clearly supports the previous results found for Tn dyes, indicating that the binding strength of the sole anchoring group is a good indication of the binding strength of attached molecules. The amount of charge transferred between the perylene and titania cluster upon grafting is calculated to be 1.12 |e| and 0.50 |e| for Pe-catechol and Pe-carboxylic, respectively. These results compare very well to the charge transfer between the anchoring group alone and the titania cluster (1.16 |e| for catechol and 0.47 |e| for formic acid). Once again, the anchoring group is found to dictate the amount of charge transfer between the dye and the substrate.
Table 4 Adsorption energy, LUMO energy of the isolated and grafted dye, energy shift (ΔE), and injection times from LUMO(dye) to the titania conduction band







E
ads (kcal mol−1)

E
LUMO (dye alone) (eV)

E
LUMO (dye grafted) (eV)
ΔE (eV)

τ
cal (fs)

τ
exp (fs)




Pe-cat
−53
−2.15
−2.35
0.20
5.4
—


Pe-carb
−37
−2.56
−3.00
0.44
6.6
13




Similarly to Tn dyes, perylene anchored to titania via carboxylic acid exhibits a larger energy shift of the dye LUMO compared to perylene anchored via catechol. However, the computed injection times predict that the injection time is slightly shorter with catechol than with carboxylic acid. This result is consistent with previous theoretical studies showing that catechol is the fastest injecting anchoring group for perylene.35 A comparison between the experimental and computed injection times for Pe-carboxylic shows that our results are in line with experiments,33 with τcalc reduced by a factor of 2 with respect to τexp.
Interestingly, a comparison between perylene and oligothiophene dyes shows that catechol yields a larger injection time than carboxylic acid when used as anchoring group for perylene whereas the situation is reversed with oligothiophene dyes except for T5-catechol dye that exhibits a faster injection time than T5-carboxylic dye. This demonstrates a subtle interplay for the catechol between the strength of the coupling between the orbitals of the anchoring group and TiO2 cluster and its donor character that decreases the LUMO density over the anchoring group.35 Since the thiophene rings in the Tn dyes have a larger donor character than the benzene rings in perylene, they are expected to enhance the donor character of catechol and hence further polarize the LUMO away from the interface, thus rationalizing the longer injection rates obtained with Tn-catechol dyes. Altogether, our results thus pinpoint that the efficiency of an anchoring group in boosting the electron injection process depends on the nature of the dye.
3. Optical properties
In this section, we examine the changes in the optical properties of the Tn dyes upon grafting on the titania substrate. The TD-DFT simulated spectra for both the isolated and grafted T2-carboxylic and T5-carboxylic (T2-catechol and T5-catechol) are shown in Fig. 15. When increasing the size of the backbone from 2 to 5 rings, the spectra simulated for both carboxylic and catechol dyes exhibit a bathochromic shift of the lowest absorption band, as expected upon extension of the π-conjugation length. The shift of the lowest absorption band reflects very well the corresponding changes in the HOMO–LUMO gap, as illustrated in Table 5.
 Fig. 15  Calculated UV-vis absorption spectra of isolated T2-carboxylic, T5-carboxylic, T2-catechol and T5-catechol versus grafted on the TiO2 cluster; the maximum absorption energy Emax is marked for each system; the spectra for the grafted systems do not extend to the high energy region, due to the large increase in the number of excited states when introducing the cluster. 
Table 5 Calculated HOMO–LUMO differences (HLgap) for isolated and grafted Tn dyes, variation of HL gap after grafting (ΔHLgap) and Emax values for grafted dyes






HLgap (dye alone) (eV)
HLgap (dye grafted) (eV)
ΔHLgap (eV)

E
max (eV)




T1-carb
5.28
4.68
0.60
3.84


T2-carb
3.99
3.34
0.65
2.94


T3-carb
3.39
2.88
0.51
2.53


T4-carb
3.07
2.46
0.61
2.23


T5-carb
2.85
2.25
0.60
2.03


T1-cat
4.66
4.74
−0.08
3.56


T2-cat
3.85
3.75
0.10
3.32


T3-cat
3.36
3.21
0.15
2.89


T4-cat
3.08
3.06
0.02
2.76


T5-cat
2.89
2.71
0.18
2.37





Fig. 15 shows that grafting on titania induces a bathochromic shift of the lowest optical absorption band by 0.79 eV and 0.54 eV for the T2-carboxylic and T5-carboxylic compounds, respectively. In contrast, a smaller shift is observed for the T2-catechol and T5-catechol dyes, by 0.20 eV and 0.22 eV, respectively. This small shift is associated to the asymmetric stabilization of the HOMO and LUMO orbitals upon grafting. As previously shown, this stabilization is stronger for the LUMO orbital, which results in a decrease in the HOMO–LUMO energy gap of the grafted dye relative to the HOMO–LUMO energy gap for isolated dyes (Table 5). The stabilization of the LUMO orbital is more pronounced for the Tn-carboxylic dyes than for the Tn-catechol dyes due to the pinning effect, thus rationalizing the larger bathochromic shift for the former compounds.
The photoinduced electron transfer to TiO2 occurs mostly via an indirect mechanism for the carboxylic dyes since all dominant transitions of the lowest energy band have a pronounced dye-to-dye character (see ESI†). This implies that the photoinduced electron transfer to TiO2 occurs via an indirect mechanism where the electron is excited first to the LUMO level before being injected in TiO2 with timescales comparable to those computed in the previous Section. In the case of T2, the lowest absorption band originates from a manifold of transitions starting from the HOMO level located on the dye and ending into the unoccupied mixed states (see ESI†). As a result, the excited states are characterized by a pronounced charge-transfer character, which explains the small intensity of the corresponding transitions due to different spatial localization of the initial (HOMO over the dye) and final (mostly over the cluster) electronic level. The short Tn-catechol dyes thus favor a direct injection mechanism by exciting the gap states from the HOMO. In the case of T5-catechol, a mixed character prevails for the injection, with some excitations showing a significant dye-centered character and others a pronounced charge-transfer character via the excitation of mixed states(see ESI†). It is worth stressing that the large electron density of the HOMO on the anchoring group in the case of the Tn-catechol dyes should favor the back transfer of the photoexcited carriers to the dye as recombination process. This is consistent with the recent experimental study of An et al.32 showing that the efficiencies of devices based on new thiophene-based catechol dyes are limited by recombination processes. In contrast, the recombination processes are expected to be more limited for the Tn-carboxylic dyes since the HOMO has a weaker electronic density on the anchoring group.
IV. Conclusions
We have investigated by means of (TD-)DFT calculations the changes in the electronic properties and optical response of a series of oligothiophene derivatives, terminated with carboxylic acid or catechol moieties, when grafted on a titania cluster. The interfacial interactions between the dye and the semiconductor have been analyzed in the framework of the Newns–Anderson model. The energy and shape of the HOMO levels of all investigated dyes are hardly affected upon grafting because those levels lie in the bandgap of the semiconductor. In contrast, the LUMO levels of oligothiophenes anchored with a carboxylic acid are significantly shifted upon grafting, due to a high orbital hybridization at the interface leading to a pinning effect, whilst a small shift is computed for the oligothiophenes anchored with a catechol group.
The interaction between the dye and the semiconductor has also been quantified via the broadening of the LUMO level. In this respect, the carboxylic oligothiophene dyes exhibit a larger broadening due to the presence of a significant electronic density on the anchoring group and hence shorter electron injection times. In contrast, the oligothiophenes linked to titania via catechol generally yield a smaller broadening and longer injection times. This difference is partly related to the donor character of the catechol, which polarizes the dye LUMO away from the dye@semiconductor interface. The analysis of the factors that affect the injection times indicates that the injection times characteristic of carboxylic oligothiophene dyes correlate with the amount of electronic density over the anchoring group in the LUMO.
Moving to the optical responses, the simulated absorption spectra of the isolated and grafted dyes show that the carboxylic oligothiophene dyes exhibit a large bathochromic shift upon grafting due to the strong LUMO stabilization whilst a small bathochromic effect is observed for catechol oligothiophene dyes. The dyes grafted by a carboxylic group operate via an indirect injection mechanism (type I) while the catechol derivatives exhibit a direct, type II, injection mechanism for short chains and a mixed character for longer systems. The location of the broadened LUMO with respect to the density of states in the conduction band of the semiconductor is at the origin of the different behaviors for the two anchoring groups: on one hand, the high energy of the broadened LUMO in the case of catechol leads to the appearance of a series of mixed states at lower energy for the short chains, which are responsible for the direct injection mechanism. On the other hand, the low energy of the broadened LUMO in the case of carboxylic acid favors the indirect injection mechanism. Interestingly, the high (poor) electronic density over the catechol (carboxylic) group in the HOMO should increase (limit) the charge recombination processes in the devices.
In our future work, we plan to extend our investigations to anchoring groups such as phosphonic acid and thioformic acid with the aim of studying in depth the change in both the rate and mechanism of electron injection with the dye molecular structure.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We thank Prof. Filippo de Angelis for providing us the initial structure of the TiO2 cluster. This work has been supported by le centre national pour la recherche scientifique et technique (CNRST) au Maroc and by the Belgian National Fund for Scientific Research (FNRS). Computational resources were provided by the Consortium des Équipements de Calcul Intensif (CÉCI) funded by F.R.S.-FNRS under Grant 2.5020.11. J. C. is an FNRS research director.
References
M. Grätzel, Photoelectrochemical cells, Nature, 2001, 414(6861), 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Ning, Y. Fu and H. Tian, Improvement of dye-sensitized solar cells: what we know and what we need to know, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3(9), 1170–1181 CAS .
M. Pastore, T. Etienne and F. De Angelis, Structural and electronic properties of dye-sensitized TiO2 for solar cell applications: from single molecules to self-assembled monolayers, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4(20), 4346–4373 RSC .
Y. Cao, Y. Bai, Q. Yu, Y. Cheng, S. Liu, D. Shi, F. Gao and P. Wang, Dye-sensitized solar cells with a high absorptivity ruthenium sensitizer featuring a 2-(hexylthio)thiophene conjugated bipyridine, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(15), 6290–6297 CAS .
Y. Bai, J. Zhang, D. Zhou, Y. Wang, M. Zhang and P. Wang, Engineering organic sensitizers for iodine-free dye-sensitized solar cells: red-shifted current response concomitant with attenuated charge recombination, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(30), 11442–11445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Daeneke, T.-H. Kwon, A. B. Holmes, N. W. Duffy, U. Bach and L. Spiccia, High-efficiency dye-sensitized solar cells with ferrocene-based electrolytes, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3(3), 211–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Porphyrin-sensitized solar cells with cobalt(II/III)–based redox electrolyte exceed 12 percent efficiency, Science, 2011, 334(6056), 629–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, The light and shade of perovskite solar cells, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13(9), 838 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-B. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Interface engineering of highly efficient perovskite solar cells, Science, 2014, 345(6196), 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Komiya, A. Fukui, N. Murofushi, N. Koide, R. Yamanaka and H. Katayama In Improvement of the conversion efficiency of a monolithic type dye-sensitized solar cell module, Technical Digest, 21st International Photovoltaic Science and Engineering Conference, 2011, pp. 2C–5O.
J. R. Durrant, S. A. Haque and E. Palomares, Towards optimisation of electron transfer processes in dye sensitised solar cells, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248(13), 1247–1257 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Prezhdo, W. R. Duncan and V. V. Prezhdo, Dynamics of the photoexcited electron at the chromophore–semiconductor interface, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41(2), 339–348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Asbury, R. J. Ellingson, H. N. Ghosh, S. Ferrere, A. J. Nozik and T. Lian, Femtosecond IR study of excited-state relaxation and electron-injection dynamics of Ru (dcbpy)2(NCS)2 in solution and on nanocrystalline TiO2 and Al2O3 thin films, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103(16), 3110–3119 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, R. Ernstorfer, F. Willig and V. May, Absorption spectra related to heterogeneous electron transfer reactions: the perylene TiO2 system, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109(19), 9589–9595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Frontiera, J. Dasgupta and R. A. Mathies, Probing interfacial electron transfer in coumarin 343 sensitized TiO2 nanoparticles with femtosecond stimulated Raman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131(43), 15630–15632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Stockwell, Y. Yang, J. Huang, C. Anfuso, Z. Huang and T. Lian, Comparison of electron-transfer dynamics from coumarin 343 to TiO2, SnO2, and ZnO nanocrystalline thin films: Role of interface-bound charge-separated pairs, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(14), 6560–6566 CAS .
J. Schnadt, P. A. Brühwiler, L. Patthey, J. N. O'shea, S. Södergren, M. Odelius, R. Ahuja, O. Karis, M. Bässler and P. Persson, Experimental evidence for sub-3 fs charge transfer from an aromatic adsorbate to a semiconductor, Nature, 2002, 418(6898), 620–623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schnadt, A. Henningsson, M. P. Andersson, P. G. Karlsson, P. Uvdal, H. Siegbahn, P. A. Brühwiler and A. Sandell, Adsorption and charge-transfer study of bi-isonicotinic acid on in situ-grown anatase TiO2 nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108(10), 3114–3122 CrossRef CAS .
R. Huber, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and J. Wachtveitl, Observation of photoinduced electron transfer in dye/semiconductor colloidal systems with different coupling strengths, Chem. Phys., 2002, 285(1), 39–45 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schnadt, J. O'shea, L. Patthey, L. Kjeldgaard, J. Åhlund, K. Nilson, J. Schiessling, J. Krempaský, M. Shi and O. Karis, Excited-state charge transfer dynamics in systems of aromatic adsorbates on TiO2 studied with resonant core techniques, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 119(23), 12462–12472 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Rehm, G. L. McLendon, Y. Nagasawa, K. Yoshihara, J. Moser and M. Grätzel, Femtosecond electron-transfer Dynamics at a sensitizing dye–semiconductor (TiO2) interface, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100(23), 9577–9578 CrossRef .
L. Gundlach, R. Ernstorfer and F. Willig, Pathway-dependent electron transfer for rod-shaped perylene-derived molecules adsorbed in nanometer-size TiO2 cavities, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111(36), 13586–13594 CAS .
L. Gundlach, T. Letzig and F. Willig, Test of theoretical models for ultrafast heterogeneous electron transfer with femtosecond two-photon photoemission data, J. Chem. Sci., 2009, 121(5), 561–574 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Bartelt, R. Schütz, A. Neubauer, T. Hannappel and R. Eichberger, Influence of TiO2/perylene interface modifications on electron injection and recombination dynamics, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(50), 21233–21241 CAS .
H. N. Ghosh, Charge transfer emission in coumarin 343 sensitized TiO2 nanoparticle: A direct measurement of back electron transfer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103(47), 10382–10387 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, M. Nilsing, I. Kondov, H. Wang, P. Persson, S. Lunell and M. Thoss, Dynamical Simulation of Photoinduced Electron Transfer Reactions in Dye–Semiconductor Systems with Different Anchor Groups, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112(32), 12326–12333 CAS .
E. Maggio, N. Martsinovich and A. Troisi, Evaluating charge recombination rate in dye-sensitized solar cells from electronic structure calculations, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2012, 116(14), 7638–7649 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sánchez-de-Armas, J. Oviedo, M. Á. San Miguel and J. F. Sanz, Direct vs. indirect mechanisms for electron injection in dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115(22), 11293–11301 Search PubMed .
P. Persson, R. Bergström and S. Lunell, Quantum chemical study of photoinjection processes in dye-sensitized TiO2 nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104(44), 10348–10351 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sánchez-de-Armas, M. San-Miguel, J. Oviedo and J. F. Sanz, Direct vs. indirect mechanisms for electron injection in DSSC: Catechol and alizarin, Comput. Theor. Chem., 2011, 975(1), 99–105 CrossRef .
K. Vandewal, Interfacial charge transfer states in condensed phase systems, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2016, 67, 113–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-K. An, W. Hu, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, New type II catechol-thiophene sensitizers for dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(41), 17964–17974 CAS .
R. Ernstorfer, L. Gundlach, S. Felber, W. Storck, R. Eichberger and F. Willig, Role of molecular anchor groups in molecule-to-semiconductor electron transfer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110(50), 25383–25391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nilsing, P. Persson, S. Lunell and L. Ojamäe, Dye-sensitization of the TiO2 rutile (110) surface by perylene dyes: Quantum-chemical periodic B3LYP computations, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111(32), 12116–12123 CAS .
F. Ambrosio, N. Martsinovich and A. Troisi, What is the best anchoring group for a dye in a dye-sensitized solar cell?, J. Phys. Lett., 2012, 3(11), 1531–1535 CAS .
F. De Angelis, Direct vs. indirect injection mechanisms in perylene dye-sensitized solar cells: A DFT/TDDFT investigation, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 493(4), 323–327 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanaka, K. Takimiya, T. Otsubo, K. Kawabuchi, S. Kajihara and Y. Harima, Development and photovoltaic performance of oligothiophene-sensitized TiO2 solar cells, Chem. Lett., 2006, 35(6), 592–593 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abate, M. Planells, D. J. Hollman, S. D. Stranks, A. Petrozza, A. R. S. Kandada, Y. Vaynzof, S. K. Pathak, N. Robertson and H. J. Snaith, An Organic “Donor-Free” Dye with Enhanced Open-Circuit Voltage in Solid-State Sensitized Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4(13), 1400166 CrossRef .
L. Lasser, E. Ronca, M. Pastore, F. De Angelis, J. R. M. Cornil, R. Lazzaroni and D. Beljonne, Energy Level Alignment at Titanium Oxide–Dye Interfaces: Implications for Electron Injection and Light Harvesting, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(18), 9899–9909 CAS .
P. Redfern, P. Zapol, L. Curtiss, T. Rajh and M. Thurnauer, Computational studies of catechol and water interactions with titanium oxide nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107(41), 11419–11427 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pastore and F. De Angelis, Computational modelling of TiO2 surfaces sensitized by organic dyes with different anchoring groups: adsorption modes, electronic structure and implication for electron injection/recombination, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14(2), 920–928 RSC .
P. Falaras, Synergetic effect of carboxylic acid functional groups and fractal surface characteristics for efficient dye sensitization of titanium oxide, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 53(1), 163–175 CrossRef CAS .
F. De Angelis, A. Tilocca and A. Selloni, Time-dependent DFT study of [Fe(CN)6] 4-sensitization of TiO2 nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126(46), 15024–15025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, First-principles modeling of the adsorption geometry and electronic structure of Ru(II) dyes on extended TiO2 substrates for dye-sensitized solar cell applications, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(13), 6054–6061 CAS .
A. Vittadini, A. Selloni, F. Rotzinger and M. Grätzel, Structure and energetics of water adsorbed at TiO2 anatase\(101) and\(001) surfaces, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81(14), 2954 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized gradient approximation made simple, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77(18), 3865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. T. Te Velde, F. M. Bickelhaupt, E. J. Baerends, C. Fonseca Guerra, S. J. van Gisbergen, J. G. Snijders and T. Ziegler, Chemistry with ADF, J. Comput. Chem., 2001, 22(9), 931–967 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Frisch, G. Trucks, H. Schlegel, G. Scuseria, M. Robb, J. Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone, B. Mennucci, G. Petersson and D. J. Fox, Gaussian 09, Revision A.02, Gaussian. Inc., Wallingford, CT,  2009 Search PubMed .
J. Muscat and D. Newns, Chemisorption on metals, Prog. Surf. Sci., 1978, 9(1), 1–43 CrossRef CAS .
P. Persson, M. J. Lundqvist, R. Ernstorfer, W. Goddard and F. Willig, Quantum chemical calculations of the influence of anchor-cum-spacer groups on femtosecond electron transfer times in dye-sensitized semiconductor nanocrystals, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2006, 2(2), 441–451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kormann, D. W. Bahnemann and M. R. Hoffmann, Preparation and characterization of quantum-size titanium dioxide, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92(18), 5196–5201 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Lundqvist, M. Nilsing, P. Persson and S. Lunell, DFT study of bare and dye-sensitized TiO2 clusters and nanocrystals, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2006, 106(15), 3214–3234 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, S. Li and Y. Jiang, A time-dependent DFT study on band gaps and effective conjugation lengths of polyacetylene, polyphenylene, polypentafulvene, polycyclopentadiene, polypyrrole, polyfuran, polysilole, polyphosphole, and polythiophene, Macromolecules, 2002, 35(3), 1109–1115 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cornil, D. Dos Santos, D. Beljonne and J. Brédas, Electronic structure of phenylene vinylene oligomers: influence of donor/acceptor substitutions, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99(15), 5604–5611 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nilsing, P. Persson and L. Ojamäe, Anchor group influence on molecule–metal oxide interfaces: periodic hybrid DFT study of pyridine bound to TiO2via carboxylic and phosphonic acid, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 415(4), 375–380 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ronca, M. Pastore, L. Belpassi, F. Tarantelli and F. De Angelis, Influence of the dye molecular structure on the TiO2 conduction band in dye-sensitized solar cells: disentangling charge transfer and electrostatic effects, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6(1), 183–193 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp05638aThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Scheme showing type I and type II photoinjection in a DSSC.	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical structures of the TiO38O76 cluster (left panel) and molecular dyes investigated (right panel).	 

 	Fig. 3  (left) Schematic representation of the three possible binding structures that catechol may adopt on a TiO2 surface. (right) Schematic representation of the four possible binding structures that a carboxylic acid may adopt on TiO2.	 
E[ads] = E[TiO2,dye] − E[TiO2] − E[dye]	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
ΔE = ELUMO(ads) − ELUMO(free ads)	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
τ = ℏ/ℏΓ	(8)
τ (fs) = 658/ℏΓ (meV)	(9)

 	Fig. 4  HOMO and LUMO energy levels for isolated Tn-catechol dyes (left) and isolated Tn-carboxylic acid dyes (right). The edge of the TiO2 conduction and valence bands are also shown, as calculated at the B3LYP level for the cluster.	 

 	Fig. 5  Shape of the HOMO and LUMO of the T5-catechol dye (left) and the T5-carboxylic dye (right).	 

Formic acid	−37	Catechol	−51
T1-carb	−33	T1-cat	−47
T2-carb	−32	T2-cat	−44
T3-carb	−28	T3-cat	−40
T4-carb	−24	T4-cat	−36
T5-carb	−21	T5-cat	−33

Formic acid	−1	−0.53	−0.47
T1-carb	−1	−0.51	−0.49
T2-carb	−1	−0.50	−0.50
T3-carb	−1	−0.49	−0.51
T4-carb	−1	−0.49	−0.51
T5-carb	−1	−0.49	−0.51
catechol	−2	−0.85	−1.16
T1-cat	−2	−0.85	−1.15
T2-cat	−2	−0.86	−1.14
T3-cat	−2	−0.86	−1.14
T4-cat	−2	−0.87	−1.13
T5-cat	−2	−0.86	−1.14

 	Fig. 6  Electron density changes upon grafting on titania for the T2-carboxylic, T5-carboxylic, T2-catechol and T5-catechol dyes. Blue surfaces identify regions in which the electron density decreases whereas zones of density accumulation are marked by purple surfaces.	 

 	Fig. 7  HOMO energy levels for the isolated and grafted Tn-catechol dyes (left) and for the isolated and grafted Tn-carboxylic dyes (right).	 

 	Fig. 8  Shape of the HOMO and LUMO+84 of the grafted T2-catechol dye and HOMO and LUMO+11 of the grafted T2-carboxylic dye.	 

 	Fig. 9  LUMO energy levels for the isolated and grafted Tn-catechol dyes (left) and for the isolated and grafted Tn-carboxylic dyes (right). We also report the energy of the conduction band edge in all cases.	 

 	Fig. 10  Total density of states for the clean (TiO2)38 cluster and partial density of states for the grafted Tn-catechol dyes (left) and Tn-carboxylic dyes (right). The black solid line corresponds to the TiO2 partial DOS, the red line corresponds to the dye partial DOS. The dashed lines correspond to the position of the LUMO levels for isolated Tn dyes.	 

T1-carb	−1.75	−2.72	0.97	220	3.0
T2-carb	−2.14	−3.04	0.90	125	5.3
T3-carb	−2.33	−3.12	0.79	96	6.8
T4-carb	−2.43	−3.23	0.80	40	16.4
T5-carb	−2.5	−3.27	0.77	35	18.9
T1-cat	−0.96	−1.22	0.26	25	26.8
T2-cat	−1.52	−1.86	0.34	30	22.0
T3-cat	−1.84	−2.18	0.34	38	17.1
T4-cat	−2.03	−2.29	0.26	29	22.6
T5-cat	−2.16	−2.47	0.31	39	17.0

 	Fig. 11  LUMO PDOS plots for T2-carboxylic and T2-catechol grafted on (TiO2)38. Black lines: dye orbital (PDOS) contributions. Red curves: Lorentzian fitted curves, ρLUMO, with parameters from Table 3. The heights of the Lorentzian curves have been scaled to facilitate the comparison between the PDOS line and Lorentzian curves.	 

 	Fig. 12  LUMO energy shift vs. broadening for Tn-carboxylic and Tn-catechol dyes.	 

 	Fig. 13  (left) Injection times vs. density of states on titania for Tn-carboxylic dyes (black squares) and Tn-catechol dyes (red triangles). (right) Injection times vs. LUMO weight on the anchoring group for Tn-carboxylic dyes and Tn-catechol dyes.	 

 	Fig. 14  Chemical structure of the investigated perylene dyes: perylene with catechol (Pe-cat) and with carboxylic acid (Pe-carb) (left). Shape of the LUMO of the perylene-catechol dye and the perylene-carboxylic dye. The carboxylic acid and catechol anchoring groups were considered to bind to the TiO2 substrate in a bidentate geometry, as previously done.	 

Pe-cat	−53	−2.15	−2.35	0.20	5.4	—
Pe-carb	−37	−2.56	−3.00	0.44	6.6	13

 	Fig. 15  Calculated UV-vis absorption spectra of isolated T2-carboxylic, T5-carboxylic, T2-catechol and T5-catechol versus grafted on the TiO2 cluster; the maximum absorption energy Emax is marked for each system; the spectra for the grafted systems do not extend to the high energy region, due to the large increase in the number of excited states when introducing the cluster.	 

T1-carb	5.28	4.68	0.60	3.84
T2-carb	3.99	3.34	0.65	2.94
T3-carb	3.39	2.88	0.51	2.53
T4-carb	3.07	2.46	0.61	2.23
T5-carb	2.85	2.25	0.60	2.03
T1-cat	4.66	4.74	−0.08	3.56
T2-cat	3.85	3.75	0.10	3.32
T3-cat	3.36	3.21	0.15	2.89
T4-cat	3.08	3.06	0.02	2.76
T5-cat	2.89	2.71	0.18	2.37
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp05638a

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
