Prominent processing techniques to manipulate semiconducting polymer microstructures  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC03971K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC03971K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2023, 11, 364-405Prominent processing techniques to manipulate semiconducting polymer microstructures

        
          
            Ioan 
            Botiz
          
          
        
      
Interdisciplinary Research Institute in Bio-Nano-Sciences, Babes-Bolyai University, 400271 Cluj-Napoca, Romania. E-mail: ioan.botiz@ubbcluj.ro
Received 
      20th September 2022
    , Accepted 16th November 2022First published on 18th November 2022AbstractMost of the technological applications that shape the development of our society and lifestyle are based on polymers. Whether we are talking about the automotive and aviation industry, packaging and adhesive materials, insulator and optoelectronic applications, medical devices and antibacterial/drug delivery solutions, environment and cosmetics, just to name a few, polymers have their valuable and well-established place. This is inclusively due to their low cost and straightforward processability. The latter is a key to the pathway towards future, novel polymer-based technologies due to its massive impact on the structure–property relationship. Therefore, it is critical to understand which strategies and processing techniques can be improved and further employed to efficiently alter the microstructure of specific polymers and thus, to control and enhance their final properties. In this work, we classify and analyze the most prominent processing techniques that have been recently developed and used in research and industrial laboratories to efficiently tune and manipulate, on nano-, micro- and macro-scales, the molecular arrangements and packing of, especially, conjugated polymers in films, solutions and solid state.
Ioan Botiz
Dr habil. Ioan Botiz was a Marie Curie fellow at the French National Centre for Scientific Research and received, in 2007, his PhD in polymer physics from the Haute Alsace University (France). He then moved to the Center for Nanoscale Materials at Argonne National Laboratory (USA) and focused on structuring of photovoltaic active layers and fabrication of organic energy devices. Botiz returned to Europe as a FRIAS excellence postdoctoral fellow at the University of Freiburg (Germany) where he was working to understand the structure–property relationships in conjugated polymers. Since 2014 he has been working at Babes-Bolyai University (Romania) where he holds the position of Scientific Researcher I. He was also a Research Associate at Imperial College London (2014–2019).
1. Introduction
Polymer molecules represent one of the most prominent classes of materials that are currently shaping irreversibly our society and life on our planet. These soft molecules are obtained through the chemical connection of specific repeating units named monomers.1,2 The latter can be endlessly designed and then developed via a plethora of synthetic routes. Therefore, polymer molecules display a multitude of physico-chemical properties and functions3–15 that extend their use and sustainability16 in a wide-range of applications,14,15,17–26 stretching from the automotive27–31 and aeronautic32–35 industry, to packaging36–40 and adhesive41–44 materials, to energy storage45–48 and optoelectronics,25,26,49–53 to additive manufacturing30,54–57 and environmental remediation,58–63 to insulator64–66 and detection67–70 applications, to medical/drug delivery uses22,71–79 and antibacterial solutions,23,80–83 to lithography20,84–86 and three-/four-dimensional (3D/4D) printing,87–95etc.
One of the most fundamental insights into the world of polymers is represented by the powerful relationship between the microstructure generated by polymer molecules upon processing and their resulting properties.13,80,96–104 It is this relationship that allows researchers to optimize and enhance the properties of polymers, by rigorously controlling and tuning the molecular arrangements at macro-, micro- and nano-meter scales. Nonetheless, an efficient tuning of molecular conformations requires continuous design and development of innovative polymer processing techniques. Moreover, because each polymer system has a unique chemical structure and can display, for instance, different molecular weights (the latter can impact inclusively the melting and/or glass transition temperature), each system requires a rather peculiar processing pathway. Therefore, most of the polymer processing techniques are often based on a multitude of physico-chemical approaches102,105–115 and depend on whether polymer chains are being processed in the solid state, solutions or films.
In this work, the aim is to review the most prominent polymer processing techniques reported in the literature and demonstrated to be efficient in altering and tuning the microstructure of polymers on multiple length scales, not only in (thin) films deposited on solid/flexible substrates, but also in various solutions and solid-state samples. Moreover, the intention here is to emphasize the advantages and disadvantages of each of these processing techniques, and to provide, when possible, the most relevant, yet recent examples of microstructures that can be obtained from certain polymeric systems upon processing.
2. Common techniques used to align polymer molecules in films
2.1 Solution-processing techniques for polymer film fabrication
The molecular arrangements of polymer chains in films depend strongly not only on how films are processed post-fabrication, but also on the conditions of film deposition in the pre-fabrication stages, i.e., on the solution-processing techniques used to generate thin films. This latter category will be discussed first in the following sections.

2.1.1 Spin casting. 
Spin casting is one of the most common techniques used to rapidly fabricate uniform polymer films of specific thickness and over a rather limited area. Schematically depicted in Fig. 1a, this technique relies on the fast dispersion of a polymer solution onto various solid substrates, under the action of centrifugal forces induced through spinning.116 While spin casting works better for polymer solutions prepared in volatile solvents, the quality and microstructure of the final films depend on the spinning speed, as well as on the acceleration and time of spinning. By varying these parameters, along with the type of solvent and cp, the thickness of a film can be controlled down to 0.5 nm. This is especially valid for polymeric systems such as natural rubber, polystyrene (PS) or poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA).117,118 Moreover, recent quantitative insights into the processes associated with spin casting showed that it is even possible to predict the final film thickness for an important range of thicknesses.119 By carefully considering the dynamics of polymer film formation120 (for instance, it is critical to control the rate of solvent evaporation in order to obtain films of a certain roughness121), the spin casting process can lead to film microstructures that can tune the charge mobilities of conjugated polymers,122 reduce the sensitivity of volatile organic compound vapors,123 improve the mechanical properties of polymer composites made of poly(lactic acid) (PLA) and cellulose nanocrystals,124etc. Furthermore, spin casting can be employed to simply generate double-layer polymer films exhibiting ultrahigh thermoelectric attributes125 or can be used on previously aggregated polymer solutions to obtain peculiar film microstructures with puzzling optoelectronic properties.126 In the latter case, the amount of structural disorder of polymer aggregates as a function of solution temperature was monitored using typical one-dimensional (1D) and two-dimensional (2D) grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of the spin casting technique. (b) Chemical structure of the isoindigo-based polymer. (c and d) Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images comparing 5 × 5 μm2 areas of two isoindigo-based polymer films prepared, by classical on-center (c) and off-center (d) spin casting processes, from a solution pre-aggregated in a mixture of two solvents. (e) Schematics depicting the drop casting method. (f) Chemical structure of PDBT-TT. (g) TEM micrograph of a film made of PDBT-TT copolymers by using an enhanced drop casting technique. The inset depicts the corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern. (h) TEM image emphasizing the ribbons of P3HT obtained by slow-drying drop casting from carbon disulfide solution. The inset shows GIWAXS data of such a P3HT film. (i) Schematics emphasizing dip coating. (j) Chemical structure of the isoindigo-based PII-2T conjugated polymer. (k and l) AFM height images depicting thin films of an isoindigo-based conjugated polymer dip coated at a deposition speed of 10 μm s−1 (k) and 100 μm s−1 (l), respectively. The white arrows show the coating direction. (m) Illustration showing the principle of spray coating. (n) Chemical structure of PEDOT:PSS. (o) AFM phase image displaying the surface of a PEDOT:PSS film fabricated by the ultrasonic spray coating method. (p) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image exhibiting the surface of a porous PS-b-P2VP layer fabricated by spray coating and then subjected to ethanol swelling at a temperature of 70 °C for 5 hours. Adapted from ref. 129 (c and d) [Copyright (2018), with permission from American Chemical Society], ref. 146 (g) [Copyright (2016), with permission from Elsevier Ltd], ref. 149 (h) – published by The Royal Society of Chemistry, ref. 159 (k and l) [Copyright (2020) WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA (Weinheim) with permission from John Wiley and Sons], ref. 171 (o) [Copyright (2016) The Author(s)] and ref. 172 (p) [Copyright (2019), with permission from Elsevier B.V.]. 
Spin casting can be further improved by placing the substrate at a specific distance from the center of the rotational stage (i.e., off-center spin casting) and thus, by taking advantage of the unidirectional centrifugal force in the direction of the substrate. This forces polymer chains to align in the direction of centrifugal force (in this case, the thickness of the films can be further varied by placing the substrate at various distances from the center127). This procedure is different from the classical spin casting where the centrifugal force, acting on the sample placed centrally, is multidirectional and leads to the alignment of polymer chains in multiple directions. A representative experimental study demonstrating the efficiency of the off-center approach was reported by Yuan and co-workers who have grown highly aligned film structures of organic 2,7-dioctyl[1]benzothieno[3,2-b][1]benzothiophene (C8-BTBT) directly from solutions made of C8-BTBT and PS. The resulting structures further took advantage of the vertical phase separation between the C8-BTBT and PS and exhibited, at that time, the highest OFET hole mobility of all organic molecules.128
The off-center approach can be combined with additional procedures such as preaggregation of polymer solutions prior to casting129,130 or ultrasonication of solutions based on marginal solvents,131 finally leading to highly aligned film microstructures that are nowadays more prominently used in the fabrication of organic field-effect transistors (OFETs).129–132 Such microstructures include highly crystalline and aligned nanowires of regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) with improved charge transport properties,131 backbone planarized and uniaxially aligned chains of conjugated isoindigo-based polymers (depicted in Fig. 1b) displaying high electron field-effect mobilities129 (Fig. 1c and d), anisotropically aligned chains of conjugated poly[(E)-1,2-(3,3′-dioctadecyl-2,2′-dithienyl)ethylene-alt-dithieno-(3,2-b:2′,3′-d)thiophene] (P18), P3HT and poly{[N,N′-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-1,4,5,8-naphthalenediimide-2,6-diyl]-alt-5,5′-(2,2′-bithiophene)} (P(NDI2OD-T2)) with enhanced charge mobility,130etc.
Finally, it can be added that the off-center spin casting technique continuously undergoes adaptations and improvements. For instance, the upside-down off-center spinning takes the additional advantage of gravity and can deliver enhanced vertical donor–acceptor (D–A) compositional gradient in the active layer of a polymer-based bulk heterojunction solar cell, leading to devices experiencing nearly 100% internal quantum efficiency.133 Instead, the rotation casting implies placing of the substrate parallel to the central line in order to induce, besides the centrifugal force, an additional inertial force that can align polymer chains orthogonal to the radial direction. This approach can lead to highly aligned nanofibrillar microstructures of conjugated polymers exhibiting high field-effect charge mobilities.134


2.1.2 Drop casting. 
Another classical polymer film deposition method is drop casting. It forms mono- or multi-layered films through the evaporation of the solvent, at room or controlled temperature, from a droplet of polymer solution previously placed on a solid/flexible substrate (Fig. 1e). This method is simple, cost-effective and requires short experimental times. But, the macroscopic coffee ring patterns, which are most often formed after the evaporation of the solvent, are highly undesirable. Nonetheless, there are ways to mitigate such effects,135 including the use of the multiple-droplet drop casting approach along with ultrasonication.136 In this latter case, several droplets of polymer solution of rather same size can be equally spaced onto a vibrating substrate, delivering larger, uniform thin solid films of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS).136
Drop casting can be employed in regular experiments aiming to deliver good quality136,137 (flexible/composite) films,137–143 less usual experiments dealing with curved surfaces144 or in applications requiring microstructures comprising specific molecular arrangements.145–149 The last category is more interesting because it emphasizes the impact of the drop casting technique on the polymer film microstructure. Our first example of drop cast films unveils the existence of mesoscopic 2D coherent charge transport in PEDOT:PSS. Experiments have shown that such films are characterized by two-regime (tunneling and hopping) transport, which is ascribed to the self-assembled laminated structure formed by wrapping the PEDOT nanocrystals with insulating sheets made of amorphous PSS chains.145 This laminated structure was deduced from GIWAXS measurements and scattering profiles of out-of-plane and in-plane. Another example that shows how drop casting can improve the microstructure in polymer films is emphasized when comparing two films of 81% regioregular P3HT fabricated by both drop and spin casting. Here, two different preferential orientations of the crystalline P3HT microdomains with respect to the substrate have been obtained. While the fast spin casting process led to conjugated lamellae with the direction of π–π stacking to be oriented perpendicularly to the substrate, the slower evaporation of the solvent during drop casting induced an in-plane orientation of the conjugated lamellae with respect to the substrate.148 As a consequence, the field-effect mobilities extracted for the latter orientation were more than an order of magnitude higher than the mobilities corresponding to the former orientation.148
The effect of drop casting on the orientation of polymer chains with respect to the substrate was further explored by Chen and co-workers, who aligned films of a D–A block copolymer (BCP) made of 3,6-bis(thiophen-2-yl)-N,N0-bis(2-octyl-1-dodecyl)-1,4-dioxo-pyrrolo [3,4-c]pyrrole and thieno-[3,2-b]thiophene (PDBT-TT; Fig. 1f) by improving the drop-casting process through the sealing of the sample within a solvent saturated environment.146 As revealed by grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) analysis and transmission electron microscopy (TEM), such experiments have delivered surfaces covered with a microstructure consisting of parallel fibers that formed along the molecular backbones (Fig. 1g) and that improved both the crystallinity and chain alignment.146 A similar approach was used earlier by Wang and co-workers to self-assemble highly ordered single fibers, with a diameter of about 10 nm, from a cyclopentadithiophene-benzothiadiazole (CDT-BTZ) co-polymer that targeted OFET applications.147 In comparison to random arrangements of polymer chains, such fibers displayed a quasi-crystalline order, provided straight pathways for charge carriers and thus, favored high OFET mobilities.147
Slow-drying drop casting can further be employed to favour the self-assembly process and to obtain either entanglement-free ribbons (formed under conditions that disfavoured nucleation density and instead favored crystallization and growth processes; Fig. 1h) or fibrils of conjugated P3HT, depending on the type of solvent that was used.149 These types of structures were identified by performing X-ray diffraction (XRD) and GIWAXS measurements (see the inset in Fig. 1h). Although in both ribbons and fibrils the grains in thin films were well-interconnected via long P3HT tie molecules, the OFET charge mobilities extracted from ribbons were higher, indicating that the charge transport proceeding through ribbons and hopping in between ribbons via tie molecules was more efficient than in the case of fibrils.


2.1.3 Dip coating. 
Dip coating is a film deposition method that involves immersion of a substrate into a precursor polymer solution for a certain time, followed by the retraction of the substrate at a constant, ideally slow, speed. During the retraction of the substrate, a layer of solution remains on it, while the rest of solution is drained. Dip-coating is complete once the solvent evaporates from the surface and a newly solid film is formed (see the schematics of dip coating in Fig. 1i). While solvent evaporation can be accelerated by thermal annealing, the final film microstructure depends on the simultaneous optimization of a variety of processing parameters, including the time of immersion, speed of retraction, cp, type of solvent and substrate, temperature of polymer solution, retraction angle, etc. As a consequence, several variants of dip coating, including drain coating and angle-dependent dip coating, were reported to exist.150 Moreover, at extreme retraction speeds, two regimes of film formation were described to occur independently. While one regime is controlled by the gravity-induced viscous drag at higher speeds, the other one is dictated by the interdependent evaporation and capillarity rise at lower speeds.151 Both regimes can be exploited to deliver, at the end, a certain type of film microstructure.
While in earlier times dip coating was used for instance, to deposit poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO)-based films necessary for the fabrication of conducting polypyrrole films,152 more recently it was employed to deliver: (i) thin films of PS:PLA blends that exhibited a controlled morphology by varying the retraction speed and geometry of the reservoir,153 (ii) amorphous nano polymer films of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) with no pits and pin holes for transistor applications,154 (iii) films of PMMA and PMMA-based bioceramics and bioglass composites free of cracks,155 (iv) polyaniline (PANI) thin films of long-chain conjugation for sensing applications,156 (v) active layers of P3HT:[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) with optimized microstructure for solar cells,157 and others.
Nowadays, dip coating can be employed to control the crystallization of blends made of PMMA and organic semiconductors such as small molecules of α,ω-dihexylquaterthiophene and diketopyrrolopyrrole–sexithiophene, respectively.158 Here, the OFET charge carrier mobilities corresponding to dip coated blended films were 6 times and 2.5 times higher than those of their drop cast analogues, respectively. This high charge mobility was attributed to the continuous alignment of the crystalline films with stratified small molecule/PMMA layers induced by the meniscus-guided dip coating.158 Highly aligned films were further obtained from an isoindigo-based conjugated polymer PII-T2 (Fig. 1j) by controlled dip coating. Li and co-workers decided to optimize not only the coating speed but also the cp and succeeded to deliver highly ordered films exhibiting an exceptional degree of planarization of the polymer backbone (Fig. 1k and l) and OFET carrier mobilities exceeding ten times the value extracted from their unaligned spin cast analogues.159
Finally, dip coating can be further used to deposit polymeric nanoparticles along with various polymer systems to obtain thin composite films. Sinturel and co-workers added, to either PVA or polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) solutions in water, colloidal suspensions of poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles and obtained composite thin films of biocompatible polymers loaded with PLGA nanoparticles.160 They applied various depositions regimes dictated by the specific retraction speeds and succeeded in controlling the concentration of nanoparticles in these composite films. Interestingly, while the crystallization of PVA was observed to occur in the PVA/PLGA composites, only amorphous PVP was observed in the PVP/PLGA composites.160 Additional information on the use of the dip coating technique to fabricate films of (polymeric) nanoparticles can be found elsewhere.20


2.1.4 Spray coating. 
The spray coating deposition approach, sketched in Fig. 1m, relies on spraying a polymer solution onto a desired substrate, with the goal to obtain large-area thin films of certain microstructure and/or to change the surface chemistry. Here, important processing parameters that have a significant impact on the final film microstructure include the cp, type of solvent and substrate, substrate temperature, distance from the nozzle to the substrate, spray duration, flow rate, pressure and others.161–163 To better understand how to control such parameters and obtain an optimized polymer film microstructure, especially when solar cell devices are targeted, readers are advised to further refer to the comprehensive work reported lately in the literature.161,162,164 The advantages of this techniques lie in the possibility of not only quickly fabricating multi-layered film configurations of chitin/cellulose biopolymers165 and polyanions/polycations,166 but also spraying thin films of PEDOT:PSS and graphene/PEDOT:PSS on 3D surfaces that are highly desired in semitransparent capacitive-touch devices.167 Moreover, spray coating can be successfully used to solve the incompatibility between, for example, hydrophobic polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) and hydrophilic PVA and to obtain desalination assemblies of tightly bound PVA on fibrous PTFE supports.168 This can be achieved by spraying submicrometer sized solution droplets of PVA onto porous PTFE. Nonetheless, some drawbacks associated with this technique exist and include the high film roughness and pinhole-like defects.162
Besides the universal spray coating,169 there are several other variants of adapted spray coating that are able to deliver polymeric films of controlled microstructure. Most common of these variants include the airbrush and ultrasonic spray coating. While the latter can lead to P3HT:PCBM active layers with optimized morphology for solar cells164 (note that P3HT:PCBM active layers with interpenetrating D–A microstructure can further be obtained by employing a multi-component spray coating that uses alternating deposition from P3HT and PCBM separate solutions170), the former is able to deliver, under optimized processing conditions, not only uniform, low-roughness PVP and poly(D,L-lactide) (PDLLA) films,163 but also high quality PEDOT:PSS (see the chemical structure in Fig. 1n) films of well phase-separated morphology (Fig. 1o).171 Other variants rely on coupling the spray coating with additional processes such as selective swelling. For instance, Ma and co-workers recently used such an approach to fabricate PS-b-poly(2-vinylpyridine) (P2VP) BCP ultrafiltration membranes.172 By controlling the cp and a variety of other processing conditions, they succeeded to deliver a dense, uniform and yet free of defects PS-b-P2VP layer on nylon support that was later on soaked in hot ethanol to induce porosity in the PS-b-P2VP layer (Fig. 1p) via selective swelling-induced pore generation.172


2.1.5 Solution shearing. 
Solution shearing is a simple film deposition technique able to induce uniaxial alignment of polymer chains by confining a limited quantity of polymer solution between the substrate and a top (solid/flexible) movable blade adopting either a parallel or a slightly tilted position with respect to the substrate.173 Here, the unidirectional motion of the solution meniscus with respect to the substrate is responsible for the resulting shear force that acts on the fluid and induces polymer chain alignment upon solvent drying.174 Processing parameters that dictate the uniaxial crystallization and/or ordering of the film microstructure include the cp, volatility of the solvent, deposition speed, substrate temperature, blade–substrate distance, type of the blade (patterned or not) and others.173–177
One typical approach of solution shearing was given by Reinspach and co-workers. They established control over the shearing speed, type of used solvent, film drying time, substrate temperature and type of the substrate, and succeeded in tuning the morphology of the resulting films of P3HT:PCBM. Their systematic UV-vis spectroscopy, grazing incident small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) and GIWAXS measurements revealed that morphologies obtained in chloroform displayed higher PCBM absorption, while those generated in 1,2 dichlorobenzene exhibited higher fractions of aggregation, including larger PCBM domains (as observed by GIWAXS; Fig. 2) and longer conjugation lengths.176 Moreover, GIWAXS further revealed that P3HT chains adopted a face-on orientation on the PEDOT:PSS substrate, an orientation that is highly desirable for organic photovoltaics (OPVs).176
 Fig. 2  GIWAXS images of films of P3HT and P3HT:PCBM sheared both from chloroform and 1,2-dichlorobenzene at various solution shearing speeds. Reproduced from ref. 176 [Copyright (2016), with permission from American Chemical Society]. 
Other interesting examples of film microstructures obtained by solution shearing were reported lately in the literature and include: (i) oriented crystalline films of D–A poly(diketopyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-co-thieno[3,2-b]thiophene) (PBDT-co-TT)175 or poly(dithienyl-diketopyrrolopyrrole)-(di(thienothienyl)ethylene) (PTDPP-DTTE)178 showing high OFET mobilities, (ii) interdigitated side chain arrangements in films of conjugated poly(2,5-bis(thiophene-2-yl)-(3,7-dihepta-decanyl tetra-thienoacene)) (P2TDC17FT4) and poly(2,5-bis(3-hexadecylthiophene-2-yl)thieno[3,2-b]thiophene) (PBTTTC16),179 (iii) aligned films of PEDOT:PSS180 and poly{2,2′-[(2,5-bis(2-hexyldecyl)-3,6-dioxo-2,3,5,6-tetrahydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-diyl)dithiophene]-5,5′-diyl-alt-thiophen-2,5-diyl} (PDPP3T)181 exhibiting ultrahigh electrical conductivities and high dichroic ratios, respectively, (iv) ultrasmooth films of dielectric poly(4-vinylphenol) for OFET applications,182 (v) crystalline films of PEO obtained from an aqueous solution and comprising chains adopting a peculiar helical conformation,183 or (vi) highly aligned films of conjugated polymers containing non-conjugated flexible linkers177 and of polyethylene (PE) displaying a great thermal conductivity.184
In some cases, it is more convenient to move the stage along with the sample, via the use of very precise translational devices, while the blade remains fixed, but slightly tilted (Fig. 3a). The advantage here is that one can reduce the deposition speed down to only several micrometers per second and thus, can promote the self-assembly and ordering of various polymeric species upon slow solvent evaporation.111,115,185 By employing this variant of solution shearing, one could dramatically alter the film microstructure of short conjugated oligothiophene (TH13; Fig. 3b) chains with respect to their as spin-cast film analogues.111 More precisely, one could switch from a porous-like (Fig. 3c) to a wrinkle-like microstructure (Fig. 3d) comprising larger, yet uniform, highly ordered domains containing more planarized oligomer chains that exhibited puzzling absorption and emission properties.111 Similarly, the film microstructure of longer polymer chains of poly[9,9-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-9H-fluorene-2,7-diyl] (PFO; Fig. 3e) could be further manipulated by controlling the deposition speed. In this case, one could easily switch from a microstructure comprising random PFO droplets of a diameter of 300–800 nm (Fig. 3f) to a porous microstructure (Fig. 3g). Here too, the altered optoelectronic properties indicated that the lower deposition speed forced PFO chains to adopt the more planar β-phase conformation.111
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of solution shearing at a slightly tilted angle of the blade. (b) Chemical structure of TH13. (c and d) AFM topography images displaying the microstructure of oligothiophene films fabricated by solution shearing at a deposition speed of 500 μm s−1 (c) and 50 μm s−1 (d), respectively. (e) Chemical structure of the utilized PFO system. (f–g) AFM topography images displaying the microstructure of PFO films fabricated by solution shearing at a deposition speed of 500 μm s−1 (f) and 50 μm s−1 (g), respectively. (h) AFM topography image depicting the microstructure of the PCE11:PPCBMB thin film prepared by solution shearing and using a deposition speed of 10 μm s−1. Dotted lines are a guide to the eye and indicate the interconnected PCE11 structure. (i) Simplified schematics depicting the blade coating technique. (j) Chemical structure of P(NDI2OD-T2). (k and l) TEM micrographs of P(NDI2OD-T2) films obtained by blade coating at 50 °C (h) and at 100 °C, respectively. The insets represent the corresponding AFM surface profiles. (m) Illustration depicting the working principle of slot-die coating. (n) Chemical structure of PPDT2FBT. (o and p) Field emission TEM of PPDT2FBT:PC71BM films fabricated by slot-die coating using head/substrate temperatures of 25/25 °C (o) and 80/80 °C (p), respectively. The insets represent the corresponding AFM topography images. Adapted from ref. 111 (b–g) – published by The Royal Society of Chemistry, ref. 115 (h) [Copyright (2019) by the authors], ref. 187 (k and l) [Copyright (2020), with permission from American Chemical Society] and ref. 215 (o and p) – published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The above solution shearing variant can further be utilized to deliver D–A microstructures of controlled molecular arrangements prepared from a variety of polymer-(poly)fullerene blends. Examples include films of poly[(5,6-difluoro-2,1,3-benzothiadiazol-4,7-diyl)-alt-(3,3′-di(2-octyldodecyl) 2,2′;5′,2′;5′,2′-quater thiophen-5,5′-diyl)]:poly{[bispyrrolidino (phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester)]-alt-[2,5-bis(octyloxy)benzene]} (PCE11:PPCBMB) displaying interconnected crystalline PCE11 domains intercalated with similar PPCBMB domains (Fig. 3h),115 as well as films of poly(2,5-bis(3-alkylthiophen-2-yl)thieno[3,2-b]thiophenes):[6,6]-phenyl-C71 butyric acid methyl ester (PBTTT:[C70]PCBM).185 In both cases, films comprising optimized microstructures exhibited better photoluminescence (PL) quenching.


2.1.6 Blade coating. 
Blade coating is a large-area processing technique that involves the deposition of a specific amount of various polymer solutions on solid or flexible substrates located in the vicinity of a rigid blade (Fig. 3i). There are two main variants of this technique and they are based on whether the blade is fixed or movable. For small area laboratory use, generally the blade is moved, but when scalable roll-to-roll (R2R) samples need to be deposited, it is more convenient to move the substrate with respect to the blade. Polymeric film microstructures of aligned chain orientation can be obtained by thoroughly controlling specific processing parameters such as the cp, quantity of solution placed on the substrate prior to coating, substrate temperature, solvent volatility, deposition speed and others.173,186 In a typical example of blade coating, a substrate of controlled temperature is fully covered with a precursor polymer(-based) solution to generate a wet film. The latter would solidify, ideally upon controlled solvent evaporation, and eventually lead to crystalline and/or oriented chain conformations on the substrate.187
Although blade coating could be successfully used to deliver oriented microstructures of different polymers188,189 and polymer nanocomposites,190 lately this technique became more popular in the field of OFET,191,192 OLED193 and OPV194–198 energy devices, where the fabrication of uniform active layers of highly aligned molecular conformations became crucial. This technique was shown to be capable of inducing both high degree of self-organization in P3HT:PCBM blends194 and alignment of the polymer chain director perpendicular to the coating direction.191 Moreover, the blade was able to change the morphology of films of the P(NDI2OD-T2) polymer (Fig. 3j) from aggregates (Fig. 3k) to long-range ordered structures such as multi-layered, yet highly oriented bundles of fibrils (Fig. 3l), when control over the quality of the solvent, coating speed and substrate temperature was established.187
Furthermore, blade coating could be coupled with controlled aggregation in solution to produce D–A layers of a blend made from poly{4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b0]dithiophene-co-4,8-di(thien-2-yl)-6-octyl-2-octyl-5H-pyrrolo[3,4-f]benzotriazole-5,7(6H)-dione}(PTzBI) and poly[N,N0-bis(2-octyldodecyl)naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis(dicarboximide)-2,6-diyl-alt-2,20bithiophene-5,50-diyl] (N2200). The resulting PTzBI/N2200 layers, characterized by a weakly ordered morphology and reduced phase separation, showed not only improved mechanical stability, but also good photovoltaic performance.195 Good photovoltaic performances could be further achieved when blade coating solutions of conjugated polymers containing additives, as it was recently shown by Schneider and Li and their co-workers.196,197 In one case, the control over polymer crystallization and suppression of the unfavorable phase separation was achieved by employing trace amounts of phthalates as additives. This approach doubled the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the resulting all-polymer solar cells.196 In the other case, essentially the same was achieved by utilizing the advantages of nonhalogenated solvents and high-temperature processing, finally leading to polymer:nonfullerene OPVs exhibiting a PCE larger than 15%.197
Crystallization kinetics could further be manipulated via blade coating when introducing molecular dopants into the binary blends made of conjugated small-molecules such as C8-BTBT and poly(indacenodithiophene-co-benzothiadiazole) (C16IDT-BT). The resulting active layers exhibited a vertically separated microstructure, with polymer chains adopting improved in-plane molecular arrangements, and demonstrated high hole OFET mobilities.192 Moreover, balanced crystallization kinetics could be achieved in the active D–A polymer-based films of double bulk heterojunction OPVs by performing sequential blade coating and delivering two active layers on top of each other.198 In such a configuration, the bottom layer was comprised of many crystal nuclei that quickly promoted crystallization and fine phase separation in the top layer. This led to a microstructure comprising small donor and acceptor crystalline phases formed along the vertical direction, which proved itself ideal for OPV applications.198


2.1.7 Slot-die coating. 
The slot-die coating technique is very similar to blade coating, with the exception that the rigid movable blade is hollow in the middle. This allows the polymer solution to be continuously pumped from a slot-die head through the blade onto the substrate (Fig. 3m). In addition to the processing parameters presented in the above section, there are some parameters that are specific only to slot-die coating. One such parameter is the amount of polymer solution that is pumped through the head onto the substrate in a defined period of time (i.e., pumping speed). In conclusion, many parameters need to be well adjusted in order to obtain highly aligned films. This generates a source of concern for slot-die coating,199 as optimizing the operating limits for a multitude of processing parameters is not an easy task. Moreover, the lateral dimension of the slot-die head containing the polymer solution dictates the maximum width of the final film.173 For additional theoretical and practical information, readers are advised to further refer to a very comprehensive study that discusses not only the operating limits of slot-die coating, with its advantages and disadvantages, but also the various solutions which are proposed to mitigate the latter.199
Slot-die coating found utility in many applications, including OFETs,200–203 OLEDs,204 capacitors205 and more recently polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells206 and actuators,207 where the fabrication of assembled/crystalline and/or aligned films was necessary. But, because this coating technique is highly scalable with respect to the R2R processes, it became more frequently utilized in the world of OPVs, as these applications require modules of large-area active polymer films of controlled molecular arrangements.
For the laboratory research, typical sample dimensions are reduced and the control over the resulting microstructure can be delivered by employing mini-slot-coating instruments. Here, the optimization of processing parameters, specific to the solvent/polymer type and operating temperatures of the head and substrate, is easier and rapidly leads to highly ordered/crystalline microstructures. The latter are generally formed through crystallization and phase separation taking place in well dissolved polymer-based (blend) solutions that, upon solvent evaporation, start to aggregate inclusively into swelled crystals.208 At the final stage, when solvent is further removed, these aggregations/crystals get aligned and eventually interconnect to form fibrils or other highly ordered, yet intermixed nanostructures,209,210 depending on the type of polymer donors and fullerene/small molecule acceptors that are used. Moreover, similarly to blade coating, sequential slot-die coating can be used to further diversify the microstructure of D–A films by multi-step deposition of binary or ternary solutions, eventually prepared in nonhalogenated solvents.211
Instead, the scalability to large OPV modules produced by R2R processes requires specific slot-die coating tools, with longer times needed to adjust the (additional) processing parameters and to mitigate the risks associated with scalable production of OPV modules.212–215 While some D–A systems require entirely new slot-die tools to be constructed in order to deliver large-area ordered/oriented microstructures,213 for other systems heating the common slot-die head (i.e., polymer-based solution) and substrate seems to be sufficient.214,215 With the latter strategy, Song and co-workers changed the microstructure of the D–A poly[(2,5-bis(2-hexyldecyloxy)phenylene)-alt-(5,6-difluoro-4,7-di(thiophen-2-yl)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole)]:[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid ester (PPDT2FBT:PC71BM; see the chemical structure of PPDT2FBT in Fig. 3n) by transforming less separated polymer and fullerene structures (corresponding to colder slot-die head and substrate; Fig. 3o) into more clearly phase-separated (corresponding to hot slot-die head and colder substrate, Fig. 3p) structures. Here, the hot slot-die heat increased the solubility of both materials in the solution and led to semi-crystalline film morphology. Films processed using hot solutions and hot substrates exhibited a clearly phase separated morphology containing fibril-like polymeric nanostructures. It was this latter morphology that led to efficient charge transport and thus, to enhanced performance of the fabricated OPV devices.215 Similarly, Na and co-workers fabricated active polymer-based films exhibiting controlled crystallinity in both face-on and edge-on orientations.214 Moreover, they could vary the d-spacing of π–π stacking of face-on orientation as a function of the chosen head/substrate temperature.


2.1.8 Wire-bar coating. 
A wire-bar coating tool has a very simple design, being comprised of a (steel) bar of a specific diameter coiled up with a wire. This system is placed in contact or in close vicinity with the substrate and moved over the polymer solution that was previously dropped, in front of it, onto the solid/flexible substrate. The substrate can be eventually positioned on a coating table/stage (Fig. 4a). The movable bar then removes the surplus of the polymer solution, leaving behind a uniform, wet film, that will further dry upon solvent evaporation. This technique is cost-effective and scalable to R2R large-scale production of a variety of polymer–based formulations. Because the polymer viscosity and surface tension are critical factors impacting the quality of fabricated films, the main processing parameters that must be controlled include the cp, solvent type, solution and substrate temperatures. Other parameters such as the deposition speed are equally important. Moreover, in order to obtain uniform polymeric films, the fluid ridges that are formed behind the coating bar need to coalesce and level off.173
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematics depicting the wire-bar coating process. (b) Chemical structure of P3HT (left) and PMMA (right). (c and d) Tapping-mode AFM phase images of P3HT/PMMA films with different blend concentrations. (e) Illustration of the zone casting technique. (f) Chemical structure of PBTTT. (g) SEM image depicting a ribbon-phase microstructure of a PBTTT film. (h) Tapping mode (TM) AFM phase image emphasizing the lamellar microstructure of a PODMA-b-PtBA-b-PODMA film generated by zone casting at 40 °C. The inset depicts a corresponding GISAXS pattern. (i) Scheme depicting the working principle of the LB technique. (j) Chemical structure of CDTBTZ-C16. (k and l) AFM images displaying the morphology of thin films of PBTTT-C14 (k) and CDTBTZ-C16 (l) produced by the LB technique at 80 °C and 140 °C, respectively. The arrows indicate the direction parallel to the long axis of the compressing barriers, i.e., orthogonal to the compression direction. Insets in (k) and (l) represent the GIWAXS images of films of PBTTT-C14 and CDTBTZ-C16 acquired utilizing incident X-rays parallel to the main polymer chains. Adapted from ref. 225 (c and d) [Copyright (2018), with permission from American Chemical Society], ref. 231 (g) [Copyright (2011) WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA (Weinheim) with permission from John Wiley and Sons], ref. 233 (h) [Copyright (2011), with permission from American Chemical Society] and ref. 246 (k and l) [Copyright (2022), with permission from American Chemical Society]. 
Because the wire-bar technique can be used with many polymer-based solution formulations, it can deliver large-area films of controlled microstructures for a variety of (conjugated) polymers216–223 and polymer-based blends224–228 that find applications in research fields such as thermal228 and thermoelectric221,224 management, sensors,216 electrochromic displays,223 OFETs217,218,220,222 and other microelectronics.219 Therefore, there is a large variety of interesting film microstructures that could be wire-bar coated. For example, by targeting a specific film thickness through the optimization of deposition speed and/or cp, a percolated microstructure of pure poly[[2,5-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-2,3,5,6-tetrahydro-3,6-dioxopyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-diyl]-alt-[[2,2′-(2,5-thiophene)bis-thieno(3,2-b)thiophene]-5,5′-diyl]] (DPPT-TT) comprising crystalline fibril-like nanoribbons could be obtained.216 Instead, under the same coating conditions, poly([N,N′-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis(dicarboximide)-2,6-diyl]-alt-5,5′-(2,2′-bithiophene)) (P(NDI2OD-T2)) led to a significantly different morphology ranging from elongated, yet rough supramolecular features found in thinner films to fibril-like structures developed in thicker films.216 In a similar way, Hong and co-workers succeeded in controlling the crystallinity in films doped with P3HT and obtained a nanorod/nanowire morphology with maximized stacking of the P3HT chains.221 Other film microstructures were developed by controlling the film thickness and some specific processing parameters and include well-organized interconnected fibril networks of the difluorobenzothiadiazole-dithienosilole (PDFDT) copolymer,222 crystalline paraelectric α-phase of poly(vinylidenefluoride) (PVDF)219 and uniaxially aligned macroscopic structures and nanofibrils with large grains made of cyclopentadithiophene-alt-benzothiadiazole (CDT-BTZ), cyclopentadithiophene-alt-fluorinated-benzothiadiazole (CDT-FBTZ) and cyclopentadithiophenealt-thiadiazolopyridine (CDT-PTZ) conjugated copolymers.220
This section ends with few examples of film microstructures wire-bar coated from blends of polymers. Here, the most frequent are the (semi-)crystalline microstructures obtained from blends based on conjugated polymers that are optimized for their use in OFETs. Such microstructures are targeted because their crystallinity is responsible for the efficiency of charge carriers and thus for the overall device performance. For instance, wire-bar coating of a blend of P3HT and high-density polyethylene (HDPE), under controlled temperature and using a heated bed on the coater, to disfavour the precipitation of polymer chains, was demonstrated to lead to preferential segregation of P3HT towards the film surface. This segregation was independent of the blend composition. Moreover, when a weight ratio of 50:50 was used, the obtained film microstructure was comprised of P3HT columnar structures surrounded by the HDPE lamellar matrix.227 More recently, wire-bar coating was used at a constant deposition speed to further combine P3HT with PMMA (see their chemical structures in Fig. 4b). Again, by controlling the P3HT:PMMA ratio, as well as the blend concentration, P3HT segregated on top of the blend, while PMMA remained rather at the bottom, leading to vertically phase separated film microstructures.225 In blends with more and more P3HT chains, film surfaces exhibited a better and better coverage with P3HT, until eventually the top surface was fully covered with P3HT with concentrations of P3HT exceeding 0.3 mg ml−1 (Fig. 4c). Furthermore, a higher coverage and more dispersive distribution of P3HT nanowires were also observed when the concentration of PMMA was increased (Fig. 4d). This was suggested to be due to both increased film thickness, that caused more P3HT chains to accumulate on the top surface, and higher blend viscosity that disfavoured the formation of large P3HT aggregates.225


2.1.9 Zone casting. 
The zone casting technique involves continuous spreading of the polymer solution onto a movable substrate (generally, the substrate is positioned on top of a moving stage) through a special flat nozzle (Fig. 4e). Consequently, solvent evaporation proceeds from the surface of the meniscus formed between the nozzle and substrate. When an appropriate concentration gradient of the polymer chains is formed in a narrow zone across the film, the solidification process accompanied by solvent evaporation will lead to the formation of highly anisotropic ordered film microstructures. In this case, the spatial and temporal evolution of the solidification front forces the alignment of polymer chains, rather than the shear stress exerted by the receding meniscus.173 Therefore, it is highly important to control the pumping speed of polymer solution. Similarly to the slot-die coating case, the temperature of the nozzle plays an important role, along with other processing parameters such as the substrate speed and temperature, cp, solvent type, diffusion coefficient, etc. These parameters dictate the rate of solvent evaporation and thus, the dynamics and rate of polymer crystallization.173,229,230
Zone casting can be successfully employed on various polymers and BCPs to generate uniaxially aligned film microstructures231–236 that find use in a variety of applications, including OFETs235 and OPVs.236 P3HT seems to be the polymer most frequently deposited via zone casting, probably due to its extensive use within a plethora of optoelectronic applications. Interesting film microstructures reported for this polymer include uniaxially aligned nanofibers with π–π stacking direction being parallel to their alignment direction.237 Such nanofibers were zone cast by controlling not only the substrate temperature, deposition and solution pumping speeds, but also the aggregation of P3HT chains in solution prior to casting (control over aggregation was possible by blending P3HT with PS or by exposing the solution to ultrasonic oscillations, but only the latter strategy proved to be highly effective).237 Uniaxially aligned P3HT nanofibers of controllable length (from 1 μm to 10 μm) were also obtained over large-area films by controlling the solubility of the solvent, length of P3HT chains and substrate temperature, i.e., by controlling the crystallization and solvent evaporation rates.238 P3HT could further be blended with PCBM to generate P3HT nanofibers with controllable degree of orientation from solutions that were aged prior to zone casting. It was shown that the degree of orientation of P3HT fibers increased when solutions were aged for longer times.236
Other polymers that produced uniaxially aligned film microstructures via zone casting include conjugated P(NDI2OD-T2), PBTTT and various BCPs. In the first case, Schuettfort and co-workers heated both the P(NDI2OD-T2) solution and substrate to a high temperature before performing zone casting at a rather low deposition speed, and obtained highly aligned films exhibiting preferential edge-on orientation.232 In the second case, by establishing a precise control over the deposition and solution pumping speeds (with the aim to control the solvent evaporation rate) and over the temperature of the substrate and solution (with the goal to avoid nucleation in solution), and by combining zone casting with thermal annealing, Lee and co-workers developed a film microstructure comprising uniaxially aligned ribbon-phase PBTTT (Fig. 4f–g). Here, the long axis of ribbons and that of PBTTT chains preferentially oriented orthogonal to the zone casting direction.231 A ribbon-like microstructure of PBTTT was also discovered in unannealed zone-cast films that exhibited a high degree of surface structural anisotropy, similar to that generated in annealed nanoribbon films.234 The third case was illustrated by Tang and co-workers, who built a custom-made zone casting tool capable of precisely controlling the solution casting rate. By utilizing various BCPs, the authors generated film microstructures displaying excellent orientational and lateral order in both semicrystalline poly(octadecyl methacrylate)-b-poly(t-butyl acrylate)-b-poly(octadecyl methacrylate) (PODMA-b-PtBA-b-PODMA) and non-crystalline polystyrene-b-polybutadiene (PS-b-PB) BCPs, independent of the type of utilized substrate. Moreover, the semicrystalline BCP films showed not only that, at an optimized casting temperature, the formed lamellae (Fig. 4h) were orthogonally oriented with respect to the substrate,233 but also that the lamellar orientation varied significantly with the casting temperature.


2.1.10 Langmuir–Blodgett. 
Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) is a technique used to produce self-assembled monolayer polymer films by transferring monolayers previously formed at the liquid–air interface to various solid substrates. The transfer is realized by lifting the substrate through the polymer monolayers (Fig. 4i). This procedure, which was the first technique to deliver controlled assembly of organic molecules,239 can be repeated to obtain more monolayers deposited on a specific substrate, finally leading to films of well-defined thickness dictated by the number of deposited monolayers. Generally, the monolayers are formed at the liquid–air interface through the assembly of amphiphilic polymer molecules along the vertical direction. This happens when the density of polymer molecules is continuously increased through the lateral pressure. Note that nowadays, the LB technique became commonly utilized also in the fabrication of monolayers of nanoparticles20 and multilayers of polymers.240
The main processing parameters that offer control over the molecular assembly with the LB technique include the initial polymer/particle density at the liquid–air interface (i.e., surface pressure), substrate lifting speed during the deposition process, structure of the amphiphilic molecules, type of utilized liquid and substrate, ionic strength and others.239 The disadvantages of the LB technique are represented by the limited sample area and increased complexity, especially when preparing the monolayers at the liquid–air interface and when transferring the monolayers to the substrate. To learn more details about the LB technique, its stages, variants and applications, we strongly recommend readers to refer to the very comprehensive literature reviews freshly published by Oliveira and co-workers239 and others.241 Therefore, the discussion on this technique will be ended after providing a couple of interesting examples of polymeric microstructures recently reported in the literature.
Recently, the LB technique was employed to self-assemble deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) hexadecyltrimethylammonium chloride (CTMA) lipoplex into linear elongated patterns by controlling the surface pressure on water, along with the subphase temperature and solvent type used for the preparation of DNA-based solution.242 Under similar LB conditions, 3D ordered film microstructures comprising poly[2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (MEH-PPV) chains oriented in-plane were fabricated on plastic substrates for sensing purposes.243 Preparation of polymeric films with sensing properties was further targeted through the use of poly[(9,9-dioctylfluorene)-co-(3-hexylthiophene)]244 and PANI.245 In the latter case, Sharma and co-workers produced nanocomposites of PANI titanium oxide (TiO2) comprising tiny TiO2 particles well dispersed in the PANI-TiO2 films, by controlling the compression and substrate lifting speeds, while keeping the surface pressure constant.245
Other oriented microstructures obtained with the LB technique were reported for films of poly[2,5-bis(3-tetradecylthiophen-2-yl)thieno[3,2-b]thiophene] (PBTTT-C14) (Fig. 4k), poly(4,4′′-didodecyl-[2,2′:5′,2′′:5′′,2′′′-quaterthiophene]-5,5′′′-diyl) (PQT-C12) and (poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-hexadecyl-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′]-dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)]) (CDTBTZ-C16) (Fig. 4l; the chemical structure of CDTBTZ-C16 can be seen in Fig. 4j). Such films were shown to be comprised of uniaxially aligned polymer backbones (with lamellae exhibiting edge-on orientation, as revealed by the GIWAXS measurements; see insets in Fig. 4k and l) and were prepared on ethylene glycol at various temperatures and through the use of a newly manufactured LB tool (capable not only to operate above 100 °C, but also adaptable to a high-boiling-point subphase).246 Similarly oriented films were further made of semiconducting poly(3,3′′′-didodecyl-quaterthiophene) (PQT) chains. The latter were found to adopt a preferred edge-on, ribbon-shaped orientation with respect to the substrate and were generated by utilization of an innovative variant of LB.247 Here, a newly designed tilted slider was employed in the floating film transfer.


2.1.11 Inkjet printing. 
Inkjet printing is a well-known technique used to transfer various, inclusively polymeric materials, in a liquid phase, onto a specific substrate, via a contactless process. Polymeric sub-nanoliter droplets can be released by applying an external signal to the printhead in an accurate and reproducible manner. Once reaching the substrate under the action of gravity, polymeric droplets spread, coalesce, wet the substrate, and later dry to form a thin (2D or 3D248) film. More details on the process associated with the film formation can be obtained from the literature.249 Depending on the amount of the used polymeric droplets and the distance at which those are placed, the resulting film may be discontinued or can cover the whole substrate. The first variant is generally used to create surface relief patterns,250,251 while the second variant is employed to deliver continuous thin films.252,253
The advantages of inkjet printing rely in its contactless mode, reproducibility, easy scalability, high speed, and cost-effectiveness (only very low amounts of materials are needed to generate homogeneous thin films). Furthermore, this technique can be developed into a plethora of variants, including piezoelectric, thermal, electrodynamic, needle-based, laser-assisted, acoustic, drop impact, or aerosol jet printing,254 just to name a few. Moreover, the tank containing the polymeric (or nanocomposite255) ink and the printhead that has a tiny opening called nozzle are generally interfaced with a computer that sends signals to the printer and controls precisely the ejection process.256 Obviously, polymeric inks require certain physical properties in terms of composition and viscosity (including the type of used solvent), otherwise the clogging of the printhead nozzle cannot be avoided. Other disadvantages that might occur during inkjet printing are related to the appearance of the so-called long live ligaments and the satellite formation.256
Interesting film microstructures obtained by inkjet printing include homogeneous surfaces of insulator PI and conductive PANI, PEDOT and PEDOT:PSS for the fabrication of all polymer capacitors,257 RC filters,258 multi-sensors259 and transistors.253 Moreover, inkjet printing was employed to create thin films of various polymers emitting red, green and blue colors.260 By optimizing the processing conditions such as ink viscosity, polymer molar mass or type of solvent, films of controlled thickness and roughness, ideal for the fabrication of OLEDs, were obtained.260 Control of the film thickness is highly important because it was shown to dictate the emission colors, for instance, of poly(p-phenyleneethynylene)-alt-poly(p-phenylenevinylene)s (PPE-PPVs).261 Other film microstructures that were reported to be generated via inkjet printing consist of active layers of electron donors poly[N-9′-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT) and poly[(4,4′-bis(2-ethylhexyl) dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]silole)-2,6-diyl-alt-(4,7-bis(2-thienyl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)-5,5′-diyl] (Si-PCPDTBT) blended with the electron acceptor [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM). In this case again, by establishing control over the inkjet printing processing conditions, an optimized morphology exhibiting better OPV properties was delivered.252
Finally, with the inkjet printing technique being adopted in more and more thin film-related applications, the number of recent literature publications reviewing this technique has grown constantly.249,256,262,263 Now there are recent reviews discussing progress in inkjet-printed electronics,264 including solar cells,265 thin film transistors,266 OLEDs,256,267 flexible and/or stretchable wearable electronic devices and sensors,263 mechano-optoelectronic conjugated polymer thin films,268etc. Moreover, the most recent variants of the inkjet printing technique were further classified and the emerging applications were well documented in a 2021 report.254 Therefore, there is no need to further insist on the inkjet printing technique. All the processing methods discussed in the above sections are shortly summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Prominent pre-fabrication and post-fabrication processing techniques used to obtain oriented/ordered microstructures in polymer films




Processing technique
Working principle
Advantages
Disadvantages
Ref.




Solution processing of polymer films


Spin casting
Dispersion of polymer solutions onto a substrate via centrifugal forces
Rapid, reliable, adaptable, highly reproducible
Significant quantity of material is lost, limited sample size

116, 122, 129, 133


Drop casting
Drying of a polymer solution dropped onto a substrate
Simple, cost-effective, rapid, adaptable to many variants
Undesirable coffee ring patterns are created

135, 145–149


Dip coating
Immersion followed by retraction of a substrate from a polymer solution
Cost-effective, adaptable, favours the alignment of films
Many processing parameters need simultaneous optimization, film cracking

150, 151, 153, 159


Spray coating
Spraying a polymer solution onto a substrate
Large-scale production, multilayer configurations, works on 3D surfaces
Rough, less uniform films may exhibit higher thickness and pinholes

161–163, 165, 167


Solution shearing
Shearing a polymer solution between a (horizontal/tilted) movable blade and a substrate followed by drying
Cost-effective, rapid, large-area samples, adaptable to many variants, scalable, low material loss
Films show thickness gradients, less effective with highly volatile solvents

111, 115, 173, 174, 180


Blade coating
Deposition and alignment of polymer chains with a (vertical/tilted) movable blade followed by drying
Large-area, scalable to R2R, broad range of polymeric formulations, multilayer configurations
Possible gradient in film thickness, requires high viscosities solutions, aggregations on the blade

173, 186, 187, 409


Slot-die coating
Pumping of a polymer solution through a hollow movable blade followed by drying
Compatible with R2R and high-throughput production, works for a broad range of polymers,
Dynamic wetting failure, ribbing and air entrainment, precipitations in the slot-die head

173, 199, 206, 212


Wire-bar coating
Spreading of a polymer solution over a substrate with a movable bar located in the vicinity
Cost-effective, rapid, compatible with R2R, works for a broad range of polymers
Local film ruptures are possible

173, 217, 219, 220, 225, 226


Zone casting
Spreading of a polymer solution over a movable substrate through a flat nozzle
The temperature of both nozzle and substrate can be controlled
Precipitation/aggregation in/on the nozzle

173, 229, 230, 233


Langmuir–Blodgett
Deposition of polymer monolayers formed at liquid-gas interface onto solid lifting substrates
High-quality assembled monolayers, suitable for biopolymers, precise film thickness and multilayers can be targeted
Slower, complex, less straightforward transfer, limited sample area, mainly limited to amphiphilic polymer molecules

239–241, 243, 246, 247


Inkjet printing
Contactless transfer of polymer droplets onto a substrate followed by wetting and drying
Fast, cheap, reproducible, easy scalable, contactless, adaptable to many variants, works for a large variety of materials, including polymers
Possible clogging of the headprint nozzle, long live ligaments could appear, satellite may form

249, 256, 262, 263, 268


Post-fabrication processing of polymer films


Thermal annealing
Exposure of polymer films to elevated temperatures
Rapid, efficient, requires cheap equipment
Processed sample size is limited by the heating stage

269–281



Solvent vapor annealing
Exposure of polymer films to solvent vapors in sealed environments
Rapid, highly efficient, very adaptable
Processed sample size is limited by the size of sample chamber

292–296, 301, 302


Hot pressing
Squeezing of polymer films under high pressure at room/elevated temperature
Supports a broad range of polymers and polymer-composites
Processed sample size is limited by the size of the pressing/hot plate

303–305, 308


Mechanical shearing
Sliding a top contacting surface over the surface of a polymer film
Rapid, supports a broad range of polymers and polymer-composites, scalable to R2R
Likely less efficient in orienting polymers of extremely high molecular mass or very thick films

311–316, 320, 321, 323


Mechanical stretching
Stretching of polymer films under mechanical stress
Uniaxial and (sequential/simultaneous) biaxial processing possible
Introduces cracks and defects in films, rather limited sample size

326–330



Mechanical rubbing
Unidirectional rubbing of a polymer film with a cloth-covered rubbing roll
Rapid, cost-effective, scalable to industrial routes
Efficient only in the near-surface region of the films, induces electrostatic charges

173, 345, 347


Dewetting
Incubation, growth and coalescence of (pin)holes in polymer films upon thermal annealing
Delivers residual layers of molecules adopting highly stretched conformations
Rather limited sample size, often additional slippery layers are necessary

355, 356


Illumination
Exposure of thin polymer films to light
Can significantly boost the absorption and emission properties of conjugated polymers
Induces only weak torsional and/or rotational changes in chain conformation, requires the use inert environments

368–372



Space confinement
Ordering of polymers in tiny confining spaces
Custom confined spaces can be constructed from other polymer systems
Less scalable, often limited to (amphiphilic) BCP systems

382–387, 393





2.2 Post-fabrication techniques for processing of polymer films

2.2.1 Thermal and melt-annealing. 
One of the most common ways to increase the mobility of (long) polymer chains and thus to favour their eventual ordering via the self-assembly or crystallization is based on the increase of film temperature. Various heating/cooling protocols involving melting (Tm) and crystallization (Tc) temperatures269–272 were established in time and proved to be efficient in delivering a plethora of ordered polymer microstructures.269–281 Here, one refers to thermal annealing, when a polymeric system is annealed above the Tc. Instead, melt annealing is used when a certain polymeric system is heated above its melting point.282
Some of these microstructures were recently further employed either to enhance the efficiency of OPVs,274,277,283 OFETs,275,278 organic resistors,280 and other devices,273 or, for instance, to simply boost the cytocompatibility of natural rubber276 or electrical conductivity of non-conjugated polymers.279
A precise control over the thermal history of thin films of crystalline BCPs such as P2VP-b-PEO (see its chemical structure in the inset of Fig. 5a) can straightforwardly generate ordered structures such as large spherulites and square-shaped single crystals (Fig. 5a and b).271 Such structures are obtained by annealing the polymer films beyond Tm (here films are homogeneously melted and polymer chains are highly mobile), followed by cooling the samples to a specific Tc and finally to room temperature. For higher Tc, better-quality flat-on lamellar crystals with decorations (spirals, ripples) can be obtained (Fig. 5c).271 A further advantage of thermal annealing is represented by the fact that one can establish control over the nucleation and growth processes and thus, one can choose how many crystals to nucleate and how large to grow them (Fig. 5d–f).269 Of course, the crystal type strongly depends on the film thickness (compare Fig. 5b with Fig. 5d–f). Moreover, by playing with the degree of supercooling, one can deliver PS-b-PEO crystals comprising chain stems that are either perpendicular or tilted to the lamellae.270 Very recently it was demonstrated that tilting of polymer chains can be also done with PEO alone.272
 Fig. 5  (a–c) Typical micrographs emphasizing crystallization of 108 nm thick P2VP-b-PEO films acquired after growing the crystals for 130 min at 45 °C (a), 160 min at 50 °C (b) and 855 min at 55 °C (c), respectively. The inset in (a) depicts the chemical structure of the employed BCP. (d–f) Optical micrographs depicting the growth of a P2VP-b-PEO crystal at 50 °C in a ∼35 nm thick film. The micrographs were taken after t0 (d), t0 + 30 min (e) and t0 + 60 min (f), respectively. The size of each image is 115 × 115 μm2. (g) Illustration of the partial melting and crystallization process appearing during thermal annealing. Here, the smallest, yet least aligned domains melt partially, while the un-melted domains template their alignment during melt crystallization, leading to an increased molecular alignment. The inset in (g) depicts the chemical structure of the PNDI-T2 copolymer based on 2-octyldodecyl derivative (OD). (h–i) TM AFM topography (left) and phase (right) images of PNDI-T2 films based on the 2-octyldodecyl derivative that were as-cast (h) and then thermally annealed at 350 °C (i). White arrows indicate the direction of molecular alignment. Adapted from ref. 271 (a–c) [Copyright (2007) Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg with permission from Springer Nature], ref. 269 (d–f) [Copyright (2008) EDP Sciences/Società Italiana di Fisica/Springer-Verlag with permission from Springer Nature] and ref. 275 (g–i) – published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Lately, thermal annealing was massively used to process thin active layers of various organic energy devices where the microstructure of conjugated polymers strongly dictates the final optoelectronic properties. For instance, by varying the processing temperature of P(NDI2OD-T2) thin films, optimized polymer domains, with long range ordered fibrillar structures that favored the OFET electron transport, could be obtained.278 Good, percolating OFET charge transport was further demonstrated in thin films made of naphthalene-diimide bithiophene (PNDI-T2) copolymers.275 Here, Luzio and co-workers optimized the thermal annealing procedure (Fig. 5g) to improve the molecular alignment of polymer chains by transforming the few tens of nanometers wide and several micrometers long fibrils (Fig. 5h) into compact layers with large domains separated by top parallel cracks. The latter are mostly spaced around 100 nm (Fig. 5i), with topographical features defined by 50 nm thick 2-octyldodecyl lamellae.275 Large, this time, plate-like domains of another p-type polymer based on semi-fluorinated alkyl side chains were further obtained by molecular rearrangements induced at high annealing temperatures.284
At the end of this section, a couple of most recent examples of conjugated microstructures, used in OPVs and obtained using the thermal annealing technique, are selected and discussed. The first example reports the generation of a polymer-polymer bulk heterojunction based on donor poly[2,3-bis(3-octyloxyphenyl)quinoxaline-5,8-diyl-altthiophene-2,5-diyl] (TQ1) and acceptor N2200 that exhibited improved TQ1 backbone planarity and N2200 crystalinity.285 Such active layers exhibited reduced geminate recombination and led to a doubling of the external quantum efficiency, i.e., to increased power conversion efficiency.283 The latter was further shown to significantly increase when using active films of P3HT:PCBM in which the crystallinity, domain size and purity, molecular π–π stacking, chain orientation and vertical phase separation were optimized by thermal annealing.274 For more interesting examples based on thermal annealing, the readers should refer to other relevant and comprehensive works reported in the literature.277,279
Towards the end of this section, it is necessary to further exemplify the importance of melt-annealing with respect to thermal annealing. The best-case example here is the beautiful work of Chowdhury and co-workers who have tuned crystalline ordering in thin films of conjugated poly-(3-hexylthiophene-co-3-dodecylthiophene) (P3HT-co-P3DDT), either neat or mixed with 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) and 1,3:2,4-di(3,4-dimethylbenzylidene)sorbitol (DMDBS) additives, by employing thermal and melt-annealing, respectively.282 By utilizing the AFM and grazing incidence X-ray scattering (GIXS) techniques, they have demonstrated a 50% increase in both the degree of crystallinity and exciton diffusion coefficient in melt-annealed films, as compared to thermally annealed and as spin-cast films, respectively (Fig. 6). Here, a decrease in the width of (h00) crystalline peaks in thermally and melt-annealed films was observed, suggesting an increase of crystallite size.282
 Fig. 6  (a-i) AFM phase images of thin films of P3HT-co-P3DDT spin-coated from a neat solution in chlorobenzene (a–c) and containing 4% DIO (d–f) or 1% DMDBS (g-i). (j–r) GIXS qz–qxy area images depicting films of P3HT-co-P3DDT spin-coated from a neat solution in chlorobenzene (j–l) and containing 4% DIO (m–o) or 1% DMDBS (p–r). All AFM and GIXS images on the left correspond to as spin-cast films. Moreover, while all images in the middle depict thin films thermally annealed at 160 °C, images on the right emphasize films melt annealed at 200 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 282 – published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Other examples where processing via melt-annealing changes the orientation or crystal structure of conjugated polymer chains, inclusively with respect to the substrate, and therefore improves/tunes their various optoelectronic properties, including films of random thiophene-based copolymers (RP-3T),286 blends of PCDTBT and P3HT,287 P(NDI2OD-T2),232 poly(cyclopentadithiophene-alt-benzothiadiazole) (PCPDTBT) and its fluorinated derivative poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′]dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(5-fluoro-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (F-PCPDTBT),288 or P3HT mixed with vertically aligned multiwalled carbon nanotubes (VA-CNTs),289etc. For example, while the annealing RP-3T films from below Tm to above Tm was found, based inclusively on GIWAXS measurements, to cause a transformation of the face-on crystallites into continuously growing edge-on crystallites,286 melt-crystallization of PCPDTBT and F-PCPDTBT led to form I polymorph structures that were not only thermodynamically stable but also not-solvent induced.288 More relevant information on melt-annealing can be found in the literature.290,291


2.2.2 Solvent vapor annealing. 
Another way to increase the mobility of polymer chains, and thus to favour structure formation in thin films, is to expose polymers to solvent vapor. This procedure, known as solvent vapor annealing (SVA), can be implemented rather simple by sealing a polymer film inside a bell jar along with a small container filled with a solvent and placed aside (sometimes, the solvent can be heated at elevated temperatures). In time, solvent evaporates and creates a saturated vapor phase. The resulting solvent vapors interact with polymer chains, increase their molecular mobility and finally induce ordering via self-assembly or crystallization. The film is then removed from the bell jar by carefully venting the vapors over a specific time (generally a few tens of seconds).292–296
A notable example of ordered microstructures obtained by employing the SVA technique includes the self-assembled nanoscale morphology, comprising parallel P3HT domains of molecular dimension separated by poly(L-lactide) (PLLA) amorphous domains that was obtained from a P3HT-b-PLLA structure-directing system (Fig. 7a).293 A similar SVA approach was followed to further order films of D–A poly(3-hexylthiophene)-b-poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene) (P3HT-b-PFO; see the corresponding chemical structure in the inset of Fig. 7b) and poly(3-hexylthiophene)-b-poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-benzothiadiazole) (P3HT-b-PFBT; see its chemical structure in the inset of Fig. 7c) BCPs. The obtained microstructures exhibited a long-range order and were comprised of crystalline nanowires with phase segregated BCP domains (Fig. 7b and c).295 More recently, it was shown that SVA can further be employed to transform random globular morphologies of dispersed, sub-monolayer P3HT and para-phenylene ethynylene (PPE) into micrometer-scale nanowires297 or to control and lock the porosity and structural order in poly(isobutylene)-b-poly(ethylene oxide) (PIB-b-PEO) films.298
 Fig. 7  (a–c) TM AFM height images depicting various ordered microstructures obtained in a film of P3HT-b-PLLA annealed in chloroform vapors for 90 h (a), a film of P3HT-b-PFO annealed in dichlorobenzene at 150 °C for 62 h (b) and a film of P3HT-b-PFBT annealed in dichlorobenzene at 150 °C for 25 h (c). Insets in (a–c) depict the chemical structure corresponding to each BCP system. (e–g) Series of TM AFM topography images emphasizing PS-(PBLG)8 ellipsoidal structures obtained by swelling the films at a cp of 53% (e), 55% (f) and 57% (g), respectively. (h) AFM height image depicting a peculiar PBLG crystal grown in a semidilute thin film chloroform solution containing trace amounts of methanol. The size of the image is 14 × 30 μm2. (i) AFM phase image depicting the region delimited in (h) by the white rectangle. The size of the image is 2.5 × 5 μm2. The inset represents WAXS intensity in reflection mode and emphasizes a peak related to the periodicity of a pseudohexagonal PBLG lattice. (j–m) Series of optical micrographs depicting a swollen film of PBLG in chloroform (j) that nucleated and grew crystals upon the addition of 8% (volume fraction φm) of methanol (k). Crystals were then dissolved by removing the methanol (l) and eventually nucleated and grew again into different crystals upon the addition of, this time, only φm = 4% methanol (m). The size of all images is 120 × 120 μm2. The inset in (j) shows the chemical structure of used PBLG. Adapted from ref. 293 (a) [Copyright (2009), with permission from American Chemical Society], ref. 295 (b and c) [Copyright (2011), with permission from American Chemical Society], ref. 299 (e–g) – published by The Royal Society of Chemistry, ref. 302 (h and i) [Copyright (2013), with permission from American Chemical Society] and ref. 301 (j–m) [Copyright (2013), with permission from American Chemical Society]. 
The efficiency of the SVA procedure strongly depends on the solvent volatility, degree of film swelling and evaporation rate. Therefore, more complex SVA tools targeting full control over the vapor pressure and evaporation rate were designed and developed.299,300 Such two-compartment SVA tools (with one compartment for the solvent and one for the sample) allowed both the solvent and/or sample to be independently heated and/or cooled and therefore were highly efficient in ordering even very complex molecules based on poly(γ-benzyl-L-glutamate) (PBLG).299,300 For instance, thin films of heteroarm-star PS-(PBLG)8 BCP (its chemical structure is depicted in Fig. 7d) could be transformed into quasi-2D semidilute “film-solutions” and forced to nucleate and grow highly ordered 3D structures of different sizes and densities, by controlling the amount of chloroform vapor that was condensed and removed from the films during their swelling and deswelling (Fig. 7e–g).299 A further advantage of this design was given by the glass window on top of the sample compartment that allowed the real-time and direct-space measurements to be made via an optical microscope.
For practical reasons, the SVA tool could be later on further optimized and redesigned to a temperature-controlled single-component sample chamber, but with an additional system able to simultaneously “bubble”, into the sample chamber with controlled amounts of solvent and/or non-solvent vapors.301,302 This advantageous SVA design was used to nucleate and grow peculiar 3D birefringent crystals in chloroform semidilute thin film solutions made of a PBLG homopolymer and containing trace amounts of methanol (Fig. 7h; note that the chemical structure of the homopolymer is given in the inset of Fig. 7j). Resulting crystals exhibited on their surface domains containing uniquely oriented parallel stripes. The latter were able to conjointly change their orientation between adjacent domains and generated a zigzag pattern (Fig. 7i).302 Furthermore, the PBLG α-helices adopted a pseudohexagonal packing within such domains, as it was revealed by wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) measurements (inset Fig. 7i). Moreover, once nucleated and grown in the presence of non-solvent methanol vapors, PBLG crystals could be fully dissolved by removing the methanol, and then, once again, nucleated and grown into different crystals, by adding, this time, a slightly different amount of methanol, demonstrating the reversibility of nucleation and growth processes (Fig. 7j–m).301


2.2.3 Hot pressing. 
Yet another common method used to alter the microstructure of a polymer film is to expose the latter to increased pressure while increasing its temperature (Fig. 8a). Generally, pressure can be generated by simply placing mechanical loads on top of the film303 or through the employment of mechanically controlled/hydraulic pressing plates,304 although there are cases when pressure is exerted with a gas such as CO2 as well.305 The degree of microstructural changes induced in the polymer films by such a densification approach strongly depends on the magnitude of applied pressure, deformation rate and utilized temperature.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematics of hot pressing. (b-c) SEM micrographs depicting the surfaces of a PVP-coated PI film before (b) and after (c) hot pressing at 180 °C and 40 MPa for 30 min. The inset in (b) emphasizes the chemical structure of PVP. (d) AFM phase image depicting a shear-aligned cylinder-forming PS-b-PHMA film previously spin cast onto a silicon substrate. The inset in (d) depicts the chemical structure of PS-b-PHMA. (e) AFM micrograph depicting the microstructure of a SIS film generated by mechanical shearing coupled with SVA. The white arrow indicates the shearing stress direction while the inset represents the chemical structure of SIS. (f) AFM phase image depicting the aligned lamellar microstructure of the P2VP-b-PS-b-P2VP BCP system obtained by CZA soft-shearing followed by removal of the topcoat. The white arrow indicates the shear direction. The inset displays a GISAXS image of BCPs aligned along the shear direction. (g) Optical micrographs comparing P3HT (left) and RP33 (right) thin films before and after being subjected to stretching with 10%, 20% and 30% strains, respectively. (h) Schematics depicting the mechanical rubbing technique. (i–j) Polarized optical micrographs obtained under crossed polarizers showing a high birefringence of the rubbed C12-PBTTT (i) and C18-PBTTT (j) films when the latter are oriented along the rubbing direction (indicated by the white arrow R) at 45° to the polarizer. Adapted from ref. 308 (b and c) [Copyright (2021), with permission from American Chemical Society], ref. 317 (d) [Copyright (2016), with permission from American Chemical Society], ref. 320 (e) [Copyright (2018), with (pe2), with permission from American Chemical Society], ref. 335 (g) [Copyright (2018), with permission from American Chemical Society] and ref. 354 (i and j) [Copyright (2021), with permission from American Chemical Society]. 
Earlier studies revealed that high pressure could induce changes in the conformation of conjugated PFO macromolecules and lead, mostly due to a reduced inter-chain distance,306 to red-shifted photoluminescence.307 Conformational changes were also induced in films of albumin or lysozyme that were exposed to supercritical CO2. Upon the increase of pressure, the relative amount of α-helix, β-sheet and random coil in the protein secondary structure progressively changed, leading to a massive secondary structure reorganization above 8–9 MPa.305 This example in notable because the protein secondary structure was almost completely recovered when the pressure was removed, in contrast to most of the cases where the pressure induced conformational changes are rather irreversible.
More recently, hot pressing was employed in a variety of studies aiming to modify the microstructure of polymeric films and thus, to enhance their physical properties.303,304,308,309 A clear example is the hot pressing of poly(4-vinylphenol) (PVP; see its chemical structure in the inset of Fig. 8b) on polyimide (PI), with the aim to obtain PVP-immobilized PI films.308 In this case, Hashizume and co-workers transformed in 30 minutes a rough PVP morphology displaying over 200 nm sized features (Fig. 8b) into a flat one comprising large structures of several tens of nanometers (Fig. 8c), by utilizing high temperature and pressure processing conditions.308 Another example exploits hot pressing to enhance the electrical and thermal performance of conducting PEDOT:PSS films.303 The performed experiments have suggested that the hot pressing induced significant changes in molecular conformations, with respect to the crystallite size and molecular orientation, that decreased the π–π stacking distance and thus, lowered the activation energy for charge carrier hopping, finally leading to more than 50% increase in electrical conductivity.303 An increase of the latter was earlier reported when hot pressing carbon nanotubes/PEDOT:PSS composite films.310 Other relevant studies where the microstructure of polymer films was altered via hot pressing can be further referred to in the literature.304,309


2.2.4 Mechanical shearing. 
Mechanical shearing involves the sliding of a top contacting surface (which can be made of a soft or hard material) over the surface of a solid or molten polymer film deposited on a specific substrate. In this case, the main processing parameters are related to the strength of the shearing force (i.e., the frictional force per unit area of solid–solid contact), sliding velocity (i.e., the contact time) and temperature of the film.311 While the former is directly dictated by the contact pressure between the film and the sliding surface, both the latter are affected by the final degree of chain disentanglements and orientation. For instance, polymer chains of increased mobility (e.g., in molten polymer films) would be able, upon shearing, to disentangle easier and more efficiently than their counterparts in solid films. Other important parameters affecting the mechanical shearing include the film chemistry and thickness and the molecular organization existing in the initial polymer film (the latter also depends on the polymer molecular weight). In order to gather more details on the physical aspects of these parameters, how they can be calculated and/or measured, readers are advised to refer to several highly comprehensive works published earlier by Briscoe and Radebaugh, and later by Priezjev and their collaborators.311–316
A notable example depicting the shearing of polymer films was reported by Abate and co-workers.317 They fabricated films of a cylinder-forming diblock copolymer comprised of PS and poly(n-hexyl methacrylate) (PHMA) and sheared them on a hot plate at elevated temperatures, using 10 kPa of pressure and 5 kPa of shear stress that was applied through a PDMS pad for 30 minutes. Such a process led to a shear-aligned cylinder forming microstructure displaying an average repeat distance between the cylindrical domains of 45 nm (Fig. 8d; the chemical structure of PS-b-PHMA can be seen in the inset).317 A similar microstructure comprising sub-10 nm cylindrical microdomains of PS-b-PDMS BCP aligned in preferential directions, was also obtained by shearing, at a high temperature, cracked pieces of SiO2 previously coated on top of the BCP.318
The efficiency of film alignment via mechanical shearing can be increased by combining the latter with SVA.319,320 Qiang and co-workers applied this approach to deliver unidirectionally aligned cylindrical nanostructures of a variety of BCP systems, including PS-b-PB-b-PS, PS-b-PDMS, PS-b-P2VP or PS-b-polyisoprene-b-PS (SIS).319 This latter BCP system was also explored by Zhang and co-workers, who physically adhered a PDMS pad to a SIS film previously cast on a silicon substrate that included a poly(4-styrenesulfonic acid) release layer.320 By introducing either toluene vapor or dry air to their system, they induced swelling and deswelling of the PDMS pad which in turn provided sufficient shear force to generate highly aligned SIS domains (Fig. 8e; the chemical structure of SIS is presented in the inset).320
Finally, it is worth mentioning that the mechanical shearing technique is highly adaptable321,322 and displays possibilities for scalability.323 The so-called cold zone annealing (CZA) soft-shearing can be employed by rolling a polymer film over a hot wire surrounded by two cold blocks especially when highly vertically oriented BCP cylinders are targeted either on rigid or flexible substrates.322–324 With this concept, the self-assembly of various BCPs can be shear-directed, for example, to align PS-b-P2VP and P2VP-b-PS-b-P2VP BCPs into oriented microstructures comprising parallel lamellae (as revealed by GISAXS experiments, the alignment was limited to the shear direction only; inset in Fig. 8f), with some of the latter exhibiting a half-pitch of about 9.8 nm (Fig. 8f).322 Interestingly, a microstructure comprising similar vertical, unidirectionally aligned lamellar patterns of P2VP-b-PS-b-P2VP was obtained before by combining the filtered plasma treatment of BCP films with the shear-rolling process implemented with different roller and stage speeds.323


2.2.5 Mechanical stretching. 
Polymer chains can be efficiently aligned along one or more directions in films that are subjected to stretching325,326 or shrinkage.327 Since the pioneering work on stretching of polyethylene terephthalate (PET),326 polypyrrole328,329 or poly(3-octylthiophene) (P3OT),330 the mechanical stretching technique became lately more exploited in the field of conjugated polymers, where many reports have nicely demonstrated the structure–optoelectronic property relationship331,332 by mainly emphasizing the changes of charge transport properties and their anisotropic nature with respect to the film elongation.173 For instance, while stretching P3HT films with a 140% strain increased by 9 times the measured charge mobility along the chain alignment direction compared to the π–π stacking direction,333 stretching MEH-PPV films with a 550% strain delivered an increase of the PL by several folds.334 Note that the stretchability of P3HT, for instance, can be enhanced via lowering its crystallinity and increasing π–π stacking of thiophene-based random copolymer chains, as it was demonstrated by comparing P3HT chains with analogue chains containing only 33 mol% of thiophene (RP33).335 While at 10% strain P3HT films already exhibited many cracks that further propagated within the films at higher strains, and eventually no cracks were observed in RP33 films. The latter statement was valid inclusively for RP33 films stretched with a 30% strain (Fig. 8g).
In yet other cases, PBTTT films were stretched with a 50% strain and generated one of the highest OFET charge mobilities along the chain alignment direction measured in this material,336 while films made of a low crystallinity indacenodithiophene-co-benzothiadiazole (IDTBT) polymer delivered transistor mobilities of about 0.6 cm2 V−1 S−1 measured along the stretching direction when stretched with a 100% strain.337 Similarly, poly[2,5-bis(4-decyltetradecyl)pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-(2H,5H)-dione-(E)-1,2-di(2,2′-bithiophen-5-yl)ethene] (DPPTVT) was used very recently with the dioctyl phthalate (DOP) additive to fabricate films with controlled chain packing that, once stretched with strains up to 100%, generated anisotropic OFET charge-carrier mobilities.338
The advantage of mechanical stretching lies in the fact that polymer films can be stretched not only uniaxially (for example to get highly oriented polymeric fibers339), but also biaxially along two different directions340–343 by employing specific equipment.344 Nonetheless, it is important here whether the stretching of the films is performed sequentially or simultaneously, as the results regarding the generated film microstructure and its corresponding properties might be very different.342 Finally, it is worth mentioning that it is possible to obtain oriented polymeric films by a process inverse to the stretching and relying on the employment of a mechanical force resulting from the in-plane shrinkage exerted by a shrinker.327 The shrinker is usually represented by a top layer and is used to orient the polymer beneath an intermediate layer which is acting as a force mediator.327


2.2.6 Mechanical rubbing. 
Mechanical rubbing involves unidirectional rolling, one or more times, of a rubbing roll covered with a piece of cloth over a polymer film deposited onto a substrate and kept at room or a higher temperature (Fig. 8h).345 While mechanical rubbing is cost-effective (the equipment is cheap and easy to fabricate) and efficient (highly oriented polymer films can be obtained by repeating the rubbing procedure even tens of times346), this technique carries along some disadvantages: it efficiently orients polymer chains located only at the near-surface region of the films and might produce electrostatic charges and dust particles.345,347 Although the technique of mechanical rubbing is mostly known for its use in the alignment of PI substrates employed in flat panel liquid crystals displays,347 nowadays it has been broadly utilized to uniaxially orient polymer films,348 including conjugated poly(2,5-dinonyloxy-1,4-phenylenevinylene),349 P3HT,350–352 PBTTT,353,354etc. In most of these latter cases, rubbing was conducted to boost the (out-of-plane) anisotropic OFET charge mobility.350,352,353
Charge conductivity was also targeted and eventually enhanced in highly oriented C12-PBTTT and C18-PBTTT films obtained by rubbing and previously doped with acceptor molecules such as F4TCNQ.354 Both C12-PBTTT and C18-PBTTT systems appeared highly oriented along the rubbing direction (Fig. 8i and j). Moreover, F4TCNQ was successfully intercalated into the layers of side chains, causing a contraction of the lattice along the π–π stacking direction for both polymers. Nevertheless, only the C12-PBTTT system showed charge conductivities reaching 196 S/cm along the rubbing direction. This was most probably due to the better capability of n-dodecyl side chains to host most of the dopants.354


2.2.7 Dewetting. 
Dewetting is the process of retraction of a polymer film (PS, MEH-PPV, P3HT or their blends, etc.) from a surface it does not like (e.g., PDMS), through the incubation of small pinholes upon annealing at elevated temperatures, followed by the growth into larger and larger holes and the final coalescence of the latter into random droplets containing most of the retracted polymeric material (Fig. 9a–d).355,356 Dewetting leaves behind a few nanometers thin residual layer of adsorbed polymer chains adopting an extended/stretched conformation on the substrate.355 This layer usually exhibits puzzling optoelectronic properties, including massive enhancements of photoluminescence,355 when conjugated polymers (in this case MEH-PPV; see its chemical structure in the inset of Fig. 9b) are subjected to dewetting. Often, in order to facilitate dewetting, polymers of interest might be deposited onto a thin layer of slippery PDMS, previously forced to adsorb on the substrate. The annealing times required for the initiation and completion of dewetting strongly depend on the polymer film thickness, polymer composition (for example, how much of a conjugated polymer is dispersed in a PS matrix) and annealing temperature (films annealed at higher temperatures will undergo dewetting faster).
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematics of dewetting. (b–d) Optical micrographs depicting the dewetting of a film (at 135 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere) made of a MEH-PPV:PS blend containing 15 wt% MEH-PPV and taken after 1 min (b), 2 min (c) and 25 min (d), respectively. The chemical structure of MEH-PPV is shown as an inset in (b). (e) Illustration of the illumination procedure performed with an optical microscope. (f–g) Optical micrographs emphasizing the microstructure of a 50 nm thick film made of a blend of MEH-PPV:PS (10%:90% by weight) recorded after 12 h (f) and 25 h (g) of dewetting at 115 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere. Inner regions delimited by the dotted red semicircles were continuously illuminated, while the regions outside were not illuminated. (h) Schematic representation of various structural morphologies expected in SP/IP blends. (i–j) TEM micrographs depicting thin films of various SP:PS blends (i) and their corresponding neat SPs (j). (k) The corresponding chemical structures for all polymeric systems shown in (j). Adapted from ref. 355 (a–d) [Copyright (2013), with permission from American Chemical Society], ref. 368 (f and g) [Copyright (2013), with permission from American Chemical Society] and ref. 400 (h–k) [Copyright (2021) The Authors. Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH]. 
Although dewetting can deliver residual layers of stretched and oriented polymer conformations,355 this process was lately adopted to rather create various surface patterns357,358 and (biomimetic) coatings,359,360 as well as hierarchical356 and other complex361 nanostructures for various applications. In many other cases, peculiar structures could be delivered by employing electro-dewetting,362 solvent-vapor-assisted dewetting,363 surface-pattern-directed dewetting,364,365 and protein adsorption controlled dewetting,366 just to name a few. More detailed information on the dewetting process can be further obtained from the literature.356,359,367


2.2.8 Illumination. 
The illumination technique is based on the exposure of polymer films to light, while keeping the films in an inert (nitrogen) atmosphere and at room or elevated temperatures (Fig. 9e). Upon illumination, thin films of conjugated polymers can experience weak torsional and/or rotational changes in the chain conformation (possibly generated by the delocalization of excitons across the polymer chains) that, all together, could cause chain stiffening or overlap and eventually lead to some macroscopically detectable differences in viscosity.368 For instance, when illuminating thin films of MEH-PPV blended with PS and undergoing dewetting on a thin layer of PDMS, the velocity of dewetting of such conjugated molecules clearly depended on the illumination, with the illuminated chains dewetting much slower (Fig. 9f and g). Moreover, such velocity could be adapted in a reversible manner through appropriate illumination.368
Conformational changes induced by the illumination of polymer films based on MEH-PPV can enhance their PL by 42% and alter other photophysical properties369 (more recently it was reported that, under optimized illumination conditions, the boost in PL could be as high as 400%370), inclusively when films are subjected to thermal annealing.371 Recently, a similar observation on PL was reported for films of poly(3-(2,5-dioctylphenyl)thiophene) (PDOPT) that were crystallized under continuous illumination.372 While without illumination the PL was reported to decrease in time, the authors speculated that the polymer interactions induced by excited electronic states might be responsible for the light-induced conformational changes.372 The optical properties of other polymer films made of polyallyl diglycol carbonate (PADC) were recently further altered by exposing them to UV radiation in the wavelength range of 250–263 nm.373
There are also other cases when polymers change their molecular conformations upon illumination, but these cases are less surprising due to the fact that polymers are designed to interact with light: azobenzene-based polymers374 that switch their helicity,375 (co-)polymers for light-triggered drug delivery,376 optically healable metallosupramolecular polymers,377 polymers with light-activated anticancer activity,378 polymers exhibiting a shape-memory effect,379etc. More details on the interaction and alteration of molecular mobility of polymers by light can be obtained from the literature.380,381


2.2.9 Utilization of space confinements. 
An interesting approach to generate highly ordered nanoscale microstructures in polymeric films is to subject polymers to various space confining geometries. Space confinement was previously shown to exhibit significant impact on both the self-assembly process382–387 and kinetics of crystallization,388 especially when dealing with BCPs. Confinements could be realized either by placing some physical constrains on top of the (amphiphilic) polymer/monomer films, like it is the case when developing vertically aligned 1 nm liquid-crystalline pores under a soft PDMS pad,389 or by placing a polymeric material in between two soft surfaces where, for instance, colloidal self-assembly of colloid-polymer films can take place.390 Other ways to fabricate confinements include patterning of surface relief structures385,391 and construction of custom confining (3D), often closed, spaces from other polymeric or non-polymeric materials.382,383,392,393 Here, one can include: (i) rigid anodic aluminum oxide nanopores for confined crystallization of various polymers,392 (ii) cylindrical geometries of microphase separated poly(ethylene-co-butylene)-b-poly(ethylene oxide) (PEB-b-PEO) and PB-b-PEO for confined crystallization of BCPs,393 (iii) closed micelles constructed via inverse emulsion for the self-assembly of poly(ethylene glycol)-b-poly(4-vinylpyridine) (PEG-b-P4VP),383 (iv) emulsified spherical droplets for confinement of bottlebrush grafted BCP (poly(norbornene)-g-PS)-b-(poly(norbornene)-g-PDMS) to obtain hierarchical photonic pigments,382 and (v) other emulsion droplets for the self-assembly of BCPs.387 Other relevant information on the relation between the symmetries of BCPs and the type of confinements, their effects on assembly and crystallization can be found in relevant studies already available in the literature.394–397
Recently, studies discussing the effects of confinement of one polymer system within various structures formed by another system in a specific blend were revealed.398–400 For instance, the confinement effects of various semiconducting polymers (SP) such as P3HT, P18, diketopyrrolopyrrole-based DPP2T, poly[2,5-bis(2-decylnonadecyl)pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-(2H,5H)-dione-(E)-1,2-di(2,2′-bithiophen-5yl)ethene] (29-DPP) and poly[4-(4,4-dihexadecyl-4H-cyclopenta[1,2-b:5,4-b′]dithiophen-2yl)-alt-[1,2,5] thiadiazolo[3,4-c]pyridine] (PCDTPT) were directly observed in the corresponding polymer blends obtained using a high content of insulating PS.400 Various structural morphologies expected in such blends are schematically represented in Fig. 9h and include island-structured SPs characterized by larger regions made of SP chains and delimited by the insulating polymer (IP) chains, partially connected SPs and continuously connected SPs. Interestingly, it was demonstrated that the physical confinement of SP chains in a PS matrix structure favored the generation of ordered film microstructures containing more straight, edge-on stacked SP chains (Fig. 9i).400 In comparison, all neat SP films exhibited a uniform morphology with well-dispersed phases containing no notable structures (Fig. 9j; the corresponding chemical structures of all employed SPs are shown in Fig. 9k). Moreover, it was shown that by reducing the confinement of poly[(2,6-(4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene))-alt-(5,5-(1′,3′-di-2-thienyl-5′,7′-bis(2-ethylhexyl)benzo[1′,2′-c:4′,5′-c′]dithiophene-4,8-dione))] (PBDB-T) to, for example, (3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′] dithiophene) (ITIC), the overall crystallinity of the PBDB-T/ITIC blends was enhanced.398 Furthermore, by promoting the confinement of acceptor N2200 to poly{4,8-bis(5-(2-hexyldecyl)-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-co-4,7-di(thien-2-yl)-5,6-difluoro-2-octyl-2H-benzo[d][1,2,3]trazole} (J51) during the phase separation process, both the domain size and phase purity of J51:N2200 blends could be altered.399

3. Efficient techniques used to structure polymer chains in solutions
The aim of this section is to emphasize the importance of various processing protocols that are used to structure polymer chains in solutions. Such protocols mainly rely on the variation of cp and solution temperature, and on the utilization of various solvents and non-solvents to generate polymer solutions. Additional protocols are based on the aging of polymer solutions and the use of additional materials within such solutions.
3.1 Variation of polymer concentration
The concentration of a polymer solution cp has a direct impact on the chain interactions, as it represents the population of chains within a specific volume of solution. The effect of cp on structuring of polymer chains in various solutions has been studied for a long time.401–403 It was shown that in concentrated DNA solutions, the DNA can be forced, by excluded volume interactions, to undergo spontaneous rearrangements into ordered tertiary structures.401 Moreover, concentrated hydroxypropylcellulose solutions (≥40 wt% in water, methanol and ethanol) were demonstrated to favor the formation of an ordered liquid-crystalline phase, with the flexibility of the cellulose-based chains appearing to be the decisive factor in dictating the needed cp.402 Further ordering of flexible polymer chains and their orientational effects on concentrated solutions were theoretically described by Birshtein and co-workers. They concluded that the non-equivalence in energy of contacts was responsible for the chain extension and decrease of chain folding.403 Later on, Khokhlov and Semenov proposed a universal approximate method that theoretically described the liquid-crystalline ordering in solutions comprising polymer chains with limited flexibility.404
Furthermore, it was reported that in semidilute solutions of star polymers, generally characterized by an inhomogeneous monomer density distribution, such polymers undergo ordering processes around the overlap concentration due to osmotic repulsion.378 Moreover, such diluted solutions are generally fully liquid and comprise star molecules of low-size polydispersity, as it is the case of multiarm star PB.405 Instead, in the concentrated solutions, star molecules were characterized by restricted diffusion, while two dynamic phases, crystalline and liquid, were indicated to coexist.405
Another case where cp was directing the structuring of polymers in solutions appeared upon the generation of polymeric colloidal particles such as micelles.406 It was reported that, at low cp, an increase in solution temperature forced the fully dissolved PEO-b-PPO-b-PEO (PPO is polypropylene) unimers to aggregate into crystalline spherical micelles that could further change their form to ellipsoidal micelles with decreased intermicelle interaction.406 Instead, at a higher cp, a rodlike structure with hexagonal symmetry was observed to form.406 In time, more and more colloidal/micellar particles with tuned shape and structure have been developed for various novel applications, including drug delivery. These works were recently summarized within two very comprehensible reviews407,408 and thus, there is no need to further discuss this topic here.
At the end of this section, it is worth mentioning that an efficient approach, to easily follow structural changes that are induced in a specific polymer solution as a function of cp, is to construct phase diagrams. For instance, such diagrams were established for mCherry-b-poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (mChP) BCPs with several different poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) coil fractions (Fig. 10), with the goal to follow the self-assembly of globular protein-polymer BCPs in concentrated solutions.410 When comparing solutions kept at temperatures situated below the room temperature, it was observed that, while the BCP containing shorter PNIPAM experienced only disordered phases at lower cp and nonbirefringent lamellar phases at higher cp (Fig. 10a), the BCPs containing longer PNIPAM displayed disordered phases at lower cp, lamellar phases at high cp and nonbirefringent lamellar phases at intermediate cp (Fig. 10b–d).410 All discovered phases, which are schematically depicted in Fig. 10e, were further confirmed by systematic small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) measurements (Fig. 10f–i). More details on how each representative SAXS pattern depended on the concentration and temperature conditions are available elsewhere.410
 Fig. 10  (a–d) Phase diagrams of mChP8 (a), mChP17 (b), mChP30 (c) and mChP57 (d) constructed as a function of temperature and cp. (e) Various phases denoted as disordered (Dis), disordered micellar (DM), nonbirefringent lamellar (NB Lam), lamellar (Lam), nonbirefringent hexagonal (Hex), hexagonally packed cylinders (HPC) and perforated lamellar (PL) that are contained in phase diagrams. Open symbols depict regions where macrophase separation between a conjugate rich ordered phase and a water-rich phase occurred. (f–i) Typical SAXS patterns acquired for mChP8 (f), mChP17 (g), mChP30 (h) and mChP57 (i) polymeric systems. Adapted with permission from ref. 410 – published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.2 Temperature variation
Besides cp, temperature is another important processing parameter used to structure polymer chains in various solutions. Early studies on latex particles and ionic polymers have found that there was a decrease of the interparticle distance in the resulting ordered structures of a latex suspension with the increase of temperature.411 Moreover, in micellar solutions of PEO-b-PPO-b-PEO, a dependence of the micellar volume fraction on the solution temperature was observed.406 While at temperatures lower than the critical micellization temperature (Tcm1) the polymer chains are dissolved as free Gaussian chains, at temperatures Tcm1 and the critical micellization temperature corresponding to the saturated volume fraction (Tcm2), the free polymer chains coexist in equilibrium with micelles. Only at temperatures higher than Tcm2 all polymer chains assemble into micelles.406 Some disordered micellar order was further reported to be obtained from disordered phases in low cp solutions of mChP BCPs when increasing the temperature of the solutions from well-below to above room temperature.410 The increase in temperature was shown to induce phase separation also in aqueous solutions of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-butyl methacrylate-co-hydrophilic/hydrophobic/cationic/anionic) co-monomers by enhancing the hydrophobic interactions between the polymer side groups.412
More recently, new investigations into solution morphologies, inclusively of thermoresponsive413 and conjugated polymers,414 were performed. Because there is an extensive recent review on the thermoresponsive systems available in the literature,415 we will shortly discuss only the case of the conjugated polymers. The latter often display monomer anisotropy and possess a backbone and various side-chains which all together favour a plethora of chain conformations and thus, may induce a multitude of temperature-dependent structures.13,414 For instance, the decrease in the temperature of solutions comprising flexible planar chains with no side chains initially increased the radius of gyration (Rg) as chains became more rigid. With a further decrease in temperature, Rg started decreasing while chains were adopting a more and more aggregated conformation (coil, racquet and then toroid) with increasing intramolecular ordering (Fig. 11a).414 Semiflexible planar and non-planar polymer chains with no side chains exhibited a similar temperature dependence of the Rg. It could be seen that an increase in chain semiflexibility triggered an increase of Rg at all temperatures, with non-planar chains displaying larger Rg at lower temperatures (Fig. 11b). A further decrease in temperature induced the coil-to-racquet transition.414 Instead, the presence of side-chains on planar polymer backbones caused significant changes in the conformational properties. In this case the side chain interactions obstructed the aggregation and thus shifted the position of the collapse transition to lower temperatures (Fig. 11c).414 The above findings are summarized into a qualitative phase diagram displaying the most important chain conformations that could be obtained with the variation of temperature and chain semiflexibility (Fig. 11d).
 Fig. 11  (a–c) The variation of Rg with temperature for flexible planar chains with no side chains (a), semiflexible planar and non-planar polymer chains with no side chains (b) and planar chains with side chains (c). (d) Phase diagram displaying the possible chains conformations that could be obtained when varying the temperature and chain semiflexibility. (e–g) Optical micrographs of single crystals of P3HT that were crystallized from a 0.2 mg ml−1 solution of 3-hexylthiophene at 32 °C for 24 h C from seeds formed at 40 °C (e), 43 °C (f) and 47 °C (g). Single crystals were spin cast onto silicon substrates. The size of all images is 100 × 100 μm2. (h) Schematic representation of the orientation of the oligothiophene/P3HT chains inside a single crystal. The size of the monoclinic unit cell (form II) is indicated by the broken lines. (i) Typical SAED pattern of a P3HT single crystal that was generated at 35 °C from a seed formed at 50 °C within 6 h. (j) Various projections of the crystalline structure along the three crystallographic axes a, b and c. Adapted from ref. 414 (a–d) [Copyright (2021), with permission from American Chemical Society] and ref. 417 (e–j) [Copyright (2012) WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA (Weinheim) with permission from John Wiley and Sons]. 
Variation of temperature was also utilized when inducing crystallization of polymer chains in solutions.416,417 In these scenarios, polymer chains could crystallize either under very simple room temperature conditions,416 or more sophisticated temperature protocols had to be provided.417 In the first case, keeping solutions of poly(vinylidene fluoride-hexafluoropropylene) (P(VDF-HFP)) at room temperature led to the formation of α-phase crystalline structures.416 In the second case, when highly ordered single crystals of conjugated oligothiophenes and P3HTs were targeted under low nucleation probability conditions, the crystallization process was based on a more complex temperature protocol that involved the self-seeding method.417 Before crystallization, solutions of various oligothiophenes/P3HTs already containing some crystalline aggregates were heated to the seeding temperature located slightly below the dissolution temperature at which all polymer chains would be completely dissolved. At the end of this step, only crystalline structures of higher order remained undissolved and further acted as seeds for the nucleation and growth of single oligothiophenes/P3HT crystals at lower Tc. Here, the Tc was varied in order to tune the number, size and internal structure of single crystals (Fig. 11e–g).417 The resulting crystals, comprising all oligothiophenes/P3HT chains adopting the same extended conformation, displayed a significant interdigitation of the hexyl side chains specific to crystals of the monoclinic form II (Fig. 11h).417 This form was inferred inclusively from combining representative SAED measurements (Fig. 11i) with trial-and-error structural modelling (Fig. 11j). These crystals were later on shown to exhibit peculiar vibrational signatures,418 as well as puzzling absorption419 and charge transport420 properties.
3.3 Manipulation of the solvent type
An important parameter strongly affecting the ordering processes in polymer solutions is the type of utilized solvent, as the latter is responsible for the nature of subsequently induced solvent–polymer and polymer–polymer interactions.421,422 For instance, while the viscosity of a solvent was shown to impact the thermal diffusion of dilute solutions of PS,423 the rotational conformations around single bonds and thus, the color of P3HT solutions, could be altered by varying the composition of the solvent.424 Moreover, experiments on macromolecular crowding effects suggested that varying the solvent properties of aqueous solutions induced by the so-called crowding agents could be the cause of soft electrostatic, hydrophobic and van der Waals interactions observed between the crowding agents and proteins.425 Furthermore, while the concentration necessary to generate ordered hydroxypropylcellulose liquid-crystalline phases in solutions was shown a long time ago to depend on the solvent quality,402 very recently it was emphasized that solvents of better quality induce moderate entropic repulsions at intermediate separation distances in crystalline conjugated polymers solutions, generating an important impact on the π–π packing process.426
One efficient way to vary (i.e., deteriorate) the quality of a solvent is to add a certain amount of a poor solvent or non-solvent. This procedure represents the base of the nanoprecipitation process (currently broadly used to design and develop complex polymeric nanoparticle/colloidal structures, inclusively for novel drug delivery systems427–430), but it can also be employed to fabricate isotropic spheres of alternating copolymers containing fluorene and thiophene moieties,431 to deliver protein-like particles by nanoprecipitation of mixtures of polymers bearing appositely charged groups,432 or to transform, by absorption of moisture, oriented liquid-crystalline solutions of poly(p-phenylene benzobisthiazole) (PBZT) and poly(p-phenylene benzobisoxazole) (PBO) into crystalline phases.433
The ratio of solvent/non-solvent is of paramount importance when targeting polymeric (micro-, nano-) particles. While highly viscous polymer solutions need a high concentration of good solvent in the non-solvent mixture in order to generate microspheres,434 a controlled variation of the solvent/non-solvent ratio could further tune the size of the generated microspheres.435 This is the case, for instance, of nanoprecipitated poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-trifluoroethylene) (P(VDF-TrFE)) (its chemical structure is available in the inset of Fig. 12a) microspheres of different diameters fabricated by depositing the polymeric solution over a non-solvent solution containing various non-solvent ratios (Fig. 12a–d).435 Control over the diameter of other microspheres, made of PLGA or methacrylic polymers, could further be established by performing nanoprecipitation within various microfluidic devices.436,437 More detailed information on the nanoprecipitation of polymers and related applications can be obtained from the literature.427–429,438
 Fig. 12  (a–d) SEM images depicting microspheres of P(VDF-TrFE) nanoprecipitated from an acetone solution of a concentration of 5 mg ml−1 mixed with a non-solvent solution comprising methanol and water in different ratios: 0% (a), 50% (b), 90% (c) and 100% (d) methanol. The inset in (a) depicts the chemical structure of the P(VDF-TrFE) system. (e–h) AFM height images of low (e and g) and high (f and h) molecular weight P3HT monolayers dip-coated from fresh (e and f) and 6 days aged (g and h) toluene solutions. Adapted from ref. 435 (a–d) [Copyright (2019), with permission from Elsevier B.V.] and ref. 448 (e–h) [Copyright (2021) SIOC, CAS, Shanghai, & WILEY-VCH GmbH, with permission from John Wiley and Sons]. 
3.4 Aging of polymer solutions
Aging polymer solutions is a well-known procedure to induce aggregation/cluster/ordered structure formation439–441 and thus to eventually change the viscosity of solutions.439,440,442,443 For example, it was shown that the viscoelastic properties of amphiphilic polymer-polyacid supramolecular solutions increased significantly with aging over a period of 30 days until a strong gel was formed, demonstrating the aging time is an important parameter that has to be considered when developing supramolecular systems via the electrostatic interaction between the amphiphilic polycations and polyacid.443 Moreover, spin casting aged solutions on solid substrates led to modifications in the film thickness and surface microstructure. Fresher films of poly[(4,4-didodecyldithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]silole)-2,6-diyl-alt-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)-4,7-diyl] displayed lower average film thickness as compared to their analogues cast from longer aged solutions.444 Interestingly, the analogues exhibited an increased density of fiber-like structures when deposited onto a substrate.444 Furthermore, while it was demonstrated that the aging of a poly(N,N-dimethylacrylamide-co-sodium-2-acrylamido-2-methyl propane sulfonate) (P(NNDAM-co-AMPS)) solution for a month at 120 °C could induce better thermal stability,445 the increase of aging time could strengthen the gelling effect in amphoteric polymer solutions.446
One of the earlier examples demonstrating that aging induced structural changes in a polymer solution was given by Ishikawa and co-workers in 1964. They have shown that a chloroform solution of poly-γ-methyl-L-glutamate aged for a long time in a desiccator at room temperature led to generation of spherulites.441 Positive spherulites (comprising chains adopting an α-helical conformation with the helical axes oriented along the radius) were obtained after aging for periods below 6 months, while increasing the aging time up to 10 months led to negative spherulites (made of chains adopting an α-helical conformation, but with the helical axes oriented along the tangential direction).441 In time, other polymeric structures, such as highly birefringent anisotropic aggregates of hairy-rod poly(p-terphenylene terephthalate) (TPPE)439 or β-phase nanofibers of PFO,447 were generated over longer aging times under specific temperature conditions. Very recently, Lin and co-workers employed solution aging to modulate the microstructure of low and high molecular weight P3HT with the goal to manipulate and enhance the OFET charge transport.448 A fresh solution of low molecular weight P3HT exhibited weaker π–π interchain packing as compared to its high molecular weight analogue and therefore, displayed lower crystalline fibrillar microstructures (compare Fig. 12e with Fig. 12f).448 Instead, 6 days aged solutions of both P3HT systems generated, under the same processing conditions, microstructures with increased fiber dimension and density (Fig. 12g and h) that favored longer conjugation lengths, which, in turn, significantly enhanced the OFET charge mobilities.448
3.5 Employment of additives
A very efficient way to induce and modulate new ordered phases in various polymeric solutions is based on the use of additives such as dopants,449 salts450 or surfactants,451 just to name a few. While the use of dopants is generally targeting the enhancement of the conductive properties of conjugated polymers and can induce different degrees of chain aggregation that depend on the doping level of polymer solutions,449 the utilization of salts can affect the behavior of polymers such as PNIPAM or poly(vinyl methyl ether) (PVME) in aqueous solutions by decreasing their demixing temperature.450 This is possible because salt ions have the capacity to structure water. Instead, adding surfactants to such systems can cause an increase in the solubilization of polymer chains and thus, can lead to higher demixing temperatures.450 Nonetheless, changes in polymer solubility are not surprising, as the use of surfactants was shown to affect the viscosity of polymer solutions452,453 and to even induce solution–gel transitions.454
Due to the existence of a plethora of surfactants, the spectrum of their interactions with various polymer chains in solutions is very broad. Therefore, there are countless examples that (theoretically) evaluate and describe the mechanisms of formation of new ordered phases in polymeric solutions upon the addition of surfactants.451,453–456 For instance, one not only can predict the lyotropic phases that are expected to form in flexible polymer solutions, by describing the mechanisms of stiffening of both flexible and linear polymer chains caused by the complexation with oligomeric surfactants,451 but can also depict the generation of various 3D mesoscale structures, including micellar, hexagonal, bicontinuous and lamellar, via the microphase separation process taking place in concentrated aqueous solutions of the triblock polymer surfactants.456 Being a key element in the structuring of polymer solutions, the process of microphase separation was further studied in solutions containing a polymer and a mixture of a solvent and an amphiphilic surfactant acting as the second solvent.457 Results have revealed that the degradation of the solvent quality favored transitions from disordered to macro-separated phases at low polymer and surfactant concentrations or to even body-centered-cubic, then hexagonal and eventually lamellar structures at high polymer and surfactant concentrations.457
There are many other valuable reports in the literature describing new structures developed in polymer solutions containing surfactants, but we would like to emphasize, at the end of this section, the example of P3HT's aggregation phases tailored with an emulsion processing method.458 More exactly, Fleischli and co-workers succeeded in generating either H- or J-like predominant molecular aggregations in P3HT:water dispersions by employing two different types of macrosurfactants and by controlling both the homogenization of the initial emulsion and the solvent quality of the organic phase of the emulsion.458 Similar P3HT nanoparticles dispersed in aqueous emulsion and containing planarized P3HT chains were also obtained more recently by using an ionic surfactant. In this case, it was suggested that polymer chain planarization occurred most probably through the generation of a blended surfactant/P3HT phase at the surface of the emulsion.459
4. Techniques employed to orient polymers in the solid state
4.1 Sintering of polymers
Sintering of polymers is a process based on the heat treatment of (compacted) solid mass polymer products without reaching the melting point of liquefaction, i.e., without generating a liquid from the starting solid-state material. This process involves the melting of polymer chains and their subsequent diffusion across the particle boundaries, followed by the coalescence of the particles and final crystallization or solidification of the material. In Fig. 13a–d we can visualize the coalescence of polyamide 12 (PA12) powder upon the increase of temperature (Fig. 13a–c), as well as the surface of the final sintered product (Fig. 13d). In this particular case, the coalescence process occurred, upon melting, within a temperature range of 21 °C and a frame time of 2 minutes only, and led to a rather homogeneous microstructure displaying only few voids.460
 Fig. 13  (a–c) Optical micrographs showing the coalescence process for a PA12 powder at a temperature of 179 °C (a), 188 °C (b) and 200 °C (c), respectively. (d) SEM image depicting the fractured surface of PA12 after sintering. The inset emphasizes the chemical structure of PA12. (e–h) SEM images depicting UHMWPE samples exposed to compaction at 103.5 MPa and at 160 °C for 0 min (e), 40 min (f), 90 min (g) and 130 min (h), respectively. The inset in (h) shows the chemical structure of PE. (i) Illustration of the α-, β- and γ-CD structures and their dimensions. (j) Schematic representation of the channel structure of a typical polymer-CD-IC. Adapted from ref. 460 (a–d) [Copyright (2019) Wiley Periodicals, Inc., with permission from John Wiley and Sons], ref. 488 (e–h) [Copyright (2021) Society of Plastics Engineers, with permission from John Wiley and Sons] and ref. 492 (i and j) [Copyright (2010), with permission from Elsevier Ltd]. 
The coalescence of polymer powders is strongly dependent on the polymer viscosity and less dependent on the interfacial tension,461 and it was already well described in 1993 by J. P. Jog462 and later on by Greco and co-workers.463,464 They have demonstrated that the key processing parameters that need to be optimized in order to generate an efficient sintering include the sintering temperature and time, heating/cooling rate, size and shape of particles pre-fabricated from polymer powders, etc. Moreover, the sintering of polymers depends on their melting behaviour. For example, melting of unpressed polymer powders does not trigger their sintering, unless some low polymer viscosities are reached.463
One very common sintering variant relies on the utilization of lasers as the power and heat source to sinter polymeric powders at high temperatures. This method, often called selective laser sintering, was well described, along with its advantages and limitations, by Kruth, Mokrane and Drummer and their co-workers.465–467 Its applicability was demonstrated on HDPE powders,463,464 as well as on ultra-high-molecular-weight PE (UHMWPE)468 and various polymer composites.469,470 For instance, while recent studies performed on UHMWPE have shown that the sintering behaviour of UHMWPE could be controlled by the morphology of the particles in addition to the viscous flow of UHMWPE,468 experiments based on the optimized laser sintering of carbon fibers/polyether-ether-ketone (CF/PEEK) composites led to reinforced CF/PEEK displaying a significantly enhanced tensile strength and elastic modulus.469
Polymer-based composites can also be sintered at low temperatures via a cold sintering process that occurs generally at a solid–liquid interface and relies on the utilization of pressure prior to any heating of the sample.470 Although in this case the processing parameters and sintering mechanisms differ from the conventional high temperature sintering, cold sintering at only 100–300 °C could lead to ceramic–polymer composites that displayed an anisotropic preferential growth both at the crystal level and at the microstructural level.470 Because the topic of cold sintering was rather recently discussed in details in several high-quality literature reviews,471–473 there is no need to further expand this part.
To complete this section, some works on solventless melt processing of conjugated polymers could be further added here. This method is not that common for such polymers as it relies on challenging aspects related to their high melting temperatures and associated oxidation phenomena. Nonetheless, it was shown that polymers such as neat P3HT112,474 or P3HT mixed/linked with other polymeric systems including poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL)475 or PE476 could be melt processed into interesting ordered microstructures. For instance, while P3HT pellets could be solidified (by bringing their melt to room temperature under high pressure) into crystalline specimens exhibiting enlarged thickness, a high degree of crystallinity and improved charge carrier mobility,112 P3HT could also undergo melt spinning and drawing to deliver microfibers with increased crystalline phase.474 Instead, taking advantage of melt processing of a blend made of P3HT and PCL, blended nanofibrillar networks with excellent OFET charge-transport properties and outstanding mechanical properties (with elongations at break exceeding 300%) were generated.475 In a similar manner, blends made of a P3HT-PE copolymer and an antioxidant could be cooled from the melt to obtain solid-state crystalline–crystalline P3HT micellar structures scattered in regions comprising lamellar PE.476
4.2 Polymer compaction
The simplest variant of compaction process assumes pressing a polymeric powder in a closed rigid die with the goal to induce chain orientation through compression.462 This process, nowadays crucial in (industrial) moulding of a variety of solid-state polymers,477 was studied by Crawford and Paul, who proposed in 1979 a cold compaction method for moulding small products and/or components of PPO, polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and polyvinylidene chloride (PVdC) powders.478 In their studies, they observed that compaction of polymeric powders depended on a series of processing parameters that included compacting pressure, particle/fragment size, peak pressure dwell time or loading rate.478 Later on, they have correlated the effects of compaction conditions on pressure and density variations,479,480 established the role of compaction rate481 and concluded that the compaction process comprises four different phases that appear chronologically with the increase of pressure.482 These phases include the initial rearrangement of polymeric particles (i.e., restacking of particles until a further increase of pressure without particle deformation is not possible), elastic deformation at contact points (i.e., powder densification through particle deformation), plastic deformation at contact points (i.e., plastic flow emerges in the vicinity of contact area) and bulk compression of the polymeric material (i.e., reaching final densification when no further reduction of porosity is possible).482
Generally, the compaction of polymeric powders becomes more efficient when performed at high temperatures.483,484 For instance, while the compaction of conjugated polymers (with and without dopants) was shown to be able to produce free-standing bulk materials with increased electrical conductivity483 or materials with more planarized polymer chains exhibiting longer conjugation lengths and red-shifts in their emission properties,307 the compaction of UHMWPE led to coherent tapes comprising long-range order folded-chain crystals that could further be transformed into extended-chain crystals by increasing the draw ratio.484 Moreover, it was shown that UHMWPE could also be compacted from reactor powders to generate, under optimal processing conditions, monolithic precursor films intended to be used for further studies on chain orientation by stretching.485 UHMWPE reactor powders can further be mixed with carbon-based electrically conductive nanofillers (e.g., carbon black/CB, 2D graphite nanopowder/GNP, multi-walled carbon nanotubes/MWCNTs), compacted and eventually sheared to generate oriented conductive composites exhibiting a segregated network structure and displaying high tensile strength and electrical conductivity486 (note that carbon-based and other type of fillers can be used to also boost, via compaction process, the thermal conductivity of polymers such as PA12 or PPO487). When, instead of shearing, the compaction process was combined with simultaneous sintering, the UHMWPE powders generated samples with well-defined particle boundaries (Fig. 13e).488 With the increase of processing time, these boundaries started to diffuse at their contact points (Fig. 13f) and then to merge at their surface (Fig. 13g). With a further increase of the processing time, UHMWPE samples suffered from complete bulk diffusion, with all particles being merged and forming a single-phase bulk material (Fig. 13h). Such samples were shown to display high relative density and hardness, as well as good tensile strength and elastic modulus values.488
Recently, new variants of the compaction process were reported.489,490 One of such variants employed ultrasonic-assisted processing procedures to study the densification process in large-diameter polymer bonded explosives (PBX).489 Here, longitudinal and radial ultrasonic transducers were used to produce longitudinal and radial ultrasonic vibrations and then applied during the compaction process. As a result, the density of compacted PBX parts has increased while the diameter expansion and density differences decreased upon ultrasonic vibration.489 Another, this time, roll compaction variant was shown to be based on a top-fed roller compactor equipped with a vertical screw feeder. With such a tool, and after the optimization of processing parameters like the roll pressure and screw speed, Pishnamazi and co-workers were able to produce, in short time and at reduced cost, ribbons of microcrystalline cellulose, lactose and lignin blends that have potential in pharmaceutical manufacturing.490 Presumably, the ribbon density increased with the increase of the roll pressure.
Finally, one could mention that compaction of polymers might further come in many different forms. For instance, by adding pressure on a molten polymeric material placed in a die, the latter can be extruded in a plethora of structures and forms, inclusively on the industrial scale (note the extrusion can be performed by utilizing a variety of methods and equipment).477 Moreover, compression of polymeric materials can be further realized through other scalable processes such as calendering (continuous transformation of molten thermoplastic polymeric materials into sheets/films of uniform thickness by pressing the material in between two heated rolls) or compression moulding (pressing polymer thermosets in specific moulds with the help of heated platens of a hydraulic press),477etc. All these processes are highly important in the industrial manufacturing of a huge variety of today's plastic products.
4.3 Use of inclusion compounds
At the end of this review, one can include a brief discussion about a more peculiar approach for processing of polymer powders. This approach is based on inclusion compounds and its peculiarity is given by the fact that bulk-like polymers containing inclusion compounds are obtained through an intermediary processing in solutions. This method was first proposed by the group of Tonelli491 who dissolved nylon 6 in formic acid and then slowly added this solution to the aqueous solutions of either α- or β-cyclodextrin (CD) using an addition funnel. The resulting solutions were maintained for 3 hours at 70 °C and then cooled to room temperature and further stirred for 6 hours. After another 24 hours in a hood, the resulting white precipitate was filtered and dried in a vacuum oven.491 A complex structural analysis of these samples, along with the physical mixtures obtained by simply blending a granular powder of nylon 6 with either α- or β-CD powders in 1:1 ratio at room temperature and with their pure analogues, revealed that nylon 6 and α- or β-CDs generated stable, high molecular weight polymer inclusion compounds (6-CD-ICs). In such compounds, the nylon 6 polymer chains were included inside the channels formed by the orderly stacked CD molecules.491 Interestingly, as inferred from differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements performed on 6-CD-ICs and pure nylon 6, the 6-CD-IC samples contained no free crystalline nylon 6 chains, as probably most of these chains were included inside CD channels.491 An illustration of the CD structures and their dimensions, along with the channel structure of a typical polymer-CD-IC, was depicted by Mohan and co-workers492 and is shown in Fig. 13i–j.
Later on, bulk PET and bisphenol A polycarbonate (PC) with reorganized structures and chain conformations, that were exhibiting puzzling thermal properties, were fabricated through the coalescence of their extended guest chains separated in the narrow channels of the crystalline ICs formed with host γ-CD.493,494 Molecule host γ-CD was further used along with urea molecules to generate crystalline ICs with poly(vinyl acetate) (PVAC), PMMA and PVAC/PMMA blend as included guests.495 Moreover, the removal of urea and γ-CD crystalline host lattices led to coalesced, yet structured amorphous bulk polymers that each exhibited a higher glass-transition temperature (Tg) when compared to those of the as-received unincluded analogues.495 Furthermore, following the same approach, a ternary PC/PMMA/PVAC blend, most probably exhibiting a homogeneous amorphous phase, was generated through the simultaneous coalescence of all polymer guests from their common γ-CD IC.496 Other polymer systems that could be exploited by the CD inclusion complexation include Bombyx mori silk fibroin497 and PCL.498 More details on the role of inclusion compounds in the processing of bulk polymers can be found in other research articles and comprehensive literature reviews published by Tonelli and co-workers.499–504
Conclusions
The continuous expansion of novel, life-changing polymer-based applications demands the scientific community to constantly design and develop innovative processing procedures, regardless of whether we are talking about polymer films, solutions, or bulk. This need for novel processing techniques is further justified by the unceasing delivery of new polymeric systems and by the fact that there are no such things as universal polymer processing paths (one could see in this review that, generally, the most appropriate processing method is chosen not only as a function of the polymer type and its aggregation state, but also as a function of the targeted final properties and the nature of the desired application or product).
Based on the analysis of all the above-mentioned processing techniques, one could identify three main ways that can be taken to generate better and/or novel polymer processing procedures. The first way is based on the improvement of already existing procedures by enhancing the equipment, with the goal to eventually better control and optimize some specific processing parameters. For instance, this is the case of the solvent vapor annealing equipment evolving in time from a simple bell jar setup, where only weak control over the solvent evaporation rate could be established, to two sample chamber setups that exhibited a very precise control not only over the evaporation rate, but also over the degree of film swelling (see Section 2.2.2). The second way pursues the combination of two or more compatible processing methods in order to generate novel polymer microstructures. For example, certain temperature/concentration protocols can be applied to generate aggregates and/or ordered structures in a polymer solution that can be afterwards used with another solution-processing technique for polymer film fabrication (e.g., spin casting, blade coating, zone casting, etc.) to produce better ordered film microstructures (see Sections 2.1.1, 2.1.6 and 2.1.9). Or, certain polymer solutions can be aged before their further use in the fabrication of polymer films by zone casting (see Section 2.1.9). The third way is to formulate new protocols to structure polymers. This is the case, for instance, of polymers containing inclusion compounds able to generate channel-like structures (see Section 4.3).
Finally, one has to mention that it is highly desirable for a polymer processing technique to be scalable and compatible with the industrial/R2R production. Only such a technique can process enough polymeric material to fabricate, on the industrial scale, various components/parts and devices. Therefore, regardless of which way one choses to develop novel polymer processing techniques, when doing so, it might be advantageous to design/prioritize new/existing processing parameters that are scalable or exhibit a significant potential towards scalability.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The author acknowledges the financial support from the Romanian National Authority for Scientific Research and Innovation, CNCS-UEFISCDI, project no. PN-III-P1-1.1-TE-2021-0388.
References
A. D. Jenkins, P. Kratochvíl, R. F. T. Stepto and U. W. Suter, Pure Appl. Chem., 1996, 68, 2287–2311 CAS .
David L. Allara, Environ. Health Perspect., 1975, 11, 29–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wunderlich and G. Czornyj, Macromolecules, 1977, 10, 906–913 CrossRef CAS .
V. Busico and R. Cipullo, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2001, 26, 443–533 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Trinetta and C. N. Cutter, in Antimicrobial Food Packaging, ed. J. Barros-Velázquez, Academic Press, San Diego,  2016, pp. 385–397 Search PubMed .
J. Moohan, S. A. Stewart, E. Espinosa, A. Rosal, A. Rodríguez, E. Larrañeta, R. F. Donnelly and J. Domínguez-Robles, Appl. Sci., 2020, 10, 65 CrossRef CAS .
R. Freeman, J. Boekhoven, M. B. Dickerson, R. R. Naik and S. I. Stupp, MRS Bull., 2015, 40, 1089–1101 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Pattanashetti, G. B. Heggannavar and M. Y. Kariduraganavar, Proc. Manuf., 2017, 12, 263–279 Search PubMed .
E. Fukada, IEEE Trans. Sonics Ultrason., 2000, 47, 1277–1290 CAS .
M. Smith and S. Kar-Narayan, Int. Mater. Rev., 2022, 67, 65–88 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yao, Z. Fan, H. Cheng, X. Guan, C. Wang, K. Sun and J. Ouyang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, 1700727 CrossRef .
D. P. Foster and D. Majumdar, Phys. Rev. E, 2021, 104, 024122 CrossRef CAS .
I. Botiz, M. M. Durbin and N. Stingelin, Macromolecules, 2021, 54, 5304–5320 CrossRef CAS .
I. B. Dimov, M. Moser, G. G. Malliaras and I. McCulloch, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 4356–4396 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, N. A. Kukhta, A. Marks and C. K. Luscombe, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 2314–2332 RSC .
A. K. Mohanty, F. Wu, R. Mincheva, M. Hakkarainen, J.-M. Raquez, D. F. Mielewski, R. Narayan, A. N. Netravali and M. Misra, Nat. Rev. Methods Primers, 2022, 2, 1–27 CrossRef .
Q.-T. Pham and C.-S. Chern, J. Polym. Res., 2022, 29, 124 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yarali, M. Baniasadi, A. Zolfagharian, M. Chavoshi, F. Arefi, M. Hossain, A. Bastola, M. Ansari, A. Foyouzat, A. Dabbagh, M. Ebrahimi, M. J. Mirzaali and M. Bodaghi, Appl. Mater. Today, 2022, 26, 101306 CrossRef .
N. Angel, S. Li, F. Yan and L. Kong, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 2022, 120, 308–324 CrossRef CAS .
M. Handrea-Dragan and I. Botiz, Polymers, 2021, 13, 445 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. C. de Leon, Í. G. M. da Silva, K. D. Pangilinan, Q. Chen, E. B. Caldona and R. C. Advincula, React. Funct. Polym., 2021, 162, 104878 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nagy-Simon, O. Diaconu, M. Focsan, A. Vulpoi, I. Botiz and A.-M. Craciun, J. Mol. Struct., 2021, 1243, 130931 CrossRef CAS .
L. Luppi, T. Babut, E. Petit, M. Rolland, D. Quemener, L. Soussan, M. A. Moradi and M. Semsarilar, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 336–344 RSC .
B. Marta, C. Leordean, T. Istvan, I. Botiz and S. Astilean, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 363, 613–618 CrossRef CAS .
I. Botiz and S. B. Darling, Mater. Today, 2010, 13, 42–51 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo and A. Facchetti, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 922–928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Sarfraz, H. Hong and S. S. Kim, Compos. Struct., 2021, 266, 113864 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wiese, S. Thiede and C. Herrmann, Addit. Manuf., 2020, 36, 101582 CAS .
V. Shah, J. Bhaliya, G. M. Patel and K. Deshmukh, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2022, 33, 3023–3048 CrossRef CAS .
S. Salifu, D. Desai, O. Ogunbiyi and K. Mwale, Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., 2022, 119, 6877–6891 CrossRef .
S. M. Prasanth, P. S. Kumar, S. Harish, M. Rishikesh, S. Nanda and D.-V. N. Vo, Chemosphere, 2021, 280, 130723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. K. Rajak, P. H. Wagh, A. Kumar, A. Behera and C. I. Pruncu, in Materials, Structures and Manufacturing for Aircraft, ed. M. C. Kuşhan, S. Gürgen and M. A. Sofuoğlu, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2022, pp. 65–88 Search PubMed .
D. M. Nikalin, Yu. I. Merkulova and V. G. Zheleznyak, Russ. J. Gen. Chem., 2021, 91, 1171–1177 CrossRef CAS .
T. Trzepieciński, S. M. Najm, M. Sbayti, H. Belhadjsalah, M. Szpunar and H. G. Lemu, J. Compos. Sci., 2021, 5, 217 CrossRef .
K. Sharma and G. Srinivas, Mater. Today: Proc, 2020, 27, 244–250 CAS .
B. Tian, D. Xiao, T. Hei, R. Ping, S. Hua and J. Liu, Polym. Int., 2020, 69, 597–603 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mangaraj, A. Yadav, L. M. Bal, S. K. Dash and N. K. Mahanti, J. Package. Technol. Res., 2019, 3, 77–96 CrossRef .
R. Nisticò, Polym. Test., 2020, 90, 106707 CrossRef .
J. Wróblewska-Krepsztul, T. Rydzkowski, G. Borowski, M. Szczypiński, T. Klepka and V. K. Thakur, Int. J. Polym. Anal. Charact, 2018, 23, 383–395 CrossRef .
K. E. Helanto, L. Matikainen, R. Talja and O. J. Rojas, BioResources, 2019, 14, 4902–4951 Search PubMed .
X. Ji, M. Ahmed, L. Long, N. M. Khashab, F. Huang and J. L. Sessler, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2682–2697 RSC .
H. N. Nguyen, E. T. Nadres, B. G. Alamani and D. F. Rodrigues, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 6616–6628 RSC .
S. Nam and D. Mooney, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 11336–11384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gomez-Lopez, S. Panchireddy, B. Grignard, I. Calvo, C. Jerome, C. Detrembleur and H. Sardon, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 9541–9562 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, X. Chen, Q. M. Zhang and D. Q. Tan, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 44, 29–47 CrossRef .
N. Patil, C. Jérôme and C. Detrembleur, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2018, 82, 34–91 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. Zhou, Y. Liu, L. Li, Y. Liu and Q. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 6369–6400 RSC .
P. Rohland, E. Schröter, O. Nolte, G. R. Newkome, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2022, 125, 101474 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Genene, W. Mammo, E. Wang and M. R. Andersson, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807275 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Khokhar, S. Jadoun, R. Arif and S. Jabin, Polym.-Plast. Technol. Mater., 2021, 60, 465–487 Search PubMed .
Q. Li and Z. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 962–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, W. Fu and H. Chen, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2022, 4, 4609–4623 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, V. G. Gregoriou, N. Gasparini and C. L. Chochos, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 4465–4483 RSC .
N. Yaragatti and A. Patnaik, Mater. Today: Proc., 2021, 44, 4150–4157 CAS .
G. D. Goh, Y. L. Yap, H. K. J. Tan, S. L. Sing, G. L. Goh and W. Y. Yeong, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2020, 45, 113–133 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, W. P. Fahy, S. Kim, H. Kim, N. Zhao, L. Pilato, A. Kafi, S. Bateman and J. H. Koo, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 111, 100638 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yuan, S. Li, J. Zhu and Y. Tang, Composites, Part B, 2021, 219, 108903 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Potara, M. Focsan, A.-M. Craciun, I. Botiz and S. Astilean, in New Polymer Nanocomposites for Environmental Remediation, ed. C. M. Hussain and A. K. Mishra, Elsevier,  2018, pp. 361–387 Search PubMed .
H. Wei, H. Wang, A. Li, D. Cui, Z. Zhao, L. Chu, X. Wei, L. Wang, D. Pan, J. Fan, Y. Li, J. Zhang, C. Liu, S. Wei and Z. Guo, ChemNanoMat, 2020, 6, 174–184 CrossRef CAS .
V. Hasija, V.-H. Nguyen, A. Kumar, P. Raizada, V. Krishnan, A. A. P. Khan, P. Singh, E. Lichtfouse, C. Wang and P. Thi Huong, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 413, 125324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Abdelmoaty, T.-D. Tessema, F. A. Choudhury, O. M. El-Kadri and H. M. El-Kaderi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16049–16058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kundu and N. Karak, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 438, 135575 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khan, S. F. Ali Shah, K. Majeed, I. Hameed, M. Najam, M. Hasan, M. Ullah, M. S. Khan, Z. Ahmad and M. S. Akhtar, Chemosphere, 2022, 304, 135236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Han, S. Chen and F. Jiao, Compos. Commun., 2021, 28, 100914 CrossRef .
H. Wang, Y. Yao, Z. He, W. Rao, L. Hu, S. Chen, J. Lin, J. Gao, P. Zhang, X. Sun, X. Wang, Y. Cui, Q. Wang, S. Dong, G. Chen and J. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901337 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yuan, Y. Wang, T. Li, P. Ma, S. Zhang, M. Du, M. Chen, W. Dong and W. Ming, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2018, 164, 153–159 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Hasseb, N. D. T. Abdel Ghani, O. R. Shehab and R. M. El Nashar, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2022, 31, 100848 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Ghoorchian, Z. Amouzegar, M. Moradi, S. Khalili, A. Afkhami, T. Madrakian and M. Ahmadi, Conductive Polymers in Analytical Chemistry, American Chemical Society,  2022, vol. 1405, pp. 165–184 Search PubMed .
G. J. Soufi, S. Iravani and R. S. Varma, Analyst, 2021, 146, 3087–3100 RSC .
X. Wang, G. Chen, P. Zhang and Q. Jia, Anal. Methods, 2021, 13, 1660–1671 RSC .
T. Leigh and P. Fernandez-Trillo, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2020, 4, 291–310 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zarrintaj, M. Jouyandeh, M. R. Ganjali, B. S. Hadavand, M. Mozafari, S. S. Sheiko, M. Vatankhah-Varnoosfaderani, T. J. Gutiérrez and M. R. Saeb, Eur. Polym. J., 2019, 117, 402–423 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, L. Liu, F. Zhang, J. Leng and Y. Liu, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 97, 864–883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nezakati, A. Seifalian, A. Tan and A. M. Seifalian, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6766–6843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Thadepalli, Mater. Today: Proc, 2022, 55, 330–336 CAS .
M. Harijan and M. Singh, J. Mol. Recognit., 2022, 35, e2944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yuksel and S. Tektas, J. Microencapsul., 2022, 39, 176–196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhao, C. Huang, X. Yue, X. Li, P. Zhou, A. Wu, C. Chen, Y. Qu and C. Zhang, Mater. Des., 2022, 220, 110850 CrossRef CAS .
S. Noreen, J.-X. Ma, M. Saeed, F. Pervaiz, M. F. Hanif, B. Ahmed, M. I. Farooq, F. Akram, M. Safdar, A. Madni, M. Naveed and L. Chang-Xing, Drug Delivery Transl. Res., 2022, 12, 2649–2666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Babutan, A.-D. Lucaci and I. Botiz, Polymers, 2021, 13, 1552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. S. Mural, A. Banerjee, M. S. Rana, A. Shukla, B. Padmanabhan, S. Bhadra, G. Madras and S. Bose, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17635–17648 RSC .
H. Luo, X.-Q. Yin, P.-F. Tan, Z.-P. Gu, Z.-M. Liu and L. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2021, 9, 2802–2815 RSC .
M. Alavi and M. Rai, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2019, 103, 8669–8676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. He, X. Ye and T. Cui, Microsyst. Nanoeng., 2021, 7, 1–23 CrossRef PubMed .
I. M. Handrea-Dragan, A. Vulpoi, C. Farcău and I. Botiz, Nanomaterials, 2022, 12, 1084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, B. Haehnle, X. V. der Laan, A. J. C. Kuehne, I. Botiz, P. N. Stavrinou and N. Stingelin, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 2230–2237 RSC .
A. M. E. Arefin, N. R. Khatri, N. Kulkarni and P. F. Egan, Polymers, 2021, 13, 1499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, S. Jambhulkar, Y. Zhu, D. Ravichandran, M. Kakarla, B. Vernon, D. G. Lott, J. L. Cornella, O. Shefi, G. Miquelard-Garnier, Y. Yang and K. Song, Composites, Part B, 2021, 223, 109102 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, W. Shou, L. Makatura, W. Matusik and K. (Kelvin) Fu, Matter, 2022, 5, 43–76 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bagheri, C. M. Fellows and C. Boyer, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2003701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. H. Mohd Yusoff, L.-R. Irene Teo, S. J. Phang, V.-L. Wong, K. H. Cheah and S.-S. Lim, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 132311 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fu, H. Li, J. Gong, Z. Fan, A. T. Smith, K. Shen, T. O. Khalfalla, H. Huang, X. Qian, J. R. McCutcheon and L. Sun, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2022, 126, 101506 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Alshebly, M. Nafea, M. S. Mohamed Ali and H. A. F. Almurib, Eur. Polym. J., 2021, 159, 110708 CrossRef CAS .
P. Imrie and J. Jin, J. Polym. Sci., 2022, 60, 149–174 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallakpour, F. Tabesh and C. M. Hussain, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 301, 102605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Brocchini, K. James, V. Tangpasuthadol and J. Kohn, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 1998, 42, 66–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. F. Holmes, M. Bohrer and J. Kohn, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2008, 33, 787–796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Wallner, W. Platzer and R. W. Lang, Sol. Energy, 2005, 79, 593–602 CrossRef CAS .
X. Song, B. Gan, S. Qi, H. Guo, C. Y. Tang, Y. Zhou and C. Gao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 3559–3569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, H. Guo, M. Qin, Y. Wang, J. Zhao, H. Sun, H. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Zhou, A. Facchetti, X. Lu, M. Zhou and X. Guo, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 7988–8001 CrossRef CAS .

          I. Botiz, C. Leordean and N. Stingelin, Semiconducting Polymers: Controlled Synthesis and Microstructure, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2017, pp. 187–218 Search PubMed .
I. Botiz, S. Astilean and N. Stingelin, Polym. Int., 2016, 65, 157–163 CrossRef CAS .
I. Botiz and N. Stingelin, Materials, 2014, 7, 2273–2300 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Noriega, J. Rivnay, K. Vandewal, F. P. Koch, N. Stingelin, P. Smith, M. F. Toney and A. Salleo, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1038–1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kirillova, T. R. Yeazel, D. Asheghali, S. R. Petersen, S. Dort, K. Gall and M. L. Becker, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 11238–11304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hashimoto, K. Tsutsumi and Y. Funaki, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 6869–6872 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. U. Fischer, K. Tremel, A.-K. Saur, S. Link, N. Kayunkid, M. Brinkmann, D. Herrero-Carvajal, J. T. L. Navarrete, M. C. R. Delgado and S. Ludwigs, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 4924–4931 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Baklar, F. Koch, A. Kumar, E. Buchaca Domingo, M. Campoy-Quiles, K. Feldman, L. Yu, P. Wöbkenberg, J. Ball, R. M. Wilson, I. McCulloch, T. Kreouzis, M. Heeney, T. Anthopoulos, P. Smith and N. Stingelin, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3942–3947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kofinas and R. E. Cohen, Macromolecules, 1995, 28, 336–343 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Tomasko, H. Li, D. Liu, X. Han, M. J. Wingert, L. J. Lee and K. W. Koelling, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2003, 42, 6431–6456 CrossRef CAS .
I. Botiz, M.-A. Codescu, C. Farcau, C. Leordean, S. Astilean, C. Silva and N. Stingelin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2513–2518 RSC .
C. Müller, N. D. Zhigadlo, A. Kumar, M. A. Baklar, J. Karpinski, P. Smith, T. Kreouzis and N. Stingelin, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 1221–1225 CrossRef .
G. W. Peterson, D. T. Lee, H. F. Barton, T. H. Epps and G. N. Parsons, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 6, 605–621 CrossRef CAS .
A. Milella, R. D. Mundo, F. Palumbo, P. Favia, F. Fracassi and R. d’Agostino, Plasma Process. Polym., 2009, 6, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
O. Todor-Boer, I. Petrovai, R. Tarcan, A. Vulpoi, L. David, S. Astilean and I. Botiz, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 1757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Lawrence, Phys. Fluids, 1988, 31, 2786 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Extrand, Polym. Eng. Sci., 1994, 34, 390–394 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Hall, P. Underhill and J. M. Torkelson, Polym. Eng. Sci., 1998, 38, 2039–2045 CrossRef CAS .
J. Danglad-Flores, S. Eickelmann and H. Riegler, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2018, 179, 257–264 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mouhamad, P. Mokarian-Tabari, N. Clarke, R. A. L. Jones and M. Geoghegan, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 123513 CrossRef .
K. E. Strawhecker, S. K. Kumar, J. F. Douglas and A. Karim, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 4669–4672 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. DeLongchamp, B. M. Vogel, Y. Jung, M. C. Gurau, C. A. Richter, O. A. Kirillov, J. Obrzut, D. A. Fischer, S. Sambasivan, L. J. Richter and E. K. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5610–5612 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Wang, W. Mo, H. Tang, Z. Cheng, Y. Chen, S. Zhang, H. Ma, B. Li and X. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910275 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shojaeiarani, D. S. Bajwa and N. M. Stark, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 190, 139–147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, D. Du, X. Guan and J. Ouyang, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 481–488 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-F. Yao, Z.-Y. Wang, H.-T. Wu, Y. Lu, Q.-Y. Li, L. Zou, J.-Y. Wang and J. Pei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 17467–17471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wasapinyokul, T. Panjasamanwong, W. Ponkasemsuk, C. Sriprachuabwong and T. Lomas, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2020, 137, 48356 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, G. Giri, A. L. Ayzner, A. P. Zoombelt, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, J. Chen, D. Nordlund, M. F. Toney, J. Huang and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3005 CrossRef PubMed .
E.-S. Shin, Y. H. Ha, E. Gann, Y.-J. Lee, S.-K. Kwon, C. R. McNeill, Y.-Y. Noh and Y.-H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13774–13782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-K. Kim, S.-Y. Jang, G. Pace, M. Caironi, W.-T. Park, D. Khim, J. Kim, D.-Y. Kim and Y.-Y. Noh, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 8345–8353 CrossRef CAS .
V. Chaudhary, R. K. Pandey, R. Prakash, N. Kumar and A. K. Singh, Synth. Met., 2019, 258, 116221 CrossRef CAS .
N.-K. Kim, E.-S. Shin, Y.-Y. Noh and D.-Y. Kim, Org. Electron., 2018, 55, 6–14 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, J. H. Carpenter, C.-Z. Li, J.-S. Yu, H. Ade and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 967–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. V. Tho, W.-T. Park, E.-Y. Choi and Y.-Y. Noh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 163303 CrossRef .
A. Kaliyaraj Selva Kumar, Y. Zhang, D. Li and R. G. Compton, Electrochem. Commun., 2020, 121, 106867 CrossRef CAS .
M. Eslamian and F. Soltani-Kordshuli, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2018, 15, 271–280 CrossRef CAS .
N. Karjule, R. Phatake, M. Volokh, I. Hod and M. Shalom, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900401 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, H. Rahman, S. Ranwa, A. Kumar and G. Kumar, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 239, 116213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, G. Fei, H. Xia and H. Zuilhof, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 6930–6935 RSC .
A. Pavinatto, A. V. de Almeida Mattos, A. C. G. Malpass, M. H. Okura, D. T. Balogh and R. C. Sanfelice, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 151, 1004–1011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dan and A. L. Elias, Adv.
Healthcare Mater., 2020, 9, 2000380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Meng, Q. Jiang, K. Cai and L. Chen, Org. Electron., 2019, 64, 79–85 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, R. Kabe, N. Nishimura, K. Jinnai and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803713 CrossRef PubMed .
R. S. Brum, P. R. Monich, M. C. Fredel, G. Contri, S. D. A. S. Ramoa, R. S. Magini and C. A. M. Benfatti, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2018, 29, 132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Honma, K. Itoh, H. Masunaga, A. Fujiwara, T. Nishizaki, S. Iguchi and T. Sasaki, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1700490 CrossRef .
L. Chen, S. Chi, K. Zhao, J. Liu, X. Yu and Y. Han, Polymer, 2016, 104, 123–129 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, M. Kappl, I. Liebewirth, M. Müller, K. Kirchhoff, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 417–420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sirringhaus, P. J. Brown, R. H. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. M. W. Langeveld-Voss, A. J. H. Spiering, R. A. J. Janssen and E. W. Meijer, Synth. Met., 2000, 111–112, 129–132 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, X. Yu, R. Li, A. Amassian and Y. Han, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 9842–9848 RSC .

          C. J. Brinker, in Chemical Solution Deposition of Functional Oxide Thin Films, ed. T. Schneller, R. Waser, M. Kosec and D. Payne, Springer, Vienna,  2013, pp. 233–261 Search PubMed .
M. Faustini, B. Louis, P. A. Albouy, M. Kuemmel and D. Grosso, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7637–7645 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Khedkar and S. Radhakrishnan, Thin Solid Films, 1997, 303, 167–172 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vital, M. Vayer, T. Tillocher, R. Dussart, M. Boufnichel and C. Sinturel, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 393, 127–133 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sathish, B. C. Shekar and R. Sathyamoorthy, Phys. Proc., 2013, 49, 166–176 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li and I. Zhitomirsky, Prog. Org. Coat., 2020, 148, 105883 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sharma, I. Rawal, A. Rajpal, A. Khokhar, V. Kumar and P. K. Goyal, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2022, 33, 14071–14085 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, J. Zhang, S. Xiong and Y. Zhao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 99, 221–225 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, T. Marszalek, P. Wucher, Z. Wang, L. Veith, H. Lu, H.-J. Räder, P. M. Beaujuge, P. W. M. Blom and W. Pisula, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1805594 CrossRef .
Q.-Y. Li, Z.-F. Yao, Y. Lu, S. Zhang, Z. Ahmad, J.-Y. Wang, X. Gu and J. Pei, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 2000080 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sinturel, M. Vayer, F. Mahut, F. Bonnier, I. Chourpa and E. Munnier, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 608, 125591 CrossRef CAS .
F. Aziz and A. F. Ismail, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2015, 39, 416–425 CrossRef CAS .
A. Reale, L. La Notte, L. Salamandra, G. Polino, G. Susanna, T. M. Brown, F. Brunetti and A. Di Carlo, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 385–406 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bose, S. S. Keller, T. S. Alstrøm, A. Boisen and K. Almdal, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 6911–6919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Susanna, L. Salamandra, T. M. Brown, A. Di Carlo, F. Brunetti and A. Reale, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1775–1778 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Satam, C. W. Irvin, A. W. Lang, J. C. R. Jallorina, M. L. Shofner, J. R. Reynolds and J. C. Meredith, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 10637–10644 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bruening and D. Dotzauer, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 449–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Carey, C. Jones, F. Le Moal, D. Deganello and F. Torrisi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 19948–19956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Meng, C. H. Lau, Y. Xue, R. Zhang, B. Cao and P. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8462–8468 RSC .
C. Schlaich, M. Li, C. Cheng, I. S. Donskyi, L. Yu, G. Song, E. Osorio, Q. Wei and R. Haag, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701254 CrossRef .
L.-M. Chen, Z. Hong, W. L. Kwan, C.-H. Lu, Y.-F. Lai, B. Lei, C.-P. Liu and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4744–4752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, X. Zhang, L. Zhang and W. Xie, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 37042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ma, J. Zhou, Z. Wang and Y. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 598, 117656 CrossRef CAS .
D. Khim, A. Luzio, G. E. Bonacchini, G. Pace, M.-J. Lee, Y.-Y. Noh and M. Caironi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705463 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Xiao, B. Kang, S. B. Lee, L. M. A. Perdigão, A. Luci, D. A. Warr, S. P. Senanayak, M. Nikolka, M. Statz, Y. Wu, A. Sadhanala, S. Schott, R. Carey, Q. Wang, M. Lee, C. Kim, A. Onwubiko, C. Jellett, H. Liao, W. Yue, K. Cho, G. Costantini, I. McCulloch and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-Y. Guo, Y. Tsai, T.-F. Yu and W.-Y. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 12006–12015 RSC .
J. A. Reinspach, Y. Diao, G. Giri, T. Sachse, K. England, Y. Zhou, C. Tassone, B. J. Worfolk, M. Presselt, M. F. Toney, S. Mannsfeld and Z. Bao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1742–1751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-J. N. Wang, F. Molina-Lopez, H. Zhang, J. Xu, H.-C. Wu, J. Lopez, L. Shaw, J. Mun, Q. Zhang, S. Wang, A. Ehrlich and Z. Bao, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 4976–4985 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shin, T. R. Hong, T. W. Lee, A. Kim, Y. H. Kim, M. J. Cho and D. H. Choi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6031–6035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Giri, D. M. DeLongchamp, J. Reinspach, D. A. Fischer, L. J. Richter, J. Xu, S. Benight, A. Ayzner, M. He, L. Fang, G. Xue, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2350–2359 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Worfolk, S. C. Andrews, S. Park, J. Reinspach, N. Liu, M. F. Toney, S. C. B. Mannsfeld and Z. Bao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 14138–14143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shaw, P. Hayoz, Y. Diao, J. A. Reinspach, J. W. F. To, M. F. Toney, R. T. Weitz and Z. Bao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9285–9296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Haase, J. Zessin, K. Zoumboulis, M. Müller, M. Hambsch and S. C. B. Mannsfeld, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1900067 CrossRef .
G. J. Dunderdale, S. J. Davidson, A. J. Ryan and O. O. Mykhaylyk, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3372 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, L. An, S. Khuje, J. Tan, Y. Hu, Y. Huang, D. Petit, D. Faghihi, J. Yu and S. Ren, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabi7410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Todor-Boer, I. Petrovai, R. Tarcan, L. David, S. Astilean and I. Botiz, Thin Solid Films, 2020, 697, 137780 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, C. Zuo, J.-X. Zhong, W.-Q. Wu, L. Shen and L. Ding, Adv. Energy Mater, 2021, 11, 2100378 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Kim, S. Lee, M. R. Niazi, K. Hwang, M.-C. Tang, D.-H. Lim, J.-S. Kang, D.-M. Smilgies, A. Amassian and D.-Y. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 36417–36427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Sunday, M. Dolejsi, A. B. Chang, L. J. Richter, R. Li, R. J. Kline, P. F. Nealey and R. H. Grubbs, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 17476–17486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. Kettwig, D. Frizlaff, P. Otto, G. Naumann, K. Harre and Y. Joseph, 2019 42nd International Spring Seminar on Electronics Technology (ISSE),  2019, pp. 1–5 Search PubMed .
H. Yang and P. Jiang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13173–13182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, M. Kaplan, H. W. Ro, S. Engmann, D. A. Fischer, D. M. DeLongchamp, L. J. Richter, E. Gann, L. Thomsen, C. R. McNeill and X. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1924–1936 CrossRef CAS .
A. Basu, M. R. Niazi, A. D. Scaccabarozzi, H. Faber, Z. Fei, D. H. Anjum, A. F. Paterson, O. Boltalina, M. Heeney and T. D. Anthopoulos, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 15368–15376 RSC .
S.-R. Tseng, H.-F. Meng, K.-C. Lee and S.-F. Horng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 153308 CrossRef .
Y.-H. Chang, S.-R. Tseng, C.-Y. Chen, H.-F. Meng, E.-C. Chen, S.-F. Horng and C.-S. Hsu, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 741–746 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lin, L. Zhang, H. Zhao, X. Xu, K. Zhou, S. Zhang, L. Gou, B. Fan, L. Zhang, H. Yan, X. Gu, L. Ying, F. Huang, Y. Cao and W. Ma, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 277–284 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Schneider, K. L. Gu, H. Yan, M. Abdelsamie, Z. Bao and M. F. Toney, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 5951–5961 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. Liu, J. Wu, H. Tang, H. Wang, Q. Yang, Y. Fu and Z. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 10239–10248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Wang, B. Lin, Z. Bi, X. Zhou, H. B. Naveed, K. Zhou, H. Yan, Z. Tang and W. Ma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000826 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ding, J. Liu and T. A. L. Harris, AIChE J., 2016, 62, 2508–2524 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. K. Kyaw, L. S. Lay, G. W. Peng, J. Changyun and Z. Jie, Chem. Commun., 2015, 52, 358–361 RSC .
J. Chang, Z. Lin, J. Li, S. L. Lim, F. Wang, G. Li, J. Zhang and J. Wu, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2015, 1, 1500036 CrossRef .
R. Wang, H. Kwon, X. Tang, H. Ye, C. E. Park, J. Kim, H. Kong and S. H. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 529, 147198 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chang, P. Sonar, Z. Lin, C. Zhang, J. Zhang, Y. Hao and J. Wu, Org. Electron., 2016, 36, 113–119 CrossRef CAS .
C. Amruth, M. Colella, J. Griffin, J. Kingsley, N. Scarratt, B. Luszczynska and J. Ulanski, Micromachines, 2019, 10, 53 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Vu, G. Nagesh, N. Yousefi, J. F. Trant, D. S.-K. Ting, M. J. Ahamed and S. Rondeau-Gagné, Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 6676–6683 RSC .
E. B. Creel, K. Tjiptowidjojo, J. Alex Lee, K. M. Livingston, P. Randall Schunk, N. S. Bell, A. Serov and D. L. Wood III, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 610, 474–485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Iacob, A. Verma, T. Buchner, Y. Sheima, R. Katzschmann and D. M. Opris, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2022, 4, 150–157 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, S. Ferdous, E. Schaible, A. Hexemer, M. Church, X. Ding, C. Wang and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 886–891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Wienhold, V. Körstgens, S. Grott, X. Jiang, M. Schwartzkopf, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Solar RRL, 2020, 4, 2000086 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hong, J. Lee, H. Kang and K. Lee, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 112, 27–35 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, G. Wang, Y. Wang, T. Xiao, M. A. Adil, G. Lu, J. Zhang and Z. Wei, Solar RRL, 2019, 3, 1800333 CrossRef .
M. Helgesen, J. E. Carlé and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1664–1669 CrossRef CAS .
D. I. Kutsarov, E. New, F. Bausi, A. Zoladek-Lemanczyk, F. A. Castro and S. R. P. Silva, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 161, 388–396 CrossRef CAS .
S.-I. Na, Y.-H. Seo, Y.-C. Nah, S.-S. Kim, H. Heo, J.-E. Kim, N. Rolston, R. H. Dauskardt, M. Gao, Y. Lee and D. Vak, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1805825 CrossRef .
S. Song, K. T. Lee, C. W. Koh, H. Shin, M. Gao, H. Y. Woo, D. Vak and J. Y. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3248–3255 RSC .
D. Khim, G.-S. Ryu, W.-T. Park, H. Kim, M. Lee and Y.-Y. Noh, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2752–2759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Khim, H. Han, K.-J. Baeg, J. Kim, S.-W. Kwak, D.-Y. Kim and Y.-Y. Noh, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4302–4308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. Khim, D.-Y. Kim and Y.-Y. Noh, 2014 21st International Workshop on Active-Matrix Flatpanel Displays and Devices (AM-FPD),  2014, pp. 57–60 Search PubMed .
M. Li, I. Katsouras, C. Piliego, G. Glasser, I. Lieberwirth, P. W. M. Blom and D. M. de Leeuw, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 7695–7702 RSC .
D. Kim, M. Yoon and J. Lee, Polymers, 2022, 14, 2 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Hong, Y. Yoo, Y. H. Kang, J. Ryu, S. Y. Cho and K.-S. Jang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 11385–11391 RSC .
B. Nketia-Yawson, H.-S. Lee, H. J. Son, B. Kim and Y.-Y. Noh, Org. Electron., 2016, 29, 88–93 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kawahara, P. A. Ersman, I. Engquist and M. Berggren, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 469–474 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, C. T. Hong, O. H. Kwon, Y. Yoo, Y. H. Kang, J. Y. Lee, S. Y. Cho and K.-S. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 6550–6556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ge, Z. Liu, S. B. Lee, X. Wang, G. Zhang, H. Lu, K. Cho and L. Qiu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 21510–21517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Lee, B. Kang, D. Kim, C. Park, S. Kim, M. Lee, W. B. Lee and K. Cho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 47153–47161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Murphy, L. Yang, S. Ray, L. Yu, S. Knox and N. Stingelin, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 093523 CrossRef .
Z. Li, L. Zhang, R. Qi, F. Xie and S. Qi, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2016, 133, 43554 Search PubMed .
L. J. Richter, D. M. DeLongchamp and A. Amassian, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6332–6366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tracz, T. Pakula and J. K. Jeszka, Mater. Sci.-Pol., 2004, 22, 415–421 CAS .
M. J. Lee, D. Gupta, N. Zhao, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 932–940 CrossRef CAS .
T. Schuettfort, L. Thomsen and C. R. McNeill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1092–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tang, W. Wu, D.-M. Smilgies, K. Matyjaszewski and T. Kowalewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11802–11809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Schuettfort, B. Watts, L. Thomsen, M. Lee, H. Sirringhaus and C. R. McNeill, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1849–1864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Lee, Z. Chen, R. di Pietro, M. Heeney and H. Sirringhaus, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2075–2082 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, X. Gao, Y. Sun and Y. Han, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 421–428 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, J.-G. Liu, Y. Sun, R.-B. Xing and Y.-C. Han, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2013, 24, 23–27 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, R. Xing, J. Liu and Y. Han, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2013, 31, 748–759 CrossRef CAS .
O. N. Oliveira, L. Caseli and K. Ariga, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 6459–6513 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Tian, J. Sun, Y. Li and X. H. Zhang, Mod. Phys. Lett. B, 2019, 33, 1950137 CrossRef .
S. A. Hussain, B. Dey, D. Bhattacharjee and N. Mehta, Heliyon, 2018, 4, e01038 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Nizioł, K. Makyła-Juzak, A. Radko, R. Ekiert, J. Zemła, N. Górska, A. Chachaj-Brekiesz, M. Marzec, H. Harańczyk and P. Dynarowicz-Latka, Polymer, 2019, 178, 121643 CrossRef .
V. Saxena, S. Chandran, S. Choudhury, A. Singh, K. Ganapathi, M. Kaur, Tanvi, K. P. Muthe and S. C. Gadkari, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 188–194 CrossRef CAS .
R. da Rocha Rodrigues, L. Caseli and L. O. Péres, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 10587–10596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sharma, H. S. Dutta and M. Dhayal, Appl. Surf. Sci. Adv., 2022, 10, 100264 CrossRef .
M. Ito, Y. Yamashita, T. Mori, M. Chiba, T. Futae, J. Takeya, S. Watanabe and K. Ariga, Langmuir, 2022, 38, 5237–5247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. M. Tripathi, M. Pandey, S. Sadakata, S. Nagamatsu, W. Takashima, S. Hayase and S. S. Pandey, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 123301 CrossRef .

          F. Bensebaa, in Interface Science and Technology, ed. F. Bensebaa, Elsevier,  2013, vol. 19, pp. 185–277 Search PubMed .
M. Singh, H. M. Haverinen, P. Dhagat and G. E. Jabbour, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 673–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jeon, S. Park, J. Nam, Y. Kang and J.-M. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1813–1818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Holdcroft, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1753–1765 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hermerschmidt, P. Papagiorgis, A. Savva, C. Christodoulou, G. Itskos and S. A. Choulis, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 130, 474–480 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawase, T. Shimoda, C. Newsome, H. Sirringhaus and R. H. Friend, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 438–439, 279–287 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Shah, D.-G. Lee, B.-Y. Lee and S. Hur, IEEE Access, 2021, 9, 140079–140102 Search PubMed .
E. Binetti, C. Ingrosso, M. Striccoli, P. Cosma, A. Agostiano, K. Pataky, J. Brugger and M. L. Curri, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 075701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C, B. Luszczynska, B. G. R. Dupont and Z. Sieradzki, Disp. Imaging, 2017, 2, 339–358 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, T. Cui and K. Varahramyan, Solid-State Electron., 2003, 47, 1543–1548 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, T. Cui, Y. Liu and K. Varahramyan, Solid-State Electron., 2003, 47, 841–847 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ballarin, A. Fraleoni-Morgera, D. Frascaro, S. Marazzita, C. Piana and L. Setti, Synth. Met., 2004, 146, 201–205 CrossRef CAS .
A. Teichler, Z. Shu, A. Wild, C. Bader, J. Nowotny, G. Kirchner, S. Harkema, J. Perelaer and U. S. Schubert, Eur. Polym. J., 2013, 49, 2186–2195 CrossRef CAS .
E. Tekin, H. Wijlaars, E. Holder, D. A. M. Egbe and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 4294–4298 RSC .
A. Teichler, J. Perelaer and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1910–1925 RSC .
A. Al-Halhouli, H. Qitouqa, A. Alashqar and J. Abu-Khalaf, Sens. Rev., 2018, 38, 438–452 CrossRef .
V. Beedasy and P. J. Smith, Materials, 2020, 13, 704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Karunakaran, G. M. Arumugam, W. Yang, S. Ge, S. N. Khan, X. Lin and G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13873–13902 RSC .
S. Chung, K. Cho and T. Lee, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801445 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Bharathan and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 2660–2662 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, A. Mongare, A. Plant and D. Ryu, Polymers, 2021, 13, 935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Grozev, I. Botiz and G. Reiter, Eur. Phys. J. E, 2008, 27, 63–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Darko, I. Botiz, G. Reiter, D. W. Breiby, J. W. Andreasen, S. V. Roth, D. M. Smilgies, E. Metwalli and C. M. Papadakis, Phys. Rev. E, 2009, 79, 041802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Reiter, I. Botiz, L. Graveleau, N. Grozev, K. Albrecht, A. Mourran and M. Möller, in Lecture Notes in Physics: Progress in Understanding of Polymer Crystallization, ed. G. Reiter and G. R. Strobl, Springer, Heidelberg,  2007, vol. 714, pp. 179–200 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, G. Ding, K. Wu, C. Cai and J. Liu, Macromol. Res., 2022, 30, 230–237 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. R. Aich, S. Chang, K. Lochhead and Y. Tao, Org. Electron., 2022, 105, 106494 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, X. Wang, H. Huang, X. Yang, T. Zhou and Z. Jiang, Optik, 2022, 265, 169488 CrossRef .
A. Luzio, J. Martin, C. H. Cheng, N. Stingelin, M. F. Toney, A. Salleo and M. Caironi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 15848–15857 RSC .
R. Marcelo do Nascimento, J. E. F. S. Rodrigues, B. Z. Favarin, A. P. Ramos, P. Ciancaglini, C. Pecharroman, R. Rahouadj, A. C. Hernandes and I. H. Bechtold, Surf. Interfaces, 2022, 31, 102048 CrossRef CAS .
V. Savikhin, L. K. Jagadamma, L. J. Purvis, I. Robertson, S. D. Oosterhout, C. J. Douglas, I. D. W. Samuel and M. F. Toney, iScience, 2018, 2, 182–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Kim, N.-K. Kim, W.-T. Park, C. Liu, Y.-Y. Noh and D.-Y. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807786 CrossRef .
Y. Joo, V. Agarkar, S. H. Sung, B. M. Savoie and B. W. Boudouris, Science, 2018, 359, 1391–1395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kim, C. Lee, W. Lee, H. Kim and Y. Kim, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2022, 4, 130–137 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dingler, K. Dirnberger and S. Ludwigs, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2019, 40, 1800601 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chowdhury, M. T. Sajjad, V. Savikhin, N. Hergué, K. B. Sutija, S. D. Oosterhout, M. F. Toney, P. Dubois, A. Ruseckas and I. D. W. Samuel, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 12441–12451 RSC .
S. Karuthedath, A. Melianas, Z. Kan, V. Pranculis, M. Wohlfahrt, J. I. Khan, J. Gorenflot, Y. Xia, O. Inganäs, V. Gulbinas, M. Kemerink and F. Laquai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7428–7438 RSC .
Y.-J. Heo, H.-G. Jeong, J. Kim, B. Lim, J. Kim, Y. Kim, B. Kang, J.-M. Yun, K. Cho and D.-Y. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 49886–49894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, C. Musumeci, J. Bergqvist, W. Ma, F. Gao, Z. Tang, S. Bai, Y. Jin, C. Zhu, R. Kroon, C. Wang, M. R. Andersson, L. Hou, O. Inganäs and E. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3835–3843 RSC .
S. Y. Son, T. Park and W. You, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 4541–4550 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lombeck, A. Sepe, R. Thomann, R. H. Friend and M. Sommer, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8087–8096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. S. U. Fischer, N. Kayunkid, D. Trefz, S. Ludwigs and M. Brinkmann, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 3974–3982 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Kang, Y.-S. Kim, W. B. Kim, D.-Y. Kim and Y.-Y. Noh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9043–9050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sommer, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3088–3098 RSC .
M. Brinkmann, L. Hartmann, L. Biniek, K. Tremel and N. Kayunkid, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 9–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Botiz, A. B. F. Martinson and S. B. Darling, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 8756–8761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Botiz and S. B. Darling, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 8211–8217 CrossRef CAS .
I. Botiz, R. D. Schaller, R. Verduzco and S. B. Darling, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9260–9266 CrossRef CAS .
R. Verduzco, I. Botiz, D. L. Pickel, S. M. Kilbey, K. Hong, E. Dimasi and S. B. Darling, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 530–539 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sinturel, M. Vayer, M. Morris and M. A. Hillmyer, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 5399–5415 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Chou, W.-C. Hsu, Y. Yang, K. S. Schanze, S.-C. Luo and C. Chen, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2021, 222, 2100135 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alvarez-Fernandez, M. J. Fornerod, B. Reid and S. Guldin, Langmuir, 2022, 38, 3297–3304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Botiz, N. Grozev, H. Schlaad and G. Reiter, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 993–1002 RSC .
I. Botiz, H. Schlaad and G. Reiter, Adv. Polym. Sci., 2011, 242, 117–149 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jahanshahi, I. Botiz, R. Reiter, H. Scherer and G. Reiter, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 4490–4494 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jahanshahi, I. Botiz, R. Reiter, R. Thomann, B. Heck, R. Shokri, W. Stille and G. Reiter, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 1470–1476 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, Z. Lei, R. Yang, W. Xing, P. Tao, W. Shang, B. Fu, C. Song and T. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 10605–10615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. F. D. P. Francisco, M. V. Lorevice, P. I. C. Claro and R. F. Gouveia, Ind. Crops Prod., 2022, 177, 114459 CrossRef CAS .
A. Striolo, A. Favaro, N. Elvassore, A. Bertucco and V. Di Noto, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2003, 27, 283–295 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Huang, J. Gierschner, J. P. Schmidtke, R. H. Friend and D. Beljonne, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 205311 CrossRef .
S. Guha, M. Chandrasekhar, U. Scherf and M. Knaapila, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2011, 248, 1083–1090 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hashizume and M. Hirashima, Langmuir, 2021, 37, 4403–4410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Meng, X. Ren, J. Wu, E. Bilotti, M. J. Reece and H. Yan, J. Materiomics, 2022, 8, 640–648 CrossRef .
W. Lee, Y. H. Kang, J. Y. Lee, K.-S. Jang and S. Y. Cho, Mater. Today Commun., 2017, 10, 41–45 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Briscoe and D. Tabor, J. Adhes., 1978, 9, 145–155 CrossRef CAS .
B. Briscoe and A. C. Smith, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys, 1982, 15, 579–594 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Priezjev and S. M. Troian, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 018302 CrossRef PubMed .
N. V. Priezjev, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2009, 80, 031608 CrossRef PubMed .
G. W. Radebaugh, J. L. Murtha, T. N. Julian and J. N. Bondi, Int. J. Pharm., 1988, 45, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Briscoe, B. Scruton and F. R. Willis, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1973, 333, 99–114 CAS .
A. A. Abate, G. T. Vu, A. D. Pezzutti, N. A. García, R. L. Davis, F. Schmid, R. A. Register and D. A. Vega, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 7588–7596 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Nicaise, K. R. Gadelrab, A. T. K. G, C. A. Ross, A. Alexander-Katz and K. K. Berggren, Nano Futures, 2018, 1, 035006 CrossRef .
Z. Qiang, Y. Zhang, J. A. Groff, K. A. Cavicchi and B. D. Vogt, Soft Matter, 2014, 10, 6068–6076 RSC .
C. Zhang, K. A. Cavicchi, R. Li, K. G. Yager, M. Fukuto and B. D. Vogt, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 4213–4219 CrossRef CAS .
G. Singh, K. G. Yager, B. Berry, H.-C. Kim and A. Karim, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10335–10342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Singh, A. Agrawal, W. Wu, A. Masud, E. Armijo, D. Gonzalez, S. Zhou, T. Terlier, C. Zhu, J. Strzalka, K. Matyjaszewski, M. Bockstaller, J. F. Douglas and A. Karim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 12824–12835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Oh, M. Shin, I. S. Kim, H. S. Suh, Y. Kim, J. K. Kim, J. Bang, B. Yeom and J. G. Son, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 8549–8558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, G. Singh, A. Dang, L. Dai, M. R. Bockstaller, B. Akgun, S. Satija and A. Karim, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2013, 34, 1642–1647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Salimi and A. A. Yousefi, Polym. Test, 2003, 22, 699–704 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Sheiko, I. S. Vainilovitch and S. N. Magonov, Polym. Bull., 1991, 25, 499–506 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Bäcklund, H. G. O. Sandberg, R. Österbacka, H. Stubb, M. Torkkeli and R. Serimaa, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1095–1099 CrossRef .
M. Osagawara, K. Funahashi, T. Demura, T. Hagiwara and K. Iwata, Synth. Met., 1986, 14, 61–69 CrossRef .
Y. Nogami, J.-P. Pouget and T. Ishiguro, Synth. Met., 1994, 62, 257–263 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dyreklev, G. Gustafsson, O. Inganäs and H. Stubb, Solid State Commun., 1992, 82, 317–320 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, H.-C. Wu, C. Zhu, A. Ehrlich, L. Shaw, M. Nikolka, S. Wang, F. Molina-Lopez, X. Gu, S. Luo, D. Zhou, Y.-H. Kim, G.-J. N. Wang, K. Gu, V. R. Feig, S. Chen, Y. Kim, T. Katsumata, Y.-Q. Zheng, H. Yan, J. W. Chung, J. Lopez, B. Murmann and Z. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 594–601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Luo, H. Li, B. Du, S. Zhou and Y. Zhu, Org. Electron., 2020, 76, 105451 CrossRef CAS .
B. O’Connor, R. J. Kline, B. R. Conrad, L. J. Richter, D. Gundlach, M. F. Toney and D. M. DeLongchamp, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3697–3705 CrossRef .
K.-P. Tung, C.-C. Chen, P. Lee, Y.-W. Liu, T.-M. Hong, K. C. Hwang, J. H. Hsu, J. D. White and A. C.-M. Yang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7296–7302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Son, J.-H. Kim, E. Song, K. Choi, J. Lee, K. Cho, T.-S. Kim and T. Park, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 2572–2579 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xue, G. Chandler, X. Zhang, R. J. Kline, Z. Fei, M. Heeney, P. J. Diemer, O. D. Jurchescu and B. T. O’Connor, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26726–26734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, G.-J. N. Wang, J. Kang, M. Nikolka, H.-C. Wu, H. Tran, S. Zhang, H. Yan, H. Chen, P. Y. Yuen, J. Mun, R. H. Dauskardt, I. McCulloch, J. B.-H. Tok, X. Gu and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905340 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, H.-C. Wu, J. Mun, R. Ning, W. Wang, G.-J. N. Wang, S. Nikzad, H. Yan, X. Gu, S. Luo, D. Zhou, J. B.-H. Tok and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2104747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ma, T. Ye, T. Zhang, Z. Wang, K. Li, M. Chen, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, S. Ramakrishna and L. Wei, Adv. Mater.
Technol., 2018, 3, 1800033 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, W. Chen, L. Meng, D. Wang and L. Li, Soft Matter, 2020, 16, 3599–3612 RSC .
M. Cakmak, M. Hassan, E. Unsal and C. Martins, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2012, 83, 123901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiong, X. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Xie, J. Lu and Z. Zhang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2021, 138, 50029 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ou and M. Cakmak, Polymer, 2008, 49, 5344–5352 CrossRef CAS .
L. Meng, Y. Lin, J. Xu, X. Chen, X. Li, Q. Zhang, R. Zhang, N. Tian and L. Li, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2015, 33, 754–762 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fernández, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 12–14 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Z. A. Aziz, K. Higashimine, N. Shioya, T. Shimoaka, T. Hasegawa, H. Sakai, V. Vohra and H. Murata, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 37529–37537 RSC .
M. F. Toney, T. P. Russell, J. A. Logan, H. Kikuchi, J. M. Sands and S. K. Kumar, Nature, 1995, 374, 709–711 CrossRef CAS .
I. Stoica, A. I. Barzic, R. M. Albu, R.-D. Rusu and M.-D. Damaceanu, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2022, 33, 870–885 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hamaguchi and K. Yoshino, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 67, 3381–3383 CrossRef CAS .
H. Heil, T. Finnberg, N. von Malm, R. Schmechel and H. von Seggern, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 1636–1641 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hartmann, K. Tremel, S. Uttiya, E. Crossland, S. Ludwigs, N. Kayunkid, C. Vergnat and M. Brinkmann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4047–4057 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kajiya, S. Ozawa, T. Koganezawa and K. Saitow, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7987–7995 CrossRef CAS .
L. Biniek, N. Leclerc, T. Heiser, R. Bechara and M. Brinkmann, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 4014–4023 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vijayakumar, E. Zaborova, L. Biniek, H. Zeng, L. Herrmann, A. Carvalho, O. Boyron, N. Leclerc and M. Brinkmann, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 4942–4953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. W. Lee, W.-C. Li, B.-J. Chen, C.-W. Yang, C.-C. Chang, I. Botiz, G. Reiter, Y. T. Chen, T. L. Lin, J. Tang, J.-H. Jou and A. C.-M. Yang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6658–6666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Brassat and J. K. N. Lindner, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 1901565 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, M. Östblom, T. Johansson and O. Inganäs, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 449, 125–132 CrossRef CAS .
O. Karthaus, L. Gråsjö, N. Maruyama and M. Shimomura, Thin Solid Films, 1998, 327–329, 829–832 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Telford, S. C. Thickett and C. Neto, J. Colloid
Interface Sci., 2017, 507, 453–469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Thickett, C. Neto and A. T. Harris, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3718–3722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, H. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. Lu, L. An and T. Shi, Polymer, 2019, 171, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhou, H. Zheng, G. Li, J. Liu and S. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 436, 839–845 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bhandaru, P. S. Goohpattader, D. Faruqui, R. Mukherjee and A. Sharma, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 3203–3214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Z. Wang, R. Xing and Y. Han, Surf. Sci., 2003, 539, 129–136 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Suh and R. Langer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 1668–1670 CrossRef CAS .
N. Janiszewska, J. Raczkowska, A. Budkowski, K. Gajos, Y. Stetsyshyn, M. Michalik and K. Awsiuk, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 11817–11828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ye, D. Zuev and S. Makarov, Int. Mater. Rev., 2019, 64, 439–477 CrossRef CAS .
I. Botiz, P. Freyberg, N. Stingelin, A. C. M. Yang and G. Reiter, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 2352–2356 CrossRef CAS .
I. Botiz, P. Freyberg, C. Leordean, A.-M. Gabudean, S. Astilean, A. C.-M. Yang and N. Stingelin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4974–4979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Ho and J. D. White, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2019, 735, 136753 CrossRef CAS .
I. Botiz, P. Freyberg, C. Leordean, A.-M. Gabudean, S. Astilean, A. C.-M. Yang and N. Stingelin, Synth. Met., 2015, 199, 33–36 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. AlShetwi, D. Schiefer, M. Sommer and G. Reiter, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2021, 125, 5636–5644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Saad, E. M. Sedqy and R. M. Ahmed, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2021, 179, 109253 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu and P. R. Onck, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 057801 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Kulkarni, R. H. N. Curvers, G. Vantomme, D. J. Broer, A. R. A. Palmans, S. C. J. Meskers and E. W. Meijer, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2005720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rust, D. Jung, A. Hoppe, T. Schoppa, K. Langer and D. Kuckling, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2021, 3, 3831–3842 CrossRef CAS .
M. Burnworth, L. Tang, J. R. Kumpfer, A. J. Duncan, F. L. Beyer, G. L. Fiore, S. J. Rowan and C. Weder, Nature, 2011, 472, 334–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xing, L. Liu, H. Tang, X. Feng, Q. Yang, S. Wang and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4058–4067 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lendlein, H. Jiang, O. Jünger and R. Langer, Nature, 2005, 434, 879–882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sekkat, Appl. Phys. B, 2022, 128, 19 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Wolfram, Polymers and light: fundamentals and technical applications, John Wiley & Sons,  2007 Search PubMed .
D.-P. Song, T. H. Zhao, G. Guidetti, S. Vignolini and R. M. Parker, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 1764–1771 CAS .
Y. Li, R. Ma, L. Zhao, Q. Tao, D. Xiong, Y. An and L. Shi, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 2757–2764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Wong, X. Qiang, A. H. E. Müller and A. H. Gröschel, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2020, 102, 101211 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Cheng, A. M. Mayes and C. A. Ross, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 823–828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Deng, H. Li, F. Liang, J. Zhu, B. Li, X. Xie and Z. Yang, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 5855–5860 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yan, Y. Zhu and W. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 13183–13195 RSC .

          I. W. Hamley, Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and Technology, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,  2002, vol. 1, pp. 457–482 Search PubMed .
X. Feng, S. Nejati, M. G. Cowan, M. E. Tousley, B. R. Wiesenauer, R. D. Noble, M. Elimelech, D. L. Gin and C. O. Osuji, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 150–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ren and Y. Ma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2733–2737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. S. U. Fischer, K. Tremel, M. Sommer, E. J. C. Crossland and S. Ludwigs, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2138–2144 RSC .
G. Liu, A. J. Müller and D. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 3028–3038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Vasilev, G. Reiter, S. Pispas and N. Hadjichristidis, Polymer, 2006, 47, 330–340 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Stewart-Sloan and E. L. Thomas, Eur. Polym. J., 2011, 47, 630–646 CrossRef CAS .
S. Napolitano, Soft Matter, 2020, 16, 5348–5365 RSC .
J. M. Carr, D. S. Langhe, M. T. Ponting, A. Hiltner and E. Baer, J. Mater. Res., 2012, 27, 1326–1350 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Duong, M. F. Toney and A. Salleo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 205205 CrossRef .
Q. Liang, J. Han, C. Song, X. Yu, D.-M. Smilgies, K. Zhao, J. Liu and Y. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15610–15620 RSC .
Q. Zhang, Z. Chen, W. Ma, Z. Xie and Y. Han, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 12560–12571 RSC .
B. Park, H. Kang, Y. H. Ha, J. Kim, J.-H. Lee, K. Yu, S. Kwon, S.-Y. Jang, S. Kim, S. Jeong, S. Hong, S. Byun, S.-K. Kwon, Y.-H. Kim and K. Lee, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2100332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Jordan, L. S. Lerman and J. H. Venable, Nat. New Biol., 1972, 236, 67–70 CAS .
R. S. Werbowyj and D. G. Gray, Macromolecules, 1980, 13, 69–73 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Birshtein, A.
A. Sariban and A. M. Skvortsov, Polymer, 1982, 23, 1481–1488 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Khokhlov and A. N. Semenov, J. Stat. Phys., 1985, 38, 161–182 CrossRef .
G. Fleischer, G. Fytas, D. Vlassopoulos, J. Roovers and N. Hadjichristidis, Phys. A, 2000, 280, 266–278 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mortensen and J. S. Pedersen, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 805–812 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Ku, J. M. Shin, H. Yun, G.-R. Yi, S. G. Jang and B. J. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802961 CrossRef .
A. M. Bodratti and P. Alexandridis, Expert Opin. Drug Delivery, 2018, 15, 1085–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Cherrington and J. Liang, in Design and Manufacture of Plastic Components for Multifunctionality, ed. V. Goodship, B. Middleton and R. Cherrington, William Andrew Publishing, Oxford,  2016, pp. 19–51 Search PubMed .
C. N. Lam and B. D. Olsen, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 2393–2402 RSC .
N. Ise, H. Matsuoka, K. Ito, H. Yoshida and J. Yamanaka, Langmuir, 1990, 6, 296–302 CrossRef CAS .
H. Feil, Y. H. Bae, J. Feijen and S. W. Kim, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 2496–2500 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, C. Weber, U. S. Schubert and R. Hoogenboom, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 109–116 RSC .
A. E. Cohen, N. E. Jackson and J. J. de Pablo, Macromolecules, 2021, 54, 3780–3789 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sponchioni, U. Capasso Palmiero and D. Moscatelli, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 102, 589–605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Kochervinskii, M. A. Gradova, O. V. Gradov, A. A. Maltsev, I. A. Malyshkina, G. A. Kirakosyan, D. A. Kiselev, R. A. Chertovskykh, M. G. Tedoradze, A. I. Zvyagina, B. V. Lokshin and M. I. Buzin, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2022, 300, 721–732 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rahimi, I. Botiz, N. Stingelin, N. Kayunkid, M. Sommer, F. P. V. Koch, H. Nguyen, O. Coulembier, P. Dubois, M. Brinkmann and G. Reiter, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11131–11135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Brambilla, M. Tommasini, I. Botiz, K. Rahimi, J. O. Agumba, N. Stingelin and G. Zerbi, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 6730–6739 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rahimi, I. Botiz, J. O. Agumba, S. Motamen, N. Stingelin and G. Reiter, RSC Adv, 2014, 11121–11123 RSC .
W. Hourani, K. Rahimi, I. Botiz, F. Koch, G. Reiter, P. Lienerth, T. Heiser, J.-L. Bubendorff and L. Simon, Nanoscale, 2014, 4774–4780 RSC .
B. Morgan and M. D. Dadmun, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 2773–2780 RSC .
V. Krakoviack, J.-P. Hansen and A. A. Louis, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2003, 67, 041801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hartung, J. Rauch and W. Köhler, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 214904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Inganäs, W. R. Salaneck, J.-E. Österholm and J. Laakso, Synth. Met., 1988, 22, 395–406 CrossRef .
L. A. Ferreira, P. P. Madeira, L. Breydo, C. Reichardt, V. N. Uversky and B. Y. Zaslavsky, J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn., 2016, 34, 92–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Wu and C. C. Hua, Macromolecules, 2022, 55, 5382–5389 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, G. Yang, D. Zou, Y. Hui, K. Nigam, A. P. J. Middelberg and C.-X. Zhao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 4134–4149 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Martínez Rivas, M. Tarhini, W. Badri, K. Miladi, H. Greige-Gerges, Q. A. Nazari, S. A. Galindo Rodríguez, R. Á. Román, H. Fessi and A. Elaissari, Int. J. Pharm., 2017, 532, 66–81 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yan, J. Bernard and F. Ganachaud, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 294, 102474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hornig, T. Heinze, C. R. Becer and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3838–3840 RSC .
T. Adachi, L. Tong, J. Kuwabara, T. Kanbara, A. Saeki, S. Seki and Y. Yamamoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 870–876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Combes, K.-N. Tang, A. S. Klymchenko and A. Reisch, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 607, 1786–1795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cohen, S. Buchner, H. G. Zachmann and D. Davidov, Polymer, 1992, 33, 3811–3817 CrossRef CAS .
J. Godbee, E. Scott, P. Pattamunuch, S. Chen and E. Mathiowitz, J. Microencapsul., 2004, 21, 151–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Macedo, E. O. Carvalho, V. F. Cardoso, D. M. Correia, C. R. Tubio, A. Fidalgo-Marijuan, G. Botelho and S. Lanceros-Méndez, Mater. Lett., 2020, 261, 127018 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bally, D. K. Garg, C. A. Serra, Y. Hoarau, N. Anton, C. Brochon, D. Parida, T. Vandamme and G. Hadziioannou, Polymer, 2012, 53, 5045–5051 CrossRef CAS .
E. Chiesa, R. Dorati, T. Modena, B. Conti and I. Genta, Int. J. Pharm., 2018, 536, 165–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Schubert, J. Joseph, T. Delaney and U. S. Schubert, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 1581–1588 RSC .
L. Hilliou, D. Vlassopoulos and M. Rehahn, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 3105–3110 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Brown, R. P. Choudhury, C. E. Meree, H. W. Beckham, S. Kumar and M. L. Shofner, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2014, 131, 39821 CrossRef .
S. Ishikawa, T. Kurita and E. Suzuki, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Gen. Pap., 1964, 2, 2349–2355 CrossRef .
E. J. Hinch and C. Elata, J. Nonnewton. Fluid Mech., 1979, 5, 411–425 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Shan, F. Wang, H. Yang, B. Zhou, H. Jiang, W. Kang and B. Sarsenbekuly, Phys. Fluids, 2020, 32, 023101 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Park, J. K. Park, J. H. Seo, J. D. Yuen, W. H. Lee, K. Cho and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Energy Mater, 2011, 1, 63–67 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sabhapondit, A. Borthakur and I. Haque, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2003, 87, 1869–1878 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, X. Lu, J. Liu, S. Hu and B. Xue, Pet. Explor. Dev., 2013, 40, 507–513 CrossRef .
L. Xu, J. Zhang, J. Peng and F. Qiu, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2015, 53, 633–639 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, R. Liu, C. Ding, J. Deng, Y. Guo, S. Long, L. Li and M. Li, Chin. J. Chem., 2021, 39, 3079–3084 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Heffner and D. S. Pearson, Synth. Met., 1991, 44, 341–347 CrossRef CAS .
K. Van Durme, H. Rahier and B. Van Mele, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 10155–10163 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Fredrickson, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 2825–2831 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Hornof, G. H. Neale and A. Chaaraoui, Paper number SPE-11775-MS presented at the SPE Oilfield and Geothermal Chemistry Symposium, Denver, Colorado, 1983 DOI:10.2118/11775-MS.
S. Talwar, J. Harding, K. R. Oleson and S. A. Khan, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 794–802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Furuya, T. Koga and F. Tanaka, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2004, 42, 733–751 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hansson and B. Lindman, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 1996, 1, 604–613 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. C. van Vlimmeren, N. M. Maurits, A. V. Zvelindovsky, G. J. A. Sevink and J. G. E. M. Fraaije, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 646–656 CrossRef CAS .
E. N. Govorun, A. S. Ushakova and A. R. Khokhlov, Eur. Phys. J. E: Soft Matter Biol. Phys., 2010, 32, 229–242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. D. Fleischli, N. Ghasdian, T. K. Georgiou and N. Stingelin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 2065–2071 RSC .
E. Gutiérrez-Fernández, T. A. Ezquerra, E. Rebollar, J. Cui, S. Marina, J. Martín and A. Nogales, Polymer, 2021, 218, 123515 CrossRef .
L. Yang, L. Wang and Y. Chen, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2020, 137, 48766 CrossRef CAS .
J.-D. Muller, K. Lamnawar and A. Maazouz, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 121–131 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Jog, Adv. Polym. Technol., 1993, 12, 281–289 CrossRef CAS .
A. Greco and A. Maffezzoli, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2004, 72, 1167–1174 CrossRef .
A. Greco and A. Maffezzoli, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2004, 92, 449–460 CrossRef CAS .

          J.-P. Kruth, G. Levy, R. Schindel, T. Craeghs and E. Yasa, Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on polymers and moulds innovations,  2008, pp. 15–30 Search PubMed .
A. Mokrane, M. Boutaous and S. Xin, C. R. Mec., 2018, 346, 1087–1103 CrossRef .
D. Drummer, S. Greiner, M. Zhao and K. Wudy, Addit. Manuf., 2019, 27, 379–388 CAS .
Y. Khalil, N. Hopkinson, A. Kowalski and J. P. A. Fairclough, Materials, 2019, 12, 3496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yan, X. Tian, G. Peng, D. Li and X. Zhang, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2018, 165, 140–147 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hérisson de Beauvoir, K. Tsuji, X. Zhao, J. Guo and C. Randall, Acta Mater., 2020, 186, 511–516 CrossRef .
J. Guo, R. Floyd, S. Lowum, J.-P. Maria, T. Herisson de Beauvoir, J.-H. Seo and C. A. Randall, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2019, 49, 275–295 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, X. Zhao, T. H. D. Beauvoir, J.-H. Seo, S. S. Berbano, A. L. Baker, C. Azina and C. A. Randall, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801724 CrossRef .
J.-P. Maria, X. Kang, R. D. Floyd, E. C. Dickey, H. Guo, J. Guo, A. Baker, S. Funihashi and C. A. Randall, J. Mater. Res., 2017, 32, 3205–3218 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fanous, M. Schweizer, D. Schawaller and M. R. Buchmeiser, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2012, 297, 123–127 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qiu, Q. Xu, M. Chen, X. Wang, X. Wang and G. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18887–18892 RSC .
C. Müller, C. P. Radano, P. Smith and N. Stingelin-Stutzmann, Polymer, 2008, 49, 3973–3978 CrossRef .
J. Vlachopoulos and D. Strutt, Mater. Sci. Technol., 2003, 19, 1161–1169 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Crawford and D. Paul, J. Mater. Sci., 1979, 14, 2693–2702 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Crawford, D. W. Paul and D. Sprevak, Polymer, 1982, 23, 123–128 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Crawford and D. W. Paul, Eur. Polym. J., 1981, 17, 1023–1028 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Crawford, Polym. Eng. Sci., 1982, 22, 300–306 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Crawford and D. W. Paul, J. Mater. Sci., 1982, 17, 2267–2280 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kroon, A. I. Hofmann, L. Yu, A. Lund and C. Müller, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 2770–2777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Joo, H. Zhou, S.-G. Lee, H.-K. Lee and J. K. Song, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2005, 98, 718–730 CrossRef CAS .
I. N. Mezheumov, S. D. Khizhnyak, A. I. Ivanova and P. M. Pakhomov, Fibre Chem., 2018, 50, 149–153 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Lebedev, A. N. Ozerin, A. S. Kechek’yan, V. G. Shevchenko, T. S. Kurkin, E. K. Golubev, E. A. Karpushkin and V. G. Sergeyev, Polym. Compos., 2019, 40, E146–E155 CAS .
F. Sillani, F. de Gasparo, M. Schmid and K. Wegener, Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., 2021, 117, 2049–2058 CrossRef .
A. Jana, S. Selvaraj and K. Subramani, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2021, 61, 2536–2556 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lv, K. Yang, B. Zhou, F. Zhang, J. Guo, C. Han and Y. Tian, Mater. Des., 2021, 207, 109872 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pishnamazi, S. Casilagan, C. Clancy, S. Shirazian, J. Iqbal, D. Egan, C. Edlin, D. M. Croker, G. M. Walker and M. N. Collins, Powder Technol., 2019, 341, 38–50 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, E. Allen and A. E. Tonelli, Polymer, 1999, 40, 3211–3221 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mohan, A. Gurarslan, X. Joyner, R. Child and A. E. Tonelli, Polymer, 2011, 52, 1055–1062 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Bullions, M. Wei, F. E. Porbeni, M. J. Gerber, J. Peet, M. Balik, J. L. White and A. E. Tonelli, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2002, 40, 992–1012 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Tonelli, Macromol. Symp., 2003, 203, 71–88 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Joijode, G. J. Antony and A. E. Tonelli, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2013, 51, 1041–1050 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Rusa, T. Uyar, M. Rusa, M. A. Hunt, X. Wang and A. E. Tonelli, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2004, 42, 4182–4194 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Rusa, C. Bridges, S.-W. Ha and A. E. Tonelli, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 5640–5646 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Williamson, R. Krishnaswamy and A. E. Tonelli, Polymer, 2011, 52, 4517–4527 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang and A. E. Tonelli, J. Macromol. Sci., Part C: Polym. Rev., 1998, 38, 781–837 CrossRef .
A. E. Tonelli, J. Incl. Phenom. Macrocycl. Chem., 2008, 60, 197–202 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Tonelli, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2009, 47, 1543–1553 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Tonelli, Biomolecules, 2019, 9, 240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Tonelli, Polym. Cryst., 2020, 3, e10095 CAS .
A. Gurarslan and A. E. Tonelli, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 3856–3861 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Ioan Botiz
	Dr habil. Ioan Botiz was a Marie Curie fellow at the French National Centre for Scientific Research and received, in 2007, his PhD in polymer physics from the Haute Alsace University (France). He then moved to the Center for Nanoscale Materials at Argonne National Laboratory (USA) and focused on structuring of photovoltaic active layers and fabrication of organic energy devices. Botiz returned to Europe as a FRIAS excellence postdoctoral fellow at the University of Freiburg (Germany) where he was working to understand the structure–property relationships in conjugated polymers. Since 2014 he has been working at Babes-Bolyai University (Romania) where he holds the position of Scientific Researcher I. He was also a Research Associate at Imperial College London (2014–2019).

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of the spin casting technique. (b) Chemical structure of the isoindigo-based polymer. (c and d) Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images comparing 5 × 5 μm2 areas of two isoindigo-based polymer films prepared, by classical on-center (c) and off-center (d) spin casting processes, from a solution pre-aggregated in a mixture of two solvents. (e) Schematics depicting the drop casting method. (f) Chemical structure of PDBT-TT. (g) TEM micrograph of a film made of PDBT-TT copolymers by using an enhanced drop casting technique. The inset depicts the corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern. (h) TEM image emphasizing the ribbons of P3HT obtained by slow-drying drop casting from carbon disulfide solution. The inset shows GIWAXS data of such a P3HT film. (i) Schematics emphasizing dip coating. (j) Chemical structure of the isoindigo-based PII-2T conjugated polymer. (k and l) AFM height images depicting thin films of an isoindigo-based conjugated polymer dip coated at a deposition speed of 10 μm s−1 (k) and 100 μm s−1 (l), respectively. The white arrows show the coating direction. (m) Illustration showing the principle of spray coating. (n) Chemical structure of PEDOT:PSS. (o) AFM phase image displaying the surface of a PEDOT:PSS film fabricated by the ultrasonic spray coating method. (p) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image exhibiting the surface of a porous PS-b-P2VP layer fabricated by spray coating and then subjected to ethanol swelling at a temperature of 70 °C for 5 hours. Adapted from ref. 129 (c and d) [Copyright (2018), with permission from American Chemical Society], ref. 146 (g) [Copyright (2016), with permission from Elsevier Ltd], ref. 149 (h) – published by The Royal Society of Chemistry, ref. 159 (k and l) [Copyright (2020) WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA (Weinheim) with permission from John Wiley and Sons], ref. 171 (o) [Copyright (2016) The Author(s)] and ref. 172 (p) [Copyright (2019), with permission from Elsevier B.V.].	 

 	Fig. 2  GIWAXS images of films of P3HT and P3HT:PCBM sheared both from chloroform and 1,2-dichlorobenzene at various solution shearing speeds. Reproduced from ref. 176 [Copyright (2016), with permission from American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of solution shearing at a slightly tilted angle of the blade. (b) Chemical structure of TH13. (c and d) AFM topography images displaying the microstructure of oligothiophene films fabricated by solution shearing at a deposition speed of 500 μm s−1 (c) and 50 μm s−1 (d), respectively. (e) Chemical structure of the utilized PFO system. (f–g) AFM topography images displaying the microstructure of PFO films fabricated by solution shearing at a deposition speed of 500 μm s−1 (f) and 50 μm s−1 (g), respectively. (h) AFM topography image depicting the microstructure of the PCE11:PPCBMB thin film prepared by solution shearing and using a deposition speed of 10 μm s−1. Dotted lines are a guide to the eye and indicate the interconnected PCE11 structure. (i) Simplified schematics depicting the blade coating technique. (j) Chemical structure of P(NDI2OD-T2). (k and l) TEM micrographs of P(NDI2OD-T2) films obtained by blade coating at 50 °C (h) and at 100 °C, respectively. The insets represent the corresponding AFM surface profiles. (m) Illustration depicting the working principle of slot-die coating. (n) Chemical structure of PPDT2FBT. (o and p) Field emission TEM of PPDT2FBT:PC71BM films fabricated by slot-die coating using head/substrate temperatures of 25/25 °C (o) and 80/80 °C (p), respectively. The insets represent the corresponding AFM topography images. Adapted from ref. 111 (b–g) – published by The Royal Society of Chemistry, ref. 115 (h) [Copyright (2019) by the authors], ref. 187 (k and l) [Copyright (2020), with permission from American Chemical Society] and ref. 215 (o and p) – published by The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematics depicting the wire-bar coating process. (b) Chemical structure of P3HT (left) and PMMA (right). (c and d) Tapping-mode AFM phase images of P3HT/PMMA films with different blend concentrations. (e) Illustration of the zone casting technique. (f) Chemical structure of PBTTT. (g) SEM image depicting a ribbon-phase microstructure of a PBTTT film. (h) Tapping mode (TM) AFM phase image emphasizing the lamellar microstructure of a PODMA-b-PtBA-b-PODMA film generated by zone casting at 40 °C. The inset depicts a corresponding GISAXS pattern. (i) Scheme depicting the working principle of the LB technique. (j) Chemical structure of CDTBTZ-C16. (k and l) AFM images displaying the morphology of thin films of PBTTT-C14 (k) and CDTBTZ-C16 (l) produced by the LB technique at 80 °C and 140 °C, respectively. The arrows indicate the direction parallel to the long axis of the compressing barriers, i.e., orthogonal to the compression direction. Insets in (k) and (l) represent the GIWAXS images of films of PBTTT-C14 and CDTBTZ-C16 acquired utilizing incident X-rays parallel to the main polymer chains. Adapted from ref. 225 (c and d) [Copyright (2018), with permission from American Chemical Society], ref. 231 (g) [Copyright (2011) WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA (Weinheim) with permission from John Wiley and Sons], ref. 233 (h) [Copyright (2011), with permission from American Chemical Society] and ref. 246 (k and l) [Copyright (2022), with permission from American Chemical Society].	 

Solution processing of polymer films
Spin casting	Dispersion of polymer solutions onto a substrate via centrifugal forces	Rapid, reliable, adaptable, highly reproducible	Significant quantity of material is lost, limited sample size	
116, 122, 129, 133
Drop casting	Drying of a polymer solution dropped onto a substrate	Simple, cost-effective, rapid, adaptable to many variants	Undesirable coffee ring patterns are created	
135, 145–149
Dip coating	Immersion followed by retraction of a substrate from a polymer solution	Cost-effective, adaptable, favours the alignment of films	Many processing parameters need simultaneous optimization, film cracking	
150, 151, 153, 159
Spray coating	Spraying a polymer solution onto a substrate	Large-scale production, multilayer configurations, works on 3D surfaces	Rough, less uniform films may exhibit higher thickness and pinholes	
161–163, 165, 167
Solution shearing	Shearing a polymer solution between a (horizontal/tilted) movable blade and a substrate followed by drying	Cost-effective, rapid, large-area samples, adaptable to many variants, scalable, low material loss	Films show thickness gradients, less effective with highly volatile solvents	
111, 115, 173, 174, 180
Blade coating	Deposition and alignment of polymer chains with a (vertical/tilted) movable blade followed by drying	Large-area, scalable to R2R, broad range of polymeric formulations, multilayer configurations	Possible gradient in film thickness, requires high viscosities solutions, aggregations on the blade	
173, 186, 187, 409
Slot-die coating	Pumping of a polymer solution through a hollow movable blade followed by drying	Compatible with R2R and high-throughput production, works for a broad range of polymers,	Dynamic wetting failure, ribbing and air entrainment, precipitations in the slot-die head	
173, 199, 206, 212
Wire-bar coating	Spreading of a polymer solution over a substrate with a movable bar located in the vicinity	Cost-effective, rapid, compatible with R2R, works for a broad range of polymers	Local film ruptures are possible	
173, 217, 219, 220, 225, 226
Zone casting	Spreading of a polymer solution over a movable substrate through a flat nozzle	The temperature of both nozzle and substrate can be controlled	Precipitation/aggregation in/on the nozzle	
173, 229, 230, 233
Langmuir–Blodgett	Deposition of polymer monolayers formed at liquid-gas interface onto solid lifting substrates	High-quality assembled monolayers, suitable for biopolymers, precise film thickness and multilayers can be targeted	Slower, complex, less straightforward transfer, limited sample area, mainly limited to amphiphilic polymer molecules	
239–241, 243, 246, 247
Inkjet printing	Contactless transfer of polymer droplets onto a substrate followed by wetting and drying	Fast, cheap, reproducible, easy scalable, contactless, adaptable to many variants, works for a large variety of materials, including polymers	Possible clogging of the headprint nozzle, long live ligaments could appear, satellite may form	
249, 256, 262, 263, 268
Post-fabrication processing of polymer films
Thermal annealing	Exposure of polymer films to elevated temperatures	Rapid, efficient, requires cheap equipment	Processed sample size is limited by the heating stage	
269–281

Solvent vapor annealing	Exposure of polymer films to solvent vapors in sealed environments	Rapid, highly efficient, very adaptable	Processed sample size is limited by the size of sample chamber	
292–296, 301, 302
Hot pressing	Squeezing of polymer films under high pressure at room/elevated temperature	Supports a broad range of polymers and polymer-composites	Processed sample size is limited by the size of the pressing/hot plate	
303–305, 308
Mechanical shearing	Sliding a top contacting surface over the surface of a polymer film	Rapid, supports a broad range of polymers and polymer-composites, scalable to R2R	Likely less efficient in orienting polymers of extremely high molecular mass or very thick films	
311–316, 320, 321, 323
Mechanical stretching	Stretching of polymer films under mechanical stress	Uniaxial and (sequential/simultaneous) biaxial processing possible	Introduces cracks and defects in films, rather limited sample size	
326–330

Mechanical rubbing	Unidirectional rubbing of a polymer film with a cloth-covered rubbing roll	Rapid, cost-effective, scalable to industrial routes	Efficient only in the near-surface region of the films, induces electrostatic charges	
173, 345, 347
Dewetting	Incubation, growth and coalescence of (pin)holes in polymer films upon thermal annealing	Delivers residual layers of molecules adopting highly stretched conformations	Rather limited sample size, often additional slippery layers are necessary	
355, 356
Illumination	Exposure of thin polymer films to light	Can significantly boost the absorption and emission properties of conjugated polymers	Induces only weak torsional and/or rotational changes in chain conformation, requires the use inert environments	
368–372

Space confinement	Ordering of polymers in tiny confining spaces	Custom confined spaces can be constructed from other polymer systems	Less scalable, often limited to (amphiphilic) BCP systems	
382–387, 393

 	Fig. 5  (a–c) Typical micrographs emphasizing crystallization of 108 nm thick P2VP-b-PEO films acquired after growing the crystals for 130 min at 45 °C (a), 160 min at 50 °C (b) and 855 min at 55 °C (c), respectively. The inset in (a) depicts the chemical structure of the employed BCP. (d–f) Optical micrographs depicting the growth of a P2VP-b-PEO crystal at 50 °C in a ∼35 nm thick film. The micrographs were taken after t0 (d), t0 + 30 min (e) and t0 + 60 min (f), respectively. The size of each image is 115 × 115 μm2. (g) Illustration of the partial melting and crystallization process appearing during thermal annealing. Here, the smallest, yet least aligned domains melt partially, while the un-melted domains template their alignment during melt crystallization, leading to an increased molecular alignment. The inset in (g) depicts the chemical structure of the PNDI-T2 copolymer based on 2-octyldodecyl derivative (OD). (h–i) TM AFM topography (left) and phase (right) images of PNDI-T2 films based on the 2-octyldodecyl derivative that were as-cast (h) and then thermally annealed at 350 °C (i). White arrows indicate the direction of molecular alignment. Adapted from ref. 271 (a–c) [Copyright (2007) Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg with permission from Springer Nature], ref. 269 (d–f) [Copyright (2008) EDP Sciences/Società Italiana di Fisica/Springer-Verlag with permission from Springer Nature] and ref. 275 (g–i) – published by The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a-i) AFM phase images of thin films of P3HT-co-P3DDT spin-coated from a neat solution in chlorobenzene (a–c) and containing 4% DIO (d–f) or 1% DMDBS (g-i). (j–r) GIXS qz–qxy area images depicting films of P3HT-co-P3DDT spin-coated from a neat solution in chlorobenzene (j–l) and containing 4% DIO (m–o) or 1% DMDBS (p–r). All AFM and GIXS images on the left correspond to as spin-cast films. Moreover, while all images in the middle depict thin films thermally annealed at 160 °C, images on the right emphasize films melt annealed at 200 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 282 – published by The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a–c) TM AFM height images depicting various ordered microstructures obtained in a film of P3HT-b-PLLA annealed in chloroform vapors for 90 h (a), a film of P3HT-b-PFO annealed in dichlorobenzene at 150 °C for 62 h (b) and a film of P3HT-b-PFBT annealed in dichlorobenzene at 150 °C for 25 h (c). Insets in (a–c) depict the chemical structure corresponding to each BCP system. (e–g) Series of TM AFM topography images emphasizing PS-(PBLG)8 ellipsoidal structures obtained by swelling the films at a cp of 53% (e), 55% (f) and 57% (g), respectively. (h) AFM height image depicting a peculiar PBLG crystal grown in a semidilute thin film chloroform solution containing trace amounts of methanol. The size of the image is 14 × 30 μm2. (i) AFM phase image depicting the region delimited in (h) by the white rectangle. The size of the image is 2.5 × 5 μm2. The inset represents WAXS intensity in reflection mode and emphasizes a peak related to the periodicity of a pseudohexagonal PBLG lattice. (j–m) Series of optical micrographs depicting a swollen film of PBLG in chloroform (j) that nucleated and grew crystals upon the addition of 8% (volume fraction φm) of methanol (k). Crystals were then dissolved by removing the methanol (l) and eventually nucleated and grew again into different crystals upon the addition of, this time, only φm = 4% methanol (m). The size of all images is 120 × 120 μm2. The inset in (j) shows the chemical structure of used PBLG. Adapted from ref. 293 (a) [Copyright (2009), with permission from American Chemical Society], ref. 295 (b and c) [Copyright (2011), with permission from American Chemical Society], ref. 299 (e–g) – published by The Royal Society of Chemistry, ref. 302 (h and i) [Copyright (2013), with permission from American Chemical Society] and ref. 301 (j–m) [Copyright (2013), with permission from American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematics of hot pressing. (b-c) SEM micrographs depicting the surfaces of a PVP-coated PI film before (b) and after (c) hot pressing at 180 °C and 40 MPa for 30 min. The inset in (b) emphasizes the chemical structure of PVP. (d) AFM phase image depicting a shear-aligned cylinder-forming PS-b-PHMA film previously spin cast onto a silicon substrate. The inset in (d) depicts the chemical structure of PS-b-PHMA. (e) AFM micrograph depicting the microstructure of a SIS film generated by mechanical shearing coupled with SVA. The white arrow indicates the shearing stress direction while the inset represents the chemical structure of SIS. (f) AFM phase image depicting the aligned lamellar microstructure of the P2VP-b-PS-b-P2VP BCP system obtained by CZA soft-shearing followed by removal of the topcoat. The white arrow indicates the shear direction. The inset displays a GISAXS image of BCPs aligned along the shear direction. (g) Optical micrographs comparing P3HT (left) and RP33 (right) thin films before and after being subjected to stretching with 10%, 20% and 30% strains, respectively. (h) Schematics depicting the mechanical rubbing technique. (i–j) Polarized optical micrographs obtained under crossed polarizers showing a high birefringence of the rubbed C12-PBTTT (i) and C18-PBTTT (j) films when the latter are oriented along the rubbing direction (indicated by the white arrow R) at 45° to the polarizer. Adapted from ref. 308 (b and c) [Copyright (2021), with permission from American Chemical Society], ref. 317 (d) [Copyright (2016), with permission from American Chemical Society], ref. 320 (e) [Copyright (2018), with (pe2), with permission from American Chemical Society], ref. 335 (g) [Copyright (2018), with permission from American Chemical Society] and ref. 354 (i and j) [Copyright (2021), with permission from American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematics of dewetting. (b–d) Optical micrographs depicting the dewetting of a film (at 135 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere) made of a MEH-PPV:PS blend containing 15 wt% MEH-PPV and taken after 1 min (b), 2 min (c) and 25 min (d), respectively. The chemical structure of MEH-PPV is shown as an inset in (b). (e) Illustration of the illumination procedure performed with an optical microscope. (f–g) Optical micrographs emphasizing the microstructure of a 50 nm thick film made of a blend of MEH-PPV:PS (10%:90% by weight) recorded after 12 h (f) and 25 h (g) of dewetting at 115 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere. Inner regions delimited by the dotted red semicircles were continuously illuminated, while the regions outside were not illuminated. (h) Schematic representation of various structural morphologies expected in SP/IP blends. (i–j) TEM micrographs depicting thin films of various SP:PS blends (i) and their corresponding neat SPs (j). (k) The corresponding chemical structures for all polymeric systems shown in (j). Adapted from ref. 355 (a–d) [Copyright (2013), with permission from American Chemical Society], ref. 368 (f and g) [Copyright (2013), with permission from American Chemical Society] and ref. 400 (h–k) [Copyright (2021) The Authors. Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH].	 

 	Fig. 10  (a–d) Phase diagrams of mChP8 (a), mChP17 (b), mChP30 (c) and mChP57 (d) constructed as a function of temperature and cp. (e) Various phases denoted as disordered (Dis), disordered micellar (DM), nonbirefringent lamellar (NB Lam), lamellar (Lam), nonbirefringent hexagonal (Hex), hexagonally packed cylinders (HPC) and perforated lamellar (PL) that are contained in phase diagrams. Open symbols depict regions where macrophase separation between a conjugate rich ordered phase and a water-rich phase occurred. (f–i) Typical SAXS patterns acquired for mChP8 (f), mChP17 (g), mChP30 (h) and mChP57 (i) polymeric systems. Adapted with permission from ref. 410 – published by The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a–c) The variation of Rg with temperature for flexible planar chains with no side chains (a), semiflexible planar and non-planar polymer chains with no side chains (b) and planar chains with side chains (c). (d) Phase diagram displaying the possible chains conformations that could be obtained when varying the temperature and chain semiflexibility. (e–g) Optical micrographs of single crystals of P3HT that were crystallized from a 0.2 mg ml−1 solution of 3-hexylthiophene at 32 °C for 24 h C from seeds formed at 40 °C (e), 43 °C (f) and 47 °C (g). Single crystals were spin cast onto silicon substrates. The size of all images is 100 × 100 μm2. (h) Schematic representation of the orientation of the oligothiophene/P3HT chains inside a single crystal. The size of the monoclinic unit cell (form II) is indicated by the broken lines. (i) Typical SAED pattern of a P3HT single crystal that was generated at 35 °C from a seed formed at 50 °C within 6 h. (j) Various projections of the crystalline structure along the three crystallographic axes a, b and c. Adapted from ref. 414 (a–d) [Copyright (2021), with permission from American Chemical Society] and ref. 417 (e–j) [Copyright (2012) WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA (Weinheim) with permission from John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 12  (a–d) SEM images depicting microspheres of P(VDF-TrFE) nanoprecipitated from an acetone solution of a concentration of 5 mg ml−1 mixed with a non-solvent solution comprising methanol and water in different ratios: 0% (a), 50% (b), 90% (c) and 100% (d) methanol. The inset in (a) depicts the chemical structure of the P(VDF-TrFE) system. (e–h) AFM height images of low (e and g) and high (f and h) molecular weight P3HT monolayers dip-coated from fresh (e and f) and 6 days aged (g and h) toluene solutions. Adapted from ref. 435 (a–d) [Copyright (2019), with permission from Elsevier B.V.] and ref. 448 (e–h) [Copyright (2021) SIOC, CAS, Shanghai, & WILEY-VCH GmbH, with permission from John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 13  (a–c) Optical micrographs showing the coalescence process for a PA12 powder at a temperature of 179 °C (a), 188 °C (b) and 200 °C (c), respectively. (d) SEM image depicting the fractured surface of PA12 after sintering. The inset emphasizes the chemical structure of PA12. (e–h) SEM images depicting UHMWPE samples exposed to compaction at 103.5 MPa and at 160 °C for 0 min (e), 40 min (f), 90 min (g) and 130 min (h), respectively. The inset in (h) shows the chemical structure of PE. (i) Illustration of the α-, β- and γ-CD structures and their dimensions. (j) Schematic representation of the channel structure of a typical polymer-CD-IC. Adapted from ref. 460 (a–d) [Copyright (2019) Wiley Periodicals, Inc., with permission from John Wiley and Sons], ref. 488 (e–h) [Copyright (2021) Society of Plastics Engineers, with permission from John Wiley and Sons] and ref. 492 (i and j) [Copyright (2010), with permission from Elsevier Ltd].	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
