Commercially viable porphyrinoid  dyes for solar cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00009D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00009D
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1897-1909Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsCommercially viable porphyrinoid dyes for solar cells

        
          
            Ivana 
            Radivojevic†
a, 
      
        
          
            Alessandro 
            Varotto†
a, 
      
        
          
            Christopher 
            Farley
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Charles Michael 
            Drain
          
          
        
      *ab
aHunter College and Graduate Center of the City University of New York, 695 Park Avenue, New York, New York 10065, USA. E-mail: cdrain@hunter.cuny.edu
bThe Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, USA
Received 
      29th March 2010
    , Accepted 15th June 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      4th August 2010
    AbstractMultifunctional molecules bearing different dyes, such as donor–acceptor systems, synthesized by covalent chemistry have provided a wealth of information on the fundamental nature of electron and energy transfer in organic systems and there is a growing literature on the materials properties of dyes on surfaces. However, in the vast majority of cases the synthetic costs of producing these covalently bound systems prohibit them from deployment in commercially viable devices. Thus, to achieve both the needed multifunctionality and to bring the synthetic costs in line with potential commercialization, supramolecular approaches to the formation of photonic materials can be exploited. This perspective focuses on porphyrinoids as exemplary dyes, but the concepts and design principles extend to other chromophores.Ivana RadivojevicIvana Radivojevic finished her PhD at Hunter College of The City University New York in 2010. She received her Diploma in Chemical Engineering from Faculty of Technology and Metallurgy, University of Belgrade, Serbia, in 2003. Currently, she is working in the Nanophotonics and Material Chemistry laboratory of Prof. Charles Michael Drain. Her research is focused on characterization of self-organized functional nanostructured materials on surfaces for photonic applications.Alessandro VarottoAlessandro Varotto is a postdoctoral Scholar at the University of California, Santa Barbara with the Mitsubishi Chemical-Center for Advanced Materials, in Prof. Fred Wudl's group. He received his ‘Laurea’ degree in Chemistry from University of Padova, Italy, in Prof. Tommaso Carofiglio lab and his PhD in Chemistry from The City University of New York in 2009, under the supervision of Prof. Charles Michael Drain at Hunter College. His doctoral thesis focused on self-organized organic dyes on surfaces for photonic devices.Christopher FarleyChristopher Farley received his Bachelor's in physics from Fordham University in 2004. After several years away from science, he recently entered The Graduate Center at The City University of New York to pursue a PhD in Chemistry with a concentration in Nanotechnology and Materials Science. He is currently working in Prof. Charles Michael Drain's laboratory at Hunter College, CUNY, investigating the photophysics of potential nanoscale materials for photonic devices.Charles Michael DrainCharles Michael Drain studied art at the University of Missouri at St Louis, and took a chemistry course to understand the chemistry of lithography only to find that he liked chemistry, and that the mechanism was largely unknown. He earned his PhD at Tufts University with Prof. Barry B. Cordon in 1989. His studies on the supramolecular chemistry of porphyrins began with postdoctoral work with Prof. David Mauzerall at Rockefeller University, followed by two years with Prof. Jean-Marie Lehn in Strasbourg and Prof. Dewey Holten at Washington University. He joined the faculty at Hunter College in 1996.
 

Broader context
Organic and hybrid organic/inorganic photovoltaic devices have great potential in a variety of applications and can be economically viable because of the reduced manufacturing costs, reduced dependence on rare metals, versatility of substrates, and less environmental impact because of reduced energy to make the devices and minimized use of toxic metals. Because of the very large quantities needed for deployment of these devices, the dyes used in solar energy absorption must also be commercially viable. While there are several classes of dyes that may be suitable, porphyrinoids, such as porphyrins and phthalocyanines, and the metallo derivatives, are very attractive because of their stability and wide range of photonic properties.

 
Once human beings realize something can be done, they're not satisfied until they've done it… Frank Herbert.
Introduction
One of the fundamental scientific issues in the chemical sciences that can “enable new opportunities to meet societal needs” is “How far can we push self-assembly?”1,2 Self-assembly can play pivotal roles in addressing some of the great challenges in science today such as the development of cost-effective solar energy harvesting systems and devices with lower power consumption in order to meet the ever increasing energy requirements of the world in an environmentally acceptable way.3 The continued development of concepts in supramolecular chemistry has other important applications, e.g. in sensors, smart materials, and medicine. The overarching theme of this perspective is to provide a roadmap to develop self-assembly and self-organization approaches to create functional, photonic materials and prototypical solar energy harvesting devices containing the various porphyrinoids. Other highly stable dyes and polymers are discussed elsewhere, vide infra. As concluded by Kalowekamo and Baker, the manufacturing costs for organic and hybrid devices can be quite competitive compared to Si-based standards.4 This perspective aims to enthuse development of new concepts and designs of hierarchical dye materials for applications such as solar energy conversion and photonic devices using porphyrinoids (Fig. 1–4) as exemplary materials.
 Fig. 1  Diverse dyes, from left to right: C60, free base 5,10,15,20-tetraphenylporphyrin; 5,10,15,20-tetraphenylporphyrinato Fe(III)Cl; 5,10,15,20-tetra-(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin; tetra-(tert-butyl)phthalo-cyaninato Zn(II); hexadecylfluorophthalocyaninato Zn(II); monoamino-tri-(tert-butyl)phthalocyaninato Zn(II); mono(thiopentyl)pentadecyl-fluorophthalocyaninato Zn(II); Pc 735; Pc787. See Fig. 2–4. 
 Fig. 2  Structures of dye molecules. 
 Fig. 3  Facile modification of a core porphyrin platform, TPPF20 enables investigation of new molecular design concepts. For example, R = (CH2)11CH3, or CH2CH2(CF2)9CF3. Using a core Por platform affords chemically compatible systems. 
 Fig. 4  Facile modification of a core phthalocyanine platform, PcF16 enables investigation of new molecular design concepts. For example, Pc735 has eight S(CH2)11CH3 mostly on the outside positions and Pc787 substitutes all of the F for the thioalkane. SCH2CH2(CF2)9CF3 can also be used to form highly fluorous derivatives. Using a core Pc platform affords chemically compatible systems. 
Concepts
Self-assembly
The near exponential growth in the number of publications on self-assembled porphyrinic systems in the last two decades5–17 was propelled by: (a) the potential to make functional materials from tectons that are significantly easier to synthesize compared to covalently linked arrays, and (b) the large number of potential applications of porphyrinoids including: photonics, sensors, catalysts, electronics, and components of solar energy utilization devices. Self-assembly11 results in discrete supramolecular systems that are usually topologically closed because the component molecules are carefully designed with complementary recognition groups and geometries to maximize specific intermolecular interactions. This strategy allows the predictable formation of nanoarchitectures such as squares and rosettes with a degree of predictability in their supramolecular properties such as energy or electron transfer and luminescence. The bottom-up design and organization of molecules into materials are aided conceptually by considering four levels of structure: molecular (primary), supramolecular (secondary), the organization of supramolecular systems into solid state materials such as crystals (tertiary), and materials in devices (quaternary).11
Self-organization
Self-organization generally relies on both specific and non-specific intermolecular interactions to yield non-discrete systems that are less ordered than those resulting from self-assembly—e.g. liquid crystals, mesogenic materials, and monolayers on surfaces.13,18,19 As an alternative strategy to the formation of hierarchical functional materials, self-organization offers several advantages and some drawbacks compared to self-assembly. There is usually a defect threshold below which self-organized systems maintain their function. However, a defect in a self-assembled system results in a new supramolecular material that may have diminished or undesired properties. The syntheses of the molecular components of self-organized systems can be easier than those designed for self-assembly because non-specific intermolecular interactions oftentimes allow simpler molecular structures to be used (less information has to be programmed into the molecule).
An important advantage afforded by self-assembled/organized materials with potential commercial applications is the high yield syntheses of molecular components.20–26 Additionally, materials assembled by specific intermolecular interactions such as metal ion coordination, complementary hydrogen bonding, and certain electrostatic constructs are generally more robust than those organized by dispersion forces and hydrophobic/hydrophilic properties.24 The disadvantages of self-assembled/organized systems largely stem from the complex equilibriums inherent to supramolecular entities (thermodynamic products) that make both characterization and material/device stability keystone issues in real-world applications. On the other hand, these equilibriums also can be exploited to anneal the material to improving device performance and yield, and afford a mechanism of self-repair.18,27
Surfaces
Applications of functional materials require interactions with surfaces in devices; however, the structure and function of self-assembled/organized materials also depend on interactions with these surfaces. Surface interactions play a complex role in the hierarchical organization of supramolecular systems, and this must be understood as part of the design process.13,14,28,29 Porphyrinoids can be organized on a variety of surfaces as chemically bound monolayers (SAMs)28,30–40 or by adsorption.41–43 The surface deposition of discrete arrays, such as square tetramers pre-assembled by metal ion coordination or H-bonds, is much more difficult.13,28 This difficulty is due to the intertwined factors affecting the equilibriums of self-assembled systems as they are applied to surfaces: e.g. solvent evaporation, fluid dynamics, concentration changes, and surface energetics. Consequently, self-assembled arrays can: (a) fall apart as the components separate into different domains, (b) aggregate, or (c) reorganize into different structures. A detailed understanding of molecular–surface and supramolecular–surface interactions can be exploited both as a design element for the formation of hierarchical photonic materials and as a means to photonically couple nanomaterials to the macroscopic world. Discussion of the reliable and predictable control of the structure of supramolecular materials at interfaces is an essential aspect of this work.
Porphyrinoids
The remarkable stability, diverse photophysical and chemical properties make porphyrinoids (Fig. 2) exemplary molecules to construct hierarchical functional materials.9,44–49 Additionally, the functional properties of porphyrinoids can be systematically varied both by metalation with nearly every metal in the periodic table and by substituents on the macrocycle, e.g.: excited state lifetimes,50,51 redox potentials, catalytic activities,52,53 magnetism,12,54–60 optical cross-sections, and molecular dynamics. The functionality of these materials is also profoundly affected by the structural or architectural organization of the chromophores, as well as environmental factors such as solvent, matrix, and surface.12,16,61–68 The structural rigidity and topological diversity of the porphyrins, phthalocyanines, and the metalo complexes make these dyes well suited for the engineering of supramolecular materials.
Materials composed of porphyrinoids can be very robust to real-world conditions such as elevated temperatures, the presence of dioxygen and/or water.10,38,69–71 Porphyrinoids are versatile tectons that afford a rich diversity in self-assembled nano-architectures because of their rigid molecular topology.13,65,72–89 A few reports describe the photonic properties of self-assembled (discrete) porphyrin (Por) and phthalocyanine (Pc) materials.61,72,90–94 Since the photonic and chemical properties of Pc are complementary to the Por (e.g. the UV-visible spectra, luminescence, stability, metal ion binding are different), supramolecular materials composed of combinations of chromophores will enable devices that are otherwise unobtainable using only one dye. As expected, additional fused benzenes on the PC core, e.g. to yield naphthocyanine, shift the absorption spectra to the red, but the additional fused benzene rings make the ligands more vulnerable to oxidative degradation.95
Simple Pc derivatives are commodity chemicals used as dyes, toners, and photonics. Simple tetraaryl Por can be made in greater than 60% yield and can have similar applications.96 In both cases, less symmetric porphyrinoid dyes requiring complex multistep synthetic procedures resulting in low yields based on the initial reagents and/or extensive chromatography are not considered in this perspective. For both Pc and Por, mixtures of positional isomers or even mixtures of compounds may be used as the photo-active material.97 Core Por and Pc platforms that can serve as test-bed for new molecular design concepts have been reported (Fig. 3 and 4).98–100
Dyes in solar cells
The advantages, disadvantages, and architectural considerations of organic and dye-based solar cell devices are well reviewed.101–110 These devices generally fall into two groups: (a) dye-sensitized solar cells wherein a dye resides on an inorganic semiconductor surface such as TiO2, SnO2, and ZnO;111 (b) organic solar cells that use conducting or semiconducting polymers. The main concerns with dye systems are that of charge separation and transport versus recombination kinetics. Recombination kinetics should be much slower than electron injection/collection. These depend on the component dyes, the substrate and the presence of intervening electron acceptors in the organic devices. Since a good solar cell should have a 20+ year lifetime, the dye will need to undergo more than 108 turnover cycles without significant decomposition.112
The goal of this perspective is to describe porphyrinoids that can be readily synthesized in large scales, and the chelates of earth-abundant metal ions. We focus herein on the dye systems that can be incorporated into devices that are designed for photovoltaics, photocatalysts for water splitting, or to derive the overpotential for water splitting catalysts.
Matching the excited state energies to the device design, as in substrate band gaps, is critical to performance. Charge injection or separation from the singlet state yields the most potential energy, but the triplet state may be sufficient in some device designs. Cyclic voltammetry and optical spectra allow the energies of the HOMO and LUMO to be evaluated.113,114 Also, the photophysical properties of the dye need to be determined,49e.g.: singlet state lifetimes, yield of inter-system-crossing to the triplet state, and triplet state lifetimes.
Surface deposition
There are many means to deposit porphyrinoids onto surfaces ranging from chemical vapor deposition at elevated temperatures and high vacuum, to solution casting. The latter approach can be accomplished by spin casting, aerosol spraying, dipping, layer-by-layer methods, and electrodeposition. Each fabrication method has associated energy consumption and results in different surface morphologies. With judicious choice of substituents, it is possible to use self-organization via solution deposition to achieve highly ordered structures similar to those observed in materials made by chemical vapor deposition (CVD). Layer-by-layer methods for Por115 and Pc116 are more recent and afford opportunities to incorporate other active materials within the active layer in a sequential manner (Fig. 5). There is also considerable work in examining the electrochemical28,30–40 and transport117 properties of Por and Pc covalently bound to surfaces, but for the most part these dyes are not commercially viable on the scales needed to deploy them for common usage. Though there are many papers describing porphyrins on surfaces, we concentrate here on active devices with simple dyes.
 Fig. 5  Sequentially dipping a substrate into separate solutions of a cationic tetra-N-methylpyridinium porphyrin (top left) and an anionic polyoxometalate (top right) allows formation of thin films with highly controlled optical densities on a variety of substrates (bottom). These films are stable even to sonicating in water (W), toluene (T) and 100 mM NaCl. This is an alternative to spin coating and vacuum deposition methods. 
As opposed to covalently linked donor–bridge–acceptor and related molecules,118 axial coordination of acceptors to metalloporphyrinoids can be a simpler means to constructing dye systems where the initial charge separation remains efficient, e.g. with SiPc-C60,119 while significantly reducing the synthetic efforts. These donor–acceptor systems facilitate charge dislocation in active layers of several types of photovoltaic devices. These constructs have been incorporated into a variety of active layer architectures, vide infra.
Phthalocyanines
Many Pc are commercially used in displays, optical recording media, dyes, and various inks because of their tunable photonic properties. Pc are robust, and the product of high-yield reactions of commodity chemicals.
Unsubstituted Pc in solution display a strong and narrow absorption peak in the red (ε > 105 M−1 cm−1); the wavelength and intensity vary according to the specific metal ion chelated. This absorption is the result of a single transition from the ground state (HOMO) to the excited state (LUMO) of the molecular orbitals. Once Pc are deposited on a surface as a film, they tend to aggregate predominantly by π–π interactions. Not only does this interaction broaden the absorption peak, but it can also give rise to additional absorption peaks because of a splitting in the energy of the LUMO. This is a result of the formation of face-to-face H-aggregates, and/or slipped cofacial aggregates, and/or head-to-tail J aggregates depending on the molecular structure.120 Because the substituents on Pc are appended directly to the chromophore, the electronic properties of the substituents play a pivotal role in the HOMO–LUMO energy gap;97,121,122 therefore, affecting the ground electronic spectra and excited state luminescence properties.
Changing the metal ion center can also vary the location of the Q-band.122 Metals with large ionic radii, such as lead, tend to bend the normally flat core of a Pc macrocycle thereby decreasing the symmetry of the molecule and lifting the degeneracy of the molecular orbitals, which in turn affect the opto-electronic properties.123 Therefore, careful consideration of these properties is necessary for incorporation of Pc dyes into solar cells.
Unsubstituted Pc are not soluble enough to form concentrated solutions for the preparation of films by spin-coating or drop casting; therefore, most devices with the Pc core are fabricated by thermal evaporation under vacuum.124 CuPc and ZnPc are widely investigated as donor materials in the preparation of thermally evaporated solar cells, both in bulk heterojunction106 (BHJ) and layered architectures.125 Other metallophthalocyanines, such as Ni, Si and Fe, are also widely used. Synthesis of Pc with exocyclic organic groups to increase solubility in either organic or aqueous solvents, and to form liquid crystalline materials is well established and commercially used in some displays.120,122 Modification of the Pc macrocycle by high yield click-type reactions97 has more recently afforded derivatives that were inaccessible because of labile functional groups that decompose in the Pc-forming reaction.126 Pc are excellent candidate dyes, but generally cover the red side of the solar energy spectrum, thus necessitating the use of other dyes such as porphyrins.
Porphyrins
In photosynthesis, nature uses carotinoids and Por with various modifications to the macrocycle to make the chlorophylls to cover the solar energy spectrum,127 but neither are robust enough to incorporate into devices with 20 year lifetimes using current device designs. The parent Por macrocycle, however, is robust enough so these are good candidates for light harvesting since they exhibit strong absorption in visible region, 400–700 nm. The maximum absorption of Por is a B (Soret) band at 390–430 nm with molar extinction coefficient (ε) on the order of 105 M−1 cm−1 and several Q-bands between 500 and 650 nm with ε 10–20 fold less.128 The Por fluorescence quantum yields are low (<15%) and have 1–15 ns lifetimes, but the triplet quantum yields are correspondingly high. Both pyrrole substituted and tetraarylporphyrins can be synthesized in high yields, e.g. 25–67% reported by Sharghi et al. for the latter.129 For the present discussion only symmetric compounds are considered because the synthesis uses pyrrole and benzaldehydes in the presence of a catalyst (CF3SO2Cl), but no organic oxidants. The purification is facile, making tetraarylporphyrins attractive for industrial production.
Thus, the use of Por to cover the blue end of the solar spectrum and Pc to cover the red end, and both have good optical densities in the middle, affords a range of dyes to incorporate into various devices.
Devices with phthalocyanines
BHJ versus bilayer devices
Generally, bilayer devices are limited by the short diffusion length of the exciton that forms in the donor (D) layer, which needs to diffuse to the acceptor (A) layer before recombining. Thus, recombination, rather than charge transport properties, is a main limiting factor to device efficiency for this geometry.124 Additionally, the series resistance that develops between the D and A layers contributes substantially to lower the performance. Forrest et al. reported one of the most efficient bilayer devices using CuPc/C60 that had a very low series resistance and a 4.2% power conversion efficiency.130
BHJ architectures, in which donor and acceptor molecules are blended or co-deposited within the same layer, offer a more intimate contact and favor the charge separation process. On the other hand this geometry suffers from poor crystalline order, low carrier mobility, and increased charge-trap densities.124 Room for improvement resides on controlling the film morphology to form interpenetrating fingers of D and A. Such systems can improve both charge transfer and charge separation. Leo and co-workers demonstrated an improved efficiency in ZnPc/C60 by interface modification at the nanoscale.131 The improved efficiency was achieved by co-deposition of sequential multi-layers of D and A and blended D/A, resulting in enhanced exciton dissociation and photocurrent extraction. The improved performance was explained by the formation of an interpenetrating network of donors and acceptors, thereby increasing the photocurrent and suppressing charge recombination. In this and another work,132 the ratio of co-deposited Pc and C60 appears to affect the Voc of the device. This is in contrast with the theory that the Voc is defined by the difference in energy of the donor HOMO and LUMO of the acceptor. However, a more recent theoretical treatment of experimental data about the origin of the Voc was suggested,105 wherein the Voc can be influenced by the shape of the orbitals of the D. The interface between the generally flat D and A molecules is also important in that molecules bearing bulky groups (such orthogonal phenyls) that prevent strong intermolecular interactions, display higher Voc.105 The greater Voc was explained by a steric effect that reduces charge recombination.
Pc have also been used as an additive to improve polymer/C60 BHJ solar cells. Polymer-containing photovoltaics have already surpassed 5–6% power conversion efficiency.133 The higher performance is mainly due to a better degree of phase segregation between D (polymer) and A (usually [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester, PCBM). Once the film is annealed, it tends to form optimally sized domains108 that facilitate charge separation and transport to the electrodes. Soluble small molecules may lack the ability to form similar domains. For example, a SiPc improved the efficiency of a polymer solar cell when blended in the film largely because the Jsc increased considerably.119 The authors explained this increase with two mechanisms: a direct contribution from the dye resulting from the extra absorption in the red, and an indirect contribution because the dye molecules promote charge separation from the polymer excitons at the interface, due to the proper alignment of the orbitals, even if they do not absorb photons directly.
Several groups have reported that Pc can be used to increase the Voc of a device. As shown by Murata and co-workers, when a thin layer of a Cu or Zn Pc was deposited between a pentacene donor and C60 acceptor the Voc increased as a result of the HOMO of the Pc.134 The nearly isoenergetic HOMO of the Cu and Zn Pc is higher in energy than that of pentacene. ZnPc was reported to increase both Voc and Jsc. The longer excited state lifetime of ZnPc (3.3 ns) compared to the CuPc (6 ps) enhances the efficiency of charge separation at the interface.
Tandem solar cells
One of the most direct ways to increase the efficiency of an organic dye based solar cell is to increase the spectral coverage of the light-harvesting layer. This can be achieved simply by using a tandem architecture, in which layers of two (or more) D of different optical band gaps are superimposed. This type of architecture has been used in inorganic solar cells to minimize the loss caused by thermalization of charge carriers.135 In organic solar cells, this concept is adopted either to increase the Voc by stacking heterojunctions of the same material, or to increase the photon harvesting by combining materials having complementary absorption spectra. Organic tandem solar cells have been recently reviewed.125 In 2002, Forrest and Yakimov utilized CuPc to fabricate a series of stacked heterojunctions (with 2, 3, 4 and 5 layers).136 The Voc in a double heterojunction was given by the sum of the Voc of the single cells, but surprisingly the overall efficiency was more than double that of the same single heterojunction. On the other hand, three or more stacked junctions lowered the overall efficiency, likely due to a reduction in light absorption. Sariciftci and co-workers combined poly(3-hexylthiophene) (PH3T) and ZnPc in a double stacked heterojunction to increase the spectral coverage.135,137,138 This cell design delivered a Voc equal to the sum of the Voc delivered by the single cells, whereas Jsc was dominated by the smallest of the two Jsc (perhaps because the layer thickness was not optimized). Implementing the powerful concept of a tandem solar cell can be challenging because of the non-trivial device design and fabrication issues. Indeed, the stacked heterojunctions must be separated by an intermediate layer to separate and connect the front and back cell.139
To circumvent these fabrication issues, we investigated the idea of blending three Pc derivatives with different optical gaps (Fig. 6) in the same layer to increase the photon absorption.97 In this case the Voc and FF were equal (or similar) to that of the devices built with one derivative, whereas the Jsc was higher than the sum of devices with the three individual dyes. Although the overall efficiency of the blended dye devices was low, due to both the all-organic device architecture and poor charge transport properties of the soluble Pc derivatives, this work demonstrates that simply blending the dyes may be advantageous compared to layered structures. The blended dye concept can be applied to other systems as well.
 Fig. 6  The band gap of chemically compatible dyes on a core Pc platform can be systematically tuned by a balance of electron withdrawing F and electron donating SR groups. The dark purple areas are where two or more overlap. 
Perhalogenated phthalocyanines
Due to the high electronegativity of fluorines and chlorines, molecular orbitals in perhalogenated Pc are strongly stabilized (Pauli electronegativity140 for Cl = 3.16 and for F = 3.98). The electron-withdrawing halogens tend to lower the LUMO which allows for efficient electron injection and also makes Pc more stable to ambient oxidation.141 Because of these properties, CuPcF16 was employed in a solar cell as an n-type electron-transporting layer.142 In this work, CuPcF16 was used as a connecting layer in a tandem architecture. The all-organic metalloPc connecting layers have a better transparency and lower sublimation temperature than inorganic semiconductors. A tunneling mechanism was used to explain the photogenerated carrier combination. The use of all-organic layers is also beneficial in reducing the resistance between the stacked layers. For this purpose, other electron-withdrawing groups such as CN and pyridyl groups can be used, and Zn, Fe, and Co metalloPc were studied.
Fluoro- and chloro-Pc can also be adopted as a convenient platform for the preparation of other derivatives by substitution of the halogens with nucleophiles, such as thiols, amines, and alcohols.97,98,143 The substitution with electron-donating groups on the periphery of the macrocycle decreases the optical gap of the material. Also, since the substituent effect is proportional to the number of substituents, it is possible to tune the optical properties accordingly, e.g. from ∼670 nm for PcF16 to ∼790 nm for Pc(SR)16 (Fig. 6). Although many of these Pc derivatives are not commercially available at present, the synthesis and purification are facile, so have potential for commercialization.
Future directions
A variety of commercially available or commercially viable Pc can be used in the preparation of solar cells. Unsubstituted Pc macrocyles and their metalo complexes are non-soluble; therefore they must be evaporated under vacuum to form high-quality layers. Future studies should address the means to form highly organized films of soluble Pc to enable solution processing for the fabrication of the devices. In addition to directing the organization of the nanofilms, which consequently can affect the charge transport properties, the exocyclic motif should bring an added functionality to the materials, e.g. facilitate charge dislocation, film stability, and film quality. Other earth abundant metals should be considered since they have a profound effect on the physical properties of the dyes. The morphological features of the domains at the nanoscale should be correlated with performance of the solar cell and the factors that dictate efficiency.
Dyes for DSSC
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) have been extensively studied since they have great potential to become one of the cheapest photovoltaic devices.104,144,145 In particular, they are attractive because of the simple design and fabrication methods, reduced material and manufacturing costs compared to commercial Si based solar cells, and scaled-up large demonstration installations. Since the initial development of DSSC in the late 1990s in the Grätzel laboratory, a substantial amount of research has been devoted to improve individual components and optimize the performance of DSSC, but the greatest conversion efficiency is ∼11%.
The various components in DSSC determine the performance of the dye. In DSSC a wide-band gap semiconductor such as TiO2, ZnO, SnO2 or other metal oxide is sensitized with a dye molecule that absorbs solar light. Nanocrystalline/nanostructured materials are of greatest interest at present. To date, the best hole transporting material (HTM) in these systems is a liquid electrolyte containing I−/I3−. When visible light is absorbed by the dye, an electron from either the singlet or triplet excited state is injected into the conduction band of TiO2 with charge injection rates ranging from 100s of fs to tens of ps. The oxidized dye is regenerated by the redox mediator. The negative charge is collected on the photoanode such as indium-tin-oxide (ITO). The main issues with deployment of DSSC include: long term instability, the electrolyte, photobleaching, and the best dyes so far contain ruthenium. Manufacturing scalability can be an issue, e.g. the efficiency rapidly drops from 10.4% for a 1 cm2 cell to 6.3% for 26.5 cm2 cell.112 Quasi-solid and solid HTM to replace the I−/I3− typically have efficiencies of ca. 5%.146
Optimal properties of the sensitizer include: (1) strong absorbance over most of the solar spectrum, including the near IR; (2) the dye should be strongly grafted to the semiconductor surface; (3) electron injection to conduction band of the metal oxide should be of high quantum efficiency; (4) the dye should be easily regenerated by the redox couple; (5) the dye should be stable in operation for over 20 years. The best performing dyes so far are ruthenium and osmium based polypyridyl complexes in terms of highest conversion efficiency and long term stability.112 The main drawback of these dyes is the high costs of the metals, which would significantly increase if they were to be deployed worldwide. Other dyes have been investigated in an attempt to find cheaper alternatives. In addition to the properties outlined above, Por chromophores have attracted much attention since these molecules are key to photosynthesis. To date, synthetic organic dyes and natural organic dyes make lower efficiency DSSC and other devices, but only a few potential commercially viable derivates have been investigated.
DSSC with porphyrins
The better Por sensitizers have the dye core serving as a harvesting system, a π-conjugated bridge, and an anchoring group that binds to the oxide surface.49 The anchoring groups include carboxylates, phosphonates, and sulfonates.147–149 The structure and position of the anchoring group significantly impact solar cell operation. One of the essential factors for high performance of DSSC is good communication between LUMO orbital of the dye and 3d orbital of Ti.150 Though PO32− groups significantly strengthen binding to metal oxide surface and can increase the stability of the cell, the overall efficiency of DSSC is lower, for reasons that are not yet completely understood. One speculation is that the electronic coupling between the dye and semiconductor is poor. This behavior is characteristic also for Ru based polypyridyl complexes.151
For example, the position of a carboxylic acid group (para or meta) on tetraarylporphyrins dictates the orientation and type of binding to the oxide surface. Galoppini and co-workers studied photophysical and electrochemical properties of Zn Por molecules with carboxylic derivatives as binding groups to TiO2 and ZnO surfaces. When the binding moieties are all on the meta position, presumably resulting in binding planar to the surface and preventing aggregation of chromophores, an improved electron injection into TiO2 is observed because the dyes are closer to the surface.149,152 Similarly, Campbell et al., and Odobel et al., have demonstrated the importance of controlling the orientation and distance from the dye to the surface.101,150
An alternative mode of binding the dyes to oxide surfaces uses oxophilic Hf(IV) and Zr(IV) metal ions that protrude from the Por macrocycle core (Fig. 7).153,154 Since the chromophore orbitals are strongly coupled with the metal ion orbitals, and the metal ion is simultaneously bound to the oxide surface, charge injection is facilitated via both the metal ion and the proximity of the dye to the surface.
 Fig. 7  A new mode of binding Pc and Por to oxide surfaces uses Zr(IV) and Hf(IV), which significantly protrude out of the macrocycle allowing the oxophylic metal ion to simultaneously bind to the surface. This is indicated by the strong binding of the group IV metal ion to both the porphyrin and the defect site of a polyoxometalate shown in the crystal structure of a Por–Hf–polyoxometalate complex (top). A scheme of the possible binding of the Hf or Zr ions to both a Por and a TiO2 (bottom). 
In single dye systems, for the maximum conversion efficiency the dye should absorb part of the NIR spectrum from 900–1000 nm. But the best performing dyes generally absorb only to ∼700 nm.112 To extend the spectral coverage of solar energy to longer wavelengths, the HOMO–LUMO energies of the molecules can be adjusted by modifications of the porphyrin macrocycle. While the LUMO has to stay sufficiently above the conduction band of TiO2 to maintain fast electron injection, the HOMO has to be below the redox potential of the redox mediator to assure reformation of the neutral dye and retain dye stability.155 Elongation of the π-system of the aromatic macrocycle shifts the absorption spectra towards the red with some peak broadening by decreasing the HOMO–LUMO gap. Interesting examples include the Zn β,β′-quinoxalino porphyrins bearing one or two carboxyl binding groups.156 Both porphyrins have broader Soret bands, and increase short circuit current in devices compared to a control molecule without carboxyquinoxalino groups. The molecule substituted with only one carboxyl group results in devices with a 5.2% power conversion efficiency, yet devices containing the Por with two carboxyl groups have 4.0% efficiency. Lee et al. showed that Soret band of a porphyrin can be red shifted by as much as 60 nm,157 but the efficiency using these sensitizers does not go over 1% due to strong aggregation between molecules, and orientation of the anchoring groups.
A so-called “push–pull” Por with an electron donating diarylamino group on the meso position opposite an anchoring COOH group has improved charge separation properties and extended absorption to longer wavelengths.158 This results in larger Jsc and a 6.0% efficiency. Varying both the alkanes and the bridge can lead to devices with ∼7% efficiencies.159 Recombination processes in DSSC tend to decrease Voc and Jsc significantly, thereby reducing overall conversion efficiencies. Long alkyl chains on the Por macrocycle can help protect free sites on the TiO2 surface. Forneli and co-workers found that recombination between the injected electron and oxidized electrolyte was reduced when free base meso tetraphenylporphyrins appended with hydrocarbon chains are deposited on TiO2.160 The alkanes had little effect on recombination with the oxidized form of the dye.
Often, pre-treating the TiO2 surface with acids such as cholic or decylphosphonic helps: (a) reduce the aggregation of porphyrins, (b) reduce desorption from the surface, (c) reduce the recombination by blocking free TiO2 sites. This strategy, however, significantly lowers the dye surface coverage. A newer approach that treats the dye-loaded electrode with phosphinic acid moves the Fermi level of TiO2 to a more positive value thereby increasing Jsc, and slowing down charge recombination processes.161 A series of green Zn Por gave the best result in terms of conversion efficiencies ranging from 5.2%–7.0%. Grätzel and co-workers synthesized β substituted Zn Por with aryl groups as electron donors and malonic acid as an acceptor group. The best performing Por resulted in an efficiency of 7.1% using a liquid electrolyte cell, and an efficiency of 3.6% in solid cell with a specialized hole transporter.162,163
DSSC with phthalocyanines
Pc are complementary to the Por for longer wavelength sensitization since they have strong Q bands in the region of 500–600 nm and Soret bands of smaller intensity around 300 nm.17 The large extinction coefficients (ε = 105 M−1 cm−1) are sufficient to reduce the thickness of dye sensitized films relative to many other dye systems. The core Pc chromophore is very stable, thus has good potential for applications in DSSC. Pc can be synthesized in high yeilds98,120 and are currently used as dyes and colorants in the textile industry, as inks, and for recordable CDs. Simple Pc tend to aggregate on TiO2 surfaces to a greater extent than Por, which is observed as a broadening of absorption spectra compared to the solution phase. This aggregation generally results in the deactivation of the excited state, thereby reducing electron injection.
There are numerous initiatives to expand Pc absorption to the near-IR region and improve solubility in common organic solvents, e.g. the significant research by Torres, Durant and co-workers.122,144 While Ru–Pc have been used in DSSC systems,164–166 other metal ions inserted into Pc core, e.g. Ti, Zn, Fe will make the dyes more economically feasible.167,168 Pc are most commonly substituted with carboxylic or sulfonic groups for better attachment to oxide surface, but unfortunately, these tend to have poor solubility and do not perform well.169 Since the efficiency of DSSC with Pc is typically less than 3%, Pc are more generally used in the fabrication of thin-film devices where they can be thermally evaporated onto conducting or semiconducting surfaces rather than processed from the solution phase.
One of the best performing ZnPc was reported by Grätzel and Nazeeruddin and has an extended π-conjugated system and is unsymmetric.169,170 To prevent aggregation and improve solubility, three bulky tert-butyl groups were appended to the macrocycle, and two carboxylic groups immobilize Pc on TiO2. This molecular design gives 2.35% efficiency. Similarly, a ZnPc with a COOH linker directly attached to the macrocycle slightly improves cell efficiency to 3.52%.169,171
Adding coadsorbents such as chenodeoxycholic acid on TiO2 can have multiple effects on the performance of solar cells. Generally, the TiO2 band edge shifts to negative potentials, consequently increasing Voc in the cell. Chenodeoxycholic acid tends to suppress recombination and prevents dye aggregation on the surface, but decreases dye coverage, which results in lower observed IPCE values and lower photocurrents.149,172
Applications of Pc in DSSC are also limited due to the relatively low energy of the LUMO orbital versus the conduction band of TiO2. Imahori et al. investigated the differences between free base and ZnPc substituted with eight phenyl groups, six of them with tert-butyl and two with carboxyl, for binding the semiconductor surface. Interestingly, the free base Pc did not display a photocurrent response, presumably because of the low energy LUMO orbital. Incorporation of Zn(II) into the Pc increases the LUMO level, driving more favorable electron injection. The overall conversion efficiency of the DSSC was as low as 0.57% with or without coadsorbent indicating suppressed aggregation and self-quenching of the excited state.173 These studies demonstrate that a good understanding of the photochemical and photophysical properties can aid in the design of improved Pc.
DSSC with other organic dyes
Beside metalloporphyrinoids, a significant research effort has focused on designing metal free organic dyes for solar cell devices that have large extinction coefficients (ε = 105 cm−1 M−1) and are easy to synthesize. These two characteristics make them commercially approachable from the cost point of view. However, DSSC with organic dyes are often not very stable due to desorption from the oxide surface and photobleaching under long illumination times and high temperatures. Though many organic dyes do not cover a broad range of solar spectrum, greater absorptivities enable production of thinner TiO2 films, and may result in higher quantum efficiencies and reduced costs.68,109 A generalized structure of organic dyes can be represented as donor/π-conjugated bridge/acceptor, thus in addition to the chromophore, the bridge and acceptor are crucial parameters. Conjugated bridges, e.g. thiophene, can improve charge transfer characteristics. Liquid DSSC with organic dyes can be around 9% efficient using an indoline dye by optimizing semiconducting surface to prevent aggregation.109,174–177 An ionic liquid device led to 7% efficiency, while a solid state solar cell reached 4%.109 Other examples of organic sensitizers include hemicyanine (6.3%), cyanine (4.8%) and squaraine (4.5%) efficiency.109,178 Hara et al. reported that coumarin dye-based devices can have 7.7% efficiencies.179,180
Future directions
The metal ion in Por and Pc can concomitantly affect (1) the excited state photophysics, fluorescence and phosphorescence quantum yields and lifetimes; (2) the electrochemical potentials; (3) the packing of the chromophores in films; and (4) can be used to form supramolecular materials. Yet, only a handful of metal ions have been investigated. Compared to most Ru based complexes, Por and Pc absorb 10 times more light, but since these have narrower absorption bands, combinations of Por and Pc will be needed to cover the solar spectrum. However, these combinations will allow much thinner active layers, e.g. potentially reducing the typically 10 µm thick semiconducting layer of dye-coated TiO2 nanoparticles to 1 µm in DSSC, thereby decreasing losses during charge transport through this layer and reducing costs.155
Cosensitization
Cosensitization with two or more dyes (see above) is a new approach to enhancing light harvesting. Since they compete for free sites on TiO2 surface, a limited number of dyes can be loaded per unit area. Organic molecules with high molar extinction coefficients mean that fewer dye molecules are required for sensitizing the nanocrystalline films because of the increased optical absorption spectra of the dye monolayer. Zhang et al. used a combination of three different organic dyes (merocyanine, hemicyanine, and a squarylium cyanine dye) to construct devices with overall higher efficiencies than each individual dye. The three dyes covered wavelengths from 380 nm to about 700 nm, and a 6.5% efficiency was reported.181 Grätzel et al. showed that a combination of red and blue dyes with an ionic liquid electrolyte increases the photocurrent and results in 6.4% efficient devices.182,183 Using “molecular cocktails” of three organic dyes covering 400–700 nm results in cells that are 7.74% efficient, again more than the performance of each individual dye.171
Cosensitization for the BHJ cell design need not be limited to Pc, vide supra. Por, Pc, and semiconducting polymers in appropriately designed cells, may afford greater spectral coverage with minimized film thicknesses and greater charge dislocation and transport. It remains to be seen if the simple mixtures of different Pc dyes in an active layer are competitive with the dyes layered one at a time.
The addition of C60 derivatives to BHJ devices to enhance the initial charge separation is widely reported. These derivatives often have ligands to bind to the metalo dyes, but the optimum system would use underivatized fullerenes since these are better electron acceptors. Other motifs on the dyes can be used to enhance intermolecular interactions with C60 as a means to design self-organized thin films of Por and Pc with the fullerene. Appending fluorous alkanes and exploiting both π–π and F–π interactions is a recent example (Fig. 8), and the fluorous alkanes may enhance the stability of the films.
 Fig. 8  Fluorous alkanes on a Por induce the formation of thin films with C60 (1:1) because of F–π interactions, whereas the hydrocarbon analogues do not. This strategy allows formation of robust films and obviates making derivatives of the fullerene. See Fig. 3 for synthesis. 
Conclusions
Even though the maximum efficiency of BHJ and DSSC remains low compared to commercial Si based solar cells (maximally ∼20%), significant understanding of the design criteria and mechanisms has allowed the fabrication and testing of new device designs and new molecular designs. Though a great variety of new dyes and metallodyes have been designed, in terms of commercialization most are likely too costly or too fragile to deploy. Dyes such as simple Por and Pc derivatives (e.g.Fig. 9), with very high molar extinction coefficients, can compete strongly with the best performing Ru bipyridyl complexes because they have the advantage of low material costs, simple synthesis, and the possibility to allow fabrication of thinner semiconductor films. Thinner devices make them more favorable for large scale applications because of reduced materials usage. However, increasing efficiency with commercially viable dye remains a keystone issue.
 Fig. 9  Porphyrinoid dyes that are potentially commercially viable are made from simple starting materials without separation of isomers, atropisomers, or other dye compounds if formed (e.g. when two or more aldehydes or pyrroles are used in Por synthesis, or phthalonitriles in Pc synthesis). The sphere represents an earth-abundant metal ion (generally +2 to +4 oxidation state). (A) Halogenated Pc, (B) some Pc derivatives, (C) octaethylporphyrin, (D) the meso aryl groups are orthogonal to the macrocycle in tetraaryporphyrin derivatives. 
Self-assembly and self-organization may allow formation of active layers with several spectrally complementary chromophores in pre-specified geometries to more effectively harvest solar energy and convert it into electrochemical potential energy. Robust but reversible intermolecular interactions, such as metal ion coordination,10,17,67,72,73 can realize complex supramolecular architectures by self-assembly such that the chromophores are in a specified order so that the direction of electron or energy transfer is correspondingly predictable, albeit this does not assure high quantum yields. Conversely, self-organized nanoparticles (NP aggregates) of dyes such as Por16,70,184 and Pc185,186 with much less structural order, or colloidal crystals187 can display significantly enhanced or modulated photonic properties because of quantum mechanical effects at this scale.185,188 A considerable advantage of the organic NP systems is that the dyes can be simple commercial molecules and the exocyclic motif used to enhance materials and photonic properties rather than potentiate intermolecular interactions. Thus, in conjunction with advances in device design, the deployment of commercially viable dyes in the active layers, including chelates of earth-abundant metal ion, will require supramolecular design concepts.
Other hierarchical nanomaterials are a rapidly emerging as new active components for solar energy harvesting and utilization. In addition to the functional groups mentioned above, several polymeric materials composed of symmetric meso aryl Por have shown promise in several types of solar energy applications. Oxidative electropolymerization of tetraaminophenyl Por forms a covalently linked polymer that is analogous to the polyaniline, and these polymeric films are useful materials for solar energy harvesting.189 Ionic free base- and metallo- porphyrins (especially the tetrasulfoxyphenyl, tetracarboxyphenyl, and tetrapyridinium derivatives) have long been known to form a plethora of nanostructured materials depending on pH, ionic strength, mixing, and deposition. Thus fractal patterns, nanotubes, nanorods, and other morphologies have been shown to have useful photonic properties that can translate into light harvesting materials.190,191 These can also be organized onto nanotubular supports such as carbon nanotubes.192-194 Mixing anionic and cationic solutions of these porphyrins afford a mode of self-organization that forms complex but robust nanostructures, for example the nanomaterials composed of pyridinium and sulfate Por reported by Shellnut and coworkers.195,196 Self-organized films of tetrapyridyl Por organized by Pd(II) coordination, and new dyes have demonstrated a capacity for solar energy harvesting.197 Many of these structure are co-formed with fullerene nanotubes. Other mixed dye systems with Pc are reported to enhance solar energy harvesting.198,199 In addition to C60 and carbon nanotubes, pereleydiimides (PDI) are commercially viable electron acceptors in heterojunction devices and porphyrin-PDI constructs have been studied by Waselewski and coworkers.200-204 There should be a way to take advantage of Pc aggregation to form analogous nanostructures as those reported in the extensive literature on Por. Metal organic framework solids of symmetrically substituted metalloporphyrins, especially the cobalt complex, have the potential to adsorb and reduce CO2 in photodriven reactions.205 From our perspective, organic components of solar cells have a bright future.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF, CHE-0847997) and a collaborative grant (CHE-0848786) to Professor James D. Batteas of Texas A&M University and to C.M.D. Hunter College science infrastructure is supported by the NSF, the National Institutes of Health (including RCMI, G12-RR-03037), and CUNY. The authors wish to thank Angela Melillo and Armond Pietrocarlo for helping with manuscript preparation.
References
R. F. Service, Science, 2005, 309, 95 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Casey, Chem. Int., 2005, 27, 8–11 .
R. F. Service, Science, 2005, 309, 548–551 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kalowekamo and E. Baker, Sol. Energy, 2009, 83, 1224–1231 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Drain, B. Christensen and D. C. Mauzerall, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1989, 86, 6959–6962 CAS .
C. M. Drain and D. Mauzerall, Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg., 1990, 24, 263–268 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Drain and D. C. Mauzerall, Biophys. J., 1992, 63, 1556–1563 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Drain and J.-M. Lehn, Chem. Commun., 1994, 2313–2315 RSC   (correction 1995, 2503).
C. M. Drain, K. C. Russel and J.-M. Lehn, Chem. Commun., 1996, 337–338 RSC .
C. M. Drain, F. Nifiatis, A. Vasenko and J. D. Batteas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 2344–2347 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Drain, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 5178–5182 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Drain, J. D. Batteas, G. W. Flynn, T. Milic, N. Chi, D. G. Yablon and H. Sommers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 6498–6502 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Milic, N. Chi, D. G. Yablon, G. W. Flynn, J. D. Batteas and C. M. Drain, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2117–2119 CrossRef CAS .

          C. M. Drain, G. Smeareanu, J. Batteas and S. Patel, in Dekker Encyclopedia of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, ed. J. A. Schwartz, C. I. Contescu and K. Putyera, Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York,  2004, vol. 5, pp. 3481–3502 Search PubMed .
C. M. Drain, G. Bazzan, T. Milic, M. Vinodu and J. C. Goeltz, Isr. J. Chem., 2005, 45, 255–269 CrossRef .
C. M. Drain, G. Smeureanu, S. Patel, X. Gong, J. Garno and J. Arijeloye, New J. Chem., 2006, 30, 1834–1843 RSC .
C. M. Drain, A. Varotto and I. Radivojevic, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 1630–1658 CrossRef CAS .

          J.-M. Lehn, Supramolecular Chemistry: Concepts and Perspectives, Wiley VCH, Weinheim,  1995 Search PubMed .
J.-M. Lehn, Science, 2002, 295, 2400–2403 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. de Silva, S. Uchiyama, T. P. Vance and B. Wannalerse, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2007, 251, 1623–1632 CrossRef .
S. J. Loeb, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 226–235 RSC .
F. J. M. Hoeben, P. Jonkheijm, E. W. Meijer and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1491–1546 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Papaefstathiou and L. R. MacGillivray, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2003, 246, 169–184 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, P. F. Barbara, A. W. Castleman, J. Chang, D. A. Dixon, M. L. Klein, G. L. McLendon, J. S. Miller, M. A. Ratner, P. J. Rossky, S. I. Stupp and M. E. Thompson, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 1297–1336 CrossRef .
L. Basabe-Desmonts, D. N. Reinhoudt and M. Crego-Calama, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 993–1017 RSC .
C. M. Drain, I. Goldberg, I. Sylvain and A. Falber, Top. Curr. Chem., 2005, 245, 55–88 CAS .
M. Schmittel, V. Kalsani and J. W. Bats, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 4115–4117 CrossRef CAS .
T. Milic, J. C. Garno, J. D. Batteas, G. Smeureanu and C. M. Drain, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 3974–3983 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Drain, T. Milic, J. C. Garno, G. Smeureanu and J. D. Batteas, Polym. Prepr. (Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Polym. Chem.), 2004, 45, 346–347 CAS .
P. Thamyongkit, L. Yu, K. Padmaja, J. Jiao, D. F. Bocian and J. S. Lindsey, J. Org. Chem., 2006, 71, 1156–1171 CrossRef CAS .
K. Padmaja, W. J. Youngblood, L. Wei, D. F. Bocian and J. S. Lindsey, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 5479–5492 CrossRef CAS .
K. Padmaja, L. Wei, J. S. Lindsey and D. F. Bocian, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 7972–7978 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wei, D. Syomin, R. S. Loewe, J. S. Lindsey, F. Zaera and D. F. Bocian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 6323–6330 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wei, H. Tiznado, G. Liu, K. Padmaja, J. S. Lindsey, F. Zaera and D. F. Bocian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 23963–23971 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lindsey, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 300–311 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Yasseri, D. Syomin, R. S. Loewe, J. S. Lindsey, F. Zaera and D. F. Bocian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15603–15612 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, S. Surthi, G. Mathur, S. Gowda, Q. Zhao, T. A. Sorenson, R. C. Tenent, K. Muthukumaran, J. S. Lindsey and V. Misra, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 1829–1831 CrossRef CAS .
K. Muthukumaran, R. S. Loewe, A. Ambroise, S.-I. Tamaru, Q. Li, G. Mathur, D. F. Bocian, V. Misra and J. S. Lindsey, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 1444–1452 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, A. A. Yasseri, R. S. Loewe, A. B. Lysenko, V. L. Malinovskii, Q. Zhao, S. Surthi, Q. Li, V. Misra, J. S. Lindsey and D. F. Bocian, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 5568–5577 CrossRef CAS .
A. Balakumar, A. B. Lysenko, C. Carcel, V. L. Malinovskii, D. T. Gryko, K. H. Schweikart, R. S. Loewe, A. A. Yasseri, Z. Liu, D. F. Bocian and J. S. Lindsey, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 1435–1443 CrossRef CAS .
L. Scudiero, K. W. Hipps and D. E. Barlow, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 2903–2909 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Barlow, L. Scudiero and K. W. Hipps, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 4413–4421 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ogunrinde, K. W. Hipps and L. Scudiero, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 5697–5701 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Splan and J. T. Hupp, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 10560–10566 CrossRef CAS .
A. Prodi, C. Chiorboli, F. Scandola, E. Iengo, E. Alessio, R. Dobrawa and F. Würthner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1454–1462 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ogawa and Y. Kobuke, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2006, 7, 1–16 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Kelley, S. Won Suk, B. Rybtchinski, L. E. Sinks and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3173–3181 CrossRef CAS .

          E. Alessio, Non-covalent Multi-Porphyrin Assemblies: Synthesis and Properties, Springer Verlag, Berlin,  2007 Search PubMed .
X.-F. Wang and H. Tamiaki, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 94–106 RSC .
C. M. Drain, S. Gentemann, J. A. Roberts, N. Y. Nelson, C. J. Medforth, S. Jia, M. C. Simpson, K. M. Smith, J. Fajer, J. A. Shelnutt and D. Holten, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 3781–3791 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, K. Muthukumaran, I. V. Sazanovich, C. Kirmaier, E. Hindin, J. R. Diers, P. D. Boyle, D. F. Bocian, D. Holten and J. S. Lindsey, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 6629–6647 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schlögl and S. B. Abd Hamid, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 1628–1637 CrossRef .
D. Mansuy, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1993, 125, 129–141 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lerouge, G. Cerveau, R. J. P. Corriu, C. Stern and R. Guilard, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1553–1555 RSC .
V. Laget, C. Hornick, P. Rabu, M. Drillon and R. Ziessel, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 178–180, 1533–1553 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ishikawa, M. Sugita, T. Ishikawa, S.-y. Koshihara and Y. Kaizu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 11265–11271 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhao, C. Zhong, C. Stern, A. G. M. Barrett and B. M. Hoffman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9769–9775 CrossRef .
M. Zhao, C. Zhong, C. Stern, A. G. M. Barrett and B. M. Hoffman, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 3377–3385 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Miller, Polyhedron, 2001, 20, 1723–1725 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ishikawa, M. Sugita, T. Ishikawa, S.-y. Koshihara and Y. Kaizu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 8694–8695 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Cheng, N. A. Thai, K. Grohmann, L. C. Teague and C. M. Drain, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 6928–6932 CrossRef CAS .
M. Koepf, A. Trabolsi, M. Elhabiri, J. A. Wytko, D. Paul, A. M. Albrecht-Gary and J. Weiss, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 1279–1282 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 6130–6143 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Choi, T. Yamazaki, I. Yamazaki and T. Aida, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 150–158 CrossRef CAS .
H. E. Toma, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2003, 14, 845–869 CAS .
H. Imahori, Y. Mori and Y. Matano, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 51–83 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. M. Drain, J. T. Hupp, K. S. Suslick, M. R. Wasielewski and X. Chen, J. Porphyrins phthal., 2002, 6, 243–256 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) K. Ariga, J. P. Hill, Y. Wakayama, M. Akada, E. Barrena and D. G. de Oteyza, J. Porphyrins phthal., 2009, 13, 23–34 Search PubMed .
F.-T. Kong, S.-Y. Dai and K.-J. Wang, Adv. OptoElectron., 2007, 1–13 Search PubMed .
Z. Liu, A. A. Yasseri, J. S. Lindsey and D. F. Bocian, Science, 2003, 302, 1543–1545 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gong, T. Milic, C. Xu, J. D. Batteas and C. M. Drain, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14290–14291 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pasetto, X. Chen, C. M. Drain and R. W. Franck, Chem. Commun., 2001, 81–82 RSC   (erratum 507).
K. F. Cheng, N. A. Thai, L. C. Teague, K. Grohmann and C. M. Drain, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4678–4680 RSC .
S. J. Lee and J. T. Hupp, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2006, 250, 1710–1723 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Hupp, Struct. Bonding, 2006, 121, 145–165 CAS .
M. H. Keefe, K. D. Benkstein and J. T. Hupp, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2000, 205, 201–228 CrossRef CAS .
V. F. Slagt, P. W. N. M. van Leeuwen and J. N. H. Reek, Dalton Trans., 2007, 2302–2310 RSC .
K. Tashiro and T. Aida, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 189–197 RSC .
M. Schmittel, R. S. K. Kishore and J. W. Bats, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2007, 5, 78–86 RSC .
A. Satake, O. Shoji and Y. Kobuke, J. Organomet. Chem., 2007, 692, 635–644 CrossRef CAS .
S. George and I. Goldberg, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 755–762 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nishiyama, T. Yokoyama, T. Kamikado, S. Yokoyama and S. Mashiko, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 253113 CrossRef .
A. Hosseini, M. C. Hodgson, F. S. Tham, C. A. Reed and P. D. W. Boyd, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 397–403 CrossRef .

  (a) J. A. A. W. Elemans, V. F. Slagt, A. E. Rowan and R. J. M. Nolte, Isr. J. Chem., 2005, 45, 271–279 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R.v. Hameren, P. Schön, A. M.v. Buul, J. Hoogboom, S. V. Lazarenko, J. W. Gerritsen, H. Engelkamp, P. C. M. Christianen, H. A. Heus, J. C. Maan, T. Rasing, S. Speller, A. E. Rowan, J. A. A. W. Elemans and R. J. M. Nolte, Science, 2006, 314, 1433–1436 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. Hoogboom, P. M. L. Garcia, M. B. J. Otten, J. A. A. W. Elemans, J. Sly, S. V. Lazarenko, T. Rasing, A. E. Rowan and R. J. M. Nolte, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 11047–11052 CrossRef CAS .
J. Elemans, A. E. Rowan and R. J. M. Nolte, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 11, 2661–2670 Search PubMed .
D. S. Lawrence, T. Jiang and M. Levett, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 2229–2260 CrossRef CAS .
D. Philp and J. F. Stoddart, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1996, 35, 1154–1196 CrossRef .
P. R. Carlier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2602–2605 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kameyama, A. Satake and Y. Kobuke, Tetrahedron Lett., 2004, 45, 7617–7620 CrossRef CAS .
M. de Napoli, S. Nardis, R. Paolesse, M. G. H. Vicente, R. Lauceri and R. Purrello, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5934–5935 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. El-Khouly, O. Ito, P. M. Smith and F. D'Souza, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2004, 5, 79–104 CrossRef CAS .
F. D'Souza and O. Ito, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 1410–1422 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. A. W. Elemans, R. v. Hameren, R. J. M. Nolte and A. E. Rowan, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1251–1266 CrossRef CAS .
S. Karan, D. Basak and B. Mallik, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 434, 265–270 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Y.-L. Yang, K. Deng and C. Wang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 439, 76–80 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kobayashi, S.-i. Nakajima, H. Ogata and T. Fukuda, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 6294–6312 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guiard, The Porphyrin Handbook, Academic Press, New York,  2000–2003 Search PubMed .
A. Varotto, C.-Y. Nam, I. Radivojevic, J. P. C. Tomé, J. A. S. Cavaleiro, C. T. Black and C. M. Drain, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2552–2554 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Leznoff and J. L. Sosa-Sanchez, Chem. Commun., 2004, 338–339 RSC .
D. Samaroo, C. E. Soll, L. J. Todaro and C. M. Drain, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 4985–4988 CrossRef CAS .
D. Samaroo, M. Vinodu, X. Chen and C. M. Drain, J. Comb. Chem., 2007, 9, 998–1011 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Campbell, A. K. Burrell, D. L. Officer and K. W. Jolley, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1363–1379 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang and S. R. Forrest, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1022–1032 CrossRef CAS .
P. Heremans, D. Cheyns and B. P. Rand, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1740–1747 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1788–1798 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Perez, C. Borek, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9281–9286 CrossRef CAS .
J. Roncali, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1719–1730 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Potscavage, A. Sharma and B. Kippelen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1758–1767 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peet, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1700–1708 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mishra, M. K. R. Fischer and P. Bäuerle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2474–2499 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kippelen and J.-L. Brédas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 251–261 RSC .
K. Yu and J. Chen, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2009, 1–10 Search PubMed .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef CAS .
J. Heinz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1984, 23, 831–847 CrossRef .
S. Kim, J. K. Lee, S. O. Kang, J. Ko, J.-H. Yum, S. Fantacci, F. De Angelis, D. Di Censo, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16701–16707 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bazzan, W. Smith, L. Francesconi and C. M. Drain, Langmuir, 2007, 24, 3244–3249 .
W. J. Doherty, R. Friedlein and W. R. Salaneck, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2724–2729 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Chan, A. E. Schuckman, L. M. Pérez, M. Vinodu, C. M. Drain and J. D. Batteas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 6110–6118 CrossRef CAS .
B. Albinsson and J. Mårtensson, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2008, 9, 138–155 CrossRef CAS .
S. Honda, T. Nogami, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 804–810 Search PubMed .

          C. C. Leznoff and A. B. P. Lever, Phthalocyanines Properties and Applications, Wiley VCH, New York,  1993 Search PubMed .
N. Kobayashi, H. Ogata, N. Nonaka and E. A. Luk'yanets, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 5123–5134 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Rio, M. S. Rodríguez-Morgade and T. Torres, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2008, 6, 1877–1894 RSC .
D. R. Tackley, G. Dent and W. E. Smith, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2001, 3, 1419–1426 RSC .
P. Peumans, A. Yakimov and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 3693–3723 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ameri, G. Dennler, C. Lungenschmied and C. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 347–363 RSC .
X. Chen, J. Thomas, P. Gangopadhyay, R. A. Norwood, N. Peyghambarian and D. V. McGrath, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13840–13843 CrossRef CAS .
G. Calogero, G. Di Marco, S. Caramori, S. Cazzanti, R. Argazzi and C. A. Bignozzi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1162–1172 RSC .

          M. Gouterman, in The Porphyrins, ed. D. Dolphin, Academic Press, New York,  1978, pp. 1–153 Search PubMed .
H. Sharghi and A. H. Nejad, Tetrahedron, 2004, 60, 1863–1868 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, S. Uchida, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3013–3015 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. Hong, B. Maennig, R. Lessmann, M. Pfeiffer, K. Leo and P. Simon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 203505 CrossRef .
P. Sullivan, S. Heutz, S. M. Schultes and T. S. Jones, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 1210–1212 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T.-Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222–225 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Kinoshita, T. Hasobe and H. Murata, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 083518 CrossRef ; 
  (b) T. Hasobe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 44–57 RSC .
G. Dennler, H.-J. Prall, R. Koeppe, M. Egginger, R. Autengruber and N. S. Sariciftci, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 073502–073503 CrossRef .
A. Yakimov and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 1667–1669 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Hoppe and N. Sariciftci, in Photoresponsive Polymers II, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  2008, pp. 1–86 Search PubMed .
M. Egginger, R. Koeppe, F. Meghdadi, P. A. Troshin, R. N. Lyubovskaya, D. Meissner and N. S. Sariciftci, Proc. SPIE-Int. Soc. Opt. Eng., 2006, 6192, 61921Y-8 .
X. Gong, M. Tong, Y. Xia, W. Cai, J. S. Moon, Y. Cao, G. Yu, C.-L. Shieh, B. Nilsson and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2009, 325, 1665–1667 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Allred, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1961, 17, 215–221 CAS .
Q. Tang, H. Li, Y. Liu and W. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14634–14639 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yu, F. Zhu, H. Wang, G. Li and D. Yan, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 114503–114505 CrossRef .
C. C. Leznoff, A. Hiebert and S. Ok, J. Porphyrins phthalocyanines, 2007, 11, 537–546 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. O'Regan and J. R. Durrant, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1799–1808 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Gonçalves, V. D. Z. Bermudez, H. A. Ribeiro and A. M. Mendes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 655–667 Search PubMed .
L. Schmidt-Mende, U. Bach, R. Humphry-Baker, T. Horiuchi, H. Miura, S. Ito, S. Uchida and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 813–815 CrossRef .
S. Cherian and C. C. Wamser, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 3624–3629 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jasieniak, M. Johnston and E. R. Waclawik, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 12962–12971 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rochford and E. Galoppini, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5366–5374 CrossRef CAS .
F. Odobel, E. Blart, M. Lagrée, M. Villieras, H. Boujtita, N. E. Murr, S. Caramori and C. A. Bignozzi, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 502–510 RSC .
C. She, J. Guo, S. Irle, K. Morokuma, D. L. Mohler, H. Zabri, F. Odobel, K.-T. Youm, F. Liu, J. T. Hupp and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 6832–6842 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rochford, D. Chu, A. Hagfeldt and E. Galoppini, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4655–4665 CrossRef CAS .
A. Falber, B. P. Burton-Pye, I. Radivojevic, L. Todaro, R. Saleh, L. C. Francesconi and C. M. Drain, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 2459–2466 CrossRef CAS .
A. Falber, L. Todaro, I. Goldberg, M. V. Favilla and C. M. Drain, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 454–467 CrossRef CAS .
N. Robertson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2338–2345 CrossRef CAS .
S. Eu, S. Hayashi, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, Y. Araki and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4396–4405 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Lee, D. L. Lee, W. N. Yen and C. Y. Yeh, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl. Chem., 2009, 46, 730–737 Search PubMed .
C.-W. Lee, H.-P. Lu, C.-M. Lan, Y.-L. Huang, Y.-R. Liang, W.-N. Yen, Y.-C. Liu, Y.-S. Lin, E. W.-G. Diau and C.-Y. Yeh, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 1403–1412 CrossRef CAS .
H.-P. Lu, C.-L. Mai, C.-Y. Tsia, S.-J. Hsu, C.-P. Hsieh, C.-L. Chiu, C.-Y. Yeh and E. W.-G. Diau, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 10270–10274 RSC .
A. Forneli, M. Planells, M. A. Sarmentero, E. Martinez-Ferrero, B. C. O'Regan, P. Ballester and E. Palomares, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1652–1658 RSC .
A. Allegrucci, N. A. Lewcenko, A. J. Mozer, L. Dennany, P. Wagner, D. L. Officer, K. Sunahara, S. Mori and L. Spiccia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1069–1073 RSC .
W. M. Campbell, K. W. Jolley, P. Wagner, K. Wagner, P. J. Walsh, K. C. Gordon, L. Schmidt-Mende, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Q. Wang, M. Grätzel and D. L. Officer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11760–11762 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, W. M. Campbell, E. E. Bonfantani, K. W. Jolley, D. L. Officer, P. J. Walsh, K. Gordon, R. Humphry-Baker, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15397–15409 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. O'Regan, I. López-Duarte, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, A. Forneli, J. Albero, A. Morandeira, E. Palomares, T. Torres and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2906–2907 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, M. Grätzel and B. A. Murrer, Chem. Commun., 1998, 719–720 RSC .
A. Morandeira, I. López-Duarte, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, B. O'Regan, C. Shuttle, N. A. Haji-Zainulabidin, T. Torres, E. Palomares and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9250–9251 CrossRef CAS .
E. Palomares, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, S. A. Haque, T. Torres and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2112–2113 RSC .
P. Balraju, M. Kumar, M. S. Roy and G. D. Sharma, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 1325–1331 CrossRef CAS .
N. Robertson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1012–1014 CrossRef CAS .
L. Giribabu, C. V. Kumar, P. Y. Reddy, J.-H. Yum, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Chem. Sci., 2009, 121, 75–82 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Cid, J.-H. Yum, S.-R. Jang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. Martínez-Ferrero, E. Palomares, J. Ko, M. Grätzel and T. Torres, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8358–8362 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Yum, S.-r. Jang, R. Humphry-Baker, M. Grätzel, J.-J. Cid, T. Torres and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5636–5640 CrossRef CAS .
S. Eu, T. Katoh, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano and H. Imahori, Dalton Trans., 2008, 5476–5483 RSC .

          S. Ito, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Liska, R. Charvet, P. Comte, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Péchy, M. Takata, H. Miura, S. Uchida and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater.,  2006, 18(9), 1202–1205 Search PubMed.
R. Argazzi, C. A. Bignozzi, T. A. Heimer, F. N. Castellano and G. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 11815–11816 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Li, D. W. Zhang, Z. Sun, Y. W. Chen and S. M. Huang, Microelectron. J., 2009, 40, 108–114 CrossRef CAS .
R. Katoh, A. Furube, S. Mori, M. Miyashita, K. Sunahara, N. Koumura and K. Hara, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 542–546 RSC .
H. Tian, X. Yang, R. Chen, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 674–677 RSC .
K. Hara, M. Kurashige, Y. Dan-oh, C. Kasada, A. Shinpo, S. Suga, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, New J. Chem., 2003, 27, 783–785 RSC .
K. Hara, K. Sayama, Y. Ohga, A. Shinpo, S. Suga and H. Arakawa, Chem. Commun., 2001, 569–570 RSC .
Y. Chen, Z. Zeng, C. Li, W. Wang, X. Wang and B. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2005, 29, 773–776 RSC .
D. Kuang, P. Walter, F. Nüesch, S. Kim, J. Ko, P. Comte, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 10906–10909 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fang, L. Su, J. Wu, Y. Shen and Z. Lu, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 270, 145–151 CrossRef CAS .
G. Smeureanu, A. Aggarwal, C. E. Soll, J. Arijeloye, E. Malave and C. M. Drain, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 12133–12140 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nitschke, S. M. O'Flaherty, M. Kröll, J. J. Doyle and W. J. Blau, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 383, 555–560 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Keuren, A. Bone and C. Ma, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 6079–6084 CrossRef .
S. Berhanu, M. A. McLachlan, D. W. McComb and T. S. Jones, Proc. SPIE-Int. Soc. Opt. Eng., 2008, 7052, 70521H-10 .
R. Rangel-Rojo, H. Matsuda, H. Kasai and H. Nakanishi, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 2000, 17, 1376–1382 Search PubMed .
M. G. Walter and C. C. Wamser, J. Phys. Chem, 2010, 114, 7563–7574 Search PubMed .
T. Hasobe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 44–57 RSC .
G. De Luca, A. Romeo and L. M. Scolaro, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7309–7315 CrossRef .
G. De Luca, A. Romeo, V. Villari, N. Micali, I. Foltran, E. Foresti, I. G. Lesci, N. Roveri, T. Zuccheri and L. M. Scolaro, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6920–6921 CrossRef CAS .
E. Maligaspe, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, T. Hasobe, O. Ito and F. D’Souza, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8158–8164 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. D. Sandanayaka, T. Murakami and T. Hasobe, J. Phys. Chem. C., 2009, 133, 18369–18378 CrossRef .
K. E. Martin, Z. Wang, T. Busani, R. M. Garcia, Z. Chen, Y. Jiang, Y. Song, J. L. Jacobsen, T. T. Vu, N. E. Schore, B. S. Swartzentruber, C. J. Medforth and J. A. Shelnutt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8194–8201 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Li, C. J. Medforth and J. A. Shelnutt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 2440–2441 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori, T. Umeyama and S. Ito, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1809–1818 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bottari, G. de la Torre, D. M. Guldi and T. s. Torres, Chem. Rev., 2010 DOI:10.1021/cr900254z .
B. E. Hardin, J.-H. Yum, E. T. Hoke, Y. C. Jun, P. Péchy, T. s. Torres, M. L. Brongersma, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. D. McGehee, Nano Lett., 2010 DOI:10.1021/nl1016688 .
A. W. Hains, C. Ramanan, M. D. Irwin, J. Liu, M. R. Wasielewski and T. J. Marks, ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 2009, 2, 175–185 Search PubMed .
J. E. Bullock, M. T. Vagnini, C. Ramanan, D. T. Co, T. M. Wilson, J. W. Dicke, T. J. Marks and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Phys. Chem., 2010, 114, 1794–1802 Search PubMed .
M. T. Colvin, E. M. Giacobbe, B. Cohen, T. Miura, A. M. Scott and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Phys. Chem., 2010, 114, 1741–1748 Search PubMed .
T. Miura, R. Carmieli and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Phys. Chem., 2010, 114, 5769–5778 Search PubMed .
M.R. Wasielewski, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1910–1921 CrossRef CAS .
E.-Y. Choi, P. M. Barron, R. W. Novotny, H.-T. Son, C. Hu and W. Choe, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 48, 426–428 .

Footnote† IR and AV contributed equally to this manuscript.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:
Ivana Radivojevic	Ivana Radivojevic finished her PhD at Hunter College of The City University New York in 2010. She received her Diploma in Chemical Engineering from Faculty of Technology and Metallurgy, University of Belgrade, Serbia, in 2003. Currently, she is working in the Nanophotonics and Material Chemistry laboratory of Prof. Charles Michael Drain. Her research is focused on characterization of self-organized functional nanostructured materials on surfaces for photonic applications.
Alessandro Varotto	Alessandro Varotto is a postdoctoral Scholar at the University of California, Santa Barbara with the Mitsubishi Chemical-Center for Advanced Materials, in Prof. Fred Wudl's group. He received his ‘Laurea’ degree in Chemistry from University of Padova, Italy, in Prof. Tommaso Carofiglio lab and his PhD in Chemistry from The City University of New York in 2009, under the supervision of Prof. Charles Michael Drain at Hunter College. His doctoral thesis focused on self-organized organic dyes on surfaces for photonic devices.
Christopher Farley	Christopher Farley received his Bachelor's in physics from Fordham University in 2004. After several years away from science, he recently entered The Graduate Center at The City University of New York to pursue a PhD in Chemistry with a concentration in Nanotechnology and Materials Science. He is currently working in Prof. Charles Michael Drain's laboratory at Hunter College, CUNY, investigating the photophysics of potential nanoscale materials for photonic devices.
Charles Michael Drain	Charles Michael Drain studied art at the University of Missouri at St Louis, and took a chemistry course to understand the chemistry of lithography only to find that he liked chemistry, and that the mechanism was largely unknown. He earned his PhD at Tufts University with Prof. Barry B. Cordon in 1989. His studies on the supramolecular chemistry of porphyrins began with postdoctoral work with Prof. David Mauzerall at Rockefeller University, followed by two years with Prof. Jean-Marie Lehn in Strasbourg and Prof. Dewey Holten at Washington University. He joined the faculty at Hunter College in 1996.

Broader context
Organic and hybrid organic/inorganic photovoltaic devices have great potential in a variety of applications and can be economically viable because of the reduced manufacturing costs, reduced dependence on rare metals, versatility of substrates, and less environmental impact because of reduced energy to make the devices and minimized use of toxic metals. Because of the very large quantities needed for deployment of these devices, the dyes used in solar energy absorption must also be commercially viable. While there are several classes of dyes that may be suitable, porphyrinoids, such as porphyrins and phthalocyanines, and the metallo derivatives, are very attractive because of their stability and wide range of photonic properties.


 	Fig. 1  Diverse dyes, from left to right: C60, free base 5,10,15,20-tetraphenylporphyrin; 5,10,15,20-tetraphenylporphyrinato Fe(III)Cl; 5,10,15,20-tetra-(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin; tetra-(tert-butyl)phthalo-cyaninato Zn(II); hexadecylfluorophthalocyaninato Zn(II); monoamino-tri-(tert-butyl)phthalocyaninato Zn(II); mono(thiopentyl)pentadecyl-fluorophthalocyaninato Zn(II); Pc 735; Pc787. See Fig. 2–4.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structures of dye molecules.	 

 	Fig. 3  Facile modification of a core porphyrin platform, TPPF20 enables investigation of new molecular design concepts. For example, R = (CH2)11CH3, or CH2CH2(CF2)9CF3. Using a core Por platform affords chemically compatible systems.	 

 	Fig. 4  Facile modification of a core phthalocyanine platform, PcF16 enables investigation of new molecular design concepts. For example, Pc735 has eight S(CH2)11CH3 mostly on the outside positions and Pc787 substitutes all of the F for the thioalkane. SCH2CH2(CF2)9CF3 can also be used to form highly fluorous derivatives. Using a core Pc platform affords chemically compatible systems.	 

 	Fig. 5  Sequentially dipping a substrate into separate solutions of a cationic tetra-N-methylpyridinium porphyrin (top left) and an anionic polyoxometalate (top right) allows formation of thin films with highly controlled optical densities on a variety of substrates (bottom). These films are stable even to sonicating in water (W), toluene (T) and 100 mM NaCl. This is an alternative to spin coating and vacuum deposition methods.	 

 	Fig. 6  The band gap of chemically compatible dyes on a core Pc platform can be systematically tuned by a balance of electron withdrawing F and electron donating SR groups. The dark purple areas are where two or more overlap.	 

 	Fig. 7  A new mode of binding Pc and Por to oxide surfaces uses Zr(IV) and Hf(IV), which significantly protrude out of the macrocycle allowing the oxophylic metal ion to simultaneously bind to the surface. This is indicated by the strong binding of the group IV metal ion to both the porphyrin and the defect site of a polyoxometalate shown in the crystal structure of a Por–Hf–polyoxometalate complex (top). A scheme of the possible binding of the Hf or Zr ions to both a Por and a TiO2 (bottom).	 

 	Fig. 8  Fluorous alkanes on a Por induce the formation of thin films with C60 (1:1) because of F–π interactions, whereas the hydrocarbon analogues do not. This strategy allows formation of robust films and obviates making derivatives of the fullerene. See Fig. 3 for synthesis.	 

 	Fig. 9  Porphyrinoid dyes that are potentially commercially viable are made from simple starting materials without separation of isomers, atropisomers, or other dye compounds if formed (e.g. when two or more aldehydes or pyrroles are used in Por synthesis, or phthalonitriles in Pc synthesis). The sphere represents an earth-abundant metal ion (generally +2 to +4 oxidation state). (A) Halogenated Pc, (B) some Pc derivatives, (C) octaethylporphyrin, (D) the meso aryl groups are orthogonal to the macrocycle in tetraaryporphyrin derivatives.	 
Footnote
† IR and AV contributed equally to this manuscript.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
