Spray-deposited CuInSe2  nanocrystal photovoltaics  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00098A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00098A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1600-1606Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsSpray-deposited CuInSe2 nanocrystal photovoltaics

        
          
            Vahid A. 
            Akhavan
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Brian W. 
            Goodfellow
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Matthew G. 
            Panthani
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Dariya K. 
            Reid
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Danny J. 
            Hellebusch
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Takuji 
            Adachi
          
        
      bc and 

        
          
            Brian A. 
            Korgel
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Texas 78712-1062. E-mail: korgel@che.utexas.edu;  Fax: +1-512-471-7060;   Tel: +1-512-471-5633
bTexas Materials Institute and Center for Nano- and Molecular Science and Technology, The University of Texas at Austin, Texas 78712
cDepartment of Chemistry, The University of Texas at Austin, Texas 78712
Received 
      28th May 2010
    , Accepted 26th July 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      6th September 2010
    AbstractPhotovoltaic devices (PVs) were fabricated by spray-coating an ink of copper indium diselenide (CIS) nanocrystals as the light-absorbing layer. Without high-temperature post-deposition annealing, PVs were made on glass and plastic substrates with power conversion efficiencies of up to 1.9% and 1.1%, respectively, under AM1.5 illumination. The mild processing conditions also enabled fabrication of alternative device structures that are not compatible with conventional high-temperature PV processing, including substrate and superstrate designs, and devices with transparent back contacts of conducting indium tin oxide (ITO) and plastic substrates. Device performance is observed to be limited by poor charge extraction from the nanocrystal films, with the highest efficiencies being obtained from PVs with relatively thin absorber layers. To improve light absorption without sacrificing internal quantum efficiency, stacked PVs were fabricated, which exhibited improved short-circuit current and power conversion efficiency compared to stand-alone single junction devices.

Broader context
New low-cost, high throughput manufacturing strategies are needed to dramatically lower the cost of solar cells. Here, we explore a “spray-painting” approach to photovoltaic device (PV) fabrication using dispersions of nanocrystals to deposit inorganic layers without using high-temperature and vacuum processing. Photovoltaic devices (PVs) were fabricated by spray-coating dispersions of CuInSe2 (CIS) nanocrystals. PVs could be made on various substrates, including glass and plastic, with power conversion efficiencies near 2%. Since high-temperature processing is not required, back contact metals other than Mo, which is the standard back contact metal for CIS PVs, could be used, including Au and ITO. The device efficiency was found to be significantly better using Au compared to Mo for these devices. Generally, however, device efficiency is relatively low, limited by poor extraction of photogenerated carriers from the nanocrystal layers. The highest efficiency devices are obtained with relatively thin light absorber (i.e., nanocrystal) layers that are only absorbing a fraction of the sunlight. One way to increase the device efficiency is demonstrated: stacking of semi-transparent spray-deposited devices. This approach leads to enhanced light absorption in the device without significantly increasing the distance required for electrons and holes to travel to the electrodes.

1. Introduction
Crystalline silicon solar cells dominate worldwide sales of photovoltaic devices (PVs), yet remain relatively expensive. Thin film PVs with lower manufacturing cost, like amorphous Si, copper indium gallium diselenide (CIGS) and CdTe, are gaining marketshare, but still require significant cost reductions to enable widespread adoption.1 Here, we report the development and use of an ink of copper indium diselenide (CIS) nanocrystals that can be spray-coated under ambient conditions onto various substrates to fabricate PVs. This materials system is compatible with high throughput roll-to-roll processing on plastic substrates.
CIGS is a particularly good semiconductor for PVs: it has a very high optical absorption coefficient, good photostability, and an optical gap that is well-suited for high efficiency single junction devices that can be tuned between 1.04 and 1.68 eV by manipulating the Ga content.2 Vapor-deposited CIGS PVs have demonstrated power conversion efficiencies as high at 19.9%3 and are being commercially produced.4 The CIGS layers in commercial devices, however, are deposited by a relatively expensive multistage coevaporation process that requires high temperature and vacuum. In practice, it is difficult to control the stoichiometry of the film over large device areas using these processes, which ultimately leads to elevated manufacturing cost,5 as small deviations in stoichiometry across the film lead to variable device performance.6 CIGS PVs have also been made on flexible substrates, with efficiencies as high as 12.8%;9 however, the processes used for those devices are not compatible with light-weight plastic substrates and the highest efficiencies require sacrificial rigid supports, vacuum processing, and high-temperature deposition.10 A single-step layer deposition technique that does not require high temperature or vacuum, utilizes a high percentage of raw material input, that is compatible with roll-to-roll processing on flexible plastic substrates, and enables improved process automation would greatly reduce the overall cost of manufacturing CIGS PV devices.7,8
Recently, PVs with CIGS absorber layers have been made using nanocrystal-based inks deposited under ambient conditions.11,12 Synthetic methods for colloidal CIGS nanocrystals with chalcopyrite structure and targeted stoichiometry have been developed, in which Cu, In, Ga, and Se reactants are combined into one pot in a high boiling solvent and heated in the presence of a capping ligand, oleylamine.11,12 The ligand-coated nanocrystals readily disperse in organic solvents and can be cast onto substrates under ambient conditions. We have demonstrated that CIS nanocrystal-based PVs can be fabricated with these materials, but with very low efficiency, of less than 0.3%.11 Recently, Hillhouse and Agrawal demonstrated that high-temperature (>500 °C) selenization of CIS-based nanocrystal films can be used to achieve PV efficiencies nearing 10%, but the use of the high-temperature annealing process eliminates the possibility of roll-to-roll processing on plastic substrates.12–14
Here, we demonstrate significant improvement in the single junction PV efficiency of spray-coated CIS nanocrystal PVs that have not been processed using high temperature or vacuum, with power conversion efficiencies of up to 1.9% under AM 1.5 simulated sunlight. CIS nanocrystal films were deposited by spray-coating onto bottom-contact supports of glass or plastic, and then finished with CdS and transparent conductive oxide. The mild deposition conditions of the CIS absorber layer also enabled PV fabrication on a variety of alternative substrates, including flexible kapton polymer (power conversion efficiency of 1.2%) and transparent conductive indium tin oxide (ITO) (power conversion efficiency of 1.1%). The efficiency of the spray-deposited CIS nanocrystal PVs was found to be limited by inefficient electron/hole separation and transport in the nanocrystal layer; the highest efficiencies were obtained from relatively thin devices that absorb only a fraction of the incident sunlight. An approach to increased efficiency by stacking devices with transparent contacts is demonstrated.
2. Experimental details
Chemicals
Oleylamine (OLA; >70%), tributylphosphine (TBP; 97%), copper(I) chloride (CuCl; 99.995+%), indium(III) chloride (InCl3; anyhydrous 99.99%), elemental selenium (99.99%), cadmium sulfate (CdSO4, 99.999%) from Aldrich Chemical Co.; ammonium hydroxide (18M NH3, ACS certified), toluene (99.99%), ethanol (absolute), from Fisher Scientific; and thiourea (99.999%) from Fluka. Oleylamine was degassed by three cycles of freeze-pump-thaw. All other chemicals were used as received without further purification. Copper(I) chloride, indium(III) chloride, TBP and degassed OLA were stored in a nitrogen-filled glovebox to prevent degradation.
CIS nanocrystal synthesis
CIS nanocrystals were synthesized as previously described.11,12 Briefly, 5 mmol of CuCl (0.45 g), 5 mmol of InCl3 (1.11 g), 50 mL of degassed OLA, and a magnetic stir bar are sealed in a 100-mL three-neck flask with septa and an attached condenser-stopcock valve combination. The reaction flask is taken outside the glovebox and mounted on a conventional Schlenk line setup. The flask is purged of oxygen and water by pulling vacuum at 110 °C for 30 min, followed by N2 bubbling at 110 °C for 5 min while stirring.
A 1M TBP:Se solution is separately prepared in the glovebox by dissolving 10 mmol of Se (0.79 g) in 10 mL TBP in a 25 mL vial under magnetic stirring. The resulting Se reactant solution is drawn into a syringe and taken outside the glovebox in preparation for injection into the reaction flask on the Schlenk line. At this point, the temperature of the reaction flask is raised to 240 °C at a heating rate of approximately 50 °C min−1. When the temperature in the flask reaches 180 °C, the TBP:Se stock solution is injected into the flask. The reaction mixture is then maintained at 240 °C for 10 min. The heating mantle is removed and the reaction is allowed to cool to room temperature. The contents of the reaction vessel and 10 mL of ethanol are mixed in a glass centrifuge tube and the nanocrystal product is precipitated by centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 5 min. The supernatant is discarded. The nanocrystal product is redispersed in 5 mL of toluene and centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 5 min to remove the larger and poorly capped product. The supernatant is added to a new glass centrifuge tube and the precipitate is discarded. Ethanol is then slowly added to the nanocrystal dispersion until the mixture becomes slightly turbid. The mixture is centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 5 min to again precipitate the nanocrystal product. The supernatant is discarded and the solid product is redispersed in toluene to a final concentration of 20 mg mL−1.
Materials characterization
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed using either a Phillips 208 TEM operated with 80 kV accelerating voltage or a JEOL 2010F TEM at 200 kV. TEM samples were prepared by drop casting from chloroform onto a 200 mesh nickel grid with a carbon film (Electron Microscopy Sciences). Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was carried out using an Oxford INCA EDS detector on the JEOL 2010F TEM.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained for device-ready nanocrystal films using a Zeiss Supra 40 VP SEM operated at 10 keV accelerating voltage. Images were collected through the in-lens detector. Samples were grounded to the SEM base using a strip of copper tape to prevent charging of sample surface.
X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed using a Bruker-Nonius D8 Advance θ–2θ Powder Diffractometer equipped with a Bruker Sol-X Si(Li) solid-state detector and a rotating stage. Cu Kα (λ = 1.54 Å) radiation was used. XRD data was collected at 0.02 increments of 2θ at a scan rate of 12°/min with a theta-theta goniometer and sample rotation of 15 RPM.
UV–vis–NIR absorbance spectroscopy was performed at room temperature using a Varian Cary 500 UV–vis–NIR spectrophotometer. Nanocrystals were dispersed in hexane in quartz cuvettes. Absorbance was also measured for thin, optically transparent nanocrystal films deposited by spray-coating on a quartz substrate.
PV device fabrication and testing
Conductive back contacts (molybdenum, gold, or ITO) were deposited on soda lime glass (Delta Technologies, 25 mm × 25 mm × 1.1 mm polished float glass) or kapton (Dupont) using conventional vapor deposition techniques. Molybdenum and ITO were RF sputtered and gold was thermally evaporated. 20 mg mL−1 solutions of nanoparticles were prepared for the spray-deposition. CIS nanocrystal layers were spray-coated with an airbrush (Iwata Eclipse HP-CS) operated at 50 psig of head pressure. A CdS buffer layer was deposited by chemical bath deposition following procedures described by McCandless and Shafarman.15 Briefly, the device is preheated to 90 °C by placing it directly on a heated hotplate; 1 mL of an aqueous solution containing 3 mM CdSO4, 0.53 M thiourea, and 8.1 M NH3 is dropcast on the surface of the device and the reaction chamber is quickly sealed by placing an inverted petri dish directly above the substrate. The reaction is allowed to proceed for 2 min. At that stage, the substrate is removed and washed by running DI water over the surface. The film is dried by blowing clean air over the surface. i-ZnO/ITO top contacts were deposited by RF sputtering from targets of ZnO (99.9%, Lesker) in an atmosphere of 0.5% O2 in Ar (99.95%, Praxair) or ITO (99.99% In2O3: SnO2 90:10, Lesker) in an Ar atmosphere (research grade, Praxair). The final active region of the device was 8 mm2 (a 4 mm × 2 mm rectangle).
PV response was measured using a Keithley 2400 General Purpose Sourcemeter and a Xenon Lamp Solar Simulator (Newport) equipped with an AM1.5 filter. Incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were gathered using a home-built spectrophotometer with a lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research Systems, model SR830), a monochromator (Newport Cornerstone 260 1/4M), and a Si photodiode calibrated by the manufacturer (Hamamatsu). IPCE was collected under ambient light. PV devices were stacked by placing the active areas directly on top of each other and then connecting the stacked devices in parallel using conductive silver paint (SPI Supplies). There was less than 5% area offset between multiple stacked devices.
3. Results and discussion
CIS nanocrystals

Fig. 1 shows TEM, SEM, and XRD data for the oleylamine-capped CIS nanocrystals. The nanocrystals are composed of chalcopyrite CIS with an average diameter of 12 ± 4 nm and a slightly irregular, faceted shape. The atomic ratio of Cu:In:Se in the nanocrystals determined by EDS is nearly 1:1:2, with a tendency to be slightly Cu rich, with a Cu/(Cu + In) ratio of 52%. Using the approach reported here for nanocrystal synthesis, it has not been possible to vary the Cu:In ratio. The nanocrystals disperse in various organic solvents, including chloroform, hexane, toluene and acetone. Toluene was used as the dispersing solvent for the nanocrystal inks used to fabricate devices, as it provided the most uniform coatings of the solvents that were tested. An SEM image of a spray-deposited 300 nm thick nanocrystal film is shown in Fig. 2c. The film has uniform thickness and is nearly free of drying cracks, which is crucial for obtaining functional PVs without electrical shorts. In practice, it is very difficult to completely eliminate drying cracks, and even the film in Fig. 2c has some observable cracks. However, much thicker films were much more prone to cracking, and films thicker than about 800 nm tended to be electrically shorted due to significant cracking during the drying of the films. Film uniformity is still one aspect of the device fabrication process that requires further optimization.
 Fig. 1  (a, b) TEM images of CIS nanocrystals; (c) an SEM image of a film of CIS nanocrystals spray-deposited from a toluene dispersion; (d) XRD pattern of CIS nanocrystals indexed to chalcopyrite CIS (PDF#97-006-8928). The inset in (d) is the average Cu, In, and Se composition determined by EDS of a field of nanocrystals. 
 Fig. 2  (a) SEM image of a cross-section of the PV device built using the conventional device architecture with spray-coated CIS nanoparticle layer in place of vapor deposited CIS layer and (b) the I–V characteristics and power conversion efficiency of a typical PV device with this structure. 
PV devices fabricated by spray-deposition of CIS nanocrystals

Fig. 2 shows a cross-sectional SEM image of a PV device made by spray-depositing a CIS nanocrystal layer. The device has a similar architecture as those with the highest reported efficiency for CIGS,3 consisting of layers of glass/Mo/CIS(nc)/CdS/ZnO/ITO. No high-temperature annealing or selenization of this device was carried out. This particular device had a power conversion efficiency under AM 1.5 simulated sunlight of 1.18%.
Since the absorber layers are not processed at high temperature, alternative substrates and contacts can be used, including transparent conductive ITO or mechanically flexible plastic. Fig. 3 shows photographs of different kinds of PV devices that could be prepared by spray-depositing CIS nanocrystal absorber layers. The devices generally consist of a sandwiched construction of the p-type light-absorbing nanocrystal layer interfaced with an n-type semiconductor (CdS, ZnO) positioned between two planar conducting contacts. The thin CdS layer (5–10 nm) also helps protect the CIS nanocrystal layer during sputtering of the window layer.
 Fig. 3  (Top) Photographs of PVs fabricated by spray-depositing CIS nanocrystals on various substrates: (top left and right) glass and (top, middle) plastic (kapton). (Bottom) Illustration of the device layer structure as viewed from the top and from the side. 
Replacement of the Mo back contact with Au
Conventional vapor-deposited CIGS PVs are fabricated on soda lime glass substrates with Mo back contacts because it can withstand the high selenization/annealing temperatures used to process the CIGS layer. The work function of Mo, however, is not well suited for the devices, as it creates a Schottky barrier with the CIS layer. During the selenization process, a thin MoSe2 layer is created that provides ohmic contact to the CIGS layer, so this is not a problem.16 However, without annealing, the Schottky barrier between Mo and CIS significantly limits device performance.
Gold (Au) has a higher work function than Mo and should make a better back contact metal for the p-type CIS nanocrystal layer. Au is not used in conventional CIGS PVs because it cannot withstand the high-temperature annealing conditions. We have found that CIS nanocrystal PVs made with Au contacts on glass outperform those made with Mo contacts. Au contacts are also easy to deposit on plastic substrates for flexible devices. Fig. 4 shows device characteristics of PV devices made from spray-deposited CIS nanocrystal layers on Au contacts on (4a) glass and (4b) plastic substrates.
 Fig. 4  
I–V characteristics of spray-deposited CIS nanocrystal PVs with gold back contacts on (a) soda lime glass and (b) plastic (kapton). The power conversion efficiencies (PCE) were measured under AM1.5 illumination. 
Influence of CIS layer thickness on device efficiency
The relatively modest power conversion efficiency (up to 2% PCE under AM1.5 illumination) of the nanocrystal-based PVs is primarily related to the lower short-circuit current (Jsc) compared to the conventional vapor-deposited devices. Vapor-deposited CIS layers are capable of producing Jsc in excess of 40 mA cm−2;23 whereas, we have not been able to achieve Jsc values greater than 10 mA cm−2 from the CIS nanocrystal PVs. Interestingly, the nanocrystal PVs with the highest Jsc have been made with relatively thin absorber layers that are less than 200 nm thick—far too thin to absorb all of the incident light. Incomplete absorption of the incident light leads to losses in the power conversion efficiency. Devices made with thicker nanocrystal layers absorb more light, but do not have improved efficiency. Fig. 5 summarizes performance data for devices made with varying nanocrystal layer thickness, showing the trends in power conversion efficiency with nanocrystal layer thickness.
 Fig. 5  Device characteristics measured for PVs made with spray-deposited CIS nanocrystal layers of varying thickness. ηAM1.5 is the PCE under AM1.5 illumination, Voc is the open circuit voltage, and Jsc is the short circuit current density. 

Fig. 6a shows the optical absorbance spectra for a 200 nm thick CIS nanocrystal film. The layer absorbs only a limited fraction of incident light, especially at the longer wavelengths near the band edge. It is also worth noting that the optical absorption of the nanocrystal layer is weaker than a dense CIS film due to the presence of the ligands—approximately 30% of the volume in the film is occupied by ligands, which only absorb very short wavelength blue and UV light. Devices made with thicker nanocrystal films absorb proportionally more light, but do not perform better. In fact, Jsc was found to decrease with increasing CIS film thickness, as shown in Fig. 5. This means that the nanocrystal films have a high charge carrier trap density with significant electron-hole recombination that leads to losses in efficiency.
 Fig. 6  (a) UV–vis–NIR absorbance spectra of a 200 nm thick CIS nanoparticle film on a quartz substrate and the corresponding fraction of incident light that is absorbed. (b) External and internal quantum efficiency (EQE and IQE) of a PV device made with a spray-deposited CIS nanocrystal layer. EQE is determined from the incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra, which is a measure of short circuit current as a function of light wavelength. The IQE is then determined from the EQE by accounting for the fraction of light that is absorbed by the CIS layer at each wavelength (i.e., the absorbance spectra). It should be noted that these IQE calculations do not account for additional absorption in the active layer that might occur due to internal reflections within the device. Furthermore, light absorption by CdS at wavelengths below 500 nm is not accounted for in the IQE calculation. 

Fig. 6b shows the external and internal quantum efficiencies of a CIS nanocrystal device as a function of photon wavelength. The external quantum efficiency (EQE)—also known as incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra—are determined by measuring the short circuit current (at zero bias) when the device is illuminated with varying photon wavelength. The EQE are not equivalent to power conversion efficiencies, but nonetheless provide revealing data about internal losses due to electron-hole recombination. The EQE is lowest near the CIS optical gap due to low light absorption, but extends across all visible wavelengths, indicating that the devices are functioning via light absorption by the nanocrystals.
Another way to examine the losses in the device due to electron-hole recombination is to calculate the internal quantum efficiency (IQE). The IQE is obtained by normalizing the EQE with the optical absorption in the nanocrystal layer and does not depend on how much light the layer absorbs. The devices made with thin nanocrystal layers had reasonably high values of IQE, of about 25% across the visible spectrum. The peak in IQE at about 450 nm is related to light absorption by the CdS buffer layer. Clearly, the PCE of the nanocrystal devices could be significantly improved if losses due to recombination could be reduced. Perhaps this could be accomplished by improving capping ligand passivation of traps on the nanocrystal surfaces and by reducing the energy barrier to interparticle charge transport with thinner ligand layers.
Improved efficiency by device stacking
One other way to improve overall PCE, given the significant amount of recombination in the device is to stack multiple devices, with thin absorber layers and transparent contacts to combine the efficiency of each device layer. Fig. 7 shows the device characteristics of a spray-deposited CIS nanocrystal PV with ITO back contacts. Such a device configuration is not possible with conventional vapor deposition due to the high-temperature annealing and selenization. The CIS nanocrystal layer in this device absorbs less than 50% of the AM1.5 solar spectrum (Fig. 7b).
 Fig. 7  (a) I–V characteristics of a device prepared with a transparent ITO back contact, and (b) the fraction of the incident light absorbed and transmitted by the device on ITO determined from the UV–vis absorbance spectra of the device. 

Fig. 8 shows the device performance of stacked PV structures with two and three junctions compared to a single junction device. The stacked devices have enhanced Jsc. For example, the triple-stacked, spray-deposited CIS nanocrystal PV device had a 70% improvement in Jsc compared to a single junction device. However, in these particular devices, Voc and the fill factor also decreased when the devices were stacked, reducing the gains in enhanced Jsc enough that the PCE did not increase. Nonetheless, stacked devices could be made that also exhibited higher PCE. Fig. 9 shows a stacked PV device with significantly enhanced PCE compared to the single junction devices. This device was made by layering a semi-transparent device with ITO top and bottom contacts over a device with an ITO top contact and a Au bottom contact, which yielded a power conversion efficiency of 2.1% under AM 1.5 simulated sunlight. Table 1 summarizes the device parameters for the two different stacked PV structures. Combining the Au back contact junction with an ITO back contact junction resulted in 20% improvement in PCE over the single junction devices (Fig. 9).
Table 1 Summary of device characteristics obtained from stacked junction spray-deposited CIS nanocrystal devices with transparent back contacts






Multiple Transparent Junctions
Highest Efficiency Stacked Device


One Junction
Two Junctions
Three Junctions
Bottom Device
Top Device
Stacked Device





η
AM1.5

1.1%
1.11%
0.97%
1.79%
1.01%
2.10%



J
sc/mA cm−2
5.34
7.907
8.87
7.96
4.62
10.88



V
oc/mV
467
371
349
468
458
465


Fill Factor
0.442
0.379
0.349
0.479
0.478
0.414




 Fig. 8  
I–V characteristics of nearly transparent devices prepared with ITO back and top contacts placed in a stacked device configuration. 
 Fig. 9  
I–V characteristics of two CIS nanocrystal PVs measured independently and in a stacked configuration under AM1.5 illumination. 
The reason that all of the gains in Jsc have not translated directly into higher device efficiency is that the ITO contacts have suffered from a relatively low shunt resistance. Fig. 10 shows a comparison of the dark I–V characteristics of CIS nanocrystal devices prepared with Au and ITO back contacts. The series resistance (Rs) and shunt resistance (Rsh) of the devices were estimated by fitting the data to a diode equation, (1)A is the area, J0 is the saturation current density under reverse bias, and n is the ideality factor of the device, with k and T representing Boltzmann's constant and the temperature. Devices made with Au back contacts have significantly higher shunt resistance than the devices with ITO back contacts. Lower shunt resistance leads to reduced Voc and FF and power conversion efficiency and must be improved in order to realize the full benefit of stacking the semi-transparent PVs. The stacked device structure used in Fig. 9 is an example of a structure in which the use of lower performance ITO contacts is minimized by using a Au bottom contact, which also provides a reflective back contact to help increase the total amount of light absorption by the device.
 Fig. 10  
I–V characteristics of typical diodes used for the stacked structure devices that were prepared on Au and ITO back contacts. Measured data (open circles) were modeled (solid lines) using eqn (1). The best fit of eqn (1) to the data gives the diode parameters tabulated in the inset. 
4. Conclusions
PV devices with reproducible and reliable power output were fabricated by spray-coating CIS nanocrystals without post-deposition annealing. Layered Au/CIS/CdS/ZnO/ITO PV devices exhibited power conversion efficiencies of up to 1.9% for single-junction devices and 2.1% for stacked-junction devices under AM 1.5 illumination. The device efficiency still requires significant improvement; however, it is similar to that of other nanocrystal devices that have been fabricated without post-deposition high-temperature annealing. For example, Cd- and Pb-containing nanocrystal devices have exhibited efficiencies as high as 3.6%,17–21 and Cu2S or Cu(Zn,Sn)S2 systems have demonstrated efficiencies up to 1.5%.22–24 Nanocrystal-based devices in general have suffered to date from low Jsc. One approach to improving Jsc is to perform a post-deposition high-temperature anneal to sinter the films and reduce the grain boundary density in the film, as Hillhouse and Agrawal have demonstrated for CuIn1−xGax(S1−ySey)2 PVs, in which they have achieved power conversion efficiency of more than 10%.13,14 Stacking single-junction nanocrystal devices provides a potential route for improved light harvesting and increased Jsc for significantly improved power conversion efficiency without the need for high-temperature annealing.
A nanocrystal ink that could be used to fabricate high efficiency PVs without the need for high-temperature processing would change the way PVs are made. New contact and substrate combinations could be used, with high throughput roll-to-roll processing on lightweight, flexible plastic substrates. At the moment, however, nanocrystal-based PVs require higher efficiency. This means that a better understanding of how to passivate defects and traps in the nanocrystal layers and at materials interfaces in the devices, without resorting to high-temperature sintering, is needed and remains an ongoing topic of research.
Acknowledgements
This research was funded in part by the Robert A. Welch Foundation (Grant no. F-1464) and the Air Force Research Laboratory (FA8650-07-2-5061). We also thank Paul Barbara, Ananth Dodabalapur and Chris Lombardo for helpful discussions.
Notes and references

          Trends in Photovoltaic Applications, International Energy Agency: Photovoltaic Power Systems Programme,  2009, http://www.iea.pvps.org/products/download/rep1_18.pdf Search PubMed .
S. H. Wei and A. Zunger, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 78, 3846–3856 CrossRef CAS .
I. Repins, M. A. Contreras, B. Egaas, C. DeHart, J. Scharf, C. L. Perkins, B. To and R. Noufi, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2008, 16, 235–239 Search PubMed .
Companies reporting or given a timetable for production of commercial CIGS solar cells include Miasolé, Solyndra, HelioVolt, Nuvosun, Nanosolar, SoloPower, Ascent Solar and Solorion among others. Ascent Solar and Solorion are working on manufacturing flexible solar panels on metal foils. SulfurCell, Johanna Solar Technologies and Applied Quantum Technologies are working on manufacturing commercial CIS modules. Centrotherm Inc. now offers full manufacturing line specifically focused on vapor-deposited CIGS manufacturing.
M. Powalla and B. Dimmler, Thin Solid Films, 2000, 361–362, 540–546 CrossRef CAS .
R. Noufi, R. Axton, C. Herrington and S. K. Deb, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1984, 45, 668–670 CrossRef CAS .

          K. E. Knapp, T. L. Jester and G. B. Mihalik, Proceedings of 28th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialist Conference, Piscataway,  2000 Search PubMed .

          J. R. Tuttle, T. Schuyler, E. Choi and J. Freer, Proceedings of the 20th European Photovoltaic Solar energy Conference and Exhibition, Barcelona,  2005 Search PubMed .
F. Kessler and D. Rudmann, Sol. Energy, 2004, 77, 685–695 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Tiwari, M. Krejci, F.-J. Haug and H. Zogg, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 1999, 7, 393–397 Search PubMed .
M. G. Panthani, V. Akhavan, B. Goodfellow, J. P. Schmidtke, L. Dunn, A. Dodabalapur, P. F. Barbara and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16770–16777 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, S. J. Kim, M. Kar, W. N. Shafarman, R. W. Birkmire, E. A. Stach, R. Agrawal and H. W. Hillhouse, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2982–2987 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, G. M. Ford, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3060–3065 CrossRef CAS .

          Q. Guo, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, 2009 AIChE Annual Meeting, Nashville,  2009, p. 447C Search PubMed .

          B. E. McCandless and W. N. Shafarman, US Patent 6,537,845,  2003 .
U. Rau and H. W. Schock, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1999, 69, 131–147 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, M. L. Geier and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2005, 310, 462–465 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Luther, M. Law, M. C. Beard, Q. Song, M. O. Reese, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3488–3492 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, J. M. Luther, H. Zheng, Y. Wu and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1699–1703 CrossRef CAS .
G. I. Koleilat, L. Levina, H. Shukla, S. H. Myrskog, S. Hinds, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 833–840 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Choi, Y. F. Lim, M. B. Santiago-Berrios, M. Oh, B. R. Hyun, L. Sun, A. C. Bartnik, A. Goedhart, G. G. Malliaras, H. D. Abruna, F. W. Wise and T. Hanrath, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3749–3755 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, C. Wadia, W. Ma, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2551–2555 CrossRef CAS .
C. Steinhagen, M. G. Panthani, V. Akhavan, B. Goodfellow, B. Koo and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12554–12555 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11672–11673 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Broader context
New low-cost, high throughput manufacturing strategies are needed to dramatically lower the cost of solar cells. Here, we explore a “spray-painting” approach to photovoltaic device (PV) fabrication using dispersions of nanocrystals to deposit inorganic layers without using high-temperature and vacuum processing. Photovoltaic devices (PVs) were fabricated by spray-coating dispersions of CuInSe2 (CIS) nanocrystals. PVs could be made on various substrates, including glass and plastic, with power conversion efficiencies near 2%. Since high-temperature processing is not required, back contact metals other than Mo, which is the standard back contact metal for CIS PVs, could be used, including Au and ITO. The device efficiency was found to be significantly better using Au compared to Mo for these devices. Generally, however, device efficiency is relatively low, limited by poor extraction of photogenerated carriers from the nanocrystal layers. The highest efficiency devices are obtained with relatively thin light absorber (i.e., nanocrystal) layers that are only absorbing a fraction of the sunlight. One way to increase the device efficiency is demonstrated: stacking of semi-transparent spray-deposited devices. This approach leads to enhanced light absorption in the device without significantly increasing the distance required for electrons and holes to travel to the electrodes.


 	Fig. 1  (a, b) TEM images of CIS nanocrystals; (c) an SEM image of a film of CIS nanocrystals spray-deposited from a toluene dispersion; (d) XRD pattern of CIS nanocrystals indexed to chalcopyrite CIS (PDF#97-006-8928). The inset in (d) is the average Cu, In, and Se composition determined by EDS of a field of nanocrystals.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) SEM image of a cross-section of the PV device built using the conventional device architecture with spray-coated CIS nanoparticle layer in place of vapor deposited CIS layer and (b) the I–V characteristics and power conversion efficiency of a typical PV device with this structure.	 

 	Fig. 3  (Top) Photographs of PVs fabricated by spray-depositing CIS nanocrystals on various substrates: (top left and right) glass and (top, middle) plastic (kapton). (Bottom) Illustration of the device layer structure as viewed from the top and from the side.	 

 	Fig. 4  
I–V characteristics of spray-deposited CIS nanocrystal PVs with gold back contacts on (a) soda lime glass and (b) plastic (kapton). The power conversion efficiencies (PCE) were measured under AM1.5 illumination.	 

 	Fig. 5  Device characteristics measured for PVs made with spray-deposited CIS nanocrystal layers of varying thickness. ηAM1.5 is the PCE under AM1.5 illumination, Voc is the open circuit voltage, and Jsc is the short circuit current density.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) UV–vis–NIR absorbance spectra of a 200 nm thick CIS nanoparticle film on a quartz substrate and the corresponding fraction of incident light that is absorbed. (b) External and internal quantum efficiency (EQE and IQE) of a PV device made with a spray-deposited CIS nanocrystal layer. EQE is determined from the incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra, which is a measure of short circuit current as a function of light wavelength. The IQE is then determined from the EQE by accounting for the fraction of light that is absorbed by the CIS layer at each wavelength (i.e., the absorbance spectra). It should be noted that these IQE calculations do not account for additional absorption in the active layer that might occur due to internal reflections within the device. Furthermore, light absorption by CdS at wavelengths below 500 nm is not accounted for in the IQE calculation.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) I–V characteristics of a device prepared with a transparent ITO back contact, and (b) the fraction of the incident light absorbed and transmitted by the device on ITO determined from the UV–vis absorbance spectra of the device.	 



η
AM1.5
	1.1%	1.11%	0.97%	1.79%	1.01%	2.10%

J
sc/mA cm−2	5.34	7.907	8.87	7.96	4.62	10.88

V
oc/mV	467	371	349	468	458	465
Fill Factor	0.442	0.379	0.349	0.479	0.478	0.414

 	Fig. 8  
I–V characteristics of nearly transparent devices prepared with ITO back and top contacts placed in a stacked device configuration.	 

 	Fig. 9  
I–V characteristics of two CIS nanocrystal PVs measured independently and in a stacked configuration under AM1.5 illumination.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 10  
I–V characteristics of typical diodes used for the stacked structure devices that were prepared on Au and ITO back contacts. Measured data (open circles) were modeled (solid lines) using eqn (1). The best fit of eqn (1) to the data gives the diode parameters tabulated in the inset.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
