Environmental impact and potential health risks of 2D nanomaterials  - Environmental Science: Nano (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EN00401J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EN00401J
(Critical Review)
Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 1617-1633Environmental impact and potential health risks of 2D nanomaterials

        
          
            Michaela 
            Fojtů†
, 
      
        
          
            Wei Zhe 
            Teo
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Martin 
            Pumera
          
          
        
      *
      Division of Chemistry & Biological Chemistry, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 637371, Singapore. E-mail: pumera.research@gmail.com
Received 
      8th May 2017
    , Accepted 5th June 2017First published on 19th July 2017AbstractThe prospective intensive utilization of two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials, such as graphene, transition metal dichalcogenides, and black phosphorus, increased the requirements for thorough comprehension of their potential impact on the environment and health. The unique properties of 2D materials originate from their parent material crystalline structure composed of vertically stacked layers. This enables the reduction of their thickness on the atomic layer scale while simultaneously changing their physicochemical properties. Layered nanomaterials are revealing their promising employment in a wide range of applications, from the fabrication of products for everyday use to water purification and applications in biomedicine. The degradation of such materials, their biocompatibility, and their effect on living organisms have begun to attract increased attention since their auspicious application potential is still increasing. Here, we summarize recent knowledge regarding the environmental and health risks of graphene-based materials, transition metal dichalcogenides, and black phosphorus. We have summarized the current progress and findings concerning their biocompatibility, nanotoxicity, and biodistribution, bringing awareness to the complexity of these phenomena.Martin PumeraProf. Martin Pumera has been a faculty member at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, since 2010. He received his PhD at Charles University, Czech Republic, in 2001. After two postdoctoral stays (in the USA and Spain), he joined the National Institute for Materials Science, Japan, in 2006 for a tenure-track arrangement and stayed there until Spring 2008 when he accepted a tenured position at NIMS. In 2009, Prof. Pumera received an ERC-StG award. Prof. Pumera has a broad interest in nanomaterials and microsystems in the specific areas of the chemistry of 2D materials, nanotoxicity, environmental science, and energy storage devices. He is the editor-in-chief of Applied Materials Today (Elsevier), a member of the Editorial Board of Chem. Eur. J., Electrochem. Commun., Electrophoresis, Electroanalysis, The Chemical Record, and ChemElectroChem. He has published over 450 peer-reviewed articles and has an h-index of 65.

Environmental significance
The aim of this review is to provide a comprehensive overview of recent studies concerning the toxicity and possible environmental risks of two-dimensional materials. It provides an evaluation of the knowledge gaps that should be filled in order to disclose the real safety risks associated with their everyday utilization so that we can benefit from their unique properties.

Introduction
Today, the term “engineered nanomaterials (ENMs)” broadly refers to any anthropogenic substance with a lateral size between 1 and 100 nm that can be found in many consumer products such as food packaging, sunscreens, cosmetics, washing machine detergents, fabric, and paints.1–3 According to the Nanotechnology Consumer Products Inventory (CPI) created by the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars and the Project on Emerging Nanotechnology in 2005 to document products containing nanomaterials that are marketed and distributed in the commercial marketplace, there are a total of 1814 nanomaterial-containing consumer products listed in the inventory as of March 2015.4 This number represents a 500% increase in the number of such consumer products listed in the online CPI since it was launched a decade ago in 2006.5 Consumer products listed in the CPI are grouped into eight consumer goods categories. Fig. 1 shows the number of products in each major category between 2007 and 2014.4 The Health and Fitness category, which consists of seven subcategories such as Personal Care, Clothing, Cosmetics, and Sunscreen products, has the largest number of products in the CPI (42%). Among these subcategories, Personal Care is the largest, constituting about one-third of the products included in the Health and Fitness category. Sports equipment, such as tennis rackets, baseball bats, and bicycle frames, is embedded with carbon nanotubes for improved strength; these products come under the Health and Fitness category as well.6
 Fig. 1  Number of nanomaterial-containing consumer products listed in the CPI from 2007 in each major category and in the Health and Fitness subcategories. Reproduced from ref. 4. 
A special group of ENMs that we focused on in this review represents two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials that have gained increasing attention in the last two decades because of their versatile utilization in sensing applications,7–9 energy storage and conversion devices,10,11 optoelectronics,12,13 and water purification.14,15 Among the most intensively studied 2D nanomaterials are graphene, graphene oxide, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), and black phosphorus. All of these materials have the characteristic of having particle dimensions on the nanometer-length scale (<100 nm). Despite intensive research concerning possible industrial applications of these unique materials, evaluation of their environmental toxicity as a risk to humans remains a matter of concern. Therefore, recent rapid progress in 2D nanomaterial synthesis has drawn increased attention to their environmental safety. Here, we present an overview of current studies evaluating the toxicity of the most widely utilized 2D nanomaterials and their interactions with the environment and with biological samples. Furthermore, we introduce our perspectives and discuss the challenges this promising field is facing. We hope that this will bring increased awareness to the complexity of these phenomena and will contribute to a better understanding of the interactions and fate of 2D nanomaterials in nature.
2D layered materials
Before moving into describing the interaction of 2D materials with living organisms, we will briefly review them in the following sections.
Graphene-based materials
Graphene-based nanomaterials represent one of the most important and most intensively studied groups of 2D materials that show versatile application potential in electronics, catalysis, or synthesis of advanced membranes or nanocomposites.16 The structure of graphene is a single layer of sp2-bonded carbon atoms.17 Large-scale production of graphene and graphene oxide (GO) is achieved by top-down approaches based on either mechanical, physical, or chemical exfoliation of graphite using strong acids and oxidants.18 Various modifications of the original chlorate-based (Hofmann) or permanganate (Hummers) methods have been developed.19–21 Graphene oxide differs from graphene by the presence of hydroxyl and epoxide groups on its basal plane and carboxylic groups at its edges.17 Owing to the presence of oxygen-containing functional groups on the surface, GO possesses favorable properties for the management of heavy metal pollution. These oxygen moieties enable the sorption of pollutants, e.g. antibiotics or environmental pollution, and make GO a promising candidate for use in water purification. Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) is then produced by thermal annealing or chemical treatment eliminating functional groups on the GO surface. Additionally, many ecological methods of GO reduction have recently been described, utilizing environmentally-friendly compounds such as aluminum powder22 or tea polyphenols.23 Graphene-based materials also demonstrated favourable properties for biomedical applications such as near-infrared (NIR) photothermal therapy for cancer,24,25 Alzheimer's disease, diagnosis of cancer cells and associated biomarkers, cancer imaging, and drug delivery.26–28
Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs)
Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are a family of around 40 materials, some of which exist as naturally occurring minerals.30,31 They can be represented by the general formula MX2, where M represents any transition metal element from group 4, 5, or 6 (e.g., Ti, Zr, V, Nb, Mo, and W) in the periodic table and X represents a chalcogen (S, Se, or Te).29
Research in TMDs has been ongoing since the 1960s and several interesting properties exhibited by these materials were observed.31–33 For instance, TMDs can be insulating, semiconducting, metallic, or even superconducting depending on the identities of the transition metal and chalcogen present in the material.34–36 In the bulk form, about two-thirds of the TMDs exist as layered structures. Each of these layers consists of covalently bonded chalcogen and transition metal atoms, arranged as three planes of atoms (X–M–X), as seen in Fig. 2.29 The adjacent layers of the bulk TMDs are held together by weak van der Waals forces of attraction, as in the case of graphite, except that the TMDs exhibit a wide array of polytypes. Bulk and 2D TMDs can be utilized in many applications, including batteries, electrocatalysts, lubricants, and solar cells.37–41
 Fig. 2  Three-dimensional schematic representation of a typical layered transition metal dichalcogenide (MX2) structure. The figure shows three layers of MX2, each layer consisting of covalently bonded M–X arranged as three planes of atoms, with M forming the center plane and X (chalcogen S, Se, Te) forming the top and bottom planes. Reproduced from ref. 29. 
Black phosphorus
Black phosphorus (BP) is the most thermodynamically stable phosphorus allotrope. It is composed of two-dimensional layers of phosphorus atoms that are held together by weak van der Waals forces which therefore enable the preparation of few-layer BP structures and formation of ultrathin two-dimensional nanosheets by exfoliation.42 Besides the great number of potential applications in the physical, electrical, and chemical fields,43–46 a number of studies have recently pointed out its unique properties and promising potential for biomedical applications. This can be attributed to the immense progress made in its synthesis in recent years.47 Until recently, the attention that was paid to BP toxicity was only marginal. Nevertheless, this is progressively changing as its unique electronic and optical properties and promising potential in the life sciences become known.
Fate of 2D nanomaterials in the environment
It is estimated that the amount of ENMs that are released directly into surface water globally can be as much as 66000 metric tons per year.48,49 Upon release into water, these ENMs would likely undergo transformation in the form of aggregation, dissolution, oxidation, sulphidation, or changes in the chemical state.48,50 The rate and extent of these transformations depend mainly on the chemical properties of the water and the length of time that the ENMs spend in the water. Other factors such as size, morphology, and surface properties of the nanomaterials would also affect the degree of transformation. The transformation will cause alteration of the physicochemical properties of the nanomaterials, affecting their interactions with the environment and probably their toxicity.51–53 While there is information on the persistence of nanoparticles in the environment, knowledge about the environmental effects of 2D materials, such as graphene, is more scarce. We will review selected examples of studies that were conducted to examine the transformation of selected 2D nanomaterials and their interactions with living tissues.

In vitro toxicity assessment of 2D nanomaterials
Research on the toxicity of ENMs has increased over the past decade as a result of concerns over escalating human and environmental exposure to these nanomaterials arising from their growing incorporation into consumer products.54 Besides investigating the toxicity of ENMs that have already been introduced in consumer products, nanomaterials that exhibit potential for future applications, especially in the biomedical field, should be examined for possible toxicological effects prior to their utilization. In this way, we could better determine their suitability for employment in the respective fields.
The toxicity of 2D nanomaterials is highly influenced by their interactions with biological systems, which can in turn be affected by the physicochemical properties of nanomaterials such as shape, size, and chemical composition. For instance, graphene oxides can exist in sheets of various layers and sizes, with different functional groups such as carbonyl, epoxyl, hydroxyl, and carboxyl, thus leading to significant differences in their reported toxicity.55 Therefore, toxicity studies should be carried out systematically on well-characterized nanomaterials so that appropriate correlation between the physicochemical variations of a material and their toxicological effects on biological systems can be established. As shown in Fig. 3, a thorough characterization of 2D nanomaterials should be performed to elucidate their physicochemical properties prior to analyzing any data obtained from toxicity assessments of the nanomaterials.
 Fig. 3  
In vitro and in vivo assessments to determine toxicity of nanomaterials. Reproduced from ref. 56. 
Compared to in vivo assessments, in vitro testing methods are fast, low-cost, and do not involve ethical issues of animal testing, making them the ideal model systems for examining the toxicity of ENMs since they require immediate attention.56 Precise and quantifiable measurements with good reproducibility obtained from these in vitro assessments will serve as an initial step towards the evaluation of a nanomaterial's biocompatibility, which is crucial for biomedical applications. There are various known routes for determining the induced toxicity of 2D nanomaterials, including disruption of metabolic activity, cell membrane disintegration, DNA damage, and oxidative stress.54In vitro methods can be used to determine whether these processes have taken place. Such techniques can generally be grouped into two categories: viability assays and functional assays.
Viability assays examine the extent of cell damage/death caused by exposing the cells to 2D nanomaterials. Cellular properties such as mitochondrial activity, membrane integrity, and membrane structure can be probed by specific assays to determine cell viability.57 For example, metabolic assays like MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide) and WST-8 (water-soluble tetrazolium salt) assays assess mitochondrial activity. The tetrazolium reagents in the assays will be reduced in the presence of metabolically active cells to generate colored formazan dyes whose color intensity reflects the percentage of viable cells present.58,59 Necrosis assays measure cell viability through assessing membrane integrity; the LDH (lactate dehydrogenase) assay is an example of such assays. In the presence of lysed cells, LDH is released into the cell media where it oxidizes lactate to pyruvate, which in turn promotes the reduction of the active tetrazolium reagent in the LDH assay to colored formazan.60,61 The percentage of cell viability can then be derived through optical absorbance measurements.
Functional assays enable users to determine the toxicity mechanism through the assessment of particular cellular processes. For example, damage to cell DNA can be investigated using the Comet assay, which is by far the most commonly employed technique.62 The ratio of the fluorescence intensity emitted from the comet “tail” (containing damaged DNA) to that emitted from the “head” (containing intact DNA) is measured using this assay, and the value indicates the degree of DNA damage caused by the nanomaterials.63 Besides damaging DNA, nanomaterials can disrupt cellular processes by inducing oxidative stress, thereby increasing the formation of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as superoxides, hydroxyl radicals, peroxy radicals, and hydrogen peroxide to abnormal levels.57 The amount of ROS in the cells can be quantified by the 2′,7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (DCFDA) assay, a method that has been applied in several studies concerning the toxicity of nanomaterials.64–66 In principle, the cell permeable non-fluorescent probe DCFDA reacts with ROS to produce highly fluorescent 2′,7′-dichlorofluorescein (DCF) as the former accumulates within the cell, and the intensity of the fluorescence reflects the quantity of ROS in the cell.66
However, the unique properties of nanoparticles are also frequent sources of interference affecting the cytotoxicity assessments described above. Nanoparticles possess a large surface area, high adsorption capacity, unique optical properties, and also catalytic activity. Despite known limitations, most of the studies that focused on in vitro evaluation of nanoparticle toxicity still relied on assays that were not primarily designed for evaluation of nanomaterials, e.g., neutral red assay, lactate-dehydrogenase (LDH) assay, formazan-based assays (XTT, MTT, WST), resazurin assay, thiobarbituric (TBA) assay, or Annexin V/propidium iodide staining, and therefore might provide misleading and unreliable results.67–69 Thus, the characteristics of particles and their possible interactions should be taken into account when assessing the toxicity of new nanomaterials prior to choosing a particular assay. The assays designed for assessing cellular viability after nanoparticle administration further need to allow rapid and robust screening. Besides, another crucial demand is their reliability. However, while most of the assays evaluating cytotoxicity are focused on assessing metabolic events, real-time monitoring systems are also available (e.g. xCELLigence Real-Time Cell Analysis system) based on measuring proliferation kinetics.70 Since the standardized assay for assessing nanoparticle toxicity is still lacking, modification of the standard ones, e.g., modified LDH assay (mLDH)71 or a combination of several assorted assays (e.g., metabolism- and proliferation-based) is highly recommended.
In the following sections, we will discuss the properties of graphene-based nanomaterials, transition metal dichalcogenides, and black phosphorus. These groups of nanomaterials represent potential candidates for future commercial introduction.

In vitro toxicity of graphene-based materials
As the number of possibilities of applying graphene-based materials increases, growing attention should be also paid to their effect on biological systems and the environment. Unfortunately, there is substantial inconsistency in the toxicological studies evaluating the effect of graphene-based materials on living tissues. This situation results from the fact that their toxicological effects vary substantially depending on their lateral dimensions and size in general, and on their shape, monodispersity, surface structure, and charge or functionalization.72–74 Therefore, particular aspects influencing particle behavior and its consequent toxicity profile will be discussed.
The cellular uptake mechanism of graphene and its analogues remains rather ambiguous. However, spontaneous membrane penetration was identified as a main uptake mechanism in the case of graphene microsheets.75 In general, carbon- or graphene-based nanomaterials are considered to be safe, having only mild or no toxicity. Even though GO particles were found to induce oxidative stress at low concentrations, only a slight drop in cell viability was observed.76 Further, only slight toxicity was observed after exposure to high concentrations. Generation of ROS was shown to be dependent on the GO concentration. In most of the studies, GO was proven to be non-toxic and biocompatible. Altogether, harmful effects on cells seem to worsen with increasing incubation time.77 Nevertheless, other contradictory effects were observed and further assigned to the initial contact of the particles with the cells. This phase was identified as being the most crucial one for cellular survival. Such a discrepancy in results may be caused by different surface properties causing different levels of protein adsorption on the particle surface. The so-called protein “corona” on the particle surface may then mitigate the toxicity of particles by weakening the interaction with the cells. GO materials were found to exhibit higher toxicity than rGO of the same size. Nevertheless, in comparison with GO, application of rGO increased the concentration of ROS and led to higher expression of the genes involved in the mechanism of oxidative stress.78 In another study, a high level of DNA damage was observed after treatment with GO. No such effect was observed in the case of rGO. It was suggested that the key aspect influencing nanomaterial toxicity is the presence of oxygen-containing groups on the surface of the particles. Therefore, reduction of GO significantly improves the toxicity profile of these particles. It should also be mentioned that the vast majority of papers did not study the effects of particles under physiological conditions. As mentioned above, one of the promising applications of 2D materials resides in cancer therapy. However, cancer and other diseases are pathophysiological states generally accompanied by a high rate of oxidative stress, and it is known that the behavior of particles may differ substantially under conditions of stress.79 A cytochrome c/H2O2 system was proposed to play a key role in stress-induced nanotoxicity. Under stress conditions, GO may facilitate electron transfer from cytochrome c found on the surface of mitochondria to H2O2, which in turn leads to an increase of ROS production resulting in higher cytotoxicity. In contrast, under physiological conditions, cytochrome c protein is located in the inner mitochondrial membrane and therefore is not in direct contact with H2O2.
Besides the complexity of factors affecting the evaluation of nanotoxicity, the inconsistency in studies concerning this topic is also probably influenced by a lack of a uniform assessment approach. Many studies take advantage of colorimetric assays such as MTT, XTT, and other dyes. It should be noted that in many cases these assessments are not suitable for evaluating cell survival after application of nanoparticles. These dyes may fail to predict the harmful effects of particles because their employment often leads to the acquisition of false positive results.80 Another method assessing membrane integrity by evaluating LDH leakage from cells was reported to be unsuitable. Chang et al. remarked that this method may be misleading when assessing the effect of nanoparticles, since they can absorb on the surface of the cells and therefore cause blocking of the leakage channels present in the cellular membrane.76 Simultaneously, this method can impair the exchange of essential compounds between the cells and culture media.
Graphene-based nanomaterials were found to be capable of microbial degradation through the action of naphthalene-degrading bacteria. These microorganisms were isolated from contaminated soil in a graphite mine and were able to oxidize graphite and GO as well as reduced GO.81 Further, enzymatic dispersibility-dependent degradation of graphene oxide was observed using myeloperoxidase derived from human neutrophils82 and by horseradish peroxidase (HRP).83 Interestingly, surface modification of GO by PEG or BSA was proven to decrease the effectiveness of HRP degradation due to steric hindrances. This result highlights the importance of smart nanomaterial design.
Effect of graphene-based particle size and shape
The toxicity of graphene-based particles was proven to be dependent on particle size.76,78 Smaller particles were shown to induce more severe oxidative damage than larger ones. It was also hypothesized that different levels of GO cellular uptake can be achieved by changing the particle size. Das and his co-workers compared GO and rGO nanotoxicities and correlated them with the physicochemical properties of the particles.78 The toxicity of the particles was also observed to be size-dependent. Toxicity gradually decreased in relation to reduction in particle size. This size-dependent effect was attributed to a more intensive interaction of the smaller particles with the surface of the cells. Since the method of preparation strongly affects the structure of GO, it must also be emphasized that generalization of the obtained data for all types of GO might lead to false estimations of particle safety.84 Additionally, variations in toxic effects might also be influenced by the percentage of material impurities, which is usually not negligible.85 Even though many studies were concerned with the application of graphene and graphene oxide materials as drug carriers intended for intravenous administration, surprisingly, very little attention was given to the evaluation of their effect in the bloodstream. Liao et al. explored the effect of graphene and graphene oxide on erythrocytes and human skin fibroblasts, taking into account the effect of particle size, exfoliation, and amount of oxygen adsorbed.80 The hemolytic activity of both particle types was shown to be dose-dependent, as shown in Fig. 4, with GO sheets having the lowest hemolytic effect. Administration of smaller (sonicated) GO particles led to increased hemolysis compared with that of the aggregated larger (untreated) ones. Further, the hemolytic activity of GO was proven to be almost eliminated by chitosan modification. In adherent human skin fibroblasts, compacted graphene sheets caused more intensive generation of ROS than did less densely packed GO and therefore had a greater cytotoxic effect. It was clearly demonstrated that the toxicity of particles should be evaluated in the context of the real environment, since the particle effect on the cells may differ substantially according to their type (suspension vs. adherent cells). Further, the size of the nanoparticles also strongly affects their distribution within an organism. This will be discussed below in a section focused on the in vivo toxicity of graphene-based nanomaterials.
 Fig. 4  (a) Percent hemolysis of erythrocytes incubated with graphene oxide-based particles at concentrations ranging from 3.125 to 200 μg ml−1. Colloidal suspension of GO (GO, red line), GO obtained after 5 h of bath sonication of GO (bGO, blue), GO obtained after 5 min of probe-sonication of GO (pGO-5, green), GO obtained after 30 min of probe-sonication of GO (pGO-30, purple), and graphene sheets obtained after hydrothermal processing of pGO-5 (GS, black) for 3 h at 37 °C with shaking. Data represent mean ± SD from at least five independent experiments, also including the hemolysis percentage after incubation of erythrocytes with pGO-30/chitosan at 100 μg ml−1 for 3 h and 37 °C with shaking. (b) Photographs of erythrocytes after 3 h of exposure to increasing concentrations of GO, bGO, pGO-5, pGO-30, and GS (3.125 to 200 μg ml−1). The amount of red hemoglobin present in the supernatant of blood samples corresponds to the level of membrane damage. Positive and negative controls are marked as (+) and (−), respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. 
Additionally, when studying GO and multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs), the particle shape was found to contribute to differences in the biological effect of graphene-containing materials.86 GO was shown to be only moderately toxic against human cell lines and caused just a slight delay in the hatching of zebrafish embryos at a dose of 50 mg l−1. The level of apoptosis induced by GO was significantly lower than that in the case of MWNTs. Nevertheless, MWNTs caused developmental defects of embryos even after application of half of the concentration used in the case of GO. Variations in biological effects on living tissues were assigned to differences in the geometrical structure of particles.
Effect of graphene-based particle surface modification
The solubility of graphene-based particles in solvent is dependent on the solvent's polarity. In the case of GO, it also plays an important role, as well as the level of its surface oxidation. The surface of GO contains functional oxygen-containing groups, such as hydroxyl, epoxyl, and carboxyl, which facilitate the solubility of GO in water.87 Various functional moieties attached to the surface of these particles were found to improve their solubility. One of the most common, not just for graphene-based particles, is surface coating with polyethylene glycol (PEG) in the process often termed PEGylation. Many studies describe the use of PEG as a means of preventing particle agglomeration and of improving particle cytocompatibility.88–90 Wang and his co-workers grafted core–shell upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) with graphene nanooxide (NGO) via bifunctional polyethylene glycol and then loaded it with phthalocyanine (ZnPc) on the surface of NGO.91 These particles showed good biocompatibility and low cytotoxicity. Remarkably, a synergistic effect of photothermal and photodynamic treatment was observed and displayed a greater therapeutic effect than did each of these therapies individually. Furthermore, the use of ultra-small reduced graphene oxide non-covalently modified with PEG (RGO-PEG) was reported to improve the performance of graphene-based PPT in vivo. Simultaneously, rGO-PEG showed reduced demands on NIR laser power density, which is lower than the one usually applied when using gold nanostructures.88 Graphene-based materials were reported to show favorable antibacterial properties, which will be described in more detail in a subsequent chapter. Nevertheless, their routine utilization is limited because of their low dispersibility in common solvents and lack of low-cost production methods. Other approaches developed in order to increase dispersibility and stability in biological fluids include polyethylene glycol–polypropylene glycol–polyethylene glycol (Pluronic P123), sodium deoxycholate, chitosan, or surface modification with sulphuric acid.27,89,92 Another promising solution appears in the dispersal of graphene-based particles in a nanocomposite matrix.93–95 Carpio et al. dispersed GO in polyvinyl-N-carbazole (PVK).96 The resulting PVK-GO then improved the toxicity against both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria when compared with GO alone, indicating the enhancement of GO antimicrobial properties. In contrast, no toxicity towards mammalian cells was observed.

In vitro toxicity of TMDs
Prior to introducing transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) into industrial and biomedical applications, it is necessary to evaluate the safety risks that might be associated with their utilization. The current lack of studies assessing their toxicity and possible environmental impact hampers the practical application of these materials.
Similar to graphene, also in the case of TMDs, we might expect differences in material properties and toxicity depending on the particle shape, size, and surface chemistry. Nevertheless, the number of studies concerned with the toxicological evaluation of TMDs is still negligible. One of the few in vitro assessments investigated the safety profile of three exfoliated TMDs: MoS2, WS2, and WSe2.97 The data obtained after exposure of the A549 cell line showed that TMDs containing sulphur are less toxic than WSe2, and that both of them do not induce a significant drop in cell viability up to a concentration of 200 μg ml−1. The toxicity induced by MoS2 and WS2 was even lower than that in the case of GO nanomaterials, which highlights their superior biocompatibility and suitability not only for industrial, but also for biomedical applications. In fact, inorganic fullerene-like nanoparticles of WS2 (IF-WS2) were already successfully used as dry lubricants for coating orthodontic stainless steel wires.98 In contrast, after the application of 400 mg ml−1 WSe2, only around 30% of treated cells survived and 50% mortality was observed at a concentration of 100 mg ml−1.97 Even so, the toxicity of WSe2 was found to be comparable to that of GO. In general, from the group of TMDs, MoS2 nanomaterials are the most intensively investigated. Their biocompatibility was further investigated on CCC-ESF-1 (human embryonic epidermal fibroblast cells), A549 (lung adenocarcinoma cells), and K562 cell lines (leukemic cells).99 The application of particles did not significantly affect the growth of the CCC-ESF-1 cell line after the cells were treated with the highest concentration of 3.52 mg l−1 of the material for 48 hours. K562 appeared to be the most sensitive among the cell lines tested, even though application of 3.52 mg l−1 MoS2 particles resulted in only around 10% cell death. The cytotoxicity of MoS2, WS2, and WSe2 was further compared with the effect of GaSe and GeS.100 Surprisingly, compared to other TMDs, GaSe materials induced significantly higher mortality rates of 54% (WST-8) and 46% (MTT) even after exposure to the lowest concentration of 3.125 μg ml−1 for 24 hours. It was suggested that this relatively high cytotoxic effect might be attributed to the better solubility of gallium ions under physiological pH when compared to other transition metals. In contrast, GeS appeared to be generally non-toxic. In addition, similar to graphene-based materials and also in the case of TMDs, some studies report the possible inappropriateness of assays utilizing tetrazolium salts for cytotoxicity assessment.97,100
Besides the chemical composition of materials, the method of exfoliation was also found to greatly change the material behavior of TMDs both in vitro and in vivo. When comparing the effects of aggregated MoS2 (Agg-MoS2) with that of its counterpart exfoliated by lithiation (Lit-MoS2) and MoS2 dispersed by Pluronic F87 (PF87-MoS2), Agg-MoS2 was found to induce severe pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrogenic effects at a cellular level.101 Moreover, when compared to Agg-MoS2, 2D-MoS2 nanomaterials also proved to be safer in terms of lung injury. In general, these data imply that the toxicity of nanomaterials might be modulated by varying the level of exfoliation. This was also observed in a study investigating the relationship between the level of MoS2 exfoliation and the cytotoxicity level.102 However, the lowering of TMD toxicity by exfoliation should not be generalized since the chosen exfoliation approach also matters. Three organolithium compounds, namely, Me-Li, n-Bu-Li, and t-Bu-Li, were used to create different levels of material exfoliation. N-Bu-Li and t-Bu-Li, which provided more efficient exfoliation of MoS2, were also found to cause higher cellular mortality than materials exfoliated by the less efficient Me-Li. WS2 nanosheets synthesized by liquid exfoliation using H2SO4 also appeared to be suitable candidates for particles for combined photothermal and photodynamic therapy.103 No significant mortality of HeLa cells was observed up to a concentration of 0.2 mg ml−1, even though the same concentration of WS2 particles exfoliated by Li ion insertion induced significant cell death in another study.104 The WS2 exfoliation method was therefore identified as the major cause of this extensive difference in toxicity. The toxicity was lowered even more by the surface modification of particles with BSA, which simultaneously increased the biocompatibility of the particles. Other approaches for increasing the biocompatibility of TMDs have been explored. Yin et al. modified the surface of MoS2 particles with chitosan and observed improved biocompatibility and decreased toxicity of particles on two types of cell lines, KB (human epithelial carcinoma cell line) and Panc-1 (cell line established from pancreatic carcinoma).105 Furthermore, chitosan-modified particles also exhibited good blood compatibility yet induced only insignificant hemolysis.
Not much attention has been paid to the biodegradability of TMDs until recently, when Kurapati et al. investigated the biodegradability of MoS2.106 They observed prompt degradation of both metastable pristine and highly stable covalently functionalized MoS2 in physiological H2O2 concentration without the presence of any enzyme. Surprisingly, in the presence of peroxidases (plant HRP and human MPO) and low H2O2 concentration, the degradation of MoS2 appeared to be less intensive. In general, these in vitro findings represent another point in favor of MoS2 and its applicability in biomedical applications.

In vitro toxicity of black phosphorus
In general, black phosphorus is considered to be non-toxic. Phosphorus occurs naturally in the human body as one of the essential constituent elements. In comparison with semiconductor quantum dots, BPQDs display low toxicity, higher biocompatibility, and biodegradability. The cytotoxicity of layered BP was determined to be intermediate between that of graphene oxide and exfoliated TMDs, namely, MoS2, WS2, and WSe2.107 In general, BP nanoparticles are assumed to be naturally degradable to nontoxic compounds. Nevertheless, it should be noted that in some cases their toxicity might be underestimated, similar to that of graphene-based materials and TMDs, due to their ability to reduce the tetrazolium salts used for in vitro cytotoxicity assessments, as shown in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Extent of WST-8 and MTT reduction to formazan product after exposure to increased concentration of BP. The black dotted line represents the blank control while the green dotted line marks the 150% control formazan concentration limit set; interference above this limit is considered significant. Adapted from ref. 107. 
Biodegradability has been studied by Lee and his co-workers. They synthesized several-layered black phosphorus nanodots that had produced a proven stable formation of PxOy (in general phosphates and phosphonates) when kept in water or in the presence of air.108 They also showed degradation of approximately 80% of the particles after 10 days in phosphate buffer saline. BP-nanodots were subjected to in vitro cytotoxicity assessment of HeLa, COS-7, and CHO-K1 cell lines. Only a negligible cytotoxic effect was observed at concentrations under 1 mg ml−1 and a 10% inhibition of cell growth was observed when the cells were subjected to a concentration of 3 mg ml−1. Similar results were observed after ionized BP-nanodots were applied. The structure of the BP-nanodots was shown to be unstable when present in an aqueous solution. After 10 days, roughly 20% of the particles remained in their crystalline form and also outlined the potential of these particles as blue- and green-emission probes for biomedical imaging.

In vivo toxicity assessment of 2D nanomaterials
Besides prospective applications, the attention of researchers when designing nanoparticles from black phosphorous, TMDs, or graphene oxide should also be focused on the future of these materials in the environment and determination of their toxicity. To date, most cytotoxicity assessments of 2D layered materials have been performed on in vitro models. Nevertheless, the assumed behavior of such materials in physiological fluids should also be considered, since in vivo assessments provide essential information towards particle absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion within the body. One of the most intensively investigated and most attractive areas of nanoparticle utilization in the biomedical field is indisputably the targeting of cancer cells and overall cancer treatment. The pharmacokinetic behavior of nanocarriers within the body is strongly dependent on a variety of factors such as carrier size, shape, and surface modification. Due to this multifactorial contribution of individual parameters, it is very difficult to predict particle behavior. Additionally, the behavior can also be modulated by various conditions of the particle surface. This is also often applied in order to increase the stability in physiological liquids by using biocompatible polymers, such as polyethylene glycol (PEG). This modification was also proven to be successful commercially. The PEG-modified liposomal formulation of doxorubicin is already successfully used in clinical practice under the trademark “Doxil®.”
Layered materials have also shown great potential as strong photosensitizers for photothermal therapy since they are capable of producing singlet oxygen (1O2). Singlet oxygen is one of the most reactive molecules from the group of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and is predominantly used as a cytotoxic agent during photodynamic therapy (PDT).109 The mechanism of PDT action is multifactorial. First, it has a strong effect on mitochondria and kills cancer cells via apoptotic or/and necrotic signalling pathways. In addition, it influences tumor vascularization whereas ROS causes irreversible injury of neoplastic cells and vessels. Additionally, it also impacts the functions of the immune system.110–112 Several materials are capable of producing singlet oxygen such as noble metals or some organic molecules. Nevertheless, layered materials seem to overcome problems commonly associated with their utilization, which is commonly hampered by reduced water solubility, low quantum yield, low biocompatibility, or quick photobleaching.113,114 PDT therapy has a great potential for clinical practice, especially in the area of cancer treatment. This stems from the fundamental highly localized characteristic of PDT-induced oxidative damage. Therefore, this strategy is capable of supplementing or even replacing traditional treatment approaches based on clinical surgery, chemo-, or radiotherapy.109,115,116

In vivo toxicity of graphene-based materials
Initial studies evaluating the toxicity of nanoparticles are always carried out on cell lines. Nevertheless, in vivo evaluation is always needed in order to eliminate potential risks of particle administration in terms of systemic toxicity.
Wu and his colleagues outlined the possible safety risks of GO exposure of environmental organisms on a nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.117 They observed hyperpermeabilization of the intestine, impairing the defecation ability of the organism and other detrimental effects on the neuronal and reproductive systems after long-term exposure to 0.5–100 mg l−1 GO. Several studies described favorable prolonged circulation lifetimes and low uptake by reticulo-endothelial system (RES), but also accompanied by prolonged entrapment of graphene-based particles in the lungs after intravenous and intratracheal administration in mice, as shown in Fig. 6.77,118–120 In accordance with the results from in vitro studies, cytotoxicity was shown to be dose- and time-dependent.77 Administration of graphene oxide at low and middle doses (0.1 and 0.25 mg, respectively) did not cause any observable damage in major organs. However, after application of high doses of GO (0.4 mg), the formation of granulomas caused severe lung tissue damage. This lung injury was found to be GO dose-dependent. The authors cited possible deteriorated removal of particles from the kidneys. In contrast, Zhang and his colleagues did not observe any acute or chronic pathological changes in major organs including the kidneys after administration of 1 mg kg−1 of body weight of GO.118 In this study, they also observed good compatibility with erythrocytes, which is contradicted by the study performed by Liao and colleagues mentioned above.80 Surprisingly, an even higher concentration of GO administered (10 mg kg−1 of body weight) did not lead to any pathophysiological changes in the liver, spleen, or kidney. However, high accumulation and slow clearance were again observed in the lungs, leading to tissue inflammation, fibrosis, granuloma formation, and other pathological processes. It is also worth mentioning that most of the studies are focused on the investigation of systemic toxicity either after inhalation or intravenous (i.v.) application. Nevertheless, other routes of administration are very rarely discussed. One of the few studies dealing with this topic was led by Yang et al. who studied the fate of PEGylated GO nanoparticles in an organism after oral feeding and intraperitoneal (i.p.) administration.121 They did not observe any tissue uptake after oral administration, implicating rapid excretion from the organism. After i.p. injection, no tissue toxicity for GO was observed. In contrast, administration of MWNTs led to granuloma formation, which again proved the importance of particle size, shape, and surface chemistry.
 Fig. 6  Light micrographs of mice lung tissue after exposure to 0.1 mg of GO; (A) 7 days of exposure, (B) 30 days of exposure, magnification 200×. Adapted from ref. 77. 
The distribution of particles within an organism is strongly affected by particle size. Liu and his co-workers evaluated the effect of GO particle size on biodistribution.120 They determined the liver to be the preferred place of small nanoparticle accumulation, while larger particles preferentially accumulated in the lungs. Therefore, tendencies for particle aggregation may substantially affect systemic toxicity. Increasing the dose of small particles may lead to their aggregation and eventual preferential entrapment by the lungs. Protein opsonization caused by specific and nonspecific interactions of particles with plasma proteins may further lead to considerably distinct pharmacokinetic properties compared to the case of bare particles.120 Additionally, activation of macrophages and both local and systemic immune responses were found to be greatly influenced by the lateral size of the particle.122 Larger GO particles were found to be strongly associated with the plasma membrane, and therefore, were able to activate a higher number of toll-like receptors (TLRs) than did particles with reduced size. Increased activation of TLRs then consequently led to M1 macrophage induction and activation of the NF-κB pathway. This subsequently activated the transcription of pro-inflammatory cytokines in vitro and inflammatory responses in vivo.
Studies published so far have considered graphene-based particles to be generally non-toxic at low doses and also confirmed the multifactorial characteristic of particle toxicity. In addition, investigations of the adverse effects of particles in vivo are often restricted to acute toxicity. However, deeper insight into the chronic effects of novel materials is needed since they are intended for the manufacture of everyday products. This situation raises the need for further investigation of the effects of particles so we can benefit from the unique properties they exhibit.

In vivo toxicity of TMDs
Studies concerned with the toxicity of TMDs in vivo are rare and are usually mentioned just marginally within those concerned with TMD-mediated targeted therapy. For example, MoS2 was proven to be capable of effective loading of various chemotherapeutic agents due to its high surface-to-volume ratio. MoS2 particles functionalized with lipoic acid modified PEG were subjected to a study investigating their potential as drug carriers and photothermal agents simultaneously.123 The high loading capacity of the particles was observed using various chemotherapeutics such as doxorubicin (DOX), 7-ethyl-10hydroxycamptothecin (SN38), and a photodynamic agent chlorine e6 (CE6), with DOX demonstrating the highest drug loading ratio (weight ratio between the drug and MoS2) of approximately 239%. Loading of the drug above this value led to unwanted particle aggregation. In terms of toxicity, treating HeLa cells with 0.16 mg ml−1 MoS2 for 24 hours did not cause any decrease in cell viability. After 72 hours, 27% cell death was observed after MoS2 application. Only 10% of the cells died after MoS2-PEG treatment, indicating improved biocompatibility. Moreover, it was found that after intravenous injection (i.v.) and long blood circulation, the MoS2-PEG particles caused only a slight decrease in the alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level and platelet counts, both within physiological ranges. Therefore, these data suggest that MoS2-PEG particles are promising and biocompatible materials for drug delivery applications.
In summary, published observations imply the suitability of TMDs not only for industrial applications, but also for biomedical use. However, further studies are needed in order to understand the interplay between surface properties and the effect of materials on living tissues. Despite the more or less positive findings regarding TMD safety profiles, there might be a subgroup of these that presents a considerable safety risk. For that reason, detailed investigation of particle interaction with living tissues is needed. At the same time, detailed environmental studies must be performed, since there are still zero papers concerning this topic.

In vivo toxicity of black phosphorus
A promising application of black phosphorus is its utilization as a photothermal agent. Exfoliated black phosphorus nanosheets were first used by Wang et al. as potent photosensitizers.124 They proved that both the BP bulk material and, more intensively, BP nanosheets have a great ability to produce singlet oxygen (1O2). They also observed the degradation of BP nanosheets into nontoxic compounds such as phosphite and phosphate ions and other PxOy species in water with simultaneous increased effectiveness after long-time light irradiation. Furthermore, they subjected BP nanosheets to in vitro and in vivo assessments. Under light irradiation, they observed cell apoptosis on the MDA-MB-231 cell line as a result of superior ROS activity. In contrast, no such effect was observed in the non-irradiated group. The same results were observed in vivo in Balb/c nude mice bearing MDA-MB-231 breast tumors, while only ultrathin BP nanosheet-treated mice subjected to irradiation displayed significant inhibition of tumor growth. This was further confirmed by immunohistochemistry.
Another of the few studies focused on the in vivo evaluation of BP behavior was published by Sun and his co-workers who used animal models to evaluate the behavior of PEGylated BP under physiological conditions.125 They synthesized black phosphorus quantum dots (BPQDs) and performed additional modification of their surface with PEG to prevent aggregation and to enhance their behavior under physiological conditions. Due to their convenient structural properties, these particles also exhibit photothermal performance in vitro and in vivo by converting NIR light into thermal energy. In vitro cell viability assessments of the particles in different concentrations were performed on a panel of four cell lines. The BPQDs did not reveal any signs of cytotoxicity even at a concentration exceeding that used during photothermal experiments. In contrast, BPQD illumination with a NIR laser led to extensive suppression of C6 and MCF-7 cell growth. Illumination of BPQDs at a concentration of 50 ppm led to the death of almost all cells. No effect from illumination with a NIR laser in the absence of BPQDs was observed. Another study utilizing PEGylated BPQDs confirmed their higher photothermal conversion efficiency than those of Au particles or TMDs usually used for this application.126 It was found that the effectiveness of photoacoustic (PA) signals is dependent on the particle concentration and the power intensity of the laser beam applied to the cells. In addition, the PA signal is linearly dependent on the particle concentration. The behavior of the particles after their intravenous application was further evaluated in vivo. The BPQDs gradually accumulated in the liver, kidneys, and tumor in a time-dependent manner. The BPQDs were cleared from the liver and kidneys after 24 hours. In contrast, significant accumulation was still observed in the tumor region, showing favorable prolonged tumor entrapment and easy elution by the kidneys and liver. The behavior of the BPQDs was further assessed after intratumoral injection, since the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect alone was not capable of reaching an adequate concentration of particles in the tumor region. After application of laser light, the tumor temperature increased to 59 °C, leading to extensive reduction of its size in just three days. In contrast, neither the BPQDs nor the laser treatment alone provided noticeable suppression of tumor growth. It is of great interest that mice treated with PEGylated BPQDs combined with laser irradiation recovered completely and survived for over 42 days, which is even longer than the mice in the control group. Histological analysis of major organs collected from mice administered with PEGylated BPQDs did not reveal any signs of cancer cells spreading or organ toxicity, while the untreated group developed aggressive metastatic lesions in the liver and lung.
Antimicrobial effect of graphene-based particles
Several studies described graphene and especially graphene oxide particles as superior biocompatible materials with low or negligible toxicity against mammalian cell lines and highlighted their potential for commercial applications. Simultaneously, these materials were reported to also have favorable antibacterial properties.127,128 This combination of non-toxicity towards mammalian cells and a simultaneous antimicrobial effect would perfectly meet the contemporary need for ideal materials for biomedical applications. However, published studies concerned with the antimicrobial activity of graphene-based materials are not consistent.
The antimicrobial activity of graphene-based materials was assessed to be declining from GO, which showed the highest cytotoxicity, to rGO, Gt, and GtO.129 The dose- and time-dependent antimicrobial activities of GO and rGO were shown in evaluations of their antimicrobial effect against Pseudomonas aeruginosa.130 The generation of ROS was suggested as the key mechanism of the toxicity of both types of particles. The antimicrobial activity of graphene-based materials was hypothesized as being the result of induced membrane stress and physical injury of cell membranes resulting in leakage of cellular content, including RNA.129 Oxidative stress seems to be induced by a superoxide anion (O2˙−)-independent mechanism, since no superoxide anion formation was detected. In the case of graphene nanowalls, their bacterial toxicity was described as being caused by an efflux of the cytoplasmic material and RNA by damaging the bacterial membrane integrity with the sharp edges of the particles.128 In detail, particles directly interact with the slightly negatively charged bacterial membrane and improve the mutual charge transfer leading to membrane disruption. This observation is supported by the fact that reduced GO particles induce higher toxicity than do non-reduced GO particles. This could be attributed to the better electron transfer between bacteria and particles and also to stronger physical interaction, since reduction of the material leads to sharpening of the material edges. This also explains the higher toxicity observed after administration to Gram-positive bacteria than to Gram-negative bacteria, since the Gram-positive ones lack the bacterial outer membrane.
In summary, studies overall indicate the generally low cytotoxicity of graphene-based nanoparticles on mammalian cell lines and their simultaneous antimicrobial effect. Surprisingly, this totally distinct phenomenon is discussed very rarely in the literature. The antimicrobial effect is predominantly attributed to the puncture of the bacterial cell membrane after particle exhibition, whereas cytotoxicity towards eukaryotic cells, even if low, is assigned to increased generation of reactive oxygen species.79 Nevertheless, there has been no study investigating or describing the possible underlying mechanism of this selectivity. There is still no explanation as to why graphene oxide should be selectively toxic to prokaryotic cells and non-toxic to mammalian cells, which are known to be usually more affected by ambient factors. In contrast, some studies describe that GO does not possess any antibacterial or bacteriostatic activity. In fact, graphene-based materials were found to enhance the cellular growth of both bacteria and mammalian cells by acting as a scaffold that enhances cell attachment and growth.131 More studies are therefore needed to elucidate the effect of graphene oxide on prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells before introducing this promising material for proposed applications and commercial use.
Effect of 2D materials on plant and algae growth
A significant number of publications are concerned with the toxicity of nanoparticles and their future in the environment. However, only a few of these are concerned with two-dimensional nanomaterials. The number of studies evaluating the effects of 2D nanomaterials on plants is limited. One of the few complex studies concerned with the impact of GO on cellular morphology, uptake, and metabolism was published by Hu and his co-workers.132 They evaluated the effect of GO administration on Chlorella vulgaris and found a significant decrease in chlorophyll a synthesis, injury of chloroplasts, and altered membrane fluidity. In addition, GO also enhanced ROS generation resulting in increased activity of antioxidative enzymes (SOD, CAT, and POD) besides cellular and organelle injury. This was attributed to the number of GO functional groups available for interaction with cellular enzymes that might impair their catalytic functions. Inhibition of algae growth was described as the consequence of GO-induced downregulated sugar and amino acid metabolism. In agreement with a study concerned with graphene-encased bacteria,133 also found in algal cells was GO attachment to the cell surface attributed to nitrogen-containing groups. Similar results reporting the negative effects of graphene were obtained when evaluating its effect on the growth of Triticum aestivum. Besides inhibiting growth, graphene impaired photosynthesis and led to an imbalance in nutrient homeostasis manifested by a reduction of shoot biomass and the number of root hairs (Fig. 7), a decrease in chlorophyll content and PSII activity, and nutrient deprivation.134
 Fig. 7  Effect of graphene on root hair formation of Triticum aestivum. Growth of hair roots was inhibited after 48 h of exposure to graphene. (a) Control; (b) 500 mg l−1 graphene. Figure adapted from ref. 134. 
The phytotoxicity of GO with carboxyl single-walled carbon nanotubes (C-SWCNTs) was also further evaluated on Chlorella vulgaris. C-SWCNTs inhibited DNA replication even at a concentration of 1 mg l−1. When the concentration was increased to 10 mg l−1, both materials caused significant inhibition of DNA replication.135 One of the few studies investigating the effects of graphene exposure in terrestrial plants (cabbage, tomato, and red spinach) was performed by Begum and her colleagues.136 They observed massive cell death and visible injury of leaves 20 days after exposure to the particles. Accumulation of the particles occurred on the surface of the roots after exposure to a concentration of 1000 mg l−1. The phytotoxic effect manifested by plant growth and biomass inhibition was assigned to the mechanism of oxidative stress via the necrotic pathway. This effect was found to be concentration- and time-dependent as well as plant species specific.
Studies evaluating the effects of graphene-based nanoparticles on plant cultivation are not consistent. Some of them report enhanced growth after application of the particles. For example, in a study conducted by Lahiani et al. evaluating different types of carbon-based materials (few-layered graphene, helical MWCNTs, long MWCNTs, and short MWCNTs),137 all tested nanoparticles were found to enhance cell growth, germination, and plant growth. The positive effects also observed after administration of 5 ml graphene solution (40 μg ml−1) during tomato seed germination was attributed to better water penetration after the particles penetrated the husk.138 However, another study focused on the effects of graphene on the germination and growth of rice seeds reported ambiguous results. Administration of 5 μg ml−1 improved rice growth. However, a concentration of 50 μg ml−1 inhibited growth and reduced plant biomass.139 Similarly confusing results were obtained in a study assessing the effects of single-bilayer graphene oxide sheets on the germination of Vicia faba.140 Beneficial effects of GO application were found at concentrations ranging from 400 to 800 mg ml−1 manifested by enhanced seed imbibition, increased seed germination, and root elongation. In contrast, concentrations below or above this range caused growth inhibition, loss of electrolytes, and enhanced lipid and protein oxidation.
The toxicity of particles should also be evaluated with respect to real ambient conditions. After particles are released into the environment, they will be exposed to sunlight, humidity, and/or water. Exposure to water and irradiation with visible light might considerably alter the structure, surface chemistry, and toxicity of large-sheet graphene to long-ribbon graphene.141 The irradiation of particles has driven their agglomeration, which was attributed to increased generation of oxygen-containing functional groups on their surface. Furthermore, irradiation and hydration also inhibited the production of ROS by graphene, leading to decreased levels of protein carbonylation and reduced DNA damage in Chlorella vulgaris. It also reversed the lowered reproduction ability and decreased concentrations of chlorophylls a and b caused by the exposure of algal cells to graphene. This study showed that without considering real ambient conditions and factors, the resulting data might be misleading. It should be noted that similar impairment of particle properties and activity might also be expected in the case of other layered materials and might consequently lead to false over- or underestimations of particle safety.
It is also of great importance to recognize that graphene-based nanomaterials may potentiate the toxicity of other materials. It is known that the generation of ROS may inhibit photosynthesis and other metabolic processes within the cell. Changes in ROS and MDA levels were evaluated when the combined effects of GO and Cd2+ solution on Microcystis aeruginosa were investigated.142 At the same concentration, GO caused significantly lower oxidative stress than did Cd2+. However, it was proven that concentrations higher than 5 mg l−1 can enhance the level of oxidative stress caused by Cd2+ in a concentration-dependent manner. GO alone caused only low toxicity at concentrations below 10 mg l−1. Above this value, GO particles tended to stick to the surface of cyanobacteria, which led to cellular aggregation and resulted in cellular injury and altered physiological functions.
Interaction of 2D nanomaterials with the environment
Nanomaterials, e.g., carbon or silver particles, occur in the environment naturally. These days, an increasing number of 2D nanomaterials are being developed due to the immense progress in nanoparticle synthesis. Some of them are even fabricated from materials previously considered unsuitable for this application. However, this steep progress is simultaneously raising concerns regarding environmental safety. Regarding the broad spectrum of applications, such materials might be exposed to agricultural soil and water, accumulate, transform, and eventually enter the food chain. It is therefore of great interest to understand the interplay between these materials and the environment and to evaluate their effects on plants and animals.
Possible serious ecological consequences after GO exposure were outlined in a study evaluating its toxicity to white rot fungus, Phanerocheate chrysosporium.143 Its growth was completely inhibited at a concentration exceeding 1.2 mg ml−1. Below this level, GO still induced observable morphological changes. Releasing GO into an aquatic environment might also cause toxicity in protozoa. This was found in a study assessing its toxicity after administration to Euglena gracilis.144 Here, GO was found to inhibit growth at concentrations exceeding 2.5 mg l−1 probably as a consequence of a large decrease in light utilization since the GO covered the cell membrane of Euglena. Carbon-14 tracking was then used to evaluate the effect of graphene on planktonic organisms.145 Cellular uptake, accumulation, and elimination from planktonic organisms were investigated in Daphnia magna. This organism plays an important role in the freshwater food chain since it serves as food for organisms of higher trophic levels. After exposure to a maximum concentration of 250 μg l−1 of 14C-labeled graphene solution for 24 hours, graphene was determined to comprise nearly 1% of the mass. Interestingly, the depuration period was shortened after the addition of algae and humic acid (HA) as a main component of the natural organic matter. However, a significant fraction of graphene remained in the organism. Graphene was further trapped in the brood pouch of gravid organisms and was hypothesized to be transferable to neonates. Accumulation seems to be prevented by the modification of few-layer graphene (FLG) with horseradish peroxidase.146 This was shown to substantially decrease the accumulation of particles in Daphnia magna due to better stability and monodispersity. Besides, the toxicity of the modified FGL was also greatly reduced compared with that of the unmodified particles. This again underlines the importance of surface chemistry and particle coating since they have considerable impact on environmental safety. Humic acid was further used to modify GO toxicity in zebrafish.147 It was found that the interaction of GO and GO-HA with zebrafish chorion differs significantly. GO was found to be tightly bound to the chorion surface, thus blocking the pores essential for sufficient oxygen supply at environmentally relevant concentrations (0.01–100 mg l−1). The resulting hypoxic environment inside the chorionic space led to ischemia, hatching delay, and embryonic malformations. In contrast, the oxygen content inside the chorion increased significantly after administration of GO-HA. HA caused a loosening of the GO attachment to the chorion surface, enabling sufficient physiological oxygen concentration inside the chorional sac essential for normal embryogenesis. Administration of free GO also caused modifications in the secondary structure of proteins making up the chorionic sac. Furthermore, a triggered facilitated uptake inside the chorion was observed in the case of free GO. This was attributed to its higher lipophilicity causing accumulation in the cytoplasm. The beneficial effect of HA was attributed to an increased negative charge on the material surface, leading to reduced contact of the particles with the embryo, mitochondria, and other cellular structures.
In contrast with these observations, there are also signs that the environment might negatively influence the toxicity of graphene-based materials. For example, these results were acquired in a study investigating the influence of biological secretions on the toxicity of GO nanosheets.148 Biological secretions consisting of small organic molecules, proteins, nucleotides, and mucopolysaccharides were obtained from zebrafish culture water. Compared to exposure to bare graphene oxide nanosheets (GONS), exposure of zebrafish embryos to graphene oxide nanosheets with biological secretions (GOBS) caused a higher number of deaths and malformations. Juvenile fish were affected by tail flexure, pericardial edema, and tachycardia. GOBS exhibited generally higher toxicity, even though there were no significant differences in ROS levels. The authors of the study hypothesized that the increased embryotoxicity was caused by stronger adhesion of GOBS due to the presence of a higher number of functional groups on the particle surface resulting from the altered oxygen and Ca2+ exchange. Moreover, another factor contributing to the higher toxicity of GOBS is probably their reduced size resulting from the improved monodispersity caused by the presence of natural molecules on the particle surface.
Conclusion
In the past few years, graphene oxide (GO), transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), and black phosphorus (BP) have gained tremendous attention owing to their unique physicochemical and electronic properties. Although significant attention has been paid lately to the utilization of these layered materials in constructing electrodes, devices for electronics, photovoltaics, and sensing,149–152 only limited efforts have been made to evaluate their environmental impact and potential safety risks to living organisms. In the development of a new material, one of the crucial requirements besides its application potential should be degradability and the fate of such a material in the environment.
Further, other and even stricter safety demands will arise when this material displays potential for biomedical applications. This review discusses recent results and summarizes available environmental and biological studies that have been published with special concern for 2D materials.
Considering the promising advances that have been made in nanotechnology in recent years, it is more than likely that these novel materials will gradually be incorporated into commercial products. In many cases, the major factor hampering the introduction of two-dimensional nanomaterials in a commercial setting is their poorly researched toxicity and lack of studies describing their behavior under real environmental or physiological conditions, emphasizing the large research needs in this area. Therefore, it is absolutely crucial to identify the different properties that might influence material safety and to become aware of potential difficulties associated with their utilization so we can benefit from the remarkable properties they exhibit.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a Tier 1 grant (99/13), Ministry of Education, Singapore. M. F. was supported by the Masaryk University Foundation (MUNI/A/1355/2016 and LF MU Junior Researcher and by Brno Ph.D. Talent Scholarship program funded by the Brno City Municipality.
References
P. Espitia, N. D. Soares, J. D. Coimbra, N. Andrade, R. Cruz and E. Medeiros, Food Bioprocess Technol., 2012, 5, 1447–1464 CrossRef CAS .
A. Weir, P. Westerhoff, L. Fabricius, K. Hristovski and N. von Goetz, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 2242–2250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Piccinno, F. Gottschalk, S. Seeger and B. Nowack, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1–11 CrossRef .
M. E. Vance, T. Kuiken, E. P. Vejerano, S. P. McGinnis, M. F. Hochella Jr., D. Rejeski and M. S. Hull, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2015, 6, 1769–1780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. o. E. Nanotechnologies, On-line inventory of nanotechnology-based consumer products, www.nanotechproject.org/cpi/about/analysis/, (accessed 13 March 2015) .
M. F. L. De Volder, S. H. Tawfick, R. H. Baughman and A. J. Hart, Science, 2013, 339, 535–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Kannan, D. J. Late, H. Morgan and C. S. Rout, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13293–13312 RSC .
C. Z. Zhu, D. Du and Y. H. Lin, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 89, 43–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Q. R. Xiong, F. Xiao and H. W. Duan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 89, 136–151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Cao, C. L. Tan, X. Zhang, W. Zhao and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6167–6196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, J. G. Zhang and G. Z. Shen, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 82–97 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. S. Tsai, K. K. Liu, D. H. Lien, M. L. Tsai, C. F. Kang, C. A. Lin, L. J. Li and J. H. He, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3905–3911 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) D. Li, A. E. D. R. Castillo, H. Jussila, G. Ye, Z. Ren, J. Bai, X. Chen, H. Lipsanen, Z. Sun and F. Bonaccorso, Applied Materials Today, 2016, 4, 17 CrossRef .
C. Z. Zhu, D. Dan and Y. H. Lin, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 17 Search PubMed .
J. Xu, H. D. Lv, S. T. Yang and J. B. Luo, Rev. Inorg. Chem., 2013, 33, 139–160 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao and X. B. Li, Adsorption, 2014, 20, 713–727 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Zhu, S. Murali, W. W. Cai, X. S. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, B. W. Yao, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Carbon, 2013, 64, 225–229 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Tung, M. J. Allen, Y. Yang and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 25–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Fan, K. Wang, T. Wei, J. Yan, L. P. Song and B. Shao, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1686–1689 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. X. Shi and J. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1127–1133 CAS .
M. Li, X. J. Yang, J. S. Ren, K. G. Qu and X. G. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1722–1728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Robinson, S. M. Tabakman, Y. Y. Liang, H. L. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, D. Vinh and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6825–6831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Y. Feng, L. Wu and X. G. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 168–186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Q. Bao, Y. Z. Pan, Y. Ping, N. G. Sahoo, T. F. Wu, L. Li, J. Li and L. H. Gan, Small, 2011, 7, 1569–1578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Yang, X. Y. Zhang, Z. F. Liu, Y. F. Ma, Y. Huang and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17554–17558 CAS .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Makovicky, Rev. Mineral. Geochem., 2006, 61, 7–125 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Wilson and A. D. Yoffe, Adv. Phys., 1969, 18, 193–335 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
A. D. Yoffe, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1973, 3, 147–170 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ataca, H. Şahin and S. Ciraci, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8983–8999 CAS .
B. Sipos, A. F. Kusmartseva, A. Akrap, H. Berger, L. Forro and E. Tutis, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 960–965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Castro Neto, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 4382–4385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chatzitheodorou, S. Fiechter, M. Kunst, J. Luck and H. Tributsch, Mater. Res. Bull., 1988, 23, 1261–1271 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Laursen, S. Kegnaes, S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5577–5591 CAS .
C. Lee, Q. Li, W. Kalb, X.-Z. Liu, H. Berger, R. W. Carpick and J. Hone, Science, 2010, 328, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Watanabe, J. Noshiro and S. Miyake, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2004, 183, 347–351 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tributsch, Faraday Discuss. Chem. Soc., 1980, 70, 189–205 RSC .
H. Liu, Y. C. Du, Y. X. Deng and P. D. Ye, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2732–2743 RSC .
M. B. Erande, M. S. Pawar and D. J. Late, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 11548–11556 CAS .
B. S. Wan, B. C. Yang, Y. Wang, J. Y. Zhang, Z. M. Zeng, Z. Y. Liu and W. H. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 6 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Eswaraiah, Q. S. Zeng, Y. Long and Z. Liu, Small, 2016, 12, 3480–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Ding, L. L. Wen, S. P. Huang, Y. L. Li, Y. F. Zhang and Y. P. Lu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 80872–80884 RSC .
F. N. Xia, H. Wang and Y. C. Jia, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 6 Search PubMed .
K. L. Garner and A. A. Keller, J. Nanopart. Res., 2014, 16, 1–28 CrossRef .
A. A. Keller and A. Lazareva, Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett., 2014, 1, 65–70 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. G. M. Peijnenburg, M. Baalousha, J. Chen, Q. Chaudry, F. von der Kammer, T. A. J. Kuhlbusch, J. Lead, C. Nickel, J. T. K. Quik, M. Renker, Z. Wang and A. A. Koelmans, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 45, 2084–2134 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Lowry, B. P. Espinasse, A. R. Badireddy, C. J. Richardson, B. C. Reinsch, L. D. Bryant, A. J. Bone, A. Deonarine, S. Chae, M. Therezien, B. P. Colman, H. Hsu-Kim, E. S. Bernhardt, C. W. Matson and M. R. Wiesner, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 7027–7036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. V. Lowry, K. B. Gregory, S. C. Apte and J. R. Lead, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 6893–6899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) A. Praetorius, M. Scheringer and K. Hungerbühler, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 6705–6713 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Pumera, Chem. – Asian J., 2011, 6, 340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. L. Gunsolus and C. L. Haynes, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 451–479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bianco, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4986–4997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sharifi, S. Behzadi, S. Laurent, M. Laird Forrest, P. Stroeve and M. Mahmoudi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2323–2343 RSC .
B. J. Marquis, S. A. Love, K. L. Braun and C. L. Haynes, Analyst, 2009, 134, 425–439 RSC .

          M. Ishiyama, Y. Miyazono, M. Shiga and K. Sasamoto, US Pat., 6063587,  2000 Search PubMed .
T. Mosmann, J. Immunol. Methods, 1983, 65, 55–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Korzeniewski and D. M. Callewaert, J. Immunol. Methods, 1983, 64, 313–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Decker and M.-L. Lohmann-Matthes, J. Immunol. Methods, 1988, 115, 61–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Love, M. A. Maurer-Jones, J. W. Thompson, Y.-S. Lin and C. L. Haynes, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2012, 5, 181–205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Collins, Mol. Biotechnol., 2004, 26, 249–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Pulskamp, S. Diabaté and H. F. Krug, Toxicol. Lett., 2007, 168, 58–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, S. F. Ali, E. Dervishi, Y. Xu, Z. Li, D. Casciano and A. S. Biris, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3181–3186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Horváth, A. Magrez, M. Burghard, K. Kern, L. Forró and B. Schwaller, Carbon, 2013, 64, 45–60 CrossRef .
A. Kroll, M. H. Pillukat, D. Hahn and J. Schnekenburger, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2009, 72, 370–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Jones and D. W. Grainger, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2009, 61, 438–456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Worle-Knirsch, K. Pulskamp and H. F. Krug, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1261–1268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Limame, A. Wouters, B. Pauwels, E. Fransen, M. Peeters, F. Lardon, O. De Wever and P. Pauwels, PLoS One, 2012, 7, 12 Search PubMed .
H. Ali-Boucetta, K. T. Al-Jamal and K. Kostarelos, Methods Mol. Biol., 2011, 726, 299–312 CAS .
L. L. Ou, B. Song, H. M. Liang, J. Liu, X. L. Feng, B. Deng, T. Sun and L. Q. Shao, Part. Fibre Toxicol., 2016, 13, 24 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Montagner, S. Bosi, E. Tenori, M. Bidussi, A. A. Alshatwi, M. Tretiach, M. Prato and Z. Syrgiannis, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 9 Search PubMed .
Y. Volkov, J. McIntyre and A. Prina-Mello, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 22 Search PubMed .
Y. F. Li, H. Y. Yuan, A. von dem Bussche, M. Creighton, R. H. Hurt, A. B. Kane and H. J. Gao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 12295–12300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Chang, S. T. Yang, J. H. Liu, E. Dong, Y. W. Wang, A. N. Cao, Y. F. Liu and H. F. Wang, Toxicol. Lett., 2011, 200, 201–210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, J. Ruan, H. Song, J. L. Zhang, Y. Wo, S. W. Guo and D. X. Cui, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 8 Search PubMed .
S. Das, S. Singh, V. Singh, D. Joung, J. M. Dowding, D. Reid, J. Anderson, L. Zhai, S. I. Khondaker, W. T. Self and S. Seal, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2013, 30, 148–157 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Zhang, C. Wang, Z. J. Li, Z. Z. Lu, Y. Y. Li, J. J. Yin, Y. T. Zhou, X. F. Gao, Y. Fang, G. J. Nie and Y. L. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5391–5397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Liao, Y. S. Lin, C. W. Macosko and C. L. Haynes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2607–2615 CAS .
L. Liu, C. L. Zhu, M. M. Fan, C. T. Chen, Y. Huang, Q. L. Hao, J. Z. Yang, H. Y. Wang and D. P. Sun, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13619–13628 RSC .
R. Kurapati, J. Russier, M. A. Squillaci, E. Treossi, C. Menard-Moyon, A. E. Del Rio-Castillo, E. Vazquez, P. Samori, V. Palermo and A. Bianco, Small, 2015, 11, 3985–3994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Li, L. Z. Feng, X. Z. Shi, X. J. Wang, Y. L. Yang, K. Yang, T. Liu, G. B. Yang and Z. Liu, Small, 2014, 10, 1544–1554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Chua, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 13453–13459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. A. Wong, Z. Sofer, M. Kubesova, J. Kucera, S. Matejkova and M. Pumera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 13774–13779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Q. Chen, P. P. Hu, L. Zhang, S. Z. Huang, L. F. Luo and C. Z. Huang, Sci. China: Chem., 2012, 55, 2209–2216 CrossRef CAS .
T. Szabo, O. Berkesi, P. Forgo, K. Josepovits, Y. Sanakis, D. Petridis and I. Dekany, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2740–2749 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, J. M. Wan, S. Zhang, B. Tian, Y. J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 2206–2214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wojtoniszak, X. C. Chen, R. J. Kalenczuk, A. Wajda, J. Lapczuk, M. Kurzewski, M. Drozdzik, P. K. Chu and E. Borowiak-Palen, Colloids Surf., B, 2012, 89, 79–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Park, S. Y. Park and I. In, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2011, 17, 298–303 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Wang, H. G. Wang, D. P. Liu, S. Y. Song, X. Wang and H. J. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 7715–7724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Zhang, J. G. Xia, Q. H. Zhao, L. W. Liu and Z. J. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 537–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. F. Musico, C. M. Santos, M. L. P. Dalida and D. F. Rodrigues, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3789–3796 CAS .
C. S. Shan, H. F. Yang, D. X. Han, Q. X. Zhang, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12030–12033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Liang, Y. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. F. Ma, T. Y. Guo and Y. S. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2297–2302 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. M. Carpio, C. M. Santos, X. Wei and D. F. Rodrigues, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4746–4756 RSC .
W. Z. Teo, E. L. K. Chng, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 9627–9632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Redlich, A. Katz, L. Rapoport, H. D. Wagner, Y. Feldman and R. Tenne, Dent. Mater., 2008, 24, 1640–1646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Wu, R. Yang, B. M. Song, Q. S. Han, J. Y. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. Fang, R. Tenne and C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1276–1281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Latiff, W. Z. Teo, Z. Sofer, S. Huber, A. C. Fisher and M. Pumera, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 67485–67492 RSC .
X. Wang, N. D. Mansukhani, L. M. Guiney, Z. X. Ji, C. H. Chang, M. Y. Wang, Y. P. Liao, T. B. Song, B. B. Sun, R. B. Li, T. Xia, M. C. Hersam and A. E. Nel, Small, 2015, 11, 5079–5087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. K. Chng, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14412–14418 RSC .
Y. Yong, L. J. Zhou, Z. J. Gu, L. Yan, G. Tian, X. P. Zheng, X. D. Liu, X. Zhang, J. X. Shi, W. S. Cong, W. Y. Yin and Y. L. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10394–10403 RSC .
L. Cheng, J. J. Liu, X. Gu, H. Gong, X. Z. Shi, T. Liu, C. Wang, X. Y. Wang, G. Liu, H. Y. Xing, W. B. Bu, B. Q. Sun and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1886–1893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Yin, L. Yan, J. Yu, G. Tian, L. J. Zhou, X. P. Zheng, X. Zhang, Y. Yong, J. Li, Z. J. Gu and Y. L. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6922–6933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kurapati, L. Muzi, A. P. R. De Garibay, J. Russier, D. Voiry, I. A. Vacchi, M. Chhowalla and A. Bianco, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 12 CrossRef .
N. M. Latiff, W. Z. Teo, Z. Sofer, A. C. Fisher and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 13991–13995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. U. Lee, S. Y. Park, S. C. Lee, S. Choi, S. Seo, H. Kim, J. Won, K. Choi, K. S. Kang, H. G. Park, H. S. Kim, H. R. An, K. H. Jeong, Y. C. Lee and J. Lee, Small, 2016, 12, 214–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. J. MacDonald and T. J. Dougherty, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2001, 5, 105–129 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Oleinick, R. L. Morris and T. Belichenko, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2002, 1, 1–21 CAS .
B. Krammer, Anticancer Res., 2001, 21, 4271–4277 CAS .
M. Korbelik, I. Cecic, S. Merchant and J. H. Sun, Int. J. Cancer, 2008, 122, 1411–1417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. S. Samia, X. B. Chen and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 15736–15737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Hou, X. Y. Zhang, T. C. Pijper, W. R. Browne and B. L. Feringa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 910–913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Dolmans, D. Fukumura and R. K. Jain, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2003, 3, 380–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Castano, P. Mroz and M. R. Hamblin, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2006, 6, 535–545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. L. Wu, L. Yin, X. Li, M. Tang, T. Zhang and D. Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9934–9943 RSC .
X. Y. Zhang, J. L. Yin, C. Peng, W. Q. Hu, Z. Y. Zhu, W. X. Li, C. H. Fan and Q. Huang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 986–995 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, J. Z. Yang, Q. Huang, Y. Zhang, C. Peng, Y. J. Zhang, Y. He, J. Y. Shi, W. X. Li, J. Hu and C. H. Fan, NPG Asia Mater., 2013, 5, 8 Search PubMed .
J. H. Liu, S. T. Yang, H. F. Wang, Y. L. Chang, A. N. Cao and Y. F. Liu, Nanomedicine, 2012, 7, 1801–1812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang, H. Gong, X. Z. Shi, J. M. Wan, Y. J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 2787–2795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, R. Liu, X. Wang, Q. Liu, Y. N. Chen, R. P. Valle, Y. Y. Zuo, T. Xia and S. J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10498–10515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, C. Wang, X. Gu, H. Gong, L. Cheng, X. Z. Shi, L. Z. Feng, B. Q. Sun and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3433–3440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Z. Yang, W. Shao, S. C. Chen, J. F. Xie, X. D. Zhang, J. Wang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11376–11382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Sun, H. H. Xie, S. Y. Tang, X. F. Yu, Z. N. Guo, J. D. Shao, H. Zhang, H. Huang, H. Y. Wang and P. K. Chu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11526–11530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Sun, L. Wen, J. F. Zeng, Y. Wang, Q. Sun, L. J. Deng, C. J. Zhao and Z. Li, Biomaterials, 2016, 91, 81–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. B. Hu, C. Peng, W. J. Luo, M. Lv, X. M. Li, D. Li, Q. Huang and C. H. Fan, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4317–4323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Akhavan and E. Ghaderi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5731–5736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Liu, T. H. Zeng, M. Hofmann, E. Burcombe, J. Wei, R. R. Jiang, J. Kong and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6971–6980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gurunathan, J. W. Han, A. A. Dayem, V. Eppakayala and J. H. Kim, Int. J. Nanomed., 2012, 7, 5901–5914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. N. Ruiz, K. A. S. Fernando, B. J. Wang, N. A. Brown, P. G. Luo, N. D. McNamara, M. Vangsness, Y. P. Sun and C. E. Bunker, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8100–8107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. G. Hu, K. C. Lu, L. Mu, J. Kang and Q. X. Zhou, Carbon, 2014, 80, 665–676 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mohanty, M. Fahrenholtz, A. Nagaraja, D. Boyle and V. Berry, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1270–1275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, R. R. Zhang, X. Z. Fang, T. Q. Song, X. D. Cai, H. J. Liu and S. T. Du, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 317, 543–551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. G. Hu, S. H. Ouyang, L. Mu, J. An and Q. Zhou, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 10825–10833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Begurn, R. Ikhtiari and B. Fugetsu, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3907–3919 CrossRef .
M. H. Lahiani, E. Dervishi, I. Ivanov, J. H. Chen and M. Khodakovskaya, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 13 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhang, B. Gao, J. J. Chen and Y. C. Li, J. Nanopart. Res., 2015, 17, 8 CrossRef .
S. J. Liu, H. M. Wei, Z. Y. Li, S. Li, H. Yan, Y. He and Z. H. Tian, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2015, 15, 2695–2701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Anjum, N. Singh, M. K. Singh, I. Sayeed, A. C. Duarte, E. Pereira and I. Ahmad, Sci. Total Environ., 2014, 472, 834–841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. G. Hu, M. Zhou and Q. X. Zhou, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 3410–3418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Tang, J. L. Tian, S. Y. Li, C. H. Xue, Z. H. Xue, D. Q. Yin and S. L. Yu, Sci. Total Environ., 2015, 532, 154–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Xie, Z. Ming, H. L. Li, H. Yang, B. W. Yu, R. H. Wu, X. Y. Liu, Y. T. Bai and S. T. Yang, Chemosphere, 2016, 151, 324–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Hu, Q. Wang, H. T. Zhao, L. Z. Wang, S. F. Guo and X. L. Li, Chemosphere, 2015, 128, 184–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. K. Guo, S. P. Dong, E. J. Petersen, S. X. Gao, Q. G. Huang and L. Mao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 12524–12531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lu, Q. G. Huang, P. Wang and L. Mao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 8558–8565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Chen, C. X. Ren, S. H. Ouyang, X. G. Hu and Q. X. Zhou, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 10147–10154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mu, Y. Gao and X. G. Hu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 8530–8537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pumera, A. Ambrosi, A. Bonanni, E. L. K. Chng and H. L. Poh, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2010, 29, 954–965 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pumera, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 308–315 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Park and H. J. Sohn, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2465–2468 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gong, H. J. Zhang, W. H. Wang, L. Colombo, R. M. Wallace and K. J. Cho, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 4 Search PubMed .

Footnote† On leave from the Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Martin Pumera	Prof. Martin Pumera has been a faculty member at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, since 2010. He received his PhD at Charles University, Czech Republic, in 2001. After two postdoctoral stays (in the USA and Spain), he joined the National Institute for Materials Science, Japan, in 2006 for a tenure-track arrangement and stayed there until Spring 2008 when he accepted a tenured position at NIMS. In 2009, Prof. Pumera received an ERC-StG award. Prof. Pumera has a broad interest in nanomaterials and microsystems in the specific areas of the chemistry of 2D materials, nanotoxicity, environmental science, and energy storage devices. He is the editor-in-chief of Applied Materials Today (Elsevier), a member of the Editorial Board of Chem. Eur. J., Electrochem. Commun., Electrophoresis, Electroanalysis, The Chemical Record, and ChemElectroChem. He has published over 450 peer-reviewed articles and has an h-index of 65.

Environmental significance
The aim of this review is to provide a comprehensive overview of recent studies concerning the toxicity and possible environmental risks of two-dimensional materials. It provides an evaluation of the knowledge gaps that should be filled in order to disclose the real safety risks associated with their everyday utilization so that we can benefit from their unique properties.


 	Fig. 1  Number of nanomaterial-containing consumer products listed in the CPI from 2007 in each major category and in the Health and Fitness subcategories. Reproduced from ref. 4.	 

 	Fig. 2  Three-dimensional schematic representation of a typical layered transition metal dichalcogenide (MX2) structure. The figure shows three layers of MX2, each layer consisting of covalently bonded M–X arranged as three planes of atoms, with M forming the center plane and X (chalcogen S, Se, Te) forming the top and bottom planes. Reproduced from ref. 29.	 

 	Fig. 3  
In vitro and in vivo assessments to determine toxicity of nanomaterials. Reproduced from ref. 56.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Percent hemolysis of erythrocytes incubated with graphene oxide-based particles at concentrations ranging from 3.125 to 200 μg ml−1. Colloidal suspension of GO (GO, red line), GO obtained after 5 h of bath sonication of GO (bGO, blue), GO obtained after 5 min of probe-sonication of GO (pGO-5, green), GO obtained after 30 min of probe-sonication of GO (pGO-30, purple), and graphene sheets obtained after hydrothermal processing of pGO-5 (GS, black) for 3 h at 37 °C with shaking. Data represent mean ± SD from at least five independent experiments, also including the hemolysis percentage after incubation of erythrocytes with pGO-30/chitosan at 100 μg ml−1 for 3 h and 37 °C with shaking. (b) Photographs of erythrocytes after 3 h of exposure to increasing concentrations of GO, bGO, pGO-5, pGO-30, and GS (3.125 to 200 μg ml−1). The amount of red hemoglobin present in the supernatant of blood samples corresponds to the level of membrane damage. Positive and negative controls are marked as (+) and (−), respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80.	 

 	Fig. 5  Extent of WST-8 and MTT reduction to formazan product after exposure to increased concentration of BP. The black dotted line represents the blank control while the green dotted line marks the 150% control formazan concentration limit set; interference above this limit is considered significant. Adapted from ref. 107.	 

 	Fig. 6  Light micrographs of mice lung tissue after exposure to 0.1 mg of GO; (A) 7 days of exposure, (B) 30 days of exposure, magnification 200×. Adapted from ref. 77.	 

 	Fig. 7  Effect of graphene on root hair formation of Triticum aestivum. Growth of hair roots was inhibited after 48 h of exposure to graphene. (a) Control; (b) 500 mg l−1 graphene. Figure adapted from ref. 134.	 
Footnote
† On leave from the Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
