Toward a new generation of low cost, efficient, and durable metal–air flow batteries  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA10658H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA10658H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26744-26768Toward a new generation of low cost, efficient, and durable metal–air flow batteries

        
          
            Wentao 
            Yu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenxu 
            Shang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Tan
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Bin 
            Chen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Zhen 
            Wu
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Haoran 
            Xu
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Zongping 
            Shao
          
        
      ef, 
      
        
          
            Meilin 
            Liu
          
        
      g and 

        
          
            Meng 
            Ni
          
        
      *dh
aDepartment of Thermal Science and Energy Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, Anhui, China. E-mail: pengtan@ustc.edu.cn
bInstitute of Deep Earth Sciences and Green Energy, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, China
cShaanxi Key Laboratory of Energy Chemical Process Intensification, School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710049, Shaanxi, China
dDepartment of Building and Real Estate, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China
eJiangsu National Synergetic Innovation Center for Advanced Material, College of Energy, State Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing 210009, China
fDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Curtin University, Perth, WA 6845, Australia
gSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Center for Innovative Fuel Cell and Battery Technologies, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0245, USA
hEnvironmental Energy Research Group, Research Institute for Sustainable Urban Development (RISUD), The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: meng.ni@polyu.edu.hk
Received 
      26th September 2019
    , Accepted 22nd October 2019First published on 23rd October 2019AbstractOver the past few decades, metal–air flow batteries (MAFBs) have attracted great attention as a promising candidate for next-generation energy storage systems because of their potential to offer both high performance and scale flexibility, derived from the high energy density of metal–air batteries and the scalability of redox flow batteries. In this article, recent progress in metal–air flow batteries is overviewed, focusing on the structural design and advances in materials development. To obtain an insightful view of the battery features, different categories are introduced on the basis of flow media, working principles, and configurations. In addition, detailed discussion about metal–air flow batteries with aqueous and non-aqueous electrolytes is conducted, containing advances in the structural design and materials development of metal electrodes, air electrodes, and electrolytes. Finally, the challenges and perspectives for future development are synoptically presented.
1. Introduction
In recent years, climate change and the ever-increasing demands for energy have promoted the development of renewable energy sources (e.g., wind, solar, and water power).1 Owing to the intermittent nature of these energy sources, large-scale and high-performance energy storage systems are in great need. Among various alternative technologies such as supercapacitors,2–7 and compressed air,8–11 phase change,12–14 and pumped hydro energy storage devices,15–17 batteries are still one of the most promising energy storage devices due to their flexibility and stability.18 Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have been widely used in many applications, notably for portable electronics and electric vehicles due to the remarkable energy densities.19–21 LIBs have also been used for stationary applications, but the high cost and heating problems of LIBs make it urgent to develop new energy storage systems for large-scale power grids.20,22–25 Metal–air batteries (MABs), which use oxygen from the ambient air as one reactant and pure metal as the other reactant, offer a very high energy density. Since oxygen can be taken from air, the theoretical capacity of a MAB is determined largely by the amount of metal used. Thus, the theoretical capacity of a zinc–air battery (ZAB) is ∼820 mA h gZn−1, which is several times higher than that of widely used LIBs.26 For a lithium–air battery (LAB), the theoretical capacity is ∼3860 mA h gLi−1.27 Regardless of the attractive prospects of MABs, however, many intrinsic problems still remain for practical applications. Similar to other secondary batteries using pure metals, dendrite formation is a critical challenge, which dramatically degrades the safety and stability. Passivation of metal electrodes due to adhesion of insoluble products and by-products is another critical challenge, resulting in degradation in battery performance. For porous air electrodes, the performance is often limited by the availability of surface sites for electrode reactions and the resistance to transport of ions, electrons, and gases to or away from the reaction sites during charge and discharge. More importantly, the formation of insoluble products and by-products, especially in non-aqueous MABs (e.g., LABs), may block the path for gas transport and/or cover the active sites for electrode reactions, degrading battery performance during operation. In addition, the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) during discharge and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) during charge are multi-step, multi-electron transfer processes, and their sluggish kinetics drag the energy output and decrease the energy efficiency and coulombic efficiency.28 Notwithstanding these challenges, significant progress has been achieved in three areas: (i) developing high-performance battery materials (e.g., catalysts and stable electrolytes);29–34 (ii) designing new nanostructures or optimizing cell designs (e.g., nano-structured catalysts and fluidic electrode designs);35–40 and (iii) combining MABs with other batteries to form hybrid systems, such as hybrid Zn–M/air batteries (M represents transition metals)41–48 and photo-assisted batteries.49,50 In spite of these efforts, the commercialization of MABs still has a long way to go.
Redox flow batteries (RFBs) use external tanks to store electrolytes and reaction redox couples. Thus, the energy of the redox couples dissolved in the electrolytes is stored in separate storage tanks, not in the electrode materials of the RFB, which act only as the active reaction zones and current collectors, effectively eliminating many problems of air electrodes discussed earlier. Also, the power and energy are no longer coupled because the electrolyte and electroactive materials are stored separately.51 These features greatly improve the convenience for enlarging the scale of the battery, making RFBs attractive for large-scale applications.52–54 Since the first Fe–Cr redox flow battery (Fe2+/Fe3+, Cr2+/Cr3+) proposed in the 1970s,55 various types of RFBs have been developed, such as Sn–Fe,56 Fe–Cr,57,58 and vanadium-based RFBs.58–62 Although significant progress from materials to structural design has been made in VRFBs,63–65 many problems still remain to be addressed, including the narrow operational temperature window (10 to 40 °C), low energy density (<25 W h Lelectrolyte−1), and limited stability and solubility of redox couples.51,66–68
Due to the forced convection of the electrolyte enabled by the circulation sub-system, the mass transfer is dramatically enhanced in RFBs. Therefore, when applying the flow system to MABs, many aforementioned problems in MABs and conventional RFBs can be well solved. First, a relatively high energy density is obtainable for a metal–air flow battery (MAFB) due to the relatively higher energy density of a MAB than a conventional RFB. Second, MAFBs are more compact than conventional RFBs. For conventional RFBs such as VRFBs, two redox couples, employed for electrode reactions, are stored in two separate storage tanks to avoid cross-contamination. Conversely, the reactants of MAFBs are metals and ambient air, which means that the circulating electrolytes are just for enhancing mass transfer and bringing out products and by-products. Hence, only one storage tank is needed in MAFBs, which reduces the overall size and increases the energy density indirectly. Third, an ion exchange membrane is usually indispensable for separating the anolyte and catholyte in RFBs.69–73 While in MAFBs, except for some alkaline metal-based MAFBs with dual electrolytes, the electrolyte membranes are used for separating the metal and air electrodes and sometimes are even unnecessary,74,75 which reduces the cost and eliminates the performance degradation caused by the transport resistance through the membrane.
In recent years, plenty of studies of static MABs (e.g., LABs and ZABs) and battery components (metal electrode, electrolyte, and air electrode) have been reported.34,76–79 In addition, the reviews of static MABs have also been summarized by researchers.75,80,81 By contrast, the work on MAFBs is still at an early stage, and few researchers have systematically reported the progress, challenges, and perspectives of MAFBs. Recently, studies of MAFBs are synoptically summarized in a review which gives an introduction of next-generation flow-battery technologies.82 More recently, a review from the perspectives of materials and chemistry was reported, which introduced the developments of vanadium–air flow batteries (VAFBs), zinc–air flow batteries (ZAFBs), and lithium–air flow batteries (LAFBs) under both static and flow conditions.83 It is worth noting that VAFBs should not be classified as conventional MABs due to the application of vanadium ions of different valences (V3+/V2+) as redox couples instead of pure vanadium metal for the negative electrode reaction. In addition, the existing problems in ZAFBs and LAFBs have commonality and individuality since both kinds of batteries can be employed using either aqueous or non-aqueous electrolytes, making the division of MAFBs unreasonable only in light of the used metal. Moreover, although the developments of materials and structures of MAFBs were comprehensively overviewed, new issues of introducing the flow system are not emphasized specifically. Therefore, it is essential to summarize previous studies of MAFBs and offer new insights for further development and practical applications, especially on the structural design and advances in materials.
We will start with a brief introduction to the system configurations and working principles and then discuss the flow media used in various systems and their classifications; MAFBs are divided into three categories according to structural features, working principles, and applications. Subsequently, the development of MAFBs based on aqueous electrolytes will be presented in Section 3, including the advances in metal and air electrodes. In Section 4, the achievements and problems of MAFBs based on non-aqueous electrolytes are discussed. Finally, the current status and the critical challenges of MAFBs are highlighted, along with the perspectives for further development.
2. Battery configuration and working mechanisms
Different from VRFBs, the reactants of MAFBs are solid metals (on the metal electrode) and gaseous oxygen (on the air electrode) during discharge. Therefore, battery configurations and working mechanisms are substantially different. A lot of developments on MAFBs have been reported, and different kinds of solvents have been used depending on the nature of the metal, including aqueous and non-aqueous electrolytes. While in a specific MAFB, different types of electrolytes can co-exist with different flow forms. Thus, according to the electrolytes used and the flow forms, the existing MAFBs can be loosely classified into three categories: one flow medium with one circulation, two flow media with one circulation, and two flow media with two circulations, which will be discussed in detail in this section.
2.1 One medium with one circulation
Commonly, conventional MABs are composed of three parts: a metal electrode, a porous air electrode, and an electrolyte. The metal electrode acts as the negative electrode and provides reactants while the air electrode provides reaction sites for the ORR and OER. As for MAFBs, the flow system is introduced into conventional MABs. Therefore, two external devices are needed, including a tank to store the electrolyte and a pump to provide the flowing power. As schematically shown in Fig. 1, this type of MAFB has similar components to those of static MABs except for employing an additional flow system to enable the circulation of the applied electrolyte in the whole battery during operation. To couple with the metal electrodes, different kinds of electrolytes are applied.84,85 For example, aqueous electrolytes are usually used in zinc-based flow batteries,74 while non-aqueous electrolytes are generally employed for active metals (e.g., Li and Na).34 In such kinds of MAFBs, only one kind of electrolyte is applied, and the ones with two or more electrolytes will be introduced later.86–88 Since the working principles are different when different types of electrolytes are used, the configurations based on aqueous and non-aqueous electrolytes are discussed separately.
 Fig. 1  Structure diagrams of MAFBs with one medium with one circulation. (a) Metal particle slurry flow. (b) Only the electrolyte flow. (c) Carbon slurry flow. 
For MAFBs with flowing aqueous electrolytes, they can be mainly divided into two classifications. One is that the metal particles are added to the electrolyte to form a slurry, which circulates inside the negative region of the battery. As schematically shown in Fig. 1a, the aqueous electrolyte with metal particles (e.g., zinc pellets) is stored in a tank,89 and the negative electrode only provides a place for the reactions of metal dissolution and precipitation. Taking the ZAFB as an example, the reactions on the negative electrode can be expressed as: (1)
During the discharge process, the mixtures of zinc particles and the electrolyte driven by a pump are delivered to the negative electrode, and zinc particles are oxidized to divalent zinc ions (Zn2+), combine with hydroxide (OH−) to form Zn(OH)42− and dissolve in the electrolyte. The electrochemical reactions on the positive (air) electrode are conventional ORR and OER processes during discharge and charge, respectively. For aqueous electrolytes, the ORR and OER are very complicated reactions and reaction kinetics are pretty sluggish. For the ORR, there exist two reaction pathways, the two-electron pathway and the four-electron pathway, when applying different catalysts and electronic structures.90–92 The pathways of the OER are similarly complicated and are different from those of the ORR. Therefore, a bifunctional catalyst is needed to accelerate the reaction rates of both ORR and OER. The reaction equation can be described as: (2)
The combination of reactions (1) and (2) results in the overall reaction: (3)
Unlike a conventional Zn battery, the negative electrode of a MAFB acts only as a current collector so that dendrite formation and surface passivation are avoided. For this cell configuration, the critical challenge is how to fully utilize the metal particle in the electrochemical reaction and avoid the blockage of zinc particles in the electrode. It is worth mentioning that the cells with this configuration are recharged mechanically, which means that the zinc particles are fed mechanically and the aged electrolyte will be replaced by a new one after a period of operation. Therefore, the reduction of zinc ions does not occur inside the battery.
The other one is that only the electrolyte acts as the flow medium. As schematically shown in Fig. 1b, the electrolytes are stored separately in an external tank that is connected to the battery through a pipe. In the discharge and charge processes, the electrolyte induces a stable circulation between the positive electrode region of the battery and the tank under the action of a pump. The air electrode is usually made of porous materials (e.g., carbon paper and metal foam) to increase the reaction area,80,93 while the negative electrode usually consists of metals in the form of foils or particles deposited on a substrate. For static ZABs, during the discharge process, when the concentration of Zn(OH)42− is high or even saturated, the formation rate of zinc oxide (ZnO) increases sharply,94,95 which is a white flocculent precipitate and not electrically conductive. Due to the accumulation of ZnO on the negative electrode, the surface area in contact with the electrolyte is reduced, leading to passivation.79,96,97 Besides, the sluggish reaction kinetics of the ORR accompanied by the high species transport resistance greatly affect the electrochemical performance. After introducing the flow system, the generated Zn(OH)42− ions can be brought to the outside of the battery by the flow of the electrolyte, together with ZnO (if any), thus suppressing passivation.98–101 Additionally, species transport is accelerated, reducing the concentration polarization.102,103 During the charge process, driven by the pump, the electrolyte containing Zn(OH)42− ions is sent to the battery to participate in the reaction. Different from the situation in static batteries where the formation of dendrites may occur, the flow of the electrolyte can shape the form of deposited zinc to inhibit dendrite formation.83,104 In addition, the generated oxygen (especially gaseous oxygen) during the OER can be taken out of the battery in time instead of occupying the porous electrode, thus avoiding the decrease of reaction sites and the leakage of the electrolyte caused by the high inner pressure.83 The configuration shown in Fig. 1b can also be applied to batteries based on non-aqueous electrolytes such as lithium–air and sodium–air flow batteries.105 The reactions for non-aqueous LAFBs can be expressed as follows:
Positive electrode: (4)
Negative electrode: (5)
Overall reaction: (6)which are immensely different from those of ZAFBs. During the discharge process, lithium is oxidized to lithium ions (Li+) and gradually dissolve in the electrolyte. Simultaneously, the ORR is carried out on the positive electrode. Because of the infiltration of the non-aqueous electrolyte,74 oxygen first dissolves in the electrolyte to form dissolved oxygen and then reduces to form super oxygen ions (O2−) and combines with Li+ transferred from the negative electrode to form lithium peroxide (Li2O2). Li2O2 does not dissolve in the non-aqueous electrolyte, reducing the active surface area and species transport pathways of the porous air electrode in static LABs. Fortunately, its precipitation can be carried outside the battery accompanied by the flow of the electrolyte, which suppresses the above issues effectively.105 During the charge process, the limited interfaces between solid Li2O2 and the electrode and electrolyte hinder the deposition, resulting in a high overpotential. While carried by the circulating medium, the flowing electrolyte can accelerate the transport of ions and even carry solid Li2O2 to the porous air electrode to increase the contact interfaces, and thus facilitate the OER. In addition, the dendrite growth during lithium deposition can also be mitigated by the flow of the electrolyte. Notably, lithium metal has strong reducibility and can react with many substances including the air electrode reactant, oxygen. Therefore, oxygen crossover is a very severe problem in LAFBs as the flow electrolyte enhances oxygen transfer. Oxygen crossover can lead to various decomposition reactions and the corrosion of the lithium electrode.106,107 Commonly, a ceramic membrane (Fig. 1b) is used to block oxygen crossover, as well as nitrogen and carbon dioxide.34,107
Inspired by ZAFBs with zinc particle flow, a semi-solid-flow LAB has been developed, as schematically shown in Fig. 1c.108 This structure uses a semi-solid catholyte to circulate in the air electrode region of the battery, which is composed of carbon particles suspended in a non-aqueous electrolyte. By employing this semi-solid-flow design, the ORR and OER are carried out on carbon particles instead of the conventional porous air electrode, solving the clog and passivation issues. The details of this semi-solid-flow design will be introduced in a later section.
2.2 Two media with one circulation
Generally, the discharge current densities of non-aqueous LABs are only about 0.1–1 mA cm−2, far lower than those of ZABs (e.g., 10 mA cm−2).31 An important reason is the lack of a gas phase caused by the complete saturation of non-aqueous electrolytes in the air electrodes.109 Owing to the low oxygen dissolution rate, solubility, and diffusivity in common non-aqueous electrolytes, the oxygen concentration at the reaction interface is greatly limited. To solve this issue, hybrid electrolytes have been applied, which include two different types of electrolytes for the negative and positive electrodes, respectively as shown in Fig. 2a. Commonly, solid membranes are necessary to protect the lithium electrode. However, some of them (e.g., LATP: Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3) will react with lithium.110 Even for those that are stable when directly in contact with lithium (e.g., LAGP: Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3), the interface resistance is large.111 To this end, non-aqueous electrolytes are essential for this kind of configuration to protect lithium, increase the contact areas, and facilitate the transport of Li+ ions. In the air electrode region, the aqueous electrolyte is applied to create more triple-phase boundaries for fast oxygen transport and solve the pore clog issue due to the formation of soluble discharge products (e.g., LiOH). To protect the metal electrode from aqueous electrolytes, dual electrolytes are separated using a solid membrane that only allows the transport of Li+ ions.
 Fig. 2  (a) Structure diagrams of MAFBs with two media and one circulation. (b) A diagram showing the operational principle and configuration of the lithium–air flow battery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the hybrid sodium–air flow battery equipped with a catholyte tank. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Stemming from this concept, LAFBs with dual electrolytes in which only the catholyte is flowing have been proposed.87,88Fig. 2b shows a schematic diagram of the structure and working principle of a LAFB developed by He and co-workers.87 The non-aqueous and aqueous electrolytes are isolated by a Li+-ion conducting glass-ceramic (e.g., LISICON) membrane. During discharge, lithium metal is oxidized to Li+ ions as indicated in reaction (5), which are then transported through the solid membrane, while oxygen passes through the gas diffusion layer and reacts at the triple-phase boundaries based on reaction (2). Since the degradation of the LISICON membrane occurs under strongly alkaline conditions, a cation exchange membrane is used to divide the aqueous electrolytes with different alkalinities to enhance the stability. At a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2, the battery delivers a stable voltage of ∼2.8 V and a high electrode capacity of ∼19000 mA h gcatalyst−1. At a lower current density of 0.1 mA cm−2, the discharge voltage can reach ∼3.2 V. When testing the battery performance with a higher current density of 1 mA cm−2, the voltage remains at ∼2.6 V, which is a visible improvement in comparison with that of static LABs. Later on, Chen et al. made some optimizations to form a new type of hybrid LAFB.88 The battery also consists of an electrochemical reaction unit and a recycling unit. While different from the structure in Fig. 2b, the electrochemical unit employs a relatively closed system in which the whole air electrode is immersed in the aqueous electrolyte. During discharge, gaseous oxygen is continuously introduced into the tank to dissolve in the electrolyte. By this method, the circulating aqueous electrolyte contains saturated oxygen without the requirement of oxygen from the gas diffusion layer, greatly reducing the transport resistance. In addition, a thicker air electrode can be applied, providing a larger reactive surface to enhance the reaction kinetics. At a current density of 1 mA cm−2, the discharge and charge voltages are stabilized at 3.2 V and 3.9 V, respectively, better than those of conventional LABs. At a high current density of 5 mA cm−2, the discharge voltage remains at 1.5 V and a high power density of up to 7.64 mW cm−2 is achieved at 4 mA cm−2. Moreover, the resistance of the total battery is found to be determined by the Li+-ion conducting glass-ceramic membrane, and its impedance should be reduced to effectively improve the battery performance.
In addition to LAFBs, this flow structure can also be applied in MAFBs made of more reactive metals, such as sodium. A sodium–air flow battery with hybrid electrolytes (Fig. 2c) has been developed by Hwang and his co-workers.86 This battery consists of the sodium metal electrode in a non-aqueous electrolyte and the air electrode in an aqueous electrolyte, which is separated by a Na+-ion conducting glass-ceramic (e.g., NASICON) membrane. The aqueous catholyte is circulated in flow-through mode, continuously replacing the reaction products with fresh reactants near the air electrode and helping convert ambient oxygen gas to dissolved oxygen in the catholyte. At a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2, charge and discharge voltages of 3.68 V and 3.32 V with a peak power density of ∼5.4 mW cm−2 are achieved, respectively. In addition, the battery shows good stability, and the voltage fluctuation is only 0.36 V in 20 cycles with a duration of 200 h.
2.3 Two media with two circulations
Besides the above-mentioned flow configurations, Wen et al. proposed a novel concept of a ZAFB based on two hybrid flow electrolytes by introducing a new substance, propanol, as a reactant to participate in an extra electrode reaction during charge.99 As shown in Fig. 3a, this battery consists of two independent flow systems and an energy conversion unit. In the energy conversion unit, three electrodes divide the unit into two parts for charge and discharge, respectively. During charge, the reactions on the positive electrode can be presented as follows: 2Ni(OH)2 + 2OH− → 2NiOOH + 2H2O + 2e−(7) CH3CH2OH + 4NiOOH + H2O → CH3CH2COOH + 4Ni(OH)2(8) CH3CH2COOH + KOH → CH3CH2COOK + H2O(9)
 Fig. 3  The configuration of a ZAFB with two flow systems with the configuration of (a) a gas-introducing and (b) cavity-opening structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2009, Elsevier. 
Nickel hydroxide (Ni(OH)2) on the electrode first reacts with the hydroxide ions in the electrolyte. Then, the product NiOOH reacts with propanol to regenerate Ni(OH)2, maintaining its mass in the whole process. However, propanol will become propionic acid, which further reacts with KOH in the alkaline electrolyte, indicating that propanol is consumed throughout the process. The deposition of zinc occurs on the negative electrode as in conventional ZABs (reaction (1)). The positive and negative electrodes are separated by an ion exchange membrane, and propanol only circulates in the positive electrode side. Therefore, the OER is replaced by another reaction. During discharge, the porous air electrode and the metal electrode form a general ZAFB with circulation of aqueous electrolytes and the reactions are the same as reaction (1) and reaction (2) in Section 2.1. To introduce air into the reaction zone, a “gas-introducing” structure was developed (Fig. 3a), which was further optimized into a “cavity-opening” structure to increase the oxygen transport rate (Fig. 3b). Consequently, the discharge voltage increases by about 100 mV, and the energy efficiency reaches up to 59.2%. Apparently, the introduction of propanol avoids the issues during the OER, but results in a more complex battery structure.
Recently, Brandon et al. reported a primary aluminum–air battery employing oil flow displacement to suppress the open-circuit corrosion of the aluminum electrode.112 The battery is divided into two parts by a separator with properties of oleophobicity and hydrophilicity. The air electrode side is full of the NaOH solution while the aluminum electrode side is supplied with the NaOH solution during operation and the insulating oil during standby, respectively. During discharge, the electrolyte is continuously circulated inside the whole battery, but when the circuit is disconnected, the electrolyte in the aluminum side is replaced by the oil to suppress open-circuit corrosion. During standby, the corrosion current density with this kind of flow structure remains between 0.0001 and 0.0011 mA cm−2, which is several orders of magnitude lower than that of the conventional battery (1 to 10 mA cm−2). The battery delivers an energy density of 2.08 ± 0.07 W h g−1 Al while the value drops to 0.4 ± 0.07 W h g−1 Al in the conventional battery in an intermittent test of 5 min of operation at a current density of 150 mA cm−2 and 24 or 72 hour pauses. This work provides ideas for applying flow systems to address some issues that static batteries can hardly handle.
3. Flow media based on aqueous electrolytes
MABs based on aqueous electrolytes usually include aluminum–air, magnesium–air, zinc–air, and some lithium/sodium–air batteries.75,80,86,113,114 From Section 2, the basic reactions (OER and ORR) on the air electrodes of aqueous MAFBs are similar. Among aqueous MABs, the ones using magnesium and aluminum suffer from severe passivation and corrosion, which greatly hinder their electrochemical rechargeability and performance.113,115–118 For the ones using lithium or sodium, the inevitable use of glass-ceramic membranes complicates the battery configuration, and the use of non-aqueous electrolytes, as well as the occasional contact of alkaline metals and aqueous solvents, also threatens the safety. In contrast, ZABs have intrinsic safety and can be recharged electrochemically.89,101,102,119–122 In this section, we will introduce the developments and common issues based on the battery components instead of the specific types. The metal electrode designs will be first summarized, followed by the air electrode designs. The electrochemical performance of different types of MAFBs will be also compared at the end of this section.
3.1 Metal electrode design
Metal electrodes are usually composed of metallic plates or powders deposited on current collectors.30,123 During repeated discharge and charge processes, some issues such as dendrite formation, hydrogen evolution, shape changes, and passivation will decrease the utilization of the metal electrode, cause capacity loss, limit the cycle life, and even lead to short-circuit.95,120,124–126 Many feasible approaches have been proposed to address these issues.124,127–130 As one promising strategy, surface coating is conducted by introducing a protective layer for the metal electrode, which can effectively suppress dendrite formation, hydrogen evolution, and passivation. The introduction of additives is another way to enhance the performance of the metal electrode.131,132 For example, the most commonly used additives for the zinc electrode include Bi2O3, Ca(OH)2, PbO, SnO2, and LiBO.133 As most of the aqueous MAFBs focus on ZAFBs, we will take the zinc electrode as an example to discuss the effective design strategy.83,97,121
Since zinc particles and slurries are usually used, the corresponding metal electrode design is demanded to address the issues of zinc utilization, the blockage caused by remaining zinc, and solid products and by-products. The most common design employs a zinc electrode chamber with a tapered-end structure, as shown in Fig. 4a.102,134,135 Earlier, Cooper et al. reported a zinc–air fuel cell employing a tapered-end structure chamber as the negative electrode fed with zinc particle slurries.135 During discharge, zinc particle slurries are pumped into the chamber through a hopper where the zinc particles are oxidized. The size of zinc particles gradually decreases during discharge, and thus zinc particles can automatically flow from the upper end to the lower end of the chamber. Based on this design, a fuel stack was developed with the tapered-end structured chambers, in which zinc particles were fed by gravity while the electrolyte was driven by the pump during discharge. As a result, a peak power density of 435 mW cm−2 was achieved. In addition to this design, two kinds of tapered-end structured chambers (type V and type Y) were tested to fully utilize the active areas, as shown in Fig. 4b.102 The experimental results showed that the bottom portion of the type V chamber was not filled with zinc particles, causing a sharp decrease of the effective active area of the anode. In contrast, zinc particles filling the type Y chamber were much more homogeneous, and the inactive region was reduced to a minimum value. The peak power density with the type Y chamber was as high as 274 mW cm−2 at a current density of 420 mA cm−2, while the value with the type V one was only 110 mW cm−2 at a current density of 123 mA cm−2 under the same operating conditions. Apart from the tapered-end structure, a zinc electrode bed was also reported (Fig. 4c).89 During discharge, zinc particle slurries are pumped into the bed and the zinc particles are trapped within the bed, while the electrolyte keeps flowing from the top to the bottom. With the dissolution of zinc particles, their size becomes smaller and then the particles migrate to the bottom of the bed. Using this design, a single battery could successfully operate for 1000 h, delivering a stable power density of 300 mW cm−2.
 Fig. 4  (a) Negative electrode chamber with the tapered-end structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (b) Anode chamber with tapered-end structure: type V (left) and type Y (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (c) Zinc fuel cell frame with the zinc bed structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2007, Elsevier. 
Passivation is considered to be another factor that limits the metal electrode performance. As the operating time goes by, the concentration of hydroxide ions in the solution gradually decreases, and conversely, the concentration of zincate ions (Zn(OH)42−) slowly reaches saturation, which will cause the precipitation of the insoluble and insulating product zinc oxide (ZnO).134,136 ZnO is difficult to electrochemically reduce to zinc and can easily adhere to the electrode surface, reducing the active surface area of the metal electrode.96,97,133 Actually, the passivation phenomenon is not obvious in most reported ZABs since the concentration of zinc ions in the electrolyte is not saturated, and the rate of generating zinc oxide is relatively low for ordinary discharge. However, when the concentration of zinc ions in the electrolyte is saturated as occurred in the deep discharge case, the battery performance is largely affected.134,136,137 Using a flowing electrolyte or slurry is an effective approach to alleviate surface passivation and enhance battery performance.119,134 Puapattanakul et al. investigated the flow effects on zinc–air fuel cell performance by comparing the cells with a static electrolyte, flowing electrolyte, and flowing gelled KOH electrolyte, respectively.119 The results demonstrated that the average current of the cell with the flowing electrolyte was 27% higher than that with the static electrolyte at a constant voltage of 0.7 V. Besides, the gelled KOH electrolyte provided no evident improvements on the battery performance but reduced gas evolution and alleviated zinc oxidation caused by hydroxide ions during discharge. To obtain in-depth information of the flow effects on passivation, a flow zinc–air fuel cell was fabricated with a mechanically refuelable tapered-end zinc electrode chamber filled with zinc particles with an average diameter of 0.4 mm.134 At a constant current of 212 mA, the capacity with the flowing electrolyte was one order of magnitude higher than that with the static electrolyte, and adding fresh electrolyte cannot improve the values due to the blockage caused by zinc particles. Thus, the suppression of passivation and the improvement of battery performance by using the flowing electrolyte were illustrated. A passive model of zinc particles with a ZnO shell was also proposed, as shown in Fig. 5a. At the initial discharge stage, passivation is hindered due to the high concentration of hydroxide ions maintained by the flowing electrolyte. After long-term discharge, the zincate concentration gradually reaches saturation and the concentration of hydroxide ions decreases, resulting in passivation. Two kinds of passivation films (Fig. 5b) are proposed, including an inner light gray/black dense ZnO layer (type II) in the region closer to the anode surface at the metal/electrolyte interface under the lower pH condition and an external white porous layer (type I) formed by the precipitation of saturated zincate ions (Zn(OH)42−). Although the electrolyte storage tank provides a large amount of electrolyte for the cell and collects the products and by-products, a large space is demanded which decreases the energy density and in turn limits commercial applications. To further optimize the cell structure, a novel system with a filter instead of the electrolyte storage tank to isolate reaction product precipitations and suppress anode passivation was proposed by Pei and co-workers.136 The filter made of titanium powder can effectively remove ZnO from the electrolyte with an efficiency of nearly 100%. From the experimental results, the battery without a filter had a clear voltage decrease and formed a white precipitate in the electrolyte, while the one with a filter could still operate with a stable voltage over 1.1 V and the solution remained transparent. Two flow fields with low (2300) and high (9200) Reynolds numbers were also employed, and the passivation layers on the electrode could be easily damaged under the higher Reynolds number condition. Recently, to suppress corrosion and passivation of zinc particles, functional electrolyte additives have been introduced into ZAFBs, such as ethanol.138 Alkoxide ions, which originate from the transformation of alcohols in alkaline solutions, can compete with hydroxide ions for the coordination of Zn2+ ions.139 Consequently, the introduction of ethanol can suppress the formation of ZnO, and concentrations of 5–10% v/v ethanol were found to be beneficial for dissolution and the hindrance of passivation. In addition, two kinds of surfactants have also been proposed, including sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and Pluronic F-127 (P127).98,140 Specific discharge capacity increases of 30% and 24% were achieved in the electrolyte containing 100 ppm P127 and 0.2 mM SDS, respectively.
 Fig. 5  (a) Model of spherical Zn particles with the passive ZnO shell. (b) Physical images (left) and SEM micrographs at magnifications of 100× and 500× (right) of the passivation model. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2017, Springer. 
For electrically rechargeable metal-based batteries, dendrites are a key factor that restricts performance and safety. In alkaline solutions, zincate (Zn(OH)42−) is the main product in the discharge process, which should be completely reduced to zinc in the charge process. However, the concentration of zincate on the electrode surface is different from that in the electrolyte due to the transport resistance. As the electrode surface is not absolutely smooth, the concentration gradient makes the deposition rate non-uniform, resulting in dendrite growth.104,124 The influences of the flowing electrolyte on the zinc deposition process have been investigated, which revealed that the circulation of the electrolyte can inhibit dendrite growth. Wang et al. established a three-dimensional model and conducted experiments to illustrate the morphology control of zinc regeneration in the presence of flow media.104 As shown in Fig. 6a, the convection caused by flow media dominates the mass transport in the electrolyte rather than the diffusion, making the concentration of each part in the electrolyte uniform. With an increase of the Peclet number (a dimensionless parameter to measure the proportion of convective transport and diffusion transport), the distribution of the ion concentration in the electrolyte becomes more and more uniform. To obtain an insight view of the effects of flow media, the SEM images of the zinc morphology deposited under static (up) and flow (down) conditions are presented in Fig. 6b, respectively. Apparently, the morphology under the flowing electrolyte is more compact than that under the static electrolyte. Hence, through reducing the concentration gradients between the surface of the zinc electrode and the bulk electrolyte, the flowing electrolyte can suppress dendrite growth effectively. It is worth noting that the effects on dendrite suppression have been demonstrated in the plate-like metal electrode. For new designs such as porous metal electrodes,141 the incorporation of the flowing electrolyte may further inhibit dendrite growth and enable better cycling stability.
 Fig. 6  (a) Electrolyte concentration: Pe = 100 (up) and Pe = 1 × 105 (down). (b) Deposited zinc morphologies after charging for 10 min in 40 wt% KOH solution with 1 M zinc oxide at a current density of 100 mA cm−2 of the quiescent electrolyte (up) and the flowing electrolyte (down). Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. 
3.2 Air electrode design
The air electrodes are mainly composed of a porous gas diffusion layer for oxygen transport and a catalyst layer for oxygen electrochemical reactions.74,84,142 In aqueous MABs, during discharge, oxygen in ambient air passes through the gas diffusion layer to the triple-phase boundaries and is then reduced (ORR).143 During charge, oxygen is evolved at the electrolyte/electrode interfaces (OER) and then released into the air through the gas diffusion layer. Different from the metal electrode, the ORR and OER are mutually reversible processes, but the reaction pathways and reaction processes are not completely reversible. The catalysts that have high activity for the ORR, unfortunately, usually suffer from insufficient activity for the OER. When introducing the flow media into the static MABs, the mass transport (e.g., ions, oxygen, products, and by-products) can be enhanced,83 while developing effective catalysts and optimizing electrode structures are still essential for MAFBs.

3.2.1 Decoupled electrodes. 
The design of decoupled electrodes means that the battery has two positive electrodes for charge and discharge processes, respectively, in which two catalysts for the ORR and OER are employed, respectively.74,123 Bockelmann et al. reported a ZAFB with a three-electrode design, as shown in Fig. 7a.120 Two commercial positive electrodes were used, including a silver electrode for the ORR and a nickel foam electrode for the OER. At a dramatically high current density of 600 mA cm−2, the battery still delivered a discharge voltage of 0.4 V and a charge voltage of 2.7 V with 14.8% voltage efficiency (Fig. 7b). At a lower current density of 460 mA cm−2, the peak power density reached 270 mW cm−2. Besides, the influence of operating temperature on the performance was also investigated (Fig. 7c). With an increase of operating temperature from 22 to 40 °C, the voltage efficiency increased slightly from 58% to 61%, but the cyclability of the battery declined dramatically. Moreover, the battery operated stably for 250 cycles at a current density of 50 mA cm−2, and a longer cyclability of 600 cycles (Fig. 7d) was achieved after solving the short-circuit caused by inhomogeneous zinc deposition during operation. In addition to the single battery, the three-electrode system has also been applied to the stack. Amunátegui et al. built a stack of twenty tandem ZAFBs in which the single battery consists of three electrodes.144 The prototype consists of three different stacks connected in parallel, each of which is composed of 20 single cells connected in series and 0.25 m3 of the electrolyte, delivering 1.8 kW h at medium power (0.5 kW) and 3.0 kW h at low power (0.24 kW). At a current density of 25 mA cm−2, 2000 discharge–charge cycles were tested. At the beginning, the energy efficiency and coulombic efficiency were 48% and 82%, respectively, while the values decreased to 34% and 69%, respectively, due to gas diffusion layer flooding, zinc accumulation, and short-circuits. Although the three-electrode design can address the problem of different catalyst requirements for the ORR and OER, it is not a perfect design owing to its cost and complexity, which not only complicates the internal structure of the battery but also increases the requirements for external circuits.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the testing cell: (1) zinc plate, (2) copper foam, (3) nickel foam, and (4) oxygen depolarized cathode. Characteristics of the electrically rechargeable zinc–oxygen cell: (b) voltage efficiency as a function of current density, (c) influence of operating temperature on cell performance at 50 mA cm−2, and (d) cycling performance of the cell over 600 cycles at room temperature (22 °C) and 50 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 


3.2.2 One electrode with bifunctional catalysts. 
Compared to the three electrode design, the two-electrode design is preferred due to the simple and compact structure. The basic approach is to integrate two highly efficient catalysts that are responsible for the ORR and OER onto the air electrode. Pan et al. reported a ZAFB employing nano-structured Ni(OH)2 and electrolytic MnO2 doped with NaBiO3 as the highly efficient catalysts for the OER and ORR, respectively (Fig. 8a).121 This battery delivered an average coulombic efficiency of 97.4% and an energy efficiency of 72.2% in 150 cycles (Fig. 8b). Apart from transition metal oxide catalysts, perovskites and spinels are widely used in ZABs in recent years. The mixture of the La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3 perovskite and NiCoO4 spinel has been applied in ZAFBs.122,145,146 At a current density of 50 mA cm−2, the battery with the La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3 perovskite and NiCoO4 spinel bi-catalyzed bifunctional air electrode operated stably for 1000 h and 450 cycles in pure oxygen and for over 650 h and 300 cycles in synthetic air (80% N2/20% O2), respectively.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram and (b) coulombic efficiency/energy efficiency curves in the first 150 cycles of the single flow Zn–O2 battery with a bifunctional air electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2009, Elsevier. (c) Charge and discharge polarization curves and (d) discharge polarization curves and the corresponding power density plots for the Zn–air battery with Co/Co3O4@PGS and Pt/C + Ir/C catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2018, Wiley Online Library. 
The use of two kinds of catalysts will inevitably increase the cost and complexity. Thus, developing bifunctional catalysts with activity for both ORR and OER is significant.80,147–150 Until now, plenty of bifunctional catalysts have been reported and applied in MAFBs. A bifunctional air electrode employing the La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3 perovskite and an optimized amount of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) and carbon nanofibers (CNFs) was reported by Pichler and his co-workers.101 PTFE acts as a hydrophobic binder material and CNFs benefit oxygen transport and electrical conductivity by forming a fibrous electrically conductive network. A ZAFB with this electrode demonstrated dramatically high stability for over 1800 h. Meanwhile, stable operation with a voltage efficiency of higher than 50% was achieved in 1000 h. Carbon-based materials with heterogeneous atom doping as bifunctional catalysts have attracted increasing attention in the past several years.150–152 Recently, a hybrid catalyst composed of interpenetrating Co and Co3O4 nanoparticles stitched in a porous graphitized shell (Co/Co3O4@PGS) was developed as a bifunctional catalyst for ZAFBs.153 This bifunctional catalyst achieved better performance than the precious metal and oxide catalysts, as shown in Fig. 8c and d. The battery with Co/Co3O4@PGS demonstrated a lower over-potential and a higher power density of 118.27 mW cm−2, delivering high cyclability for 800 h (4800 cycles) at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. More recently, Guo et al. reported a novel and excellent bifunctional electrocatalyst made of a metallic Fe–Ni alloy encased in nitrogen-doped carbon based on predesigned covalent organic polymers (CCOPTDP–FeNi–SiO2) for a ZAFB, which delivered a peak power density of 112.8 mW cm−2 and lower charge–discharge voltage gaps of 0.79 V and 1.24 V at 5 mA cm−2 and 20 mA cm−2, respectively.154

3.3 Performance comparisons

Table 1 lists the compositions and performance of various MAFBs based on aqueous flowing electrolytes. Most of the studies are focused on ZAFBs due to the advantages mentioned at the beginning of this section. In ZAFBs, two different charge methods, namely mechanical and electrochemical, are employed. For mechanically charged ZAFBs, a high power density (435 mW cm−2 for the highest) accompanied by stable and long-term operation at high current densities can be achieved.102 In addition, dendrite growth can be fully avoided since no zinc deposition occurs inside the battery. However, the passivation is severe after long-term operation, which is inevitable due to the saturated zincate ions. This can be addressed by replacing the aging electrolyte with a new one.134 Besides, the low utilization and clog problems caused by zinc particles cannot be ignored during operation. For electrochemically charged ZAFBs, catalysts for the ORR and OER play crucial roles in improving the power density, cycling stability, and energy efficiency. With the development of materials, many bifunctional catalysts have been developed, which can highly improve the stability of long-term operation and demonstrate better performance over precious metal and metal oxide catalysts. However, the energy efficiency (about 70%) is still not very high for practical applications. It is worth mentioning that the areal power density varies so dramatically between different ZAFBs, which is mainly caused by the catalyst and recharging method applied to the batteries. Besides ZAFBs, lithium and sodium–air batteries using aqueous flowing electrolytes have also been developed by employing ceramic membranes to protect active metals.87,155 Unfortunately, for LAFBs, although the power densities are ameliorated compared with the static LABs, the power densities are one to two orders of magnitude lower than those of aqueous ZAFBs, which may be caused by the high resistance of the ceramic membrane, parasitic reactions, and sluggish reaction rate caused by the lack of pathways for gaseous oxygen on the air electrode.75 In addition, the cyclability is also below the requirements for practical applications. Considering the promising prospects, the battery materials (e.g., membrane and catalysts), structural design (flow field and air electrode), and operating conditions (e.g., atmosphere and temperature) deserve deep investigations.
Table 1 Performance comparison of MAFBs based on aqueous electrolytes




Metal electrode
Air electrode
Electrolyte
Recharge method
Electrochemical performance
Ref.




Zinc particles with a zinc trapped bed
Platinum catalyst
45 wt% KOH
Mechanical
Power density: 300 mW cm−2

89



Cyclability: 1000 h at constant power density of 300 mW cm−2


Zinc particles with a tapered-end chamber
MnO2 catalyst
40 wt% KOH
Mechanical
Peak power density: 435 mW cm−2

102



Operational current density: 510 mA cm−2


Zinc powder
MnO2 catalyst
8 M KOH
Mechanical
Peak power density: 240 mW cm−2

103



Zinc particles with a tapered-end chamber


6 M KOH
Mechanical
Peak power density: 36 mW cm−2

134



Specific capacity: >770 mA h gZn−1


Energy density: >894 W h kgZn−1


Zinc particles
MnO2 catalyst
8 M KOH with ethanol as an additive
Mechanical
Peak power density: >32 mW cm−2

138



Specific capacity: 470 mA h gZn−1


Energy density: 576 mW h gZn−1


Zinc particles


7 M KOH with surfactants
Mechanical
Peak power density: >78 mW cm−2

140



Specific capacity: 350 mA h gZn−1


Energy density: 360 mW h gZn−1


Zinc foil


30 wt% KOH
Mechanical
Electrolyte capacity: 1025 A h L−1

136



Deposited zinc
Ni(OH)2 and MnO2 doped with NaBiO3
7 M KOH with 0.7 M LiOH and 0.7 M ZnO
Electrochemical
Coulombic efficiency: 97.4%

121



Energy efficiency: 72.2%


Cyclability: 150 cycles at 20 mA cm−2


Zinc foil
NiCo2O4 spinel and La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3 perovskite
8 M KOH with 0.5 M ZnO
Electrochemical
Voltage efficiency: 62%

145



Cyclability: 1000 h and 450 cycles at 50 mA cm−2


Deposited zinc
NiCo2O4 spinel and La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3 perovskite
8.0 M KOH and 0.5 M ZnO
Electrochemical
Energy efficiency: 49%

146



Cyclability: 450 h and 200 cycles at 50 mA cm−2


Zn plate
NiCo2O4 spinel and La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3 perovskite
8.0 M KOH and 0.5 M ZnO
Electrochemical
Cyclability: 1820 h at 50 mA cm−2

101



Voltage efficiency: 57%


Zinc foil
NiCo2O4 spinel and La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3 perovskite
8.0 M KOH and 0.5 M ZnO
Electrochemical
Cyclability: 800 h at 50 mA cm−2

122



Voltage efficiency: 68%


Zinc plate
Co/Co3O4@PGS
6.0 M KOH
Electrochemical
Peak power density: >118.27 mW cm−2

153



Cyclability: 800 h and 4800 cycles at 10 mA cm−2


Voltage efficiency: 55% at 10 mA cm−2


Zinc plate
CCOPTDP–FeNi–SiO2 catalyst
8.0 M KOH and 0.5 M ZnO
Electrochemical
Peak power density: 112.8 mW cm−2

154



Voltage efficiency: 59% at 5 mA cm−2


Deposited zinc
Two positive electrodes (a nickel electrode and a silver electrode)
30 wt% KOH electrolyte with 2 wt% ZnO
Electrochemical
Peak power density: 270 mW cm−2

120



Cyclability: 600 cycles at 50 mA cm−2


Energy efficiency: 54%


Sodium plate
Pt/C and IrO2 catalysts
1 M NaNO3 and 0.1 M citric acid catholyte and a solid electrolyte (NASICON)
Electrochemical
Peak power density: 5.4 mW cm−2

86



Cyclability: 20 cycles and 200 h at 0.1 mA cm−2


Voltage efficiency: 89%


Lithium foil
Carbon nanofoam
0.85 M CH3COOH and CH3COOLi
Electrochemical
Peak power density: 7.64 mW cm−2

88



Cyclability: 20 cycles and 200 h at 0.1 mA cm−2


Voltage efficiency: 82%


Lithium metal
Mn3O4/activated carbon composite
1 M LiOH and LiNO3
Mechanical
Peak power density: 1127 W kg−1

87



Electrode capacity: 19000 mA h gcatalyst−1




4. Flow media based on non-aqueous electrolytes
In MAFBs based on aqueous electrolytes, the mass transport (e.g., oxygen and ions) is enhanced and the electrochemical performance can be improved compared with the static ones. Especially for LAFBs based on aqueous flowing electrolytes, the product is changed from solid Li2O2 to soluble LiOH, avoiding the pore clog issue. However, shortcomings also exist. First, the solubility of LiOH is lower than that of KOH or NaOH, which can easily lead to product precipitation during the discharge process. Additionally, a lithium protection layer (e.g., LISICON plate) is demanded to avoid direct contact between lithium and aqueous electrolytes,88,156,157 which suffers from insufficient stability in alkaline and/or acidic solutions and low ionic conductivity. Therefore, LAFBs based on non-aqueous electrolytes have also been proposed. In static LABs based on non-aqueous electrolytes, the high oxygen transport resistance and insoluble Li2O2 deposition are the main problems that affect the performance,75,158,159 but these can be effectively alleviated through circulating media.83,160 Although non-aqueous electrolytes have been applied in various kinds of MABs (e.g., lithium–air, sodium–air, potassium–air,161 and even zinc–air batteries74,162,163), the reported non-aqueous MAFBs are still concentrated on LAFBs. Hence, we will overview the development of LAFBs based on non-aqueous electrolytes in this section, focusing on the strategies for solving the inherent issues (e.g., poor cycle life and low real capacity).164,165
4.1 Mass transfer enhancement

4.1.1 Modeling studies. 
Mathematical modeling can provide details on the battery operation which are difficult to be measured and hence can serve as a power tool for design optimization. An immense amount of modeling studies on the detailed process of static LABs have been conducted,166 such as lithium ion transport,167–169 oxygen transport,167,170,171 and deposition of Li2O2,172,173 but the convection effects of the electrolyte are usually neglected. While for LAFBs, due to the influence of flow media, transport phenomena (e.g., oxygen, ions, insoluble products, and by-products) during charge and discharge change dramatically.83 Hence, models for LAFBs need to be further optimized to fit the real conditions.
Based on previous models of conventional redox flow batteries174–178 and static non-aqueous LABs,179–185 a two dimensional, transient, non-isothermal simulation model for LAFBs was reported to investigate the heat and mass transfer under the flow conditions.186 The air electrode was set to have internal flow channels, and two different pressures were employed in the inlet and outlet respectively to simulate the circulation inside. As shown in Fig. 9a, the specific discharge capacity of the flow model is 1217 mA h g−1, while the value dramatically decreases to 178 mA h g−1 in the static model at a discharge current density of 0.2 mA cm−2. When increasing the discharge density to a higher value of 2 mA cm−2, the discharge capacity of the flow model is about 15 times higher than that of the static model (201 mA h g−1versus 12.2 mA h g−1). This is because the flowing electrolyte can effectively enhance the mass transfer (especially oxygen transport) and improve the utilization of the air electrode. The volume fractions of Li2O2 after discharge in flow and static models are compared, as shown in Fig. 9b. The horizontal axis (χ) of the graph is the dimensionless length of the air electrode. Due to the enhanced mass transfer, it is evident that the Li2O2 volume distribution of the flow model is more uniform, and the whole electrode is much better utilized than the static model. The same group also reported a further-improved two-dimensional and transient model, considering the electrolyte concentration, oxygen concentration, electrolyte potential, electrode potential, and porosity change caused by Li2O2 precipitation.160 In this work, two more designs were tested, including a dual layer air electrode and alternating flow. The dual layer air electrode is equipped with uneven porosity for better pore utilization of the air electrode. When the oxygen side has a higher porosity (0.9) and the separator side has a lower porosity (0.7), the specific capacity is 105% higher than that with uniform porosity. Alternating flow is a design that can change the flow direction to fully utilize the micro-pores equally, and the calculated results show that the capacity is improved by 3% at a current density of 0.2 mA cm−2. Apart from the two aforementioned designs, the distribution of the Li2O2 volume fraction (εLi2O2) at different current densities was also studied. It is found that a higher Li2O2 volume fraction emerged at a lower discharge current. Additionally, the Li2O2 fraction close to the inlet reached the maximum value due to a high reaction rate caused by a higher oxygen concentration. Previous work has demonstrated that oxygen transport is one of the most important factors that affect the battery performance. The impacts of the two most important parameters for oxygen transport on static and flow LABs, namely oxygen diffusion coefficient (DO2) and solubility (cO2;sat), are illustrated in Fig. 9c and d. At the same value of DO2 or cO2;sat, the specific capacity of the flow battery is always higher than that of the static one. Even when the DO2 decreases to nearly zero, the specific capacity still maintains a relatively high value due to oxygen transport, originating from convection. The air electrode thickness is also crucial to achieving the power density and energy density. Four different thicknesses (400, 600, 800, and 1000 μm) were employed in the static and flow models, respectively. In a static battery, the specific capacity becomes stable when the cathode thickness increases, while in a flow battery, the best thickness appears to achieve the maximum specific capacity. As pump work must be considered in practical applications of LAFBs, the influence of the pressure difference on the energy output has been investigated, which is found to be proportional to the pump work. The results showed that 0.4 atm is an optimal pressure difference when the flow design can improve the capacity to 15 times than that of the static one, and the pump work only occupies 10% of the total energy output. More recently, a novel modeling method for LAFB design has been proposed by Poli and his co-workers.187 This work reports a semi-empirical model which associates the net power output with the 3D cathode geometry. Different from the aforementioned modeling studies, the model is based on the experimental data without the demand of kinetics data, which dramatically decreases the modeling complexity of LAFBs.
 Fig. 9  (a) Comparison of voltage vs. specific capacity curves between the lithium–air cells with passive and active air electrodes. The discharge current density is 0.2 mA cm−2. (b) Distributions of volume fractions of Li2O2 in the electrode after the passive and the active lithium cells are fully discharged at different current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (c and d) The impacts of (c) the oxygen diffusion coefficient, DO2, and (d) the oxygen solubility, cO2;sat, on the air electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (e and f) Simulation results of the maximum current density that can be achieved as a function of (e) cathode porosity, ranging from 0.1 to 0.9 and (f) depth of cathode immersion, ranging from 10 to 200 mm for different initial concentrations of O2 (5, 10, 15 and 20 mol m−3) in N,N-di-ethyl-N-(2-methoxyethyl)-N-methylammonium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (DEME-TFSI, 3300 mol m−3 of DEME+). Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2017, Wiley. 
To investigate the impacts of the air electrode parameters on LAFBs, a numerical investigation was carried out based on a static battery model with assumptions on the Li2O2 solubility to simulate the influence of flow.105 In the flow system, the solubility of Li2O2 was set to be infinity (1000000 mol m−3), different from that in the static case (0.09 mol m−3). Focused on the optimized gas diffusion layer (GDL), the optimal values of two parameters (porosity and depth of immersion of the electrode in the electrolyte) were investigated. As shown in Fig. 9e the maximum current density is always proportional to the porosity at different initial oxygen concentrations because of a higher oxygen transport rate at higher porosity. However, as shown in Fig. 9f, an optimal value exists to achieve the best performance for a specific oxygen concentration.
The modeling studies on LAFBs are still at very early stages, and only the discharge process has been studied. As the charge process is related to the cycle life, the corresponding modeling studies should be performed. Moreover, design parameters, such as the flow field design and pump work, are required to be further investigated.


4.1.2 Experimental investigations. 
Experimental investigations have also been conducted to investigate the effects of flow media on LAFBs. Fig. 10a shows a schematic diagram of a LAFB, which employs an ionic liquid (IL), N,N-di-ethyl-N-(2-methoxyethyl)-N-methylammonium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (DEME-TFSI), as the flow medium, while 1 M LiTFSI dissolved in propylene carbonate used as the electrolyte for the lithium anode is static.105 The comparison of the discharge profiles with and without electrolyte flow at a current density of 0.077 mA cm−2 is shown in Fig. 10b. Apparently, the flow battery operates stably and exhibits a higher capacity than the static one, suggesting that the initial discharge product, the superoxide anion radical O2−, is effectively removed from the cathode surface and transported into the bulk electrolyte by the mechanical flow of the ionic liquid. However, both the static and flow batteries show relatively low voltages, which is attributed to the large overpotentials caused by the low diffusivity of O2− in the IL lacking Li salts. IL-based electrolytes have been considered to be promising candidate electrolytes for LABs in recent years owing to the high stability toward superoxides, wide electrochemical stability window, low volatility, non-flammability, high safety, good conductivity, and hydrophobicity.188–194 However, the main problem for LABs employing IL-based electrolytes is the worse performance at high discharge current densities, which is mainly caused by the sluggish oxygen transport.188 To investigate the effects of the flow system on oxygen transport in IL-based electrolytes, a novel structure for LAFBs with an oxygen-bubbling device (OBD) was developed by Monaco, as shown in Fig. 10c.188 One kind of O2-saturated IL, N-butyl-N-methyl pyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (PYR14TFSI), mixed with LiTFSI was used as the electrolyte for the LAFB with a meso–macroporous carbon (ZL)-coated glassy carbon (ZL/GC) electrode. PYR14TFSI is a promising electrolyte for LAFBs due to its good compatibility with lithium metal195,196 and relatively high oxygen solubility (2.9–3.1 mm at 25–30 °C) and oxygen diffusion coefficient (8.8 × 10−6 cm2 s−1).190,197,198 The discharge/charge profiles under static and flow conditions at a current density of 0.2 mA cm−2 are shown in Fig. 10d. It is evident that the flowing electrolyte can dramatically ameliorate the battery performance, especially the discharge capacity. The specific capacity and coulombic efficiency are 600 mA h g−1 and 91.8%, respectively. Later, a scale-up LAFB prototype with a similar structure and the same electrolyte was reported, in which a new mesoporous carbon (C250) was attempted.198,199 The specific capacity ranges from 700–1400 mA g−1 on different carbon substrates and at operation temperatures, while the coulombic efficiency is low, which is because of the parasitic reactions and detachment of the discharge product caused by the flowing electrolyte during the OER.200
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the LAFBs, and the electrolyte is N,N-di-ethyl-N-(2-methoxyethyl)-N-methylammonium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (DEME-TFSI). (b) Discharge behavior of non-aqueous LABs with and without the flowing catholyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2017, Wiley. (c) Scheme of the flow IL-based lithium–air battery (R stands for reference electrode). (d) Flow battery voltage and ZL/CP and Li electrode potentials vs. Li+/Li upon discharge/recharge cycles at room temperature and 0.2 mA cm−2: 1st cycle (black curves) with the pump off and 2nd cycle (red curves) with the pump on. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2013, ACS Publications. 

4.2 Semi-solid flow design
To achieve high energy and power density, the concept of semi-solid, fluidic electrodes has been employed in Li/Na-ion batteries,201 supercapacitors,202 and LABs.203 In Section 2, the metal electrode can be a semi-solid, fluidic electrode in ZAFBs, in which particles are mixed into the electrolyte to form a slurry. In LAFBs based on non-aqueous electrolytes, since the air electrode is the main component that limits the battery performance, a semi-solid catholyte was thus reported.108 As shown in Fig. 11a and b, the battery employed a semi-solid catholyte composed of 2 wt% Super P (SP) carbon suspended in O2-saturated tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether (TEGDME)-LiTFSI. The current collector of the air electrode is a carbon percolating network composed of SP-coated reticulated vitreous carbon (RVCSP). During discharge, the ORR takes place and Li2O2 deposits on the SP particle surfaces. Thus, the passivation and clogging issues of the air electrode are addressed, and the discharge product can be easily electrochemically oxidized. Besides, the reaction surface is expanded due to the carbon percolating network of the semi-solid component, accelerating the reaction rate and enhancing the performance at high current densities. The semi-solid flow prototype demonstrates higher performance over conventional LABs, including a high current density of up to 4 mA cm−2, a high capacity of 175 mA h cm−2, and a peak power density of 7.5 mW cm−2, as presented in Fig. 11c. Notably, the results manifest that the performance of the battery is affected by the lithium anode rather than the cathode and catholyte, which is definitely different from conventional lithium–air flow batteries. This indicates that the battery performance can be further improved by developing a high-performance lithium electrode. On the basis of this work, the same group conducted further studies on the effects of different compositions of the catholyte on battery performance.204,205 The influence of different weight percentages of Super P (SP) from 2 wt% to 20 wt% was first investigated,204 and the results show that the specific energy and energy density of 12 wt% SP are 10 times higher than those of 2 wt% SP. When the weight percentage of SP is >12%, the specific energy and energy densities are predicted to reach more than 1 kW h kg−1 and 1 kW h L−1, respectively. Then, the electrochemical properties of other types of carbon particles, Pureblack carbon (PB), with different weight percentages (2 wt%: PB2, 10 wt%: PB10) were tested.205 At a current density of 0.25 mA cm−2, the use of a high weight percentage of PB (PB10) decreases the overpotential of the cathode effectively, in which the Vcath values of SP2, PB2, and PB10 are 2.32, 2.47 and 2.74 V vs. Li/Li+, respectively. Moreover, viscosity has a great impact on the flow of the electrolyte. As shown in Fig. 11d, 10 PB and 2SP catholytes have the same viscosity curves basically, while the former has better electrochemical performance. More importantly, the highly concentrated PB demonstrates pseudoplastic behaviors. Thus, it is possible to decouple the lower pump energy consumption and higher energy output of the semi-solid LAFB by employing reasonably concentrated carbon particles and appropriate flow field design.
 Fig. 11  The semi-solid lithium–air flow battery scheme (a) and (b) and the prototype under operation. (c) Cell and cathode discharge polarization curves and power vs. current plots. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Viscosity (η) vs. shear rate (γ) of the 2 SP, 2 PB and 10 PB catholytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
4.3 Functional additives
To further address surface passivation and pore clog issues of the air electrode caused by the insoluble Li2O2, soluble redox mediators (RMs), originating from the concept of “redox targeting” reactions proposed for LIBs206–208 and static LABs,93,209,210 have been introduced into LAFBs. A LAFB with soluble RMs in an aqueous catholyte was first proposed by Wang and his co-workers.211 Later, Zhu et al. conducted several experimental studies employing redox mediators.212–214 As shown in Fig. 12a,212 during discharge, the redox mediator RM1 is first reduced on the air electrode: RMOX1 + e− → RMred1(10)and then the reduced product reacts with Li+-ions in the tank: 2Li+ + 2RMred1 + O2 → Li2O2 + 2RMOX1(11)
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the configuration and working process of a redox flow lithium–oxygen battery (RFLOB). The cell stack constitutes a lithium metal anode and a carbon felt cathode (2 cm × 2 cm), separated by a membrane. A gas diffusion tank (GDT) is connected to the cathodic compartment through a pump. During the discharging process, oxygen flows into the tank and is reduced to form Li2O2 while the electrolyte fluid containing redox mediators and Li+ circulates between the GDT and the cell. The photo at the lower right corner shows an RFLOB single cell powering three light-emitting diodes. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of EV and LiI in TEGDME. The scan rate is 0.10 V s−1. The redox potential of Li2O2 is indicated for reference. (c) Discharge/charge curves and coulombic efficiency of an RFLOB employing a PVDF–Nafion membrane at different cycle numbers. The current density is 0.125 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Diagram describing DTBBQ- and TMPPA-catalyzed ORR and OER reactions during the charging and discharging processes of the RFLOB. Reproduced with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2016, ACS Publications. (e) Configuration of an RFLOB cell system (single cell) with integrated electrolyte spray. (f) Voltage and power density vs. current density curves of RFLOB cells under different operating conditions. The electrolyte was EV-DQ (0.2 M/0.2 M) in 1 M LiTFSI/DSMO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In this process, RM1 regenerates and Li2O2 precipitates in the tank, avoiding the pore clog issue. During charge, another soluble mediator RM2 is oxidized on the air electrode: RMred2 → RMOX2 + e−(12)and the product flows into the tank and oxidizes solid Li2O2: Li2O2 + 2RMOX2 → 2Li+ + 2RMred2 + O2(13)
Evidently, RM1 and RM2 play important roles in the discharge and charge processes. Zhu et al. selected ethyl viologen (EV) and iodide as redox catalysts due to their redox potentials, as shown in Fig. 12b.212Fig. 12c manifests the discharge/charge curves and the coulombic efficiency of the LAFB incorporated with RMs. No deterioration of the charge capacity was observed in the first 30 cycles. Instead, due to improved conductivity of the composite membrane used to protect the lithium electrode, the charge capacity was even enhanced with a coulombic efficiency of nearly 100% after the 10th cycle. Later, the same group developed another two soluble catalysts, 2,5-di-tert-butyl-p-benzoquinone (DTBBQ) and tris{4-[2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy]phenyl}amine (TMPPA), for the ORR and OER processes, respectively, as shown in Fig. 12d. The battery with these two soluble catalysts demonstrated high stability for 100 cycles.213 More recently, a LAFB with a spraying nozzle and an electrolyte collection tank was reported to further improve the reaction kinetics of the ORR (Fig. 12e).214 The nozzle increased the reaction areas and thus accelerated the ORR rate. In this battery, a new redox soluble catalyst, duroquinone (DQ), which has superior electrochemical reversibility and a higher diffusion coefficient than the other two RMs (EV and DTBBQ), was introduced into the EV-based electrolyte to prepare an EV-DQ dual RM electrolyte. Fig. 12f shows the voltage profiles of the battery operating in pure oxygen and dry air with the EV-DQ (0.2 M/0.2 M) dual RM electrolyte. Under the pure oxygen conditions, the battery achieved a peak power density of 60 mW cm−2. In addition, the utilization of lithium metal loaded in the negative electrode reached 80% at a constant current density of 15 mA cm−2. When the current density decreased to 1 mA cm−2, the utilization further increased to above 90%. When the battery was operated in dry air, it operated steadily at a power density of about 22 mW cm−2 and the peak power density reaches 34 mW cm−2 with a lithium utilization of around 90%. To test the cycling stability of the battery and the robustness of the ORR process, a device to mechanically refuel the lithium metal is designed instead of introducing an OER redox catalyst. By refueling fresh Li foil, the battery operated stably at 10 mA cm−2 with a capacity of around 140 mA h cm−2 in the first two feeds.
The introduction of redox mediators into LAFBs is a promising way to address the problems caused by solid products and by-products, combining the advantages of redox mediators and unique flow structures, but the stability of redox mediators and the corresponding structural design for effective operation still need further investigations.
4.4 Summary of non-aqueous metal–air flow batteries
From Table 2, the reported studies of non-aqueous LAFBs mainly focus on developing novel structures (e.g., semi-solid air electrode design) and employing new materials (e.g., IL-based electrolytes and redox mediators) with the assistance of a flow field to address the intrinsic problems. Obviously, the battery performance is effectively improved by employing these novel structures and materials, but many problems still exist. First, the power densities are still far lower than those of ZAFBs, which is caused by the low operating current densities of LAFBs. Second, most of the used gas is still pure oxygen, and the performance suffers from a sharp decrease when replacing pure oxygen by dry air, which is impractical for future applications. Third, the cycling stability is still insufficient even compared with static LABs. These problems still need to be addressed in future studies.
Table 2 Summary of non-aqueous metal–air flow batteries




Metal electrode
Air electrode
Electrolyte
Atmosphere
Electrochemical performance
Ref.




Lithium metal
ZL/GC
Pyr14TFSI-LiTFSI
Oxygen
Specific capacity: 600 mA h g−1

188



Coulombic efficiency: 91.8%


Lithium metal
ZL or C250
Pyr14TFSI-LiTFSI
Oxygen
Specific capacity: 1445 mA h g−1

198



Coulombic efficiency: 49%


Lithium metal
Micro-porous layer
DEME-TFSI
Oxygen



105



Lithium metal
Carbon paper
TEGDME-LiTFSI-Super P
Oxygen
Discharge capacity: >175 mA h cm−2

108



Energy density: >500 mW h cm−2


Power density: >7 mW cm−2


Lithium metal
Carbon felt
TEGDME-LiTFSI-EV-I2
Oxygen
Coulombic efficiency: 100%

212



Cyclability:>30 cycles at 0.125 mA cm−2


Lithium metal


TEGDME-LiTFSI-DTBBQ-TMPPA
Oxygen
Cyclability: >100 cycles at 0.5 mA cm−2

213



Lithium foil
Carbon felt
DSMO-LiTFSI-EV-DQ
Dry air
Power density: 34 mW cm−2

214



Areal capacity: 140 mA h cm−2 at 10 mA cm−2




5. Conclusions and perspectives
In conclusion, MAFBs have many advantages over other energy storage systems due to the high capacity, remarkable energy density, and low cost. Crucial studies and developments of MAFBs have been done in the past few decades, most of which focus on aqueous ZAFBs and non-aqueous LAFBs. For ZAFBs, the enhancement effects of flow media on battery performance have been investigated. Simultaneously, several designs and additives have been reported to improve the zinc electrodes, and plenty of structures and catalysts have been applied to fabricate effective air electrodes. With respect to LAFBs, novel concepts combined with flowing media have been proposed to address the intrinsic problems. Although promising steps toward practical applications have been achieved, the remaining challenges, such as low energy efficiency of ZAFBs, low power density of LAFBs, and insufficient cycle life of both, should be addressed.
For ZAFBs, (i) the effects of different flow fields on the triple-phase boundaries need to be further investigated. In ZABs, the triple-phase boundaries in the air electrode play key roles in the ORR. The introduction of flowing media, on the one hand, may change the morphology of the solution and gas phases, and thus influence the reaction process. Apparently, different flow fields and rates have different effects on the reaction interfaces. On the other hand, during long-term operation, the flowing media will exert an additional pressure difference on the air electrode, which may damage the microporous structure and decrease the hydrophobicity of the gas diffusion layer. However, few efforts have been made to give an insight view of these impacts. (ii) Morphological changes of the electrodes caused by flow media should be considered. Although it is revealed that the flow media can suppress dendrite formation effectively, while the electrodes may suffer from shape changes in the flow field. For zinc electrodes, the zinc atoms close to the inlet will be transferred to other parts for deposition during charge, which consequently results in shape changes of the zinc electrode. In some reported zinc-based batteries, a porous zinc electrode is employed to increase the reaction area.129 Although the formation of zinc dendrites of planar electrodes can be effectively suppressed by flow media, the impacts of flow media on dendrites and shape changes of porous zinc electrodes are still unclear. For air electrodes, the morphology and porous structures may also be changed under the influence of flow media. Thus, novel electrode and flow field designs are important to alleviate or eliminate the negative effects. (iii) The effects of flow media on the charge process and cycling stability need to be investigated. For secondary ZABs, due to the resistance of the gas diffusion layer, gaseous oxygen accumulation during charge is a severe problem that limits the performance. The generated oxygen bubbles will accumulate on the surface of the air electrode and thus reduce the reaction areas. More importantly, the bubbles increase the inner pressure of the battery, causing leakage of the electrolyte and the decrease of hydrophobicity, thus decreasing the cycle life. Although introducing a flowing electrolyte has been proven to improve the charge performance, the intrinsic mechanisms, especially from the oxygen transport perspectives, should be further illustrated.
For LAFBs, (i) modeling studies need to be further conducted to reveal the effects of flow media on oxygen transport. In most reported studies, dissolved oxygen in the electrolyte is taken as the reactant in simulations. However, this is not a practical situation for battery operation due to an additional oxygen dissolution process. (ii) Novel reaction interface designs are needed. To improve the power density, artificial triple-phase boundaries by developing an electrolyte comprising two immiscible components have been reported, in which one component has an excellent oxygen transport ability while the other is a non-aqueous polar liquid with high Li+ transport ability.215 This probably is a good concept for the development of flow media that can further accelerate oxygen transport and reaction rates. (iii) The cyclability is demanded to be further improved. The passivation of lithium metal, limited reaction interfaces of solid products, and parasitic reactions make the battery have poor reversibility. For most experimental and modeling studies, the electrical charge process and cyclability are rarely considered, which may be significantly different when the flowing electrolyte is introduced. (iv) Designs of the flow path and the storage tank are demanded for solving the pore clog problem. During discharge, the flow media bring the generated solid product out of the battery and the products are stored in the tank, which will return to the air electrode to be decomposed during charge. On the one hand, a corresponding structure used for avoiding clogging of the flow path and the storage tank is important for long-term operation. On the other hand, because the electrolyte is circulating constantly during operation, it is essential to allow the solid product to remain in the tank during discharge and react thoroughly in the air electrode during charge.
The design of the MAFB stack is important for practical applications. When the battery size is scaled up, the battery performance may decrease dramatically.101,122 In addition, as a half-open system, electrolyte leakage becomes pretty severe. Therefore, developing stacks comprising small battery units is a promising way. Due to the demands of ambient air and the flow electrolyte, the mass transfer in the stack is a key point. First, an appropriate stack design is needed to meet the consumption of air. Second, a storage tank is commonly placed outside the battery to store the electrolyte. As it is impossible that every single battery has an independent storage tank, one or several storage tanks of a stack as the container of electrolyte and manifolds are applied to distribute the electrolyte. For the electrolyte with high conductivity in the manifolds, a new problem of shunt currents appears, which greatly reduces coulombic efficiency and causes energy loss.144 Although many studies of shunt currents in RFBs have been reported in recent years,216–220 reasonable flow channel and battery structure design is crucial.
In most reported studies, the battery performance increase originating from the flow system is only considered. However, the negative impacts are also obvious. First, the external storage tank and flow pipes occupy a large space, which not only makes the battery structure complicated but also decreases the practical specific capacity. Usually, the volume of the storage tank unit is larger than that of the battery unit, and hence the specific capacity of the whole battery is greatly reduced because of which the MAFBs may lose the most important advantages of high capacity for portable electronics and electric vehicles. Second, pump work is an inevitable part of the whole battery system, and only a few modeling studies considered the pump work by pure theoretical calculations,160,186 which are not very accurate due to the assumptions in viscosity, temperature, and flow channel structure. In Section 4.1.1, we have introduced a semi-empirical model for calculating the net power output of LAFBs,187 while further studies are still needed to balance the pump work and output power in practical applications.
Finally, the working conditions need to be considered comprehensively. First, due to the semi-open structure, the evaporation of the electrolyte, which may be accelerated by the flow media, is inevitable and irreversible. Although the storage tank can store plenty of electrolytes, the evaporation problem cannot be ignored during long-term operation. In addition, parasitic reactions caused by carbon dioxide and moisture contamination from the ambient air deteriorate the battery performance. For ZAFBs, carbonates will form in the presence of CO2, which reduce the surface area of the porous electrode and deteriorate the conductivity of the alkaline electrolyte.81 For LAFBs, when the non-aqueous electrolyte is mixed with moisture, the lithium electrode will be corroded and the overpotential will also increase.221 More importantly, both moisture and CO2 can participate in the electrochemical reactions on the surface of the air electrode and lead to poor cycle life.222 Furthermore, the operating temperatures, either hot or cold, can change the performance. Thus, the detailed influences should be revealed and proper management methods should be developed.
In summary, MAFBs are promising next-generation energy storage systems with widespread potential applications. Although the development of MAFBs is still at an early stage, the experimental and theoretical efforts, together with the development of materials and structures, as well as characterization methods, will surely accelerate commercialization.
Conflicts of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
P. Tan acknowledges the funding support from the CAS Pioneer Hundred Talents Program and USTC Tang Scholar. Z. Wu acknowledges the funding support from the Hong Kong Scholar Program (XJ2017023) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21736008). M. Ni acknowledges the funding support from The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (G-YW2D) and a grant (Project Number: PolyU 152214/17E) from the Research Grant Council, University Grants Committee, Hong Kong SAR.
References
C. Breyer and A. Gerlach, Prog. Photovolt: Res. Appl., 2013, 21, 121–136 CrossRef .
Q. Jiang, M. Z. Qu, G. M. Zhou, B. L. Zhang and Z. L. Yu, Mater. Lett., 2002, 57, 988–991 CrossRef CAS .
V. Paladini, T. Donateo, A. de Risi and D. Laforgia, Energy Convers. Manage., 2007, 48, 3001–3008 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhi, C. Xiang, J. Li, M. Li and N. Wu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 72–88 RSC .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. A. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Chee, H. N. Lim, Z. Zainal, N. M. Huang, I. Harrison and Y. Andou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 4153–4172 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vangari, T. Pryor and L. Jiang, J. Energy Eng., 2012, 139, 72–79 CrossRef .
P. Denholm and R. Sioshansi, Energy Policy, 2009, 37, 3149–3158 CrossRef .
H. L. Ferreira, R. Garde, G. Fulli, W. Kling and J. P. Lopes, Energy, 2013, 53, 288–298 CrossRef .
E. Drury, P. Denholm and R. Sioshansi, Energy, 2011, 36, 4959–4973 CrossRef .
M. Budt, D. Wolf, R. Span and J. Yan, Appl. Energy, 2016, 170, 250–268 CrossRef .
K. Pielichowska and K. Pielichowski, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2014, 65, 67–123 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sharma, V. V. Tyagi, C. R. Chen and D. Buddhi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2009, 13, 318–345 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. D. Han, H. Li and J. C. Grossman, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1446 CrossRef .
J. P. Deane, B. P. Ó. Gallachóir and E. J. McKeogh, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 1293–1302 CrossRef .
D. Connolly, H. Lund, P. Finn, B. V. Mathiesen and M. Leahy, Energy Policy, 2011, 39, 4189–4196 CrossRef .
C. J. Yang and R. B. Jackson, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 839–844 CrossRef .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J. M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS .
V. Etacheri, R. Marom, R. Elazari, G. Salitra and D. Aurbach, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3243–3262 RSC .
L. Lu, X. Han, J. Li, J. Hua and M. Ouyang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 226, 272–288 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zubi, R. Dufo-López, M. Carvalho and G. Pasaoglu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 89, 292–308 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, T. Wierzbicki and W. Li, J. Power Sources, 2018, 378, 153–168 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, Y. Liu, D. Lin, A. Pei and Y. Cui, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaas9820 CrossRef .
X. Feng, M. Ouyang, X. Liu, L. Lu, Y. Xia and X. He, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 10, 246–267 CrossRef .
R. Schmuch, R. Wagner, G. Hörpel, T. Placke and M. Winter, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 267–278 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xu, D. G. Ivey, Z. Xie and W. Qu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 283, 358–371 CrossRef CAS .
H. Geaney, J. O'Connell, J. D. Holmes and C. O'Dwyer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A1964–A1968 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cao, E. D. Walter, W. Xu, E. N. Nasybulin, P. Bhattacharya, M. E. Bowden, M. H. Engelhard and J. G. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2436–2440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. G. Hardin, D. A. Slanac, X. Wang, S. Dai, K. P. Johnston and K. J. Stevenson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1254–1259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Caramia and B. Bozzini, Mater. Renew. Sustain. Energy, 2014, 3, 28 CrossRef .
M. A. Rahman, X. Wang and C. Wen, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2014, 44, 5–22 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, W. Xu and W. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7438–7444 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kuboki, T. Okuyama, T. Ohsaki and N. Takami, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 766–769 CrossRef CAS .
M. Balaish, A. Kraytsberg and Y. Ein-Eli, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 2801–2822 RSC .
M. K. Song, S. Park, F. M. Alamgir, J. Cho and M. Liu, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2011, 72, 203–252 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Y. Li and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 443–467 CrossRef CAS .
M. Prabu, K. Ketpang and S. Shanmugam, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3173–3181 RSC .
R. D. McKerracher, C. Alegre, V. Baglio, A. S. Aricò, C. Ponce De León, F. Mornaghini, M. Rodlert and F. C. Walsh, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 174, 508–515 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vignesh, M. Prabu and S. Shanmugam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6019–6031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, Y. Lei, K. C. Lau, X. Luo, P. Du, J. Wen, R. S. Assary, U. Das, D. J. Miller, J. W. Elam, H. M. Albishri, D. A. El-Hady, Y. K. Sun, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2383 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Tan, B. Chen, H. Xu, W. Cai, W. He, H. Zhang, M. Liu, Z. Shao and M. Ni, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 36873–36881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Chang, Y. C. Lee, H. J. Liao, Y. T. Kao, J. Y. An and D. Y. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 2860–2866 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tan, B. Chen, H. Xu, W. Cai, W. He, M. Liu, Z. Shao and M. Ni, Small, 2018, 14, 1800225 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Li, J. Quan, A. Loh, J. Chai, Y. Chen, C. Tan, X. Ge, T. S. A. Hor, Z. Liu, H. Zhang and Y. Zong, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 156–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shang, W. Yu, P. Tan, B. Chen, H. Xu and M. Ni, J. Power Sources, 2019, 421, 6–13 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tan, B. Chen, H. Xu, W. Cai, W. He and M. Ni, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 104–112 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tan, B. Chen, H. Xu, W. Cai, M. Liu, Z. Shao and M. Ni, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, A2119–A2126 CrossRef CAS .
D. U. Lee, J. Fu, M. G. Park, H. Liu, A. Ghorbani Kashkooli and Z. Chen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1794–1802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, X. Ren, L. Ma and Y. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lv, S. C. Abbas, Y. Huang, Q. Liu, M. Wu, Y. Wang and L. Dai, Nano Energy, 2018, 43, 130–137 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Q. Luo, B. Li, X. Wei, L. Li and Z. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 970–986 CrossRef CAS .
P. Alotto, M. Guarnieri and F. Moro, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 29, 325–335 CrossRef CAS .
P. Leung, X. Li, C. Ponce De León, L. Berlouis, C. T. J. Low and F. C. Walsh, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 10125–10156 RSC .
A. Z. Weber, M. M. Mench, J. P. Meyers, P. N. Ross, J. T. Gostick and Q. Liu, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2011, 41, 1137–1164 CrossRef CAS .

          L. H. Thaller, US Pat. 3996064,  1976 .
X. Zhou, L. Lin, Y. Lv, X. Zhang and Q. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 404, 89–95 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ponce de León, A. Frías-Ferrer, J. González-García, D. A. Szánto and F. C. Walsh, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 716–732 CrossRef .
M. Skyllas-Kazacos, M. H. Chakrabarti, S. A. Hajimolana, F. S. Mjalli and M. Saleem, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, R55–R79 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dawoud, E. Amer and D. Gross, Int. J. Energy Res., 2007, 34, 182–189 Search PubMed .
C. Menictas and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2011, 41, 1223–1232 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhao, H. Zhang, H. Zhou, J. Chen, S. Gao and B. Yi, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 1416–1420 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dawoud, E. Amer and D. Gross, Int. J. Energy Res., 2012, 36, 1105–1120 CrossRef .
Q. Wu, X. Zhang, Y. Lv, L. Lin, Y. Liu and X. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20347–20355 RSC .
Q. Wu, Y. Lv, L. Lin, X. Zhang, Y. Liu and X. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2019, 410–411, 152–161 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zeng, F. Li, F. Lu, X. Zhou, Y. Yuan, X. Cao and B. Xiang, Appl. Energy, 2019, 238, 435–441 CrossRef CAS .
M. Skyllas-Kazacos, M. Kazacos and M. Cheng, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1990, 20, 463–467 CrossRef .
F. Rahman and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, J. Power Sources, 1998, 72, 105–110 CrossRef CAS .
F. Rahman and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 1212–1219 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xi, Z. Wu, X. Qiu and L. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2007, 166, 531–536 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. Zhang, Z. Mai, H. Zhang and I. Vankelecom, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1147–1160 RSC .
H. Prifti, A. Parasuraman, S. Winardi, T. M. Lim and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, Membranes, 2012, 2, 275–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Janoschka, N. Martin, U. Martin, C. Friebe, S. Morgenstern, H. Hiller, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Nature, 2015, 527, 78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Luo, O. David, Y. Gendel and M. Wessling, J. Power Sources, 2016, 312, 45–54 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and H. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5257–5275 RSC .
P. Tan, H. R. Jiang, X. B. Zhu, L. An, C. Y. Jung, M. C. Wu, L. Shi, W. Shyy and T. S. Zhao, Appl. Energy, 2017, 204, 780–806 CrossRef .
P. Tan, Z. H. Wei, W. Shyy, T. S. Zhao and X. B. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1783–1793 RSC .
X. B. Zhu, T. S. Zhao, Z. H. Wei, P. Tan and G. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2782–2790 RSC .
S. Li, C. Cheng, X. Zhao, J. Schmidt and A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1856–1862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Müller, F. Holzer and O. Haas, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1998, 28, 895–898 CrossRef .
J. Fu, Z. P. Cano, M. G. Park, A. Yu, M. Fowler and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604685 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Tan, B. Chen, H. Xu, H. Zhang, W. Cai, M. Ni, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2056–2080 RSC .
M. Park, J. Ryu, W. Wang and J. Cho, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 2, 16080 CrossRef .
X. Han, X. Li, J. White, C. Zhong, Y. Deng, W. Hu and T. Ma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801396 CrossRef .
J. Lee, S. T. Kim, R. Cao, N. S. Choi, M. Liu, K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 34–50 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rahman, X. Wang and C. Wen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A1759–A1771 CrossRef .
S. M. Hwang, W. Go, H. Yu and Y. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11592–11600 RSC .
P. He, Y. Wang and H. Zhou, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1686–1689 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Chen, A. Shellikeri, Q. Wu, J. P. Zheng, M. Hendrickson and E. J. Plichta, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A1619–A1623 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Smedley and X. G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 897–904 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Zinola, A. J. Arvia, G. L. Estiu and E. A. Castro, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 7566–7576 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Spendelow and A. Wieckowski, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2654–2675 RSC .
Z. L. Wang, D. Xu, J. J. Xu and X. B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7746–7786 RSC .
H. D. Lim, H. Song, J. Kim, H. Gwon, Y. Bae, K. Y. Park, J. Hong, H. Kim, T. Kim, Y. H. Kim, X. Leprõ, R. Ovalle-Robles, R. H. Baughman and K. Kang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 4007–4012 CrossRef .
C. Y. Jung, T. H. Kim, W. J. Kim and S. C. Yi, Energy, 2016, 102, 694–704 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Mainar, O. Leonet, M. Bengoechea, I. Boyano, I. De Meatza, A. Kvasha, A. Guerfi and J. A. Blázquez, Int. J. Energy Res., 2016, 40, 1032–1049 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Y. Cao, X. Ai and L. Xiao, J. Power Sources, 2004, 128, 97–101 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pei, K. Wang and Z. Ma, Appl. Energy, 2014, 128, 315–324 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hosseini and S. Kheawhom, ECS Trans., 2018, 85, 15–23 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Wen, J. Cheng, S. Q. Ning and Y. S. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2009, 188, 301–307 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Arenas, A. Loh, D. P. Trudgeon, X. Li, C. Ponce de León and F. C. Walsh, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 90, 992–1016 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pichler, K. Mayer and V. Hacker, Batteries Supercaps, 2018, 1, 1–10 CrossRef .
P. Pei, Z. Ma, K. Wang, X. Wang, M. Song and H. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 249, 13–20 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiratchayamaethasakul, N. Srijaroenpramong, T. Bunyangyuen, W. Arpavate, N. Wongyao, A. Therdthianwong and S. Therdthianwong, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2014, 44, 1205–1218 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Keliang Wang, P. Pei, Z. Ma, H. Xu and P. Li, J. Power Sources, 2014, 271, 65–75 CrossRef .
B. Kim, K. Takechi, S. Ma, S. Verma, S. Fu, A. Desai, A. S. Pawate, F. Mizuno and P. J. A. Kenis, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4198–4206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Assary, J. Lu, P. Du, X. Luo, X. Zhang, Y. Ren, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 51–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Geng, N. Ding, T. S. A. Hor, S. W. Chien, Z. Liu, D. Wuu, X. Sun and Y. Zong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502164 CrossRef .
I. Ruggeri, C. Arbizzani and F. Soavi, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 206, 291–300 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Zhang, D. Foster and J. Read, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1235–1240 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kitaura and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 889–894 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kumar and B. Kumar, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 1113–1119 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Hopkins, Y. Shao-horn and D. P. Hart, Science, 2018, 362, 658–661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 196–206 RSC .
S. Yang and H. Knickle, J. Power Sources, 2002, 112, 162–173 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mokhtar, M. Z. M. Talib, E. H. Majlan, S. M. Tasirin, W. M. F. W. Ramli, W. R. W. Daud and J. Sahari, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2015, 32, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Elia, K. Marquardt, K. Hoeppner, S. Fantini, R. Lin, E. Knipping, W. Peters, J. F. Drillet, S. Passerini and R. Hahn, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7564–7579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Q. Sun, W. Li, K. R. Adair, J. Li and X. Sun, Green Energy and Environment, 2017, 2, 246–277 CrossRef .
C. S. Li, Y. Sun, F. Gebert and S. L. Chou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1–11 Search PubMed .
A. Puapattanakul, S. Therdthianwong, A. Therdthianwong and N. Wongyao, Energy Procedia, 2013, 34, 173–180 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bockelmann, U. Kunz and T. Turek, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 69, 24–27 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, L. Ji, Y. Sun, P. Wan, J. Cheng, Y. Yang and M. Fan, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 2191–2194 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pichler, B. S. Berner, N. Rauch, C. Zelger, H. J. Pauling, B. Gollas and V. Hacker, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2018, 48, 1043–1056 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, M. Gong, Y. Liang, J. Feng, J. Kim, H. Wang, G. Hong, B. Zhang and H. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1805 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yi, P. Liang, X. Liu, K. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Xia and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3075–3095 RSC .
K. Wang, P. Pei, Z. Ma, H. Chen, H. Xu, D. Chen and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22648–22655 RSC .
H. Kim, G. Jeong, Y. U. Kim, J. H. Kim, C. M. Park and H. J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9011–9034 RSC .
C. Yang, J. Ming and C. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2009, 191, 669–677 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, J. Cheng, Y. Yang and Y. Wen, J. Power Sources, 2008, 179, 381–387 CrossRef CAS .
M. Minakshi, D. Appadoo and D. E. Martin, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A77–A80 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ullah, A. Badshah, F. Ahmed, R. Raza, A. A. Altaf and R. Hussain, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2011, 6, 3801–3811 CAS .
C. Zhang, J. M. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Q. Zhang and C. N. Cao, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2001, 31, 1049–1054 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shivkumar, G. P. Kalaignan and T. Vasudevan, J. Power Sources, 1998, 75, 90–100 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Da Cho and G. T. K. Fey, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 610–616 CrossRef .
C. Mele, A. Bilotta, P. Bocchetta and B. Bozzini, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2017, 47, 877–888 CrossRef CAS .

          J. F. Cooper, D. Fleming, L. Keene, A. Maimoni, K. Peterman and R. Koopman, Demonstration of Zinc/Air Fuel Battery to Enhance the Range and Mission of Fleet Electric Vehicles: Preliminary Results in the Refueling of a Multicell Module, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,  1994 Search PubMed .
P. Pei, S. Huang, D. Chen, Y. Li, Z. Wu, P. Ren, K. Wang and X. Jia, Appl. Energy, 2019, 241, 124–129 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Zhu, D. P. Wilkinson, X. Zhang, Y. Xing, A. G. Rozhin and S. A. Kulinich, J. Energy Storage, 2016, 8, 35–50 CrossRef .
S. Hosseini, S. J. Han, A. Arponwichanop, T. Yonezawa and S. Kheawhom, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 11273 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lee, B. Hwang, M. S. Park and K. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 199, 164–171 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hosseini, W. Lao-atiman, S. J. Han, A. Arpornwichanop, T. Yonezawa and S. Kheawhom, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 14909 CrossRef PubMed .
J. F. Parker, C. N. Chervin, I. R. Pala, M. Machler, M. F. Burz, J. W. Long and D. R. Rolison, Science, 2017, 418, 415–418 CrossRef PubMed .
D. U. Lee, J. Y. Choi, K. Feng, H. W. Park and Z. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301389 CrossRef .
P. Gu, M. Zheng, Q. Zhao, X. Xiao, H. Xue and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7651–7666 RSC .
B. Amunátegui, A. Ibáñez, M. Sierra and M. Pérez, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2018, 48, 627–637 CrossRef .
B. Pichler, S. Weinberger, L. Re, F. Gebetsroither, B. Bitschnau and V. Hacker, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 251, 488–497 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pichler, S. Weinberger, L. Reščec and V. Hacker, ECS Trans., 2017, 80, 371–375 CrossRef CAS .
D. U. Lee, H. W. Park, M. G. Park, V. Ismayilov and Z. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 902–910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bin Yang, J. Miao, S.-F. Hung, J. Chen, H. B. Tao, X. Wang, L. Zhang, R. Chen, J. Gao, H. M. Chen, L. Dai and B. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501122 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Park, D. U. Lee, M. H. Seo, Z. P. Cano and Z. Chen, Small, 2016, 12, 2707–2714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, L. Qu, G. Shi, J. Liu, J. Chen and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2230–2234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Qu, Y. Liu, J. B. Baek and L. M. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Qu, Y. Zheng, S. Dai and S. Z. Qiao, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 373–381 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, Y. P. Deng, J. Fu, D. U. Lee, R. Liang, Z. P. Cano, Y. Liu, Z. Bai, S. Hwang, L. Yang, D. Su, W. Chu and Z. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702900 CrossRef .
J. Guo, T. Li, Q. Wang, N. Zhang, Y. Cheng and Z. Xiang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 211–218 RSC .
J. P. Zheng, P. Andrei, M. Hendrickson and E. J. Plichta, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A43–A46 CrossRef CAS .
G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, A. C. Luntz, S. Swanson and W. Wilcke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2193–2203 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vinatier, P. Stevens, G. Toussaint, C. Cantau and L. Puech, J. Power Sources, 2012, 214, 330–336 CrossRef .
T. Wang, M. Yang and J. Pan, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2017, 12, 6022–6030 CrossRef CAS .
R. Black, B. Adams and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 801–815 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang and A. Faghri, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 174, 908–918 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ren and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2923–2926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Simons, A. A. J. Torriero, P. C. Howlett, D. R. MacFarlane and M. Forsyth, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 18, 119–122 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Mainar, E. Iruin, L. C. Colmenares, A. Kvasha, I. de Meatza, M. Bengoechea, O. Leonet, I. Boyano, Z. Zhang and J. A. Blazquez, J. Energy Storage, 2018, 15, 304–328 CrossRef .
F. Cheng and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2172–2192 RSC .
A. Manthiram and L. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401302 CrossRef .
P. Tan, W. Kong, Z. Shao, M. Liu and M. Ni, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2017, 62, 155–189 CrossRef .
D. Foster, K. Mutolo, J. Read, W. Behl, A. Driedger, M. Ervin and J. Wolfenstine, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1351–A1356 CrossRef .
W. Lai and F. Ciucci, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 4369–4377 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Franco and K.-H. Xue, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2013, 2, M3084–M3100 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Lee, V. Roev, T. Y. Kim, M. S. Park, D. J. Lee, D. Im and S. G. Doo, J. Power Sources, 2016, 331, 122–131 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, W. Lv, K. H. L. Zhang, X. Wang, P. Yan, J. H. Dickerson and W. He, Energy, 2015, 83, 669–673 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Xiao, J.-G. Zhang, D. Wang and W. Xu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 157, A219–A224 Search PubMed .
M. Safari, B. D. Adams and L. F. Nazar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3486–3491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Shah, M. J. Watt-Smith and F. C. Walsh, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 8087–8100 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vynnycky, Energy, 2011, 36, 2242–2256 CrossRef CAS .
H. Al-Fetlawi, A. A. Shah and F. C. Walsh, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 3192–3205 CrossRef CAS .
H. Al-Fetlawi, A. A. Shah and F. C. Walsh, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 55, 78–89 CrossRef CAS .
K. Oh, H. Yoo, J. Ko, S. Won and H. Ju, Energy, 2015, 81, 3–14 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and S. C. Cho, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A1847–A1855 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Sandhu, J. P. Fellner and G. W. Brutchen, J. Power Sources, 2007, 164, 365–371 CrossRef CAS .
K.-H. Xue, T.-K. Nguyen and A. A. Franco, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, E3028–E3035 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tashiro, T. Masuda and F. Arai, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 75, 239–246 Search PubMed .
K. Yoo, S. Banerjee and P. Dutta, J. Power Sources, 2014, 258, 340–350 CrossRef CAS .
U. Sahapatsombut, H. Cheng and K. Scott, J. Power Sources, 2013, 227, 243–253 CrossRef CAS .
U. Sahapatsombut, H. Cheng and K. Scott, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 409–418 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Huang and A. Faghri, Energy, 2015, 81, 489–500 CrossRef CAS .
F. Poli, L. K. Ghadikolaei and F. Soavi, Appl. Energy, 2019, 248, 383–389 CrossRef CAS .
S. Monaco, F. Soavi and M. Mastragostino, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1379–1382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. De Giorgio, F. Soavi and M. Mastragostino, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1090–1093 CrossRef CAS .
S. Monaco, A. M. Arangio, F. Soavi, M. Mastragostino, E. Paillard and S. Passerini, Electrochim.
Acta, 2012, 83, 94–104 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Allen, J. Hwang, R. Kautz, S. Mukerjee, E. J. Plichta, M. A. Hendrickson and K. M. Abraham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20755–20764 CrossRef CAS .
F. Soavi, S. Monaco and M. Mastragostino, J. Power Sources, 2013, 224, 115–119 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mizuno, K. Takechi, S. Higashi, T. Shiga, T. Shiotsuki, N. Takazawa, Y. Sakurabayashi, S. Okazaki, I. Nitta, T. Kodama, H. Nakamoto, H. Nishikoori, S. Nakanishi, Y. Kotani and H. Iba, J. Power Sources, 2013, 228, 47–56 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Cui, W. G. Fan and X. X. Guo, J. Power Sources, 2013, 235, 251–255 CrossRef CAS .
L. Grande, E. Paillard, G. T. Kim, S. Monaco and S. Passerini, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2014, 15, 8122–8137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Grande, J. Von Zamory, S. L. Koch, J. Kalhoff, E. Paillard and S. Passerini, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5950–5958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Herranz, A. Garsuch and H. A. Gasteiger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19084–19094 CrossRef CAS .
L. Grande, A. Ochel, S. Monaco, M. Mastragostino, D. Tonti, P. Palomino, E. Paillard and S. Passerini, Energy Technol., 2016, 4, 85–89 CrossRef CAS .
M. Olivares-Marín, P. Palomino, E. Enciso and D. Tonti, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 20772–20783 CrossRef .
M. Piana, J. Wandt, S. Meini, I. Buchberger, N. Tsiouvaras and H. A. Gasteiger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A1992–A2001 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ventosa, D. Buchholz, S. Klink, C. Flox, L. G. Chagas, C. Vaalma, W. Schuhmann, S. Passerini and J. R. Morante, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7298–7301 RSC .
J. Campos, Y. Gogotsi, E. C. Kumbur, K. W. Knehr, V. Presser and C. R. Dennison, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 895–902 CrossRef .
T. Zhang and H. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1817 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Soavi, I. Ruggeri and C. Arbizzani, ECS Trans., 2016, 72, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ruggeri, C. Arbizzani and F. Soavi, Carbon, 2018, 130, 749–757 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, D. Wang, I. Exnar and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 118, 8377–8380 CrossRef .
F. Pan, J. Yang, Q. Huang, X. Wang, H. Huang and Q. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400567 CrossRef .
Q. Huang, H. Li, M. Grätzel and Q. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 1793–1797 RSC .
Y. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, Z. Peng, O. Fontaine and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sun, Y. Shen, W. Zhang, L. Yu, Z. Yi, W. Yin, D. Wang, Y. Huang, J. Wang, D. Wang and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8941–8946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, P. He and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 770–779 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Zhu, C. Jia, J. Yang, F. Pan, Q. Huang and Q. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9451–9454 RSC .
Y. G. Zhu, X. Wang, C. Jia, J. Yang and Q. Wang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6191–6197 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Zhu, F. W. T. Goh, R. Yan, S. Wu, S. Adams and Q. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 27930–27936 RSC .
M. Balaish, A. Kraytsberg and Y. Ein-Eli, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 90–94 CrossRef .
F. Xing, H. Zhang and X. Ma, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 10753–10757 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tang, J. McCann, J. Bao and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, J. Power Sources, 2013, 242, 349–356 CrossRef CAS .
F. T. Wandschneider, S. Röhm, P. Fischer, K. Pinkwart, J. Tübke and H. Nirschl, J. Power Sources, 2014, 261, 64–74 CrossRef CAS .
S. König, M. R. Suriyah and T. Leibfried, J. Power Sources, 2015, 281, 272–284 CrossRef .
H. Fink and M. Remy, J. Power Sources, 2015, 284, 547–553 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, Z. Cui, N. Zhao, J. Sun and X. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 191, 473–478 CrossRef CAS .
S. Meini, N. Tsiouvaras, K. U. Schwenke, M. Piana, H. Beyer, L. Lange and H. A. Gasteiger, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 11478–11493 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Structure diagrams of MAFBs with one medium with one circulation. (a) Metal particle slurry flow. (b) Only the electrolyte flow. (c) Carbon slurry flow.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Structure diagrams of MAFBs with two media and one circulation. (b) A diagram showing the operational principle and configuration of the lithium–air flow battery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the hybrid sodium–air flow battery equipped with a catholyte tank. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
2Ni(OH)2 + 2OH− → 2NiOOH + 2H2O + 2e−	(7)
CH3CH2OH + 4NiOOH + H2O → CH3CH2COOH + 4Ni(OH)2	(8)
CH3CH2COOH + KOH → CH3CH2COOK + H2O	(9)

 	Fig. 3  The configuration of a ZAFB with two flow systems with the configuration of (a) a gas-introducing and (b) cavity-opening structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2009, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Negative electrode chamber with the tapered-end structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (b) Anode chamber with tapered-end structure: type V (left) and type Y (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (c) Zinc fuel cell frame with the zinc bed structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2007, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Model of spherical Zn particles with the passive ZnO shell. (b) Physical images (left) and SEM micrographs at magnifications of 100× and 500× (right) of the passivation model. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2017, Springer.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Electrolyte concentration: Pe = 100 (up) and Pe = 1 × 105 (down). (b) Deposited zinc morphologies after charging for 10 min in 40 wt% KOH solution with 1 M zinc oxide at a current density of 100 mA cm−2 of the quiescent electrolyte (up) and the flowing electrolyte (down). Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2014, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the testing cell: (1) zinc plate, (2) copper foam, (3) nickel foam, and (4) oxygen depolarized cathode. Characteristics of the electrically rechargeable zinc–oxygen cell: (b) voltage efficiency as a function of current density, (c) influence of operating temperature on cell performance at 50 mA cm−2, and (d) cycling performance of the cell over 600 cycles at room temperature (22 °C) and 50 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram and (b) coulombic efficiency/energy efficiency curves in the first 150 cycles of the single flow Zn–O2 battery with a bifunctional air electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2009, Elsevier. (c) Charge and discharge polarization curves and (d) discharge polarization curves and the corresponding power density plots for the Zn–air battery with Co/Co3O4@PGS and Pt/C + Ir/C catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2018, Wiley Online Library.	 

Zinc particles with a zinc trapped bed	Platinum catalyst	45 wt% KOH	Mechanical	Power density: 300 mW cm−2	
89

Cyclability: 1000 h at constant power density of 300 mW cm−2
Zinc particles with a tapered-end chamber	MnO2 catalyst	40 wt% KOH	Mechanical	Peak power density: 435 mW cm−2	
102

Operational current density: 510 mA cm−2
Zinc powder	MnO2 catalyst	8 M KOH	Mechanical	Peak power density: 240 mW cm−2	
103

Zinc particles with a tapered-end chamber	
	6 M KOH	Mechanical	Peak power density: 36 mW cm−2	
134

Specific capacity: >770 mA h gZn−1
Energy density: >894 W h kgZn−1
Zinc particles	MnO2 catalyst	8 M KOH with ethanol as an additive	Mechanical	Peak power density: >32 mW cm−2	
138

Specific capacity: 470 mA h gZn−1
Energy density: 576 mW h gZn−1
Zinc particles	
	7 M KOH with surfactants	Mechanical	Peak power density: >78 mW cm−2	
140

Specific capacity: 350 mA h gZn−1
Energy density: 360 mW h gZn−1
Zinc foil	
	30 wt% KOH	Mechanical	Electrolyte capacity: 1025 A h L−1	
136

Deposited zinc	Ni(OH)2 and MnO2 doped with NaBiO3	7 M KOH with 0.7 M LiOH and 0.7 M ZnO	Electrochemical	Coulombic efficiency: 97.4%	
121

Energy efficiency: 72.2%
Cyclability: 150 cycles at 20 mA cm−2
Zinc foil	NiCo2O4 spinel and La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3 perovskite	8 M KOH with 0.5 M ZnO	Electrochemical	Voltage efficiency: 62%	
145

Cyclability: 1000 h and 450 cycles at 50 mA cm−2
Deposited zinc	NiCo2O4 spinel and La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3 perovskite	8.0 M KOH and 0.5 M ZnO	Electrochemical	Energy efficiency: 49%	
146

Cyclability: 450 h and 200 cycles at 50 mA cm−2
Zn plate	NiCo2O4 spinel and La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3 perovskite	8.0 M KOH and 0.5 M ZnO	Electrochemical	Cyclability: 1820 h at 50 mA cm−2	
101

Voltage efficiency: 57%
Zinc foil	NiCo2O4 spinel and La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3 perovskite	8.0 M KOH and 0.5 M ZnO	Electrochemical	Cyclability: 800 h at 50 mA cm−2	
122

Voltage efficiency: 68%
Zinc plate	Co/Co3O4@PGS	6.0 M KOH	Electrochemical	Peak power density: >118.27 mW cm−2	
153

Cyclability: 800 h and 4800 cycles at 10 mA cm−2
Voltage efficiency: 55% at 10 mA cm−2
Zinc plate	CCOPTDP–FeNi–SiO2 catalyst	8.0 M KOH and 0.5 M ZnO	Electrochemical	Peak power density: 112.8 mW cm−2	
154

Voltage efficiency: 59% at 5 mA cm−2
Deposited zinc	Two positive electrodes (a nickel electrode and a silver electrode)	30 wt% KOH electrolyte with 2 wt% ZnO	Electrochemical	Peak power density: 270 mW cm−2	
120

Cyclability: 600 cycles at 50 mA cm−2
Energy efficiency: 54%
Sodium plate	Pt/C and IrO2 catalysts	1 M NaNO3 and 0.1 M citric acid catholyte and a solid electrolyte (NASICON)	Electrochemical	Peak power density: 5.4 mW cm−2	
86

Cyclability: 20 cycles and 200 h at 0.1 mA cm−2
Voltage efficiency: 89%
Lithium foil	Carbon nanofoam	0.85 M CH3COOH and CH3COOLi	Electrochemical	Peak power density: 7.64 mW cm−2	
88

Cyclability: 20 cycles and 200 h at 0.1 mA cm−2
Voltage efficiency: 82%
Lithium metal	Mn3O4/activated carbon composite	1 M LiOH and LiNO3	Mechanical	Peak power density: 1127 W kg−1	
87

Electrode capacity: 19000 mA h gcatalyst−1

 	Fig. 9  (a) Comparison of voltage vs. specific capacity curves between the lithium–air cells with passive and active air electrodes. The discharge current density is 0.2 mA cm−2. (b) Distributions of volume fractions of Li2O2 in the electrode after the passive and the active lithium cells are fully discharged at different current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (c and d) The impacts of (c) the oxygen diffusion coefficient, DO2, and (d) the oxygen solubility, cO2;sat, on the air electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (e and f) Simulation results of the maximum current density that can be achieved as a function of (e) cathode porosity, ranging from 0.1 to 0.9 and (f) depth of cathode immersion, ranging from 10 to 200 mm for different initial concentrations of O2 (5, 10, 15 and 20 mol m−3) in N,N-di-ethyl-N-(2-methoxyethyl)-N-methylammonium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (DEME-TFSI, 3300 mol m−3 of DEME+). Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2017, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the LAFBs, and the electrolyte is N,N-di-ethyl-N-(2-methoxyethyl)-N-methylammonium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (DEME-TFSI). (b) Discharge behavior of non-aqueous LABs with and without the flowing catholyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2017, Wiley. (c) Scheme of the flow IL-based lithium–air battery (R stands for reference electrode). (d) Flow battery voltage and ZL/CP and Li electrode potentials vs. Li+/Li upon discharge/recharge cycles at room temperature and 0.2 mA cm−2: 1st cycle (black curves) with the pump off and 2nd cycle (red curves) with the pump on. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2013, ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 11  The semi-solid lithium–air flow battery scheme (a) and (b) and the prototype under operation. (c) Cell and cathode discharge polarization curves and power vs. current plots. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Viscosity (η) vs. shear rate (γ) of the 2 SP, 2 PB and 10 PB catholytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 
RMOX1 + e− → RMred1	(10)
2Li+ + 2RMred1 + O2 → Li2O2 + 2RMOX1	(11)

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the configuration and working process of a redox flow lithium–oxygen battery (RFLOB). The cell stack constitutes a lithium metal anode and a carbon felt cathode (2 cm × 2 cm), separated by a membrane. A gas diffusion tank (GDT) is connected to the cathodic compartment through a pump. During the discharging process, oxygen flows into the tank and is reduced to form Li2O2 while the electrolyte fluid containing redox mediators and Li+ circulates between the GDT and the cell. The photo at the lower right corner shows an RFLOB single cell powering three light-emitting diodes. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of EV and LiI in TEGDME. The scan rate is 0.10 V s−1. The redox potential of Li2O2 is indicated for reference. (c) Discharge/charge curves and coulombic efficiency of an RFLOB employing a PVDF–Nafion membrane at different cycle numbers. The current density is 0.125 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Diagram describing DTBBQ- and TMPPA-catalyzed ORR and OER reactions during the charging and discharging processes of the RFLOB. Reproduced with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2016, ACS Publications. (e) Configuration of an RFLOB cell system (single cell) with integrated electrolyte spray. (f) Voltage and power density vs. current density curves of RFLOB cells under different operating conditions. The electrolyte was EV-DQ (0.2 M/0.2 M) in 1 M LiTFSI/DSMO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
RMred2 → RMOX2 + e−	(12)
Li2O2 + 2RMOX2 → 2Li+ + 2RMred2 + O2	(13)

Lithium metal	ZL/GC	Pyr14TFSI-LiTFSI	Oxygen	Specific capacity: 600 mA h g−1	
188

Coulombic efficiency: 91.8%
Lithium metal	ZL or C250	Pyr14TFSI-LiTFSI	Oxygen	Specific capacity: 1445 mA h g−1	
198

Coulombic efficiency: 49%
Lithium metal	Micro-porous layer	DEME-TFSI	Oxygen	
	
105

Lithium metal	Carbon paper	TEGDME-LiTFSI-Super P	Oxygen	Discharge capacity: >175 mA h cm−2	
108

Energy density: >500 mW h cm−2
Power density: >7 mW cm−2
Lithium metal	Carbon felt	TEGDME-LiTFSI-EV-I2	Oxygen	Coulombic efficiency: 100%	
212

Cyclability:>30 cycles at 0.125 mA cm−2
Lithium metal	
	TEGDME-LiTFSI-DTBBQ-TMPPA	Oxygen	Cyclability: >100 cycles at 0.5 mA cm−2	
213

Lithium foil	Carbon felt	DSMO-LiTFSI-EV-DQ	Dry air	Power density: 34 mW cm−2	
214

Areal capacity: 140 mA h cm−2 at 10 mA cm−2

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
