Steering the crystallization of perovskites for high-performance solar cells in ambient air   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA02566A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA02566A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12166-12175Steering the crystallization of perovskites for high-performance solar cells in ambient air†

        
          
            Feng 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ting 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yafei 
            Wang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Detao 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hao 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Long 
            Ji
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhi David 
            Chen
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Jiang 
            Wu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Liu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Yanbo 
            Li
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Yafei 
            Wang§
a and 

        
          
            Shibin 
            Li
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan 610054, China. E-mail: shibinli@uestc.edu.cn
bDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Center for Nanoscale Science & Engineering, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40506, USA
cInstitute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan 610054, China
Received 
      8th March 2019
    , Accepted 16th April 2019First published on 17th April 2019AbstractThe fabrication of perovskite solar cells in ambient air is of significant economic benefit. However, to date, there is no satisfactory solution to achieve this, and the reported results of solar cells fabricated in ambient air vary significantly. It has been observed through studies of the “turbid point”, a time point at which the appearance of the precursor film changes from transparent to turbid, that the crystallization of methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) precursor films is strongly affected by humidity. A theoretical model based on the dependence of crystallization on evaporation was developed. We further designed a “humidity-insensitive antisolvent method” based on the turbid point and its tuning to control the fabrication of high-quality MAPbI3 films and solar cells irrespective of the ambient humidity levels. Note that a champion device prepared in ambient air at 90% RH exhibits the efficiency of 19.5%, which is highest among those of the devices prepared in ambient air with over 30% RH. Our study may also impact other perovskite devices and inspire other researchers to perform innovative experiments.
1. Introduction
Organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have undergone a significant progress since 2009, delivering the certified power conversion efficiencies (PCE) over 23% for laboratory-scale solar cells.1,2 However, note that high-performance PSCs are generally fabricated inside gloveboxes filled with N2 or other inert gases.3–9 This demanding condition increases the cost of solar panel manufacturing.10–12 As a result, there is an urgent need to develop a method for the fabrication of PSCs in ambient air without gloveboxes.
Moisture is known to cause decomposition of perovskite, which is the key issue to address when PSCs are fabricated in ambient air. Several research groups have reported the preparation of PSCs in ambient air.10–19 Miyasaka's group pioneered the preparation of methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) solar cells via a two-step method in ambient air, and the excellent PCE of 15.3% was acheived.13 Jeong et al. have shown that the deposition of perovskite films is humidity dependent.15 The average PCE of the MAPbI3 PSCs prepared at the relative humidity (RH) of 40% was around 10%, almost 10 times that of the PSCs prepared at 20% RH. Xu et al. have pointed out that moisture activates the reaction between PbI2 and methylammonium halides; thus, a moderate RH level is favored for the two-step method.16 Solutions for suppressing the influence of moisture have been proposed to facilitate the preparation of PSCs.10,17 Park's group has demonstrated that preheating can effectively tune the grain size of PbI2 layers, through which the best PCE of 15.76% for mesostructured PSCs prepared at 50% RH has been achieved.10 Tai et al. replaced PbI2 with Pb(SCN)2 to deposit perovskite films using the two-step method, and the corresponding MAPbI3−x(SCN)x-based solar cells showed a maximum PCE of around 15%.17
On the other hand, the fabrication of PSCs in humid air using the antisolvent method, which is the most widely used technique for the fabrication of high performance PCEs, has attracted considerable attention due to the simplicity of the procedure.11,12,20–22 Wozny et al. reported the preparation of formamidinium lead halide perovskite (FAPbI3) films at various RH levels and found that satisfactory perovskite films could only be formed at very low RH levels.20 The average PCE of the associated FAPbI3 solar cells deteriorates from 15.2% to less than 10% as the humidity level increases from 2% RH to 40% RH. Aranda et al. proposed that the ratio of PbI2:dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) should be carefully chosen to prepare high-quality perovskite films from a PbI2:MAI:DMSO complex in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) in ambient air at various humidity levels.21 However, the average PCE of the obtained PSCs decreased with increasing RH. Notably, the PCE deteriorates when the RH level rises over 50%. To resist the effects of humidity on the deposition of perovskite films, Troughton et al. proposed that selection of the antisolvent is critical and observed that ethyl acetate is a better choice than both chlorobenzene (CBZ) and diethyl ether (DE).11 Ethyl acetate is considered to be both an antisolvent and moisture absorber; thus, the influence of moisture is suppressed. However, the average PCE of MAPbI3 PSCs fabricated at 30% RH and 50% RH is around 10%, which is substantially lower than that of PSCs fabricated at 75% RH. These results indicate that the influence of humidity on the deposition of perovskite films remains unclear. Sveinbjörnsson et al. reported the deposition of mixed-ion (FAPbI3)1−x(MAPbBr3)x on heated substrates and obtained an excellent device with an average PCE of 17.6%.22 However, the humidity level of the fabrication environment is not mentioned. Overall, because the mechanism of the influence of humidity is not fully understood, a reliable approach has not been developed for the fabrication of high-quality perovskite films in a wide range of humidity levels.
Herein, we study the mechanism of the effects of humidity on the spin-coating-induced crystallization (SCIC) of MAPbI3 films in ambient air. During the SCIC process, an important time point, which we name the “turbid point”, at which the appearance of the MAPbI3 precursor film changes from transparent to turbid was found to be highly sensitive to the ambient RH. It should be noted that the turbid phenomenon was mentioned by Ahn et al. (ESI†) and was used in an antisolvent method in a glove box.23 We propose a theoretical model for evaporation-dependent crystallization. Based on our model, a “humidity-insensitive antisolvent method” is proposed through turbid-point tuning at various humidity levels. Using the novel “humidity-insensitive antisolvent method”, efficient PSCs were fabricated in a wide range of ambient RH levels. The excellent device prepared in a humid atmosphere of 90% RH shows a PCE of 19.5%, exceeding those of all other PSCs prepared in ambient air over 30% RH. The proposed method can be applied not only to PSCs but also to other perovskite-based devices, including transistors, detectors, and light-emitting diodes. The proposed theoretical model may inspire other researchers to perform innovative experiments.
2. Results
The antisolvent method was conducted by dropping antisolvent onto a spinning perovskite precursor film.24–27 We divided the antisolvent process into two steps: (1) spin-coating-induced crystallization (SCIC) of a perovskite precursor film and (2) enhanced nucleation through solvent extraction by dropping antisolvent. The uniform crystallization of the perovskite precursor film relies on these two consecutive steps. The key of the success of the antisolvent method is to determine the time point at which one should drop the antisolvent. The time point is closely related to the turbid point and usually occurs several seconds before the turbid point. Dropping too early or too late leads to inhomogeneous morphology. The turbid point indicates a proper state of the precursor film produced by a SCIC method suitable for antisolvent crystallization. Therefore, understanding the effects of humidity on the turbid point is crucial to determine the impact of humidity on the quality of MAPbI3 films.
2.1. Effects of humidity on the SCIC of MAPbI3 films
To study the effects of humidity on the SCIC, MAPbI3 precursor solutions were spin-coated on SnO2 substrates without application of antisolvent. During the SCIC process, we observed that the turbid point was strongly affected by the humidity level. Fig. 1a shows a schematic of the appearance changes of the perovskite films during spin-coating. UV-vis absorption spectra of MAPbI3 precursor films with transparent and turbid appearances are presented in ESI Fig. 1.† The absorption behavior changes substantially, suggesting that there is a substantial change in the films around the turbid point.28 On the other hand, the turbid point provides a timing criterion to drop the antisolvent to uniformly crystallize the perovskite precursor film. As shown in ESI Fig. 2,† black and shiny MAPbI3 films can only be obtained when the antisolvent is dropped just before the turbid point. Therefore, the turbid point offers an ideal parameter to investigate the influence of environmental humidity on the SCIC of perovskite precursor films. We monitored the optical appearance of the perovskite films through a camera during the spin-coating process at a series of RH levels at ∼25 °C: 0% RH, 50% RH, 70% RH, and 90% RH. Fig. 1b shows snapshots of the perovskite films before and after the turbid point under these humid conditions and microscopic images of the prepared perovskite films. It was found that the turbid point is delayed as the humidity level increases. Specifically, the turbid point appears in approximately 9 s, 15 s, 19 s and 20 s for 0% RH, 50% RH, 70% RH, and 90% RH, respectively, as summarized in Fig. 1c. It should be noted that in the case of 90% RH, the turbid point is not as easy to observe as in other cases, and a dashed line is applied to note this. As can be seen from the microscopic images in Fig. 1b, the perovskite film obtained at 0% RH shows a very dense morphology, with grains far smaller than the scale bar (50 μm). In the case of 50% RH, there are fewer grains with larger grain sizes, ranging from 1 μm to 25 μm. When the humidity level increases to 70% RH or 90% RH, only countable grains appear, with grain lengths over 50 μm. The microscopic images of the MAPbI3 films show a clear trend where the crystalline size increases remarkably and the crystalline density decreases as the RH level increases. Fig. 1d shows photographs of the MAPbI3 films prepared under these humidity conditions. As the RH increases, the color of the MAPbI3 films changes from dark to almost transparent, which is consistent with the microscopic observation that fewer grains are present as the RH level increases. After monitoring the turbid points and the morphologies of the perovskite films, it is clear that the atmospheric humidity substantially affects the SCIC of the perovskite precursor films.
 Fig. 1  The dependence of SCIC on humidity. (a) Schematic of the appearance changes of the MAPbI3 films during spin-coating. The appearance changes from transparent to turbid after seconds of spin-coating. (b) Images of the MAPbI3 films during spin-coating in atmospheres with different RH levels (∼25 °C): 0% RH, 50% RH, 70% RH and 90% RH. The pictures in the bottom row are microscopic images of the prepared MAPbI3 films. The scale bar is 50 μm. (c) Turbid point as function of relative humidity (∼25 °C). (d) Photographs of the MAPbI3 films prepared at different RH levels. 
2.2. Evaporation-crystallization model
The humid atmosphere affects the SCIC through two possible ways: (1) the SCIC is solution sensitive, and airborne H2O absorbed into the perovskite precursor films changes their composition; (2) the SCIC is atmosphere sensitive; therefore, that the humid atmosphere impacts the SCIC. For the first possibility, a similar mechanism has been adopted to explain the humidity dependence of perovskite film deposition.16,29 When spin-coating perovskite films in humid conditions using the two-step method, the morphology variation of the perovskite films is ascribed to airborne H2O, which accelerates the reaction between PbI2 and MAI.16 A small amount of H2O was proved to facilitate the formation of high-quality perovskite films.30 Although the turbid point was not mentioned, Gao et al. reported a similar phenomenon where a higher RH level leads to a perovskite film with less coverage when depositing MAPbI3 films using a one-step method.29 They proposed that the variation of the perovskite morphology results from a decrease of the perovskite nucleation density; this is caused by moisture absorbed into the perovskite precursor film during spin-coating, which acts as additional solvent. We carried out an experiment to verify this explanation and found that it is not applicable in our case because H2O does not show good solubility for dissolving perovskite. As shown in ESI Fig. 3,† we found that the addition of a small amount of deionized water (∼20 μl) to the perovskite solution (2 ml) instantly induces a white precipitate. This can be ascribed to the formation of perovskite hydrates due to bonding of water and perovskite or perovskite precipitation due to solvent (DMF/DMSO) extraction by H2O because H2O is highly miscible with DMF/DMSO. The perovskite solution became transparent again after sufficient stirring; this can be ascribed to the fact that the added deionized water dispersed into the entire solution. Either way, H2O increases the perovskite concentration and facilitates the nucleation. Further quantitative study was carried out to simulate the influence of H2O absorption on the SCIC process. Precursor solutions (equimolar MAI and PbI2 in a mixed solvent of DMF and DMSO) with addition of xH2O (x = 0.3, 1 or 3, molar ratio to MAI) were spin-coated on SnO2 substrates in a glovebox. As can be seen from ESI Fig. 4,† negligible differences were found in the turbid points as well as the morphologies of the perovskite films, indicating that water has little impact on the perovskite precursor solutions. This further suggests that the absorption of airborne water is unlikely to induce a large difference in the SCIC of perovskite films as depicted in Fig. 1. However, this does not exclude the possibility that airborne water can be absorbed in the precursor solutions. It should be mentioned that H2O has been identified in perovskite films due to fabrication in humid environments.31 We also noted that some groups reported the influence of the addition of H2O to precursor perovskite solutions on the morphologies of perovskite films and the performance of the corresponding PSCs.32,33 However, it should be noted that the precursor solutions which they used, MAI:PbCl2 (3:1) or MAI:PbAc2, undergo halide element substitution (Cl to I and Ac to I, respectively) to form MAPbI3, which is quite different from the MAI:PbI2 solution we used. Wu et al. proved that adding a small amount of H2O improves the solubility of PbI2 in DMF, resulting in PbI2 films with full coverage and high-quality perovskite films.34,35 This can be ascribed to the fact that the Lewis acid Pb2+ may accept lone pair electrons from oxygen in H2O so that H2O-containing Lewis adducts are formed.23 Because we show that the absorbed water does not affect SCIC, the possible influence of airborne water on the nature of the perovskite precursors is out of our scope. Consequently, we suggest that the variation of SCIC at different RH levels is caused by atmospheric humidity through suppressing the evaporation of precursor solvent (DMF/DMSO). A schematic model of evaporation-crystallization for the effects of humidity on the SCIC process as well as on the antisolvent process window is shown in Fig. 2. In this model, there are two parts: (1) solvent evaporation (Fig. 2a) and (2) nuclei formation and growth (Fig. 2b).
 Fig. 2  Evaporation-crystallization model of the effects of humidity on SCIC and the anti-solvent method. (a) Schematic model of the effects of humidity on solvent evaporation. The bottom layer is liquid (“L-liquid”), while the top layer is vapor (“L-vapor”). Between these two layers, there is a phase-transition thin layer (“L-trans”) consisting of both gas and liquid phases. Evaporation at a low RH level (left) and a high RH level (right) is shown. (b) Schematic model of the effects of humidity on SCIC processes. Three cases, including low RH (0%), medium RH (50%) and high RH (70%), are shown. C0 and Cs represent the initial concentration and super-saturation concentration, respectively. TP-L, TP-M, and TP-H represent the turbid points at low RH, medium RH and high RH, respectively. ΔCL, ΔCM, and ΔCH represent the super-saturation depths at low RH, medium RH and high RH, respectively. (c) A-windows to apply antisolvent in atmospheres with different RH levels (0% RH, 50% RH and 70% RH). 
For the solvent evaporation (Fig. 2a), there are three phase layers when evaporation takes place.36,37 The bottom layer is liquid (“L-liquid”), while the top layer is vapor (“L-vapor”). Between these two layers, there is a phase-transition thin layer (“L-trans”) consisting of both gas and liquid phases. The liquid phase in the phase-transition thin layer nucleates from the accumulated gas in the top layer. There is a gas concentration gradient along the phase-transition thin layer to the vapor layer, which acts as a driving force for evaporation.37 Fewer gas molecules in the vapor layer results in a higher concentration gradient, leading to a higher evaporation rate. In contrast, more gas molecules in the vapor layer suppress the evaporation. Consequently, SCIC is atmosphere sensitive because it is a process driven by evaporation. To verify this, we spin-coated MAPbI3 films inside the glovebox with or without introduction of DMF into the spin-coating chamber. It was found that without the introduction of DMF into the atmosphere, the appearance of the perovskite precursor films changed from transparent to turbid several seconds after the spin-coating started. Interestingly, the turbid point was not observed when the DMF atmosphere was introduced. Additionally, as shown in ESI Fig. 5,† the final morphology of the MAPbI3 film comprised micrometer-sized dendrites when the DMF atmosphere was introduced, which is similar to the phenomenon depicted in Fig. 1a. The evaporation of a solvent is not only suppressed by its vapor, but is also subject to other vapors. It was found that the evaporation rate of ethanol slowed more when it was spin-coated in air than in N2.37 This may be because both H2O and ethanol are polar substances, so the moisture in the air slowed the evaporation of ethanol. Because H2O is miscible with DMF/DMSO and both H2O and DMF/DMSO are polar solvents, we propose that the existence of moisture also suppresses evaporation. The higher the humidity level, the slower the evaporation of DMF/DMSO. The schematic evaporation model for solvent (DMF/DMSO) in low and high humidity environments is shown in Fig. 2a.
Based on the influence of humidity on evaporation, the crystallization dynamics is thus impacted by the RH level during the spin-coating process. Fig. 2b shows the concentration profiles and the corresponding crystallization dynamics. Generally, once spin-coating starts, the DMF/DMSO solvent begins to evaporate after excess solution is spun away, resulting in an increase of the perovskite precursor concentration. After exceeding the super-saturation concentration (Cs), the perovskite precursor film begins to form nuclei.38 As evaporation proceeds, more solute tends to precipitate, either contributing to growth of the formed nuclei or forming new nuclei.39 Thus, there is competition between nuclei formation and nuclei growth in consuming the solute. The super-saturation quench depth (ΔC), namely the difference between the highest concentration and the super-saturation concentration, determines whether nuclei formation or nuclei growth dominates during the crystallization process. If the depth is high, nuclei formation dominates the crystallization process. If the depth is low, nuclei growth dominates the crystallization process instead. When the SCIC proceeds at a low humidity level, the solvent evaporation is so strong that the solution quickly reaches a high concentration, leading to a high super-saturation quench depth (ΔCL). In this case, nuclei formation dominates the crystallization process, resulting in dense nuclei. The morphology of the associated perovskite film is expected to be continuous, with numerous small grains which scatter incident light strongly; thus, the turbid point is quite easy to observe. At a high humidity level, evaporation of the precursor solvent is slow, so the depth is low; thus, nuclei growth dominates the crystallization process. The resulting perovskite film is expected to consist of a few large grains, resulting in less scattering of incident light; therefore, the turbid point is less evident. In this case, more time is also required to change the film structure, so the turbid point should be delayed. Meanwhile, at a medium humidity level, the evaporation of the solvent is suppressed less substantially, and the depth is moderate; thus, nuclei formation and growth occur at comparable rates. Consequently, the morphology of the resulting perovskite film falls between that obtained at a low humidity level and that obtained at a high humidity level. Therefore, the phenomenon in Fig. 1 can be well understood using this model.
2.3. Effects of humidity on the antisolvent method
Based on the knowledge of the humidity level dependence of the SCIC process, it is predictable that the antisolvent method will be affected by the humidity level. As mentioned above, the success of the antisolvent method relies on two consecutive processes, namely an initial nucleation state caused by SCIC and enhanced nucleation by application of antisolvent. Because the crystallization dynamics vary with the humidity level, the initial nucleation state varies with the humidity level as well; as a result, the antisolvent method is sensitive to the humidity level. There is a period where SCIC drives the precursor film to exceed a proper initial nucleation state. High-quality perovskite films with flat and pinhole-free morphologies can be obtained only when dropping the antisolvent within this period. We term this process window the antisolvent window (A-window). From our experience, the A-window for MAPbI3 deposition is a period of several seconds before the turbid point. As shown in Fig. 2c, when chlorobenzyl (CBZ) was chosen as the antisolvent, we found that the A-window increases as the humidity level increases from 0% RH to 50% RH because the turbid point is delayed. In these two cases, dark and shiny perovskite films can be obtained within their corresponding A-windows. Similarly, Aranda et al. reported delayed timing for adding antisolvent at low and moderate humidity levels.21 When the humidity level increases to 70% RH, the initial nucleation state is below the critical nucleation density (D-c), leading to failure of the antisolvent method. The appearance of the resulting perovskite film is gray and shiny, as shown in Fig. 2c. The above results show the humidity dependence of the turbid point and A-window. To summarize, the conventional antisolvent method is humidity-sensitive and even fails at a higher humidity level.
2.4. Humidity-insensitive antisolvent method
Controllable SCIC and appropriate initial nuclei density are key to successfully apply the antisolvent method. As a result, we steered the SCIC process by tuning it towards the nucleation-dominated mode to controllably prepare high-quality perovskite films at various humidity levels. Based on our model, the key finding is that slow solvent evaporation causes delay and disappearance of the turbid point, so the initial precursor film is no longer suitable for applying antisolvent. Therefore, the solution to this problem is to increase the solvent evaporation rate so that the turbid point appears earlier with a higher initial nuclei density. There are many possible ways to increase the solvent evaporation rate, e.g. substituting DMF/DMSO with a volatile solvent. We present a substrate preheating method to increase the evaporation of solvent, thus realizing tuning of the SCIC. Both the substrate and spin-coater chuck were preheated to a desired temperature. As shown in Fig. 3a, when the temperature increases from 25 °C to 40 °C or 70 °C when spin-coating the perovskite precursor film in 90% RH (∼25 °C), the crystalline density increases remarkably and the crystalline size obviously decreases. We also studied how temperature influences the turbid point, as shown in Fig. 3b. It was found that the turbid point occurs earlier as the temperature increases. The perovskite film becomes turbid at around 8 s at 40 °C and 3 s at 70 °C. For 50% RH and 70% RH, the turbid point appears at the same time point when the substrate is preheated to 40 °C or 70 °C. This suggests that the turbid point is no longer dependent on humidity after the substrate is preheated; therefore, the antisolvent method is humidity insensitive.
 Fig. 3  SCIC tuning strategy and mechanism. (a) Morphologies of MAPbI3 films deposited in 90% RH atmosphere on substrates at temperatures of 25 °C, 40 °C and 70 °C, respectively. The scale bar is 25 μm. (b) Turbid point as function of substrate temperature at a humidity level of 90% RH (∼25 °C). (c) Schematic of the crystallization process. ΔG* and r* represent the critical free energy and critical nucleus radius of nucleation, respectively. ΔGv and ΔGS represent a volume term and a surface term of the free energy, respectively. 
Preheating also facilitates nucleation in another way. As shown in Fig. 3c, two thermodynamic factors are critical for the nucleation process: the critical free energy of nucleation (ΔG*) and critical nucleus radius (r*).40,41 The critical free energy, composed of a surface term ΔGS and a volume term ΔGv, is a barrier determining whether nucleation can take place (nuclei form stably). A nucleus with a radius smaller than the critical nucleus radius is unstable. ΔG* and r* can be expressed as follows:29,42 (1) (2)
ΔGv, the volume free energy change per unit, can be expressed as:43 (3)
It should be noted that ΔGv is negative. k is the Boltzmann constant, and Cs and Ce are the concentrations for super-saturation and equilibrium of the perovskite solution, respectively. As a result, the absolute value of ΔGv increases as the temperature increases. On the other hand, according to the Eötvös rule, σ, surface free energy per unit surface area, can be expressed in eqn (4):44,45 (4)where V is the molar volume, Tc is the critical temperature, and kE is the Eötvös constant. For a specific liquid, Tc is always higher than T. Consequently, σ decreases as the temperature T increases. Both ΔGv and σ are temperature dependent; ΔGv increases as the temperature increases, while σ has the opposite trend. As a result, when the temperature increases, ΔG* and r* decrease. Therefore, the nucleation of the SCIC process is facilitated at higher temperatures.
2.5. Preparation of perovskite films
Based on the above humidity-insensitive method, we prepared perovskite films using CBZ as the antisolvent at 70% RH (∼25 °C) and using diethyl ether (DE) as the antisolvent at 90% RH (∼25 °C). The perovskite films prepared with or without preheating (denoted as “P”) were compared. The substrates were preheated to 70 °C. The antisolvents were dropped according to the corresponding turbid points. Fig. 4a shows scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of MAPbI3 films prepared by the antisolvent method with and without preheating, respectively. The top row shows MAPbI3 films treated with DE, and the bottom row shows MAPbI3 films treated with CBZ. The insets show corresponding SEM images at higher resolution. It can be seen that the MAPbI3 films without preheating exhibit morphologies full of pinholes and randomly stacked small grains. In the case of CBZ, the morphology is extremely mesoporous. Strikingly, with preheating, both MAPbI3 films show flat morphologies with compact aligned grains. XRD characterization (Fig. 4b) shows that all the perovskite films have intense diffraction peaks at around 14.1°, 28.4° and 31.8°, which are assigned to the (110), (220), and (310) planes of the tetragonal MAPbI3 structure, respectively.25 The MAPbI3 films prepared with preheating have much stronger diffraction peak intensities, suggesting better crystallinity. The PL decay curves depicted in Fig. 4c show that the carrier lifetimes of the MAPbI3 films prepared with preheating increased obviously for both DE and CBZ. Fitting the PL decay curves to a biexponential equation, we extracted the defect-induced non-radiative recombination lifetimes (τ1) and radiative recombination lifetimes (τ2), as listed in the inset of Fig. 4c.6,35,46 Preheating the substrate almost doubles the radiative recombination lifetimes of the MAPbI3 films. Specifically, the radiative recombination lifetime extends from ∼85 ns to ∼147 ns for DE and from ∼62 ns to ∼107 ns for CBZ. The extended radiative recombination lifetime indicates fewer defects in the perovskite layer, thus benefiting the photovoltaic performance. As shown in ESI Fig. 6,† UV-vis absorption spectra of these MAPbI3 films show that the films deposited with preheating exhibit higher absorption over the entire region below the cutoff wavelength (∼780 nm). It was noted that the MAPbI3 film obtained using DE as the antisolvent has slightly higher absorption than that obtained with CBZ; this is beneficial for light harvesting, leading to a higher photocurrent.9,47 We also prepared MAPbI3 films with substrate preheating using CBZ as the antisolvent at a humidity level of 90% RH. SEM images of the resulting MAPbI3 films are shown in ESI Fig. 7.† It can be seen that the morphology of the central area is pinhole free. However, the morphology becomes mesoporous near the edges. This is probably due to the fact that moisture prevents CBZ from spreading from the center to the edge areas. We also prepared MAPbI3 films in 0% RH, 50% RH and 70% RH atmospheres (∼25 °C) using the antisolvent method with substrate preheating. Shiny dark perovskite films were obtained. The photovoltaic performance of the solar cells based on these films is shown in ESI Table 1.† It should be noted that the time point for dropping antisolvent (DE or CBZ) remained at ∼2 s after the spin-coating started irrespective of the relative humidity, suggesting that the antisolvent method is humidity insensitive after preheating.
 Fig. 4  Characterization of perovskite films prepared with and without preheating. (a) SEM images, (b) XRD patterns and (c) time-resolved PL kinetics of MAPbI3 films prepared using the antisolvent method with and without preheating. “P” denotes preheating. 
2.6. Performance of MAPbI3 solar cells
We further fabricated PSCs with the following architecture: ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au.48 As shown in Fig. 5a, for both DE and CBZ, the PCE of the PSCs was improved substantially by using the “humidity-insensitive antisolvent method”. The Jsc, FF and Voc values are shown in ESI Fig. 8(a)–(c).† A statistical summary is shown in ESI Table 2.† Overall, the average PCE increased from 11.2% to 18.7% and from 9.2% to 17.1% for DE and CBZ, respectively. It is clear that the PSCs with MAPbI3 films prepared by the “humidity-insensitive antisolvent method” using DE as the antisolvent show the best performance. Fig. 5b exhibits the JV curve of the best cell with a PCE of 19.5% (reverse scan). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum together with the integrated current curve are shown in Fig. 5c. The integration of Jsc from the EQE spectrum is 22.8 mA cm−2, showing a negligible difference (3%) from the result obtained from the JV scan. The tracking of the current density and efficiency at the maximum power point are presented in Fig. 5d. The stabilized current density and efficiency are 21.3 mA cm−2 and 19.1%, respectively. As shown in ESI Table 1,† controllable deposition of high-quality perovskite films was also demonstrated at 0% RH, 50% RH and 70% RH using both DE and CBZ. Average PCEs of 17.3%, 17.8%, and 18.4% were obtained for DE as the antisolvent at 0%, 50% and 70% RH, respectively. Average PCEs of 16.3%, 16.8%, and 17.0% were obtained for CBZ as the antisolvent at 0% RH, 50% RH and 70% RH, respectively. The tendency of the average PCE to increase as the RH increases can be ascribed to the humid atmosphere annealing effect. It has been demonstrated that humid atmosphere annealing can passivate grain defects of perovskite films, enhancing their photovoltaic performance.49–51 Also, preheating may be a reason for the performance improvement of the solar cells.52 To the best of our knowledge, our best cell has the highest efficiency (under reverse scan) among PSCs prepared in humid atmospheres over 30% RH.10,11,13–18,20–22,29 It should be noted that a PCE of 20.8% was recently reported for triple cation PSCs fabricated in air with the RH controlled to be less than 25%.12 The PCEs under reverse scan of other reported PSCs fabricated in ambient air together with our work are summarized in Fig. 5e. We further measured the shelf life (stored in a glovebox) and stability in humid air (60% RH to 70% RH, ∼23 °C) for PSCs prepared with preheating at 90% RH and control devices prepared in a glovebox by a conventional antisolvent method. As shown in Fig. 5f, over 90% of the initial PCE was retained for both devices in terms of shelf life over 6 weeks. Meanwhile, for stability in humid air (60% RH to 70% RH, ∼23 °C), the PSCs prepared using the “humidity-insensitive antisolvent method” retained 60% of their initial performance after 10 days of exposure, exhibiting better stability than the control devices. These results demonstrate that the “humidity-insensitive antisolvent method” is effective for the preparation of efficient PSCs in high RH conditions without sacrificing their long-term stability.
 Fig. 5  Photovoltaic performance of PSCs with the architecture ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3 layer/HTM/Au. (a) PCEs of PSCs with MAPbI3 films prepared by the antisolvent method with or without preheating using either DE (90% RH, ∼25 °C) or CBZ (70% RH, ∼25 °C) as the antisolvent. 15 cells were measured for each case. (b) J–V curves for the best cell under reverse scan (R) and forward scan (F). (c) External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum and integrated Jsc from the EQE curve and (d) tracking of the maximum power points for the best device. (e) PCE comparison (reverse scan) of PSCs prepared at various RH levels. Circles represent studies that do not specify the temperature of the humid environment. (f) Shelf life and stability in humid air (60% RH to 70% RH, ∼23 °C) for PSCs prepared with preheating at 90% RH (∼25 °C). “P” denotes preheating. 
3. Conclusion
In summary, we studied the mechanism of the effects of humidity on the spin-coating-induced crystallization (SCIC) of MAPbI3 films in ambient air. As the humidity level increases, the turbid point is delayed, suggesting that the SCIC shifts from nucleation dominated to nuclei growth dominated. We proposed a theoretical model for evaporation-based crystallization. According to this model, we developed a humidity-insensitive antisolvent method for the preparation of MAPbI3 films and efficient perovskite solar cells in a wide range of humidity levels. Notably, PSCs prepared in atmosphere with 90% RH exhibit a maximum PCE of 19.5%, which is the highest among PSCs prepared in humid atmospheres above 30% RH. Therefore, we developed a highly controllable method for the deposition of perovskite films and the fabrication of PSCs irrespective of humidity.
4. Experimental section
4.1. Materials
Unless mentioned otherwise, all materials and solvents were purchased from Youxuan Corp. and were used as received. N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were provided by Sigma-Aldrich, and methylammonium iodide (MAI) was provided by Xi'an Polymer Light Tech. The SnO2 colloid precursor was purchased from Alfa Aesar (tin(IV) oxide, 15% colloidal dispersion in H2O).
4.2. Methods
ITO glass substrates were cleaned in detergent aqueous solution and rinsed with deionized water three times, followed by sequential sonication in acetone and ethanol for 15 min each. After residual ethanol was evaporated, the substrates were further treated with UV-ozone for 15 min. A compact layer of SnO2 was deposited via spin-coating of diluted SnO2 aqueous solutions (SnO2 colloid precursor and deionized water, 1/6 v/v) at 4000 rpm for 20 s followed by annealing at 165 °C for 30 min in air and UV-ozone treatment for 15 min. MAPbI3 films were prepared by spin-coating perovskite precursor solution (1.5 mol MAI and PbI2 in 1 ml mixed solvent of DMF and DMSO, 9:1 v/v) at 4000 rpm for 25 s and dropping 300 μl antisolvent (DE or CBZ) ∼1 second before the turbid point. The perovskite films were then heated at 100 °C for 5 min. To study the SCIC and observe the turbid point, no antisolvent was applied. After the spin-coating process, the perovskite films were heated at 100 °C for 1 min. For the antisolvent with preheating, the perovskite precursor solution was diluted to 1.1 M, and both the chuck of the spin-coater and the SnO2 substrate were heated so that the substrate was spin-coated at the desired temperature. The chuck was made of aluminum and was directly heated by a hotplate without removing it from the spin-coater. After removing the hotplate, the temperature of the chuck was kept constant (within 5 °C) over 60 s after a slight temperature decrease in the first 20 s, which was adequate to finish the deposition of the perovskite films at the designed preheating temperature (40 °C or 70 °C). After the MAPbI3 films were deposited, the hole-transporting material (HTM) layer was spin-coated from a solution consisting of 72.3 mg spiro-MeOTAD, 28.8 μl 4-tert-butylpyridine, and 17.5 μl Li-TFSI solution (520 mg Li-TFSI in 1 ml acetonitrile) in 1 ml of chlorobenzene. Finally, 80 nm of Au top electrode was thermally evaporated onto the HTM layer. All the materials were stored and all solutions were prepared in the glovebox. Fabrication of the PSCs was conducted in ambient air except for the deposition of the HTM layers, which were spin-coated in the glovebox. It should be noted that the humidity level of the spin-coating chamber was controlled by introducing humid air. The humid air was obtained by flowing air through a flask filled with water. Control of the flow of humid air yielded different relative humidity levels. A temperature/humidity meter was used to monitor the relative humidity and temperature inside the spin-coating chamber.
4.3. Characterization
Top-view SEM images of the perovskite films were obtained using an FEI-Inspect F50, Holland. X-ray patterns of the perovskite films deposited on SnO2 were obtained using an X-ray diffractometer (Bruker D8 Advance A25). UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded with an ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-3101 PC). Time-resolved PL measurements were carried out using a Rudower Chaussee 29 (PicoQuant GmbH). The exciting wavelength was 510 nm. J–V curves were recorded using a Keithley 2400 instrument under AM 1.5 G illumination (1000 W m−2) from a solar simulator (Newport Oriel Solar 3 A Class AAA, 64023 A). The AM 1.5 G sunlight (100 mW cm−2) was calibrated using a standard Si-solar cell (Oriel, VLSI Standards). The active area for the solar cells was 0.04 cm2. Metallographic microscopy was conducted using an MZ5000 instrument (Jiangnan Yongxin). Videos were taken using a portable camera (Huawei, V8). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were measured using a QTEST HIFINITY 5 (Crowntech).
Author contributions
F. W. and T. Z. designed the experiments. Z. D. C., Y. W.§, and S. L. supervised the project. F. W., T. Z., Y. W.‡, D. L. and P. Z. prepared the perovskite films and solar cells. F. W., H. C., L. J., and X. L. performed the characterizations. F. W., L. C. and Y. L. analyzed the data. F. W. and J. W. wrote the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under grant No. 61421002, 61874150, 61574029, and 61471085. This work was also partially supported by Advanced Semiconductor Processing Technology LLC, Lexington, Kentucky, USA.
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
NREL chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/pv-efficiencies-07-17-2018.pdf, accessed, 2018.
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. Il Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
H. Tan, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, F. P. G. De Arquer, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Yuan, B. Zhang, Y. Zhao, F. Fan, P. Li, L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, Z. H. Lu, Z. Yang, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2017, 355, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, B. W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. Il Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, H. Na, E. H. Jung, T. Y. Yang, Y. G. Lee, G. Kim, H. W. Shin, S. Il Seok, J. Lee and J. Seo, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 682 CrossRef CAS .
D. Luo, W. Yang, Z. Wang, A. Sadhanala and Q. Hu, Science, 2018, 360, 1442–1446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Wu, P. Zhang, D. Liu, T. Zhang, L. Ji, X. Gu, Z. David Chen and S. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 616–625 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Ko, J. W. Lee and N. G. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8808–8815 RSC .
J. Troughton, K. Hooper and T. M. Watson, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 60–68 CrossRef CAS .
T. Singh and T. Miyasaka, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–9 Search PubMed .
K. L. Wu, A. Kogo, N. Sakai, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 321–323 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lei, V. O. Eze and T. Mori, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 54, 100305 CrossRef .
B. Jeong, S. M. Cho, S. H. Cho, J. H. Lee, I. Hwang, S. K. Hwang, J. Cho, T. W. Lee and C. Park, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2016, 10, 381–387 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, L. Zhu, J. Shi, X. Xu, J. Xiao, J. Dong, H. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 112–118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tai, P. You, H. Sang, Z. Liu, C. Hu, H. L. W. Chan and F. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cheng, X. Xu, Y. Xie, H. W. Li, J. Qing, C. Ma, C. S. Lee, F. So and S. W. Tsang, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1700097 CrossRef .
F. Wang, Z. Ye, H. Sarvari, S. M. Park, A. Abtahi, K. Graham, Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, Z. D. Chen and S. Li, J. Power Sources, 2019, 412, 359–365 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wozny, M. Yang, A. M. Nardes, C. C. Mercado, S. Ferrere, M. O. Reese, W. Zhou and K. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4814–4820 CrossRef CAS .
C. Aranda, C. Cristobal, L. Shooshtari, C. Li, S. Huettner and A. Guerrero, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 540–547 RSC .
K. Sveinbjörnsson, K. Aitola, J. Zhang, M. B. Johansson, X. Zhang, J. P. Correa-Baena, A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo and E. M. J. Johansson, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16536–16545 RSC .
N. Ahn, D. Y. Son, I. H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N. G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. Il Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y. B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9898–9903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Patton, Z. Tang, Y. Rong, H. Graham, X. Zhong, A. M. Guloy, Y. Jing, Y. Yao, S. Venkatesan and Y. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10595–10599 RSC .
T. Zhang, J. Wu, P. Zhang, W. Ahmad, Y. Wang, M. Alqahtani, H. Chen, C. Gao, Z. D. Chen, Z. Wang and S. Li, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
M. Yang, Z. Li, M. O. Reese, O. G. Reid, D. H. Kim, S. Siol, T. R. Klein, Y. Yan, J. J. Berry, M. F. A. M. Van Hest and K. Zhu, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17038 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, C. Bao, F. Li, T. Yu, J. Yang, W. Zhu, X. Zhou, G. Fu and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9110–9117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Adhikari, A. Dubey, E. A. Gaml, B. Vaagensmith, K. M. Reza, S. A. A. Mabrouk, S. Gu, J. Zai, X. Qian and Q. Qiao, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2693–2703 RSC .
L. Contreras-Bernal, C. Aranda, M. Valles-pelarda, T. T. Ngo, S. Ramos-terrón, J. Gallardo, J. Navas, A. Guerrero, I. Mora-sero, J. Idigoras and J. A. Anta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 5341–5348 CrossRef CAS .
B. Conings, A. Babayigit, T. Vangerven, J. D'Haen, J. Manca and H. G. Boyen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19123–19128 RSC .
L. Ling, S. Yuan, P. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Tu, J. Wang, Y. Zhan and L. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5028–5034 CrossRef CAS .
C.-G. Wu, C.-H. Chiang, Z.-L. Tseng, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2725–2733 RSC .
C. H. Chiang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and C. G. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 808–817 RSC .
A. Frezzotti, Boundary conditions at the vapor-liquid interface, Phys. Fluids, 2011, 23, 030609 CrossRef .
R. M. van Hardeveld, P. L. J. Gunter, L. J. van IJzendoorn, W. Wieldraaijer, E. W. Kuipers and J. W. Niemantsverdriet, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1995, 84, 339–346 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Heo, D. H. Song and S. H. Im, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8179–8183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Lamer and R. H. Dinegar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1950, 72, 4847–4854 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, H. Tan, H. Yuan, Z. Yang, J. Z. Fan, J. Kim, O. Voznyy, X. Gong, L. N. Quan, C. S. Tan, J. Hofkens, D. Yu, Q. Zhao and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1607 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ummadisingu, L. Steier, J. Y. Seo, T. Matsui, A. Abate, W. Tress and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2017, 545, 208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. Eckertova, Physics of thin films, Plenum Publishing Corporation, New York,  1977 Search PubMed .

          J. A. Venables, Introduction to Surface and Thin Film Processes, World Publish Corporation, Beijing,  2003 Search PubMed .
M. A. Floriano and C. A. Angell, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 4199–4202 CrossRef CAS .
I. Pászli and K. László, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2007, 285, 1505–1508 CrossRef .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J. D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, A. Rajagopal and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704418 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Yang, J. Meng, H. Liu, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16177 CrossRef .
J. You, Y. Yang, Z. Hong, T. B. Song, L. Meng, Y. Liu, C. Jiang, H. Zhou, W. H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 183902 CrossRef .
S. G. Hashmi, D. Martineau, M. I. Dar, T. T. T. Myllymäki, T. Sarikka, V. Ulla, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12060–12067 RSC .
A. Dubey, N. Kantack, N. Adhikari, M. Reza, S. Venkatesan, M. Kumar, D. Khatiwada, S. Darling and Q. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 10231–10240 RSC .
D. T. Gangadharan, Y. Han, A. Dubey, X. Gao, B. Sun, Q. Qiao, R. Izquierdo and D. Ma, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700215 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta02566a‡ Yafei Wang is a PhD student at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China.§ Yafei Wang is a professor at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The dependence of SCIC on humidity. (a) Schematic of the appearance changes of the MAPbI3 films during spin-coating. The appearance changes from transparent to turbid after seconds of spin-coating. (b) Images of the MAPbI3 films during spin-coating in atmospheres with different RH levels (∼25 °C): 0% RH, 50% RH, 70% RH and 90% RH. The pictures in the bottom row are microscopic images of the prepared MAPbI3 films. The scale bar is 50 μm. (c) Turbid point as function of relative humidity (∼25 °C). (d) Photographs of the MAPbI3 films prepared at different RH levels.	 

 	Fig. 2  Evaporation-crystallization model of the effects of humidity on SCIC and the anti-solvent method. (a) Schematic model of the effects of humidity on solvent evaporation. The bottom layer is liquid (“L-liquid”), while the top layer is vapor (“L-vapor”). Between these two layers, there is a phase-transition thin layer (“L-trans”) consisting of both gas and liquid phases. Evaporation at a low RH level (left) and a high RH level (right) is shown. (b) Schematic model of the effects of humidity on SCIC processes. Three cases, including low RH (0%), medium RH (50%) and high RH (70%), are shown. C0 and Cs represent the initial concentration and super-saturation concentration, respectively. TP-L, TP-M, and TP-H represent the turbid points at low RH, medium RH and high RH, respectively. ΔCL, ΔCM, and ΔCH represent the super-saturation depths at low RH, medium RH and high RH, respectively. (c) A-windows to apply antisolvent in atmospheres with different RH levels (0% RH, 50% RH and 70% RH).	 

 	Fig. 3  SCIC tuning strategy and mechanism. (a) Morphologies of MAPbI3 films deposited in 90% RH atmosphere on substrates at temperatures of 25 °C, 40 °C and 70 °C, respectively. The scale bar is 25 μm. (b) Turbid point as function of substrate temperature at a humidity level of 90% RH (∼25 °C). (c) Schematic of the crystallization process. ΔG* and r* represent the critical free energy and critical nucleus radius of nucleation, respectively. ΔGv and ΔGS represent a volume term and a surface term of the free energy, respectively.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 4  Characterization of perovskite films prepared with and without preheating. (a) SEM images, (b) XRD patterns and (c) time-resolved PL kinetics of MAPbI3 films prepared using the antisolvent method with and without preheating. “P” denotes preheating.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photovoltaic performance of PSCs with the architecture ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3 layer/HTM/Au. (a) PCEs of PSCs with MAPbI3 films prepared by the antisolvent method with or without preheating using either DE (90% RH, ∼25 °C) or CBZ (70% RH, ∼25 °C) as the antisolvent. 15 cells were measured for each case. (b) J–V curves for the best cell under reverse scan (R) and forward scan (F). (c) External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum and integrated Jsc from the EQE curve and (d) tracking of the maximum power points for the best device. (e) PCE comparison (reverse scan) of PSCs prepared at various RH levels. Circles represent studies that do not specify the temperature of the humid environment. (f) Shelf life and stability in humid air (60% RH to 70% RH, ∼23 °C) for PSCs prepared with preheating at 90% RH (∼25 °C). “P” denotes preheating.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta02566a
‡ Yafei Wang is a PhD student at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China.
§ Yafei Wang is a professor at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
