A facile and green synthesis of colloidal Cu 2 ZnSnS 4 nanocrystals and their application in highly efficient solar water splitting   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA00257B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA00257B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4695-4709A facile and green synthesis of colloidal Cu2ZnSnS4 nanocrystals and their application in highly efficient solar water splitting†

        
          
            Mahesh 
            Suryawanshi‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Seung Wook 
            Shin‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Uma 
            Ghorpade
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Donghoon 
            Song
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Chang Woo 
            Hong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sang-Soo 
            Han
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jaeyeong 
            Heo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Soon Hyung 
            Kang
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Jin Hyeok 
            Kim
          
        
      *a
aOptoelectronics Convergence Research Center and Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Chonnam National University, 300, Yongbong-Dong, Buk-Gu, Gwangju 500-757, South Korea. E-mail: jinhyeok@chonnam.ac.kr;   Tel: +82-62-530-1709
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA
cNext-generation Pharmaceutical Research Center, Korea Institute of Toxicology (KIT), Daejeon, South Korea
dDepartment of Chemistry Education and Optoelectronics Convergence Research Center, Chonnam National University, 500-757, South Korea. E-mail: skang@jnu.ac.kr
Received 
      9th January 2017
    , Accepted 26th January 2017First published on 2nd February 2017AbstractThe development of solution-processable routes as well as compounds consisting of earth abundant elements is highly desirable to reduce the fabrication cost. Recently, kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) nanocrystals (NCs) have attracted great attention for photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting owing to their suitable low-cost, earth-abundancy and suitable band gap energy. However, the environmentally benign synthesis of high-quality CZTS NCs without toxic solvents remains elusive. Here, a green chemistry approach employing vegetable oil as a non-toxic solvent for the synthesis of monodisperse and size-tunable CZTS NCs is introduced for the first time. Additionally, the relationship between the abnormal size behavior of the CZTS NCs and the degree of decomposition in the vegetable oil using electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) measurements is elucidated for the first time. As a conceptual strategy, a ternary abundant compound based heterojunction nanostructure for efficient solar water splitting by introducing CZTS NCs onto 5 nm Zn(O,S) passivated layer/hydrothermally grown TiO2 nanorod arrays (TNRs) is designed and developed. Remarkably, this ternary CZTS NCs/Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrode shows a photocurrent density as high as 15.05 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V (vs. the NHE), which is the highest ever for previously reported CZTS NC-based photoelectrodes. The reasons for the enhanced PEC performance are discussed in detail based on different PEC characterizations. More importantly, this work reflects the sophistication of eco-friendly solution phase synthesized CZTS NCs without using any toxic chemicals as an earth abundant sensitizer and constitute a new paradigm towards the enhanced PEC performance with quantum dot based hetero-nanostructures.
Introduction
Kesterite copper–zinc–tin–sulfo-selenide based compounds, Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS), Cu2ZnSnSe4 (CZTSe) and Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe), have recently emerged as a promising candidate for photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting after their successful utilization as functional absorber materials in thin-film solar cells (TFSCs) as an alternative to Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2 (CIGSSe) and CuInS2 (CIS) compounds.1,2 These compounds exhibit a high absorption coefficient (>104 cm−1), and their easily tunable direct band gap energy ranges from 1.0 to 1.5 eV by adjusting their alloy composition.3–5 In addition, other properties, such as cost effectiveness, environmental benignity and the natural earth abundancy of their elements, make these compounds very attractive for efficient PEC water splitting.6,7 Reportedly, numerous vacuum- and non-vacuum-based synthetic methodologies have been employed to demonstrate the potential impact of the production environment on the use of these kesterite compounds as absorber layers in TFSCs. Surprisingly, the power-conversion efficiency (PCE) has increased significantly in the past few years, reaching a record high value of 12.7% for hydrazine-based solution-processed CZTSSe thin films.8 This rapid development in laboratory-scale techniques is the motivation underlying the development of scalable techniques compatible with industrial mass production.
Among the several non-vacuum-based synthetic methodologies available, colloidal CZTS nanocrystal (NC) ink is a highly desirable and emerging cost-effective strategy that is compatible with large-scale device-fabrication processes, such as roll-to-roll processes, spray coating and inkjet printing.5 Four different bottom-up approaches are promising for synthesizing CZTS NC inks: (i) hot injection, in which one or all precursors are injected into a pre-heated flask under an inert atmosphere; (ii) one-pot heat-up, in which all the precursors are heated in one pot under an inert atmosphere; (iii) hydrothermal/solvothermal, in which all precursors are heated in a sealed autoclave in a furnace or oven; and (iv) microwave, in which all the precursors are heated using microwave power in a reaction flask under an air atmosphere. The key finding of these studies suggested that the NCs synthesized using the microwave approach exhibit a wide particle size distribution and poor crystallinity and require further annealing at higher temperatures to improve the crystallinity. On the other hand, the NCs synthesized using hydrothermal/solvothermal approaches require a longer processing time and high spontaneous pressure and most of the NCs are heavily agglomerated and exhibit irregular sizes and shapes and thus are not suitable for homogenous ink formation.9 Currently, the hot-injection method is the most popular and effective among the four discussed here for the successful synthesis of CZTS NC inks because the resulting CZTS NCs have outstanding characteristics, such as high mono-dispersity, a controlled crystal structure, a narrow size distribution, and high shape uniformity. However, most synthetic studies investigating the synthesis of high-quality CZTS NCs using the hot-injection method involve the use of highly toxic, hazardous, unstable, and expensive solvents such as oleylamine (OLA), trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO), oleic acid (OA), and dodecanethiol (DDT) and generally require stringent inert conditions, which may increase the overall manufacturing costs and limit mass production. These weaknesses have led researchers to seek alternative green chemistry approaches that eliminate the use of unnecessary toxic raw materials and the formation of side products while producing NCs with similar features to those obtained via the conventional hot-injection method. In this context, the synthesis of a variety of NCs using green chemistry approaches has been achieved by many research groups.9,10,19 However, a universal green chemistry approach to synthesize high-quality CZTS NCs has not been reported to date. Table 1 summarizes the representative results for CZTS NCs obtained using different solvents.
Table 1 Summarized representative results of colloidal synthesis of CZTS NCs using different solvents




Solvents
Cation and anion source
Reaction temp. and time
Size (nm)
Nature of dispersity
Band gap energy (eV)
Ref.





a Oleylamine.
b Trioctylphosphine oxide.
c Oleic acid.
d Dodecanethiol.
e Octadecene.
f Octadecylamine.
g Ethylene glycol.





OLAa
Cu(acac)2, Zn(acac)2, Sn bis(acac)2, S powder
225 °C for 0.5 h
15–25
Poly-dispersive
1.5

11



OLA
Cu(acac)2, Zn(OAc)2, SnCl2, S powder
280 °C for 1 h
10.6 ± 2.9
Mono-dispersive
1.3

12



OLA
CuCl2, ZnCl2, SnCl2, thiourea
235 °C for 0.5 h
22.5 ± 2.0
Mono-dispersive
1.52

13



OLA, TOPOb
Cu(acac)2, Zn(OAc)2, Sn(OAc)2, S powder
300 °C for 0.75 h
12.8 ± 1.8
Mono-dispersive
1.5

14



OLA, OAc, DDTd
CuCl2, ZnCl2, SnCl4, DDT
240 °C for 1 h
20
Mono-dispersive
1.4

15



ODEe, OA
Cu2ZnSn(S2CNEt2)10
220 °C for 1 h
17
Poly-dispersive
1.55

16



OLA, DDT
Cu(acac)2, Zn(acac)2, Sn(acac)2, DDT
220 °C for 4 h
50
Mono-dispersive
1.49

17



ODE, ODAf, EGg
CuCl2, Zn(OAc)2, SnCl2,
220 °C for 1 h
6.5
Mono-dispersive
1.5

18



EG
CuCl2, ZnCl2, SnCl2, thiourea
190 °C for 4 h
25–150
Poly-dispersive
1.5

19




Vegetable oil


Cu(acac)

2

, Zn(acac)

2

, SnCl

2

, S powder


250 °C for 0.5 h


19.9 ± 3.1


Mono-dispersive


1.5


This work





In this paper, we first introduced a vegetable oil, an attractive but previously uninvestigated green and scalable solvent, as a reaction medium to reduce the negative environmental impacts and overall manufacturing costs of producing NCs (see the cost-effective calculation in the ESI†). Here, the vegetable oil was purchased from a commercial shop and was used without any additional treatment. As a solvent, vegetable oil is lower in cost and more environmentally benign than the toxic and expensive solvents used previously in the hot-injection method. Specifically, vegetable oil contains many fatty acids with long carbon chains, such as triglycerides consisting of oleic acid, α-linolenic acid, linoleic acid, stearic acid, and palmitic acid, as shown in Fig. 1; thus, it is a promising coordinating solvent for the phosphine-free synthesis of CZTS NCs.20 Additionally, the boiling point of vegetable oil is near 300 °C, which is suitable for strong heating conditions, and it is liquid at room temperature with relatively low viscosity, which facilitates easy ligand exchange and molecular diffusion in the reaction medium. Thus, as an alternative to highly toxic organic phosphine ligands, using vegetable oil as a solvent allows the controlled growth of high-quality CZTS NCs at an elevated reaction temperature. The as-synthesized CZTS NCs exhibit a high quality of crystallinity, colloidal stability and size-controllable characteristics. It should be noted that this study is somewhat unique for quaternary copper chalcogenide NCs, and no previous attempt has been made to use vegetable oil as a solvent for the synthesis of monodisperse CZTS NCs with size-controllable characteristics.
 Fig. 1  Chemical structures of common solvents used in hot-injection processes (left panel) and vegetable oils, including different fatty acids (right panel). Vegetable oil comprises triglycerides with high levels of unsaturated fatty acids, such as linoleic, oleic, stearic, and palmitic acids. The cyan, lavender, red and yellow colors represent carbon (C), hydrogen (H), oxygen (O), and sulfur (S) atoms, respectively. 
Furthermore, as a conceptual strategy, we fabricated a one dimensional (1D)-structured system by introducing CZTS NCs and 5 nm thin atomic layer deposited Zn(O,S) onto hydrothermally grown TiO2 nanorod arrays (TNRs). The green chemistry approach synthesized CZTS NCs can act as an earth abundant sensitizer, which can harvest a maximum solar spectrum in the visible region and enables fast electron transportation to TNRs. Thus, by devising this novel 1D structured system of CZTS NCs with ligand exchange (LE)/Zn(O,S)/TNRs, a remarkable photocurrent density over 15 mA cm−2 with satisfactory stability was achieved, which is so far the highest photocurrent density for CZTS NC based photoelectrode based PEC systems (see Table 2). Furthermore, electrochemical characterizations have been carried out as well as a mechanism for enhanced PEC performance of various structured devices such as TNRs, CZTS NCs without (W/O) LE/TNRs, LE CZTS/TNRs, Zn(O,S)/TNRs, and LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNRs is also proposed to elucidate the enhanced PEC water splitting performance (see Scheme 1).
Table 2 Results of the representative reports in the literature on CZTS based water splitting devices




Type of CZTS
Photoelectrode
Electrolyte (M)
pH of the electrolyte
Applied potential (V vs. the RHE)
Photocurrent density (mA cm−2)
Stabilitya (min)
Ref.





a Stability showed much less current decay.





Thin film
CZTS/FTO
Eu(NO3)3, 0.2 M
—
−0.5 (Ag/AgCl)
1.8
No decay (6)

15



Nanocrystals
CZTS/Ag2S/TiO2
Eu(NO3)3, 1 M
—
0.5 (Ag/AgCl)
0.58
No decay (3)

34



Thin film
CZTS/CdS/AZO/TiO2/Pt
Na2SO4, 0.1 M
7
−0.2
2.5
55% (10)

35



Thin film
CZTS/CdS/In2S3/Pt
Na2SO4, 0.3 M
6.5
0.62 (Ag/AgCl)
4.5
95% (180)

36



Thin film
CZTS/CdS/TiO2
Eu(NO3)3, 0.2 M
—
−0.5
0.2
—

37



3D CZTS
3D CZTS/CdS/ZnO/steel (two storey nanostructure)
0.25 M Na2S and 0.35 M Na2SO4
12.5
0
12.59
—

38



Nanocrystal
TiO2/CdS/CZTS/ZnS/Pt
0.25 M Na2S and 0.35 M Na2SO4
12.35
1.23 (Ag/AgCl)
6.91
—

39



Thin film
CZTS/CdS/Pt
Na2HPO4, 0.2 M
10
0
1.2
No decay (150)

40



Nanocrystals
CZTSSe/FTO
Na2SO4, 0.1 M
3
−0.24
0.2
—

41



Nanocrystals
Au/CZTS core/shell
0.1 M EV(ClO4)2 and 0.1 M TBAPF in MeCN
—
0
0.06
No decay (1200)

42



Thin films
CZTS/Pt
Na2SO4, 0.6 M
6
−0.4
0.04
—

43



Nanosheet
FTO/CZTS/Pt
Na2SO4, 0.5 M
9.5
0
1.2
60% (210)

44



Thin film
CZTS/Pt
Na2SO4, 0.5 M
6
−0.2
0.7
—

45




Nanocrystal


CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TiO

2



Na

2

SO

4

, 0.1 M


6.8


1.23 (NHE)


15.05


67% (60)


Present work





 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the understanding of the enhanced PEC performance of TNR, W/O LE CZTS/TNR, LE CZTS/TNR, Zn(O,S)/TNR, and LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR devices and cascaded charge transfer mechanism in the CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR structure. Red color is used for the enhanced photocurrent factors, whereas blue color is used for the reduced photocurrent factors. 
Results and discussion
Characterization of vegetable oil-based synthesized CZTS NCs
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM) images were recorded to study the shape and structure of the synthesized NCs. Fig. 2 shows low- and high-magnification TEM and HR-TEM images of CZTS NCs synthesized at different reaction temperatures: 210 °C ((a), (e), and (i)), 250 °C ((b), (f), and (j)), 290 °C ((c), (g), and (k)), and 330 °C ((d), (h), and (l)), respectively. The NCs synthesized at the low reaction temperature of 170 °C are heavily agglomerated and exhibit irregular sizes and shapes with poor size distributions (Fig. S2†), suggesting that 170 °C is not an appropriate reaction temperature for the synthesis of monodisperse NCs. Indeed, a careful literature survey (Table 1) revealed that a minimum reaction temperature of 190 °C is required for the synthesis of monodisperse CZTS NCs. The low- and high-magnification TEM images indicated that the apparent sizes of NCs increased significantly as the reaction temperature was increased beyond 210 °C, except for those synthesized at 330 °C. All the NCs synthesized at reaction temperatures exceeding 210 °C have spherical shapes, as shown in the high-magnification TEM images. The crystallinity of the NCs was studied by HR-TEM, which showed that the NCs existed in kesterite form without any observable presence of other crystalline phases such as Cu2−xSx, ZnS, SnxSy, and Cu2SnS3 based compounds. As shown in the HR-TEM images in Fig. 2(i)–(l), individual NCs showed lattice fringes with a d-spacing value of 0.31 ± 0.01 nm, which corresponds to the (112) plane in the kesterite CZTS structure, regardless of the reaction temperature.21
 Fig. 2  Low-magnification and high-magnification TEM, and HR-TEM images of NCs synthesized at different reaction temperatures: ((a), (e), and (i)) 210 °C, ((b), (f), and (j)) 250 °C, ((c), (g), and (k)) 290 °C, and ((d), (h), and (l)) 330 °C, respectively. The TEM samples were prepared on carbon-meshed Ni grids by drop casting using NCs dispersed in toluene at room temperature. 
To investigate the homogeneity of the synthesized NCs, we determined the size distributions, average sizes, and standard deviations of the synthesized spherical NCs. Fig. 3 shows the size distribution graphs of NCs synthesized at different reaction temperatures: (a) 210 °C, (b) 250 °C, (c) 290 °C, and (d) 330 °C. The detailed analysis indicates that the synthesized NCs show the average sizes (Fig. 3(e)) of 13.25 ± 3.87 nm, 19.9 ± 3.10 nm, 28.73 ± 3.98 nm, and 26.12 ± 5.19 nm for reaction temperatures of 210 °C, 250 °C, 290 °C, and 330 °C, respectively. Surprisingly, Fig. 3(a)–(d) also show that the size of the NCs increased as the reaction temperature increased, except at 330 °C (Fig. 3(e)). Interestingly, the CZTS NCs synthesized at 250 °C showed high monodispersity and the lowest standard deviation among the reaction temperatures tested (Fig. 3(f)).
 Fig. 3  Size distributions of NCs synthesized at different reaction temperatures ((a) 210 °C, (b) 250 °C, (c) 290 °C, and (d) 330 °C) and (e) their average sizes and (f) standard deviations. 
Scanning transmission electron microscopy-energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (STEM-EDS) elemental mapping was applied to clarify the elemental distributions of the NCs synthesized at 250 °C, as displayed in Fig. 4. Cu, Zn, Sn, and S were homogenously distributed throughout the NCs without any apparent elemental aggregation or segregation, confirming the absence of NCs with different compositions or phases. Notably, this is the first synthesis of monodisperse CZTS NCs with such a narrow size distribution using inexpensive and environmentally benign vegetable oil as the solvent.
 Fig. 4  STEM-EDS elemental mapping results of NCs synthesized at 250 °C. All elements are well distributed in the NCs without elemental segregations. 
Table S1† shows the elemental compositions and composition ratios of NCs synthesized at different reaction temperatures using the EDS instrument installed on the TEM equipment. The composition ratios of all the CZTS NCs showed slightly Cu- and Sn-rich but Zn-poor compositions. A similar discrepancy in the Zn content was observed by Y. Liu et al.22 This discrepancy in the Zn content is attributed to different cationic precursor reactivities as well as the lower reactivity of Zn compared to those of Sn and Cu. Because of the higher reactivity of Cu and Sn with S relative to that of Zn, Cu ions nucleate first, and subsequently, Sn and Zn ions are introduced into the structures of the NCs during the crystal-growth stage, followed by Cu. This led to a lower Zn content in the synthesized NCs, which is in good agreement with the reported literature studies.11,17,22
The phase and oxidation states of the as-synthesized CZTS NCs were determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Raman spectroscopy, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Fig. 5(a) shows the XRD patterns of NCs synthesized at different reaction temperatures from 170 °C to 330 °C. To clearly match the crystal structures of the simulated and measured diffraction patterns, the XRD peaks are indexed to the different planes according to tetragonal CZTS (JCPDS No. 26-0575), tetragonal Cu2SnS3 (JCPDS No. 89-4717) and cubic ZnS (JCPPDS No. 80-0020) structures. The diffraction peak widths decrease with increasing reaction temperature upto 290 °C and further slightly increased at 330 °C, which suggests that the synthesis at higher reaction temperatures yields NCs with larger sizes and this is confirmed from the TEM images shown in Fig. 2. Although, the diffraction peak widths broaden at lower reaction temperatures, all XRD patterns match the expected diffraction pattern for the kesterite CZTS (JCPDS No. 26-0575, a = b = 5.43 Å and c = 10.88 Å) crystal structure.21 In addition, the several weak diffraction peaks at 33.26° [(200)], 69.3° [(008)] and 76.49° [(332)] are clearly resolved in NCs synthesized at 250 °C, 290 °C and 330 °C, indicating the unambiguous presence of kesterite CZTS.23 The full width at half maximum (FWHM) (Fig. S3(a)†) value of the diffraction peak from the (112) plane decreased as the reaction temperature increased, suggesting that the crystallinity of the NCs was enhanced at higher reaction temperatures. However, this value was increased at 330 °C, which is related to the decrease in the CZTS NC size (Fig. 2 and 3). Further crystallite sizes were extracted from the FWHM value of the (112) diffraction peak using the Debye–Scherrer equation. The crystallite sizes are found to be 6.91, 12.32, 18.42, 28.41, and 26.36 nm for reaction temperatures of 170 °C, 210 °C, 250 °C, 290 °C, and 330 °C, respectively, which are in good agreement with the TEM results. However, XRD results alone often cannot confirm the presence of phase pure CZTS since the diffraction patterns of CZTS, Cu2SnS3 and ZnS overlap with each other.24 Therefore, the phase purity analysis of all the NCs synthesized at different reaction temperatures was supported by Raman spectroscopy, as shown in Fig. 5(b), which can provide a more definitive assignment of the structural purity of CZTS. Raman spectra of all NCs show the presence of a main Raman peak located at 337 cm−1 and a weak peak at 285 cm−1, which corresponds to the Al mode of the CZTS crystal structure.7,25 Raman scattering corresponding to Cu2S (475 cm−1), ZnS (350 cm−1), and SnS2 (315 cm−1) is not present. The intensity of the main Raman peak was enhanced, but its FWHM decreased (Fig. S3(b)†) as the reaction temperature increased. These effects were intensified at reaction temperature of 330 °C. No secondary phases were observed, confirming that all the synthesized NCs consisted of a pure kesterite CZTS phase. Based on the EDS, XRD and Raman results, we thus concluded that the NCs are phase pure CZTS within the detection limits of XRD and Raman scattering.
 Fig. 5  (a) XRD patterns and (b) Raman spectra of CZTS NCs synthesized at different reaction temperatures. The XRD peaks are indexed to the different planes according to the tetragonal CZTS (JCPDS No. 26-0575), tetragonal Cu2SnS3 (JCPDS No. 89-4717) and cubic ZnS (JCPPDS No. 80-0020) structures. 
XPS measurements were conducted to confirm the oxidation state of each element in the CZTS NCs synthesized at 250 °C. Fig. S4† shows the high-resolution (HR) XPS spectra of the four constituent elements, presenting Cu 2p, Zn 2p, Sn 3d, and S 2p core levels at a reaction temperature of 250 °C. Two distinct, narrow Cu 2p peaks appeared at 931.8 (2p3/2) and 951.5 eV (2p1/2), indicating the presence of Cu(I), which has a binding energy splitting of 19.7 eV.7,23,24 The peaks of Zn located at 1021.7 (2p3/2) and 1044.8 (2p1/2) eV with the characteristic peak separation of 23.1 eV confirmed the Zn(II) states.7,23,24 The Sn peaks at 486.5 (2d5/2) and 494.9 eV (2d3/2) with a peak splitting of 8.4 eV indicate the presence of Sn(IV).7,23,24 The S 2p peaks located at 161.7 (2p3/2) and 162.9 eV (2p1/2) are consistent with the binding energy of S in the sulfide state in CZTS.7,23,24
Ultraviolet (UV)-Vis absorption and room-temperature photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopies were used to evaluate the optical properties of the CZTS NCs. Fig. 6 shows the (a) absorbance and (b) room-temperature PL of CZTS NCs synthesized at different reaction temperatures. All CZTS NCs showed strong absorption in the visible region, suggesting their potential as light-absorbing materials (Fig. 6(a)). Additionally, the sharp absorption edge shifted towards longer wavelengths as the reaction temperature increased. The optical band gap energy (Eg) of the CZTS NCs was measured by the linear extrapolation of the (αhν)2 of the X-axis vs. photon energy (hν) plots, as shown in Fig. S5.† The Eg values of the CZTS NCs were estimated to be 1.35–1.6 eV, in good agreement with previously reported values.12–19 The values of Eg decreased as the reaction temperature increased, except for that at 330 °C. The intensities of the room-temperature PL peaks of the CZTS NCs were enhanced as the reaction temperature increased, except for that at 330 °C, at which the positions of the peaks shifted toward lower wavelengths, indicating decrease of the value of Eg. M. Li et al.17 reported the relationship between the diameter of CZTS NCs and their band gap energy and they found that the band gap values were gradually decreased from 2.01 to 1.49 eV with increase in the NC size from 10 to 40 nm. They attributed this narrowing of the band gap with increase in the NC size to the quantum size effect even though the CZTS NC sizes are larger than their Bohr radius (<5 nm). A similar tendency of band gap narrowing with increase in the CZTS NC size was observed in the current study and is attributed to the quantum size effect as reported by M. Li et al.17
 Fig. 6  (a) Absorbance and (b) room-temperature PL spectra of CZTS NCs synthesized at different reaction temperatures. The absorbance spectra were obtained using the diffuse reflectance spectra of the samples. 
Discussion: abnormal size behavior mechanism of CZTS NCs synthesized using vegetable oil as a solvent
The aforementioned experimental results yielded information about the successful synthesis of monodisperse CZTS NCs with abnormal size behavior characteristics using vegetable oil as a non-toxic solvent. Generally, the size and shape-controllable characteristics of NCs obtained by the hot-injection method are strongly related to the following reaction parameters; (i) precursors, (ii) reaction temperature, and (iii) solvents. The precursors used to synthesize CZTS NCs in this study were the same as those reported in the literature, and therefore, their effects on the abnormal size behavior characteristics were not considered further. Additionally, the average sizes of the NCs increased with increasing reaction temperature, as reported frequently in the literature.13–19 However, the average sizes of the CZTS NCs synthesized here increased as the reaction temperature increased to 290 °C and then decreased at 330 °C. Finally, a solvent with long carbon chains can support the size and shape control of CZTS NCs synthesized using the hot-injection method. Vegetable oil, which was used as a solvent in these experiments, contains many long chain fatty acids, as shown in Fig. 1. Previous reports indicated that vegetable oil can be easily decomposed into many fatty acids with different numbers of carbons, such as oleic acid, α-linolenic acid, linoleic acid, stearic acid, and palmitic acid, at high reaction temperatures.20 Fig. S6† shows the photographs of vegetable oil before and after heat treatment at different temperatures. The color of the vegetable oil changed from transparent yellow to black, suggesting that the single fatty acids were agglomerated to a very viscid solution. Based on the above experimental results and discussion, we hypothesized that the reaction temperature and decomposition degree of the vegetable oil during the reaction process were critical parameters for the novel abnormal size behavior characteristics of the CZTS NCs and that they exhibited inverse relationships.
To clearly demonstrate the abnormal size behavior characteristics and surface chemistry of the synthesized CZTS NCs, we measured the ATR-FTIR spectra of pure vegetable oil, the intermediate reaction complex, and the synthesized CZTS NCs and the ESI-MS of vegetable oil before and after heat treatment at different temperatures. Fig. 7 shows the ATR-FTIR spectra of monomeric vegetable oil, the intermediate reaction complex and the synthesized CZTS NCs at a reaction temperature of 250 °C. The intermediate reaction complex was a precursor solution after heat treatment at 150 °C for 30 min. The characteristic absorption bands of the hydrocarbon groups can be clearly seen in all spectra. A weak vinyl C–H stretching band located at 3009 cm−1 indicates that some oleic acid remains on the NC surface.26 The bands at 2850–3000 cm−1 are ascribed to the CH2 and CH3 symmetric and asymmetric stretching vibrations, whereas those at 1464 cm−1 are attributable to the CH2 bending vibration.26 The main absorption bands at 1744 cm−1 and 1160 cm−1 are assigned to the CO and C–O–C stretching modes of the carbonyl and ester functionalities, respectively.27 The bands at 1744 cm−1 and 1377 cm−1 correspond to the CO stretching and symmetric COO− stretching modes, respectively28 and that at 722 cm−1 is assigned to the C–H out-of-plane stretching of the saturated carbon–carbon bonds.29 Thus, all the absorption bands in the ATR-FTIR spectra are in good agreement with the structure of triglycerides bearing unsaturated fatty acids and oleic acids. Notably, the bending bands of the intermediate complex and the synthesized CZTS NCs are slightly shifted to lower wavelengths relative to those of vegetable oil. This phenomenon was previously reported in OLA-capped NCs30,31 and might be attributable to the subsequent constraint of the capping ligand motions and the interaction between carbonyl functional groups and the CZTS NCs. Overall, these ATR-FTIR features indicate that the surfaces of the CZTS NCs are capped by poly-fatty acids and triglycerides resulting from the decomposition of vegetable oil during the reaction process.
 Fig. 7  ATR-FTIR spectra of vegetable oil, the intermediate complex, and the CZTS NCs synthesized at 250 °C. The intermediate complex was a mixture of the precursor solutions heated for 30 min at 150 °C. 

Fig. 8 shows the ESI-MS spectra of pure vegetable oil before and after heat treatment at temperatures of 250 °C, 290 °C, and 330 °C for 10 min and Fig. S6† shows photographs of the corresponding samples. To better understand and explain these results, we divided the spectra into three regions: A (275–400 m/z), B (600–700 m/z), and C (850–950 m/z). Each region corresponded to various components of the vegetable oil: the single-molecule fatty acids, such as oleic acid, α-linolenic acid, linoleic acid, stearic acid, and palmitic acid (Region A); poly-molecule fatty acids (Region B); and triglycerides (Region C).20,32,33 The vegetable oils before and after heat treatment at 150 °C, 170 °C, 210 °C, and 250 °C (Fig. 8 and S7†) showed abundant strong peaks located in Regions B and C and a few weak peaks located in Region A. Thus, the sample contains long carbon chains, and the particle nuclei can be fully covered by fatty acids with long carbon chains in the initial reaction stage. Surprisingly, in addition to the peaks in Regions B and C, the presence of several peaks in Region A for the vegetable oil after heat treatment at 290 °C was observed (Fig. 8). This finding suggested that near the boiling point, the triglycerides were decomposed to single or poly-fatty acids. Heat treatment of the vegetable oil at 330 °C resulted in many single-molecule fatty acids and a smaller proportion of poly-fatty acids (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  ESI-MS spectra of vegetable oil after heat treatment at different temperatures for 10 min. The ranges for each region are A (275–400 m/z), B (600–700 m/z), and C (850–950 m/z). 
Based on the decomposition behavior of vegetable oil after heat treatment at different temperatures, the interesting abnormal size behavior characteristics of CZTS NCs with increasing reaction temperature can be explained as follows. The average size of the CZTS NCs increased as the reaction temperature increased to 290 °C but decreased at 330 °C (Fig. 2 and 3). In contrast, the values of the standard deviation of the average size of the CZTS NCs showed the opposite trend with respect to the reaction temperature (Fig. 3). At reaction temperatures, as high as 250 °C, the triglycerides and poly-fatty acids with long carbon chains present in the vegetable oil fully cover the CZTS NCs during the reaction process. In addition, they may facilitate easy ligand exchange and molecular diffusion in the reaction medium, resulting in CZTS NCs that are monodisperse and uniform in size. Further increasing the reaction temperature to 290 °C increased the average size and standard deviation of the CZTS NCs compared to the values at 250 °C (Fig. 2 and 3). This behavior may be attributed to the decomposition of vegetable oil into single fatty acids, which have shorter carbon chains than triglycerides. Higher reaction temperatures led to CZTS NCs with larger average sizes. However, higher proportions of single fatty acids may correspond to larger standard deviations in the average sizes of the CZTS NCs for reaction temperatures higher than 250 °C. Finally, the decreased average sizes of the CZTS NCs and the higher standard deviations found at 330 °C were ascribed to the presence of single-molecule fatty acids, which cannot fully cover the CZTS nuclei during the initial reaction stage. In the absence of tightly binding ligands at higher reaction temperatures (290 and 330 °C), we expect a large standard deviation in the average size of the CZTS NCs, as confirmed by Fig. 3(f). Although we verified our hypothesis by achieving a detailed understanding of the decomposition behavior of vegetable oil after heat treatment at different reaction temperatures via ESI-MS characterization, the exact synthesis reaction mechanism remains unclear. Better understanding this mechanism would facilitate improving both the quality and processing of CZTS NCs. Therefore, more work is needed to completely elucidate the reaction mechanism of CZTS NC synthesis by hot injection with vegetable oil as a green solvent.
Application to the water splitting device as an earth abundant sensitizer
Preparation and characterization of the CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR PEC device
We designed the CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNRs in order to enhance the PEC performance in water splitting devices using compounds consisting of earth abundant elements. The previous CZTS NC based water splitting devices showed a poor photocurrent due to the (i) high recombination rate of photogenerated charge carriers, (ii) poor long term stability during water splitting reactions, and (iii) unfavorable band alignment between TiO2 and CZTS NCs, which may generate leakage current from CZTS to the electrolyte.34–39 Several approaches have been employed to introduce intermedium materials such as AgS2, Pt, In2S3, CdS, and ZnO between CZTS and the electrolyte34–39 and an enhanced PEC performance has been achieved as compared to that of using only CZTS based materials as a photoelectrode. Table 2 shows the summary of the results of the representative reports in the literature on PEC performances using CZTS and other conditions. Recently we have shown that the PEC of TNR devices can be enhanced by introducing thin atomic layer deposited Zn(O,S) as a passivation layer on TNRs because it can enhance the charge-separation and the charge-transfer process as well as the band alignment between Zn(O,S) and TNRs. Details on the effect of Zn(O,S) on the PEC performance of TNR and Zn(O,S)/TNR system can be found in ref. 46. These research results suggested that the designed and fabricated 1-dimensional (1D) nanostructures with suitable band alignments as well as earth abundant materials are a promising photoelectrode for improving the PEC water splitting performance.47 Herein, we introduce green chemistry approach synthesized CZTS NCs as an earth abundant sensitizer for highly efficient PEC performance using a 1D nanostructured Zn(O,S)/TNR system. Scheme S1† depicts the green chemistry approach for the synthesis of CZTS NCs, ligand exchange processes, and fabrication of the 1D nanostructured CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrode system. Details on the ligand exchange and the fabrication process of the PEC device can be found in the experimental detail part in the ESI.†
As shown in Scheme S1,† vertically aligned TNRs were directly grown on a F-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate. The TNRs had a diameter in the range from 80 to 120 nm and an average length of ∼2 µm (Fig. S8(a) and (b)†). Subsequently, a 5 nm thin Zn(O,S) layer was deposited using the atomic layer deposition method to ensure uniform coating over the surface of the TNRs. Finally, to efficiently immobilize the CZTS NCs onto both the TNR and Zn(O,S)/TNR structures with a high loading, ligand exchange (LE) with thioglycolic acid was carried out via a hydrolysis procedure to remove the long hydrocarbon chains and convert CZTS NCs into a water-soluble material, which is proved by ATR-FTIR characterization of without and with LE CZTS NCs (Fig. S9(a)†) and the low and high magnification TEM images of LE CZTS NCs are shown in Fig. S9(b).† CZTS NCs without and with the LE process will be denoted hereafter as W/O LE CZTS NCs and LE CZTS NCs, respectively. These water-soluble LE CZTS NCs were grafted homogeneously over both the TNRs and Zn(O,S)/TNR structures by a simple dip coating method. It is found that LE CZTS NCs are uniformly coated on the surface of TNRs as well as on the surface of the Zn(O,S)/TNR structure. The cross-sectional FE-SEM images shown in Fig. S8(d) and (f)† show that the LE CZTS NCs were homogeneously distributed over the whole TNRs and Zn(O,S)/TNRs.

Fig. 9 shows the typical TEM image of the LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR structure, from which it is clearly observed that the TNRs are completely encapsulated by thin Zn(O,S) and CZTS sheaths. The HR-TEM image (Fig. 9(b)) clearly reveals the three different interfaces of TNRs, Zn(O,S) and LE CZTS NCs. Additionally, the homogenous coatings of LE CZTS NCs onto Zn(O,S)/TNRs were further characterized using the STEM high angle annular dark-field (HAADF) mode image and STEM-EDS elemental mapping as shown in Fig. 9(c), which illustrates the uniform signals from Ti, O, Cu, Zn, Sn and S elements ensuring the homogenous distribution of LE CZTS NCs on Zn(O,S)/TNRs. Moreover, the TEM, HR-TEM and STEM-EDS elemental mapping of the LE CZTS/TNR structure were performed and the results are shown in Fig. S10.† The TEM image reveals the deposition of LE CZTS NCs directly onto TNRs; however, it was not possible to completely distinguish the uniform distribution of LE CZTS NCs onto TNRs due to the overlapping of CZTS onto TNRs (Fig. S10(a) and (b)†). Nevertheless, the homogenous coatings of LE CZTS NCs onto TNRs were identified using the STEM-EDS elemental mapping as shown in Fig. S10(c).†
 Fig. 9  (a) High-magnification TEM and (b) HR-TEM images of the CZTS NCs/Zn(O,S)/TNR structure, and (c) STEM high angle annular dark field (HAADF) mode image and STEM-EDS mapping of Ti, O, Cu, Zn, Sn, and S elements. 
The phase and optical properties of the obtained structures were investigated by XRD and UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (UV-Vis DRS), respectively. As shown in Fig. S11(a),† several sharp diffraction peaks located at 27.45°, 36.10°, 41.26°, 54.3°, 62.76°, 64.15°, and 69.09° correspond to the (110), (101), (111), (211), (002), (310), and (301) planes indicating the formation of the polycrystalline rutile TiO2 phase (JCPDS Card No. 75-1753).48 The absence of typical diffraction peaks of Zn(O,S) is due to the very thin layer. However, diffraction peaks at 28.53°, 47.33° and 56.17° are observed which correspond to the (112), (220), and (312) planes of kesterite phase CZTS (JCPDS Card No. 00-026-0575).48 Fig. S11(b)† shows the UV-Vis DRS spectra of TNR, LE CZTS/TNR, and LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR structures. The TNRs exhibit a strong absorption edge in the UV region with an absorption edge at approximately 410 nm. Moreover, the absorbance in the visible light region increases gradually after the grafting of LE CZTS NCs, owing to the visible light absorption from CZTS NCs. However, LE CZTS/TNRs and LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNRs show similar light absorption edges, implying no additional band gap transition induced by the Zn(O,S) thin layer. Thus, it is concluded that this significant enhancement in visible light absorption mainly originates from CZTS.
Performance of the earth abundant LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR 1D structured water splitting device
PEC measurements were performed using TNRs, LE CZTS/TNRs, and LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNRs as photoelectrodes. Fig. 10 shows (a) the linear sweep voltammograms (LSV) under dark conditions and upon light illumination, (b) the photon conversion efficiency, (c) the chopped LSV, (d) the incident photo-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE), and (e) the electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of TNR, LE CZTS/TNR, and LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR structures. Additionally, we have also measured the performance of W/O LE CZTS/TNR and Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrodes, and the results are shown in Fig. S12.† It is clearly observed that all the photoelectrodes exhibit a negligible background current under dark conditions. Upon illumination, the LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrode exhibits a remarkable photocurrent density of 15.05 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V (vs. the NHE), which is about 2.1 and 11 times that of LE CZTS/TNR (7.13 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V (vs. the NHE)) and TNR (1.39 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V (vs. the NHE)) photoelectrodes. Interestingly, this photocurrent density is the best value obtained among the CZTS NC or thin film based PEC devices in previous literature studies (Table 2). Furthermore, the photocurrent onset potential of TNRs (i.e. −0.639 V vs. the NHE) is gradually shifted to a positive onset potential of 0.096 V and 0.138 V vs. the NHE for LE CZTS/TNR and LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrodes (Fig. 10(a)), respectively. This enhancement in both the photocurrent density and the onset potential of LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNRs can be attributed most likely to higher light absorption by LE CZTS NCs as well as optimum coverage of visible light active CZTS NCs and faster electron transfer through favorable energy band alignment between each materials.49,50 The cascade faster electron transfer results from step-wise conduction band alignment, which is further explained in Scheme 1.
 Fig. 10  (a) Photocurrent densities–voltage (J–V) curve under dark and illumination with one sun conditions (100 mW cm−2 with AM 1.5G), (b) STH efficiency, (c) chopped on/off cycles, (d) incident photo-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) as a function of wavelength, (e) electrochemical impedance spectra of TNR, LE CZTS/TNR, and LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR structured devices and (f) steady-state photocurrent curves of LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNRs measured for 60 min. The electrolyte solution is Na2SO4 (pH 6.8). Here, all the CZTS NCs were used after the LE process. 

Fig. 10(b) shows the photo conversion efficiencies (i.e. solar energy to chemical fuel) of each photoelectrode as a function of applied bias. The LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrode exhibits a highest photo conversion efficiency of 6.94% at 0.64 V vs. the NHE, which is significantly higher than that of LE CZTS/TNRs (3.40% at 0.62 V vs. the NHE) and TNRs (0.61% at 0.043 V vs. the NHE). This proves that the enhanced PEC performance of the LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrode is related to the synergistic influence of the integration of Zn(O,S) and LE CZTS NCs with TNRs. Furthermore, the photo-response of TNRs, LE CZTS/TNRs, and LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNRs was investigated by measuring the LSV under chopped light illumination (Fig. 10(c)). From the chopped LSV, it is found that all these samples exhibit a rapid and reproducible photocurrent response with respect to the on/off cycles. The photocurrent density of these photoelectrodes under chopped light illumination follows an ascending order as TNRs < LE CZTS/TNRs < LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNRs, which demonstrates that the PEC performance is further enhanced after the integration of Zn(O,S) and CZTS NCs with TNRs (Fig. 10(c) and S12(b)†). Moreover, the steady vertical rising and falling photocurrent densities of the transient photocurrent response indicate decreased electron–hole pair recombination and quick charge transport in all these photoelectrodes.48
To further quantify the PEC splitting behavior and signify its relationship with light absorption, the incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) was measured, as shown in Fig. 10(d). The pristine TNRs exhibited a strong photo-response in the UV region (19.59% at 420 nm). The LE CZTS/TNR (51.94% at 510 nm) and LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR (69.42% at 510 nm) photoelectrodes showed a greater IPCE in both the UV and the visible region especially from 400 to 800 nm. This could be attributed to the enhancement in the light absorption by CZTS NCs (Fig. S11(b)†). Moreover, the LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrode exhibited an enhanced IPCE compared to that of the LE CZTS/TNR photoelectrode. These results signify the effectiveness of the LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrode, in which integration of CZTS as an earth abundant sensitizer can increase the light absorption in the visible region, and photo-induced electrons in CZTS can efficiently transfer to the TNRs via Zn(O,S). The obtained IPCE results are consistent with the UV-Vis absorption spectra. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) studies were carried out to investigate the charge transport in these photoelectrodes and the interfacial reaction resistance.51 The TNR, LE CZTS/TNR, and LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrodes were best-fitted to series resistance (Rs) and two RC-circuit models. The corresponding equivalent circuit model is shown in the inset of Fig. 10(e). Fitting of semicircles into Nyquist plots gives the impedance parameters and various resistance values, which are listed in Table S2.† It is clearly seen that a similar series resistance (Rs) of 71 Ω (±3 Ω) was obtained for all photoelectrodes. The RCE, which represents the interfacial resistance of the photoelectrode and FTO, is lowest in LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNRs among all the photoelectrodes. The lowest interfacial resistance in the LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrode can result in faster interfacial electron transfer, which is beneficial to the interfacial electron transfer from LE CZTS NCs to TNRs through the Zn(O,S) thin layer. Furthermore, the RCT, which represents the charge transfer resistance between the photoelectrode and electrolyte, dramatically decreased in the LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrode and the order of the RCT values measured is TNRs (1626 Ω) < LE CZTS/TNRs (438 Ω) < LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNRs (212 Ω). Most interestingly, the ternary LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrode exhibits the lowest RCT value, which suggests more effective photo-generated electron–hole separation and the lowest charge transfer resistance among all the photoelectrodes.51,52
When chalcogenide compounds are employed as a photoelectrode in PEC water splitting, stability is a major property in solar hydrogen generation systems. Therefore, the stability of our photoelectrode was investigated by testing the LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrode for 60 min under simulated sunlight illumination and the results are shown in Fig. 10(f). The photocurrent density of the LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrode decays to 10.08 mA cm−2 after 60 min and thereafter continues to very slightly decrease and remains at about 67% of its original value. The decay in the photocurrent density is probably attributed to the oxidative decomposition of CZTS due to direct exposure to an electrolyte. Furthermore, Fig. S12† shows the PEC performance, IPEC, and EIS characterization of TNR, W/O LE CZTS/TNR, and Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrodes. The PEC performance and quality of interface between the electrolyte and photoelectrodes under light illumination follow an ascending order as TNRs < W/O LE CZTS/TNRs < LE CZTS/TNRs < Zn(O,S)/TNRs < LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNRs. Details on the understanding of the highly enhanced PEC performance of each device will be demonstrated in the next paragraph. As photo-corrosion still remains in the LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrode, further efforts are being made to improve its PEC stability by surface modification of CZTS.
Understanding the highly enhanced PEC performance of the LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrode as compared to that of other structured photoelectrodes
The aforementioned experimental results yielded valuable information about the highly enhanced PEC performance of the LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrode as compared to those of other structured photoelectrodes. We designed various types of photoelectrodes such as TNRs, W/O CZTS/TNRs, LE CZTS/TNRs, Zn(O,S)/TNRs, and LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNRs in order to improve the PEC performance and quality of interface between the electrolyte and photoelectrode. The factors responsible for the reduced and enhanced photocurrent densities in each photoelectrodes are graphically illustrated in Scheme 1. In the case of TNRs, poor PEC performance was obtained among the various types of devices. The poor PEC performance is strongly related to the presence of high surface state densities and trap sites on the surface of TNRs (Scheme 1(a)). TNRs were prepared by a hydrothermal technique at a relatively low synthesis temperature of 190 °C and high defect densities are normally formed during the synthesis process and arranged to disordered atoms on the surface region due to the relatively low formation energy.53,54 The high surface state densities and trap sites on the surface of TiO2 nanostructures significantly affect the overall charge collection efficiency because they are strongly dependent on the recombination velocity and chemical reaction dynamics.55 The W/O LE CZTS/TNR and LE CZTS/TNR photoelectrodes show an enhanced photocurrent as compared to that of TNRs, suggesting the enhancement in the light absorption by CZTS NCs (Scheme 1(b) and (c) and Fig. S11(b)†). Additionally, the LE CZTS/TNR photoelectrode shows a higher PEC performance than the W/O LE CZTS/TNR photoelectrode. The difference between the W/O LE CZTS/TNR and LE CZTS/TNR photoelectrodes is long carbon chains including triglycerides (see Fig. 7 and S9†) and they make a no contact region between CZTS/TNRs and generate leakage current from the carbon ligand and CZTS NCs due to unfavorable band alignments.49,56 In the case of the Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrode (Scheme 1(d) and Fig. S12(c)†), the surface defects present onto TNRs could be effectively passivated by the deposition of 5 nm thin Zn(O,S) layer, which may reduce the recombination of charge carriers and thereby improves photo current density. Interestingly, EIS characterization (Fig. 10(e) and S12(c)†) of each photoelectrode shows a smaller semicircle diameter for the Zn(O,S) passivated TNR photoelectrode than that of the pristine Zn(O,S) TNR photoelectrode. This indicates the lowest charge transfer resistance between each layer.51,52 The abovementioned synergistic influence for enhancement of light absorbing behavior and passivated TNRs in the photoelectrode leads to the reduced recombination rate from defects on the TNR surface and the enhanced photo-current from CZTS NCs as the sensitizer, and finally, to highly enhanced PEC performance of the LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR device (Scheme 1(e)).
For better understanding of the enhanced PEC performance of the LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR device, the proposed cascade charge transfer mechanism is illustrated graphically in Scheme 1(f). The charge transfer between the respective semiconductors is revealed based on their band edge positions. The conduction band (CB) and valance band (VB) potentials suggest the Z-scheme band alignment for CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TiO2, which enables fast and efficient transfer of the photogenerated electrons within the three semiconductors. The enhanced PEC performance of LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNRs is attributed to the following three factors: (i) the strong light-harvesting capability resulted from CZTS NCs, (ii) reduced surface state traps from the passivation of the thin Zn(O,S) layer onto TNRs, and (iii) favorable band alignment at the interface among LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR photoelectrodes that accelerates the charge transfer due to the interfacial contact reinforcement. The CB of CZTS is more negative than that of Zn(O,S), which is almost similar to that of TiO2. Due to this step-wise band structure, the photogenerated electrons are quickly transferred sequentially from the CB of CZTS to Zn(O,S) to TiO2. Meanwhile the photogenerated holes on the VB side of TiO2 directly move to Zn(O,S) and then to the VB of CZTS. Thus, the electrons and holes move in a cascading fashion toward the surface of the platinum electrode (via an external circuit) and the electrode–electrolyte interface, respectively. Thus, owing to the versatility, the rational coupling of visible light harvesting as well as surface passivation components will enable the development of our model ternary photoelectrode for a visible light-induced efficient PEC water splitting system.
Conclusion
In summary, we have demonstrated an innovative green and economically viable synthetic strategy for the synthesis of monodisperse CZTS NCs using vegetable oil as a green solvent, thereby eliminating the need for conventional expensive, highly toxic and air-sensitive alkyl phosphines. XRD, Raman, TEM and XPS characterizations confirmed the outstanding characteristics of the CZTS NCs, which had an average size of 19.9 ± 3.1 nm at a reaction temperature of 250 °C. Our advances in developing a green synthetic strategy for monodisperse CZTS NCs using vegetable oil as a solvent derive from the interplay between the reaction temperature and the decomposition degree of the vegetable oil. The key finding of this study is that reaction temperatures above 250 °C lead to decomposition of the vegetable oil into single fatty acids with short carbon chain ligands, which decreased the average size and increased the standard deviation in the average size of the CZTS NCs. This finding confirms the utility of vegetable oil as a green solvent for the synthesis of monodisperse CZTS NCs using the hot-injection method for the first time. Moreover, the effectiveness of this CZTS NC as an earth abundant sensitizer in PEC water splitting has been examined. It is worth mentioning that the photocurrent density of 15.05 mA cm−2 obtained for the CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR structured system consisting of earth abundant elements is the highest among the reported CZTS-based photoelectrodes and is also among the highest compared to those of photoelectrodes in neutral media. Considering the impact of increasing energy scarcity and environmental pollution, this synthesis method for monodisperse CZTS NCs is expected to be a promising alternative generalized synthesis strategy for a variety of NCs and a possible pathway toward green chemistry-based energy-harvesting applications.
Experimental details
In a typical synthesis, stoichiometric amounts of copper(II) acetate, zinc acetate and tin(II) chloride were placed in a three-necked flask containing vegetable oil at room temperature and cycled between vacuum and nitrogen three times. Here, the vegetable oil was purchased from a commercial shop and was used without any additional treatment. Subsequently, the mixture was kept at 150 °C for 30 min and then heated to temperatures from 170 °C to 330 °C. At the desired temperature, the separately prepared sulfur precursor, which consisted of sulfur powder dissolved in vegetable oil, was injected. The reaction mixture was maintained at different temperatures for 30 min to allow sufficient growth of NCs. Then, the flask was allowed to cool naturally to room temperature. The as-synthesized NCs were washed three times by precipitation with ethanol and redispersed in toluene or chloroform. In order to fabricate the PEC device, we designed the earth abundant materials based CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR structure as a photoelectrode. TNRs were hydrothermally grown on a FTO substrate at 150 °C for 9 h and then a Zn(O,S) layer with 5 nm thickness was deposited by the atomic layer deposition technique at 120 °C on the TNRs. Finally, the Zn(O,S)/TNRs were immersed into water soluble CZTS NCs for 6 h at room temperature under dark conditions. The detailed experimental procedure and characterizations are given in the ESI.†
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a Human Resources Development grant (No. 20124010203180) from the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) funded by the Korean Government Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy and was partially supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (NRF-2015R1A2A2A01006856).
References
Q. Tian, L. Huang, W. Zhao, Y. Yang, G. Wang and D. Pan, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1269–1275 RSC .
A. H. Pinto, S. W. Shin, E. S. Aydil and R. L. Penn, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 5814–5821 RSC .
M. Dimitrievska, A. Fairbrother, R. Gunder, G. Gurieva, H. Xie, E. Saucedo, A. Perez-Rodriguez, V. Izquierdo-Roca and S. Schorr, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 8692–8700 RSC .
M. G. Gang, S. W. Shin, C. W. Hong, K. V. Gurav, J. Gwak, J. H. Yun, J. Y. Lee and J. H. Kim, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 700–711 RSC .
U. Ghorpade, M. Suryawanshi, S. W. Shin, K. Gurav, P. Patil, S. Pawar, C. W. Hong, J. H. Kim and S. Kolekar, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11258–11273 RSC .
M. P. Suryawanshi, G. L. Agawane, S. M. Bhosale, S. W. Shin, P. S. Patil, J. H. Kim and A. V. Moholkar, Mater. Tech., 2013, 8, 98–109 CrossRef .
M. P. Suryawanshi, S. W. Shin, U. V. Ghorpade, K. V. Gurav, C. W. Hong, G. L. Agawane, S. A. Vanalakar, J. H. Moon, J. H. Yun, P. S. Patil, J. H. Kim and A. V. Moholkar, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 150, 136–145 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, H. Hiroi, T. K. Todorov, O. Gunawan, M. Kuwahara, T. Gokmen, D. Nair, M. Hopstaken, B. Shin, Y. S. Lee, W. Wang, H. Sugimoto and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7427–7431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Ghorpade, M. Suryawanshi, S. W. Shin, I. Kim, S. K. Ahn, J. H. Yun, C. Jeong, S. S. Kolekar and J. H. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3308–3317 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ji, T. Shi, X. Qiu, J. Zhang, G. Xu, C. Chen, Z. Jiang and C. Ye, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2733 Search PubMed .
Q. Guo, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11672–11673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Steinhagen, M. G. Panthani, V. Akhavan, B. Goodfellow, B. Koo and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12554–12555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wei, Q. Du, D. Wang, W. Liu, G. Jiang and C. Zhu, Mater. Lett., 2012, 79, 177–179 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Riha, B. A. Parkinson and A. L. Prieto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12054–12055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, Z. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3141–3143 RSC .
C. Zou, L. Zhang, D. Lin, Y. Yang, Q. Li, X. Xu, X. Chen and S. Huang, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 3310–3313 RSC .
M. Li, W. H. Zhou, J. Guo, Y. L. Zhou, Z. L. Hou, J. Jiao, Z. J. Zhou, Z. L. Du and S. X. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 26507–26516 CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Sun, C. Shao, D. Boye and J. Zhao, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 245605 CrossRef PubMed .
U. V. Ghorpade, M. P. Suryawanshi, S. W. Shin, C. W. Hong, I. Y. Kim, J. H. Moon, J. H. Yun, J. H. Kim and S. S. Kolekar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 19777–19788 RSC .
E. C. Cabral, G. F. da Cruz, R. C. Simas, G. B. Sanvido, L. d. V. Goncalves, R. V. P. Leal, R. C. F. da Silva, J. C. T. da Silva, L. E. S. Barata, V. S. da Cunha, L. F. de Franca, R. J. Daroda, G. F. de Sa and M. N. Eberlin, Anal. Methods, 2013, 5, 1385–1391 RSC .
M. Suryawanshi, S. W. Shin, W. R. Bae, K. Gurav, M. G. Kang, G. Agawane, P. Patil, J. H. Yun, J. Y. Lee, A. Moholkar and J. H. Kim, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2014, 211, 1531–1534 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, D. Yao, L. Shen, H. Zhang, X. Zhang and B. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 17, 7207–7210 CrossRef PubMed .
M. P. Suryawanshi, S. W. Shin, U. V. Ghorpade, K. V. Gurav, G. L. Agawane, C. W. Hong, J. H. Yun, P. S. Patil, J. H. Kim and A. V. Moholkar, Sol. Energy, 2014, 110, 221–230 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Shin, S. M. Pawar, C. Y. Park, J. H. Yun, J.-H. Moon, J. H. Kim and J. Y. Lee, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 3202–3206 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Chernomordik, A. E. Beland, N. D. Trejo, A. A. Gunawan, D. D. Deng, K. A. Mkhoyan and E. S. Aydil, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10389–10395 CAS .
F. Kucuk Baloglu, S. Garip, S. Heise, G. Brockmann and F. Severcan, Analyst, 2015, 140, 2205–2214 RSC .
H. I. Ryoo, L. Y. Hong, S. H. Jung and D.-P. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6419–6421 RSC .
X. Liu, X. Lin, M. Wu, R. Lin, B. Li and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 4119–4129 RSC .
B. K. Wilt, W. T. Welch and J. G. Rankin, Energy Fuels, 1998, 12, 1008–1012 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dalui, A. H. Khan, B. Pradhan, J. Pradhan, B. Satpati and S. Acharya, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 97485–97494 RSC .
C. Dun, W. Huang, H. Huang, J. Xu, N. Zhou, Y. Zheng, H. Tsai, W. Nie, D. R. Onken, Y. Li and D. L. Carroll, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 30302–30308 CAS .
R. C. Simas, R. R. Catharino, I. B. S. Cunha, E. C. Cabral, D. Barrera-Arellano, M. N. Eberlin and R. M. Alberici, Analyst, 2010, 135, 738–744 RSC .
M. Li, E. Butka and X. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, J. Liu, A. Genc, M. Ibanez, Z. Luo, A. Shavel, J. Arbiol, G. Zhang, Y. Zhang and A. Cabot, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 10555–10561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Rovelli, S. D. Tilley and K. Sivula, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8018–8024 CAS .
F. Jiang, Gunawan, T. Harada, Y. B. Kuang, T. Minegishi, K. Domen and S. Ikeda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13691–13697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, P. Zhang, X. Song and L. Gao, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 21318–21324 RSC .
Y. W. Choi, M. K. Baek, Z. Zhang, V. D. Dao, H. S. Choi and K. J. Yong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15291–15299 RSC .
Y. Zhang, S. Ouyamg, Q. Yu, P. Li and J. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14057–14059 RSC .
Z. Guan, W. Luo, Y. Xu, Q. Tao, X. Wen and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5432–5438 CAS .
Y. B. Chen, C. H. Chuang, K. C. Lin, S. Shen, C. McCleese, L. Guo and C. Burda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 11954–11963 CAS .
E. Ha, Y. S. Lee, J. H. Wang, F. Li, K. Y. Wong and S. C. E. Tsang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3496–3500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guan, W. Luo and Z. Zou, CrystEngComm., 2014, 16, 2929–2936 RSC .
B. J. Li, P. F. Yin, Y. Z. Zhou, Z. M. Gao, T. Ling and Z. W. Du, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 2543–2549 RSC .
X. Wen, W. Luo and Z. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15479–15485 CAS .
S. W. Shin, M. P. Suryawanshi, H. K. Hong, G. Yun, D. H. Lim, J. Y. Heo, S. H. Kang and J. H. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 219, 470–481 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .
S. W. Shin, J. Y. Lee, K. S. Ahn, S. H. Kang and J. H. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 13375–13383 CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294–2320 RSC .
C. Li, T. Hisatomi, O. Watanabe, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, K. Domen and J. J. Delaunary, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1493–1500 CAS .
T. Lopes, K. Andrade, F. L. Formal, M. Gratzel, K. Sivula and A. Mendes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 16515–16523 RSC .
H. Chen, G. Liu and L. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Pu, Y. Ling, K. D. Chang, C. M. Liu, J. Z. Zhang, Y. H. Hsu and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 15086–15094 CAS .
T. McDowell, M. F. Lichterman, A. I. Carim, R. Liu, S. Hu, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15189–15199 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Hwang, C. Hahn, B. Liu and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5060–5069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, Z. R. Tang, Y. Sun, J. C. Colmenares and Y. K. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5053–5075 RSC .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: FWHM values of XRD and Raman peaks, XPS spectra, and band gap energy of CZTS NCs at different reaction temperatures. Extra characterization data of water splitting devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta00257b‡ M. P. Suryawanshi and S. W. Shin contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:


OLAa	Cu(acac)2, Zn(acac)2, Sn bis(acac)2, S powder	225 °C for 0.5 h	15–25	Poly-dispersive	1.5	
11

OLA	Cu(acac)2, Zn(OAc)2, SnCl2, S powder	280 °C for 1 h	10.6 ± 2.9	Mono-dispersive	1.3	
12

OLA	CuCl2, ZnCl2, SnCl2, thiourea	235 °C for 0.5 h	22.5 ± 2.0	Mono-dispersive	1.52	
13

OLA, TOPOb	Cu(acac)2, Zn(OAc)2, Sn(OAc)2, S powder	300 °C for 0.75 h	12.8 ± 1.8	Mono-dispersive	1.5	
14

OLA, OAc, DDTd	CuCl2, ZnCl2, SnCl4, DDT	240 °C for 1 h	20	Mono-dispersive	1.4	
15

ODEe, OA	Cu2ZnSn(S2CNEt2)10	220 °C for 1 h	17	Poly-dispersive	1.55	
16

OLA, DDT	Cu(acac)2, Zn(acac)2, Sn(acac)2, DDT	220 °C for 4 h	50	Mono-dispersive	1.49	
17

ODE, ODAf, EGg	CuCl2, Zn(OAc)2, SnCl2,	220 °C for 1 h	6.5	Mono-dispersive	1.5	
18

EG	CuCl2, ZnCl2, SnCl2, thiourea	190 °C for 4 h	25–150	Poly-dispersive	1.5	
19


Vegetable oil
	
Cu(acac)

2

, Zn(acac)

2

, SnCl

2

, S powder
	
250 °C for 0.5 h
	
19.9 ± 3.1
	
Mono-dispersive
	
1.5
	
This work


 	Fig. 1  Chemical structures of common solvents used in hot-injection processes (left panel) and vegetable oils, including different fatty acids (right panel). Vegetable oil comprises triglycerides with high levels of unsaturated fatty acids, such as linoleic, oleic, stearic, and palmitic acids. The cyan, lavender, red and yellow colors represent carbon (C), hydrogen (H), oxygen (O), and sulfur (S) atoms, respectively.	 


Thin film	CZTS/FTO	Eu(NO3)3, 0.2 M	—	−0.5 (Ag/AgCl)	1.8	No decay (6)	
15

Nanocrystals	CZTS/Ag2S/TiO2	Eu(NO3)3, 1 M	—	0.5 (Ag/AgCl)	0.58	No decay (3)	
34

Thin film	CZTS/CdS/AZO/TiO2/Pt	Na2SO4, 0.1 M	7	−0.2	2.5	55% (10)	
35

Thin film	CZTS/CdS/In2S3/Pt	Na2SO4, 0.3 M	6.5	0.62 (Ag/AgCl)	4.5	95% (180)	
36

Thin film	CZTS/CdS/TiO2	Eu(NO3)3, 0.2 M	—	−0.5	0.2	—	
37

3D CZTS	3D CZTS/CdS/ZnO/steel (two storey nanostructure)	0.25 M Na2S and 0.35 M Na2SO4	12.5	0	12.59	—	
38

Nanocrystal	TiO2/CdS/CZTS/ZnS/Pt	0.25 M Na2S and 0.35 M Na2SO4	12.35	1.23 (Ag/AgCl)	6.91	—	
39

Thin film	CZTS/CdS/Pt	Na2HPO4, 0.2 M	10	0	1.2	No decay (150)	
40

Nanocrystals	CZTSSe/FTO	Na2SO4, 0.1 M	3	−0.24	0.2	—	
41

Nanocrystals	Au/CZTS core/shell	0.1 M EV(ClO4)2 and 0.1 M TBAPF in MeCN	—	0	0.06	No decay (1200)	
42

Thin films	CZTS/Pt	Na2SO4, 0.6 M	6	−0.4	0.04	—	
43

Nanosheet	FTO/CZTS/Pt	Na2SO4, 0.5 M	9.5	0	1.2	60% (210)	
44

Thin film	CZTS/Pt	Na2SO4, 0.5 M	6	−0.2	0.7	—	
45


Nanocrystal
	
CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TiO

2

	
Na

2

SO

4

, 0.1 M
	
6.8
	
1.23 (NHE)
	
15.05
	
67% (60)
	
Present work


 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the understanding of the enhanced PEC performance of TNR, W/O LE CZTS/TNR, LE CZTS/TNR, Zn(O,S)/TNR, and LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR devices and cascaded charge transfer mechanism in the CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR structure. Red color is used for the enhanced photocurrent factors, whereas blue color is used for the reduced photocurrent factors.	 

 	Fig. 2  Low-magnification and high-magnification TEM, and HR-TEM images of NCs synthesized at different reaction temperatures: ((a), (e), and (i)) 210 °C, ((b), (f), and (j)) 250 °C, ((c), (g), and (k)) 290 °C, and ((d), (h), and (l)) 330 °C, respectively. The TEM samples were prepared on carbon-meshed Ni grids by drop casting using NCs dispersed in toluene at room temperature.	 

 	Fig. 3  Size distributions of NCs synthesized at different reaction temperatures ((a) 210 °C, (b) 250 °C, (c) 290 °C, and (d) 330 °C) and (e) their average sizes and (f) standard deviations.	 

 	Fig. 4  STEM-EDS elemental mapping results of NCs synthesized at 250 °C. All elements are well distributed in the NCs without elemental segregations.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) XRD patterns and (b) Raman spectra of CZTS NCs synthesized at different reaction temperatures. The XRD peaks are indexed to the different planes according to the tetragonal CZTS (JCPDS No. 26-0575), tetragonal Cu2SnS3 (JCPDS No. 89-4717) and cubic ZnS (JCPPDS No. 80-0020) structures.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Absorbance and (b) room-temperature PL spectra of CZTS NCs synthesized at different reaction temperatures. The absorbance spectra were obtained using the diffuse reflectance spectra of the samples.	 

 	Fig. 7  ATR-FTIR spectra of vegetable oil, the intermediate complex, and the CZTS NCs synthesized at 250 °C. The intermediate complex was a mixture of the precursor solutions heated for 30 min at 150 °C.	 

 	Fig. 8  ESI-MS spectra of vegetable oil after heat treatment at different temperatures for 10 min. The ranges for each region are A (275–400 m/z), B (600–700 m/z), and C (850–950 m/z).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) High-magnification TEM and (b) HR-TEM images of the CZTS NCs/Zn(O,S)/TNR structure, and (c) STEM high angle annular dark field (HAADF) mode image and STEM-EDS mapping of Ti, O, Cu, Zn, Sn, and S elements.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Photocurrent densities–voltage (J–V) curve under dark and illumination with one sun conditions (100 mW cm−2 with AM 1.5G), (b) STH efficiency, (c) chopped on/off cycles, (d) incident photo-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) as a function of wavelength, (e) electrochemical impedance spectra of TNR, LE CZTS/TNR, and LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNR structured devices and (f) steady-state photocurrent curves of LE CZTS/Zn(O,S)/TNRs measured for 60 min. The electrolyte solution is Na2SO4 (pH 6.8). Here, all the CZTS NCs were used after the LE process.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: FWHM values of XRD and Raman peaks, XPS spectra, and band gap energy of CZTS NCs at different reaction temperatures. Extra characterization data of water splitting devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta00257b
‡ M. P. Suryawanshi and S. W. Shin contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
