A hierarchical thermal interface material based on a double self-assembly technique enables efficient output power via solar thermoelectric conversion ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA00818A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA00818A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 10452-10465A hierarchical thermal interface material based on a double self-assembly technique enables efficient output power via solar thermoelectric conversion†

        
          
            Yueyang 
            Gao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Minghang 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yexiang 
            Cui
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Di 
            Bao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Fei 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaosong 
            Shen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yanji 
            Zhu
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Huaiyuan 
            Wang
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Chemical Engineering, Department of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China. E-mail: huaiyuanwang@tju.edu.cn
bCollege of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Northeast Petroleum University, Daqing 163318, China
cTianjin Key Lab Composite & Functional Materials, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China
Received 
      29th January 2022
    , Accepted 25th March 2022First published on 13th April 2022AbstractThe solar thermoelectric generator (STEG) device, which provides electricity from solar irradiation power based on the Seebeck effect is a promising strategy for clean solar energy utilization. The integration of thermal interface materials (TIMs) and modified STEG enables efficient thermal conduction and conversion for sustainable energy output, further rendering the inverse application as the semiconductor cooler based on the Peltier effect. However, the limited output power density (<50 W m−2) results from the deficient thermal conductive property of TIMs still restricting the widespread application of STEG. Herein, a structured TIM with oriented percolating networks is fabricated through a double self-assembly technique, exhibiting a high in-plane thermal conductivity of 35.29 W m−1 K−1. These microstructure characteristics enable well-developed thermoconductive pathways with low thermal resistance, allowing concentrated thermal energy to be efficiently distributed through the TIM. In the robot-based thermal management test system, a nearly 13.5 °C decrease in the transmission chip is obtained from this TIM when compared to the commercial product. Furthermore, a distinguished output power density of 165.8 W m−2 is also achieved in the STEG device by real-environment solar-thermoelectric conversion, which is comparable to some commercial photovoltaic devices. This study not only exhibits potential prospects in advanced thermal management systems but also provides prospective alternatives for high electricity supply from solar energy.
1 Introduction
The energy coming from the solar irradiation on the earth within an hour is far more than the energy consumed by the entire human race during a whole year. Regarded as one of the most promising and abundant sources, solar energy provides large number of options together with little environmental impacts.1,2 Currently, two main approaches have been developed to directly convert the solar energy into electricity for practical applications. The former is the photovoltaic technique, which is based on the electron–hole pair generation to fulfill the solar-electric conversion process.2,3 Such a commercial technology includes photovoltaic solar panels, which can engender the average power density over 100 W m−2.4,5 The latter method includes the solar thermoelectric generator (STEG) device, which requires the temperature difference transformed from the solar-thermal conversion effect to produce the voltage potential based on the Seebeck effect.6–11 At present, the combination of thermal interface materials (TIMs) with STEG devices instead of directly applying incident solar irradiation on the thermoelectric (TE) module has huge advantages, due to the fact that TIMs could greatly improve the conversion efficiency through uniform heat conduction on the module interface.12 Therefore, with the help of the rapid transfer of heat flux and reduced thermal resistance, more semiconductor devices inside the TE module can be activated via sufficient thermal energy for higher electricity generation. Nevertheless, the current TIM-based STEG device is still obstructed by the low output power density, which could be attributed to the poor thermal management performance of the thermal interface material (TIM) and the inferior design of the STEG system.
Specifically, the localized region with powerful sunlight irradiation enables high photothermal conversion and a significant temperature rise. However, the charging rate of the photothermal energy is still unsatisfactory due to the poor intrinsic thermal conductivity of the pure polymer (<0.5 W m−1 K−1).13 Moreover, the thermal conduction rate between the solid–solid thermal interfaces should also be investigated since the captured energy in TIMs need to be discharged into the solid-state TE module efficiently. To explain it further, when a thermal conductive material is directly attached to the TE device, the resulting interfacial thermal resistance (ITR) between the matting surfaces is nonnegligible because the interfacial micro-gaps are filled with nonflowing air with extremely low thermal conductivity (≈0.026 W m−1 K−1).14 Furthermore, when the TE device is inversely applied as the semiconductor cooler on the basis of the Peltier effect,15 a high-performance TIM with flexible property is also required since the generated joule heat needs to be dissipated efficiently into the heat sink. Therefore, TIM, which behaves efficiently and has multidirectional thermo-conductive properties plays a significant role in the thermal management system.
Currently, the general method to obtain thermal interface materials is by the blending of inorganic filler with a polymer matrix. Numerous efforts have been made in order to tackle the divergent phonon vibrational modes within the interfaces between the filler and matrix, such as taking advantage of fillers with synergistic aspects,16,17 constructing 3D connected network,18–20 and forming filler scaffold.21,22 However, these methods, which require elaborate techniques in the fabrication process impeded the large-scale production of effective TIMs. Furthermore, some of the engineering techniques based on chemically exfoliating or mechanically cleaving methods to obtain graphene (GR) with ultrahigh intrinsic thermal conductivity (TC) are also difficult for the fabrication of qualified large-size GR sheets on a large scale.23 Although such kinds of GR sheets can be obtained from the chemical vapor deposition-grown (CVD) method, the extremely high cost of the process further restricts the large-scale production of the related TIMs.24
In addition to the difficulty of fabricating thermal pathways within the TIMs, the strategy used to harvest solar irradiation also needs to be improved. A concentrating technique using an optical system was developed recently to focus on thermal energy into the localized region, which is beneficial to maximize the captured solar energy.25–27 However, since the heat conduction in traditional TIMs is either randomly distributed or unidirectional,28,29 realizing the rapid and multidirectional thermal conductive property within TIMs for efficient thermal charging and TE discharging remains challenging.
Herein, we took the advantage of hierarchical architectures from natural materials by replicating the elaborate microstructure of palm tree bark. This idea was inspired by the compact and aligned morphology of strips during the natural drying process under appropriate environmental conditions. Such features can be used to address these integrated problems (TC and ITR) by constructing a multilayered oriented microstructure through a unique double self-assembly strategy. Distinguished from the traditional method, which merely applied one kind of self-assembly technique, the structured engineered TIM based on the gelatin hydrogel and modified worm-like expanded graphite (M-EG) was reported via gravity-assisted self-assembly and vacuum-assisted self-assembly techniques. Followed by the molecular interactions and chain bundling within the hydrogel system introduced by the Hofmeister effect, the flexible TIM with the aligned percolative network could maximize the thermal conductivity (TC) of graphite sheets to fulfill the fast and microscopically uniform phonon pathways in the matrix. As a result, compared with pristine gelatin matrix, an enhancement of 205-fold in-plane TC and 55-fold through-plane TC is achieved simultaneously, which therefore ensures rapid thermal transfer capability and uniform temperature distribution when applied under a spot-like heat source in the STEG device. Furthermore, the heat dissipation test in the tracked robot platform indicated that this TIM exhibited a 13.5 °C decrease compared with the commercial thermal pad when applied to the video transmission module, demonstrating its thermal management potential in robot industries and microelectronic cooling. Apart from its fast and multidirectional thermal conductive performance, this TIM is capable of enduring the concentrated solar beam while providing a high heat transfer rate. A high real-environment output power density of 165.8 W m−2 was yielded when applying this TIM with a STEG device. Combined with the maximum energy capture method through an optical device and the unique design of thermal pathways within the TIM, this work also demonstrates a prospective and alternative option for solar energy utilization and clean energy supply in our daily life.
2. esults and discussion
2.1 Preparation and characterization of the M-EG/Gel-Am composite
Different from the previous studies, which were focused on processing the graphite flakes into graphene sheets at the nano-micro size by destroying its inherent vdW interaction,30,31Fig. 1a shows the conceptual design fabrication process of our materials. Layered graphite flakes consist of large amounts of compact GNPs that can be unfolded while partly maintaining the vdW force via particular methods. In this work, in situ thermal exfoliation of the graphite intercalation compounds was employed to obtain the worm-like filler consisting of interconnected GNPs. The graphite structure is based on parallel layers within which the atoms form hexagonal cells through covalent bonds 1.42 Å long. Along the c-axis of the structure, vdW forces maintain the carbon sheets 3.35 Å apart. Therefore, the bond strength is much higher within the layers than perpendicular to them. Such a feature accounts for the maintained vdW interaction between the GNPs after thermal exfoliation. In situ polymerization of dopamine particles was employed for the modification of GNPs to construct the polydopamine (PDA) layer to improve the interfacial compatibility. Furthermore, the mixture of gelatin solution and modified graphite sheets was subjected to a planetary gravity mixer to complete the gravity-assisted assembly process for better dispersion (a detailed description can be found in Fig. S1†). The M-EG/Gel film is tightly packed, and the oriented hierarchical structure is constructed by virtue of the laminate assembly feature of vacuum filtration. After soaking in the ammonium sulfate solutions, the intermolecular interactions and chain bundling within the gelatin hydrogel can be enhanced significantly. Eventually, it is feasible to obtain the M-EG/Gel-Am material after the physical crosslink treatment introduced by the Hofmeister effect. The consecutive microstructure of massive GNPs forms a high orientation degree and the sheet–sheet interfacial thermal resistance that would also obtain a low lateral spatial density because of the large oriented graphite sheets. Besides, the nano PDA layers between the aligned adjacent sheets and the enhanced hydrogen bonding formed by the Hofmeister effect, both, can effectively reduce the junction resistance. Compared with the pristine GNP (Fig. 1b), the HRTEM image exhibited in Fig. 1c clearly shows a thin PDA-layered deposition (3 nm) together with the well-preserved crystal lattice of the graphite in the inset image.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram for fabricating the M-EG/Gel-Am composite and constructing the highly oriented graphite sheets. (b) HRTEM image of the W-EG. (c) HRTEM image of the M-EG with a thin PDA layer, the inset showed the well-preserved crystal lattice of graphite. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of the M-EG/Gel-Am composite. (e) The morphology of the palm tree bark, which inspired the microstructure engineering of the composite. The optical images of the M-EG/Gel-Am composite exhibiting (f) large size, (g) adequately tensile strength, and (h) resistance property in the LCD 1602 module. 

Fig. 1d exhibits the oriented microstructure with multilayered large graphite sheets along the horizontal direction, indicating that the double self-assembly technique (gravity-assisted assembly and vacuum-assisted assembly) was effective and practical. The strategy to fabricate the material came from the aligned palm tree bark strip in the natural drying process (Fig. 1e), which formed the oriented trend with multilayered morphology in a proper environment. The inspiration from the formation of natural palm tree bark with oriented strip morphology helped successfully fabricate the M-EG/Gel-Am composite. As a result, a large-scale specimen with a diameter of 90 mm can be obtained through this method (Fig. 1f). Meanwhile, the unique matrix gives the required adhesiveness of the samples to the mating surfaces, which is particularly beneficial for the installation and use of TIMs. Furthermore, the obtained M-EG/Gel-Am exhibited outstanding flexibility after different bending processes and can still endure the stretching of over 100 times its weight under static tensile force without any breakage (Fig. 1g). Such properties indicate that our sample has huge potential in the packaging process when used in the flexible circuit. In addition, as illustrated in Fig. 1h, the M-EG/Gel-Am composite exhibited potential in the application of regulating the resistor and can be used as a potentiometer in the circuit connection of the LCD 1602 module (circuit diagram can be found in Fig. S2†) since it has a required resistance around 5 kΩ to enable the adjustment of the screen contrast.
2.2 Morphology and microstructure of the composites
The graphite sheet could obtain a large surface area and length according to the thermal exfoliation degree or the GNP thickness. The graphite sheet can be seen as a gigantic graphene nanosheet when the thickness of GNP reaches a single-carbon-atom extent.32 The sheet–sheet junction thermal resistance that exists inside the materials would be reduced substantially when the graphite sheets form the ideally oriented layered structure; thus the composites can reach the theoretically maximum in-plane TC. However, the current technical difficulty in producing the ideal graphite sheet from natural graphite flakes still faces huge obstacles.
To tackle this problem in a practical way, it is feasible and efficient to obtain pieces of GNP micro-clusters from the graphite flake with intercalation compounds through in situ thermal exfoliation. Furthermore, the inherent vdW interactions between GNPs could be preserved by this method, and the obtained GNP micro-cluster was named worm-like expanded graphite (W-EG). The compact and ordered microscale graphite intercalation compounds (GIC) were separated into pieces of W-EG during the in situ thermal exfoliation process (Fig. 2a and b), resulting in high carbon content (over 90%) and low oxygen content (Fig. S3†).
 Fig. 2  Morphology and structural characterization of the graphite sheets and the obtained material. (a) The SEM images of the graphite intercalation compounds (GIC). (b) The SEM images of W-EG and the inset showed its microstructure. (c) The SEM image of the M-EG with the PDA layer. (d) Top view SEM image of M-EG/Gel-Am composite. (e) Cross-sectional SEM image of M-EG/Gel-Am composite. (f) Magnified SEM image of the selected area exhibited the highly oriented GNPs. (g) XRD results of GIC, W-EG, and M-EG. (h) Raman spectra of GIC, W-EG, and M-EG. (i) FT-IR spectra of Gel-Am, W-EG, M-EG, and M-EG/Gel-Am composite. 
As a result, the interspace between the GIC was greatly extended, and the scale of the flakes among the z-axis direction increased over 100 times, while the diameter remained nearly unchanged after the treatment. Besides, the dopamine particles were employed to fabricate the modified W-EG sheets with the PDA layer (M-EG) to strengthen the interfacial affinity. These dopamine particles can help form the nanocoating inside the grooves and cracks of the W-EG during the polymerization process and improve the dispersity (Fig. S4†). Subsequently, the nano PDA layer would uniformly deposit on the GNPs and fill the interspace within the graphite sheets. The overall morphology of the obtained M-EG can be well-preserved by the in situ polymerization, as exhibited in Fig. 2c. It should be stressed that the gravity-assisted assembly technique was employed to improve the mixing process and complete the degassing procedure of some micro air gaps. Then, the viscous gelatin matrix can efficiently permeate into the microstructure of the graphite sheets under the stage mixing. The top view of the M-EG/Gel-Am composite showed a horizontally oriented morphology (Fig. 2d). The M-EG sheets in the material are highly oriented and can also construct consecutive GNP networks in the micro-size during the vacuum-assisted assembly (Fig. 2e and f). Furthermore, the microstructure of the M-EG/Gel-Am composite could also be improved via appropriately extending the time period of the vacuum assembly process to make it more compact (Fig. S5†). Eventually, with the introduction of Hofmeister effect-assisted treatment, the M-EG/Gel-Am with multilayered microstructure and the enhanced mechanical properties was fabricated successfully. Each M-EG formed several large interconnected cluster sheets including massive oriented and double-bonded GNPs (vdW and hydrogen bond), constructing efficient thermal conductive pathways inside the composite. To further investigate the role of each self-assembly technique, a comparison study was also carried out. Since the gravity-assisted self-assembly plays an important role, allowing the precursor to form a uniform phase before the latter shaping procedure. Therefore, this procedure was necessary for the further fabrication process. Compared with the double self-assembly strategy, the composite prepared by the direct consolidation without the vacuum-assisted self-assembly technique exhibited a relatively disordered microstructure (Fig. S6†). Furthermore, the existence of the large cavity and microdefects also demonstrated that the vacuum-assisted self-assembly was helpful in constructing a tightly packed and oriented hierarchical microstructure.
X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Raman spectra were used to further investigate the crystallinity of the above graphite sheets. The diffraction patterns of the carbon-based materials (GIC) showed a strong peak at 26.5°, which can be assigned to the (002) interlayer spacing of the natural graphite (Fig. 2g).33–35 The obvious intensity decrease in the characteristic graphite peak (002) was observed in W-EG and M-EG, resulting from the thermal exfoliation of graphite nanoplatelets.36 Besides, the narrower full width at half maximum (FWHM) of M-EG (0.389) and W-EG (0.488) indicates a highly ordered sp2-hybridized carbon lattice after in situ thermal exfoliation when compared with GIC (0.580). In addition, the sharper peak of M-EG at 26.5° also suggests further restacking of GNPs, which are beneficial for constructing the dense pathways for thermal transfer.37 To further prove the oriented microstructure of the M-EG/Gel-Am material, composite without the vacuum-assisted assembly technique was also investigated in the XRD test. Compared with the sample, which was consolidated without the double self-assembly strategy, M-EG/Gel-Am exhibited a stronger intensity of the (002) characteristic peak while maintaining a relatively low intensity of the (004) characteristic peak (Fig. S7†). Such results demonstrated that the directionally arranged and tightly packed microstructure was constructed within the composite. It can be noted that the ID/IG ratio in W-EG (0.067) exhibited a dramatic decrease when compared with GIC (0.279), as exhibited in Fig. 2h, indicating the formation of the isolated smaller graphite sp2 domains and reduction of defects.34 The slight increase in ID/IG for M-EG from 0.067 to 0.148 indicated that few defects were generated during the in situ polymerization. Noteworthily, M-EG also displayed a much lower ID/IG in comparison to rGO (usually >1.00). In summary, high structural integrity is a key prerequisite to guarantee the innate thermal conductive property of the graphite nanoplatelets.
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was also used to determine the decomposition behavior of PDA in the M-EG (Fig. S8†). The weight loss of the samples under 150 °C can be ascribed to the evaporation of free water molecules. Besides, compared with the W-EG, the additional weight loss of M-EG in the temperature range of 200–600 °C can result from the thermal degradation of the PDA layer. The total weight loss of M-EG at 750 °C was 12.49%, while W-EG exhibited a total weight loss of 7.80% in the end. It should be noticed that pure PDA was not decomposed completely in the end, with a remaining weight of 51.89%.
The good interfacial interaction between the M-EG and gelatin matrix can be confirmed by the Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectrum shown in Fig. 2i. The Gel-Am exhibited a broad characteristic peak at 3442 cm−1 for the O–H stretching vibrations, a peak at 1640 cm−1 for the amide I bands, and a characteristic peak at 1401 cm−1 for the C–H bending vibrations and CH3 symmetric deformation vibrations.38 The stretching vibrations of –OH, CO, and C–O groups of W-EG were observed at 3458, 1646, and 1070 cm−1, respectively.36 The appearance of vibration peak at 1032 cm−1 for M-EG was ascribed to the N–H out-of-plane bending absorption of the amine group of dopamine.39 Furthermore, the stretching vibration of –OH groups in the spectrum of M-EG exhibited an obvious red-shift from 3458 to 3440 cm−1 when compared to that of the W-EG. This phenomenon was assigned to the π–π bonding, intermolecular hydrogen bonding, and the van der Waals interaction between the W-EG and the PDA coating, which contained plentiful catechol groups.39,40 The intensity of the O–H stretching increased at 3432 cm−1, which suggested the reinforced hydrogen bonds. Besides, the generation of intermolecular α-helix and triple-helix gelatin chain structures can be observed through the absorption of the amide I bands, which is mostly due to the CO stretching vibrations of the peptide linkages and is often used to determine the secondary structure of proteins.41 The increased intensity of the amide I bands (1640 cm−1) also indicated the enhanced chain bundling and triple helix structure in the M-EG/Gel-Am hydrogels.42 These results also demonstrated that the kosmotropic salt and functional groups of PDA introduced strong interfacial interactions and chain bundling between the gelatin and fillers.
2.3 Thermal properties of M-EG/Gel-Am composites
It should be noted that the double self-assembly technique and the enhanced nanointerfacial layer play a significant role in constructing efficient thermal pathways with low interface thermal resistance (ITR). Considering the characteristic oriented microstructure of the composite, it may have a preferred heat transfer direction along the in-plane direction.
As illustrated in Fig. 3a, the thermal conductivity of M-EG/Gel-Am reached 35.29 W m−1 K−1 with an increase of over 41% of the W-EG/Gel-Am. In addition, the through-plane TC of M-EG/Gel-Am (9.35 W m−1 K−1) was also 1.45 times higher than that of W-EG/Gel-Am (the filler loading was fixed at 42.2 vol%). Such a result demonstrated that unique microstructure construction and interfacial engineering are necessary for fabricating functional materials with high TC. According to the summary of the relationship between the filler network and TC, it is obvious that the in-plane TC of both composites improved with the increased filler content (Fig. S9†), and the TC value of M-EG/Gel-Am was always higher than that of W-EG/Gel-Am at the same filler loading. The enhancement in thermal conductivity can be ascribed to the well-developed thermal network formed by the oriented M-EG sheets and the fewer interface defects due to the gravity-assisted assembly technique. The content of the polydopamine was controlled by changing the in situ polymerization reaction time to further investigate the importance of the nano PDA layer in improving the thermal conductivity. Compared with a longer reaction time of 24 h, composites prepared by the polymerization period of 18 h exhibited a similar in-plane thermal conductivity (Fig. S10†). Such a result can be ascribed to the well-developed nano PDA layer within the interface of the filler. Furthermore, the shorter period of in situ polymerization (12 h) could result in a relatively lower thermal conductive performance, which might be due to the inadequate interfacial affinity between the filler and the matrix. Therefore, the in situ polymerization reaction time could be set as 18 h for the modification procedure. The nano PDA layer not only helps improve the dispersity of the M-EG sheets within the composite but also strengthens the interfacial interaction between the functional filler and the matrix, helping construct better thermal pathways within the bark-like structure.
 Fig. 3  (a) In-plane and through-plane thermal conductivity of the obtained TIMs. (b) Comparison of the specific TCE efficiency along the in-plane direction between our work and previously reported polymer-based TIMs (PAA: polyacrylic acid; ANF: aramid nanofiber). (c) Simulated values of K0 and tα using Foygel's nonlinear model based on the experimental data of this study. (d) Surface temperature evolution of the radio frequency module within the tracked robot platform. (e) Infrared thermal images of the radio frequency module with different TIMs during the test. (f) The correlation curve between the simulated effective TC and the module temperature. (g) The simulation comparison indicating the superior cooling efficiency of M-EG/Gel-Am TIM. 
The specific thermal conductivity enhancement (TCE) is a widely known factor that can be used to evaluate the efficiency of the fillers on the thermal network of the polymer-based composites.43,44 This definition can be expressed by the following equation: (1)where Kc and Km are the TC of the composite and the matrix (gelatin ≈ 0.172 W m−1 K−1), respectively, and φ is the mass fraction of the filler.
As summarized in Fig. 3b, the M-EG/Gel-Am composite revealed an outstanding specific TCE (≈340) in the in-plane direction when compared to that from the reported studies on pliant thermal interface materials (also see Fig. S11 and Table S1†).45–54 Compared with the traditional method, the addition of the gravity-assisted self-assembly step allowed a better mixing process while promoting the degassing procedure of some micro air gaps. Furthermore, the polymer matrix could effectively permeate into the microstructure of the functional filler during the stage mixing. Such a process intensification strategy was employed during the fabrication to construct a better thermal conductive network. It should be noticed that the analysis was focused on the in-plane TC of the composites. The results of the comparison exhibited the advantages of the unique design strategy and the double self-assembly technique in constructing the multilayered oriented microstructure with enhanced thermal conductivity.
Foygel's theory was employed to analyze the interfacial thermal resistance (ITR) of the composites to further investigate the inherent factors related to the enhancement of thermal conductivity.55–57 We supposed the fillers presented a highly oriented structure within the in-plane direction and the main ITR of the composites came from the overlapped interfaces of the graphite sheets. Therefore, the nonlinear model proposed by Foygel et al. can be applied as follows: (2) (3)where K0 is the preexponential factor, which depends on the conductivity and the contact condition of the filler; tα is a conductivity exponent relating to the filler's aspect ratio; Vc is the critical volume fraction of the filler, Rc is the contact resistance between the adjacent graphite sheets.
By fitting the experimental data with the nonlinear model, the corresponding K0 values can be obtained and the results are exhibited in Fig. 3c. The K0 value of M-EG/Gel-Am composite was nearly 1.58 times higher than that of W-EG/Gel-Am, indicating a well-developed thermal network and sufficient fusion between the filler interfaces. Besides, the ITR value between the contiguous graphite sheets can be calculated using the following equation: R = Rc × S(4)where S represents the average overlap area of fillers, we obtained this value (2.41 × 10−12 m2) according to the previously reported equations (for details, see the ESI†).58
Based on the above results, the ITR value of M-EG/Gel-Am composite was evaluated at 4.60 × 10−9 m2 K W−1, demonstrating a nearly 60% decrease in the in-plane contact resistance when compared to that of the W-EG/Gel-Am composite (1.05 × 10−8 m2 K W−1), as summarized in Fig. S12 and Table S2.† Such a phenomenon can be attributed to the improved filler dispersibility and the enhanced interfacial affinity between the M-EG and gelatin matrix. The fitting results further confirm the construction of the oriented bark-like microstructure and the nano PDA layer can help reduce the ITR within the system efficiently.
To further analyze the thermal management performance of the M-EG/Gel-Am composite, we built a tracked robot platform equipped with a 5.8 GHz image transmitter chip (RC module) based on an Arduino microchip computer. The relevant core code for controlling the robot and the compiling environment is exhibited in Fig. S13.† With the help of intelligent control, we can adjust and analyze the transmission chip effectively. Since most of the intelligent robots with advanced abilities were controlled by the microchip, it is a big challenge to dissipate the accumulated heat generated by the operation modules. By comparing the surface temperature of the image transmitter chip at a fixed band, we can simulate the high-power loading under the long-range transmission circumstance. To evaluate the cooling efficiency of the TIM in the practical application of the transmission device, the pure Gel-Am, commercial 3M 467MP thermal pad (≈5.5 W m−1 K−1, 3 M, USA) and M-EG/Gel-Am were used in the heat dissipation of high-power RC module chip (rated power: 15 W). The TIMs with the same bond line thickness (BLT: 0.5 mm) and size (30 × 20 mm) were mounted between the heat sink and the RC module chip. Fig. 3d summarizes the surface temperature curves of the RC module equipped with different TIMs. It should be noted that due to the inferior thermal conductive performance, the RC module became overheated just after 200 s, which was harmful to the operation of the transmission chip when it was employed under a long-range distance. However, the balance temperature of the RC module only reached 56.6 °C (Fig. 3e), which was 13.5 °C lower than that of the commercial 3M 467MP thermal pad, indicating a better heat dissipation performance of the M-EG/Gel-Am composite in applications with advanced electronic modules. Besides, thermal stability is also an important property of the TIM to ensure its reliability in practical application. Therefore, the stability test was further accessed and the results are summarized in Fig. S14.† The in-plane thermal conductivity of the test sample changed slightly during the thermal cycling test in the temperature range of 20 °C to 80 °C, and still exhibited a high retention ratio of 92% (≈32.46 W m−1 K−1) after these thermal shocks, indicating its reliable performance in the electronic device's long-running instances.
Computational fluid dynamics simulation based on ANSYS was applied to further investigate the heat conduction process of the transmitter chip within the robot platform. The relevant model parameters and settings are exhibited in Fig. S15 and Table S3.†Fig. 3f exhibits the correlation curve between the module temperature and the calculated effective TC value of the TIMs. As a result, the effective TC of M-EG/Gel-Am reached 13.29 W m−1 K−1, which was nearly 8 times higher than that of 3M 467MP (≈1.76 W m−1 K−1). Furthermore, the calculated thermal contact resistance of M-EG/Gel-Am (23.45 K mm2 W−1) was also nearly one order of magnitude smaller than that of 3M 467MP (192.54 K mm2 W−1), the detailed calculation process is demonstrated in Table S4.† This increasing enhancement in thermal management performance can be ascribed to the collaborative integration of unique natural microstructure and elaborate interfacial engineering. Apart from the boosted thermal conductive performance, the mechanical properties of M-EG/Gel-Am were also improved due to the physical junction treatment introduced by the Hofmeister effect. Pure gelatin could be easily ruptured with a small tensile strain (72%) and tensile strength (0.036 MPa) (Fig. S16†). However, the tensile strength of Gel-Am exhibited a significant enhancement, which was nearly 103 times higher than that in the original sample (3.72 MPa). Furthermore, the general tensile strength of M-EG/Gel-Am even achieved 8.08 MPa (nearly 225 times than the pure hydrogel) at the elongation rate of 122% (Fig. S17†), indicating its huge potential in advanced application fields of soft electronics. In conclusion, our composite demonstrated promising application potential in future robot systems and microelectronic cooling fields, as exhibited in Fig. 3g, in which the simulated temperature profiles showed good thermal management performance.
2.4 Light-thermal conversion based on periodical laser spot
To investigate the practical efficiency of heat charging/discharging and the light-thermal conversion, we applied a laser transmitter as an ideal-localized light source with a periodical output signal (T = 120 s) controlled by the Arduino chip (Fig. 4a), which can be used to simulate the solar thermal energy. The temperature profile on the surface of different materials was recorded by the infrared camera (Fig. 4b). As exhibited in Fig. 4c, the spot temperature of all samples changed periodically together with the output signal. For instance, the M-EG/Gel-Am composite showed the best thermal conductive property since its thermal charging rate was the highest when compared with the other two samples. Moreover, its spot temperature was also 16.8 °C higher than the 3M 467MP thermal pad at 60 s, indicating the better thermal conductive property.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the periodical laser test system controlled by the Arduino microchip and an infrared camera recording of the surface temperature distribution. (b) Infrared thermal images of the surface temperature of different samples during the first time period. (c) Central spot temperature evolution of different samples during the three test cycles. (d) Average temperature and effective response area of the samples at different time spots, indicating the uniform and rapid thermal conduction of M-EG/Gel-Am. (e) 3D IR temperature distribution of different samples at the balance time. (f) Temperature distribution curve on the surface of the samples (from the center of the samples to the edge). (g) Comparison of experimental data and simulated results based on the classic thermoelastic theory. (h) Finite simulation results exhibit the microscopic and macroscopic heat transfer properties within the sample. 
The average temperature and effective area (for details, see the ESI†) were calculated and are exhibited in Fig. 4d to further evaluate the general light-thermal conversion property. The average temperature of the surface represented the thermal response-ability in the in-plane direction. It should be noticed that the average temperature of 3M 467MP composite at 60 s only reached about 24.6 °C though its spot temperature was as high as 45.7 °C, indicating a poor in-plane thermal conductive property. However, the M-EG/Gel-Am composite with a better in-plane thermal conductivity exhibited a uniform and higher average temperature (56.8 °C at 60 s), which was very close to its spot temperature. The above results also corresponded to the effective area ratio illustrated in the figure, indicating the outstanding heat transfer property. The 3D-IR figure was used to better demonstrate the temperature distribution based on the experimental results. Compared with the Gel-Am (Fig. 4e), the M-EG/Gel-Am composite exhibited a significantly higher temperature peak and a larger distribution area. Such a phenomenon can also be confirmed from the temperature difference in the radial direction (Fig. 4f). The value difference from the center to the edge of the sample on the surface demonstrated that the better in-plane thermal pathways of M-EG/Gel-Am (ΔT = 7.8 °C) are much more beneficial to the uniform heat conduction than the matrix (ΔT = 19.1 °C). The energy of heat flow in Gel-Am can only be restricted to a localized region, while the heat flow in M-EG/Gel-Am can be efficiently transferred in the whole plane from the central spot to the edges. In conclusion, the unique microstructure architecture and interface engineering in this work were of great significance in tacking the hotspot problems because of the fast thermal transfer property.
The experimental results of the spot temperature evolution were also in agreement with the simulated curve based on the classic thermoelastic theory, as exhibited in Fig. 4g. The fast thermal charging rate in the first period of the signal also demonstrated superior thermal conductive performance. In addition, finite simulations based on ANSYS were also carried out to better reveal the heat transfer and temperature profile of the sample from the microscopic to the macroscopic view. The simulation results exhibited an outstanding heat transfer performance in both of the horizontal and vertical directions, which can be ascribed to the uniform temperature distribution and the higher end temperature in Fig. 4h (detailed calculation can be seen in Fig. S18 and S19†). The top view and perspective view in the temperature distribution of the macroscopic view of the sample revealed a direct method to visualize the process of heat transfer since the simulated values showed matching results with the experiment data. The dynamically simulated animation (Movie S1†) obtained from the simulated process was also an option of great convenience to rate the thermal charging rate of the composites.
2.5 Practical application in solar thermoelectric generator (STEG) system
For the real-environment solar-thermal electric conversion, we made a STEG device (Fig. 5a), which included the test sample, a liquid-cooled heat sink (Al) with circulating water (CW) of 8 °C, and a convex lens (diameter of 10 cm) to concentrate sunlight (the detailed description can be seen in Fig. S20†). The thermal management performance of the TIM is not only related to the through-plane thermal conductivity but also the in-plane thermal conductivity (TC). In-plane TC plays an important role in the heat conduction process because once the localized heat source (or hot spot) is employed, a huge amount of thermal energy will accumulate within the small area. If the TIM has poor in-plane TC, such huge amounts of heat energy will gradually accumulate in the local spot area and then destroy the whole material even causing damage to the STEG device. After the combination of the thermoelectric module, a real-environment thermal electric experiment was carried out at Tianjin University, China (environment temperature: 7.4 °C; solar intensity ≈2600 W m−2). The aim of the experiment was to try to investigate the thermal conductive property of the thermal interface material (TIM) when applied in the STEG device for thermal energy conversion. Therefore, thermal management performance can also be evaluated through the temperature profile and the output power density. The pure substrate without any material was also employed in this device for comparison. Furthermore, the surface temperature of the thermoelectric module could be found through the four residual corners within the square profile (Fig. 5b). The central spot of the Gel-Am material showed a rapid temperature increase due to the focused solar irradiation. However, the surface temperature of the thermoelectric module did not exhibit any obvious change even when the spot temperature of Gel-Am reached over 300 °C at 1200 s. Such a phenomenon could be attributed to the poor thermal conductive property. Furthermore, the accumulated heat could only be transferred through the thermal convection by the cold wind since the climate was windy (wind speed: 6.8 m s−1). As a result, the Gel-Am material was destroyed due to the huge amount of accumulated heat.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the self-made solar thermoelectric generator (STEG) device for solar energy harvesting. (b) Infrared thermal images of the temperature distribution in the STEG device with different TIMs. (c) The upper surface temperature of the thermoelectric module and output voltage at different time spots. (d) Output voltage and current of the self-made STEG device with the duration of time. (e) Output power density of the STEG device equipped with different TIMs at typical time spots. (f) Comparison of output power density in this work with previous reported studies. (g) The simulated temperature profile of the STEG device with substrate under coupling conditions. 
It should be noticed that the surface temperature of M-EG/Gel-Am was also affected by the strong thermal convection resulting from the windy climate since the ambient temperature was quite low. The central spot temperature of the M-EG/Gel-Am showed a lower degree when compared with other samples. However, one can find that the upper surface temperature of the thermoelectric module (square profile) was always higher than other test samples (Fig. 5c), indicating that the solar irradiation was converted and transferred into the module efficiently even under such windy weather (over 17.0 °C from 300 s to 900 s). Therefore, more of the micro thermoelectric elements inside the module can be activated for better output power. The high output voltage of the STEG device equipped with M-EG/Gel-Am reached over 365 mV (at 300 s) while the device with a pure substrate only reached 99 mV. Attributed to the outstanding thermal charging/discharging performance and the rapid heat transfer property of the M-EG/Gel-Am material, concentrated solar energy could be efficiently converted into ceaseless electricity with a maximum output power density of 165.8 W m−2 (Fig. 5d). Furthermore, this efficient STEG device also exhibited a satisfactory efficiency of solar-thermal-electric conversion as compared with other previous reports (Table S5†). Such efficiency of the STEG device nearly approaches the same order of magnitude as the intrinsic efficiency of the thermoelectric conversion of the commercial thermoelectric plate. In addition, the solar-thermal-electric conversion efficiency and the output power density could be effectively improved if a better thermal interface material could be applied in the required thermal interfaces (Fig. 5e). Therefore, through-plane TC is also important for the real-environment solar-thermoelectric conversion of STEG devices because the heat energy needs to be transferred to the upper surface of the TE module efficiently to form the temperature difference. We improved the through-plane TC through two aspects. Firstly, the in situ polymerization of dopamine particles was employed in the modification of the functional filler to construct the polydopamine (PDA) nano-layer to enhance the interfacial compatibility among the systems. Therefore, the interfacial thermal resistance (ITR) could be effectively reduced in the through-plane direction. Secondly, the strategy of the double self-assembly technique was used to make a tightly packed morphology of the microstructure. Thus, the combined intensification strategy was applied during the fabrication to construct a better thermal conductive network for the composite. As a result, our STEG system equipped with this advanced TIM could constantly provide a durable yielding of clean electric energy without mechanical devices and the additional graphite layer, as a relative plateau period could be observed in the output voltage versus time curve after the heating stage, demonstrating the numerous amounts of solar energy could be captured and then released into the power supply.
As for current STEG techniques, an obvious dilemma exists because the output power density is largely restricted under the value of 50 W m−2 due to the poor thermal management performance in the required materials and the exhausted structure design of the STEG.12,59 Furthermore, some studies applied traditional phase change materials in STEG to obtain high thermal charging rate but they still lack modified integration of microstructure engineering. In this work, by introducing the modified worm-like graphite sheets into the environmental polymer matrix through the double self-assembly technique, effective thermal pathways with oriented microstructures were obtained. Our conceptual design also enables the STEG device to fulfill a high output power density of 165.8 W m−2 with optimized light-thermal response-ability and an efficient energy transfer rate through the real-environment solar-thermal-electric conversion. Besides, the material used in our STEG device does not need the additional sprayed graphite layer, implying an integrated design for multifunctional applications. Taking advantage of the above aspects, this work has a relatively better performance among the reported similar-type STEG devices (Fig. 5f),59–65 and even outperforms some of the commercial photovoltaic solar panels. The finite element simulation based on ANSYS also demonstrated that without the application of advanced TIM for efficient thermal conduction among the surface (Fig. 5g), many of the micro thermoelectric elements inside the module cannot be activated since the heat flow can only be limited to a localized region (detailed model description can be found in Fig. S21†). However, the optimized properties, including the high-performance thermal conduction and rapid thermal charging rate in this work make our STEG device a promising alternative to the photovoltaic technology fields, especially for thermal irradiation harvesting and clean energy supply.
3 Experimental section
3.1 Materials
Gelatin granules were obtained from Boyang Biology Co. Ltd (Henan, China). Graphite intercalation compounds (average size: 200 μm) were supplied by Qing Dao Teng Sheng Da Tan Su Ji Xie Co., Ltd. Dopamine hydrochloride (DA, >98%) was purchased from Meryer Chemical Technology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Tris (hydroxymethyl) aminomethane (Tris, >99.9%) was provided by AKZ Biotech Co., Ltd. (Tianjin, China). Ammonium sulfate was purchased from Tianjin HEOWNS Co., Ltd. Absolute ethyl alcohol, and hydrochloric acid (∼38 wt% aqueous solution) were obtained from Tianjin Yuanli Chemical Co., Ltd. (China). Deionized water was obtained from Yongqingyuan pure water manufacturing center (Tianjin, China). All reagents were of analytical grade and used as received without further purification.
3.2 Fabrication of M-EG
Worm-like expanded graphite (W-EG) was obtained through the in situ thermal exfoliation of the graphite intercalation compounds (GIC) in the muffle furnace at 800 °C for 120 s. Furthermore, the worm-like graphite sheets modified with nano polydopamine coating (M-EG) were prepared by the mussel-inspired chemistry of dopamine. Specifically, 2.5 g of W-EG was added to 350 mL of freshly prepared Tris–buffer solution (10 mM, pH 8.5) and 50 mL of ethanol, then ultrasonicated for 20 min. After that, 500 mg of dopamine hydrochloride (DA) was further added to the above mixture under magnetic stirring for 18 h at room temperature. Finally, the suspension was subjected to vacuum-assisted filtration and washed with DIW, three times to remove the unreacted DA and then freeze-drying for 36 h overnight to obtain M-EG.
3.3 Preparation of M-EG/Gel-Am composites
A gelatin solution (14 wt%) was prepared by dissolving gelatin granules in deionized water under magnetic stirring for 1 h at 80 °C. Furthermore, an appropriate number of M-EG sheets were added to the gelatin solution under magnetic stirring for 10 min while keeping the same temperature. After that, a homogeneous phase of the solution was mixed by the planetary gravity mixer according to the gravity-assisted assembly technique. Then, the precursor of the composite was obtained through vacuum-assisted filtration. Subsequently, the resultant composite was peeled off from the filter membrane after curing at room temperature for 6 h. Eventually, the M-EG/Gel-Am composite was obtained after soaking in ammonium sulfate solutions (30 wt%) at room temperature for 12 h. For comparison, W-EG/Gel-Am composites were also prepared by the same method.
3.4 Characterization
The morphology of the composites was studied using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) (Apreo S LoVac, USA) equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) detector at an acceleration voltage of 5.0 kV. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were obtained using an HT7700 (Hitachi, Japan) instrument at an acceleration voltage of 100 kV. The crystallographic properties of the materials were investigated using X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku Ultima IV using Cu Kα radiation) and a Raman microscope (Renishaw plc, UK) with a laser wavelength of 532 nm. Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra were obtained using a Spectrum two (PerkinElmer, UK) spectrometer between 500 and 4000 cm−1. Thermal diffusivities (α) of the composites were measured by a laser flash analysis (LFA, Netzsch Instruments Co., Nanoflash LFA467, Netzsch instrument Co., Ltd., Germany) at room temperature. The specific heat (Cp) was evaluated by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC, STA449F). The TC (λ, W m−1 K−1) was then calculated as λ = ρ × Cp × α, where ρ (g cm−1) is the sample density, Cp (J g−1 K−1) is the specific heat and α (mm2 s−1) is the thermal diffusivity. The thermal decomposition was studied using a thermogravimetric analyzer (TA Discover-550, Netzsch instrument Co., Ltd., Germany) at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 from 25 to 750 °C under nitrogen atmosphere. The tensile properties were tested using a universal testing machine (Instron 3360, USA) with a 1 kN load cell at room temperature. The measurement was performed according to the ASTM D638 standard. A laser transmitter with a maximum power of 15 W was used to simulate the solar irradiation beam, and the temperature distribution was recorded by an infrared camera (Fluke Ti480 Pro, USA). An Arduino UNO R3 microchip was used to control the output signal of the electronic modules.
4 Conclusions
In summary, we report a highly thermo-conductive M-EG/Gel-Am composite with a hierarchical arrangement of thermal pathways for multidirectional heat transfer. The composite prepared using the unique double self-assembly technique exhibits a high in-plane TC (35.29 W m−1 K−1) with through-plane TC (9.35 W m−1 K−1) when loaded with 42 vol% M-EG filler, which enables the rapid and efficient thermal conduction in the radial and perpendicular directions. Besides, it also manifests great thermal management performance when applied to the video transmission module in the tracked robot platform, demonstrating a 13.5 °C decrease compared to commercial TIMs, which is ascribed to not only the higher TC but also the lower thermal contact resistance according to the FE analysis. When combined with the solid thermoelectric module in a STEG, our material can not only endure the concentrated solar energy but also maximumly discharge them into the thermoelectric system with the help of high thermal conductivity. Furthermore, this work demonstrates prospective alternatives to photovoltaic technologies by employing an integrated real-environment STEG device without an additional absorption layer while achieving a peak power density of 165.8 W m−2 based on the Seebeck effect, opening opportunities for efficient utilization of solar energy while relieving the energy crisis and environmental pollution in the world.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships.
Acknowledgements
The research is financially supported by the National Science Foundation for Distinguished Young Scholars of China (Grant No. 51925403), the Major Research Plan of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 91934302), the National Science Foundation of China (21676052, 21606042), State Key Laboratory of Chemical Engineering (SKL-ChE-20T07). In addition, Yueyang Gao wants to express his appreciation to Minghang Zhang and Zhixiang Zhang for their substantial support and help during this research. In addition, Yueyang Gao would like to thank Shuangshuang Song for their help in the characterization test. A special acknowledgement should also be given to Xinran Chen for her friendship to me and encouragement these past few years. Time settles us first and then confuses us. Sometimes forever, sometimes never.
References
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, B. Rosenberger and G. Yu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw5484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Creutzig, P. Agoston, J. C. Goldschmidt, G. Luderer, G. Nemet and R. C. Pietzcker, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17140 CrossRef .
P. K. Nayak, S. Mahesh, H. J. Snaith and D. Cahen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 269–285 CrossRef CAS .
R. López-Vizcaíno, E. Mena, M. Millán, M. A. Rodrigo and J. Lobato, Renewable Energy, 2017, 114, 1123–1133 CrossRef .
J. S. Price, A. J. Grede, B. Wang, M. V. Lipski, B. Fisher, K.-T. Lee, J. He, G. S. Brulo, X. Ma, S. Burroughs, C. D. Rahn, R. G. Nuzzo, J. A. Rogers and N. C. Giebink, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17113 CrossRef .
L. L. Baranowski, G. J. Snyder and E. S. Toberer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9055 RSC .
H. J. Goldsmid, J. E. Giutronich and M. M. Kaila, Sol. Energy, 1980, 24, 435–440 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kraemer, B. Poudel, H. P. Feng, J. C. Caylor, B. Yu, X. Yan, Y. Ma, X. Wang, D. Wang, A. Muto, K. McEnaney, M. Chiesa, Z. Ren and G. Chen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 532–538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Telkes, J. Appl. Phys., 1954, 25, 765–777 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Weinstein, J. Loomis, B. Bhatia, D. M. Bierman, E. N. Wang and G. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12797–12838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiao, T. Yang, P. Li, P. Zhai and Q. Zhang, Appl. Energy, 2012, 93, 33–38 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, K. Wu and Q. Fu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2109255 CrossRef CAS .
V. Singh, T. L. Bougher, A. Weathers, Y. Cai, K. Bi, M. T. Pettes, S. A. McMenamin, W. Lv, D. P. Resler, T. R. Gattuso, D. H. Altman, K. H. Sandhage, L. Shi, A. Henry and B. A. Cola, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 384–390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lv, X.-W. Tan, K.-H. Yu, R.-L. Zheng, J.-J. Zheng and W. Wei, Carbon, 2016, 99, 222–228 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zeng, D. Zavanelli, J. Chen, M. Saeidi-Javash, Y. Du, S. LeBlanc, G. J. Snyder and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 485–512 RSC .
G.-Q. Qi, J. Yang, R.-Y. Bao, Z.-Y. Liu, W. Yang, B.-H. Xie and M.-B. Yang, Carbon, 2015, 88, 196–205 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, L.-S. Tang, R.-Y. Bao, L. Bai, Z.-Y. Liu, B.-H. Xie, M.-B. Yang and W. Yang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 56–64 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, H. Zhao, H. Niu, Y. Ren, H. Fang, X. Fang, R. Lv, M. Maqbool and S. Bai, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 6917–6928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Han, G. Du, W. Gao and H. Bai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900412 CrossRef .
J. Yang, L.-S. Tang, L. Bai, R.-Y. Bao, Z.-Y. Liu, B.-H. Xie, M.-B. Yang and W. Yang, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 250–273 RSC .
Y. Cui, D. Bao, F. Xu, Y. Gao, X. Zhang, H. Geng, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhu and H. Wang, Composites, Part B, 2021, 224, 109203 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Y. Chen, Y. Li, W. Dai, Q. Yan, F. E. Alam, S. Du, Z. Wang, K. Nishimura, N. Jiang, C. T. Lin and J. Yu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 17600–17606 RSC .
J. Zhao, S. Pei, W. Ren, L. Gao and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5245–5252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Cottrill, A. T. Liu, Y. Kunai, V. B. Koman, A. Kaplan, S. G. Mahajan, P. Liu, A. R. Toland and M. S. Strano, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 664 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kraemer, Q. Jie, K. McEnaney, F. Cao, W. Liu, L. A. Weinstein, J. Loomis, Z. Ren and G. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16153 CrossRef CAS .
K. McEnaney, D. Kraemer, Z. Ren and G. Chen, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 074502 CrossRef .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Min, J. Liu, X. Li, F. An, P. Liu, Y. Shen, N. Koratkar and Z.-Z. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1805365 CrossRef .
Z. Yang, S. Jia, Y. Niu, X. Lv, H. Fu, Y. Zhang, D. Liu, B. Wang and Q. Li, Small, 2021, 17, e2101093 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho and A. H. Castro Neto, Science, 2016, 353, aac9439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shen, Z. Wang, Y. Wu, X. Liu, Y. B. He and J. K. Kim, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3585–3593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, T. Li, Z. Tong, J. Chao, T. Zhai, J. Xu, T. Yan, M. Wu, Z. Xu, H. Bao, T. Deng and R. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1905099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. R. Choi and S.-J. Park, Composites, Part A, 2018, 109, 498–506 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Zeng, D. Han, K. Wu, B. Yu, S. Chai, F. Chen and Q. Fu, Carbon, 2018, 133, 435–445 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yan, F. E. Alam, J. Gao, W. Dai, X. Tan, L. Lv, J. Wang, H. Zhang, D. Chen, K. Nishimura, L. Wang, J. Yu, J. Lu, R. Sun, R. Xiang, S. Maruyama, H. Zhang, S. Wu, N. Jiang and C. T. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2104062,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.202104062 .
S. Yang, Q. Wang and B. Wen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 1511–1523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-H. Li, P. Liu, X. Li, F. An, P. Min, K.-N. Liao and Z.-Z. Yu, Carbon, 2018, 140, 624–633 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, Y. Huang and S. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705069 CrossRef .
V. K. Thakur, J. Yan, M.-F. Lin, C. Zhi, D. Golberg, Y. Bando, R. Sim and P. S. Lee, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 962 RSC .
H. Shen, J. Guo, H. Wang, N. Zhao and J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5701–5708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bandekar, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Protein Struct. Mol. Enzymol., 1992, 1120, 123–143 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cebi, M. Z. Durak, O. S. Toker, O. Sagdic and M. Arici, Food Chem., 2016, 190, 1109–1115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hou, Y. Chen, W. Dai, Z. Wang, H. Li, C. T. Lin, K. Nishimura, N. Jiang and J. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 375, 121921 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, C. Xu, C. Ma, Z. Liu, H. M. Cheng and W. Ren, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900199 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Dai, J. Yu, Y. Wang, Y. Song, F. E. Alam, K. Nishimura, C.-T. Lin and N. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4884–4891 RSC .
C. P. Feng, L. B. Chen, G. L. Tian, S. S. Wan, L. Bai, R. Y. Bao, Z. Y. Liu, M. B. Yang and W. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 18739–18745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, X. Yang, K. Ruan, J. Kong, M. Dong, J. Zhang, J. Gu and Z. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 25465–25473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hong, Y. H. Jung, J. S. Lee, C. Jeong, J. U. Kim, S. Lee, H. Ryu, H. Kim, Z. Ma and T. I. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902575 CrossRef .
H. Jiang, Z. Wang, H. Geng, X. Song, H. Zeng and C. Zhi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 10078–10084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, F. Li, X. Zhao, W. Zhang, S. Li, Y. Lu and L. Zhang, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 1661–1669 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ma, Y. Zhao, K. Ruan, X. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Guo, X. Yang, J. Kong and J. Gu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 1677–1686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, X. Zeng, R. Sun, J. B. Xu and C. P. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15645–15653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, X. Zeng, F. Wang, R. Sun, J.-b. Xu and C.-P. Wong, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1049–1057 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zeng, L. Ye, S. Yu, H. Li, R. Sun, J. Xu and C. P. Wong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6774–6781 RSC .
M. Foygel, R. D. Morris, D. Anez, S. French and V. L. Sobolev, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 104201 CrossRef .
X. Zeng, Y. Yao, Z. Gong, F. Wang, R. Sun, J. Xu and C. P. Wong, Small, 2015, 11, 6205–6213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Pan, Y. Yao, X. Zeng, J. Sun, J. Hu, R. Sun, J. B. Xu and C. P. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33001–33010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wei, L. zhang and S. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 404, 126437 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, C. Lei, K. Wu and Q. Fu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 15738–15747 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Cao, D. Sun, L. Wang, Z. Yan, W. Liu, X. Wang and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 13207–13217 RSC .
Y. Jeyashree, Y. Sukhi, A. Vimala Juliet, S. Lourdu Jame and S. Indirani, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2020, 107, 104782 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Niu and W. Yuan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 17523–17534 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xue, X. Z. Jin, X. Xie, X. D. Qi, J. H. Yang and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 18691–18701 RSC .
J. Yang, L.-S. Tang, R.-Y. Bao, L. Bai, Z.-Y. Liu, W. Yang, B.-H. Xie and M.-B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18841–18851 RSC .
J. Yang, L.-S. Tang, R.-Y. Bao, L. Bai, Z.-Y. Liu, W. Yang, B.-H. Xie and M.-B. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 315, 481–490 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d2ta00818aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram for fabricating the M-EG/Gel-Am composite and constructing the highly oriented graphite sheets. (b) HRTEM image of the W-EG. (c) HRTEM image of the M-EG with a thin PDA layer, the inset showed the well-preserved crystal lattice of graphite. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of the M-EG/Gel-Am composite. (e) The morphology of the palm tree bark, which inspired the microstructure engineering of the composite. The optical images of the M-EG/Gel-Am composite exhibiting (f) large size, (g) adequately tensile strength, and (h) resistance property in the LCD 1602 module.	 

 	Fig. 2  Morphology and structural characterization of the graphite sheets and the obtained material. (a) The SEM images of the graphite intercalation compounds (GIC). (b) The SEM images of W-EG and the inset showed its microstructure. (c) The SEM image of the M-EG with the PDA layer. (d) Top view SEM image of M-EG/Gel-Am composite. (e) Cross-sectional SEM image of M-EG/Gel-Am composite. (f) Magnified SEM image of the selected area exhibited the highly oriented GNPs. (g) XRD results of GIC, W-EG, and M-EG. (h) Raman spectra of GIC, W-EG, and M-EG. (i) FT-IR spectra of Gel-Am, W-EG, M-EG, and M-EG/Gel-Am composite.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) In-plane and through-plane thermal conductivity of the obtained TIMs. (b) Comparison of the specific TCE efficiency along the in-plane direction between our work and previously reported polymer-based TIMs (PAA: polyacrylic acid; ANF: aramid nanofiber). (c) Simulated values of K0 and tα using Foygel's nonlinear model based on the experimental data of this study. (d) Surface temperature evolution of the radio frequency module within the tracked robot platform. (e) Infrared thermal images of the radio frequency module with different TIMs during the test. (f) The correlation curve between the simulated effective TC and the module temperature. (g) The simulation comparison indicating the superior cooling efficiency of M-EG/Gel-Am TIM.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
R = Rc × S	(4)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the periodical laser test system controlled by the Arduino microchip and an infrared camera recording of the surface temperature distribution. (b) Infrared thermal images of the surface temperature of different samples during the first time period. (c) Central spot temperature evolution of different samples during the three test cycles. (d) Average temperature and effective response area of the samples at different time spots, indicating the uniform and rapid thermal conduction of M-EG/Gel-Am. (e) 3D IR temperature distribution of different samples at the balance time. (f) Temperature distribution curve on the surface of the samples (from the center of the samples to the edge). (g) Comparison of experimental data and simulated results based on the classic thermoelastic theory. (h) Finite simulation results exhibit the microscopic and macroscopic heat transfer properties within the sample.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the self-made solar thermoelectric generator (STEG) device for solar energy harvesting. (b) Infrared thermal images of the temperature distribution in the STEG device with different TIMs. (c) The upper surface temperature of the thermoelectric module and output voltage at different time spots. (d) Output voltage and current of the self-made STEG device with the duration of time. (e) Output power density of the STEG device equipped with different TIMs at typical time spots. (f) Comparison of output power density in this work with previous reported studies. (g) The simulated temperature profile of the STEG device with substrate under coupling conditions.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d2ta00818a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
