Metal-containing and related polymers for biomedical applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CS00026F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CS00026F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5232-5263Metal-containing and related polymers for biomedical applications

        
          
            Yi 
            Yan†
*ab, 
      
        
          
            Jiuyang 
            Zhang†
ac, 
      
        
          
            Lixia 
            Ren
          
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Chuanbing 
            Tang
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, USA. E-mail: tang4@mailbox.sc.edu; yanyi@nwpu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Applied Chemistry, School of Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an, Shannxi 710129, China
cSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China
dSchool of Material Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China
Received 
      12th January 2016
    First published on 24th February 2016AbstractA survey of the most recent progress in the biomedical applications of metal-containing polymers is given. Due to the unique optical, electrochemical, and magnetic properties, at least 30 different metal elements, most of them transition metals, are introduced into polymeric frameworks for interactions with biology-relevant substrates via various means. Inspired by the advance of metal-containing small molecular drugs and promoted by the great progress in polymer chemistry, metal-containing polymers have gained momentum during recent decades. According to their different applications, this review summarizes the following biomedical applications: (1) metal-containing polymers as drug delivery vehicles; (2) metal-containing polymeric drugs and biocides, including antimicrobial and antiviral agents, anticancer drugs, photodynamic therapy agents, radiotherapy agents and biocides; (3) metal-containing polymers as biosensors, and (4) metal-containing polymers in bioimaging.
Yi Yan
Dr Yi Yan received his BS from College of Chemistry, Jilin University and PhD from the State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, Jilin University under the supervision of Prof. Lixin Wu. Then, he moved to Canada to pursue his postdoctoral research at Queen's University with Prof. Anne Petitjean from August 2011 to October 2012. From November 2012 to April 2015, he was a postdoctoral scholar at the University of South Carolina with Prof. Chuanbing Tang. Since May 2015, he has been a full professor in Department of Applied Chemistry, School of Science at Northwestern Polytechnical University, P. R. China. His research is focused on supramolecular chemistry, controlled polymerization, metal-containing polymers and inorganic–organic hybrids.
Jiuyang Zhang
Dr Jiuyang Zhang received his BS from Nanjing University (2010). He joined Prof. Chuanbing Tang's group and obtained his PhD (2014) from University of South Carolina. His research focuses on metal-containing polymers, controlled polymerization techniques and hybrid polymeric materials.
Lixia Ren
Dr Lixia Ren received her BS from Hebei University in 2004 and PhD from Institute of Chemistry Chinese Academy of Science under the supervision of Prof. Yongming Chen in 2009. She did her postdoctoral research at University of South Carolina with Prof. Chuanbing Tang from 2009 to 2011. Currently she is an associate professor at Tianjin University, China. She is interested in controlled polymerization of topological polymers, supramolecular polymers, metal-containing polymers and polymer-based biomaterials.
Chuanbing Tang
Prof. Chuanbing Tang received BS from Nanjing University and PhD from Carnegie Mellon University with Prof. Krzysztof Matyjaszewski and Tomasz Kowalewski. He was a postdoctoral scholar at the University of California Santa Barbara with Prof. Edward J. Kramer and Craig J. Hawker. Since August 2009, he has been an Assistant Professor, Associate Professor and College of Arts and Sciences Distinguished Professor in Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of South Carolina. His research interests focus on organic polymer synthesis, sustainable polymers from biomass, metal-containing polymers, dielectric polymers, and polymers for biomedical applications.
1. Introduction
Metal-containing polymers, also named organometallic polymers or metallopolymers, are one of the major classes of polymers discovered in the 20th century.1–3 They stand out independently because of a unique combination of organic and inorganic components in one macromolecular system.4–12 Thus a full benefit could be achieved by simultaneously incorporating the mechanical and processing properties of polymeric frameworks and the electronic, catalytic, magnetic and radioactive properties of metal building blocks.13–20 With the advent of polymer science in the 1950s, metals were subsequently introduced into polymers in the hands of organic and polymer scientists.21–26 As a statistical example, Fig. 1 lists the evolution of publications containing “organometallic polymers” over the last two and half decades, searched via SciFinder (Fig. 1). There has been a steady growth of significant research in this field. Over the years metal-containing polymers have been developed to posess a range of applications that span diverse fields, such as sensing, catalysis, media storage, electrolysis and electro-optical devices.27–34 Research on metal-containing polymers in the biomedical field is emerging.35,36 The research is primarily inspired by the progress of organometallic compounds in polymer chemistry and medicinal chemistry that have been found to have vast utilities including anti-cancer, anti-bacterial, anti-fungal, and anti-virus treatments.37–40 The ability of cisplatin, the first approved organometallic drug for killing cancer cells, is arguably the most exciting biomedical discovery in the field.41,42 Many other organometallic compounds have been reported for entering different stages of clinical trials.43,44
 Fig. 1  Publications containing “organometallic polymers” from 1990 to 2015 based on SciFinder search. 
The early pioneer work has served as a springboard to push metal-containing polymers for applications in the biomedical context.36,45–49 The key to the success is to understand their structural, compositional and chemical variation and to correlate fundamentals already discovered in small organometallic compounds in the environment of a macromolecular system. Generally, these metal centers exist in either sandwich, half-sandwich, π-ligand, CO-coordination, carbene, or supramolecular interactions.50–52 The essential mechanism of metals in biological media typically relies on electron transfer between metals and biological substrates, either by a radical or an ionic pathway.53 The metal building blocks are either hydrophobic or hydrophilic. The incorporation into a polymeric framework affords them more tunable physical properties in conjunction with the diversity of the organic chemistry of macromolecules, thus facilitating their biological functions. Robust organic chemistry and controlled polymerization techniques allow precision installation of metal centers into desirable locations of macromolecules, which in turn offer their artificially tunable architectures for providing rational design.54–57
There are about 30 different metals used in polymeric systems (Fig. 2). Given the nature of polymers and metals usually bridged by covalent or supramolecular bonds, most of them are transition metals. Among them, Pt is probably the mostly studied, while iron, cobalt, silver and ruthenium are also widely explored. Beyond Pt, metals in groups IV and V have attracted the most attention in the scientific research communities. Based on the biological functions of metal-containing polymers, this review is organized into four sections including (1) polymers as drug delivery systems; (2) polymers as drugs and biocides; (3) polymers for biosensing; and (4) polymers for bioimaging. In the first section, most drug delivery systems utilize the redox chemistry or dynamic covalent bond chemistry of metals. The second section is the major focus of this review. The metal drugs/biocides are classified into antimicrobial/antiviral, anticancer, photodynamic therapy, radiotherapy and biocides. The biosensing application in the third section is centred on the redox properties of metals; while the bioimaging in the last section is composed of fluorescent imaging and magnetic resonance imaging. Meanwhile, biomedical applications of polymers containing some non-metallic elements (As, Se, Te) are also covered in this review. A few metal-containing dendrimers are included as well.
 Fig. 2  Metals in periodic tables used in polymeric systems for biomedical applications and covered by this review article. 
To the best of our knowledge, a summary on the biomedical applications of metal-containing polymers has been missing. This comprehensive review is a timely contribution to the emerging field. Different aspects of biomedical applications are embedded in numerous excellent reviews or book chapters on metal-containing polymers: such as “Metallopolymers: New Multifunctional Materials” by Manners,2 “Recent developments in the Supramolecular Chemistry of Terpyridine-metal Complexes” by Schubert et al.,58 “Macromolecules Containing Metal and Metal-Like Elements” by Abd-El-Aziz,59 and “Polymers with Platinum Drugs and Other Macromolecular Metal Complexes for Cancer Treatment” by Stenzel et al.,37 to name just a few.
2. Metal-containing and related polymers as drug delivery vehicles
Metal-containing polymers are excellent candidates for drug delivery due to their redox chemistry and charged state. With fully reversible redox chemistry, ferrocene-containing polymers are promising candidates and widely studied for smart drug delivery.60–63 Using a layer-by-layer strategy of polyanionic and polycationic poly(ferrocenylsilane) (PFS), Vancso et al. constructed a hybrid polymer capsule with controlled permeability.64 The permeability and swellability of this capsule can be adjusted by the chemical oxidation of ferrocene. Using PFS with N-dimethylethyl ammonium and N-dimethyldecyl ammonium substituents, they also built redox-responsive micelles, which can be used to load and release drugs like paclitaxel.65 Importantly, this polymer showed low cell toxicity below the concentration of 10 mg mL−1.
Similarly, liposomes with controlled permeability can be prepared from a ferrocene-modified phospholipid.66 Zhang et al. synthesized a ferrocene-containing block copolymer consisting of hydrophilic polyethylene oxide (PEO) and hydrophobic poly(2-(methacryloyloxy)ethyl ferrocene-carboxylate) (PMAEFc), as shown in Fig. 3.67 By using the hydrophilic Rhodamine B as a model molecule, this system demonstrated efficient controlled release upon the oxidation of H2O2, which played a more important role in the specific physiological environment of tumors than in normal tissues.
 Fig. 3  Self-assembly of ferrocene-containing block copolymer PEG-b-PMAEFc, and redox-responsive release of a model molecule (Rhodamine B). Adapted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright © 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another strategy to construct smart delivery systems from ferrocene is to utilize host–guest chemistry between cyclodextrin and ferrocene. For example, Yuan et al. reported a redox-responsive vesicle by using poly(styrene)–β-cyclodextrin (PS–β-CD) and poly(ethylene oxide)–ferrocene (PEO–Fc) as building blocks.68 Upon oxidation, the host–guest interaction was destroyed, and thus the vesicle was disassembled, which can be used to deliver drugs with controlled release. In a similar study, Ritter et al. prepared a redox-responsive supramolecular graft polymer using the host–guest interaction between ferrocene-containing acrylic copolymer (PDMA-stat-Fc) and β-CD-terminated polydiethylacrylamide (PDEA).69
To deliver drugs toward intracellular targets, the Zuber group reported a smart cytosolic protein delivery system by using a nickel-containing polymer.70 As shown in Fig. 4, they used a supramolecular system that facilitated the assembly of pyridylthiourea-grafted polyethylenimine (pPEI) with affinity-purified His-tagged proteins pre-organized onto a nickel-immobilized polymeric guide. The guide was prepared by functionalization of an ornithine polymer with nitrilotriacetic acid groups, which were excellent binding sites for His-tagged proteins. The delivery efficiency was high as measured using evaluation in living U87 glioblastoma cells with an easily detectable fluorescent protein and single-chain antibodies. Transduction of the protease caspase 3 induced apoptosis in two cancer cell lines, demonstrating that this new protein delivery method could be used to interfere with cellular functions.
 Fig. 4  Illustration of the Ni-containing protein delivery system. Adapted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright © 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Another interesting smart delivery system is selenium-containing polymers. Selenium is an important element in the human body. Selenoproteins, a combination of selenium and protein, have the ability to prevent cellular damage from free radicals.71,72 Many selenium-containing biomolecules have been prepared as antioxidants against free radicals to treat some chronic diseases, such as cancer and heart disease.73 These studies indicate the potential bioactivities of selenium-containing materials. Although selenium-containing small molecules have been broadly studied, study on selenium-containing polymers has been rare in the past decades.71 Since 2008, Zhang, Xu, and coworkers have extensively investigated selenium-containing polymers.71 Various architectures of selenium-containing polymers were designed by their group, including main-chain selenium-containing polymers, side-chain analogues and dendrimers. Based on the unique chemical and biological properties of the element selenium, these polymeric materials have been applied as advanced biomaterials.
In 2010, they reported a selenium-containing main-chain block copolymer based on diselenide.72 Considering the bigger radius of the selenium atom and the lower electronegativity of selenium compared with sulphur, energy of selenium–selenium bonds (Se–Se) (172 kJ mol−1) is much lower than that of S–S bonds (240 kJ mol−1). The low energy of Se–Se makes it easier to break the bonds under mild oxidation conditions. As shown in Fig. 5, diselenide-containing main-chain polymers (PEG–PUSeSe–PEG) were prepared via coupling with diselenide-containing diols. The PEG–PUSeSe–PEG polymers showed good solubility in common solvents.
 Fig. 5  Synthesis of the diselenide-containing main-chain polymers (PEG–PUSeSe–PEG). Adapted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright © 2010, American Chemical Society. 
Due to the amphiphilic nature of block copolymers, PEG–PUSeSe–PEG formed micelles in water with a critical micellar concentration (CMC) of 3.1 × 10−4 mg mL−1. The micelles were stable under ambient conditions. The diselenide was encapsulated in the core of the micelles. These micelles can be disassembled by oxidation under very mild conditions, such as in 0.01% (v/v) H2O2 solution. This study indicated that diselenide-containing block copolymers are excellent candidates for redox-responsive drug delivery vehicles.
Xu and coworkers found that micelles from PEG–PUSeSe–PEG can be disrupted as diselenide is also sensitive to γ-radiation.74 They prepared doxorubicin-loaded PEG–PUSeSe–PEG micelles in aqueous solution based on the hydrophobic interaction. Under γ-radiation (dose: 50 J kg−1), the micelles were disrupted, and a further γ-radiation dose (500 J kg−1) led to the release of doxorubicin drugs. The dose of γ-radiation was quite similar to the amount that was received by patients during a single radiotherapy treatment. They demonstrated that such γ-radiation sensitive materials have great potential as advanced drug delivery materials in the combination of radiotherapy and chemotherapy.
Besides γ-radiation and H2O2 oxidation, PEG–PUSeSe–PEG micelles are also sensitive to singlet oxygen, which can be produced in solution by porphyrin derivatives when irradiated with red light.75 As shown in Fig. 6, diselenide was oxidized by singlet oxygen, and the micelles were disaggregated. As a result, the doxorubicin drug was effectively released.
 Fig. 6  Drug release from diselenide-containing block copolymer micelles under red light. Adapted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright © 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
They also successfully synthesized monoselenide-containing main-chain block copolymers and used them as new vehicles for drugs.76 Hydrophobic selenide can be easily turned into hydrophilic selenoxide or selenone groups via chemical oxidation. Thus, redox responsive polymeric materials can be prepared based on selenide-containing polymers.
In a similar synthetic route to PEG–PUSeSe–PEG, PEG–PUSe–PEG was also prepared.76 The amphiphilic nature of PEG–PUSe–PEG led to the formation of spherical micelles with the ability to load doxorubicin. The drug could be conveniently released via the oxidation of hydrophobic selenide into hydrophilic selenoxide and selenone by 0.1% (v/v) H2O2.
Recently, Xu et al. found that the monoselenide-containing polymers had the ability to coordinate with platinum ions (Pt2+).77 PEG–PUSeSe–PEG was first coordinated with Pt2+, and doxorubicin was encapsulated to form stable micelles. These micelles were disassembled in the presence of glutathione (GSH) due to the strong affinity between GSH and platinum ions. As a result, doxorubicin was released into the medium via these coordination reactions. They demonstrated that this novel system could have great potential in drug delivery applications considering GSH as the most abundant thiol species in cancer cells.
Besides main-chain polymers, selenide-containing side-chain polymers have been also investigated by the groups of Zhang and Xu.78 They reported two kinds of selenide-containing side-chain polymers: (1) covalent side-chain selenium-containing polymers; (2) non-covalent side-chain selenium-containing polymers. Generally, the covalent side-chain selenium-containing polymers were synthesized via esterification with selenide-containing alcohols.78 These polymers can also form micelles in aqueous solution. The covalent side-chain selenium-containing polymers have similar chemical properties to the main-chain ones. Via the oxidation of selenide compound by diluted H2O2 solution, the micelles could be disrupted and then release drugs. Interestingly, instead of further oxidization to selenone, the selenide in PEG-b-PAA–Se was only oxidized into selenoxide. These selenoxide-containing polymers were reduced back to selenide-containing polymeric micelles by mild reducing agents, such as vitamin C. The reversible redox process could be performed for several cycles. The redox responsive materials are excellent materials for drug delivery.
The non-covalent side-chain selenium-containing polymers were prepared via electrostatic interactions between a selenium-containing cationic ammonium surfactant (SeQTA) and an anionic polyacrylic acid (PEG-b-PAA), as shown in Fig. 7.79 This side-chain selenium-containing PEG-b-PAA–SeQTA complex showed similar redox properties to PEG-b-PAA–Se polymers, which could also release drugs under oxidation and reduction.
 Fig. 7  Oxidation-responsive micelles based on a side-chain selenium-containing polymeric supra-amphiphile formed through the electrostatic interaction. Adapted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright © 2010, American Chemical Society. 
Compared with selenium-containing polymers, tellurium-containing polymers are far less explored although tellurium has very similar physical and chemical behaviors to selenium.80,81 Tellurium-containing compounds have been identified as mimics of glutathione peroxidase (GPx), which has the ability to protect cells from oxidative stress. Furthermore, tellurium-containing molecules are usually less toxic to humans than selenium-containing compounds.81,82
Considering the quite similar properties between tellurium and selenium, techniques and applications used in selenium-containing polymers might be also suitable for tellurium-containing polymers. In 2014, Xu et al. reported the utilization of tellurium-containing polymers as a new possible coordination-responsive drug delivery system.81 The polymer, PEG–PUTe–PEG, which has a similar structure to the selenium-containing polymer (PEG–PUSe–PEG), was prepared via a similar synthetic technique. PEG–PUTe–PEG formed micelles in aqueous solution due to its amphiphilic nature. The CMC of the polymer is 1.4 × 10−3 g L−1 (about 3.7 × 10−8 M). As an analogue of PEG–PUSe–PEG, PEG–PUTe–PEG also showed an excellent ability to associate with cisplatin, which can be confirmed by 127Te NMR. This coordination interaction could be disrupted when a certain amount of glutathione (GSH) was added. Due to the strong affinity between GSH and platinum ions, cisplatin was effectively released in the medium. The overall mechanism is shown in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  Structure of tellurium-containing polymer, PEG–PUTe–PEG, and the mechanism of association with cisplatin and release via glutathione. Adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Similar to selenium-containing polymers, tellurium-containing polymers are also sensitive to oxidation and γ-radiation.83,84 These properties provide opportunities to utilize tellurium-containing polymers as advanced redox-responsive and light-responsive materials. Compared with selenium-containing polymers, the tellurium-containing polymer is highly sensitive to oxidation, which is ascribed to the oxidation-sensitive nature of the element tellurium.84 Upon oxidation under very mild conditions (100 μM H2O2) or γ-radiation, PEG–PUTe–PEG was oxidized into PEG–PUTeO–PEG (telluride-containing), and the micelles started to change their morphology. Further oxidation led to the decomposition of the micelles. These tellurium-containing polymers provided an ultra-sensitive redox-responsive platform that uniquely took advantage of the sensitive nature of the element tellurium. Besides the linear polymers, a branched tellurium-containing polymer was also reported.83 The branched polymer was synthesized via Williamson ether synthesis between PEG–Te and tris(bromomethyl)benzene. The aggregation of this branched polymer was also redox sensitive to a low concentration of H2O2 (100 μM).
3. Metal-containing polymeric drugs and biocides
Considering their diverse redox properties, cytotoxicity and their special interaction with DNA/RNA, metal-containing polymers are promising drugs with broad applications, ranging from antibacterial agents to anticancer drugs. The most well-known example is the cisplatin-containing anticancer drugs, some of which have been already approved by the FDA and used in clinics. We mainly summarize the metal-containing polymeric drugs or prodrugs according to their different applications.
3.1 Antimicrobial and antiviral agents
Infections by bacteria and fungi are leading to a global crisis, which is even worse in developing countries. Many drugs with promising antibacterial and antifungal properties were developed during the last century. Due to their charged nature and interesting bioactivities, most metal-containing polymers, especially the transition metal-containing polymers, showed interesting antimicrobial and antiviral properties.
Zirconium-containing polymers were found to have an antiviral activity. Carraher et al. reported that a polymer from bis(cyclopentadienyl)zirconium dichloride and diethylstilbestrol (Fig. 9) was active against vaccinia virus, preventing more than 35% of treated cells from infection at a high concentration of 0.15 g mL−1.85 Through condensation with different drug precursors, Carraher et al. also reported titanium-containing polymers (Fig. 9) with potential anticancer and antibacterial properties.86,87
 Fig. 9  Chemical structures of Zr- and Ti-containing polymers with antiviral activity. 
The Islam group reported the antibacterial activity of vanadium-containing metallopolymers.88 These polymers, including Na3[V2O2(O2)4(carboxylate)]–PA [PA = poly(acrylate)] (PAV) and Na2[VO(O2)2(carboxylate)]–PMA [PMA = poly(methacrylate)] (PMAV), were synthesized by the reaction of V2O5 with H2O2 and sodium salts of the respective macromolecular ligands at pH ≈ 6. The antibacterial activity was screened against Gram-negative Escherichia coli (E. coli) and Gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus). Significantly, PMAV treatment resulted in 66.8% inhibition of S. aureus at a low concentration of 20 μg mL−1.
Chromium-containing polymers also show interesting biomedical applications due to their biological, pharmacological, and clinical importance. The Nartop group synthesized Schiff base-functionalized polystyrene, which could form complexes with Cr(III) complexes,89 as shown in Fig. 10. All of these polymers showed moderate or high antibacterial activities against different bacteria, such as S. aureus, Shigella dysenteriae type 10, Listeria monocytogenes 4b, E. coli, Salmonella typhi H, Staphylococcus epidermis, Brucella abortus, Micrococcs luteus, Bacillus cereus sp., Pseudomonas putida sp., and antifungal activity against Candida albicans.
 Fig. 10  Chemical structure of Cr-containing polymers with antibacterial activity. 
A series of biocompatible cobalt-containing polymers with interesting anti-Candida applications were reported by the Hashmi group.90 These polymers were synthesized from sunflower fatty amide diol, adipic acid and cobalt chloride through a microwave reaction. They showed significant antifungal activity against Candida both in liquid and solid media. A preliminary mechanism study showed that the activity originated from the inhibition of the plasma membrane. Using a similar strategy to the construction of cobalt–sunflower oil based polymers, another sunflower oil based nickel–zinc bimetallic polymer was reported by the same group (Fig. 11).91 This polymer showed interesting antifungal properties by using Candida species as model organisms. The concentration of this polymer plays an important role on the growth and sensitivity of the Candida species. A study on the mechanism showed that the antifungal activity of this polymer arose from the targeting H+-ATPase mediated H+-pumping, which led to intracellular acidification and cell death.
 Fig. 11  Chemical structure of Ni–Zn-bimetallic sunflower oil based polymers with antifungal property. 
Polymeric Schiff bases are widely used to prepare transition metal-containing polymers through coordination interactions. Main-chain polymeric Schiff bases were prepared through a condensation reaction.92 Then, the target metal-containing polymer can be prepared in quantitative yields by interacting with an equimolar amount of transition metal salts (Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II), Cu(II) and Zn(II)). Compared with the polymeric Schiff bases, Parveen et al. found that all of these metal-containing polymeric compounds showed enhanced antibacterial activity against E. coli, B. subtilis, S. aureus, P. aeruginosa and S. typhi, and antifungal activity against T. longifusus, C. albicans, M. canis, F. solani and C. glaberata. In another study, they designed new polymeric Schiff bases and corresponding metallopolymers, which showed similar antibacterial and antifungal activities. They attributed the enhanced activity to the coordination interaction with metal ions.92,93
Germanium and its derivatives have been utilized for dietary supplements, immunity enhancement and antimicrobial materials.94–96 Based on their unique properties, germanium-containing polymers were also investigated. In 2014, Zaki and coworkers reported the modification of functionalized polyethylene glycol (PEG) by germanium dioxide to produce a germanium nonionic surfactant (Fig. 12).97 The surfactant spontaneously formed micelles in aqueous solution with a critical concentration of 0.3–0.5 mM. Via standard disk-diffusion assay, the surfactant showed good ability to inhibit the growth of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria and fungi. The inhibition zones on the disk achieved a diameter of 20–40 mm with 1 mg of surfactant for different bacteria and fungi.
 Fig. 12  Chemical structure of Ge-containing PEO surfactant with antibacterial activity. 
Organotins are among the most widely used organometallic materials with different functionalities. They are broadly used as biocidal materials.98,99 Tin-containing polymethylacrylate is well-known for delivering substances to micro-organisms at certain rates.98 Trialkyltin-containing polymeric materials have been used as surface coating materials against marine organisms that foul ship bottoms.100 Tributyltin-containing polymers usually give the best antifouling effects due to the readily hydrolysis from carboxylate group.98 As a result, many effective coating materials based on tin-containing polymethacrylates have been produced. Such polymeric materials successively release tin complexes in order to inhibit the growth of certain organisms in a long period.
Due to the great advantages of organotin molecules, tin-containing polymers are also prepared as antimicrobial materials. Through condensation polymerization, tin-containing polyamines (dibutyltin pyrimidine polyamines, Fig. 13) were prepared and showed effective inhibition towards various strains of bacteria, including E. coli, S. cerevisiae, S. aureus and so on.101 Using a similar technique, organotin can also form esters with some commercial antibiotics. For example, Carraher and coworkers reported the polycondensation reactions between organotin and the commercial available antibiotic ciprofloxacin.102 The resultant tin-containing polymers had the ability to kill different kinds of viruses, including reovirus ST3, vaccinia WR, herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1, and varicella zoster virus (VZV). Furthermore, the polymers can also inhibit Balb 3T3 cancer cells, which indicated their potential as anticancer drugs. Additionally, these polymers have great ability to kill various kinds of bacteria and yeasts. With different alkyl groups in the organotin molecules, they showed different effects against cancer cells. The best polymer was based on divinyltin–ciprofloxacin. All of these results demonstrated that organotin-containing polymers are candidates as new biomedical materials.
 Fig. 13  Chemical structures of Sn-containing polymers with antibacterial activity. 
Metallocene-containing polymers are also very promising candidates for antibacterial drugs. Cobaltocenium has many advantages over its analogue, ferrocene, such as better stability and ion-dependent solubility. Metzler-Nolte and coworkers reported a series of cobaltocenium bioconjugates prepared via solid phase peptide synthesis (SPPS).103 It was found that the presence of a positively charged cobaltocenium did not significantly influence hydrogen bonds in peptide structures. Taking advantage of the higher redox potential and chemical stability of cobaltocenium, they reported the first example of directed nuclear delivery of cobaltocenium, by conjugation to the SV-40 T antigen nuclear localization signal (NLS; primary sequence HPro-Lys-Lys-Lys-Arg-Lys-Val-OH) peptide. They also found that these bioconjugates showed potential antibacterial activity against E. coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and S. aureus, although very limited.104
The Manners group investigated main-chain cobaltocenium-containing polymers via anionic ring-opening polymerization.105–107 They first reported the association between main-chain cobaltocenium-containing polymers and DNA due to ionic interactions, which could be potentially utilized for DNA or gene delivery.108
Recently, we reported the synthesis of side-chain cobaltocenium-containing polymers and their applications as advanced materials.109–121 In 2014, we reported the utilization of side-chain cobaltocenium-containing polymers as novel antimicrobial materials to kill methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA).122 MRSA is resistant to most current commercial β-lactam antibiotics. We found that cobaltocenium-containing polymers could be effective against various strains of MRSA. Due to the unique ionic interaction between carboxylic anions and cationic cobaltocenium moieties, these cobaltocenium-containing polymers have the ability to rejuvenate traditional antibiotics against MRSA via the binding with β-lactamase. β-Lactamase produced by MRSA is an enzyme that can deactivate antibiotics via hydrolysis of the β-lactam rings in antibiotics. As shown in Fig. 14, through association with carboxylic anions in antibiotics, the bioconjugates of cobaltocenium-containing polymers could protect antibiotics from the hydrolysis by β-lactamase. This conjugation was stable in aqueous solution and confirmed by 1H NMR study. Furthermore, the antibiotics can be released effectively when the bioconjugates arrive at the negatively charged bacterial cell membranes or cell walls. Additionally, these side-chain cobaltocenium-containing polymers themselves also have the ability to kill various strains of bacteria, including MRSA at relatively low concentrations (1–10 μM) via disruption of cell membranes. According to in vivo and in vitro tests, these metallopolymers exhibited an extremely low cytotoxicity to red blood cells and high selectivity against bacterial cells. These studies indicated the great potential of cobaltocenium-containing polymers as advanced antimicrobial materials.
 Fig. 14  (a) Formation of ion-pairs between β-lactam antibiotics and cationic cobaltocenium-containing polymers. (b) 1H NMR spectrum of ion-pairs of nitrocefin and cationic cobaltocenium-containing polymers. (c) Antibiotic release from antibiotic–metallopolymer ion pairs via lipoteichoic acid or β-lactamases. (d) Four β-lactam antibiotics are used for this study. CSLM images (left column) and corresponding SEM images (right column) of HA-MRSA cells incubated respectively in the presence of control solution, 5.6 μM penicillin-G (2 μg mL−1), 1 μM Cl−-paired cationic cobaltocenium-containing polymers (12.5 μg mL−1), and penicillin-G–metallopolymer bioconjugate (5.6 μM penicillin-G and 1 μM metallopolymers). CSLM imaging employed BacLight live/dead stain (green indicates live cells, red indicates dead cells). Scale bars in confocal images, 50 μm; scale bar in SEM images, 1 μm. Adapted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
With such antimicrobial activities and binding affinity with antibiotics, we also introduced these cationic cobaltocenium moieties into polymeric networks to form cobaltocenium-containing hydrogels.123 The gels were prepared via free radical polymerization of methacrylate cobaltocenium monomers and dimethacrylate functionalized PEO crosslinkers. Based on the unique anion-dependent solubility of cobaltocenium moieties,117,124 these gels showed a transition between organogels and hydrogels. Such a transition could be easily achieved by using tetrabutylammonium salts (Fig. 15). Gels with PF6− anions were compatible with a few organic solvents. However, Cl−-paired cobaltocenium-containing gels (PCoCl–Gel) were highly hydrophilic. The gels showed quite different mechanical properties and water uptake ability with different anions. Additionally, considering the binding affinity between anionic antibiotics and cationic cobaltocenium moieties,122,125 Cl−-paired cobaltocenium-containing gels have high efficiency to absorb β-lactam antibiotics, which can be applied to treat antibiotic-contaminated water. Antibiotic contamination has become a critical issue in the world due to the fact that β-lactam antibiotics have greatly enhanced the evolution of bacterial resistance.126 Cl−-paired cobaltocenium-containing gels showed a better ability to remove β-lactam antibiotics (1.5 g L−1 gel could clean antibiotics waste at a concentration of 3–10 mg L−1), compared with other adsorption techniques.127,128 Furthermore, PCoCl–Gel could also inhibit the growth of different strains of bacteria, Gram-negative E. coli, Gram-positive S. aureus and MRSA, at different concentrations (∼20 mg mL−1) due to the antimicrobial activities of cobaltocenium moieties.125 These versatile cobaltocenium-containing hydrogels are new materials with broad applications, especially in the areas of biomedicines and environmental treatment.
 Fig. 15  (a) Illustration of anion-paired cobaltocenium-containing organogels and hydrogels. Inserted: Optical images of representative gels (scale bar: 1 cm). Inhibition of cobaltocenium-containing hydrogels (PCoCl–Gel) was observed against (b) Gram-negative E. coli; (c) Gram-positive S. aureus; and (d) HA-MRSA at different concentrations using standard solution micro-broth measurement. Adapted with permission from ref. 123. Copyright © 2015, Rights Managed by Nature Publishing Group. 
The Abd-El-Aziz group developed antimicrobial agents based on the cationic η6-arene–η5-cyclopentadienyliron(II) (Cp-FeII–arene) complex (Fig. 16).129 These antimicrobial organometallic dendrimers showed tunable activity against multidrug-resistant Gram-positive bacteria, such as MRSA and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium, with the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) in the low micromolar range. Interestingly, these dendrimers were non-cytotoxic to epidermal cell lines and to mammalian red blood cells. Mechanistically, they found two mechanisms for the enhanced antimicrobial activity, which include interactions with cell membranes and induction of oxidative stress on bacteria.
 Fig. 16  Chemical structure of Fe-containing dendrimer with antibacterial activity. 
3.2 Anticancer drugs
Due to their special interaction with biological substrates and unique chemical properties such as Fenton chemistry and reactive oxygen species, metal-containing polymers show promising applications as anticancer drugs.47
It is known that ferrocene shows low acute toxicity, while its oxidized state, ferrocenium, can generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) and hydroxyl radicals130 in a physiological environment, which shows specific toxicity to tumor cells. Neuse et al. carried out a series of studies on the anti-cancer activity of ferrocene-containing polymers.131 They grafted hydrophobic ferrocene to a water-soluble carrier, polyaspartamide (Fig. 17). The in vitro antiproliferative activity of these ferrocene-containing polymers was tested against the HeLa cancer line, and showed similar activities to cisplatin polymers.132
 Fig. 17  Synthesis of ferrocene-containing polyaspartamides. 
To further enhance therapeutic effectiveness, Neuse et al. introduced the concept of drug co-conjugation with polymer carriers, which led to reduction in the doses and side effects caused by the high dose of the pure drug. For example, they grafted both ferrocene and methotrexate (MTX) to the polyaspartamide carriers.133 In another study, they successfully grafted the relatively cheap MTX analogue, folic acid, to polyaspartamide carriers, with a content of ca. 15%.134 They even grafted aminoquinolines and ferrocene to polyaspartamide, a potential cancer chemotherapy agent with drug adjuvant.135 Mukaya et al. synthesized macromolecular co-conjugates of bisphosphonate and ferrocene.136 Their study on the drug release at different pH conditions revealed that both the ferrocene complex and bisphosphonate were released with increasing release rates upon the decrease of pH.
Besides polyaspartamide, Neuse et al. also developed a polyamidoamine-based carrier. The introduction of oligo(ethylene oxide) greatly increased the hydrophilicity and water solubility of ferrocene-containing polymers (Fig. 18).137–144 They used cell lines derived from cultured human cancers, such as HeLa, LNCaP, and Caco-2 to evaluate preliminary biological effects. Interestingly, the polyaspartamide-based conjugates revealed an unexpectedly uniform performance spectrum against the three test lines, which gave IC50 values around 2–10 μg Fe mL−1. After a careful survey of the structure–effect relationship, they concluded that the ferrocene-containing polymers were readily conveyed into endoplasmic space and exerted a powerful antiproliferative imprint upon the affected cells. They also found that the ferrocene-containing polymers, which possess tertiary amine groups, were exceptionally promising and displayed similar activities to cisplatin.
 Fig. 18  Chemical structure of ferrocene-containing polymers reported by the Neuse group. 
The Mirza group synthesized a series of ferrocene-containing main-chain poly(azomethine)esters and studied their biological activities (Fig. 19).145 In biological studies it was found that the fluorinated material was antibacterial with activity comparable to the antibiotics that were used as controls. Significant antibacterial, cytotoxic and antitumor activities indicated their potential use as antibiotics and anticancer agents. All polymers were found to be highly potent antioxidants and more importantly to protect DNA. These polymers can be studied further for pharmacological activities as potential drug candidates. In another study, they screened these polymers for antibacterial activity, brine shrimp cytotoxicity, free radical induced oxidative DNA damage and DPPH free radical scavenging activity. Among all, PFeF showed inhibition of S. aureus, Micrococcus luteus, Bordetella bronchiseptica and Salmonella typhimurium. In the brine shrimp cytotoxicity assay PFeF and PFePr exhibited an LD50 < 1 ppm, a highly cytotoxic behavior. A Schiff base monomer (SB) significantly inhibited the tumor (36.02%) and revealed a higher radical scavenging activity (IC50 13.65 ppm) than the polymers.146 In general, all the polymers (PAMEs) had good antioxidant and DNA protective behavior. Molecular docking and QSAR studies were carried out to investigate the interactions between the polymers and double stranded DNA. The studies showed good correlation of the binding strength and the activity of the polymers. The high value of binding constants implied that respective drugs strongly bound to DNA.
 Fig. 19  Chemical structure of main-chain ferrocene-containing polymers reported by the Mirza group. 
Zhang et al. prepared shell cross-linked (SCL) thermoresponsive polymer micelles by cross-linking poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-aminoethyl methacrylate)-b-polymethyl methacrylate with 1,1′-ferrocenedicarboxylic acid.147 These ferrocene-containing hybrid polymeric micelles exhibited antitumor activity, with cytotoxicity toward HeLa cells with an IC50 as low as 0.2 g L−1.
Bearing similar chemical properties to iron-containing polymers, ruthenium-containing polymers are also used as potential biosensors and anti-cancer drugs. Although ruthenocene-containing polymers were successfully synthesized by the Tang group, these polymers did not show cytotoxicity towards cancer cells.148 The ruthenium complexes commonly used for biomedical applications are ruthenium–ligand coordination complexes or half-ruthenocenes.149
Valente et al. carried out an anti-cancer study of ruthenium-cyclopentadienyl derivatives (Fig. 20).150 They synthesized a D-glucose end-capped polylactide ruthenocenium cyclopentadienyl complex (compound 1 in Fig. 20). Biological tests against human MCF7 and MDAMB231 breast and A2780 ovarian adenocarcinoma revealed that these complexes were potential anti-cancer drugs with IC50 values in the micromolar range.150
 Fig. 20  Chemical structures of representative Ru-containing polymers with anticancer activity (ref. 149 and 151–153). 
Besides the side-chain topology, main-chain ruthenium-containing polymers were also prepared for biomedical application. By using the coordination interaction between bis(terpyridine) derivatives and Ru2+ or Fe2+ ions, Higuchi et al. constructed a series of metallo-supramolecular polymers (compound 2 in Fig. 20).151 Owing to the electrostatic interaction between the metal cations of polymers and the phosphate anions of DNA, these polymers showed high binding ability to different DNAs, such as calf thymus DNA,152 herring sperm DNA, [poly(dA–dT)]2, and [poly(dG–dC)]2. Meanwhile, these polymers displayed high statistical significance to human non-small cell lung cancer lines (NCI-H460).
Dendritic ruthenium-containing polymers are also widely explored for biological applications, especially owing to the “enhanced permeability and retention” (EPR) effect, which allows large molecules to selectively enter cancer cells. Smith et al. developed a series of multinuclear arene ruthenium-containing poly(propyleneimine) (PEI) dendrimers (compound 3 in Fig. 20). An anti-cancer study against the A2780 human ovarian cancer cell line indicated that these ruthenium-containing dendrimers showed moderate anti-proliferative activity. Importantly, there was a clear trend between the size of molecules and cytotoxicity: the larger the size, the more toxic the molecule.153 In another study, they prepared chelating neutral (N,O) and cationic (N,N) ruthenium arene dendrimers based on a PEI scaffold. The cytotoxicity was evaluated over A2780 (cisplatin sensitive) and A2780cisR (cisplatin resistant) human ovarian carcinoma cancer cell lines. The results showed that the antiproliferative activity was almost similar in both cell lines, indicating that these polymers have different anticancer mechanisms to that of cisplatin.154
Some ruthenium metallacages were also used in the construction of ruthenium-containing polymers for potential biological applications. The Therrien group prepared a series of water soluble ruthenium macromolecules through the host–guest interaction between arene ruthenium metallaprisms and pyrenyl-functionalized dendrimers (compounds 4 and 5 in Fig. 20). These host–guest systems showed enhanced cytotoxicity compared to pyrenyl-containing polymers and the metallaprism itself, which might be attributed to the increased water solubility. It is notable that the host–guest systems showed similar cytotoxicity for both the cisplatin-sensitive A2780 and cisplatin-resistant A2780cisR cancer cell lines, indicating that they behaved with a different mechanism from the reference drug, cisplatin.155,156 They further designed another host–guest system by using a water soluble guest, which allowed comparison of the biological activity of both dendrimers and the host–guest system.157 A biological test towards human ovarian cancer cells showed that the host–guest system was considerably more cytotoxic than the individual hosts and guests. Meanwhile, this system was quite stable in biological media.
Cobalt-containing compounds and polymers are widely used as anticancer, antifungal, and antibacterial agents. Natarajan et al. synthesized a water soluble cobalt-containing coordination polymer through the coordination between Co(NO3)2 and a new ligand (Fig. 21).158 This coordination polymer was found to form stable complexes with calf thymus DNA (CT-DNA) and bovine serum albumin (BSA) through intercalation. Interestingly, they found this cobalt-containing polymer has strong radical scavenging potency against different radicals, such as hydroxyl radicals, 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl radicals, nitric oxide and superoxide anion radicals. Moreover, the water soluble complex exhibited good cytotoxic activity against HeLa, HEp-2, Hep G2 and A431 cancer cell lines without significantly affecting the normal NIH 3T3 cells. Especially, it exhibited excellent cytotoxic specificity against Hep G2 cells with an anticancer activity of ca. three times higher than that of cisplatin.
 Fig. 21  Chemical structure of Co-containing coordination polymer with anticancer activity. 
The Arunachalam group also reported a series of side-chain cobalt-containing polymers by using some cobalt–pyridine complexes (Fig. 22).159 Similar to cobalt-containing coordination polymers, these side-chain polymers can form stable binding complexes with different DNAs. All these polymers showed good anticancer activities: the stronger the binding between polymers and DNAs, the higher the inhibition value. Recently, they found that the side-chain polymer formed by the simple bipyridine ligand showed better antibacterial and antifungal activities against some human pathogenic microorganisms, such as S. aureus, Bacillus subtilis, E. coli, Pseudomonas auregenosa and Candida albicans.160
 Fig. 22  Chemical structures of side-chain Co-containing polymers with anticancer properties. 
Copper-containing polymers also exhibited potential anticancer and antibacterial properties. The Arunachalam group reported the cytotoxic property of a Cu-containing polymer against human lung cancer cells.161 The Cu-containing polymer was synthesized from copper ion and 2,2′-bipyridyl ligand and branched polyethyleneimine. It was found that most of the NCI-H460 human lung cancer cells were killed through apoptosis and/or necrosis after treatment with the Cu-containing polymer.
Similarly, they prepared other Cu-containing polymers by using 1,10-phenanthroline and L-arginine as ligands.162 These polymers can form stable complexes with DNA/RNA through intercalation and electrostatic interaction, which is dependent on the degree of coordination. These polymers showed cytotoxicity towards MCF-7 mammary carcinoma cells through apoptosis. Meanwhile, these polymers also exhibited antimicrobial activities to some pathogens.
Germanium-containing polymers are also utilized as anticancer materials. In 1982, Norihiro filed a patent about using organogermanium oligomers as anticancer agents (Fig. 23).163 The oligomer effectively inhibited growth of cancer cells, while this phenomenon was not observed for germanium monomers.
 Fig. 23  Chemical structure of Ge-containing polymer with anticancer activity. 
Although elements in group VA only make up less than 0.2% of the weight of the Earth’s crust, they are critically important in both daily life and industry. Nitrogen and phosphorus are the most necessary elements for nutrients in the world. As a result, a tremendous number of reports have been published about nitrogen or phosphorus-containing polymers.164–166 Compared with nitrogen and phosphorus, arsenic, antimony and bismuth-containing polymers are less explored, although the biological activities of these elements have been well known for a long time.102 Arsenic, antimony and bismuth have quite similar chemical properties. For example, halide compounds of these elements are extremely easy to react with alcohol or amine to form esters or amides.102 Various kinds of arsenic, antimony and bismuth-containing polyethers or polyamines have been synthesized via the esterification or amidation between dihalide compounds and dialcohol or diamine. Additionally, these dihalide compounds also have the ability to react with diacid to form polyesters. Considering the biological activities of arsenic, antimony and bismuth, these polymers can be applied as new anticancer drugs and antimicrobial materials.102Fig. 24 shows structures of currently reported biopolymers containing arsenic, antimony and bismuth.
 Fig. 24  Chemical structures of hybrid polymers from group VA with thiodiglycolic acid and glycyrrhetinic acid. 
During the past two decades, the Carraher group has extensively studied the synthesis and biological activities of arsenic, antimony and bismuth-containing polyethers or polyamines. They discovered many kinds of drugs and biomaterials based on the above mentioned three types of reactions. In 2014, they found that thiodiglycolic acid could react with arsenic, antimony and bismuth dihalide compounds to form polyesters (Fig. 24) with good yield in less than one minute under room temperature.167 The resultant polymers have molecular weights ranging from 80 kDa to 200 kDa. These polymers showed excellent activities against different tumor cell lines and low toxicity towards normal human cells. The arsenic polyesters had outstanding inhibition against the human pancreas adenocarcinoma pancreatic cancer cell line (AsPC-1) with an IC50 of 0.055 μg mL−1, which was much lower than cisplatin (IC50: 1400 μg mL−1). Due to the metastasization prior to detection of the disease, treatment of pancreatic cancer is rarely successful. Arsenic and bismuth-containing polymers also effectively inhibited the growth of the PC-3 human prostate cancer cell line with a low IC50 of 0.064 μg mL−1 and 12 μg mL−1, respectively. Furthermore, the antimony polymers were also capable of showing activities on both the MDA-MB-231 (IC50: 0.77 μg mL−1) and MCF-7 human pleural effusion breast cancer cells (IC50: 3.1 μg mL−1). These polymers showed better or comparable performance in contrast with cisplatin.
With a similar technique, the Carraher group reported another drug, glycyrrhetinic acid, which could be coupled with arsenic, antimony and bismuth dihalides via esterification and ether formation in less than 15 seconds.168 The structures of the polymers are shown in Fig. 24. The yields to form these polymers were in the range of 10–50%, depending on the compounds used and reaction conditions. The molecular weight of these polymers was around 200 kDa, quite similar to polymers with thiodiglycolic acid. Similarly, these polymers showed activities against different cell lines, including AsPC-1, the human pancreas epithelioid duct carcinoma cell line (PANC-1), normal embryonic human lung fibroblast cells (WI-38 cells), and the mouse embryo-fibroblast (NIH-3T3) cell line. These results are summarized in Table 1. These polyesters showed good inhibition against different cell lines, though less effective than cisplatin.
Table 1 IC50 values (ng mL−1) for the tested cell lines upon treatment with glycyrrhetinic acid (GA) and metal-containing polymers. The values given in parentheses are the standard deviations. (Ph3 indicates triphenyl metal-containing dihalide used to form polymers. Me is methyl group). Adapted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright © 2013 Taylor & Francis




Compound
WI-38
NIH/3T3
AsPC-1
PANC-1





Ph3Sb/GA

130(10)
2800(22)
1900(23)
1700(8)



Ph3Bi/GA

170(15)
1800(14)
>32000
3800(9)



Ph3As/GA

220(12)
5400(29)
>32000
2500(9)



Me3Sb/GA

>32000
>32000
3800(19)
>32000



Cisplatin

15(10)
1200(19)
1400(150)
340(12)




The work by the Carraher group focused on the main-chain metal-containing polymers, which were usually obtained from polycondensation. The molecular weight and polydispersity were difficult to control. In 2014, the Le group reported the utilization of side-chain arsenic-containing polymers as new anticancer drugs.169 They first synthesized prodrugs of poly(ethylene oxide)-b-poly[α-(6-mercaptohexyl amino)carboxylate-ε-caprolactone] (PEO-b-PCCL). The PEO-b-PCCL was then functionalized with thiol groups, which could bind with phenylarsenic oxide via As–S bonds (Fig. 25). Using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) characterization, 65% of thiol groups were found to conjugate with phenylarsine oxide (PAO).
 Fig. 25  Encapsulation of PAO into PEO-b-P(CCLC6-SH) and PEO-b-P(CCLC6) micelles. Adapted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 
The CMC of PEO-b-P(CCLC6-S-PAO) was determined to be 0.07 mg mL−1. In in vitro study, the release of conjugated PAO in the polymeric micellar carrier was prolonged, compared with free PEO-b-P(CCLC6-S-PAO). However, the rate could be accelerated in the presence of glutathione due to the higher binding affinity between glutathione and PAO. Both PEO-b-P(CCLC6-S-PAO) and PEO-b-P(CCLC6-SH) showed effects against MDA-MB-435 cancer cells. The results indicated that the IC50 of PEO-b-P(CCLC6-S-PAO) was not significantly different from that of free PAO. These results demonstrated that PEO-b-P(CCLC6-SH) was a promising carrier for successful arsenic delivery for cancer therapy.
Carraher et al. found that Zr-containing polymers have the ability to suppress the growth of a series of tumor cell lines originating from breast, colon, prostate, and lung cancers at concentrations generally lower than those required for inhibition of cell growth by cisplatin.170
Some precious metal-containing polymers were found to show interesting anticancer activities. Silver– and gold–polyacrylic acid complexes were studied by Ostrovskaya et al. They found that the silver-containing polymer was highly effective against Lewis lung carcinoma, and can inhibit almost 90% of the tumor growth, and extend the average lifespan of the mice by 46% in comparison with the control group, while in the case of acatol adenocarcinoma, the growth was inhibited by 55%. Interestingly, the Au-containing polymer efficiently inhibited the growth of both tumors by at least 80%, which was recommended for thorough preclinical study.171
Platinum-containing complexes (some structures are shown in Fig. 26) are widely used in anticancer studies, and some of them are even used in the clinic.37 Cisplatin, as the first platinum drug, is one of the commercially available anticancer drugs, and shows broad-spectrum anticancer effects, including against ovarian cancer, prostate cancer, testicular cancer, lung cancer, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, esophageal cancer, malignant lymphoma, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, thyroid carcinoma and osteogenic sarcoma.172
 Fig. 26  Chemical structures of small molecular Pt-containing anticancer drugs. The compounds in the first row are commercially available; those in the second row are in the phase I or phase II clinical stage. 
However, most of these drugs are associated with significant side effects, rising drug resistance and low hydrolytic stability.173 To combat these problems, drug delivery carriers have been developed to increase the protection of drugs and increase efficacy. Generally, there are mainly two approaches to designing platinum drug–polymer conjugates: (1) physical encapsulation in a polymer substrate; (2) attachment to a polymer backbone via covalent bonding.
Neuse, Rensburg and coworkers carried out a systematic study to prepare water-soluble platinum drug-containing polymers. Most of the polymer backbones they used are based on polyaspartamide, as shown in Fig. 27. These conjugates initially showed full solubility in water, and tended to undergo an ageing process on storage. However, in frozen aqueous solution, they were stable enough for extended periods of time.174,175 They also used the main-chain strategy via aliphatic polyamide carriers with ethylenediamine segments. However, in this design, the platinum drugs were shielded in the PEO segments and prevented the efficient intracellular release of drugs.176,177 As a result, the IC50 (determined by using HeLa cells) for the main-chain polymer was as high as 120 μg mL−1, while the value for the side chain counterpart was as low as 14 μg mL−1. By using the LNCaP human metastatic prostate adenocarcinoma cell line, they also found that both monoamine-coordinated platinum-containing polymers and cis-diamine-coordinated platinum-containing polymers showed good antiproliferative activity.178 In addition to the direct cytotoxic properties, the platinum drugs have been reported to generate ROS, which is also responsible for the anticancer properties.179 Rensburg et al. studied the effect of cisplatin and water soluble platinum-containing polymers on the production of ROS. The results demonstrated that differently from cisplatin, these Pt-containing polymers were unable to generate ROS by granulocytes and monocytes/macrophages, which made them potential clinical anticancer agents.180
 Fig. 27  Chemical structures of anticancer Pt-containing polymers developed by the Neuse and Rensburg group (ref. 174–180). 
Kataoka and Yokoyama et al. introduced cisplatin to polymer micelles for drug delivery.181 They found that Pt-containing micelles allowed prolonged circulation of Pt and specific accumulation in the tumors.182 They also successfully introduced oxaliplatin to block copolymer micelles.183 These Pt-containing micelles were stable enough for 240 h, and showed sustained release within 96 h. Such micelles showed considerable in vitro cytotoxicity against murine colon adenocarcinoma 26 (C-26) cells, which was lower than oxaliplatin, but increased with the exposure time as a result of the release of platinum complexes from micelles. The long-term delivery and release of platinum drug can be also realized by using in situ-formed hydrogel. Ding et al. designed a conjugate by covalently linking Pt(IV) complex to the hydrophobic end of two methoxyl poly(ethylene glycol)-b-poly(D,L-lactide) (mPEG–PLA) copolymer chains (Fig. 28).184 Such conjugates can form micelles and gels in water depending on the concentration. In vitro release experiments of Pt(IV)-conjugated thermogel showed that the platinum release lasted as long as two months. Interestingly, most of the released Pt(IV) drugs were mainly in the form of micelles and micellar aggregates from the gel depot. More importantly, the micellar Pt drug showed enhanced in vitro cytotoxicity against cancer cells due to the effective accumulation into cells via endocytosis.
 Fig. 28  Molecular design of the unique polymer–Pt(IV) conjugate and corresponding thermogel. Adapted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
The Jing and Huang group designed a series of platinum drug-containing polymers.185 They prepared a biodegradable block copolymer, poly(ethylene glycol)-b-poly(L-lactide-co-2-methyl-2-carboxyl-propylene carbonate), as a carrier for an oxaliplatin analogue, as shown in Fig. 29. This polymer self-assembled into micelles, which can release platinum drugs under an acidic condition. In vitro evaluation showed that the micelles exhibited the same or higher cytotoxicity against SKOV-3, HeLa, and EC-109 cancer cells, compared with oxaliplatin. It was attributed to the effective internalization of micelles by cells via endocytosis and the sensitivity of SKOV-3 cells to platinum drugs. By using a similar strategy, they also successfully prepared a polymer carrier for an oxaliplatin analogue. This polymer–drug conjugate approach can remarkably enhance the uptake of substances by cancer cells and partially overcome drug resistance in ovarian cancer cells.186 Through co-assembly of oxaliplatin- and gemcitabine-containing block copolymers, they found that the hybrid micelles showed much lower systemic toxicity and enhanced efficacy against the xenograft cancer model than either of them alone or even Gem/Pt combinations.187 In a similar study, they also co-assembled cisplatin and all-trans-retinoic acid-containing block copolymers,188 and daunorubicin and oxaliplatin-containing block copolymers.189 This method achieved enhanced drug efficacy and safety. To increase the loading efficiency of the platinum drug, they used thiol–ene chemistry to prepare 1,2-bidentate carboxyl group-containing biodegradable block copolymers, which can be used to chelate with the active anticancer species (DACH–Pt) of oxaliplatin. In vitro study showed that this Pt-containing polymer exhibited enhanced cytotoxicity against SKOV-3 and MCF-7 cancer cells. However, the presence of sulfur was a major cause of drug resistance to platinum drugs.190
 Fig. 29  Chemical structures of anticancer Pt-containing polymers developed by the Jing and Huang group (ref. 185–191). 
By using a strategy of combination chemotherapy,191 Huang et al. achieved co-delivery of multiple drugs using a polymer–(tandem drugs) conjugate system. Different combinations of drugs were used, such as two drugs (demethylcantharidin (DMC) and cisplatin),192 and three drugs (cisplatin, azidyl radical and DMC).193 Interestingly, when the polymer–(multifunctional single-drug) conjugate was internalized by cisplatin-resistant cells (A549R), all drugs can be sequentially released from the polymer chain within reactivated endosomes/lysosomes under UVA irradiation to kill cancer cells and overcome cisplatin resistance. To achieve specific targets, they also co-assembled oxaliplatin- and folic acid-containing block copolymers. Antitumor activity evaluation with mice bearing H22 liver cancers showed that the micelles with folic acid moieties exhibited greater antitumor efficacy than those without folic acid or oxaliplatin.194 Enhanced drug toxicity can be also achieved by conjugation of the platinum drugs to polymers with guanidine-containing zwitterionic groups. Stenzel et al. demonstrated that the drug did not need to be cleaved from the polymer in order to be active, and the key was to create carriers with sufficient solubility.195 In a recent study, they found that conjugation of albumin with polymer–drug conjugates can enhance the anticancer activity.196
The Qiao group prepared cross-linked polymer vesicles by using ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) and thiol–ene chemistry (Fig. 30).197 This system allowed a steady release, due to the combined diffusion and chemically controlled de-complexation processes. In a recent report, they designed degradable cross-linked polymer vesicles for the efficient delivery of cisplatin.198 To avoid the presence of sulfur, 2,2′-(propane-2,2-diyl bis(oxy))diethanamine was used. This chemical design provided a faster drug release under acidic conditions (pH = 5.5) due to the presence of an acid-degradable linker. The anticancer activity of cisplatin loaded into the cross-linked vesicle was improved in comparison with free cisplatin. A similar strategy was also reported via crosslinking a polymer micellar core. The cisplatin-loaded micelles were very stable for an extended period of time. In vitro studies demonstrated that the cross-linked micelles rapidly internalized and delivered cisplatin into human A2780 ovarian carcinoma cells.199
 Fig. 30  Chemistry of constructing cross-linked polymer vesicles and their drug conjugation with cisplatin. Adapted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright © 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Hyperbranched polymers were also used in Pt-containing anticancer drugs. The Burt group reported the use of hyperbranched aliphatic polyesters as a platform to load cisplatin.200 The cisplatin-loaded hyperbranched polymers were stable for at least 5 days and exhibited a slow release profile over 7 days.
Coordination polymers were also designed for drug delivery. The Lin group reported nanoscale coordination polymers (NCPs) from Tb3+ ions and c,c,t-(diamminedichlorodisuccinato) Pt(IV) complex (Fig. 31).201 Then the resultant NCPs were coated with a shell of amorphous silica, which allowed enhanced water dispersibility and biocompatibility. Furthermore, the release of the platinum drug can be tuned by varying the thickness of silica shell. In order to enhance the cellular uptake of NCPs in vitro, a RGD sequence was grafted onto the surface of the silica shell. Their results showed that the RGD-targeted NCPs had an IC50 value of 9.7 μM, while the cisplatin standard had an IC50 value of 13.0 μM. Recently, they achieved enhanced antitumor activities by using zinc bisphosphonate NCPs that carried ca. 48% cisplatin prodrug and 45% oxaliplatin prodrug.202 In all tumour xenograft models evaluated, including CT26 colon cancer, H460 lung cancer and AsPC-1 pancreatic cancer, pegylated NCPs showed superior potency and efficacy, compared with free drugs.
 Fig. 31  Formation of Pt-containing nanoscale coordination polymers. Adapted with permission from ref. 201. Copyright © 2008, American Chemical Society. 
More importantly, several platinum-containing polymers were successfully used in chemotherapeutics. One example is AP5346, developed by Access Pharmaceuticals (Fig. 32).203 Chemically, AP5346 is a polymer-linked diaminocyclohexyl platinum complex. Sood et al. reported the synthesis of AP5346. Generally, they started from the copolymerization of N-(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide (HPMA) and MA-GG-ONp, followed by the conversion of the –NO2 group to amidomalonate and coordination with DACHPtCl2. They also reported an improved method to synthesize AP5346, which was more cost-effective and scalable. They also carried out the phase I and pharmacokinetic trial of AP5346.204 Twenty-six patients were treated at seven dose levels from 40 mg Pt per m2 to 1280 mg Pt per m2 for 3 weeks. The pharmacokinetics of AP5346 indicated a prolonged half-life, and evidence of antitumor activity at the dose level of 640 mg Pt per m2. Now, AP5346 is in phase II clinical trials.
 Fig. 32  Synthetic approach of Pt-containing anticancer drug AP5346. 
Another example is AP5280, also developed by Access Pharmaceuticals. Preliminary study showed that AP5280 showed an encouraging in vitro and in vivo activity against solid tumors.205 In the phase I trial, the result showed that AP5280 can be administered safely as a 1 h i.v. infusion and produced prolonged plasma exposure, compared with any of the free Pt-containing drugs.206
3.3 Photodynamic therapy (PDT) agents
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a promising light-activated treatment that is used clinically to destroy locally diseased tissues.207–209 When exposed to light, a photosensitizer transfers its excitation energy to ground-state triplet oxygen and generates highly reactive singlet oxygen and other cytotoxic reactive oxygen species, inducing oxidative damage to cells that causes localized cell death and ultimately tissue apoptosis or necrosis (Fig. 33).210 In comparison with other treatments such as chemotherapy, a major advantage of PDT is that, in the absence of light, the photosensitizer is biologically benign.
 Fig. 33  PDT-induced effects. Light-mediated excitation of photosensitizer-loaded tumor cells leads to the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) within these cells, leading to cell death (predominantly apoptotic and necrotic). Adapted with permission from ref. 210. Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society, Inc. 
Zinc–porphyrin/phthalocyanine (Pc) complexes have been extensively studied for PDT and as imaging agents because of their optical properties and long triplet excited state lifetime. Sarantopoulou et al. used Zn–Pc-containing zero generation polyamidoamine (G0-PAMAM) as a sensitizer to treat symptomatic and asymptomatic human carotid tissues.211 Compared to the deposition on atheromatous tissues with different aggregation features between G0 and G0/ZnPc nanoparticles, the deposition of nanodrug carriers on healthy tissues resulted in an inverse impact. The results indicated the importance of PAMAM dendrimer carriers as a novel and promising PDT platform for atherosclerosis therapies.
The Wong group reported the synthesis of a few amphiphilic Ru(II) and Zn(II) porphyrins using different linkers. In order to find the optimal linker properties in these Ru(II)-porphyrin conjugates, they investigated luminescence, subcellular localization, cellular uptake, and photo-cytotoxic and (dark) cytotoxic properties.212 All conjugates had IC50 values in the low micromolar range, which decreased by at least 10 times upon irradiation of cell cultures with visible light.213
Ruthenium porphyrin derivatives are also very important and widely studied due to their ability to produce reactive oxygen species that can be used in PDT of cancer (Fig. 34).214 Therrien et al. prepared a series of ruthenium porphyrin complexes and tested their application as photosensitizing chemotherapeutic agents. Biological tests and cellular uptake experiments demonstrated that the ruthenium complexes can facilitate uptake and result in highly active photosensitization under a light irradiation dose of only 5 J cm−2. Meanwhile, the ruthenium porphyrin compounds accumulated in the cytoplasm and intracellular organelles other than the lysosomes and nuclei of human melanoma cells.215 To obtain a longer excited-state lifetime and achieve better PDT efficiency, halogenated tetraaryl porphyrins were used. For example, Swavey et al. synthesized a ruthenium-bipyridine fluorinated porphyrin, which can bind DNA very strongly according to DNA titration with calf thymus (CT). When irradiated with a 60 W tungsten lamp, this complex preferentially led to apoptosis of the melanoma cells over the normal skin cells.216
 Fig. 34  Chemical structure of a Ru-containing PDT agent. 
Meanwhile, making use of the ability of Ir(III) complex to sensitize singlet oxygen formation (1O2), the Yang group achieved a three-in-one platform for optical imaging, T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and PDT (Fig. 35).217 The Ir–Gd coordination polymer nanoparticles (CPPs) showed good stability in simulated biological media and low cytotoxicity toward a model line of HeLa cancer cells. Due to the co-presence of phosphorescent properties of the iridium complex and magnetic properties of the metallic Gd(III) ions, the Ir–Gd CPPs could be simultaneously used as an optical probe and MR contrast agent. Moreover, 1O2 was generated effectively upon irradiation with a visible light, which can be used for the PDT of cancer cells.
 Fig. 35  Synthesis and theranostic applications of Ir–Gd coordination polymer particles. Adapted with permission from ref. 217. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
In combination with cisplatin and poly(ethylene glycol)-b-poly(L-aspartic acid) (PEG–PLA), the Jang group prepared polymer–metal complex micelles that can be used as both a drug carrier and PDT agent (Fig. 36).218 The polymer–metal complex micelles were formed by the coordination interaction between cisplatin with ZnPc and PEG–PLA. These micelles were very stable in phosphate buffer solution (PBS) without NaCl, while it can slowly release cisplatin in a physiological PBS solution at 37 °C. Meanwhile, upon laser irradiation, these micelles can also generate singlet oxygen for PDT.
 Fig. 36  Chemical structure of the dendrimer–metal complex reported by the Jang group. 
The zinc porphyrin complex can be also introduced into an organosilica framework through condensation. Interestingly, the two-photon imaging capacity was preserved in the resultant nanoparticles.219 These particles were nontoxic towards MCF-7 breast cancer cells, which allowed the uptake of these particles. Upon laser irradiation, it was clear that the nanoparticles were successfully endocytosed by cancer cells, as shown by two-photon fluorescence imaging (TPEF) at 750 and 800 nm.
However, most of the phthalocyanine complexes were hydrophobic and easily formed aggregates, which resulted in serious self-quenching. To solve this problem, the Kataoka group developed a zinc–phthalocyanine type sensitizer by the incorporation of dendrimer phthalocyanine (DPc) into polyion complex micelles.220 Their results demonstrated that the micelles showed a significant enhancement in in vitro photo-cytotoxicity of about 10 times (Fig. 37).
 Fig. 37  Time-dependent morphological changes of the DPc- and DPc/m-treated A549 cells during photoirradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 220. Copyright © 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
Meanwhile, the use of disulfide crosslinking in the micellar core can prevent unfavourable photochemical reactions with serum proteins without compromising photochemical reactions involving oxygen molecules, leading to remarkably enhanced PDT.221,222
To avoid the use of UV-visible light in conventional PDT and increase the penetration in tissues, Heitz et al. reported a two-photon (TP) sensitizer, zinc diketopyrrolopyrrole–porphyrin conjugates, which could be excited under near infrared (NIR) light.223 Their preliminary TP-PDT experiments on HeLa cells showed that 90% of cells were killed after irradiation at 910 nm for 300 scans.
Besides the modification of exterior functional groups, different core structures were also studied for enhanced TP-PDT efficiency. For example, the Maillard group synthesized a series of conjugated zinc porphyrin oligomers by incorporation of various neutral π-conjugated cores, ethynyl, butadiyne, diethynylbenzene, and electron-donor triphenylamine (Fig. 38).224 The singlet oxygen quantum yields of these porphyrin oligomers were around 45–75%. In comparison with the lower TPA cross-section for the monomer (50 GM), these oligomers showed higher values above 1300 GM, which made these oligomers promising candidates for TP-PDT. Meanwhile, they also introduced α-mannose units on each chromophore for targeting tumor cells with over-expressing lectin-type membrane receptors.
 Fig. 38  Chemical structures of conjugated zinc porphyrin oligomers. 
3.4 Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy is a medical treatment of diseases (especially cancer) with the exposure to a radioactive substance. Ionizing radiation can damage the DNA of cancerous tissues, leading to cellular death. Almost all the radionuclides used are early transition metal ions.
Due to its energetic β emission (Emax = 2.28 MeV) and moderate half-life time, yttrium-90 (90Y) is a clinically acceptable β-emitting radionuclide. 90Y-containing metallopolymers are widely used for imaging and radionuclide therapy. Hnatowich and coworkers used a DNA analogue, morpholinos (MORFs), labelled with either 1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-N,N′,N′′,N′′′-tetraacetic acid (DOTA) or mercaptoacetyltriglycine (MAG3) to form radionuclide metallopolymers with 90Y for therapeutic applications. By comparing the in vitro stability and biodistribution in normal mice, it was found that 90Y-labeled MORF showed increased instability relative to that of 111In.225 When radiolabelled with MAG3, 188Re showed in vitro and in vivo instability compared to 99mTc, while all labels were still largely intact after 48 h in saline or serum.
Similarly, Hrubý et al. used a thermoresponsive poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) conjugated with L-tyrosinamide or diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) to chelate 125I and 90Y for local radiotherapy.226 These polymers were readily soluble in water at room temperature, which allowed facile isotope labelling and administration via injection, and they precipitated slightly below body temperature, so they should persist at the site of injection.
Polymeric microspheres prepared by a solvent evaporation technique are also widely used in radiotherapy. Basically, polymers are dissolved in a suitable volatile solvent and dispersed in a continuous medium using a stabilizing agent. Controlled evaporation of solvent results in the formation of solid microspheres. This method was used for the preparation of polylactic acid microspheres containing 166Ho, 90Y, 186Re as radioisotopes.227 Radioactive 166Ho-loaded polylactic acid microspheres were prepared by Mumper et al.228166Ho-acetylacetonate (HoAcAc) and polylactic acid were dissolved in chloroform, and the solution was added to polyvinyl alcohol solution. These microspheres were recently tested for the treatment of hepatic malignancies in rabbits.229 Biodistribution and histological analysis confirmed that radioactive microspheres were heterogeneously distributed over the liver and accumulated preferentially in the tumor area. It was demonstrated that 166Ho polylactic acid microspheres were a promising system for liver tumor treatment.
In 1992, Mumper et al. investigated poly-L-lactic acid (PLA) microspheres containing neutron activated 166Ho as potential agents for radionuclide synovectomy.230In vivo retention studies were conducted by administering irradiated 166Ho polylactic acid microspheres into the joint space of normal rabbits (n = 6). Biodistribution data for 166Ho was acquired by killing the rabbits at 44 h or 120 h after administration of the polylactic acid microspheres. It appeared that the majority of 166Ho leaching occurred from the joint in the first 44 h after administration. However, no 166Ho activity was observed in the feces or lymph nodes after 120 h.
Because of its rapid data collection and low exposure of radiation to patient during a scanning procedure, 99mTc is an ideal radioisotope for scintigraphic imaging. Cabral et al. reported a 99mTc-based cancer imaging agent by treating a PAMAM-G4-FITC dendrimer with a 99mTc(CO)3 complex. In vivo biodistribution study of the 99mTc(CO)3-dendrimer-FITC was carried out with C57BL/6 mice and melanoma-bearing mice.231 For both cases, accumulation was observed in the hepatic, renal and bladder regions. Scintigraphic imaging showed high uptake in liver and kidney for melanoma-bearing mice. The radiolabelling of the dendrimer was stable for at least 24 h with a yield of approx. 90%.
Other technetium salts can be also used to prepare 99mTc-containing polymers. For example, Veronese and Mazzi et al. reported a simple 99mTc-labeling procedure through in situ coordination between PN2S modified polyethylene glycol and 99mTcO4− (Fig. 39).232 Such 99mTc-containing amphiphilic polymers can self-assemble into micelles in aqueous solution, while [99mTcO]3+ species were coordinated at the same time. Such prepared 99mTc-containing polymers exhibited high stability both in vitro and in vivo.
 Fig. 39  Illustration of direct labeling of PEGylated PN2S ligands. A drawing of the mechanism of 99mTc reduction-coordination mediated by PN2S–PEG micelle aggregation with the two possible coordination species is shown. Adapted with permission from ref. 232. Copyright © 2004, American Chemical Society. 
Peñuelas et al. developed an orally administrated 99mTc-based imaging agent by using poly(anhydride)–cyclodextrin (NP–CD) nanoparticles.233 As proved by single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), when orally administered, NP–CD remained in the gut with no evidence of translocation or distribution to other organs of the animals’ bodies. In addition, CD–NP moved more slowly inside the gut than conventional NP, probably due to their physicochemical structure which allowed stronger interactions with the gut mucosa.
Blood pool imaging is also assisted by 99mTc-labeled synthetic polymers, which could be helpful for cardiovascular imaging, capillary leak imaging, and gastrointestinal bleeding studies. Weissleder et al. used a DTPA-terminated poly-L-lysine labelled with 99mTc for phase I clinical trial with humans (Fig. 40).234 Laboratory values, ECG findings, and hemodynamic parameters were not observed to have significant abnormalities.
 Fig. 40  Chemical structure of DTPA-terminated poly-L-lysine, which can be used to chelate 99mTc. 
Conjugation of mannose molecules to 99mTc-labeled macromolecules like polylysine, albumin, dextrans, and gold nanoparticles led to compounds that could be trapped in the sentinel node with minimal spread to non-target organs. The most promising compound was the mannosylated 99mTc–DTPA–dextran (99mTc–Tilmanocept) reported by Vera et al., which was recently approved by FDA for sentinel lymph node detection (SLND) in melanoma and breast cancer. Santos et al. reported a multifunctional imaging agent for sentinel lymph nodes based on the modification of dextran with a radionuclide (99mTc or 68Ga) and a near-infrared (NIR) reporter (Fig. 41).235 The probes allowed a clear visualization of the popliteal node by SPECT or positron emission tomography (PET), as well as real-time optically guided excision. Such multifunctional nanoplatforms displayed a popliteal extraction efficiency >90%, highlighting their potential to be further explored as dual imaging agents.
 Fig. 41  Chemical structure of multifunctional imaging agent for sentinel lymph nodes based on the modification of dextran with a radionuclide (99mTc or 68Ga) and a near-infrared (NIR) reporter. 
Polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimer (G5-Ac), partially acetylated G5, was reacted with biotin and 2-(p-isothiocyanatobenzyl)-6-methyl-diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (1B4M-DTPA) to produce the complex Bt–G5-Ac–1B4M, followed by subsequent conjugation with avidin, yielding the conjugate Av–G5-Ac–1B4M. 99mTc was then used as the radiolabel for both conjugates. An in vitro study showed that Av–G5-Ac–1B4M–99mTc had much higher cellular uptake in HeLa cells than Bt–G5-Ac–1B4M–99mTc. In addition, biodistribution and micro-SPECT imaging was observed only for the former.236

N-(2-Hydroxypropyl) methacrylamide (HPMA) copolymers carrying doubly cyclized Arg–Gly–Asp motifs (HPMA copolymer–RGD4C conjugate) were also used to form water soluble complexes with 99mTc.237 According to the scintigraphic images of prostate tumor-bearing SCID mice obtained 24 h post-i.v. injection, there was greater tumor localization of the HPMA copolymer–RGD4C conjugate than the control, HPMA copolymer–RGE4C conjugate. More importantly, HPMA copolymer–RGD4C conjugates sustained tumor retention over 72 h with reasonably efficient clearance from the background organs. These results suggested that specific tumor angiogenesis targeting was possible with HPMA copolymer–RGD4C conjugates.
Besides synthetic polymers, DNA analogue morpholinos (MORFs) were used for labelling with 99mTc. It was found that the stability of 99mTc–MORF was greater than 85% over 24 h in 37 °C serum with minimal protein binding.238
Several other reports indicated different ways of preparing and binding N,S-containing bifunctional chelators to peptides involving amide coupling between the peptide molecule and metal complexes/ligands.239

188Re (rhenium) is another easily obtained and frequently used radionuclide. Different polymers were used to load 188Re for radionuclide therapy. For example, Kim et al. studied the anti-tumor activity of 188Re labelled transferrin–polyethylenimine (Tf–PEI) conjugate through intratumoral injection.240 Typically, they used the branched cationic PEI as a platform and Tf for site-specific drug delivery. When treating the Ramos lymphoma (human Burkitt's lymphoma) xenografted tumors, this 188Re-containing polymer showed increased retention time inside the tumor and caused extensive tumor necrosis.
3.5 Biocide
Metallopolymers, prepared from group IVB metallocene dichlorides and the plant growth hormone gibberellic acid (GA3 or GA),241 were used to help the restoration of Everglades and to improve the germination of seeds, including seeds producing food. Generally, GA3 has three reactive sites, two alcohol groups and one acid functional group. The products were crosslinked, and a representative structure is given in Fig. 42. It was found that ppm amounts of both polymers and GA3 could decrease the germination time and increase the germination rate of sawgrass, which was one of the essential features in the Everglades. While in the case of cattail seeds, the germination rate decreased with longer germination time.242 Carraher et al. also found that the group IVB-GA3 containing polymer can increase the germination of (Jagger) wheat seed up to 2–3 times and (Little Marvel) peas up to 8 times.243
 Fig. 42  Chemical structure of Zr–gibberellic acid-containing crosslinked polymer for biocide. 
They also found potential applications on leaf formation for metallopolymers prepared from indole-3-butyric acid (auxins, IBA for short) and titanocene dichloride. Compared with IBA, this metallopolymer showed enhanced leaf formation and a greater proportion of roots in rooting experiments using Albo Lacinatus.244,245
4. Metal-containing polymers as biosensors
Another biomedical application for ferrocene-containing polymers lies in the field of biosensors.246,247 Due to the fully reversible redox process of ferrocene, ferrocene-containing polymers are widely used as redox-active mediators. In this case both the ferrocene-containing polymers and their hybrids with different functional materials are used. For example, Gao et al. cross-linked a ferrocene-containing polymer with glucose oxidase as an efficient glucose sensor using poly(ethylene glycol)diglycidyl ether and bovine serum albumin (BSA).248
The Xiao group explored biosensing properties of a series of ferrocene-containing highly branched polyurethane. They found that the supramolecular recognition between the hyper-branched polymer and glucose or ATP anion (adenosine-5′triphosphate, ATP2−) changed the electron transfer during the redox process of ferrocene, making it a promising candidate for biosensing.249,250 To avoid the leeching of the mediator from the electrode and to get better sensitivity and linearity, Singh et al. designed a copolymer through the direct electrochemical polymerization of pyrrole and ferrocenecarboxylate modified pyrrole on indium-tin-oxide (ITO) substrate. By incorporating glucose oxidase into the copolymer film, this film showed fast detection of glucose within 3 s and with linearity up to 16.8 mM.251
Besides glucose sensing, different sensors can be constructed by incorporating the corresponding enzymes into a polymeric framework of ferrocene. For example, Erden et al. reported a uric acid biosensor based on ferrocene-containing poly(vinylferrocene), carboxylated multiwalled carbon nanotubes and gelatin modified electrodes. The uricase enzyme was immobilized covalently through N-ethyl-N′-(3-dimethyaminopropyl) carbodiimide (EDC) and N-hydroxyl succinimide (NHS) chemistry. Under optimal conditions this system showed a detection limit as low as 2.3 × 10−8 M and a dynamic linear range of uric acid from 2.0 × 10−7 M to 7.1 × 10−4 M. By determining the uric acid in human serum they also demonstrated that this uric acid biosensor showed good selectivity and sensitivity.252 By combining Pt nanoparticles and hyperbranched ferrocene-containing polymers, Armada et al. developed a dihydronicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) sensor. The detection limit for NADH was as low as 4.78 μM.253 Based on this result, they developed a novel amperometric alcohol biosensor by using alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH). The devices showed more affinity for methanol than for ethanol with a wide linear range to 30 mM and sensitivities of 0.957 and 0.756 μA mM−1 cm−2.
As shown in Fig. 43, Liu et al. developed a label-free immunosensing strategy for the detection of tumor necrosis factor-alpha antigen (TNF-α) via surface-initiated atom transfer radical polymerization (SI-ATRP) of ferrocenylmethyl methacrylate (FMMA) and glycidyl methacrylate (GMA), and TNF-α antibody on a gold substrate.254 Due to the redox property of ferrocene as an electron-transfer mediator, this design provided a platform for sensitive detection of TNF-α with a low detection limit of 3.9 pg mL−1.
 Fig. 43  Schematic illustration of ferrocene-based sensor. Adapted with permission from ref. 254. Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
Leech et al. prepared osmium (Os)-containing polymers with osmium complexes attached via a “covalent binding approach”. A reversible redox property was observed for these polymers (Fig. 44), which were further evaluated as mediators in biosensors and biofuel cells.255 They integrated these polymers together with glucose oxidase and multiwalled carbon nanotubes. The electrode displayed current densities of glucose oxidation as high as 560 μA cm−2 for PBS containing 100 mM glucose at 0.45 V vs. Ag/AgCl.
 Fig. 44  Chemical structure of Os-containing polymers used in biosensors. 
Antiochia et al. developed a rapid amperometric biosensor for fructose in food analysis based on an osmium–polymer hydrogel (Fig. 44).256 By immobilising fructose dehydrogenase (FDH) and the Os-containing hydrogel into a carbon nanotube paste electrode, the electrode showed a detection limit for fructose of 1 μM and a large linear range between 0.1 and 5 mM. More importantly, 80% of its initial sensitivity was maintained even after 4 months.
Gao et al. reported a glucose biosensor using ruthenium-containing polymer-mediated enzymatic oxidation of glucose (Fig. 45).257 A ruthenium-containing polymer and glucose oxidase were co-assembled on a glassy carbon electrode by crosslinking with glutaraldehyde. This electrode displayed excellent catalytic activity toward the oxidation of glucose with a sensitivity of 24.3 μA mM−1 cm−2 and linearity up to 10 mM. Due to the relatively low operating potential of −0.15 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), the interferences in blood were effectively alleviated.
 Fig. 45  Chemical structure of Ru-containing polymer used in a biosensor. 
5. Metal-containing polymers in bioimaging
Another promising application for metal-containing polymers is bioimaging, which can be divided into fluorescence imaging and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), according to the different metals that are used. Due to the high luminescence efficiency and paramagnetic properties, the metals most used in this area are Ir, Pt, Ga, In, Mn, and Gd.
5.1 Fluorescence imaging
Different from organic dyes and chromophores with poor solubility in water and easy photo-bleaching, metal-containing polymers are promising fluorescence imaging agents because of their excellent water solubility and stable luminescence. Due to their high photoluminescence efficiency, iridium(III) complexes and polymers are regarded as one of the most excellent phosphorescent materials and widely used in bio-imaging.258–261 Li and coworkers prepared Ir-containing polymers that exhibited bioimaging properties (Fig. 46). They integrated an Ir(III) complex into thermoresponsive PNIPAM. The change of phosphorescence was due to the interaction between the β- or γ-aminothiol group and the aldehyde group in the Ir(III) complex. Thus it would be used as a sensor for cysteine (Cys)/homocysteine (Hcy).262 By crosslinking Ir(III)-containing polymers, they also synthesized a quasi-solid sensing system. Living-cell imaging confirmed that the bioprobe was membrane permeable and capable of detecting Cys in living cells.
 Fig. 46  Illustration of the conformation of Ir-containing polymers in aqueous solution as a dual phosphorescent sensor for Cys/Hcy and temperature. Adapted with permission from ref. 262. Copyright © 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
By embedding the fluorophore Ir(III) complex and photochromic diarylethene derivatives into polyacrylamide nanoparticles, Yang et al. successfully prepared a photo-switchable luminescent probe for bioimaging applications.263
The excellent phosphorescence property of Ir(III) complexes can be also integrated with other imaging systems, such as MRI, which will be described in detail in Section 5.2, to achieve multiple imaging. Yang and coworkers prepared magneto-phosphorescent d-fCPPs by using Ir(III) and Gd(III) ions as metallic nodes.264 These water soluble CPPs showed intense red phosphorescence, moderate longitudinal relaxivity (r1) and low cytotoxicity.
Excellent bioimaging agents for hypoxia were reported with Pt-containing polymers. Huang, Li and coworkers synthesized a platinum(II) porphyrin and fluorine-based conjugated polymer that was used as a fluorescent/phosphorescent dual-emissive system (Fig. 47).265 This polymer self-assembled into ultrasmall conjugated polymer dots in PBS solution. This system displayed excellent luminescence response to O2 content because of the presence of O2-sensitive groups. In vivo oxygen sensing experiments were carried out using luminescence imaging of tumor hypoxia in nude mice.
 Fig. 47  (A) In vivo luminescence imaging of a tumor-bearing mouse (ROI 1) and the control nude mouse (ROI 2) after injection of the FPPdots. (B) The change in luminescence intensity of the marked regions (ROI 1, ROI 2 and ROI 3). Adapted from ref. 265 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The utilization of metal-containing complexes in group IIIA as catalysts, solar cells, and biomedicines has been broadly investigated.266–268 However, incorporation of these metals into polymers has received less attention due to the difficulties of the chemistry. Recently, Nichols and coworkers found that an isotope of gallium, 68Ga radionuclide, could be used for bioimaging.269 Dextran polymers were first modified with DTPA and tetrazine groups. 68Ga was then incorporated into the polymers through chelation with DTPA groups. The tetrazine had excellent ability to react with trans-cyclooctene antibodies (Fig. 48) via Diels–Alder reactions. Through this interaction, 68Ga could be located on tumor cells as advanced probes for cancer cells.
 Fig. 48  Gallium-containing dextran as a bioimaging agent for tumor cells. Adapted from ref. 269 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Using a similar technique, Patil and coworkers reported 111indium-containing polymers for bioimaging in vivo.270 The 111indium was chelated with polyethylene glycol-b-polyphosphoramidate (PEG-b-PPA) by DTPA. The labelled polymers were able to bind with DNA to form hybrid nanoparticles as vehicles. Quantitative imaging analysis was achieved, and the in vivo trafficking kinetics for PEG-b-PPA/DNA nanoparticles was revealed via this technique.
5.2 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Due to the noninvasive nature, minimal radiation, and the ability for real-time 3D imaging, MRI has received wide attention in fundamental research and clinical diagnosis.271 Generally, the MRI signal is dictated by the longitudinal (T1) and transverse (T2) relaxation times of hydrogen nuclei, which are abundant in various tissues. Different magnetic materials are used, especially Gd and Mn, to accelerate the relaxation of protons and enhance the MRI signal. Manganese compounds show interesting magnetic properties, which can be used as potential MRI agents. Pan et al. prepared polymer micelles by co-self-assembly of an amphiphilic diblock copolymer, polystyrene-b-poly(acrylic acid) (PS8-b-PAA400), with a polyoxyethylene sorbitan monooleate, in which the acidic carboxylate groups can be used to load the single molecule magnets Mn12–acetate [MnIII/IV12O12(CH3CO2)16(H2O)4] (Fig. 49).272In vitro MRI studies revealed that these particles offered higher T1 relaxivity in comparison to bare Mn12–acetate. Preliminary in vivo study with a rat model using an intravenous (i. v.) dose showed that this system was promising for biological imaging in living subjects.
 Fig. 49  Synthesis and characterization of poly-SMM. Adapted with permission from ref. 272. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Paramagnetic metals chelate Gd(III)–DTPA and Gd(III)–DOTA, and their derivatives have been found to increase the relaxation rate of the surrounding water protons, and thus are used as contrast agents for MRI.273 However, these agents cannot effectively discriminate diseased tissues from normal tissues due to their low molecular weight. Macromolecular Gd(III) complexes could be developed to enhance image contrast enhancement by conjugating Gd(III) chelates to biopolymers, including poly(amino acids), polysaccharides, dendrimers, proteins, etc.
The Lu group carried out systematic research on Gd-based MRI agents. They prepared a polymer–Gd(III) chelate conjugate that contained a degradable disulfide spacer to facilitate the excretion of Gd complexes.274 They chose anionic poly(L-glutamic acid) (PGA) and cystamine as a macromolecular carrier for Gd(III) chelates and a cleavable spacer respectively (Fig. 50). Because of the reaction between cystamine and custeine, an endogenous plasma thiol, the Gd(III) DOTA chelate derivative was readily released from the polymer conjugate. Significant MRI blood pool contrast enhancement was produced in nude mice with OVCAR-3 human ovarian carcinoma xenographs. The pharmacokinetic MRI results indicated that the complex was released by the endogenous thiols and excreted through renal filtration, as the Gd(III) complex mainly accumulated in the urinary bladder.
 Fig. 50  Chemical structure of Gd-containing polymer with cystamine as the cleavable spacer. 
To further optimize the physicochemical and pharmacokinetic properties of Gd-containing polymers, the Lu group further introduced the nontoxic, nonantigenic and biocompatible poly(ethylene glycol).275 Their results indicated that enhancement in heart and blood vessel MRI were achieved by using the Gd-containing polymer as compared to a low molecular weight control agent, Gd–(DTPA–BMA).
Besides the side-chain strategy, Lu et al. also reported main-chain biodegradable polydisulfide-based macromolecular Gd(III) complexes, which showed improvement in both in vivo retention time and MRI contrast enhancement.276 However, the molecular weight of this main-chain polymer was not high enough. They prepared Gd-containing poly(L-glutamic acid) with a different molecular weight. As shown in Fig. 51, the conjugate with a molecular weight of 28 kDa rapidly cleared from circulation and had a relatively lower tumor accumulation. The conjugates with higher molecular weight showed a more prolonged blood circulation and higher tumor accumulation.271 Similar results were obtained by using dendrimers with different generations.277
 Fig. 51  Coronal MR images of tumor bearing mice (a) before and at (b) 1, (c) 11, (d) 20, (e) 30, (f) 60, (g) 120, (h) 180, and (i) 240 min and (j) 24 h after injection of PGA–1,6-hexanediamine–(Gd–DO3A) conjugates of different molecular weights. Adapted with permission from ref. 276. Copyright © 2006, American Chemical Society. 
Using dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI), Lu et al. discovered that a biodegradable polydisulfide-based Gd(III)-containing polymer could assess the antiangiogenic efficacy of avastin in the animal tumor model, which was based on vascular parameters in tumor periphery.278 By introducing targeting groups or photosensitizer molecules, they also achieved detection of the angiogenesis biomarker αvβ3 integrin4 and MRI-guided PDT for site-specific cancer treatment.279
Similarly, Li et al. prepared a series of biocompatible MRI contrast agents by using poly(L-glutamic acid) as a substrate. The resulting copolymers can form spherical micelles in aqueous solution at pH 7.4, where the size of micelles can be tuned by pH. DTPA–Gd chelated to the shell layer of micelles exhibited significantly higher spin–lattice relaxivity (r1) than a small-molecular-weight MRI contrast agent, indicating that water molecules could readily access the Gd ions in the micelles.280,281
To achieve specific targeting, Na et al. developed a cancer-recognizable MRI contrast agent (CR-CAs) by using amphiphilic block copolymers, which consisted of methoxy poly(ethylene glycol)-b-poly(L-histidine) (PEG–p(L-His)) and methoxy poly(ethylene glycol)-b-poly(L-lactic acid)–diethylenetriaminopentaacetic acid dianhydride–gadolinium chelate (PEG–p(L-LA)–DTPA–Gd).282 At physiological pH (pH = 7.4), the CR-CAs self-assembled into spherical micelles with a size of ca. 40 nm. However, the CR-CAs were disassembled in an acidic tumoral environment (pH 6.5), because of the protonation of p(L-His) blocks, leading to positively charged water-soluble polymers. In the tumor region the CR-CAs exhibited highly effective T1 MR contrast enhancement.
Besides linear polymers, dendrimers have been widely used as substrates for MRI.283,284 Much of the early work using dendrimers as contrast agents focused on PAMAM, as investigated by Wiener et al.285 G2 and G6 PAMAM dendrimers were conjugated with DTPA to create polymers with 11 and 170 surface DTPA groups, respectively. In vivo analysis showed that these dendrimers increased half-life from 24 min for Gd(III)DTPA to 40 and 200 min for the G2 and G6 analogues, respectively. Bryant et al. studied the relationship between r1 and generation numbers of PAMAM–DOTA scaffolds and determined that r1 increased up to G7, but then plateaued, which was ascribed to slow water exchange.286 To further increase the size of the dendrimer, Tsourkas et al. synthesized dendrimer nanoclusters (DNCs) through crosslinking fifth generation PAMAM dendrimers with NHS–PEG–NHS.287 The size of the DNCs was ca. 75–150 nm. As a result, the relaxivity per DNC was as high as ca. 3.6 × 106 mM−1 s−1.
Raymond et al. developed hydroxypyridonate (HOPO)-based chelates, such as the heterotripodal Gd–TREN–bisHOPO–TAM–Me, which showed promise due to the high relaxivity while maintaining high stability and selectivity, regardless of functionalization on the TAM moiety.288 As shown in Fig. 52, they further conjugated amine-functionalized TREN-bis(1,2-HOPO)–TAM–ethylamine and TREN–bis-(1-Me-3,2-HOPO)–TAM–ethylamine ligands with biocompatible esteramide (EA)- and poly-L-lysine (PLL)-based dendrimers, which are capable of binding up to eight gadolinium complexes. These conjugates had a T1 relaxivity of up to 38.14 ± 0.02 mM−1 s−1 per gadolinium at 37 °C, corresponding to relaxivity of up to 228 mM−1 s−1 per dendrimer molecule.289,290
 Fig. 52  Chemical structures of Gd-containing dendrimers for MRI. 
Interestingly, it was found that ligands also play an important role in the water exchange rate. Merbach et al. conjugated G5–G9 PAMAM with ethylenepropylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (EPTPA), and it was observed that relaxivity increased from G5 to G7. However, this trend was reversed for the G9 structure.291 It was found that the higher relaxivity came from the induced scaffold rigidity due to the protonation of the tertiary amines of PAMAM. The effect of scaffold rigidity on relaxivity enhancement was also studied by other groups.292–294 For example, Kobayashi et al. synthesized a series of dendrimer-based MRI agents with rigid linkers, from which they achieved a relaxivity of 29 mM−1 s−1 for the G5 analogue. Meanwhile Meijer et al. found a reduction of relaxivity by using a flexible linker.294
MRI can also be coupled with other imaging tools, or even a drug delivery vehicle, to obtain multi-modal imaging and targeted chemotherapy and diagnosis. As shown in Fig. 53, Chang et al. fabricated a multifunctional platform for simultaneous MRI and targeted therapeutics.295 This platform was self-assembled from a hydrophobic poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) core and a hydrophilic paramagnetic-folate-coated PEGylated lipid shell. In this system, the Gd-containing shell served as an MRI agent due to its higher spin–lattice relaxivity, while the PLGA core can be used to load and release a hydrophobic anticancer drug.
 Fig. 53  Schematic representation of a multifunctional core–shell nanoparticle system (PLGA/PFPL) composed of a PLGA core and a paramagnetic folate-coated PEGylated liposome shell for MRI and drug delivery for targeted therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 295. Copyright © 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Ghandehari et al. used N-(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide (HPMA) as a platform to load both an MRI agent and anticancer drug through covalent bonds. Coupled with low toxicity, high stability and relaxivity, these conjugates showed the potential for monitoring the in vivo fate of HPMA-based drug delivery systems by MRI techniques.296 Liu et al. constructed functional unimolecular micelles,297 which were prepared from a G4 hyperbranched polyester by ring-opening polymerization of 3-caprolactone, ATRP of oligo(ethylene glycol) monomethyl ether methacrylate and 3-azidopropyl methacrylate (AzPMA), and subsequent click reaction with alkynyl-functionalized cancer cell-targeting moieties, alkynyl-folate, and T1-type MRI contrast agents. These micelles were capable of encapsulating paclitaxel with a loading content of 6.67 w/w%. These micelles exhibited controlled release of up to 80% of the drug over a time period of ca. 120 h. In vitro MRI experiments demonstrated considerably enhanced T1 relaxivity (18.14 mM−1 s−1) for unimolecular micelles compared to 3.12 mM−1 s−1 for that of the small molecule counterpart, alkynyl–DOTA–Gd. In vivo MR imaging in rats revealed prominent positive contrast enhancement, good accumulation of unimolecular micelles within rat liver and kidney, and relatively long duration of blood circulation.
Woods et al. reported an europium (Eu)-containing polycationic polymer as an MRI contrast agent. Due to its quantitative binding to DNA, this polymer was used as a reporter for gene therapy (Fig. 54).298 Significantly, the MR contrast signal from the agent itself diminished as a result of this binding event. This polymer could provide a platform for imaging and gene delivery into cells and tissues, enabling the monitoring of gene delivery in real time.
 Fig. 54  Chemical structure of Eu-containing polymers for MRI. 
For imaging the delivery of therapeutic nucleic acids at different biological scales, Reineke et al. developed polymer beacons based on the oligoethyleneamines (Fig. 55), which can bind and compact nucleic acids into nanoparticles, and coordinate with lanthanide (Ln) ions (both luminescent europium (Eu3+) and paramagnetic gadolinium (Gd3+)).299 The Ln-containing polymers allowed the visualization of the delivery vehicle via microscopy and MRI at different scales.
 Fig. 55  Chemical structure of Ln-containing polymers for MRI. 
Recently, Tsien et al. developed a dendrimer-based chelating agent with both a contrast agent and a fluorescent probe.300,301 They conjugated a G5 PAMAM dendrimer with activatable cell penetrating peptides (ACPPs) masked by PEG. The PEG chain can be cleaved from the ACPPs by proteases, and the cell penetrating peptides can then adhere to and be taken up by surrounding cells. Because the proteases MMP-2 and MMP-9 were associated with tumor growth and metastasis, the conjugates afforded a tumor-specific target. Then the conjugates were further labeled with Cy5 fluorescing agent and DOTA, which could be used to load Gd(III). When administered via tail-vein injections into mice with HT-1080 tumors 48 h prior to scanning, it was observed that the ACPP–dendrimer constructs increased r1 and signal intensity by 32% and 21%, respectively. Meanwhile, for HT-1080 tumors injected intramuscularly, it was observed that following ACPP–dendrimer administration, the Cy5 ligand showed brightest fluorescence at the tumor edges. As a result, these constructs had potential for aiding in the complete surgical removal of tumor tissues.
6. Conclusions and perspectives
Metals, with various unique functionalities, have the ability to bring new and powerful tools into polymer science. Nowadays metal-containing polymers are becoming increasingly important in the areas of interdisciplinary research. This review focuses on their biomedical applications. Metal-containing polymers have been successfully and broadly applied as advanced biomaterials in drug delivery, new drugs, radiotherapy, biosensors and bioimaging.
Metals and their derivatives are validly proved as effective drugs for various diseases and bacteria. Starting in the 20th century, metals have been gradually incorporated into polymers, leading to metal–polymer conjugates or metallopolymers, which have been investigated as new biomedical materials with many advantages over traditional polymers. Various drug delivery materials based on metallopolymers have been successfully designed and evaluated in in vivo and in vitro studies. These new metallopolymer-based drug delivery systems are usually ‘smart’, with remarkable response toward different stimuli, including thermal, light, oxidation/reduction and pH. These characters are introduced by metals in the polymers, significantly distinct from regular organic polymers. Metallopolymers have been identified as effective antimicrobial agents against various strains of bacteria, including drug-resistant ones. Metallopolymers can be also utilized as anticancer drugs against different tumors with low toxicity towards mammalian cells. Furthermore, the unique redox properties of metal-containing complexes make metallopolymers useful as biosensors, such as glucose sensors and food analytical tools. The magnetic response and radioactivity of metal elements in metallopolymers have been utilized to establish new radiotherapies for various cancers and to construct magnetic imaging devices. Although not extensively covered in this review, metallopolymers with dynamic bonds could serve as responsive materials for many biomedical applications.21–23
Though a flourishing future of metal-containing polymers in the biomedical field could be envisioned, there are several major obstructions that limit the development of metallopolymers as biomaterials. Firstly, the limited variation of metals has slowed down the discovery of new biomaterials containing metals. Among all metal elements, only about 30 of them have been reported as metal-containing biopolymers. Most of them are from VIII, IB and VA group elements. There are great opportunities to discover powerful tools to overcome biological issues. Secondly, the difficulties in the synthesis of metallopolymers hinder the versatility of metallopolymers. Currently, most of the metallopolymers for biomedical applications are based on coordination polymers, which usually lack the precise control over polymer architectures, molecular weight and molecular weight distribution. Radical and ionic polymerizations are typical controlled techniques for polymers with controlled properties. However, the synthesis of metallopolymers via controlled radical or ionic polymerizations are far less investigated. Metals in polymerization systems remarkably increase the complexity of polymerization processes. Thirdly, the toxicity of metals severely limits the applications of metal-containing materials in human bodies. Some of metals have been well known for their toxicities in the biological systems. How to avoid toxic metals in the environment is a critical challenge facing the construction of metal-containing biomaterials.
Acknowledgements
The support from National Institute of Health (1R01AI120987 to C. T.) and National Science Foundation (CHE-1151479 to C. T.) is acknowledged. Yi Yan thanks “The Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities” (3102015QD0024 and 3102015BJ(II)MYZ27) and Open Project of State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials (sklssm201625) for funding support.
Notes and references
G. R. Whittell, M. D. Hager, U. S. Schubert and I. Manners, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 176–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Whittell and I. Manners, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3439–3468 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Qian, M. Zhang, I. Manners and M. A. Winnik, Trends Biotechnol., 2010, 28, 84–92 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ke, E.-K. Jeong, X. Wang, Y. Feng, D. L. Parker and Z.-R. Lu, Int. J. Nanomed., 2007, 2, 191 CAS .
V. Bellas and M. Rehahn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5082–5104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rehahn, Acta Polym., 1998, 49, 201–224 CrossRef CAS .
M. Burnworth, D. Knapton, S. J. Rowan and C. Weder, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2007, 17, 91–103 CrossRef CAS .
C. Weder, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2006, 16, 101–113 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Dutton and P. J. Ragogna, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 1414–1425 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jäkle, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3985–4022 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Resendes, J. M. Nelson, A. Fischer, F. Jäkle, A. Bartole, A. J. Lough and I. Manners, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 2116–2126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Grubbs, Polym. Rev., 2007, 47, 197–215 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kulbaba and I. Manners, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2001, 22, 711–724 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Wong and C. L. Ho, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2006, 250, 2627–2690 CrossRef CAS .
F. H. Schacher, P. A. Rupar and I. Manners, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7898–7921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2002, 23, 995–1031 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Heilmann, M. Scheibitz, Y. Qin, A. Sundararaman, F. Jäkle, T. Kretz, M. Bolte, H. W. Lerner, M. C. Holthausen and M. Wagner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 920–925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. P. Chen, K. P. Miller, B. M. Cash, S. Jones, S. Glenn, B. C. Benicewicz and A. W. Decho, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12030–12033 RSC .
L. Wang, M. Cole, J. Li, Y. Zheng, Y. P. Chen, K. P. Miller, A. W. Decho and B. C. Benicewicz, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 248–255 RSC .
Y. Li, T. M. Krentz, L. Wang, B. C. Benicewicz and L. S. Schadler, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6005–6021 CAS .
R. J. Wojtecki, M. A. Meador and S. J. Rowan, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 14–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Burnworth, L. M. Tang, J. R. Kumpfer, A. J. Duncan, F. L. Beyer, G. L. Fiore, S. J. Rowan and C. Weder, Nature, 2011, 472, 334–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Shanmuganathan, J. R. Capadona, S. J. Rowan and C. Weder, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 212–222 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Sui, X. L. Feng, M. A. Hempenius and G. J. Vancso, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 1658–1672 RSC .
R. B. Grubbs, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 553–555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Massey, K. N. Power, I. Manners and M. A. Winnik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 9533–9540 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Chan, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2007, 251, 2104–2118 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz and E. K. Todd, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2003, 246, 3–52 CrossRef CAS .
B. Happ, A. Winter, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2222–2255 RSC .
X. S. Wang and R. McHale, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 331–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. U. Pittman, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2005, 15, 33–55 CrossRef CAS .
D. Astruc, Acc. Chem. Res., 1997, 30, 383–391 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chadha and P. J. Ragogna, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5301–5303 RSC .
Z. M. Hudson, J. S. Qian, C. E. Boott, M. A. Winnik and I. Manners, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 187–191 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Cohen, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2007, 11, 115–120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. W. Neuse, Macromol. Symp., 1994, 80, 111–128 CrossRef CAS .
M. Callari, J. R. Aldrich-Wright, P. L. de Souza and M. H. Stenzel, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 1614–1643 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, G. Niu and X. Y. Chen, Pharm. Res., 2014, 31, 1358–1376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. D. Pomogailo and V. N. Kestelman, Metallopolymer Nanocomposites, Springer Science & Business Media,  2006 Search PubMed .

          M. Gielen and E. R. Tiekink, Metallotherapeutic Drugs and Metal-Based Diagnostic Agents: The Use of Metals In Medicine, John Wiley & Sons,  2005 Search PubMed .

          J. R. Durant, Cisplatin: A Clinical Overview, Academic Press, New York,  1980 Search PubMed .
B. Rosenberg, L. Van Camp and T. Krigas, Nature, 1965, 205, 698–699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Hartinger and P. J. Dyson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 391–401 RSC .
P. Martins, M. Marques, L. Coito, A. J. L. Pombeiro, P. Viana Baptista and A. R. Fernandes, Anti-Cancer Agents Med. Chem., 2014, 14, 1199–1212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ringsdorf, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Symp., 1975, 51, 135–153 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Jaouen and N. Metzler-Nolte, Medicinal Organometallic Chemistry, Springer,  2010 Search PubMed .
G. Gasser, I. Ott and N. Metzler-Nolte, J. Med. Chem., 2010, 54, 3–25 CrossRef PubMed .
K. P. Miller, L. Wang, B. C. Benicewicz and A. W. Decho, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7787–7807 RSC .
K. P. Miller, L. Wang, Y.-P. Chen, P. J. Pellechia, B. C. Benicewicz and A. W. Decho, Front. Microbiology, 2015, 6, 189 Search PubMed .
C. G. Hardy, J. Zhang, Y. Yan, L. Ren and C. Tang, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 1742–1796 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lanigan and X. S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8133–8144 RSC .
X. S. Wang, K. Cao, Y. B. Liu, B. Tsang and S. Liew, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3399–3402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Quirante, F. Dubar, A. Gonzalez, C. Lopez, M. Cascante, R. Cortes, I. Forfar, B. Pradines and C. Biot, J. Organomet. Chem., 2011, 696, 1011–1017 CrossRef CAS .
K. Matyjaszewski and J. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 2921–2990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Hawker, A. W. Bosman and E. Harth, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 3661–3688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chiefari, Y. Chong, F. Ercole, J. Krstina, J. Jeffery, T. P. Le, R. T. Mayadunne, G. F. Meijs, C. L. Moad and G. Moad, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 5559–5562 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Bielawski and R. H. Grubbs, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2007, 32, 1–29 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hofmeier and U. S. Schubert, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2004, 33, 373–399 RSC .

          A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, C. E. Carraher, C. U. Pittman, J. E. Sheats and M. Zeldin, Macromolecules Containing Metal and Metal-Like Elements: Biomedical Applications, Wiley, Hoboken, NJ,  2004 Search PubMed .

          I. Manners, Synthetic Metal-Containing Polymers, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim,  2006 Search PubMed .
J. Kong, T. Schmalz, G. Motz and A. H. Müller, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 1280–1291 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Staff, M. Gallei, M. Mazurowski, M. Rehahn, R. Berger, K. Landfester and D. Crespy, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9042–9049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Sui, M. A. Hempenius and G. J. Vancso, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4023–4025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, W.-F. Dong, M. A. Hempenius, H. Möhwald and G. Julius Vancso, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 724–729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Janczewski, J. Song, E. Csanyi, L. Kiss, P. Blazso, R. L. Katona, M. A. Deli, G. Gros, J. Xu and G. J. Vancso, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6429–6435 RSC .
D. Correia-Ledo, A. A. Arnold and J. Mauzeroll, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15120–15123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, L. Rui, Y. Gao and W. Zhang, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 1817–1829 RSC .
Q. Yan, J. Yuan, Z. Cai, Y. Xin, Y. Kang and Y. Yin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9268–9270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Szillat, B. V. K. J. Schmidt, A. Hubert, C. Barner-Kowollik and H. Ritter, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 1293–1300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Postupalenko, D. Desplancq, I. Orlov, Y. Arntz, D. Spehner, Y. Mely, B. P. Klaholz, P. Schultz, E. Weiss and G. Zuber, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 10583–10586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Xu, W. Cao and X. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1647–1658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ma, Y. Li, H. P. Xu, Z. Q. Wang and X. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 442–443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, X. M. Liu, Q. A. Luo, J. Q. Liu and J. C. Shen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1171–1184 RSC .
N. Ma, H. P. Xu, L. P. An, J. Li, Z. W. Sun and X. Zhang, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 5874–5878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Han, S. C. Li, W. Cao, Y. Li, Z. W. Sun, Z. Q. Wang and H. P. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 740–743 RSC .
N. Ma, Y. Li, H. F. Ren, H. P. Xu, Z. B. Li and X. Zhang, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 1609–1614 RSC .
W. Cao, Y. Li, Y. Yi, S. B. Ji, L. W. Zeng, Z. W. Sun and H. P. Xu, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 3403–3408 RSC .
H. F. Ren, Y. T. Wu, N. Ma, H. P. Xu and X. Zhang, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 1460–1466 RSC .
P. Han, N. Ma, H. F. Ren, H. P. Xu, Z. B. Li, Z. Q. Wang and X. Zhang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 14414–14418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Mao, Z. Y. Dong, J. Q. Liu, X. Q. Li, X. M. Liu, G. M. Luo and J. C. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 11588–11589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cao, Y. W. Gu, M. Meineck, T. Y. Li and H. P. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5132–5137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Thomas, Z. Y. Dong, W. Dehaen and M. Smet, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 2127–2132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Fang, H. P. Xu, W. Cao, L. L. Yang and X. Zhang, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 2817–2821 RSC .
W. Cao, Y. W. Gu, T. Y. Li and H. P. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7069–7071 RSC .
M. Roner, K. Shahi, G. Barot, A. Battin and C. Carraher, Jr., J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2009, 19, 410–414 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Carraher Jr and L. Lanz, Polym. Mater.: Sci. Eng., 2002, 87, 243 Search PubMed .
J. Peterson, C. E. Carraher Jr, A. Salamone and A. Francis, Polym. Mater.: Sci. Eng., 1999, 81, 149 CAS .
D. Kalita, S. Sarmah, S. P. Das, D. Baishya, A. Patowary, S. Baruah and N. S. Islam, React. Funct. Polym., 2008, 68, 876–890 CrossRef CAS .
C. Selvi and D. Nartop, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2012, 95, 165–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Singh, N. U. Khan, S. Shreaz and A. A. Hashmi, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2013, 53, 2650–2658 CAS .
T. Singh, S. Shreaz and A. A. Hashmi, Int. J. Polym. Mater., 2013, 62, 653–662 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nishat, S. Khan, R. Rasool and S. Parveen, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2012, 22, 455–463 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hasnain, M. Zulfequar and N. Nishat, J. Coord. Chem., 2011, 64, 952–964 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. D. Dorman and S. G. Deans, J. Appl. Microbiol., 2000, 88, 308–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Miliauskas, P. R. Venskutonis and T. A. van Beek, Food Chem., 2004, 85, 231–237 CrossRef CAS .
F. H. Nielsen, J. Trace Elem. Exp. Med., 1998, 11, 251–274 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Zaki and S. M. Tawfik, J. Oleo Sci., 2014, 63, 921–931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. E. Carraher Jr and C. U. Pittman, Macromolecules Containing Metal and Metal-Like Elements, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2004, pp. 1–18 Search PubMed .

          G. J. M. v. d. Kerk, Organotin Compounds: New Chemistry and Applications, American Chemical Society,  1976, vol. 157, pp. 1–25 Search PubMed .
L. D. Chambers, K. R. Stokes, F. C. Walsh and R. J. K. Wood, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2006, 201, 3642–3652 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Battin and C. E. Carraher Jr, Abstr. Papers Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 229, U1145 Search PubMed .

          A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, C. E. Carraher Jr, C. U. Pittman and M. Zeldin, Inorganic and Organometallic Macromolecules-Design and Applications, Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, USA,  2007 Search PubMed .
A. Gross, D. Habig and N. Metzler-Nolte, ChemBioChem, 2013, 14, 2472–2479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Chantson, M. Vittoria Verga Falzacappa, S. Crovella and N. Metzler-Nolte, ChemMedChem, 2006, 1, 1268–1274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. F. Mayer, J. B. Gilroy, D. O'Hare and I. Manners, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10382–10383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. F. Mayer, J. P. Charmant, J. Rae and I. Manners, Organometallics, 2008, 27, 1524–1533 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Gilroy, S. K. Patra, J. M. Mitchels, M. A. Winnik and I. Manners, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5851–5855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qiu, J. B. Gilroy and I. Manners, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 42–44 RSC .
Y. Yan, J. Zhang, Y. Qiao and C. Tang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 254–259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, L. Ren, C. G. Hardy and C. Tang, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 6857–6863 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Yan, M. W. Chance, J. Chen, J. Hayat, S. Ma and C. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13387–13391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ren, J. Zhang, X. Bai, C. G. Hardy, K. D. Shimizu and C. Tang, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 580–583 RSC .
L. Ren, C. G. Hardy and C. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8874–8875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, T. M. Deaton, J. Zhang, H. He, J. Hayat, P. Pageni, K. Matyjaszewski and C. Tang, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 1644–1650 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Yan, J. Zhang and C. Tang, Controlled Radical Polymerization: Materials, American Chemical Society,  2015, vol. 1188, pp. 15–27 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Yan, J. Chen, W. M. Chance, J. Hayat, Z. Gai and C. Tang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3185–3190 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, P. J. Pellechia, J. Hayat, C. G. Hardy and C. Tang, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 1618–1624 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ren, J. Zhang, C. G. Hardy, D. Doxie, B. Fleming and C. Tang, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 2267–2275 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ren, J. Zhang, C. G. Hardy, S. Ma and C. Tang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 510–516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ren, C. G. Hardy, S. Tang, D. B. Doxie, N. Hamidi and C. Tang, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 9304–9310 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, J. Zhang, P. Wilbon, Y. Qiao and C. Tang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 1840–1845 CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. P. Chen, K. P. Miller, M. S. Ganewatta, M. Bam, Y. Yan, M. Nagarkatti, A. W. Decho and C. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4873–4876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Yan, P. Pageni, Y. Yan, A. Wirth, Y. Chen, Y. Qiao, Q. Wang, A. W. Decho and C. Tang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Yan, M. W. Chance, J. H. Chen, J. Hayat, S. G. Ma and C. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13387–13391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Wei, L. X. Ren, C. Tang and Z. H. Su, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 6480–6488 RSC .
A. C. Engler, N. Wiradharma, Z. Y. Ong, D. J. Coady, J. L. Hedrick and Y. Y. Yang, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 201–222 CrossRef CAS .
V. Homem and L. Santos, J. Environ. Manage., 2011, 92, 2304–2347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Adams, Y. Wang, K. Loftin and M. Meyer, J. Environ. Eng., 2002, 128, 253–260 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, C. Agatemor, N. Etkin, D. P. Overy, M. Lanteigne, K. McQuillan and R. G. Kerr, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 3694–3703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Osella, M. Ferrali, P. Zanello, F. Laschi, M. Fontani, C. Nervi and G. Cavigiolio, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2000, 306, 42–48 CrossRef CAS .
E. Neuse, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2005, 15, 3–31 CrossRef CAS .
E. W. Neuse, Polym. Adv. Technol., 1998, 9, 786–793 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mufula, B. A. Aderibigbe, E. Neuse and H. Mukaya, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2012, 22, 423–428 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mufula and E. Neuse, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2012, 22, 134–148 CrossRef CAS .
B. Aderibigbe, K. Jacques and E. Neuse, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2011, 21, 336–345 CrossRef CAS .
H. E. Mukaya and X. Y. Mbianda, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2015, 25, 411–418 CrossRef CAS .
G. Caldwell, M. G. Meirim, E. W. Neuse and C. E. J. van Rensburg, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 1998, 12, 793–799 CrossRef CAS .
G. Caldwell, M. Meirim, E. Neuse, K. Beloussow and W.-C. Shen, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2000, 10, 93–101 CrossRef CAS .
M. Johnson, E. Kreft, D. N'Da, E. Neuse and C. J. van Rensburg, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2003, 13, 255–267 CrossRef CAS .
M. Johnson, E. Neuse, C. J. van Rensburg and E. Kreft, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2003, 13, 55–67 CrossRef CAS .
M. Meirim, E. Neuse and G. Caldwell, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 1998, 8, 225–236 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Greenwald, C. D. Conover and Y. H. Choe, Crit. Rev. Ther. Drug Carrier Syst., 2000, 17, 62 CrossRef .
E. Neuse, M. Meirim, D. N'Da and G. Caldwell, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 1999, 9, 221–230 CrossRef CAS .
E. W. Neuse, Macromol. Symp., 2001, 172, 127–138 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gul, Z. Akhter, M. Siddiq, S. Sarfraz and B. Mirza, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 2800–2807 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gul, S. Sarfraz, Z. Akhter, M. Siddiq, S. Kalsoom, F. Perveen, F. L. Ansari and B. Mirza, J. Organomet. Chem., 2015, 779, 91–99 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, C.-Y. Quan, C. Chang, X.-Z. Zhang and R.-X. Zhuo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 5309–5314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, J. Zhang, Y. Qiao, M. Ganewatta and C. Tang, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 8816–8823 CrossRef CAS .
M. Helena Garcia, T. S. Morais, P. Florindo, M. F. M. Piedade, V. Moreno, C. Ciudad and V. Noe, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2009, 103, 354–361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Valente, M. H. Garcia, F. Marques, Y. Miao, C. Rousseau and P. Zinck, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2013, 127, 79–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, T. Murakami and M. Higuchi, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2013, 23, 119–125 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Z. Futera, H. Li, Y. Tateyama and M. Higuchi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4839–4841 RSC .
P. Govender, N. C. Antonels, J. Mattsson, A. K. Renfrew, P. J. Dyson, J. R. Moss, B. Therrien and G. S. Smith, J. Organomet. Chem., 2009, 694, 3470–3476 CrossRef CAS .
P. Govender, A. K. Renfrew, C. M. Clavel, P. J. Dyson, B. Therrien and G. S. Smith, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 1158–1167 RSC .
A. Pitto-Barry, N. P. E. Barry, O. Zava, R. Deschenaux, P. J. Dyson and B. Therrien, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 1966–1971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Therrien, G. Süss-Fink, P. Govindaswamy, A. K. Renfrew and P. J. Dyson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3773–3776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pitto-Barry, O. Zava, P. J. Dyson, R. Deschenaux and B. Therrien, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 7119–7124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Raja, N. S. P. Bhuvanesh and K. Natarajan, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 4365–4377 RSC .
S. Nehru, S. Arunachalam, R. Arun and K. Premkumar, J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn., 2014, 32, 1876–1888 CAS .
G. Vignesh, R. Senthilkumar, P. Paul, V. S. Periasamy, M. A. Akbarsha and S. Arunachalam, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 57483–57492 RSC .
R. Senthil Kumar, V. S. Periasamy, C. Preethy Paul, A. Riyasdeen, S. Arunachalam and M. A. Akbarsha, Med. Chem. Res., 2011, 20, 726–731 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lakshmipraba, S. Arunachalam, A. Riyasdeen, R. Dhivya, S. Vignesh, M. A. Akbarsha and R. A. James, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2013, 109, 23–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Norihiro, Jpn pat., 57102895,  1982 Search PubMed .
S. Monge, B. Canniccioni, A. Graillot and J. J. Robin, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 1973–1982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Maiti, S. Banerjee and S. K. Palit, Prog. Polym. Sci., 1993, 18, 227–261 CrossRef CAS .
J. Stejskal, I. Sapurina and M. Trchova, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 1420–1481 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Carraher Jr, M. R. Roner, N. Pham and A. Moric-Johnson, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl. Chem., 2014, 51, 547–556 CrossRef .
C. E. Carraher Jr, N. T. C. Truong, M. R. Roner, A. Moric and N. T. Trang, J. Chin. Adv. Mater. Soc., 2013, 1, 134–150 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, M. R. Vakili, X. F. Li, A. Lavasanifar and X. C. Le, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 7088–7100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Roner, C. Carraher, K. Shahi, Y. Ashida and G. Barot, BMC Cancer, 2009, 9, 358 CrossRef PubMed .
L. A. Ostrovskaya, S. D. Varfolomeev, M. G. Voronkov, D. B. Korman, N. V. Bluchterova, M. M. Fomina, V. A. Rikova, V. M. Goldberg, K. A. Abzaeva, L. V. Zhilitskaya, L. V. Snegur, A. A. Simenel and S. I. Zykova, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2014, 63, 1211–1217 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. van Rijt and P. J. Sadler, Drug Discovery Today, 2009, 14, 1089–1097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kelland, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2007, 7, 573–584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Mbonyana, E. W. Neuse and A. G. Perlwitz, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 1993, 7, 279–288 CrossRef CAS .
B. Schechter, G. Caldwell, M. G. Meirim and E. W. Neuse, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2000, 14, 701–708 CrossRef CAS .
G. Caldwell, E. W. Neuse and C. E. van Rensburg, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 1997, 7, 217–231 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. N'Da and E. W. Neuse, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2010, 20, 468–477 CrossRef .
W.-C. Shen, K. Beloussow, M. G. Meirim, E. W. Neuse and G. Caldwell, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2000, 10, 51–60 CrossRef CAS .
B. Geetha, A. Sodhi and S. M. Singh, Immunopharmacol. Immunotoxicol., 1991, 13, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Smit, E. Neuse, P. Becker, R. Anderson and C. van Rensburg, Drug Dev. Res., 2006, 66, 204–209 CrossRef .
M. Yokoyama, T. Okano, Y. Sakurai, S. Suwa and K. Kataoka, J. Controlled Release, 1996, 39, 351–356 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nishiyama, Y. Kato, Y. Sugiyama and K. Kataoka, Pharm. Res., 2001, 18, 1035–1041 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cabral, N. Nishiyama, S. Okazaki, H. Koyama and K. Kataoka, J. Controlled Release, 2005, 101, 223–232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shen, J. Luan, L. Cao, J. Sun, L. Yu and J. Ding, Biomacromolecules, 2014, 16, 105–115 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xiao, D. Zhou, S. Liu, Y. Zheng, Y. Huang and X. Jing, Acta Biomater., 2012, 8, 1859–1868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, R. Qi, J. Cai, X. Kang, S. Sun, H. Xiao, X. Jing, W. Li and Z. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 83343–83349 RSC .
H. Song, H. Xiao, M. Zheng, R. Qi, L. Yan and X. Jing, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 6560–6570 RSC .
R. Wang, H. Xiao, H. Song, Y. Zhang, X. Hu, Z. Xie, Y. Huang, X. Jing and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 25453–25462 RSC .
H. Xiao, W. Li, R. Qi, L. Yan, R. Wang, S. Liu, Y. Zheng, Z. Xie, Y. Huang and X. Jing, J. Controlled Release, 2012, 163, 304–314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiao, D. Zhou, S. Liu, R. Qi, Y. Zheng, Y. Huang and X. Jing, Macromol. Biosci., 2012, 12, 367–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dhar and S. J. Lippard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 22199–22204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Zhou, H. H. Xiao, F. B. Meng, X. Y. Li, Y. X. Li, X. B. Jing and Y. B. Huang, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2013, 2, 822–827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhou, S. He, Y. Cong, Z. Xie, X. Chen, X. Jing and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 4913–4921 RSC .
R. Wang, X. Hu, S. Wu, H. Xiao, H. Cai, Z. Xie, Y. Huang and X. Jing, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2012, 9, 3200–3208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. A. Karim, R. H. Utama, H. Lu and M. H. Stenzel, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 6600–6610 RSC .
A. Dag, Y. Jiang, K. J. A. Karim, G. Hart-Smith, W. Scarano and M. H. Stenzel, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2015, 36, 890–897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, Q. Fu, J. M. Ren, G. Bryant and G. G. Qiao, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 33–35 RSC .
Q. Fu, J. Xu, K. Ladewig, T. M. A. Henderson and G. G. Qiao, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 35–43 RSC .
S. Bontha, A. V. Kabanov and T. K. Bronich, J. Controlled Release, 2006, 114, 163–174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Haxton and H. M. Burt, Dalton Trans., 2008, 5872–5875 RSC .
W. J. Rieter, K. M. Pott, K. M. Taylor and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11584–11585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, C. Poon, K. Lu, C. He and W. Lin, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4182 CAS .
P. Sood, K. B. Thurmond, J. E. Jacob, L. K. Waller, G. O. Silva, D. R. Stewart and D. P. Nowotnik, Bioconjugate Chem., 2006, 17, 1270–1279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Campone, J. M. Rademaker-Lakhai, J. Bennouna, S. B. Howell, D. P. Nowotnik, J. H. Beijnen and J. H. Schellens, Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol., 2007, 60, 523–533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bouma, B. Nuijen, R. Harms, J. R. Rice, D. P. Nowotnik, D. R. Stewart, B. A. J. Jansen, S. van Zutphen, J. Reedijk, M. J. van Steenbergen, H. Talsma, A. Bult and J. H. Beijnen, Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm., 2003, 29, 981–995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Rademaker-Lakhai, C. Terret, S. B. Howell, C. M. Baud, R. F. de Boer, D. Pluim, J. H. Beijnen, J. H. Schellens and J.-P. Droz, Clin. Cancer Res., 2004, 10, 3386–3395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. J. G. J. Dolmans, D. Fukumura and R. K. Jain, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2003, 3, 380–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Jeong, H.-J. Yoon and W.-D. Jang, Polym. J., 2012, 44, 512–521 CrossRef CAS .
P. Agostinis, K. Berg, K. A. Cengel, T. H. Foster, A. W. Girotti, S. O. Gollnick, S. M. Hahn, M. R. Hamblin, A. Juzeniene, D. Kessel, M. Korbelik, J. Moan, P. Mroz, D. Nowis, J. Piette, B. C. Wilson and J. Golab, Ca-Cancer J. Clin., 2011, 61, 250–281 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Agostinis, K. Berg, K. A. Cengel, T. H. Foster, A. W. Girotti, S. O. Gollnick, S. M. Hahn, M. R. Hamblin, A. Juzeniene and D. Kessel, Ca-Cancer J. Clin., 2011, 61, 250–281 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Spyropoulos-Antonakakis, E. Sarantopoulou, P. Trohopoulos, A. Stefi, Z. Kollia, V. Gavriil, A. Bourkoula, P. Petrou, S. Kakabakos, V. Semashko, A. Nizamutdinov and A.-C. Cefalas, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 1–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-X. Zhang, J.-W. Zhou, C.-F. Chan, T. C.-K. Lau, D. W. J. Kwong, H.-L. Tam, N.-K. Mak, K.-L. Wong and W.-K. Wong, Bioconjugate Chem., 2012, 23, 1623–1638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gianferrara, A. Bergamo, I. Bratsos, B. Milani, C. Spagnul, G. Sava and E. Alessio, J. Med. Chem., 2010, 53, 4678–4690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-L. Ravanat, J. Cadet, K. Araki, H. E. Toma, M. H. G. Medeiros and P. D. Mascio, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1998, 68, 698–702 CAS .
F. Schmitt, P. Govindaswamy, G. Süss-Fink, W. H. Ang, P. J. Dyson, L. Juillerat-Jeanneret and B. Therrien, J. Med. Chem., 2008, 51, 1811–1816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rani-Beeram, K. Meyer, A. McCrate, Y. Hong, M. Nielsen and S. Swavey, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 11278–11283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, F. Xue, H. Yang, M. Shi, Y. Yan, L. Qin, Z. Zhou and S. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 573–579 CAS .
J. Kim, H.-J. Yoon, S. Kim, K. Wang, T. Ishii, Y.-R. Kim and W.-D. Jang, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4627–4631 RSC .
C. Mauriello-Jimenez, J. Croissant, M. Maynadier, X. Cattoen, M. Wong Chi Man, J. Vergnaud, V. Chaleix, V. Sol, M. Garcia, M. Gary-Bobo, L. Raehm and J.-O. Durand, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 3681–3684 RSC .
N. Nishiyama, Y. Nakagishi, Y. Morimoto, P.-S. Lai, K. Miyazaki, K. Urano, S. Horie, M. Kumagai, S. Fukushima, Y. Cheng, W.-D. Jang, M. Kikuchi and K. Kataoka, J. Controlled Release, 2009, 133, 245–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Herlambang, M. Kumagai, T. Nomoto, S. Horie, S. Fukushima, M. Oba, K. Miyazaki, Y. Morimoto, N. Nishiyama and K. Kataoka, J. Controlled Release, 2011, 155, 449–457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-D. Jang, Y. Nakagishi, N. Nishiyama, S. Kawauchi, Y. Morimoto, M. Kikuchi and K. Kataoka, J. Controlled Release, 2006, 113, 73–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schmitt, V. Heitz, A. Sour, F. Bolze, H. Ftouni, J.-F. Nicoud, L. Flamigni and B. Ventura, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 169–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Achelle, P. Couleaud, P. Baldeck, M.-P. Teulade-Fichou and P. Maillard, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2011, 1271–1279 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Liu, G. Z. Liu, N. Liu, Y. U.-m. Zhang, J. He, M. Rusckowski and D. J. Hnatowich, Nucl. Med. Biol., 2003, 30, 207–214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hrubý, V. Šubr, J. Kučka, J. Kozempel, O. Lebeda and A. Sikora, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2005, 63, 423–431 CrossRef PubMed .

          A. Jayakrishnan and M. Latha, Controlled and Novel Drug Delivery, CBS publishers, New Delhi,  1997, pp. 236–255 Search PubMed .
R. J. Mumper, U. Y. Ryo and M. Jay, J. Nucl. Med., 1991, 32, 2139–2143 CAS .
F. Nijsen, D. Rook, C. Brandt, R. Meijer, H. Dullens, B. Zonnenberg, J. de Klerk, P. van Rijk, W. Hennink and F. van het Schip, Eur. J. Nucl. Med., 2001, 28, 743–749 CrossRef CAS .
V. R. Sinha, V. Goyel and A. Trehan, Die Pharmazie, 2004, 59, 419–426 CAS .
M. R. Tassano, P. F. Audicio, J. P. Gambini, M. Fernandez, J. P. Damian, M. Moreno, J. A. Chabalgoity, O. Alonso, J. C. Benech and P. Cabral, Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett., 2011, 21, 5598–5601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Visentin, G. Pasut, F. M. Veronese and U. Mazzi, Bioconjugate Chem., 2004, 15, 1046–1054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Areses, M. T. Agüeros, G. Quincoces, M. Collantes, J. Á. Richter, L. M. López-Sánchez, M. Sánchez-Martínez, J. Irache and I. Peñuelas, Mol. Imaging Biol., 2011, 13, 1215–1223 CrossRef PubMed .
R. J. Callahan, A. Bogdanov, A. J. Fischman, T. J. Brady and R. Weissleder, Am. J. Roentgenol., 1998, 171, 137–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Morais, M. P. C. Campello, C. Xavier, J. Heemskerk, J. D. G. Correia, T. Lahoutte, V. Caveliers, S. Hernot and I. Santos, Bioconjugate Chem., 2014, 25, 1963–1970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Guo, X. Zhang, Y. Qi and Y.-M. Shen, Bioorg. Med. Chem., 2011, 19, 1643–1648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mitra, J. Mulholland, A. Nan, E. McNeill, H. Ghandehari and B. R. Line, J. Controlled Release, 2005, 102, 191–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mang'era, G. Liu, W. Yi, Y. Zhang, N. Liu, S. Gupta, M. Rusckowski and D. Hnatowich, Eur. J. Nucl. Med., 2001, 28, 1682–1689 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. Smith, H. Gali, G. L. Sieckman, C. Higginbotham, W. A. Volkert and T. J. Hoffman, Bioconjugate Chem., 2003, 14, 93–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E.-M. Kim, H.-J. Jeong, Y.-J. Heo, H.-B. Moon, H.-S. Bom and C.-G. Kim, J. Korean Med. Sci., 2004, 19, 647–651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Salamone, C. Carraher, J. Stewart, S. Miao, J. Peterson and A.-M. Francis, Polym. Mater.: Sci. Eng., 1999, 81, 147 CAS .
A. Salamone, C. Carraher, S. Carraher, H. Stewart, S. Miao and C. Cowen, Polym. Mater.: Sci. Eng., 2000, 82, 79 CAS .

          C. Carraher, Jr., J. Haky and A. Rivalta, in Functional Condensation Polymers, ed. C. Carraher, Jr. and G. Swift, Springer, US,  2002, pp. 55–62 Search PubMed .

          C. E. Carraher Jr, B. Currell, C. Pittman Jr, J. Sheats and M. Zeldin, Inorganic and Metal-Containing Polymeric Materials, Springer Science&Business Media,  2012 Search PubMed .
C. E. Carraher Jr, H. Stewart, L. Reckleben, M. Williams, W. Soldani and D. Bernstein, Polym. Mater.: Sci. Eng., 1989, 61, 437 Search PubMed .
D. Astruc, C. Ornelas and J. Ruiz, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 841–856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Astruc, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 255–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Deng, W. Shen and Z. Gao, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 168, 238–242 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xiao, M. Gu, Y. Liang, M. Dong, Z. Zhao and D. Zhi, J. Organomet. Chem., 2014, 772–773, 122–130 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xiao, Y. Liang, S. Li, M. Gu and L. Yue, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2014, 733, 77–84 CrossRef CAS .
N. Palomera, J. L. Vera, E. Meléndez, J. E. Ramirez-Vick, M. S. Tomar, S. K. Arya and S. P. Singh, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 658, 33–37 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Erden, C. Kaçar, F. Öztürk and E. Kılıç, Talanta, 2015, 134, 488–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jiménez, M. P. G. Armada, J. Losada, C. Villena, B. Alonso and C. M. Casado, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 190, 111–119 CrossRef .
L. Yuan, W. Wei and S. Liu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 38, 79–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ó. Conghaile, S. Pöller, D. MacAodha, W. Schuhmann and D. Leech, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 43, 30–37 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Antiochia, G. Vinci and L. Gorton, Food Chem., 2013, 140, 742–747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Deng, A. K. L. Teo and Z. Gao, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 191, 522–528 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, C. Huang and F. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2508–2524 RSC .
K. K.-W. Lo, A. W.-T. Choi and W. H.-T. Law, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 6021–6047 RSC .
K. K.-W. Lo, S. P.-Y. Li and K. Y. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 265–287 RSC .
E. Baggaley, J. A. Weinstein and J. A. G. Williams, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 1762–1785 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, S. Liu, H. Yang, Y. Wu, H. Sun, J. Wang, Q. Zhao, F. Li and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2013, 1, 319–329 RSC .
T. Yang, Q. Liu, S. Pu, Z. Dong, C. Huang and F. Li, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 494–503 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, D. Li, H. Yang, Y. Zhu and S. Yang, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 11941–11944 RSC .
Q. Zhao, X. Zhou, T. Cao, K. Y. Zhang, L. Yang, S. Liu, H. Liang, H. Yang, F. Li and W. Huang, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 1825–1831 RSC .
S. Dagorne, M. Normand, E. Kirillov and J. F. Carpentier, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 1869–1886 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Ma, E. T. Darmawan, M. Zhang, L. Zhang and J. D. Bryers, J. Controlled Release, 2013, 172, 1035–1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Panthani, V. Akhavan, B. Goodfellow, J. P. Schmidtke, L. Dunn, A. Dodabalapur, P. F. Barbara and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16770–16777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Nichols, Z. T. Qin, J. Yang, D. R. Vera and N. K. Devaraj, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 5215–5217 RSC .
R. R. Patil, J. H. Yu, S. R. Banerjee, Y. Ren, D. Leong, X. Jiang, M. Pomper, B. Tsui, D. L. Kraitchman and H. Q. Mao, Mol. Ther., 2011, 19, 1626–1635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ye, T. Ke, E.-K. Jeong, X. Wang, Y. Sun, M. Johnson and Z.-R. Lu, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2006, 3, 507–515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kim, A. H. Schmieder, A. J. Stacy, T. A. Williams and D. Pan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10377–10380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Caravan, J. J. Ellison, T. J. McMurry and R. B. Lauffer, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 2293–2352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-R. Lu, X. Wang, D. L. Parker, K. C. Goodrich and H. R. Buswell, Bioconjugate Chem., 2003, 14, 715–719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Mohs, X. Wang, K. C. Goodrich, Y. Zong, D. L. Parker and Z.-R. Lu, Bioconjugate Chem., 2004, 15, 1424–1430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zong, X. Wang, K. C. Goodrich, A. M. Mohs, D. L. Parker and Z. R. Lu, Magn. Reson. Med., 2005, 53, 835–842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Kaneshiro, E.-K. Jeong, G. Morrell, D. L. Parker and Z.-R. Lu, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 2742–2748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, E.-K. Jeong, L. Emerson, J. Hoffman, D. L. Parker and Z.-R. Lu, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2009, 7, 41–48 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Vaidya, Y. Sun, T. Ke, E. K. Jeong and Z. R. Lu, Magn. Reson. Med., 2006, 56, 761–767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wen, E. F. Jackson, R. E. Price, E. E. Kim, Q. Wu, S. Wallace, C. Charnsangavej, J. G. Gelovani and C. Li, Bioconjugate Chem., 2004, 15, 1408–1415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, R. Zhang, X. Wen, L. Li and C. Li, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 36–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, W. Park, J. Hu, Y. H. Bae and K. Na, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 337–343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nwe, L. H. Bryant Jr and M. W. Brechbiel, Bioconjugate Chem., 2010, 21, 1014–1017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nwe, H. Xu, C. A. S. Regino, M. Bernardo, L. Ileva, L. Riffle, K. J. Wong and M. W. Brechbiel, Bioconjugate Chem., 2009, 20, 1412–1418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Wiener, F. Auteri, J. Chen, M. Brechbiel, O. Gansow, D. Schneider, R. Belford, R. Clarkson and P. Lauterbur, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 7774–7782 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Bryant, M. W. Brechbiel, C. Wu, J. W. Bulte, V. Herynek and J. A. Frank, J. Magn. Reson. Imaging, 1999, 9, 348–352 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Cheng, D. L. Thorek and A. Tsourkas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 346–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Cohen, J. Xu, E. Radkov, K. N. Raymond, M. Botta, A. Barge and S. Aime, Inorg. Chem., 2000, 39, 5747–5756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. Floyd III, P. J. Klemm, D. E. Smiles, A. C. Kohlgruber, V. C. Pierre, J. L. Mynar, J. M. Fréchet and K. N. Raymond, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2390–2393 CrossRef PubMed .
V. C. Pierre, M. Botta and K. N. Raymond, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 504–505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Laus, A. Sour, R. Ruloff, E. Toth and A. E. Merbach, Chem. – Eur. J., 2005, 11, 3064–3076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rudovský, M. Botta, P. Hermann, K. I. Hardcastle, I. Lukeš and S. Aime, Bioconjugate Chem., 2006, 17, 975–987 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kobayashi, S. Kawamoto, S.-K. Jo, H. L. Bryant, M. W. Brechbiel and R. A. Star, Bioconjugate Chem., 2003, 14, 388–394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Langereis, Q. G. De Lussanet, M. H. Van Genderen, W. H. Backes and E. Meijer, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 3084–3091 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liao, H. Wang, X. Wang, P. Zhao, S. Wang, W. Su and J. Chang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1179–1186 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zarabi, A. Nan, J. Zhuo, R. Gullapalli and H. Ghandehari, Macromol. Biosci., 2008, 8, 741–748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Qian, T. Liu, X. Hu, G. Zhang, Y. You and S. Liu, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 6595–6605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, C. E. Carney, M. Denton, E. Hart, P. Zhao, D. N. Streblow, A. D. Sherry and M. Woods, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2010, 8, 5333–5338 CAS .
J. M. Bryson, K. M. Fichter, W.-J. Chu, J.-H. Lee, J. Li, L. A. Madsen, P. M. McLendon and T. M. Reineke, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 16913–16918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Olson, T. Jiang, T. A. Aguilera, Q. T. Nguyen, L. G. Ellies, M. Scadeng and R. Y. Tsien, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 4311–4316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. T. Nguyen, E. S. Olson, T. A. Aguilera, T. Jiang, M. Scadeng, L. G. Ellies and R. Y. Tsien, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 4317–4322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors equally contributed.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Yi Yan
	Dr Yi Yan received his BS from College of Chemistry, Jilin University and PhD from the State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, Jilin University under the supervision of Prof. Lixin Wu. Then, he moved to Canada to pursue his postdoctoral research at Queen's University with Prof. Anne Petitjean from August 2011 to October 2012. From November 2012 to April 2015, he was a postdoctoral scholar at the University of South Carolina with Prof. Chuanbing Tang. Since May 2015, he has been a full professor in Department of Applied Chemistry, School of Science at Northwestern Polytechnical University, P. R. China. His research is focused on supramolecular chemistry, controlled polymerization, metal-containing polymers and inorganic–organic hybrids.

Jiuyang Zhang
	Dr Jiuyang Zhang received his BS from Nanjing University (2010). He joined Prof. Chuanbing Tang's group and obtained his PhD (2014) from University of South Carolina. His research focuses on metal-containing polymers, controlled polymerization techniques and hybrid polymeric materials.

Lixia Ren
	Dr Lixia Ren received her BS from Hebei University in 2004 and PhD from Institute of Chemistry Chinese Academy of Science under the supervision of Prof. Yongming Chen in 2009. She did her postdoctoral research at University of South Carolina with Prof. Chuanbing Tang from 2009 to 2011. Currently she is an associate professor at Tianjin University, China. She is interested in controlled polymerization of topological polymers, supramolecular polymers, metal-containing polymers and polymer-based biomaterials.

Chuanbing Tang
	Prof. Chuanbing Tang received BS from Nanjing University and PhD from Carnegie Mellon University with Prof. Krzysztof Matyjaszewski and Tomasz Kowalewski. He was a postdoctoral scholar at the University of California Santa Barbara with Prof. Edward J. Kramer and Craig J. Hawker. Since August 2009, he has been an Assistant Professor, Associate Professor and College of Arts and Sciences Distinguished Professor in Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of South Carolina. His research interests focus on organic polymer synthesis, sustainable polymers from biomass, metal-containing polymers, dielectric polymers, and polymers for biomedical applications.

 	Fig. 1  Publications containing “organometallic polymers” from 1990 to 2015 based on SciFinder search.	 

 	Fig. 2  Metals in periodic tables used in polymeric systems for biomedical applications and covered by this review article.	 

 	Fig. 3  Self-assembly of ferrocene-containing block copolymer PEG-b-PMAEFc, and redox-responsive release of a model molecule (Rhodamine B). Adapted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright © 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Illustration of the Ni-containing protein delivery system. Adapted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright © 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 5  Synthesis of the diselenide-containing main-chain polymers (PEG–PUSeSe–PEG). Adapted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright © 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Drug release from diselenide-containing block copolymer micelles under red light. Adapted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright © 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  Oxidation-responsive micelles based on a side-chain selenium-containing polymeric supra-amphiphile formed through the electrostatic interaction. Adapted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright © 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Structure of tellurium-containing polymer, PEG–PUTe–PEG, and the mechanism of association with cisplatin and release via glutathione. Adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Chemical structures of Zr- and Ti-containing polymers with antiviral activity.	 

 	Fig. 10  Chemical structure of Cr-containing polymers with antibacterial activity.	 

 	Fig. 11  Chemical structure of Ni–Zn-bimetallic sunflower oil based polymers with antifungal property.	 

 	Fig. 12  Chemical structure of Ge-containing PEO surfactant with antibacterial activity.	 

 	Fig. 13  Chemical structures of Sn-containing polymers with antibacterial activity.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Formation of ion-pairs between β-lactam antibiotics and cationic cobaltocenium-containing polymers. (b) 1H NMR spectrum of ion-pairs of nitrocefin and cationic cobaltocenium-containing polymers. (c) Antibiotic release from antibiotic–metallopolymer ion pairs via lipoteichoic acid or β-lactamases. (d) Four β-lactam antibiotics are used for this study. CSLM images (left column) and corresponding SEM images (right column) of HA-MRSA cells incubated respectively in the presence of control solution, 5.6 μM penicillin-G (2 μg mL−1), 1 μM Cl−-paired cationic cobaltocenium-containing polymers (12.5 μg mL−1), and penicillin-G–metallopolymer bioconjugate (5.6 μM penicillin-G and 1 μM metallopolymers). CSLM imaging employed BacLight live/dead stain (green indicates live cells, red indicates dead cells). Scale bars in confocal images, 50 μm; scale bar in SEM images, 1 μm. Adapted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Illustration of anion-paired cobaltocenium-containing organogels and hydrogels. Inserted: Optical images of representative gels (scale bar: 1 cm). Inhibition of cobaltocenium-containing hydrogels (PCoCl–Gel) was observed against (b) Gram-negative E. coli; (c) Gram-positive S. aureus; and (d) HA-MRSA at different concentrations using standard solution micro-broth measurement. Adapted with permission from ref. 123. Copyright © 2015, Rights Managed by Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 16  Chemical structure of Fe-containing dendrimer with antibacterial activity.	 

 	Fig. 17  Synthesis of ferrocene-containing polyaspartamides.	 

 	Fig. 18  Chemical structure of ferrocene-containing polymers reported by the Neuse group.	 

 	Fig. 19  Chemical structure of main-chain ferrocene-containing polymers reported by the Mirza group.	 

 	Fig. 20  Chemical structures of representative Ru-containing polymers with anticancer activity (ref. 149 and 151–153).	 

 	Fig. 21  Chemical structure of Co-containing coordination polymer with anticancer activity.	 

 	Fig. 22  Chemical structures of side-chain Co-containing polymers with anticancer properties.	 

 	Fig. 23  Chemical structure of Ge-containing polymer with anticancer activity.	 

 	Fig. 24  Chemical structures of hybrid polymers from group VA with thiodiglycolic acid and glycyrrhetinic acid.	 


Ph3Sb/GA
	130(10)	2800(22)	1900(23)	1700(8)

Ph3Bi/GA
	170(15)	1800(14)	>32000	3800(9)

Ph3As/GA
	220(12)	5400(29)	>32000	2500(9)

Me3Sb/GA
	>32000	>32000	3800(19)	>32000

Cisplatin
	15(10)	1200(19)	1400(150)	340(12)

 	Fig. 25  Encapsulation of PAO into PEO-b-P(CCLC6-SH) and PEO-b-P(CCLC6) micelles. Adapted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 26  Chemical structures of small molecular Pt-containing anticancer drugs. The compounds in the first row are commercially available; those in the second row are in the phase I or phase II clinical stage.	 

 	Fig. 27  Chemical structures of anticancer Pt-containing polymers developed by the Neuse and Rensburg group (ref. 174–180).	 

 	Fig. 28  Molecular design of the unique polymer–Pt(IV) conjugate and corresponding thermogel. Adapted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  Chemical structures of anticancer Pt-containing polymers developed by the Jing and Huang group (ref. 185–191).	 

 	Fig. 30  Chemistry of constructing cross-linked polymer vesicles and their drug conjugation with cisplatin. Adapted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright © 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 31  Formation of Pt-containing nanoscale coordination polymers. Adapted with permission from ref. 201. Copyright © 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  Synthetic approach of Pt-containing anticancer drug AP5346.	 

 	Fig. 33  PDT-induced effects. Light-mediated excitation of photosensitizer-loaded tumor cells leads to the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) within these cells, leading to cell death (predominantly apoptotic and necrotic). Adapted with permission from ref. 210. Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 34  Chemical structure of a Ru-containing PDT agent.	 

 	Fig. 35  Synthesis and theranostic applications of Ir–Gd coordination polymer particles. Adapted with permission from ref. 217. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 36  Chemical structure of the dendrimer–metal complex reported by the Jang group.	 

 	Fig. 37  Time-dependent morphological changes of the DPc- and DPc/m-treated A549 cells during photoirradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 220. Copyright © 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 38  Chemical structures of conjugated zinc porphyrin oligomers.	 

 	Fig. 39  Illustration of direct labeling of PEGylated PN2S ligands. A drawing of the mechanism of 99mTc reduction-coordination mediated by PN2S–PEG micelle aggregation with the two possible coordination species is shown. Adapted with permission from ref. 232. Copyright © 2004, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 40  Chemical structure of DTPA-terminated poly-L-lysine, which can be used to chelate 99mTc.	 

 	Fig. 41  Chemical structure of multifunctional imaging agent for sentinel lymph nodes based on the modification of dextran with a radionuclide (99mTc or 68Ga) and a near-infrared (NIR) reporter.	 

 	Fig. 42  Chemical structure of Zr–gibberellic acid-containing crosslinked polymer for biocide.	 

 	Fig. 43  Schematic illustration of ferrocene-based sensor. Adapted with permission from ref. 254. Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 44  Chemical structure of Os-containing polymers used in biosensors.	 

 	Fig. 45  Chemical structure of Ru-containing polymer used in a biosensor.	 

 	Fig. 46  Illustration of the conformation of Ir-containing polymers in aqueous solution as a dual phosphorescent sensor for Cys/Hcy and temperature. Adapted with permission from ref. 262. Copyright © 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 47  (A) In vivo luminescence imaging of a tumor-bearing mouse (ROI 1) and the control nude mouse (ROI 2) after injection of the FPPdots. (B) The change in luminescence intensity of the marked regions (ROI 1, ROI 2 and ROI 3). Adapted from ref. 265 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 48  Gallium-containing dextran as a bioimaging agent for tumor cells. Adapted from ref. 269 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 49  Synthesis and characterization of poly-SMM. Adapted with permission from ref. 272. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 50  Chemical structure of Gd-containing polymer with cystamine as the cleavable spacer.	 

 	Fig. 51  Coronal MR images of tumor bearing mice (a) before and at (b) 1, (c) 11, (d) 20, (e) 30, (f) 60, (g) 120, (h) 180, and (i) 240 min and (j) 24 h after injection of PGA–1,6-hexanediamine–(Gd–DO3A) conjugates of different molecular weights. Adapted with permission from ref. 276. Copyright © 2006, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 52  Chemical structures of Gd-containing dendrimers for MRI.	 

 	Fig. 53  Schematic representation of a multifunctional core–shell nanoparticle system (PLGA/PFPL) composed of a PLGA core and a paramagnetic folate-coated PEGylated liposome shell for MRI and drug delivery for targeted therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 295. Copyright © 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 54  Chemical structure of Eu-containing polymers for MRI.	 

 	Fig. 55  Chemical structure of Ln-containing polymers for MRI.	 
Footnote
† These authors equally contributed.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
