Commercialisation of high energy density sodium-ion batteries: Faradion's journey and outlook   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA00376C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA00376C
(Perspective)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 8279-8302Commercialisation of high energy density sodium-ion batteries: Faradion's journey and outlook†

        
          
            Ashish 
            Rudola
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Anthony J. R. 
            Rennie
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Richard 
            Heap
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Seyyed Shayan 
            Meysami
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Alex 
            Lowbridge
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Francesco 
            Mazzali
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ruth 
            Sayers
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Christopher J. 
            Wright
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jerry 
            Barker
          
          
        
      *
      Faradion Limited, The Innovation Centre, 217 Portobello, Sheffield S1 4DP, UK. E-mail: jerry.barker@faradion.co.uk
Received 
      14th January 2021
    , Accepted 17th February 2021First published on 17th February 2021AbstractThere is no doubt that rechargeable batteries will play a huge role in the future of the world. Sodium-ion (Na-ion) batteries might be the ideal middle-ground between high performance delivered by the modern lithium-ion (Li-ion) battery, desire for low costs and long-term sustainability. To commercialise the Na-ion technology, Faradion was founded in 2011 as the world's first non-aqueous Na-ion battery company. Over the years, we have made rapid progress in increasing the all-around performance of Na-ion batteries, benefitting from decades' worth of industry experience and prior Na-ion as well as Li-ion academic research. The Faradion Na-ion chemistry can now exceed the energy densities of LiFePO4//graphite Li-ion batteries with rapidly converging cycle lives, similar rate performance and charge acceptance. In addition, our technology makes use of lower materials costs, offers improved safety through the use of high flash point electrolytes and has the ability to be discharged to zero volts for storage and transportation. In this article, Faradion's step-by-step progress in the Na-ion technology will be discussed together with a general picture of how our Na-ion chemistry compares with other Na-ion systems and commercially available Li-ion technology. Finally, the importance of starting experimental testing on new materials, keeping commercially-relevant protocols in mind, will be illustrated by clearly highlighting the drastic effects of some crucial experimental factors. By sharing such industry know-how, Faradion hopes researchers worldwide will adopt such experimental protocols as routine methodology in the laboratory. These simple measures can significantly shorten the path from a new invention to commercial application, while also ensuring that the battery-related literature conveys the true commercial feasibility of an invention or discovery to the general public.Ashish RudolaAshish Rudola is currently a Battery Scientist at Faradion. He received his PhD at the National University of Singapore (NUS) in 2015, where he was awarded the NUS President's Graduate Fellowship for his research work. He was subsequently a Postdoctoral Research Fellow in NUS until 2017 before joining Faradion in 2018. As one of the first researchers to focus a PhD degree solely on sodium-ion batteries, Ashish has explored different facets of room-temperature sodium-based rechargeable batteries since 2011. His research interests are wide-ranging in this field and cover novel materials for cathodes, anodes and electrolytes along with original concepts to enhance the performance of sodium-based chemistries.Anthony J. R. RennieAnthony Rennie received his MEng and PhD from the Department of Chemical & Process Engineering at the University of Strathclyde. He worked for 6 years at the University of Sheffield in the area of energy storage technologies where research was focused on the application of ionic liquid electrolytes in supercapacitors and batteries. He is currently Quality & Performance manager at Faradion and is involved in technology transfer and commercialization of sodium-ion technology.Richard HeapRichard Heap received his BSc and PhD from the University of Surrey, before moving to Singapore to work as a Research Fellow at Nanyang Technological University. He has since worked in the UK battery industry for 12 years, focusing on Li-ion, Mg-ion and Na-ion batteries, specifically the design of new active materials to meet consumer demands. As well as being a named inventor on >15 patents, he has successfully managed several collaborative R&D projects, and has gained both all-round and in-depth knowledge of the materials, equipment, processes, testing regimes and scale-up techniques used in the industry.Ruth SayersRuth has worked for Faradion since 2012, now in her current role as Operations Manager. She has supported the company to grow and evolve since joining as a Research Scientist in its early start-up days. She gained her Materials Science MEng at Imperial College London where she was awarded the Charles Salter Prize, as well as gaining the AT Green Award for Excellence in Ceramics from the Institute of Materials, Minerals & Mining. Ruth gained her doctorate at Imperial College London in 2010 and was awarded the John Kilner Prize for Energy Materials for her thesis on cathode materials for Solid Oxide Fuel Cells. She has numerous patents and publications in the fields of fuel cells and sodium-ion batteries.Christopher J. WrightChris Wright has a BA and D.Phil in Chemistry from Oxford University. He was a Royal Society European fellow at Milan University, research fellow at the Harwell research establishment and RSC BOC centenary lecturer in 1992. He was Operations Director at AEA Technology Plc (licensor of Lithium Cobalt Oxide); CEO of IP2IPO (now IP Group, the leading UK investor in university IP) and Co-Founder of Faradion Ltd. He is chairman of Faradion Ltd, and a director of Aceleron Ltd and Carbon Air Ltd. Chris is an author on over 60 papers and inventor of ten patents.Jerry BarkerDr Jerry Barker is founder and CTO of Faradion Limited – a UK-based start-up company developing high energy density Na-ion batteries. Previously Jerry was Chief Scientist at Valence Technology Inc. He has published over 70 technical papers (h-index = 56, total citation > 10000) and is the named inventor on more than 110 issued and 50 pending US battery patents. He is the inventor of several commercial Na-ion and Li-ion active materials, including Na3V2(PO4)2F3, NaVPO4F, LiVPO4F, Li3V2(PO4)3, LiFe(Mg)PO4 as well as the carbothermal reduction manufacturing method. In 2012, Jerry was awarded the IBA Technology Award in recognition of his contributions to Li-ion battery materials. He is a member of the Expert Panel for the UK's Faraday Institution.
Introduction
As the world transitions to a green economy, energy storage is seen as a key component towards achieving this vision. This is because renewable energy harvesting technologies such as solar, tidal or wind are intermittent in their availability, hence, energy storage will always be the one common denominator that is required.1–3 While there are various forms of energy storage available, electrochemical energy storage, i.e. batteries, represent the only option that is effective at all scales: from residential home storage to micro-grids to large-scale utility grids. Apart from stationary energy storage, rechargeable batteries are also indispensable towards ubiquitous applications such as e-mobility devices/vehicles and consumer electronics.1,2 It is no surprise, therefore, that the worldwide rechargeable battery market is projected to be in excess of US $140 billion by year 2025.4
The current rechargeable battery technology market is dominated by lead-acid (PbA) batteries along with the higher energy density Li-ion batteries.4 PbA batteries have been the battery workhorse for over a century,5 and while this technology has improved consistently, there is an inherent limit to its energy density which is dictated by the cell chemistry. As a result, intensive efforts over the last few decades have been directed towards the development of Li-ion batteries whose working principle and chemistry allows for much higher energy densities. Li-ion batteries are now the highest energy density battery option commercially available across various scales.6,7 The reliance of Li-ion batteries on scarce elements, such as Co and Li in particular and on Ni and natural graphite to a lesser extent, has been well documented with several studies concluding that the supply of such elements to meet the burgeoning Li-ion battery demand might only be feasible in the short-term, even after accounting for battery recycling.8–10 The 2020 lockdowns imposed on many countries by their respective governments in an effort to slow down the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic, have highlighted the extreme dependency of the world on one country (China), not just for the manufacturing and supply of Li-ion cells/packs, but also for the refinement and supply of these critical elements.11 It is becoming apparent that, from a global energy security perspective in both the present and the future, a high energy density battery technology is required utilising more earth-abundant and geographically widespread elements.
There are various possible battery technologies that rely on abundant elements and have potentially high energy densities at the module/pack level. However, some of these battery technologies will be disruptive to the industry in terms of manufacturing methodologies, incurring intensive capital investment to establish manufacturing capabilities and equipment. The incentive to switch to such technologies can only be provided if these show significantly higher energy densities than current Li-ion batteries in large, commercial-scale batteries, similar to the leap shown by Sony in the first ever successful Li-ion battery demonstration.12 Perhaps the most prominent example here might be metal-air batteries,13 which have a huge upside in terms of energy density vs. the current generation of commercial Li-ion batteries, but are still in the relatively nascent stage of laboratory-scale research. Excitingly, there are other technologies, such as metal–sulphur (in particular NaS batteries, which have already been commercialised albeit requiring a high operating temperature),14,15 rechargeable alkali-metal,16–18 and in situ metal plating or ‘anode-free’ batteries,19 to name a few, who have had tremendous research focus recently and are currently in the process of pre-commercialisation or would likely start this process in the near future.20 Interestingly, out of all alternative rechargeable and sustainable battery technologies existing currently, the case for Na-ion batteries and, to a lesser extent, for potassium-ion (K-ion) batteries, is fundamentally unique: such alkali-ion batteries possess the same working principle as Li-ion batteries and utilise identical manufacturing protocols and equipment as those required for Li-ion batteries.21 This means that if the energy density and other performance metrics of such Na-ion/K-ion batteries could be similar to those of Li-ion batteries, the incentive for battery manufacturers to switch to such batteries would come down to the final cost in $ per kW h. On this point, the much larger worldwide Na and K resources compared to Li resources would result in obvious cost reductions in $ per kW h if the resultant alkali-ion battery can avoid other scarce elements, particularly Co.8,22,23 While the K-ion field is still in its infancy, the Na-ion battery technology has made remarkable strides over the last decade.24–26
This Perspective article, therefore, aims to provide a brief summary on how far the Na-ion technology has come over the last few decades, to the point of commercialisation, from the lens of the first non-aqueous commercial Na-ion battery company established in the world – Faradion Limited. We will first describe the history of Na-ion technology prior to Faradion's inception, culminating with the state-of-knowledge at the time Faradion was founded, in 2011. We will then describe the rationale we used in order to design Na-ion batteries geared for high energy density applications. Afterwards, we will illustrate various examples of cathodes (positive electrodes), anodes (negative electrodes) and electrolytes that Faradion developed over the years, to progressively increase the energy densities of large-scale Na-ion cells. We will then review the state-of-the-art large-scale Na-ion full cells that exists in the literature currently. Finally, we will present some of our recent results on commercial-scale Na-ion cells, which will prove that the Na-ion technology can match the energy densities of several types of Li-ion batteries, and that our technology is well-suited to many market applications.
Along the way, we will point out various guidelines on how to design a better battery utilising our vast experiences (successes as well as failures) on thousands of prospective Na-ion battery materials. These examples, while specific to Na-ion systems, are applicable to all battery technologies. By doing so, we hope to shine a spotlight on some issues of commercial significance that are crucial in determining whether a material will ever be commercially feasible. It is hoped that by sharing such industry know-how, we can help researchers around the world to accelerate the already excellent progress in Na-ion batteries achieved in the last decade.
Brief history of Na-ion batteries: 1970s to circa 2011
The birth of modern Na-ion batteries can be traced to the first reports demonstrating successful alkali-ion intercalation in solid active materials. It is striking that the first papers on Na-ion (Na+) and Li-ion (Li+) intercalation were published in successive months in 1976. Winn et al. demonstrated successful Na+ intercalation into TiS2 using a Na–Hg amalgam counter electrode and NaI in propylene carbonate (PC) liquid electrolyte (they also demonstrated Li+ intercalation in TiS2 using a Li metal counter electrode and LiClO4 in PC liquid electrolyte).27 This was followed by Whittingham, who showed successful Li+ intercalation into TiS2 in a Li half-cell as well, using a liquid electrolyte composed of LiClO4 in a mixture of dimethoxyethane and tetrahydrofuran28 (though the priority patent application was filed in 1975).29 These papers galvanised the battery community to delve further in the direction of intercalation-based active materials for Li-ion and Na-ion batteries. On the Na-ion side, the next notable development was the successful demonstration of a Na metal anode as the counter electrode in a TiS2 half-cell by Newman and Klemann in 1980 (though the cycling stability was quite poor over 16 cycles).30 The discovery by Professor Goodenough's group in 1980,31 of high voltage oxide-based cathodes (LixCoO2) capable of reversible Li+ intercalation, led to the first high voltage oxide-based Na-ion cathodes, O3–NaCoO2 and P2-Na0.7CoO1.96, as demonstrated by Delmas et al. in 1981.32
However, at this stage, the apparently higher energy densities realised by Li-ion cathode materials seemed to negatively impact the focus on Na-ion battery research. In the quest for realising the modern alkali-ion battery, the next breakthrough was predictably on the Li-ion side: the 1982-filed patent by Samar Basu of Bell Telephone Laboratories detailed a lithiated graphite (LiC6) anode/2 M LiAsF6 in 1,3-dioxolane liquid electrolyte/NbSe3 cathode configuration.33 This important work demonstrated the feasibility of the ‘rocking-chair’ type alkali-ion battery (where the alkali-ion shuttles from a non-metal anode to cathode during discharge and vice versa during charge). However, this work demonstrated a Li-ion cell fabricated in the charged state (anode being lithiated) and not in the discharged state (where the anode contains no mobile Li), as occurs for modern-day Li-ion batteries. It is curious that it took almost eight years for this seminal demonstration, which was revealed by Sony in 1990.12
The viability of a similar rocking-chair type Na-ion battery was actually first demonstrated by Shacklette et al. of Allied-Signal in a priority patent application dated October, 1987, utilising P2-NaxCoO2 cathode, 1 M NaPF6 in dimethoxyethane liquid electrolyte and conjugated backbone (co)polymer-based anodes.34 Almost immediately afterwards, Shishikura et al. of Showa Denko and Hitachi, filed a priority patent application dated November, 1987 detailing a NaxCoO2 cathode//NaPF6 in ether-based liquid electrolytes//Na–Hg alloy-based composite anodes, showing excellent cycling stabilities of such non-rocking-chair type Na-based battery systems (cycle life up to 699 cycles in de-rated conditions demonstrated).35,36 In the academic literature, similar reports soon started emerging: a Na-ion rocking-chair type system using a polymer electrolyte, Na0.6CoO2 cathode and a carbonaceous petroleum coke anode was revealed by Doeff et al. in 1993, though the operating temperature was 100 °C to facilitate the use of polymer electrolyte.37 Doeff et al. further showed a symmetrical NaxMnO2/polymer electrolyte/NaxMnO2 full cell in 1994, which also required use of high temperatures (85 °C).38 In an important discovery in this field, Stevens and Dahn reported in 2000 that hard carbon, when used as a Na-ion anode, could result in reversible capacities of 300 mA h g−1, quite close to those seen for Li storage in graphite, at very low potentials also similar to those for Li storage in graphite.39 Subsequently, the first viable rocking-chair type Na-ion battery was demonstrated by Barker et al. in 2002 using a hard carbon anode/1 M NaClO4 in EC (ethylene carbonate):DMC (dimethyl carbonate) liquid electrolyte/NaVPO4F cathode.40 This seminal paper showed an attractive full cell profile with a high average discharge voltage of 3.7 V, comparable to state-of-the-art Li-ion batteries at the time (and also currently), and a decent cathode specific capacity around 82 mA h g−1. This work also resulted in the first viable Na-ion battery patent in the field (as judged by current commercial viability), filed by Valence Technology in 2002.41
Despite these exciting reports for that time, the middle part of the 2000 decade saw only a handful of Na-ion battery literature, chiefly announcing electrochemical storage characteristics of novel Na-based cathode materials for use in Li-ion cells such as Na-VOx,42 Na0.4MnO2,43 Na3V2(PO4)2F,44 α-Na0.66MnO2.13,45 and Na2FePO4F.46 The zeitgeist seems to have been that sodium-based electrode materials might provide new solutions for the established Li-ion technology; perhaps this is best signified by the examples on sodium/lithium ‘hybrid-ion’ batteries by Valence Technology which entailed use of Na-based cathodes, Li-ion anodes and either Li-ion or mixed Na/Li-ion electrolytes.47,48
Reports focusing solely on the sodium storage performance of novel electrode materials were sporadic. Apart from the above-mentioned pioneering studies, some other studies published from 1980 – mid 2000s explored the sodium storage characteristics of phosphates such as NaTi2(PO4)3,49 Na3V2(PO4)3,50 or NaV1−xCrxPO4,51 or oxides such as P2-Na2/3[Ni1/3Mn2/3]O2,52 α-NaFeO2,53 NiCo2O4,54 or Fe3O4.55 Towards the end of the 2000s, reports started emerging on novel electrode materials meant solely for Na-ion batteries. Important contributions on Na2FePO4F,56 NaFeF3,57 NaCrO2,58 along with the pioneering works mentioned above, laid a compelling case that Na-ion electrode materials indeed have the potential to result in high voltage and high energy density batteries.
Faradion's inception and initial scientific approach
At its beginning in 2011, we at Faradion had a clear idea of the type of Na-ion system we had to investigate. Learning from the knowledge revealed in the published studies as outlined in the previous section and also from our prior know-how, we sought the following prerequisites which future Faradion Na-ion batteries should be based on for high energy density applications:
(1) System-level requirements: it was clear that we had to use earth-abundant elements in our cathode, anode and electrolytes to avoid counteracting the low costs expected by using abundant Na resources. This straight away precluded any Co-based cathodes or anodes. We were cognisant that versatile transition metals (TMs) such as V or Ni could be used, but it would be ideal if cathodes/anodes were not solely based on these, as such TMs are not as globally abundant as Na. On this point, Ni was preferred as it is relatively low-cost compared to Co, readily available with good geographic distribution and has well established supply-chains, as Ni is heavily used in steel manufacturing (V, on the other hand, typically demonstrates volatility in costs and is also quite toxic).8,59 Ideally, Fe and/or Mn-based electrode materials would need to be designed. Some other features we deemed as important were:
• Ambient air stability of cathodes and anodes, to aid processing and reduce manufacturing costs.
• High coulombic efficiencies and low hysteresis in the cycling profiles of the cathodes/anodes, to ensure high Round-Trip-Energy-Efficiency (RTEE)
• No requirements of pre-sodiation of anode or cathode to achieve high energy densities.
• Performance validation only at large-scale on full cells (i.e. not at small-scales and not in half-cells)
(2) Cathode: apart from the type of TMs upon which the cathodes would be based, it was important that these cathodes demonstrate high tap densities. Tap density is a crucial factor in battery design (refer to the ‘Practical Consideration’ section for more details). As such, oxide-based materials were the obvious contender here. We also considered polyanion-based materials, provided the anion in these materials was not too bulky.
(3) Anode: hard carbon had already been demonstrated to possess an attractive cycling profile with low voltage activity and high capacity, making it the front runner. We also considered alternative types of anodes, but most of these had some critical limitation:
(i) Alloy-based anodes can have a huge capacity (>500 mA h g−1 expected), but demonstrate severe volume change during sodium storage (200–400%).60 Good cycling of such anodes, hence, will only occur with specialised and often complicated nano-scale morphologies. This would not only increase costs but also decrease tap density of the resultant material. Furthermore, good performance in large-scale cells would be a very challenging task to achieve. Due to these glaring drawbacks, we did not consider alloy-based materials at all.
(ii) Conversion-based anodes can also demonstrate high capacities (such as 500–1000 mA h g−1). However, these generally also require complicated nano-scale morphologies to contain the electrode pulverisation seen for the reconstitution reaction of such materials into the elemental TM.61,62 This would again increase costs and decrease tap densities. Furthermore, conversion-based anodes typically suffer from large voltage hysteresis, which is another big drawback. Again, due to these reasons, we did not consider conversion-based materials.
(iii) Organic anodes have generally very poor tap densities, while also being quite electronically insulating, which would necessitate a much higher proportion of conductive additives.63 Both these points would result in a low energy density Na-ion battery.
(iv) Polyanion-based anodes were considered, although lack of numerous high capacity polyanionic materials, along with finding suitable redox couples to operate at appropriate potentials, would be a challenging task. We specifically did not consider bulky anions owing to expected lower tap densities for such materials.
(v) Intercalation-based oxide anodes were looked at with interest, due to the possibility of high tap density, low average voltage and high capacity. Although oxide-based anodes might struggle to achieve specific capacities rivalling those of hard carbon, it was thought that they may be useful in lower energy/high power applications.
(4) Electrolyte & separator: seeing that we were aiming for high energy density Na-ion batteries, we thought it was obvious to use non-aqueous liquid electrolytes, similar to those used for commercial Li-ion systems. Furthermore, to enhance the safety of a future Faradion Na-ion battery, we aimed to use solvents with high thermal stability and high flash points. At the same time, it was important to ensure such electrolytes were not too viscous, as this would detract from rate capability, low temperature performance and ease of cell manufacturing. Further, to stay consistent with Li-ion cell manufacturing methodologies (required for existing cell manufacturers to seamlessly adopt Na-ion from cell fabrication perspective), we restricted ourselves to the commercially widely used polyolefinic separators.
Cathode
Some of the first cathode materials Faradion investigated were polyanionic materials, as this type of material had already been demonstrated by Valence Technology to possess a rich Na-ion chemistry,41 thus signalling great potential for developing high voltage and high capacity Na-ion cathodes. In fact, one of the first patents Faradion filed was in September 2011 on condensed mixed-phosphate polyanions,64 followed by another patent application in February 2012 on sulphate-based cathodes.65 These patents covered some popular Na-ion cathodes of today such as Na4M3(PO4)2(P2O7) with M being Mn or Fe,66 Na7V4(P2O7)4(PO4),67 or Na2Fe2(SO4)3.68 Examples of electrochemical cycling of such materials are presented in Fig. S1a and b in the ESI.† While these materials could display a high average discharge voltage (>∼3 V vs. Na/Na+), good cycling stability and rate performance, along with a high degree of safety,69 the observed reversible capacities in full Na-ion cells were below 100 mA h g−1. In a bid to increase reversible capacities, Faradion investigated some oxide cathode materials and was able to file a patent in March 2012 on metallate electrodes of the type NaaMbXcOd with X being Sb, Ni, Se, Te, Ta and/or Bi.70 As an example of this now widely investigated class of oxide materials in the Na-ion academic literature,71 cycling data of Na3Ni1.5Zn0.5SbO6 is shown in Fig. S1c:† such a material delivers a discharge capacity of 117 mA h g−1 in a Na-ion full cell at a relatively high average discharge voltage of 3.13 V when paired with a hard carbon anode.69 Having had initial success in designing high capacity Na-ion cathodes with oxide-based materials, Faradion hence delved further into the complex and rich chemistries of the various different Na-based layered oxides.
Faradion's subsequent investigations into the use of Na-based layered oxides as positive active materials focused on materials with O3-, P2- and P3-type structures,72–75 as described by Delmas et al.76 While various kinds of other oxide cathodes are possible,77 O3-type oxides typically show the highest specific energies on account of the higher Na content in such oxides (x value in Nax(TM)O2 is typically ∼1) which leads to higher capacities; so early work focused on materials with this structure. Unlike some polyanionic materials, the Ni2+  Ni4+ redox potential operates within an electrochemically stable voltage window for the electrolyte in Na-based layered oxides. Therefore, in order to maximise specific energy and minimise cost, Faradion sought to take advantage of the two-electron change conferred by the presence of a small quantity of Ni2+ in the starting material, allowing twice the number of moles of Na+ to be shuttled per mole of Ni2+. Although most O3-type materials reported in the literature are fully stoichiometric, i.e. Na = 1, Faradion reduced this in order to avoid the production of unwanted NiO, as found by Kang et al.78 The rest of the stoichiometry was designed based on a number of considerations. Faradion discovered at an early stage that some Na-based layered oxides are able to exceed their expected theoretical charge capacities. Whilst this can often be observed to a small extent in Na-ion and Li-ion cells, due to side reactions such as electrolyte breakdown, the additional charge capacity achieved in some of Faradion's layered oxides represented a significant increase over the conventional theoretical capacities, and the subsequent reversibility of this capacity pointed away from side reactions in the cells. It was therefore thought that this additional anomalous capacity was either due to O redox, irreversible oxidation of O2−, or a mixture of the two. As a result, Faradion designed a range of materials to take advantage of these effects and, based on the results, a patent application was filed in January 2014, covering the materials displaying this additional capacity, along with some potential processing routes to achieve these materials.73
The ability to access additional charge capacity is of no commercial use in Na-ion full cells unless it comes with a corresponding increase in discharge capacity. Therefore, Faradion sought to take advantage of this phenomenon by including a redox active element which is initially present in a high oxidation state, with the idea of ‘activating’ this either during the first discharge, or during cycling. There were several reasons behind this design, to allow for the possibility of different anomalous capacity mechanisms. If any O2−  O(2−n)− + ne− redox showed high hysteresis, or wasn't fully reversible, the idea was that the high oxidation state metal would be reduced on discharge, ensuring additional reversible capacity could thus be accessed. Additionally, if any O2−  O(2−n)− + ne− redox was found to result in an unacceptable level of capacity fade, the initially high oxidation state metal would be in place as a buffer.
After a series of trials following such aforementioned design philosophies, the first of Faradion's materials to be scaled up to multi-kilogramme level (referred to as ‘Gen 1’ cathode material), had the stoichiometry Na0.950Ni0.317Mn0.317Mg0.158Ti0.208O2, with a typical O3 phase, as shown in the X-ray diffraction (XRD) plot in Fig. 1a. This material, along with its use in devices, is covered in US Patent 9774035,74 and an O-deficient version is covered in the anomalous capacity patent application.73 The choice of stoichiometry was based on an assumption at the time that the anomalous capacity for this material was due to irreversible O2− oxidation, and, as such, the composition was designed as described below.
 Fig. 1  Overview of Faradion's Gen 1 cathode material. (a) XRD plot confirming a typical O3 phase. (b) Cycle 1 of a full Na-ion cell paired with commercial hard carbon. (c) Cycle 2 of such a Na-ion cell illustrating smooth charge–discharge curves. (d) Cycling stability over 200 cycles at ±C/6 rate. 
Unlike many of the high energy Li-ion cathode materials available on the market today, Faradion was keen to avoid the use of Co, due to its high cost and sustainability/ethical issues. As mentioned previously, Ni was chosen as the main redox active element, since a high specific energy and low cost could be realised via the presence of a relatively small quantity of Ni2+. Mn was included in its Mn4+ form, as its small ionic radius can lead to materials with higher crystallographic densities – this would be important in dictating the resultant material's tap density. It's widely known that the presence of Mn3+ in some Li-ion active materials can lead to a Jahn–Teller distortion during cycling, causing Mn dissolution into the electrolyte and poor performance. Despite this, because Li-ion and Na-ion materials often differ significantly in their behaviour, it was thought that Mn4+ could be a potential candidate for the high oxidation state metal that could be activated during use.
When deciding on the quantities of Ni2+ and Mn4+, the quantity of Ni2+ was based on 1/3 of the Na content, so that 2/3 of the Na could be extracted by the oxidation of half the molar ratio of Ni2+, e.g. a positive electrode reaction of [(x)Na+ + (x/3)Ni2+ → (x/3)Na+ + (x/3)Ni4+ + (2/3)e−]. It was thought that if the system was charged further, using the oxidation of lattice O2− to O2 gas, the remaining x/3 Na could be removed if the structure would allow it, e.g. [(x/3)Na+ + 2O2− → 0Na+ + 2 − (x/3)O2− + (x/6)O2]. Because it was thought that the oxygen oxidation may be irreversible in this case, x/3 Mn4+ was included in the stoichiometry, to be reduced to Mn3+, from the first discharge onwards. In this way, the materials were designed to have an unconventionally high initial charge capacity and a high long-term reversible capacity.
In order to explain further, the simplified example below shows a theoretical system, in which all the Na can be removed and reinserted, while using a minimal amount of Ni in order to ensure low cost and high sustainability. This example assumes the extreme case of O2− oxidation only, with no O2−  O(2−n)− + ne− redox included, and it should be stressed that the example below is theoretical, in order to aid understanding, since a first cycle loss is not taken into account and it is highly unlikely that acceptable cycle life could be achieved if all the Na-ions were removed from the structure. The process described here, however, can be applied in a more practical manner, as covered in Faradion's IP portfolio.

Charge. 
Step (1): Na+ extraction via Ni2+ oxidation to Ni4+Na0.950Ni0.3172+Mn0.3174+Mg0.158Ti0.208O2 → Na0.317Ni0.3174+Mn0.3174+Mg0.158Ti0.208O2 + 0.633Na+ + 0.633e−
Step (2): Na+ extraction via O2− oxidation to O2Na0.317Ni0.3174+Mn0.3174+Mg0.158Ti0.208O2 → Ni0.3174+Mn0.3174+Mg0.158Ti0.208O1.842 + 0.158O2 + 0.317Na+ + 0.317e−


Discharge. 
Step (1): Na+ insertion via Ni4+ reduction to Ni2+Ni0.3174+Mn0.3174+Mg0.158Ti0.208O1.842 + 0.633Na+ → Na0.633Ni2+0.317Mn0.3174+Mg0.158Ti0.208O1.842 + 0.633e−
Step (2): Na+ insertion via Mn4+ reduction to Mn3+Na0.633Ni0.3172+Mn0.3174+Mg0.158Ti0.208O1.842 + 0.317Na+ + 0.317e− → Na0.950Ni0.3172+Mn0.3173+Mg0.158Ti0.208O1.842
As shown above, the Gen 1 cathode has the ability to cycle at higher capacities than would be expected based on conventional thinking. The theoretical cathode specific capacity of Na0.950Ni0.317Mn0.317Mg0.158Ti0.208O2 (based on the Ni2+  Ni4+ redox couple only) is 164 mA h g−1. However, Fig. 1b shows a first charge capacity of 215 mA h g−1, representing an increase of >30%. The cell achieved a first discharge capacity of 157 mA h g−1, and continues to cycle at this capacity, which is an impressive result for a material containing <18 wt% Ni (refer to Fig. 1c for cycling profile of the second cycle and Fig. 1d for cycling stability of this material). It should be stressed that Fig. 1 presents data for Na-ion full cells, with no pre-cycling of the anode, as indicated by the significant first cycle loss. It should also be noted that the first cycle loss seen here is by design; Faradion's Gen 1 cathode takes advantage of the anomalous capacity as described above to provide a significantly higher reversible capacity than could be achieved conventionally. Based on a theoretical capacity of 164 mA h g−1, a reversible capacity of 157 mA h g−1 is equivalent to a conventional first cycle loss of just 4% (of course, in practice, the first cycle loss was ∼27%, but our material design, viz. absorbing the first cycle inefficiencies through the anomalous capacity from O, results in an effective first cycle loss of just 4% when viewed from the lens of the traditional TM redox theoretical capacity). As a further point, there were two main reasons for the inclusion of Mg2+ and Ti4+ in this material. Firstly, although neither element was expected to be redox active over the intended voltage window, it was found that their presence conferred improved cycling stability via the inhibition of irreversible phase changes;74 the smooth voltage curve after the first charge suggests no irreversible two-phase behaviour (this is seen clearly in the second cycle profile shown in Fig. 1c). Secondly, Mg and Ti are both low-cost, highly abundant and lightweight, helping to maximise specific energy, increase sustainability and reduce costs.
Faradion's Gen 1 material provided high energy and good cycle life at an early stage for Faradion. This material was first synthesised by Faradion in January 2013, and was used in Faradion's first battery pack demonstrators (an e-bike and an e-scooter), with excellent results.21 Although the material showed promise for future commercialisation, further developments were not made at the material level, as focus shifted towards a new range of materials. These developments eventually led to the design of Faradion's ‘Gen 2’ cathode material, which demonstrated superior all-round performance, requiring relatively little development for it to become Faradion's first product to enter the market.
As mentioned previously, Faradion originally focused on single-phase layered nickelate materials. In addition to O3-type materials, P2- and P3-type materials were also targeted, with IP being filed on all structure types. In particular, P2 oxides were well-known and fairly easy to synthesize and stabilize at lower Na contents.77 However, in the past, researchers had found that P2-type materials were prone to irreversible phase changes when cycled above 4 V,79 but Faradion overcame this via targeted substitutions on the transition metal site, minimising the two-phase behaviour associated with the phase change between P2- and O2-type phases and allowing a wider proportion of the voltage window to be accessed.75 It was found that a number of substitutional elements were effective for this, but, as for Faradion's single-phase O3-type materials, work focused on low-cost lightweight elements, such as Mg and Ti. Although these P2-type materials didn't deliver capacities as high as their O3-type counterparts in full Na-ion cells on account of their limited Na content, they offered advantages such as increased average discharge voltages and higher intrinsic ionic conductivity. It is also worth mentioning that the lower capacities for P2-type materials can be partially overcome by approaches such as using sacrificial Na-containing compounds in the cathode which irreversibly decompose to furnish extra Na+ in the first cycle;80 an approach Faradion is actively investigating as well. For these reasons, plans are currently underway to develop P2-type materials for high power applications. In an attempt to combine the high capacities attainable in O3-type materials with the higher discharge voltages and increased rate capabilities offered by the P2-type phases, Faradion designed a range of mixed-phase materials, which provided excellent all-round performance.81 After thorough investigation, Faradion developed a wide range of materials where the O3:P2 ratio can be modified via the choice of composition and synthesis methods, allowing an extensive range of energy storage applications to be targeted.82 These materials are so structurally versatile that, for the same precursor mix, the O3:P2 ratio can be tuned to produce materials that encompass effectively the whole O3–P2 spectrum.
Faradion's Gen 2 material is among the mixed-phase materials described above, and was designed by averaging the stoichiometries of known Faradion O3- and P2-type materials. The stoichiometry of the P2-type material used for this experiment was Na0.667Ni0.300Mn0.600Mg0.033Ti0.067O2, and the stoichiometry of the O3-type material was based on a variation of the Gen 1 material referred to earlier. Since averaging the stoichiometries meant the target material would automatically have a Na content of <1, this removed the reason behind the previously mentioned avoidance of Na = 1.0 materials, allowing NaNi0.333Mn0.333Mg0.167Ti0.167O2 to be used as the O3-type end member. Several experiments were conducted, targeting stoichiometries using different relative proportions of the O3- and P2-type end members, e.g. (25% O3, 75% P2); (50% O3, 50% P2); (75% O3, 25% P2). It should be noted that these end-member stoichiometries were not necessarily expected to exist as discrete phases within these mixed-phase materials. If this is desired, it can be achieved via the synthesis of each phase individually, followed by physical mixing, which is also covered within Faradion's IP. When synthesising these mixed-phases directly, however, the elemental ratio within each phase is determined by a number of factors, including the relative thermodynamic stabilities of each cation in the different structure types, and the synthesis conditions used. The material that demonstrated the best all-round performance, synthesised directly, has since become known as Faradion's Gen 2 material and has been scaled up by our commercial partner Haldor Topsøe A/S: the precursor material is prepared at the tonne level, and this can be fired under different conditions to provide active materials with a wide range of properties.

Fig. 2a shows an XRD plot for Faradion's Gen 2 material, showing the presence of both O3- and P2-type structures. The Gen 2 material consists of ∼20 μm particle aggregates comprising ∼1 μm primary particles, as shown in the Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FESEM) image (refer to Fig. S2a in the ESI†). Such a morphology undoubtedly contributes to the tap density of this material; an increase of 33% in tap density relative to Gen 1 material has been achieved thus far by careful adjustments of the morphology via modification of the synthesis conditions. From higher resolution FESEM images shown in Fig. S2b and c,† an intriguing stacking arrangement can be clearly seen. Such stacking morphology indicates high likelihood for a good degree of intergrowth between the O3/P2 phases: some interesting work by Lee et al. has shown that such intergrowths also enhance the sodium storage properties in mixed Na–Li oxide systems.83
 Fig. 2  Overview of Faradion's Gen 2 cathode. (a) XRD plot indicating presence of O3 as well as P2 phases. (b) Half-cell cycling at ±C/5 at various voltage windows. Typical cycling performances of Gen 2 cathode in full Na-ion cells when paired with commercial hard carbon, showing (c) typical Cycle 1 curves using various voltage windows, (d) cycling stability at 4–1 V highlighting excellent cycling stabilities over 3000 cycles (please note that the capacity jumps seen after every 1000 cycles were due to cell relaxation for a few days after each thousand cycles: as the cycling programme was scheduled in batches of 1000 cycles, there was some delay in restarting the cycling programme), along with cycling stability at 4.2–1 V, (e) rate performance capabilities – response at a fast 10C rate (6 min) possible with 84% capacity retention, and (f) fast charge capabilities of Faradion's Na-ion cells with charge acceptance possible at 4C (15 min) without any drop in capacity. 

Fig. 2b presents the half-cell cycling of Faradion's Gen 2 cathode material using different voltage windows and cycled according to our standard CCCV (constant current, constant voltage) cycling protocol. At the most expanded 4.35–2 V window, the material delivers a near-theoretical capacity of 156 mA h g−1 at ±C/5 rate (theoretical capacity of the Gen 2 material is 165 mA h g−1 based on the Ni2+  Ni4+ redox couple); under de-rated conditions, such as 4.25–2 V or 4.1–2 V, reversible capacities of 147 mA h g−1 or 121 mA h g−1, respectively, can still be obtained. This versatility of operation coupled with high specific energies for the Gen 2 cathode material is capitalised in designing different full cell systems to suit different applications by conveniently varying the cathode:anode active material ratios. Fig. 2c presents galvanostatic cycling curves of full Na-ion pouch cells containing Gen 2 cathode//commercially available hard carbon anode using three different voltage windows to illustrate such flexibility of operation. At the most expanded voltage window of 4.3–1 V, a reversible capacity of 154 mA h g−1 is obtained with an average discharge voltage of ∼3.2 V, yielding a level of specific energy far exceeding any type of Na-ion full cell ever reported in the literature and even higher than some Li-ion cells (further details mentioned in later sections). In a slightly narrower 4.2–1 V window, reversible capacities of ∼130 mA h g−1 are obtained at a relatively high average discharge voltage of 3.15 V. As an example of de-rated conditions, a cycling curve for the 4–1 V window has also been included: ∼101 mA h g−1 reversible capacity at 3.02 V could still be obtained.
Cycle lives of the Gen 2 cathode//hard carbon full Na-ion systems are dependent on the voltage window used for cycling along with the cathode:anode mass balance, as for any battery system. As shown in Fig. 2d, when evaluated in 0.1 A h pouch cells at relatively fast ±1C rate between 4–1 V, cycle lives in excess of 3000 cycles can be obtained to 20% capacity fade. Furthermore, for our current generation of cell design, the obtainable cycle life at 4.2–1 V at ±1C is around 1000 cycles in prototype 0.1 A h cells, as also presented in Fig. 2d. It is well known from Li-ion literature that as the voltage window of cycling expands, the cycle life decreases due to a combination of several factors such as increased electrolyte reactivity at higher potentials, increased cathode (and/or anode) polarisation also in part due to the greater amount of volume change of cathode or anode. On the last point, we expect the volume change of our mixed-phase O3/P2 Gen 2 cathode material in the course of sodium (de-)intercalation to be quite low, in line with what has been reported for other mixed-phase materials, due to opposing changes in the c-axis lattice parameter for the O3 and P2 phases,84 and/or due to the expected lesser distortion to the TMO6 bond lengths,85 as compared to single-phase materials. It is worth noting that such cycle lives are also made possible in part by Faradion's careful optimisation of cathode:anode mass balances in cells which ensure that the hard carbon potentials during charging never drop below 0 V vs. Na/Na+, which could lead to Na plating and rapid capacity fade. Three-electrode pouch cells, built according to in-house design, confirm that negative electrode potentials are safely above 0 V at the top of charge (refer to Fig. S3† for three-electrode cycling profiles).
As mentioned previously, Faradion's Na-ion cell design is geared for high energy density; however, our energy cells can still respond at relatively fast rates. To illustrate this, Fig. 2e presents the cycling stabilities at various rates up to 10C (charging being performed at C/5) in a 0.1 A h pouch cell cycled over 4–1 V (the corresponding cycling curves are displayed in Fig. S4†). It can be seen that our cells can deliver over 91% capacity retention at a fast 4C rate (15 min discharge); even more impressively, 84% capacity retention was obtained at a faster 10C rate (6 min discharge). Such response times open the door for Faradion cells to be deployed in various applications requiring high power, such as in moderate-range electric vehicles or power tools. Charge acceptance capability is another important parameter for a battery as it dictates how quickly a cell can be charged – faster charging capability is crucial for many applications, especially consumer-facing applications such as electric vehicles or consumer electronics, where customers prefer batteries capable of charging quickly. As shown in Fig. 2f, Faradion cells can be safely charged at a fast 4C rate (15 min total charge time) without any adverse effects such as Na plating – it can be seen that the C/5 capacity after charging at 4C is identical with the ±C/5 cycling in the initial part of the experiment, confirming no loss of Na inventory from the cell due to plating.

Anode

Faradion fundamental research on hard carbon: the commercial significance of addressing the enigma of the sodiation mechanism. 
Hard carbon is broadly referred to as a class of carbon often associated with the following three key structural attributes:
• Derived from non-volatile carbonaceous precursors with high carbon and oxygen content and low hydrogen content, which can be enriched into a blend of sp2- and sp3-hybridised carbon structure by means of thermal treatment.
• Distinguishable by its inability to fully graphitise at extreme temperatures up to 3000 °C, such non-graphitisable carbon often exhibits strongly cross-linked and highly immobilised crystallites which cannot be thermally rearranged into well aligned graphitic structures from their initial turbostratic state.86
• Lacking long-range crystalline order, these immobilised nano-scale domains locally exhibit pseudographitic crystallinity and, at microscopic scales, such domains are bridged to form a structure with closed microporosity (1–2 nm) and ultra-microporosity (≤1 nm)
It should be noted that hard carbon can work well as a Li-ion anode. However, on account of hard carbon's higher average potential during (de-)lithiation (due to a greater contribution from the ‘sloping’ part of the potential profile, as opposed to from the flat ‘plateau’ part) as well as slightly lower capacities in general, graphite anode is still preferred in Li-ion systems where higher energy density is required.39,87–89 Interest in use of hard carbon as active materials in Na-ion cells – as detailed earlier – originates from two important unique characteristics: controllable closed and open porosity as well as the extended d-spacing of the pseudographitic layers. These are advantageous over graphite and graphitisable (soft) carbon because (a) Na-ion has a highly restricted electrochemical activity towards graphite, and (b) graphitisable carbon generally cannot be purified at moderately low temperatures to achieve low oxygen content (excessive surface oxygen is deemed unfavourable due to its participation in parasitic reactions causing irreversible capacity loss).
Several sodiation mechanisms have been proposed for hard carbon following the remarkable report by Stevens and Dahn.39 The works by Morikawa et al.,90 Alvin et al.91 and Stratford et al.92 are notable examples of recent studies in this field. The prevailing belief is that the slope portion of the voltage profile is associated with sodiation via intercalation between disorderly stacks of graphene layers, while the low-potential plateau capacity correlates to the sodiation via nesting in micropores. However, a common methodology in studies supporting this mechanism (or the ones opposing it), is to focus on one or a limited number of hard carbon samples analysed within a restricted window of experimental conditions, and to draw conclusions on the sodiation mechanism of hard carbon in general.93–95 Regardless of the actual sodium storage mechanism, on a practical basis, it has been recently shown that glucose-derived hard carbon electrodes expand in thickness by only ∼2% in the course of sodium storage.96 If this result also applies to hard carbons derived from other sources, it is quite appealing from a commercial perspective as it ensures good structural integrity of hard carbon electrodes in full cells.
We believe sodiation is a multi-scale phenomenon and various aspects of the system could significantly impact the behaviour.97 Firstly, at the material level, hard carbon is not an exclusively defined material and a wide range of characteristics such as volume and size distribution of closed microporosity, d-spacing of the pseudographitic layers and surface oxygen content could substantially alter the sodiation/voltage response curve. Secondly, physical characteristics of the anode electrode, such as coatweight, macroporosity and coating density are important considerations. Thirdly, the composition of the counter electrode used in the cycling experiment (either being Na metal or a commercially feasible cathode), the composition of the electrolyte, and how the cell is balanced in terms of the cathode:anode capacity, can dictate the extent of sodiation. Therefore, the sodiation/voltage profile of a hard carbon electrode cycling in a practical/commercial full cell could end up being fundamentally different from those obtained by sodiating a hard carbon electrode from a Na metal counter electrode to unpractically low potentials e.g. 1 mV. Moreover, hard carbon cycling in Na metal half-cells is particularly fraught with complications owing to the demonstrated high polarisation of the Na metal counter electrode in commonly used carbonate-ester solvents.98,99 And lastly, the test conditions such as the rate of sodiation/desodiation of hard carbon, and kinetics of sodiation in general, should not be overlooked.
Faradion's position on the sodiation mechanism of hard carbon, therefore, tends to be very system-specific. We do not favour the concept of universal sodiation mechanisms as we are not dealing with a material with fixed and narrowly defined crystallographic metrics, and whose electrochemical behaviour depends so drastically on other cell components and test conditions. Thus, it is not overly surprising that well-defined specific capacity ranges could not be agreed on.
We have been able to showcase the commercial significance of the tuneable nature of the sodiation mechanism in our hard carbon grades, by tailoring the shape of the anode potential/capacity curve to the desired specifications of our cell and pack applications. We have demonstrated that cycling stability, energy density, cell nominal and mean discharge voltages, as well as charge acceptance rate, could be controlled by taking advantage of certain grades that offer flexibility in terms of the ratio of slope and plateau capacity.

Commercial aspects of manufacturing hard carbon for Na-ion cells
From a commercial point of view, metrics such as cost ($ per kg), scalability, attainable purity, tap density (g cm−3) and surface area (m2 g−1) are as important as having high reversible specific capacity when it comes to formulating hard carbon for Na-ion cells. Synthesis of hard carbon from sustainable resources continues to be the subject of a large number of studies in the field.100,101
Practical specifications of some of the hard carbon precursors screened by Faradion are summarised in Table S1 in the ESI.†
We observed that although most of the lignocellulosic precursors are abundant and relatively inexpensive, the obtainable tap density of derived hard carbon, and consequently the coating density of the resulting electrodes, are often low (<0.6–0.7 g cm−3 coating density). This negatively impacts the energy density of cells (shown in the ‘Practical Considerations’ section). This observation is particularly evident in the case of wood-based charcoal and biochar, and might be due to the vascular nature of such precursors creating particles with high aspect ratios and low packing factors. In contrast, carbohydrates and lignin-rich biomass tend to yield hard carbons with higher tap densities. Other commercially significant parameters include the yield of manufacturing and the composition of trace impurities. Biomass-derived chars often contain inorganic impurities that require purification by means of chemical treatment. Carbonates and transition metal oxide impurities are less technologically challenging and far cheaper to eliminate than aluminosilicates. Therefore, the nature of impurities is a selection factor in the case of biomass precursors. It is often preferred to perform purification steps on charred/carbonised materials with high contents of fixed carbon in order to minimise carbon loss, e.g., via oxidation and dissolution of organics. It is also favourable to carry out high-temperature pyrolysis after such treatments to reduce oxygen-containing functional groups that often participate in parasitic reactions and cause irreversible capacity.
Faradion proprietary anode materials
Representative data from half-cells and 0.1 A h Na-ion pouch full cells featuring Faradion proprietary hard carbon grades are summarised in Fig. 3. Referring to Fig. 3a, it can be seen that the specific capacity of Faradion's proprietary hard carbon is typically in excess of 330 mA h g−1 at ±C/20, with a very high first cycle coulombic efficiency of 91.9% despite using carbonate-ester solvents (rather than glyme-based solvents, which tend to result in higher first cycle coulombic efficiencies for Na-ion anodes). In contrast, a lower first cycle coulombic efficiency of 88.6% was obtained for a commercially available hard carbon anode that delivered ∼285 mA h g−1, even when cycled at ±C/70 to avoid Na counter electrode polarisation effects. In full Na-ion 0.1 A h pouch cells utilising Faradion's Gen 2 cathode, commercial hard carbon anodes yield a very respectable first cycle efficiency of 88%, resulting in cathode reversible capacities of 128.2 mA h g−1. However, when paired with Faradion's proprietary hard carbon, an industry-leading first cycle coulombic efficiency of 90% is obtained in a full Na-ion cell (to the best of our knowledge, the highest first cycle coulombic efficiency value of a hard carbon anode-based full cell in the literature with no pre-sodiation currently is ∼87% in a simulated full cell),102 leading to higher cathode reversible specific capacities of 134.5 mA h g−1 (refer to Fig. 3b). Faradion's hard carbon similarly results in excellent cycling stabilities and rate performance – further cycling details shall be presented in a forthcoming manuscript. Such performances have been demonstrated in a wide range of cell footprints and capacities up to 12 A h.
 Fig. 3  Electrochemical performance of Faradion's proprietary hard carbon. (a) Half-cell cycling curves illustrating higher capacities with a higher first cycle coulombic efficiency (η1) compared with those obtained from commercial hard carbon. (b) The more efficient Faradion hard carbon results in unprecedented first cycle efficiencies in full Na-ion cells (≥90%) when paired with Faradion's Gen 2 cathode. In both sets of experiments, all other experimental conditions were the same; thus, comparisons can be made with confidence. 
Faradion is currently in the process of integrating the next generation of proprietary carbon,103 as well as hard carbon + X (X = non-carbonaceous materials) composite anode active grades,104 into our commercial offerings. These materials will have even lower manufacturing costs along with world-leading coulombic and round-trip efficiencies in Na-ion full cells, faster charge acceptance and enhanced cycling stability.
Electrolyte & safety
Different types of commercial Li-ion batteries are well known for using liquid carbonate-ester solvents in their electrolytes. The carbonate-ester EC was initially recognised as a mandatory component in a Li-ion liquid electrolyte blend due to its ability to form a stable solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI) on the graphite anode. As is well known, the low potentials of graphite anodes cause breakdown (reduction) of the carbonate-ester solvents and the success of this process is dictated primarily by the stability of the reduction product (SEI) and its ionic conductivity to Li+ (while simultaneously being electronically insulating). However, owing to the high viscosity of EC along with its high melting point (∼35–38 °C), use of low viscosity co-solvents is compulsory for designing electrolyte blends with sufficiently low viscosities yet allowing high conductivities, especially at low temperatures.105 These co-solvents, such as DEC or DMC, have especially low flash points (31 or 18 °C, respectively) which severely compromise the safety of commercial Li-ion liquid electrolytes, significantly contributing to fires/explosions resulting from thermal runaway.106–108 What is curious is that a homologue of EC, propylene carbonate or PC, which has a wide liquidus range (−48.8 to 242 °C), is incompatible with graphite anodes when used in Li-ion batteries (PC causes exfoliation of the graphene layers present in graphite). However, in 2011, Komaba et al. had already shown that hard carbon anode could cycle well in PC-only Na-ion liquid electrolytes.109 This exciting discovery, along with the inherently high flash point of PC (∼135 °C),110 indicated that Na-ion electrolytes with high PC content could be designed, providing the promise to deliver high performance while ensuring a high degree of safety.
Several combinations of PC-containing Na-ion electrolytes were trialled at Faradion in its early years. We eventually selected an EC:DEC:PC = 1:2:1 wt/wt solvent blend with NaPF6 salt and certain additives to boost specific performance traits, as our preferred first generation Na-ion liquid electrolyte. As is common knowledge in the Li-ion field, electrolyte additives can have a huge impact on cycling stability. For Na-ion systems, this too holds true, though the specific additives that show performance improvements for Li-ion might not necessarily do so in Na-ion. We have, thus, investigated several different additives over the years with mixed results – some additives, which are routinely used in Li-ion, surprisingly did not show any effect on cycle life in Faradion's Na-ion systems, but some additives certainly did. As an example, Fig. S5 in the ESI† presents cycle life data from some old Faradion prototype 0.6 A h Na-ion pouch cells evaluating the effect of one specific additive. As can be seen, just 1 wt% additive to the electrolyte resulted in a > 50% increase in cycle life, with all other factors unchanged. By such careful systematic experiments, Faradion electrolytes now incorporate a blend of several additives.
Most of the cycling results shown in the previous sections are utilising this electrolyte at 30 °C. It is vital that the electrolyte can respond well at various temperatures to ensure a Na-ion product suitable globally across various climates. Thus, Fig. 4a presents 4.2–1 V cycling data of Faradion's Gen 2 cathode//commercial hard carbon anode 0.1 A h pouch cells at different temperatures utilising a dynamic cycling protocol, where the cells were charged at C/5 at 30 °C, but discharged at the various temperatures and at different rates, as indicated. This kind of protocol replicates several applications where charging is performed indoors, such as consumer electronics, private electric vehicles (in garages), commercial e-buses (in warehouses), or back-up data storage. At higher temperatures, the Faradion cells could deliver their rated 0.1 A h capacity and cycle in a very stable fashion across various rates: even at an extremely high 80 °C, very stable cycling is seen, despite charging to a high voltage of 4.2 V. At lower temperatures, the expected sluggish kinetics are not so prevalent. At 0 °C, 96% of the rated capacity was delivered along with response times up to 1C, while at −20 °C, 90% capacity retention can be obtained with response times up to C/2, signalling good performance at such low temperatures. In fact, at a very low −30 °C, response times as fast as 3 h are still obtainable with reasonable capacities. These results indicate that the Faradion Na-ion chemistry is not only excellent at higher temperatures but, perhaps surprisingly for some, can still respond within 1–2 h at sub-zero temperatures despite containing 50 wt% of the thermally stable yet more viscous EC and PC solvents in the solvent blend.
 Fig. 4  Progress in Faradion's non-aqueous Na-ion electrolytes and illustration of stability of Faradion's Na-ion pouch cells when shorted. (a) Illustration of typical temperature performance of Faradion's Gen 2 cathode//commercial hard carbon 0.1 A h Na-ion cells at various temperatures using EC:DEC:PC = 1:2:1 wt/wt solvent blends. (b) An example of the cycling curve when the Na-ion cell is discharged down to 0 V and held at 0 V for 24 h. (c) Cycling stability when the cell is shorted at 0 V for 24 h after each cycle. Faradion's most recent developments on formulating PC-dominant electrolytes showing (d) cycling stabilities at 4.2–1 V of experimental 0.9 A h Na-ion pouch cells using either EC:DEC:PC = 1:2:1 wt/wt or PC-dominant solvent blends, and (e) rate performance of PC-dominant electrolytes at 4.2–1 V. 
While PC-containing Na-ion electrolytes can deliver acceptable performance both at high and low temperatures, their true benefit is evident when comparing the safety of the resultant Na-ion batteries. Table 1 presents results on six of the industry-standard abuse tests (following the IEC 62660-2 protocol) conducted on Faradion's 2 A h and 10 A h pouch cells at 100% SOC (State-of-Charge), i.e. at the fully charged state of 4.2 V (please refer to Note 1 in the ESI† for details regarding each test). As is evident, none of the tests resulted in any fire or explosion; in fact, there were hardly any adverse reactions at all. Apart from the self-evident stability of the de-sodiated Faradion cathode and sodiated hard carbon anode, one of the chief reasons for such outstanding stability of Faradion's Na-ion cells is the enhanced thermal stability of the electrolyte.
Table 1 Abuse testing of Faradion 2 A h and 10 A h Na-ion pouch cells. IEC 62660-2 testing protocol




Test type on fully charged Cells
Result
Maximum temperature (°C)
Comments




External short circuit
No fire and no explosion
96
Minor pouch expansion


Overcharge
No fire and no explosion
24
Testing stopped at 2× rated capacity


Hot box (at 130 °C)
No fire and no explosion
127
Minor cell voltage drop (recoverable)


Flat crush
No fire and no explosion
27
Negligible voltage and temperature change


Edge-on crush
No fire and no explosion
20
Negligible voltage and temperature change


Nail penetration
No fire and no explosion
41
Internal short achieved




Another valuable safety characteristic of Na-ion cells is the ability to discharge such cells down to 0 V, an option that does not exist for graphite-based commercial Li-ion batteries. Due to this reason, such Li-ion batteries are forced to be stored and transported at a finite SOC, which is typically around 30–40%.21 As is well known in the field of alkali-ion batteries, from a strictly active material viewpoint of the cathode and anode, the safest state of such batteries is at 0% SOC (the fully discharged state). In graphite-based Li-ion batteries, Al cannot be used as the current collector for the anode as Li can alloy with Al; thus, Cu current collector has to be used (Al can be used for the cathode). The Cu current collector on the anode precludes the possibility of discharging Li-ion cells down to 0 V, due to the instability of Cu at high potentials (vs. Li/Li+). For Na-ion cells, it is now well established that Al can be used as the current collector not just for the cathode, but also for the anode. Apart from being ∼2.5 times lighter than Cu, Al is also significantly cheaper, hence, there are obvious energy density gains and cost savings in using Al current collectors. Beyond this obvious point, Al on the anode now enables Na-ion cells to be discharged safely to 0 V without any adverse effects. Fig. 4b presents a typical cycling profile of a Faradion cell discharged down to 0 V and held at 0 V for 24 h; Fig. 4c shows the cycling stability of this cell which was held at 0 V for 24 h after each discharge cycle. As can be seen, the cycling stability of such a cell was not compromised. Faradion has filed a patent application covering this concept of storing and transporting all its cells at 0 V.111 In fact, our cells may shipped be in a physically shorted state by placing a shunt between the cathode and anode terminals, as shown in Fig. S6 in the ESI.† Furthermore, as illustrated in Fig. S7 in the ESI,† long-term shorting of our pouch cells at 0 V (time durations such as six months) does not adversely affect cycling stability.
Faradion is consistently pushing the envelope of what Na-ion batteries are capable of, and as such, we have strived to make our Na-ion liquid electrolytes even safer, without compromising performance. Through various trials and optimisations, we developed our second-generation liquid electrolyte, which relies on high concentrations of PC in the solvent blend (>75 wt%).112 As mentioned previously, PC is relatively viscous, therefore, a diluting solvent is required in commercial-scale cells utilising polyolefinic separators (otherwise the electrolyte would not wet the separator, preventing the passage of Na+).113–116 The progress made in the field of highly concentrated electrolytes (or ‘solvent-in-salt’ systems) has brought forth the idea of using diluting solvents which do not affect salt-primary solvent(s) coordination but affect the physical traits of the resultant electrolyte (such as viscosity).117 It should be pointed out that solvent-in-salt systems are still too viscous for use in commercial batteries using commercial polyolefinic separators, in our opinion (refer to Fig. S8a–d in the ESI† for separator wetting experiments showing commercial Celgard 2500 separator being wet by a 17 m NaClO4 aqueous water-in-salt electrolyte or a PC-dominant electrolyte, with PC wt% > 75% in the solvent blend). However, we have utilised this concept of diluting non-concentrated PC-based solvents with appropriate diluting agents. By careful screening of various diluting solvents and additives, Faradion's second-generation liquid electrolytes display a desirable combination of cycling performance, oxidative stability and safety. On the latter point, these PC-dominant electrolytes (PC wt% content in the solvent >55%) show exceptional levels of thermal stability to the point of being non-flammable. Table S2 in the ESI† presents closed-cup flash point testing results using industry-standard protocols on several Na-ion liquid electrolyte blends.110 While Note 2 in the ESI† details the experimental conditions along with the finer points on the flash point testing, it can be seen that PC-dominant electrolytes exhibited no flash point at all until 120 °C: such electrolytes are more prone to decompose than ignite, a fact that may allow explosion-free Na-ion batteries utilising such electrolytes. From a performance viewpoint, such PC-dominant electrolytes deliver even longer cycle lives than Faradion's first generation electrolyte's solvent blend, with similar rate performance when cycled between 4.2–1 V (refer to Fig. 4d and e respectively). The higher ionic conductivities and lower desolvation energies of Na-ion electrolytes with respect to those of analogous Li-ion electrolytes,113,114,116 undoubtedly also helps in achieving such rate performance.
As a final point, it can be appreciated that often Na-ion cells are charged to 4.2 V (vs. Na/Na+), or even higher potentials, similar to the way current commercial Li-ion batteries are cycled (typical upper cut-off voltage for NMC-based Li-ion batteries are around 4.2 or 4.3 V).118 This means that a 4.2 V upper cut-off for a Na-ion cell would equate to cathode potentials <4.3 V vs. Na/Na+ for an appropriately balanced cell and likewise, for Li-ion, a 4.2 V upper voltage limit would indicate that the Li-ion cathode's absolute potentials are <4.3 V vs. Li/Li+. However, in absolute potentials, using the same reference point (such as the Li/Li+ redox couple), it can now be seen that the Na-ion cathodes are actually experiencing very high potentials (∼4.6 V vs. Li/Li+). As is well known from the Li-ion literature, electrolyte oxidation can be a serious concern at these potentials and this would also be expected for such high voltage Na-ion cells, especially when EC is present as a co-solvent.119,120 Apart from the cycling performance and safety benefits of using PC-based electrolytes, another attractive feature of PC which is often not fully appreciated is the enhanced oxidative stability for a PC-dominant electrolyte blend devoid of EC. Cyclic voltammetry results, contained in Note 3 in the ESI,† corroborate this point. Hence, PC-dominant electrolytes are an elegant way to ensure good cycling of large-scale Na-ion cells devoid of electrolyte breakdown concerns. This option of using PC-majority solvent blends is not available for graphite-based Li-ion batteries and can be a unique advantage for high voltage Na-ion batteries, as governed by the inherent Na-ion chemistry.
Large-scale Na-ion systems
In designing large-scale full cell systems (whether Li-ion or Na-ion), fresh problems arise that are not seen in smaller-scale full cells. Issues such as the extent of volume change of active materials, high viscosity/poor wettability of the electrolyte and poor oxidative stability of the electrolyte at higher voltages, significantly affect performance at large-scale, but can be managed, or are not apparent, at smaller scales (at the coin/Swagelok cell level or even in pouch cells of limited capacity). As an example of one of these issues faced by Faradion when scaling-up our full cell design, consider the case of high viscosity electrolytes. As shown in Fig. S8e,† a PC-only electrolyte with certain additives demonstrated a cycle life of around 385 cycles in an experimental Na-ion pouch cell at ±C/2 with a nominal capacity of 6 mA h, using a polyolefinic separator. However, when this cell design was scaled-up to the 1 A h level, the cell did not cycle at all, even during formation cycling at ±C/10. The cause for this is simply one of scale: PC can sufficiently wet a polyolefinic separator to enable a small-scale cell to cycle efficiently, but its higher viscosity is a serious liability at larger-scales, hence the need for diluting solvents, as mentioned in the previous section.
Working with our cell manufacturing partners, Faradion has successfully overcome such challenges and scaled-up its full cell design across multiple scales: from pouch cells of <10 mA h capacity, corresponding to first-stage R&D, to 0.1–3 A h prototype-category cells and finally to ≥10 A h production-category pouch cells. Fig. 5 presents various cycling results of 12 A h pouch cells representative of Faradion's first-generation commercial cells. Fig. 5a–c show cycling stabilities at ±C/5, ±C/3 or a faster 1C charge, C/3 discharge, at three different voltage windows, 4.2–1 V, 4.1–1 V and 4–1 V respectively. For each voltage window, the cycling was found to be very stable, with negligible capacity loss over 300–600 cycles. Importantly, such 12 A h nominal capacity cells could also display fast charge acceptance: faster charge rates such as 1C resulted in identical performance to that delivered by slower charge rates, such as C/5 or C/3 (refer to Fig. 5b and c). Furthermore, these 12 A h cells were very energy efficient, displaying RTEE values of around 94–95% (refer to Fig. S10 in the ESI†): such high RTEE values are on par with or higher than current commercially available Li-ion batteries. These 12 A h cycling results highlight the scalable cell designs with excellent performance and safety characteristics for Faradion's first-generation commercial products.
 Fig. 5  Cycling of Faradion's first-generation production-category 12 A h Na-ion pouch cells. Cycling stabilities at various voltage windows: (a) 4.2–1 V, (b) 4.1–1 V and (c) 4–1 V. (d) Summary of the best published full Na-ion cells in the literature with a reported capacity of at least 50 mA h. In this plot, the size of the circle or square represents the cycle life reported in the publications with the number above the circle/square being the reported capacity retention. Faradion's specific energy is based on a 32 A h cell at 4.2–1 V, while the cycle life is based on our prototype cells at 4–1 V or 4.2–1 V (refer to Fig. 2d); these cycle lives are currently being confirmed in 32 A h cells. From the figure, it is clear that the Faradion Na-ion technology significantly surpasses that of all prior reports, in terms of specific energies, while still avoiding costly elements such as Co or V. 
To put the above results in perspective, and illustrate how far advanced Faradion's Na-ion technology is compared with the very best reported Na-ion full cells in the literature, we carried out a detailed literature review on large-scale Na-ion full cells with a minimum capacity of at least 50 mA h (a threshold, which allowed comparisons with a few academic reports; a higher threshold, such as 10 A h, would have ruled out all reports except one). Fig. 5d provides an overview of the best reported such large-scale Na-ion cells comparing the cell-level specific energy, average discharge voltage and reported cycle life in one plot (Table S4 in the ESI† lists the specific details). Fig. 5d demarcates three different formats of cells: 18650 cells,121–125 pouch cells,21,126–128 and the one prismatic Na-ion cell reported by Sumitomo.129 From this figure, it is apparent that the reported pouch cells have, in general, higher specific energies – an unsurprising fact considering the weight penalty imposed on 18650 and prismatic cells, due to their casings. However, it is clear that the highest energy density cells, along with acceptable cycle life, have been reported by industry players:
(1) Novasis's Mn–Fe Prussian Blue Analogue//hard carbon Na-ion chemistry can deliver 100–130 W h kg−1 in 0.5–5 A h pouch cells at an average discharge voltage of 3.4 V.21
(2) HiNa's O3-oxide//amorphous hard carbon Na-ion chemistry is able to exhibit an improved 135 W h kg−1 with good cycling stability until 1000 cycles, though at a relatively lower average discharge voltage of ∼2.83 V.130
(3) Faradion's Na-ion systems have the highest energy densities. As indicated in Fig. 5d, the obtainable specific energy from Faradion pouch cells, utilising the Na-ion technology verified in our prototype cells (refer to Fig. 2), is projected to be ∼160 W h kg−1 in 32 A h pouch cells at 4.2–1 V. We expect the cycle life at this scale to be similar to what we have witnessed in our prototype cells (>3000 cycles or 1000 cycles to 20% capacity fade at 4–1 V or 4.2–1 V, respectively); qualification is underway in 32 A h pouch cells. It should be noted that, just as is the case for Li-ion chemistries, it is not expected that the maximum cycle life and the maximum energy density can be obtained simultaneously even for Na-ion technology. It should, thus, be understood that the cycling condition that delivers maximum specific energy (∼160 W h kg−1) will not yield the maximum cycle life (∼3000 cycles).
In order to design high energy density batteries, Faradion has gained a significant amount of knowledge and know-how over the last decade. In the following section, we share some of these insights, in the hope that battery researchers around the world will consider the experimental details that are relevant in commercial settings, but often overlooked at the initial R&D stage. We hope that by doing so, discoveries become commercially feasible in a far more expeditious manner than happens currently.
Practical considerations
There are several areas in which cell designs used for materials testing differ from those found in commercial products, with each influencing cell performance and materials costs.131,132 The specific energy (also referred to as gravimetric energy density) of lab-scale cells differs from that of commercially viable production cells despite using identical materials. For example, a 0.6 A h Na-ion cell delivered only 104 W h kg−1 whereas a 12 A h cell, under identical testing conditions, demonstrated 140 W h kg−1 using exactly the same materials and electrode parameters. Faradion developed a model to accurately predict the specific energy and bill of materials (BOM) of our Na-ion cells by considering the cell architecture, experimental data and cost of all cell components and materials. In terms of specific energy, this model has been found to predict values within ±2% of those determined experimentally (please refer to Fig. S11 in the ESI†). The influence that some of these parameters have on specific energy are illustrated in the following examples based on changes to the design of a hypothetical “A5 sized” pouch cell with a capacity of 15 A h.
Effect of cell dimensions
Modelling stacked pouch cells, in order to understand the influence of design aspects on specific energy, illustrates the importance of several factors. For example, one area where design can have a significant impact on the specific energy delivered by given electrode coatings is simply the cell dimensions. As the area of electrodes increase, the area of packaging material required increases proportionally. However, as cell thickness increases, the extra mass of packaging material required is marginal. Also, accompanying an increase in electrode area is a reduction in the relative proportion of ‘excess’ anode area required to ensure that cathodes are aligned correctly.
Applying our model for a given set of design parameters to a 15 A h cell (with cathode dimensions equivalent to an A5 sized sheet of paper) predicts a specific energy of 139.2 W h kg−1. Doubling the cathode active area to that of an A4 sized sheet, doubles the cell capacity but results in the predicted specific energy increasing only slightly to 140.4 W h kg−1 using the same design parameters. On the other hand, doubling capacity by adding more electrode layers (i.e. increasing the cell thickness), results in the predicted specific energy increasing to 146.3 W h kg−1 – an increase of over 5%.
The effect of using different cell dimensions is illustrated in Fig. 6a. It can be seen that the specific energy delivered by a given cell chemistry, materials and physical parameters (such as electrode porosity) approaches a limit with increasing cell capacity. The reasons for this behaviour include the practical limits of a given cell design. For instance, the ability to draw the laminated aluminium foil packaging to the desired dimensions, and the ability of this material to seal cells reliably, need to be considered when defining the maximum cell thickness.132 In addition to these mechanical constraints are some arising due to the performance demands of a specific application, and others, essential for safe operation. For example, the current collector foils and tab terminals must be thick enough to handle the rates required by the application, and robust enough to support the active material coating. Similarly, the separator needs to be of sufficient thickness and strength to electrically isolate the electrode layers, whilst sufficiently porous to facilitate ionic conductivity; however, an excessively thick separator adversely influences performance by reducing the effective ionic conductivity of the electrolyte as well as adding redundant mass and volume to the cell design.
 Fig. 6  Some practical considerations in the design of cells with high specific energy. Using Faradion's cell model, the influence of several design parameters on specific energy are illustrated. Figures indicate the effect of (a) cell dimensions, (b) separator type and electrolyte loading (GF/A represents glass microfibre filter paper and PP represents a typical polyolefin-based separator), (c) cathode active material loading (the cathode:anode mass balance being the same for all cases), (d) electrode formulation (active material:binder:conductive carbon mass ratio) and (e) electrode densities and first cycle coulombic efficiencies – (especially for carbon anodes). 
Once these practical constraints are accounted for, it is clear that minimising the mass of electrochemically inactive components will increase the specific energy delivered by a given cell.
Effect of separator & electrolyte loading
When testing newly synthesised materials, it is common to use glass microfibre filter paper as a convenient separator material, particularly in coin-cell or Swagelok cell arrangements. Even when compressed, this is several times thicker than the polyolefinic separators used in commercial cells, and possesses a large fraction of open porosity (>90% when uncompressed). Such cells require a relatively large amount of electrolyte in order to operate, and this reservoir of excess electrolyte influences the performance characteristics of materials (e.g. by keeping the concentration of parasitic reaction by-products critically low) as well as significantly restricting the specific energy.
Using the same “A5 sized” cell described previously with a 0.25 mm thick glass microfibre separator (filled with electrolyte to occupy the open porosity in the cell), the specific energy of the cell drops from 139.2 W h kg−1 to 64.3 W h kg−1. In terms of volume, the energy density of the cell drops from 204 W h L−1 to 113 W h L−1. Reducing the thickness of the glass fibre separator to 0.125 mm yields a specific energy of 92.6 W h kg−1 and an energy density of 151 W h L−1. These results are illustrated in Fig. 6b.
Effect of active material loading
An important factor influencing the performance of cells is the areal loading of active materials. This parameter partly defines electrode thickness, influences cell rate capability and affects the relative proportions of active-to-inactive cell components.
For example, reducing the active material loading to 1 mg cm−2 (often found in reports concerning new materials) requires twenty times the number of electrodes to maintain the same capacity as our example 15 A h “A5” cell (while maintaining the same ratio of active materials). The specific energy of such a cell would be 46.0 W h kg−1, with an energy density of only 52 W h L−1. Fig. 6c illustrates how the estimated specific energy of a 15 A h “A5 sized” pouch cell varies with cathode active material loading.
The vast difference in specific energy between the cell using a cathode loading of 1 mg cm−2 and that using 20 mg cm−2 is explained in Fig. S12, in the ESI,† where the relative proportions by mass of each cell component are indicated. For the 15 A h cell, using a cathode loading of 1 mg cm−2, the total mass is 1.06 kg, with over 40% of this being due to the current collector foils. On the other hand, a cell of the same capacity, using a cathode loading of 20 mg cm−2, has a mass of only 0.33 kg, and the current collectors are only responsible for 6.7% of this mass.
Effect of electrode formulation
Another major area where research-scale and commercial cells differ significantly is the formulation of composite electrodes. Reports concerning new materials generally use relatively large proportions of binders and conductive additives in order to produce mechanically robust coatings with a high degree of electronic conductivity. Whilst these are useful for the characterisation of inherent material properties, they add to the inactive cell mass (thereby lowering specific energy) and increase cell costs in terms of $ per kW h.
The effect of altering electrode formulation is presented in Fig. 6d. It can be seen that as the proportion of active material in the electrodes increase, the specific energy of the cell increases. Taking the example of a typical formulation used in materials research, where the ratios of active material:binder:conductive additive are 80:10:10 (by mass), the capacity of our “A5 sized” cell falls from 15 A h to 13.4 A h. The estimated specific energy drops from 139.2 W h kg−1 to 123.5 W h kg−1. In contrast, if the electrode formulation is 96:2:2, the cell capacity of our “A5 sized” cell increases to from 15 A h to 16.4 A h, with a concomitant increase in specific energy from 139.2 W h kg−1 to 147.4 W h kg−1.
Effect of electrode density
Electrode densities also significantly influence the specific energy delivered by a given cell chemistry. The calendering process controls the degree of porosity in composite electrodes, and this in turn affects the minimum volume of electrolyte required for operation. Furthermore, particle size distribution also has an impact on the porosity,133,134 and subsequently on the coating density.
Limiting the cathode coating density to 1.0 g cm−3 (e.g. through the use of an active material with a low tap density, such as polyanionic cathodes using bulky anion groups) reduces the specific energy of our “A5 sized” cell to 108 W h kg−1. Increasing the density to 1.5 g cm−3 raises this to 122 W h kg−1. These are labelled as Case 1 and Case 2 in Fig. 6e. These values can be contrasted with the specific energy of our “A5 sized” cell (139.2 W h kg−1), which is Case 6 in Fig. 6e.
The first cycle coulombic efficiency of a cell is a crucial design parameter to consider as it determines the amount of sodium that can be reversibly transferred between anode and cathode. Using a carbon anode material that has a substantially lower tap density and higher specific surface area (such as reduced graphene oxide) results in low density electrodes. If this parameter is limited to 0.2 g cm−3, the specific energy is estimated to be only 59 W h kg−1 (refer to Case 3 in Fig. 6e). However, in addition to a larger volume of electrolyte being required, such an anode consumes a much greater amount of sodium during formation of the SEI. In the case that the first cycle coulombic efficiency is 50%, and the reversible specific capacity of the cathode material is reduced by a proportionate amount, the specific energy of the cell falls to just 34 W h kg−1 (labelled as Case 4 in Fig. 6e). This case in particular highlights how misleading full cell performance can be when the anode has been pre-sodiated or pre-cycled in half-cells prior to full cell testing, as reported in some literature.
The worst possible combination of these cases combines a cathode density of 1.0 g cm−3 and the high surface area anode with a density of 0.2 g cm−3 – Case 5 in Fig. 6e shows that this combination results in a specific energy of only 30 W h kg−1.
These brief examples highlight the importance of testing materials under commercially relevant conditions, and can be summarised by four broad recommendations which lab-scale studies can take into consideration.
(1) Use thin polyolefinic separators with realistic electrolyte loadings: this has a major impact on cycling stabilities.
(2) Avoid using low loadings of active material: the performance of thin coatings may not translate to commercially viable products.
(3) Use higher fractions of active material in composite electrodes: using excessive binder or conductive carbon additives with novel materials can produce performance characteristics that are unattainable at a commercial level.
(4) Be aware of possible causes of misleading performance characteristics: e.g. very porous materials may demonstrate excellent charge storage capabilities when analysed in half-cells at low electrode loadings, but these may not be achievable in large full cells.
Outlook
Cost
Whilst there are many published reports on the costs of Li-ion battery materials, cells and packs (for example, the recent bottom-up analysis by Wentker et al.135), there is relatively little available analysis of these for Na-ion. A recent analysis by Hirsch et al.136 on the use of Na-ion batteries for grid energy storage, included a cost analysis of Na-ion cells for various sodium cathode chemistries, and includes a comparison with the cost ($ per kW h) of LiCoO2. The calculated values compare very favourably with those calculated by Faradion. There is a 2018 study by Vaalma et al.22 and a 2019 study by Peters et al.,137 that both use the Argonne Batpac model138 to compare Na-ion and Li-ion costs, with Vaalma et al. using a 11.5 kW h, 7 kW battery, with a fixed number of cells as the model system, and Peters et al. modifying Batpac from a prismatic cell model to a cylindrical 18650 cell model.
There are numerous examples in the literature where the cost structure of Li-ion batteries has been calculated from a bottom-up or top-down approach, as well as various market reports that identify current trends and attempt to predict future trends in battery costs. This leads to a broad range of published costs for Li-ion that are highly dependent on the information source, the volume (which affects the materials pricing, $), the cell type (pouch, prismatic or cylindrical) and the battery design (which affects the energy, kW h), as well as the definition of a battery, for example, whether the cost allows for the inclusion of a battery management system (BMS). In fact, of course, the costs are highly dependent on all of these factors and unsurprisingly, the same is true for Na-ion cost models.
Hirsch et al. show cobalt-free Na-ion to be between 40% and 60% lower cost in $ per kW h than LiCoO2//graphite (which they calculate to be at 99 $ per kW h).136 These authors attribute this significant decrease in cost to the transition metal elements, particularly Co and Ni, which in Na-ion cathodes can be absent or minimised without the detrimental effect on performance observed in equivalent Li-ion cathodes of the same B-site composition. In an effort to make a true and fair comparison of Na-ion and Li-ion, that captures the differences in their cell performance as well as the materials costs, we have taken an LiFePO4 (LFP)//graphite battery as a reference where the cell design and materials prices have been supplied to us from cell manufacturers, materials suppliers and battery market analysts, as our current best know-how for LFP//graphite costs, which are based on current state-of-the-art LFP performance and pricing (i.e., the default values for LFP//graphite cells in BatPac have been updated). We believe the LFP//graphite system is a good comparator as typically the energy density is similar to that of Faradion's Na-ion (details mentioned later in Fig. 7). Furthermore, both chemistries are cobalt free and well-suited to similar applications.
 Fig. 7  The trend of enhancement in cell-level specific energies of commercially-available Li-ion cells compared with Faradion's Na-ion pouch cells. The specific energy stated for each Li-ion cell is at 100% DOD (or most expanded voltage window) and at 4.2–1 V for Faradion Na-ion cells, while the cycle life is quoted at the stated DOD or voltage window, as indicated. For Faradion cells, we have indicated specific energies already achieved thus far, along with projected values for the immediate future. It can be seen that the rate of progress of the Na-ion technology is significantly faster than that of the Li-ion cells (compare the trend lines for each case). For comparisons with the LiFePO4//graphite Li-ion cells, data from CATL's 120 A h prismatic cell,143,144 Pylontech's 25 A h pouch cell,145 and EVE Energy's 280 A h prismatic cell,146 are included. Note: ‘Oxide’ can refer to LixCoO2 or different types of NMC or NCA cathodes and ‘Gr’ refers to graphite. Data taken from the following sources for 18650 Li-ion cells. Sony 18650 Li-ion cells: 1991 and 2001,147 1994,148 1997, 1998 and 2002,149 2010,150 and 2015.151 Panasonic/Sanyo 18650 Li-ion cells:1994–2008,152 2010,7 2012,152 and 2014.7 LG 21700 Li-ion cell: 2016.140 
In the analysis of Li-ion battery and materials prices, Wentker et al. demonstrate that fluctuations in cobalt prices have a dramatic effect on the materials costs of cobalt containing cathodes.135 The authors determined that between January 2017 and March 2018, the near tripling of the cobalt price resulted in up to a 63.56% increase in Li-ion cathode costs. Vaalma et al. also assess the impact of cobalt prices on Li-ion battery cathode materials, pointing out that a significant advantage for Na-ion is that high capacity materials can be produced which do not use cobalt.22 Whilst, some Li-ion cathodes, such as LFP, also do not contain cobalt, all graphite anode-based Li-ion cells contain copper as the current collector for the negative electrode. In Na-ion, the copper current collector is absent (replaced by cheaper and lighter aluminium), and Vaalma et al. correctly identify this is a key contribution in reducing the cell BOM.
We have made a comparison of the relative cell material costs for LFP//graphite and Faradion's Gen 2 cathode//commercial hard carbon anode (Faradion Na-ion), shown in Fig. S13 and Note 4 in the ESI,† in cells of the same size and current (2020) commercial material pricing at the same volumes (i.e. > 500 tonnes per annum cathode).139 It can be seen that when material pricing is considered at equivalent volumes, Faradion's Na-ion system is ∼25 to 30% lower in cost than the LFP//graphite chemistry: the electrolyte, current collectors (replacing the copper and carbon-coated aluminium in LFP//graphite with uncoated aluminium in Na-ion) and electrode additives (conductive carbon) are the main sources of the cost reduction. Cell material costs comprise about 70% of the total cost of Li-ion pouch cells,4 and as Na-ion cell manufacturing uses the same infrastructure and equipment as Li-ion (meaning there is no additional capital expenditure required), a 25 to 30% lower materials costs has a significant impact on total cell costs.
As Na-ion cells continue to increase in cell energy density, the $ per kW h, costs and the full cost of ownership (FCO) will decrease further. The FCO of Na-ion cells, at today's prices, is already highly competitive with the FCO of PbA batteries, which have low upfront costs but require many replacements over the same time duration. For example, a PbA battery with a nameplate energy of 10 kW h, would operate at 50% DOD (Depth of-Discharge) and achieve typically 500 cycles, whereas a Faradion Na-ion battery of the same nameplate energy would operate at 80% DOD for 3000 cycles, meaning you would need to replace the PbA battery five times over the lifetime of one Na-ion battery. Combining the upfront costs of multiple PbA batteries with the required maintenance costs, the cost/useable kW h of Na-ion is approximately 2/3 that of PbA.
Faradion's data shows that Na-ion battery cell material costs are forecast to be circa 25 to 30% lower than that of LFP//graphite cells at current commercial performance and today's LFP pricing, assuming equivalent material volumes. Whilst it will take some time for the supply-chains for Na-ion systems to mature enough to match those of Li-ion batteries, Faradion's Na-ion battery packs are already cost-competitive with those of current commercial LFP//graphite battery packs. Once the Na-ion supply-chains are well established, we can expect the costs for Na-ion cells to further decrease.
Performance & applications
The rapid progress achieved in Na-ion batteries in just one decade is highly encouraging. As outlined in the previous sections, Faradion has been pushing the envelope of Na-ion technology. Since its inception in 2011, 30 patent families have been secured or filed by Faradion, covering all aspects of Na-ion technology. To put this rapid progress in perspective, Fig. 7 presents a timeline plot comparing commercially available Li-ion technology with that of Faradion's Na-ion technology. The journeys of two prominent Li-ion cell manufacturers, Sony and Panasonic/Sanyo, have also been mapped out, tracking their high specific energy 18650 cells. In addition, the highest energy density cylindrical Li-ion cell currently available commercially (to the best of our knowledge), LG Chem's 21700 M50 model of ∼2016, has been included.140 LiFePO4//graphite-based 18650 cells typically have lower specific energies (90–137 W h kg−1),141,142 therefore, we included the state-of-the-art prismatic or pouch cell data from CATL,143,144 Pylontech,145 and EVE Energy.146 In this figure, we also present the specific energies obtained for Faradion's Na-ion pouch cells, along with projections for the latter half of 2020 and for 2021. For 2020, Faradion's production-category Na-ion pouch cells, whose performance data in prototype cells we discussed in this article (for example, see Fig. 2), would lead to 160 W h kg−1 in 32 A h cells at 4.2–1 V, as illustrated in Fig. S11† (cell manufacture is currently in progress). Our 2021 projections are based on achievable technological targets, utilising developments already demonstrated in our prototype cells (for example, refer to Fig. 3 and 4).
From Fig. 7, we can glean several points. Firstly, it can be seen that the rate of development for the Na-ion technology (gauged from the slope of the trendline for each case) is significantly faster than that of the Li-ion technology. This is not a surprise, considering that both these alkali-ion batteries share the same working principle, cell engineering considerations, method of manufacture and similar types of materials. Hence, the cumulative knowledge and best practices gathered from decades of Li-ion research, including latest Li-ion developments, can be fairly easily translated into Na-ion technology, thus reducing the cycles of learning required to enhance performance. In terms of specific energies offered by both types of technologies, it should be clear that NMC (Li–Ni–Mn–Co-oxides) or NCA (Li–Ni–Co–Al-oxides)//graphite Li-ion systems offer significantly higher values than Na-ion systems. The specific energies for Li-ion systems are based on cylindrical cells as opposed to pouch cells as reliable historical data could be obtained for the former, owing to their standardised size. However, cylindrical cells have lower specific energies owing to the weight penalty imposed by the stainless steel cell casing. This fact implies that such Li-ion products would still be the ideal choice currently, and in the near future, for the highest energy density applications, such as long-range electric vehicles and many types of consumer electronics. However, as mentioned previously, after bringing cost, sustainability and supply-chain considerations into the equation, for most other applications, Na-ion systems might be ideal. It should also be mentioned that we expect it is likely that the maximum achievable specific energy from the Na-ion technology would be lower than that from Li-ion. At this stage, Li-ion has entered its fourth decade of commercialisation, while Na-ion is not even past the first decade yet. In the historical development of cylindrical Li-ion cells, apart from a move to higher Ni content in oxide cathodes, a clear shift was seen on the anode side around the early part of the last decade in commercial cells, where cell manufacturers introduced graphite + Si anodes (as opposed to pure graphite anodes).153–155 This also had an impact on the higher specific energies that oxide cathode-based Li-ion cells could achieve. By now, it is estimated that graphite + Si-anode based Li-ion systems would plateau around ∼300 W h kg−1 in cylindrical cells.20 An equivalent estimation might be a bit premature for Na-ion technology at this stage in general, especially as data for hard carbon + X (X = non-carbonaceous materials) composite anodes is still not widely known in large-format cells (refer also to Table S4 in the ESI†). Faradion, however, is actively working in this direction.
For the other type of energy-dense Li-ion system commercially available, the LFP//graphite system, specific energies typically range from 140–175 W h kg−1 in large-scale 25–280 A h prismatic or pouch cells.143–146 As shown in Fig. 7, 140 W h kg−1 was already achieved by Faradion at the 12 A h scale in 2018. 160 W h kg−1 is projected to be achieved by end of 2020 in 32 A h pouch cells, a product of simply increasing the cell size without modifying the cell chemistry (this has been already demonstrated in the previous section; refer to Fig. 6a and S11†). While LFP//graphite cells have excellent cycle lives, those of Faradion's Na-ion systems are rapidly increasing and, within one year, we expect to match the cycle life levels offered by some LiFePO4//graphite cell suppliers. Once the excellent rate performance, charge acceptance capabilities and huge cost savings over shipping, transportation and storage of Na-ion cells are taken into account, it is highly likely that, going forwards, Na-ion energy storage products will provide better all-around value compared to LFP//graphite systems, with lower cost, greater sustainability and significant safety improvements. Commercial-scale demonstrations are well underway to verify this.
From an application perspective, based on customer interactions and orders received by Faradion, we are deploying Na-ion systems in many applications that are currently being serviced by PbA batteries. Such interest is being driven primarily by the much higher energy densities and better all-around performance, coupled with lower $ per kW h and maintenance-free operation, of Faradion's Na-ion systems relative to PbA batteries. These applications, such as low-speed electric vehicles (electric rickshaws or three-wheelers), back-up energy storage applications (UPS, data centres etc.) or the automotive SLI (Starter-Lighting-Ignition) batteries ubiquitous in internal combustion engine vehicles, will benefit from significantly enhanced performance offered by Na-ion products. In the near-term, certain higher energy density applications that require fast response times and/or a greater degree of safety, at reasonable costs, which are currently being earmarked for or being served by the LFP//graphite systems, would be ideal for Na-ion systems. Some examples include electric mobility applications (electric scooters, buses, trucks or low/mid-range electric cars), different types of large-scale stationary energy storage, power tools and offshore/marine energy storage. As a last point, based on the unique performance portfolio mix offered by the Na-ion technology (energy densities surpassing LFP//graphite systems, long cycle lives, low costs, high degree of safety, versatile temperature performance and good power densities with fast charge capability) while ensuring sustainability, we expect new markets to open up, which were relying previously on costly NMC//graphite Li-ion batteries due to a lack of suitable alternatives.
Most of Faradion's developments to date have been focused on high energy cells, although we intend to develop high power cells in the future, incorporating significantly faster charge acceptance capability. This will require developments of various cell components in order to ensure that fast charge acceptance will be achieved both effectively and safely. Another development on Faradion's near horizon will be our ultra-sustainable cells. Although Faradion's current offering is already highly sustainable compared to Li-ion technology, our ultra-sustainable cells will be Ni-free and contain ultra-low-cost materials, making them ideal for applications where these factors are the key drivers. Having said that, it should be self-evident that no single battery chemistry possesses all the attributes for every single application – each market has its nuances and requires unique solutions. The Na-ion chemistry will certainly not be the answer for all applications; however, it will be well-suited to complement, rather than displace, the existing and future Li-ion technologies in many applications.
Finally, it might be appropriate to mention that the substantial worldwide research being conducted on rechargeable batteries, involving countless researchers in academic as well as non-academic institutions, generally has one goal in mind – solutions to help mitigate climate change, for the betterment of the world. We hope that after we have shared some of our experiences and insights in developing commercial Na-ion systems, academic researchers conducting vital first-stage R&D in new materials, or new battery-related ideas, take into account some of the above outlined factors. These factors are crucial to ensure that their inventions and discoveries are firstly, commercially-relevant, and secondly, that they're developed to become commercially feasible in an expeditious manner. This can be conveniently accomplished by using easily implementable experimental conditions, in line with those of the battery industry, as we have highlighted in the previous section. This approach would certainly help develop improved energy storage solutions at a faster pace, thus ensuring most efficient use of the collective materials, as well as the intellectual resources of the world. We ultimately hope that the global battery research focus, once aligned, will result in a timely transition of the world's energy to more sustainable and cleaner options, before it is too late.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Faradion Limited for permission to publish this article. We thank our commercial partner, Haldor-Topsøe A/S, for FESEM micrographs. We also sincerely thank the entire Faradion team and all our commercial partners in helping to achieve the results disclosed herein.
References
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. W. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Palomares, P. Serras, I. Villaluenga, K. B. Hueso, J. Carretero-González and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5884–5901 RSC .

          C. Pillot, in Stockage Batterie Meeting, Bpifrance,  2019, https://www.bpifrance.fr/A-la-une/Actualites/Demain-quelles-solutions-pour-le-stockage-de-l-energie-47171, accessed December, 2020 Search PubMed.
P. Ruetschi, J. Power Sources, 1977, 2, 3–120 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Berg, C. Villevieille, D. Streich, S. Trabesinger and P. Novák, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2468–A2475 CrossRef CAS .
T. Placke, R. Kloepsch, S. Dühnen and M. Winter, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2017, 21, 1939–1964 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Olivetti, G. Ceder, G. G. Gaustad and X. Fu, Joule, 2017, 1, 229–243 CrossRef .
K. Turcheniuk, D. Bondarev, V. Singhal and G. Yushin, Nature, 2018, 559, 467–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Karabelli, S. Singh, S. Kiemel, J. Koller, A. Konarov, F. Stubhan, R. Miehe, M. Weeber, Z. Bakenov and K. P. Birke, Frontiers in Energy Research, 2020, 8, 349 Search PubMed .

          A. Cohen, Forbes,  2020, https://www.forbes.com/sites/arielcohen/2020/2003/2025/manufacturers-are-struggling-to-supply-electric-vehicles-with-batteries/#2021b2579c2991ff2023, accessed June 2020 Search PubMed.
T. Nagaura and K. Tozawa, Prog. Batteries Sol. Cells, 1990, 9, 209 CAS .
Y. Li and J. Lu, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1370–1377 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hong, J. Mei, L. Wen, Y. Tong, A. J. Vasileff, L. Wang, J. Liang, Z. Sun and S. X. Dou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802822 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Nikiforidis, M. C. M. van de Sanden and M. N. Tsampas, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 5649–5673 RSC .
Y. Zhao, K. R. Adair and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2673–2695 RSC .
C. Xu, Y. Yang, H. Wang, B. Xu, Y. Li, R. Tan, X. Duan, D. Wu, M. Zhuo and J. Ma, Chem.–Asian J., 2020, 15, 3584–3598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gong, B. Wang, J. Zhu, R. Podila, A. M. Rao, X. Yu, Z. Xu and B. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601885 CrossRef .
S. Nanda, A. Gupta and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2000804 CrossRef CAS .

Faraday Report - January 2020. High-energy battery technologies, available online: https://faraday.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/High-Energy-battery-technologies-FINAL.pdf, accessed December 10, 2020 Search PubMed.
A. Bauer, J. Song, S. Vail, W. Pan, J. Barker and Y. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702869 CrossRef .
C. Vaalma, D. Buchholz, M. Weil and S. Passerini, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18013 CrossRef .
D. Larcher and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, M. Dahbi and S. Komaba, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11636–11682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Hwang, S.-T. Myung and Y.-K. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3529–3614 RSC .
H. Pan, Y.-S. Hu and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2338–2360 RSC .
D. A. Winn, J. M. Shemilt and B. C. H. Steele, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 559–566 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, Science, 1976, 192, 1126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. S. Whittingham, US Pat., 4009052,  1977 Search PubMed .
G. H. Newman and L. P. Klemann, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 2097 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mizushima, P. C. Jones, P. J. Wiseman and J. B. Goodenough, Mater. Res. Bull., 1980, 15, 783–789 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delmas, J.-J. Braconnier, C. Fouassier and P. Hagenmuller, Solid State Ionics, 1981, 3–4, 165–169 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Basu, US Pat., 4423125,  1983 Search PubMed .

          L. W. Shacklette, L. B. Townsend and T. R. Jow, US Pat., 5011748,  1991, (priority date October 23, 1987) Search PubMed .

          T. Shishikura, M. Takeuchi, Y. Murakoshi, H. Konuma and M. Kameyama, US Pat., 5051325,  1991, (priority date November 20, 1987) Search PubMed .
K. Kubota, M. Dahbi, T. Hosaka, S. Kumakura and S. Komaba, Chem. Rec., 2018, 18, 459–479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Doeff, Y. Ma, S. J. Visco and L. C. De Jonghe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, L169 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Doeff, M. Y. Peng, Y. Ma and L. C. De Jonghe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, L145 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Stevens and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1271 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barker, M. Y. Saidi and J. L. Swoyer, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, A1 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Barker, M. Y. Saidi and J. L. Swoyer, US Pat., 6872492,  2005,(priority date Apil 4, 2002) Search PubMed .
S. Nordlinder, J. Lindgren, T. r. Gustafsson and K. Edström, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, E280 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hu and M. M. Doeff, J. Power Sources, 2004, 129, 296–302 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. B. Gover, A. Bryan, P. Burns and J. Barker, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 1495–1500 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bach, J. P. Pereira-Ramos and P. Willmann, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 504–510 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Ellis, W. R. M. Makahnouk, Y. Makimura, K. Toghill and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 749–753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Barker, R. K. B. Gover, P. Burns and A. J. Bryan, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A190 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barker, R. K. B. Gover, P. Burns and A. J. Bryan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A882 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delmas, F. Cherkaoui, A. Nadiri and P. Hagenmuller, Mater. Res. Bull., 1987, 22, 631–639 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Uebo, T. Kiyabu, S. Okada and J.-i. Yamaki, The Reports of Institute of Advanced Material Study, Kyushu University,  2002, vol. 16, pp. 1–5 Search PubMed .
H. Zhuo, X. Wang, A. Tang, Z. Liu, S. Gamboa and P. J. Sebastian, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 698–703 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lu and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A710 CrossRef CAS .
S. Okada, Y. Takahashi, T. Kiyabu, T. Doi, J.-i. Yamaki and T. Nishida, ECS Meeting Abstracts, 2006, MA2006–02, 201 Search PubMed .
R. Alcántara, M. Jaraba, P. Lavela and J. L. Tirado, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 2847–2848 CrossRef .
S. Komaba, T. Mikumo and A. Ogata, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1276–1279 CrossRef CAS .
N. Recham, J. N. Chotard, L. Dupont, K. Djellab, M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A993 CrossRef CAS .
I. D. Gocheva, M. Nishijima, T. Doi, S. Okada, J.-i. Yamaki and T. Nishida, J. Power Sources, 2009, 187, 247–252 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komaba, C. Takei, T. Nakayama, A. Ogata and N. Yabuuchi, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 355–358 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Perles, in Proceedings of the Metal Bulletin 28th International Ferroalloys Conference, Berlin, Germany,  2012 Search PubMed .
V. L. Chevrier and G. Ceder, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A1011 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cabana, L. Monconduit, D. Larcher and M. R. Palacín, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E170–E192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Poizot and F. Dolhem, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2003–2019 RSC .

          J. Barker, US Pat., 9608269,  2017(priority date September 30, 2011) Search PubMed .

          J. Barker, WO Application, 2013114102,  2015(priority date February 1, 2012) Search PubMed .
H. Kim, G. Yoon, I. Park, K.-Y. Park, B. Lee, J. Kim, Y.-U. Park, S.-K. Jung, H.-D. Lim, D. Ahn, S. Lee and K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3325–3335 RSC .
S. Y. Lim, H. Kim, J. Chung, J. H. Lee, B. G. Kim, J.-J. Choi, K. Y. Chung, W. Cho, S.-J. Kim, W. A. Goddard, Y. Jung and J. W. Choi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Barpanda, G. Oyama, S.-i. Nishimura, S.-C. Chung and A. Yamada, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Barker, R. J. Heap, N. Roche, C. Tan, R. Sayers and Y. Liu, ECS Meeting Abstracts, 2013, MA2013–02, 367 Search PubMed .

          J. Barker and R. Heap, US Pat., 10115966,  2018(priority date March 23, 2012) Search PubMed .
S.-Y. Xu, X.-Y. Wu, Y.-M. Li, Y.-S. Hu and L.-Q. Chen, Chin. Phys. B, 2014, 23, 118202 CrossRef .

          J. Barker and R. Heap, WO Application, 2014009724,  2014(priority date July 10, 2012) Search PubMed .

          J. Barker and R. Heap, US Pat., Application 20160329564,  2016(priority date January 9, 2014) Search PubMed .

          J. Barker and R. Heap, US Pat., 9774035,  2017(priority date July 10, 2012) Search PubMed .

          R. Sayers, J. Barker and R. Heap, US Pat., 10196280,  2019(priority date May 22, 2014) Search PubMed .
C. Delmas, C. Fouassier and P. Hagenmuller, Physica B+C, 1980, 99, 81–85 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delmas, D. Carlier and M. Guignard, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11(2), 2001201 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kang, D. Carlier, J. Reed, E. M. Arroyo, G. Ceder, L. Croguennec and C. Delmas, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4503–4507 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Lee, J. Xu and Y. S. Meng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 3304–3312 RSC .
G. Singh, B. Acebedo, M. C. Cabanas, D. Shanmukaraj, M. Armand and T. Rojo, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 37, 61–63 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Sayers, J. Barker and R. Heap, US Pat., 10550007,  2020(priority date May 22, 2014) Search PubMed .

          J. Barker and R. Heap, WO Application, 2019197812,  2020(priority date April 9, 2018) Search PubMed .
E. Lee, J. Lu, Y. Ren, X. Luo, X. Zhang, J. Wen, D. Miller, A. DeWahl, S. Hackney, B. Key, D. Kim, M. D. Slater and C. S. Johnson, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400458 CrossRef .
M. Keller, D. Buchholz and S. Passerini, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501555 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhou, J. Wang, X. Liu, X. He, F. Sun, V. Murzin, G. Schumacher, X. Yao, M. Winter and J. Li, J. Power Sources, 2020, 473, 228557 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Franklin and J. T. Randall, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1951, 209, 196–218 CAS .
D. A. Stevens and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A803 CrossRef CAS .
S. Alvin, H. S. Cahyadi, J. Hwang, W. Chang, S. K. Kwak and J. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000283 CrossRef CAS .
R. Väli, A. Jänes, T. Thomberg and E. Lust, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 253, 536–544 CrossRef .
Y. Morikawa, S.-i. Nishimura, R.-i. Hashimoto, M. Ohnuma and A. Yamada, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903176 CrossRef CAS .
S. Alvin, D. Yoon, C. Chandra, H. S. Cahyadi, J.-H. Park, W. Chang, K. Y. Chung and J. Kim, Carbon, 2019, 145, 67–81 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Stratford, P. K. Allan, O. Pecher, P. A. Chater and C. P. Grey, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 12430–12433 RSC .
J. S. Weaving, A. Lim, J. Millichamp, T. P. Neville, D. Ledwoch, E. Kendrick, P. F. McMillan, P. R. Shearing, C. A. Howard and D. J. L. Brett, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 7474–7484 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gotoh, T. Yamakami, I. Nishimura, H. Kometani, H. Ando, K. Hashi, T. Shimizu and H. Ishida, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14472–14481 RSC .
Y. E. Kim, S. J. Yeom, J.-E. Lee, S. Kang, H. Kang, G.-H. Lee, M. J. Kim, S. G. Lee, H.-W. Lee and H. G. Chae, J. Power Sources, 2020, 468, 228371 CrossRef CAS .
H. Alptekin, H. Au, A. C. S. Jensen, E. Olsson, M. Goktas, T. F. Headen, P. Adelhelm, Q. Cai, A. J. Drew and M.-M. Titirici, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 9918–9927 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, J. Liao, L. Yu, R. Lv, P. Li, W. Sun, R. Tan, X. Duan, L. Zhang, F. Li, J. Kim, K. H. Shin, H. Seok Park, W. Zhang, Z. Guo, H. Wang, Y. Tang, G. Gorgolis, C. Galiotis and J. Ma, Chem.–Asian J., 2020, 15, 995–1013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rudola, D. Aurbach and P. Balaya, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 46, 56–59 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Z. Jian, X. Wang, I. A. Rodríguez-Pérez, C. Bommier and X. Ji, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 2610–2613 RSC .
J. Górka, C. Vix-Guterl and C. Matei Ghimbeu, C, 2016, 2, 24 Search PubMed .
J. F. Peters, M. Abdelbaky, M. Baumann and M. Weil, Mater. Tech., 2019, 107, 503 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kamiyama, K. Kubota, D. Igarashi, Y. Youn, Y. Tateyama, H. Ando, K. Gotoh and S. Komaba, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021 DOI:10.1002/anie.202013951 .

          R. Sayers, J. Barker and A. Rudola, WO Application, 2020120967,  2020(priority date December 13, 2018) Search PubMed .

          J. Barker and Y. Liu, US Pat., Application 20180301696,  2018(priority date October 6, 2015) Search PubMed .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, Y. Liu, D. Lin, A. Pei and Y. Cui, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaas9820 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Doughty and E. P. Routh, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2012, 21, 37–44 CAS .
Q. Wang, L. Jiang, Y. Yu and J. Sun, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 93–114 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komaba, W. Murata, T. Ishikawa, N. Yabuuchi, T. Ozeki, T. Nakayama, A. Ogata, K. Gotoh and K. Fujiwara, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3859–3867 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hess, M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens and M. Wachtler, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A3084–A3097 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Barker and C. J. Wright, US Pat., Application 20170237270,  2017(priority data August 22, 2014) Search PubMed .

          J. Barker and A. Rudola, PCT Patent, Application PCT/GB2020/051317,  2020(priority date May 29, 2019) Search PubMed .
Y. Huang, L. Zhao, L. Li, M. Xie, F. Wu and R. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808393 CrossRef .
G. G. Eshetu, G. A. Elia, M. Armand, M. Forsyth, S. Komaba, T. Rojo and S. Passerini, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000093 CrossRef CAS .
D. Monti, E. Jónsson, A. Boschin, M. R. Palacín, A. Ponrouch and P. Johansson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 22768–22777 RSC .
A. Ponrouch, D. Monti, A. Boschin, B. Steen, P. Johansson and M. R. Palacín, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22–42 RSC .
Y. Yamada, J. Wang, S. Ko, E. Watanabe and A. Yamada, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 269–280 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, H. Liu, J. Xia, A. R. Cameron, M. Nie, G. A. Botton and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A655–A665 CrossRef CAS .
R. Petibon, J. Xia, L. Ma, M. K. G. Bauer, K. J. Nelson and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A2571–A2578 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xia, R. Petibon, D. Xiong, L. Ma and J. R. Dahn, J. Power Sources, 2016, 328, 124–135 CrossRef CAS .
L. U. Subasinghe, G. S. Reddy, A. Rudola and P. Balaya, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 110504 CrossRef CAS .
K. Du, C. Wang, L. U. Subasinghe, S. R. Gajella, M. Law, A. Rudola and P. Balaya, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 29, 287–299 CrossRef .
A. Tripathi, A. Rudola, S. R. Gajjela, S. Xi and P. Balaya, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25944–25960 RSC .
T. Broux, F. Fauth, N. Hall, Y. Chatillon, M. Bianchini, T. Bamine, J.-B. Leriche, E. Suard, D. Carlier, Y. Reynier, L. Simonin, C. Masquelier and L. Croguennec, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800215 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mariyappan, T. Marchandier, F. Rabuel, A. Iadecola, G. Rousse, A. V. Morozov, A. M. Abakumov and J.-M. Tarascon, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 1657–1666 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, G.-L. Xu, H. Che, H. Wang, K. Yang, X. Yang, F. Guo, Y. Ren, Z. Chen, K. Amine and Z.-F. Ma, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4909–4918 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Kumar, S. Ghosh, S. Biswas and S. K. Martha, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 080531 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y.-S. Hu, X. Qi, X. Rong, H. Li, X. Huang and L. Chen, Energy Storage Materials, 2016, 5, 191–197 CrossRef .
A. Fukunaga, T. Nohira, R. Hagiwara, K. Numata, E. Itani, S. Sakai and K. Nitta, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2016, 46, 487–496 CrossRef CAS .
X. Rong, Y. Lu, X. Qi, Q. Zhou, W. Kong, K. Tang, L. Chen and Y. Hu, Energy Storage Sci. Technol., 2020, 9, 515–522 Search PubMed .
Z. Lin, T. Liu, X. Ai and C. Liang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ue, K. Sakaushi and K. Uosaki, Mater. Horiz., 2020 Search PubMed .
S. Tang, L. Wu, Y. Sui and S. Zhong, Adv. Powder Technol., 2020, 31, 1564–1573 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sui, Y. Hao, X. Zhang, S. Zhong, J. Chen, J. Li and L. Wu, Adv. Powder Technol., 2020, 31, 190–197 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wentker, M. Greenwood and J. Leker, Energies, 2019, 12, 504 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Hirsh, Y. Li, D. H. S. Tan, M. Zhang, E. Zhao and Y. S. Meng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001274 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Peters, A. Peña Cruz and M. Weil, Batteries, 2019, 5, 10 CrossRef CAS .

          P. A. Nelson, K. G. Gallagher, I. D. Bloom and D. W. Dees, Exploring the Economic Potential of Sodium-Ion Batteries, Argonne National Lab.(ANL), Argonne, IL (United States),  2012 Search PubMed .
R. E. Ciez and J. F. Whitacre, Nature Sustainability, 2019, 2, 148–156 CrossRef .

          Datasheet, Lithium Ion INR21700 M50 18.20Wh, available online: https://www.dnkpower.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/LG-INR21700-M50-Datasheet.pdf, accessed July 22, 2020 Search PubMed.

          Datasheet, 18650 Lithium Ion Power Cell APR18650M1B, available online: https://a123batteries.com/product_images/uploaded_images/APR18650M1B.pdf, accessed July 22, 2020 Search PubMed.

          Datasheet, Shandong Goldencell Electronics Technology Model HTCFR18650-1800mAh-3.2V, available online: https://enerpower.de/wp/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Technical-Specifications-HTCFR18650-1800mAh-3.2V-EN.pdf, accessed July 30, 2020 Search PubMed.
Y. Lu, X. Rong, Y.-S. Hu, L. Chen and H. Li, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 23, 144–153 CrossRef .

          Datasheet, CATL LiFePO4Lithium Battery 3.2V120Ah, available online: http://www.evlithium.com/CATL-Battery.html, accessed July 22, 2020 Search PubMed.

          Datasheet, Pylontech Energy Type Cell PF25N, available online: http://www.pylontech.com.cn/download.aspx?id=103, accessed July 30, 2020 Search PubMed.

          Datasheet, EVE Energy LFP Power Battery LF280, available online: http://www.dcmax.com.tw/LF280(3.2V280Ah).pdf, accessed July 30, 2020 Search PubMed.
Y. Nishi, J. Power Sources, 2001, 100, 101–106 CrossRef CAS .
S. Megahed and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 1994, 51, 79–104 CrossRef CAS .
M. Broussely and G. Archdale, J. Power Sources, 2004, 136, 386–394 CrossRef CAS .

          Datasheet, Sony Cell Type US18650VTC5, available online: https://enerpower.de/wp/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Specification-US18650VTC5.pdf, accessed July 22, 2020 Search PubMed.

          Datasheet, Sony Cell Type US18650VTC6, available online: https://enerpower.de/wp/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Specification-US18650VTC6.pdf, accessed July 22, 2020 Search PubMed.
G. Crabtree, E. Kócs and L. Trahey, MRS Bull., 2015, 40, 1067–1078 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Lain, J. Brandon and E. Kendrick, Batteries, 2019, 5, 64 CrossRef CAS .
H. Popp, N. Zhang, M. Jahn, M. Arrinda, S. Ritz, M. Faber, D. U. Sauer, P. Azais and I. Cendoya, e & i Elektrotechnik und Informationstechnik, 2020, 137, 169–176 Search PubMed .

          L. Zyga, Phys.org,  2010, https://phys.org/news/2010-2003-panasonic-si-alloy-anode-technology-battery.html, accessed December, 2020 Search PubMed.

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta00376cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Ashish Rudola	Ashish Rudola is currently a Battery Scientist at Faradion. He received his PhD at the National University of Singapore (NUS) in 2015, where he was awarded the NUS President's Graduate Fellowship for his research work. He was subsequently a Postdoctoral Research Fellow in NUS until 2017 before joining Faradion in 2018. As one of the first researchers to focus a PhD degree solely on sodium-ion batteries, Ashish has explored different facets of room-temperature sodium-based rechargeable batteries since 2011. His research interests are wide-ranging in this field and cover novel materials for cathodes, anodes and electrolytes along with original concepts to enhance the performance of sodium-based chemistries.
Anthony J. R. Rennie	Anthony Rennie received his MEng and PhD from the Department of Chemical & Process Engineering at the University of Strathclyde. He worked for 6 years at the University of Sheffield in the area of energy storage technologies where research was focused on the application of ionic liquid electrolytes in supercapacitors and batteries. He is currently Quality & Performance manager at Faradion and is involved in technology transfer and commercialization of sodium-ion technology.
Richard Heap	Richard Heap received his BSc and PhD from the University of Surrey, before moving to Singapore to work as a Research Fellow at Nanyang Technological University. He has since worked in the UK battery industry for 12 years, focusing on Li-ion, Mg-ion and Na-ion batteries, specifically the design of new active materials to meet consumer demands. As well as being a named inventor on >15 patents, he has successfully managed several collaborative R&D projects, and has gained both all-round and in-depth knowledge of the materials, equipment, processes, testing regimes and scale-up techniques used in the industry.
Ruth Sayers	Ruth has worked for Faradion since 2012, now in her current role as Operations Manager. She has supported the company to grow and evolve since joining as a Research Scientist in its early start-up days. She gained her Materials Science MEng at Imperial College London where she was awarded the Charles Salter Prize, as well as gaining the AT Green Award for Excellence in Ceramics from the Institute of Materials, Minerals & Mining. Ruth gained her doctorate at Imperial College London in 2010 and was awarded the John Kilner Prize for Energy Materials for her thesis on cathode materials for Solid Oxide Fuel Cells. She has numerous patents and publications in the fields of fuel cells and sodium-ion batteries.
Christopher J. Wright	Chris Wright has a BA and D.Phil in Chemistry from Oxford University. He was a Royal Society European fellow at Milan University, research fellow at the Harwell research establishment and RSC BOC centenary lecturer in 1992. He was Operations Director at AEA Technology Plc (licensor of Lithium Cobalt Oxide); CEO of IP2IPO (now IP Group, the leading UK investor in university IP) and Co-Founder of Faradion Ltd. He is chairman of Faradion Ltd, and a director of Aceleron Ltd and Carbon Air Ltd. Chris is an author on over 60 papers and inventor of ten patents.
Jerry Barker	Dr Jerry Barker is founder and CTO of Faradion Limited – a UK-based start-up company developing high energy density Na-ion batteries. Previously Jerry was Chief Scientist at Valence Technology Inc. He has published over 70 technical papers (h-index = 56, total citation > 10000) and is the named inventor on more than 110 issued and 50 pending US battery patents. He is the inventor of several commercial Na-ion and Li-ion active materials, including Na3V2(PO4)2F3, NaVPO4F, LiVPO4F, Li3V2(PO4)3, LiFe(Mg)PO4 as well as the carbothermal reduction manufacturing method. In 2012, Jerry was awarded the IBA Technology Award in recognition of his contributions to Li-ion battery materials. He is a member of the Expert Panel for the UK's Faraday Institution.

 	Fig. 1  Overview of Faradion's Gen 1 cathode material. (a) XRD plot confirming a typical O3 phase. (b) Cycle 1 of a full Na-ion cell paired with commercial hard carbon. (c) Cycle 2 of such a Na-ion cell illustrating smooth charge–discharge curves. (d) Cycling stability over 200 cycles at ±C/6 rate.	 
Na0.950Ni0.3172+Mn0.3174+Mg0.158Ti0.208O2 → Na0.317Ni0.3174+Mn0.3174+Mg0.158Ti0.208O2 + 0.633Na+ + 0.633e−
Na0.317Ni0.3174+Mn0.3174+Mg0.158Ti0.208O2 → Ni0.3174+Mn0.3174+Mg0.158Ti0.208O1.842 + 0.158O2 + 0.317Na+ + 0.317e−
Ni0.3174+Mn0.3174+Mg0.158Ti0.208O1.842 + 0.633Na+ → Na0.633Ni2+0.317Mn0.3174+Mg0.158Ti0.208O1.842 + 0.633e−
Na0.633Ni0.3172+Mn0.3174+Mg0.158Ti0.208O1.842 + 0.317Na+ + 0.317e− → Na0.950Ni0.3172+Mn0.3173+Mg0.158Ti0.208O1.842

 	Fig. 2  Overview of Faradion's Gen 2 cathode. (a) XRD plot indicating presence of O3 as well as P2 phases. (b) Half-cell cycling at ±C/5 at various voltage windows. Typical cycling performances of Gen 2 cathode in full Na-ion cells when paired with commercial hard carbon, showing (c) typical Cycle 1 curves using various voltage windows, (d) cycling stability at 4–1 V highlighting excellent cycling stabilities over 3000 cycles (please note that the capacity jumps seen after every 1000 cycles were due to cell relaxation for a few days after each thousand cycles: as the cycling programme was scheduled in batches of 1000 cycles, there was some delay in restarting the cycling programme), along with cycling stability at 4.2–1 V, (e) rate performance capabilities – response at a fast 10C rate (6 min) possible with 84% capacity retention, and (f) fast charge capabilities of Faradion's Na-ion cells with charge acceptance possible at 4C (15 min) without any drop in capacity.	 

 	Fig. 3  Electrochemical performance of Faradion's proprietary hard carbon. (a) Half-cell cycling curves illustrating higher capacities with a higher first cycle coulombic efficiency (η1) compared with those obtained from commercial hard carbon. (b) The more efficient Faradion hard carbon results in unprecedented first cycle efficiencies in full Na-ion cells (≥90%) when paired with Faradion's Gen 2 cathode. In both sets of experiments, all other experimental conditions were the same; thus, comparisons can be made with confidence.	 

 	Fig. 4  Progress in Faradion's non-aqueous Na-ion electrolytes and illustration of stability of Faradion's Na-ion pouch cells when shorted. (a) Illustration of typical temperature performance of Faradion's Gen 2 cathode//commercial hard carbon 0.1 A h Na-ion cells at various temperatures using EC:DEC:PC = 1:2:1 wt/wt solvent blends. (b) An example of the cycling curve when the Na-ion cell is discharged down to 0 V and held at 0 V for 24 h. (c) Cycling stability when the cell is shorted at 0 V for 24 h after each cycle. Faradion's most recent developments on formulating PC-dominant electrolytes showing (d) cycling stabilities at 4.2–1 V of experimental 0.9 A h Na-ion pouch cells using either EC:DEC:PC = 1:2:1 wt/wt or PC-dominant solvent blends, and (e) rate performance of PC-dominant electrolytes at 4.2–1 V.	 

External short circuit	No fire and no explosion	96	Minor pouch expansion
Overcharge	No fire and no explosion	24	Testing stopped at 2× rated capacity
Hot box (at 130 °C)	No fire and no explosion	127	Minor cell voltage drop (recoverable)
Flat crush	No fire and no explosion	27	Negligible voltage and temperature change
Edge-on crush	No fire and no explosion	20	Negligible voltage and temperature change
Nail penetration	No fire and no explosion	41	Internal short achieved

 	Fig. 5  Cycling of Faradion's first-generation production-category 12 A h Na-ion pouch cells. Cycling stabilities at various voltage windows: (a) 4.2–1 V, (b) 4.1–1 V and (c) 4–1 V. (d) Summary of the best published full Na-ion cells in the literature with a reported capacity of at least 50 mA h. In this plot, the size of the circle or square represents the cycle life reported in the publications with the number above the circle/square being the reported capacity retention. Faradion's specific energy is based on a 32 A h cell at 4.2–1 V, while the cycle life is based on our prototype cells at 4–1 V or 4.2–1 V (refer to Fig. 2d); these cycle lives are currently being confirmed in 32 A h cells. From the figure, it is clear that the Faradion Na-ion technology significantly surpasses that of all prior reports, in terms of specific energies, while still avoiding costly elements such as Co or V.	 

 	Fig. 6  Some practical considerations in the design of cells with high specific energy. Using Faradion's cell model, the influence of several design parameters on specific energy are illustrated. Figures indicate the effect of (a) cell dimensions, (b) separator type and electrolyte loading (GF/A represents glass microfibre filter paper and PP represents a typical polyolefin-based separator), (c) cathode active material loading (the cathode:anode mass balance being the same for all cases), (d) electrode formulation (active material:binder:conductive carbon mass ratio) and (e) electrode densities and first cycle coulombic efficiencies – (especially for carbon anodes).	 

 	Fig. 7  The trend of enhancement in cell-level specific energies of commercially-available Li-ion cells compared with Faradion's Na-ion pouch cells. The specific energy stated for each Li-ion cell is at 100% DOD (or most expanded voltage window) and at 4.2–1 V for Faradion Na-ion cells, while the cycle life is quoted at the stated DOD or voltage window, as indicated. For Faradion cells, we have indicated specific energies already achieved thus far, along with projected values for the immediate future. It can be seen that the rate of progress of the Na-ion technology is significantly faster than that of the Li-ion cells (compare the trend lines for each case). For comparisons with the LiFePO4//graphite Li-ion cells, data from CATL's 120 A h prismatic cell,143,144 Pylontech's 25 A h pouch cell,145 and EVE Energy's 280 A h prismatic cell,146 are included. Note: ‘Oxide’ can refer to LixCoO2 or different types of NMC or NCA cathodes and ‘Gr’ refers to graphite. Data taken from the following sources for 18650 Li-ion cells. Sony 18650 Li-ion cells: 1991 and 2001,147 1994,148 1997, 1998 and 2002,149 2010,150 and 2015.151 Panasonic/Sanyo 18650 Li-ion cells:1994–2008,152 2010,7 2012,152 and 2014.7 LG 21700 Li-ion cell: 2016.140	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta00376c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
