Towards lignin-based functional materials in a sustainable world  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5GC02616D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5GC02616D
(Tutorial Review)
Green Chem., 2016, 18, 1175-1200Towards lignin-based functional materials in a sustainable world

        
          
            Dan 
            Kai
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Mein Jin 
            Tan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Pei Lin 
            Chee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yun Khim 
            Chua
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yong Liang 
            Yap
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Xian Jun 
            Loh
          
        
      *acd
aInstitute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), A*STAR, 2 Fusionopolis Way, #08-03 Innovis, Singapore 138634. E-mail: kaid@imre.a-star.edu.sg; lohxj@imre.a-star.edu.sg
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Block N4.1, Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, National University of Singapore, 9 Engineering Drive 1, Singapore 117576
dSingapore Eye Research Institute, 11 Third Hospital Avenue, Singapore 168751
Received 
      31st October 2015
    , Accepted 7th January 2016First published on 8th January 2016AbstractIn light of the incessant consumption of raw materials in the world today, the search for sustainable resources is ever pressing. Lignin, the second most naturally abundant biomass, which makes up 15% to 35% of the cell walls of terrestrial plants, has always been treated as waste and used in low-value applications such as heat and electricity generation. However, its abundance in nature could potentially solve the problem of the rapidly depleting resources if it was successfully translated into a renewable resource or valorized to higher value materials. Advanced lignin modification chemistry has generated a number of functional lignin-based polymers, which integrate both the intrinsic features of lignin and additional properties of the grafted polymers. These modified lignin and its copolymers display better miscibility with other polymeric matrices, leading to improved performance for these lignin/polymer composites. This review summarizes the progress in using such biopolymers as reinforcement fillers, antioxidants, UV adsorbents, antimicrobial agents, carbon precursors and biomaterials for tissue engineering and gene therapy. Recent developments in lignin-based smart materials are discussed as well.Dan Kai and Xian Jun LohDr Dan Kai received his B.E. in Biomedical Engineering from Xi'an Jiaotong University, China in 2006, and obtained an M.E. in Biomedical Engineering from the National Engineering Research Center for Biomaterials, Sichuan University, China in 2009. He obtained his Ph.D. degree at the NUS Graduate School for Integrated Science & Engineering, National University of Singapore, in 2013. Currently, he is working as a scientist at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, A*STAR, Singapore. His research interests are focused on the synthesis of lignin-based functional polymers, hydrogels and nanofibers for personal care products. He is also interested in engineering electrospun nanofibers for biomedical applications.Dr Xian Jun Loh is a polymer chemist working in the inter-disciplinary field of biomaterials. He is currently the Programme Manager of the A*STAR Personal Care Programme. He is concurrently the Programme Manager of the Consumer Care Programme at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE) and an Assistant Professor at the National University of Singapore (NUS). He is also an adjunct scientist at the Singapore Eye Research Institute. His main research interests are in the design of supramolecular and stimuli-responsive polymers and hydrogels for biomedical and personal care applications. Currently, he is the author and co-author of 94 journal papers, 12 patents, 10 book chapters and 3 books, publishing mainly in the area of biomaterials.
1. Introduction
With industrial developments and human population growth, the consumption of fossil fuels is steadily increasing globally, together with the associated environmental issues (such as environmental pollution and global warming). Efforts have been made to find green and sustainable resources for new energy sources and materials.1 Extensive efforts have been made to develop materials from biodegradable polymers such as poly(lactide), poly(ε-caprolactone) and poly[(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate].2–11 Naturally abundant and renewable resources such as lignocellulosic biomass are viewed to have the potential to replace fossil fuels.12 Lignin is a heterogeneous and amorphous polymer that constitutes a large portion of the cell walls of vascular plants, making it the second most ample biomass on earth, just after cellulose.13 Despite its huge possibilities, lignin technologies are currently not fully developed, and lignin-based materials are not utilized as high value products. Only a small percentage, less than 2%, of the approximately 70 million tons of lignin produced during the extraction of cellulose for the paper industry is employed as concrete additives, stabilizing agents or dispersants and surfactants.14–16 The remainder is simply discarded as waste or burnt as low grade burning fuel.17
Lignin is inexpensive and possesses numerous attractive properties, such as high carbon content, high thermal stability, biodegradability, antioxidant activity and favorable stiffness.18–20 These advantages have motivated interest in developing lignin into value-added products for various applications. However, the brittle nature of lignin and its incompatibility with other polymer systems have led to little success in creating lignin-based high performance materials.18,21 Promising approaches that could overcome these weaknesses are chemical modification of lignin and synthesis of lignin-derived copolymers. To date, various researchers have reported different lignin valorization methods to modify lignin and to synthesize lignin-based polymers. Several notable review papers have highlighted the conversion of lignin to functional materials. Vishtal et al. summarized different methods to extract technical lignins and identified the challenges of converting and utilizing these lignins in industrial applications.22 Avérous et al. described in detail the different chemical modifications of lignins.21 Thakur et al. summarized recent advances involving the use of lignin in the development of green polymer composites and hydrogels.18,20 Lawoko et al. reviewed the topics of both the direct use of lignin and the chemical modifications of lignin toward micro- and nanostructured materials.23 Argyropoulos et al. discussed the thermal and mechanical strength behavior of lignin-based copolymers, blends and composites.16 Liu et al. presented currently available approaches and strategies for the thermochemical conversion of lignin to functional carbon materials.1
In this review, we attempt to summarize the recent developments of lignin in terms of different approaches to synthesize lignin-based copolymers, the resulting features, the various ways to engineer lignin-based biomaterials and the potential applications of lignin-based copolymers. The review will then introduce various emerging lignin-based materials possessing properties such as antibacterial activity, antioxidant activity and UV-absorbance as high-value products. Furthermore, the review will also discuss a new class of smart materials based on lignin that are responsive to stimuli such as temperature and pH, with a corresponding change in material properties. Finally, the review will conclude with future perspectives on lignin-based functional materials with smart and high performance properties.
2. Background of lignin
Lignin is part of a group of complex organic polymers present in the cell walls of plants, where it is one of the main constituents, together with cellulose and hemicellulose (Fig. 1).24,25 The main role of lignin is to provide rigidity to strengthen the structures of cell walls, especially in larger roots and stems. Its other functions in plants include the regulation of water transport, protection against biological stresses by inhibiting enzymatic degradation of other components, and anti-bacterial activity against microorganisms.26
 Fig. 1  The position of lignin within the lignocellulosic matrix. Adapted with permission from ref. 14. 
Lignin has a large and complex polymer structure containing methoxyl groups, phenolic hydroxyl groups and some terminal aldehyde groups in its side chains.1 The differences between the structures of lignin in the various plants are based on the linkages formed between the phenylpropanoid lignin precursors. The three aromatic alcohols are p-coumaryl, coniferyl and sinapyl. Lignin is created through an enzyme-mediated dehydrogenative polymerization of these units in which the respective polymer units are synthesized, forming p-hydroxyphenyl (H), guaiacyl (G) and syringyl (S) from coumaryl alcohol, coniferyl alcohol and sinapyl alcohol, respectively (Fig. 2).27 During biosynthesis, the monolignols of lignin undergo an in situ radical polymerization, generating some interunit linkages, such as aryl ether (α-O-4′ and β-O-4′), resinol (β-β′), phenylcoumaran (β-5′), biphenyl (5-5′), and 1,2-diaryl propane (β-1′), as shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  The precursors of lignin and several common linkages between phenyl propane units. 
Lignin can be extracted from its botanical source, but also from pulping chemical processes, which results in technical lignin. There are four different types of technical lignins, classified by either sulphur or sulphur-free processes.28Table 1 summarizes the structures and properties of the four technical lignins. Most lignin is extracted through the kraft process. Lignin bonds with cellulose are broken in the presence of white liquor, a strong alkali solvent of aqueous sodium hydroxide and sodium sulphide. The kraft process breaks the lignin molecule into smaller chains, which are soluble in water or alkali, allowing for further fragmentation as the linkages between the phenylpropane units are cleaved.29 Kraft lignin characteristics include aliphatic thiol groups, which are hydrophobic and have high sulphur content (1 to 2 wt%). The sulphite process works in a similar way to the kraft process, except that the alkaline medium is replaced with an acidic one. The final product of lignin is in the form of lignosulfonates.30,31 Lignosulfonates are water soluble, with sulfonate groups present on their aliphatic side chains. Lignosulfonates have many industrial uses. For instance, they can be used to produce newsprint paper, binders, cement adhesives, and tanning leather; the oxidation of lignosulfonates produces vanillin, which is the artificial flavouring of vanilla.32 Soda lignin, like kraft lignin, undergoes a similar cooking process, except there is no sulphur content in this reaction. This process is the main method for chemical pulping of non-wood material species.22 Soda lignin resembles natural lignin compared to kraft and lignosulfonate lignins. Being sulphur free and closer to the composition of natural lignin, soda lignin can be used directly without purification. These features also make soda lignin more suited for chemical modification to be used in other economical applications. Solvent pulping or organosolv uses organic solvents (such as acetic acid, formic acid, ethanol and peroxiorganic acids) and water as the cooking liquid for the wood chips.33 Organosolv lignin, like soda lignin, undergoes little modification, as only solubilizing is involved; its high purity also makes it ideal for direct usage. However, its low molecular weight and hydrophobicity cause it to be less desirable for papermaking pulping, as the pulp produced is of poorer quality than kraft lignin.
Table 1 Technical lignins and their properties




Technical lignins
Kraft
Lignosulfonate
Soda
Organosolv




DMF: dimethylformamide; DMSO: dimethyl sulfoxide. Tg: Glass transition temperature; Td: thermal decomposition temperature.




Structure














Separation methods
Precipitation (pH change)
Ultrafiltration
Precipitation (pH change)
Precipitation (addition of non-solvent)


Ultrafiltration


Ultrafiltration
Dissolved air flotation


Product status
Industrial
Industrial
Industrial
Laboratory/Pilot


Sulphur (%)
1.0 to 3.0
3.5 to 8.0
0
0


Nitrogen (%)
0.05
0.02
0.2 to 1.0
0 to 0.3


Molecular weight (×103 g mol−1)
1.5 to 5 (up to 25)
1 to 50 (up to 150)
0.8 to 3 (up to 15)
0.5 to 5


Polydispersity
2.5 to 3.5
6 to 8
2.5 to 3.5
1.5 to 2.5


Acid soluble lignin (%)
1 to 5
—
1 to 11
∼2


Solubility
Alkali, some organic solvents (DMF, pyridine and DMSO)
Water
Alkali
Wide range of organic solvents



T
g (°C)
140 to 150
130
140
90 to 110



T
d (°C)
340 to 370
250 to 260
360 to 370
390 to 400




3. Modification and polymerization of lignin
Raw lignin, without any chemical modification, has been directly incorporated into matrices to improve or enhance their material properties.34,35 Raw lignin can be utilized as an additive in plastics as an antioxidant, in ultraviolet protection agents, in flame retardants or in reinforcement fillers.18,21 Also, the incorporation of inexpensive lignin into industrial polyolefins can reduce the costs of the final products. Although lignin holds great potential for multiple industrial applications, it can only be blended in a small amount in plastics, due to its immiscibility with many other thermoplastics. The development of modified lignin or lignin-based polymers seems to be a rational start to the wide use of this sustainable biopolymer.
3.1. Chemical modification on lignin
Fragmentation or depolymerization of lignin is an important method to produce useful materials from waste lignin.1,36,37 In the last 60 years, lignins have been cleaved into different low molar mass macromers, such as vanillin, dimethyl sulfoxide, acetic acid, quinines, aldehydes and many other aromatic chemical compounds.37,38 A great number of thermochemical and biochemical conversions have been reported to depolymerize lignin, including pyrolysis, oxidation, hydrogenation, hydrolysis, gasification and microbial conversion.21,36,39
On the other hand, lignin also can be modified as a macropolyol without fragmenting its intrinsic structure. Chemically, lignin with its particular structure provides a variety of functional groups, such as hydroxyl, methoxyl, carbonyl and carboxyl groups. To further increase the chemical reactivity and physical properties of lignin, different methods of modification have been proposed to introduce new chemical active sites onto lignin (Fig. 3). Alkylation and alkoxylation are simple methods for modifying lignin.17 Due to the presence of a large number of active hydroxyl groups, alkylated or alkoxylated lignin can be easily synthesized by nucleophilic aromatic substitution reactions.16 With such reactions, lignin ethers and hydroxyalkyl lignins can be produced as potential pre-polymers for lignin-based copolymer synthesis.40–42 Amination of lignin can be achieved through a Mannich reaction with amine and formaldehyde, and the resultant products can used for the preparation of a cationic surfactant (with high surface activity) and as a filler to reinforce the properties of polymer/lignin composites.43–46 Nitration is another approach to modify lignin with nitrating reactants (such as nitric acid) in the presence of acetic anhydride or concentrated acetic acid.47 Nitrolignin powder has been used to synthesize polyurethane networks.48,49 These chemical modifications potentially assist material scientists to develop and synthesize new and functional lignin macromonomers with multiple applications.
 Fig. 3  Summary of the chemical modification of lignin. 
Lignin contains both aliphatic hydroxyl groups and phenolic hydroxyl groups; the phenolic hydroxyl group is one of the most reactive functional groups that can be readily modified. The functionalization of hydroxyl groups is a good strategy to develop multiple-functional lignin copolymers (Fig. 3). Esterification is one of the easiest ways to modify the hydroxyl groups of lignin.50 Different esterifying agents, including acidic compounds, acid anhydrides and chloride acids, have been utilized for lignin esterification.13,14,51–55 In the reaction, the properties of the resulting lignin polyesters can be adjusted by varying the feeding ratios of the monomers. Phenolation of lignin is an approach to condense phenol with the lignin aromatic rings and side chains in an acidic medium. This reaction can introduce more phenolic hydroxyl groups onto lignin and therefore improve its chemical reactivity for synthesizing new lignin-based phenol resins.56 Oxyprolylation is the most extensively studied etherification method to modify lignins with propylene oxide to generate new macropolyols.57 During oxyprolylation, oxianions generated from the hydroxyl groups of lignin react with propylene oxide in the presence of an alkaline catalyst, such as KOH.58 It is important to note that chemical modifications of the lignin macromolecule are highly dependent on its structural features and the reactivity of its functional groups.
3.2. Graft polymerization on lignin
The polymerization of lignin is another approach to improve its properties and overcome its limitations. Recently, numerous researchers have attempted to use the lignin macromolecule as a monomer for polymer synthesis. The hydroxyl groups of lignin can react with active isocyanate groups to form urethane bonds via an exothermic reaction. Lignin based polyurethanes can be synthesized by either a one-step reaction through mixing unmodified lignin and diisocyanate with another diol monomer,59,60 or a two-step reaction with the synthesis of an isocyanate-based prepolymer followed by polymerization between the prepolymer and lignin.61,62 Saito et al. developed lignin-based thermoplastic polyurethanes with high lignin contents (65 to 75 wt%).63 In their study, hardwood lignin was crosslinked with formaldehyde, followed by coupling with diisocyanate-based telechelic polybutadiene as a network-forming soft segment. The lignin polyurethanes showed molecular weights ranging from 346000 to 531000 g mol−1, with two Tg at around −35 and 154 °C. Although some phase immiscibility was observed in the synthesized lignin polyurethanes, it was found that increasing the lignin content lead to increasing tensile strength and stiffness. The same group also reported that the formaldehyde-crosslinked lignin could react with dicarboxy-terminated polybutadiene and KOH in 1,4-dioxane to from lignin-g-polybutadiene copolymers with a two-phase morphology.13
Atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) is another useful method to synthesize lignin-based functional polymers. First, raw lignin is esterified by reacting it with 2-bromoisobutyryl bromide (BIBB). Then different monomers can be grafted onto the lignin macroinitiator to generate designed lignin-based polymers in a controlled free radical system (Fig. 4). Commonly, CuBr is used as the catalyst, with N,N,N′,N′′,N′′-pentamethylenediethylenetriamine or 1,1,4,7,10,10-hexamethyltriethylenetetramine (HMTETA) as the ligand. N-Isopropylacrylamide (NIPAM) was firstly copolymerized onto hardwood kraft lignin to synthesize thermoresponsive lignin-based polymers by ATRP.64 The lignin-g-PNIPAM copolymers underwent the typical hydrophilic-to-hydrophobic transition at 32 °C. In another ATRP study, three different monomers derived from dehydroabietic acid (DA) were grafted onto lignin to prepare rosin polymer-grafted lignin composites.65 Compared to unmodified lignin, these rosin-grafted lignin copolymers showed lower glass transition temperatures (Tg), higher water contact angles and higher water resistance properties. Recently, a photosensitive compound, acryloyl benzophenone (ABP), and styrene were grafted to kraft lignin via an activator regenerated by electron transfer ATRP.66 Instead of using CuBr, CuBr2/2,2′-bipyridine complex was introduced into the reaction. The lignin-g-poly(styrene-co-ABP) copolymers exhibited tunable molecular weights ranging from 6000 to 11500 g mol−1 and a single Tg at ∼100 °C. Containing 6% to 9% of ABP, these copolymers were UV curable, and up to 30% of them could crosslink under UV irradiation to form insolvable polymer networks. This polymerization technique also offers some other advantages, such as modulation of the molecular weight of the grafted chains and the number of grafts per macroinitiator.
 Fig. 4  Synthetic scheme for the preparation of polymer grafted lignin copolymers by ATRP. 
Ring-opening polymerization (ROP) is an established method for the synthesis of poly(lactide) (PLA) and polycaprolactone (PCL), and it has been also used for the development of lignin-based copolymers. A simple metal- and solvent-free method was reported to graft lactide onto lignin to produce lignin-g-PLA copolymers.67 In the reaction, lignin and lactide monomer were polymerized at 130 °C under N2 atmosphere in the presence of an organocatalyst, triazabicyclodecene. The molecular weight and chain length of the PLA could be easily controlled by varying the lignin/lactide ratio and pre-acetylation treatment. In another study, a lignin-g-rubber-g-poly(lactide) copolymer was synthesized in stages via ROP.68 A poly(ε-caprolactone-co-lactide) (PCLLA) rubbery layer was first coated on the surface of the lignin core initiated by the alkyl alcohol functional groups on lignin (reacted at 120 °C in the presence of Sn(Oct)2). Next, poly(D-lactide) (PDLA) or poly(L-lactide) (PLLA) was grafted as the outer segments of the copolymer under the same conditions. This copolymer showed a Tg of −17 °C and a molecular weight of 20000 g mol−1.
In addition to ATRP and ROP, other chemical approaches have been used to synthesize lignin-based polymeric systems. Lignin-g-PMMA copolymer was synthesized by grafting raw lignin with methyl methacrylate (MMA).69 The reaction was carried out in mild acidified distilled water as the reaction medium (under N2 atmosphere) and using manganic pyrophosphate as the initiator. The yield of the copolymer was found to be 23.2% and the grafting efficiency was found to be 82.5%. A new type of lignin copolymer was developed based on lignin and a highly branched poly(ester-amine) (HBPEA).70 First, the poly(ester-amine) was obtained by melt condensation (85 kPa, 100 °C for 4 h) of a trifunctional monomer, 1,1,1-triethanolamine (TEA) and dicarboxylic acids. Then the lignin-g-HBPEA polymers were prepared by esterification of lignin with the HBPEA in tetrahydrofuran (THF). It was found that the amount and properties of TEA in the reaction have an important role in the development of lignin-based copolymers. Graft copolymerization of vinyl acetate on lignin was carried out in aqueous reaction medium. In the reaction, potassium persulfate is used as an initiator and ammonium iron(II) sulfate is added as a catalyst. It was found that the reaction parameters, such as temperature, initiator concentration, amount of monomers and volume of the catalyst, considerably influenced the grafting efficiency.71 Reversible addition–fragmentation chain-transfer (RAFT) polymerization is another controlled radical polymerization method to synthesize lignin-based polymers. First, a lignin RAFT macroinitiator was obtained by reacting acyl chloride xanthate with lignin at room temperature for 12 h. Next, the lignin macroinitiator was grafted with monomers in the presence of azobis-(isobutyronitrile) (under N2 atmosphere). With this method, polyacrylamide and poly(acrylic acid) were grafted onto kraft lignin.72 Analysis of the polymer-graft cleavage showed that the cleaved polyacrylamide was consistent with a higher average molecular weight (up to a degree of polymerization of 159 and a polydispersity of 1.83), suggesting that not all sites of the lignin macroinitiator participated in the polymerization. Both lignin-g-polyacrylamide and lignin-g-poly(acrylic acid) were readily soluble in water, and the characteristic size was 15 to 20 nm at low concentrations. Moreover, these lignin copolymers were surface active and the surface tension was as low as 60 dyn cm−1 at 1 mg mL−1, suggesting they can be used as surfactants for water-in-oil emulsions. It was hypothesized that the long-chain polymer grafts in these lignin surfactants were hydrophilic, while the short-chain polymer arms favored the oil phase. It is believed that the synthesis of lignin graft copolymers is a suitable strategy to overcome the limitations of raw lignins and enhance their potential in developing new value-added materials.
4. Value-added materials from lignin
4.1. Modified lignin for mechanical reinforcing composites
In nature, lignin is responsible for the mechanical support of the sturdy structure of plants; thus, it is rational to use lignin as a reinforcing agent in the polymer matrix. Extensive studies have been carried out on lignin-reinforced polymer composites; recently, these low cost, eco-friendly lignin-based plastic composites have gained the attention of the research community all over the world. Today, lignin has become one of the most popular reinforcement agents for producing high performance composites. However, it is always a great challenge to develop miscible lignin/polymer composites, as raw lignins are not highly miscible or compatible with many polymers, especially non-polar systems. The poor interfacial binding between lignin particles and the polymer matrix tends to favor particle aggregation and phase separation in the resulting blends. In most lignin/polymer blend systems, a weaker tensile strength with low elongation at break was always observed, even in the presence of compatibilizers. Modification of lignin by grafting of compatible polymer chains might be a helpful strategy, since it has showed some successful cases in inorganic particle/polymer dispersions. Efforts have been made to modify lignin with functional groups to achieve better compatibility and mechanical properties in polymer matrices.
Lignin modification for thermoplastic composites is one of the most popular research topics in this field. Chen et al. alkylated kraft lignin by using bromododecane in isopropanol at 80 °C.73 Unfortunately, the alkylated lignin was still brittle, and it showed a negative effect on either the tensile or the flexural properties of its blends with polypropylene (PP), even though the impact strength of the PP/lignin composites (with <40% alkylated lignin) was found to increase up to 35% compared to neat PP. Maldhure et al. compared the mechanical properties of PP blended with alkylated lignin and esterified lignin.74 They reported that the PP blends containing lignin esterified with maleic anhydride exhibited less deterioration in mechanical performance than blends of PP and alkylated lignin with dichloroethane. In another study, lignin-g-PMMA copolymer was blended with low density polyethylene (LDPE) using poly[ethylene-co-(glycidyl methacrylate)] (PEGMA) as a compatibilizer.69 The results showed that the LDPE blends with modified lignin possessed higher tensile strength and elongation at break, together with higher thermal stability during processing, compared to the unmodified lignin blends. Yue et al. modified softwood soda lignin via the Mannich reaction for the interfacial modification of poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC)/wood-flour composites.43 The lignin amine treatment provided significant improvement in the mechanical performances of the composites compared to those with untreated wood-flour. Hilburg et al. synthesized thermoplastic lignin composites by grafting synthetic polymers, such as polystyrene or PMMA, onto 5 nm-size kraft lignin via ATRP.75 The molecular weight and lignin mass fractions could be easily controlled by varying the ratios of lignin macroinitiator and monomers. Both lignin-g-PMMA and lignin-g-polystyrene nanocomposites not only exhibited enhanced toughness and ultimate elongation compared to the homopolymers, but also showed 10 times higher toughness and 4 times better ultimate elongation than the corresponding lignin/polymer blend system. These results indicated that ATRP holds great potential for developing a ‘one component’ composite for lignin (and other sustainable polymer) based thermoplastics. All the above studies reported that the incorporation of modified lignins resulted in reinforced strength or stiffness of the commonly used thermoplastics; unfortunately, this is always accompanied by a significant drop in the elongation at break of the composites.
McDonald's group prepared lignin-g-HBPEA polymeric systems to examine the mechanical effects of lignin on a poly(ester-amine) matrix. Thermo-mechanical tests showed that the lignin-g-HBPEA copolymers were flexible, tough materials and their mechanical properties were tunable by simply varying the amount of lignin added. With the increasing lignin content (from 25% to 45%) in the copolymer, the glass transition temperature (Tg) increased from −15 to 17 °C, the tensile strength was enhanced from 5 to 34 MPa, the Young's modulus increased from 8 to 189 MPa and the elongation at break improved from 85% to 165%. It was recognized that the hydrogen bonding based on various hydroxyl groups in lignin and aliphatic ester groups from HBPEA played an important role in the excellent thermo-mechanical properties of the lignin polymer networks.70 Recently, Sun et al. developed lignin-g-rubber-g-poly(lactide) copolymer particles as a filler for PLA/lignin composites.68 The copolymer, with an outer layer of PDLA, formed strong interfacial interactions with the PLLA matrix by stereocomplexation. Up to 15% lignin copolymers were blended into a commercial PLLA matrix, and 0.5 mm-thick nanocomposite films were prepared by film casting in chloroform. The results showed that the incorporation of lignin-copolymer fillers improved the mechanical properties of the PLLA/lignin composites, especially the elongation at break and toughness (about 6 times compared to neat PLLA) (Fig. 5). Compared to the lignin-g-rubber-g-PLLA, lignin-g-rubber-g-PLDA exhibited remarkably stronger filler/matrix binding and better mechanical performance in the PLLA matrix due to the stronger stereocomplexation between PLDA and PLLA. Moreover, the PCLLA rubbery layer also played an important role in mediating the interface of the matrix and lignin and reducing the crack formation during elongation. These lignin “sandwich” fillers might be a promising approach to engineer reinforced lignin-based composites; however, the large scale production of the lignin particles might be very challenging.
 Fig. 5  Tensile mechanical properties of renewable and biodegradable PLA nanocomposites. (a) Young's modulus. (b) Tensile strength. (c) Elongation at break. (d) Toughness, calculated by integrating the stress–strain curves of the nanocomposites. (e) Typical stress–strain curves. Reprinted with permission from ref. 58. 
A large number of rubber/lignin composites have been produced, and lignin has proved to be a good reinforcing agent for these rubber thermoplastic systems. Teramoto et al. modified organosolv lignin with alkyl esters with different carbon numbers (n = 2 to 5) to improve the miscibility of lignin in poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL).76 Different amounts of the esterified lignins were blended into PCL by solution mixing in chloroform. For blends of lignin esters (n = 3 to 5), a Tg shift was revealed by DSC, and no significant phase separation was observed by atomic force microscopy (AFM). At the ratio of 50/50 (lignin ester/PCL), the blends showed increasing mechanical strength (from 7.9 to 17.2 MPa) and increasing elongation at break (from 21% to 667%) with increasing carbon number of the ester substituents. The higher miscibility between lignin valerate and PCL may be attributed to the chemical similarity between the alkyl ester substituents and a repeating unit of the aliphatic polyester. Xiao et al. prepared a lignin-reinforced rubber system by incorporating lignin-layered double hydroxide (lignin-LDH) complex into styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR) via the melt compounding method.77 They observed that compared to the LDH/SBR composite, the mechanical properties of lignin-LDH/SBR composites was significantly reinforced, and a higher lignin content resulted in a higher tensile strength, elongation at break and hardness. The thermal stability of the lignin-LDH/SBR composites was also improved compared to that of pristine LDH/SBR. Chung et al. claimed that the treatment of lignin with Lewis acids would improve the mechanical properties of the resultant lignin-based polyurethanes, as the modified lignin contains a higher concentration of hydroxyl groups available to react with diisocyanate monomers.78 Polyurethanes were formed by first preparing a prepolymer based on mixtures of toluene-2,4-diisocyanate and unmodified or modified lignin (hydrogen bromide treatment), followed by polymerization through the addition of polyethylene glycol (PEG). The final polyurethane contained 17 wt% of lignin. Compressive tests showed that the modulus of modified lignin polyurethanes was 5.5 times higher than that of the unmodified lignin polyurethanes. The higher concentration of hydroxyl groups on the modified lignin indeed resulted in better integration of lignin into the covalent urethane network. Nano-lignin (<100 nm), self-assembled from colloidal lignin and poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride), was employed as a filler in natural rubber by Jiang et al.79 The nano-lignin fillers were homogeneously dispersed in the rubber matrix, and therefore significantly enhanced the thermal stability and mechanical properties of the rubber composites. The same group used lignin as both a crosslinker to cure epoxidized natural rubber (ENR) and as a reinforcing filler to improve the mechanical properties of the lignin/ENR composites.80 It was proposed that the hydroxyl and carboxyl groups on lignin were able to react with the epoxy sites of the ENR via the ring opening reaction under a high-temperature dynamic heat treatment (180 °C), leading to uniform dispersion of lignin in the ENR matrix. Up to 40 phr lignin were incorporated into the ENR matrix, and it was found that the crosslinking degree, Tg, and the tensile properties of the composites substantially increased with the addition of lignin. The rubber composites with 40 phr lignin (curing time of 3 hours) exhibited the highest crosslinking density (13.9 × 10−5 mol cm−3), tensile strength (∼12 MPa) and modulus (∼11 MPa). The results suggest strong interactions between lignin and ENR, and that lignin is a suitable crosslinker and reinforcing filler for this rubber matrix. All these studies suggest that lignin polymers show better compatibility and affinity for rubber materials compared to polyolefins and other thermoplastics, which enables a greater incorporation of lignin (>15%) into the matrices.
The utilization of lignin as a reinforcing agent for materials with porous structures has also been reported. Lignin-based polyurethane foams are the most widely studied porous materials in this field.81,82 Del Saz-Orozco et al. prepared lignin nanoparticle-reinforced phenolic foams by incorporating different lignin nanoparticle weight fractions (1.5 to 8.5 wt%) into the phenolic foams, and the formulations were optimized using an analysis of variance approach.83 With higher lignin content, the foams exhibited a low density with a smaller cell sizes due to the surfactant effect of lignin in the formulation mixture. Moreover, compared to the phenolic foams without lignin, lignin-reinforced phenolic foams showed greater compressive moduli and strengths in most density ranges (<145 kg cm−3). In another study, Luo et al. used lignin from bioethanol production as a reactive reinforcing filler in soy-based polyurethane biofoams.84 The biofoams were prepared using lignin concentrations of 0%, 5%, 10% and 15% (w/w), and the density of the samples increased from 0.062 to 0.086 g cm−3 while the cell size decreased from 587 to 270 μm. Mechanical analysis revealed that lignin fillers enhance the mechanical properties of the resulting foams, and the samples with 10% lignin exhibited the highest compressive properties and flexural properties. Pan et al. compared the properties and structures of rigid polyurethane foams made from two different lignins (hardwood ethanol organosolv lignin and hardwood kraft lignin).85 They found that the ethanol organosolv lignin demonstrated much better mechanical properties in the foams compared to the kraft lignin, probably due to the better miscibility of the ethanol organosolv lignin in the polyol. Recently, Brook's group reported that even without any surface modification, softwood lignin could be used as both crosslinker and reinforcing reagent in hydride-functional silicone elastomers (pentamethyldisiloxane, PDMS).86 They found that homogeneous lignin/silicone elastomers could be engineered when the lignin content was less than 57%, and excess amounts of lignin would lead to the self-cracking of the elastomers. Based on the findings, they further developed a simple route to produce lignin/silicone composite foam via extrusion followed by compression molding (Fig. 6).87 A uniform lignin/silicone foam with up to 55% lignin was made by extrusion at room temperature followed by molding at an optimized temperature and pressure. The lignin inside the silicone foams acted as both a reinforcing filler and a crosslinker, which formed chemical bonds with the siloxane network; therefore, the lignin/silicone foams exhibited superior mechanical performance (tensile strength up to 0.42 MPa, break at elongation up to 249%). Compared to bulk materials, porous lignin composites with higher surface areas would expand the application of lignin materials to new fields, such as catalysts, adsorbents, molecular sieves, ion exchangers and even biomedical materials. Future research should be conducted on the technologies of controlling the porosity (and pore size) of the lignin composites and the approaches of increasing the porosity without compromising the mechanical properties.
 Fig. 6  Illustrations of lignin/silicone foam structures and their resultant mechanical properties: the tensile modulus increases with crosslinking density, while the elongation at break depends on both the crosslinking density and uniformity of the foams. Type A structures are foams either with large trapped (A1) or collapsed voids (A2, closer to an elastomer than a foam); type A1 foams break easily with extension or bending, due to large defects. Type B structures are foams with uniform morphology; these foams are flexible with tunable toughness. Type C structures are foams with excessive crosslinking density and fewer voids; type C1 foams are tough, while type C2 are brittle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. 
4.2. Lignin for phenol-formaldehyde resins
Phenol-formaldehyde (PF) resins are a class of synthetic polymers with excellent mechanical strength, good heat and moisture resistance, and advanced ablative properties.88 With such advantages, PF resins have been widely used for various applications in electronics, railways, building and construction products as coatings, insulation, lamination, and wood bonding; they are also well known as plywood adhesives.89–91 Recently, material scientists have started to consider the possibility of using lignin as a substitute for phenols in PF resin synthesis, given the concerns of rapid consumption of fossil resources and increasing environmental issues.92,93 Several research groups conducted investigations on the direct reaction of raw lignin with phenol and formaldehyde to synthesize PF resins.88–90,94 Jin et al. modified PF resins by adding up to 20% enzymatic hydrolysis lignin.95 The lignin-modified resins were used as adhesives to prepare plywoods by hot-pressing, and the resins with 10% lignin showed the highest bonding strengths of 1.76 MPa in dry conditions. Similarly, Qiao et al. utilized enzymatic hydrolysis lignin to partially replace phenol for preparing lignin-based PF resins, and the substitution rate was in range of 10 wt% and 60 wt%.96 The adhesive strength (0.92 to 1.05 MPa) was increased by adding lignin to the resin up to 50% substitution, while lignin substitution of 60 wt% led to inferior strength (0.76 MPa) compared to PF resin (0.86 MPa). Moubarik et al. isolated lignin from Moroccan sugar cane bagasse, and they found that up to 30% of the bagasse lignin can added to PF resin to partially replace phenol without compromising the physical properties of the resin.97 Wang et al. found that the replacement of phenol with lignin deferred the curing process and decreased the thermal stability of the composites.98 Zhang et al. used lignocellulosic ethanol residue to partially replace phenol in the range of 10 to 70% to prepare lignin-based PF resins.99 The results revealed that phenol could be replaced up to 50%, even though the ethanol residue contained rich hydroxyl groups and fewer methoxyl groups and also had a lower molecular weight, which favors substitution. Hiziroglu's group compared the bending properties between a kraft lignin PF resin (50% lignin substitution) and a control PF resin; they found that the kraft lignin PF resin showed comparable mechanical and physical properties to the commercial PF resin, indicating that lignin-based PF resins hold some potential for oriented strandboard manufacture.100 In these studies, lignin acted more as a filler than as a phenol substitute, due to the relative lower reactivity of lignin compared to petroleum-based phenols. Lignin, as a complex polyphenolic macromolecule, contains fewer reactive positions that are readily available for addition reactions. As a result, the incorporation of raw lignin into PF resins always requires higher energy and longer reaction periods.
Modification (and/or depolymerization) of lignin might be a worthwhile effort to improve its reactivity and achieve higher phenol substitution. Phenolation is one of the most widely used modification approaches to introduce reactive functional groups onto raw lignin.101 Sun et al. found that phenolation in alkaline conditions could effectively introduce more active sites onto lignin, potentially achieving higher phenol substitution and better adhesive behavior.102 Lignin-based PF resins were successfully synthesized as plywood adhesives using four biorefinery technical lignins via a phenolation step. The results indicated that 50% phenol could be replaced by the lignins, and the bonding strengths of the three layer plywoods prepared with lignin-based PF resins fulfilled the requirements of first grade plywood.103 Lehnen's group investigated the increased reactive sites of phenolated lignins from different sources, and they found that the phenolation significantly increased the number of p-hydroxyphenyl groups on all types of lignins.104 They also suggested that the structural properties of various raw lignins (the number of aliphatic hydroxyl groups) could be related to the increase of reactive sites upon phenolation. The highest activations were observed for hardwood organosolv and softwood sulphite lignins, while weak activation was found for soda grass and softwood kraft lignin. Their study would be helpful in the selection of suitable lignins and the optimization of the formulation for the synthesis of lignin-based PF resins. To prepare a bio-phenol-hydroxymethylfurfural resin, Zhang et al. depolymerized hydrolysis lignin followed by phenolation, to enhance its reactivity.105 Then the sustainable resin was synthesized by a resinification reaction between the phenolated lignin and hydroxymethylfurfural under pressure in the presence of Lewis acid catalysts. The bio-phenol-hydroxymethylfurfural resin contained more than 50 wt% lignin-based phenol and showed ∼90 MPa of tensile strength after curing, which is ∼10% less than that of the control phenol-hydroxymethylfurfural composite (∼110 MPa). Zhao et al. prepared lignin-based PF resins by ternary gradual copolymerization.106 They found that by optimizing the phenolate conditions, the phenolic hydroxyl content of the steam explosion lignin could be increased by 130%, while the methoxyl content was reduced by 68%. With the modified lignin, the maximum lignin replacement percentage of phenol reached 70 wt%, and the properties of the adhesives and plywoods still met the Chinese National Standard. The lignin, which is obtained as a by-product from the production of bioethanol, had a high purity of 94%, and was activated under alkaline conditions. The activated lignin was then used to produce lignin-PF adhesives to partially replace expensive phenols (50%) in the commercial production of biocomposite boards such as plywood for construction. The large scale synthesis of lignin-PF adhesives in China for the production of plywood is a successful demonstration of innovative cost reduction for the construction industry.103
4.3. Lignin as an antioxidant
Lignin is a heteropolymeric aromatic compound that has a complex chemical structure, containing aromatic rings with hydroxyl and methoxy functional groups. Due to the presence of these functional groups, the oxidation propagation reaction can be terminated through hydrogen donation. As a result, studies were carried out with regard to the incorporation of lignin into materials for manufacturing value-added antioxidant products in various fields, aiding to alleviate the rate of auto-oxidation. Azadfar et al. revealed that the anti-oxidation activity of alkali lignin was comparable to that of commercial antioxidants (such as butylated hydroxytoluene), as the 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) inhibition percentages of lignin and butylated hydroxytoluene were 86.9% ± 0.34% and 103.3% ± 1%, respectively.107 Alkali lignin consists of hydroxycinnamic acid derivatives, and the antioxidant activity of the hydroxycinnamic acid was determined by the quantity of hydroxyl groups in the aromatic ring and ortho substitutions with the electron donating methoxy groups. For higher anti-oxidative efficiency, lignin requires a higher quantity of phenolic hydroxyl and methoxy groups, a lower quantity of aliphatic hydroxyl groups, narrow polydispersity and lower molecular weight.108–110 Furthermore, the effects of chemical characterisation, the structure of the side chains, and the π-conjugated systems of lignin on its antioxidant activity have been studied. It was determined that the main factor that contributes to the antioxidant activity of lignin is the high number of phenolic moieties, which undergo a proton coupled electron transfer mechanism. The remaining factors that could contribute to antioxidant activity included the relative content of phenylpropane units, phenylpropane units with CH2 groups in the α-position of side chains, and phenylpropane units with oxygen-containing groups in the side chains, as well as the size of the π-conjugated systems. Ponomarenko observed a significant negative influence on lignin antioxidant activity when the number of oxygen-containing groups in the side chains and the size of the π-conjugated systems increased.109
The purpose of food packaging is to prevent loss of food quality and shelf life, which in turn increases the economic value of the product. This could be accomplished by active packaging, whereby food oxidation may be retarded due to the elimination of undesirable compounds through absorption and/or scavenging. Antioxidant packaging film will have higher stabilization of the polymeric film; that is, the rate of polymeric film degradation will be reduced.111 Pouteau et al. assessed the antioxidant activity of PP/lignin blends based on oxidation induction time (OIT) using TGA. The experimental results revealed that blending only 1 wt% lignin into PP led to an increase in OIT. Its virgin PP had an OIT of 30 minutes, while the OITs of the PP/lignin blends varied from 70 minutes to 670 minutes. Comparing the OIT against the phenolic content (ratio of aliphatic hydroxyl groups to phenolic organosolv lignin groups) showed that the OIT increased with decreasing phenolic content, therefore indicating that low phenolic content would improve the compatibility between lignin and PP.112 Consequently, the antioxidant activity was increased. Similarly, Morandim-Giannetti et al. evaluated the antioxidant activity of lignin in PP/coir fibre (PP/CF) composite based on OIT using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). It was found that there was a sharp increase in OIT when lignin was incorporated into the PP/CF composite. Without lignin, the OIT of the PP/CF composite was reported as 9.41 minutes, while the OIT of the composite with lignin varied in the range of 11.3 minutes to 45.7 minutes, depending on the percentage of lignin incorporated.113 Louaifi et al. investigated the potential of lignin as an antioxidant additive in active biodegradable packaging materials by incorporation of lignin PROTOBIND 1000 into PLA, followed by the execution of a DPPH antioxidant assay. Neat PLA was used as the control in the experiment, and its DPPH assay result showed that there is no antioxidant activity (Fig. 7). However, after incorporation of lignin into PLA, the DPPH antioxidant assay results of the lignin/PLA blends showed antioxidant activity, as there was a decrease in the concentration of DPPH˙ free radicals over time (Fig. 7). A greater decrease in the DPPH˙ free radical concentration indicates the presence of higher antioxidation activity. In addition, PLA with 1 wt% of lignin was found to show only a small reduction in the concentration of DPPH˙ free radicals, while PLA with 10 wt% of lignin showed a significant reduction of 58%. Therefore, it was concluded that the presence of a higher amount of lignin in PLA would result in an increase in the antioxidant activity of the lignin/PLA blends.114 Alcohol-soluble lignin (ASL) was incorporated into starch films, and a DPPH antioxidant assay was carried out. It showed that DPPH antioxidant activity is absent in the starch films without ASL, while the percentage of DPPH inhibition increased up to 10.79% with the addition of only 5% ASL.115 These results indicated that only a small amount of lignin (<10%) in a polymer matrix is required for good antioxidation activity in food packaging applications.
 Fig. 7  Effect of lignin on the antioxidant activity of PLA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. 
The implantation of biomaterials under in vivo conditions always results in several biological responses, one of which is oxidative stress. Upon implantation of a foreign body into a human body, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidases will be activated. As a result, there will be an increase in hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) content. When these H2O2 molecules are exposed to cells, necrosis will occur due to an increase in intracellular oxidative stress. Hence, it is important to reduce H2O2 production, which could be achieved by the incorporation of anti-oxidative compounds into these biomaterials. Not only will the incorporation improve the biocompatibility of the material, but it will also locally reduce oxidative stress-related disorders. Ge et al. investigated the dissolution and antioxidant properties of nanoscale lignin and non-nanoscale lignin for biomaterial applications. The specific surface areas of nanoscale lignin and non-nanoscale lignin were 35.74 m2 kg−1 and 4.38 m2 kg−1, respectively; a higher surface area will result in higher solubility and bioavailability. This was reflected in the experimental results, which showed that the nanoscale lignin had a dissolution of approximately 31% and required less than 2 hours to reach equilibrium, while non-nanoscale lignin had a dissolution of 2.5% and took 4 hours to reach equilibrium. Mathematically, the dissolution of nanoscale lignin was 12.4 times higher than that of non-nanoscale lignin. DPPH antioxidant assay results showed that the nanoscale and non-nanoscale lignin were concentration dependent. The IC50 values of nanoscale lignin and non-nanoscale lignin were 2.70 ± 0.17 mg ml−1 and 32.21 ± 0.1 mg ml−1, respectively. The lower IC50 value of nanoscale lignin indicated that it had higher antioxidant activity.116 Thus, nanoscale lignin had greater dissolubility and antioxidant properties. In another study, Loh's group reported that lignin-based copolymers demonstrated good antioxidant properties and enhanced cell viability under H2O2 treatment.117 Although a high concentration of lignin can provide strong anti-oxidation properties, it still does cause some adverse effects. Ugartondo et al. reported that a high concentration of lignin possibly resulted in cytotoxic effects for human keratinocyte HaCaT and murine fibroblast 3T3 cells.110 Therefore, the concentration of lignin in biomaterials should be optimized to achieve a balance between the antioxidant activity and the cytotoxicity level.
4.4. Lignin for ultraviolet (UV) protection
Lignin is derived from the polymerisation of monolignols. During polymerisation, the electronic conjugation of the vinyl group para to the phenolic OH will be lost. This results in the generation of UV chromophores at the coupling sites.118 Due to the generation of the chromophoric groups, lignin possesses absorption capability in the UV/visible region.119 Thus, lignin has been incorporated into a wide range of materials for UV protection applications.
Pucciariello et al. blended steam-explosion lignin into biodegradable PCL by high-energy ball milling.120 The addition of lignin strongly improved the UV stabilisation of PCL composites, as the phenolic groups of lignin acted as radical scavengers, which inhibits or reduces the rate of the radical process of degradation. Hambardzumyan et al. investigated novel nanocomposite coatings comprising cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) and lignin. The lignin–CNC composite had high transmittance in the visible spectrum and high absorbance in the UV spectrum. When the lignin–CNC composite was used as an ‘isotropic’ coating film, it was capable of absorbing in the full UV region, depending on the lignin–CNC weight ratio, as well as on the weight percentage of lignin. A higher weight percentage of CNC led to an increase in the surface area of the cellulose. As a result, the absorbance increased and scattering of the dehydrogenation polymer (DHP) molecules occurred in the network, which led to an improvement in the lignin–CNC interactions. In addition, due to the phenolic acid moieties that were covalently bound to lignin, the lignin–CNC composite was capable of absorbing wavelengths up to 340 nm.121 Qian et al. incorporated lignin into pure creams and sunscreen lotions as a native sun blocker.122 The sun protection factor (SPF) values of the creams increased proportionately with the lignin concentration (Fig. 8). Even when 10 wt% of lignin was incorporated, the SPF of the creams increased only from 1 to more than 5, and the transmittance in the UVA region was lower than SPF 15. In addition, when 2 wt% of lignin was loaded into sunscreen lotion with SPF 15, the SPF value increased close to SPF 30. Interestingly, the sunscreen performance improves with UV-radiation time, and 2 hours of UV radiation remarkably improved the UV absorbance of the lignin-containing sunscreen lotion. This might be attributed to the synergistic effects between lignin and other active sunscreen agents in the lotions, together with the antioxidant properties of lignin. On the other hand, it was found that the SPF value was reduced back to 15 when 10 wt% of lignin was incorporated into BIOTHERM sunscreen lotion. This decline could possibly be due to the high loading of lignin, which led to poor dispersion in the sunscreen lotion. Thus, modified lignin or lignin-based copolymers with better miscibility in basic creams might be better candidates for broad spectrum sunscreens. In addition, the undesirable colour of lignin is another concern for its application in cosmetic products, as a high amount of lignin would turn white cream yellow or even brown. It is a great challenge to use less lignin content (low effect on colour) to achieve high UV absorption capability.
 Fig. 8  UV transmittance of the pure creams blended with different amounts of lignin in the UVB and UVA areas. The purchased SPF 15 sunscreen serves as the reference. (a) NIVEA cream + lignin; (b) LIFE cream + lignin. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. 
Chung et al. reported that the incorporation of a lignin-g-PLA copolymer into a PLA matrix resulted in an increase in tensile strength (16%) without compromising the stiffness and the elongation at break. Moreover, the lignin-g-PLA copolymer exhibited good UV absorption capability in the matrix.67 As shown in Fig. 9, PLA has no UV ray transmission in the lower wavelength range of UVC (100 nm to 230 nm) only. PLA with unmodified lignin (PLA1L) exhibited an insignificant decrease in the transmission of UV rays, due to the poor dispersity of lignin in PLA. Conversely, PLA with the copolymer (PLA1C) showed no UV ray transmission in nearly the entire wavelength ranges of UVC and UVB, as well as a partial wavelength range of UVA (315 nm to 400 nm). Recently, UV-absorbent lignin-based multi-arm star copolymers, lignin-g-poly(methyl methacrylate-co-butyl acrylate) (lignin-g-P(MMA-co-BA)), were synthesized by Yu et al.123 These copolymers showed the properties of thermoplastic elastomers with tunable Tg (−10 to 40 °C). Compared to linear P(MMA-co-BA) without lignin, the lignin-g-P(MMA-co-BA) elastomers exhibited significantly higher tensile strength and elongation at break. Furthermore, the lignin-g-P(MMA-co-BA) which contains less than 0.2 wt% lignin exhibited good UV absorption capability, and its transmittance declined significantly (by 85%) in the UV wavelength range (240 nm to 400 nm). In contrast, the transmittance of linear P(MMA-co-BA) only decreased by 0% to 20%. With their excellent UV-absorbent ability and mechanical properties, these lignin based copolymers could be used as UV-absorbent coating materials.
 Fig. 9  UV spectra of PLA, PLA with unmodified lignin (PLA1L) and lignin-g-PLA (PLA1C). Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
4.5. Lignin as an antimicrobial agent
As research in current medical and biological fields advances, an increasing interest in the possibility of lignin to act as an antimicrobial agent has been garnered. This section aims to explore the factors behind the antimicrobial activity of lignin, its mode of bactericide, and its efficacy as an antibacterial agent; we will conclude with a few applications.
The main determining factor of the antimicrobial effect of lignin lies in its phenolic components, specifically the side chain structure and the nature of the functional groups. Typically, the presence of a double bond in the α, β positions of the side chain and a methyl group in the γ position grants phenolic fragments with the highest potency against microorganisms. In contrast, the existence of oxygen in the functional groups of the phenolic fragment renders it less effective.124,125 In addition to its chemical structure, other factors that can influence the efficacy of lignin as an antimicrobial agent include its origin, the extraction method,125–127 the growth medium concentration and the types of bacteria used in the experiment.124 For instance, kraft lignin was found to be effective against E. carotovora and X. vesicatoria but showed non-existent bactericide effects against P. syringe and B. polymyxa.124,125 Another study revealed that an optimal extraction temperature was also crucial in achieving the maximum antimicrobial activity. In the study, a rise in the temperature from 130 °C to 160 °C for half an hour to an hour caused complete loss of the antimicrobial activity.127 Even though the inherent antibacterial properties and the extraction procedures have a great influence over the ultimate antimicrobial activities, they are not representative of the achievable limit. In their study, Dumitriu and Popa demonstrated that it is also possible to improve the efficiency of lignin against microorganisms through quaternization with ammonium compounds.
The nature of the phenolic compounds, either monophenolic or polyphenolic, does not compromise the antimicrobial effects of lignin, but it does affect the mode of bactericide. The most common mode is the disintegration of cell the membrane followed by the subsequent release of the cell contents, whereas some monophenolic compounds such as cinnamaldehyde can deplete adenosine triphosphate by infiltrating the bacteria and decreasing the intracellular pH.124,125
The risk of bacterial colonization is often encountered in the uses of biomedical implants and polyethylene catheters. Possession of both bactericidal ability and biocompatibility at an affordable cost has made lignin a favorable solution to overcome such risks. Hence, the efficacy of lignin as an antimicrobial agent has largely been investigated in studies such as those performed by Gregorova et al., where agar diffusion tests using both Gram-negative and Gram-positive strains of bacteria were conducted.128 By comparing Bjorkman lignin derived from beechwood against other standard antibacterial effective additives, such as silver nitrate, chlorhexidine, benzalkonium chloride and bronopol, Gregorova et al. showed that the diameter of growth inhibition for Bjorkman lignin was similar to that of bronopol and chlorhexidine for both strains of bacteria. Thus, it was reported that the bactericidal ability of lignin was comparable to that of the current antimicrobial agents. The practicality of lignin as an antimicrobial agent was further examined. Bjorkman lignin was introduced into polyethylene films, and mechanical testing was conducted;128 no drastic drop in the mechanical properties was observed, indicating that Bjorkman lignin can potentially be used in polyethylene films while preserving the antibacterial properties of silver.
Besides its use as antibacterial addictive, it is not uncommon to find lignin being employed as functional additives to improve other antibacterial materials. A recent example is the introduction of a lignin core into silver nanoparticles. Although silver nanoparticles could target a broad spectrum of microorganisms, including but not limited to Escherichia coli (E. coli) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, they also have their own disadvantages. In their activated form, the unused silver nanoparticles remain in the environment and could adversely affect ecosystems. Recognizing the issue at stake, Richter et al. hypothesized that lignin, which is abundant and environmentally friendly, could be used to replace the silver core. They then tested environmentally benign lignin-core nanoparticles against various strains of bacteria to evaluate their antimicrobial efficiency.129 In the study, the bacteria were exposed to the lignin nanoparticles and the controls for a pre-determined period before being cultured onto Luria-Bertani agar plates. The controls used include polydiallyldimethylammonium chloride polyelectrolyte solution, silver nitrate (AgNO3) solution, positively charged branched polyethyleneimine-coated silver nanoparticles, lignin nanoparticles without silver ions, and centrifuged supernatant solution from the sample. The number of colony-forming units that grew on the agar plates was then used to determine the effectiveness of the antibacterial agents. Surprisingly, the lignin nanoparticles outperformed the controls, silver nitrate solution and conventional silver nanoparticles, which had twelve times and twenty times more silver ions respectively. In addition, it was found that the potency against microorganisms was lost when the silver ions were completely utilized.129 Hence, the presence of lignin is critical for the continuous use of silver nanoparticles as an antibacterial agent.
Another potential problem in the use of silver nanoparticles is the absence of movement restriction, which could result in toxicity to cells. With respect to this problem, many studies have been conducted. In one particular study by Hu et al., lignin was used to bind silver nanoparticles to cellulose fibers. The efficacy of these silver nanoparticles-alkali lignin/cellulose fibers was investigated through agar diffusion tests against E. coli. It was found that this material was able to inhibit bacterial growth; however, the inhibition zone was limited to 3 mm, which indicates restricted motion (Fig. 10).130 Thus, the study showed that lignin could be used to complement silver nanoparticles for biological applications.
 Fig. 10  Photographs of agar plates illustrating the influence of (a) cellulose; (b) AgNPs-AL-Cell on the growth of E. coli. Four serially diluted bacteria concentrations were tested in a single agar plate and the bacteria was exposed to the samples for ten minutes. (c) Photograph of an agar plate showing the inhibition zone of growth when exposed to AgNPs-AL-Cell. 0.1 mL of 105 CFU mL−1E. coli was used in the tests, and the bacteria cultured on the agar plates was incubated at 37 °C for 24 hours. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
In another study, Eraković et al. developed a coating consisting of organosolv lignin and silver doped hydroxyapatite for titanium implants, with the objective to prevent the formation of biofilms.131 The effectiveness of the developed coating was tested with Staphylococcus aureus, a bacteria strain which is often correlated with post-orthopedic infection. The antibacterial performance was determined by comparing the number of viable colonies after incubation with different setups for twenty four hours. The test revealed that the antimicrobial effect of the lignin was lacking compared to that of the silver.131 Despite its inability to profoundly impact the bacteria, lignin was proven to be essential in the development of an antibacterial and biocompatible coating for bone implants.131,132
While many studies have been performed on lignin to investigate its potential uses in antibacterial agents and functional additives, few studies have been performed to investigate the antimicrobial effectiveness of the various types of lignin as well as their activities against different strains of bacteria. In addition, information is still lacking on the minimum concentration of lignin required to eliminate bacteria and its kinetics in targeting the bacteria. Another important aspect that will need to be explored is the lifespan of lignin and its degradation rate, which will provide a better estimation of the amount required to effectively inhibit growth and allow for the eventual elimination of bacteria.
4.6. Lignin for biomedical materials
Tissue engineering (TE) is one of the most attractive interdisciplinary research areas today for the purpose of repairing, replacing and enhancing the function of a particular tissue or organ. One main challenge of this technology is to design and develop suitable scaffolds for cell growth both in vitro and in vivo. Several studies are underway to explore the potential of developing lignin into functional biomaterials (such as hydrogels and nanofibers) for tissue engineering applications.133 Hydrogel is an exciting biomaterial for TE, due to its intrinsic structural resemblance to the native extracellular matrix. Raschip et al. developed semi-interpenetrating (semi-IPN) hydrogels by incorporating different types of lignin (aspen wood lignin, annual fibre crops lignin and lignin epoxy-modified resin) into a biocompatible xanthan gum.134,135 The study revealed that the addition of lignin influenced the thermo-oxidative stability and the swelling properties of the hydrogel systems. Park et al. prepared wood mimetic hydrogel beads containing three major wood components (cellulose, xylan and lignin) for enzyme immobilization.136 Lipase from Candida rugosa was used as an enzyme model to entrap mimetic beads in the wood, and the beads showed positive results for the enhancement of the activity of the lipase as well as the elongation of its half-life. Lignin was therefore demonstrated to be the most important component in improving the thermal and pH stability of the entrapped lipase. These biodegradable and biocompatible wood mimetic hydrogel beads could be used as a good substrate for enzyme immobilization for multiple biomedical applications. Diao et al. synthesized thermogelling copolymers composed of a lignin core and multiple arms of graft polymer chains (a block of PNIPAM and a block of brush-like random copolymer of PEG and poly(propylene glycol) (PPG)) by ATRP.137 The aqueous solutions of the copolymers exhibited thermogelling behavior and could form hydrogels at body temperatures. The lignin based thermogel was found to possess numerous advantages, including low gelation concentration in the range of 1.3 to 2.5 wt% and easily tunable mechanical and rheological properties, which could be achieved by varying the lignin content in the system. The researchers claimed that the lignin thermogels could be used for biomedical applications such as TE and drug delivery; unfortunately, no cell culture studies were included in the paper. In another study, Kai et al. prepared a series of PEGMA grafted lignin hyperbranched copolymers which could self-assemble into supramolecular hydrogels when mixed with α-cyclodextrin (α-CD) in aqueous solution (Fig. 11).138 They reported that as low as 1% lignin-based copolymers were able to form stable hydrogels at body temperature, and the lignin core was particularly important for inducing the gelation properties. Thus, these hydrogel systems showed tunable mechanical response, excellent self-healing capability and good biocompatibility, indicating that these lignin-based supramolecular hydrogels are potentially useful as a smart biomaterial for biomedical applications.
 Fig. 11  Photographs of (A) inclusion complex suspension of PEG 10/10 (10% PEGMA + 10% α-CD) and (B) the lignin-based hydrogel (2% lignin-g-PEGMA + 10% α-CD) and (C) schematic illustration of the proposed structure of a lignin-based supramolecular hydrogel by inclusion complexation between lignin-g-PEGMA and α-CD. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
In addition to hydrogels, other forms of lignin-based biomaterials have also been developed. Jankovic et al. embedded organosolv lignin into silver-doped hydroxyapatite thin films by matrix-assisted pulsed laser evaporation.139 Not only were the obtained nanocomposite films biocompatible by supporting the growth of human mesenchymal stem cells in vitro, they also showed enhanced antimicrobial activity against both bacterial and fungal biofilms. Thus, these lignin-based hydroxyapatite films appear to be promising candidates for implantable bioscaffolds or prosthetic coatings for bone regeneration. Electrospun nanofibers with porous and fibrous architectures are another popular biomaterial widely explored for TE applications. Kai et al. blended lignin-g-PMMA copolymers with different lignin mass fractions (from 5.6% to 46.1%) with PCL and engineered into nanofibrous composites by electrospinning.140 Tensile test and dynamical mechanical analysis showed that the incorporation of lignin-g-PMMA copolymers significantly improved the tensile strength, Young's modulus, and storage modulus of the resulting nanofibrous composites. Furthermore, in vitro study revealed that these PCL/lignin-g-PMMA nanofibers were biocompatible, as human dermal fibroblasts were found to attach, proliferate and interact well with the nanofibrous scaffolds (Fig. 12). The mechanism by which these lignin copolymers favored cell growth was not reported in the work.
 Fig. 12  Laser scanning confocal microscopic images of human dermal fibroblasts on electrospun nanofibers (A, D) PCL, (B, E) PCL with 50% lignin-PMMA30, (C, F) PCL with 50% lignin-PMMA100 immunostained for F-actin (Green) and nuclei (Blue). D to F are the images merged with differential interference contrast images, showing the orientations of nanofibers. Scale bar = 30 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. 
Gene therapy is an emerging strategy to deliver functional and therapeutic genes into specific cells for the treatment of genetic disorders at their source. Recently, lignin-based polymeric materials have been investigated as potential gene carriers for gene therapy. Liu et al. synthesized a series of cationic amphiphilic lignin-based copolymers by ATRP of 2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate (DMAEMA).141 These lignin-g-PDMAEMA copolymers were able to compact plasmid DNA into nanoparticles with sizes ranging from 100 to 200 nm at N/P ratios of 5 or higher. Cytotoxicity study suggested that the copolymers with higher content of lignin exhibited lower cytotoxicity to Cos-7, MDA-MB-231 and Hela cells. The gene transfection efficiency of such copolymers was highly dependent on the PDMAEMA chain length, and it was interesting to find that the lignin copolymer with a very short arm length (average DMAEMA units = 5.5) showed excellent in vitro transfection efficiency that was comparable to or even higher than that of branched polyethylenimine (25 K), a commonly used carrier for gene delivery. Ten et al. developed and synthesized lignin nanotubes (LNT) using lignin isolated by different methods, and the properties of these nanotubes as DNA delivery vehicles were investigated.142 These LNTs showed good biocompatibility with human HeLa cells at a low tolerance concentration of 90 mg mL−1, which is much higher than that of carbon nanotubes. Confocal microscopy imaging showed that all the LNTs entered HeLa cells without the help of any auxiliary agent and that LNTs made from NaOH-lignin were even able to penetrate the cell nucleus (Fig. 13). LNTs made from NaOH-lignin also expressed the highest transfection efficiency, as they were able to bind well with DNA and deliver it directly into the nucleus. Jiang et al. explored the potential to use lignin-poly(glycidyl methacrylate)-poly(ethylene glycol) methacrylate (lignin-PGEA-PEGMA) copolymers for gene delivery.117 The multi-arm lignin cationic copolymers could efficiently compact pDNA into nanoparticles with sizes ranging from 150 to 250 nm at N/P ratios of 10 or higher, and the copolymer with 33.8% of lignin showed the highest transfection efficiency. More importantly, the copolymers exhibited antioxidant activity due to the high content of lignin. H2O2 was employed to stimulate HEK 293T and Hep G2 cells with oxidant stress. When they were cultured with the lignin copolymer, it was found that the relative viability of these two types of cells increased from approximately 100% to 150% and 80% to 140%, respectively, indicating the strong antioxidant activity of the lignin-PGEA-PEGMA copolymer. Although the above studies reported the potential of using lignin in biomaterials, the biocompatibility of lignin is still a major concern, as many toxic chemicals and ions are introduced during extraction processing. Much more data must be collected both in vitro and in vivo to evaluate the safety of lignin-based biomaterials.
 Fig. 13  Confocal microscopy images of LNTs made from (a) PINE thioglycolic acid isolated lignin and (b) PINE NaOH isolated lignin located inside HeLa cells. Scale bar represents 15 μm. White arrows point to LNT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 132. 
4.7. Lignin-based smart materials
Smart materials are a class of unique materials that can sense their environment and change their functions accordingly. This means that one of their properties can be designed to change in a controlled fashion as a result of external stimuli, such as load, temperature, moisture, pH or electricity. The development of lignin-based smart materials is an interesting research topic. In the above sections, we have introduced some stimuli-responsive copolymers containing lignin. By grafting PNIPAM onto the surface of lignin, temperature-sensitive lignin-based copolymers and hydrogels have been successfully prepared, and these materials showed phase transitions at body temperature.64,137,143 Feng et al. prepared a temperature-sensitive hydrogel by grafting acetic acid lignin with PNIPAM using N,N′-methylenebisacrylamide as the crosslinker and H2O2 as the initiator.143 These lignin-based temperature-sensitive hydrogels displayed the lower critical solution temperature (LCST) at ∼32 °C, and the swelling ratio of the hydrogels decreased dramatically from >1000% to <200% at this temperature. Using the same monomer, Kadla's group developed ionic-responsive lignin-based nanofibers by grafting PNIPAM onto the surface of lignin nanofibers by aqueous surface-initiated ATRP. The PNIPAM-modified lignin nanofibers showed a LCST of 32 °C, which is similar to that of PNIPAM, and these smart nanofibers displayed tunable fiber diameters and water contact angles in aqueous solutions with different ion concentrations.144,145 The same group also developed moisture-responsive lignin based nonwoven fabrics by co-electrospinning kraft lignin with poly(ethylene oxide) followed by controlled thermal treatment.146 The thermal treatment modified the morphologies of the electrospun materials from fibers to smooth film, and the thermostabilized nonwoven fabrics exhibited a reversible, moisture-responsive shape change, similar to a shape memory material (Fig. 14). By changing the lignin fraction or thermal treatment conditions, the moisture-responsive properties of the materials could be adjusted. Qian et al. developed smart lignin-g-PDMAEMA nanoparticles by ATRP.147 These smart nanoparticles could be easily dispersed in water upon CO2 bubbling, but were precipitated out by bubbling with N2. This CO2/N2 switching property is regulated by the graft density and chain length of the DEAEMA units. The lignin-based nanoparticles were demonstrated as a surfactant for Pickering emulsion. Stable Pickering emulsions were prepared by homogenizing decane (1 ml) in water (4 ml) with only 1 mg of lignin nanoparticles; the emulsions remained stable and could be stored for one month without any phase separation. It was found that bubbling CO2 into the emulsion demulsified the emulsion and caused phase separation, while N2 bubbling resulted in a re-emulsification of the mixture. These gas-triggered demulsification/re-emulsification processes were highly reversible and easily repeatable (Fig. 15). Such smart lignin surfactants could be easily reclaimed and re-used in applications, indicating their advantages over existing products.
 Fig. 14  Thermostabilized lignin electrospun fibers placed on moist paper (a–d), then moved to dry paper (e–h). Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. 
 Fig. 15  Three cycles of the N2/CO2-triggered emulsification/demulsification process of Pickering emulsion with lignin-g-DEAEMA nanoparticles as a smart surfactant. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. 
Shape memory polymers (SMPs) are a class of smart polymeric materials that possess shape shifting behavior.148–150 Thermoresponsive SMPs have a most attractive feature: they can be programmed to exhibit certain temporary shapes and subsequently recover their original shapes upon heating.151,152 These materials have attracted much attention in the field of polymeric and biomedical research in recent years, due to their versatility and functionality. Recently, McDonald's group has started to explore the potential of developing advanced SMPs from lignin. Thermally-stimulated shape memory copolymeric elastomers were synthesized from lignin and glycerol-adipic acid based hyperbranched prepolymers.153 The hyperbranched prepolymers were firstly prepared by melt condensation of glycerol and adipic acid with the addition of diisopropanolamine or tris(hydroxymethyl) aminomethane (THAM). Then the prepolymers were reacted with soda lignin to form shape memory elastomers. The biobased lignin elastomers displayed tuneable Tg (also the shape transition temperature of the shape memory effects) ranging from −10 to 37 °C; these could be controlled by varying the proportions of glycerol and additive. The shape memory properties of these biobased lignin copolymers were investigated by dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) via a stress-controlled cyclic thermomechanical test. The results demonstrated that these lignin-g-poly(ester-amine) exhibited advanced dual shape memory behavior with excellent recovery rate (Rr, up to 95%) and fixity rate (Rf, up to 99%) (Fig. 16). However, they showed poor triple shape memory behavior. To improve the lignin SMP, lignin-based triple SMP was synthesized later based on the reaction of soda lignin and hyperbranched poly(ester-amine-amide) with THAM.154 The lignin copolymers with a mixing phase with poly(ester-amine) and poly(ester-amide) network comprised both permanent covalent cross-links and physical cross-links. A triple-shape memory cycle constructed under stress-controlled programming and staged heating recovery conditions was performed by DMA. The thermomechanical test demonstrated the excellent triple shape memory effects of the lignin-g-poly(ester-amine-amide), which originate from the combined effect of the glass transitions of the polyester copolymers and lignin together with the dissociation of self-complementary hydrogen bonding and cross-link density. Rf for the 1st and 2nd shape recovery stages of lignin-based SMPs could reach 41% and 92%, respectively, while Rr for the 1st and 2nd shape recovery stages could reach 40% and 86%, respectively. It was found that the lignin-g-poly(ester-amine) network was responsible for the first recovery stage, and the lignin-g-poly(ester-amide) network was responsible for the second recovery stage. Indeed, it is exciting that so many lignin-based smart materials have been designed and engineered; however, the role of lignin in these materials is debatable. These stimuli-responsive capabilities or shape memory effects are not due to the nature of lignin. The true value of lignin in these materials is not yet clear, especially when the content of lignin in most cases (lignin-based composites) is less than 10%, indicating that the contribution of lignin to the function of the composites is relatively weak.
 Fig. 16  Photographs showing the thermally-stimulated shape memory elastomers of a biobased lignin copolymer: (1), curled at room temperature (25 °C); (2), subjected to ice (0 °C), where the curled shape was maintained even after 180 s; (3), returned to room temperature; and (4), gradual recovery of the original shape in 150 s. Reprinted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
4.8. Lignin as carbon precursors
Recently, lignin has gained much prominence and attention as a potential source/precursor of higher value materials, also known as lignin valorization. There are several methods for lignin valorization, from the simple blending of lignin into polymeric materials to form high performance polymer composites, to the electro-spinning of lignin-based carbon fibers, both of which have been covered earlier in this review. Thermochemical conversion (including pyrolysis and hydrothermal carbonization) of large scale lignin has been garnering significant interest, due to its versatility and the reduced emission of harmful gases compared to burning (Fig. 17).155 In this section of the review, possible value-added functional materials and applications from various thermochemical processes will be presented and summarized.
 Fig. 17  Various routes of thermochemical conversion of lignin. Copyright: © 2014 Rosas, Berenguer, Valero-Romero, Rodríguez-Mirasol and Cordero. Reprinted with permission from ref. 145. 

Activated carbon for catalysis and environmental remediation. 
Activated carbon (AC) is a carbonaceous material which has a large surface area per unit volume and possesses pores of various sizes where adsorption can occur. Organic materials with high carbon content can be converted to AC via physical modification and thermal decomposition in a furnace under controlled atmosphere and at high temperature.155 More recently, thermochemical activation processes have gained more prominence because of their cost-effectiveness and ease of operation, as mentioned earlier. Due to their high surface area to volume ratio, the surface energy of AC materials is high enough to facilitate the physical adsorption of molecules (e.g. contaminants, catalysts) onto the pore walls.156 As such, ACs have found great potential in the areas of catalysis and environmental remediation.
Thermochemical activation of lignin precursors not only allows the tailoring of pore size, but also allows surface modification of the carbon pore walls with active functional groups (e.g. OH, NH2, COOH, SO3H, CO) that exhibit catalytic properties. A relatively simple surface modification process using HNO3 after carbonization of the lignin precursor yielded carbon monoliths with tunable mesopores and various functional groups on the surface of their mesopore walls (Fig. 18).157
 Fig. 18  Process schematic for the thermochemical activation of activated carbon. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147. 
As an example, carbonaceous solid acids (containing SO3H groups) are typical metal-free catalysts used in many acid-catalyzed reactions, such as esterification.158,159 The hydrophilic SO3H groups, coupled with high macro-porosity, are able to incorporate a high concentration of H2O molecules and have high mass transfer rates, which facilitates access to reactants.160 Similarly, solid base catalysts derived from kraft lignin have also been demonstrated. These solid base catalysts have shown good catalytic activity in the transesterification of rapeseed oil with methanol to obtain biodiesel.161 In addition to functioning as the catalyst itself, lignin-based char materials have also been used as supports to stabilize metal or oxide nanoparticles for catalytic applications. The high degree of surface functionalities and porosity allows the loading of a large concentration of nanoparticles, which can significantly increase catalytic activity. A classic example is the immobilization of Fe nanoparticles for catalytic wet peroxide oxidation (CWPO) and the catalytic destruction of NOx precursors.162,163 However, the presence of inorganic impurities in lignin sources (e.g. Na, K, Ca, and Mg) may contribute to undesirable side reactions and, thus, reduce its catalytic selectivity.
Beyond catalytic applications, the presence of active functional groups can also be used to sequester heavy metals for pollutant removal and environmental remediation. It has been demonstrated by various research groups that lignin-based activated porous carbon can be a cost-effective material for the removal of pollutants such as Ni(II),164 Cu(II),165 Cr(VI)166 and p-nitrophenol.167 Nonetheless, some inherent pollutants may already reside within lignin-based char materials (e.g. polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and metallic cations) which can contribute to secondary pollution. As such, further research efforts must be made to develop sustainable methods for the purification of lignin-based char to prevent unwanted leeching.


Energy storage applications. 
One of the most recognized strategies to tackle the global energy crisis is the storage of energy generated from renewable sources such as solar and wind. Thus, one major factor in this strategy is to lower the cost of energy storage devices. With the ability to synthesize large area mesoporous carbon and the fabrication of carbon fiber (CF) mats through spinning techniques, membranes derived from lignin sources can be obtained. These obtained membranes were demonstrated to be functional electrodes in energy storage applications such as batteries and supercapacitors. The main advantage of using these membranes is the elimination of the need for expensive conductivity promoters and binders.155 Furthermore, with the main raw material (lignin) deriving from abundant and renewable sources, the long term cost is greatly reduced. Studies and modelling of the pseudo-capacitance of lignin-based electrodes exhibited similar or even superior performance compared to conventional electrodes, highlighting the potential for lignin-based electrodes to become a benchmark for such applications.168,169
For supercapacitors (also known as electronic double layer capacitors (EDLCs)), lignin-based membranes have exhibited remarkable performance. Supercapacitors are gaining increasing attention for energy storage applications in recent years due to their fast charging rates, high energy and power densities, and good cycle life. Suitable functional groups, if they do not already exist, can be easily modified onto the surface of the lignin char membranes to enhance the pseudo-capacitance, increase the amount of energy stored in the super-capacitor, improve the wettability and enhance the cycle stability of the electrode. Free-standing and mechanically flexible electrode membranes have been electro-spun from a mixed solution of lignin and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and applied in supercapacitors with excellent performance by Lai et al. High gravimetric capacitances of 64 F g−1 at a current density of 400 mA g−1 and 50 F g−1 at 2000 mA g−1 were achieved. Excellent cycle stability was also exhibited.170 Saha et al. synthesized a lignin-derived mesoporous carbon electrode using F127 Pluronic as the templating agent. Their results indicate that various activating conditions could result in different gravimetric capacitances, with CO2 activation giving rise to enhanced gravimetric capacitance (Fig. 19).168 Others have also reported similarly impressive performances of supercapacitors utilizing lignin-based membranes as electrodes.171,172 Interestingly, lignin can also function as a matrix for the formation of metal NPs (e.g. Au, Ag) as well as oxide NPs (e.g. NiO)173 that greatly improves the conductivity of the membrane; lignin can also function as a compatibilizer for carbon nanotubes (CNTs) based mesh networks.174
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic for the formation of lignin-derived templated mesoporous activated carbon (MACs) for use as an electrode material in supercapacitors. (b) Gravimetric capacitance vs. scan rate graphs of different activating conditions for MACs. (c) Modelling of supercapacitors using lignin-derived electrodes. Adopted with permission from ref. 158. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
In other types of energy storage, e.g. Li-ion batteries (LIBs), lignin-based membranes can be utilized as a cathode or anode, depending on the redox potential of the Li-intercalation compound in the device.175 Wang and co-workers demonstrated the use of lignin-based free-standing carbon fiber mats electro-spun from an organosolv-lignin/PEO (<10 wt%) blend as LIB electrodes (Fig. 20).176 The conductivity of the CF mats and the specific capacity of LIBs improved upon nitrogen-doping, from 10.5 to 12.2 S cm−1 and 445 to 576 mA h g−1 at 30 mA g−1, respectively. Tenhaeff and co-workers later developed lignin-based anodes for LIBs that did not require blending with any synthetic polymer and were melt-spun from Alcell lignin.177 They discovered that increasing the carbonization temperatures caused significant improvements in the first cycle efficiencies of LIBs, but also resulted in decreased specific charge capacities for subsequent cycles. Jin and co-workers fabricated free-standing CF mats from either polyacrylonitrile (PAN) or refined lignin for use in metal ion batteries as anodes. Their studies revealed that lignin-based anodes exhibited performance equivalent to that of PAN-derived anodes. Thus, their studies suggest that lignin is a suitable low-cost substitute for PAN as a precursor for carbon electrodes.178
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic showing lignin-derived carbon fiber mats obtained from electrospinning. (b) Charge capacities at different scan rates and cyclic stability. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
As shown by the various examples above, lignin-based/derived materials (either activated porous or CF mats) can be applied to applications such as catalysis, environmental remediation and energy storage, with performance on par or even exceeding that of existing materials. With lignin being derived from biomass and usually discarded as waste, this naturally abundant material has enormous potential to be a low-cost alternative in the various applications mentioned above, and many more applications remain to be discovered as research efforts continue to be focused on this material.

5. Conclusion and future perspectives
In nature, lignin is a major biopolymer that provides strength and rigidity to plant stems. However, its usefulness has always gone untapped during the commercialization of paper, wherein only cellulose is extracted. With comprehensive studies being performed to investigate the structure and chemistry of lignin, its inherent properties have also been gradually discovered. Some features, such as antioxidant, antimicrobial and stabilizing properties, make this abundant biomass a promising low cost additive for various applications. On the other hand, the brittle and immiscible natures of unmodified lignin hinder its wide application. Surface modification of lignin through different chemical techniques is believed to be an effective way to improve its compatibility with other polymer materials. For instance, thermoplastics with modified lignin have shown reinforced mechanical properties and improved thermal stability.
Graft copolymerization is one successful technique used to alter the surface characteristics of the lignin and to synthesize functional lignin-based polymers. ATRP and ROP have been demonstrated to be effective methods to develop lignin functional polymeric materials. Based on these technologies, quite a few novel lignin-based copolymers have been synthesized. These could find use in a wide variety of fields, ranging from reinforcement fillers for packaging materials and amphiphilic surfactants to supramolecular hydrogels and gene carriers for tissue regeneration. We believe that more lignin functional materials will be designed and developed via this simple and effective polymerization method.
Many biomass materials, such as cellulose, starch, chitosan, silk and collagen, are well-known examples of biomaterials that are currently used in biomedical applications. These biopolymers exhibit excellent biocompatibility and bioactivity, and many of them have been utilized as scaffolds for TE, carriers for drug/gene delivery and patches for wound healing. On the other hand, few studies have investigated the potential of using lignin in biomaterials. The studies performed are also quite preliminary and are limited to the cytotoxicity evaluation of lignin with a few cell types. Endowed with biodegradability, antioxidant activity and anti-bacterial properties, lignin is a promising candidate for use in biomaterials to reduce the stress and inflammation generated by implantation. It could also be used in cosmetics and pharmaceutical products.
In addition to biomaterials, another attractive field for lignin is in the development of smart materials. In our review, we have introduced emerging studies on developing lignin into temperature-sensitive, mechanical responsive hydrogels and nanofibers, as well as shape memory materials. It is foreseen that more lignin-based smart materials with high performance will be designed and prepared in the future. Moreover, the increasing numbers of modified lignin polymers with flexible physicochemical properties allow for more advanced techniques in lignin processing. Emerging fabrication techniques, including 3-dimensional (3D) printing, reactive extrusion, thermoforming, melt electrospinning, 3D braiding and lithography, also offer new possibilities in manufacturing lignin-based plastics with designed features.
Indeed, lignin-based polymeric materials show a bright future as a promising alternative to traditional petroleum-based materials. Although lignin displays many advantages, its vastly different and complex structures hinder the scale-up of lignin utilization from laboratory to industry. To overcome this limitation, considerable studies should be conducted for better understanding of the physics and chemistry of natural lignin. Advanced extraction approaches or pretreatment processes should also be developed for lignin purification. Given the progress of modification chemistry and the development of processing techniques, lignin is a promising renewable resource for high performance materials, and lignin valorization is expected to emerge as an important research field in the near future.
References
W.-J. Liu, H. Jiang and H.-Q. Yu, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 4888–4907 RSC .
X. Zhu and X. Jun Loh, Biomater. Sci., 2015, 3, 1505–1518 RSC .
H. Ye, C. Owh and X. J. Loh, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 48720–48728 RSC .
X. J. Loh and Y.-L. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10815–10818 RSC .
X. J. Loh, A. Abdul Karim and C. Owh, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 7641–7652 RSC .
Z. Li and X. J. Loh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2865–2879 RSC .
A. Abdul Karim and X. J. Loh, Soft Matter, 2015, 11, 5425–5434 RSC .
D. Kai and X. J. Loh, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 106–119 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kai, S. S. Liow and X. J. Loh, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2014, 45, 659–670 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Loh, W. Guerin and S. M. Guillaume, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21249–21256 RSC .
X. J. Loh, Z. X. Zhang, K. Y. Mya, Y. L. Wu, C. B. He and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10634–10642 RSC .
M. Norgren and H. Edlund, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 19, 409–416 CrossRef CAS .
T. Saito, R. H. Brown, M. A. Hunt, D. L. Pickel, J. M. Pickel, J. M. Messman, F. S. Baker, M. Keller and A. K. Naskar, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 3295–3303 RSC .
B. Xiao, X. F. Sun and R. C. Sun, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2001, 71, 223–231 CrossRef CAS .
D. Stewart, Ind. Crops Prod., 2008, 27, 202–207 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sen, S. Patil and D. S. Argyropoulos, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 4862–4887 RSC .
J. H. Lora and W. G. Glasser, J. Polym. Environ., 2002, 10, 39–48 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Thakur, M. K. Thakur, P. Raghavan and M. R. Kessler, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 1072–1092 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ten and W. Vermerris, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2015, 132, 13 CrossRef .
V. K. Thakur and M. K. Thakur, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2015, 72, 834–847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Laurichesse and L. Avérous, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 1266–1290 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vishtal and A. Kraslawski, Bioresources, 2011, 6, 3547–3568 Search PubMed .
A. Duval and M. Lawoko, React. Funct. Polym., 2014, 85, 78–96 CrossRef CAS .

          R. C. Kuhad and A. Singh, Lignocellulose biotechnology: future prospects, IK International Pvt Ltd,  2007 Search PubMed .
Y. Lu, Q. F. Sun, D. J. Yang, X. L. She, X. D. Yao, G. S. Zhu, Y. X. Liu, H. J. Zhao and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13548–13557 RSC .
W. Boerjan, J. Ralph and M. Baucher, Annu. Rev. Plant Biol., 2003, 54, 519–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Dorrestijn, L. J. J. Laarhoven, I. Arends and P. Mulder, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2000, 54, 153–192 CrossRef CAS .
W. O. S. Doherty, P. Mousavioun and C. M. Fellows, Ind. Crops Prod., 2011, 33, 259–276 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gellerstedt and K. Gustafsson, J. Wood Chem. Technol., 1987, 7, 65–80 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. L. Constantino, A. Dhanabalan, A. Curvelo and O. N. Oliveira, Thin Solid Films, 1998, 327, 47–51 CrossRef .
A. S. Singha, V. K. Thakur, I. K. Mehta, A. Shama, A. J. Khanna, R. K. Rana and A. K. Rana, Int. J. Polym. Anal. Charact., 2009, 14, 695–711 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Komissarenkov and T. L. Lukanina, Russ. J. Gen. Chem., 2012, 82, 985–990 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. de la Torre, A. Moral, M. D. Hernandez, E. Cabeza and A. Tijero, Ind. Crops Prod., 2013, 45, 58–63 CrossRef CAS .
G. Toriz, F. Denes and R. A. Young, Polym. Compos., 2002, 23, 806–813 CrossRef CAS .
P. Alexy, B. Kosikova and G. Podstranska, Polymer, 2000, 41, 4901–4908 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Xu, R. A. D. Arancon, J. Labidi and R. Luque, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7485–7500 RSC .
M. P. Pandey and C. S. Kim, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2011, 34, 29–41 CrossRef CAS .
C. Amen-Chen, H. Pakdel and C. Roy, Bioresour. Technol., 2001, 79, 277–299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Prado, A. Brandt, X. Erdocia, J. Hallet, T. Welton and J. Labidi, Green Chem., 2016 10.1039/c5gc01950h .
J. P. S. Aniceto, I. Portugal and C. M. Silva, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1358–1368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Truter, A. Pizzi and H. Vermaas, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1994, 51, 1319–1322 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Goncalves and P. Benar, Bioresour. Technol., 2001, 79, 103–111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. P. Yue, F. G. Chen and X. S. Zhou, Bioresources, 2011, 6, 2022–2034 CAS .
M. Arend, B. Westermann and N. Risch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 1044–1070 CrossRef .
X. Y. Du, J. B. Li and M. E. Lindstrom, Ind. Crops Prod., 2014, 52, 729–735 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Wang, Y. K. Zhang, C. Hao, X. H. Dai, Z. L. Zhou and N. C. Si, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 28156–28164 RSC .
L. Zhang and J. Huang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2001, 81, 3251–3259 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang and L. N. Zhang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2002, 86, 1799–1806 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang and L. N. Zhang, Polymer, 2002, 43, 2287–2294 CrossRef CAS .
W. Thielemans and R. P. Wool, Biomacromolecules, 2005, 6, 1895–1905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fang, X. S. Cheng and W. S. Lin, Bioresources, 2011, 6, 2874–2884 CAS .
M. Firdaus and M. A. R. Meier, Eur. Polym. J., 2013, 49, 156–166 CrossRef CAS .
S. Thiebaud and M. E. Borredon, Bioresour. Technol., 1995, 52, 169–173 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. N. Sailaja and M. V. Deepthi, Mater. Des., 2010, 31, 4369–4379 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ahvazi, O. Wojciechowicz, T. M. Ton-That and J. Hawari, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2011, 59, 10505–10516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Effendi, H. Gerhauser and A. V. Bridgwater, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2008, 12, 2092–2116 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sadeghifar, C. Z. Cui and D. S. Argyropoulos, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 16713–16720 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. F. Wu and W. G. Glasser, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1984, 29, 1111–1123 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Thring, M. N. Vanderlaan and S. L. Griffin, Biomass Bioenergy, 1997, 13, 125–132 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Vanderlaan and R. W. Thring, Biomass Bioenergy, 1998, 14, 525–531 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarkar and B. Adhikari, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2001, 73, 169–175 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarkar and B. Adhikari, Eur. Polym. J., 2001, 37, 1391–1401 CrossRef CAS .
T. Saito, J. H. Perkins, D. C. Jackson, N. E. Trammel, M. A. Hunt and A. K. Naskar, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 21832–21840 RSC .
Y. S. Kim and J. F. Kadla, Biomacromolecules, 2010, 11, 981–988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Wang, K. J. Ya, A. L. Korich, S. G. Li, S. G. Ma, H. J. Ploehn, P. M. Iovine, C. P. Wang, F. X. Chu and C. B. Tang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 3728–3738 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang and R. A. Venditti, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 1839–1845 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Chung, J. V. Olsson, R. J. Li, C. W. Frank, R. M. Waymouth, S. L. Billington and E. S. Sattely, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 1231–1238 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, L. Yang, X. Lu and C. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3699–3709 CAS .
R. R. N. Sailaja, Polym. Int., 2005, 54, 1589–1598 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sivasankarapillai and A. G. McDonald, Biomass Bioenergy, 2011, 35, 919–931 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Panesar, S. Jacob, M. Misra and A. K. Mohanty, Ind. Crops Prod., 2013, 46, 191–196 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gupta and N. R. Washburn, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 9303–9312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen, H. H. Dai, X. L. Dong, J. T. Yang and M. Q. Zhong, Polym. Compos., 2011, 32, 1019–1025 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Maldhure, J. D. Ekhe and E. Deenadayalan, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2012, 125, 1701–1712 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Hilburg, A. N. Elder, H. Chung, R. L. Ferebee, M. R. Bockstaller and N. R. Washburn, Polymer, 2014, 55, 995–1003 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Teramoto, S. H. Lee and T. Endo, Polym. J., 2009, 41, 219–227 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xiao, J. X. Feng, J. Zhu, X. Wang, C. W. Yi and S. P. Su, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 130, 1308–1312 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Chung and N. R. Washburn, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2840–2846 CAS .
C. Jiang, H. He, H. Jiang, L. Ma and D. M. Jia, Express Polym. Lett., 2013, 7, 480–493 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, H. He, X. J. Yao, P. Yu, L. Zhou and D. M. Jia, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2014, 131, 9 Search PubMed .
H. Hatakeyama, N. Kato, T. Nanbo and T. Hatakeyama, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 7254–7261 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cinelli, I. Anguillesi and A. Lazzeri, Eur. Polym. J., 2013, 49, 1174–1184 CrossRef CAS .
B. Del Saz-Orozco, M. Oliet, M. V. Alonso, E. Rojo and F. Rodriguez, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2012, 72, 667–674 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Luo, A. Mohanty and M. Misra, Ind. Crops Prod., 2013, 47, 13–19 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Pan and J. N. Saddler, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2013, 6, 10 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Chen, P. Sewell and M. A. Brook, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1811–1819 RSC .
J. Zhang, E. Fleury and M. A. Brook, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 4647–4656 RSC .
M. V. Alonso, M. Oliet, J. Garcia, F. Rodriguez and J. Echeverria, Chem. Eng. J., 2006, 122, 159–166 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tejado, C. Pena, J. Labidi, J. M. Echeverria and I. Mondragon, Bioresour. Technol., 2007, 98, 1655–1663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. F. Ma, C. P. Wang, S. H. Li, M. M. Zhang and F. X. Chu, Ind. Crops Prod., 2013, 43, 326–333 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Park, W. Doherty and P. J. Halley, Ind. Crops Prod., 2008, 27, 163–167 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Hu, H. Pan, Y. H. Zhou and M. Zhang, Bioresources, 2011, 6, 3515–3525 CAS .
J. Zhou, L. H. Hu, B. C. Liang, C. Y. Bo, P. Y. Jia and Y. H. Zhou, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2015, 54, 178–182 CrossRef .
N. S. Cetin and N. Ozmen, Int. J. Adhes. Adhes., 2002, 22, 477–480 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Jin, X. S. Cheng and Z. B. Zheng, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 2046–2048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Qiao, S. J. Li, G. W. Guo, S. Y. Han, S. X. Ren and Y. L. Ma, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2015, 21, 1417–1422 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moubarik, N. Grimi, N. Boussetta and A. Pizzi, Ind. Crops Prod., 2013, 45, 296–302 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Wang, M. Leitch and C. B. Xu, Eur. Polym. J., 2009, 45, 3380–3388 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Y. F. Ma, Y. Z. Xu, C. P. Wang and F. X. Chu, Int. J. Adhes. Adhes., 2013, 40, 11–18 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Cavdar, H. Kalaycioglu and S. Hiziroglu, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2008, 202, 559–563 CrossRef .
M. N. M. Ibrahim, N. Zakaria, C. S. Sipaut, O. Sulaiman and R. Hashim, Carbohydr. Polym., 2011, 86, 112–119 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Zhang, T. Q. Yuan and R. C. Sun, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2015, 132, 8 Search PubMed .
S. Yang, J. L. Wen, T. Q. Yuan and R. C. Sun, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 57996–58004 RSC .
J. Podschun, A. Stucker, B. Saake and R. Lehnen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 2526–2532 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z. Yuan, N. Mahmood, S. Huang and C. C. Xu, Ind. Crops Prod., 2016, 79, 84–90 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhao, J. Jing, Y. Zhu, X. Yang, X. Wang and Z. Wang, Int. J. Adhes. Adhes., 2016, 64, 163–167 CrossRef CAS .
M. Azadfar, A. H. Gao, M. V. Bule and S. L. Chen, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2015, 75, 58–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Dizhbite, G. Telysheva, V. Jurkjane and U. Viesturs, Bioresour. Technol., 2004, 95, 309–317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ponomarenko, T. Dizhbite, M. Lauberts, A. Volperts, G. Dobele and G. Telysheva, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2015, 113, 360–369 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ugartondo, M. Mitjans and M. P. Vinardell, Bioresour. Technol., 2008, 99, 6683–6687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sanches-Silva, D. Costa, T. G. Albuquerque, G. G. Buonocore, F. Ramos, M. C. Castilho, A. V. Machado and H. S. Costa, Food Addit. Contam., Part A, 2014, 31, 374–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pouteau, P. Dole, B. Cathala, L. Averous and N. Boquillon, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2003, 81, 9–18 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Morandim-Giannetti, J. A. M. Agnelli, B. Z. Lancas, R. Magnabosco, S. A. Casarin and S. H. P. Bettini, Carbohydr. Polym., 2012, 87, 2563–2568 CrossRef CAS .
S. Domenek, A. Louaifi, A. Guinault and S. Baumberger, J. Polym. Environ., 2013, 21, 692–701 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. E. Acosta, P. I. T. Chavez, B. Ramrez-Wong, L. A. Bello-Perez, A. V. Ros, E. C. Millan, M. P. Jatomea and A. I. L. Osuna, Starch/Staerke, 2015, 67, 502–511 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Ge, Q. Wei and Z. L. Li, Bioresources, 2014, 9, 6699–6706 CAS .
S. Jiang, D. Kai, Q. Q. Dou and X. J. Loh, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 6897–6904 RSC .
J. C. Dean, P. Navotnaya, A. P. Parobek, R. M. Clayton and T. S. Zwier, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 139, 16 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Chaochanchaikul, K. Jayaraman, V. Rosarpitak and N. Sombatsompop, Bioresources, 2012, 7, 38–55 CAS .
R. Pucciariello, C. Bonini, M. D'Auria, V. Villani, G. Giammarino and G. Gorrasi, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2008, 109, 309–313 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hambardzumyan, L. Foulon, B. Chabbert and V. Aguie-Beghin, Biomacromolecules, 2012, 13, 4081–4088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qian, X. Q. Qiu and S. P. Zhu, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 320–324 RSC .
J. Yu, J. F. Wang, C. P. Wang, Y. P. Liu, Y. Z. Xu, C. B. Tang and F. X. Chu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2015, 36, 398–404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Dumitriu and V. Popa, Polymeric Biomaterials: Structure and Function, CRC Press,  2013 Search PubMed .

          S. Thomas, P. M. Visakh and A. P. Mathew, Advances in Natural Polymers: Composites and Nanocomposites, Springe, Berlin Heidelberg,  2012 Search PubMed .
X. Dong, M. D. Dong, Y. J. Lu, A. Turley, T. Lin and C. Q. Wu, Ind. Crops Prod., 2011, 34, 1629–1634 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. A. Nada, A. I. Eldiwany and A. M. Elshafei, Acta Biotechnol., 1989, 9, 295–298 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Gregorova, S. Redik, V. Sedlarik, F. Stelzer and T. Ltd, Nanocon,  2011, 2011, 184–189 .
A. P. Richter, J. S. Brown, B. Bharti, A. Wang, S. Gangwal, K. Houck, E. A. C. Hubal, V. N. Paunov, S. D. Stoyanov and O. D. Velev, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 817–823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. X. Hu and Y. L. Hsieh, Carbohydr. Polym., 2015, 131, 134–141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Eraković, A. Jankovic, I. Z. Matic, Z. D. Juranic, M. Vukasinovic-Sekulic, T. Stevanovic and V. Miskovic-Stankovic, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 142, 521–530 CrossRef .
S. Erakovic, A. Jankovic, G. C. P. Tsui, C. Y. Tang, V. Miskovic-Stankovic and T. Stevanovic, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2014, 15, 12294–12322 CrossRef .
E. M. Fernandes, R. A. Pires, J. F. Mano and R. L. Reis, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1415–1441 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. Raschip, C. Vasile, D. Ciolacu and G. Cazacu, High Perform. Polym., 2007, 19, 603–620 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. Raschip, E. G. Hitruc and C. Vasile, High Perform. Polym., 2011, 23, 219–229 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, S. H. Kim, K. Won, J. W. Choi, Y. H. Kim, H. J. Kim, Y. H. Yang and S. H. Lee, Carbohydr. Polym., 2015, 115, 223–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Diao, Z. X. Zhang, J. L. Zhu and J. Li, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 42996–43003 RSC .
D. Kai, Z. W. Low, S. S. Liow, A. Abdul Karim, H. Ye, G. Jin, K. Li and X. J. Loh, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 2160–2169 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jankovic, S. Erakovic, C. Ristoscu, N. Mihailescu, L. Duta, A. Visan, G. E. Stan, A. C. Popa, M. A. Husanu, C. R. Luculescu, V. V. Srdic, D. Janackovic, V. Miskovic-Stankovic, C. Bleotu, M. C. Chifiriuc and I. N. Mihailescu, J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med., 2015, 26, 14 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kai, S. Jiang, Z. W. Low and X. J. Loh, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 6194–6204 RSC .
X. H. Liu, H. Yin, Z. X. Zhang, B. S. Diao and J. Li, Colloids Surf., B, 2015, 125, 230–237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ten, C. Ling, Y. Wang, A. Srivastava, L. A. Dempere and W. Vermerris, Biomacromolecules, 2014, 15, 327–338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Feng, F. G. Chen and H. R. Wu, Bioresources, 2011, 6, 4942–4952 CAS .
G. Z. Gao, J. I. Dallmeyer and J. F. Kadla, Biomacromolecules, 2012, 13, 3602–3610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Z. Gao, M. A. Karaaslan, J. F. Kadla and F. Ko, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 3890–3898 RSC .
I. Dallmeyer, S. Chowdhury and J. F. Kadla, Biomacromolecules, 2013, 14, 2354–2363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qian, Q. Zhang, X. Q. Qiu and S. P. Zhu, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4963–4968 RSC .
J. L. Hu, Y. Zhu, H. H. Huang and J. Lu, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2012, 37, 1720–1763 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xie, Polymer, 2011, 52, 4985–5000 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, W. M. Huang, Z. Ding, Y. Zhao, C. C. Wang, H. Purnawali and C. Tang, Mater. Des., 2012, 33, 577–640 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Hu and S. J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3346–3355 RSC .
C. Liu, H. Qin and P. T. Mather, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1543–1558 RSC .
H. Li, G. Sivasankarapillai and A. G. McDonald, Ind. Crops Prod., 2015, 67, 143–154 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sivasankarapillai, H. Li and A. G. McDonald, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 2735–2742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Rosas, R. Berenguer, M. J. Valero-Romero, J. Rodriguez-Mirasol and T. Cordero, Front. Mater., 2014, 1, 29,  DOI:10.3389/fmats.2014.00029 .
P. J. M. Carrott and M. M. L. R. Carrott, Bioresour. Technol., 2007, 98, 2301–2312 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Liu, L. B. Kong, C. Lu, X. M. Li, Y. C. Luo and L. Kang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 1890–1896 RSC .
K. Nakajima and M. Hara, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1296–1304 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shimizu and A. Satsuma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3140–3153 CAS .
M. Okamura, A. Takagaki, M. Toda, J. N. Kondo, K. Domen, T. Tatsumi, M. Hara and S. Hayashi, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3039–3045 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Li, Y. Zuo, Y. Zhang, Y. Fu and Q. X. Guo, Fuel, 2013, 113, 435–442 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Zazo, J. Bedia, C. M. Fierro, G. Pliego, J. A. Casas and J. J. Rodriguez, Catal. Today, 2012, 187, 115–121 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Min, J. Y. Lin, P. Yimsiri, M. Asadullah and C. Z. Li, Fuel, 2014, 116, 19–24 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, Q. Y. Yue, B. Y. Gao, Y. Y. Sun, W. Y. Wang, Q. Li and Y. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 217, 345–353 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Maldhure and J. D. Ekhe, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 168, 1103–1111 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gonzalez-Serrano, T. Cordero, J. Rodriguez-Mirasol, L. Cotoruelo and J. J. Rodriguez, Water Res., 2004, 38, 3043–3050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Cotoruelo, M. D. Marques, F. J. Diaz, J. Rodriguez-Mirasol, J. J. Rodriguez and T. Cordero, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 184, 176–183 CrossRef CAS .
D. Saha, Y. C. Li, Z. H. Bi, J. H. Chen, J. K. Keum, D. K. Hensley, H. A. Grappe, H. M. Meyer, S. Dai, M. P. Paranthaman and A. K. Naskar, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 900–910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Kim, Y. K. Kim, H. Lee, S. B. Lee and H. S. Park, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1094–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Lai, Z. P. Zhou, L. F. Zhang, X. X. Wang, Q. X. Zhou, Y. Zhao, Y. C. Wang, X. F. Wu, Z. T. Zhu and H. Fong, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 134–141 CrossRef CAS .
S. X. Hu, S. L. Zhang, N. Pan and Y. L. Hsieh, J. Power Sources, 2014, 270, 106–112 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Navarro-Suarez, J. Carretero-Gonzalez, V. Roddatis, E. Goikolea, J. Segalini, E. Redondo, T. Rojo and R. Mysyk, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 48336–48343 RSC .
F. Chen, W. J. Zhou, H. F. Yao, P. Fan, J. T. Yang, Z. D. Fei and M. Q. Zhong, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 3057–3063 RSC .
G. Milczarek and M. Nowicki, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 4032–4038 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Roberts, X. Li and H. F. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4341–4356 RSC .
S. X. Wang, L. P. Yang, L. P. Stubbs, X. Li and C. B. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12275–12282 CAS .
W. E. Tenhaeff, O. Rios, K. More and M. A. McGuire, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 86–94 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jin, S. J. Yu, Z. Q. Shi, C. Y. Wang and C. B. Chong, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 800–807 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Dan Kai and Xian Jun Loh	Dr Dan Kai received his B.E. in Biomedical Engineering from Xi'an Jiaotong University, China in 2006, and obtained an M.E. in Biomedical Engineering from the National Engineering Research Center for Biomaterials, Sichuan University, China in 2009. He obtained his Ph.D. degree at the NUS Graduate School for Integrated Science & Engineering, National University of Singapore, in 2013. Currently, he is working as a scientist at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, A*STAR, Singapore. His research interests are focused on the synthesis of lignin-based functional polymers, hydrogels and nanofibers for personal care products. He is also interested in engineering electrospun nanofibers for biomedical applications.Dr Xian Jun Loh is a polymer chemist working in the inter-disciplinary field of biomaterials. He is currently the Programme Manager of the A*STAR Personal Care Programme. He is concurrently the Programme Manager of the Consumer Care Programme at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE) and an Assistant Professor at the National University of Singapore (NUS). He is also an adjunct scientist at the Singapore Eye Research Institute. His main research interests are in the design of supramolecular and stimuli-responsive polymers and hydrogels for biomedical and personal care applications. Currently, he is the author and co-author of 94 journal papers, 12 patents, 10 book chapters and 3 books, publishing mainly in the area of biomaterials.

 	Fig. 1  The position of lignin within the lignocellulosic matrix. Adapted with permission from ref. 14.	 

 	Fig. 2  The precursors of lignin and several common linkages between phenyl propane units.	 


Structure	

	

	

	


Separation methods	Precipitation (pH change)	Ultrafiltration	Precipitation (pH change)	Precipitation (addition of non-solvent)
Ultrafiltration	
	Ultrafiltration	Dissolved air flotation
Product status	Industrial	Industrial	Industrial	Laboratory/Pilot
Sulphur (%)	1.0 to 3.0	3.5 to 8.0	0	0
Nitrogen (%)	0.05	0.02	0.2 to 1.0	0 to 0.3
Molecular weight (×103 g mol−1)	1.5 to 5 (up to 25)	1 to 50 (up to 150)	0.8 to 3 (up to 15)	0.5 to 5
Polydispersity	2.5 to 3.5	6 to 8	2.5 to 3.5	1.5 to 2.5
Acid soluble lignin (%)	1 to 5	—	1 to 11	∼2
Solubility	Alkali, some organic solvents (DMF, pyridine and DMSO)	Water	Alkali	Wide range of organic solvents

T
g (°C)	140 to 150	130	140	90 to 110

T
d (°C)	340 to 370	250 to 260	360 to 370	390 to 400

 	Fig. 3  Summary of the chemical modification of lignin.	 

 	Fig. 4  Synthetic scheme for the preparation of polymer grafted lignin copolymers by ATRP.	 

 	Fig. 5  Tensile mechanical properties of renewable and biodegradable PLA nanocomposites. (a) Young's modulus. (b) Tensile strength. (c) Elongation at break. (d) Toughness, calculated by integrating the stress–strain curves of the nanocomposites. (e) Typical stress–strain curves. Reprinted with permission from ref. 58.	 

 	Fig. 6  Illustrations of lignin/silicone foam structures and their resultant mechanical properties: the tensile modulus increases with crosslinking density, while the elongation at break depends on both the crosslinking density and uniformity of the foams. Type A structures are foams either with large trapped (A1) or collapsed voids (A2, closer to an elastomer than a foam); type A1 foams break easily with extension or bending, due to large defects. Type B structures are foams with uniform morphology; these foams are flexible with tunable toughness. Type C structures are foams with excessive crosslinking density and fewer voids; type C1 foams are tough, while type C2 are brittle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77.	 

 	Fig. 7  Effect of lignin on the antioxidant activity of PLA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104.	 

 	Fig. 8  UV transmittance of the pure creams blended with different amounts of lignin in the UVB and UVA areas. The purchased SPF 15 sunscreen serves as the reference. (a) NIVEA cream + lignin; (b) LIFE cream + lignin. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112.	 

 	Fig. 9  UV spectra of PLA, PLA with unmodified lignin (PLA1L) and lignin-g-PLA (PLA1C). Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Photographs of agar plates illustrating the influence of (a) cellulose; (b) AgNPs-AL-Cell on the growth of E. coli. Four serially diluted bacteria concentrations were tested in a single agar plate and the bacteria was exposed to the samples for ten minutes. (c) Photograph of an agar plate showing the inhibition zone of growth when exposed to AgNPs-AL-Cell. 0.1 mL of 105 CFU mL−1E. coli was used in the tests, and the bacteria cultured on the agar plates was incubated at 37 °C for 24 hours. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Photographs of (A) inclusion complex suspension of PEG 10/10 (10% PEGMA + 10% α-CD) and (B) the lignin-based hydrogel (2% lignin-g-PEGMA + 10% α-CD) and (C) schematic illustration of the proposed structure of a lignin-based supramolecular hydrogel by inclusion complexation between lignin-g-PEGMA and α-CD. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Laser scanning confocal microscopic images of human dermal fibroblasts on electrospun nanofibers (A, D) PCL, (B, E) PCL with 50% lignin-PMMA30, (C, F) PCL with 50% lignin-PMMA100 immunostained for F-actin (Green) and nuclei (Blue). D to F are the images merged with differential interference contrast images, showing the orientations of nanofibers. Scale bar = 30 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130.	 

 	Fig. 13  Confocal microscopy images of LNTs made from (a) PINE thioglycolic acid isolated lignin and (b) PINE NaOH isolated lignin located inside HeLa cells. Scale bar represents 15 μm. White arrows point to LNT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 132.	 

 	Fig. 14  Thermostabilized lignin electrospun fibers placed on moist paper (a–d), then moved to dry paper (e–h). Reprinted with permission from ref. 136.	 

 	Fig. 15  Three cycles of the N2/CO2-triggered emulsification/demulsification process of Pickering emulsion with lignin-g-DEAEMA nanoparticles as a smart surfactant. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137.	 

 	Fig. 16  Photographs showing the thermally-stimulated shape memory elastomers of a biobased lignin copolymer: (1), curled at room temperature (25 °C); (2), subjected to ice (0 °C), where the curled shape was maintained even after 180 s; (3), returned to room temperature; and (4), gradual recovery of the original shape in 150 s. Reprinted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Various routes of thermochemical conversion of lignin. Copyright: © 2014 Rosas, Berenguer, Valero-Romero, Rodríguez-Mirasol and Cordero. Reprinted with permission from ref. 145.	 

 	Fig. 18  Process schematic for the thermochemical activation of activated carbon. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic for the formation of lignin-derived templated mesoporous activated carbon (MACs) for use as an electrode material in supercapacitors. (b) Gravimetric capacitance vs. scan rate graphs of different activating conditions for MACs. (c) Modelling of supercapacitors using lignin-derived electrodes. Adopted with permission from ref. 158. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic showing lignin-derived carbon fiber mats obtained from electrospinning. (b) Charge capacities at different scan rates and cyclic stability. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
