Rigidification or interaction-induced phosphorescence of organic molecules  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CC09288H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CC09288H
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 2081-2093Rigidification or interaction-induced phosphorescence of organic molecules

        
          
            Massimo 
            Baroncini
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Giacomo 
            Bergamini
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Paola 
            Ceroni
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry “Giacomo Ciamician” and Interuniversity Center for the Chemical Conversion of Solar Energy (SolarChem), University of Bologna, Via Selmi 2, 40126 Bologna, Italy. E-mail: paola.ceroni@unibo.it
Received 
      21st November 2016
    , Accepted 4th January 2017First published on 23rd January 2017AbstractPhosphorescent materials are mostly based on metal complexes. Metal-free organic molecules usually display phosphorescence only in a rigid matrix at 77 K. In the last few years, there has been increasing interest in the design of organic molecules displaying long-lived and highly intense room-temperature phosphorescence, an extremely difficult task since these two properties are generally conflicting. This review reports the most recent and tutorial examples of molecules that are weakly or non-phosphorescent in deaerated fluid solution and whose room temperature phosphorescence is switched on upon aggregation. The examples are divided into two classes according to the mechanism responsible for switching on phosphorescence: (i) rigidification by crystallization or by encapsulation in a polymeric matrix and (ii) interaction with other molecules of the same type (self-aggregation) or a different type by taking advantage of heavy-atom effects.
Introduction
Phosphorescent materials are commonly used in organic light-emitting diodes (OLED), as well as in chemical and biological sensors, but because of a lack of practical, efficient and versatile metal-free organic phosphors, the range of usable materials is limited. Phosphorescence is indeed generally regarded solely as an inorganic or organometallic property. In the case of organic molecules, it is easily detectable in a rigid matrix at 77 K, while at room temperature quenching by dioxygen is extremely effective because of the long lifetime of the phosphorescent excited state and it cannot be detected in air-equilibrated solution. However, phosphorescence of organic molecules has been known for a long time.1–4 In 1941 Lewis and his coworkers first suggested that the long-lived phosphorescence of fluorescein in rigid media derives from the lowest triplet state.5 In 1944, Lewis and Kasha published the phosphorescence of a large series of aromatic molecules in rigid glasses at 77 K.6 The first unequivocal demonstration of the fact that phosphorescence derives from a triplet state was made by Lewis and Calvin in 1945:7 they demonstrated that the phosphorescent state of fluorescein in boric acid glass at room temperature is paramagnetic. In 1955 Evans and coworkers reported that the lifetimes of phosphorescence and paramagnetic susceptibility are identical for triphenylene in boric acid glass at room temperature.8
In 1972 it was discovered that many salts of polynuclear carboxylic acids, phenols, amines, and sulfonic acids adsorbed on a solid substrate like filter paper, silica or alumina exhibit strong phosphorescence at room temperature, with no evidence of quenching by dioxygen.9 As expected, the spectra were similar to those of frozen solutions at 77 K. In the following years, Turro reported solubilization of arenes in micellar aggregates as a method for the ready observation of phosphorescence at room temperature.10 Then, different hosts,11 like cyclodextrins,12 zeolites,13 and hemicarcerand14 were used to induce room-temperature phosphorescence of organic molecules and this process was exploited as a powerful analytical tool.15
In the last few years, there has been a resurgence of interest towards the rational design and theoretical study of novel organic molecules that are weakly or non-phosphorescent in deaerated fluid solution and whose room temperature phosphorescence is switched on upon aggregation.16–21 A better understanding of the mechanistic details involved in long lived luminescence in solid organic materials and general strategies for their preparation are of paramount importance for their application in electroluminescent devices, luminescent sensors and cell imaging materials.
The present review is focused on organic molecules which do not exhibit phosphorescence in deaerated fluid solution and whose room temperature phosphorescence is switched on either by rigidification of the matrix (crystallization or dispersion in a polymer matrix) or by aggregation and electronic interactions of the molecules among themselves or with the host matrix. Before presenting a selection of the most relevant examples from the tutorial point of view and their potential applications, it is worthwhile recalling a few elemental principles of electronic spectroscopy with particular focus on phosphorescence and the parameters affecting its efficiency and its time-decay. Interested readers can refer to several books for deeper discussions.22–24
Phosphorescence
Phosphorescence is the radiative decay between electronic excited states of different spin multiplicities: it is a spin-forbidden process and it is thus intrinsically slower than the spin-allowed fluorescence process.
To get better insights into phosphorescence and other competing processes, we can refer to Fig. 1 which depicts a schematic energy level diagram for a generic organic molecule. The ground electronic configuration of an organic molecule is usually closed-shell, so that, in most cases, the ground state is a singlet state (S0), and the excited states are either singlets (S1, S2, etc.) or triplets (T1, T2, etc.). In principle, transitions between states having the same spin value are allowed, whereas those between states of different spins are forbidden, so that the T1 excited state cannot be populated by direct absorption of light. The electronic absorption bands correspond to S0 → Sn transitions. When a molecule is excited to upper singlet excited states, it usually undergoes fast and 100% efficient radiationless deactivation (internal conversion, ic) to the lowest excited singlet, S1 (Kasha's rule).25 Such an excited state undergoes deactivation via three competing first-order processes: non-radiative decay to the ground state (internal conversion, rate constant kic); radiative decay to the ground state (fluorescence, kfl); and conversion to the lowest triplet state T1 (intersystem crossing, kisc). In its turn, T1 can undergo deactivation via non-radiative (intersystem crossing, kisc′) or radiative (phosphorescence, kph) decay to the ground state S0. The lifetime (τ) of an excited state, i.e. the time needed to reduce the excited state concentration by 2.718, is given by the reciprocal of the summation of the deactivation rate constants: τ(S1) = 1/(kic + kfl + kisc)(1) τ(T1) = 1/(kisc′ + kph)(2)The orders of magnitude of τ(S1) and τ(T1) are approximately 10−10–10−8 s and 10−6–100 s, respectively; while the upper lying excited states Sn and Tn exhibit much shorter lifetimes of the order of 10−12 s, in agreement with Kasha's rule.
 Fig. 1  Schematic Jablonski diagram for a generic organic molecule: solid line for absorption, dashed line for emission processes and wavy lines for non-radiative processes. 
The quantum yields of fluorescence (the ratio between the number of photons emitted by S1 and the number of absorbed photons) and phosphorescence (the ratio between the number of photons emitted by T1 and the number of absorbed photons) can range between 0 and 1 and are given by the following expressions: Φfl = kfl/(kic + kfl + kisc)(3) Φph = ηisc × ηph = kphkisc/[(kisc′ + kph)(kic + kfl + kisc)](4) Phosphorescence quantum yield is the product of the efficiency of population of T1(ηisc) by upper lying excited states (S1 in the example reported in Fig. 1 and eqn (4)) and the intrinsic efficiency of phosphorescence (ηph), i.e. the percentage of T1 deactivating by phosphorescence. Since we are interested in bright and long-lived phosphorescent organic molecules, we will discuss the parameters affecting Φph and τ(T1), bearing in mind that we need to maximize both the efficiency of isc (ηisc) and the efficiency of phosphorescence (ηph).
When the molecule contains heavy atoms, the formally forbidden intersystem crossing and phosphorescence processes become faster. The spin selection rules of radiative and non-radiative processes are valid to the extent to which spin and orbital functions can be separated rigorously. Departures from this approximation are due to spin–orbit coupling, which mixes electronic states of different multiplicities and increases as the atomic number of the atoms involved increases (for an atomic species, spin–orbit coupling is proportional to the fourth power of atomic number, Z4). This is the reason why most of the phosphorescent materials are based on metal complexes, but a similar heavy-atom effect is induced also by the presence, for example, of halogen atoms in the molecules (internal heavy-atom effect) or in the solvent or polymeric matrix (external heavy-atom effect). The heavy-atom effect is larger when the “heavy atom” is directly involved in the phosphorescence decay, meaning that the orbitals involved in the corresponding electronic transition are also localized on that atom, or it is interacting with an atom involved in the phosphorescence deactivation.1
The rate of non-radiative inter system crossing processes is increased also when (i) the involved singlet and triplet states belong to different electronic configurations, according to El-Sayed rules:26 inter system crossing like 1(n,π*) → 3(π,π*) is substantially faster than those between states of the same orbital nature, e.g.1(n,π*) → 3(n,π*); (ii) the energy difference between the involved electronic states is low because of a higher spin–orbit coupling and a better vibrational overlap of the initial and final states (energy gap law).23 The energy separation between the singlet and triplet states of a given electronic configuration arises from the repulsion experienced by neighboring electrons and corresponds to twice the electron exchange integral.23,24 When the electronic transition is (n,π*), the two orbitals barely overlap since they lie in orthogonal planes, so that the singlet–triplet splitting is small. The same holds true for electronic transition with charge-transfer character since the spatial orbital overlap is limited. On the other hand, the splitting of singlet–triplet states deriving from (π,π*) transitions is relatively large since the orbital overlap is considerable.
With regard to the lifetime of T1, it is generally much shorter for 3(n,π*) states than for 3(π,π*) states. This experimental finding can be rationalized as follows: the nominal 3(n,π*) state of ketones, for example, has a significant singlet character because of the efficient spin–orbit coupling with higher lying singlet states of different orbital natures, like 1(π,π*), and thus deactivation to the singlet ground state is relatively fast. On the other hand, for aromatic molecules, like naphthalene, all the lowest states have (π,π*) character and spin–orbit coupling between states of the same orbital nature is very poor, according to El-Sayed rules, so T1 can be regarded as a pure triplet state except in so far as vibronic spin–orbit coupling relaxes symmetry constraints.3
It is now worth considering two prototypical examples, i.e. naphthalene and benzophenone, to illustrate the concepts outlined above.

Fig. 2 reports the Jablonski diagrams of naphthalene and benzophenone at 77 K. It is worth noting that, as discussed above, the energy gap S1–T1 is much larger for the (π,π*) states of naphthalene than for the (n,π*) state of benzophenone and that the lifetime of the 3(π,π*) state is much longer than that of 3(n,π*) of benzophenone.
 Fig. 2  Schematic Jablonski diagram for naphthalene (left) and benzophenone (right) in a rigid matrix at 77 K (solid line for emission processes and wavy lines for non-radiative processes). 
Naphthalene is poorly phosphorescent also in a rigid matrix: Φph = 0.051 and τ(T1) = 2.3 s. Comparison of naphthalene with naphthalene carrying a halogen atom in position 1 demonstrates the heavy-atom effect on k(S1 → T1) (Table 1). Indeed, the heavy-atom effect markedly increases the rates of both radiative and non-radiative singlet↔triplet processes, according to the following considerations and with references to the processes reported in Fig. 1: kisc(S1 → T1) increases ⇒ τ(S1) and Φfl decrease, ηisc(S1 → T1) increases(5) kisc′(T1 → S0) increases ⇒ τ(T1) and ηph decrease(6) kph(T1 → S0) increases ⇒ τ(T1) decreases and ηph increases(7)Therefore, the heavy-atom effect brings about a decrease of τ(S1), τ(T1) and Φfl, but it is difficult to predict if the phosphorescence quantum yield will increase or decrease as a result of the heavy-atom effect, as processes (5) and (7) conflict with process (6). For example, in the case of naphthalene derivatives Φph decreases on going from 1-chloronaphthalene to 1-bromonaphthalene (Table 1).
Table 1 Internal heavy-atom effect on electronic transitions between states of naphthalene derivatives in a rigid matrix at 77 K (vol. 2, p. 126 of ref. 27)




Molecule

Φ
fl


Φ
ph


τ(T1) (s)

η
isc


k
ph (s−1)

k
isc (s−1)

k
isc′ (s−1)




Naphthalene
0.55
0.051
2.3
0.45
0.05
0.82 × 106
0.39


1-Fluoronaphthalene
0.84
0.056
1.5
0.16
0.23
0.57 × 106
0.42


1-Chloronaphthalene
0.058
0.30
0.29
0.94
1.10
49 × 106
2.35


1-Bromonaphthalene
0.0026
0.27
0.02
1
13.5
1850 × 106
36.5


1-Iodonaphthalene
<0.0005
0.38
0.002
1
190
>6000 × 106
310




In the case of benzophenone, a very strong phosphorescence is observed at 77 K with Φph = 0.90 and a lifetime of 6 ms. The phosphorescence quantum yield is so high thanks to the unitary efficiency of the population of T1 by S1: such a remarkable value is possible since S1(n,π*) deactivation does not lead directly to the T1(n,π*) state, which would be a forbidden process according to El-Sayed rules, but to T2(π,π*), which is an allowed process. Then, T2(π,π*) relaxes rapidly to the very close T1(n,π*) state by internal conversion.
Another example of a carbonyl compound exhibiting phosphorescence is biacetyl, which is strongly phosphorescent in the solid, solution and gas phase.1,28
Up to now, we discussed deactivation of excited states only by intrinsic (first order) decay channels (Fig. 1), but it can occur also by interaction with other species (called “quenchers”) following second order kinetics. The kinetics of the quenching process is described by the Stern–Volmer equation in fluid solution: τ0/τ = Φ0/Φ = 1 + kqτ0[Q](8)where τ0 and τ (or Φ0 and Φ) are the lifetimes (or emission quantum yields) of the chromophore in the absence and presence of the quencher, respectively, kq is the quenching constant and [Q] is the molar concentration of the quencher.
In the case of phosphorescence, a typical quencher is dioxygen which is usually dissolved at mM concentrations in air-equilibrated solvents.29 From eqn 8, you can estimate that for a chromophore with τ0(T1) = 1 ms, [Q] = 1 mM and kq = 109 M−1 s−1, the resulting phosphorescence quantum yield is 1000 times lower than Φ0. This is the reason why spectra of long-lived phosphorescent organic molecules are usually recorded in a rigid matrix at 77 K to prevent quenching by diffusing quenchers, like dioxygen or other impurities present in the solvent. On the other hand, the effect of temperature on kph is quite limited. In the case of S1 excited states, which have much shorter lifetimes, bimolecular quenching processes are not effective, unless very high concentrations of quenchers are employed. Provided the solution is very thoroughly deoxygenated, it is possible to observe phosphorescence in fluid solutions of low viscosity at room temperature, but the T1 lifetime is much shorter than in rigid glass at 77 K and correspondingly the phosphorescence quantum yield is much lower. For example, benzophenone exhibits a lifetime of 6.9 μs at 298 K and 6 ms at 77 K.29 The discrepancy is mainly due to quenching by impurities: for lifetimes on the order of a few seconds, quenching can occur when the impurity concentration is as low as 10−8 M.
Another second order process that deactivates T1 is observed when the T1 concentration is high, like in the concentrated solution of chromophores displaying long-lived T1 excited states or in pure organic crystals; it is named triplet–triplet annihilation: T1 + T1 → S1 + S0(9) This process was first evidenced by observing delayed fluorescence of pyrene,30i.e. fluorescence due to the radiative deactivation of S1 produced according to eqn (9). It is usually an exergonic process since the energy gap between T1 and S0 is generally larger than that between S1 and T1 (see Fig. 1 as a representative case). This process was studied in the past in pure crystals of naphthalene and benzophenone, where triplet excited states can migrate among neighboring molecules and finally annihilate or be quenched by impurities. Triplet–triplet annihilation was observed to be predominant in naphthalene crystals rather than in benzophenone crystals because of the different orbital nature and much longer lifetime of the naphthalene 3(π,π*) state compared to the benzophenone 3(n,π*) state.31,32
Based on the above-reported discussion, design of organic molecules displaying long-lived and highly intense room-temperature phosphorescence is a difficult task. For example, molecules possessing the T1 excited state with a charge-transfer character, i.e. (n,π*) transitions, usually display bright phosphorescence with a short lifetime. On the other hand, aromatic molecules like naphthalene and pyrene with the 3(π,π*) excited state are usually weakly phosphorescent, but with a long lifetime. Indeed, a long T1 lifetime means that T1 is subjected to quenching by a very low-concentration of impurities even in the crystals thanks to triplet energy migration, so that complete exclusion of dioxygen and very pure samples are needed in order to observe room-temperature phosphorescence. It is worth noting that long-lived phosphorescence (ms to s) is not desirable for all applications. For example, in the case of OLEDs, phosphorescent chromophores with long lifetimes are detrimental since they bring about a decrease of the overall efficiency.33
In the following, we will discuss the most recent results with particular emphasis on the most instructive examples, divided into two main classes in which phosphorescence is switched on by: (i) rigidification of the matrix (in a crystal or polymeric matrix) or (ii) interaction with other molecules of the same type or a different type (heavy-atom effect).
1. Rigidification-induced phosphorescence
Reducing the mobility (e.g., rotation) of a chromophore is one of the most explored and effective strategies to increase the phosphorescence quantum yield by diminishing the impact of quenching and non-radiative processes. In the following, we refer to rigidification-induced phosphorescence when the reduced mobility is due to non-bonding interactions with the “environment” surrounding the chromophore. By far the most explored implementation of this strategy is represented by inclusion of the chromophores in a rigid crystalline lattice. To succeed in this approach the compound has to be chemically engineered, mostly in a trial and error way, to make it a crystallization synthon. Alternatively, embedding the luminophore in a rigid polymeric host matrix is another widely explored strategy to reduce their mobility and promote room temperature solid state phosphorescence. This last strategy, while less heuristic in its approach, puts narrow constraints on the nature of the employed polymeric matrix mainly due to the necessity of being light transparent and chemically compatible with the luminophore.

1.1 Rigidification induced by crystallization. 
Crystallization represents a rational strategy, highly explored in the literature, to develop persistent room temperature phosphorescent organic materials. However, the reported phosphorescence quantum yields of most metal-free organic crystals are generally rather low: Φph < 0.3. Exceptions are limited to single crystals of 4,4′-difluorobenzophenone (1),34 1,4-dibenzoyl-2,5-bis(siloxy)-benzenes (2),35 1,2,3,4,5,6-hexakis(arylthio)benzenes (3),36,37 and 2-(1-hexyl-2,6-di-methylpyridin-4H-ylidene)malononitrile (4)38 (Fig. 3). Therefore, the design of metal-free chromophores with high quantum yields under ambient conditions remains a formidable challenge mostly due to the trial and error nature intrinsic to the stringent requirements for preparing high quality crystalline materials.
 Fig. 3  Chemical structures of high quantum yield solid state crystalline phosphorescent molecules. Phosphorescence quantum yield (Φ) and lifetime of the lowest triplet excited state (τ) are reported for comparison. 
The first examples of a crystal engineering approach to efficient organic phosphorescence is represented by simple pure organic chromophores, such as benzophenone and 4,4′-dibromobiphenyl.34 Benzophenone and its derivatives containing halogen atoms 1, 5–9 (Fig. 4) are poorly emissive when dissolved in good solvents, adsorbed on TLC plates, or doped into polymer films, but display quite intense phosphorescence at room temperature upon crystal formation. The phenomenon is general for this class of materials and the long lifetime of the emitting excited states (τ up to 4.8 ms) confirms the spin-forbidden nature of the radiative transition. The restriction of rotational motion due to multiple inter-molecular interactions induced by physical confinement in the crystalline lattice is mainly responsible for the enhancement of phosphorescence in the solid state.
 Fig. 4  Chemical structures of benzophenone derivatives displaying crystallization induced phosphorescence.34 
That the interplay between non-bonding interactions in the solid state molecular arrangement is critical for the observation of solid state phosphorescence is elegantly evidenced in the study of crystalline compound 2 (Fig. 3). It exhibits solid-state phosphorescence with excellent quantum yield and long lifetime, as reported in Fig. 3. Comparison between the corresponding bis(trimethylsilyl)- and bis(silylmethyl)-substituted benzenes revealed that the siloxy group is essential for the excellent luminescence performance.39 In the crystalline structure, the hydrogen bonds between the carbonyl oxygens and hydrogens of the tert-butyl group bonded to the silicon diminish intramolecular motion, slowing down the rate of non-radiative decay of the phosphorescent excited state. According to DFT calculations, excitation to S1 occurs via an n → π* transition from a silicon-attached oxygen atom to the carbonyl moieties. It is proposed that the remarkable luminescence performance of 2 is related to the stabilization of T1 by σ–n conjugation between Si–C σ-orbital(s) and the half-vacant nonbonding orbital on the oxygen of the siloxy group. ESR experiments support the proposed generation of the paramagnetic triplet state. The efficient induction of phosphorescence by siloxy groups, whose effect is remarkably greater than that of bromine, is unique and is important for future development in the field.
Another benzophenone derivative displaying bright and long-lived phosphorescence is compound 10 (Fig. 5): the crystalline powder displays green phosphorescence with Φph = 0.35 and τ(T1) = 0.2 s, while no emission is recorded in solution or amorphous powder, unless the sample is cooled down to 77 K.40 The authors examined a series of these benzophenone compounds featuring aromatic moieties to investigate the spin–orbit coupling constant and its correlation with the (n,π*) character of the involved excited states in the series. The excellent performance of compound 10 is related to the presence of a T2 state with a strong (n,π*) character, located slightly lower than the S1 excited state populated by light excitation. This assures a strong spin–orbit coupling, which promotes an efficient intersystem crossing. T2 rapidly deactivates, by internal conversion, to T1, which displays a strong (π,π*) character and thus a much longer lifetime compared to the archetypal benzophenone.
 Fig. 5  Chemical structure and photophysical properties of a benzophenone derivative.40 
Compound 3 (Fig. 3) is based on a hexathiobenzene core and it exhibits no luminescence in fluid solution and a very intense green phosphorescence when the molecule experiences a rigid environment (i.e. in a frozen solution at low temperature or in the crystalline state):36 an emission quantum yield of 1.0 was reported for the crystalline state. This is a consequence of a decrease of intramolecular rotations and motions; conformational and rotamer issues along with substituent effects might also play a role. A detailed computational study disclosed an important role of CH–π interactions: indeed, the analog of molecule 3 featuring six isopropyl groups instead of six tolyl groups attached to the sulfur atoms is not luminescent also in a rigid matrix because of a different nature of the lowest triplet excited state showing a very efficient non-radiative inter system crossing to the singlet ground state. Compound 3 has been exploited in luminescent organic nanocrystals and light-emitting diodes with a fully solution processable technology. In order to rationalize the optical properties as a function of the chemical structure, a series of functionalized persulfurated benzene molecules were analyzed from the point of view of optical properties and crystal packing.37 All compounds exhibit very similar optical properties in terms of the energy of S1 and T1 excited states: they are non-emitting in solution at room temperature and phosphorescent in the solid state at room temperature with emission quantum yields ranging from 0.06 to 1.0. The authors suggest that the restriction of molecular rotations and motions is the most important factor for observing phosphorescence enhancement, but a conformational issue can also be responsible for the differences observed in the phosphorescence emission quantum yields in a rigid environment.
Recently, it was proven that even simple aromatic hydrocarbons in the form of aggregated hydrosol of benz(a)anthracene show crystallization induced phosphorescence at room temperature.41 The crystalline microstructures obtained by re-precipitation of benz(a)anthracene using sodium dodecyl sulfate as a soft template display a long lived (ms timescale) red emission. Theoretical calculations suggest that restriction of intermolecular motion induced by molecular packing is again responsible for locking the molecular conformation, thus hindering non-radiative deactivation pathways.
It is important to appreciate that in all these classes of materials, where phosphorescence is induced by solid state arrangement, any perturbation able to alter the crystalline lattice can cause changes in the luminescence properties allowing the development of “smart” mechanosensitive materials. This possibility is exploited in a set of carbazole-benzophenone based molecules (compounds 11–13 in Fig. 6) with a donor–acceptor structure.42 These compounds exhibit long-lived solid state phosphorescence with τ up to 520 ms. All of these chromophores display a reversible mechanochromism between crystalline and amorphous states, accompanying the presence and disappearance of triplet emissions.
 Fig. 6  Chemical structure and the corresponding photophysical properties of carbazole–benzophenone based molecules. Φcryst and Φamorph represent phosphorescence quantum yields in the crystalline and amorphous phases, respectively.42 
Simultaneous fluorescence and phosphorescence in a single pure organic compound under ambient conditions is unusual. This rare property has been applied to obtain mechanosensitive solid-state emission color tuning in donor–acceptor type dipenylsulfone derivatives. In particular, 4-iodo-4′-(N-carbazolyl)diphenylsulfone (compound 14 in Fig. 7) displays a strong solid-state emission composed by the superposition of a very strong fluorescence peak together with a weak phosphorescence peak separated by over 150 nm in the crystalline state in air. Mechanical grinding of the crystals leads to an amorphous powder, which exhibits an unusually wide range of blue shift in its emission: the color changes from orange to purple due to the disruption of the crystalline lattice that affects phosphorescence and not fluorescence.43,44 Similar results have been obtained for another carbazole derivative, namely 4-(carbazol-9-yl)benzaldehyde, which exhibits reversible conversion from phosphorescence to fluorescence by grinding.45
 Fig. 7  Chemical structure of donor–acceptor type diphenylsulfone derivative 14 and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of 14 at different grinding times. Excitation wavelength: 350 nm.43 Copyright © 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Adapted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Crystallization-induced phosphorescence has been reported also for triphenylphosphine chromophores with a 27-time increase of the phosphorescence quantum yield going from solution to crystals (Φ = 26.8%).46


1.2 Rigidification induced by encapsulation in a polymer matrix. 
Embedding molecules in the rigid environment of a polymeric matrix is another valuable strategy to inhibit vibrational relaxation and quenching by impurities. This is, at least in principle, a more general approach to inhibit non-radiative pathways compared to rigidification through molecular engineering of highly crystalline chromophores, which has proved to be highly successful, but intrinsically heuristic in nature.
Bright room temperature phosphorescence has been achieved by embedding purely organic phosphors into an amorphous glassy polymer matrix (Fig. 8). The tacticity of PMMA strongly affects the quantum efficiency of the embedded organic phosphors: isotactic PMMA most efficiently suppresses the non-radiative triplet decay and allows the embedded organic chromophore to achieve high phosphorescence quantum yield.47 This system can also be used as a temperature sensor: phosphorescence intensity becomes highly sensitive to temperature by embedding the compound into a temperature-sensitive matrix, such as PMMA with a low glass transition temperature.
 Fig. 8  Chemical structure of phosphor 15 and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of 15 in thin films and embedded in isotactic PMMA (iPMMA), atactic PMMA (aPMMA) and syndiotactic PMMA (sPMMA). λex = 365 nm.47 Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Cross-linking between the chromophoric unit reported in Fig. 8 and polymer matrices via Diels–Alder click chemistry results in a sharp increase in phosphorescence quantum efficiency: ca. two to five times higher than that of phosphor-doped polymer systems having no such covalent linkage.48 This strategy is a new and versatile method to restrict molecular motion and induce room temperature phosphorescence.
The design principle described for compound 10 has been used, in a similar way, to switch on the phosphorescence of naphthalimide derivatives in PMMA films.49 Naphthalimide chromophore 16 shows very weak phosphorescence in PMMA films, a result that can be rationalized on the basis of the schematic Jablonski diagram shown in Fig. 9. The lowest singlet and triplet excited states are separated by a large energy difference, as expected for (π,π*) transition (see above). The large energy difference brings about low spin–orbit coupling, so that population of the T1 state is inefficient. Compound 17 carries a trimethoxyphenyl substituent on the imide nitrogen, which introduces a charge-transfer transition, characterized by a much smaller singlet–triplet energy splitting. As reported in Fig. 9, fast intersystem crossing between 1CT and 3CT is expected, which then results in the efficient population of the lowest 3(π,π*) state by internal conversion. Moreover, encapsulation of the naphthalimide chromophore 17 in a PMMA film switches on the phosphorescence characterized by Φ = 0.039 and τ = 0.23 s.
 Fig. 9  Chemical structure of naphthalimide chromophores 16 and 1749 and the corresponding Jablonski diagram showing the most relevant photophysical processes (solid line for absorption, dashed line for emission processes and wavy lines for non-radiative processes). 
Amorphous rigid steroidal compounds have also been applied to minimize quenching of long-lived triplet excited states and achieve efficient and persistent phosphorescence in pure organic amorphous guest materials in air.50–52 These types of host–guest systems enabled the fabrication of afterglow OLEDs by introducing an organic aromatic phosphorescent emitter layer into an OLED structure.53
Besides rigid polymeric matrices, gels represent a flexible and highly tunable matrix ideal for controlling the environment of luminophores. Thermally on–off reversible room temperature phosphorescence has been achieved by entrapping 3-bromoquinoline (18 in Fig. 10) into supramolecular gels formed by the self-assembly of sorbitol derivatives.54 The gel state exhibits strong phosphorescence. The chromophore is entrapped in the hydrophobic 3D network structure of gels, thereby restricting the motion of 18 and avoiding the quenching of its phosphorescence.
 Fig. 10  Room temperature phosphorescence (RTP) spectra of 3-bromoquinoline 18 in a gel (black curve) and sodium deoxycholate solution (red curve).54 Adapted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Compound 19 (Fig. 11) represents a peculiar case of room temperature phosphorescence triggered by encapsulation in a polymer matrix.55 It contains the previously discussed hexathiobenzene chromophore 3, which is not phosphorescent in fluid solution and becomes highly phosphorescent upon crystallization or rigidification of the matrix, appended with six terpyridine ligands at its periphery. The absorption spectrum shows no ground-state interaction between the central chromophore and the terpyridine ligands. No luminescence is observed in fluid solution upon excitation of either the core or the peripheral terpyridine ligands, while phosphorescence (Φ = 0.02, τ = 1.7, 11.6 μs) is observed in the solid state. Upon titration of 19 in air-equilibrated THF solution with Mg(ClO4)2 salt, a red-shifted absorption band appears and reaches its maximum intensity upon the addition of three metal ions per molecule. Concomitantly, a phosphorescence band with a maximum at 545 nm, very similar to that observed for the solid sample of 19, increases up to the addition of 3 equivalents of metal ions reaching a phosphorescence quantum yield of 0.10. These results are rationalized by the formation of a supramolecular polymer (Fig. 11), as confirmed by DLS and AFM analysis: nanoparticles with a diameter of approximately 60 nm are formed. This structure inhibits intramolecular rotations and motions, thus favouring radiative deactivation. The supramolecular polymer can be disassembled upon fluoride addition, thus switching off the luminescence. Moreover, it performs as a light-harvesting antenna: excitation of the [Mg(tpy)2]2+ units sensitizes the hexathiobenzene core luminescence with almost unitary efficiency. The novelty of the present system is that metal ion coordination is not directly involved in the phosphorescence process; it induces the formation of a supramolecular polymer displaying phosphorescence in air equilibrated solution, light-harvesting abilities and sensing properties. Indeed, the present system is a sensor of both metal cations and fluoride anions.
 Fig. 11  Chemical formula of compound 19, which is not emissive in fluid solution, and the polymeric structure reversibly formed upon Mg(II) complexation. A picture of the corresponding solutions under UV light excitation is reported at the bottom.55 Adapted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 

2. Interaction-induced phosphorescence
Electronic interactions among chromophores or between a chromophore and the surrounding matrix is a viable route to access intense and long-lived phosphorescence by: (i) the formation of a lower lying excited state compared to the isolated chromophore or (ii) increase in the population of the phosphorescent excited state by spin–orbit coupling. Both of these approaches will be presented in the following.

2.1 Interaction among chromophores. 
Electronic interactions among chromophores favored by the close proximity and ordered array in the solid state can lead to long-lived phosphorescence from organic molecules. A successful implementation of this approach is represented by a class of compounds based on carbazolyl-1,3,5-triazine (compounds 20–23 in Fig. 12): the presence of aromatic units and O, N and P heteroatoms in their structure favors n, π* electronic transition and hence facilitates the intersystem crossing processes to populate the lowest triplet excited state.56 Upon UV excitation at 365 nm, these compounds show an intense blue emission, which is the superposition of fluorescence and phosphorescence bands, in the solid state. By switching off the UV excitation source, the fluorescence disappears and remarkably long phosphorescence is registered at wavelengths over 500 nm with a lifetime of ca. 1.0 s and an emission quantum yield of 0.01. By changing the molecular structure, as reported in Fig. 12, the color of the ultra-long phosphorescence can be tuned from green (515 nm) to red (644 nm) under ambient conditions. These results were tentatively rationalized on the basis of a stabilization of the triplet excited state of the chromophore by the formation of H-aggregates, compatible with the chromophore arrangement observed in the X-ray diffraction pattern of single crystals and computational calculations.
 Fig. 12  The steady-state photoluminescence (PL, left) and ultra-long phosphorescence (right) spectra of a series of carbazolyl-1,3,5-triazine molecules. Insets show the corresponding photographs taken before (left) and after (right) the excitation source is turned off. Excitation wavelength 365 nm at 300 K.56 Adapted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright © 2015, Rights Managed by Nature Publishing Group. 
Stable organic radicals, namely 2-(imidazo[1,2-a]pyridin-2-yl)-2-oxoacetic acid (24 in Fig. 13), containing an aromatic carbonyl group, exhibit interesting phosphorescence behaviour.57 Compound 24 displays UV phosphorescence (no emission maximum at wavelengths longer than 380 nm) in aqueous solution and white phosphorescence in the solid state with an emission maximum at 483 nm (Φph = 0.052 and a lifetime of ca. 20 μs). In the solid crystalline state, it forms one-dimensional (1D) columnar chains, in which the molecules adopt slipped anti-parallel stacking modes. Although the stacking distance is outside van der Waals contact, there exist intermolecular close contacts in the crystal structure between neighboring molecules that might be responsible for intermolecular charge transfer interactions, leading to broad and lower energy phosphorescence bands compared to those observed in solution. The color can be tuned: the sodium salt of compound 24 exhibits blue phosphorescence. Although information on the crystal structures is not present for the sodium salt, the change in emission color is expected to be related to a different crystal packing.
 Fig. 13  Formula and stacking interaction in the crystalline carboxylic acid radical 2-(imidazo[1,2-a]pyridin-2-yl)-2-oxoacetic acid 24.57 Adapted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright © 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Crystalline isophthalic acid (25 in Fig. 14) and analogous benzoic acids are another class of luminophores that exhibit room-temperature phosphorescence with an afterglow that lasts for several seconds.58 The phosphorescence mechanism of 25 is attributed to the forced packing of molecules, which enables dimer formation leading to charge transfer (CT) absorption and radical ion pair (RIP) formation. Since separated radical pairs derived from CT have two electron spins over two molecules, the electron spins are only weakly coupled and thus the difference in energy between singlet (1RIP) and triplet (3RIP) excited states of radical ion pairs is so low that intersystem crossing is highly favored and finally leads to the population of the T1 excited state of the benzoic acid monomer, as schematically reported in Fig. 15. The authors examine the effect of a magnetic field and report that stronger phosphorescence intensity is observed in the presence of a magnetic field. Moreover, as usual, the suppression of vibronic motions in the crystal favors phosphorescence compared to non-radiative decay of the T1 excited state. Delayed fluorescence by triplet–triplet annihilation (eqn (9)) was also reported by the same authors. The phosphorescent afterglow facilitates time-resolved detection and such phosphorescent materials are promising candidates for bioimaging applications.
 Fig. 14  Phosphorescence of crystalline benzoic acid derivatives on irradiation with white light (WL) or at 365 nm (UV) for isophthalic acid (25), terephthalic acid (26), and pyromellitic acid (27).58 Adapted with permission from ref. 58. Published by the PCCP Owner Societies. 
 Fig. 15  Schematic energy level diagram showing the most important photophysical processes occurring for isophthalic acid 25 in solution and in crystals.58 Adapted with permission from ref. 58. Published by the PCCP Owner Societies. 
Both delayed fluorescence and persistent phosphorescence (τ > 290 ms) from isophthalic acid crystals were reported under ambient conditions.59


2.2 Interaction between the chromophore and the matrix. 
Besides reduction of vibrational deactivation pathways and quenching by dioxygen a matrix surrounding a luminophore can have a direct electronic effect on the guest molecule, thus affecting the excited state dynamics of the guest molecules. The most effective realization of this concept utilizes a heavy halogen atom in the matrix embedding the luminophores to further increase the intersystem crossing rate of the coupled units. In order to fully take advantage of this effect, the heavy atom should be as close as possible to the molecular moiety where the triplet is produced. Therefore, in the case of carbonyl compounds, the heavy atom should be “bound” to carbonyl oxygen. The tendency of halogen atoms to interact with aromatic carbonyls (halogen bonding)60 can thus be exploited.
The first example of this approach is represented by 2,5-dihexyloxy-4-bromobenzaldehyde 15, which exhibits green phosphorescence at 500 nm, with a quantum yield of 0.029 and a lifetime of 5.4 ms when excited at 360 nm in its crystal form.61 Single-crystal X-ray diffraction (XRD) revealed that in the crystal of 15 there is an extremely close contact between the carbonyl oxygen and the bromine of the neighboring molecule. The CO⋯Br angle of 126° falls within the range of reported halogen bonds and the distance 2.86 Å is among the shortest bromine–oxygen halogen bonds ever reported,60,62 thus producing a very efficient heavy atom effect. However, 15 suffers greatly from self-quenching and to improve its performance, 15 needs to be diluted in the solid state, but it also needs to maintain its halogen-bonding motif that assures a strong heavy atom effect on the carbonyl moiety. This result has been achieved by using 2,5-dihexyloxy-1,4-dibromobenzene (28, Fig. 16), a bi-halogenated analogue to 15 with a second bromine in place of its aldehyde group. The crystals made of 28 do not exhibit phosphorescence and XRD investigation revealed a halogen–halogen interaction very similar to the halogen bonding seen in crystals of 15. XRD analysis of 15/28 mixed crystals containing ∼10 wt% 15 revealed a unit cell identical to that of pure 15 crystals. The resulting mixed crystals (0.001 to ∼1 wt% 15) exhibit green phosphorescence very similar to the phosphorescent portion of the spectrum from pure 15 crystals, but with a much higher quantum yield (up to 0.5, τ = 8.3 ms).
 Fig. 16  Bromobenzaldehyde purely organic phosphorescent crystals. (A) Benchmark aldehyde emitter and host, 15 and 28, respectively. (B) Schematic illustration of 15 (emitter) crystals, non-emissive 28 (host) crystals, and bright phosphorescent 15/28 (mixed crystals).63 
Phosphorescence from the mixed crystals is polarized, indicating that guest molecules are ordered in the host crystal. While host compounds tolerate a surprising variety of emitter sizes, both oversized and undersized, maximum quantum efficiency is reached when emitters and hosts are identical in size and the former is present at 1–10 wt% of total solids. The optimum quantum efficiency for these systems appears, empirically, to be in the range of 0.45–0.55. To fine-tune emission color, altering the halogen substitution of the emitter molecule affords sequential 5–30 nm changes to emission maxima within the green region, without significantly affecting the structure of the mixed crystals.63
In a similar approach, modification of alkyl terminal groups with bromine atoms of bromobenzene derivatives 29–32 (Fig. 17) enhances the phosphorescence efficiency in the crystalline state by manipulating heavy-atom interaction, as depicted in Fig. 17B.64 Bright green phosphorescence is observed for all these dibromobenzene derivatives in the solid state under ambient conditions due to the heavy-atom effect. By comparing differently substituted compounds (Fig. 17B), the ones with four bromine atoms showed higher luminescence quantum yield than the ones with two bromines. From the single-crystal analysis, it is evident that the enhancement of phosphorescence results from increased intermolecular heavy-atom interaction in the crystals of the compounds with more bromine atoms. Despite these attractive qualities, the mixed crystal motif defining these materials is very much demanding in terms of crystal packing, chemical structure, and sample preparation.
 Fig. 17  (A) Proposed strategy of manipulating heavy-atom interaction in the solid state. (B) Chemical structures of dibromobenzene derivatives.64 

Conclusions
Until the last decade, most of the investigated phosphorescent materials were based on metal complexes, widely used in OLEDs, sensors, and photoelectrochemical cells. Although phosphorescence of organic molecules has been known since the 1940s, only recently have organic phosphorescent materials attracted increasing attention from theoretical and applicative points of view. Indeed, organic phosphors offer advantages of higher processability, biocompatibility and synthetic flexibility, which enable the modulation of optical, electronic and solubility properties.
The design principles of organic molecules displaying bright and long-lived phosphorescence are based on old and well-known concepts of photophysics, revisited for a new application: (i) prevention of dioxygen quenching by encapsulation of the chromophore in a matrix or as a crystal; (ii) reduction of non-radiative decay rates of the phosphorescent excited state by rigidification of the system; (iii) efficient population of the phosphorescent excited state by promoting spin–orbit coupling via intramolecular or intermolecular heavy-atom effects and via reduction of the energy separation between excited states involved in the intersystem crossing process.
Some interesting applications of these materials have already been reported and highlighted in the present review. The challenge now is to develop these potential applications from a laboratory test up to the industrial level in a variety of fields, ranging from sensors to lighting and information encoding devices. A particularly stimulating field of research in which organic phosphors can outperform their metal-based counterparts is that of phosphorescent sensors of viscosity, temperature or specific analytes: upon binding to a proper phosphor, luminescence is switched on by restriction of molecular motion. This fascinating area of research can have a strong impact on the imaging of nanostructures and biological objects by taking advantage of time-gated detection on a long-term scale (from μs to ms), which eliminates scattered light and autofluorescence of the sample by low-cost equipment.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the European Commission ERC Starting Grant (PhotoSi, 278912).
References

          J. P. Simons, Photochemistry and Spectroscopy, Wiley-Interscience, London,  1971 Search PubMed .

          N. J. Turro, Molecular Photochemistry, Benjamin, New York,  1965 Search PubMed .

          J. A. Barltrop and J. D. Coyle, Principles of Photochemistry, Wiley, Chichester,  1975 Search PubMed .
S. K. Lower and M. A. El-Sayed, The Triplet State and Molecular Electronic Processes in Organic Molecules, Chem. Rev., 1966, 66(2), 199–241 CrossRef CAS .
G. N. Lewis, D. Lipkin and T. T. Magel, Reversible Photochemical Processes in Rigid Media. A Study of the Phosphorescent State, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1941, 63(11), 3005–3018 CrossRef CAS .
G. N. Lewis and M. Kasha, Phosphorescence and the Triplet State, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1944, 66(12), 2100–2116 CrossRef CAS .
G. N. Lewis and M. Calvin, Paramagnetism of the Phosphorescent State, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1945, 67(7), 1232–1233 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Evans, Photomagnetism of Triplet States of Organic Molecules, Nature, 1955, 176(4486), 777–778 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Schulman and C. Walling, Phosphorescence of Adsorbed Ionic Organic Molecules at Room Temperature, Science, 1972, 178(4086), 53–54 CAS .
N. J. Turro and M. Aikawa, Phosphorescence and Delayed Fluorescence of 1-Chloronaphthalene in Micellar Solutions, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102(15), 4866–4870 CrossRef CAS .

          J. H. Fendler, Photochemistry in Organized Media, VCH Publishers,  1983, vol. 60 Search PubMed .
S. Scypinski and L. J. Cline Love, Room-Temperature Phosphorescence of Polynuclear Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Cyclodextrins, Anal. Chem., 1984, 56(3), 322–327 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ramamurthy, D. F. Eaton and J. V. Caspar, Photochemical and Photophysical Studies of Organic Molecules Included within Zeolites, Acc. Chem. Res., 1992, 25(7), 299–307 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Parola, F. Pina, E. Ferreira, M. Maestri and V. Balzani, Photoinduced Electron- and Energy-Transfer Processes of Biacetyl Imprisoned in a Hemicarcerand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118(46), 11610–11616 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Vo-Dinh, Room Temperature Phosphorimetry in Chemical Analysis, John Wiley & Sons, New York,  1984 Search PubMed .
S. Mukherjee and P. Thilagar, Recent Advances in Purely Organic Phosphorescent Materials, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51(55), 10988–11003 RSC .
J. Mei, Y. Hong, J. W. Y. Lam, A. Qin, Y. Tang and B. Z. Tang, Aggregation-Induced Emission: The Whole Is More Brilliant than the Parts, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(31), 5429–5479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mei, N. L. C. Leung, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Aggregation-Induced Emission: Together We Shine, United We Soar!, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115(21), 11718–11940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-R. Wang, Y.-Y. Gong, W.-Z. Yuan and Y.-M. Zhang, Crystallization-Induced Phosphorescence of Pure Organic Luminogens, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2016, 27, 1184–1192 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, R. Chen, C. Zheng and W. Huang, Excited State Modulation for Organic Afterglow: Materials and Applications, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(45), 9920–9940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ceroni, Design of Phosphorescent Organic Molecules: Old Concepts under a New Light, Chem., 2016, 1(4), 524–526 CAS .

          V. Balzani, P. Ceroni and A. Juris, Photochemistry and Photophysics: Concepts, Research, Applications, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2014 Search PubMed .

          N. J. Turro, V. Ramamurthy and J. C. Scaiano, Modern Molecular Photochemistry of Organic Molecules, University Science Books, Sausalito,  2010 Search PubMed .

          P. Klán and J. Wirz, Photochemistry of Organic Compounds: From Concepts to Practice, Wiley, Chichester,  2009 Search PubMed .
M. Kasha, Characterization of Electronic Transitions in Complex Molecules, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1950, 9, 14–19 RSC .
M. A. El-Sayed, Spin-Orbit Coupling and the Radiationless Processes in Nitrogen Heterocyclics, J. Chem. Phys., 1963, 38(12), 2834–2838 CrossRef CAS .

Organic Molecular Photophysics, ed. J. B. Birks, Wiley, Bristol,  1975 Search PubMed .
H. Okabe and A. W. Noyes, The Relative Intensities of Fluorescence and Phosphorescence in Biacetyl Vapor, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1957, 79(4), 801–806 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Montalti, A. Credi, L. Prodi and M. T. Gandolfi, Handbook of Photochemistry, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  2006 Search PubMed .
C. A. Parker and C. G. Hatchard, Delayed Fluorescence of Pyrene in Ethanol, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1963, 59, 284–295 RSC .
H. Sternlicht, G. C. Nieman and G. W. Robinson, Triplet–Triplet Annihilation and Delayed Fluorescence in Molecular Aggregates, J. Chem. Phys., 1963, 38(6), 1326 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Hochstrasser, Transfer of Triplet Excitation Energy in Benzophenone Crystals, J. Chem. Phys., 1963, 39(11), 3153 CrossRef CAS .
C. Murawski, K. Leo and M. C. Gather, Efficiency Roll-off in Organic Light-Emitting Diodes, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25(47), 6801–6827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Z. Yuan, X. Y. Shen, H. Zhao, J. W. Y. Lam, L. Tang, P. Lu, C. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, Q. Zheng, J. Z. Sun, Y. Ma and B. Z. Tang, Crystallization-Induced Phosphorescence of Pure Organic Luminogens at Room Temperature, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(13), 6090–6099 CAS .
M. Shimizu, Y. Asai, Y. Takeda, A. Yamatani and T. Hiyama, Twisting Strategy Applied to N,N-Diorganoquinacridones Leads to Organic Chromophores Exhibiting Efficient Solid-State Fluorescence, Tetrahedron Lett., 2011, 52(32), 4084–4089 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bergamini, A. Fermi, C. Botta, U. Giovanella, S. Di Motta, F. Negri, R. Peresutti, M. Gingras and P. Ceroni, A Persulfurated Benzene Molecule Exhibits Outstanding Phosphorescence in Rigid Environments: From Computational Study to Organic Nanocrystals and OLED Applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1(15), 2717–2724 RSC .
A. Fermi, G. Bergamini, R. Peresutti, E. Marchi, M. Roy, P. Ceroni and M. Gingras, Molecular Asterisks with a Persulfurated Benzene Core Are among the Strongest Organic Phosphorescent Emitters in the Solid State, Dyes Pigm., 2014, 110, 113–122 CrossRef CAS .
R. Boonsin, G. Chadeyron, J.-P. Roblin, D. Boyer and R. Mahiou, Development of Rare-Earth-Free Phosphors for Eco-Energy Lighting Based LEDs, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 9580–9587 RSC .
M. Shimizu, R. Shigitani, M. Nakatani, K. Kuwabara, Y. Miyake, K. Tajima, H. Sakai and T. Hasobe, Siloxy Group-Induced Highly Efficient Room Temperature Phosphorescence with Long Lifetime, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(21), 11631–11639 CAS .
W. Zhao, Z. He, J. W. Y. Lam, Q. Peng, H. Ma, Z. Shuai, G. Bai, J. Hao and B. Z. Tang, Rational Molecular Design for Achieving Persistent and Efficient Pure Organic Room-Temperature Phosphorescence, Chem, 2016, 1(4), 592–602 CAS .
S. Maity, P. Mazumdar, M. Shyamal, G. P. Sahoo and A. Misra, Crystal Induced Phosphorescence from Benz(a)anthracene Microcrystals at Room Temperature, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2016, 157, 61–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, G. Chen, Q. Peng, W. Z. Yuan, Y. Xie, S. Li, Y. Zhang and B. Z. Tang, Achieving Persistent Room Temperature Phosphorescence and Remarkable Mechanochromism from Pure Organic Luminogens, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(40), 6195–6201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Mao, Z. Yang, Y. Mu, Y. Zhang, Y. F. Wang, Z. Chi, C. C. Lo, S. Liu, A. Lien and J. Xu, Linearly Tunable Emission Colors Obtained from a Fluorescent-Phosphorescent Dual-Emission Compound by Mechanical Stimuli, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54(21), 6270–6273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, Z. Mao, X. Zhang, D. Ou, Y. Mu, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, S. Liu, Z. Chi, J. Xu, Y. C. Wu, P. Y. Lu, A. Lien and M. R. Bryce, Intermolecular Electronic Coupling of Organic Units for Efficient Persistent Room-Temperature Phosphorescence, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55(6), 2181–2185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xue, J. Sun, P. Chen, P. Wang, B. Yao, P. Gong, Z. Zhang and R. Lu, Luminescence Switching of a Persistent Room-Temperature Phosphorescent Pure Organic Molecule in Response to External Stimuli, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51(52), 10381–10384 RSC .
P. Xue, P. Wang, P. Chen, J. Ding and R. Lu, Enhanced Room-Temperature Phosphorescence of Triphenylphosphine Derivatives without Metal and Heavy Atoms in Their Crystal Phase, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(57), 51683–51686 RSC .
D. Lee, O. Bolton, B. C. Kim, J. H. Youk, S. Takayama and J. Kim, Room Temperature Phosphorescence of Metal-Free Organic Materials in Amorphous Polymer Matrices, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135(16), 6325–6329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Kwon, Y. Yu, C. Coburn, A. W. Phillips, K. Chung, A. Shanker, J. Jung, G. Kim, K. Pipe, S. R. Forrest, J. H. Youk, J. Gierschner and J. Kim, Suppressing Molecular Motions for Enhanced Room-Temperature Phosphorescence of Metal-Free Organic Materials, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8947 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, C. Xu, T. Wang, C. Zhou, J. Du, Z. Wang, H. Xu, T. Xie, G. Bi, J. Jiang, X. Zhang, J. N. Demas, C. O. Trindle, Y. Luo and G. Zhang, Versatile Room-Temperature-Phosphorescent Materials Prepared from N-Substituted Naphthalimides: Emission Enhancement and Chemical Conjugation, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55(34), 9872–9876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hirata, K. Totani, J. Zhang, T. Yamashita, H. Kaji, S. R. Marder, T. Watanabe and C. Adachi, Efficient Persistent Room Temperature Phosphorescence in Organic Amorphous Materials under Ambient Conditions, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23(27), 3386–3397 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Katsurada, S. Hirata, K. Totani, T. Watanabe and M. Vacha, Photoreversible On-Off Recording of Persistent Room-Temperature Phosphorescence, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3(12), 1726–1737 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hirata and M. Vacha, Circularly Polarized Persistent Room-Temperature Phosphorescence from Metal-Free Chiral Aromatics in Air, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7(8), 1539–1545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kabe, N. Notsuka, K. Yoshida and C. Adachi, Afterglow Organic Light-Emitting Diode, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(4), 655–660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Wang, X. Yang, Q. Wang and Y. Yang, Ion-Unquenchable and Thermally “on-Off” reversible Room Temperature Phosphorescence of 3-Bromoquinoline Induced by Supramolecular Gels, Langmuir, 2015, 31(1), 486–491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fermi, G. Bergamini, M. Roy, M. Gingras and P. Ceroni, Turn-on Phosphorescence by Metal Coordination to a Multivalent Terpyridine Ligand: A New Paradigm for Luminescent Sensors, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(17), 6395–6400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. An, C. Zheng, Y. Tao, R. Chen, H. Shi, T. Chen, Z. Wang, H. Li, R. Deng, X. Liu and W. Huang, Stabilizing Triplet Excited States for Ultralong Organic Phosphorescence, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14(7), 685–690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-P. Yong, Y.-M. Zhang, W.-L. She and Y.-Z. Li, Stacking-Induced White-Light and Blue-Light Phosphorescence from Purely Organic Radical Materials, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(46), 18520 RSC .
S. Kuno, H. Akeno, H. Ohtani and H. Yuasa, Visible Room-Temperature Phosphorescence of Pure Organic Crystals via a Radical-Ion-Pair Mechanism, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17(24), 15989–15995 RSC .
Y. Gong, L. Zhao, Q. Peng, D. Fan, W. Z. Yuan, Y. Zhang and B. Z. Tang, Crystallization-Induced Dual Emission from Metal- and Heavy Atom-Free Aromatic Acids and Esters, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6(8), 4438–4444 RSC .
R. Berger, G. Resnati, P. Metrangolo, E. Weber and J. Hulliger, Organic Fluorine Compounds: A Great Opportunity for Enhanced Materials Properties, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40(7), 3496–3508 RSC .
O. Bolton, K. Lee, H.-J. Kim, K. Y. Lin and J. Kim, Activating Efficient Phosphorescence from Purely Organic Materials by Crystal Design, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3(3), 205–210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cavallo, P. Metrangolo, T. Pilati, G. Resnati, M. Sansotera and G. Terraneo, Halogen Bonding: A General Route in Anion Recognition and Coordination, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39(10), 3772–3783 RSC .
O. Bolton, D. Lee, J. Jung and J. Kim, Tuning the Photophysical Properties of Metal-Free Room Temperature Organic Phosphors via Compositional Variations in Bromobenzaldehyde/dibromobenzene Mixed Crystals, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26(22), 6644–6649 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shi, Z. An, P. Z. Li, J. Yin, G. Xing, T. He, H. Chen, J. Wang, H. Sun, W. Huang and Y. Zhao, Enhancing Organic Phosphorescence by Manipulating Heavy-Atom Interaction, Cryst. Growth Des., 2016, 16(2), 808–813 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
τ(S1) = 1/(kic + kfl + kisc)	(1)
τ(T1) = 1/(kisc′ + kph)	(2)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic Jablonski diagram for a generic organic molecule: solid line for absorption, dashed line for emission processes and wavy lines for non-radiative processes.	 
Φfl = kfl/(kic + kfl + kisc)	(3)
Φph = ηisc × ηph = kphkisc/[(kisc′ + kph)(kic + kfl + kisc)]	(4)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic Jablonski diagram for naphthalene (left) and benzophenone (right) in a rigid matrix at 77 K (solid line for emission processes and wavy lines for non-radiative processes).	 
kisc(S1 → T1) increases ⇒ τ(S1) and Φfl decrease, ηisc(S1 → T1) increases	(5)
kisc′(T1 → S0) increases ⇒ τ(T1) and ηph decrease	(6)
kph(T1 → S0) increases ⇒ τ(T1) decreases and ηph increases	(7)

Naphthalene	0.55	0.051	2.3	0.45	0.05	0.82 × 106	0.39
1-Fluoronaphthalene	0.84	0.056	1.5	0.16	0.23	0.57 × 106	0.42
1-Chloronaphthalene	0.058	0.30	0.29	0.94	1.10	49 × 106	2.35
1-Bromonaphthalene	0.0026	0.27	0.02	1	13.5	1850 × 106	36.5
1-Iodonaphthalene	<0.0005	0.38	0.002	1	190	>6000 × 106	310
τ0/τ = Φ0/Φ = 1 + kqτ0[Q]	(8)
T1 + T1 → S1 + S0	(9)

 	Fig. 3  Chemical structures of high quantum yield solid state crystalline phosphorescent molecules. Phosphorescence quantum yield (Φ) and lifetime of the lowest triplet excited state (τ) are reported for comparison.	 

 	Fig. 4  Chemical structures of benzophenone derivatives displaying crystallization induced phosphorescence.34	 

 	Fig. 5  Chemical structure and photophysical properties of a benzophenone derivative.40	 

 	Fig. 6  Chemical structure and the corresponding photophysical properties of carbazole–benzophenone based molecules. Φcryst and Φamorph represent phosphorescence quantum yields in the crystalline and amorphous phases, respectively.42	 

 	Fig. 7  Chemical structure of donor–acceptor type diphenylsulfone derivative 14 and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of 14 at different grinding times. Excitation wavelength: 350 nm.43 Copyright © 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Adapted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 8  Chemical structure of phosphor 15 and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of 15 in thin films and embedded in isotactic PMMA (iPMMA), atactic PMMA (aPMMA) and syndiotactic PMMA (sPMMA). λex = 365 nm.47 Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Chemical structure of naphthalimide chromophores 16 and 1749 and the corresponding Jablonski diagram showing the most relevant photophysical processes (solid line for absorption, dashed line for emission processes and wavy lines for non-radiative processes).	 

 	Fig. 10  Room temperature phosphorescence (RTP) spectra of 3-bromoquinoline 18 in a gel (black curve) and sodium deoxycholate solution (red curve).54 Adapted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Chemical formula of compound 19, which is not emissive in fluid solution, and the polymeric structure reversibly formed upon Mg(II) complexation. A picture of the corresponding solutions under UV light excitation is reported at the bottom.55 Adapted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  The steady-state photoluminescence (PL, left) and ultra-long phosphorescence (right) spectra of a series of carbazolyl-1,3,5-triazine molecules. Insets show the corresponding photographs taken before (left) and after (right) the excitation source is turned off. Excitation wavelength 365 nm at 300 K.56 Adapted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright © 2015, Rights Managed by Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  Formula and stacking interaction in the crystalline carboxylic acid radical 2-(imidazo[1,2-a]pyridin-2-yl)-2-oxoacetic acid 24.57 Adapted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright © 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Phosphorescence of crystalline benzoic acid derivatives on irradiation with white light (WL) or at 365 nm (UV) for isophthalic acid (25), terephthalic acid (26), and pyromellitic acid (27).58 Adapted with permission from ref. 58. Published by the PCCP Owner Societies.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic energy level diagram showing the most important photophysical processes occurring for isophthalic acid 25 in solution and in crystals.58 Adapted with permission from ref. 58. Published by the PCCP Owner Societies.	 

 	Fig. 16  Bromobenzaldehyde purely organic phosphorescent crystals. (A) Benchmark aldehyde emitter and host, 15 and 28, respectively. (B) Schematic illustration of 15 (emitter) crystals, non-emissive 28 (host) crystals, and bright phosphorescent 15/28 (mixed crystals).63	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Proposed strategy of manipulating heavy-atom interaction in the solid state. (B) Chemical structures of dibromobenzene derivatives.64	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
