Droplet energy harvesting panel   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE00357K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE00357K
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 2916-2926Droplet energy harvesting panel†

        
          
            Xiaote 
            Xu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Pengyu 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yongtao 
            Ding
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wanghuai 
            Xu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shiyuan 
            Liu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhuomin 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zuankai 
            Wang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Zhengbao 
            Yang
          
        
      *
      Department of Mechanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. E-mail: zb.yang@cityu.edu.hk
Received 
      31st January 2022
    , Accepted 31st May 2022First published on 15th June 2022AbstractBreakthroughs in high-efficiency droplet energy harvesters have been achieved by taking advantage of the transistor-inspired bulk effect; however, strategies toward large-scale application under multi-position droplet impacts are lacking. In this work, we developed a fully transparent and high-performance droplet energy harvesting (DEH) panel that allows for high-efficiency droplet energy harvesting under multi-position droplet impacts from both fixed and random positions. The proposed DEH panel possesses the superiorities of (1) high performance, originating from the bulk effect of the new coplanar-electrode transistor-inspired structure; (2) ease of integration, requiring only one patterning process to form the coplanar electrodes and one full-wave rectifier in external rectification; and (3) full transparency, endowing it with great potential for integration with solar panels and smart windows. We also developed a wireless forest monitoring system fully powered by the proposed DEH panel, showing its great potential in self-powered environmental monitoring. The DEH panel is also low-cost and facile for massive fabrication, representing a new pathway for high-efficiency droplet energy harvesting.

Broader context
Water, covering about 72% of the earth's surface, contains vast energy in various forms of water motions. For raindrops, the estimated kinetic energy is 3000 TW h per year, which is equal to 5% of the global annual energy consumption. However, such enormous energy has not yet been effectively exploited. Although high-efficiency droplet energy harvesters with transistor-inspired structures have been developed, strategies toward large-scale application under multi-position droplet impacts are lacking. Herein, we present a droplet energy harvesting (DEH) panel for high-efficiency energy harvesting under multi-position droplet impacts. The new coplanar-electrode transistor-inspired structure, which alleviates the adverse shunting effect of parasitic capacitance that deteriorates the output performance, enables the large-area DEH panel (A4-paper-sized) to generate a high output voltage of 103.47 V. Rational panel-topology designs are proposed for different application scenarios, such as random raindrops and fixed-position droplets generated by dispensers. The DEH panel also shows satisfying robustness and long-term stability. Hybrid rain-solar energy harvesting and self-powered wireless forest monitoring system are demonstrated as potential applications. Overall, the DEH panel represents a new pathway for high-efficiency droplet energy harvesting to power wireless sensor systems and the emerging internet of things.

Introduction
Renewable energy, such as water energy, solar energy, and wind energy, is a promising alternative to fossil fuels for solving the energy crisis being faced by humanity today. Water, covering about 72% of the earth's surface, contains vast energy in the form of raindrops,1,2 river flows,3 ocean waves,4 and others.5–14 Traditional hydropower plants, which are bulky and require a large-volume water supply, have achieved great success in the global energy supply system. By contrast, the enormous energy stored in droplets has not yet been effectively exploited, such as raindrops, dews, and waterfalls. For raindrops, the estimated kinetic energy is 3000 TW h per year, which is equal to 5% of the global annual energy consumption2,15,16 (the amount of global annual precipitation is about 5.05 × 105 km3, diameter of rain droplets is about 2 mm, and terminal speed of rain droplets is about 6.5 m s−1).
Recently, diverse approaches have been proposed to harvest droplet energy, including piezoelectric energy harvesters,17–21 electromagnetic generators,22,23 and liquid–solid triboelectric nanogenerators.2,24–31 However, the aforementioned approaches are limited by their respective shortcomings. For example, due to the small momentum of droplet impact, piezoelectric energy harvesters usually need to compromise between flexibility and power generation, which exerts a heavy workload on the material and structural optimization. Electromagnetic generators, usually heavy and bulky, are not efficient under a low-volume water supply. Liquid–solid triboelectric nanogenerators, based on the coupling effect of contact electrification and electrostatic induction, usually suffer from low energy conversion efficiency. Although the surface charge density of the dielectric layer can reach a relatively high level after sequential droplet impacts, the high-density surface charge cannot be fully utilized by the electrostatic induction process, resulting in a low energy conversion efficiency.24 To fully utilize the high-density surface charge, a droplet-based electricity generator (DEG) with a non-coplanar-electrode transistor-inspired structure is developed, which is capable of generating a high instantaneous power density of 50.1 W m−2 by converting the interfacial effect into the bulk effect.1
Analogous to the solar energy utilization that has evolved from solar cells in labs to solar panels in real-life applications, droplet energy harvester cells need to be assembled into an array/panel to generate sufficient power. Despite extensive efforts that have been made on droplet energy harvesters at the cell-unit level, studies on large-area array/panel designs are still lacking, especially for those based on the transistor-inspired bulk effect. Due to the alternating current output of the transistor-inspired structure, full-wave rectification is commonly required to achieve effective energy harvesting. In conventional array designs, every droplet energy harvester cell is equipped with a full-wave rectifier,32 causing high cost and inconvenience in fabrication and maintenance. Furthermore, for array/panel integration, we cannot take it for granted that the total power output is the product of the number and power output of each droplet energy harvester cell.33 Therefore, there are still some challenges in achieving a droplet energy harvesting array/panel that possesses a good combination of high output performance and ease of integration.
Herein, we introduce a fully transparent and high-performance droplet energy harvesting panel for scavenging energy from multi-position droplet impacts. The coplanar-electrode transistor-inspired DEH cell is the basis of the high-performance DEH panel. The transistor-inspired structure ensures high output performance that originates from the bulk effect, and the coplanar-electrode structure alleviates the adverse shunting effect of parasitic capacitance. Based on the coplanar-electrode DEH cell, panel-topology strategies for harvesting energy under multi-position droplet impacts from both fixed and random positions are proposed. For fixed-position droplet impacts, a “crosstalk-free” checker-like DEH panel with drainage holes is developed, effectively preventing the downstream water flow from interfering with droplet spreading in the neighboring position. For random droplet impacts, a strip-like DEH panel is proposed to improve the energy harvesting efficiency utilizing the U-shaped drain electrode for droplet contact from three directions (left, right, and bottom). The DEH panel only requires one full-wave rectifier rather than multiple rectifiers commonly required by conventional array design, which greatly reduces the cost and complexity of fabrication and maintenance. We demonstrate that the fully transparent DEH panel is capable of being integrated with solar panels. Furthermore, we developed a self-powered wireless forest monitoring system and demonstrated its temperature and smoke sensing function in a forest.
Results
Working mechanism and performance characterization of the DEH cell
The droplet energy harvesting panel consists of periodic transistor-inspired droplet energy harvesting (DEH) cells and one full-wave rectifier in external rectification. In the transistor-inspired DEH cell (Fig. 1a), the coplanar source electrode and drain electrode were separated by etching a gap with a width of 1 mm on the ITO. A fluorinated ethylene propylene (FEP) layer, a promising dielectric material with strong electron-attraction ability, fully covers the source electrode to avoid the water-induced electrical conduction between the source electrode and the drain electrode. The average open-circuit voltage and the short-circuit current are 266.6 V and 273.6 μA, respectively (see Fig. 1c). Owing to the high-performance transistor-inspired bulk effect, the DEH cell substantially outperforms conventional liquid-solid triboelectric nanogenerators based on electrostatic induction (see Fig. 1d). The detailed performance comparison of different cell devices and the corresponding large-area panels is shown in Table S1 (ESI†).
 Fig. 1  Working mechanism and performance characterization of the transistor-inspired droplet energy harvesting (DEH) cell. (a) Schematic diagram of the DEH panel and the DEH cell; (b) Schematic diagram of the working mechanism, the charge transfers from the source electrode to the drain electrode rapidly when the spreading droplet reaches the drain electrode, and gradually flows back until the droplet departs from the drain electrode; (c) Output voltage and current of the DEH cell; (d) Output performance of the different cell devices, the DEH cell based on bulk effect outperforms the double-electrode triboelectric nanogenerator (DE-TENG) and the single-electrode triboelectric nanogenerator (SE-TENG). 
The working mechanism of the DEH cell is closely related to the droplet dynamic (see Fig. 1b). Before droplet impact, the negative-charged FEP induces positive charge on the source electrode. When the spreading droplet reaches the drain electrode, the positive charge of the source electrode transfers to the drain electrode rapidly; thus, a high instantaneous output is generated. During droplet retracting, the positive charge gradually flows back to the source electrode. The working mechanism is proven by the time-resolved voltage waveform in Fig. S1 (ESI†). In this transistor-inspired structure, the two coplanar electrodes and the spreading water droplet serve as the source, drain, and gate, respectively. The droplet dynamically controls the on/off state of the device, depending on its contact status with the drain electrode.
The working mechanism can be better interpreted from a circuit perspective (see Fig. S2d, ESI†). Before the droplet reaches the drain electrode, the circuit is in the “switch-off” mode, where CF, CE1, RW, and RL are the capacitor of FEP, the electrical-double-layer (EDL) capacitor at the water/FEP interface, the resistor of water, and the resistor of external load, respectively. When the droplet reaches the drain electrode, another EDL capacitor CE2 is formed at the water/drain interface, bridging the circuit into the “switch-on” mode, and the charge of the capacitor CF is rapidly released to the capacitors CE2 and CE1. After the rapid discharging process, capacitor CF is gradually recharged by capacitors CE2 and CE1. The capacitance of CF is determined by the droplet spreading area, which is regarded as the top-plate area of the capacitor model. Overall, the abundant charge accumulated during the droplet spreading process (liquid–solid friction) is allowed to be rapidly released once the device is “switched-on” (droplet contacts drain electrode), while conventional liquid–solid triboelectric nanogenerators are based on relatively low-efficiency electrostatic induction.
Coplanar-electrode structure for maintaining high performance in a large-area panel
Maintaining high performance in large-area droplet energy harvesting panels is still challenging although high-performance droplet energy harvester cells are developed. The high-performance DEH cells based on the bulk effect are adopted to form the DEH panel. To maintain high performance in large-area panels, we introduced a new coplanar-electrode DEH cell that can effectively alleviate the adverse shunting effect of parasitic capacitance compared to the conventional non-coplanar-electrode DEH cell. Although the coplanar-electrode DEH cell and the non-coplanar-electrode DEH cell have comparable output performance (see Fig. S2b and S3b, ESI†), the coplanar-electrode DEH panel substantially outperforms the non-coplanar-electrode DEH panel (see Fig. 2c). The lower output performance of the non-coplanar-electrode DEH panel is caused by the adverse shunting effect of parasitic capacitance.
 Fig. 2  Adverse shunting effect of parasitic capacitance in non-coplanar-electrode structure. (a) Schematic diagram of the coplanar-electrode DEH panel and (b) non-coplanar-electrode DEH panel; (c) output performance of the DEH panels (A4-paper-sized), the coplanar-electrode panel substantially outperforms the non-coplanar-electrode panel; (d) output voltage and parasitic capacitance of the non-coplanar-electrode DEH cell; the output voltage is inversely proportional to the top-electrode area and the parasitic capacitance; (e) schematic of the non-coplanar-electrode DEH cell; parasitic capacitance is formed between the top electrode and the bottom electrode; (f) equivalent circuit model of the non-coplanar-electrode DEH cell; the decrease in the output is caused by the adverse shunting effect of the parasitic capacitance CP. 
The parasitic capacitance is the unavoidable and undesired capacitance between the source electrode and the drain electrode, which reduces charge release to an external load. For the non-coplanar-electrode structure (see Fig. 2e), a parasitic capacitance CP is formed between the top electrode and the bottom electrode,34 introducing the adverse shunting effect35 that reduces charge release to an external load (see the shunting current I1 in Fig. 2f). The parasitic capacitance CP increases with the top-electrode area (see Fig. 2d), resulting in an enhanced shunting effect, especially in the large-area panel where the top-electrode area is dramatically increased. As a result, the output performance is inversely proportional to the top-electrode area (see Fig. 2d). The device with zero top-electrode area in Fig. 2d refers to the coplanar-electrode DEH cell. The parasitic capacitances CP of the coplanar-electrode DEH cell, non-coplanar-electrode DEH cell, A4 paper-sized coplanar-electrode DEH panel, and non-coplanar-electrode DEH panel are 0.26 pF, 2.49 pF, 80.20 pF, and 871.90 pF, respectively. Although the parasitic capacitance of the coplanar-electrode DEH panel also increases with the panel size, which results in decreased outputs compared to cell devices, the parasitic capacitance is still much lower compared to the non-coplanar-electrode panel (about 1/10). The coplanar-electrode DEH panel delicately alleviates the parasitic capacitance issue, maintaining a high output voltage of 103.47 V (see Fig. 2c). Such a coplanar-electrode DEH panel is capable of effectively harvesting energy from multi-position droplet impacts (see Fig. S7c, ESI†).
“Crosstalk-free” checker-like DEH panel for fixed-position droplets
Based on the high-performance coplanar-electrode DEH cell, we present here panel-topology designs for high-efficiency energy harvesting under multi-position droplet impacts from both fixed positions and random positions. For fixed-position droplet generation, a water-collector-and-dispenser platform is fabricated to produce droplets with fixed dripping rates and impact positions (see Fig. 3a). The top-view schematic of the checker-like DEH panel is shown in Fig. 3b. The dark green, light green, white, gray, and blue colors show the source electrode covered by FEP, drain electrode, gap between the source and the drain electrodes, drainage holes, and droplets, respectively. Under high dripping frequency, downstream water flows will be formed and interfere with the droplet spreading behavior of neighboring positions, which is similar to the crosstalk phenomenon in electronics wherein a signal in a circuit/channel induces an unexpected side effect in another circuit/channel.36 To address this issue, a “crosstalk-free” DEH panel with drainage holes below every droplet position is designed to allow quick water drainage. The geometrical parameters of DEH cells are determined by the droplet spreading area, which is closely relevant to the hydrophobicity of the dielectric layer, droplet volume, and dripping height. For example, the maximum diameter of the droplet spreading area on FEP is about 1.8 cm for a droplet with a volume of 53 μL and a dripping height of 20 cm. Accordingly, the width and length of the source electrode are designed to be 2 cm and 3 cm, respectively, which are slightly larger than the droplet spreading area to allow the droplet to contact the drain electrode at its maximum spreading area.
 Fig. 3  The “crosstalk-free” checker-like DEH panel for fixed-position droplet impacts. (a) Optical image of the water-collector-and-dispenser platform for fixed-position droplet generation; (b) Schematic of the checker-like DEH panel; drainage holes were designed to prevent the downstream water flow from interfering with the droplet spreading behavior of neighboring positions; (c) Schematic of the multi-rectifier DEH array; (d) Charging performance of the single-rectifier DEH panel and the multi-rectifier DEH array; inset shows the checker-like electrode pattern. 
Compared to the complex array design (see Fig. 3c), the DEH panel only requires one full-wave rectifier in external rectification, which greatly reduces the cost and complexity of fabrication and maintenance. How does one full-wave rectifier work for multi-position droplet impacts? The answer is related to two features of the DEH cell: (1) the DEH cell works under discrete droplet impacts with a dripping frequency roughly below 30 Hz; (2) the output duration of the DEH cell is instantaneous within tens of milliseconds. There is a limited chance that more than one output signal is generated at a certain moment. The single full-wave rectifier works for multi-position droplet impacts in a time-staggered manner. We further compared the charging performance of the single-rectifier DEH panel (Fig. 3b) with the multi-rectifier DEH array (Fig. 3c) under sequential droplet impacts from three fixed positions. The single-rectifier DEH panel presented a comparable charging performance with the multi-rectifier DEH array, showing a great combination of effectiveness and ease of integration.
Efficiency-improved strip-like DEH panel for random droplets
For random droplets, we proposed a strip-like DEH panel to improve the droplet energy harvesting efficiency. For the DEH cell, the output voltage is position-sensitive, showing a positive correlation with the droplet spreading area upon contacting the drain electrode. Full output is generated when a droplet contacts the drain electrode at its maximum spreading area, otherwise incomplete output is generated. The typical droplet contact statuses are shown in Fig. 4a (different spreading contacts) and Fig. S8 (ESI†) (sliding contact). Improving the possibility of full outputs contributes to the improvement of the droplet energy harvesting efficiency (see Fig. S9, ESI†).
 Fig. 4  The efficiency-improved strip-like DEH panel for random droplet impacts. (a) The position-dependent output voltage; the output voltage is proportional to the droplet spreading area on contacting the drain electrode, which determines the top-plate area and the capacitance of capacitor CF; (b) schematic of the checker-like DEH panel; the droplet generates a full output only when it impacts the center of the checker (e.g., droplet 1) and (c) initial impact position to generate full output (e.g. position 5 and 14) for the checker-like DEH panel; (d) output voltages of bottom contact, left contact, and right contact; (e) schematic of the strip-like DEH panel; the droplets generate full outputs by bottom contact (e.g., droplet 1), left contact (e.g., droplet 2), and right contact (e.g., droplet 3); (f) initial impact position to generate full output (e.g., position 5, 8, 11 and 14) for the strip-like DEH panel, the strip-like DEH panel is more efficient for energy harvesting from random droplet impacts. (g) Schematic of the strip-like DEH panel; (h) charging curve of a capacitor (4.7 μF) under random droplet impacts; inset shows the strip-like electrode pattern. 
We compared the checker-like DEH panel and the strip-like DEH panel on the possibility of full output under random droplet impacts. In the checker-like DEH panel (see Fig. 4b), a droplet generates a full output only when it impacts the center of the checker (e.g., droplet 1), otherwise it generates an incomplete output (e.g., droplet 2 and droplet 3). To improve the droplet energy harvesting efficiency, we proposed a strip-like DEH panel (see Fig. 4e) to utilize three sides (left, right, and bottom) of the U-shaped drain electrode for droplet contact to generate full outputs. Full outputs can be generated by three contact modes (left contact, right contact, and bottom contact) in a strip-like DEH cell (see Fig. 4d). The increase in the possibility of full output can be better interpreted from Fig. 4c and f; the numbers represent the initial droplet impact positions and red rectangles mark the initial droplet impact positions that can produce full outputs. For the checker-like DEH panel, droplets with initial impact positions of 5 and 14 will spread to reach the drain electrode to generate full outputs. For the strip-like DEH panel, droplets with initial impact positions of 5, 8, 11, and 14 generate full outputs by contacting the drain electrode from three sides. The full-output possibility of the strip-like DEH panel (initial position 5, 8, 11, and 14) is twice the checker-like DEH panel (initial position 5 and 14). Theoretically, the full-output possibility of the strip-like DEH panel is nearly 3 times the checker-like DEH panel when the Y-direction dimension becomes infinitely large (see Fig. S10, ESI†).
Combining the strip-like topology and the coplanar-electrode structure, we finally proposed an efficiency-improved strip-like DEH panel (see Fig. 4g). Theoretically, the widths of the strip-like source electrode should be designed to be slightly smaller than the maximum diameter of the droplet spreading area to ensure left contact and right contact during the droplet spreading process. The proposed strip-like DEH panel can effectively charge a capacitor (4.7 μF) under random droplet impacts (see Fig. 4h). Overall, the strip-like DEH panel improved the energy harvesting efficiency utilizing three sides (left, right, and bottom) of the U-shaped drain electrode for droplet contact to increase the possibility of full outputs.
Robustness and stability
Robustness and stability are critical for practical applications of droplet energy harvesting panels. Considering that natural water contains rich ions, we characterized the effect of ion concentration on the output performance. The output performances of tap water and rain water are comparable while that of sea water was significantly lower, which indicates that the high-concentration ions in sea water deteriorate the output performance (see Fig. 5a). By adjusting the NaCl concentration, the output performance is proven to be inversely proportional to the ion concentration (see Fig. 5b). Although affected by high ion concentration, the output performance is still at a high level. Note that the effect of ion concentration is widely perceived in not only this transistor-inspired structure but also in conventional liquid–solid TENGs. We further characterized the output performance under different droplet impact conditions. The output performances remained stable under a wide range of inclination angles (see Fig. 5c) and dripping frequencies (see Fig. 5d and e). Theoretically, high output performance can be obtained if adequate droplet spreading area and quick droplet departure are guaranteed, which is closely related to the hydrophobicity of the dielectric layer. Besides, the output performance can be further improved by increasing the droplet volume and dripping height (see Fig. S11, ESI†).
 Fig. 5  Robustness and stability. (a) Water source; (b) ion concentration; (c) inclination angle; (d) dripping frequency (<5 Hz); (e) dripping frequency (>10 Hz); (f) source–drain gap covered by water; (g) after taking out from water; (h) samples over 6 months; (i) performance recovery. 
We characterized the robustness under two extreme conditions: (1) when the source–drain gap was covered by water, the output performance remained unchanged (see Fig. 5f); (2) after taking out from water, the output voltage gradually recovered and stabilized at about 220 V in 3 min (see Fig. 5g). For long-term stability, the output voltages of the three samples are at a high level from 170 V to 240 V after 6 months (see Fig. 5h). The variance in the output is due to the difference in the surface charge density after a long period of storage. We recovered the performance of the low-output sample 3 by rubbing it with Nylon to increase the surface charge density. The output performance recovered and even outperformed untreated as-fabricated devices, maintaining about 340 V (see Fig. 5i). The proposed droplet energy harvesting panels show satisfactory robustness and stability for practical applications.
Hybrid rain-solar energy harvesting
Strategies that integrate droplet energy harvesters with solar cells are proposed as proof-of-concept for all-weather solar cells.37–42 However, most of them stay at cell-unit levels. For hybrid rain-solar energy harvesting, strip-like DEH panels are recommended due to their improved efficiency under random raindrop impacts. We fabricated a DEH-solar panel to realize hybrid rain-solar energy harvesting. The average transmittance of the FEP-based DEH panel is more than 78% under incident wavelength from 550 nm to 780 nm (see Fig. S12, ESI†). Note that the transmittance can be further improved to minimize the influence on the solar panel.40,41 To verify the generality, we compared the output performances of different transparent dielectric materials. The average outputs of FEP, AF, and PDMS were 266.6 V, 144.3 V, and 120.4 V, respectively (see Fig. 6a), showing a strong correlation to the surface charge density (see Fig. S13 for the surface potential, ESI†). High surface charge density and high hydrophobicity are required for the dielectric materials to obtain high output performance (see Fig. S14, ESI†), while electrode materials have negligible effects (see Fig. S15, ESI†). Among commonly used fluorine-containing materials, including fluoropolymers (e.g., FEP40,41 and PTFE37) and amorphous fluoropolymers (e.g., Teflon AF1 and CYTOP31), the FEP adopted in this work possesses advantages of high surface charge density, high hydrophobicity, high transparency, and low cost. The schematic diagram of the hybrid DEH-Solar panel and the optical image of the self-powered wireless sensor system are shown in Fig. 6b and c, respectively. The performance of the hybrid DEH-Solar panel was characterized by charging a capacitor for a wireless sensor system (see Fig. 6d). Before droplet impacts, the capacitor (15 μF) was charged to 1.86 V rapidly and maintained at a plateau by merely the solar panel. After droplet impacts, the capacitor was further charged to 4.60 V for the wireless transmission (see Fig. 6d and Movie S1, ESI†). The result shows the successful synergy of the transparent DEH panel and the solar panel, indicating the great potential for hybrid rain-solar energy harvesting.
 Fig. 6  Hybrid rain-solar energy harvesting for wireless sensor systems. (a) Output voltages of transparent dielectric materials; (b) schematic of the hybrid DEH-solar panel; (c) optical image of a wireless sensor system powered by the hybrid DEH-solar panel; (d) the voltage response of a capacitor (15 μF); without droplet impacts, the capacitor was charged to 1.86 V rapidly by the solar panel and maintained at a plateau; during the droplet impacts, the capacitor was further charged to 4.60 V for the wireless transmission. 
Self-powered wireless forest monitoring system
In recent years, severe forest fires have been reported in the Amazon rainforest, Australia, and North America, posing huge threats to human life and the local ecological environment. Forest monitoring systems that respond to the fire problems at an early stage can effectively minimize the damage and casualties.43–45 To fulfill the demand for an early alert of forest fire, we fabricated a wireless forest monitoring system powered by the DEH panel, which is capable of transmitting the detected temperature and smoke signals across a distance of 18 m in a forest environment (see the inset in Fig. 7a and Movie S2, ESI†). The schematic diagram of the self-powered wireless forest monitoring system is shown in Fig. 7c. Under droplet impacts, the capacitor (10 μF) was charged to 10.69 V to power a system that consisted of a smoke sensor, a temperature sensor, and a wireless transmitter. The received smoke signal and temperature signal were displayed and recorded by a laptop (see Fig. 7d). For potential applications in water-rich areas, checker-like DEH panels are recommended. Additional pipes for directional water transportation and dispensers for stable droplet generation are required. This work paves a new pathway for powering wireless forest monitoring systems by droplet energy harvesting technologies.
 Fig. 7  Self-powered wireless forest monitoring system. (a) Schematic of the self-powered wireless forest monitoring system; the strip-like DEH panel and the checker-like DEH panel are adopted to harvest droplet energy from random raindrops and fixed-position droplets, respectively; (b) optical image of the transmitting terminal; the capacitor (10 μF) is charged to 10.69 V for the operation of sensing and wireless transmission; (c) schematic of the self-powered wireless forest monitoring system; (d) optical image of the receiving terminal, showing the successfully transmitted signals of the smoke value and temperature. 
Conclusion
We develop a fully transparent and high-performance droplet energy harvesting panel for scavenging energy from multi-position droplet impacts. The transistor-inspired structure ensures the high output performance that originates from the bulk effect, and the coplanar-electrode structure alleviates the adverse shunting effect of parasitic capacitance. Based on the high-performance DEH cell, a “crosstalk-free” checker-like DEH panel and an efficiency-improved strip-like DEH panel are developed for harvesting energy from fixed-position droplets and random droplets, respectively. The proposed DEH panel only requires one full-wave rectifier in external rectification rather than multiple rectifiers commonly required by conventional array design, which greatly reduces the cost and complexity of fabrication and maintenance. The full transparency of the DEH panel shows great potential for integration with solar panels and smart windows. We demonstrate a wireless forest monitoring system fully powered by the DEH panel, showing great potential for powering environmental monitoring systems. We envision that the DEH panel will open new pathways for harvesting droplet energy to power wireless sensor systems and the emerging internet of things.
Materials and methods
Fabrication of the individual DEH cell
For the coplanar-electrode DEH cell, a piece of ITO/PET substrate (Shenzhen Huanan Xiangcheng Technology Co., Ltd, thickness 125 μm, 10 Ω sq−1, of size 20 mm × 35 mm) was covered by two parallel Kapton tapes (of size 20 mm × 30 mm and 20 mm × 4 cm, respectively), exposing the etching area of the source–drain gap (of size 20 mm × 1 mm). Then, the sample was immersed in etching liquid (HNO3:HCl:H2O = 4:50:50) for 10 min; the exposed ITO was completely etched away while the ITO covered by Kapton remained, and thus, the coplanar source electrode and drain electrode were formed. After removing the Kapton tapes, the sample was ultrasonically cleaned in DI water for 10 min to remove the residual etching liquid. After drying, an FEP film (Taizhou Chenguang Plastic Industry Co., Ltd, thickness 150 μm, size 22 mm × 31 mm) was adhered to fully cover the source electrode. For the top electrode of the non-coplanar-electrode DEH cell, a ribbon-like conductive copper tape (of size 20 mm × 1 mm), rather than ITO, was adhered to the FEP surface for ease of fabrication (the output is independent of electrode material). For other transparent dielectric materials, AF (Dupont Teflon AF 601S2, 6 wt%) was drop-casted and annealed at 120 °C for 15 min. Polydimethylsiloxane (Corning Sylgard 184) mixed with a curing agent (ratio 10/1) was drop-casted and cured at 80 °C for 2 h.
Fabrication of the DEH panel
The basic fabrication process of the DEH panel is the same as the DEH cell. A checker-like (see Fig. 3b) or strip-like (see Fig. 4g) electrode pattern was first printed on paper and then adhered to the bottom side of the transparent substrate. According to the pattern shown on the substrate, Kapton tapes were adopted to cover the ITO of the source/drain area and expose the ITO of the gap area for etching. For the large-area DEH panel (A4-paper-sized), conductive copper tapes (Benyida Company, thickness 50 μm) were adopted to fabricate coplanar electrodes (see Fig. S16b, ESI†). Mechanical cutting was adopted to fabricate the drainage holes according to the pattern. For mass production, photolithography and laser cutting are recommended. For the hybrid DEH-solar panel, the transparent DEH panel was directly glued onto the solar panel.
Fabrication of wireless sensor system
The wireless system was composed of a power management module (LTC3588-1), a wireless transmitter (CC430F5137), and a wireless receiver (CC430F6137) connected to a laptop. The sensor system was composed of an embedded temperature sensor on the wireless module and a high-sensitivity optical sensor (MAX30105) for smoke detection. Open-source software (VOFA+) was adopted to display and record the received temperature signals in real time. Note that the wireless system can be integrated with different sensors based on practical application scenarios.
Characterization and electrical measurement
For characterization, droplets with a volume of 53 μL and a dripping height of 20 cm were generated by a plastic tube connected to a syringe pump (LSP01-1A). The water source for droplet generation was tap water (ion concentration: 0.0031 mol L−1). The device was titled at about 45° for rapid droplet departure. Coplanar-electrode DEH cells are adopted for the characterization of different influence factors on the output (e.g., Fig. 4a, d, 5, 6a and Fig. S8, S11, S14 and S15, ESI†). For video demonstrations of Movies S1 and S2 (ESI†), droplets were released from 1.6 m. For simulated rain, random droplet impacts were generated by randomly moving a plastic tank with irregularly distributed dripping holes (see Fig. S17, ESI†). For electrical measurement, the current and voltage were measured by a low-noise current preamplifier (Stanford Research SR570) and an oscilloscope (Rohde and Schwarzrte, RTE1024), respectively. The parasitic capacitance was measured from the source electrode and drain electrode by an LCR meter (Victor 4091C). The charge was measured by a charge amplifier (VK-105) and displayed on an oscilloscope. The surface potential was measured by an electrostatic fieldmeter (JH-TEST).
Data and materials availability
All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in this paper are present in the paper and/or the ESI.† Additional data and raw data are available upon request from the authors.
Author contributions
Z. Y. and X. X. conceived the project and designed the studies. X. X. performed experiments and analyzed the experimental data. P. L. fabricated the wireless sensor system. Y. D. contributed to the experiment on wireless forest monitoring. Z. Y., X. X., Z. W., S. L., Z. Z., and W. X. wrote the manuscript. Z. Y. supervised the project.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the financial support from the General Research Grant (Project No. CityU 11212021) and the Early Career Scheme (Project No. CityU 21210619) from the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.
References
W. Xu, H. Zheng, Y. Liu, X. Zhou, C. Zhang, Y. Song, X. Deng, M. Leung, Z. Yang, R. X. Xu, Z. L. Wang, X. C. Zeng and Z. Wang, Nature, 2020, 578, 392–396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, X. Zhou, C. Hao, H. Zheng, Y. Liu, X. Yan, Z. Yang, M. Leung, X. C. Zeng, R. X. Xu and Z. Wang, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2019, 6, 540–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhu, Y. Su, P. Bai, J. Chen, Q. Jing, W. Yang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6031–6037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, Nature, 2017, 542, 159–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, H. Gu, H. Zheng, S. Ye, L. Kang, C. Huang, K. Lu, W. Xu, Q. Miao, Z. Wang, J. Zhang and X. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104748 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yıldırım and H. Külah, Microfluid. Nanofluidics, 2012, 13, 107–111 CrossRef .
T. B. H. Schroeder, A. Guha, A. Lamoureux, G. Vanrenterghem, D. Sept, M. Shtein, J. Yang and M. Mayer, Nature, 2017, 552, 214–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, Z. Wang and Y. Zi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100038 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Logan and M. Elimelech, Nature, 2012, 488, 313–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, D. Goodnight, Z. Gao, A. H. Cavusoglu, N. Sabharwal, M. Delay, A. Driks and O. Sahin, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Dhiman, F. Yavari, X. Mi, H. Gullapalli, Y. Shi, P. M. Ajayan and N. Koratkar, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3123–3127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xue, Y. Xu, T. Ding, J. Li, J. Yin, W. Fei, Y. Cao, J. Yu, L. Yuan, L. Gong, J. Chen, S. Deng, J. Zhou and W. Guo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 317–321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, H. Cheng, C. Yang, P. Zhang, Q. Liao, H. Yao, G. Shi and L. Qu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4166 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Siria, M. L. Bocquet and L. Bocquet, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0091 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Serio, F. G. Carollo and V. Ferro, J. Hydrol., 2019, 576, 210–228 CrossRef .
U. Uzar, Renewable Energy, 2020, 155, 591–603 CrossRef .
M. A. Ilyas and J. Swingler, Energy, 2017, 125, 716–725 CrossRef .
V. K. Wong, J. H. Ho and E. H. Yap, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2015, 26, 2170–2180 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. R. Perera, B. G. Sampath, V. P. C. Dassanayake and B. M. Hapuwatte, World Acad. Sci. Eng. Technol. Int. J. Math. Comput. Phys. Quantum Eng., 2014, 8, 325–330 Search PubMed .
M. A. Ilyas and J. Swingler, Energy, 2015, 90, 796–806 CrossRef .
X. Xu, Y. Wang, P. Li, W. Xu, L. Wei, Z. Wang and Z. Yang, Nano Energy, 2021, 90, 106573 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, J. Ai, Y. Yue, K. Wang and B. Su, Nano Energy, 2021, 83, 105846 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, J. Ai, Y. Shi, K. Wang and B. Su, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2006839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Lin, G. Cheng, S. Lee, K. C. Pradel and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4690–4696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Lin, G. Cheng, W. Wu, K. C. Pradel and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6440–6448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Jeon, D. Kim, G. W. Yoon, J. B. Yoon and Y. K. Choi, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 636–645 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kil Yun, H. Soo Kim, Y. Joon Ko, G. Murillo and J. Hoon Jung, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 233–240 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, N. Sun, J. Liu, Z. Wen, X. Sun, S. T. Lee and B. Sun, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2893–2899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhong, L. Xu, F. Zhan, H. Wang, F. Wang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 10510–10517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, Z. Shi, R. Zheng, W. Ye, X. Gao, W. Zhao and G. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 40021–40030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jang, M. La, S. Cho, Y. Yun, J. H. Choi, Y. Ra, S. J. Park and D. Choi, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104541 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, X. Fu, C. Li, G. Liu, Y. Gao, Y. Qi, T. Bu, Y. Chen, Z. L. Wang and C. Zhang, Microsyst. Nanoeng., 2022, 8, 30 CrossRef PubMed .
J. K. Moon, J. Jeong, D. Lee and H. K. Pak, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1487 CrossRef PubMed .
T. T. Grove, M. F. Masters and R. E. Miers, Am. J. Phys., 2005, 73, 52–56 CrossRef .
B. De Marneffe and A. Preumont, Smart Mater. Struct., 2008, 17, 035015 CrossRef .
J. A. DeFalco, IEEE Spectr., 2009, 7, 44–50 Search PubMed .
L. Zheng, Z. H. Lin, G. Cheng, W. Wu, X. Wen, S. Lee and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 291–300 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, J. Duan, L. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Duan, L. Vaillant-Roca, X. Yang and Q. Tang, Nano Energy, 2021, 82, 105773 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zheng, G. Cheng, J. Chen, L. Lin, J. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Li and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1–8 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Wang, G. Xu, A. Döring, W. A. Daoud, J. Xu, A. L. Rogach, Y. Xi and Y. Zi, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 10359–10369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Helseth and X. D. Guo, Renewable Energy, 2016, 99, 845–851 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xie, L. Yin, Y. Liu, H. Liu, B. Lu, C. Zhao, T. A. Khattab, Z. Wen and X. Sun, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 5292–5302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qian and X. Jing, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 78–87 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Song, R. Cao, L. Wang, Z. Yan and G. Shan, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104843 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pang, S. Chen, J. An, K. Wang, Y. Deng, A. Benard, N. Lajnef and C. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003598 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1: time-resolved voltage waveform of the DEH cell. Fig. S2: coplanar-electrode DEH cell. Fig. S3: non-coplanar-electrode DEH cell. Fig. S4: large-area DEH panel. Fig. S5: liquid-solid TENG cells. Fig. S6: large-area liquid-solid TENG panels. Fig. S7: large-area coplanar-electrode DEH panel for multi-position droplet impacts. Fig. S8: schematic and output of the sliding contact. Fig. S9: schematic and charging performance of three different droplet impact positions. Fig. S10: theoretical possibility of full output for strip-like DEH panel and checker-like DEH panel. Fig. S11: effect of droplet volume and dripping height on the output. Fig. S12 Transmittance spectrum of the transparent DEH panel. Fig. S13: surface potential of transparent dielectric materials. Fig. S14: effect of wettability and surface charge density on the output. Fig. S15: effect of electrode materials on the output. Fig. S16: optical image of coplanar-electrode DEH panels. Fig. S17: optical image of setup for random droplet generation. Table S1: performance comparison of different cell devices and large-area panels. Table S2: performance comparison of the coplanar-electrode DEH cell with the reported droplet energy harvesters. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee00357kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
Water, covering about 72% of the earth's surface, contains vast energy in various forms of water motions. For raindrops, the estimated kinetic energy is 3000 TW h per year, which is equal to 5% of the global annual energy consumption. However, such enormous energy has not yet been effectively exploited. Although high-efficiency droplet energy harvesters with transistor-inspired structures have been developed, strategies toward large-scale application under multi-position droplet impacts are lacking. Herein, we present a droplet energy harvesting (DEH) panel for high-efficiency energy harvesting under multi-position droplet impacts. The new coplanar-electrode transistor-inspired structure, which alleviates the adverse shunting effect of parasitic capacitance that deteriorates the output performance, enables the large-area DEH panel (A4-paper-sized) to generate a high output voltage of 103.47 V. Rational panel-topology designs are proposed for different application scenarios, such as random raindrops and fixed-position droplets generated by dispensers. The DEH panel also shows satisfying robustness and long-term stability. Hybrid rain-solar energy harvesting and self-powered wireless forest monitoring system are demonstrated as potential applications. Overall, the DEH panel represents a new pathway for high-efficiency droplet energy harvesting to power wireless sensor systems and the emerging internet of things.


 	Fig. 1  Working mechanism and performance characterization of the transistor-inspired droplet energy harvesting (DEH) cell. (a) Schematic diagram of the DEH panel and the DEH cell; (b) Schematic diagram of the working mechanism, the charge transfers from the source electrode to the drain electrode rapidly when the spreading droplet reaches the drain electrode, and gradually flows back until the droplet departs from the drain electrode; (c) Output voltage and current of the DEH cell; (d) Output performance of the different cell devices, the DEH cell based on bulk effect outperforms the double-electrode triboelectric nanogenerator (DE-TENG) and the single-electrode triboelectric nanogenerator (SE-TENG).	 

 	Fig. 2  Adverse shunting effect of parasitic capacitance in non-coplanar-electrode structure. (a) Schematic diagram of the coplanar-electrode DEH panel and (b) non-coplanar-electrode DEH panel; (c) output performance of the DEH panels (A4-paper-sized), the coplanar-electrode panel substantially outperforms the non-coplanar-electrode panel; (d) output voltage and parasitic capacitance of the non-coplanar-electrode DEH cell; the output voltage is inversely proportional to the top-electrode area and the parasitic capacitance; (e) schematic of the non-coplanar-electrode DEH cell; parasitic capacitance is formed between the top electrode and the bottom electrode; (f) equivalent circuit model of the non-coplanar-electrode DEH cell; the decrease in the output is caused by the adverse shunting effect of the parasitic capacitance CP.	 

 	Fig. 3  The “crosstalk-free” checker-like DEH panel for fixed-position droplet impacts. (a) Optical image of the water-collector-and-dispenser platform for fixed-position droplet generation; (b) Schematic of the checker-like DEH panel; drainage holes were designed to prevent the downstream water flow from interfering with the droplet spreading behavior of neighboring positions; (c) Schematic of the multi-rectifier DEH array; (d) Charging performance of the single-rectifier DEH panel and the multi-rectifier DEH array; inset shows the checker-like electrode pattern.	 

 	Fig. 4  The efficiency-improved strip-like DEH panel for random droplet impacts. (a) The position-dependent output voltage; the output voltage is proportional to the droplet spreading area on contacting the drain electrode, which determines the top-plate area and the capacitance of capacitor CF; (b) schematic of the checker-like DEH panel; the droplet generates a full output only when it impacts the center of the checker (e.g., droplet 1) and (c) initial impact position to generate full output (e.g. position 5 and 14) for the checker-like DEH panel; (d) output voltages of bottom contact, left contact, and right contact; (e) schematic of the strip-like DEH panel; the droplets generate full outputs by bottom contact (e.g., droplet 1), left contact (e.g., droplet 2), and right contact (e.g., droplet 3); (f) initial impact position to generate full output (e.g., position 5, 8, 11 and 14) for the strip-like DEH panel, the strip-like DEH panel is more efficient for energy harvesting from random droplet impacts. (g) Schematic of the strip-like DEH panel; (h) charging curve of a capacitor (4.7 μF) under random droplet impacts; inset shows the strip-like electrode pattern.	 

 	Fig. 5  Robustness and stability. (a) Water source; (b) ion concentration; (c) inclination angle; (d) dripping frequency (<5 Hz); (e) dripping frequency (>10 Hz); (f) source–drain gap covered by water; (g) after taking out from water; (h) samples over 6 months; (i) performance recovery.	 

 	Fig. 6  Hybrid rain-solar energy harvesting for wireless sensor systems. (a) Output voltages of transparent dielectric materials; (b) schematic of the hybrid DEH-solar panel; (c) optical image of a wireless sensor system powered by the hybrid DEH-solar panel; (d) the voltage response of a capacitor (15 μF); without droplet impacts, the capacitor was charged to 1.86 V rapidly by the solar panel and maintained at a plateau; during the droplet impacts, the capacitor was further charged to 4.60 V for the wireless transmission.	 

 	Fig. 7  Self-powered wireless forest monitoring system. (a) Schematic of the self-powered wireless forest monitoring system; the strip-like DEH panel and the checker-like DEH panel are adopted to harvest droplet energy from random raindrops and fixed-position droplets, respectively; (b) optical image of the transmitting terminal; the capacitor (10 μF) is charged to 10.69 V for the operation of sensing and wireless transmission; (c) schematic of the self-powered wireless forest monitoring system; (d) optical image of the receiving terminal, showing the successfully transmitted signals of the smoke value and temperature.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1: time-resolved voltage waveform of the DEH cell. Fig. S2: coplanar-electrode DEH cell. Fig. S3: non-coplanar-electrode DEH cell. Fig. S4: large-area DEH panel. Fig. S5: liquid-solid TENG cells. Fig. S6: large-area liquid-solid TENG panels. Fig. S7: large-area coplanar-electrode DEH panel for multi-position droplet impacts. Fig. S8: schematic and output of the sliding contact. Fig. S9: schematic and charging performance of three different droplet impact positions. Fig. S10: theoretical possibility of full output for strip-like DEH panel and checker-like DEH panel. Fig. S11: effect of droplet volume and dripping height on the output. Fig. S12 Transmittance spectrum of the transparent DEH panel. Fig. S13: surface potential of transparent dielectric materials. Fig. S14: effect of wettability and surface charge density on the output. Fig. S15: effect of electrode materials on the output. Fig. S16: optical image of coplanar-electrode DEH panels. Fig. S17: optical image of setup for random droplet generation. Table S1: performance comparison of different cell devices and large-area panels. Table S2: performance comparison of the coplanar-electrode DEH cell with the reported droplet energy harvesters. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee00357k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
