Atomic spectrometry update. X-ray fluorescence spectrometry  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B813039F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B813039F
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23, 1409-1437Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsAtomic spectrometry update. X-ray fluorescence spectrometry

        
          
            Margaret 
            West
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Andrew T. 
            Ellis
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Peter 
            Kregsamer
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Philip J. 
            Potts
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Christina 
            Streli
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Christine 
            Vanhoof
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Peter 
            Wobrauschek
          
        
      c
aWest X-ray Solutions Ltd, 405 Whirlowdale Road, Sheffield, UK S11 9NF
bOxford Instruments Analytical Oy, Nihtisillankuja 5, FI-02631 Espoo, Finland
cTU Wien, Atominstitut der Österreichischen Universitäten, Stadionallee 2, A-1020, Vienna, Austria
dFaculty of Science, The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, UK MK7 6AA
eVITO, Environmental Measurements, Boeretang 200, B-2400 Mol, Belgium
Received 
      28th July 2008
    , Accepted 28th July 2008First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      20th August 2008
    Contents1 Introduction and reviews2 Instrumentation2.1 General instrumentation2.2 Detectors3 Spectrum analysis, matrix correction and calibration procedures4 X-ray optics and microfluorescence5 Synchrotron radiation5.1 Instrumental development5.2 Combined methods5.3 Applications6 TXRF7 Portable and mobile XRF8 On-line XRF9 Applications9.1 Sample preparation9.2 Geological and industrial minerals9.3 Environmental9.4 Archaeological, cultural heritage and forensic9.5 Industrial9.6 Clinical and biological9.7 Thin films and coatings9.8 Chemical state and speciation10 AbbrevationsReferencesAbstract
This annual review of X-ray fluorescence covers developments over the period 2007–2008 in instrumentation and detectors, matrix correction and spectrum analysis procedures, X-ray optics and micro-fluorescence, synchrotron XRF, TXRF, portable XRF and on-line applications as assessed from the published literature. The trend set in previous years continues with an increase in the number of papers published on applications for XRF, including sample preparation, geological, environmental, archaeological, forensic, biological, clinical, thin films, chemical state and speciation studies. Earlier literature has not been ignored in that some of Archimedes oldest writing, previously hidden from sight in a medieval prayer book has now been revealed thanks to the power of modern µ-SRXRF. X-ray optics now benefit from the use of poly-capillaries systems, equipment portability has been extended to include the TXRF configuration and readers will find several papers on the use of both two and three dimensional imaging to support environmental, geological and biological studies. The writing team would welcome feedback from readers of this review and invite you to complete the Atomic Spectrometry Updates questionnaire on http://www.asureviews.org.
      
1 Introduction and reviews
This review continues the series of annual Atomic Spectrometry Updates in X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometry1 and should be read in conjunction with other related reviews in the series.2–4 This update refers to papers published approximately between May 2007 and April 2008. The writing team have commented on papers that demonstrated innovation and developments in instrumentation with a noticeable trend to combine several synchrotron radiation-based techniques such as µ-SRXRF, µ-EXAFS in fluorescence mode, µ-XANES and µ-XRD for the comprehensive characterisation of samples. Portability has now been extended to TXRF for rapid monitoring of liquids outside the confines of a laboratory or for sample screening. Readers will find a wealth of information on applications for the XRF technique in all its many guises with extensive use of scanning XRF for evaluating cores to characterise the sedimentary record for studying climate change within the geological record. Both 2D and 3D elemental imaging feature for clinical and biological applications where confocal tomography has been used to great advantage to perform partial volume tomography. In vivo bone measurements for Sr have contributed to an evaluation of bone pharmacology and provide insight for studies to measure bone density. Several new certified reference materials are described along with a novel way of standardising and characterising the performance of individual instruments based on the use of the 50 cent Euro coin.
2 Instrumentation
2.1 General instrumentation
In recent years, spectrometer designs have offered both research and commercial users the prospect of higher sensitivity through various methods to reduce background noise in measured fluorescence spectra from both the X-ray tube and the sample. Monochromators are used to isolate characteristic tube lines; polarised configurations are popular, where the sample is excited by radiation scattered from a selection of targets of low atomic number elements; secondary targets; Bragg reflectors or polycapillary optics and total external reflection of the primary beam (TXRF) are all testament to the innovative configurations available today. Vasin et al.5 presented examples of the application of their system, using sample excitation from a secondary target, for the determination of heavy-metal concentrations in aqueous solutions and for the measurement of film thickness. This configuration provided analysis of a sample using both fluorescence and transmission spectra. Their spectrometer provided three beams; a primary from the 2.5 kW tube, one excited from the secondary target and the fluorescent beam from the sample. The angles of incidence between the primary beam and the target as well as that between the exciting beam and the sample were all 45°. X-ray tubes with Cr, Rh or W anodes and exchangeable secondary targets such as Ge, Mo, Ni, Ti and Zr in conjunction with X-ray filters enabled the authors to increase the contrast of the recorded spectra. They also presented TXRF data, optimised for specific groups of elements, reaching detection limits of 10−6 g g−1 in aqueous solutions and precise results (error ∼1%) over a wide range of film thickness using the absorption analysis option. Section 6 of this Review offers more insight into the capabilities of TXRF as a portable system or coupled to a synchrotron radiation excitation source.
A crystal-optic XRF spectrometer was designed and tested by Adams and Attenkofer6,7 which combined the features of high energy resolution, large solid angle coverage and a tuneable photon energy range from 6.5 to 12 keV. The design was based on the principle of active optics, with ten actuators available to adjust the shape of a single silicon crystal used in the Bragg geometry. In most applications, the shape was that of a logarithmic spiral to provide high energy resolution with a spatially non-resolving detector. A wide range of other shapes was also possible for applications such as imaging or single-shot spectroscopy over a spectral range of the operator's choosing. Hudson et al.8 designed and built a curved-crystal X-ray emission spectrometer to measure 2 to 5 keV fluorescence resulting from a core-level excitation of gas phase species. The spectrometer could rotate 180°, allowing detection of emitted X-rays with variable polarising angles and was capable of collecting simultaneously spectra over a wide energy range (20 eV wide with 0.5 eV resolution at the Cl K edge). In addition, the entire experimental chamber could be rotated about the incident radiation axis by nearly 360° whilst maintaining vacuum, permitting measurements of the angular distributions of the emitted X-rays.
Alberti et al.9 designed a novel XRF spectrometer for elemental mapping applications. The spectrometer was based on a new ring-shaped monolithic array of four independent high-performance droplet type silicon drift detectors. These detectors and the innovative geometry of the spectrometer with a capillary lens coupled with a low-power X-ray generator provided a means for fast elemental mapping. A dedicated data acquisition system was also developed in order to fully exploit the detection rate performance of the detector. The spectrometer could be used for several applications in industry, geology, the analysis of works of art and bio-chemical studies, where its performance in imaging analysis of elements present in very low concentrations would be welcomed. Tsuji and Nakano10 described a new three dimensional µ-XRF instrument based on a confocal configuration using two independent polycapillary X-ray lenses and two X-ray sources (Cr and Mo anodes). A full polycapillary X-ray lens was attached to each X-ray tube with another half polycapillary lens fitted to a silicon drift detector. The focal spots of the three lenses were adjustable to a common position. Depth resolutions were evaluated by using a 10 µm thick Au foil and gave ∼90 µm for Au Lα. The Cr anode was used for the excitation of lower atomic number elements whilst the Mo tube was more efficient for elements further up the periodic table. The authors demonstrated the spectrometer's performance with 3D elemental mapping of the major elements of an amaranth seed performed non-destructively at ambient air pressure with each element shown as different mapping images at different layer depths. This topic is explored further in section 4 of this Review.
2.2 Detectors
In what was a sparse year for material available to review, cryogenic detectors constituted the main area of interest. A review by Ullom,11 a member of the active group at NIST, Boulder, USA, described the use of cryogenic detectors not only for X-ray spectroscopy, but also for the THz to gamma ray energy range and for the measurement of the energy of neutrons, simple ions and alpha particles. In a second paper from this group, Jach et al.12 reported the analysis of two multielement glass samples using a transition edge sensor (TES) microcalorimeter in conjunction with an electron microprobe. X-ray lines only 45 eV apart were shown to be almost fully resolved and analysed concentration values for elements in the glasses were within 1% m/m absolute of values from a number of other analytical techniques. An interesting TES variant was reported by Leman et al.13 in which X-rays were absorbed in a (relatively) large silicon or germanium crystal and the deposited energy was read out by four distributed TES's. The sensor dimensions in this study were 500 × 500 µm2 and impressive energy resolution at 5.9 keV of 72 and 80 eV was obtained for silicon absorber crystals. The authors proposed that the scalability of their design was a practical way to achieve the large area devices required for space X-ray telescopes, compared with the much smaller TES devices hitherto available. An interesting combination of technologies was reported by Miller et al.14 in which a TES was cooled by superconductor tunnel junction (STJ) solid state refrigerators. The cooling was in two stages; 300 mK to 220 mK and then 220 mK to 160 mK, and no additional readout noise was observed in the TES readout system. An STJ detector, in which the Nb/Al–AlOx/Al/Nb STJ was fabricated in the shape of a normal distribution, was described by Taino and co-workers15 who sought to reduce the magnetic field required to produce effective energy dispersive X-ray detectors. The multilayer fabrication technique used for the shaped STJ was described and an energy resolution of 55 eV at 5.9 keVwas reported for a 2500 µm2 device that had a signal rise time of 5 µs and a decay time of 200 µs. This performance was achieved with a magnetic field of only 3 mT, compared with the 30 mT previously required by typical working devices. A useful 2D model was reported16 for quasi-particle losses at the edge of an STJ strip detector, which described the dependency of the energy resolution and peak shape on these losses. The emerging technology of metallic magnetic calorimeters17 shows promise for the next generation of very high resolution X-ray detectors and the detailed microfabrication of such devices was described by Burck et al.18 and Hsieh and co-workers,19 who claimed their use of thin film microfabrication was suitable for making sensor arrays that would be a considerable advantage over the present generation TES detectors that are extremely small and very inefficient geometrically for widespread real analytical use in conventional SEM or EDXRF systems.

Silicon-based X-ray detectors are poorly represented in this year's review although it is now clear that silicon drift detectors (SDD) have been adopted extremely widely in all areas of EDXRF and X-ray microanalysis and continue to supplant conventional Si(Li) and Si PIN technologies. An exotic application of large area SDD was described20 for the measurement of kaonic X-rays in a high energy physics experiment. Of more interest though, was the detailed work of Lowe and Sareen21 on measuring the electron-hole pair creation energy and Fano factor for a small area Si PIN detector over the temperature range 80 to 270 K. Finally, a new high-speed readout system was proposed22 for the interesting DePMOS active pixel sensor multichannel/pixellated X-ray detector system developed at the Max Planck Institute in Munich.

Materials other than silicon continue to be explored sporadically and an interesting paper on the use of silicon carbide (SiC) for X-ray detectors was published by Moscatelli.23 Many of the properties of SiC show promise for X-ray detection, with its concomitant advantages of being radiation-hard, providing very low leakage currents and reduced sensitivity to IR radiation. Leakage current of the devices fabricated was claimed to be up to 30 times less than for other semiconductor detectors and encouraging energy resolution of 315 eV at 13.9 keV was shown for a device operating temperature of 27 °C. Even when operated at 100 °C, the detector gave an energy resolution of 797 eV at 13.9 keV. While these energy resolution figures seem high, they were measured at 13.9 keV and may prove sufficiently interesting for applications where much lower operating temperatures are difficult or expensive to obtain in practice. Based upon an interesting assertion, which stands little scrutiny, that HPGe detectors are being increasingly used for X-ray spectrometry, Mohanty et al.24 recommended that detector efficiency be experimentally checked against the value modelled from the manufacturer's supplied data. Such advice should be headed and is normally included as part of the set up of most EDXRF systems, irrespective of the detector material. Although interest continued in GaAs detectors during the review period,25–27 these papers were limited to the fabrication and use of GaAs for X-ray 2D imaging detectors where the stopping power of the GaAs is an advantage but there was no use made of the potential energy dispersive detection from the devices. The potential of diamond as a detector material was reported by De Sio et al.,28 whose focus was mainly on photon counting and extreme radiation hardness in high energy physics and SR applications rather than as useful energy dispersive detectors.
Never a year passes without some continuing interest in gas-filled detectors and the group at the University of Coimbra, Portugal continued to develop their gas proportional scintillation counters (GPSC). In their latest report29 a xenon-filled GPSC was described in which potassium iodide or bromide photocathodes, mounted on a microstrip plate, were used to detect the VUV scintillation. Energy resolutions at 5.9 kV of 12% for KI and 15% for KBr photocathodes were demonstrated, which are interesting but not compelling reasons for the wide application of these detectors. In a second paper from the group30 a new anode structure was described for a gridded microstrip GPC and energy resolution at 5.9 keV of 13.4 % and 12.6% were claimed for gas fills of xenon and P10 respectively.
3 Spectrum analysis, matrix correction and calibration procedures
For those to whom the mathematical approach to matrix correction is a mystery, why not start with a tutorial on the fundamental parameter approach to calibration in XRF by Thomsen?31 As the author comments, this is a unique approach to calibration based on the theoretical relationship between measured intensity and elemental concentration. This approach depends in part on a knowledge of the spectral distribution of intensities from the X-ray tube, and Sitko32 investigated the influence of this distribution derived from experimental measurements and theoretical algorithms on the calculated fluorescence intensity for the more common tube targets (Cr, Mo, Rh and W) using elements commonly determined in steel as examples. The spectral distribution of tube spectrum reaching the sample can be influenced by the use of filters and Luo et al.33 examined the use of aluminium, copper and indium filters and collimators of different diameters in the XRF analysis of bone for Pb. They found that spectral resolution of the Pb K-lines improved when the divergence of the tube beam was reduced by using longer collimators and/or smaller collimator diameters and that the Pb signal-to-noise ratio improved slightly when an indium filter was employed. Bakhtiarov et al.34 described a new algorithm for XRF analysis based on the standard background method and a simplified form of the universal equation applied to the analysis of ores and ore process products.
Turning now to the analysis of EDXRF spectra, Sole et al.35 developed a user-friendly multiplatform program that allowed both interactive and batch processing of large data sets and was particularly well suited to X-ray imaging applications. This package, developed at the European Synchrotron Facility, is freely available to non-commercial users.

Monte Carlo simulations are frequently used to describe X-ray interactions with matter and Scot and colleagues36 used this approach to develop a 3D version of the code MCSHAPE, to simulate the diffusion of X-rays and gamma rays through matter, giving a general description of the polarised state of photons. The code accounts for the photoelectric effect, Rayleigh and Compton scattering and this 3D version was discussed in terms of applicability to scanning XRF and XRF tomography experiments. The Monte Carlo method was also used by Gui et al.37 to simulate the detection properties of polycrystalline mercury (II) iodide, amorphous selenium and polycrystalline cadmium telluride in the range 10 to 100 keV. Results showed that deep traps in these materials could affect detection sensitivity when the mean free path length of carriers (ionised electrons) was less than the thickness of the material. Otherwise, the sensitivity of mercury (II) iodide was 5 times greater than and cadmium telluride 10 times greater than that of amorphous selenium. Hansson and Isaksson38 used the Monte Carlo approach in a different way—as an individual calibration method for in vivo determination of thyroid iodine content to avoid the problem that calibration using phantoms resembling the neck may give misleading results by not accounting for individual features of the measured subjects.
Il'in39 presented an interesting challenge to the conventional fundamental parameter approach by arguing that the fundamental properties of X-ray fluorescence are determined by the atomic number of elements, not their atomic weight, since the intensity of X-ray spectra is determined by the number of excited atoms, not their mass. Il'in argued that the assumption of dependency on the mass concentration was introduced in the middle of the 20th century, without a justifiable physical basis and is now a hindrance to the development of a universal model for quantitative XRF analysis.
K-shell X-ray production cross sections and fluorescence yields were measured for Dy, Eu, Gd and Ho by Demir and Sahin40 under the influence of a large external magnetic field (0.75 T) using 241Am as the excitation source. Results showed that key fundamental parameters can change when excitation takes place in a magnetic field. The authors extended this work to the L-lines of a second range of elements (73 ≤ Z ≤ 92). The same excitation source was used by Han et al.41 to measure K-line cross sections, fluorescence yields and intensity ratios for elements in the range 22 ≤ Z ≤ 68, in most cases finding agreement with theoretical values.
4 X-ray optics and microfluorescence
Not very long ago, this section would have been dominated by mono-capillary studies. However, with advances in technical manipulation, polycapillaries are now the most commonly used optic for µ-XRF (not counting SR techniques). The transmission performance of a cylindrical polycapillary was evaluated by Lin et al.42 based on a detailed ray tracing programme. The authors found that simulated and experimental results were in good agreement, but that the spectral distribution of X-rays transmitted through a cylindrical polycapillary was uneven. Sun et al.43 reported that the performance of a polycapillary lens was related to the spot size of the X-ray source. In particular, the transmission efficiency decreased and the output focal spot size increased with increasing source spot size, in part because large sources generated an ‘escape halo’. It is interesting to note that polycapillaries do not just have application to µ-XRF e.g. Sun et al.44 also reported a set up for µ-XRD using two devices, either a polycapillary parallel X-ray lens, or a slightly focusing polycapillary X-ray lens. Back to µ-XRF based on polycapillary optics, Cheng et al.45,46 described such a device for the non-destructive analysis of archaeological artefacts using a rotating anode excitation source. The instrument was capable of focusing the beam down to a size of tens of µm and was evaluated in the analysis of ancient Chinese porcelain. Buzanich et al.47 described the design and construction of a portable focused beam XRF, designed for a similar application in which a low power palladium tube was coupled to a polycapillary optic or a collimator depending on the preferred mode of excitation. The instrument was fitted with a silicon drift detector and a vacuum chamber to permit determination of the elements from Na upwards in archaeological applications. One innovation was that the instrument was fitted with two laser pointers to position accurately samples at the focal point of the polycapillary. In a different analytical configuration, Yang et al.48 described the use of a polycapillary in a grazing emission XRF configuration as an effective means of obtaining µm sized beams and applied this instrument to the analysis of semiconductor film samples to acquire measurements of film thickness, composition and density.
There is increasing interest in the use of polycapillary optics in the design of confocal µ-XRF instruments. Sun et al.49 described such an instrument using a polycapillary optic in the detection channel and a Kirkpatrick–Baez mirror in the excitation channel to give an overall resolution of 76.3 µm (x), 53.4 µm (y) and 77.1 µm (depth, Θ = 90°). Members of the same group50 also described a tabletop version of such an instrument incorporating a polycapillary full lens in the excitation channel and a polycapillary half lens in the detection channel, this time examining the confocal image from a modern coin. Tsuji et al.51 described a confocal µ-XRF instrument that incorporated two independent micro Mo anode X-ray tubes with full polycapillary lenses being attached to each tube. A half-polycapillary lens was included in the silicon drift detector channel. The advantage of this instrument was to increase the intensity of the 3D XRF analysis when two X-ray tubes were used in confocal configuration, as was demonstrated by the elemental depth profiling of a grain of black wheat. Tsuji and Nakano52 described an alternative form of this instrument incorporating Cr and Mo anode tubes (rather than two Mo tubes) and evaluated performance on an amaranth seed. Mantouvalou et al.53 described a reliable procedure to quantify 3D µ-XRF spectroscopy data, applied to the quantitative reconstruction of the composition of stratified material. This procedure allowed determination of the chemical composition and the thickness of layers, work that was supported by the development of an appropriate stratified reference material.
Reports on alternative forms of microanalysis instrumentation included a µ-XRF spectrometer described by Maeo et al.54 and evaluated for the analysis of small particles on a silicon wafer. The X-ray tube excitation source contained three anodes (Cr, Pd and W), which could be excited sequentially and the focusing device was a doubly curved Si(111) crystal capable of focusing the X-ray beam down to less than 100 µm. It was estimated that particles down to 1.6 µm could be detected. In contrast, Masschaele et al.55 described a new computer tomography facility at the University of Ghent based on a state of the art open-type X-ray tube with a dual head, one for high power µ-CT and the second for sub-µ- (or nano-)CT and a range of detectors that could be used to optimise scanning conditions for the objects under investigation. Tsuji et al.56 continued their interest in solid/liquid interfaces, an important region for the investigation of chemical reactions such as those associated with electrolysis and corrosion. They investigated the application of confocal 3D µ-XRF analysis to the chemical deposition of Cu on an iron plate and the dissolution of Fe in a solution of CuSO4. The propagation of X-rays through a waveguide comprising a narrow extended, planar slit was described by Egorov and Egorov57 on the basis of a waveguide resonance radiation propagation mechanism.
5 Synchrotron radiation
5.1 Instrumental development
Only a few instrumental developments have been reported during this review period. Gupta et al.58 discussed the capabilities of the KMC-2 beamline at BESSY for spatially resolved measurements with nanometer resolution. A combination of experimental methods of XRF and EXAFS with the X-ray standing waves technique was applied to the depth profiling of Si/W/Si layers with sub-nanometer resolution. The investigated layers were placed into the waveguide structure formed by two gold films to increase sensitivity and accuracy of the measurements. In-depth resolution of the order of 1 nm was obtained for the structure measurements, which seems to be outstanding and offers a promising application for future studies.
Chukalina et al.59 discussed a comparison of two XRF microtomography techniques (computed and confocal) also from the point of quantification. The authors recommended sequential use of both techniques. The computed tomography, implementing a ‘large’ scanning step size and a ‘large’ rotational angular value, gave a preliminary image of the sample volume and then, using confocal tomography, it was possible to investigate the selected small volumes with moderate lateral resolution and good sensitivity. Confocal tomography has the great advantage of being able to perform “partial volume tomography”; that is, analysing a small volume inside a larger one, by partial scanning. De Samber et al.60 reported 3D-elemental imaging and its role in environmental chemistry. Using nanobeams of X-rays coupled with state-of-the-art scanning systems and multi-element detectors, a detailed 3D structure of the elemental distributions within individual cells could be produced, which was claimed to provide new insights into the role of metals in cellular metabolism. Zoeger et al.61 studied the element distribution in human bone joints using the 3D capabilities of confocal µ- SRXRF and XRF microtomography at the ANKA Fluo-Topo beamline and the HASYLAB beamline L. The authors found a highly specific accumulation of Pb at the tidemark between non-calcified and calcified cartilage. Furthermore, both Pb and Zn accumulation coincided at the tidemark. Since the tidemark plays an important role in osteoarthritis, the results might strengthen other authors' conclusions that Pb is associated with this joint disease. Although offering less spatial resolution when compared with microtomography, confocal µ- SRXRF was found to be better suited for such studies. For readers specifically interested in this topic, more information may be found in section 9.6 devoted to clinical and biological applications.
5.2 Combined methods

Combining several synchrotron radiation-based analytical techniques, e.g., µ-SRXRF, µ-EXAFS in fluorescence mode, µ-XANES and µ-XRD for the comprehensive characterisation of samples continues to show an upward trend. The most outstanding application was the investigation of Fe in extra-terrestrial grains trapped in aerogel collectors. Grossemy et al.62 investigated some analogues of stardust samples in order to develop an analytical protocol for the characterisation of samples from the NASA Stardust Capsule Sample Return, which came back to Earth in January 2006 with its load of cometary and contemporary interstellar grains trapped in aerogel collectors. The aim was to study the effects of slowing down the hypervelocity particles into an aerogel with a focus upon the physical and chemical properties of the collected grains. Some samples were investigated by µ-XRF so as to establish elemental maps together with µ-XANES for Fe speciation. In particular, the XANES measurements showed that Fe was present in different oxidation states in the sample, predominantly in a ferric form at the track entrance whilst in a ferrous form both at the end of the track and in the final grain. Tests performed on the Allende meteorite dust grains for which the Fe2+/Fe3+ ratio was previously known, tended to show that the final particles collected presented the same oxidation state as the initial incident grains. This topic was also represented in both the plenary session and a dedicated session at the Annual Denver X-ray Conference in Colorado Springs 2007, (http://www.dxcicdd.com/07).
Pinakidou et al.63 applied µ-XRF and µ-XAFS to study the bonding environment of Fe and Zn in vitrified samples that contain electric arc furnace dust from metal processing industries. The samples were studied in the as-cast state and also after annealing at 900 °C, concluding that annealing does not induce any significant changes in the distribution of either Fe or Zn, in both the as-cast and annealed glasses. The same authors also reported an investigation of the thermal stability of vitrified industrial wastes64 and concluded that Pb was trapped in the crystalline region if the micro-crystallites produced during annealing was in the form of lead and iron oxides and therefore the material was considered to be safe. Readers can find more details on this subject in section 9.3.2.
Various µ-focused SR techniques have been used by Denecke et al.65 to investigate actinide elements in geological samples in order to assist research into the disposal of nuclear waste. Results from a bore core section of a uranium-rich tertiary sediment collected from Ruprechtov, Czech Republic, showed a natural analogue to those nuclear waste repository scenarios involving deep geological formations. The authors found that preparation of the thin section created an arsenic oxidation state that apparently changed the As valence in some regions of the sample. These results supported their previously proposed hypothesis for the mechanism for U-enrichment in the sediment. In this, an AsFeS coating on framboid Fe nodules in the sediment reduced mobile groundwater-dissolved U(VI) to less-soluble U(IV), thereby immobilising U in the sediment.
Atypical micrometric pigments in 16th century paintings from Grunewald were investigated by Cotte et al.66 using the µ-SRXRF setup at the ESRF ID21. The use of 2D-mapping highlighted the presence of micrometer-sized grains of S and Sb in a lead matrix. XANES measurements were performed at both the S K-edge and the Sb L-edge to refine information from the atomic to the molecular level. Beam stability was a key point in this study so as to selectively probe micrometer pigment grains dispersed in the lead matrix. The measurements confirmed that the grains were made of stibnite (antimony sulfide). Chemical mapping of sulfides perfectly correlated with antimony mapping and provided a clear visualisation of the stibnite pigments, in addition to their identification. Besides its artistic relevance, this work was aimed at illustrating developments of synchrotron X-ray microprobe methods for the chemical characterisation and observation of complex and micrometer-scale materials. Readers with more interest in this topic are referred to section 9.4.

Electron microprobe and µ-SRXRF mapping were combined by Jacobson et al.67 for an investigation of the distribution of Cu in high-copper vineyard soils. The spatial distribution of Cu was measured at two resolutions (0.3 mm and 20 µm) in thin sections of the undisturbed surface soil. The results indicated that the Cu distribution was strongly heterogeneous at both scales of observation. Entire regions of the thin sections were virtually devoid of Cu, whereas highly localised “hotspots” had Cu signal intensities thousands of times higher than the background. The distribution of Rb, or Al and Si, indicators of clay minerals, or Fe as iron hydroxides, showed that Cu was not preferentially associated with these mineral phases. Instead, Cu hotspots were associated with particulate organic matter. The authors claimed that these observations suggest a modification to the current sampling protocols is required, when used for eco-toxicological experiments involving micro-organisms in contaminated soils. The same two methods were used by Kawai et al.68 for a risk assessment of TiO2 photocatalyst during the analysis of individual micrometer-sized particles. The Ti K-edge XANES technique was performed on single microparticles in order to successfully discrimination between rutile and anatase.

Investigations into root-uptake were reported by several groups: Meirer et al.69 used SR-TXRF-XANES for As speciation in cucumber xylem sap. The group performed chemical speciation of As at trace levels of 30 ppb and found that plants fed with nutrient solutions containing As(V) were converted to As(III), while plants fed with As(III) remained as As(III) in the xylem sap. A considerable advantage of this technique is that no sample preparation was required, other than depositing a drop onto the sample reflector followed by drying. This was an impressive demonstration of the trace element features of TXRF used in combination with the XANES technique. Stacey et al.70 studied the root uptake of lipophilic zinc-rhamnolipid complexes and found that rhamnolipids either increased total plant up-take of Zn from the soil or increased Zn translocation by reducing the prevalence of insoluble Zn-phytate-like compounds in roots. Kitajima et al.71 observed the early process of arsenic transfer in the leaf tissue of a hyperaccumulator fern (Pteris vittata L.) within a 12 h period after arsenic uptake by the root system. The authors claimed that this study visually revealed for the first time, the transfer of arsenic from the root to the marginal part of the leaf within 1 h of exposure. Readers with an interest in this topic can find more information in section 9.3.3 of this review.
Hoffmann et al.72 demonstrated the ability of TXRF combined with near-edge EXAFS and X-ray photo-electron spectroscopy (XPS) to identify the chemical bonds and speciation in boron and silicon carbon-nitride films, produced as layers of some hundred nm periodicity. The BCxNy films were prepared by low pressure chemical vapour deposition using trimethylamine borane as a precursor. The SiCxNy films, were manufactured by plasma-enhanced chemical vapour deposition using hexamethyl disilazane. Hettiarachchi et al.73 used a combination of several synchrotron based techniques, µ-XRF, µ-XANES and bulk XANES and EXAFS to speciate different fertilizer-derived Mn and Zn forms in highly calcareous soils, in order to understand the chemistry underlying the observed differential behaviour of fluid and granular micro-nutrient forms. The authors reported that µ-XRF mapping of soil-fertilizer reaction zones indicated that the diffusion of Mn and Zn from the liquid fertilizer was greater than that for the equivalent granular sources. Manganese in the liquid fertilizers formed hydrated phosphates and calcite-like structures whereas zinc was associated with silicates. Granular sources tended to transform into comparatively less soluble solid forms such as oxides, carbonates and phosphate phases. McNear and co-workers74 turned their attention to Ni speciation in refinery enriched soils, using conventional XRF and µ-EXAFS. Aluminium and nickel layered double hydroxide phases were found in both limed and unlimed mineral soils and with a tendency towards the more stable phyllosilicate Ni species in the limed soil. Studies showed that making the soils calcareous was effective in decreasing the chemically-extractable Ni as well as alleviating Ni phytotoxicity symptoms in vegetable crops grown in the vicinity of a nickel refinery in Ontario, Canada. Conversely, additions of dolomitic limestone were reported to increase the uptake of Ni in the plant, Alyssum Murale and this species has now been proposed for use in a remediation strategy for the area.
5.3 Applications
A review of the benefits of SRXRF for biological samples was given by Fahrni.75 The author recognised that SRXRF is the only technique compatible with fully hydrated biological samples such as whole cells or tissue sections, combined with trace element sensitivity and submicron spatial resolution. Futhermore, SRXRF is ideally suited for the study of intracellular distribution and speciation of trace elements in addition to the therapeutic or diagnostic metal complexes owing to its ability to provide information concerning the oxidation state and coordination environment of metal cations. Popescu et al.76 reported the asymmetric distribution of metals in the Xenopus laevis oocyte and concluded that SRXRF was a useful tool to examine metal accumulation and redistribution during fertilisation and embryonic development. Kramar et al.77 analysed spherules of the Cretaceous/Tertiary boundary transitions in NE Mexico and Haiti. The authors recognised the potential of µ-SRXRF analysis to discriminate between primary and altered spherules enabling a re-construction of their evolution. Futhermore, they were able to show that the spherules represent a complex mixture of different materials from the subsurface at the Chicxulub impact site. Peeters et al.78 presented a quantitative µ-XRF study of CoTSPc and CuTSPc thin-films deposited on gold by cyclic voltammetry and concluded that a comparison of scanning SRXRF results with electrochemical data provided further insight into the mechanism for the thin layer growth.
More routine applications of SRXRF can be found elsewhere in this Review in the respective sections devoted to environmental, geological, medical, biological, industrial and cultural heritage applications.
6 TXRF
In this section of the review only special achievements are mentioned, whereas routine applications may be found in their respective application sections.
A review of the developments of TXRF was presented by Wobrauschek79 that covered general aspects of this particular energy-dispersive XRF analytical technique. The author emphasised the ability of synchrotron radiation as an excitation source to provide a means for the determination of ultra trace levels of elements at femto gram levels that find application in the analysis of silicon wafers. The principles, advantages, instrumentation, quantification issues and applications were described. The author's long lasting interest in the extension of TXRF to the light element range was easily recognised in this article, as well as the trend to combine it with techniques such as X-ray absorption spectroscopy. TXRF has become a mature analytical technique but nevertheless new developments offer the prospect of new applications.
Kunimura and Kawai80 described the trace elemental analysis of commercially bottled drinking water using their amazing portable TXRF spectrometer. This work had previously been presented at the TXRF conference in Trento in 2007. The main feature of this portable instrument; comprising a 1.5 W transmission tungsten anode X-ray tube, a waveguide collimator and a Si-PIN diode detector for the analysis of airborne particulate samples, is that in spite of its restricted sensitivity, this system will be invaluable for rapid monitoring in the field or for sample screening. The effect of matrix content on the detection limits of TXRF has been studied in many publications in the past and should not be overlooked when developing new applications. In this context Karijou81 contributed a study of trace elements in environmental and biological samples by investigating variable concentrations of NH4NO3 matrix with the expected outcome that the detection limits, expressed in concentration units, improved with increasing total sample mass, whereas the detection limits, expressed in mass units, deteriorated. For the optimal determination of Se in blood a total mass of 200 µg was found. In the context of the ozonation of drinking water, as an alternative to the purification of drinking water by chlorination, bromide ions are oxidized to bromate, a probable human carcinogen. Bromate ions are usually not found in water, but are created during this oxidation process. Hatzistavros et al.82 overcame the problem of bromate speciation encountered by using ion chromatography in combination with conductivity detection, visible-UV absorbance detection, or by ICP-MS. Whilst the authors recognised that TXRF cannot discriminate between bromide and bromate ions, they offered an alternative to the afore mentioned procedures using selective membrane collection. These membranes were produced on the surface of reflectors and then used for standard TXRF analysis. Various membranes containing a few µg of different complexing reagents plus the bromide-masking complexing agents were added to the analysed solution for subsequent testing.
Beckhoff et al.83 presented a publication on reference-free TXRF analysis of semiconductor surfaces using synchrotron radiation at the PTB laboratory at BESSY II storage ring, Berlin. Their fundamental parameter approach made use of the well-defined monochromatised undulating radiation produced by a plane grating mirror in the range of 0.078 to 1.86 keV, particularly suited for the excitation of light elements. Calibrated photodiodes and Si(Li) detectors monitored the exciting radiant power as well as the fluorescence radiation coming from the sample. Heavy elements were analysed using L-lines, which of course can complicate the quantification of the light elements present. Importantly, the authors were also able to quantify the relative uncertainty of the analytical results, taking into account the various contributions ranging from the excitation source, being monitored, the detector efficiency, the geometry and the appropriate fundamental parameter set. Carvalho et al.84 gave an overview of published work on healthy and malignant human tissue analysed by various XRF techniques (EDXRF, TXRF, SRXRF and PIXE) currently applied in the field of medical physics, specifically oncology. The authors reached several conclusions in their search for the correlation between elemental concentrations in cancerous tissues and healthy ones, but admitted that further work from a wider population was needed before general acceptance could be gained. Sirito de Vives et al.85 studied the use of the tree “Sibipiruna” (Caesalpina peltophorides), widespread in the areas of investigation in Piracicaba city, Brazil, as a bio-indicator for environmental pollution. Nutritional and toxicological chemical elements were identified and quantified, using the Brazilian Light Source NSLS in Campinhas. Terra et al.86 investigated muscle and gonad tissue from three abundant fish species of the Paraiba do Sul river, Brazil. They found Cr and Pb values exceeding the maximum permissible legal limits in fish from certain sections of the river.
Various other interesting applications of TXRF included the determination by Dhara et al.87 of Th and U as major elements in the presence of each other. A significant advantage of using TXRF is that small sample volumes are required and therefore very little radioactive waste is produced. Misra et al.88 focussed their interest on the trace element determination in thorium oxide, after dissolution in a HNO3/HF mixture followed by separation from the matrix by solvent extraction. Piccirilli et al.89 reported work to improve the understanding of polymer interactions at liquid-solid interfaces, paticularly important in porous media where the walls can be either attractive or repulsive for the polymer adsorption. They used varying concentrations of iodine-marked water-polysaccharide solutions that were brought in contact with glass micro-spheres (400–600 µm). The adsorption was evaluated by the iodine concentration as measured with TXRF. Bee honey produced primarily from floral nectars can serve as a bio-indicator for heavy metal contamination of the environment, within the bees’ forage area that can extend as far as 7 km2. This was previously demonstrated and has now been revived by Enrich et al.90 for areas in Argentina. The samples were decomposed by microwave digestion and chemometric tools were employed to relate the honey composition to the environmental contamination of studied areas. Alvarez et al.91 presented a study for the analysis of heavy metals in rainwater, applying different sample preparation procedures. The authors compared the detection limits, precision and accuracy obtained by TXRF and anodic stripping voltammetry.
During the fabrication process of integrated circuits, dopant atoms segregate to energetically favourable sites at the interface between silicon and silicon dioxide. TXRF in combination with successive etching was used by Steen et al.92 to determine the concentration profile of implanted As at the interface between Si and SiO2. With other methods such as SIMS, Medium Energy Ion Scattering, X-ray Photo-electron Spectroscopy, Auger-electron Spectrometry or Rutherford Backscatter Spectroscopy the shape of the concentration profile at the interface remains elusive. Therefore these techniques present a challenge for those interested in the depth resolution due to the large fraction of the implanted dose segregated within a narrow layer of about 2nm or less. Garcia et al.93 showed that quantitative TXRF of the impacted mass on the reflector could be used to specify transport efficiencies in femto-second laser ablation ICP-MS ablation cells. Padmanabhan et al.94 studied the surface composition of alkali-halide aqueous solutions by the application of grazing incidence XRF. According to the authors, interfacial effects played a key role, but no theory or general agreement on the mechanisms involved was offered, even for the surface tension and surface potential at the air/solution interface. However, concentration profiles were found in good agreement with numerical simulations after the inclusion of an attractive potential of a few k(B)T of energy into the halide model.
7 Portable and mobile XRF
This year, most regular applications of PXRF are reviewed in the appropriate applications section, this section being reserved for innovative applications and developments in instrumentation. Occasionally, something rather interesting comes up in the former category, this year exemplified by the work of Wilkins et al.,95 who developed a technique whereby mosquitoes could be marked with Rb with the field portability of XRF used to detect labelled insects at breeding sites or in the laboratory for mark-release-recapture experiments. The technique involved culturing larvae to pupation in solutions containing 300 µg mL−1 RbCl (higher concentrations caused increased mortality) with PXRF capable of detecting Rb above background levels in 10 day old females and 4 day old males. The Rb marker was found to decline significantly as adult insects aged.
A number of innovative instrumental developments have been described in the current review year, often coupling PXRF with other techniques. One example is the portable spectrometer described by Pappalardo et al.96 designed for simultaneous XRF and PIXE analysis. A244 Cm source (an X-ray and alpha emitter) was used to excite samples and was coupled to a silicon drift detector. The instrument was capable of the quantitative or fingerprint analysis of samples for the elements Na (K lines) through to Pb (L and M lines). Examples of the in situ analysis of bronze samples were given. Carapelle et al.97 tested a hand-held PXRF spectrometer designed to measure the thickness of coatings (1 to 1500 nm thick) on samples in an industrial environment. An accuracy of 3% from a one minute measurement was claimed. Gianoncelli and Kourousias98 discussed the limitations of PXRF in evaluating depth information from archaeological samples, in particular artefacts that suffered from surface alteration due to prolonged environmental exposure and gilded artefacts. A multi-technique approach was followed by Miliani et al.99 to study Renoir's ‘A woman at her toilette’. The combination of non-invasive, in situ, portable methods were PXRF, mid-IR and near-IR reflectance spectroscopy, UV-VIS absorption and emission spectroscopy and the aim of this work was to evaluate this non-invasive approach with a conventional micro-sampling method. PXRF was used as a complementary technique to fibre-optic Fourier transform mid-IR reflectance spectroscopy by Miliani et al.100 for the non-invasive in situ study of mural painting materials, specifically a Rennaisance fresco by Pietro Vannucci located in the church of Santa Maria delle Lacrime (Perugia, Italy). XRF was used to identify pigments, whereas the IR technique was used to characterise lacunas, restoration materials and two different secco refinements. Portability extended to the application of a TXRF instrument by Kunimura et al.101 for the analysis of trace elements in commercially bottled oolong tea, pool water and water leached from the metallic foil coating a plastic toy. Various elements were detected (Ca, Fe, K, Mn, S) and quantified using an internal standards method.
PXRF has the advantage of facilitating a number of innovative applications, including the work of Cesareo et al.102 who proposed a novel way of standardising and characterising the performance of individual instruments based on the use of the 50 cent Euro coin. The wide distribution of this coin guarantees maximum availability and its use demonstrated that different X-ray tubes and different detectors resulted in detection limits that varied by a factor of 6 for Zn and 100 for Sn, with the high voltage setting of the X-ray tube being the most important parameter. ‘Hand-held’ PXRF analysers were evaluated by Block et al.103 to measure wood that had been treated with preservative containing arsenic and reported best detection limits of 1 mg kg−1. Kim et al.104 carefully evaluated the use of PXRF for the rapid, on-site and near real time analysis of filters used to measure airborne contamination of lead in the workplace to demonstrate compliance with Korean Government regulations. Following relevant NIOSH procedures, a careful comparison was made with replicate determinations made by ICP-AES, and after a detailed analysis of ICP and PXRF results, it was concluded that the two data sets were highly correlated in terms of precision, accuracy and bias, confirming the suitability of the PXRF approach for the on site measurement of filters up to 26 µg g−1 level per sample. Melquiades et al.105 evaluated the use of ammonium pyrrolyoline dithiocarbamate for the preconcentration of heavy metals in water and concluded that using optimum preconcentration conditions, PXRF was suitable for in situ surveys. Bar code nanomaterials were studied by Sattayasamitsathit et al.106 who showed that ternary Co-Ni-Cu alloy nanowires could be used with an X-ray fluorescence readout to provide barcode identification of components that was compatible with processes based on mixed metal plating solutions. Factors affecting embedding the nanowires within plastics and inks were also discussed. Tsutsumimoto and Tsuji107 undertook a time resolved study of the uptake of nutrients by plants, using XRF to measure Ca, Cu, Fe, K, Mn and Zn from a nutrient solution.
Two papers have been published in which the performance of PXRF was compared with other techniques. Craig et al.108 compared XRF and PXRF in the analysis of 68 obsidian archaeological artefacts from southern Peru. Despite significant differences in individual element data, which could be resolved through instrument cross calibration, both techniques produced the same artefact classification. Ferretti et al.109 undertook a more ambitious comparison between PXRF and laser induced breakdown spectrometry for the in situ analysis of several bronze pieces (from the Porticello Bronzes) at the National Museum of Magna Grecia in Reggio Calabria, Italy. Results appeared to be complementary in classifying the pieces as belonging to at least two statues, a classification that agreed well with stylistic criteria.

Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy is a portable technique that in a number of ways rivals PXRF for in situ applications. It is interesting, therefore, to review the work of Laville et al.110 who used the technique for the multi-element analysis of solidified mineral melt samples. The authors encountered difficulties in obtaining sufficiently linear trends in the calibration curves of the elements of interest due to matrix effects. Instead, a more robust approach was to account for the influence on spectroscopic signals from the species of interest due to the presence of others using a multivariate approach based on a second order polynomial linear regression. Good agreement was then obtained with XRF analyses, which was used as a confirmatory technique.
8 On-line XRF
Either there is no innovation going on out there or systems are just too hard at work for applications to be written up and published—either way there is not much to report over the current review period. However, Tsutsumimoto and Tsuji111 proposed the use of XRF for the direct measurement at solid–liquid interfaces using an instrument immersed in the liquid and developed for the monitoring of nickel electrodeless plating processes—a worthy and innovative contribution.
9 Applications
9.1 Sample preparation
Modern X-ray spectrometers offer ever increasing sensitivity, thereby enabling analysts to report data on analytes at lower concentrations and where appropriate, from a smaller sample mass. Therefore, the spatial distribution over the irradiated area of the sample must be appreciated especially when a sample may not be homogeneous. A group from the National Research Centre for Geoanalysis in Beijing112 prepared a small solder disc, consisting mainly of lead and tin, with a diameter of about 3 mm. They systematically moved the disc over the 3 cm2 expected irradiated region to measure the distribution achieved using different secondary targets (HOPG, Mo and Al2O3) in a polarised EDXRF system. Intensities of Sn Kα and Lα plus Pb Lα and Mα lines were measured to describe the XRF yield from the three secondary targets. Their results suggested that the total area contributing to the XRF signal was 2 cm2 for all three secondary targets. However, it was noted that for both the HOPG and Al2O3 targets, a sharp beam distribution pattern was observed wherein 50% of the intensity was centralised over a 7 × 7 mm spot. This paper has implications for all analysts to ensure that the spatial distribution of their spectrometer(s) is understood and that the production of calibrants, especially filter papers, is spatially characterised at the mm2 level. Worley and Colletti113 used a surfactant to disperse their µL plutonium solutions onto Kapton film substrates to ensure uniform dispersion. After drying, the thin films were sealed in sample cells to avoid the potential for radioactive liquid to leak into the spectrometer. The films were then quantified for Fe and Ga.
Borate fusion techniques are widely adopted for the preparation of oxides, carbonates and silicates but where more refractory materials and metal powders are concerned; the analyst must adopt or develop a reliable preliminary stage to ensure complete digestion of the sample. The XRF group at NIST114 chose an alkali reaction as a precursor to fusion when called upon to analyse a candidate silicon carbide reference material. Lithium hydroxide (LiOH. H2O) was used to convert Si to Li2SiO3 prior to fusion with a lithium borate flux without damage to the platinum ware. The method enabled the authors to report value assignments for Al, Ca, Cr, Cu, Mn, Ni, S, Ti and Zn. Levels of Ca, Cr, Cu and S were near the limits of quantification of the fusion method and the results for Fe were acknowledged to be subject to low bias. Phosphorus was, as expected, subject to volatilisation losses. Song et al.115 adopted HNO3 during a preliminary digestion stage before fusion of a manganese ore. They investigated different fluxes, fusion times and volumes of HNO3 to overcome two problems, volatilisation of sulfur and foaming during the fusion stage. The authors, in common with many analysts, now regard fusion prior to XRF analysis as a rapid, precise and simple analytical procedure.

Preconcentration techniques of note during this review period included the electro-deposition of Au, Bi, Ni, Sb and Te from aqueous solution on a copper cathode in a report by Zawisza and Sitko.116 A special holder for a copper electrode was constructed to perform the electro-deposition on only one side of the electrode. Following electrolysis, the electrode was removed from its holder, rinsed with water and dried prior to analysis. The effect of time on deposition yield was investigated with homogeneity of the prepared specimens checked using an internal standard method. The best calibration results were achieved using the standard addition method for the subsequent analysis of the anode slime. Silva and Masi117 offered a new, simple and precise indirect method for the determination of terazosin, a drug used to improve urinary flow rate in men suffering benign prostate obstruction. The method was based on the precipitation of an ion-associate complex formed between terazosin and Zn(SCN)42− and the formation of a thin film on a membrane filter. Optimum conditions for the formation of the complex, such as pH, ionic strength, shaking time and stoichiometry were studied prior to measurement of the Zn Kα line. Mahmoud et al.118 tested four chemically modified chelating silica gel phases with ion exchange groups for their potential capability to selectively bind, extract and preconcentrate uranyl ions from different aqueous solutions as well as ore samples. Factors evaluated included; pH of the contact solution, mass of extractant, stirring time and the eluent concentration for desorption of the surface-bound uranyl ion and interfering anions and cations. The authors reported optimum conditions as assessed by recovery values of 91% for silica phase (II) and 93% for silica phase (IV). The preconcentration method was further applied to samples of uranium ore as well as granite to produce results in good agreement with their assigned values.
9.2 Geological and industrial minerals
XRF (often now in association with ICP-MS) is one of the classic techniques used in the analysis of geological samples, mainly because of the precision and accuracy with which the major elements and a wide range of trace elements may be determined. One example of such an application is the work of Park et al.119 who used XRF with ICP-MS and ICP-AES to analyse late Quaternary tephra layers discovered in piston cores from the Ulleung Basin, East Sea (Sea of Japan). Relative amounts of the elements Nb, P, Ti, Y, Zr were used to differentiate tephra from different tectonic zones. Chernysheva and Kharin120 used XRF and ICP-MS to analyse volcanic rocks dredged during cruise 10 of R/V Akademik Kurchatov and showed, mainly on the basis of the incompatible trace elements, that oceanic and continental alkaline rocks, related to the opening of the North Atlantic Ocean in the Late Paleocene are significantly different in petrochemical and geochemical characteristics. Aizawa et al.121 were interested in volcanic rocks on eleven island arc-type volcanoes in Japan, using XRF data to show that the zeta potential (a key electrochemical property of the pore water/mineral interface) of volcanic rocks did not correlate with major element concentrations, but by implication with the mineralogical composition or crystalline structure. The geochemical signatures of eclogites from the Saxonian Erzgebirge in central Europe of Variscan age were analysed by XRF and ICP-MS in a study by Massonne and Czambor122 to distinguish MORB (mid ocean ridge basalt) derived eclogites from those originating from protoliths within plate igneous rocks. Fluid inclusions were of interest to Nagaseki and Hayashi123 specifically the determination of Cu and Zn in synthetic fluid inclusions using SRXRF. The aim of this study was to determine vapour-liquid partition coefficients for these elements under boiling conditions at 500–650 °C and 35–100 MPa in sulfur-bearing and sulfur-free systems. It was found that Cu preferentially partitions into the vapour phase, whereas Zn partitions into the hypersaline liquid in sulfur-bearing systems in a study relevant to the formation of hydrothermal ore deposits. Two studies investigated marine ferromanganese crusts and nodules. Manceau et al.124 studied the speciation of Ba and Ni in a ferromanganese nodule from Lake Baikal (Russia) using µ-XRF, µ-XRD, and absorption spectroscopy. A detailed assessment of the mineralogical association of these elements was undertaken to elucidate the formation of tectomanganate (romanschite) or phyllomanganate (vernadite) during ferromanganese nodule accretion. Peacock and Sherman125 were interested in the crystal chemistry of Ni in marine ferromanganese crusts and nodules from the Pacific Ocean and the Madeira abyssal plain, using energy dispersive spectrometry to show the association of Ni with manganese oxide phases and XRD to examine crystal phases. It was proposed that the transformation of Ni from surface complexation to structural incorporation provided a potentially irreversible sink for Ni in seawater. Slate from the salt lakes in Altai Krai were of interest to Leonova et al.126 using AAS and SRXRF and INAA to determine 40 trace elements. The study was designed to investigate the influence on trace element profiles of organisms inhabiting aquatic ecosystems of variable salt composition. Walsh127 used XRF in combination with XRD and SEM to study slate from Ballachulish (Scotland) in an investigation designed to allow provenancing of used slate to contribute to an understanding of why some slate materials (e.g., used for roofing) last for centuries, whilst others fail after a few years. It was found that the best indicator of provenance was the composition of individual minerals and possible key accessory minerals. The mineral wollastonite was of interest to Luo128 in a chinese study that described an XRF method of analysis based on a fusion sample preparation technique.
The analysis of core samples provides a particular opportunity for XRF, especially when the technique can be used in scanning mode, as was the case in a study by Moreno et al.129 They examined the Lago Chungara sedimentary sequence in the northern Andean Chilean Altiplano to provide a detailed reconstruction of the lacustrine sedimentary evolution over the last 14000 years. Kido et al.130 were interested in the stratigraphy and high resolution analysis of biogenetic components and deep-water oxygenation conditions in the Sea of Japan over the last 640 ka. Oxygen isotope data was one of the tools used, but microscanning XRF was also employed to evaluate deep water oxygenation conditions from both the major element compositions of sediments and the excess sulfur content. High resolution XRF scanning was also used by Kristen et al.131 along with other techniques to evaluate the hydrological changes that have taken place in southern Africa over the last 200 ka from the analysis of lake sediments from the Tswaing impact crater. Sorrel et al.132 used scanning XRF and microfacies analysis to estimate the extent of wind strength and frequency in the Aral Sea basin during the Late Holocene period on the basis of a high resolution record of Ti in a core. This element was used as a proxy for detrital inputs linked to the varying influence of the Siberian high pressure weather system. Levitan et al.133 also analysed Holocene sediments by XRF, samples originating from the eastern continental slope of the Weddell Sea. In contrast, Fe by scanning XRF was the element of interest to Sluijs et al.134 in an analysis of samples from the Lomonosov Ridge in the Arctic, collected on expedition 302 of the Integrated Ocean Drilling Program. Their interest was to reconstruct the latest Paleocene to early Eocene paleoenvironments with special reference to the Paleocene-Eocene thermal maximum (PETM). The same phenomenon (PETM) was also of interest to Rohl et al.135 who developed a detailed chronology using scanning XRF of core samples taken from the Leg 208 of the Ocean Drilling Programme (Walvis Ridge, South-eastern Atlantic). Data were compared with previously published results from other PETM sites, permitting a detailed chronology to be produced on the scale of precession cycles with the total duration of the PETM estimated to be similar to 170 ka. Westerhold et al.136 also studied cores collected from the Ocean Drilling Programme Leg 198 (Shatsky Rise, NW Pacific Ocean) and Leg 208 (Walvis Ridge SE Atlantic Ocean) using scanning XRF and high resolution core logging to establish the first complete cyclic sedimentary successions for the Early Paleogene. Shanahan et al.137 investigated the use of scanning XRF for the elemental mapping of annual laminated sediment samples, choosing examples from environments dominated by terrigenous, biological and chemical deposition. Data reduction (e.g., using principle components transformation) enhanced element maps from all sediment types and it was concluded that this approach represented a valuable tool for the study of laminated sediments.
XRF has also been used extensively for the analysis of soils and sediments over the current review period. One example is the work of Gurung et al.138 who undertook a geochemical study of fluvio-lacustrine aquifers in the Katmandu basin, Nepal. Their particular interest was the potential for the elution of arsenic into groundwater, which did not appear to be dependent on As concentrations in bulk sediments, but is likely to be effected by other factors such as redox conditions and the content of organic matter. An innovative reason for analysing sediments was the basis of the work by Hung et al.139 who use XRF, XRD and SEM to examine fine sediments from the Shih-Men reservoir (Taiwan) with a view to recycling these as expanded lightweight aggregate. Sintering at 1200–1300 °C for 10 to 12 min was required to achieve this objective. Hwang and Hwang140 used XRF to analyse phosphatic clay to evaluate its suitability as a cost effective way of remediating heavy metal contamination in aqueous and slurry phases. An interesting problem arising from the magnetic behaviour of soils that can seriously interfere with the performance of geophysical sensors was studied by Van Dam et al.,141 using XRF and XRD and a number of other techniques to analyse iron rich soils developed on basaltic substrate in Hawaii. XRF Fe data ranged from 13 to 58% m/m and it was concluded that the high soil magnetic properties observed in geophysical surveys were entirely due to neoformed minerals. Yalcin et al.142 used a bench top XRF to analyse surface soil samples from the Sultan Marsh in Turkey. Relatively high concentrations of a number of elements were associated with geological, mining, industrial and other anthropogenic sources. XRF and XRD were used by Kleber et al.143 to undertake a comprehensive analysis of two lowland neotropical rain forest soils in Cost Rica with a particular interest in elucidating the mechanism of formation of halloysite and gibbsite. Soils derived from weathered volcanic rock were of interest to Tazaki144 with XRF being used to demonstrate that Ca, Cl, K and S play an important role as nutrients in terraced rice fields.
The geochemistry and mineralogy of coals from the Songzao coalfield, Chongqing, SW China from the Late Permian period were studied by Dai et al.145 using XRF, ICP-MS, and a variety of other techniques to determine the trace element and mineralogical compositions. Amongst other details, the authors reported that alkaline volcanic ash bands appeared to be the origin of enhanced concentrations of the alkaline elements, Hf, Nb, Ta and Zr and that sulfide minerals were the main carriers of Cu, Ga and Hg. Van Alphen146 reviewed opportunities for the automated mineralogical analysis of coal and ash products using XRF to determine the elemental composition of ash with XRD and petrographic analysis to complete the characterisation without the need to heat or modify the coal sample prior to analysis. The author commented that coal and ash analysis was entering a new and exciting era. Turkish coals were analysed by Ural,147 mainly using XRD, but with XRF to determine chemical compositions. Zivotic et al.148 undertook a comprehensive analysis of brown coal from Soko mine in Serbia with XRF being used to determine major and trace element content thereby demonstrating above average abundance lignite concentrations of Mo, Ni, Se, U and W. Pinetown et al.149 undertook a comprehensive analysis (including the use of XRF) of minerals in coal deposits in the Witbank and Highveld Coalfields in the Mpumalanga Province of South Africa. Their particular interest was in assessing the potential for the coal and coal-bearing units to produce acid mine-drainage conditions.
In the study of industrial minerals, Gonzalez-Fernandez et al.150 used a polarised secondary target EDXRF instrument to analyse mine wastes from different depths of two mine tailings from the Cartagena-La Union mining district in Spain. Particular interest was shown in the determination of Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn in evaluating the environmental risk in relation to European and Spanish legislation, by classifying wastes as inert or as waste that had to be disposed to controlled land-fill. Zinc concentrations were found to slightly exceed regulatory limits, but Pb exceeded them by 3 to 6 times. A polarised EDXRF instrument was used by Ustundag et al.151 to analyse pyrite ores from the Rize-Cayeli and Mardin in Turkey. Ilmenite was the mineral of interest to Charlier et al.,152 using XRF and in situ LA-ICP-MS to analyse samples from the Tellnes iron-titanium deposit in SW Norway. Results were used to elaborate a more detailed understanding of the formation of this deposit within the Rogaland Anorthosite Province. XRF was one of the techniques used to assess the suitability of Campanian ignimbrite (South-Central Italy) as a raw material for the production of lightweight aggregates; work that demonstrates new uses for material that was previously disposed of as waste. Orissa fly ash (India) was characterised by XRF and a range of other techniques by Nayak and Panda153 with interest in the fineness of the particles which provided a large active surface area for mineral leaching. XRF also contributed to multi-technique studies of heavy mineral sands from Richards Bay (South Africa);154 to support a gamma spectrometry study of natural uranium in the processing stream of an extraction plant,155 in assessing the gamma radiation absorption properties of two igneous rocks (a diorite and an andesite) in terms of their suitability for reducing radiation hazards156 and in the characterisation of kaolin deposits at the Torniella mine (southern Tuscany, Italy)—kaolin being derived by the hydrothermal weathering of primary rhyolite.

Other relevant studies included the work of Cotta et al.,157 who used WDXRF (and µ-SRXRF) to assess the homogeneity of a new Brazillian geological reference material BRP-1 (Parana Basin basalt). This work demonstrated that homogeneity was sufficient to recommend minimum test portions of 1 mg for some major elements, 1 to 13 mg for some trace elements (except Zr) in an evaluation that included USGS BCR-2 and GSP-2. Borsato et al.158 used scanning µ-SRXRF to analyse a stalagmite from the Grotta di Ernesto cave in NE Italy, combining results with ion microprobe data to reveal chemical variability across the visible layers of the annual laminae. Some of the measurements demonstrated element abundances found in the thin dark layer at the top of each lamina were Y > Zn, Cu and Pb > P, Br, trends that were thought to reflect the transport of these elements, possibly by organic colloids flushed through the soil zone during Autumn infiltration. Chan et al.159 studied the weathered igneous rocks in Hong Kong. The authors used gamma-ray spectrometric measurements, ICP-MS as well as XRF to characterise their samples, with results indicating that only K showed a systematic variation with an increasing degree of weathering, possibly associated with an increase in the porosity and interconnectivity of microfractures in the weathered surface. In another study related to the durability of building stone, Franzini et al.160 collected 26 samples of ‘Macigno’ sandstone from quarries from the Lunigiana area of NW Tuscany, Italy and analysed them by XRF, XRD and optical microscopy. The overall conclusion of the authors was that degradation of the sandstone was caused by the absorption of water by smectite, which on expanding, cause parts of the stone surface to flake off.
9.3 Environmental

9.3.1 Aerosols and particulates. 
The literature covered in this review period continues to demonstrate the ability of XRF to contribute to a better understanding of the composition and source apportionment of aerosols and particulates. Characterisation of particulates now includes interest in ultra-fine particles, defined as those with diameters less than 0.5 µm, generally associated with the coarser size fractions PM 2.5 and PM 10. Linak et al.161 studied ultra-fine ash aerosols from coal combustion that were mainly formed through vaporisation, nucleation, coagulation and condensation mechanisms leading to compositions notably different from the coarser size fractions formed by fragmentation. Ultra-fine, fine and coarse ash particulates were segregated and collected from a coal burned in a 20 kW laboratory combustor and two additional coals burned in an externally heated drop tube furnace. Samples from both combustors were characterised by TEM, WDXRF, XAFS and Mossbauer spectroscopy. The ultra-fine fraction was found to contain significant amounts of carbon, probably originating from coal tar volatiles and was dependent on coal type and combustion design. XAFS data linked Cr and S to the ultra-fine ash particles and confirmed TEM data linking carbon with transition metal complexes. Lammel et al.162 used a Berner low pressure round nozzle cascade impactor with four stages corresponding to 0.1–0.25, 0.25–1.0, 1.0–4.0 and 4–16 µm aerodynamic particle sizes for the investigation of anthropogenic aerosols in the coastal town of Salina Cruz, Mexico. The impaction plates were modified to accommodate a Perspex® support for subsequent analysis by TXRF without further sample pre-treatment. The authors reported limits of detection for elemental content in individual impactor stages corresponding to 25–60 ng m−3 for Si; 0.8–4 ng m−3 for Ca, Cl, K, Ti and V; 3–20 pg m−3 for Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni and Zn and 7–50 pg m−3 for As, Br, Hg, Pb, Rb, Se and Sr.
X-ray techniques continue to assist occupational hygienists in their work to monitor workplace air quality with the literature reflecting an increase in the use of portable XRF analysers to measure airborne particulates (see section 7 of this Review). Airborne particulates may be generated in dental surgeries by devices such as air-turbine hand tools, ultrasonic scalers and polishers as well as drilling and air spraying in the oral cavity. Sotiriou et al.163 used both continuous (every minute) and integrated (5 h) methods to sample both PM 2.5 and PM 10 particulates on five different days. The XRF data showed that the dental procedures generated particles small enough to penetrate deep into the lungs with potential health concerns for dental personnel.
Moving outdoors, Li et al.164 used a µ-SRXRF system to analyse individual PM 2.5 particles collected from ambient air in Shanghai. They used an excitation energy of 17.4 keV at the BL-4A beamline of Photon Factory, Japan to identify Cr, S, Sr and Pb in individual particles. Only a 60 s irradiation time was needed to measure each particle to confirm the origin such as vehicle exhaust, metallurgical emissions or power plants. An increase in the worldwide usage of platinum group elements (PGE) has been observed over recent decades. High levels of PGE are associated with the chemical industries and jewellery production, but the increased demand for these metals is primarily related to the introduction of automobile catalytic converter systems. The Pt:Rh ratio used in these auto-catalysts was reported in numerous environmental studies. A group from Gdansk, Poland165 presented a review of analytical procedures for PGE quantification in samples such as airborne particulate matter, road dust, soil sediments and waste water. Sampling, sample storage and preservation techniques were presented with XRF featuring amongst the analytical procedures recommended. Smichowski et al.166 presented a similar review of quantification methods for the key traffic related elements, Pb, Pd, Pt, Rh and Sb in atmospheric aerosols. They discussed the use of ET-AAS, TXRF and ICP-MS as well as NAA and PIXE techniques which had featured in the literature over the last decade. Regional studies of urban air pollution continued to feature in the literature during this review period with that by Perrino et al.167 being typical in using a combination of ion chromatography, XRF and ICP-AES for inorganic components and thermo-optical analysis for carbon compounds. This investigation in the Lazio region of central Italy identified sea salt and desert dust storms as well as anthropogenic pollutants in the PM 2.5 and PM 10 samples collected.
A pilot study was conducted by Rasmussen and colleagues168 in the city of Ottawa, Canada to establish sampling and analytical protocols for the determination of airborne metal concentrations in residential environments. During a 7 day period of the winter season, PM 2.5 and PM 10 samples were continuously collected in the living rooms of 10 urban and 10 rural homes. Simultaneously, outdoor PM samples were collected using MiniVol® samplers positioned 1.5 m above each front entrance. Total metal concentrations were determined by EDXRF followed by acid digestion and ICP-MS. The results indicated that metal concentrations in the indoor air of these Canadian homes were orders of magnitude lower than occupational guidelines. The authors concluded that lower detection limits were needed than those achieved using current protocols and that care must be taken to avoid unintentional contamination of filters during handling, transport and sampling. Baxter and co-workers169 collected indoor and outdoor samples of NO2 and PM 2.5 particulates from 43 residences over multiple seasons from low socioeconomic status urban communities in Boston, USA. Samples were collected over 3–4 days in mostly multi-unit residences. Reflectance analysis for elemental carbon and XRF data for other trace analytes were combined with information from a lifestyle questionnaire. Cooking time, gas stove-usage, occupant density and the use of humidifiers were identified as important contributors to levels of indoor pollution.


9.3.2 Consequences of industrial activity. 
Local, regional and national authorities are keen to ensure that land, once used for mining is returned to good use. Hendandez and Pastor170 investigated the relationship between plant biodiversity and metal bioavailability in grasslands overlaying an abandoned barium mine in Spain, now situated in the heart of a bird sanctuary. Today the area sustains grassland interspersed with oak trees and is populated by cattle, sheep, wild animals and birds. The authors conducted soil analyses and performed a greenhouse evaluation of the effects of different metals (Cd, Cu, Pb and Zn) on biodiversity using soil samples from the mine and from a control pasture. Negative effects on plant biodiversity were demonstrated by changes in the Shannon index and species richness. (The Shannon index is commonly used to characterise species diversity in a community accounting for both abundance and evenness of the species present.) The number of grasses, legumes and composites were reduced, whilst other species including ruderals (plants that grow on poor or waste land) were affected to a lesser extent. XRF data showed Zn to have the greatest effect on biodiversity, followed by Cd and Cu. Lima et al.171 characterised the treatment of gold mine tailings. Solid waste from a mine in north-eastern Brazil was examined using XRF, XRD, NAA and ICP-MS. The material was found to be mainly quartz and goethite with a Au content of about 1.8 mg kg−1 and Hg at 10 mg kg−1. A remarkable feature of the waste was that Au and Hg were both concentrated in both the fine and coarse particles, but not in those of intermediate size. Leaching studies indicated that the tailings were stable in weak organic acids, but soluble in alkaline and aerated cyanide solutions, from which 89% Au and 100% Hg could be extracted in 24 h. Electro-leaching experiments performed using sodium chloride as electrolyte indicated that both Au and Hg could be extracted simultaneously with recovery of both metals as high as 70% in 4 h, giving an effective route to clean up the solid waste. Alsecz et al.172 exploited the superior sensitivity of µ-XRF over EPMA for the detection of long-lived radionuclides in sludges from a uranium deposit in Hungary. The laboratory µ-XRF proved an efficient method in identifying the active particles whilst TXRF was recommended for on-site analysis in situations where accidental uranium contamination affected water systems.
Red mud is a waste and tail material from primary aluminium production and is named from its colour, coming from the iron oxide content. The red mud gives rise to two concerns, adverse environmental impact and cost of storage. Akinci and Artir173 used XRF for the determination of Al, Ca, Fe, K, Na, S, Si and Ti and gamma spectroscopy for K, Ra, Th, and U. The radioactive elements were found to be within safe limits and therefore the mud was proposed as a reinforcement material in composites for the building trade. Hussain and Hakim174 investigated recycling of aluminium scrap such as beverage cans, engine components and low Al alloys. XRF and electron microscopy were used to assist in the formulation of Al alloys using mass balance calculations. Electrical conduit was formed from die-casting the recycled metal and a corrugation manufacturing process was adopted to form honeycomb panels for use as sound insulation in structural applications.
Stringent legislation is being implemented across Europe relating to contamination from heavy metals in the environment. Forton et al.175 reported a method for the reliable determination of the Cu, Fe, Pb and Zn content of automotive shredder residue. The material was first pyrolysed in a rotary kiln to remove organic fractions so that different analytical methods (ICP-MS, EDXRF, WDXRF and PXRF) could be used to analyse the burned char, which varied from large fractions of metal to fine powder. The rotary kiln residues were found to contain 8000 µg g−1 Pb whereas the normal shredder residue feed contained 16000 µg g−1. The finest fraction (<850 µm), which made up about half the mass of the shredder residue feed, was found to contain 2700 µg g−1 after firing, making it of interest for further work to develop uses as a feed in other industries.
Polypropylene is one of the most common plastics used in the manufacture of lead-acid battery cases, where the recycling of the material has become common practice. During the recycling process, the various components of the spent battery are separated and the crushed battery case is washed in order to remove any excess acid and particles containing lead. The plastic components are subsequently melted and extruded into pellets that are then blended with virgin material to form new battery cases and lids by an injection molding process. Ferg and Rust176 used XRF, XRD and TEM to show that significant amounts of lead-containing particles in the form of lead dioxide and lead sulfate remained in the recycled plastic and were evenly distributed throughout the polymer matrix. XRF was recommended by the authors as a reliable method to quantify analytes found in the plastic with the concentration of Pb used as a “marker” to identify the amount of recycled polypropylene used in the subsequent manufacture of a particular battery case. The study also showed that particles containing Br and Pb are small enough to become air-borne during the burning of the plastic but no Pb was observed in the gases emitted during a simulated low-temperature injection moulding process; however Br was detected in these gases. A group from University of Bologna, Italy177 reported the mineralogical and chemical characterisation of a heating process for soil and sludge with high Pb content generated during the manufacture of ceramics. The chemical stability of the glass produced was determined by leaching tests. Progressive heating and successive melting of the soil led to the decomposition of organic compounds and the removal of volatile metals. On cooling, a monolithic glass was formed that immobilised the high atomic number metals and inorganic contaminants. The results demonstrated the effectiveness of vitrification by Joule heating technology with a view to scaling up the process in a field study for the treatment of large amounts of inorganic industrial wastes containing lead. Pinakidou et al.64 used XAFS to monitor the effect of annealing on a series of vitrified industrial wastes. With a combination of micro and conventional fine structure studies, the authors demonstrated that annealing caused the formation of Fe and Pb rich micro-crystallites that were embedded in the glass matrix. The micro-crystallites were mixed Fe and Pb oxides that rendered the material safe since Pb was trapped both in the crystalline and vitreous regions. The effect of different crystalline phases and the crystalline ratio on the characteristic pre-edge peak in the near edge XAFS spectra was also discussed. Those readers interested in the use of similar combined techniques are refeered to section 5.2 of this Review.
The discharge of untreated electroplating waste waters directly into the environment is a concern. Even though legislation is in place to control the discharge of high atomic number metals, many small-scale electroplating facilities are not thought to apply adequate protective measures. Electroplating waste waters contain large amounts of metal contaminants that vary in composition and pH value (often below 2), depending on the facility. Such pollution is known to diminish the biodiversity of aquatic ecosystems and also endanger human health. Horvat et al.178 observed and measured the toxic effects induced by a mixture of seven heavy metals on the bio-indicator species Lemna minor L. Since laboratory-prepared metal mixtures do not entirely predict the behaviour of waste water samples nor provide information related to specific conditions in a realistic environment, the authors used actual electroplating waste water discharged from a small electroplating facility. In order to obtain three more samples of the same metals at different concentrations, the original electroplating waste waters were purified and the pH adjusted to acceptable values for discharge into the environment. The Lemna bio-assays were found to be good indicators of the different interactions of metals on plant growth and metabolism. EDXRF was used to measure metal accumulation in the affected plants. Jiang et al.179 used XRF, XRD and SEM to investigate leaching toxicity of metals in fly ashes from urban waste incinerators in China. Primary analytes of interest were Cu, Cr, Pb and Zn with Pb levels reported to be up to 163.1 mg L−1 and 164.9 mg L−1 for Zn, exceeding the Chinese Indication Standard for hazardous wastes. The morphology of the fly ash was found to be irregular, with both amorphous structures and polycrystalline aggregates. The authors confirmed that the heavy metals were volatilised at high furnace temperatures, condensed on cooling and captured at air pollution control monitoring stations. Fly ash from large combustors was generally found to contain higher volatile components and to exhibit higher leaching toxicity, whereas that from incinerators and of smaller capacity often produced higher levels of non-volatile components with lower toxicity.


9.3.3 Other environmental studies. 
An Australian group180 assessed metal contamination during the landfill remediation of the Casey Station in Thala Valley, East Antarctica, during efforts to clean up contaminated sites associated with the Australian Antarctic Programme. These sites ranged from abandoned rubbish dumps to fuel spills that were principally contaminated with metals and petroleum hydrocarbons. Remediation success depended on a number of factors including the accurate, cost effective and fit-for-purpose chemical analysis of soil and water samples from the site to guide excavation; in situ and ex situ treatment and where appropriate, the disposal of contaminated material plus validation to show if the process was satisfactory. Due to the remote location, it was necessary to perform the chemical analyses on-site using a transportable EDXRF spectrometer, for the measurement of Cd, Cu, Pb and Zn. The results were combined with toxicity leaching tests to identify material that could not be treated on-site and was therefore returned to Australia for safe disposal. Gupta et al.181 also used EDXRF to measure analytes from Ti to Pb in samples collected from three different landfill sites from urban and suburban areas in the city of Kolkata, West Bengal, India. All the analytes were found to have concentration levels higher than the ecological screening values by a factor of 2–7 except for Fe, where the factor varied from 100 to 200. Al-Jundi and Al-Tarazi182 used WDXRF in their assessment of municipal landfill sites in Jordan with Al, Ba, Cr, Fe, Mg, Mn, Rb and Zn levels reported to be higher than the control site. Gamma-ray spectrometry was also used to determine active concentrations of natural radionuclides in soil samples with higher values reported than the average worldwide value of 70 µSv a−1, thereby highlighting the need for remediation. Carr et al.183 demonstrated the benefits of PXRF to locate pollution hotspots from a former rubbish dump now used as a sports ground in Galway City, Ireland. Rapid, in situ measurements of the top-soil at 200 locations on a 20 × 20 m grid revealed maximum values of 744, 2224, 10297 and 24716 mg kg−1 soil for As, Cu, Pb and Zn respectively. Geographic Information System techniques were applied to the dataset to generate interpretive hazard maps of the pollutants in the study area. Immediate remediation of the top-soil was recommended to safeguard the health of children who use the sports ground.
In recent years, this Review has commented on the development of micro-techniques adopted by researchers to further the understanding of contaminated soils. Vodyanitskii184 presented a study of quantitative mineralogical micro-analysis of As, Pb and Zn compounds in such soils using three techniques, µ-XRF, µ-XRD and EXAFS. Arsenic was found to be adsorbed on scorodite (FeAsO4·2H2O) and As5+ on jarosite. Despite the high levels of carboxyl groups in the organic fraction of soils, Pb was reported to be more readily chelated by the functional groups of aromatic rings to form bidentate complexes. Lead phosphates represented the most stable form of Pb in the soils examined, with pyromorphite found on ore tailings, lawn soils, soils near chemical plants and soils within geochemical anomalies. Secondary Zn compounds were represented by kerolite, Si4Zn3O10·OH2 and to a lesser extent, by Zn fixed by manganese oxides and iron hydroxides. Strawn and Baker185 were interested in the speciation of Cu in agricultural soil contaminated by fungicide and other spills that reduce soil quality and diminish crop growth. They used µ-SRXRF to map elemental distribution and XANES and EXAFS to show that Cu was predominantly adsorbed on the organic matter in the soil via bidentate inner-sphere co-ordination with carboxyl or amine ligands. These studies will assist the understanding of long-term fate and best management practices for contaminated soils. Hettiarachchi et al.73 used a combination of several synchrotron based techniques, µ-XRF, µ-XANES and bulk XANES and EXAFS to measure the speciation of different fertilizer-derived Mn and Zn forms in highly calcareous soils and to understand the chemistry underlying the observed differential behaviour of fluid and granular forms of micro-nutrient. The authors reported that µ-XRF mapping of soil-fertilizer reaction zones indicated that the mobility of Mn and Zn from the liquid fertilizer was greater than that for equivalent granular sources. Manganese in the liquid fertilizers formed hydrated phosphates and calcite-like structures whereas zinc was associated with silicates. Granular sources tended to transform into comparatively less soluble solid forms such as oxides, carbonates and phosphate phases. McNear and co-workers74 turned their attention to Ni speciation in refinery enriched soils, using conventional XRF and µ-EXAFS. Aluminium and nickel layered double hydroxide phases were found in both limed and unlimed mineral soils with a tendency towards the more stable phyllosilicate Ni species in limed soil. Studies showed that making the soils calcareous was effective in reducing chemically extractable Ni as well as alleviating the symptoms of Ni phytotoxicity in vegetable crops grown in the vicinity of a nickel refinery in Ontario, Canada. Conversely, additions of dolomitic limestone were reported to increase the uptake of Ni in the plant, Alyssum Murale and this species has now been proposed for use in a remediation strategy for the area. A Swedish group186 presented an overview of data published during the last five years, on the mobilisation of As, Cr, Cu, Pb and Zn in soils by mechanisms such as adsorption onto mineral surfaces, formation of stable complexes with organic ligands, surface precipitation and ion exchange. Precipitation as salts and co-precipitation were reported to contribute to a reduction of contaminant mobility. These techniques were proposed for in situ and ex situ methods to reclaim and re-vegetate industrially devastated areas and mine spoil heaps, confirming the work by the other afore-mentioned authors. Chankina et al.187 investigated bush cinquefoil (Pentaphylloides fruticosa) subjected to radioactive contamination and found a change in certain element ratios indicating adverse conditions of plant growth. They suggested the use of these plants as a phyto-meter of radioactive contamination. The same group188 also used SRXRF for the estimation of soil and phytomass elemental composition in long-term field experiments with clones of Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris L.) in West Siberia. The authors claim to have revealed the temporal dynamics of inter-clonal variability from the elemental composition of pine needles. Goldberg et al.189 studied the correlation of elements in tree rings of Siberian Larch, where they found that Br, Cl and Zn were correlated with the trend of atmospheric precipitation in the region investigated.
Two papers described the distribution and speciation of arsenic within and around plants and seeds cultivated in riparian soils. These soils are periodically flooded, leading to temporarily reducing conditions. Voegelin et al.190 used µ-XRF to show that As and Fe were enriched around roots and XANES and EXAFS to identify that As was predominantly As(V) associated with iron hydroxides. Meharg et al.191 also used SRXRF and XANES to locate As in polished and unpolished brown rice grains from the United States, China and Bangladesh. In white rice, As was generally dispersed throughout the grain with the bulk in the endosperm. Brown rice, however, was found to localize As at the surface in the region corresponding to the pericarp and aleurone layer. The elements Cu, Fe, Mn and Zn localization followed that of As in brown rice, while the location of Cd and Ni was distinctly different, showing relatively even distribution throughout the endosperm. A wider survey of the whole grain speciation of white and brown rice samples from sources such as fields, pot trials and supermarkets showed that brown rice had a higher proportion of inorganic As than the white rice—food for thought! Vogel-Mikus et al.192 looked at seeds and seedlings of the metal hyper-accumulating, Thlaspi Praecox, to gain more knowledge on plant reproductive success at metal polluted sites. The seeds were found to contain 1351 µg g−1 (dry weight) of Cd, 121 µg g−1 of Zn and 17 µg g−1 of Pb. A 20% reduction in seed fitness was found from Cd uptake, with µ-PIXE revealing that preferential storage of most elements was in the embryonic axis. The report concluded that restriction of Pb and Zn uptake and hyper- accumulation of Cd, accompanied by partitioning of Cd in the epidermal tissues of cotyledons, may enable the survival of the seedlings in Cd polluted environments.
Highly organic soils and in particular ombrotrophic peat bogs have often been used to monitor climate changes and metal contamination. Peat bogs are domed peat-lands in which the surface layers are hydrologically isolated from the influence of local ground-waters and surface waters are supplied only by atmospheric deposition. Zaccone et al.193 measured Cu, Pb and Zn from anthropogenic activities and 137Cs, mostly released during the Chernobyl disaster. In 2005, a peat profile was cored from an effectively undisturbed Swiss ombrotrophic bog and analysed by EDXRF and low background gamma-ray spectroscopy. This work showed the extent of human activities, such as industry, traffic, combustion of fossil fuels and “environmental disasters” from the profile of the analytes of interest. The data confirmed a general increase in Cu, Pb and Zn since the Industrial Revolution as well as marking past single impact events such as the introduction of leaded gasoline and particular agricultural practices. Although 137Cs showed a main peak corresponding to the Chernobyl disaster, the data revealed the mobility of this radionuclide along the profile. De Vleeschouwer et al.194 used XRF and MC-ICP-MS to confirm that Belgian ombrotrophic peat bogs bear witness to the impact of activities throughout the last two millennia. During the Roman Empire, pollutants were mainly from ore extraction and smelting across Europe. Then, during the Middle Ages and the beginning of the Industrial revolution (1750), pollution extended to coal burning and the combustion engine. The Pb content combined with 14C and 210Pb data demonstrated how peat bogs provide a fingerprint of anthropogenic particles in NW Europe. Phedorin et al.195 reported a new method to measure the downcore distribution of some major and trace elements that record the Holocene history of peat-forming processes in bogs from the Elovka mesotrophic swamp (West Siberia).
Studies of marine and lake sediments during this review period demonstrate the ability of µ-XRF elemental maps and quantitative XRF whole-core scanning to provide high resolution data on the chemical transitions linked to palaeo-environmental changes. Boning et al.196 were able to discriminate between changes and diagenetical effects from the Fe/Ti profile and S maps. The µ-XRF produced high resolution element maps of individual sections and the calculation of individual continuous element profiles was performed on overlap measurements from successive sections. Kalugin et al.197 presented a unique 800 year long record of annual air temperatures and precipitation over SW Siberia from measurements of bottom sediments from Teletskoye Lake in the Altai Mountains. They used an XRF scanner providing 0.1 mm resolution of the elemental composition to show that Br appears to be broadly correlated with mean annual temperature variations due to changes in the productivity of catchment vegetation. In this, the Sr/Rb ratio reflected the proportion of the un-weathered terrestrial fraction. The artificial neural networks method was applied to convert the Br content and Sr/Rb ratio to annual records of temperature and precipitation using a transform function.
Park et al.198 investigated the possibility of using waste eggshell to remove heavy metals from strongly acidic waste water. Calcination behaviour, qualitative and quantitative elemental formation, mineral type and surface characteristics, both before and after calcination of eggshell were examined by TGA, XRF, XRD and SEM respectively. When the calcined eggshell was used to treat synthetic waste water containing heavy metals, the complete removal of Cd and 99% Cr was observed after 10 min, compared with only partial removal of Cd and Cr using natural eggshell after 60 min. However, a more efficient removal of Pb was observed with natural eggshell rather than calcined eggshell. The authors concluded that calcined eggshell showed promise as a good neutraliser for real electroplating waste waters. Kalyani et al.199 studied the use of chitosan-coated perlite beads as a biosorbent to remove Co(II) from waste water. The coated perlite beads were prepared by drop-wise addition of a slurry containing chitosan and perlite to an alkaline bath. The resultant beads were characterised using FTIR, SEM, EDXRF and surface area analysis. The equilibrium characteristics of Co(II) ions on the newly developed biosorbent were studied and experimental adsorption data assessed with the Freundlich and Langmuir adsorption isotherm models. Adsorption and desorption cycles indicated that the chitosan coated perlite could be regenerated and re-used to remove Co(II) from contaminated water.

9.4 Archaeological, cultural heritage and forensic
It could be argued that forensic applications test the XRF technique to the limits in terms of the range of sample types presented for analysis and the potential consequence that stem from the analytical results. One such study was reported by Obhodas et al.,200 who were asked by the Zagreb Police Authority to analyse a metal cylinder suspected of containing ‘red mercury’. Activation analysis with 14.1 MeV neutrons and EDXRF were the two techniques used, EDXRF to analyse the capsule (Cr, Fe, Ni) to show that the additional element detected by activation analysis (Hg) represented the contents. Kasamatsu et al.201 used SRXRF to analyse heated and non-heated sheet glass and reported that the X-ray intensity ratios Sr Kα/Rb Kα, Zr Kα/Rb Kα, Ba Kα/Ce Kα and La Kα/Ce Kα could be used to discriminate between either type of glass fragment. The discrimination of ceramic prints on automobile glass for forensic purposes was the application described by Nishiwaki et al..202 They found using high energy SRXRF that the ratio to either Pb or Bi of a range of trace elements provided a fingerprint from samples as small as 0.5 mm2. In terms of a more direct human link, Bush et al.203 used portable XRF (and ED-SEM) to characterise dental restorative resins for forensic purposes by developing an appropriate data base—PXRF could then be used to distinguish resin brand and bone tooth from other substances. Zadora204 used XRF as a supporting technique to GC-MS and ED-SEM to analyse samples of an illegal fuel activity that involved removing Solvent Yellow 124 from heating oil, whilst Zieba-Palus et al.205 expounded the benefits of a combined µ-Raman/µ-XRF spectrometer in the analysis of forensic samples.
XRF has traditionally made a significant impact in the archaeological analysis of lithic artefacts. As remarked by Shackley,206 the number of papers devoted to the analysis of lithic materials has increased by 30 times since 1958, judged by papers published in the Journal, Archaeometry. In one example, De Francesco et al.207 used WDXRF to analyse obsidian from all the Mediterranean outcrops of geological interest using conventional XRF techniques. However, splinters were taken from the original hand specimens with a shape designed to replicate that of waste found at archaeological sites and analysed to determine intensity ratios (so avoiding surface effects due to their irregular shape). Comparison between elemental ratios (from bulk samples) with elemental ratios (from splinter samples) established a methodology for provenancing obsidian from Neolithic sites. Craig et al.108 undertook a cross comparison of conventional XRF and PXRF in the analysis of archaeological obsidian from Southern Peru, finding that significant differences, which could be explained by instrument cross contamination, had no bearing on source identification. Negash et al.208 reported a provenancing study of Pleistocene/early Holocene obsidian artefacts from Central Ethiopia while Carter and Shackley209 described a similar study for obsidian artefacts from a single Neolithic structure in Central Anatolia. Archaeological basalt was analysed by Lundblad et al.210 with particular interest in assessing the effect of varying size and the degree of weathering of the artefact and reported significant variability for samples with a surface area of less than 100 mm2.
When considering the analysis of glass, XRF has often been a contributing technique to the work published over the current review year. Thus, in a study of the influence of sea water on the chemical and physical degradation of Roman glass, Benedetti et al.211 used XPS and SIMS as the primary techniques with µ-XRF and SRXRD being used to characterise crystallisation processes that contributed to the degradation of the glass. XRF was used with ED-SEM by Huisman et al.212 to study another form of degradation—this time of colourless Roman glass from the Bocholtz burial, near Limburg (The Netherlands). Fragmentation of the artefacts was caused by the intense leaching of soda and its replacement by water and the authors considered that the resultant ‘sugared’ glass may have been overlooked in other archaeological settings so that the archaeological record may be biased towards blue-green transparent glass objects, which are much more durable to this form of degradation. The study by Oikonomou et al.213 used Raman spectroscopy with XRF to characterise 25 glass (mostly fragmented) beads with the Raman results suggesting relatively low processing temperatures, whereas Prinsloo and Colomban214 used the same combination of techniques to analyse oblate seed beads from an Iron Age site in South Africa (Mapungubwe Hill) to elucidate glass technology and the pigments used to produce the beads. Zacharias et al.215 were interested in the luminescence studies of glass beads from Thebes, Greece, with XRF used to provide chemical patterns. XRF (with the electron microprobe) played a more substantial role in the analysis of 85 colourless glass samples found in a Roman ship (Iulia Felix) wrecked off the coast of North Italy in a study by Silvestri et al.216 Data showed that all the samples were soda-lime-silica in composition, originated from two different production technologies, with beach sand used as one of the raw materials.
The characterisation of pottery, porcelain and glazes normally makes a significant contribution to this review, and this year is no exception. The role of high precision XRF, in addition to INAA in broadening the usefulness of chemical compositional data for archaeological investigation was described by Asaro and Adan-Bayewitz217 in relation to the influential contributions of the Lawrence Berkley National Laboratory. Odriozola and Perez218 used the XRF microprobe as well as ED-SEM, XRD and FTIR to study the manufacturing process developed in the third millenium BC for white incrusted pottery from the middle Guadiana River basin. These incrustations were mainly identified as burnt bone rather than calcium carbonate, as had been reported elsewhere. Papageorgiou and Liritzis219 used cluster analysis to classify data obtained by PXRF on Neolithic ceramics from the Aegean islands and Asia Minor. A comprehensive study of coarse wares for table use was undertaken by Gliozzo et al.220 using XRF as one of a clutch of techniques to elucidate the manufacturing process. A similar objective was the basis of a SRXRD study by Broekmans et al.,221 which also used XRF and other techniques to study the manufacturing process for North Mesopotamian Bronze Age pottery. TXRF was used by Fernandez-Ruiz and Garcia-Heras222 to study archaeological ceramics, investigating solid sedimentation and solid chemical homogenisation sample preparation procedures. By contrast, Papadopoulou et al.223 used a compact portable µ-XRF spectrometer to characterise decorated sherds of Neolithic pottery from Polyplatanos, North Greece with a view to confirming origin and manufacturing techniques. Other studies of a similar nature include those of Fortina et al.224 (glazed ceramics from southern Tuscany), Wang et al.225 (porcelain sherds found at Shangdian and Lidipo sites and dated to the Kin Dynasty) and Wood et al.226 (Abbasid blue and white ware from Iraq), amongst others.
Strong interest continues in the use of a range of XRF techniques in the analysis of paper, parchment, pigments and paintings all within the sphere of works of art. As a starting point, Dawson227 reviewed the careful work necessary in the examination, conservation and restoration of painted art. However, if you want to be inspired about the power of modern µ-SRXRF science, read the popular article by Bergmann228 on the way this technique was used to reveal some of Archimedes oldest writings that were hidden from sight in an ancient medieval prayer book. The original Greek writing on the parchment had been partially erased and overwritten by a 13th century medieval monk, to create a prayer book with four pages obliterated by a 20th century forgery comprising religious paintings. Scanning µ-SRXRF was particularly successful in revealing the original AD 950 writing, thought to be only the fifth copy of Archimedes original text. Faubel et al.229 was also interested in historic manuscripts and described the use of a novel combination of techniques (µ-SRXRF and FTIR) to investigate decomposition phenomena affecting historical manuscripts and prints. EDXRF was used by Manso et al.230 to determine the elemental content of ancient and modern papyrus and parchment and newspaper, and claimed that it was possible to distinguish ancient from modern (modern samples usually contained lower concentrations) and older (1919) from modern (2005) newspaper (the latter containing lower elemental abundances). In a second contribution, Manso et al.231 applied these techniques to a range of papers (dating from 1555 to 2005) and found that by using a statistical approach, they could be classified into 10 types, mainly on their Ca, Cu, Fe, Sr and Zn content. Silverpoint drawings of Hans Baldung Grien were analysed using SRXRF by Reiche et al.,232 who found that three of the drawings were produced with a common type of silverpoint containing about 10.4% m/m Cu with a 10% m/m Hg content caused by subsequent alteration (absorption from the atmosphere?).Lots of studies have used PXRF techniques to study pigments, especially on historic paintings, including Appoloni et al.233 who used a portable XRF system to identify pigments in measurements designed to attribute a painting to Gainsborough. White (lead white and calcium sulfate-Pb, S, Ca), Prussian blue (Fe), Vermillion (Hg, S), brown (Fe and Mn oxides) and an absence of modern pigments all testified to its provenance. Cotte et al.234 used SR based FTIR and XRF microscopies to investigate ‘protrusions’ that result from the reaction between oil in the organic binder and lead compounds, often in the ground layer below the coloured layer, to form lead soap aggregates. Apparently, this degradation can occur rapidly and so is found in modern as well as ancient paintings. Rather more conventional studies of pigments were undertaken by Cotte et al.66 who illustrated developments in SRXRF microprobe techniques by the analysis of stibnite as a pigment in a 16th century painting by Grunewald. A similar technique was used by Calza et al.235,236 to analyse pigments found in decorative paintings in the sarcophagus of an Egyptian mummy. Gil et al.237,238 used WDXRF and XRD to characterise yellow and red ochre pigments from southern Portugal, particularly to establish a link between local geology and traditional lime wash mural paintings and differentiate between natural, natural processed and synthetic pigments. XRF enhanced the differentiation between ochre samples used in indigenous Australian art in a LA-ICP-MS study by Green and Watling239 to assist in the authentification of artworks.
XRF has contributed to a number of other miscellaneous applications, including the work of Miriello and Crisci240 who undertook a detailed chemical and petrographic analysis of bricks from the Svevian Castle (Rocca Imperiale, northern Calabria, Italy) and local raw materials to facilitate the location of outcrops of clay and non-plastic material that would confirm the hypothesis that the materials used were found locally. Velosa et al.241 used XRF and XRD and other techniques to characterise mortars from the Roman site at Conimbriga (Portugal). The degradation of building stone by S from air pollution was the basis of a transportable EDXRF study by Diana et al.242 The instrument used was fitted with a miniature tungsten anode X-ray tube and a silicon drift detector and was used to examine Roman monuments and statues made of stone, housed in the Roman National Museum, the Sarcophagus of Pope Boniface VIII in the Crypt of the Vatican Basilica. Human bones were the subject of a couple of studies, the first by Carvalho and Marques243 describing the use of EDXRF to compare the behaviour of different bone structures from the Middle Ages to diagenetic changes during burial. The elements Ca, Fe, K, Mn, Pb, Sr, Ti, Zn were of particular interest, but clear categorisation could not be achieved for some samples to distinguish elemental content associated with the original bone and contamination from the surrounding soil. In the second study by Fleming and Blom,244 XRF was used to determine lead in a study of the diagenesis of ancient bones from the southern Andes, and the authors reported that predominantly trabecular bone contained a higher Pb content than predominantly cortical bone, indicating that digenesis is the major contributor to the observed lead levels. Mazel et al.245 used µ-XRF and XANES microspectroscopy to prove the presence of Fe associated with protein, which had itself been located by TOF-SIMS and SR-FTIR microspectrometry to confirm the presence of blood in the patina of African art objects from Mali in a new protocol that avoided false positives. XRF was used by Franceschi et al.246 to measure the penetration of metals into wood in a wider study to investigate the degradation of wet wood (fir and chestnut) some of which contained iron and copper nails. Little interest has been shown in coins over the current review year, but Civici et al.247 used EDXRF to analyse a hoard of silver coins minted by the Illyrian king Monounios (3rd century BC), using trace compositions (Au, Bi, Pb) to classify them. Gilded bronze panels were of interest to Ferretti and Siano,248 who used PXRF to evaluate details of the development of an art foundry during the early Renaissance, based on a study of the Porta del Paradiso by Lorenzo Ghiberti. Figueiredo et al.249 used µ-XRF to examine a Late Bronze Age bronze spear from Central Portugal, with particular interest in the metal surface and corrosion layers. The results by µ-XRF indicated that the Pb content of the corrosion layers could reach values of up to 4 times higher than the content determined in the metal surface.
9.5 Industrial
In the field of nanotechnology and the development of catalysts and new ceramic materials, the XRF technique continues to be one of the favourable analytical tools routinely applied in the characterisation process of these materials, as reflected by the high number of contributions in this review period. However, as these papers are more focussed on the synthesis and the performance characteristics of these materials and therefore, of lesser importance to the X-ray fluorescence analyst, these applications will not be handled in this review section, but nevertheless readers interested should consult our companion ASU review on Industrial Analysis: Metals, Chemicals and Advanced Materials.3
Since the implementation of the EU Directive on Restriction on Hazardous Substances (RoHS) in July 2006, the analytical performance for the determination of Cd, Cr, Hg and Pb remains of significant interest with regard to both the applied analytical method and the development of standard polymer material. Elam et al.250 set up a calibration method for the determination of the RoHS elements in plastics. Considering the lack of suitable calibrants required to set up a quantitative method and the increased uncertainties when using “standardless” fundamental parameters for the analysis of low atomic mass element matrices, the authors developed a suitable fundamental parameter method. In this, the matrix composition was determined by difference so requiring only one multi-element reference material which included all the relevant additives. In addition, the intensity of the tube lines scattered from the sample was used to compensate for thickness variations, resulting in improved results for Cd. Using this procedure, the results look promising with average relative errors and relative standard deviations of about 10%. Regarding suitable plastic reference materials, Mans et al.251 developed and produced acrytonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) terpolymer reference materials containing the elements of interest Br, Cd, Cr, Hg and Pb. The elemental concentrations were distributed over nine independent calibration samples in order to enable inter-element corrections and empirical mass absorption coefficients to be calculated. Comparative analyses after digestion and using ICP-AES for the determination of the elements Cd, Cr, Hg and Pb and NAA for the determination of Br, showed a very good correlation. Moreover, the Japanese Society of Analytical Chemistry recognised the need for certified reference materials of this type and, therefore, continued work towards the development and certification of polyester CRMs for the elements Cd, Cr, Hg and Pb.252 This Japanese language contribution described the certification process in the production of 360 batches of the candidate reference materials, JSAC 0631 and 0632. Disk samples were prepared by filling Al-cylindrical molds with the raw material liquid comprising polyester resin mixed with hardener and organometallic compounds. After setting, these disks were polished. Concentration levels for the elements Cd, Cr, Hg and Pb varied between 20 and 100 mg kg−1. The certified values, together with the uncertainty at a confidence level of 95%, were determined on the basis of the results of an inter-laboratory comparison involving 24 participants.
The European Directive 2003/2/EC relating to restrictions on the marketing and use of arsenic, including the restrictive use of chromated copper arsenate (CCA) as wood preservative, has led to several investigations in which the XRF technique was involved, not only as a screening tool for sorting CCA-treated wood in the recycling processes, but also to evaluate alternative treatment processes. Jacobi et al.253 documented the characteristics of the wood waste stream and subsequently evaluated the effectiveness of various sorting methods for identifying treated wood. Complementary to a visual inspection, the use of a PAN indicator stain and/or a hand-held XRF unit was tested. Experiments were performed on source-separated loads containing only construction and demolition wood and also on wood hand-picked from mixed loads of general construction and demolition waste. Results showed that 77% of the treated wood was CCA-treated. For piles of source-separated but contaminated wood, visual inspection in combination with a PAN indicator was adequate, whilst the hand-held XRF device was found to be effective for sorting mixed wood. Of course, the use of XRF resulted in the recycling cost increasing, mainly because of the associated labour costs. Reducing these labour costs by mounting automated XRF units on conveyor systems will be the next challenge in this process. The search for alternative wood treatment processes evaluated in terms of the penetration of the preservative into the wood and how much was deposited (the retention) in the penetrated zone, was described by both Cai et al.254 and Yildiz.255 Both used the XRF technique as the analytical tool of choice. The former authors investigated the impregnation of wood with melamine-urea-formaldehyde (MUF) and with different nanofillers (3 types)/MUF formulations. For the organophilic nanoclay/MUF resin-impregnated wood, the water absorption after 24 hours was reduced to 5% uptake compared with 62% for untreated wood. After 1 week's immersion in water, an uptake of only 22% (125% for untreated wood) was observed. X-ray fluorescence measurements showed that some nanoparticles migrated into the wood cell wall, resulting in improved wood characteristics. The latter contribution studied the treatability of four different heartwood species (scotch pine, Siberian scotch pine, Siberian larch and oriental spruce) with the water-based preservative copper azole. The penetration of the preservative was also determined by X-ray fluorescence spectrometry. The highest penetration and retention values were found for the scotch pine, with satisfactory results for the Siberian scotch pine, while the other two treated wood species showed lower penetration and retention results compared with the pine samples.
Several contributions dealt with the development of dedicated analytical methods using the XRF technique and covering a broad field of applications. Van Meel et al.256 developed a fast procedure for the determination of precious metals (Pd, Pt and Rh) in spent automotive catalyst using high-energy polarised-beam XRF. Pressed pellet samples were prepared using wax as a binder material. To obtain the most efficient excitation for the analytes under investigation, a CsI secondary target was selected for the excitation of Pd Kα and Rh Kα while a Zr target was chosen for Pt Lα excitation. Using an irradiation time of 500 s for each target, detection limits better than 5 mg kg−1 were found for Pd, Pt and Rh, and the precision of the method was estimated to be around 1%. The analytical performance of the polarised EDXRF method was equivalent to the classical but more time-consuming ICP-AES method, as determined by comparative analyses on 29 unknown samples. Teixeira et al.257 proposed a methodology using EDXRF to determine Cu and Fe in gasoline samples collected from different gas stations. Samples were distilled and the residues from this process were spotted onto cellulose paper disks to form a uniform thin film. A linear calibration was obtained between 20 and 800 µg L−1 for each element. The limits of detection, calculated as three times the standard deviation of 10 blank measurements, were found to be 15 and 10 µg L−1 for Cu and Fe, respectively. The precision determined under repeatability on a 100 µg L−1 solution of Cu and Fe, was 8.1% and 7.8%, respectively. Miskoiczi et al.258 determined the elemental compositions of waste crumb rubber samples using non-polarised EDXRF. Real rubber samples with known elemental composition for Ca, Fe, Mg, P, S, Si and Zn were used to calibrate the benchtop system. Comparative analyses of eight control samples using EDXRF and ICP-AES (after nitric acid digestion) proved that rubber samples can be analysed with high accuracy using EDXRF, but the authors recognised that the matrix effect was not negligible for this type of sample. Specifically, the determination of Mg and S was affected by a matrix effect from phosphorous, whilst different C/H ratios did not cause significant differences. Jung et al.259–261 devised three quantitative analytical methods using XRF. The first paper presented the determination of Cl and Fe in hydrochloric pickling solutions, whilst the second contribution described the determination of Cl, Fe and Zn in electroplating solutions. For both procedures liquid calibrants were prepared, for which the concentrations were verified using the conventional techniques, namely, the titration method for Cl and ICP-AES for Fe and Zn. The observed performance characteristics showed satisfactory results with respect to the required precision and accuracy and provided evidence that both methods could be used as an alternative. The third paper in this series described a procedure for the determination of fluorine in slags using the fusion pretreatment technique. Glass discs were prepared at a fusion temperature of 1050 °C using a lithium borate mix, with a sample dilution of 1 : 15 and the addition of ammonium iodide as releasing agent. Synthetic calibrants were prepared from pure compounds and oxides covering a comparable compositional range for the slags. Although the author considered this method as applicable, one can wonder whether the high fusion temperature won't introduce possible losses of volatile fluorine.
Another interesting application was reported by Numata et al.262 who used high-resolution XRF for the determination of the oxidation states of sulfur atoms bonded as a sulfoxide on a silica stationary phase and applicable to the separation of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) from mineral oils. Organic sulfide was attached to a silica surface by an amide bond, and the bonded sulfide residues were oxidised to sulfoxide with hydrogen peroxide to afford sulfoxide and sulfone residues being bonded to the stationary phases. High-resolution XRF experiments for identification of the oxidation states of the bonded sulfur atoms were then performed. The modified silica sample or the reference compound was put onto boric acid powder, and then the mixture was pressed into a tablet. Sulfur Kα fluorescence spectra from these pellets were measured with a double-crystal spectrometer using two Ge(111) analysing crystals. Data were collected for 10 s per step increment (approximately 12 min per spectrum). The approximate contribution of the sulfur oxidation states was determined by fitting with combinations of the reference spectra. The reference spectra of sulfide, sulfoxide, and sulfone, weighted with relevant factors, were combined, and the obtained spectrum was subtracted from the spectrum of the stationary phase. The contributions of sulfide, sulfoxide, and sulfone were determined from the weighting factors that minimised the residuals. The results showed that the modified stationary phases, especially the sulfoxide-bonded phase, separated the PCBs from the mineral oils more efficiently than the aminopropyl silica or other polar stationary phases that have been used for the clean-up of PCBs.
Balarini et al.263 used a combination of analytical techniques - XRD, XRF and SEM-EDS - for the determination of sulfide in roasted ore concentrate samples to help detect process problems in the hydrometallurgical extraction of the Zn. Incomplete particle roasting and the presence of highly stable zinc ferrite (ZnFe2O4) formed in the pyrometallurgical step were the two major obstacles; the presence of which was confirmed by the microscopic investigations of a cross-section of particles.
Finally, Huang and Zhou264 described in a Chinese contribution a simple and rapid method for the determination of Re2O3in rare earth oxide using XRF. A filter paper placed in a sample holder made of PTFE, was used to absorb 1 mL analytical solution, dried, and subsequently analysed by XRF with a 6 µm covering film. Vanadium was used as an internal standard. The analytical performance of this method was satisfactory and results were in agreement with other methods. The sample preparation procedure was proved to be valid for a variety of materials.
9.6 Clinical and biological
The use of XRF in clinical and biological applications is an emerging field, especially for the direct trace element determinations in humans (in vivo) or in samples from humans (in vitro) and in the field of metalloproteomics. This is reflected by several review papers concerning these issues. In a special issue of JAAS dedicated to metallomics, Gao et al.265 presented a review covering advanced nuclear analytical techniques for the detection and characterisation of metalloproteins. The XRF technique, and especially SRXRF, proved to be a valuable tool in these kinds of studies. In the review by Borjesson and Mattsson,266 several medical applications were highlighted describing techniques for the estimation of trace element levels for both in vivo and in vitro XRF analyses. Attention was paid to the classical studies of Pb in bone and Cd in kidneys, as well as to Hg in kidneys, Au and Pt in the human body, and to the newest applications of Zn in the prostate and As in skin. A review of current analytical techniques applied to tissue analyses related to diseases of the central nervous system (CNS), was presented by Szczerbowska-Boruchowska.267 The author stressed that SRXRF in combination with XANES were powerful tools to provide insight into the comprehension of the biochemical processes involved in Parkinson's disease, amiotrophic lateral sclerosis and brain gliomas. Moreover, an extended review on “clinical and biological materials, foods and beverages” handling both new developments in analytical techniques and a broad range of applications for these type of matrices, was presented by our companion ASU group.2
The importance of the K X-ray fluorescence technology – referred to as KXRF - for in vivo measurements of Pb in bone, a valuable marker in addressing long-term health effects related to cumulative exposure, was emphasized in a contribution by Nie et al.268 One of the critical factors for achieving consistent and accurate data is the calibration of the KXRF system which has undergone significant improvements and upgrades over time. Calibration problems were encountered even in one of the major KXRF laboratories and the approach taken to solve the problem was discussed. Moreover, this contribution stressed the need to perform inter-laboratory round robin tests in order to obtain comparable results between various laboratories. In this framework, Parsons et al.269 presented an interesting paper describing an inter-laboratory study involving bone lead KXRF laboratories. An assessment was performed by circulating nine bare tibia derived from the bones of Pb-dosed goats. Fifteen KXRF systems were used by 10 participating laboratories, to make 5 measurements on each of the nine caprine tibia. Reported Pb concentrations across the nine caprine tibia ranged from the KXRF detection limit to 63 µg g−1 bone mineral, with no statistical outliers detected. However, for each of the nine tibia, differences between the 15 reported bone lead results were statistically significant. The within laboratory variability, measured as the standard deviation of the 5 replicates, ranged from 0.5 to 6.5 µg g−1 bone mineral across nine tibia. Hopefully, these results will encourage the laboratories to tackle the sources of variability in the KXRF bone lead measurements to improve inter-laboratory agreement. We await with interest the results of the planned second circulation of a caprine tibia set. In addition to the accuracy of the data, the improvement of the detection limit is also an ongoing issue. Fleming and Mills270 presented preliminary results of KXRF measurements using a 4 x 500 mm2 “cloverleaf” low energy germanium detector. These measurements, performed on Pb-doped bone phantoms and compared with those of a conventional single detector system of equivalent surface, resulted in improved performance characteristics. Using a 109Cd source activity of 4.4 GBq, measurements of leg phantoms resulted in an average bone lead uncertainty of 0.78 µg g−1 and a reproducibility of 0.84 µg g−1. Brito et al.271 described the important effect that the use of 109Cd KRXF measurements had on the complete understanding of Pb metabolism in humans. In particular, models of Pb metabolism that have been shown to account well for short-term Pb exposures and blood Pb required modification of rates of transfer to and from bone in order to account for the long-term aspects of the behaviour of Pb in the body. The current paper reviewed these developments and highlighted approaches for future work. Several research studies all using 109Cd KXRF were performed to elucidate the influence of cumulative Pb exposure to a broad variety of diseases. Perlstein et al.272 presented data indicating that Pb exposure might contribute to the observed increase in pulse pressure that occurs with aging in industrialised societies, and perhaps might be correlated to cardiovascular mortality. Men with tibia Pb above the median of 19 µg g−1 showed, on average, a 4.2 mm Hg higher pulse pressure compared with men having tibia Pb level below the median. In contrast, blood Pb level was not associated with pulse pressure. Researchers at the Tulane University carried out two studies on a group of African-American patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD). The former study273 investigated the association of tibia Pb and blood Pb with end-stage renal disease. Both median blood Pb and median tibia Pb levels of the ESRD patients (6 µg dL−1, respectively 17 µg g−1 bone mineral) were significantly higher compared with their control counterpart (3 µg dL−1, respectively 13 µg g−1 bone mineral). The latter contribution274 evaluated whether elevated blood Pb levels reported among patients with ESRD, were due to the release of Pb from the skeleton as a result of uremic bone disease. The tibia and blood Pb levels from these patients with various levels of serum calcium, serum phosphorus and calcium phosphorus product, with respect to the results of the control group, showed no evidence to support this assumption. To conclude, in a longitudinal study, Stewart and Schwartz275 found indications, based on tibia Pb results from 109Cd KXRF measurements, that a significant proportion of what is considered to be normal age-related cognitive decline might, in fact, be due to past exposure to neurotoxicants such as Pb.
During the past year, Zamburlini et al.276 continued their work on in vivo bone Sr measurements using 125I as excitation source. As part of an in vivo pilot study, the index finger and the tibial ankle joint of 22 people were analysed. For all subjects, the Sr peak was clearly distinguishable from the background, proving the capability of the system to measure Sr in vivo in subjects having normal bone Sr levels. When comparing different people, the accuracy of the Sr signal, normalised to the coherently scattered peak at 35.5 keV, was about 12%. Remarkably the study revealed that significantly higher bone Sr concentrations were observed in continental Asian subjects. In a second contribution,277 a literature review was presented concerning in vivo bone Sr measurements combined with dual-photon absorptiometry to measure the bone density. These techniques have the potential to provide more insights into bone Sr concentrations, retention and elimination, and therefore, an evaluation of the beneficial effects on bone of pharmacological dosages of Sr, especially with regards to its anti-osteoporotic affects.
In the field of osteoporosis and arthritis, research to understand the process and to recognise the influencing factors gains more interest. Bradley et al.278 used synchrotron radiation to perform XRD and XRF analyses in order to study the Ca and Sr distribution in the bone-cartilage interface and within individual trabecula and to explore the changes in mineralisation associated with the development of ‘osteoarthrosis’. Analyses of lesions revealed that at the centre of the lesion the ratio of Sr to Ca was much lower than that in a normal tissue, although the calcified cartilage showed a higher ratio than the underlying bone. In the superficially normal tissue around the lesion, the calcified cartilage returned to a normal ratio much more rapidly than the underlying bone, demonstrating the complex relationship between changes in cartilage and the underlying bone. The author279 also used a bench top XRF analytical microscope, providing a spatial resolution of 10 µm, instead of the commonly used SRXRF technique, to map metal ion distributions in bone and cartilage from the equine metacarpophalangeal joint. An increased concentration of Sr and Zn ions was observed around the tidemark between normal and mineralised cartilage, which confirmed the previous SRXRF results of enhanced deposition of Sr and Zn at the surface of the subchondral bone and articular cartilage. Chinese workers280 studied diabetic osteoporosis of femurs by elemental analysis using SRXRF microprobe. The relative mineral content of Ca, P, Sr and Zn decreased significantly in diabetic femurs compared with controls, while the S content was significantly higher. No obvious difference was observed in the relative content of Cr, Cu, Fe and Pb between the two groups. The results revealed that loss of minerals accounted for the bone mineral density reduction in diabetics. Zhang et al.281 investigated the element distribution in human femoral heads from 5 autopsies and 7 patients with femoral neck fractures by PIXE and SRXRF microprobe. Scans of slices of the femoral head from its periphery to its centre, via cartilage, compact and spongy zones showed that the concentrations of Ca, Cu, Fe, P and Sr in the control group were higher than those in the patient groups, but no significant alteration of the K, Mn, S and Zn content was observed. The distributions of these elements showed that Ca, K and P were obviously low in both spongy and cartilage zones in the patient group, but not in the compact zone.
Another interesting application was described by Khuder et al.282 using XRF and TXRF for element determinations in whole blood and human hair samples. Direct XRF with different collimation units and different excitation modes was successfully applied to the determination of Br, Ca, Fe, K, P and S in blood samples and Ca, Fe, K and Mn in human hair samples. For the determination of Rb and Sr in digested blood and human hair samples, direct TXRF analysis was performed, while the co-precipitation method using APDC for TXRF was used for the determination of Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn in both matrices. These improved methods were implemented in a study of samples from a non-occupationally exposed population living in Damascus city. Chikawa et al.283 observed homeostasis in the concentration of essential elements in hair and abnormalities due to cancer. Analyses of single hair samples by SRXRF showed that breast cancer was associated with high Ca concentration in cells. Moreover, the presence of Br was associated with renal failure, whilst hypertension patients showed K deficiency. The elements Cu, Fe and Zn in hair were found to be indicators of liver function. The localisation of metals in soft and calcified tissue was investigated by Geraki et al.284 in a study of both breast carcinoma and osteoarthritis. Breast tissue 2D element maps with 18 µm resolution showed elevated metal levels except for Fe in cancer cells. In the bone samples outside of the immediate area of the osteoarthritic lesion, the presence of Ca and Zn each reached a peak both at the cartilage surface and the tidemark; whereas, within the lesion, a significant loss of surface elemental enhancement was observed. Bazhanova et al.285 also investigated changes in the elemental composition of healthy and pathological tissue from human organisms and discussed the important issue of sample preparation. To demonstrate the influence of inhaled fine (PM < 2.5) and ultrafine (PM < 0.1) particles on the central nervous system (CNS), Wang et al.286 performed some preliminary studies on the transport of intra-nasally instilled fine Fe2O3 particles in mice brain. The Fe micro-distribution obtained by SRXRF measurements showed an obvious increase of the Fe content in the olfactory nerve and the trigeminus of the brain stem, while XANES results indicated that the ratios of Fe(III)/Fe(II) were increased in both the olfactory bulb and the brain stem. Further histopathological observations confirmed the adverse impact of inhalation of fine Fe2O3 particles on the CNS. A group from the Chinese Academy of Science in Wuhan investigated elemental distributions in the brains of rats, exposed to lanthanum287 and mercury288 as well as the relationship between the 2D zinc distribution and zinc transporter 3 mRNA.289 They found that the Zn contents were 5 to10 times higher in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus than in other neural locations and this was in correlation with the ZnT3 mRNA. The same group studied the elemental distribution in rat olfactory bulbs after exposure to MnCl2. They also reported280 on the elemental analysis of femur samples resulting from diabetic induced osteoporosis The authors found significantly reduced Ca, P, Sr and Zn levels in diabetic femurs compared with the control group, but with increased S levels and no differences in Cr, Cu, Fe, and Pb levels. Rat brain was also investigated by Rubio et al.290 with respect to chronic arsenic exposure. The results of this work indicated that chronic uptake of arsenic-contaminated water induced arsenic accumulation and reduction of the Cl and Fe content in rat brain. The percentage of As in the bulk diminished with arsenic dose suggesting the existence of a saturation value for the bulk As concentration in the brain.
Contributions covering the analysis of both food and plant material were less pronounced in this review period. Nevertheless, for process control, EDXRF remains an interesting technique as reflected by the research of Perring and Blanc.291 The determination of Fe in commercial infant cereals using a fast and non-destructive EDXRF method was validated. Pellet samples were prepared and two different EDXRF systems were calibrated with 20 reference samples. Comparative analyses of 24 independent samples, analysed using both EDXRF systems and with ICP-AES, resulted in equivalent results. Manso et al.292 analysed the muscle, digestive glands and gonads of three species of cephalopods, captured on the west and south coasts of Portugal, by measuring the essential elements (Ca, Cu, Fe, K, Rb, Se, Sr and Zn) with XRF and the toxic elements (Cd, Cr, Hg, Ni and Pb) with the more sensitive AAS technique. Calcium and P were present at the highest concentration in all the samples, while the highest level of toxic elements was found in the digestive glands, exceeding the maximum allowed values in the case of Cd and Se. Comparing both coasts, higher levels of Pb were found at the west coast, while the south coast presented enhanced levels of Hg.
The analysis of human teeth using SRXRF can provide the world of science with interesting archaeological information. Carvalho et al.293 evaluated human teeth from the Middle Ages to show that Ba, Fe, Mn and Pb from the soil diffused into the tooth structure. A microprobe XRF set-up with a 100 µm spatial resolution and an excitation energy of 18 keV, installed at LURE synchrotron (France), was used to perform line scans in steps of 100 to 1000 µm along several regions of each tooth. An enriched Ba concentration of up to 200 µg g−1 was measured close to the external enamel region of ancient teeth, whereas this element is almost non-existent in more recent teeth. The Pb behaviour in ancient teeth also suggested post-mortem uptake from the soil as an increased Pb concentration of 20 µg g−1 was observed close to the external enamel region, decreasing strongly to 0.5 µg g−1 to the inner part of the dentine. This is contrary to current understanding where the highest concentrations of Pb are in the inner root dentine. The presence of a car park for more than 20 years adjacent to the burial site may be one reason for the elevated Pb concentration in ancient human teeth. Martin and co-workers294 studied the distribution of Br, Pb and Zn in tooth and bone samples obtained from an individual from an ancient Peruvian burial site located at the north coast of Peru. The SRXRF results showed that Pb and Zn seemed to be confined to similar regions (cementum and periostium), while Br showed a novel distribution with enrichment close to the Haversian canals and/or in regions that appear to be Ca deficient. Beside providing evidence of their origin, the analysis of human teeth can give a better understanding of the mechanism of both calculus growth and the migration of Hg from dental amalgams through human teeth. Abraham et al.295 compared hard dental tissues, such as the dentine and cementum, with the calcified deposits in several parts of human teeth of adults. Planar slices with calculus and dental tissue were analysed using µ-SRXRF, resulting in different features of the element concentrations of As, Br, Cu, K, V, Sr and Zn in the analysed regions. The molar ratio of Ca to P was used to estimate the average composition of calcium phosphate phases in the measured points. Finally, Harris et al.296 demonstrated the relative importance of the direct migration of Hg through the tooth as an alternative exposure pathway. The spatial distribution of Ca, Cu, Hg and Zn in sections of human teeth was determined by XRF imaging and XANES was employed to gain chemical information on the Hg in teeth. Up to 10 mg g−1 of Hg was detected with elevated concentrations in the dentinal tubules, while Zn concentrations of more than 100 mg g−1 were measured but found to be evenly distributed. XANES proved that Hg had undergone an alteration of its chemical form during migration.
9.7 Thin films and coatings
In this section of the Review, XRF techniques are often used in association with other investigative tools to assist in the production processes and characterisation of thin films. Fleury et al.297 were concerned with mechanical-cross characterisation of sputtered inconel thin films for micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS). These devices involve the integration of mechanical elements, sensors, actuators, and electronics on a common silicon substrate. Whilst the electronics are fabricated using integrated circuit processes, the micro-mechanical components are constructed using a compatible micro-machining process that selectively etches away parts of the silicon wafer or adds new structural layers to form the mechanical and electro-mechanical devices resulting in a “system-on-a-chip”. Sensors gather information from the environment through measuring mechanical, thermal, biological, chemical, optical, and magnetic phenomena. The electronics then process the information derived from the sensors and through some decision-making capability, direct the actuators to respond by moving, positioning, regulating, pumping, and filtering, thereby controlling the environment for some desired outcome or purpose. The afore-mentioned work focused on the determination of mechanical properties of inconel thin films ranging from 0.4–1.2 µm sputtered on to a Si (100) substrate. XRF confirmed the composition of the films to be 14% Cr, 6% Fe and 80% Ni (m/m), close to that of inconel 600. A wafer curvature measurement technique was used to determine residual stress and the linear thermal expansion coefficient. Bulge testing on the micro-machined square membranes determined the Young's modulus and residual stress of the films. Morone298 studied the pulsed laser deposition of Ni–Ti–Cu alloy thin film with properties optimised for shape memory effect, super-elasticity and bio-compatibility designed for applications ranging from bio-medical to MEMS. The author reported preliminary results from in situ XRF and ex situ XRD to further an understanding of the growth mechanism of the thin alloy film. A prolific author in this area, Dakhel299 published information on conduction mechanisms in crystalline oxidised La and La–Mn films grown on p-type Si substrates using both XRF and XRD derived data. The author demonstrated that the addition of Mn oxide to La oxide, that almost terminated the hygroscopic products, neither changed the DC-conduction nature of the film, nor improved the insulating quality of pure La2O3. The same author300 also reported work on bis(dimethylglyoxinato) palladium(II) thin films for use in metal insulator semiconductor devices and showed that it was possible to use this type of film in applications requiring low-k dielectric material. In a third paper301 Er–Mn oxide thin films were grown on p-type Si substrates with the structure, band gap and optical constants determined after annealing at temperatures ranging from 400 to 1000 °C. Lysaght et al.302 deposited a series of 1.4, 1.8 and 4.0 nm thick HfO2 films on Si(100) substrates and used EXAFS to investigate the film structures after a standard post-deposition annealing step at 700 °C for 60 s in NH3 followed by an additional rapid thermal annealling cycle of 1000 °C for 10 s in N2. Analysis of the second co-ordination shell gave clear evidence of increased ordering with increased film thickness at each temperature. Similarly, increased ordering with increasing anneal temperature was evident for each film thickness. Although XRD and high resolution electron microscopy indicated the 1.4 nm HfO2 samples were amorphous, EXAFS was able to distinguish nano-crystalline from amorphous states in these films. Bacaksiz et al.303 used XRF to determine the Ag concentration profile diffused in ZnS thin films prepared by spray pyrolysis. The diffusion trials were performed at temperatures ranging from 80 to 400 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere. The authors found that the as-grown, un-doped, high resistive n-type ZnS films were converted to the p-type upon Ag-doping with a slight increase in resistivity after rapid annealing at 400 °C. In addition, the band gap of the p-type film decreased when compared with the un-doped sample annealed under the same conditions. Yamada et al.304 were interested in Ga-doped ZnO films prepared on glass substrates by ion-plating using DC arc discharge. The films were prepared in the temperature range 150–400 °C. XRD revealed that the film prepared at 250 °C showed preferential orientation of the c-axis and the highest crystallinity whilst XRF showed Ga concentration increased monotonically with temperature above 250 °C.
The literature continues to demonstrate activity to further develop thin films used in the manufacture of photovoltaic cells. Avellaneda et al.305 reported structural and chemical transformations in SnS thin films that possess p-type electrical conductivity. The SnO2 : F–CdS–SnS–CuS silver print structures were found to be stable over a period of one year. Two different baths were used for the chemical deposition of the 500 nm films with XRF and XRD data generated to characterise the SnS–CuS layers. Ramdani et al.306 studied the electro-chemical behaviour of polycrystalline Mo thin films in contact with acidic aqueous solutions containing Cu(II), In(II) and Se(IV) species. A combination of Raman spectroscopy, XRF and XRD was used to show that Mo undergoes electro-chemical cementation reactions associated with a characteristic potential increase with immersion time. Immediately after immersion, small nuclei of Cu–Se deposits appeared on the surface, which after 400 s then grew to form a quasi-continuous layer, the chemical composition of the layer evolved with immersion time. No In was found to be incorporated in this layer. Dharmadasa et al.307 developed p+, p, i, n and n+ type CuInGaSe2 layers for applications in graded band gap, multi-layer, thin film solar cells. XRF was used to determine stoichiometry of the corresponding layers with optical absorption, XRD and atomic force microscopy used to investigate band gap, bulk structure and surface morphology, respectively. The addition of a p+ layer to the structure was reported to improve the device parameters because of improvements at the metal contact to the p+ surface of the n–n–i–p–p+ structure. Williams et al.308 used pulsed laser ablation to grow Cr-doped ZnSe thin films on GaAs, sapphire and Si substrates. Deposited films were analysed by XRD to confirm crystallinity and EDXRF to confirm the incorporation of Cr into the films. Dargel et al.309 also used pulsed laser deposition to form thin films of silver selenide deposited on MgO substrates. A calibration procedure was developed to determine absolute thicknesses of the films using µ-XRF. The lateral homogeneity was investigated by elemental mapping, thereby giving information about the deposition process. The results suggested a correlation between the composition of the layers and their thickness through a Ag enrichment for the thinner layers. Dzhafarov and Caliskan310 used EDXRF to study the diffusion of Au on CdTe films fabricated by the close-spaced sublimation technique. Doped and un-doped films were characterised by XRD. The mechanism for Au diffusion in the polycrystalline CdTe films was attributed to the fast migration of Au along grain boundaries with simultaneous penetration into grains and settling on Cd-vacancies.
Of the many papers published during this review period on the characterisation of nano-materials, a study by Hoffmann et al.72 demonstrated the ability of TXRF combined with near-edge EXAFS and X-ray photo-electron spectroscopy (XPS) to identify the chemical bonds and speciation in boron and silicon carbon-nitride films produced as layers of some hundred nanometres periodicity. The BCxNy films were prepared by low pressure chemical vapour deposition using trimethylamine borane as a precursor. The SiCxNy films, on the other hand, were manufactured by plasma-enhanced chemical vapour deposition using hexamethyl disilazane. Kavei et al.311 disclosed their admiration for EXAFS and contact atomic force microscopy to obtain accurate and reliable data on the thickness of nano-films. Several Cu films up to 600 nm thick were deposited on glass substrates in a sputter coater by electron beam evaporation. The authors demonstrated that ignoring the thin film surface topology may induce serious errors in the calculated thickness when using XRF, especially in the range 20 to 150 nm. Wen et al.312 deposited Ag/W multilayers with periodicity ranging from 12–200 nm by current magnetron sputtering. Micro-structure, hardness and elastic modulus were investigated by XRD, Rutherford backscattering, XRF, SEM and nano-indentation. Their results showed that multilayers with less than 50 nm periodicity had a columnar porous structure, that exhibited low modulus and a brittle structure. However, multilayers with a periodicity larger than 50 nm had a continuous laminated structure and were relatively ductile.
The literature continues to demonstrate the contribution made by XRF, used in conjunction with other techniques to investigate coating processes. Liu et al.313 used XRF to investigate the deposition rate of Au on to an electro-less nickel substrate and AFM to study the morphology of the Ni surface during the initial stage of Au deposition. A model to understand the gold-immersion-deposition process was proposed based on the experimental data. Film coating fluids commonly contain a pigment suspension that can cause sedimentation of insoluble particles during the formation of the coating fluid. Bajdik et al.314 used EDXRF for the rapid measurement of sediments of TiO2 in aqueous suspensions. The process factors evaluated were the stirring rate, time and volume to enable the authors to identify critical control points during the coating process. Zeng et al.315 described the structure and tribology of amorphous carbon deposited by an electrochemical method on GCr15 steel substrates. Huang et al.316 were interested in the corrosion behaviour of tinplate and offered a La film as a replacement for chromate. The composition and thickness of the La film were studied by XRF and XPS to develop improved protection of tinplate against sulfide-stain and corrosion. The improved film consisted of La2O3 and its hydrates such as La(OH)3 and La2O3.H2O with coverage of 0.0233 g m−2. In a second publication317 the same group also investigated the merits of Ce as even better protection for tinplate. The cerium was found to be composed of closely packed particles 50–200 nm in diameter of CeO2, Ce2O3, Ce(OH)4 and Ce(OH)3 at 0.110 g m−2. Finally in this section, Bamford et al.318 used PIXE/RBS and EDXRF for the characterisation of two thermal coatings for use in the aerospace industry. The PIXE/RBS system used a 2 MeV proton beam from a 1 MV Tandetron accelerator to show that material A consisted of three layers whereas material B comprised four layers. The XRF data, corrected for absorption effects, enabled quantitative measurements for the In and Sn layers present.
9.8 Chemical state and speciation
Interest continues in studies based on information gained from the excitation of core level electrons using X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). Of particular note this year were papers using extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) studies that have practical, rather than theoretical, application with many already cited elsewhere in this Review. Schlegel and Manceau319 investigated the sorption mechanism of Zn on gibbsite and montmorillonite exchanged with Al3+ and Keggin Al 13 {Al13O4(OH)24(H2O)127+} cations as a function of pH (5.85–7), reaction time (1–65 days) and sorbate to sorbent ratio. The results showed that Zn was incorporated in vacant octahedral sites in gibbsite-like layers at the base and/or interlayer surface of montmorillonite particles. The binding environment of Zn on the Keggin Al 13 montmorillonite was found to build progressively up with time such that after 28 days, Zn-containing gibbsite-like layers were parallel to montmorillonite layers. This work has helped to clarify the incorporation mechanism of Zn in hydroxyl-Al interlayered phyllosilicates and provided an insight into the formation mechanism of these common species in soil. Pinakidou and colleagues320,321 were interested in the structural role and co-ordination geometry of Fe in a series of Fe2O3–PbO–SiO2–Na2O glass ceramic systems. They used both EXAFS and XRF mapping to study the concentration and valency of Fe and Pb as well as the SiO2/Na2O ratio, related to the casting temperature. The XRF maps revealed that Fe-rich islands evolve into the vitreous matrix of ternary samples that contain more than 40% m/m Fe2O3. In binary Fe2O3–PbO systems the majority of Fe3+ was octahedrally co-ordinated in the Fe2O3 and/or PbFe12O19 crystalline phases. Vespa et al.322 worked on cement-based materials that play an important role in multi-barrier concepts developed for the safe disposal of hazardous and radio-active wastes. Cement was used to condition and stabilize the waste materials and form engineered barriers such as container, backfill and liner materials of repositories for radio-active waste. In this study, the Co uptake by hardened cement paste was investigated with the aim of improving the understanding of the immobilisation process of heavy metals in the cement. Both bulk and micro-beam XAS data generated information on Co speciation. Cobalt-doped samples were hydrated for time scales of 1 hour up to 1 year to simulate realistic conditions under normal atmosphere. To investigate the role of oxygen, further samples were prepared in the absence of oxygen. The study showed that, when prepared in air, Co(II) was oxidised to Co(III) after hydration for 1 h with the relative amount of Co(III) increasing with longer hydration times. Those samples prepared in the absence of oxygen remained as Co(II). The findings indicated that Co(III) species or Co(III) containing phases should be taken into account when an assessment is made of Co release from cement-stabilised waste. Andreasson et al.323 used both XANES and EXAFS to study the resistive switching in Cr-doped SrTiO3. XANES data at the Cr K edge indicated that Cr changed oxidation state from 3+ to 4+ underneath the anode after the application of an electric field. Spatially resolved µ-XRF maps showed that the Cr4+ region retracted from the anode-Cr : SrTiO3 interface after a conducting state had been achieved. The authors concluded that the switching state was not due to a valence change of the Cr, but caused by changes of oxygen valencies at the interface.
A group from Ankara, Turkey324 reported relative K X-ray intensity studies of Ni in Ni-Si alloys using EDXRF, further demonstrating the improved sensitivity and resolution achieved with modern energy dispersive systems. They found that the Kβ to Kα intensity ratio of Ni decreased from pure Ni to Ni2Si in good agreement with electronic structure calculations cited in the literature. Data from band structure calculations for pure Ni in various atomic configurations by means of linear muffin-tin orbital calculations were used with normalised theoretical intensity ratios to estimate the 3d-occupation numbers of Ni in the Ni–Si alloys. Trojek et al.325 reported two methods for the assessment of depth heterogeneity in various samples. The first method used Kα to Kβ ratios or L line equivalents, for all elements of interest. The second method was based on the comparison of spectra measured with different geometric arrangements. In particular, sample tilting was found to assist in the identification of possible heterogeneity. Monte Carlo simulations, with the MCNP4C2 code were used to predict changes and interpret the experimental data.
10 Abbrevations




AAS
Atomic absorption spectrometry


AFM
Atomic force microscopy


APDC
Ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate


ASU
Atomic Spectrometry Updates


BC
Before Christ


BL
Beamline


CCA
Chromated copper arsenate


CNS
Central nervous system


CRM
Certified reference material


CT
Computer tomography


2D/3D
2 Dimensional/3 Dimensional


ED-SEM
Energy dispersive-scanning electron microscopy


EDXRF
Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence


EPMA
Electron probe microanalysis


ESRD
End-stage renal disease


ESRF
European synchrotron radiation facility


ET-AAS
Electrothermal-atomic absorption spectrometry


EU
European Union


EXAFS
Extended X-ray absorption fine structure


FTIR
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy


GC-MS
Gas Chromatography-mass spectrometry


GPSC
Gas proportional scintillation counter


HOPG
Highly oriented pyrolytic graphite


HPGe
High performance germanium


ICP-AES
Inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry


ICP-MS
Inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry


INAA
Instrumental neutron activation analysis


IR
Infrared


JAAS
Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry


JSAC
Japanese Society of Analytical Chemistry


KXRF
K-line X-ray fluorescence


LA-ICP-MS
Laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry


LURE
Laboratory for the Use of Electromagnetic Radiation


MC-ICP-MS
Multi collector-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry


MEMS
Micro-electro-mechanical systems


MORB
Mid ocean ridge basalt


MUF
Melamine–urea–formaldehyde


NAA
Neutron activation analysis


NASA
National Aeronautics and Space Administration


NIOSH
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health


NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology


NSLS
National Synchrotron Light Source


PAN
1-(2-Pyridylazo)-2-naphthol


PCB
Polychlorinated biphenyl


PETM
Paleocene-eocene thermal maximum


PGE
Platinum group elements


PIXE
Particle induced X-ray emission


PIXE/RBS
Particle induced X-ray emission/Rutherford backscattering spectrometry


PM
Particulate matter


PTB
Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt


PVC
Polyvinylchloride


PXRF
Portable X-ray fluorescence


RoHS
Restriction on hazardous substances


SDD
Silicon drift detector


SEM
Scanning electron microscopy


SIMS
Secondary ion mass spectrometry


Si(Li)
Lithium-drifted silicon


Si-PIN
Silicon ‘PIN’ detector device


SR
Synchrotron radiation


SR-FTIR
Synchrotron radiation-Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy


SRXRD
Synchrotron radiation X-ray diffraction


SRXRF
Synchrotron radiation X-ray fluorescence


STJ
Superconducting tunnel junction


TEM
Transmission electron microscope


TES
Transition edge sensor


TGA
Thermo-gravimetric analysis


TOF-SIMS
Time of flight-Secondary ion mass spectrometry


TXRF
Total reflection X-ray fluorescence


USGS
United States Geological Survey


UV
Ultraviolet


UV-VIS
Ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy


WDXRF
Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence


XAFS
X-Ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy


XANES
X-ray absorption near edge structure


XAS
X-ray absorption spectroscopy


XPS
X-ray photon spectroscopy


XRD
X-ray diffraction


XRF
X-ray fluorescence




References
M. West, A. T. Ellis, P. Kregsamer, P. J. Potts, C. Streli, C. Vanhoof and P. Wobrauschek, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(10), 1304–1332 RSC .
A. Taylor, S. Branch, M. P. Day, M. Patriarca and M. White, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(4), 415–456 RSC .
B. Charlton, A. S. Fisher, P. S. Goodall, M. W. Hinds, S. Lancaster and M. Salisbury, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(12), 1517–1560 RSC .
O. T. Butler, J. M. Cook, C. F. Harrington, S. J. Hill, J. Rieuwerts and D. L. Miles, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(2), 249–286 RSC .
M. G. Vasin, Y. V. Ignatyev, A. E. Lakhtikov, A. P. Morovov, V. V. Nazarov and L. I. Trakhtenberg, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(4), 270–274 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Adams and K. Attenkofer, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2008, 79(2) Search PubMed .
B. W. Adams and K. Attenkofer, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 582(1), 152–155 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Hudson, W. C. Stolte, D. W. Lindle and R. Guillemin, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2007, 78 .
R. Alberti, C. Florini, C. Guazzoni, T. Klatka and A. Longoni, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 580(2), 1004–1007 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tsuji and K. Nakano, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(3), 145–149 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Ullom, J. Low Temp. Phys., 2008, 151(3–4), 746–753 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jach, N. Ritchie, J. Ullom and J. A. Beall, Powder Diffr., 2007, 22(2), 138–141 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Leman, P. L. Brink, B. Cabrera, A. Tomada, B. Young and D. S. Martinez-Galarce, J. Low Temp. Phys., 2008, 151(1–2), 40–45 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Miller, J. A. Beall, G. C. Hilton, K. D. Irwin, G. C. O'Neil, D. R. Schmidt, L. R. Vale and J. N. Ullom, J. Low Temp. Phys., 2008, 151(3–4), 635–639 CrossRef CAS .
T. Taino, T. Nishihara, K. Hoshino, H. Myoren, H. Sato, H. M. Shimizu and S. Takada, IEICE Trans. Electron., 2007, E90C(3), 566–569 Search PubMed .
V. A. Andrianov and V. P. Gorkov, J. Low Temp. Phys., 2008, 151(1–2), 327–332 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sultan, B. L. Zink, K. D. Irwin, G. C. Hilton, J. N. Ullom and L. R. Vale, J. Low Temp. Phys., 2008, 151(1–2), 363–368 CrossRef CAS .
A. Burck, S. Kempf, S. Schafer, H. Rotzinger, M. Rodrigues, T. Wolf, L. Gastaldo, A. Fleischmann and C. Enss, J. Low Temp. Phys., 2008, 151(1–2), 337–344 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Hsieh, J. A. Adams, S. R. Bandler, J. Beyer, K. L. Denis, H. Eguchi, E. Figueroa-Feliciano, H. Rotzinger, G. H. Schneider, G. M. Seidel, T. R. Stevenson and D. E. Travers, J.
Low Temp. Phys., 2008, 151(1–2), 357–362 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishiwatari, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 581(1–2), 326–329 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Lowe and R. A. Sareen, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 576(2–3), 367–370 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bombelli, C. Fiorini, M. Porto, S. Herrmann and S. Wolfel, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2007, 54(4), 1359–1366 CrossRef .
F. Moscatelli, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 583(1), 157–161 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Mohanty, P. Balouria, M. L. Garg, T. K. Nandi, V. K. Mittal and I. M. Govil, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2008, 584(1), 186–190 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Sun, M. Zazoui, N. Talbi, K. Khirouni and J. C. Bourgoin, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 573(1–2), 228–231 CrossRef CAS .
V. F. Dvoryankin, G. G. Dvoryankina, Y. M. Dikaev, M. G. Ermakov, O. N. Ermakova, A. A. Kudryashov, A. G. Petrov and A. A. Telegin, Tech. Phys., 2007, 52(10), 1369–1372 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Zaletin, Y. V. Tuzov, V. F. Dvoryankin and A. A. Sokolovskii, At. Energy, 2007, 103(5), 901–905 CrossRef CAS .
A. De Sio, E. Pace, G. Cinque, A. Marcelli, J. Achard and A. Tallaire, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(6–7), 558–561 CrossRef .
S. J. C. do Carmo, L. Carita, F. Borges and C. A. N. Conde, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2007, 54(4), 1257–1262 CrossRef CAS .
L. Carita, S. J. C. do Carmo, F. P. Santos and C. A. N. Conde, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2007, 54(5), 1779–1783 CrossRef .
V. Thomsen, Spectroscopy, 2007, 22(5), 46–50 Search PubMed .
R. Sitko, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(8), 777–786 CrossRef .
L. Luo, D. R. Chettle, H. Nie, F. E. McNeill and M. Popovic, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2007, 263(1), 258–261 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Bakhtiarov, V. A. Zaitsev and T. A. Makarova, J. Anal. Chem., 2007, 62(4), 355–361 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Sole, E. Papillon, M. Cotte, P. Walter and J. Susini, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(1), 63–68 CrossRef .
V. Scot, J. E. Fernandez, L. Vincze and K. Janssens, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2007, 263(1), 204–208 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Gui, J. C. Guo, Q. L. Yang and H. B. Niu, High Energy Phys. Nucl. Phys., 2007, 31(10), 933–937 CAS .
M. Hansson and M. Isaksson, Phys. Med. Biol., 2007, 52(7), 2009–2019 CrossRef .
N. P. Il'in, J. Anal. Chem., 2007, 62(11), 1093–1099 CrossRef CAS .
D. Demir and Y. Sahin, Eur. Phys. J. D, 2007, 42(2), 211–216 CrossRef CAS .
I. Han, M. Sahin, L. Demir and Y. Sahin, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2007, 65(6), 669–675 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Lin, Y. D. Li, G. T. Tan and T. X. Sun, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 572(2), 729–733 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sun, Z. Liu and X. Ding, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36, 377–380 CrossRef CAS .
T. X. Sun, Z. G. Liu and X. F. Ding, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2007, 262(1), 153–156 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cheng, X. L. Ding, Z. G. Liu, Q. L. Pan and X. L. Chu, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(8), 817–823 CrossRef .
L. Cheng, X. L. Ding, Z. G. Liu, Q. L. Pan, X. L. Chu and S. L. Feng, Acta Phys. Sin., 2007, 56(12), 6894–6898 Search PubMed .
G. Buzanich, P. Wobrauschek, C. Streli, A. Markowicz, D. Wegrzynek, E. Chinea-Cano and S. Bamford, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(11), 1252–1256 CrossRef .
J. Yang, X. L. Ding and C. L. Liang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253(20), 8352–8355 CrossRef CAS .
T. X. Sun, X. L. Ding, Z. G. Liu, G. H. Zhu, Y. D. Li, X. J. Wei, D. L. Chen, Q. Xu, Q. R. Liu, Y. Y. Huang, X. Y. Lin and H. B. Sun, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2008, 63(1), 76–80 CrossRef .
X. Y. Lin, Z. H. Wang, X. L. Chu, T. X. Sun and X. L. Ding, Chin. Phys. Lett., 2007, 24(12), 3368–3370 CrossRef .
K. Tsuji, K. Nakano and X. L. Ding, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(6–7), 549–553 CrossRef .
K. Tsuji and K. Nakano, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36, 145–149 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mantouvalou, W. Malzer, I. Schaumann, L. Luhl, R. Dargel, C. Vogt and B. Kanngiesser, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80(3), 819–826 CrossRef CAS .
S. Maeo, I. Sakai, K. Kuzushita and K. Taniguchi, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(6–7), 562–566 CrossRef .
B. C. Masschaele, V. Cnudde, M. Dierick, P. Jacobs, L. Van Hoorebeke and J. Vlassenbroeck, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 580(1), 266–269 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tsuji, T. Yonehara and K. Nakano, Anal. Sci., 2008, 24(1), 99–103 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Egorov and E. V. Egorov, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36 .
A. Gupta, N. Darowski, I. Zizak, C. Meneghini, G. Schumacher and A. Erko, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(6–7), 622–625 CrossRef .
M. Chukalina, A. Simionovici, S. Zaitsev and C. J. Vanegas, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(6–7), 544–548 CrossRef .
B. De Samber, G. Silversmit, R. Evens, K. De Schamphelacre, C. Janssen, B. Masschaele, L. Van Hoorebeke, L. Balcaen, F. Vanhaecke, G. Falkenberg and L. Vincze, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 390(1), 267–271 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zoeger, C. Streli, P. Wobrauschek, C. Jokubonis, G. Pepponi, P. Roschger, J. Hofstaetter, A. Berzianovich, D. Wegrzynek, E. Chinea-Cano, A. Markowicz, R. Simon and G. Falkenberg, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(1), 3–11 CrossRef CAS .
F. Grossemy, J. Borg, Z. Djouadi, A. Simionovici, L. Lemelle, D. Eichert, D. Deboffle, A. J. Westphal and C. J. Snead, Planet. Space Sci., 2007, 55(7–8), 966–973 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pinakidou, M. Katsikini, E. C. Paloura, P. Kavouras, T. Kehagias, P. Komninou, T. Karakostas and A. Erko, J. Hazard. Mater., 2007, 142(1–2), 297–304 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pinakidou, M. Katsikini and E. C. Paloura, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102 .
M. A. Denecke, A. Somogyi, K. Janssens, R. Simon, K. Dardenne and U. Noseck, Microsc. Microanal., 2007, 13(3), 165–172 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cotte, E. Welcomme, V. A. Sole, M. Salome, M. Menu, P. Walter and J. Susini, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79(18), 6988–6994 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Jacobson, S. Dousset, F. Andreux and P. C. Baveye, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41(18), 6343–6349 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kawai, H. Ishii, Y. Matsui, Y. Terada, T. Tanabe and I. Uchiyama, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(6–7), 677–681 CrossRef .
F. Meirer, G. Pepponi, C. Streli, P. Wobrauschek, V. G. Mihucz, G. Zaray, V. Czech, J. A. C. Broekaert, U. E. A. Fittschen and G. Falkenberg, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(6), 408–412 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Stacey, M. J. McLaughlin, I. Cakmak, G. M. Hetitiarachchi, K. G. Scheckel and M. Karkkainen, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2008, 56(6), 2112–2117 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kitajima, T. Kashiwabara, N. Fukuda, S. Endo, A. Hokura, Y. Terada and I. Nakai, Chem. Lett., 2008, 37(1), 32–33 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hoffmann, O. Baake, B. Beckhoff, W. Ensinger, N. Fainer, A. Klein, M. Kosinova, B. Pollakowski, V. Trunova, G. Ulm and J. Weser, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2007, 575(1–2), 78–84 CAS .
G. A. Hettiarachchi, M. J. McLaughlin, K. G. Scheckel, D. J. Chittleborough, M. Newville, S. Sutton and E. Lombi, Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 2008, 72(1), 98–110 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. McNear, R. L. Chaney and D. L. Sparks, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2007, 71(9), 2190–2208 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Fahrni, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2007, 11(2), 121–127 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. G. Popescu, Z. R. Belak, K. Ignatyev, N. Ovsenek and H. Nichol, Biochem. Cell Biol., 2007, 85(5), 537–542 Search PubMed .
U. Kramar, M. Harting, K. Rickers and D. Stuben, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(8), 824–835 CrossRef .
K. Peeters, K. De Wael, A. Adriaens, G. Falkenberg and L. Vincze, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(5), 493–501 RSC .
P. Wobrauschek, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(5), 289–300 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kunimura and J. Kawai, Anal. Sci., 2007, 23(10), 1185–1188 CrossRef CAS .
J. Karjou, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(2), 177–181 CrossRef .
V. S. Hatzistavros, P. E. Koulouridakis, II Aretaki and N. G. Kallithrakas-Kontos, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79(7), 2827–2832 CrossRef CAS .
B. Beckhoff, R. Fliegauf, M. Kolbe, M. Muller, J. Weser and G. Ulm, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79(20), 7873–7882 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Carvalho, T. Magalhaes, M. Becker and A. von Bohlen, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(9), 1004–1011 CrossRef .
A. E. S. de Vives, S. Moreira, S. M. B. Brienza, J. G. S. Medeiros, M. Tornazello, O. L. Araujo, D. Zucchi, V. F. do Nascimento and R. C. Barroso, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 579(1), 494–498 CrossRef .
B. F. Terra, F. G. Araujo, C. F. Calza, R. T. Lopes and T. P. Teixeira, Water Air Soil Pollut., 2008, 187(1–4), 275–284 CAS .
S. Dhara, N. L. Misra, K. D. S. Mudher and S. K. Aggarwal, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(1), 82–85 CrossRef .
N. L. Misra, S. Dhara, V. C. Adya, S. V. Godbole, K. D. S. Mudher and S. K. Aggarwal, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2008, 63(1), 81–85 CrossRef .
P. Piccirilli, N. Caracciolo, C. Enrich, S. Boeykens, C. Vaazquez and M. Rosen, X-Ray Spectrometry, 2007, 36(4), 211–214 Search PubMed .
C. Enrich, S. Boeykens, N. Caracciolo, G. Custo and C. Vazquez, X-Ray Spectrometry, 2007, 36(4), 215–220 Search PubMed .
A. M. Alvarez, J. R. E. Alvarez and R. P. Alvarez, Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry, 2007, 273(2), 427–433 CrossRef .
C. Steen, A. Nutsch, P. Pichler and H. Ryssel, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(5), 481–484 CrossRef .
C. C. Garcia, H. Lindner and K. Niemax, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(1), 13–19 CrossRef .
V. Padmanabhan, J. Daillant, L. Belloni, S. Mora, M. Alba and O. Konovalov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99 .
E. E. Wilkins, S. C. Smith, J. M. Roberts and M. Benedict, Med. Vet. Entomol., 2007, 21(2), 196–203 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pappalardo, J. de Sanoit, C. Marchetta, G. Pappalardo, F. P. Romano and F. Rizzo, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(5), 310–315 CrossRef CAS .
A. Carapelle, K. Fleury-Frenette, J. P. Collette, H. P. Garnir and P. Harlet, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2007, 78 .
A. Gianoncelli and G. Kourousias, Appl. Phys. A, 2007, 89(4), 857–863 CrossRef CAS .
C. Miliani, F. Rosi, A. Burnstock, B. G. Brunetti and A. Sgamellotti, Appl. Phys. A, 2007, 89(4), 849–856 CrossRef CAS .
C. Miliani, F. Rosi, I. Borgia, P. Benedetti, B. G. Brunetti and A. Sgamellotti, Appl. Spectrosc., 2007, 61(3), 293–299 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kunimura, D. Watanabe and J. Kawai, Bunseki Kagaku, 2008, 57(2), 135–139 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cesareo, M. Ferretti, G. E. Gigante, G. Guida, P. Moioli, S. Ridolfi and C. R. Garcia, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(3), 167–172 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Block, T. Shibata, H. M. Solo-Gabriele and T. G. Townsend, Environ. Pollut., 2007, 148(2), 627–633 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Kim, J. H. Kim, K. D. Ahn and B. K. Lee, J. Occup. Health, 2007, 49(6), 493–498 Search PubMed .
F. L. Melquiades, P. S. Parreira, M. J. Yabe, M. Z. Corazza, R. Funfas and C. R. Appoloni, Talanta, 2007, 73(1), 121–126 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sattayasamitsathit, J. Burdick, R. Bash, P. Kanatharana, P. Thavarungkul and J. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79(19), 7571–7575 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tsutsumimoto and K. Tsuji, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(5), 324–327 CrossRef CAS .
N. Craig, R. J. Speakman, R. S. Popelka-Filcoff, M. D. Glascock, J. D. Robertson, M. S. Shackley and M. S. Aldenderfer, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2007, 34(12), 2012–2024 Search PubMed .
M. Ferretti, G. Cristoforetti, S. Legnaloll, V. Palleschi, A. Salvetti, E. Togrioni, E. Console and P. Palaia, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(12), 1512–1518 CrossRef .
S. Laville, M. Sabsabi and F. R. Doucet, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(12), 1557–1566 CrossRef .
K. Tsutsumimoto and K. Tsuji, Bunseki Kagaku, 2007, 56(6), 499–504 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Zhan, L. Q. Luo and X. T. Fan, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(4), 275–278 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Worley and L. P. Colletti, Powder Diffr., 2007, 22(2), 152–155 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Sieber, E. A. Mackey, A. F. Marlow, R. Paul and R. Martin, Powder Diffr., 2007, 22(2), 146–151 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, F. Guo and S. H. Gu, Spectrosc. Spectr. Anal., 2007, 27(2), 404–407 CAS .
B. Zawisza and R. Sitko, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(10), 1147–1152 CrossRef .
R. A. Silva and A. N. Masi, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(4), 279–283 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Mahmoud, I. M. M. Kenawy, E. M. Soliman, M. A. Hafez, M. A. A. Akl and R. R. A. Lashein, Anal. Sci., 2008, 24(3), 381–387 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Park, J. H. Kim and Y. W. Kil, Mar. Geol., 2007, 244(1–4), 196–208 CrossRef .
E. A. Chernysheva and G. S. Kharin, Petrology, 2007, 15(3), 296–301 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aizawa, M. Uyeshima and K. Nogami, J. Geophys. Res. [Solid Earth], 2008, 113 .
H. J. Massonne and A. Czambor, Chem.Erde, 2007, 67(1), 69–83 Search PubMed .
H. Nagaseki and K. I. Hayashi, Geology, 2008, 36(1), 27–30 CrossRef .
A. Manceau, M. Kersten, M. A. Marcus, N. Geoffroy and L. Granina, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2007, 71(8), 1967–1981 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Peacock and D. M. Sherman, Am. Mineral., 2007, 92(7), 1087–1092 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Leonova, V. A. Bobrov, A. A. Bogush, V. A. Bychinskii and G. N. Anoshin, Geochem. Int., 2007, 45(10), 1025–1039 Search PubMed .
J. A. Walsh, Mater. Charact., 2007, 58(11–12), 1095–1103 CrossRef CAS .
M. Luo, Rock Miner. Anal., 2007, 26, 245 Search PubMed .
A. Moreno, S. Giralt, B. Valero-Garces, A. Saez, R. Bao, R. Prego, J. J. Pueyo, P. Gonzalez-Samperiz and C. Taberner, Quat. Int., 2007, 161, 4–21 CrossRef .
Y. Kido, I. Minami, R. Tada, K. Fujine, T. Irino, K. Ikehara and J. H. Chun, Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol., 2007, 247(1–2), 32–49 CrossRef .
I. Kristen, A. Fuhrmann, J. Thorpe, U. Rohl, H. Wilkes and H. Oberhansli, South Afr. J. Geol., 2007, 110(2–3), 311–326 Search PubMed .
P. Sorrel, H. Oberhansli, N. Boroffka, D. Nourgaliev, P. Dulski and U. Rohl, Quat. Res., 2007, 67(3), 371–382 CrossRef .
M. A. Levitan, I. A. Roshchina and A. V. Tolmacheva, Lithol. Miner. Resour., 2008, 43(2), 111–124 Search PubMed .
A. Sluijs, U. Rohl, S. Schouten, H. J. Brumsack, F. Sangiorgi, J. S. S. Damste and H. Brinkhuis, Paleoceanography, 2008, 23(1) Search PubMed .
U. Rohl, T. Westerhold, T. J. Bralower and J. C. Zachos, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2007, 8 Search PubMed .
T. Westerhold, U. Rohl, I. Raffi, E. Fornaciari, S. Monechi, V. Reale, J. Bowles and H. F. Evans, Paleogeogr. Paleoclimatol. Paleoecol., 2008, 257(4), 377–403 CrossRef .
T. M. Shanahan, J. T. Overpeck, J. B. Hubeny, J. King, F. S. Hu, K. Hughen, G. Miller and J. Black, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2008, 9 Search PubMed .
J. K. Gurung, H. Ishiga, M. S. Khadka and N. R. Shrestha, Environ. Geol., 2007, 52(3), 503–517 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Hung and C. L. Hwang, Waste Manage. Res., 2007, 25(5), 449–456 Search PubMed .
A. Hwang, W. Ji, B. Kweon and J. Khim, Chemosphere, 2008, 70(6), 1141–1145 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Van Dam, J. B. J. Harrison, D. A. Hirschfeld, T. M. Meglich, Y. Li and R. E. North, Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 2008, 72(1), 244–257 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Yalcin, R. Battaloglu and S. Ilhan, Environ. Geol., 2007, 53(2), 399–415 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kleber, L. Schwendenmann, E. Veldkamp, J. Rossner and R. Jahn, Geoderma, 2007, 138(1–2), 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tazaki, An. Acad. Bras. Cien., 2006, 78(4), 749–763 Search PubMed .
S. F. Dai, Y. P. Zhou, D. Y. Ren, X. B. Wang, D. Li and L. Zhao, Sci. China, Ser. D, 2007, 50(5), 678–688 CrossRef CAS .
C. van Alphen, Miner. Eng., 2007, 20(5), 496–505 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ural, Int. J. Coal Geol., 2007, 71(2–3), 176–184 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zivotic, H. Wehner, O. Cvetkovic, B. Jovancicevic, I. Grzetic, G. Scheeder, A. Vidal, A. Sajnovic, M. Ercegovac and V. Simic, Int. J. Coal Geol., 2008, 73(3–4), 285–306 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Pinetown, C. R. Ward and W. A. van der Westhuizen, Int. J. Coal Geol., 2007, 70(1–3), 166–183 CrossRef CAS .
O. Gonzalez-Fernandez, I. Queralt, M. L. Carvalho and G. Garcia, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2007, 262(1), 81–86 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ustundag, I. Ustundag and Y. K. Kadioglu, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2007, 65(7), 809–813 CrossRef .
B. Charlier, O. Skar, A. Korneliussen, J. C. Duchesne and J. V. Auwera, Contrib. Mineral. Petrol., 2007, 154(2), 119–134 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nayak and C. R. Panda, J. Indian Chem. Soc., 2007, 84(6), 603–608 CAS .
A. Worobiec, E. A. Stefaniak, S. Potgieter-Vermaak, Z. Sawlowicz, Z. Spolnik and R. Van Grieken, Appl. Geochem., 2007, 22(9), 2078–2085 CrossRef CAS .
U. Sundar, V. Ramamurthy, V. Buche, D. N. Rao, P. C. Sivadasan and R. B. Yadav, Talanta, 2007, 73(3), 476–482 CrossRef CAS .
A. El-Taher, H. M. Mahmoud and A. G. E. Abbady, Indian J. Pure Appl. Phys., 2007, 45(3), 198–203 CAS .
A. J. B. Cotta, J. Enzweiler, S. A. Wilson, C. A. Perez, A. J. R. Nardy and J. H. Larizzatti, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2007, 31(4), 379–393 Search PubMed .
A. Borsato, S. Frisia, I. J. Fairchild, A. Somogyi and J. Susini, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2007, 71(6), 1494–1512 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Chan, P. W. Wong and Q. F. Chen, J. Geophys. Eng., 2007, 4(3), 285–292 Search PubMed .
M. Franzini, L. Leoni, M. Lezzerini and R. Cardelli, Eur. J. Mineral., 2007, 19(1), 113–123 CrossRef CAS .
W. P. Linak, J. I. Yoo, S. J. Wasson, W. Zhu, J. O. L. Wendt, F. E. Huggins, Y. Chen, N. Shah, G. P. Huffman and M. I. Gilmour, Proc. Combust. Inst., 2007, 31, 1929–1937 CrossRef .
G. Lammel, D. G. Baumgardner, U. E. A. Fittschen and B. Peschel, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2007, 87(9), 659–672 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sotiriou, S. F. Ferguson, M. Davey, J. M. Wolfson, P. Demokritou, J. Lawrence, S. N. Sax and P. Koutrakis, Environ. Monit. Assess., 2008, 137(1–3), 351–361 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, W. Yue, A. Iida, Y. Li and G. Zhang, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2007, 260(1), 336–342 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dubiella-Jackowska, Z. Polkowska and J. Namiesnik, Pol. J. Environ. Stud., 2007, 16(3), 329–345 Search PubMed .
P. Smichowski, D. Gomez, C. Frazzoli and S. Caroji, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2008, 43(1), 22–48 CAS .
C. Perrino, S. Canepari, E. Cardarelli, M. Catrambone and T. Sargolini, Environ. Monit. Assess., 2008, 136(1–3), 69–86 CAS .
P. E. Rasmussen, R. Dugandzic, N. Hassan, J. Murimboh and D. C. Gregoire, Can. J. Anal. Sci. Spectrosc., 2006, 51(1), 1–8 CAS .
L. K. Baxter, J. E. Clougherty, F. Laden and J. I. Levy, J. Exposure Sci. Environ. Epidemiol., 2007, 17(5), 433–444 Search PubMed .
A. J. Hernandez and J. Pastor, Environ. Geochem. Health, 2008, 30(2), 127–133 Search PubMed .
L. Lima, L. A. Bernardez and L. A. D. Barbosa, J. Hazard. Mater., 2008, 150(3), 747–753 CrossRef .
A. Alsecz, J. Osan, S. Kurunczi, B. Alfoldy, A. Varhegyi and S. Torok, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(8), 769–776 CrossRef .
A. Akinci and R. Artir, Mater. Charact., 2008, 59(4), 417–421 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Hussain and I. A. A. Hakim, Mater. Manuf. Processes, 2007, 22(7–8), 916–921 Search PubMed .
O. T. Forton, L. McGrady, M. M. Singh, E. R. M. Taylor, N. R. Moles and M. K. Harder, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2007, 79(1–2), 395–402 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Ferg and N. Rust, Polym. Test., 2007, 26(8), 1001–1014 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dellisanti, P. L. Rossi and G. Valdre, Int. J. Miner. Process., 2007, 83(3–4), 89–98 CrossRef CAS .
T. Horvat, Z. Vidakovic-Cifrek, V. Orescanin, M. Tkalec and B. Pevalek-Kozlina, Sci. Total Environ., 2007, 384(1–3), 229–238 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Jiang, X. Xu, J. Wang, S. J. Yang and Y. Zhang, J. Environ. Sci. (China), 2007, 19(4), 458–463 Search PubMed .
S. C. Stark, I. Snape, N. J. Graham, J. C. Brennan and D. B. Gore, J. Environ. Monit., 2008, 10(1), 60–70 RSC .
D. Gupta, J. M. Chatterjee, R. Ghosh, A. K. Mitra, S. Roy and M. Sarkar, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2007, 65(5), 512–516 CrossRef CAS .
J. Al-Jundi and E. Al-Tarazi, J. Environ. Radioact., 2008, 99(1), 190–198 CrossRef CAS .
R. Carr, C. S. Zhang, N. Moles and M. Harder, Environ. Geochem. Health, 2008, 30(1), 45–52 Search PubMed .
Y. N. Vodyanitskii, Eurasian Soil Sci., 2006, 39(6), 611–621 CrossRef .
D. G. Strawn and L. L. Baker, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42(1), 37–42 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kumpiene, A. Lagerkvist and C. Maurice, Waste Manage., 2008, 28(1), 215–225 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Chankina, E. P. Khramova, K. P. Koutsenogii, E. I. Krylova, S. Y. Syeva and O. V. Tarasov, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 575(1–2), 210–213 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kutsenogyi, R. P. Makarikova, L. I. Milyutin, N. B. Naumova, V. V. Tarakanov and O. V. Chankina, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 575(1–2), 214–217 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Goldberg, K. B. Zolotarev, V. V. Maksimovskaya, V. I. Kondratyev, D. V. Ovchinnikov and M. M. Naurzbaev, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 575(1–2), 196–198 CrossRef CAS .
A. Voegelin, F. A. Weber and R. Kretzschmar, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2007, 71(23), 5804–5820 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Meharg, E. Lombi, P. N. Williams, K. G. Scheckel, J. Feldmann, A. Raab, Y. G. Zhu and R. Islam, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42(4), 1051–1057 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vogel-Mikus, P. Pongrac, P. Kump, M. Necemer, J. Simcic, P. Pelicon, M. Budnar, B. Povh and M. Regvar, Environ. Pollut., 2007, 147(1), 50–59 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zaccone, C. Cocozza, A. K. Cheburkin, W. Shotyk and T. M. Miano, Water Air Soil Pollut., 2007, 186(1–4), 263–271 CrossRef CAS .
F. De Vleeschouwer, L. Gerard, C. Goormaghtigh, N. Mattielli, G. Le Roux and N. Fagel, Sci. Total Environ., 2007, 377(2–3), 282–295 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Phedorin, V. A. Bobrov and K. V. Zolotarevd, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 575(1–2), 199–201 CrossRef CAS .
P. Boning, E. Bard and J. Rose, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2007, 8 Search PubMed .
I. Kalugin, A. Daryin, L. Smolyaninova, A. Andreev, B. Diekmann and O. Khlystov, Quat. Res., 2007, 67(3), 400–410 CrossRef .
H. J. Park, S. W. Jeong, J. K. Yang, B. G. Kim and S. M. Lee, J. Environ. Sci., 2007, 19(12), 1436–1441 Search PubMed .
S. Kalyani, A. Krishnaiah and V. M. Boddu, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2007, 42(12), 2767–2786 CAS .
J. Obhodas, D. S. S. Blagus and V. Valkovic, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2007, 261(1–2), 922–924 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kasamatsu, H. Kikkawa, Y. Higashikawa, Y. Suzuki, S. Suzuki, T. Nakanishi, M. Takatsu, O. Shimoda, S. Watanabe, Y. Nishiwaki and N. Miyamoto, Bunseki Kagaku, 2007, 56(12), 1159–1164 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nishiwaki, M. Takatsu, N. Miyamoto, S. Watanabe, O. Shimoda, S. Muratsui, T. Nakanishi and L. Nakai, Bunseki Kagaku, 2007, 56(12), 1045–1052 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Bush, R. G. Miller, A. L. Norrlander and P. J. Bush, J. Forensic Sci., 2008, 53(2), 419–425 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zadora, Acta Chim. Slov., 2007, 54(1), 110–113 CAS .
J. Zieba-Palus, R. Borusiewicz and M. Kunicki, Forensic Sci. Int., 2008, 175(1), 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Shackley, Archaeometry, 2008, 50, 194–215 CrossRef .
A. M. De Francesco, G. M. Crisci and M. Bocci, Archaeometry, 2008, 50, 337–350 CrossRef CAS .
A. Negash, M. Alene, F. H. Brown, B. P. Nash and M. S. Shackley, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2007, 34(8), 1205–1210 Search PubMed .
T. Carter and M. S. Shackley, Archaeometry, 2007, 49, 437–454 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Lundblad, P. R. Mills and K. Hon, Archaeometry, 2008, 50, 1–11 CAS .
D. Benedetti, E. Bontempi, R. Bertoncello, B. Dal Bianco, E. Pantos and L. E. Depero, Nuovo Cimento Soc. Ital. Fis., C, 2007, 30(1), 27–33 Search PubMed .
D. J. Huisman, S. Pols, I. Joosten, B. J. H. van Os and A. Smit, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2008, 35(2), 398–411 Search PubMed .
A. Oikonomou, P. Triantafyllidis, K. Beltsios, N. Zacharias and M. Karakassides, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2008, 354(2–9), 768–772 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Prinsloo and P. Colomban, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2008, 39(1), 79–90 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zacharias, K. Beltsios, A. Oikonomou, A. G. Karydas, V. Aravantinos and Y. Bassiakos, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2008, 354(2–9), 761–767 CrossRef CAS .
A. Silvestri, G. Molin and G. Salviulo, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2008, 35(2), 331–341 Search PubMed .
F. Asaro and D. Adan-Bayewitz, Archaeometry, 2007, 49, 201–214 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Odriozola and V. M. H. Perez, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2007, 34(11), 1794–1803 Search PubMed .
I. Papageorgiou and I. Liritzis, Archaeometry, 2007, 49, 795–813 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gliozzo, P. Vivacqua and I. T. Memmi, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2008, 35(4), 1074–1089 Search PubMed .
T. Broekmans, A. Adriaens and E. Pantos, Appl. Phys. A, 2008, 90(1), 35–42 CAS .
R. Fenandez-Ruiz and M. Garcia-Heras, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(10), 1123–1129 CrossRef .
D. Papadopoulou, A. Sakalis, N. Merousis and N. C. Tsirfiganis, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 580(1), 743–746 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fortina, I. M. Turbanti and F. Grassi, Archaeometry, 2008, 50, 30–47 CAS .
Y. Q. Wang, S. L. Feng, X. Q. Feng, Y. Lei, L. Cheng, Q. Xu, Z. X. Zhuo and D. X. Xue, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2007, 272(3), 541–543 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wood, M. S. Tite, C. Doherty and B. Gilmore, Archaeometry, 2007, 49, 665–684 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Dawson, Color. Technol., 2007, 123(5), 281–292 CAS .
U. Bergmann, Phys. World, 2007, November, 39–42 Search PubMed .
W. Faubel, S. Staub, R. Simon, S. Heissler, A. Pataki and G. Banik, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(6–7), 669–676 CrossRef .
M. Manso, M. Costa and M. L. Carvalho, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 580(1), 732–734 CrossRef CAS .
M. Manso, M. Costa and M. L. Carvalho, Appl. Phys. A, 2008, 90(1), 43–48 CAS .
I. Reiche, A. Berger, A. Duval, H. Guicharnaud, S. Merchel, M. Radtke, D. Schafer and R. Simon, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(3), 173–177 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Appoloni, M. S. Blonski, P. S. Parreira and L. A. C. Souza, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 580(1), 710–713 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cotte, E. Checroun, J. Susini and P. Walter, Appl. Phys. A, 2007, 89(4), 841–848 CrossRef CAS .
C. Calza, M. J. Anjos, S. De Souza, A. Brancaglion and R. T. Lopes, Appl. Phys. A, 2008, 90(1), 75–79 CAS .
C. Calza, M. J. Anjos, S. de Souza, A. Brancaglion and R. T. Lopes, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2007, 263(1), 249–252 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gil, M. L. Carvalho, A. Seruya, A. E. Candeias, J. Mirao and I. Queralt, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 580(1), 728–731 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gil, M. L. Carvalho, A. Seruya, I. Ribeiro, I. Queralt, A. E. Candeias and J. Mirao, Appl. Phys. A, 2008, 90(1), 49–54 CAS .
R. L. Green and R. J. Watling, J. Forensic Sci., 2007, 52(4), 851–859 CrossRef CAS .
D. Miriello and G. M. Crisci, Eur. J. Mineral., 2007, 19(1), 137–144 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Velosa, J. Coroado, M. R. Veiga and F. Rocha, Mater. Charact., 2007, 58(11–12), 1208–1216 CrossRef CAS .
M. Diana, N. Gabrielli and S. Ridolfi, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(6), 424–428 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Carvalho and A. F. Marques, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(1), 32–36 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. B. Fleming and D. E. Blom, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2007, 263(1), 41–45 CrossRef CAS .
V. Mazel, P. Richardin, D. Debois, D. Touboul, M. Cotte, A. Brunelle, P. Walter and O. Laprevote, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79(24), 9253–9260 CrossRef CAS .
E. Franceschi, I. Cascone and D. Nole, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2008, 91(1), 119–123 CrossRef CAS .
N. Civici, S. Gjongecaj, F. Stamati, T. Dilo, E. Pavlidou, E. K. Polychroniadis and Z. Smit, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2007, 258(2), 414–420 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ferretti and S. Siano, Appl. Phys. A, 2008, 90(1), 97–100 CAS .
E. Figueiredo, P. Valerio, M. F. Araujo and J. C. Senna-Martinez, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 580(1), 725–727 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Elam, R. B. Shen, B. Scruggs and J. A. Nicolosi, Powder Diffr., 2007, 22(2), 142–145 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mans, S. Hanning, C. Simons, A. Wegner, A. Janssen and M. Kreyenschmidt, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(2), 116–122 CrossRef .
K. Nakano, T. Nakamura, I. Nakai, A. Kawase, M. Imai, M. Hasegawa, Y. I. Ishibashi, I. Inamoto, K. Sudou, M. Kozaki, A. Turuta, A. Bando, A. Ono, K. Kakita, K. Takimoto and M. Sakata, Bunseki Kagaku, 2007, 56(5), 363–370 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jacobi, H. Solo-Gabriele, T. Townsend and B. Dubey, Waste Manage., 2007, 27(11), 1617–1625 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Cai, B. Riedl, S. Y. Zhang and H. Wan, Wood Fiber Sci., 2007, 39(2), 307–318 Search PubMed .
S. Yildiz, Build. Environ., 2007, 42(6), 2305–2310 CrossRef .
K. Van Meel, A. Smekens, M. Behets, P. Kazandjian and R. Van Grieken, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79(16), 6383–6389 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. G. Teixeira, R. B. S. Rocha, E. V. Sobrinho, P. R. B. Guimaraes, L. A. M. Pontes and J. S. R. Teixeira, Talanta, 2007, 72(3), 1073–1076 CrossRef CAS .
N. Miskoiczi, R. Nagy, L. Bartha, P. Halmos and B. FazekaS, Microchem J., 2008, 88(1), 14–20 CrossRef .
S. M. Jung, Y. M. Cho, H. G. Na and D. J. Min, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(3), 185–190 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Jung, Y. M. Cho and H. G. Na, ISIJ Int., 2007, 47(6), 853–859 Search PubMed .
S. M. Jung, ISIJ Int., 2007, 47(8), 1141–1148 Search PubMed .
M. Numata, Y. Aoyagi, Y. Tsuda, T. Yarita and A. Takatsu, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79(23), 9211–9217 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Balarini, L. D. Polli, T. L. S. Miranda, R. M. Z. de Castro and A. Salum, Minerals Eng., 2008, 21(1), 100–110 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Huang and S. L. Zhou, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2007, 27(9), 1873–1877 CAS .
Y. X. Gao, C. Y. Chen and Z. F. Chai, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(8), 856–866 RSC .
J. Borjesson and S. Mattsson, Powder Diffr., 2007, 22(2), 130–137 CrossRef .
M. Szczerbowska-Boruchowska, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(1), 21–31 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nie, H. Hu and D. R. Chettle, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(1), 69–75 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Parsons, D. J. Bellis, K. M. Hetter, C. Geraghty, N. A. Berglind, N. R. Ginde, P. Mata and A. C. Todd, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(1), 76–83 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. B. Fleming and C. E. Mills, Med. Phys., 2007, 34(3), 945–951 CrossRef .
J. A. A. Brito, D. E. B. Fleming and D. R. Cheftle, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(1), 84–88 CrossRef CAS .
T. Perlstein, J. Weuve, J. Schwartz, D. Sparrow, R. Wright, A. Litonjua, H. Nie and H. Hu, Environ. Health Perspect., 2007, 115(12), 1696–1700 CAS .
P. Muntner, A. Menke, V. Batuman, F. A. Rabita, J. He and A. C. Todd, Environ. Res., 2007, 104(3), 396–401 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ghosh-Narang, T. M. Jones, A. Menke, A. C. Todd, P. Muntner and V. Batuman, Am. J. Med. Sci., 2007, 334(6), 415–420 Search PubMed .
W. F. Stewart and B. S. Schwartz, Am. J. Ind. Med., 2007, 50(10), 729–739 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zamburlini, A. Pejovic-Milic, D. R. Chettle, C. E. Webber and J. Gyorffy, Phys. Med. Biol., 2007, 52(8), 2107–2122 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zamburlini, A. Pejovic-Milic and D. R. Chettle, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(1), 42–50 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Bradley, P. Muthuvelu, R. E. Ellis, E. M. Green, D. AttenburrOw, R. Barrett, K. Arkill, D. B. Colridge and C. P. Winlove, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2007, 263(1), 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Bradley, C. J. Moger and C. P. Winlove, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 580(1), 473–476 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Fei, M. Zhang, M. Li, Y. Y. Huang, W. He, W. J. Ding and J. H. Yang, Micron, 2007, 38(6), 637–642 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Zhang, Y. S. Wang, Y. P. Zhang, G. L. Zhang, Y. Y. Huang and W. He, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2007, 260(1), 178–183 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khuder, M. A. Bakir, J. Karjou and M. K. Sawan, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2007, 273(2), 435–442 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Chikawa, K. Yamada, T. Akirnoto, H. Sakurai and H. Yasui, J. X-Ray Sci. Technol., 2007, 15(3), 109–129 Search PubMed .
K. Geraki, M. J. Farquharson, D. A. Bradley, O. Gundogdu and G. Falkenberg, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(1), 12–20 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Bazhanova, L. F. Guljaeva, S. E. Krasilnikov, V. S. Titova, A. D. Shaporenko and Y. Shulga, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2007, 575(1–2), 206–209 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, W. Y. Feng, M. Wang, J. W. Shi, F. Zhang, H. Ouyang, Y. L. Zhao, Z. F. Chai, Y. Y. Huang, Y. N. Xie, H. F. Wang and J. Wang, Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 2007, 118(3), 233–243 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Feng, H. Q. Xiao, X. He, Z. J. Li, F. L. Li, N. Q. Liu, Z. F. Chai, Y. L. Zhao, Y. Y. Huang, W. He and Z. Y. Zhang, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2007, 272(2), 333–337 CAS .
F. Zhang, W. Y. Feng, J. W. Shi, M. Wang, Y. Y. Huang, W. He and Z. F. Chai, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2007, 272(3), 533–536 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, F. Wang, Y. X. Zhang, J. J. Xu, J. G. Long, H. G. Qin, F. Liu and J. S. Guo, Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 2007, 119(2), 166–174 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rubio, R. D. Perez, C. A. Perez, A. H. Eynard and G. A. Bongiovanni, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2008, 77(1), 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
L. Perring and J. Blanc, Int. J. Food Sci. Technol., 2007, 42(5), 551–555 CrossRef CAS .
M. Manso, M. L. Carvalho and M. L. Numes, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36, 413–418 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Carvalho, A. F. Marques, J. P. Marques and C. Casaca, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(6–7), 702–706 CrossRef .
R. R. Martin, S. J. Naftel, A. J. Nelson and W. D. Sapp, Can. J. Chem., 2007, 85(10), 831–836 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Abraham, M. S. Grenon, H. J. Sanchez, M. C. Valentinuzzi and C. A. Perez, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62(6–7), 689–694 CrossRef .
H. H. Harris, S. Vogt, H. Eastgate, D. G. Legnini, B. Hornberger, Z. Cai, B. Lai and P. A. Lay, J. Synchrot. Radiat., 2008, 15, 123–128 Search PubMed .
G. Fleury, C. Malhaire, C. Populaire, M. Verdier, A. Devos, P. L. Charvet and J. P. Polizzi, Sens. Actuator, B, 2007, 126(1), 48–51 CrossRef .
A. Morone, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253(19), 8242–8244 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Dakhel, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 433(1–2), 6–10 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Dakhel, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2007, 42(8), 829–833 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Dakhel, Vacuum, 2007, 81(9), 1101–1108 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Lysaght, J. C. Woicik, M. A. Sahiner, B. H. Lee and R. Jammy, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2008, 354(2–9), 399–403 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bacaksiz, O. Gorur, A. Tomakin, E. Yanmaz and A. Altunbas, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61(30), 5239–5242 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamada, A. Miyake, S. Kishimoto, H. Makino, N. Yamamoto and T. Yamamoto, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2007, 202(4–7), 973–976 CrossRef CAS .
D. Avellaneda, G. Delgado, M. T. S. Nair and P. K. Nair, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515(15), 5771–5776 CrossRef CAS .
O. Ramdani, E. Chassaing, B. Canava, P. P. Grand, O. Roussel, M. Lamirand, E. Rzepka, A. Etcheberry, J. F. Guillemoles, D. Lincot and O. Kerrec, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154(8), D383–D393 CrossRef CAS .
I. M. Dharmadasa, N. B. Chaure, G. J. Tolan and A. P. Samantilleke, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154(6), H466–H471 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Williams, R. P. Camata, V. V. Fedorov and S. B. Mirov, Appl. Phys. A, 2008, 91(2), 333–335 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dargel, M. Azeroual, B. Mogwitz, J. Janek and C. Vogt, J. Mater. Sci., 2007, 42(17), 7375–7380 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Dzhafarov and M. Caliskan, J. Phys. D, 2007, 40(13), 4003–4009 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kavei, M. H. Sarrafi and C. Falamaki, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2007, 18(5), 1441–1446 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Wen, R. L. Zong, F. Zeng, Y. Gao and F. Pan, Mater. Sci. Eng. A, 2007, 457(1–2), 38–43 CrossRef .
H. Liu, N. Li, S. Bi and D. J. Li, Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154(12), D662–D668 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bajdik, E. Bolcskei, A. Kelemen and K. Pintye-Hodi, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 2007, 44(5), 1159–1162 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Zeng, G. N. Dong and Y. B. Xie, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254(8), 2425–2430 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Huang, N. Li, L. X. Cao and H. Zheng, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62(3), 466–469 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Huang, N. Li, H. Y. Wang, H. X. Sun, S. S. Sun and H. Zheng, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516(6), 1037–1043 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bamford, P. Kregsamer, S. Fazinic, M. Jaksic, D. Wegrzynek, E. Chinea-Cano and A. Markowicz, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2007, 261(1–2), 541–543 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Schlegel and A. Manceau, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41(6), 1942–1948 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pinakidou, M. Katsikini, E. C. Paloura, O. Kaloglrou and A. Erko, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2007, 353(28), 2717–2733 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pinakidou, M. Katsikini, P. Kavouras, F. Komninou, T. Karakostas and E. C. Paloura, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2008, 354(2–9), 105–111 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vespa, R. Dahn, D. Grolimund, E. Wieland and A. M. Scheidegger, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41(6), 1902–1908 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Andreasson, M. Janousch, U. Staub, G. I. Meijer and B. Delley, Mater. Sci. Eng. B., 2007, 144(1–3), 60–63 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kalayci, A. Aydinuraz, B. Tugluoglu and R. H. Mutlu, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2007, 255(2), 438–440 CrossRef CAS .
T. Trojek, T. Cechak and L. Mtisilek, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2007, 263(1), 76–78 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
Table Content:
AAS	Atomic absorption spectrometry
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
APDC	Ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate
ASU	Atomic Spectrometry Updates
BC	Before Christ
BL	Beamline
CCA	Chromated copper arsenate
CNS	Central nervous system
CRM	Certified reference material
CT	Computer tomography
2D/3D	2 Dimensional/3 Dimensional
ED-SEM	Energy dispersive-scanning electron microscopy
EDXRF	Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
EPMA	Electron probe microanalysis
ESRD	End-stage renal disease
ESRF	European synchrotron radiation facility
ET-AAS	Electrothermal-atomic absorption spectrometry
EU	European Union
EXAFS	Extended X-ray absorption fine structure
FTIR	Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
GC-MS	Gas Chromatography-mass spectrometry
GPSC	Gas proportional scintillation counter
HOPG	Highly oriented pyrolytic graphite
HPGe	High performance germanium
ICP-AES	Inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry
ICP-MS	Inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
INAA	Instrumental neutron activation analysis
IR	Infrared
JAAS	Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry
JSAC	Japanese Society of Analytical Chemistry
KXRF	K-line X-ray fluorescence
LA-ICP-MS	Laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
LURE	Laboratory for the Use of Electromagnetic Radiation
MC-ICP-MS	Multi collector-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
MEMS	Micro-electro-mechanical systems
MORB	Mid ocean ridge basalt
MUF	Melamine–urea–formaldehyde
NAA	Neutron activation analysis
NASA	National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NIOSH	National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
NIST	National Institute of Standards and Technology
NSLS	National Synchrotron Light Source
PAN	1-(2-Pyridylazo)-2-naphthol
PCB	Polychlorinated biphenyl
PETM	Paleocene-eocene thermal maximum
PGE	Platinum group elements
PIXE	Particle induced X-ray emission
PIXE/RBS	Particle induced X-ray emission/Rutherford backscattering spectrometry
PM	Particulate matter
PTB	Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt
PVC	Polyvinylchloride
PXRF	Portable X-ray fluorescence
RoHS	Restriction on hazardous substances
SDD	Silicon drift detector
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SIMS	Secondary ion mass spectrometry
Si(Li)	Lithium-drifted silicon
Si-PIN	Silicon ‘PIN’ detector device
SR	Synchrotron radiation
SR-FTIR	Synchrotron radiation-Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
SRXRD	Synchrotron radiation X-ray diffraction
SRXRF	Synchrotron radiation X-ray fluorescence
STJ	Superconducting tunnel junction
TEM	Transmission electron microscope
TES	Transition edge sensor
TGA	Thermo-gravimetric analysis
TOF-SIMS	Time of flight-Secondary ion mass spectrometry
TXRF	Total reflection X-ray fluorescence
USGS	United States Geological Survey
UV	Ultraviolet
UV-VIS	Ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy
WDXRF	Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence
XAFS	X-Ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy
XANES	X-ray absorption near edge structure
XAS	X-ray absorption spectroscopy
XPS	X-ray photon spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction
XRF	X-ray fluorescence

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
