Facile interfacial charge transfer across hole doped cobalt-based MOFs/TiO 2 nano-hybrids making MOFs light harvesting active layers in solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA07180A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA07180A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22669-22676Facile interfacial charge transfer across hole doped cobalt-based MOFs/TiO2 nano-hybrids making MOFs light harvesting active layers in solar cells†

        
          
            Deok Yeon 
            Lee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Iseul 
            Lim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chan Yong 
            Shin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Supriya A. 
            Patil
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wonjoo 
            Lee
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Nabeen K. 
            Shrestha
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Joong Kee 
            Lee
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Sung-Hwan 
            Han
          
        
      *a
aChemistry Department, Hanyang University, Seoul 133-791, Republic of Korea. E-mail: nabeenkshrestha@hotmail.com; shhan@hanyang.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-2299-0762;   Tel: +82-2292-5212
bDepartment of Defense Ammunitions, Daeduk College, Daejeon 305-715, Republic of Korea
cKorea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul 136-791, Republic of Korea
Received 
      9th September 2015
    , Accepted 25th September 2015First published on 2nd October 2015AbstractEfficient separation of charges and their mobility are key challenges in metal–organic-framework (MOF) based devices. In the present study, thin films of cobalt-based metal organic frameworks (MOFs) are synthesized using a layer-by-layer technique, and their electrical/optoelectronic properties are studied. The as-prepared MOF films show electrically insulating behavior, which after hole doping demonstrate p-type conduction behaviour. The measured HOMO–LUMO energy states of the MOF films are found to be well matched for sensitizing TiO2, and the photoluminescence quenching experiment demonstrates a facile photoelectron transfer path from the doped frameworks to TiO2. Consequently, the doped MOFs are employed successfully as light harvesting and charge transporting active layers in a fully devised TiO2-based solar cell. Two different organic ligands viz., benzene dicarboxylic acid and naphthalenedicarboxylic acid are used to synthesize two kinds of Co–MOFs having different geometrical dimensions of unit cells and pores, and their influence on hole doping and charge transportation is studied. Under optimized conditions, the Co–MOF based device demonstrates a solar-to-electric energy conversion efficiency of 1.12% with a short circuit current of 2.56 mA cm−2, showing promising future prospects of the application of Co–MOFs in photovoltaic devices. Further, the photovoltaic performance of the Co–MOF based device is comparatively studied with that of the previously reported Cu–MOF and Ru–MOF based similar devices, and the influence of different metal centers of MOFs on their light harvesting performance is discussed.
1. Introduction
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are highly crystalline hybrid materials consisting of metal cations co-ordinated with electron donating organic linkers forming highly porous network structures.1–4 Owing to their high porosity and high surface area, MOFs have been traditionally investigated as potential materials for gas storage, gas decontamination/separation and heterogeneous catalysis.5 One of the interesting features of MOF chemistry is that by tailoring the solution chemistry of metal cations and organic linkers, the morphology of the porous networks and the functionality of the MOFs can be easily tuned.6–8 As a large diversity of metal cations and organic ligands of choice can be combined together to design MOFs targeted for a particular application, MOFs have been investigated extensively for many promising applications.7–25 Although, the concepts of MOFs as potential light harvesting and energy transferring materials are intriguing,26–32 a fully devised solar cell consisting of MOFs as the active material for harvesting and converting solar energy into electricity has been hardly investigated.33–39 Li et al.33 have demonstrated for the first time the application MOFs in dye-sensitized-solar-cells (DSSCs) as an interfacial modifier. They have demonstrated that the highly porous nature of the MOFs increases the dye loading, and owing to its electrical insulating property the interfacial MOF layer suppresses the interfacial charge recombination.34 Basically, the majority of MOFs are electrical insulators, and such MOFs can be used as interfacial modifiers for DSSCs to suppress the interfacial charge recombination. However, the same insulating property could be the most challenging issue of MOFs for their application as active light harvesting sensitizers in photovoltaic devices. In other words, apart from absorption of light, the mobility of photo-induced charges within the frameworks and injection of electrons into the accepter level across interfaces between the donor (i.e., frameworks) and acceptor (mostly TiO2 in (DSSCs)) is essential for MOFs to behave as active materials for harvesting and converting solar energy into electricity in photovoltaic devices. The electrical conductivity of MOFs – a key that controls the charge mobility in the frameworks is needed to be improved to use the MOF thin film as a photo-electrode to harvest solar radiation. As a result of the insulating property, although a MOF based solid state cell has been constructed, the device could demonstrate only a typical characteristic J–V curve of a solar cell with extremely small current, voltage and very poor fill factor.36 Previously, it has been reported that the conductivity of MOFs can be increased drastically by molecular doping with electron acceptors.40,41 Based on the above concept, very recently it has been demonstrated successfully for the first time that thin films of MOFs treated with iodine can be used as sensitizers to harvest solar radiation in TiO2 based liquid junction solar cells.35–37 Although the efficiency of MOF based devices is still lower than that of the current state-of-art dye sensitized solar cells, endless combinations of a variety of metal ions and organic linkers are possible to make MOFs with different electronic and light harvesting properties, which can improve the power conversion efficiencies of the photovoltaic devices. As we can see in previous studies35,37,39 in which different light harvesting metal centres are used, for example replacing Cu-ions by Pd-ions or Ru-ions in the frameworks, the photovoltaic performance of the device has been enhanced markedly. However, considering the cost of noble and rare metal-precursors, the search for alternative metal ion-precursors, which are commonly available and are low cost, is highly desirable. Therefore, such investigation on solar cells is expected to propel this emerging field further into a new realm in which far more efficient photoactive MOF materials suitable for solar cells may be accessed. In an attempt to explore MOFs suitable for the light harvesting absorbing layer of solar cells, the Co2+ metal ion has been selected here from the series of d-transition metals due to its suitable color for absorption of visible light and suitable electronic configuration (i.e., [Ar] 3d74s2) for establishing the d–d transition to create electron–hole pairs. In order to see the influence of pore size of the frameworks on accommodation of iodine guest molecules, two dicarboxylic acid ligands with different molecular sizes, viz. benzenedicarboxylic acid and naphthalenedicarboxylic acid, were used to grow cobalt-based MOF layers. To study the frameworks as light harvesting layers, a fully devised TiO2 based liquid junction solar cell was constructed by sensitizing the TiO2 mesoporous film electrode with cobalt(II) benzenedicarboxylate (denoted here as Co-BDC) or cobalt(II) 2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylic acid (denoted here as Co-NDC) using a layer-by-layer (LBL) technique. Meanwhile, this communication also demonstrates that trapping of iodine into the frameworks leads to the oxidative hole doping of the frameworks, and thereby the conductivity of the frameworks is improved significantly. As a result of improved conductivity, the frameworks facilitate the transfer of photo-exited electrons from CoII metal centres to the TiO2 layer by reducing the charge transfer resistance across the TiO2/MOFs/electrolyte interface. Thus, the charge transfer across MOFs/TiO2 interfaces enabled us to obtain a solar-to electric power conversion efficiency of 1.12%, showing the potential application of MOFs in photovoltaic devices.
2. Experimental
Synthesis of bulk Co–MOFs
A mixture of an equal volume of 0.137 mM Co(NO3)2·3H2O and 0.137 mM terephthalic acid in a 1:4 volume ratio of DMF and ethanol was stirred for 30 min and heated under solvothermal conditions at 373.15 K for 15 h. Similarly, a mixture of an equal volume of 0.344 mM Co(NO3)2·3H2O and 0.115 mM 2,6-NDC (2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylic acid) in DMF was heated under solvothermal conditions at 453.15 K for 3 days. After the reaction, all precipitate was filtered out, washed thoroughly with DMF, and dried at 50 °C for 3 h. These bulk MOFs were used as the reference material to characterize the MOF films prepared by using a layer-by-layer (LBL) technique.
Preparation of the hole blocking layer (HBL)
An approximately 60 nm thick TiO2 HBL was coated on cleaned fluorine-doped tin oxide-coated (FTO) glasses (Pilkington, 7 Ω sq−1) by spreading a few drops of 0.15 M titanium-diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) in 1-butanol and spinning the FTO glass at 2000 rpm for 30 s. The spin coated HBL sample was annealed at 500 °C for 20 min.
Preparation, sensitization and doping of the TiO2 photoanode
As a photoanode for a solar cell construction, an about 17 μm thick mesoporous film of TiO2 was prepared on a HBL coated FTO glass by the doctor blade method using a commercially available TiO2 nanoparticle paste (TTP-20N, ENB Korea) and the film was sintered at 450 °C for 30 min.
MOF layers were grown on TiO2 modified FTO for 20 LBL cycles. Each cycle consisted of dipping the TiO2 film for 1 h into 0.1 M benzenedicarboxylic acid or 2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylic acid in DMF solution maintained at 120 °C, followed by washing the film by dipping in DMF solution and subsequently, dipping into 0.1 M Co(NO3)2·3H2O in DMF solution maintained at 120 °C for another 1 h and washing it again with DMF. Iodine treatment of the framework films was performed by dipping the film into a solution of 0.1 M I2 in acetonitrile for 2 h at 50 °C followed by washing the film thoroughly with acetonitrile in order to remove the physically adsorbed iodine on the surface of the MOFs.
Characterization of MOF films
MOF films were characterized using FE-SEM, UV/visible absorption spectrophotometry (VARIAN & CARY-100 Conc) and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy (ILC Technology, Inc & ISS PC-1). The structural properties were characterized using an X-ray diffractometer (XRD; Rigaku & D/MAX-2500H). Cyclic voltammetry was performed using a BAS 100B Electrochemical Workstation. Carrier concentration, mobility and other semiconducting properties were measured using a Hall-effect measuring instrument (HMS-300: ECOPIA) at 25 °C. The solar-to-electric power conversion efficiency of the devices was measured by incorporating MOF-sensitized TiO2 electrodes into a thin layer sandwich-type cell. A transparent Pt-coated FTO was used as the counter electrode, which was prepared by drop casting 0.04 M isopropanol solution of chloroplatinic acid on FTO followed by heating at 450 °C for 20 min. The cell performance was measured by irradiation with 1 sun (100 mW cm−2) of white light using a solar simulator (PEC-L01, Peccell), and measuring current using a Keithley 2400 source meter. The redox electrolyte used in the present investigation consisted of 0.6 M 1,2-dimethyl-3-hexyl-imidazolium iodide, 0.04 M I2, 0.5 M 4-tertbutylpyridine and 0.05 M guanidinium thiocyanate in a mixture of acetonitrile and valeronitrile (85/15 = v/v%). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectra were obtained with an Impedance Analyser (COMPACTSTAT: IVIUM Technologies) in the frequency range of 10−2 to 106 Hz, and impedance parameters were determined by fitting of the impedance spectrum using Z-view software. The measurements of EIS were carried out at open-circuit potential under 1 sun illumination conditions.
3. Results and discussion

Fig. 1 shows top surface and cross-sectional SEM views of Co-BDC and Co-NDC films prepared by the LBL method on amine functionalized glass substrates. The Co-BDC film looks like a fused plate like structure, whereas the Co-NDC film looks like an assembly of nanorods. The XRD patterns of the LBL films of MOFs are shown in Fig. 2, which reveal that the films are composed of typical mesoporous crystalline 3-D solids. As references, XRD patterns of the bulk powder of Co-BDC and Co-NDC frameworks synthesized by using a previously reported solvothermal process42,43 are also shown in Fig. 2. These reference XRD patterns of the bulk MOFs have been used here for finger-print characterization of the LBL films. As evident in Fig. 2, the well matched XRD patterns of the bulk powder and the respective LBL films of the frameworks (sample (a) vs. (b), and sample (c) vs. (d)) confirm that the LBL films are composed of Co-BDC and Co-NDC frameworks.
 Fig. 1  Top SEM view of MOF LBL films on the amine functionalized glass substrate. (A) Co-BDC and (B) Co-NDC. Cross-sectional SEM images of (C) Co-BDC film and (D) Co-NDC film. 
 Fig. 2  XRD patterns of Co-based MOFs. (a) Co-BDC LBL film, (b) Co-BDC bulk powder, (c) Co-NDC LBL film, and (d) Co-NDC bulk powder. 
For the oxidative hole doping of the frameworks, I2 was used here as an oxidant, and oxidation of the frameworks was carried out by immersing the MOF films in iodine solution. When the above LBL films of MOFs were immersed into I2/acetonitrile solution, and subsequent washing of the films with acetonitrile was performed, no distinguished visual color of the films before and after I2 treatment was noticed. However, the UV/visible absorption spectra of the films (Fig. 3(A)) reveal that apart from the characteristic absorption peak due to the d–d transition of cobalt in MOFs at 548 nm, an additional characteristic absorption peak of iodine at about 438 nm can be observed in the case of I2 treated films. This finding suggests the capturing of iodine molecules inside the porous frameworks. Confinement of iodine molecules inside the frameworks from I2/acetonitrile solution was also confirmed by analyzing the solution spectrophotometrically, which revealed the accommodation of 0.056 molecules of I2 per unit cell of the Co-BDC film and 0.348 molecules of I2 per unit cell of the Co-NDC film. These MOFs consist of cobalt ions co-coordinating with organic linkers and forming the network of infinite chains. Thus, the network chains form porous sites and the iodine guest molecules are expected to be confined to the porous sites surrounded by aromatic rings. The concentration of the confined iodine depends on the unit cell and pore dimensions of the frameworks, which are in fact controlled by the molecular dimension and the configuration of the coordinating moiety of the ligands that binds the metal cations in the frameworks. Owing to this, metal cations coordinating with benzene tricarboxylic acid (BTC), naphthalenedicarboxylic acid (NDC), and benzene dicarboxylic acid (BDC) ligands produce frameworks with different dimensions of the unit cells and pores (decreasing order in these 3 examples).43 As a result, the iodine concentration confined per unit cell of the Cu–BTC (HKUST-1), Co-NDC and Co-BDC frameworks should be different (decreasing order). The confined iodine inside the frameworks can interact with metal cations or ligands depending on their redox potentials. In either case, the guest–host interactions result in cooperative charge transfer, and hence facilitate the charge transportation within the frameworks. Due to the unfavourable redox potential of CoII and iodine behaving as donor–acceptor couples, the incorporation of iodine into the MOFs leads to intermolecular interactions between iodine molecules and π-electrons from the aromatic rings of the ligands. Thereby, it induces oxidative doping of holes into the frameworks.44 As expected, the as-prepared MOF films are electrical insulators. However, after iodine treatment, the Hall-effect measurements demonstrated the p-type doping with a carrier concentration of +1.14 × 1011 and +5.48 × 1011 cm−3, and a hole mobility of 21.2 and 87.6 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the Co-BDC and Co-NDC films, respectively. The insulating behavior of the pristine MOF films and subsequent improvement of the electrical conductivity of the films after hole doping has also been confirmed from two-probe conductivity measurements (Fig. 3(B)).
 Fig. 3  (A) UV/visible absorption spectra, and (B) two-probe conductivity measurements of the Co-based MOF LBL film on an amine functionalized glass slide. Sample size: 1 × 1 cm−2. 
The observed relatively better conductivity of the Co-NDC film could be due to the confinement of a higher number of iodine molecules and their contribution to the interaction with π-electrons from the naphthalene ring of the frameworks. The observed conduction of electricity in the dark generally assists photoconduction of the films during illumination. However, in addition to the dark conductivity of the MOF film, the optoelectronic properties of the film are the key for controlling the light harvesting characteristic of the film. In other words, efficient separation of charges and their movement across the interfacial region between MOFs and the electron carrier are the key factors that determine if the MOFs can work as light-harvesting sensitizers in solar cells. Generally, MOFs comprised of metal cations with the closed d-electronic configuration, for example Zn2+, hardly absorb visible light. However, as a light harvesting active material, it must absorb solar radiation in the critical visible to near-IR region that comprises most of the photons incident on the earth. In such cases, the light harvesting characteristic of the film is ligand centred. Therefore, as an efficient light sensitizer, MOFs should consist of metal centres with the partially filled d-orbitals, especially eg d-orbitals such as Ru2+ and Co2+ (d7 electronic configuration). Although Cu2+ in Cu–BTC frameworks has the partially filled d-orbitals (d9 electronic configuration), it absorbs light only near the IR region.37 In contrast, Co-NDC and Co-BDC frameworks consist of Co2+ with the same d7 electronic configuration as that of the Ru2+, which constitutes the most efficient light sensitizing ruthenium dye used in dye sensitized solar cells. Moreover, the electronic absorption spectra of the Co-NDC and Co-BDC films are similar to that of the Ru–MOF film.39 This is the main reason that the frameworks with Co2+ metal centres have been investigated in the present study. To explore the feasibility of using the above Co–MOFs as light-harvesting absorber layers in photovoltaic devices, first of all, their optoelectronic properties were investigated. Fig. S1† shows the energy gap of hole doped Co-BDC and Co-NDC frameworks estimated using the electronic absorption spectrum shown in Fig. 3(A), which elucidates the gap of about 2.27 eV. From the onset of the ground state oxidation peak in the cyclic voltammogram, the HOMO energy state is estimated to be −6.22 eV below vacuum (Fig. S2†). Thus, the LUMO energy states of the Co-BDC and Co-NDC frameworks are calculated to be about −3.95 eV. Based on the energy gap and the HOMO and LUMO levels, the suitability of the Co-BDC and Co-NDC frameworks as light-harvesting sensitizers in a TiO2 based photovoltaic cell can be considered. To demonstrate the validity of the above assumption for the suitability of the above MOFs as light-harvesting sensitizers, the mesoporous film of TiO2 was sensitized with the LBL film of Co-BDC and Co-NDC frameworks and liquid junction solar cell devices with the I3−/I− redox electrolyte were constructed. Fig. 4(A–C) show the top and cross-sectional SEM views of the mesoporous TiO2 film before and after sensitization with MOFs in 20 LBL cycles.
 Fig. 4  Top SEM view of (A) TiO2/FTO, (B) Co-BDC/TiO2/FTO and (C) Co-NDC/TiO2/FTO. Insets: cross-sectional SEM images of the respective films. (D) XRD patterns of (a) Co-BDC bulk MOF, (b) Co-BDC sensitized TiO2 film, (c) Co-NDC bulk MOF, and (d) Co-NDC sensitized TiO2 film. (E) UV/visible absorption spectra of (a) TiO2/FTO substrate, (b) pristine Co-BDC/TiO2 layer, (c) pristine Co-NDC/TiO2 layer, (d) I2 treated Co-BDC/TiO2 layer, and (e) I2 treated Co-NDC/TiO2. 
The change in the morphology of the surface and cross-sectional views of the TiO2/MOF films clearly suggest the deposition of MOFs throughout the TiO2 film. The TiO2/MOF films were further characterized using the X-ray diffraction technique. In addition to X-rays diffracted from TiO2 and the FTO-substrate, well matching characteristic diffraction signals to those from pure Co-BDC and Co-NDC films in Fig. 4(D) confirm the deposition of Co-BDC and Co-NDC into the mesoporous TiO2 film. As discussed above, the MOFs of the TiO2/MOF films were treated with iodine in order to dope the frameworks with holes, and thereby to improve the conductivity of the frameworks. Like the case of iodine treated MOF films (Fig. 3), similar characteristic absorption peaks of iodine are observed in Co-BDC and Co-NDC layers grown on the TiO2 film (Fig. 4(E)). Further, the electron transfer phenomenon from the above MOF layers to the TiO2 layer in a TiO2/MOF film was studied using photoluminescence quenching. Fig. 5(A) shows the quantitative luminescence quenching of about 97% after iodine doping of the frameworks. However, no quenching phenomenon is observed when the frameworks were not doped. This result clearly suggests the importance of iodine treatment of the frameworks for injecting photo-generated electrons into TiO2, and the finding reveals that an easy electron transportation path from the frameworks to the TiO2 layer can be established only after iodine treatment of the frameworks. The observed efficient interfacial charge transfer after iodine treatment of the frameworks can be ascribed to the improved conductivity of the frameworks by hole doping. In a classical dye-sensitized-solar cell, only a mono layer of dye molecules is anchored to TiO2 because thick layers of dye cannot transfer photo-generated electrons from one dye layer to another due to the insulator property of the dye, and thereby hinder the electron transportation to the TiO2 film from the dye layers other than the first underneath layer anchored to the TiO2 surface. In contrast, like in a perovskite based solar cell,45 thick MOF layers could be deposited on the sensitized TiO2 film due to the improved electrical conductivity of the frameworks after iodine treatment. However, appropriate assembly of MOFs into TiO2 films can drastically affect the electron transportation behaviour and this is crucial for their applications. Based on our previous experience,37–39 and on the basis of hit-and-trial on photocurrent–voltage (J–V) curve measurements, 20 LBL sensitization cycles of MOFs were optimized. Fig. 5(B) shows J–V curves of the TiO2/MOF (20 LBL cycles) based devices with and without iodine treatment. The detailed photovoltaic parameters obtained from the J–V curves are tabulated in Table 1. The Co-NDC absorber layer based device has demonstrated the short circuit current (Jsc) of 2.56 mA cm−2, and the power conversion efficiency (Eff) of 1.12%. Similarly, the Co-BDC absorber layer based device has demonstrated the Jsc of 2.13 mA cm−2, and the Eff of 0.96%. In contrast, the device consisting of MOF films without iodine treatment has exhibited only a Jsc of 0.04 mA cm−2 and an Eff of 0.003%.
 Fig. 5  (A) Emission spectra of the photoanode consisting of Co-based MOFs LBL/TiO2/FTO. (a) Pristine Co-NDC/TiO2/FTO, (b) pristine Co-BDC/TiO2/FTO, (c) iodine treated Co-NDC/TiO2/FTO, and (d) iodine treated Co-BDC/TiO2/FTO. (B) Current–voltage characteristic of solar cells consisting of the photoanodes shown in (A). 
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters of the solar cell with a photo-anode of the TiO2/Co-based MOFs LBL film. (a) Iodine treated Co-NDC/TiO2/FTO, (b) iodine treated Co-BDC/TiO2/FTO, (c) pristine Co-NDC/TiO2/FTO, and (d) pristine Co-BDC/TiO2/FTO




Sample

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF

E
ff (%)




(a)
0.63
2.56
0.63
1.12


(b)
0.62
2.13
0.62
0.96


(c)
0.24
0.04
0.29
0.003


(d)
0.23
0.04
0.29
0.003




Previously, it has been demonstrated that the TiO2 film photoanode without any sensitizers can exhibit a small photocurrent.37 The photovoltaic performance of this pristine MOF sensitized device is still approximately 10 times poorer than that of the device consisting of a mesoporous TiO2 film as the photoanode without any sensitizers. The observed small currents in these two cases are almost certainly due to photolysis of triiodide and creation of iodine radicals that can then undergo redox reactions and generate small photocurrents called photogalvanic current. The further reduction of photogalvanic current of the TiO2 film photoanode after layering undoped MOFs is due to the blocking effect of the MOFs as they are insulators at the undoped state. The above observed better cell performance of the device with the Co-NDC sensitizing layer is also supported by the higher external quantum efficiency of the device (Fig. 6(A)), which can be ascribed to the higher conductivity caused by the confinement of larger number of iodine molecules into the MOFs. It should be noted in Fig. 6(A) that the pristine MOFs (Co-BDC as well as Co-NDC) as the sensitizing layer show zero external quantum efficiency of the device. This finding clearly suggests that beyond absorption of light, charge mobility is the key, which controls the photo-induced current.
 Fig. 6  (A) Incident-photon-to-current efficiency of the solar cell with the light harvesting layer of Co-based MOF LBL/TiO2/FTO. (a) Iodine treated Co-NDC/TiO2/FTO, (b) iodine treated Co-BDC/TiO2/FTO, and (c) pristine Co–MOF/TiO2/FTO. (B) Nyquist plots of the cells under open circuit conditions under 1 sun illumination: (a) iodine treated Co-NDC/TiO2/FTO, (b) iodine treated Co-BDC/TiO2/FTO, (c) pristine Co-NDC/TiO2/FTO, and (d) pristine Co-BDC/TiO2/FTO. 
Note that the power conversion efficiency of 1.12% demonstrated by the Co-NDC based solar cell in Fig. 5(B) is about 2.5 times higher than the similar cell consisting of an epitaxial Pd–porphyrin ligand based Zn–MOFs onto FTO glass as the photoanode.35 However, this conversion efficiency is enhanced by 4.3 times than that of the previously reported Cu–BTC based solar cell,37 and it is comparable to the Ru–MOF based similar device.39 As explained earlier, Cu–BTC frameworks absorb light only near IR. In contrast, Co2+ metal centres of the Co-NDC and Co-BDC frameworks have the same d7 electronic configuration and similar electronic absorption spectra to that of the Ru–MOF frameworks. In addition, the energy gap between the LUMO level of MOFs and the conduction band of TiO2 is smaller in the case of the Co–MOF sensitized device than the case of the Cu–BTC sensitized device. This accelerates the extraction of photoexcited electrons to the FTO electrode, and thereby it minimizes the charge carrier recombinations. As a result, the fill factor of the Co–MOF sensitized device is larger than that of the Cu–BTC sensitized device. Due to the above reasons, the overall photovoltaic performance of the Co–MOF based devices is much better than that of the Cu–BTC based device, and it is closer to that of the Ru–MOF based device.
As discussed above, the electronic property especially the charge transportation rate in the iodine treated MOFs can be expected to be enhanced significantly due to the interaction of iodine with π-electrons from the aromatic rings of the ligands. This is the key factor contributing to the remarkable enhancement of cell performance after iodine treatment of the MOF sensitizer shown in Table 1. As the optoelectronic properties of the Co-BDC and Co-NDC frameworks are similar, the devices based on these MOFs as sensitizers show the more or less similar photovoltaic performance in Table 1. A little difference in Voc and FF exhibited by these two Co–MOF based devices could be due to little difference in their conductivity shown in Fig. 3(B). In contrast, regardless of the types of Co–MOFs, iodine treatment of the MOFs significantly enhanced the photovoltaic performance of the device. To elucidate the huge difference in the above device performance exhibited by the iodine treated and pristine MOF based devices, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed. Fig. 6(B) shows the Nyquist plots of the above cells measured under an open circuit potential. Table S1† summarizes the quantitatively fitted results based on the equivalent circuit shown in the inset of Fig. 6(B).
Here, Rs refers to the total series resistance of the cell. R1 and R2 are the charge transfer resistances of the interfaces of the counter electrode/electrolyte and photoanode/electrolyte interfaces, respectively. In this investigation, as Rs and R1 under the same experimental conditions remain virtually constant, the differences in cell performance shown in Fig. 6(B) are mainly due to R2 values, which are controlled by the rate of charge transportation across the TiO2/MOFs/electrolyte interface. The size of semicircles in Fig. 6(B) shows the tendency of increasing R2 value indicating the same trend of overall charge transfer resistance in the samples (Table S1†). For example, the R2 values of the FTO/TiO2/Co-NDC with and without iodine treatment are estimated to be 32.28 and 154.81 Ω, respectively. The significantly higher R2 value of the pristine MOF-based device might be due to the fact that the electron transfer from the pristine frameworks to the TiO2 layer hardly takes place. These results are in line with the result exhibited by the photoluminescence quenching experiment (Fig. 5(A)). As a result of higher R2 values, charge carrier recombination rate should be higher and hence, the pristine MOF-based device exhibited only a power conversion efficiency of 0.003% (Fig. 5(B) and Table 1). Thus, from the above findings, the following charge transfer mechanism can be proposed: upon illumination, electrons from the t2g state of the CoII metal centres undergo d–d transitions to the eg state followed by the metal to ligand charge transfer (MLCT). Finally, they are injected into the TiO2 conduction band and into the external circuit through the FTO electrode as shown in Fig. S3.† The stability of the device is also investigated briefly, and the results are shown in Fig. S4.† The stability results reveal that the devices are fairly stable under the given operating conditions.
4. Conclusions
In summary, light harvesting layers of cobalt-based MOFs were synthesised using a layer-by-layer technique, and the layers were employed successfully as light-harvesting absorber films in fully devised TiO2-based solar cells. After hole doping, the MOF based cell has demonstrated a short circuit current of 2.56 mA cm−2 and a power conversion efficiency of 1.12%, which is comparable to those of the Ru–MOF based similar device, but the efficiency is enhanced by 2.5 times and 4.3 times that of the previously reported Pd–porphyrin ligand@Zn–MOF and Cu–MOF based solar cells, respectively. Photoluminescence quenching and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy demonstrate that the hole doping of MOFs is the key to facilitate the charge transfer across the TiO2/MOF interface. Based on the fact that a variety of metal ions and organic linkers are available to give unlimited possibilities of combination for developing MOFs with different electronic and light harvesting properties, the power conversion efficiencies of this sort of novel photovoltaic device can be further enhanced in future.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the KIST Institutional Program (2E23964), and the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (2013009768). One of the authors (N. K. Shrestha) acknowledges “The Korean Federation of Science and Technology Societies” for the support received under Brain Pool program.
Notes and references
S. T. Meek, J. A. Greathouse and M. D. Allendorf, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, M. Eddaoudi, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Nature, 1999, 402, 276 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kitagawa, R. Kitaura and S. Noro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Férey, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 191 RSC .
U. Czaja, N. Trukhan and U. Muller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1284 RSC .
L. Wen, J. Zhao, K. Lv, Y. Wu, K. Deng, X. Leng and D. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 1603 CAS .
M. Eddaoudi, J. N. Rosi, D. Vodak, J. Wachter, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2002, 295, 469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, Y. Yue, G. Qian and B. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Kuppler, D. J. Timmons, Q.-R. Fang, J.-R. Li, T. A. Makal, M. D. Young, D. Yuan, D. Zhao, W. Zhuang and H. C. Zhou, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2009, 253, 3042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Lee, O. K. Farha, J. Roberts, K. A. Scheidt, S. T. Nguyen and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1450 RSC .
L. E. Kreno, K. Leong, O. K. Farha, M. Allendorf, R. P. Van Duyne and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fateeva, P. A. Chater, C. P. Ireland, A. A. Tahir, Y. Z. Khimyak, P. V. Wiper, J. R. Darwent and M. J. Rosseinsky, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Horiuchi, T. Toyao, M. Saito, K. Mochizuki, M. Iwata, H. Higashimura, M. Anpo and M. Matsuoka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20848 CAS .
Y. Kataoka, K. Sato, Y. Miyazaki, K. Masuda, H. Tanaka, S. Naito and W. Mori, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 397 CAS .
C. Wang, Z. Xie, K. E. DeKrafft and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Silva, I. Luz, F. X. Llabres, I. Xamena, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 11133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Wang, K. J. Deng, K. L. Lv, C. G. Wang, L. L. Wen and D. F. Li, CrystEngComm, 2009, 11, 1442 RSC .
M. C. Das, H. Xu, Z. Wang, G. Srinivas, W. Zhou, Y. F. Yue, V. N. Nesterov, G. Qian and B. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11715 RSC .
D. Y. Lee, S. J. Yoon, N. K. Shrestha, S.-H. Lee, H. Ahn and S.-H. Han, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 153, 163–165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Díaz, M. G. Orcajo, J. A. Botas, G. Calleja and G. Palma, Mater. Lett., 2012, 68, 126 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Y. Lee, D. V. Shinde, E.-K. Kim, W. Lee, I.-W. Oh, N. K. Shrestha, J. K. Lee and S.-H. Han, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2013, 171, 53–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Choi, H. M. Jeong, J. H. Park, Y.-B. Zhang, J. K. Kang and O. M. Yaghi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Smaldone, R. S. Forgan, H. Furukawa, J. J. Gassensmith, A. M. Z. Slawin, O. M. Yaghi and J. F. Stoddart, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Horcajada, R. Gref, T. Baati, P. K. Allan, G. Maurin, P. Couvreur, G. Férey, R. E. Morris and C. Serre, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1232–1268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. McKinlay, R. E. Morris, P. Horcajada, G. Ferey, R. Gref and S. C. Couvreur, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6260 CrossRef PubMed .
F. X. L. I. Xamena, A. Corma and H. Garcia, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 80 Search PubMed .
C. A. Kent, D. Liu, L. Ma, J. M. Papanikolas, T. J. Meyer and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. V. Rao, K. K. R. Datta, M. Eswaramoorthy and S. J. George, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 2184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jin, H. Son, O. K. Farha, G. P. Wiederrecht and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lu, O. K. Farha, W. Zhang, F. Huo and J. T. Hupp, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Zhan, Q. Kuang, J.-Z. Zhou, X.-J. Kong, Z.-X. Xie and L.-S. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Kent, B. P. Mehl, L. Ma, J. M. Papanikolas, T. J. Meyer and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, A. Pang, C. Wang and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17259 RSC .
Y. Li, C. Chen, X. Sun, J. Dou and M. Wei, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, W. Zhou, J. Liu, I. Howard, G. Kilibarda, S. Schlabach, D. Coupry, M. Addicoat, S. Yoneda, Y. Tsutsui, T. Sakurai, S. Seki, Z. Wang, P. Lindemann, E. Redel, T. Heine and C. Wçll, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Lopez, A. Dhakshinamoorthy, B. Ferrer, P. Atienzar, M. Alvaro and H. Garcia, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22200 CAS .
D. Y. Lee, D. V. Shinde, S. J. Yoon, K. N. Cho, W. Lee, N. K. Shrestha and S.-H. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16328 CAS .
D. Y. Lee, C. Y. Shin, S. J. Yoon, H. Y. Lee, W. Lee, N. K. Shrestha, J. K. Lee and S.-H. Han, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3930 Search PubMed .
D. Y. Lee, E.-K. Kim, C. Y. Shin, D. V. Shinde, W. Lee, N. K. Shrestha, J. K. Lee and S.-H. Han, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 12037 RSC .
M.-H. Zeng, Q.-X. Wang, Y.-X. Tan, S. Hu, H.-X. Zhao, L.-S. Long and M. Kurmoo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kobayashi, B. Jacobs, M. D. Allendorf and J. R. Long, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4120 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Lee, H. J. Kim, Y. K. Lee, K. Park, J.-H. Son and Y.-U. Kwon, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2003, 353, 151 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Rosi, J. Kim, M. Eddaoudi, B. Chen, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yagi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Lee, E.-K. Kim, N. K. Shrestha, D. W. Boukhvalov, J. K. Lee and S.-H. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18501 CAS .
I. Lim, E.-K. Kim, S. A. Patil, D. Y. Ahn, W. Lee, N. K. Shrestha, J. K. Lee, W. K. Seok, C.-G. Cho and S.-H. Han, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 55321 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta07180aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Top SEM view of MOF LBL films on the amine functionalized glass substrate. (A) Co-BDC and (B) Co-NDC. Cross-sectional SEM images of (C) Co-BDC film and (D) Co-NDC film.	 

 	Fig. 2  XRD patterns of Co-based MOFs. (a) Co-BDC LBL film, (b) Co-BDC bulk powder, (c) Co-NDC LBL film, and (d) Co-NDC bulk powder.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) UV/visible absorption spectra, and (B) two-probe conductivity measurements of the Co-based MOF LBL film on an amine functionalized glass slide. Sample size: 1 × 1 cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 4  Top SEM view of (A) TiO2/FTO, (B) Co-BDC/TiO2/FTO and (C) Co-NDC/TiO2/FTO. Insets: cross-sectional SEM images of the respective films. (D) XRD patterns of (a) Co-BDC bulk MOF, (b) Co-BDC sensitized TiO2 film, (c) Co-NDC bulk MOF, and (d) Co-NDC sensitized TiO2 film. (E) UV/visible absorption spectra of (a) TiO2/FTO substrate, (b) pristine Co-BDC/TiO2 layer, (c) pristine Co-NDC/TiO2 layer, (d) I2 treated Co-BDC/TiO2 layer, and (e) I2 treated Co-NDC/TiO2.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Emission spectra of the photoanode consisting of Co-based MOFs LBL/TiO2/FTO. (a) Pristine Co-NDC/TiO2/FTO, (b) pristine Co-BDC/TiO2/FTO, (c) iodine treated Co-NDC/TiO2/FTO, and (d) iodine treated Co-BDC/TiO2/FTO. (B) Current–voltage characteristic of solar cells consisting of the photoanodes shown in (A).	 

(a)	0.63	2.56	0.63	1.12
(b)	0.62	2.13	0.62	0.96
(c)	0.24	0.04	0.29	0.003
(d)	0.23	0.04	0.29	0.003

 	Fig. 6  (A) Incident-photon-to-current efficiency of the solar cell with the light harvesting layer of Co-based MOF LBL/TiO2/FTO. (a) Iodine treated Co-NDC/TiO2/FTO, (b) iodine treated Co-BDC/TiO2/FTO, and (c) pristine Co–MOF/TiO2/FTO. (B) Nyquist plots of the cells under open circuit conditions under 1 sun illumination: (a) iodine treated Co-NDC/TiO2/FTO, (b) iodine treated Co-BDC/TiO2/FTO, (c) pristine Co-NDC/TiO2/FTO, and (d) pristine Co-BDC/TiO2/FTO.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta07180a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
