The effect of B-site doping in all-inorganic CsPbI x Br 3−x absorbers on the performance and stability of perovskite photovoltaics  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE01070D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE01070D
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 372-403The effect of B-site doping in all-inorganic CsPbIxBr3−x absorbers on the performance and stability of perovskite photovoltaics

        
          
            Erdi 
            Akman†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Teoman 
            Ozturk†
c, 
      
        
          
            Wanchun 
            Xiang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Faranak 
            Sadegh
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Daniel 
            Prochowicz
          
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Mohammad Mahdi 
            Tavakoli
          
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Pankaj 
            Yadav
          
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Mucahit 
            Yilmaz
          
        
      h and 

        
          
            Seckin 
            Akin
          
          
        
      *ai
aLaboratory of Photovoltaic Cells (PVcells), Karamanoglu Mehmetbey University, 70200, Karaman, Turkey
bScientific and Technological Research and Application Center, Karamanoglu Mehmetbey University, Karaman, 70200, Turkey
cDepartment of Physics, Selcuk University, 42130, Konya, Turkey
dKey Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry, National Ministry of Education, Shaanxi Engineering Laboratory for Advanced Energy Technology, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi’an 710062, P. R. China
eInstitute of Physical Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Kasprzaka 44/52, 01-224 Warsaw, Poland
fDepartment of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
gDepartment of Solar Energy, School of Technology, Pandit Deendayal Energy University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat 382007, India
hDepartment of Fundamental Sciences, Necmettin Erbakan University, 42090, Konya, Turkey
iDepartment of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, Necmettin Erbakan University, 42090, Konya, Turkey. E-mail: seckinakin@erbakan.edu.tr
Received 
      31st March 2022
    , Accepted 23rd November 2022First published on 8th December 2022AbstractDespite the impressive efficiency of perovskite solar cells (PSCs), their operational stability is still hindered by the thermodynamic instability of the hybrid organic–inorganic absorber layer with ABX3 structure (A: organic/inorganic cation, B: metal cation, X: halogen anion and mixtures thereof). Due to the hygroscopic and volatile nature of the organic cations, i.e., methylammonium (MA+), they show very poor stability not only against thermal stress but also moisture. Therefore, a photoactive material free from organic components could offer great opportunities to prolong the operational stability of devices. In this context, all inorganic CsPbIxBr3−x perovskites are meticulously developed in terms of their structural/thermal stability and have triggered increasing research interest due to great prospects in the commercialization of perovskite technology. However, besides relatively low performance, the poor phase stability of inorganic perovskites associated with lattice strain and vacancies still requires a thorough understanding and permanent solutions for tackling these problems. In this comprehensive review, the recently reported B-site doping strategy in inorganic CsPbIxBr3−x perovskite thin films, which has been elucidated to passivate the defects, tune the grain orientation, and enhance the lifetime of charge-carriers, is presented based on different B-site elements belonging to group IIIA, IVA and VA, alkaline-earth, transition, and lanthanide metals. Solutions for confronting these current problems are elaborated and an outlook on further strategies is given.
Erdi Akman
Erdi Akman is a senior researcher at Scientific and Technological Research & Application Center, Karamanoglu Mehmetbey University, Karaman, Turkey. He received his BS degree in Physics Department of Tokat Gaziosmanpasa University and PhD degree in Mechanical Engineering Department of Selcuk University in Turkey. His current research focus is developing high efficiency and stable perovskite solar cells, low-cost dye-sensitized solar cells, and quantum dots solar cells.
Teoman Ozturk
Teoman Ozturk is an Associate Professor at the Physics Department of Selcuk University, Turkey. Obtaining his PhD degree in 2012, he earned an international postdoctoral research fellowship from TUBITAK and worked as a visiting scholar at the University of Michigan during the years 2013–2014. His current research interests are nanotechnology and solar energy including dye sensitized solar cells, photocatalysis, photodiodes, and perovskite solar cells.
Daniel Prochowicz
Daniel Prochowicz is an Associate Professor at the Institute of Physical Chemistry of Polish Academy of Sciences. His current research interests are in the field of new energy materials, focusing on functional nanostructured materials and their applications in perovskite solar cells and perovskite photodetectors.
Mohammad Mahdi Tavakoli
Mohammad Mahdi Tavakoli is a scientist at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He received his PhDs from Sharif University of Technology and Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in the fields of materials science & engineering and electrical engineering respectively. His research, which combines the interdisciplinary fields of engineering, chemistry, nanomaterials, and applied physics, aims to bridge the gap between nanotechnology and microelectronics to develop disruptive technologies for the fabrication of optoelectronic devices. Currently, his research has focused on the applications of 2D materials such as graphene in the flexible, large-scale and ultra-lightweight optoelectronic devices by considering roll-to-roll processing.
Pankaj Yadav
Pankaj Yadav is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Solar Energy, Pandit Deendayal Energy University, India. His current research interests range from thin film devices, solar photovoltaics, perovskite solar cells, hydrogen generation, fuel cells, energy generation and storage devices, and electroanalytical characterizations.
Seckin Akin
Seckin Akin pursued his PhD from Eskisehir Technical University in the field of perovskite solar cells. During this period, he was a visiting researcher at Prof. Michael Grätzel’s laboratory at École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL, Switzerland). Currently, he is Assoc. Prof. at Necmettin Erbakan University and head of the Laboratory of Photovoltaic Cells. In his research career, he has focused on a wide variety of novel materials for light energy harvesting. He was awarded by the National Leader Researchers Program (2020) and the prestigious Science Academy’s Young Scientist Prize in Metallurgical and Materials Engineering (2021).

Broader context
Hitherto, all-inorganic CsPbIxBr3−x perovskite materials have been a promising research subject in emerging perovskite solar cells (PSCs) due to their excellent thermal stability and rapid progression in photovoltaic performance. However, there are still some foremost challenges such as limited absorption range, poor phase stability, and serious defect-traps, hindering further developments of inorganic perovskite materials. Recently, partial substitution of Pb2+ (B-site cation) with other metal ions has been shown to tune the energy levels, align the tolerance factor, and reduce the defect-states of CsPbIxBr3−x perovskite thin films. In line with these studies, the B-site doping strategy can be considered as one of the most important lattice engineering approaches to not only improve the photovoltaic performance but also prolong the stability of inorganic PSCs. This review provides a comprehensive and systematic overview of the recent progress in improving the photovoltaic performance and stability of all-inorganic CsPbIxBr3−x-based PSCs through the B-site doping strategy. We certainly believe that these impressive advances provide a deep understanding of the impacts of B-site doping on the optoelectronic properties and crystal/electronic structures of CsPbIxBr3−x perovskite thin films as well as lead to convenient attempts to achieve highly efficient and operationally stable photovoltaic devices.

1. Introduction
1.1. The development of all-inorganic perovskite absorbers
Owing to the intriguing opto-electronic properties of hybrid organic–inorganic metal–halide perovskite absorbers, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have reached a certified efficiency over 25% within the last decade while it took nearly 30 years for rival silicon (Si) technologies to witness this milestone.1 Since the breakthrough in 2012,2 PSCs have rapidly evolved and matured by modulating device architectures and fabrication processes.3–9 This adventure started with the first study based on methylammonium lead iodide, CH3NH3PbI3 (or MAPbI3), the most extensively investigated composition, which could therefore be considered as a model light-harnesser material. However, there are some challenges in the structural phase transition,10 moisture and thermal stability,11,12 as well as trap-state formation induced by light.13,14 Concerning high-performance devices, the focus of the scientific community has now shifted away from MAPbI3 towards composition engineering involving the utilization of the formamidinium (FA+) cation15 and/or the exchange of halide anions.16
Although the FA+ cation-based perovskite compositions indicate a favourable effect on the optical band gap with a high light-absorption coefficient,17–19 the larger ionic size of FA+ can create lattice distortion by changing the tilt of the [PbI6]4− octahedra. This distortion leads to an inactive yellow phase which inevitably induces degradation of the photoactive layer.20,21 Moreover, using different halides such as Br− or chloride (Cl−) instead of iodide (I−) can have a detrimental impact on the band gap of the perovskite material and may lead to partial phase segregation, acting as efficient recombination centres.22–24 Since the single-cation and single-halide perovskite compositions have several weaknesses such as relatively low stabilized efficiency of MAPbI3 or instability of FAPbI3 in the cubic (or pseudocubic) α-phase at room temperature, the employment of hybrid perovskites with mixed-cations and mixed-halides can be a substantial solution.
Therefore, it has become indispensable to manipulate the perovskite compositions by mixing cations and halides which can combine the advantages of the constituents while avoiding their drawbacks.25–27 For example, the simultaneous introduction of 15 mol% of both MA+ cation and Br− anion into FAPbI3 led to the stabilization of the perovskite phase.28 Following this approach, composition-additive engineering involving the mixing of FA+/MA+-based organic cations with small amounts of inorganic cations has been intensively explored in recent years to further boost the performance and prolong the stability of emerging PSCs. Recent reports have pointed out that the doping of inorganic cations, i.e., cesium (Cs+), rubidium (Rb+), potassium (K+), etc., not only stabilizes the perovskite crystallinity by suppressing the redistribution of halides and phase separation but also tunes the opto-electronic properties (such as band gap, photoluminescence (PL) emission, and quantum yield (QY)) of the active layer, leading to a significant improvement in device performance.29–31 In a pioneering work, high-quality perovskite films were achieved by doping a small amount of inorganic Cs+ cations into the MA/FA composition.32 The obtained triple-cation Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 perovskite film showed better reproducibility and thermal stability compared to that of Cs-free devices and yielded a stabilized efficiency exceeding 21% with a photoactive black phase. Despite the increasing complexity of the composition, the scientific community has been motivated by the request to enhance stability by doping suitable inorganic cations and increasing the entropy of mixing, which can stabilize ordinarily unstable materials.33,34 To further boost the photovoltaic performance and stability beyond the state-of-the-art of mixed-cation and mixed-halide-based perovskite devices, novel approaches based on additives, low-dimensional materials, and multifunctional molecules either as an additive or an overlayer were recently introduced.7,29,35–38 From all these works, it can be concluded that the perovskite cell is one of the fastest-growing photovoltaic technologies with advancements taking place every day.39,40
However, all these developments cannot change the fact that there are volatile FA+ and/or MA+ cations in the composition of the perovskite material. The presence of frailty stable monovalent organic cations in the perovskite composition still awaits solution as a critical restraining factor towards the commercialization of this technology.41–43 PSCs must be free of volatile hydrophilic organic cations and mobile dopants in the hybrid perovskite framework to become commercially relevant. To address this deficiency, the entire replacement of the volatile organic parts by inorganic components has been proven as an efficient approach to drastically prolong the stability of the devices.29,33,44 Since 2015, all inorganic perovskite compounds with Cs+ as the A-site cation (CsPbIxBr3−x, x is in the range of 0 to 3) have shown a promising future in various opto-electronic applications and have been employed in photovoltaic devices,45–47 light-emitting diodes (LEDs),48,49 photodetectors,50,51 nanogenerators,52,53 lasers,54 and many other applications.55–57
Similar to organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, the recently emerging inorganic perovskite materials can be described by the chemical formula CsPbX3 (X = I− or Br−or Cl−), where Cs+ occupies a corner of the unit cell with 12-fold coordination, Pb2+ is a divalent metal cation located in the body-centred position with 6-fold coordination, and X− is a halogen with a face-centred position. Hitherto, all-inorganic CsPbX3 perovskites (with band gap ranging from ∼1.7 to ∼2.3 eV), as light harnessing materials, have drawn increasing attention owing to their outstanding thermal stability and rapid progression in photovoltaic performance.58,59 Furthermore, inorganic CsPbIxBr3−x perovskites have superior photoelectric properties compared to hybrid counterparts, including high carrier mobility, suppressed ion migration and long carrier lifetime.60 Especially, Cs+-based perovskite materials have been demonstrated with high charge mobility (∼1000 cm2 V s−1) and lifetime at the μs level.61,62 Among different compositions, full-brominated perovskite CsPbBr3 exhibits outstanding stability against moisture and thermal stress and shows high carrier mobility, while CsPbI3 has a more applicable band gap of 1.73 eV, and it can absorb light up to long wavelengths. However, α-CsPbI3 is not stable and can easily undergo an immediate phase transition from cubic to orthorhombic phase (nonperovskite yellow phase, δ-CsPbI3 with Eg = 2.82 eV) when exposed to ambient conditions.59,63 Likewise, CsPbBr3 presents relatively low efficiency due to its severe interfacial charge recombination and absorption edge at wavelength below 550 nm, which is unable to absorb light in a wide spectral range.63
1.2. Fundamentals of all-inorganic CsPbIxBr3−x perovskites
In the next sub-sections, we broadly discuss the transformation and research progress of CsPbIxBr3−x perovskites (Fig. 1(a)) and elaborate on the role of promising strategies to in annihilating the existing deficiencies depending on the perovskite composition.
 Fig. 1  (a) Digital photographs of CsPbX3 films according to the proportion of I/Br. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) Temperature-dependent phase transition of the CsPbI3 crystal structure. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Calculated Goldschmidt tolerance factor t and octahedral factor μ for cesium metal halides and hypothetical metal halides. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Owing to its excellent thermal stability, high carrier transport ability, anti-solvent-free processing, and admissible photovoltaic performance compared to organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, CsPbI3 is one of the emerging light-harvesting materials employed in all-inorganic perovskite devices and it is assessed as an excellent top cell for tandem devices together with silicon solar cells.64,65 The CsPbI3 perovskite exhibits a tunable band gap value of 1.68–1.73eV depending on the synthesis procedure, high photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY), and perfect thermal stability that is favourable for photovoltaic devices.66–68 However, the optically active CsPbI3 perovskite black phases (α, β, γ) are not thermodynamically stable at room temperature and spontaneously tend to transform into the yellow non-perovskite δ phase (orthorhombic), which impedes their application in perovskite photovoltaics.69–72 Although it is not possible to make a comparison in terms of efficiency, recent studies have revealed that β-CsPbI3 is relatively more stable owing to its lower dissociation and formation energy, and phase transition temperature (Fig. 1(b)) as well as its ability to be deposited at a low temperature in an inert atmosphere.73,74Fig. 1(b) represents the temperature-dependent phase transitions of the CsPbI3 perovskite. Upon heating, the initial non-stable yellow phase (δ-CsPbI3) is converted to a stable black phase whereas the stable phase is spontaneously converted to quasi-stable phases (tetragonal β-CsPbI3 and/or orthorhombic γ-CsPbI3) in the cooling process. Similarly, recent studies have demonstrated the promising role of γ-CsPbI3 phase perovskite thin films in the presence of passivation agents. For example, the incorporation of phenylethylammonium iodide (PEAI) leads to a remarkably enhanced microstructure with a preferred orientation of the γ-CsPbI3 perovskite domains and substantially reduced density of traps, leading to a lower nonradiative recombination.75
The Goldschmidt tolerance factor (t) and the octahedral factor (μ) are the fundamental parameters defining the stability of perovskites. They are related to the ionic radius of the atoms and are calculated according to eqn (1) and (2):76 (1) (2)in which rA is the radius of the A cation, rB is the radius of the B cation, and rx is the radius of the anion. When 0.8 < t < 1.0 and 0.44 < μ < 0.90, a stable perovskite structure is formed. The cubic-phase (α-, Pm3m) perovskite can only be obtained when 0.9 < t < 1.29,73 However, t is an essential but not adequate condition for obtaining stable ABX3 structures. In Fig. 1(c), t and μ values of different cesium metal halides and hypothetical metal halides are summarized. As t decreases below 0.8, the perovskite structure deforms due to the inclination of the octahedron, and thus the tetragonal (β-, P4/mbm) and orthorhombic (γ-, Pbnm) phases are likely to form (Fig. 1(c)). On the other hand, if the A-site cation is too small and t becomes lower than 0.8, it will limit the photoactive phase stability. For example, the phase distortion issue of iodide-rich CsPbI3 perovskites is associated with the relatively low t value of ∼0.81, leading from the smaller ionic size of Cs+ (167 pm) to support the [PbI6]4− octahedra in the cubic perovskite structure with the larger ionic size of Pb2+ (202 pm) and I− (214 pm).77
Unlike CsPbI3, CsPbBr3 shows perfect stability under environmental conditions such as heat, oxygen, and moisture. Such property makes it a promising and highly attractive all-inorganic perovskite material for the new generation photovoltaic devices. Nevertheless, CsPbBr3 has disadvantages for the commercialization of perovskite photovoltaics due to its (i) relatively wide band gap (2.3 eV), (ii) low absorption edge associated unsatisfactory PCE outputs, and (iii) serious charge recombination kinetics between the perovskite film and the electrode (especially carbon) due to the constitution of an undesirable hole extraction barrier.79–82
Although single halide perovskites have exhibited high performance or long-term stability, they still cannot provide satisfaction on the performance/stability ratio. To get rid of this dilemma and to obtain high-performance materials with long-term stability, dual halide perovskite compositions for inorganic perovskites were recently developed. By changing the ratios of halide anions of CsPbIxBr3−x, perovskite structures with stabilized α-phases and low band gap can be obtained. Although CsPbI2Br has attracted a significant interest owing to balanced trade-off between its band gap and phase stability, it suffers from sensitivity to moisture at room temperature and easily converts to δ-phase in the ambient atmosphere due to its relatively high I−/Br− ratio.83 In this context, CsPbIBr2 obtained by using a higher content of Br presents an alternative to CsPbI2Br due to better phase stability and a more balanced band gap.
1.3. The innovative approaches for high efficiency and stable all-inorganic perovskite absorbers
Concomitantly, innovative approaches have been launched to further enhance the photovoltaic performance and prolong the stability of inorganic CsPbIxBr3−x-based PSCs associated with interface, composition, solvent, and band alignment engineering. For example, a simple solvent-controlled growth (SCG) method was introduced to obtain high-quality black-phase CsPbI3 perovskite films. This method is based on the evaporation rate of the dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) solvent which has a high boiling point (189 °C) not allowing it completely escape from the as-prepared film and thus enhancing the mass transport and diffusion. For this purpose, the as-prepared perovskite absorber can be stood for a period of time before the annealing procedure. In this way, an efficiency of 15.7% (certified efficiency of 14.67%) was reported with an excellent photostability for 500h under continuous light soaking.84 Soon after, an α-CsPbI3 PSC with a remarkable efficiency of 17.06% was reported by bifunctional stabilization including both gradient Br− doping and surface passivation of the perovskite film by utilizing phenyltrimethylammonium salt.85 More recently, our group reached an impressive efficiency of 17.1% through the Pb-site doping of CsPbI2Br by directly doping iron(II) chloride (FeCl2) into the perovskite precursor.86 In another remarkable study, the efficiency of β-CsPbI3-based PSCs has been improved to 18.4% by a crack-filling interface engineering method by using choline iodine (ChI).87 The champion efficiency of inorganic PSCs has exceeded 20% by surface engineering and they exhibited better environmental stability compared to hybrid devices.88 However, in addition to the octylammonium iodide (OAI) surface passivator, a methylammonium chloride (MACl) dissolved solution was used in this study to control the intermediate step of the crystallization process to obtain dense perovskite films. Recently, histamine (HA) was employed to intentionally passivate the iodide vacancies (VI) in the CsPbI3−xBrx perovskite films.89 Owing to the passivation of undercoordinated Pb2+ and Pb clusters and the upward shift of the energy band edge, the highest efficiency (20.8%) so far was achieved. Although the accessible efficiency of inorganic perovskite cells still falls behind those of the state-of-the-art hybrid counterparts, these guiding studies validate the significant promise of CsPbIxBr3−x materials, indicating one of the most appealing research hotspots in the field of perovskite photovoltaics.
1.4. The role of B-site cation doping in all-inorganic perovskite absorbers
Among the various effective methods developed for inorganic perovskites, B-site (Pb-site) doping has been well-recognized and has become the most popular approach to achieve high-efficiency and long-term stable inorganic PSCs in recent years. The band structure and opto-electronic properties of perovskite materials can be significantly modulated by doping at the B-site. In other words, the partial substitution of divalent lead (Pb2+) at the B-site with homovalent or heterovalent ions has emerged as an intuitive strategy to realize high-quality inorganic CsPbIxBr3−x perovskites while maintaining the opto-electronic properties of corresponding perovskites. Such a substitution can (i) reduce the usage amount of toxic lead (Fig. 2(a)),90 (ii) present a passivation effect on the grain boundaries and/or on the surfaces by increasing the size of perovskite grains (Fig. 2(b) and (c)) and reducing the grain boundaries and trap-state density, indicating a lower energy loss and charge recombination at the interfaces between the perovskite and the corresponding charge-transporting layers,86,91 (iii) ensure a modulated band gap energy towards desired values to well match the energy level with the adjacent layers for specific applications (Fig. 2(d) and (e)), also effectively decreasing trap-states and nonradiative recombination,92–94 and (iv) increase the tolerance factor (τ) and structurally induce a small lattice distortion to form microstrain, leading to a stable black phase at room temperature (Fig. 2(f)).95 In the case of B-site doping with an appropriate metal ion, either at least one or some of these functions can occur together to boost the photovoltaic parameters and enhance the stability of inorganic photovoltaics. In some recent reviews, the effects of B-site doping in inorganic perovskite thin films are given with a brief discussion of different doping models96 or only individual doping groups based on homovalent and heterovalent cations are reviewed.97 However, a state-of-the-art and comprehensive review is urgently needed to summarize the recent developments in this direction by considering the effects of exterior factors such as halide ratio and anion type.
 Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of the CH3NH3SnI3−xBrx perovskite crystal structure. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2014, Nature. (b) The EDS map of Pb and Zn element distribution in the CsPb0.9Zn0.1I2Br perovskite with the scale bar of 2 μm. (c) Schematic illustration of the GB passivation by Zn2+ doping. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. Schematic representation of trap-states and radiative/nonradiative recombinations of QDs (d) without and (e) with the Zn2+ additive. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Schematic illustration of partial doping/alloying of Pb2+ by different metal ions showing increasing tolerance factor (τ) and formation energy which results in stabilized black phase α-CsPbI3 at room temperature and improved thermal stability of orthorhombic CsPbBr3 respectively. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
In contrast, this review focuses on the use of various metal dopants to mitigate the ongoing problems in different device configurations and discusses their effects on the band gap tunability, tolerance factor, band alignment, and crystallization process with the consequent effects on the efficiency and stability of devices. In this respect, we strongly believe that such a comprehensive study providing innovative approaches will be very useful to further understand the B-site doping mechanisms of all inorganic perovskite thin films and to realize high-efficiency and stable PSCs. First, we introduce the basic knowledge of inorganic CsPbIxBr3−x perovskites from the aspects of the crystal structure, phase transitions, and opto-electronic properties as well as summarize the research progress of CsPbIxBr3−x perovskites. Then, we provide a systematic overview of the recent progress in the B-site doping strategy in CsPbIxBr3−x perovskites adopted to realize high-performance and operationally stable inorganic PSCs. Specifically, the most recent advances of the PSCs based on B-site dopants belonging to group IIIA, IVA, and VA metal ions, alkaline-earth metals, transition metal ions, and lanthanides are discussed. Scheme 1 shows the B-site metal dopants that have been employed in CsPbIxBr3−x perovskite-based solar cells reported so far. Finally, we discuss the difficulties and directions of future development. We also illustrate the long-term stability of inorganic PSCs probed under different environmental conditions. Finally, the last section elaborates the perspectives about this enticing scientific domain for tackling these ongoing problems.
 Scheme 1  A schematic of the periodic table showing the B-site dopants in CsPbIxBr3−x perovskite-based solar cells reported so far. The inset image shows the crystal structures of CsPbIxBr3−x with a yellow orthorhombic (δ) phase (left) and black cubic (α) phase (right). Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2018, Nature. 
2. The effects of various B-site doping ions in all-inorganic CsPbIxBr3−x perovskite compositions
Of the doping methods, the B-site doping approach has emerged as a powerful strategy due to its environmental impact and effective operation in not only reducing the usage of Pb2+ but also modulating the electronic properties and preserving the stable cubic phase of CsPbIxBr3−x perovskites. In this section, we summarize the literature survey based on various B-site dopants belonging to group IIIA, IVA, and VA metal ions, alkaline-earth metals, transition metal ions, and lanthanides as well as elucidate the promising role of the B-site doping strategy in the stability and photovoltaic performance of corresponding devices.
2.1. Doping with alkaline-earth metal ions
Since the heterovalent substitution can easily lead to the charge compensation effect and form defect states,102,103 the homovalent alkaline-earth metal cations belonging to group 2A present promising potential for partially substituting Pb2+ in CsPbX3 perovskites due to their smaller ionic size and equivalent charge. In addition, defect passivation and energy level tunability have been reported recently with the doping of a small number of alkaline-earth metals, demonstrating stabilized hybrid/all-inorganic perovskite structures at high temperatures and suppression of ion migration.104,105 In this group, especially calcium (Ca2+) ions with smaller ionic radii (1.14 Å) enable high-quality crystallite perovskite films with larger perovskite grains for efficient charge transport by decreasing grain boundary defects. Larger grains up to several μm can be obtained by the combination of small grains, where Ca2+ reduces the size of the colloids in the perovskite solution. This reduction provides a uniform distribution of the reactants for nucleation and perovskite crystallization.106 Moreover, Ca2+ substitution increases the band gap of perovskites, leading to higher VOC. Besides, the prolonged device stability in these devices can be explained based on the passivation effect ascribed to the calcium-rich oxide layer.
Considering these advantages of Ca2+, Lau et al. fabricated calcium iodide (CaI2)-doped CsPbI3 PSCs with the structure FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/perovskite/poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT)/Au in 2018.107 The SEM images showed that Ca-doped CsPbI3 perovskite films exhibit larger grains up to a few μm in size with homogeneous coverage. The reason behind such morphology improvement was explained based on the dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements, a technique that can be used to determine the size distribution profile of small particles in different solution/bulk samples. The DLS results indicated that the radius of the colloids is reduced from ∼1.7 to ∼1 μm as the molar ratio of Ca increases. This reduction in colloidal particle size was attributed to the hard Lewis acid nature of Ca2+ compared to soft acid Pb2+.108 As is known, hard Lewis acids trigger the dissolution of the colloids in the precursor solution reducing the size of the colloids, which leads to a more uniform distribution of the reactants inducing better nucleation and crystallization of the perovskite film. Thus, smoother perovskite grains with larger grain sizes can be obtained.109 While the best-performing device was obtained for 5 mol% Ca-doped CsPbI3 perovskites with a PCE of 13.3%, the control device exhibited a PCE of 10.6%. The improvement in efficiency was ascribed to the increased band gap with the doping of Ca2+ ions, leading to an increase in output voltage. In stability tests, the modified champion device retained 85% of its initial efficiency after 60 days of storage with encapsulation while the pristine device maintained only 65% of its initial efficiency under the same storage conditions. Such a remarkable improvement in device stability was attributed to larger grains induced by Ca2+ substitution, thus not allowing the penetration of moisture through grain boundaries.
Similar to CsPbI3, the crystallinity of the CsPbI2Br perovskite film is also enhanced after adding varying amounts (0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1%) of calcium chloride (CaCl2).110 It was also observed that the existence of Ca2+ ions retarded the crystallization process of CsPbI2Br perovskite films. Despite the highest intensity of the diffraction peak for the 0.5% CaCl2 added CsPbI2Br film, the authors claim that Cl− ions may not be able to dope into the CsPbI2Br lattice due to the large difference in the ionic radii of Cl− and I− ions and may locate at the grain boundaries of the perovskite and suppress the trap density of the perovskite film. The higher crystal quality of the CsPbI2Br film with low defect density suppressed nonradiative recombination, and prolonged carrier lifetime in the presence of the CaCl2 additive was further confirmed by the improved and blue-shifted PL emission compared to the pristine perovskite film (Fig. 3(a) and (b)). Consequently, the best CsPbI2Br PSC with 0.5% CaCl2 additive showed an efficiency of 16.79% with a remarkable VOC of 1.32 V and an FF of 83.29%, whereas an efficiency of 14.89% was obtained for the best-performing control device (Fig. 3(c)). The UPS measurements were employed to assess the origin of the increase in VOC of the CsPbI2Br solar cells. Not only a smaller energy difference between the valence bands of the optimized CsPbI2Br film and spiro-OMeTAD (0.26 to 0.22 eV) but also a raised Fermi level (−3.68 to −3.55 eV) was obtained for the optimized CsPbI2Br film, suggesting a higher driving force for photogenerated carrier separation and thereby higher VOC.111
 Fig. 3  (a) Steady-state PL and (b) TR-PL spectra of control and 0.5% CaCl2-doped CsPbI2Br films. (c) J–V characteristics of CaCl2-doped CsPbI2Br PSCs based on different concentrations of the CaCl2 additive. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (d) UV-vis absorption and (e) PL emission spectra of CsPb1−xBaxI2Br with varying Ba2+ concentrations from 0 to 0.4%. (f) 133Cs echo-detected solid-state MAS NMR spectra at 21.1T, 298K, and 24kHz MAS of bulk mechanochemical compositions of CsPbBr3, CsPb0.8Ba0.2Br3 (formula specifies the formal stoichiometry and does not show a pure-phase material), CsBr + PbBr2 (1:2), CsBr + PbBr2 (4:1), neat CsBr, CsBr + BaBr2 (2:1), and CsBr + BaBr2 (1:2) from top to bottom respectively. The asterisks display spinning sidebands. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (g) Variation of formation energy Ef of α-CsPbxBa(1−x)I3 as a function of the BaI doping concentration (x = 3.7, 7.4, 11.1, 14.8, 22.2%). The red dashed line demonstrates the experimental BaI 10% doping which is in good agreement with the presented DFT optimal value. (h) Schematic illustration of phase stabilization through Ba2+ doping into the structure with a relative explanation of corresponding CsPbI3 properties. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
However, there is no consensus on whether these cations are being doped into the perovskite lattice due to the low doping ratio and the exact action mechanism of these dopants in improving the PSC performance is still under debate.112 In addition, doping into an all-inorganic perovskite matrix at a low doping ratio may not alter the band gap of the perovskite film.113 In an interesting study, Xiang et al. showed that barium (Ba2+) can be added in large quantities (molar ratio of Ba2+ and Pb2+ up to 4:6 in the perovskite solution) during CsPbI2Br synthesis, which results in a reduction of the perovskite band gap.114 However, regarding the significant shift in the absorption onset to longer wavelengths and an analogous red-shift trend in PL emission spectra (Fig. 3(d) and (e)), the change in the I/Br ratio of the perovskite composition rather than Ba2+ substitution is found to be the main reason for the changes in the band gap. The solid-state NMR results further displayed that Ba2+ is not doped into the perovskite lattice by locating most likely at the surface and grain boundaries but induced phase segregation (Fig. 3(f)). The VOC of the corresponding device with the addition of 20 mol% Ba2+ is significantly improved to 1.33 V, yielding a champion PCE of 14.0%, while the undoped CsPbI2Br exhibits a VOC of 1.12 V with a PCE of 11.1%.
The homovalent doping approach of CsPbIxBr3−x perovskites can be enriched with effective surface passivation to further enhance the opto-electronic properties and the photovoltaic performance.115 For example, Kajal et al. demonstrated the doping of Ba2+ in the presence of camphorsulfonic acid (CSA)-based surface passivation simultaneously.116 Ba2+, as an alkaline-earth metal ion with the lowest electronegativity, was added at different mol concentrations (2, 5, and 10 mol%) into the CsPbI3 perovskite, which greatly suppressed undesirable phase transition and increased the charge transfer ability, resulting in improved photovoltaic parameters. The optimum amount of Ba2+ was determined as 10 mol% in good agreement with the presented DFT results showing the minimum formation energy for α-CsPbxBa(1−x)I3 at Ba2+ of 11.1% (Fig. 3(g)). The maximum efficiency of the PSC fabricated with an optimized Ba2+ value was obtained as 7.23% with a VOC of 0.90 V. Such a relatively low PCE in modified devices can be explained based on a much larger ionic radius of Ba2+ which makes Ba2+ an inappropriate dopant for partial substitution in all-inorganic perovskites, leading to expansion of the perovskite lattice (Fig. 3(h)). Owing to the higher melting point of Ba2+ (727 °C) than that of Pb2+ (327 °C), Ba-doped CsPbI3 films were thermally stable under ambient conditions for one year. However, in the corresponding study, no data about the performance and stability of control devices were reported for a fair comparison.
Although most of the substitutions of Pb2+ fall within the limitation of the Goldschmidt tolerance factor (0.8 < t < 1.0), Ba2+ with a relatively large ionic radius (135 pm) leads to a deviation from the Goldschmidt rule with an undesirable tolerance factor less than 0.8. However, the Ba2+ substitution evokes an improved morphology and superior crystallinity as well as suppressed carrier recombination.117 For example, Subhani et al. reported that the Ba2+ substitution in the CsPbIBr2 precursor enlarges the average grain size from 440 nm to 586 nm and enhances the crystallinity. Moreover, the average carrier lifetimes calculated from TRPL curves are increased from 1.09 ns to 1.14 ns for CsPbIBr2 and CsPb(Ba)IBr2, respectively (Fig. 4(a)). These results indicate a reduction in trap-states and suppression of nonradiative recombination.118 According to these results, we can conclude that the perovskite films are tolerant to Goldschmidt-rule-deviating homovalent heteroatoms, extending the substitution engineering of all-inorganic perovskites.
 Fig. 4  (a) TR-PL curves of control and Ba2+ doped CsPbIBr2 perovskite films. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration of the dynamic hot-air (DHA) process. (c) TR-PL spectra of control and Ba2+ doped CsPbI2Br films processed by the hot-air method. Fluorescence-lifetime imaging microscopic (FLIM) photographs (80 μm × 80 μm, λex = 470 nm) of hot-air processed (d) control and (e) 0.5% Ba2+ doped CsPbI2Br thin films. Reproduced with permission.119 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
The uniform distribution of Ba2+ substitution into the perovskite lattice is another important aspect to reach high-quality perovskite films. The homogeneous distribution of Ba2+ throughout the perovskite film can be shown by the SEM/energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping and high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) imaging.119 However, such a grain growth of the perovskite crystal is tightly related to the first nucleation followed by crystal grain growth. As is known, with the typical antisolvent-assisted solvent-engineering process it is difficult to control the homogeneous nucleation centres to tune the grain size and uniformity. Therefore, the employment of an alternative strategy for uniform perovskite deposition is needed. In this regard, Mali et al. demonstrated a fully air-processed dynamic hot-air (DHA) casting process where the perovskite layer was fabricated by blowing hot-air during the spinning of the perovskite precursor to control the morphology of the inorganic CsPbI2Br perovskite without conventional harmful antisolvents as systematically shown in Fig. 4(b). The DHA method prolonged not only the surface but also bulk recombination lifetimes of both control and Ba2+ substituted CsPbI2Br films, indicating suppression of nonradiative recombination pathways (Fig. 4(c)). The obtained lifetimes are also extracted from fluorescence-lifetime imaging microscopic (FLIM) measurements (Fig. 4(d) and (e)). The obtained results are congruent with the enhanced photovoltaic parameters.
Despite the remarkable progress in the efficiency of B-site doped all-inorganic perovskite-based devices, the requirement of high annealing temperature (generally, above 250 °C) is still elusive for practical applications, especially for flexible devices. In a related study, Lau et al. doped strontium (Sr), as another alkaline-earth metal cation, into CsPbI2Br to obtain perovskite films at lower annealing temperatures (100 °C) by the gas-quenching method.91 The obtained results demonstrated that the low temperature-processed CsPb0.98Sr0.02I2Br device (10.1%) exhibited a comparable efficiency to the high-temperature-processed cell (11.3%). This enhancement in efficiency was attributed to the Sr-enriched surface which provides a passivation effect leading to a higher lifetime.
Tang et al. reported a comparison by doping four divalent hard Lewis acid cations (Ba2+, Ca2+, Mg2+, and Sr2+) into CsPbBr3 to form CsPb1−xMxBr3 (x = 0–1) perovskite films (Fig. 5(a)).120 Compared to the bare CsPbBr3, the characteristic XRD peaks shifted to higher angles for Mg2+, Ca2+, and Sr2+ doping whereas Ba2+ doping led to a shift to lower angles (Fig. 5(b)). The mechanism behind this phenomenon was ascribed to differences in ionic radii between the divalent hard Lewis acids [Mg2+ (0.72 Å), Ca2+ (1.00 Å), Sr2+ (1.12 Å), and Ba2+ (1.35 Å)] and Pb2+, leading to the expansion or contraction of the perovskite lattice.121,122 Not only enlarged grains but also significantly suppressed carrier recombination kinetics were achieved by appropriate doping of corresponding dopants. The enlarged grain size in the presence of Mg2+, Ca2+, and Sr2+ doping was mainly ascribed to the suppressed crystal nucleus formation, while the changed surface energy can be the possible reason for the slightly enlarged grain size in the Ba2+-containing perovskite film. Thus, the addition of divalent cations increased the grain size from ∼390 nm to ∼720 nm, as shown in Fig. 5(c). The suppressed carrier recombination can be mainly ascribed to the raised formation energy of vacancy defects (Fig. 5d). Consequently, a PCE up to 9.63% was obtained for HTM-free inorganic devices with a CsPb0.97Sr0.03Br3 structure. Moreover, the best efficiencies of the pristine, Mg2+-based, Ca2+-based and Ba2+-based devices were obtained as 7.25%, 7.87%, 8.85%, and 9.12%, respectively (Fig. 5(e)). Table 1 summarizes the recent progress in the photovoltaic performance of inorganic PSCs yielded by B-site dopants belonging to alkaline-earth ions. Although most of the studies have focused on the partial removal of Pb2+, studies based on Pb-free devices or those with Pb below 10% are rarely reported. The prospective works in this direction can be suggested for developing efficient, stable, and non-toxic PSCs compared to Pb-based devices.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of partial replacement of Pb2+ in the CsPbBr3 structure with different divalent hard Lewis acid cations. (b) XRD patterns for the undoped CsPbBr3 and divalent cation doped CsPb1−xMxBr3 perovskite films. (c) Top-view SEM photographs of (i) CsPbBr3, (ii) CsPb0.97Mg0.03Br3, (iii) CsPb0.97Ca0.03Br3, (iv) CsPb0.97Sr0.03Br3 and (v) CsPb0.96Ba0.04Br3 films with a scale bar of 1 μm. (vi) The grain size statistics of these five perovskite films. (d) Normalized TR-PL spectra of various divalent cation doped CsPb1−xMxBr3 perovskite films. (e) J–V characteristics of PSCs based on different divalent hard Lewis acid cation doped CsPb1−xMxBr3 perovskites (AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Table 1 Summary of the photovoltaic performance yielded by B-site dopants belonging to alkaline-earth metal ions




Perovskite
Dopants
Amount (%)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)
Stability conditions
Degradation rate (%)
Ref.




CsPbBr3
Control


6.89
1.37
0.77
7.25
800 h, 25 °C, RH = 80%
—

120



Mg2+
3.0
7.04
1.45
0.77
7.87
—


Ca2+
3.0
7.56
1.47
0.80
8.85
—


Sr2+
4.0
7.71
1.54
0.81
9.63
5


Ba2+
3.0
7.56
1.52
0.79
9.12
—






CsPbI3
Control


17.10
0.85
0.73
10.60
60 days, 25 °C, RH = 60%
35

121



Ca2+
5.0
17.30
0.94
0.78
12.60
15


Control


—
—
—
—
—
—

116



Ba2+
10.0
13.19
0.90
0.61
7.23
500 h, 25 °C, RH = 60%
2






CsPbI2Br
Control


13.40
0.96
0.60
7.70
30 days, 25 °C, RH = <50%



91



Sr2+
2.0
14.90
1.07
0.71
11.30






Control


13.40
1.12
0.74
11.10
350 h, 85 °C
80

114



Ba2+
20.0
14.00
1.28
0.78
14.00
400 h, 85 °C
10


Control


11.88
1.09
0.72
9.34
100 h, 80 °C, and N2
100

119



Ba2+
0.5
15.45
1.21
0.79
14.85
400 h, 80 °C, and N2
10


Control


15.01
1.25
0.80
14.89
1080 h, 25 °C, RH = 25%
30

110



Ca2+
0.5
15.32
1.32
0.83
16.79


10






CsPbIBr2
Control


10.93
1.12
0.69
8.46
48 h, 85 °C, RH = 40%
90

118



Ba2+
0.4
11.91
1.19
0.74
10.51
30




2.2. Doping with metal ions from groups IIIA, IVA, and VA
The divalent Sn2+ is one of the most attractive and reported ions employed in CsPbX3 perovskite-based devices due to its similar ionic radius (1.18 Å) within the same group of the periodic table. Thereby, Pb2+ substitution by Sn2+ does not cause an obvious lattice distortion in corresponding perovskite structures. As the doping concentration increases, the hybridized perovskites are alloyed in the divalent metal cation region, where the crystal structure can completely change. At this point, it would be appropriate to clarify a special case; although some studies use the term “doping”, especially for Sn2+ substitution, many opinions argue that this is not a correct usage. Although there is no sharp distinction in this regard, it is more correct to use the term “substitution” in the case of high doping concentrations. In short, Sn2+ is proposed to be able to substitute Pb2+ in the perovskite structure in terms of the classical notion of Goldschmidt's rules and quantum mechanical principles. The most promising feature of the Sn2+ ion is the well-aligned band position in both all-inorganic and hybrid-based perovskite films revealing high device performance.123,124 Moreover, the substitution of Sn2+ into the CsPbI3-based perovskite effectively improves the stability of corresponding films due to the change in formation enthalpy determining the chemical and thermodynamic stability of a material.92 As the lattice distortion associated with the unfavourable value of τ leads to a less stable crystal structure, Sn2+ substitution with slightly smaller ionic radii than that of Pb2+ could offer a higher τ compared to intrinsic CsPbI3 where Cs+ is smaller than the cubo-octahedral void site leading to the tilt of [BX6]4− octahedral and lattice distortion with poor instability (Fig. 6(a)). In addition, the bond length of Sn–I is shorter than that of Pb–I, which is conducive to the formation of a stable perovskite lattice.125–127 Furthermore, Sn–Pb alloying gives rise to band gap bowing, allowing us to reach band gaps that are ideal for photovoltaic operations (∼1.34 eV).128 The reduced band gap is accomplished by a down-shifted conduction band minimum (CBM) with unchanged valence band maximum (VBM). Furthermore, the distributions of s and p orbitals within Pb, I, and B around the CBM and VBM of the CsPb1−xSnxI3 perovskite alloy can be seen in Fig. 6(b). In general, the contribution of Sn to the band gap increases with the increase of Sn concentration.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of the perovskite structure showing the determination of [BX6]4− octahedral sites by the B-site cations and therefore the cubo-octahedral voids for the A-site cations. (b) Band structure decomposition of CsPb1−xSnxI3 with x = 0.028, 0.037 and 0.056. The size of the symbols is proportional to the orbital contribution to the bands, where the sizes of B ions are fourfold enlarged. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Photographs of CsPb1−xSnxI3 perovskite thin films by alloying Sn2+ and Pb2+ ions as a function of Sn molar ratios of 0.00, 0.25, 0.30, 0.50, 0.75, 0.88, and 1.00 from left to right respectively. Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) SEM cross-sectional photograph of a typical PSC based on the CsPb0.6Sn0.4I3 perovskite absorber. (e) Tauc plot to determine the optical band gap of the CsPb0.6Sn0.4I3 perovskite thin film. (f) Experimental and calculated band gaps (represented by solid and open circles respectively) of CsPb1−xSnxI3 perovskite films with varying “x”. (g) Calculated DOS of a typical CsPb1−xSnxI3 perovskite with x = 0.5 according to the DFT calculation. (h) Photographs of CsPb0.6Sn0.4I3 (left) and CsPbI3 (right) perovskite thin films after heating at 80 °C in a nitrogen-filled glovebox for 0, 4, and 18 min (top to bottom). Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
Yang et al. recently fabricated inorganic CsSn0.3Pb0.7I3-based PSCs by alloying Sn2+ and Pb2+ ions.128 Regarding the B-site strategy, it is worth noting that a stable α-phase with a low band gap (∼1.34 eV) was obtained with a molar ratio of 0.3. As seen in Fig. 6(c), the colour of the films gradually changes from yellow to deep black with increasing Sn ratio (0.00 to 0.30). At additive rates above 0.30 Sn, the colour of the film becomes hazier, and this is interpreted as roughness/pinhole. The effect of the Sn2+ fraction on the grain size was studied by SEM images. When the Sn2+ fraction increases from 0.25 to 1.00, the average domain size increases from ∼300 nm to several micrometres. In turn, the pristine CsPbI3 films exhibit a smaller crystal domain size of about ∼200 nm. The film with a Sn ratio of 0.3 presents a smoother surface and high-quality surface coverage with a few pinholes while large domains in the films with higher Sn fractions are accompanied by a large number of pinholes threatening the stability of devices. Overall, the highest PCE up to 9.41% with a JSC of 20.96 mA cm−2, an FF of 70.12%, and a VOC of 0.64 V was achieved by using the CsSn0.3Pb0.7I3 perovskite film as the active layer in the cell architecture whereas the control device showed a PCE of only 0.61% with a very low JSC of 1.18 mA cm−2. The improvement in the device performance can mainly be ascribed to the high JSC as a result of the low band gap and the dense surface coverage of the CsSn0.3Pb0.7I3 perovskite film. In another study, Hu et al. reported the substitution of Sn2+ into CsPbI3-based inverted planar PSCs in CsPb0.6Sn0.4I3 scaffold stoichiometry with the architecture of FTO/NiOx/perovskite/PCBM/BCP/Ag (Fig. 6(d)). CsPb0.6Sn0.4I3 perovskite alloy compositions achieved a PCE of ∼13.4% with a record JSC (25.9 ± 1.3 mA cm−2).129 The most striking result in this study is the tunable Eg below 1.4 eV as confirmed by the Tauc plot, DFT calculations, and projected density of states (DOS) (Fig. 6(e)–(g)). The experimental results showed that the CsPb0.6Sn0.4I3 perovskite film remains black upon heating at 80 °C for up to 18 min in a glovebox, whereas the pristine CsPbI3 film turns yellow quickly under the same conditions (Fig. 6(h)). This enhancement in stability was attributed to the higher Goldschmidt tolerance factor. Moreover, the calculated formation energy of the CsPb1−xSnxI3 perovskite alloy showed a thermodynamically more stable crystal structure with the Sn2+ substitution. Such remarkable phase stability could also be explained based on its tetragonal β phase.87 However, the CsPb1−xSnxI3 film was not stable under ambient conditions with a high relative humidity of 80%. This shows that CsPb0.6Sn0.4I3 is still not the optimal composition for device applications operating under environmental conditions. The interface-functionalization approach can be applied with an effective surface passivation molecule to mitigate the environmental degradation issue and further improve the stability of corresponding devices.
Sn2+ was also substituted into the CsPbIBr2 perovskite by Liang et al.130 The CsPb0.9Sn0.1IBr2 perovskite alloy with a suitable band gap of 1.79 eV and an appropriate level of VBM (−5.32 eV) was synthesized in ambient air by a two-step solution-phase process. Not only a redshift but also higher absorbance was obtained in the presence of Sn2+ in the CsPbIBr2 perovskite structure, indicating that both I− and Sn2+ ions led to a narrower band gap and stronger absorbance. The band gap values of CsPbIBr2 and CsPb0.9Sn0.1IBr2 films were determined to be 1.90 and 1.79 eV, respectively, as close as that of CsPbI3 (1.73 eV). The higher VOC in the all-inorganic architecture with the functional layers of FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CsPb0.9Sn0.1IBr2/carbon was attributed to the energy level difference between the CBM of the electron acceptor and the VBM of the electron donor, while higher JSC can be a result of stronger absorbance.
In another study, a slightly higher efficiency of 11.53% with an admissible VOC of 1.21 V was obtained with homogeneous and densely crystallized morphology of the CsPb0.75Sn0.25IBr2 structure.131 In this study, the Sn2+ substitution displayed a small gradual shift toward a higher 2θ value of the characteristic XRD peak around 15°, indicating the shrinkage of the perovskite lattice in the CsPb1−xSnxIBr2 alloy with increasing x value. However, a poor surface morphology based on needle-like nanoplates with some pinholes was obtained for CsPb0.75Sn0.25IBr2 and CsPbSnIBr2 perovskite films, which was ascribed to the fast crystallization rate of the Sn-based perovskite. Compared to the CsPbIBr2-based film, the CsPb0.75Sn0.25IBr2-based film showed a considerable enhancement in the phase stability and illumination stability of corresponding devices, which is associated with the shrinkage of the CsPb1−xSnxIBr2 lattice.
In a recent study reported in 2021, Abib et al. designed a novel deposition strategy for the stable phase Sn-substituted CsPbBr3 perovskite alloy with efficient and economical carbon-based all-inorganic devices with the architecture of FTO/TiO2/CsPb0.998Sn0.002Br3/carbon.132 This newly developed strategy allows direct thermal evaporation of the synthesized pristine and metal-doped perovskite powders on various types of ETLs. Similar to previous reports, adding Sn2+ ions into perovskite precursors decreased the density of the pinholes and enlarged the grain size of the perovskite film. As a result of the changed band gap energy (2.3 eV to 2.2 eV), the calculated conductivity of the CsPb0.998Sn0.002Br3 perovskite is found to be greater than that of the pristine CsPbBr3 perovskite. Consequently, the Sn-substituted CsPbBr3 device achieved a PCE of 8.95% with a record VOC of 1.40 V in comparison with 6.87% for the pristine CsPbBr3 device. This enhancement in the overall efficiency was attributed to the developed interface extraction of charges between the perovskite and charge transport layers with the introduction of the Sn2+ ion. To further clarify this hypothesis, the effect of Sn substitution on the energy band structure of the CsPbBr3 perovskite was investigated by performing ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopic (UPS) characterization. The VBM values were calculated as 5.53 eV and 5.27 eV for the pristine CsPbBr3 and CsPb0.998Sn0.002Br3 perovskite films, respectively, showing the remarkable energy level alignment in the devices. Such a similar reduction (from −5.6 eV to −5.46 eV) in the valence band energy level was also reported by the doping of SnBr2 into the CsPbBr3 perovskite, facilitating more effective hole transfer from the active layer to the top electrode.133
Contrary to what is well known, Sn-based devices have debatable toxicity.134,135 Although Sn could be an environmentally benign alternative, Babayigit et al. showed that the strong acidification induced by SnI2 is more harmful than PbI2.134 The conversion of highly unstable SnI2 in the ambient atmosphere forms acidifying hydroiodic acid (HI) as a byproduct, which makes Sn-containing perovskites more acutely toxic than that of a milder acidifying Pb counterpart. Moreover, Sn-based devices are more unstable than the Pb2+ counterparts under environmental conditions due to the high hole doping densities generated upon the easy oxidation of Sn2+ into Sn4+ when exposed to an oxygen atmosphere, a fact explained by the inert pair effect. Therefore, Sn2+ is still not the best substitution element for Pb2+ at the B-site when targeting highly stable devices operating under environmental conditions. This has encouraged scientists working in this field to investigate novel alternative elements to overcome existing low stability and efficiency problems together.
In this regard, germanium (Ge2+), located in the same group as Pb2+ and Sn2+, was introduced into CsPbI2Br by Yang et al. in 2018.136 Inorganic CsPb1−xGexI2Br perovskites with varying Ge contents (x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3) were prepared at ambient temperature. While the highest PCE was obtained as 10.8% with a VOC of 1.27 V for the CsPb0.8Ge0.2I2Br-based structure with a planar device structure of FTO/SnO2/perovskite/P3HT/spiro-OMeTAD/Au, the PCE of the undoped device was obtained as only 5.3% with a VOC of 1.02 V. By increasing Ge content in the perovskite composition, the highest VOC up to 1.34 V was achieved for CsPb0.7Ge0.3I2Br accompanying a PCE of 9.0%. However, the oxidation issue is even more pronounced for the Ge2+ ion due to its 4s2 electrons, possessing lower binding energy.137 Despite the admissible device performance, poor stability under environmental conditions can be accepted as the Achilles’ heel of these devices.
Apart from divalent ions, heterovalent dopants with a higher valence state than that of Pb2+ have been used to realize high-performance and operationally stable inorganic PSCs. In one of the pioneering works, Hu et al. employed different ratios of bismuth (Bi3+) doping as heterovalent substitution of Pb2+ into the CsPbI3 perovskite structure not only to stabilize the α-phase at room temperature but also to improve the performance of CsPbI3-based PSCs.95 The effect of Bi3+ doping on the structural, electrical, and morphological properties of CsPbIxBr3−x perovskite structures is shown in Fig. 7. The authors first examined the effects of Bi3+ doping on the phase formation/transition of CsPbI3 films by XRD analysis (Fig. 7(a)). When the Bi3+ ions are doped into the perovskite structure, the main characteristic peaks of (012), (112), and (122) planes of the orthorhombic phase gradually disappeared, and the (100), (110), (111), and (200) peaks of the cubic phase emerged, showing the phase transition from δ-CsPbI3 to α-CsPbI3 phase. Besides, due to the smaller radius of Bi3+ (1.03 Å) than Pb2+ (1.19 Å), B-site substitution increased the tolerance factor from 0.81 (α-CsPbI3) to 0.84 (α-CsPb1−xBixI3), which is beneficial to improve the stability. The reason for higher CsPbI3 stability was ascribed to the Bi3+-doping-induced lattice micro-strain, which distorts the metastable cubic perovskite structure (Fig. 7(b)). Regarding photovoltaic performance, 4 mol% Bi3+ doped CsPbI3-based devices with a planar architecture with CuI as the hole transport material (HTM) achieved a PCE of 13.21% with a JSC of 18.76 mA cm−2, an FF of 0.73 V, and a VOC of 0.97 V, which is much higher than the PCE of control devices (8.07%) (Fig. 7(c)). Such an improvement in the PCE compared to control devices was ascribed to the improved light absorption and electrical conductivity upon Bi3+ doping. In sharp contrast, Yin et al. demonstrated that the partial substitution of Pb2+ by Bi3+ ions in the bulk or on the surface of the perovskite forms deep trap-states. Such trap-states act as nonradiative carrier recombination centres.138 Furthermore, Snaith et al. reported an increased electronic disorder and reduced carrier lifetime for Bi3+-doped MAPbBr3 single crystals, which was ascribed to the increase in nonradiative recombination centres acting as trapping and scattering centres.139 Although the previous publication by Zhang et al. reported that the Bi3+doping of CsPbI3 is a feasible route to increase the PL efficiency and improve the structural stability as well as photovoltaic performance,95 these recent publications are inconsistent with these findings, and indicate that further work is still required to deeply understand the impact of the doping scenario upon organic–inorganic perovskites. At this stage, such an opposite trend in these reports can be ascribed to the structure of perovskite films.
 Fig. 7  (a) XRD patterns of α-CsPbI3, δ-CsPbI3, and CsPb1−xBixI3 perovskite films with varying bismuth concentrations (0 ≤ x < 0.1). (b) Proposed stabilization mechanisms of the α-CsPbI3 perovskite structure by doping HI or Bi3+ into the precursor solution. (c) J–V curves of champion PSCs based on α-CsPbI3 and Bi-doped CsPb0.96Bi0.04I3 perovskite films. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. SEM images of the top view of the (d) control CsPbI2Br and (e) InCl3-doped CsPbI2Br thin films with 2% InCl3 dopant. (f) GIXRD patterns of the CsPbI2Br films without and with 0.25% InCl3 dopant. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
As another heterovalent substitution of Pb2+, the antimony ion (Sb3+) with a similar outer electronic configuration (ns2) provides optical stability as well as energy state tuning to CsPbI3 perovskite films. In this direction, the weaker coulombic interaction between core and extranuclear electrons in both Pb2+ and I− due to the contribution of more valence electrons to the system by the Sb 5p3 orbital than that of the Pb 6p2 orbital (weaker electronegativity of Sn compared to Pb) leads to a reduction in Pb–I bonding energy, which results in an enlarged band gap energy.140 The use of Sb3+ as a promising doping ion was first attempted by Xiang et al. to partially substitute Pb2+ in the β-CsPbI3 phase leading to stable CsPb0.96Sb0.04I3.141 Similar to the Bi-doped CsPb1−xBixI3 study reported by Hu et al.,95 the grain size gradually decreases with the increase in the substitution amount of Sb3+ ions. After the optimization of Sb content, the device based on CsPb0.96Sb0.04I3 displayed a PCE of 5.18% in the HTM-free architecture with enhanced ambient stability, which was higher than that of the control device (4.45%). Such a remarkable improvement in the performance and stability of CsPb0.96Sb04I3-based devices was attributed to the suppressed hysteresis and improved crystallite quality associated with the substitution of Pb2+ by Sb3+. The substitution of Pb2+ by Sb3+ was confirmed in a work reported by Bera et al. in 2019.142 In this study, Sb-doped CsPbI3-based inorganic PSCs were fabricated and the effects of Sb3+ doping were discussed based on the increase in cohesive energy (from 13.094 eV to 12.71 eV) and reduction in the optical band gap of the CsPbI3 perovskite, which was further supported by density-functional theory (DFT).
Another trivalent metal ion, indium (In3+), was doped into CsPbI3 and CsPbI2Br films to investigate its effect on the electrical structure and photoelectric property of the perovskite. Li et al. doped indium(III) iodide (InI3) into the CsPbI3 structure and investigated the grain growth and opto-electronic properties of the perovskite film for high-performance perovskite devices.143 The XPS results revealed that a shift was observed in the peaks of the CsPbI3:InI3 film relative to the pristine due to the partial substitution of Pb2+ by In3+, suggesting that In3+ can be doped into the crystal lattice of CsPbI3 forming a more stable phase. Unlike the other trivalent metal ions, the average grain size of pristine CsPbI3 increased from 225 to 325 nm with the In3+ doping strategy. To determine the carrier transport behaviour, the authors studied the dark J–V characteristics of the devices in both electron-only and hole-only configurations. The electron mobility of the pristine CsPbI3 and InI3-doped CsPbI3 was calculated as 0.51 and 1.30 cm2 (V−1 s−1), respectively, while the hole mobility of the pristine CsPbI3 and InI3-doped CsPbI3 was obtained as 0.29 and 0.52 cm2 (V−1 s−1), respectively. Likewise, the PL lifetime was increased with InI3 doping from 2.41 to 6.40 ns. The champion device employing InI3 yielded a PCE over 17% with a VOC of 0.99 V, a JSC of 22.21 mA cm−2, and an FF of 0.77, while only 14.36% of PCE was obtained for the reference device. This improvement of the champion cell was ascribed to the efficient charge transfer associated with superior film quality and reduced interface recombination in the presence of In. Due to the formation of larger grains and fewer grain boundaries in the perovskite film, the InI3-doped device retained 77% of its initial efficiency after 860 h ageing at room temperature in a nitrogen atmosphere while the pristine CsPbI3 film turned from black to yellow phase within only 7 h.
In addition to the partial replacement of In3+ with Pb2+ at the B-site, X-site doping was also performed by the substitution of Cl− with halides (I− and Br−) in the CsPbI2Br perovskite. In an interesting study, indium(III) chloride (InCl3) was introduced into the CsPbI2Br perovskite to stabilize the α-phase.144 The partial substitution of the B-site and X-site with the smaller In3+ cation (0.91 Å) and Cl− anion (1.81 Å) decreased the size of octahedral and cubo-octahedral voids and thereby stabilized the α-phase InCl3:CsPbI2Br perovskite. The improvement in α-phase stability can be mainly ascribed to the increase in Goldschmidt's tolerance factor. In addition to the increase in the tolerance factor, the reduction in grain size is also beneficial to stabilize the black α-phase perovskites due to higher surface energy (Fig. 7(d) and (e)), which is associated with the enhanced overall spatial symmetry and closely packed atom arrangement.68 The 2D grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) measurements revealed multiple crystal orientations of InCl3-doped CsPbI2Br films resulting in efficient charge transport along multiple directions (Fig. 7(f)). Table 2 summarizes the recent progress in the photovoltaic performance of inorganic PSCs yielded by B-site dopants belonging to group IIIA, IVA, and VA metal ions.
Table 2 Summary of the photovoltaic performance of inorganic PSCs yielded by B-site dopants belonging to group IIIA, IVA, and VA metal ions




Perovskite
Dopants
Amount (%)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)
Stability conditions
Degradation rate (%)
Ref.




CsPbBr3
Control


7.27
1.29
0.73
6.85
2400 h, 25 °C, RH = 10%
5

133



Sn2+
0.2
7.66
1.37
0.82
8.63
760 h, 25 °C, RH = 80%
4




















Control


7.08
1.33
0.73
6.87
700 h, 25 °C, air environment
5

132



Sn2+
0.2
9.27
1.36
0.71
8.95


4






CsPbI3
Control


16.02
0.89
0.57
8.07
168 h, 25 °C, RH = 55%
80

95



Bi3+
4.0
18.76
0.97
0.73
13.21


30




Control


13.46
0.71
0.46
4.45
240 h, 25 °C, RH = 20%
27

141



Sb3+
4.0
14.65
0.73
0.50
5.31
890 h, 25 °C, RH = 20%
7
























Control


—
—
—
—
—
—

129



Sn2+
40.0
25.87
0.77
0.67
13.37
2800 h, 25 °C, N2 atmosphere, 1000 h, 45 °C
0




Control


1.78
0.67
0.51
0.61
168 h, 25 °C, continuous illumination
—

128



Sn2+
30.0
20.96
0.64
0.70
9.41


5




Control


21.45
0.89
0.74
14.36
860 h, 25 °C, N2 atmosphere
40

143



In3+
1.0 mg mL−1
22.21
0.99
0.77
17.09


20








CsPbI2Br
Control


9.06
1.02
0.57
5.30
7 h, RH = 50–60%
100

136



Ge2+–Ge4+
20.0
12.15
1.27
0.70
10.80


—




Control


13.80
1.19
0.70
11.45
1000 h, air atmosphere, ∼85 °C, RH = 65–75%
40

145



In3+
0.25
15.91
1.28
0.75
15.27


13




Control


15.10
1.10
0.78
12.92
80 h, air atmosphere, RT, RH = 30%
75

144



In3+
0.25
15.70
1.14
0.77
13.74


0








CsPbIBr2
Control


12.32
1.08
0.62
8.25
50 h, RT, RH = 50–60%
—

130



Sn2+
10.0
14.30
1.26
0.63
11.33
15




Control


8.32
1.18
0.74
7.34
1000 h, RT, RH = 50–60%
90

131



Sn2+
25.0
12.57
1.21
0.75
11.53
20




Control


—
—
—
—
10 d, air atmosphere, RT
—

146



Sn2+
30.0
15.50
1.18
0.77
14.10


25






2.3. Doping with transition metal ions
Similar to alkaline-earth metals, transition metals are also abundant in the crust of the earth.147 This makes partially substituting Pb2+ with transition metal ions an ecofriendly strategy for large-scale commercial applications. Among the various alternatives, manganese (Mn2+) can be considered as an ideal dopant for B-site doping in all-inorganic perovskites due to its smaller ionic radius (0.97 Å) compared to Pb2+, suggesting prolonged phase stability and higher tolerance factor.148 This was first demonstrated by Akkerman et al. based on a computational work showing that Mn2+ doping causes a shrinking of the CsPbI3 lattice due to the shortening of the metal–halide bonds from 3.14 Å for Pb–I to 2.97 Å for Mn–I.149 The synergistic effect of Pb2+ substitution with Mn2+ was investigated by Yao et al. for the all-inorganic CsPbI3 perovskite.148 In this study, the 2% Mn-doped CsPbI3-based PSC showed a higher PCE of 16.52% than that of the control device (15.05%). The addition of Mn2+ ions into CsPbI3 effectively suppressed the hysteresis by reducing the trap-states in the perovskite structure. Moreover, the addition of Mn2+ enables a compact surface with lower roughness while it does not influence the absorption edge of the perovskite film. Besides, the 2% addition of Mn gradually increases the grain size from ∼350 nm to ∼563 nm. The effect of Mn2+ ion doping on perovskite growth was investigated by Bai et al. in 2018.150 The authors reported that Mn2+ ions insert into the interstices of the perovskite lattice during the growth process, suppressing nucleation and thus reducing the growth rate. This leads to lower defect states and fewer pinholes and thus reduces the shunt paths, which results in lower carrier recombination and better device stability. This can be ascribed to the shrinkage of the perovskite lattice due to a smaller ionic radius, which decreases the size of [BX6]. Owing to the strong exchange interactions between the d electrons of dopant ions and charge carriers of the photoexcited host perovskite, doping of Mn2+ ions into the inorganic perovskite structure facilitates energy transfer from the host to Mn2+ ions, resulting in high quantum yield, which could be beneficial for applications in photon energy conversion.151,152
The effects of transition metals on the optical, morphological, structural, and electrical properties of CsPbIxBr3−x perovskite films are given in Fig. 8. Although some studies indicated that the Mn2+ ion does not change the optical properties, especially the optical band gap of CsPbI3-based perovskite films,150 Liang et al. reported a reduction in the band gap (from 1.89 to 1.75 eV) of CsPb1−xMnxI1+2xBr2−2x with increasing concentration of Mn2+ ions (Fig. 8(a)), which boosted the light-harvesting ability and reduced energy loss in hole transfer.153 Also, the absorbance intensities of the films increased in a broad spectrum with the Mn dopant. Another factor affecting the hole transfer from the perovskite to the carbon electrode was shown as the formation of vertical branches on the perovskite surface which is beneficial for the photovoltaic performance due to their protruding nature which increases the contact area between adjacent layers (Fig. 8(b)). Such enhancement in the hole transfer and narrow band gap improved light harvesting in the devices with the structure FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CsPb0.995Mn0.005I1.01Br1.99/carbon and resulted in a PCE of 7.36% (Fig. 8(c)).
 Fig. 8  (a) UV-vis absorbance spectra of control CsPbIBr2 and doped CsPb1−xMnxI1+2xBr2−2x perovskites with different concentrations of the Mn2+ ion (x = 0.005, 0.01, and 0.02). (b) Top view SEM images of CsPbIBr2 and CsPb1−xMnxI1+2xBr2−2x (x = 0.005) films with scale bars of 1 μm. (c) The regular device architecture of a mesoscopic all-inorganic PSC with the structure FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CsBX3/carbon. Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) The lattice constant changes of the pristine CsPbBr3 and transition metal ion doped perovskite crystals. (e) Dark J–V characteristics for the hole-only devices with the structure FTO/NiO/perovskite/carbon. (f) Schematic energy-level diagram of the different layers of an all-inorganic PSC based on the CsPb1−xTMxBr3 active layer. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
A comparative study based on divalent transition metal ions (Cu2+, Mn2+, Ni2+, and Zn2+) was reported by Tang et al. to modulate the crystalline structure of the CsPbBr3 film.102 The partial doping of corresponding ions into the CsPbBr3 lattice was explained based on the change in the lattice constant of the pristine CsPbBr3 (5.8353 Å) which gradually decreased with the atomic number of doped transition metal ions (Fig. 8(d)). The mechanism behind this phenomenon can be attributed to lattice shrinkage upon substitution of Pb2+ ions with smaller Zn2+ (74 pm), Cu2+ (73 pm), Ni2+ (69 pm), and Mn2+ (67 pm) ions. Owing to the smaller ionic radius than Pb2+, they obtained CsPbBr3 films with enlarged grain size for all doping ions, leading to a decrease in the density of grain boundaries. This further implies a reduction in the density of trap-states and suppression of the shallow trap-state formation near the valence band edge of the CsPbBr3 perovskite. As confirmed by the dark J–V characteristics of hole-only devices with the structure of FTO/NiO/perovskite/carbon, a much lower trap density of the CsPb0.995Zn0.005Br3-based PSC than that of the control device is obtained (Fig. 8(e)). The energy level diagram in Fig. 8(f) shows a smaller energy difference between the CB of various CsPbBr3 films (especially for CsPb0.995Zn0.005Br3) based on different dopants of transition metal ions and that of TiO2. Similar energy level tuning can be also seen between the VB of perovskite films and the work function (WF) of the carbon electrode. This results in a reduced energy loss in charge transfer, facilitates electron transfer, and eliminates radiative recombination within the devices.
Zinc (Zn2+) is another promising transition metal ion due to its higher chemical activity than Pb2+, which coordinates strongly with Br/I, slowing down the crystallization process. Owing to the slowdown of perovskite phase formation, enlarged grains with a high degree of growth orientation can be achieved with Zn doping. The functional role of Zn doping was first reported by Zheng et al.154 The authors reported that the XRD peak position shifts to lower values with the increase in Zn2+ content, showing the insertion of Zn2+ ions in the interstitial sites of the CsPbI2Br lattice. Zn2+ ions are incorporated as interstitial ions in the perovskite lattice due to the great size mismatch between Zn2+ (0.74 Å) and Pb2+ (1.19 Å). Besides, the lattice constant increases from 6.0662 Å (CsPbI2Br) to 6.1294 Å (with 10% Zn), indicating a lattice expansion for the CsPbI2Br perovskite. Moreover, it was claimed that the excessive Zn2+ in the surface of perovskite passivates the defects at the grain boundaries, which reduces the trap-states thereby decreasing the nonradiative recombination.
Soon after this study, Sun et al. showed that 10% Zn substitution in the CsPbI2Br perovskite can diminish the trap-states at grain boundaries and reduce the energy band gap, facilitating charge transport.99 Moreover, partial replacement of Pb with Zn facilitated a uniform growth and enlarged the perovskite grains up to 2–3 μm for CsPb0.94Zn0.06I2Br composition while pure CsPbI2Br exhibited smaller grains with a grain size of about 0.5–1 μm (Fig. 9(a)). Such larger grains can be explained based on the retarding function of Zn2+ during the crystallization process, stemming from its physical–chemical properties. The role of Zn2+ in the nucleation, crystallization, and grain growth of the perovskite film was explored by in situ XRD analysis (Fig. 9(b)). The control film quickly crystallized in the α- and δ-phases at a low temperature of 50 °C, whereas the PbI2 phase in the CsPb0.9Zn0.1I2Br film obviously remained in the α-phase at 50 °C, indicating that the components do not crystallize as quickly as the control film. As the temperature increases, Zn2+ ions destroy the formed α-phase to separate components, slowing down the crystallization process. The grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements (Fig. 9(c)) reveal similar diffraction rings with spotty patterns for both CsPbI2Br and CsPb0.9Zn0.1I2Br films forming polycrystalline structure with some degree of crystallite orientation which demonstrate no new impurity phase after Zn doping. Moreover, the Zn2+ doping leads to the preferred crystallite orientation in CsPb0.9Zn0.1I2Br perpendicular to the substrate due to the change of surface energy by the Zn2+ ions with the control of crystal growth directions (Fig. 9(d)).155,156 This is beneficial to the formation of large crystalline and uniform grains and is specifically ascribed to the higher chemical activity of Zn2+ than that of Pb2+, which is more prone to interact with the A-site cation and X-site anion.157 Thus, Zn hinders the Cs, Pb, I, and Br from crystallization leading to slowly growth to large crystals.
 Fig. 9  (a) Top-view SEM images of the CsPbI2Br and CsPb1−xZnxI2Br perovskite films. (b) In situ annealing temperature-dependent XRD spectra; the insets show the optical images of films. (c) GIWAXS patterns of CsPbI2Br and CsPb0.9Zn0.1I2Br perovskite films. (d) Proposed mechanism of the nucleation and control of the crystal growth directions of perovskite films through Zn2+ doping. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) UPS spectra analysis for valence-band regions (Eonset), and secondary electron cutoffs of CsPbI2Br and CsPb0.99Zn0.01IBr2 perovskite samples. (f) Sketch of the band alignment of CsPbIBr2 and CsPb0.99Zn0.01IBr2-based PSCs. (g) 2D AFM and KPFM images of the CsPbIBr2 and CsPb0.99Zn0.01IBr2 perovskite surfaces. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The energy level matching between active perovskite and charge transfer layers is of importance for efficient transfer of charges and suppressed recombination. Very recently, UPS measurements were conducted to explore the impact of Zn2+ ions on the electronic structure of CsPbIBr2.158 The WFs of the pristine CsPbIBr2 and CsPb0.99Zn0.01IBr2 films were derived as 3.78 and 3.70 eV, respectively, indicating 0.08 eV lower WF of CsPb0.99Zn0.01IBr2 (Fig. 9(e)). Lower WF indicates a more favourable dissociation and rapid transfer of photo-generated carriers as well as efficient inhibition of charge recombination in the perovskite devices (Fig. 9(f)).159 Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) is also employed to investigate the surface potential of the perovskite films. The obtained results showed a higher surface potential after Zn2+ doping (684 to 764 mV), indicating 0.08 eV smaller WF of CsPb0.99Zn0.01IBr2 than that of the CsPbIBr2 film (Fig. 9(g)). In this direction, the higher surface potential leads to a stronger built-in electric field in the perovskite films, which is favourable for charge carrier extraction, separation, and transport.
Similar grain growth indicating improved crystallinity was observed with the addition of copper (Cu2+) ions into CsPbIBr2.160 To investigate the potential of Cu2+ doping in improving the photovoltaic performance of perovskite devices, Liu et al. explored the impact of the doping concentration of the Cu2+ additive in the device configuration of FTO/TiO2/CsPbIBr2/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag. By doping different amounts of Cu (0.25, 0.50, 0.75, and 1% molar ratio) into CsPbIBr2 perovskite films, the highest efficiency value of 10.4% was obtained for the 0.50% Cu doped CsPbIBr2 device. In contrast, the pristine CsPbIBr2 presented a PCE of only 4.72%. To further explain the improved PSC performance by Cu2+ doping, interfacial charge transfer kinetics were studied by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements. The Nyquist plots showed an increase in the low-frequency region of CsPbIBr2–0.50% Cu-based PSCs, indicating lower charge recombination at the corresponding interface. The reduced charge recombination was further confirmed by light intensity-dependent J–V measurements with a smaller ideality factor value (1.69 to 1.80), facilitating an effective charge extraction via Cu2+ doping. However, it is noteworthy that despite the lower J–V hysteresis of Cu2+ doped CsPbIBr2-based devices, the hysteresis phenomenon was more prominent in comparison with the reported organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite-based devices. The severe hysteresis of the control cell was attributed to charge recombination associated with poor morphology. On the other hand, the phase separation behaviour occurring with the introduction of an excessive amount of Cu2+ can be the reason for the admissible hysteresis for the Cu2+-doped devices.161
Hysteresis commonly occurs along with the photovoltaic performance measurements of PSCs, especially for the planar-type PSCs. One of the studies revealed that efficient suppression of hysteresis can be achieved with a certain amount of niobium (Nb5+) doping into the CsPbI2Br perovskite.162 Among the devices, the 0.5% Nb-doped device showed the lowest hysteresis index value of 3.55%, owing to the reduced trap-states by the appropriate amount of Nb5+ doping. The Nb5+ ion is doped into the CsPbI2Br lattice most probably by a slight substitution of Pb2+, which increased the tolerance factor of the corresponding perovskite (0.81 to 0.815) and significantly stabilized the α-CsPbI2Br phase. The peak shift in the XPS spectra was attributed to the occupation of the Pb2+-site of the perovskite by Nb5+ (Fig. 10(a)). However, this is further confirmed by the theoretical study predicting that Nb5+ tends to occupy the B-site of the halide perovskite and partial replacement of Pb2+ (1.19 Å) with the much smaller Nb5+ (0.64 Å) leads to the contraction of [BX6] and changes in chemical bonding properties as reflected by the shift of XPS peaks. Furthermore, the electronic properties of CsPb0.875Nb0.125I2Br were calculated by the partial density of states based on the generalized gradient approximation method (Fig. 10(b) and (c)). The obtained results showed that the VBM is composed of I and Br p orbitals with a small contribution from Pb 6s orbitals, and the CBM mainly consists of Pb 6p orbitals. Overall, the Fermi level shifted up to the CBM as a result of the Nb 4d electrons, which reveals the n-type semiconductor feature of CsPb0.875Nb0.125I2Br.
 Fig. 10  (a) High-resolution XPS patterns of Pb 4f and I 3d for the control and 4% Nb-based CsPbI2Br films, represented by a black line and red line, respectively. Calculated partial density of states for (b) CsPbI2Br and (c) CsPb0.875Nb0.125I2Br according to the generalized gradient approximation method. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Variation of optical images of the control and 0.5% FeCl2 doped CsPbI2Br perovskite films annealed at 40 °C based on different times. (e) Cross-sectional SEM image of the full 0.5% FeCl2-doped CsPbI2Br-based PSC. (f) J–V characteristics of the champion PSCs based on the CsPbI2Br perovskite films without and with 0.5% FeCl2 dopant. (g) Operational stability of the unencapsulated control CsPbI2Br device and a device with 0.5% FeCl2 dopant under continuous white light. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
Another study on Nb5+ doped CsPbI2Br-based PSCs was conducted by Patil et al. via a simple hot air method.163 They reported that excellent uniformity and improved grain size (from 700 nm to 1.4 μm) were obtained with the optimum (0.5%) Nb5+ dopant amount. In this study, the 0.5% Nb-doped CsPb1−xNbxI2Br perovskite exhibited the highest PCE of 16.45% with a remarkable VOC of 1.317 V compared to the PCE of 14.35% of the reference device with a VOC of 1.249 V. To check the effect of Nb5+ doping on the transport properties, time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) analysis was performed. According to TRPL results, Nb5+ doping into CsPbI2Br reduced the charge recombination and increased the average lifetime of the pristine CsPbI2Br perovskite from 11 ns to 16 ns. The uniform distribution of Nb5+ in the perovskite lattice and throughout the perovskite film was displayed by HAADF STEM imaging/energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy mapping. Moreover, owing to the hot-air method instead of the anti-solvent-assisted method, the pristine CsPbI2Br film exhibited a pinhole-free surface morphology and the grain boundaries were not formed, resulting in improved photovoltaic performance.
Energy-dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) can be also conducted to elucidate the location of dopant ions in the perovskite films. Fang et al. employed EDX mapping and showed that unlike the uniform distribution of other elements, the nickel (Ni2+) ions are distributed unequally over the perovskite film with a much lower density.164 The much smaller radius of the Ni2+ ion (72 pm) compared to Pb2+ could verify the speculation again that Ni ions have been doped into the crystal lattice as interstitial ions and the excess Ni ions are mainly located at the grain boundaries of the perovskite film.99
As is well-known, not only pinholes occurring due to the great variety of crystal grain sizes but also grain boundaries play a significant role in the stability and photovoltaic performance of perovskite devices. The improved quality and crystallinity of the CsPbX3 perovskite may result in self-passivation at the grain boundaries. Such passivation has a promising effect on the photovoltaic parameters of the corresponding devices. KPFM can be conducted to identify the self-passivation at the corresponding grain boundaries. KPFM is a surface potential measurement technique displaying the surface potential mappings of perovskite films. Very recently, Lan et al. reported that adding cobalt bromide (CoBr2) into the CsPbBr3 precursor eliminated the formation of pinholes and enlarged the grain size.165 They used KPFM to obverse the potential barriers among the grain boundaries of the CsPbBr3 film in the presence/absence of CoBr2 doping. The pristine perovskite film shows bright regions throughout the grain boundaries and relatively dark regions of crystal grains with a contact potential difference (CPD) of about −820 mV, whereas the CsPb0.998Co0.002Br3 film exhibits a comparatively uniform CPD of about −780 mV. Such reduction in CPD indicates a lower surface potential barrier among the grain boundaries. Therefore, the KPFM results confirm the self-passivation role of CoBr2 doping at the grain boundaries of the CsPbBr3 film, inferring a better carrier transport behaviour in the CsPb0.998Co0.002Br3 film compared to the pristine film.
It is deduced that the passivation of grain boundaries and/or fewer grain boundaries associated with enlarged grains play a role in the stability of PSCs by minimizing moisture penetration.41 Contrary to this argument, smaller grain size is also considered beneficial to stabilize the black α-phase perovskites due to its higher surface energy.95,144 Li et al. stated that large grain size in the high-temperature annealed perovskite film such as CsPbI2Br is not conducive to stabilizing the α-phase and the device performance can be easily degraded due to the existence of pinholes.166
Very recently, our group showed that iron(II) chloride (FeCl2) as a B-site additive for the CsPbI2Br perovskite structure can trigger the formation of smaller grain size distributing in the range of 200–300 nm with a densely packed and homogeneous coverage.86 The impact of FeCl2 on CsPbI2Br crystallization was monitored by annealing the corresponding films at a low temperature for a period of time (Fig. 10(d)). Variation in film colour showed that the introduction of Fe2+ induces the crystallization process of perovskite film due to the distortion of the [PbI6]4− octahedral in perovskite crystal which results in smaller grain size, beneficial to stabilize the black α-phase CsPbI2Br perovskites due to higher surface energy.166 In this study, we doped FeCl2 in very small quantities (0.2%, 0.5%, 1.0%, and 1.5%) into CsPbI2Br and obtained PSCs with the structure FTO/c-SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au (Fig. 10(e)). While Cl− ions suppressed the traps and reduced the charge carrier recombination, Fe2+ increased the tolerance factor from 0.85 to 0.96 due to its smaller ionic size (78 pm). The addition of FeCl2 minimized the defects, increased the lifetime, and enhanced the device performance of CsPbI2Br PSCs. The 0.5% FeCl2-doped CsPbI2Br-based device showed the best performance with a record PCE of 17.1% with a VOC of 1.31 V (Fig. 10(f)). While the PCE of the 0.5% FeCl2-doped CsPbI2Br-based device maintained 95% of its initial PCE after 330 h, the PCE of the pristine device decreased to 25% after only 100 h under continuous illumination (Fig. 10(g)). Table 3 summarizes the recent progress in the photovoltaic performance of inorganic PSCs yielded by B-site dopants belonging to transition metal ions.
Table 3 Summary of the photovoltaic performance yielded by B-site dopants belonging to transition metal ions




Perovskite
Dopants
Amount (%)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)
Stability conditions
Degradation rate (%)
Ref.




CsPbBr3
Control


6.79
1.30
0.77
6.81
200 h, air environment
4

165



Co2+
0.2
7.45
1.36
0.85
8.57


4


Control


6.04
1.43
0.74
6.37
760 h, 25 °C, RH = 80%
—

102



Mn2+
0.5
6.10
1.44
0.79
6.98


—


Ni2+
0.5
6.80
1.48
0.79
8.03


—


Cu2+
0.5
6.97
1.53
0.79
8.23


—


Zn2+
0.5
7.30
1.56
0.81
9.18


0


Control


7.29
1.11
0.77
6.31
1000 h, 25 °C, RH = 80%
50

167



Ag+
1.0
7.67
1.13
0.80
6.92


20






CsPbI3
Control


19.29
1.04
0.75
15.05
240 h, 80 °C, N2 atmosphere
—

148



Mn2+
2.0
19.53
1.10
0.77
16.52


—




Control


15.87
1.21
0.73
13.98
240 h, 25 °C, RH = 30%
38

168



Zn2+
10.0
17.58
1.23
0.74
16.07


15








CsPbI2Br
Control


14.15
1.11
0.75
11.88
35 days, 25 °C, RH = 25–35%
—

150



Mn2+
2.0
14.37
1.17
0.80
13.47


3


Control


13.27
1.12
0.68
10.21
500 h, RH = ∼60%
40

154



Zn2+
7.5
15.61
1.23
0.63
12.16


24


Control


14.90
1.10
0.71
11.8
400 h, 25 °C, RH = 20%
85

99



Zn2+
10.0
15.80
1.18
0.72
13.6


15


Control


15.06
1.11
0.71
11.97
43 days in N2, RH = 20–30%
50

164



Ni2+
2.0
16.02
1.14
0.75
13.88


19


Control


11.95
1.21
0.63
9.05
120 s, continuous illumination



162



Nb5+
0.5
12.06
1.20
0.72
10.42






Control


15.39
1.24
0.74
14.35
96 h, RH = 30%



163



Nb5+
0.5
16.23
1.31
0.77
16.45


10


Control


15.49
1.20
0.78
14.6
100 h, 25 °C, RH = ∼50%
75

86



Fe2+
0.5
15.90
1.31
0.81
17.1
330 h, 25 °C, RH = ∼50%
5






CsPbIBr2
Control


12.15
0.96
0.53
6.14
144 h, ambient atmosphere
20

153



Mn2+
0.5
13.15
0.99
0.57
7.36
300 h, ambient atmosphere
8


Control


10.7
1.19
0.61
7.81
500 h, 90 °C, RH = 30%
50

160



Cu2+
0.5
12.8
1.21
0.67
10.4
1000 h, 90 °C, RH = 30%
25


Control


10.21
1.22
0.63
7.84
400 h in N2, 85 °C
67

158



Zn2+
1.0
11.92
1.28
0.69
10.51


18


Control


8.56
0.99
0.54
4.36
10 h, 25 °C, RH = ∼55%
45

169



Cd2+
0.5
9.76
1.19
0.57
6.79


24


Control


10.74
1.24
0.64
8.48
1000 h, 25 °C, RH = ∼30%
40

170



Cd2+
1.0
11.53
1.32
0.70
10.63


8




2.4. Doping with lanthanide ions
Another remarkable dopant type used in B-site doping is the lanthanides, which are widely preferred in new-generation opto-electronic devices for eliminating deep defects and improving the film quality owing to their unique optical and structural properties.171,172 Moreover, lanthanide ions impart high electrical mobility and stabilize the film formation of perovskite materials with enhanced charge extraction.173,174 Lanthanides attract interest because of their unique 4f electron configuration and provide efficient light-harvesting ability and energy levels within the band gap of the material due to their up and down conversion properties.175 In addition, some energy levels can arise within the band gap of the material using the lanthanides that can increase optical transitions at frequencies lower than the fundamental absorption.176–178
Among the various lanthanide ions, europium (Eu2+ or Eu3+) is one of the widely used additives for partially replacing Pb2+ in both hybrid and all-inorganic perovskites. At first, Eu ions were used as a dopant in phosphor-based compounds and ferroelectric oxide perovskites to improve the luminescence emission of corresponding structures. These studies showed successful doping of Eu ions at Pb2+ crystal sites.179 The doping of Eu ions can also trigger the formation of a high-crystallite perovskite film, which decreases the trap state density and increases the performance of devices. This can be explained based on the almost same ionic radius of Eu2+ (1.17 Å), which increases the tolerance factor of the perovskite film, thus altering the stability and opto-electronic properties of corresponding devices.
In this context, Miyasaka et al. explored the inclusion of varying amounts (from 0.5 to 10 mol%) of Eu3+ into CsPbI3 for stabilization of the black phase under ambient conditions.180 As reported in this study, the stability of the black phase varied with Eu concentration: the greater the Eu ion content, the longer the life of the black phase. In the XRD patterns of the films with varying amounts of Eu, the peaks of the cubic phase appeared while the peaks of the orthorhombic phase disappeared. Furthermore, the XRD peaks shifted with higher Eu content which implies the occupation of some interstitial sites with Eu3+ substituting Pb2+ (Fig. 11(a) and (b)). Based on the XRD and SEM results, crystal structure distortion and reduced grain size in the presence of Eu-doping were attributed to the black phase stabilization. Overall, CsPbI3 PSCs containing 4–6% Eu were found to have an efficiency of over 6% (Fig. 11(c)). Despite the substantially lower photovoltaic performance of the cells, the obtained results indicate that the performance and stability of CsPbI3-based devices can be further improved by comprehensive optimization of the device fabrication process. In further work, the same group showed the beneficial role of Eu in the formation of the γ-phase CsPbI3 at low temperature (80 °C).181 They affirmed that the phase transition from γ to δ phases occurs slowly in the presence of Eu, indicating better stability.
 Fig. 11  (a) XRD patterns of CsPbI3 films with different rates of Eu doping (4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 10 mol%). (b) The (100) peak of CsPbI3 perovskite films with 4, 6, 8, and 10 mol% EuCl3 doping shows a shift with higher Eu content. (c) The box chart of PCEs in the reverse scan of CsPbI3:xEu with x of 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 10 mol% EuCl3 devices (10 cells of each condition). Reproduced with permission.180 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) 133Cs spin–lattice relaxation times of different perovskite compositions. The solid curves are stretched exponential fits. The dashed line is the best biexponential fit of the CsPb0.95Eu0.05I2Br dataset. (e) SPO curves at maximum power point (MPP) tracking under the working condition with 100 mW cm−2 irradiation. (f) Operational stability of the unencapsulated undoped CsPbI2Br and CsPb0.95Eu0.05I2Br devices under continuous white light. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
As an efficient cell with Eu-doping, Xiang et al. reported on the CsPb1−xEuxI2Br composition by doping different Eu contents (0.01, 0.03, 0.05, 0.07, and 0.09%) into the CsPbI2Br lattice, which was validated by 133Cs solid-state magic-angle spinning (MAS) nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) (Fig. 11(d)) and HAADF STEM.113 A stretched exponential behavior (solid lines) is obtained with stretching factors (β) of 0.69, 0.44, and 0.38 for 3 mol%, 5 mol%, and 8 mol% stoichiometric Pb replacement in CsPbI2Br, respectively. The obtained values represent the presence of a distribution of Cs relaxation times in the material, corresponding to Cs sites at different distances from the paramagnetic Eu ions. On the one hand, the HAADF STEM image and EDX mapping indicate that Eu is uniformly distributed inside the perovskite grains. The optimized CsPb0.95Eu0.05I2Br composition was used as an absorber layer leading to the highest PCE of 13.71% with a VOC of 1.22 V. The stabilized power output (SPO) was measured as 13.34% at full sun illumination, while JSC was 13.94 mA cm−2 (Fig. 11(e)). Under ambient conditions at a RH of 40%, the CsPb0.95Eu0.05I2Br film remained almost the same for more than 6 months, while the colour of the pristine film changed in less than 50 h. Moreover, the long-term stability of the undoped CsPbI2Br and CsPb0.95Eu0.05I2Br cells was studied under continuous illumination based on a white LED in a N2 atmosphere. After 370 h, the PCE of the undoped device retained about 20% of its initial value, while the PCE of the CsPb0.95Eu0.05I2Br PSC maintained 93% of its initial value (Fig. 11(f)). The enhanced stability of CsPb0.95Eu0.05I2Br can be ascribed to the increase in the tolerance factor and surface energy with Eu doping.
As a well-known phenomenon, Eu ions can also be in the Eu2+ state in addition to the Eu3+ state. Recently, Eu2+-doped all-inorganic CsPbBr3-based perovskite cells were reported by a multistep solution method in an ambient atmosphere. Eu2+ doping into CsPbBr3 films not only improved the crystallite size but also modulated the surface roughness. However, in contrast to previous Eu3+-doped inorganic structures,113,180 the introduction of Eu2+ ions considerably increased the grain size of the perovskite. Such enlargement in grain size resulted in a significantly higher shunt resistance, indicating a lower defect-state density.
Another remarkable study on the lanthanide-doped CsPbI2Br perovskite was reported using samarium (Sm3+) by Patil et al.182 The authors fabricated CsPb1−xSmxI2Br (x = 0–0.04) perovskite devices by a simple hot air method. The partial substitution of the B-site with Sm3+ cations was confirmed by XRD results, revealing a slight shift to a higher 2θ angle. With the optimum Sm3+ doping amount (3%), the champion cell achieved an outstanding efficiency of 15.68% with a VOC of 1.298 V. More importantly, the unencapsulated 3% Sm-doped CsPbI2Br device retained 85% of its initial efficiency after 200 h at 85 °C, while the pristine device degraded within 120 h under the same thermal stress.
In 2018, Duan et al. introduced different trivalent lanthanide ions (Ln3+ = Er3+, Ho3+, Sm3+, Tb3+, and Yb3+) into the structure of the CsPbBr3 film to improve the performance of all-inorganic PSCs by extending the light-absorbance range and suppressing charge recombination within the perovskite films.183 The XRD peak positions obviously shifted to higher angles with all lanthanide ions, indicating the doping of dopants into the CsPbBr3 structure. Consistent with this result, the grain sizes of the Ln3+-doped perovskites increased as a harbinger of prolonged carrier lifetime and reduced charge recombination (Fig. 12(a)). The potential mechanism behind the grain enlargement was elucidated by the Tyndall scattering (Fig. 12(b)). It was found that the Ln3+-containing perovskite solutions facilitated the formation of large colloid particles owing to the strong interaction between Ln3+ and Br−. This led to the absorbance of dopants onto the colloidal surface. During the spin-coating process, the film separated into large grains with an Ln3+ capping layer. The improvement of perovskite crystallization was ascribed to the changes in the surface energy, resulting in more orientated crystalline domains.184 Overall, owing to the enlarged grain sizes and minimized grain boundaries, the CsPb0.97Sm0.03Br3-based device achieved a PCE of 10.14% with an ultrahigh VOC of 1.594 V in a hole transport layer (HTL)-free architecture (Fig. 12(c)).
 Fig. 12  (a) Top-view SEM images of as-prepared lanthanide ion doped CsPbBr3 perovskite films deposited on FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2 substrates (left to right: CsPbBr3, Yb3+-CsPbBr3, Er3+-CsPbBr3, Ho3+-CsPbBr3, Tb3+-CsPbBr3, Sm3+-CsPbBr3). (b) Photographs of the Tyndall effect in Ln3+ containing precursors. Left to right: Undoped, Yb3+, Er3+, Ho3+, Tb3+, Sm3+. (c) The J–V curves of lanthanide ion doped CsPbBr3 based PSCs. Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) XRD patterns of YbCl3 driven CsPbI3 perovskite films with different Yb3+ concentrations annealed at 80 °C; the insets show the optical images of films. FT-IR spectra of (e) DMSO and the YbCl3·DMSO adduct complex, and (f) 5% YbCl3-doped perovskite films annealed at 80 and 150 °C. (g) Schematic illustration of the influence of YbCl3 on the formation of the perovskite. Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (h) The J–V curves of the PSCs with and without GdCl3 dopant. (i) The MPP tracking of PSCs under one-sun illumination at 45 °C. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. 
In a similar work, Wang et al. introduced Lewis acid ytterbium(III) chloride (YbCI3) into the CsPbI3 perovskite in order to stabilize the α-phase at low temperatures.166 The Yb3+ ions partially substituted the Pb2+ in the perovskite structure with an enhanced tolerance factor and α-CsPbI3 was obtained at a low temperature of 80 °C. At this temperature, both films without and with a small amount of YbCl3 doping (3%) showed the characteristic yellow phase, which disappeared for the molar ratio ≥5% as depicted in the insets of Fig. 12(d). The lower defect states associated with perovskite passivation were explained based on the reaction between YbCl3 and Lewis base solvent DMSO in the perovskite precursor. As a typical Lewis acid, YbCl3 has an unpaired electron in its 4f orbit, which can easily accept an electron from a DMSO Lewis base to form a YbCl3·DMSO Lewis adduct phase. This interaction was further confirmed by the shift of the SO stretching vibration related with the bonding between YbCl3 and DMSO to a lower wavenumber in the FT-IR spectra (Fig. 12(e)). Compared to the FT-IR spectrum of the perovskite film annealed at 150 °C, the SO stretching vibration can be seen in the spectrum of the film annealed at 80 °C while it disappears in the 150 °C annealed sample demonstrating the existence of the YbCl3·DMSO adduct complex at the grain boundary of perovskite films based on 5% YbCl3 annealed at 80 °C which will decompose at 150 °C (Fig. 12(f)). The all-inorganic perovskite film modified by YbCl3 showed smaller grains compared to the pristine film. This reveals better stability at a lower temperature due to the reduction of crystallite size leading to the formation of a crystal structure with high symmetry. Yb3+ with a smaller size than that of Pb2+ can tune the perovskite structure with the reduced crystallite size and slightly larger tolerance factor which could lead to the formation of a crystal structure with high symmetry and better stability at a lower temperature (Fig. 12(g)). However, this is contrary to the previously mentioned work183 and such a contradictory situation can be associated with the functional anion of dopants, perovskite structure, or chemical process. Very recently, another study demonstrated Yb2+ doping into the CsPbI2Br all-inorganic perovskite and a considerable efficiency of 15.41% for a small area of (0.09 cm2) and 14.04% for a large area (1 cm2) was achieved for CsPb0.97Yb0.03I2Br-based devices with excellent reproducibility.185
Very recently, the highest efficiency so far was achieved by doping 0.4% gadolinium(III) chloride (GdCl3) into the CsPbI2Br perovskite structure. Li et al. reported an enhanced Goldschmidt tolerance factor of the CsPbI2Br perovskite by doping GdCl3, yielding a dense perovskite film with small grains and a remarkably stable α-phase.186 Such improvements are ascribed to suppression of charge recombination and appropriate energy level alignment for the GdCl3-doped CsPbI2Br perovskite film compared with the pristine film. J–V curves of the control and 0.4% GdCl3-doped PSCs are demonstrated in Fig. 12(h). As a result, the nonencapsulated GdCl3-doped PSC reached a high efficiency of 16.24% along with VOC = 1.22 eV, JSC = 16.09 mA cm−2, and FF = 82.58% and showed exceptional long-term stability retaining 88% of the original efficiency after 1000 h under the MPP tracking at 45 °C (Fig. 12(i)). Guvenc et al. investigated the potential of lanthanide-based Gd3+ which has a similar ionic radius (0.93 Å) to Pb2+ in 6-fold coordination.187 With Gd3+ doping into CsPbI3 at various levels (0 to 15 mol%), the phase stability of the pure CsPbI3 structure increased from 5 days to 11 days under ambient conditions. Based on the experimental results and DFT calculations, the prolonged phase stability was attributed to three factors: (i) distortion of cubic symmetry, causing the splitting of reflection at the (200) plane, (ii) increased Goldschmidt's tolerance factor (from 0.807 to 0.817), and (iii) reduced defect density due to the association of Gd3+ ions with more I− ions compared to Pb2+ ions. Table 4 summarizes the recent progress in the photovoltaic performance of inorganic PSCs yielded by B-site dopants belonging to lanthanides.
Table 4 Summary of the photovoltaic performance yielded by B-site dopants belonging to lanthanides




Perovskite
Dopants
Amount (%)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)
Stability conditions
Degradation rate (%)
Ref.




CsPbBr3
Control


6.94
1.35
0.75
6.99
1440 h, 25 °C, RH = 80% and 80 °C, RH = 0%
9

183



Yb3+
3.0
7.45
1.54
0.80
9.20


—


Er3+


7.46
1.56
0.83
9.66






Ho3+


7.45
1.57
0.83
9.75






Tb3+


7.47
1.59
0.85
10.06






Sm3+
3.0
7.48
1.59
0.85
10.14
1440 h, 25 °C, RH = 80% and 80 °C, RH = 0%
5


Ce3+


0.58
0.62
0.44
0.17






Eu3+


5.22
1.22
0.53
3.36






Nd3+


5.47
1.26
0.69
4.79


—


La3+


7.34
1.52
0.85
9.47


—






CsPbI3
Control


5.81
1.31
0.75
5.66
800 h, 25 °C, RH = 70–80%
7

188



Eu2+
60 μL
6.33
1.45
0.79
7.28


5


Control


—
—
—
—
—
—

180



Eu2+
5.0
11.10
0.89
0.68
6.80
720 h, 25 °C, RH = 10–20%
—


Control


18.68
0.98
0.69
11.87
80 h in N2, 80 °C
40

189



Ce3+
1.0
21.02
1.13
0.74
17.57


20


Control


—
—
—
—
—
—

166



Yb3+
5.0
18.40
1.13
0.60
12.40
400 h, 80 °C, RH = 25% and 100 °C, RH = 25%
40






CsPbI2Br
Control


12.57
1.12
0.72
10.21
370 h in N2, continuous illumination
80

113



Eu2+
5.0
14.63
1.22
0.76
13.71


7


Control


13.80
1.19
0.70
11.45
1000 h, air atmosphere, ∼85 °C, RH = 65–75%
40

145



Eu2+


14.90
1.25
0.74
13.72


25


Control


14.86
1.05
0.71
11.05
20 h in N2, ∼85 °C
90

190



Eu3+
0.5
15.26
1.13
0.71
12.13
100 h in N2, ∼85 °C
60


Control


15.30
1.20
0.70
12.85
180 h, 85 °C
100

182



Sm3+
3.0
15.90
1.29
0.76
15.68
200 h, 85 °C
15


Control


11.53
0.98
0.55
6.31
50 h, RH = 20–30%
80

172



La3+
2.0
11.66
1.12
0.61
8.03
400 h, RH = 20–30%
10


Control


14.30
1.20
0.71
12.34
240 h, 85 °C, RH = ∼30–35%
100

185



Yb3+
3.0
15.94
1.26
0.76
15.41
280 h, 85 °C, RH = ∼30–35%
15


Control


15.65
1.15
0.78
14.01
1000 h, 45 °C
60

186



Gd3+
0.4
16.09
1.22
0.83
16.24
MPP, one-sun illumination
12


Control


13.97
1.20
0.69
11.60
1500 h in N2, 25 °C
82

191



Nd3+
2.0
16.01
1.25
0.75
15.01


50


Control


12.56
1.09
0.76
10.37
20 h, 85 °C, RH = 50–65%, MPP
100

192



Tb3+
5.0
14.97
1.25
0.77
14.42
300 h, 85 °C, RH = 50–65%, MPP
20




2.5. Co-doping B-site strategy
It is evident from the above-mentioned systematic studies that some doping metal ions (i) passivate the electronic trap-states of all-inorganic perovskite structures and improve the charge transport properties; (ii) with a certain amount can significantly enlarge the grain size and achieve enhanced device stability; and (iii) enhance the photoresponse of perovskite devices. Combining them in all-inorganic perovskite structures, all the photovoltaic parameters of corresponding cells can be appreciably improved, leading to an admissible PCE while keeping superior device stability. Thus, it is necessary to explore a convenient co-doping strategy to reduce the usage of lead without sacrificing the excellent opto-electronic properties of all-inorganic perovskites or to reduce trap density and suppress the recombination of carriers while keeping the band gap constant. It is very interesting that while many studies based on the co-additive strategy have been reported on different subjects,193–196 a very limited number of studies have been found on all-inorganic perovskite applications. This situation can only be explained by the fact that this subject is still a fairly new field.
In this direction, the co-doping strategy of all-inorganic perovskite materials has been first reported by mixing Mn2+ and Zn2+ ions in CsPbI2Br.197 Based on the combination of MnCl2 and ZnCl2 doping into CsPbI2Br, photovoltaic performances of the PSCs were enhanced due to improved surface morphology, reduced trap density, and suppressed recombination rate. The PCE of the PSC with 0.25% ZnCl2–MnCl2 doping was increased from 13.47 to 14.15% compared with the pristine device. However, no relevant comments about the dopants or co-doping effect have been discussed in this study.
Interestingly, Chang et al. very recently co-doped Zn2+ and Mn2+ in the all-inorganic perovskite structure of CsPb1−x−yMnxZnyBr3.198 The obtained results showed that the Zn2+ dopant reduces the optical band gap and exciton binding energy of the CsPbBr3 perovskite whereas the Mn2+ dopant reduces the structural disorder. By the co-doping strategy, they also reported as much as 50% reduction of the toxic Pb without deteriorating the opto-electronic properties and exciton recombination while the maximum reduction of the toxic Pb was ∼12.5% with only Zn dopant. In the same direction, the influence of partial substitution of Pb2+ by Bi3+ and Sb3+ on the phase stability of the CsPbI3 perovskite was reported by Zhang et al. without fabricating devices.199 The co-doping of Bi3+ and Sb3+ with a content of 25% stabilized the black phase of CsPbI3 by radically reducing the temperature of phase transition between α and δ phases. Such a stable phase was ascribed to the longer Pb–I bonds and the contracted volume for the α cell upon co-doping.
Although several studies are reporting the effects of the co-doping B-site strategy on the structural and opto-electronic properties of perovskite films without fabricating perovskite devices,200,201 these findings highlight a promising direction toward stable all-inorganic perovskite materials with tailored electronic properties for photovoltaic applications.
3. Conclusions and future outlook
Owing to the effects of halides where I− tunes the band gap into the useful range for photovoltaic applications and Br− imparts electrostatic stability,202 the full series of CsPbIxBr3−x may be operated to obtain the optimum combination of PCE due to its tunable band gap value and material stability.59,203 Nevertheless, this does not meet the sufficient criteria for the cells of interest to compete with their hybrid counterparts. Recently, researchers have been intensely focused on tackling these issues. Despite the various attempts such as halide exchange, encapsulation, interface engineering, and nanocrystallization, one of the best ways of improving PSCs has been through using Pb-site dopants – small traces of suitable elements that are added during the perovskite fabrication process.
Despite the meritorious effects of the B-site doping strategy, the primary requirement to achieve remarkably stable efficiencies is a deep understanding of the relationship between the perovskite structure and the photophysics of dopants. Partially substituting Pb2+ with other elements changes the physical and chemical properties of the material, boosting the stability and efficiency of the ensuing cells. As detailed above, the dopants used to replace Pb2+ include isovalent/heterovalent elements, alkaline earth metals, transition metals, lanthanides, or their combinations. For example, as a widely used B-site element, Sn2+ substitution enables a better spatial match of the A-site cation (Cs+) with the surrounding MI6 (M = Pb/Sn) octahedra by decreasing the volume of the latter, thus stabilizing the perovskite structure. However, the rapid oxidation of Sn accelerates the degradation of the absorber layer within the devices.204 Similarly, while some dopants stabilize all-inorganic perovskites, they increase the band gap of materials and induce a high carrier effective mass owing to the lack of p electrons in the outer shell. On the other hand, different dopants should be excluded due to their rareness and high material cost. Furthermore, the substitution of trivalent cations should be an effective approach to reduce the Pb2+ toxicity, but the doping concentration of such cations is quite low (generally lower than 5%). Divalent cations should significantly reduce the amount of the Pb component, but such cations increase the band gap and exciton binding energy of the corresponding perovskite and thus deteriorate the photovoltaic performance due to the strong effect of s orbitals.205
With regard to the preceding instances, it is noteworthy to remark on an outlook concerning how to solve the problems related to B-site doping, including theory, methods, materials, etc. These complex and unpredictable results make the selection and employment criteria of the dopant elements even more important to bring about a beneficial effect. Despite the rapid progress in all-inorganic perovskites by B-site doping, there is still a long way to become competitive with other rivals and take a step towards the commercialization of CsPbX3-based PSCs. There are many new opportunities and challenges that need to be addressed in the future. In other words, plenty of effort is still needed to obtain high-quality all-inorganic perovskite films and improve the final device performance. In this context, the evaluation of new modifications and approaches will be important in shortening this process. To guide the researchers, we can list the alternative ways and the deficits in this area as follows:
(i) The Sn-based all-inorganic perovskite is one of the top priorities and urgent issues waiting to be resolved. The Sn-based all-inorganic perovskite has a narrow band gap of ∼1.17 eV which shows the possibility of further boosting the performance of inorganic PSCs soon. For this reason, the solution of vacancy defects and rapid oxidation-based current problems of Sn-based perovskites is an important milestone to take the next step. In this regard, researchers can explore ways to provide solutions for the Sn-rich perovskite devices by introducing new approaches, i.e., some antioxidant additive materials.
(ii) Aside from A-site and B-site substitution, passivation treatment by introducing a functional anion such as fluoride (F−), acetate (Ac−), sulfate (SO42−), thiocyanate (SCN−), and so on can be another effective way to regulate the structural, morphological and opto-electronic properties of all-inorganic perovskites. For example, Ac− anions have been used to partially substitute the I− or Br− ions in CsPbIxBr3−x perovskites to control surface morphology and to stabilize their crystal structure based on the strong interaction between Pb2+ and the Ac− anions.206,207 Also, F− is a strong electron-withdrawing group, which demonstrates more promising interaction with the divalent metal cation than other halides. This can suppress trap-states and oxidation of Sn2+ in particular.208–210 However, there has been relatively little work exploring the replacement of the familiar halide anions in CsPbIxBr3−x perovskites with new anions.
(iii) Apart from halogen ions, because of their resemblance to the traditional halides, researchers have recently focused on pseudohalides showing significant chemical properties and chemical stability.211 Jiang et al. have reported that SCN− can occupy the X-site in the structure of the ABX3 perovskite and improve the phase stability and passivate defects of perovskite materials owing to an almost identical ionic radius of SCN− (217 pm) with I− (220 pm).212 Currently, Liu et al. realized a stable and photoactive α-phase CsPbI3 by doping the pseudohalide ion SCN−.213 It is demonstrated that SCN− ions improve the crystallinity and stability of perovskite films. As is known, the surface and interior defects are mainly associated with the halide vacancies, that occur in the absence of I− or Br− ions on the surface of solution-processed perovskite films.89,214 In this context, pseudohalide anions can be investigated in connection with CsPbIxBr3−x to eliminate a prevalent and notorious defect in the perovskite films. Similarly, although the co-doping B-site strategy is a fruitful approach for improving photovoltaic performance and device stability, there are limited number of co-doping studies in the literature. Therefore, we can suggest that such studies should be widespread in the literature with appropriate elements.
(iv) Indeed, facile B-site doping has been demonstrated and is now widely used in both thin films and nanocrystals of all-inorganic perovskites.215 Inspired by these studies, relevant adaptations can be also applied to photovoltaic devices. For example, Zhang et al. demonstrated the high potential of lanthanide-based neodymium(III) (Nd3+) which has a similar ionic radius (0.98 Å) to Pb2+ in 6-fold coordination.216 Nd3+ doping into CsPbBr3 led to prolonged phase stability, which was attributed to increased Goldschmidt's tolerance factor, and enhanced PLQY due to the association by lattice contraction.
Another promising direction to obtain high-quality all-inorganic perovskite films and improve the final device performance could be the formation of suitable band alignment between high-quality charge-transporting layers and the perovskite layer. The rational selection of both electron transport layer (ETL) and HTL materials can spontaneously eliminate the opto-electronic losses in the devices by transferring the photogenerated charges effectively.217,218 Considering the overall assessment, although the B-site doping strategy plays a key role in improving device performance and prolonging stability, not only understanding in great depth the mechanism of the doping process but also further investigations are required to reach the commercialization goals. We believe that the B-site doping strategy will play a prominent role in shaping the development of perovskite technologies.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
S. A. would like to thank the Turkish Science Academy's Young Scientist Awards Programme (BAGEP). F. S. acknowledges the financial support from the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK, Project number: 120C126). W. X. thanks the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51972255, 52211540391).
References
NREL, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart (accessed 10/06/2022).
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Seo, H. S. Kim, S. Akin, M. Stojanovic, E. Simon, M. Fleischer, A. Hagfeldt, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2985–2992 RSC .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef CAS .
N. Arora, M. I. Dar, S. Akin, R. Uchida, T. Baumeler, Y. H. Liu, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Small, 2019, 15, 1904746 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Seo, T. Matsui, J. S. Luo, J. P. Correa-Baena, F. Giordano, M. Saliba, K. Schenk, A. Ummadisingu, K. Domanski, M. Hadadian, A. Hagfeldt, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Steiner, M. Gratzel and A. Abate, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600767 CrossRef .
Y. H. Liu, S. Akin, A. Hinderhofer, F. T. Eickemeyer, H. W. Zhu, J. Y. Seo, J. H. Zhang, F. Schreiber, H. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. I. Dar and M. Gratzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15688–15694 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Sadegh, S. Akin, M. Moghadam, R. Keshavarzi, V. Mirkhani, M. A. Ruiz-Preciado, E. Akman, H. Zhang, M. Amini, S. Tangestaninejad, I. Mohammadpoor-Baltork, M. Graetzel, A. Hagfeldt and W. Tress, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102237 CrossRef .
J. Z. Chen and N. G. Park, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2742–2786 CrossRef .
C. Quarti, E. Mosconi, J. M. Ball, V. D'Innocenzo, C. Tao, S. Pathak, H. J. Snaith, A. Petrozza and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 155–163 RSC .
N. Aristidou, C. Eames, I. Sanchez-Molina, X. N. Bu, J. Kosco, M. S. Islam and S. A. Haque, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15218 CrossRef .
D. Bryant, N. Aristidou, S. Pont, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchuangchutchaval, S. Wheeler, J. R. Durrant and S. A. Haque, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1850 RSC .
J. Rappich, F. Lang, V. V. Brus, O. Shargaieva, T. Dittrich and N. H. Nickel, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900216 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Wu, M. T. Trinh, D. Niesner, H. M. Zhu, Z. Norman, J. S. Owen, O. Yaffe, B. J. Kudisch and X. Y. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2089–2096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Tavakoli, W. Tress, J. V. Milic, D. Kubicki, L. Emsley and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3310–3320 RSC .
M. M. Tavakoli, P. Yadav, D. Prochowicz, M. Sponseller, A. Osherov, V. Bulovic and J. Kong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803587 CrossRef .
Z. L. Chen, H. K. Zhang, F. Yao, C. Tao, G. J. Fang and G. Li, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2020, 1, 100205 CrossRef .
T. J. Jacobsson, J. P. Correa-Baen, M. Pazoki, M. Saliba, K. Schenk, M. Gratzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1706–1724 RSC .
E. Akman, A. E. Shalan, F. Sadegh and S. Akin, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 1176–1183 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kim, H. Min, K. S. Lee, D. Y. Lee, S. M. Yoon and S. I. Seok, Science, 2020, 370, 108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Liu, J. B. Zhao, Z. K. Li, C. Mu, W. Ma, H. W. Hu, K. Jiang, H. R. Lin, H. Ade and H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5293 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Correa-Baena, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, T. J. Jacobsson, M. Gratzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 710–727 RSC .
J. Hieulle, X. M. Wang, C. Stecker, D. Y. Son, L. B. Qu, R. Ohmann, L. K. Ono, A. Mugarza, Y. F. Yan and Y. B. Qi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3515–3523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Lin, S. Y. Li, W. S. Zhang, C. J. Shao and Z. Q. Yang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1374–1380 CrossRef CAS .
T. Baumeler, N. Arora, A. Hinderhofer, S. Akin, A. Greco, M. Abdi-Jalebi, R. Shivanna, R. Uchida, Y. H. Liu, F. Schreiber, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. H. Friend, M. Graetzel and M. I. Dar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 10188–10195 CrossRef CAS .
J. Albero, A. M. Asiri and H. Garcia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4353–4364 RSC .
Y. H. Wu, H. W. Zhu, B. B. Yu, S. Akin, Y. H. Liu, Z. J. Shen, L. F. Pan and H. Z. Cai, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 433, 134613 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476 CrossRef .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J. Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Correa-Baena, L. Nienhaus, R. C. Kurchin, S. S. Shin, S. Wieghold, N. T. P. Hartono, M. Layurova, N. D. Klein, J. R. Poindexter, A. Polizzotti, S. J. Sun, M. G. Bawendi and T. Buonassisi, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3734–3742 CrossRef .
C. W. Myung, J. Yun, G. Lee and K. S. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702898 CrossRef .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
J. W. Lee, D. H. Kim, H. S. Kim, S. W. Seo, S. M. Cho and N. G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501310 CrossRef .
C. Y. Yi, J. S. Luo, S. Meloni, A. Boziki, N. Ashari-Astani, C. Gratzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Rothlisberger and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 656–662 RSC .
E. Akman and S. Akin, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Akin, E. Akman and S. Sonmezoglu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002964 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Liu, S. Akin, L. F. Pan, R. Uchida, N. Arora, J. V. Milic, A. Hinderhofer, F. Schreiber, A. R. Uhl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. I. Dar and M. Gratzel, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, aaw2543 CrossRef .
T. Ozturk, A. Sarilmaz, S. Akin, H. Dursun, F. Ozel and E. Akman, Sol. RRL, 2022, 6, 2100737 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Seo, S. Akin, M. Zalibera, M. A. R. Preciado, H. S. Kim, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. V. Millc and M. Gratzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102124 CrossRef CAS .
S. Akin, B. T. Dong, L. Pfeifer, Y. H. Liu, M. Graetzel and A. Hagfeldt, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2004593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Akin, N. Arora, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Gratzel, R. H. Friend and M. I. Dar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903090 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Dagnall, B. J. Foley, S. A. Cuthriell, M. R. Alpert, X. Y. Deng, A. Z. Chen, Z. M. Sun, M. C. Gupta, K. Xiao, S. H. Lee, Y. Z. Ma and J. J. Choi, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1298–1304 CrossRef CAS .
B. Philippe, M. Saliba, J. P. Correa-Baena, U. B. Cappel, S. H. Turren-Cruz, M. Gratzel, A. Hagfeldt and H. Rensmo, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3589–3596 CrossRef CAS .
L. Iagher and L. Etgar, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 366–372 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Li, J. Xu, S. J. Zhou, B. Zhang, X. L. Liu, S. Y. Dai and J. X. Yao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 38183–38192 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Wang, H. Bian, Z. W. Jin, H. Zhang, L. Liang, J. L. Wen, Q. Wang, L. M. Ding and S. F. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 6231–6238 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. I. Dar, L. K. Ono, T. Y. Zhang, M. Kan, Y. W. Li, L. J. Zhang, X. T. Wang, Y. G. Yang, X. Y. Gao, Y. B. Qi, M. Gratzel and Y. X. Zhao, Science, 2019, 365, 591 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Yang, Y. Song, J. S. Yao, K. H. Wang, J. J. Wang, B. S. Zhu, M. M. Yao, S. U. Rahman, Y. F. Lan, F. J. Fan and H. B. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2956–2967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Zhang, C. Y. Yin, F. Yang, Y. Yao, F. L. Yuan, H. T. Chen, R. W. Wang, S. Bai, G. L. Tu and L. T. Hou, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 2437–2443 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. He, L. Matei, H. J. Jung, K. M. McCall, M. Chen, C. C. Stoumpos, Z. F. Liu, J. A. Peters, D. Y. Chung, B. W. Wessels, M. R. Wasielewski, V. P. Dravid, A. Burger and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1609 CrossRef .
T. Zhang, F. Wang, P. Zhang, Y. F. Wang, H. Chen, J. Li, J. Wu, L. Chen, Z. D. Chen and S. B. Li, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 2871–2877 RSC .
H. Y. Chen, L. L. Zhou, Z. Fang, S. Z. Wang, T. Yang, L. P. Zhu, X. M. Hou, H. L. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2011073 CrossRef .
G. X. Xie, X. Y. Yang, J. L. Duan, Y. Y. Duan and Q. W. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11966–11975 RSC .
Q. Y. Shang, M. L. Li, L. Y. Zhao, D. W. Chen, S. Zhang, S. L. Chen, P. Gao, C. Shen, J. Xing, G. C. Xing, B. Shen, X. F. Liu and Q. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 6636–6643 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692–3696 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Dursun, Y. Z. Zheng, T. L. Guo, M. De Bastiani, B. Turedi, L. Sinatra, M. A. Hague, B. Sun, A. A. Zhumekenov, M. I. Saidaminov, F. P. G. de Arquer, E. H. Sargent, T. Wu, Y. N. Gartstein, O. M. Bakr, O. F. Mohammed and A. V. Malko, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1492–1498 CrossRef .
K. M. Sim, A. Swarnkar, A. Nag and D. S. Chung, Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 12, 430–459 Search PubMed .
Y. Z. Jiang, J. Yuan, Y. X. Ni, J. Yang, Y. Wang, T. G. Jiu, M. J. Yuan and J. Chen, Joule, 2018, 2, 1356–1368 CrossRef .
R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, L. Miranda, E. S. Parrott, B. A. Kamino, J. B. Patel, M. T. Horantner, M. B. Johnston, A. A. Haghighirad, D. T. Moore and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502458 CrossRef .
J. De Roo, M. Ibanez, P. Geiregat, G. Nedelcu, W. Walravens, J. Maes, J. C. Martins, I. Van Driessche, M. V. Koyalenko and Z. Hens, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2071–2081 CrossRef .
G. R. Yettapu, D. Talukdar, S. Sarkar, A. Swarnkar, A. Nag, P. Ghosh and P. Mandal, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4838–4848 CrossRef .
J. Liang, C. X. Wang, Y. R. Wang, Z. R. Xu, Z. P. Lu, Y. Ma, H. F. Zhu, Y. Hu, C. C. Xiao, X. Yi, G. Y. Zhu, H. L. Lv, L. B. Ma, T. Chen, Z. X. Tie, Z. Jin and J. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15829–15832 CrossRef .
X. Li, Y. Tan, H. Lai, S. P. Li, Y. Chen, S. W. Li, P. Xu and J. Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 29746–29752 CrossRef .
K. Wang, Z. W. Jin, L. Liang, H. Bian, D. L. Bai, H. R. Wang, J. R. Zhang, Q. Wang and S. Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4544 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ahmad, J. Khan, G. D. Niu and J. Tang, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1700048 CrossRef .
R. J. Sutton, M. R. Filip, A. A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, B. Wenger, F. Giustino and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1787–1794 CrossRef .
T. Y. Zhang, M. I. Dar, G. Li, F. Xu, N. J. Guo, M. Gratzel and Y. X. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 1700841 CrossRef .
A. Swarnkar, A. R. Marshall, E. M. Sanehira, B. D. Chernomordik, D. T. Moore, J. A. Christians, T. Chakrabarti and J. M. Luther, Science, 2016, 354, 92–95 CrossRef PubMed .
D. B. Straus, S. Guo and R. J. Cava, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 11435–11439 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Marronnier, G. Roma, S. Boyer-Richard, L. Pedesseau, J. M. Jancu, Y. Bonnassieux, C. Katan, C. C. Stoumpos, M. G. Kanatzidis and J. Even, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3477–3486 CrossRef .
F. Ke, C. X. Wang, C. J. Jia, N. R. Wolf, J. J. Yan, S. Y. Niu, T. P. Devereaux, H. I. Karunadasa, W. L. Mao and Y. Lin, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 461 CrossRef .
D. B. Straus, S. Guo, A. M. M. Abeykoon and R. J. Cava, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001069 CrossRef .
J. A. Steele, H. D. Jin, I. Dovgaliuk, R. F. Berger, T. Braeckevelt, H. F. Yuan, C. Martin, E. Solano, K. Lejaeghere, S. M. J. Rogge, C. Notebaert, W. Vandezande, K. P. F. Janssen, B. Goderis, E. Debroye, Y. K. Wang, Y. T. Dong, D. X. Ma, M. Saidaminov, H. R. Tan, Z. H. Lu, V. Dyadkin, D. Chernyshov, V. Van Speybroeck, E. H. Sargent, J. Hofkens and M. B. J. Roeffaers, Science, 2019, 365, 679 CrossRef .
H. H. Yao, J. Zhao, Z. Z. Li, Z. P. Ci and Z. W. Jin, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 1221–1235 RSC .
Z. B. Zhang, R. Ji, M. Kroll, Y. J. Hofstetter, X. K. Jia, D. Becker-Koch, F. Paulus, M. Loffler, F. Nehm, K. Leo and Y. Vaynzof, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100299 CrossRef .
V. M. Goldschmidt, Naturwissenschaften, 1926, 14, 477–485 CrossRef .
R. D. Shannon, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Cryst. Phys., Diffr., Theor. Gen. Crystallogr., 1976, 32, 751–767 CrossRef .
A. Ho-Baillie, M. Zhang, C. F. J. Lau, F. J. Ma and S. J. Huang, Joule, 2019, 3, 938–955 CrossRef .
J. L. Duan, Y. Y. Zhao, B. L. He and Q. W. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3787–3791 CrossRef .
S. J. Zhou, R. Tang and L. W. Yin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703682 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Q. Wang, W. N. Dong, A. Gurung, K. Chen, F. Wu, Q. Q. He, R. Pathak and Q. Q. Qiao, J. Power Sources, 2019, 432, 48–54 CrossRef .
J. L. Duan, Y. Y. Zhao, B. L. He and Q. W. Tang, Small, 2018, 14, 1704443 CrossRef .
W. D. Zhu, Q. N. Zhang, D. Z. Chen, Z. Y. Zhang, Z. H. Lin, J. J. Chang, J. C. Zhang, C. F. Zhang and Y. Hao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802080 CrossRef .
P. Y. Wang, X. W. Zhang, Y. Q. Zhou, Q. Jiang, Q. F. Ye, Z. M. Chu, X. X. Li, X. L. Yang, Z. G. Yin and J. B. You, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2225 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, T. Y. Zhang, M. Kan and Y. X. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12345–12348 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Ozturk, E. Akman, A. E. Shalan and S. Akin, Nano Energy, 2021, 87, 106157 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. I. Dar, L. K. Ono, T. Y. Zhang, M. Kan, Y. W. Li, L. J. Zhang, X. T. Wang, Y. G. Yang, X. Y. Gao, Y. B. Qi, M. Gratzel and Y. X. Zhao, Science, 2019, 365, 591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Yoon, H. Min, J. B. Kim, G. Kim, K. S. Lee and S. I. Seok, Joule, 2021, 5, 183–196 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Gu, W. C. Xiang, Q. W. Tian and S. Z. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 23164–23170 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Ke and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 965 CrossRef .
C. F. J. Lau, M. Zhang, X. F. Deng, J. H. Zheng, J. M. Bing, Q. S. Ma, J. Kim, L. Hu, M. A. Green, S. J. Huang and A. Ho-Baillie, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2319–2325 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fang, M. H. Shang, X. M. Hou, Y. P. Zheng, Z. T. Du, Z. B. Yang, K. C. Chou, W. Y. Yang, Z. L. Wang and Y. Yang, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 389–396 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Mir, Y. Mahor, A. Lohar, M. Jagadeeswararao, S. Das, S. Mahamuni and A. Nag, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8170–8178 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Li, J. W. Chen, L. M. Xu, S. N. Liu, S. Lan, X. S. Li and J. Z. Song, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 1444–1453 RSC .
Y. Q. Hu, F. Bai, X. B. Liu, Q. M. Ji, X. L. Miao, T. Qiu and S. F. Zhang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2219–2227 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Ma, L. Q. Yang, K. X. Lei, S. J. Zheng, C. Chen and H. W. Song, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105354 CrossRef CAS .
G. Q. Wang, M. Lei, J. Q. Liu, Q. Q. He and W. Zhang, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000528 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 489–494 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Sun, J. Zhang, X. L. Gan, L. T. Yu, H. B. Yuan, M. H. Shang, C. J. Lu, D. G. Hou, Z. Y. Hu, Y. J. Zhu and L. Y. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900896 CrossRef .
A. Swarnkar, W. J. Mir and A. Nag, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 286–289 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Ke, I. Spanopoulos, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4785 CrossRef .
M. X. Tang, B. L. He, D. W. Dou, Y. Liu, J. L. Duan, Y. Y. Zhao, H. Y. Chen and Q. W. Tang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 375, 121930 CrossRef .
S. H. Zou, Y. S. Liu, J. H. Li, C. P. Liu, R. Feng, F. L. Jiang, Y. X. Li, J. Z. Song, H. B. Zeng, M. C. Hong and X. Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11443–11450 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Correa-Baena, Y. Q. Luo, T. M. Brenner, J. Snaider, S. J. Sun, X. Y. Li, M. A. Jensen, N. T. P. Hartono, L. Nienhaus, S. Wieghold, J. R. Poindexter, S. Wang, Y. S. Meng, T. Wang, B. Lai, M. V. Holt, Z. H. Cai, M. G. Bawendi, L. B. Huang, T. Buonassisi and D. P. Fenning, Science, 2019, 363, 627 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, A. J. Pearson, G. Divitini, S. Cacovich, B. Philippe, H. Rensmo, C. Ducati, R. H. Friend and S. D. Stranks, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2671 CrossRef PubMed .
D. P. McMeekin, Z. P. Wang, W. Rehman, F. Pulvirenti, J. B. Patel, N. K. Noel, M. B. Johnston, S. R. Marder, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607039 CrossRef PubMed .
C. F. J. Lau, X. F. Deng, J. H. Zheng, J. Kim, Z. L. Zhang, M. Zhang, J. M. Bing, B. Wilkinson, L. Hu, R. Patterson, S. J. Huang and A. Ho-Baillie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5580–5586 RSC .
R. Buonsanti and D. J. Milliron, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1305–1317 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Y. H. Chen, Z. H. Liu, Q. Chen, X. D. Wang and H. P. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9862 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, H. Zhao, C. Y. Duan, S. M. Yang, Z. Yang, Z. K. Liu and S. Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909972 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Chen, H. Y. Chen, G. Y. Xu, R. M. Xue, S. H. Wang, Y. W. Li and Y. F. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 304 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Kubicki, D. Prochowicz, A. Pinon, G. Stevanato, A. Hofstetter, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Gratzel and L. Emsley, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2326–2333 RSC .
W. C. Xiang, Z. W. Wang, D. J. Kubicki, W. Tress, J. S. Luo, D. Prochowicz, S. Akin, L. Emsley, J. T. Zhou, G. Dietler, M. Gratzel and A. Hagfeldt, Joule, 2019, 3, 205–214 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Xiang, Z. W. Wang, D. J. Kubicki, X. T. Wang, W. Tress, J. S. Luo, J. H. Zhang, A. Hofstetter, L. J. Zhang, L. Emsley, M. Gratzel and A. Hagfeldt, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4686 CrossRef .
J. S. Yao, J. Ge, K. H. Wang, G. Z. Zhang, B. S. Zhu, C. Chen, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, S. H. Yu and H. B. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2069–2079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kajal, G. H. Kim, C. W. Myung, Y. S. Shin, J. Kim, J. Jeong, A. Jana, J. Y. Kim and K. S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21740–21746 RSC .
C. L. Chen, Y. Xu, S. H. Wu, S. S. Zhang, Z. C. Yang, W. J. Zhang, H. M. Zhu, Z. Z. Xiong, W. T. Chen and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7903–7912 RSC .
W. S. Subhani, K. Wang, M. Y. Du and S. F. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 165–172 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Mali, J. V. Patil and C. K. Hong, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6213–6220 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Zhao, Y. D. Wang, J. L. Duan, X. Y. Yang and Q. W. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6877–6882 RSC .
C. F. J. Lau, X. F. Deng, J. H. Zheng, J. Kim, Z. L. Zhang, M. Zhang, J. M. Bing, B. Wilkinson, L. Hu, R. Patterson, S. J. Huang and A. Ho-Baillie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5580–5586 RSC .
L. M. Dong, Z. Chen, L. Ye, Y. Yu, J. B. Zhang, H. Liu and J. F. Zang, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1733–1738 CrossRef .
C. W. Li, Z. N. Song, D. W. Zhao, C. X. Xiao, B. Subedi, N. Shrestha, M. M. Junda, C. L. Wang, C. S. Jiang, M. Al-Jassim, R. J. Ellingson, N. J. Podraza, K. Zhu and Y. F. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803135 CrossRef .
Z. B. Yang, A. Rajagopal, C. C. Chueh, S. B. Jo, B. Liu, T. Zhao and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8990–8997 CrossRef .
M. R. Filip, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith and F. Giustino, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5757 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. Wang, A. L. Wang and F. Hao, iScience, 2022, 25, 103599 CrossRef .
L. Lanzetta, T. Webb, N. Zibouche, X. X. Liang, D. Ding, G. H. Min, R. J. E. Westbrook, B. Gaggio, T. J. Macdonald, M. S. Islam and S. A. Haque, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2853 CrossRef .
Z. B. Yang, X. H. Zhang, W. Y. Yang, G. E. Eperon and D. S. Ginger, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 2782–2794 CrossRef .
M. Y. Hu, M. Chen, P. J. Guo, H. Zhou, J. J. Deng, Y. D. Yao, Y. Jiang, J. Gong, Z. H. Dai, Y. X. Zhou, F. Qian, X. Y. Chong, J. Feng, R. D. Schaller, K. Zhu, N. P. Padture and Y. Y. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 151 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liang, P. Y. Zhao, C. X. Wang, Y. R. Wang, Y. Hu, G. Y. Zhu, L. B. Ma, J. Liu and Z. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14009–14012 CrossRef .
N. Li, Z. L. Zhu, J. W. Li, A. K. Y. Jen and L. D. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800525 CrossRef .
M. H. Abib, J. C. Li, H. M. Yang, M. Wang, T. T. Chen, E. Xu and Y. Jiang, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 3380–3389 RSC .
H. Y. Guo, Y. Pei, J. Zhang, C. Cai, K. Zhou and Y. J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 11234–11243 RSC .
A. Babayigit, D. D. Thanh, A. Ethirajan, J. Manca, M. Muller, H. G. Boyen and B. Conings, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 18721 CrossRef .
M. Li, F. M. Li, J. Gong, T. K. Zhang, F. Gao, W. H. Zhang and M. Z. Liu, Small Struct., 2022, 3, 2100102 CrossRef .
F. Yang, D. Hirotani, G. Kapil, M. A. Kamarudin, C. H. Ng, Y. H. Zhang, Q. Shen and S. Hayase, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 12745–12749 CrossRef PubMed .
S. F. Hoefler, G. Trimmel and T. Rath, Monatsh. Chem., 2017, 148, 795–826 CrossRef .
J. Yin, G. H. Ahmed, O. M. Bakr, J. L. Bredas and O. F. Mohammed, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 789–795 CrossRef .
P. K. Nayak, M. Sendner, B. Wenger, Z. P. Wang, K. Sharma, A. J. Ramadan, R. Lovrincic, A. Pucci, P. K. Madhu and H. J. Snaith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 574–577 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, M. H. Shang, P. Wang, X. K. Huang, J. Xu, Z. Y. Hu, Y. J. Zhu and L. Y. Han, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 535–541 CrossRef .
S. S. Xiang, W. P. Li, Y. Wei, J. M. Liu, H. C. Liu, L. Q. Zhu and H. N. Chen, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9996–10004 RSC .
S. Bera, D. Ghosh, A. Dutta, S. Bhattacharyya, S. Chakraborty and N. Pradhan, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1364–1369 CrossRef .
X. M. Li, K. L. Wang, F. Lgbari, C. Dong, W. F. Yang, C. Ma, H. Ma, Z. K. Wang and L. S. Liao, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 2203–2208 CrossRef .
C. Liu, W. Z. Li, H. Y. Li, H. M. Wang, C. L. Zhang, Y. G. Yang, X. Y. Gao, Q. F. Xue, H. L. Yip, J. D. Fan, R. E. I. Schropp and Y. H. Mai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803572 CrossRef .
S. S. Mali, J. V. Patil, J. A. Steele, S. R. Rondiya, N. Y. Dzade and C. K. Hong, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 778–788 CrossRef .
W. H. Zhang, H. Liu, X. N. Qi, Y. Y. Yu, Y. C. Zhou, Y. Xia, J. S. Cui, Y. Q. Shi, R. Chen and H. L. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, 2106054 CrossRef .
S. S. Zheng, X. R. Li, B. Y. Yan, Q. Hu, Y. X. Xu, X. Xiao, H. G. Xue and H. Pang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602733 CrossRef .
Z. Yao, W. G. Zhao, S. J. Chen, Z. W. Jin and S. Z. R. Liu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 5190–5197 CrossRef .
Q. A. Akkerman, D. Meggiolaro, Z. Y. Dang, F. De Angelis and L. Manna, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2183–2186 CrossRef .
D. L. Bai, J. R. Zhang, Z. W. Jin, H. Bian, K. Wang, H. R. Wang, L. Liang, Q. Wang and S. F. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 970 CrossRef CAS .
A. Biswas, R. Bakthavatsalam and J. Kundu, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7816–7825 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ricciarelli, D. Meggiolaro, P. Belanzoni, A. A. Alothman, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 1869–1878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, Z. H. Liu, L. J. Qiu, Z. Hawash, L. Q. Meng, Z. F. Wu, Y. Jiang, L. K. Ono and Y. B. Qi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800504 CrossRef .
J. J. Lu, S. C. Chen and Q. D. Zheng, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 1044–1050 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Wu, F. X. Xie, H. Chen, X. D. Yang, H. M. Su, M. L. Cai, Z. M. Zhou, T. Noda and L. Y. Han, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701073 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Zhou, O. S. Game, S. P. Pang and N. P. Padture, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4827–4839 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Chen, D. G. Hou, C. J. Lu, J. Zhang, P. Liu, H. Tian, Z. B. Zeng, Q. Xiong, Z. Y. Hu, Y. J. Zhu and L. Y. Han, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 1093–1100 RSC .
Y. J. Long, C. Y. Wang, X. H. Liu, J. H. Wang, S. Q. Fu, J. Zhang, Z. Y. Hu and Y. J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 2145–2155 RSC .
Z. Kang, H. N. Si, M. Y. Shi, C. Z. Xu, W. Q. Fan, S. F. Ma, A. Kausar, Q. L. Liao, Z. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Sci. China Mater., 2019, 62, 776–789 CrossRef CAS .
P. Y. Liu, X. Q. Yang, Y. H. Chen, H. M. Xiang, W. Wang, R. Ran, W. Zhou and Z. P. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 23984–23994 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, M. U. Rothmann, A. Liu, Z. Y. Wang, Y. P. Zhang, A. R. Pascoe, J. F. Lu, L. C. Jiang, Y. Chen, F. Z. Huang, Y. Peng, Q. L. Bao, J. Etheridge, U. Bach and Y. B. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700946 CrossRef .
Z. L. Guo, S. Zhao, A. M. Liu, Y. Kamata, S. Teo, S. Z. Yang, Z. H. Xu, S. Hayase and T. L. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 19994–20003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. V. Patil, S. S. Mali and C. K. Hong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27176–27183 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Chen, L. Wan, X. D. Li, W. X. Zhang, S. Fu, Y. M. Wang, S. Li, H. Q. Wang, W. J. Song and J. F. Fang, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 9032–9039 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, W. J. Li, Z. B. Du, G. D. Li, W. H. Sun, J. H. Wu and Z. Lan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 1649–1655 RSC .
M. Wang, K. M. Deng, L. X. Meng and L. Li, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1900652 CrossRef .
S. L. Chen, X. L. Liu, Z. Wang, W. H. Li, X. Y. Gu, J. Lin, T. Y. Yang, X. Y. Gao and A. K. K. Kyaw, Adv. Energy Sust. Res., 2021, 2, 2000099 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, C. Kang, G. Zhang, Z. Pan, Z. Huang, S. Xu, H. Rao, H. Liu, S. Wu, X. Wu, X. Li, Z. Zhu, X. Zhong and A. K. J. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2005930 CrossRef .
R. F. Wang, H. M. Zhang, S. Q. Han, Y. Z. Wu, Z. N. Hu, G. X. Zhang, H. X. Liu, Q. C. He and X. J. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 9243–9250 RSC .
Y. Xu, G. D. Li, Y. Jing, H. Y. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Lu, J. H. Wu and Z. Lan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 608, 40–47 CrossRef .
G. C. Pan, X. Bai, D. W. Yang, X. Chen, P. T. Jing, S. N. Qu, L. J. Zhang, D. L. Zhou, J. Y. Zhu, W. Xu, B. Dong and H. W. Song, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 8005–8011 CrossRef .
S. L. Chen, T. J. Zhang, X. L. Liu, J. L. Qiao, L. Peng, J. Wang, Y. S. Liu, T. Y. Yang and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 3351–3358 RSC .
Z. L. Song, W. Xu, Y. J. Wu, S. N. Liu, W. B. Bi, X. F. Chen and H. W. Song, Small, 2020, 16, 2001770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. G. Wang, H. P. Zhou, J. N. Hu, B. L. Huang, M. Z. Sun, B. W. Dong, G. H. J. Zheng, Y. Huang, Y. H. Chen, L. Li, Z. Q. Xu, N. X. Li, Z. Liu, Q. Chen, L. D. Sun and C. H. Yan, Science, 2019, 363, 265 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. van der Ende, L. Aarts and A. Meijerink, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 11081–11095 RSC .
W. J. Mir, T. Sheikh, H. Arfin, Z. G. Xia and A. Nag, NPG Asia Mater., 2020, 12, 9 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zheng, P. Huang, Z. L. Gong, D. Tu, J. Xu, Q. L. Zou, R. F. Li, W. W. You, J. C. G. Bunzli and X. Y. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3462 CrossRef .
N. Estebanez, A. Cortes-Villena, J. Ferrera-Gonzalez, M. Gonzalez-Bejar, R. E. Galian, S. Gonzalez-Carrero and J. Perez-Prieto, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003766 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mendez-Gonzalez, A. Penton-Madrigal, A. Pelaiz-Barranco, S. J. A. Figueroa, L. A. S. de Oliveira and B. Concepcion-Rosabal, Physica B, 2014, 434, 171–176 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni, Y. Sanehira, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6668–6674 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alberti, E. Smecca, I. Deretzis, G. Mannino, C. Bongiorno, S. Valastro, S. Sanzaro, G. Fisicaro, A. K. Jena, Y. Numata, Z. L. Guo, C. Spinella, T. Miyasaka and A. La Magna, Adv. Energy Sust. Res., 2021, 2, 2100091 CrossRef .
J. V. Patil, S. S. Mali and C. K. Hong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 16364–16371 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Duan, Y. Y. Zhao, X. Y. Yang, Y. D. Wang, B. L. He and Q. W. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802346 CrossRef .
J. T. W. Wang, Z. P. Wang, S. Pathak, W. Zhang, D. W. deQuilettes, F. Wisnivesky-Rocca-Rivarola, J. Huang, P. K. Nayak, J. B. Patel, H. A. M. Yusof, Y. Vaynzof, R. Zhu, I. Ramirez, J. Zhang, C. Ducati, C. Grovenor, M. B. Johnston, D. S. Ginger, R. J. Nicholas and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2892–2901 RSC .
J. V. Patil, S. S. Mali, D. W. Park and C. K. Hong, Mater. Today Chem., 2021, 22, 100557 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pu, J. Yang, T. Wang, S. Cheng, Q. Cao, J. Zhao, H. Chen, Y. Zhang, T. Xu, I. Tojiboyev, H. Salarie and X. Li, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 70, 9–17 CrossRef .
C. M. Guvenc, Y. Yalcinkaya, S. Ozen, H. Sahin and M. M. Demir, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 24865–24872 CrossRef .
S. K. Karunakaran, G. M. Arumugam, W. T. Yang, S. J. Ge, S. N. Khan, Y. H. Mai, X. Z. Lin and G. W. Yang, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000390 CrossRef .
J. Huang, Y. M. Li, H. Wang, F. H. Zhang and D. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 20230–20236 CrossRef PubMed .
L. B. Chen, W. Wu, J. P. Wang, Z. Y. Qian, R. G. Liu, Y. Y. Niu, Y. H. Chen, X. J. Xie and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 3937–3944 CrossRef .
L. Shen, Y. Yang, T. Zhu, L. Liu, J. Zheng and X. Gong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 19469–19479 CrossRef .
S. S. Mali, J. V. Patil, S. R. Rondiya, N. Y. Dzade, J. A. Steele, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. S. Patil and C. K. Hong, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2203204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Liu, X. Zhang, Z. D. Hao, Y. S. Luo, X. J. Wang and J. H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16379–16384 RSC .
B. Mehmood, M. I. Khan, M. Iqbal, A. Mahmood and W. Al-Masry, Int. J. Energy Res., 2021, 45, 2445–2459 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dashora, C. Ameta, R. Ameta and S. C. Ameta, Int. J. Sustainable Green Energy, 2015, 4, 219–226 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ouyang, J. W. Zheng, Z. F. Huang, L. Zhu and W. C. H. Choy, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 371–379 RSC .
U. Khan, Z. N. Yu, A. A. Khan, A. Zulfiqar and N. Ullah, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2019, 14, 116 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Guo, J. Su, L. Wang, Z. H. Lin, Y. Hao and J. J. Chang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 3393–3400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Zhang, L. Yang, R. Y. Liu and L. J. Chen, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6, 105529 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shao, X. Bai, H. N. Cui, G. C. Pan, P. T. Jing, S. N. Qu, J. Y. Zhu, Y. Zhai, B. Dong and H. W. Song, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 1023–1029 RSC .
D. Ricciarelli, E. Mosconi, B. Merabet, O. Bizzarri and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 5482–5489 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mariotti, O. S. Hutter, L. J. Phillips, P. J. Yates, B. Kundu and K. Durose, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3750–3760 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Beal, D. J. Slotcavage, T. Leijtens, A. R. Bowring, R. A. Belisle, W. H. Nguyen, G. F. Burkhard, E. T. Hoke and M. D. McGehee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 746–751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, C. Ding, Y. H. Zhang, T. S. Ripolles, T. Kamisaka, T. Toyoda, S. Hayase, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino, S. Y. Dai, M. Yanagida, H. Noguchi and Q. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16708–16719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chatterjee and A. J. Pal, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3793–3823 RSC .
H. Zhao, Y. Han, Z. Xu, C. Y. Duan, S. M. Yang, S. H. Yuan, Z. Yang, Z. K. Liu and S. Z. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902279 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Yang, H. Zhao, Y. Han, C. Y. Duan, Z. K. Liu and S. Z. Liu, Small, 2019, 15, 1904387 CrossRef .
T. M. Koh, T. Krishnamoorthy, N. Yantara, C. Shi, W. L. Leong, P. P. Boix, A. C. Grimsdale, S. G. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14996–15000 RSC .
G. C. Xing, M. H. Kumar, W. K. Chong, X. F. Liu, Y. Cai, H. Ding, M. Asta, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar, N. Mathews and T. C. Sum, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8191–8196 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Lee, S. S. Shin, Y. C. Kim, D. Kim, T. K. Ahn, J. H. Noh, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3974–3977 CrossRef .
F. Bella, A. Sacco, G. P. Salvador, S. Bianco, E. Tresso, C. F. Pirri and R. Bongiovanni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 20421–20430 CrossRef .
Q. Jiang, D. Rebollar, J. Gong, E. L. Piacentino, C. Zheng and T. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11006 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yao, Z. W. Jin, X. R. Zhang, Q. Wang, H. Zhang, Z. Xu, L. M. Ding and S. Z. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 13736–13742 RSC .
W. Q. Wu, P. N. Rudd, Z. Y. Ni, C. H. Van Brackle, H. T. Wei, Q. Wang, B. R. Ecker, Y. L. Gao and J. S. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 3989–3996 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon and D. S. Ginger, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1190–1196 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Xie, B. Peng, I. Bravic, Y. Yu, Y. R. Dong, R. Q. Liang, Q. R. Ou, B. Monserrat and S. Y. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2001698 CrossRef CAS .
S. Akin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 39998–40005 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sadegh, S. Akin, M. Moghadam, V. Mirkhani, M. A. Ruiz-Preciado, Z. W. Wang, M. M. Tavakoli, M. Graetzel, A. Hagfeldt and W. Tress, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 105038 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Erdi Akman
	Erdi Akman is a senior researcher at Scientific and Technological Research & Application Center, Karamanoglu Mehmetbey University, Karaman, Turkey. He received his BS degree in Physics Department of Tokat Gaziosmanpasa University and PhD degree in Mechanical Engineering Department of Selcuk University in Turkey. His current research focus is developing high efficiency and stable perovskite solar cells, low-cost dye-sensitized solar cells, and quantum dots solar cells.

Teoman Ozturk
	Teoman Ozturk is an Associate Professor at the Physics Department of Selcuk University, Turkey. Obtaining his PhD degree in 2012, he earned an international postdoctoral research fellowship from TUBITAK and worked as a visiting scholar at the University of Michigan during the years 2013–2014. His current research interests are nanotechnology and solar energy including dye sensitized solar cells, photocatalysis, photodiodes, and perovskite solar cells.

Daniel Prochowicz
	Daniel Prochowicz is an Associate Professor at the Institute of Physical Chemistry of Polish Academy of Sciences. His current research interests are in the field of new energy materials, focusing on functional nanostructured materials and their applications in perovskite solar cells and perovskite photodetectors.

Mohammad Mahdi Tavakoli
	Mohammad Mahdi Tavakoli is a scientist at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He received his PhDs from Sharif University of Technology and Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in the fields of materials science & engineering and electrical engineering respectively. His research, which combines the interdisciplinary fields of engineering, chemistry, nanomaterials, and applied physics, aims to bridge the gap between nanotechnology and microelectronics to develop disruptive technologies for the fabrication of optoelectronic devices. Currently, his research has focused on the applications of 2D materials such as graphene in the flexible, large-scale and ultra-lightweight optoelectronic devices by considering roll-to-roll processing.

Pankaj Yadav
	Pankaj Yadav is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Solar Energy, Pandit Deendayal Energy University, India. His current research interests range from thin film devices, solar photovoltaics, perovskite solar cells, hydrogen generation, fuel cells, energy generation and storage devices, and electroanalytical characterizations.

Seckin Akin
	Seckin Akin pursued his PhD from Eskisehir Technical University in the field of perovskite solar cells. During this period, he was a visiting researcher at Prof. Michael Grätzel’s laboratory at École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL, Switzerland). Currently, he is Assoc. Prof. at Necmettin Erbakan University and head of the Laboratory of Photovoltaic Cells. In his research career, he has focused on a wide variety of novel materials for light energy harvesting. He was awarded by the National Leader Researchers Program (2020) and the prestigious Science Academy’s Young Scientist Prize in Metallurgical and Materials Engineering (2021).

Broader context
Hitherto, all-inorganic CsPbIxBr3−x perovskite materials have been a promising research subject in emerging perovskite solar cells (PSCs) due to their excellent thermal stability and rapid progression in photovoltaic performance. However, there are still some foremost challenges such as limited absorption range, poor phase stability, and serious defect-traps, hindering further developments of inorganic perovskite materials. Recently, partial substitution of Pb2+ (B-site cation) with other metal ions has been shown to tune the energy levels, align the tolerance factor, and reduce the defect-states of CsPbIxBr3−x perovskite thin films. In line with these studies, the B-site doping strategy can be considered as one of the most important lattice engineering approaches to not only improve the photovoltaic performance but also prolong the stability of inorganic PSCs. This review provides a comprehensive and systematic overview of the recent progress in improving the photovoltaic performance and stability of all-inorganic CsPbIxBr3−x-based PSCs through the B-site doping strategy. We certainly believe that these impressive advances provide a deep understanding of the impacts of B-site doping on the optoelectronic properties and crystal/electronic structures of CsPbIxBr3−x perovskite thin films as well as lead to convenient attempts to achieve highly efficient and operationally stable photovoltaic devices.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Digital photographs of CsPbX3 films according to the proportion of I/Br. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) Temperature-dependent phase transition of the CsPbI3 crystal structure. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Calculated Goldschmidt tolerance factor t and octahedral factor μ for cesium metal halides and hypothetical metal halides. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of the CH3NH3SnI3−xBrx perovskite crystal structure. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2014, Nature. (b) The EDS map of Pb and Zn element distribution in the CsPb0.9Zn0.1I2Br perovskite with the scale bar of 2 μm. (c) Schematic illustration of the GB passivation by Zn2+ doping. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. Schematic representation of trap-states and radiative/nonradiative recombinations of QDs (d) without and (e) with the Zn2+ additive. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Schematic illustration of partial doping/alloying of Pb2+ by different metal ions showing increasing tolerance factor (τ) and formation energy which results in stabilized black phase α-CsPbI3 at room temperature and improved thermal stability of orthorhombic CsPbBr3 respectively. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 1  A schematic of the periodic table showing the B-site dopants in CsPbIxBr3−x perovskite-based solar cells reported so far. The inset image shows the crystal structures of CsPbIxBr3−x with a yellow orthorhombic (δ) phase (left) and black cubic (α) phase (right). Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2018, Nature.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Steady-state PL and (b) TR-PL spectra of control and 0.5% CaCl2-doped CsPbI2Br films. (c) J–V characteristics of CaCl2-doped CsPbI2Br PSCs based on different concentrations of the CaCl2 additive. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (d) UV-vis absorption and (e) PL emission spectra of CsPb1−xBaxI2Br with varying Ba2+ concentrations from 0 to 0.4%. (f) 133Cs echo-detected solid-state MAS NMR spectra at 21.1T, 298K, and 24kHz MAS of bulk mechanochemical compositions of CsPbBr3, CsPb0.8Ba0.2Br3 (formula specifies the formal stoichiometry and does not show a pure-phase material), CsBr + PbBr2 (1:2), CsBr + PbBr2 (4:1), neat CsBr, CsBr + BaBr2 (2:1), and CsBr + BaBr2 (1:2) from top to bottom respectively. The asterisks display spinning sidebands. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (g) Variation of formation energy Ef of α-CsPbxBa(1−x)I3 as a function of the BaI doping concentration (x = 3.7, 7.4, 11.1, 14.8, 22.2%). The red dashed line demonstrates the experimental BaI 10% doping which is in good agreement with the presented DFT optimal value. (h) Schematic illustration of phase stabilization through Ba2+ doping into the structure with a relative explanation of corresponding CsPbI3 properties. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) TR-PL curves of control and Ba2+ doped CsPbIBr2 perovskite films. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration of the dynamic hot-air (DHA) process. (c) TR-PL spectra of control and Ba2+ doped CsPbI2Br films processed by the hot-air method. Fluorescence-lifetime imaging microscopic (FLIM) photographs (80 μm × 80 μm, λex = 470 nm) of hot-air processed (d) control and (e) 0.5% Ba2+ doped CsPbI2Br thin films. Reproduced with permission.119 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of partial replacement of Pb2+ in the CsPbBr3 structure with different divalent hard Lewis acid cations. (b) XRD patterns for the undoped CsPbBr3 and divalent cation doped CsPb1−xMxBr3 perovskite films. (c) Top-view SEM photographs of (i) CsPbBr3, (ii) CsPb0.97Mg0.03Br3, (iii) CsPb0.97Ca0.03Br3, (iv) CsPb0.97Sr0.03Br3 and (v) CsPb0.96Ba0.04Br3 films with a scale bar of 1 μm. (vi) The grain size statistics of these five perovskite films. (d) Normalized TR-PL spectra of various divalent cation doped CsPb1−xMxBr3 perovskite films. (e) J–V characteristics of PSCs based on different divalent hard Lewis acid cation doped CsPb1−xMxBr3 perovskites (AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

CsPbBr3	Control	
	6.89	1.37	0.77	7.25	800 h, 25 °C, RH = 80%	—	
120

Mg2+	3.0	7.04	1.45	0.77	7.87	—
Ca2+	3.0	7.56	1.47	0.80	8.85	—
Sr2+	4.0	7.71	1.54	0.81	9.63	5
Ba2+	3.0	7.56	1.52	0.79	9.12	—


CsPbI3	Control	
	17.10	0.85	0.73	10.60	60 days, 25 °C, RH = 60%	35	
121

Ca2+	5.0	17.30	0.94	0.78	12.60	15
Control	
	—	—	—	—	—	—	
116

Ba2+	10.0	13.19	0.90	0.61	7.23	500 h, 25 °C, RH = 60%	2


CsPbI2Br	Control	
	13.40	0.96	0.60	7.70	30 days, 25 °C, RH = <50%	
	
91

Sr2+	2.0	14.90	1.07	0.71	11.30	
	

Control	
	13.40	1.12	0.74	11.10	350 h, 85 °C	80	
114

Ba2+	20.0	14.00	1.28	0.78	14.00	400 h, 85 °C	10
Control	
	11.88	1.09	0.72	9.34	100 h, 80 °C, and N2	100	
119

Ba2+	0.5	15.45	1.21	0.79	14.85	400 h, 80 °C, and N2	10
Control	
	15.01	1.25	0.80	14.89	1080 h, 25 °C, RH = 25%	30	
110

Ca2+	0.5	15.32	1.32	0.83	16.79	
	10


CsPbIBr2	Control	
	10.93	1.12	0.69	8.46	48 h, 85 °C, RH = 40%	90	
118

Ba2+	0.4	11.91	1.19	0.74	10.51	30

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of the perovskite structure showing the determination of [BX6]4− octahedral sites by the B-site cations and therefore the cubo-octahedral voids for the A-site cations. (b) Band structure decomposition of CsPb1−xSnxI3 with x = 0.028, 0.037 and 0.056. The size of the symbols is proportional to the orbital contribution to the bands, where the sizes of B ions are fourfold enlarged. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Photographs of CsPb1−xSnxI3 perovskite thin films by alloying Sn2+ and Pb2+ ions as a function of Sn molar ratios of 0.00, 0.25, 0.30, 0.50, 0.75, 0.88, and 1.00 from left to right respectively. Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) SEM cross-sectional photograph of a typical PSC based on the CsPb0.6Sn0.4I3 perovskite absorber. (e) Tauc plot to determine the optical band gap of the CsPb0.6Sn0.4I3 perovskite thin film. (f) Experimental and calculated band gaps (represented by solid and open circles respectively) of CsPb1−xSnxI3 perovskite films with varying “x”. (g) Calculated DOS of a typical CsPb1−xSnxI3 perovskite with x = 0.5 according to the DFT calculation. (h) Photographs of CsPb0.6Sn0.4I3 (left) and CsPbI3 (right) perovskite thin films after heating at 80 °C in a nitrogen-filled glovebox for 0, 4, and 18 min (top to bottom). Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) XRD patterns of α-CsPbI3, δ-CsPbI3, and CsPb1−xBixI3 perovskite films with varying bismuth concentrations (0 ≤ x < 0.1). (b) Proposed stabilization mechanisms of the α-CsPbI3 perovskite structure by doping HI or Bi3+ into the precursor solution. (c) J–V curves of champion PSCs based on α-CsPbI3 and Bi-doped CsPb0.96Bi0.04I3 perovskite films. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. SEM images of the top view of the (d) control CsPbI2Br and (e) InCl3-doped CsPbI2Br thin films with 2% InCl3 dopant. (f) GIXRD patterns of the CsPbI2Br films without and with 0.25% InCl3 dopant. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

CsPbBr3	Control	
	7.27	1.29	0.73	6.85	2400 h, 25 °C, RH = 10%	5	
133

Sn2+	0.2	7.66	1.37	0.82	8.63	760 h, 25 °C, RH = 80%	4

	
	
	
	
	
	
	

Control	
	7.08	1.33	0.73	6.87	700 h, 25 °C, air environment	5	
132

Sn2+	0.2	9.27	1.36	0.71	8.95	
	4


CsPbI3	Control	
	16.02	0.89	0.57	8.07	168 h, 25 °C, RH = 55%	80	
95

Bi3+	4.0	18.76	0.97	0.73	13.21	
	30	

Control	
	13.46	0.71	0.46	4.45	240 h, 25 °C, RH = 20%	27	
141

Sb3+	4.0	14.65	0.73	0.50	5.31	890 h, 25 °C, RH = 20%	7	


	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	

Control	
	—	—	—	—	—	—	
129

Sn2+	40.0	25.87	0.77	0.67	13.37	2800 h, 25 °C, N2 atmosphere, 1000 h, 45 °C	0	

Control	
	1.78	0.67	0.51	0.61	168 h, 25 °C, continuous illumination	—	
128

Sn2+	30.0	20.96	0.64	0.70	9.41	
	5	

Control	
	21.45	0.89	0.74	14.36	860 h, 25 °C, N2 atmosphere	40	
143

In3+	1.0 mg mL−1	22.21	0.99	0.77	17.09	
	20	



CsPbI2Br	Control	
	9.06	1.02	0.57	5.30	7 h, RH = 50–60%	100	
136

Ge2+–Ge4+	20.0	12.15	1.27	0.70	10.80	
	—	

Control	
	13.80	1.19	0.70	11.45	1000 h, air atmosphere, ∼85 °C, RH = 65–75%	40	
145

In3+	0.25	15.91	1.28	0.75	15.27	
	13	

Control	
	15.10	1.10	0.78	12.92	80 h, air atmosphere, RT, RH = 30%	75	
144

In3+	0.25	15.70	1.14	0.77	13.74	
	0	



CsPbIBr2	Control	
	12.32	1.08	0.62	8.25	50 h, RT, RH = 50–60%	—	
130

Sn2+	10.0	14.30	1.26	0.63	11.33	15	

Control	
	8.32	1.18	0.74	7.34	1000 h, RT, RH = 50–60%	90	
131

Sn2+	25.0	12.57	1.21	0.75	11.53	20	

Control	
	—	—	—	—	10 d, air atmosphere, RT	—	
146

Sn2+	30.0	15.50	1.18	0.77	14.10	
	25	


 	Fig. 8  (a) UV-vis absorbance spectra of control CsPbIBr2 and doped CsPb1−xMnxI1+2xBr2−2x perovskites with different concentrations of the Mn2+ ion (x = 0.005, 0.01, and 0.02). (b) Top view SEM images of CsPbIBr2 and CsPb1−xMnxI1+2xBr2−2x (x = 0.005) films with scale bars of 1 μm. (c) The regular device architecture of a mesoscopic all-inorganic PSC with the structure FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CsBX3/carbon. Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) The lattice constant changes of the pristine CsPbBr3 and transition metal ion doped perovskite crystals. (e) Dark J–V characteristics for the hole-only devices with the structure FTO/NiO/perovskite/carbon. (f) Schematic energy-level diagram of the different layers of an all-inorganic PSC based on the CsPb1−xTMxBr3 active layer. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Top-view SEM images of the CsPbI2Br and CsPb1−xZnxI2Br perovskite films. (b) In situ annealing temperature-dependent XRD spectra; the insets show the optical images of films. (c) GIWAXS patterns of CsPbI2Br and CsPb0.9Zn0.1I2Br perovskite films. (d) Proposed mechanism of the nucleation and control of the crystal growth directions of perovskite films through Zn2+ doping. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) UPS spectra analysis for valence-band regions (Eonset), and secondary electron cutoffs of CsPbI2Br and CsPb0.99Zn0.01IBr2 perovskite samples. (f) Sketch of the band alignment of CsPbIBr2 and CsPb0.99Zn0.01IBr2-based PSCs. (g) 2D AFM and KPFM images of the CsPbIBr2 and CsPb0.99Zn0.01IBr2 perovskite surfaces. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) High-resolution XPS patterns of Pb 4f and I 3d for the control and 4% Nb-based CsPbI2Br films, represented by a black line and red line, respectively. Calculated partial density of states for (b) CsPbI2Br and (c) CsPb0.875Nb0.125I2Br according to the generalized gradient approximation method. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Variation of optical images of the control and 0.5% FeCl2 doped CsPbI2Br perovskite films annealed at 40 °C based on different times. (e) Cross-sectional SEM image of the full 0.5% FeCl2-doped CsPbI2Br-based PSC. (f) J–V characteristics of the champion PSCs based on the CsPbI2Br perovskite films without and with 0.5% FeCl2 dopant. (g) Operational stability of the unencapsulated control CsPbI2Br device and a device with 0.5% FeCl2 dopant under continuous white light. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

CsPbBr3	Control	
	6.79	1.30	0.77	6.81	200 h, air environment	4	
165

Co2+	0.2	7.45	1.36	0.85	8.57	
	4
Control	
	6.04	1.43	0.74	6.37	760 h, 25 °C, RH = 80%	—	
102

Mn2+	0.5	6.10	1.44	0.79	6.98	
	—
Ni2+	0.5	6.80	1.48	0.79	8.03	
	—
Cu2+	0.5	6.97	1.53	0.79	8.23	
	—
Zn2+	0.5	7.30	1.56	0.81	9.18	
	0
Control	
	7.29	1.11	0.77	6.31	1000 h, 25 °C, RH = 80%	50	
167

Ag+	1.0	7.67	1.13	0.80	6.92	
	20


CsPbI3	Control	
	19.29	1.04	0.75	15.05	240 h, 80 °C, N2 atmosphere	—	
148

Mn2+	2.0	19.53	1.10	0.77	16.52	
	—	

Control	
	15.87	1.21	0.73	13.98	240 h, 25 °C, RH = 30%	38	
168

Zn2+	10.0	17.58	1.23	0.74	16.07	
	15	



CsPbI2Br	Control	
	14.15	1.11	0.75	11.88	35 days, 25 °C, RH = 25–35%	—	
150

Mn2+	2.0	14.37	1.17	0.80	13.47	
	3
Control	
	13.27	1.12	0.68	10.21	500 h, RH = ∼60%	40	
154

Zn2+	7.5	15.61	1.23	0.63	12.16	
	24
Control	
	14.90	1.10	0.71	11.8	400 h, 25 °C, RH = 20%	85	
99

Zn2+	10.0	15.80	1.18	0.72	13.6	
	15
Control	
	15.06	1.11	0.71	11.97	43 days in N2, RH = 20–30%	50	
164

Ni2+	2.0	16.02	1.14	0.75	13.88	
	19
Control	
	11.95	1.21	0.63	9.05	120 s, continuous illumination	
	
162

Nb5+	0.5	12.06	1.20	0.72	10.42	
	

Control	
	15.39	1.24	0.74	14.35	96 h, RH = 30%	
	
163

Nb5+	0.5	16.23	1.31	0.77	16.45	
	10
Control	
	15.49	1.20	0.78	14.6	100 h, 25 °C, RH = ∼50%	75	
86

Fe2+	0.5	15.90	1.31	0.81	17.1	330 h, 25 °C, RH = ∼50%	5


CsPbIBr2	Control	
	12.15	0.96	0.53	6.14	144 h, ambient atmosphere	20	
153

Mn2+	0.5	13.15	0.99	0.57	7.36	300 h, ambient atmosphere	8
Control	
	10.7	1.19	0.61	7.81	500 h, 90 °C, RH = 30%	50	
160

Cu2+	0.5	12.8	1.21	0.67	10.4	1000 h, 90 °C, RH = 30%	25
Control	
	10.21	1.22	0.63	7.84	400 h in N2, 85 °C	67	
158

Zn2+	1.0	11.92	1.28	0.69	10.51	
	18
Control	
	8.56	0.99	0.54	4.36	10 h, 25 °C, RH = ∼55%	45	
169

Cd2+	0.5	9.76	1.19	0.57	6.79	
	24
Control	
	10.74	1.24	0.64	8.48	1000 h, 25 °C, RH = ∼30%	40	
170

Cd2+	1.0	11.53	1.32	0.70	10.63	
	8

 	Fig. 11  (a) XRD patterns of CsPbI3 films with different rates of Eu doping (4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 10 mol%). (b) The (100) peak of CsPbI3 perovskite films with 4, 6, 8, and 10 mol% EuCl3 doping shows a shift with higher Eu content. (c) The box chart of PCEs in the reverse scan of CsPbI3:xEu with x of 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 10 mol% EuCl3 devices (10 cells of each condition). Reproduced with permission.180 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) 133Cs spin–lattice relaxation times of different perovskite compositions. The solid curves are stretched exponential fits. The dashed line is the best biexponential fit of the CsPb0.95Eu0.05I2Br dataset. (e) SPO curves at maximum power point (MPP) tracking under the working condition with 100 mW cm−2 irradiation. (f) Operational stability of the unencapsulated undoped CsPbI2Br and CsPb0.95Eu0.05I2Br devices under continuous white light. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Top-view SEM images of as-prepared lanthanide ion doped CsPbBr3 perovskite films deposited on FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2 substrates (left to right: CsPbBr3, Yb3+-CsPbBr3, Er3+-CsPbBr3, Ho3+-CsPbBr3, Tb3+-CsPbBr3, Sm3+-CsPbBr3). (b) Photographs of the Tyndall effect in Ln3+ containing precursors. Left to right: Undoped, Yb3+, Er3+, Ho3+, Tb3+, Sm3+. (c) The J–V curves of lanthanide ion doped CsPbBr3 based PSCs. Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) XRD patterns of YbCl3 driven CsPbI3 perovskite films with different Yb3+ concentrations annealed at 80 °C; the insets show the optical images of films. FT-IR spectra of (e) DMSO and the YbCl3·DMSO adduct complex, and (f) 5% YbCl3-doped perovskite films annealed at 80 and 150 °C. (g) Schematic illustration of the influence of YbCl3 on the formation of the perovskite. Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (h) The J–V curves of the PSCs with and without GdCl3 dopant. (i) The MPP tracking of PSCs under one-sun illumination at 45 °C. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2022, Elsevier.	 

CsPbBr3	Control	
	6.94	1.35	0.75	6.99	1440 h, 25 °C, RH = 80% and 80 °C, RH = 0%	9	
183

Yb3+	3.0	7.45	1.54	0.80	9.20	
	—
Er3+	
	7.46	1.56	0.83	9.66	
	

Ho3+	
	7.45	1.57	0.83	9.75	
	

Tb3+	
	7.47	1.59	0.85	10.06	
	

Sm3+	3.0	7.48	1.59	0.85	10.14	1440 h, 25 °C, RH = 80% and 80 °C, RH = 0%	5
Ce3+	
	0.58	0.62	0.44	0.17	
	

Eu3+	
	5.22	1.22	0.53	3.36	
	

Nd3+	
	5.47	1.26	0.69	4.79	
	—
La3+	
	7.34	1.52	0.85	9.47	
	—


CsPbI3	Control	
	5.81	1.31	0.75	5.66	800 h, 25 °C, RH = 70–80%	7	
188

Eu2+	60 μL	6.33	1.45	0.79	7.28	
	5
Control	
	—	—	—	—	—	—	
180

Eu2+	5.0	11.10	0.89	0.68	6.80	720 h, 25 °C, RH = 10–20%	—
Control	
	18.68	0.98	0.69	11.87	80 h in N2, 80 °C	40	
189

Ce3+	1.0	21.02	1.13	0.74	17.57	
	20
Control	
	—	—	—	—	—	—	
166

Yb3+	5.0	18.40	1.13	0.60	12.40	400 h, 80 °C, RH = 25% and 100 °C, RH = 25%	40


CsPbI2Br	Control	
	12.57	1.12	0.72	10.21	370 h in N2, continuous illumination	80	
113

Eu2+	5.0	14.63	1.22	0.76	13.71	
	7
Control	
	13.80	1.19	0.70	11.45	1000 h, air atmosphere, ∼85 °C, RH = 65–75%	40	
145

Eu2+	
	14.90	1.25	0.74	13.72	
	25
Control	
	14.86	1.05	0.71	11.05	20 h in N2, ∼85 °C	90	
190

Eu3+	0.5	15.26	1.13	0.71	12.13	100 h in N2, ∼85 °C	60
Control	
	15.30	1.20	0.70	12.85	180 h, 85 °C	100	
182

Sm3+	3.0	15.90	1.29	0.76	15.68	200 h, 85 °C	15
Control	
	11.53	0.98	0.55	6.31	50 h, RH = 20–30%	80	
172

La3+	2.0	11.66	1.12	0.61	8.03	400 h, RH = 20–30%	10
Control	
	14.30	1.20	0.71	12.34	240 h, 85 °C, RH = ∼30–35%	100	
185

Yb3+	3.0	15.94	1.26	0.76	15.41	280 h, 85 °C, RH = ∼30–35%	15
Control	
	15.65	1.15	0.78	14.01	1000 h, 45 °C	60	
186

Gd3+	0.4	16.09	1.22	0.83	16.24	MPP, one-sun illumination	12
Control	
	13.97	1.20	0.69	11.60	1500 h in N2, 25 °C	82	
191

Nd3+	2.0	16.01	1.25	0.75	15.01	
	50
Control	
	12.56	1.09	0.76	10.37	20 h, 85 °C, RH = 50–65%, MPP	100	
192

Tb3+	5.0	14.97	1.25	0.77	14.42	300 h, 85 °C, RH = 50–65%, MPP	20
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
