Robust and multifunctional natural polyphenolic composites for water remediation  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2MH00768A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2MH00768A
(Review Article)
Mater. Horiz., 2022, 9, 2496-2517Robust and multifunctional natural polyphenolic composites for water remediation

        
          
            Yuanting 
            Xu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Junfei 
            Hu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xueqian 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dandan 
            Yuan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gaigai 
            Duan
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Yiwen 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Polymer Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610065, China. E-mail: ywli@scu.edu.cn
bCenter of Efficient Processing and Utilization of Forest Resources, International Innovation Center for Forest Chemicals and Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanjing Forestry University, Nanjing, 210037, China
Received 
      21st June 2022
    , Accepted 28th July 2022First published on 28th July 2022AbstractThe scarcity of clean water has become a global environmental problem which constrains the development of public health, economy, and sustainability. In recent years, natural polyphenols have drawn increasing interests as promising platforms towards diverse water remediation composites and devices, owing to their abundant and renewable resource in nature, highly active surface chemistry, and multifunctionality. This review aims to summarize the most recent advances and highlights of natural polyphenol-based composite materials (e.g., nanofibers, membranes, particles, and hydrogels) for water remediation, by focusing on their structural and functional features, as well as their diversified applications including membrane filtration, solar distillation, adsorption, advanced oxidation processes, and disinfection. Finally, the future challenges in this field are also prospected. It is anticipated that this review will provide new opportunities towards the future development of natural polyphenols and other kinds of naturally occurring molecules in water purification applications.
Yuanting Xu
Yuanting Xu obtained his BS (2010) and MS (2013) degree in polymer materials and engineering, and biomedical engineering at Sichuan University, respectively. He then worked at the College of Polymer Science and Engineering at Sichuan University as a lecturer, and then continue to obtain the PhD degree (2020) in biomedical Engineering under the supervision of Prof. Changsheng Zhao. He then joined Prof. Yiwen Li's group and currently focuses on the environmental remediation application of robust and multifunctional polyphenolic composite materials.
Yiwen Li
Yiwen Li received his BS in Chemistry from University of Science and Technology of China (2008) and PhD in Polymer Science from the University of Akron (2013). After two years’ postdoctoral training at University of California, San Diego, he began his independent career at Sichuan University in 2016, where he is currently a professor. Yiwen was listed by MIT Technology Review as one of the top innovators under the age of 35 (TR35), and was the recipient of Polymer Young Investigator Award from CCS and Feng Xinde Polymer Prize from Elsevier. He has published 130+ peer-reviewed articles, and served as the editorial board members for Macromol. Rapid Commun., Giant, Chin. Chem. Lett., etc. His current research interests focus on the bioinspired polymers including synthetic melanin and polyphenolic materials.
1 Introduction
Along with the explosive population growth and continuing water quality deterioration, the scarcity of clean water has emerged as a serious environmental and social crisis around the world.1 According to a recent report by the United Nations, there are more than 2 billion people living under water scarcity.2 Moreover, many countries have emphasized that clean water and sanitation are the first line of defense against current COVID-19 pandemics.2 Therefore, it is of great importance to provide abundant fresh water resources with satisfactory quality to meet the increasing water demand, which can be achieved by treating wastewater and desalinating seawater.3,4 Up to now, a variety of wastewater treatment and seawater desalination technologies have been developed, such as disinfection,5 adsorption,6 membrane filtration,7 advanced oxidation,8 solar desalination,9 and so on. Importantly, it is anticipated that the design of various robust and multifunctional water remediation composite materials and devices (e.g., disinfectant, adsorbent, separation membrane, catalyst, and photothermal material) plays a crucial role in all these methods.10,11
In order to meet a series of requirements in wastewater treatment and seawater desalination, an ideal water remediation system by our definition should be that (1) possessing excellent machinability that can be fabricated into diversiform functional devices for practical applications; (2) easy to be involved multifunctionalities. (e.g., photothermal conversion capacity, hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity, bactericidal activity); (3) low-cost with abundant resources, thus escorting a large-scale application. Moreover, in consideration of the increasing energy crisis and possible secondary environmental pollution, employing natural resources to fabricate water remediation materials weaned from petrochemical substances has attracted great attentions. For example, chitosan, cellulose, and some other types of carbonized biomass materials have been extensively investigated in water remediation via adsorption and other methods, which have been carefully summarized into some relevant review papers recently.12–14
Natural polyphenols are a class of naturally occurring molecules with two or more phenolic hydroxyl groups and ubiquitously present in plants ranging from fruits, vegetables, tea, plant seeds, and medicinal herbs. Up to now, there are over 8000 polyphenolic molecules have been discovered and identified.15 Owing to their reducibility as well as abundant contents in foods and beverages, natural polyphenols have always acted as dominant antioxidants in human diet.16 Along with the discovery of their intrinsic adhesive property and biocompatibility, natural polyphenols have also been regarded as suitable candidates to prepare biomaterials with a variety of fascinating functions (e.g., antioxidant, antimicrobial, antiviral, myocardial protection, and immune-regulatory ability),17,18 which can meet the needs of diverse healthy and biomedical applications, such as tissue engineering,19 cancer therapy,20 theranostic,21 sunscreen,22 and hair dye.23 Especially, benefiting from rich dynamic covalent interactions and strong non-covalent interactions between catechol/pyrogallol groups and other structures, natural polyphenols can be easily conjugated with many kinds of building blocks to develop multifunctional and different dimensional composite materials, which broaden the multiple applications.24–26 For example, a multitude of one-dimensional (1D) polyphenolic fibers, two-dimensional (2D) polyphenolic membranes and three-dimensional (3D) polyphenolic particles/hydrogels have been facilely fabricated to obtain clean and safe fresh water by membrane filtration, solar distillation, advanced oxidation processes, adsorption and disinfection, etc. Considering the encouraging achievements of natural polyphenolic composites in water purification applications, it is highly desirable to provide a timely overview on their structures, functions, fabrication strategies, and applications in water remediation.
This review paper aims not only to summarize the structural and functional contributions of natural polyphenols in composite design, but also to highlight the fabrication strategies and various water remediation applications of those robust and bioinspired composites. We start with a brief introduction about the employment of natural polyphenols as the unique structural and functional synthons towards the design of water remediation composite materials, followed by a discussion on the strategies to fabricate different types of natural polyphenolic composites. Afterwards, we particularly focus on the recent studies to highlight the detailed utilization of natural polyphenolic composites in multiple pathways, including membrane filtration, solar distillation, adsorption, advanced oxidation processes, and disinfection to obtain high-quality fresh water (Fig. 1). Finally, we also strive to provide an outlook on the new trends and future directions in designing multifunctional natural polyphenolic composites for realizing more efficient water remediation.
 Fig. 1  Overview of water remediation applications of natural polyphenolic composites. 
2 Natural polyphenols in multifunctional composites
Emerging from the unique structural and functional features, natural polyphenols have drawn growing interests in multifunctional water treatment. As shown in Fig. 2, a variety of natural polyphenols have already been applied in water purification, including tannic acid (TA), lignin (LIG), gallic acid (GA), tea polyphenols (TP), epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), epigallocatechin (EGC), epicatechin gallate (ECG), ellagic acid (EA), protocatechualdehyde (PA), anthocyanin (ACN), quercetin (QN), curcumin (CUR), caffeic acid (CA), etc. Especially, they can possess various covalent and non-covalent interactions with a multitude of materials, which allow the physicochemical property tailoring of the resulting natural polyphenolic composites for water remediation applications. This section will mainly discuss these interactions and relevant examples to display the structural and functional contributions of natural polyphenols in the composite design, which are very helpful for us to classify and expand their water treatment applications.
 Fig. 2  Chemical structures of typical natural polyphenols used in water remediation. 
2.1 Structural features
The most striking structural feature of natural polyphenols is the plentiful phenolic hydroxyl functional groups in their molecules, which enables natural polyphenols to combine with other structures through various covalent interactions (e.g., Schiff base reaction or Michael addition, polyphenol–metal coordination, polyphenol–boronate complexation, radical coupling reaction) and non-covalent interactions (e.g., hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic interactions, electrostatic interactions, π interactions) (Fig. 3).15 For example, natural polyphenols could serve as the sole precursors for the formation of multifunctional coatings on various substrate surfaces based on the auto-oxidative polymerization of phenolic molecules. Such a deposition of polyphenol coatings mainly occurred under alkaline conditions or in the presence of enzymes, and can be further accelerated by UV irradiation.27 Messersmith and co-workers developed a series of transparent coating by utilizing the TA, EGCG, ECG, as well as the crude extracts of green tea, cacao bean, and red wine. Meanwhile, the coating also demonstrated an interesting ability to modulate the intrinsic optical property of nanoparticles (NPs), such as gold and silver nanorods.28 On the other hand, the metal-phenolic networks (MPNs) composed of metal ions coordinated to phenolic ligands were also often used for the deposition of polyphenol coatings on substrate surfaces. In 2013, Caruso et al. developed a universal coating by simply mixing coordination complexes of Fe3+ ions and natural polyphenols in one-pot.29 Resulting from the chelating sites for Fe3+ ions provided by adjacent hydroxyl groups, as well as the efficient crosslinking driven by pyrogallol moiety coordination, this fascinating coating could be completed within several minutes on a variety of planar and organic, inorganic and biological particle templates. Especially, in consideration of the ubiquitous presence of both metal ions and polyphenols in nature, the functional materials based on various metal-phenolic interactions have drawn increasing attentions during the recent years. Apart from the aforementioned MPNs derived from coordination interactions between metal ions and phenolic ligands, other kinds of interactions between metal ions and polyphenolic groups were also investigated.30 For instance, the plentiful catechol/pyrogallol moieties of natural polyphenols have been characterized by high aromaticity and π-electron content, which could supply strong negative binding sites for cationic alkali or alkaline-earth metal ions to form cation-π interactions.31 Noble metal ions (e.g., Ag+, Pd2+, and Au3+) could be reduced into stable metallic forms by accepting electrons donated by polyphenols based on the redox reactions. Meanwhile, the catechol within polyphenolic compounds were oxidized into quinones to further promote the stabilization of noble metal atoms and form nanocomposites. Therefore, natural polyphenols have been widely employed as green and effective chemicals to induce the in situ synthesis of metal and metal oxide NPs, which avoided the use of hazardous reducing reagents (e.g., NaBH4 and hydrazine).27 Therefore, the polyphenolic composites derived from metal-phenolic interactions demonstrated great potentials for biomedical as well as environmental applications.30,32 As an illustration, Shi et al. exploited a biomass-derived microporous membrane based on the interfacial formation of uranium–phenolic networks, which demonstrated excellent mechanical strength, swelling capacity, hydrophilicity as well as the effective uranium recovery ability from both simulated seawater and natural seawater.33
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of typical covalent and non-covalent interactions within natural polyphenolic composites. 
Apart from the common coating, the highly active chemical structure of natural polyphenols enabled them to act as other structural building blocks of composites for water remediation. For example, natural polyphenols could be beneficially employed to produce versatile and stable anchors/primers for the immobilization of functional molecules, thus allowing more functional integration. Based on the secondary reactions of TA composite coatings, Wang's group developed a variety of functional composite materials, including adsorbent, superhydrophobic membrane, and catalytic materials, through the introduction of silane coupling agent, amines, and Ag NPs, respectively.34 Additionally, Polyphenols had multibinding sites, and were capable of complexing or cross-linking with other hydrophilic macromolecules to form the hydrogels, thus beneficially integrating the advantages of polyphenols and hydrogels, as well as showing great vitality in the field of wastewater treatment.35 The plentiful catechol or pyrogallol groups of natural polyphenols could readily coordinate with transition metal ions to construct MPNs, which could be further used as precursors for the fabrication of metal–organic framework (MOF). For the past few years, TA, GA, EA, etc. had been employed for the development of synthesis of green MOFs.36–38 Not only that, a few kinds of natural polyphenols (e.g., TA and GA) were weak organic acids, which could release free protons to penetrate into MOFs to damage their framework, accordingly constructing the hollow nanostructures of MOF.39,40 Very recently, several MOFs, including ZIF-67, MIL-53 and Prussian blue, were all in situ etched by TA. Because of the extra transfer channels provided by hollow structure, the hollow MOF-incorporated nanofiltration membrane exhibited an improvement of 270% for methanol permeance than the pristine membrane.41 Overall, the existence of phenolic hydroxyl groups as well as R-groups enabled natural polyphenols to interact with other functional substances to realize a multitude of functions; therefore, these unique structural features play essential roles in the attractive design and pragmatic manufacture of natural polyphenolic composite for water remediation.
2.2 Functional features

Adhesion. 
It is commonly known that polyphenols show a strong affinity for various substrates (Fig. 4a),42 which hold the structural similarity to marine mussels. Mussels secrete Mytilus edulis foot proteins that can stick firmly to hulls or rocks in wet environments. Their strong adhesive ability mainly derives from the presence of a large number of 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine, which is a kind of polyphenolic molecules with catechol groups. Similarly, the catechol/pyrogallol moieties are also regarded as the crucial basis for adhesion-related properties of natural polyphenols, relying on their strong covalent and non-covalent interactions with different substrate surfaces.35 For example, the catechol groups could interact with metal or metal oxide via chelating bonding and hydrogen bonding. Natural polyphenols could be stuck onto some organic and hydrophobic surfaces via π–π stacking and hydrophobic interactions. They also showed high affinity to some specific surfaces containing amine and/or thiol groups (e.g., tissue surface proteins) via Michael addition and/or Schiff base reactions.43 Therefore, they can be employed as functional coatings with outstanding adhesion ability for a variety of surfaces with different shapes. For example, our group recently designed two types of coatings via a one-pot integration of protocatechualdehyde (PA) and aminoglycosides, as well as the layer-by-layer assembly of 5,6-dihydroxyindole and aminoglycosides, respectively.44,45 The universal coatings could be performed successfully on various substrates (metal, glass, polymer) with different shapes (flat substrates, catheters studs, screws), and even some familiar objects in life (clamp, vial, badge, grape). Moreover, the dynamic covalent chemistry enabled the facile and interesting functionalization of diverse surface-independent coatings, including antibacterial property, pH-response, and smart drug release capacity. Very recently, based on the formation of adhesive supramolecular networks between catechol and pyrogallol groups of polyphenols and repeat units of poly(ethylene glycol) via hydrogen bonds, Cui et al. developed a hot melt super glue with an adhesion strength of 8.8 MPa.46 Ejima et al. further designed a class of ultrastrong underwater adhesives on various substrates by using non-canonical phenolic groups. The adhesion strengths on metal could exceed 10 MPa, surpassing all commercial and literature underwater adhesives.47 It is important to highlight that the superb adhesion ability enables natural polyphenols to admirably integrate with many other types of substrates to exploit the multifunctional composite materials that can be used for water treatment and other applications.
 Fig. 4  Functional contributions of natural polyphenols for water remediation. 


Hydrophilicity. 
The hydrophilic property of materials has a critical influence on their water treatment performance.48 Fortunately, the intrinsic hydrophilic nature of abundant phenolic groups could significantly improve the hydrophilicity of polyphenolic composites (Fig. 4b), which played a greatly important role in their water purification applications, such as enhancing the water flux in membrane filtration, promoting the permeation and transport of water in adsorption and solar distillation, finally accelerating the water remediation process. Very recently, tannic acid (TA) served as an intermediate to construct both the inner and surface hydrophilic layers of the polyethersulfone (PES) membranes via the bimetallic polyphenol networks.49 The modified PES membrane exhibited a significantly lower water contact angle (44.57°) than that of pristine membrane (97.21°). Moreover, the pure water flux of modified membrane was also increased to 1662.16 L m−2 h−1, which was much higher than that of pristine membrane (515.99 L m−2 h−1). In another work reported by Senapati's group, the green tea polyphenols (TP) were bound to the metal surface of Fe3O4 NPs through metal–oxygen chelation.50 The obtained hydrophilic surface coating endowed the NPs with better stability and dispersibility in aqueous medium, as well as the effective adsorption capacity for organic dyes and easy recycle from the wastewater. Graphene-based materials have attracted widespread attentions owing to the excellent photothermal conversion efficiency. Unfortunately, the hydrophobicity of graphene limited the capillary transportation of water, and thus impeded the solar distillation efficacy. Recently, TA was used to assist the exfoliation of graphene, which was followed by crosslinking treatment with Fe3+ to obtain a Fe3+/TA/graphene complex.51 Benefiting from the introduction of hydrophilic phenolic hydroxyl groups, the obtained TA-functionalized graphene complex demonstrated a higher solar distillation rate and energy efficiency for seawater desalination.


Photothermal performance. 
In recent years, solar driven seawater desalination plays a central role in producing fresh water with low-energy;52,53 therefore, the efficient photothermal conversion ability of polyphenols is another fascinating function for their water remediation applications (Fig. 4c). Taking the most typical bioinspired synthetic polydopamine (PDA) as an example, our group previously developed a series of strategies to regulate its light-harvesting ability, thus further enhancing its photothermal conversion and solar distillation efficiency.54–64 Nevertheless, the practical large-scale application of PDA may be limited because of its high cost. Therefore, the natural polyphenols have attracted increasing interests owing to their ubiquitous presence in plants and retaining many advantages of PDA. For example, many MPNs derived from natural polyphenols have been proved to exhibit a wide range of optical absorption throughout near infrared to ultraviolet regions, which can be attributed to the strong coordination between phenol hydroxyl groups and metal ions.30 Specifically, the introduction of metal ions could broaden the absorption cross-section to enhance the light absorption ability. For another, the chelation of metal ions and polyphenol made the metal ions (with unoccupied d orbits) complexes to absorb more photons, and further underwent internal d–d transitions, which can reduce the band gap of polyphenolic composites, eventually improving the light harvesting capacity and total photothermal effect.65 For example, Pham et al. prepared a coconut husk-based photothermal material via the coordination of phenolic compounds with Fe3+.66 The obtained biomass-based material exhibited favorable properties of high blackness and enhanced light absorption, thus generating a desirable photothermal conversion performance of 73.2% and a water evaporation rate of 1.83 kg m−2 h−1, which was 4.15 times higher than that of bulk seawater.


Antibacterial. 
A few kinds of natural polyphenols have been found to exhibit antibacterial property (Fig. 4d), and their antibacterial mechanisms can be explained by the inhibition of biosynthesis of cell constituents, the damage of bacterial cell wall, as well as the destruction of bacterial cell membranes.35 Very recently, Park et al. employed green tea extract as a source of polyphenolic building blocks to develop a nature-derived antibacterial nano-thin coating.67 Moreover, the antibacterial performance including bacterial killing and prevention of bacterial attachment was further enhanced after a decaffeination treatment. Polyphenols can also act additional roles in the design of antibacterial composite materials. Xu's group recently proposed a novel strategy of polyphenol-assisted chemical crosslinking to obtain antioxidative and antibacterial properties, based on the crosslinking sites formation by multiple reactive phenolic hydroxyl groups of EGCG coupling with the nearby free radicals.68 When the concentration of EGCG was 4 wt%, the resulting composites exhibited high sterilizing efficiencies of 92% and 97% for Gram-negative Escherichia coli (E. coli) and Gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus), respectively. Especially, the sterilizing efficiencies were further enhanced to ∼100% when the concentration of EGCG was above 6 wt%. Ag NPs are regarded as typical antibacterial, and natural polyphenols can help to produce Ag NPs via the interaction with Ag+. In a work conducted by Liu et al., the tea polyphenols/polystyrene nanofibers were prepared via electrospinning technology, and then immersed in an aqueous solution of [Ag(NH3)2]+.69 The tea polyphenols provided reduction reactive sites for the generation of Ag NPs and further endowed the nanofibers with excellent antibacterial activity against both E. coli and S. aureus microorganisms, which was confirmed by an inhibition zone of 16.67 mm and 15.30 mm, respectively. Very recently, the natural polyphenols-based surface functionalization was also used for the inhibition of SARS-CoV-2. For example, Guo and co-workers designed a reusable, antibacterial, and antiviral nanocoating based on the supramolecular complexation of TA and Cu2+, which exhibited at least 105 plaque forming units mL−1 inhibitory titer against SARS-CoV-2 and excellent rejection efficiency of 93.6% against the diffusion of aerosols as well as particulate matters even after ten cycles. The nanocoating could also realize a long-term usage based on the disassembly and recyclable assembly formation of TA-Cu2+ MPNs.70

3 Polyphenols-based building blocks for composites
Benefiting from the unique structural and functional features, natural polyphenols have been considered as promising building blocks towards the construction of various water remediation composite materials. More importantly, their fascinating structures allow the facile integration of natural polyphenols with other functional units via surface coating, chemical grafting, and physical blending strategies. Owing to the robust adhesive property of natural polyphenols, surface coating has become a powerful tool to manipulate material surface property and further fabricate various functional devices. For example, various types of wood with different shapes,71 porous sponge,72 foams,73 and silk74 could be directly immersed into the polyphenols/metal ions reaction solution to fabricate a series of evaporator devices for solar distillation. Polyphenolic composites could also be coated onto polymer membranes or Fe3O4 NPs to prepare separation membranes or magnetic adsorbents.75,76 Very recently, TA-based polymer matrix was coated on various substrates (e.g., graphene, carbon nanotube, carbon black, carbon cloth, MoS2, TiO2, SiO2, and ZnO) for catalytic applications.77 Besides, polyphenols could also be chemically grafted on other polymers to fabricate desirable functional materials. For instance, protocatechualdehyde was used to modify chitosan via one-step reductive amination reaction, and the as-prepared catechol-functionalized chitosan was further fabricated into hydrogel disinfector through an in situ gelation process.78 TA was directly used to crosslink with collagen fibrous network to enhance the thermal stability and produce reactive oxygen species for antibacterial property.79 In other studies, natural polyphenols were blended with other polymers to act their roles directly. For instance, lignin NPs were dispersed in polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) solution through ultrasonic treatment, finally forming a composite film through vapor induced phase separation process. The photothermal effect derived from lignin NPs endowed the membrane with stable solar steam generation performance.80 In this section, we will discuss several types of natural polyphenolic composites, including 1D nanofibers, 2D membranes, 3D particles, and hydrogels (Fig. 5). Moreover, diversiform natural polyphenolic composites for water remediation have been also classified and summarized in Table 1, with regard to their polyphenolic species, functional additions, composite forms, functions, and applications.
 Fig. 5  Schematic of the polyphenols-based building blocks for composites. 
Table 1 Typical natural polyphenolic composites for water remediation




Natural Polyphenol
Other components
Composite
Function of composites
Application in water remediation
Year
Ref.




CS: chitosan, AC: activated carbon, NOR: norfloxacin, KP: ketoprofen, PUHs: phenylurea herbicides, U: uranium, SMX: sulfamethoxazole.




TA
PEI, silane, Ag+, APTES
Membrane
Superhydrophobicity, positive charge, catalytic activity,
Oil/water separation, dye adsorption, catalytic degradation
2019

34



ZIF-8
Membrane

In situ growth of ZIF-8
Membrane filtration for desalination
2021

81



Fe3+, APTES
Sponge
Photothermal conversion, confinement capillarity
Solar distillation
2021

72



FeSO4
Carbon nanospheres
Mesoporous property
Adsorption for Cr6+
2021

82



Meso-Bi/TiO2
Nanofiber
Improving light absorption
Photocatalytic degradation for methylene blue and bisphenol A
2021

83



CS, AC
Hydrogel
Oxidation to release H2O2
Water sterilization
2021

78



GA
TiO2, CNTs
Membrane
Superhydrophilicity, corrosive resistance
Corrosive oil/water separation
2021

84



Fe3O4, PEI, CS
Hydrogel
Magnetic separation
Removal for Cr6+via synergistic adsorption-reduction
2021

76



PVA, Cu2O
Membrane
Simultaneously crosslinking PVA and reducing Cu2+
Oxidative and reductive degradation for dyes
2021

85



PVDF, PEI
Membrane
Co-deposition with PEI, binding and reduction of Ag+
Water sterilization
2021

86



LIG
Polypyrrole
Hydrogel
Anti-salt accumulation
Solar distillation, adsorption for Cu2+, Cr6+, Co2+
2022

87



Fe3O4
Nanoparticle
Magnetic separation
Adsorption for COD
2020

88



CoFe2O4
Nanoparticle
Magnetic separation
PMS degradation for SMX
2022

89



TP
APTES
Membrane
Superhydrophilicity
Oil/water separation
2022

90



Acrylic acid
Hydrogel
Bond ability with metal ions
Static and dynamic adsorption for Cr3+, Pb2+, and Fe3+
2020

91



Metal ions
Silk
Hydrophilicity, photothermal conversion,
Solar distillation
2021

74



BT
BSA
Nanoparticle
Stability under γ-ray irradiation
Adsorption for uranium
2018

92



Graphene
Aerogel
Hydrophilicity, photothermal conversion
Solar distillation, adsorption for U
2021

93



CA
CS
Fibers
Superhydrophilicity
Oil/water separation, adsorption for dyes, and heavy metal ions
2022

94



Graphene oxide
3D flake
Reducing graphene oxide
Adsorption for NOR and KP
2020

95



QN
Fe3O4@SiO2
Nanoparticle
Magnetic separation, high porosity
Adsorption and detection for PUHs
2021

96



ACN
None
Piece
Positively charged property
Adsorption for I−
2020

97





3.1 Nanofibers
Nanofibers, a typical type of 1D materials with nanometer range diameters, can be fabricated via various methods, including electrospinning, self-assembly, phase separation, and so on.98 Among them, electrospinning technique has become a mainstream for mass-producing nanofibers. Especially, owing to the merits of large specific surface area, high porosity, and easily tunable surface functionality, electrospun nanofibers have attracted particular research interests in environmental remediation applications.99 In our previous studies, we designed a series of electrospun nanofibers with specific functions and structures to realize efficient wastewater purification via adsorption or photocatalytic degradation.100–105 As for natural polyphenols, on one hand, the catechol/pyrogallol moieties could endow the nanofibers with superior mechanical performance via the formation of physically and chemically crosslinked networks with electrospun polymer matrix. On the other hand, the natural polyphenols could facilitate the further multifunctional modification of electrospun nanofibers. In a recent work reported by He's group, the introduction of TA not only enhanced the mechanical strength of sodium alginate nanofibers, but also facilitated the in situ synthesis of photo-Fenton catalyst β-FeOOH NPs on the surface of nanofibers.106 Owing to the outstanding underwater superoleophobic property, the obtained nanofibers exhibited superb anti-crude oil-fouling ability and efficient separation performance for crude oil-in-water emulsion. Moreover, the nanofibers could degrade contaminants adsorbed on the nanofibers via the photo-Fenton reaction, thus realizing the self-cleaning performance.
Notably, those 1D nanofibers could be further used to fabricate the 2D nanofibrous membrane materials and 3D nanofibrous aerogel materials. For instance, Kim et al. prepared a superhydrophilic and underwater superoleophobic polysulfone nanofibrous membrane via a two-step MPNs coating process.107 The obtained nanofibrous membrane demonstrated excellent separation efficiency and ultrahigh permeation flux for the oil-in-water mixture and emulsion only under gravity. In addition to oil–water separation and self-cleaning property, Huang et al. carried out an interesting work to further endow the electrospun polyimide nanofibrous membrane with effective antibacterial and UV-shielding ability by the introduction of TA-Al3+ MPNs.108 In another study, Ji and co-workers prepared a hybrid coating on the framework of cellulose nanofibers-based aerogel via the TA-induced grafting of siloxane.109 Owing to the high porosity of aerogel, high hydrophobicity resulted from the cardanol-derived siloxane, as well as plentiful adsorption sites supplied by phenolic hydroxyl groups of TA, the as-prepared composite aerogels exhibited efficient adsorption capacity toward both Cu2+ and oil droplets.
3.2 Membranes
Membrane, one of the most typical 2D materials, has emerged as a well-liked choice for reclaiming clean water from wastewater for reuse.110 According to the intrinsic property and separation principle, membrane generally can be classified into several types, including microfiltration (MF, 0.1–5 μm), ultrafiltration (UF, 0.5–100 nm), nanofiltration (NF, 0.5–10 nm) and reverse osmosis (RO, <0.5 nm), etc., which can achieve the interception of suspended particles, organic molecules, colloidal haze, oil emulsions, proteins, bacteria, viruses, even ions from raw water.99,111 Excitingly, natural polyphenols have been extensively used as coating of the membrane via surface chemistry strategy to realize the desirable functionality. As an illustration, Zhao et al. proposed a simple, universal, and environmentally friendly method to design a TA-based thin coating on the surface of PES membrane, which integrated the inorganic (Ag NPs) and organic (zwitterionic polymer based on quaternization of polyethyleneimine (PEI)) components to obtain antibacterial and antifouling property simultaneously.112,113 Xu's group proved that both primary and secondary amines could be linked with catechol groups via Michael addition to produce polyphenol/polyamine oligomers under mild-alkaline and aerobic conditions.114 Based on this polyphenol/polyamine co-deposition, they further exploited a series of surface coatings (e.g., pyrogallol/PEI, catechol/PEI, dopamine/diethylenetriamine, dopamine/triethylenetetramine) on the polymeric membranes to obtain the nanofiltration performance for organic dye molecules and inorganic salt.115 The property of 2D membrane is closely related to the membrane filtration application, which will be further discussed in later section.
In addition to the general functions of membrane, natural polyphenols are also able to improve the water purification performance of other 2D nanomaterials. For instance, TA was engaged to change the surface chemistry and microstructures of graphene sheets through the combination of chemical reduction process from TA and hydrothermal reduction process. The resulting TA-graphene hydrogel exhibited a more porous network, larger specific surface area and superior adsorption capacity for organic dyes.116 Ultrathin transition metal dichalcogenides (e.g., MoS2) have been regarded as promising alternatives to graphene for environment remediation and other applications.117 Xu et al. developed a versatile polyphenol-assisted method to facilely exfoliate transition metal dichalcogenides into nanosheets as photothermal materials.118 They found that TA, EGC, EGCG, and tea catechins (ECG, EGC, and EGCG) all acted as a much better water-soluble stabilizer during the exfoliation process of MoS2. Moreover, the as-exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets exhibited excellent photothermal ability and enhanced antibacterial performance.
3.3 Particles & hydrogels
The high reactivity of nature-inspired phenolic chemistry has remarkably nourished the development of materials science and also facilitated the assembly as well as stabilization of phenolic NPs with defined sizes and monodisperse characteristics.15,119 For example, our group has successfully prepared several types of natural phenolic NPs derived from green tea,120,121 grape seed,122 propolis,123 gallic acid (GA),124 and explored their effects on UV protection and radicals scavenging capacity. In other studies, some functionalized NPs derived from tea polyphenols and fruit polyphenols were synthesized and showed effective removal capacity of heavy metal ions, antibiotics, and bacteria in wastewater.125–127 Not only that, catechol, pyrogallol, and other polyphenol derivates were also used to fabricate the coating of particles for wastewater treatment. Zhao's group prepared positively charged aminated coatings on the surface of PES particles via the direct reaction between phenol groups and amino groups.128 This approach exhibited applicability to other hexanediamine, diethylenetriamine, triethylenetetramine, and tetraethylenepentamine to give more amino groups to particles, which demonstrated multiple adsorption capacities of Congo red dyes, Cu2+ heavy metal ions, and bilirubin biochemical substances. However, the practical applications of these particles are severely restricted by the easy sedimentation in wastewater. For this reason, this polyphenol-induced aminated coating was expanded to the surface of magnetic Fe3O4 NPs in their further studies, which could be easily recycled from the wastewater through an external magnetic field.129,130
Hydrogel, a 3D network capable of absorbing large amounts of water, has confirmed its potential as a multifunctional material platform to escort global water security, owing to the unique physicochemical characteristics, such as swellability, porosity, and hydrophilicity.131 For example, hydrogel with large specific surface area could rapidly adsorb various pollutants and then realize recycle via the regeneration of active sites.132 Superabsorbent hydrogel with bactericidal property could directly absorb microorganism-contaminated water and then extrude to produce the disinfected water.133 Photothermal hydrogel could produce vapor from seawater and then transform into collectible fresh water.134 The chemistry of polyphenolic network formation also allowed the fabrication strategies to expand from nanofibers, membranes, particles to hydrogel materials via crosslinking with other substances.35 Moreover, the introduction of natural polyphenols could further enrich the structural and functional features of the hydrogel systems, such as high strength, toughness, and strong adhesion, which enabled hydrogels to easily cope with the complex environment in wastewater.135 Zhang et al. prepared a double network porous hydrogel adsorbent from tea residue and acrylic acid, which demonstrated high selectivity and adsorption capacity for Cr3+, Pb2+, and Fe3+ heavy metal ions in static adsorption experiments.91 This tea residue-derived hydrogel adsorbent was further used for the fixed-bed column experiments to prove the dynamic removal capacity for simulated wastewater containing multiple heavy metal ions.
4 Applications
In this section, we will continue to focus on the inspiring achievements of natural polyphenolic composites in enhancing water quality by discussing the comprehensive examples of recent studies. In detail, their applications in the different areas of water remediation, including membrane filtration, solar distillation, adsorption, advanced oxidation process, and disinfection, will be discussed. For each category, it starts with an introduction of the general working principle, followed by a discussion on the specific application and the advance made in this field.
4.1 Membrane filtration
In general, water remediation is usually performed to obtain clean fresh water by physical methods such as filtration and sedimentation, chemical processes such as chemical oxidation and disinfection, or biological techniques such as aerobic and anaerobic digestions. Among these technologies, membrane filtration has drawn extensive attentions of both industry and academia, owing to its advantages of low energy, easily large-scale application and ability to produce high-quality water (Fig. 6a).136 Benefiting from the extraordinary adhesive ability and favorable hydrophilicity, natural polyphenols-based coating provided a powerful tool to optimize the structure and property of membranes, such as wettability and anti-fouling, thus improving the membrane filtration performance. Therefore, we will discuss the filtration applications of natural polyphenols-based composite membranes in this section, including oil/water separation, contaminants interception and desalination.
 Fig. 6  Membrane filtration applications of natural polyphenolic composites. (a) Schematic illustration of membrane filtration. Reprinted with permission136 Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The fabrication, structure and oil/water separation of a TA-based composite membrane. Reproduced with permission137 Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Design of preferable functional materials based on the secondary reactions of the TA/APTES coating. Reproduced with permission34 Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (d) Construction of dually charged membrane for dye/salt separation. Reproduced with permission138 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (e) MOF nanofiltration membrane based on TA-Zn2+ MPNs for desalination. Reproduced with permission81 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (f) Modification of PVDF membrane via GA-assisted accurate-deposition strategy for complex corrosive dyed emulsions separation. Reproduced with permission84 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
Due to the increasing oily wastewater generated from crude oil leakage, petroleum industry, and domestic grease, oil/water separation based on membrane technology has emerged as one of the most common wastewater treatment applications.137 As shown in Fig. 6b, based on the co-deposition of TA and aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES), Li et al. developed a universal one-step strategy to simply transform highly hydrophobic membranes (e.g., polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), polypropylene (PP), nylon mesh, stainless steel wire, and copper mesh) into superhydrophilic and underwater superoleophobic ones.75 The as-prepared membrane was verified to effectively separate various oil-in-water (gasoline-in-water, soybean oil-in-water, dichloroethane-in-water, toluene-in-water) emulsions with high oil rejection (>99%), ultrahigh permeation flux (>2200 L m−2 h−1), excellent stability and outstanding antifouling performance. In their further study, this TA-APTES coating was extended to design superhydrophobic materials, adsorbent materials or catalytic materials via different secondary reactions.34 As displayed in Fig. 6c, by coupling with a silane coupling agent, this coating transformed to exhibit superhydrophobic property and could achieve effective water/oil separation in another way, namely, selectively filtering oil and intercepting water from the oil/water mixtures. Owing to the introduction of abundant amine groups, the resultant membrane exhibited removal ability for high concentrated dyes. Based on the in situ reduction of monodispersed Ag NPs, this membrane was equipped with catalytic activity to realize the degradation of 4-nitrophenol in wastewater.
Apart from the oil/water separation, the separation of organic molecules and inorganic salts is another important application based on membrane technology. As s depicted in Fig. 6d, Luo et al. developed a dual-charged multilayer membrane via a polyphenol-assisted co-deposition strategy and weak competitive reactions among TA, PEI, and poly-γ-glutamic acid.138 Benefiting from the synergistic effect of electrostatic interaction and size exclusion, the resulting membrane demonstrated high separation selectivity towards multiple charged organic dyes and inorganic salts. As a cutting-edge material in various fields over the past decade, MOFs have displayed promising potentials in advanced membrane separation applications.139–141 In a recent work reported by Lin's group, a PES substrate membrane, whose surface had been constructed a TA layer via a green dip-coating process, was immersed into a mixture of hydrated zinc acetate and Hmim solution.142 The coordination reaction between abundant pyrogallol groups and Zn2+ promoted the heterogeneous nucleation of MOFs, and finally leaded to the formation of ZIF-8 thin membrane. Compared with the ordinary ZIF-8 membrane without TA as an intermediate layer, the obtained ZIF-8/TA membrane exhibited a superior water permeability of 3.6 L m−2 h−1 bar−1 with higher Na2SO4 and NaCl rejections of 92.2% and 64.7%, respectively. In their further study, TA-Zn2+-based MPNs were employed as a precursor to fabricate the MOF nanofiltration membrane.81 As shown in Fig. 6e, based on the layer-by-layer self-assembly of TA and Zn2+, an ultrathin TA-Zn2+ layer was constructed on the PES substrate membrane, which served as a unique zinc source to facilitate the conversion of ZIF-8 membrane. What is more, their morphology and desalination capacity could be readily regulated by adjusting the bilayer numbers of layer-by-layer self-assembly.
In addition to the most common TA, other natural polyphenols also played significant roles in membrane separation application. Very recently, Jiao et al. employed TP to construct hierarchical NPs on the surface of PP melt-blown nonwoven.90 The resultant membrane with superhydrophilic and underwater superoleophobic properties demonstrated excellent separation efficiencies (>99.1%) for both mineral oil/water mixtures and vegetable oil/water mixtures. In another study, laccase, a polyphenol oxidase containing four Cu2+ ions, was used to trigger the co-deposition of chitosan and natural tea catechins.143 The stacking of the produced chitosan/catechin nano-aggregates brought about dense and defect-free layers on the polysulfone membrane substrate, thereby producing a high-water permeation flux (ca. 45 L m−2 h−1) with an efficient rejection (ca. 99%) of Na2SO4. GA is a natural polyphenol extracted from traditional Chinese gallnut. Benefiting from the carboxylic acid groups and pyrogallol moieties in structure, it can improve the stability of TiO2-based nanomaterials through the polyphenol-metal and titanium-carboxylic coordination bonding. As displayed in Fig. 6f, based on a GA-assisted accurate-deposition method combining with TiO2 NPs and halloysite nanotubes, He et al. successfully transformed the commercial PVDF membrane from hydrophobicity to superhydrophilicity, thus realizing the high separation efficiency of complex corrosive dyed emulsions.84 More importantly, the obtained membrane demonstrated extraordinarily resistant stability against various incredibly corrosive situations and harsh environmental challenges, which indicated a broad application prospect in industrial wastewater remediation fields.
4.2 Solar distillation
As the most promising sustainable energy source, solar energy is of great importance for the hydrologic cycle on earth and can be used to produce clean water without pollution. However, traditional solar distillation approach is extremely restricted by the low efficiency, because it relies on heating bulk water to high temperature, which may cause that a large amount of solar energy is stored in the bulk liquid and not used in water vapor production. In order to enhance the energy utilization efficiency, interfacial solar distillation has been considered as a promising pathway to obtain fresh water in recent years.144 As illustrated in Fig. 7a, solar light was absorbed by the photothermal material at absorber layer and converted into thermal energy, which could achieve localized heating for the water at interface.145 The thermal insulation layer composed of material with low thermal conductivity was used to limit the heat diffusion to bulk water. The channels within the solar absorber layer and thermal insulation layer transported the water to the heated interface for distillation. Therefore, based on the well-designed photothermal material as the key component of functional device (Fig. 7b), this interfacial solar distillation could selectively heat up the evaporative portion of water, and thus realizing highly efficient water purification.146 Moreover, compared to the aforementioned membrane filtration method, this technique was also suitable to desalinate hypersaline water (even up to a highest salinity of 10 wt%, which is the representative salinity of the Dead Sea).147–149 Natural polyphenols could endow the composite with excellent photothermal performance and hydrophilicity, which benefit both the water transport and interfacial solar distillation. What is more, the robust adhesive ability of natural polyphenols also enabled the facile fabrication of various functional devices for efficient solar distillation.
 Fig. 7  Solar distillation applications of TA-based composites. (a) Schematic illustration of the structure and operation of an interfacial distillation system. Reproduced with permission145 Copyright 2016 Springer Nature. (b) Experimental functional device for solar distillation. Reproduced with permission146 Copyright 2016 Springer Nature. (c) Transformation of various woods into photothermal materials. Reproduced with permission71 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (d) Versatile photothermal coating for various types of substrates. Reproduced with permission150 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (e) The confinement capillarity of photothermal thin coating for boosting solar distillation. Reproduced with permission151 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. 
TA has been commonly employed to prepare functional coatings for various photothermal materials. For example, Li et al. developed a simple and versatile method to prepare photothermal woods just by immersing the wood into TA and ferric sulfate aqueous solution chronologically.71 As shown in Fig. 7c, this method is suitable for various woods (e.g., poplar, oak, ashtree, pine, cedarwood, beech, and cudrania tricuspidata) with any shapes. The resultant TA-Fe3+ coordination compounds facilitated the high and wide light absorption of these photothermal woods. Together with the superwettability, rough surface, and pore channels of the wood itself, the as-prepared poplar-TA-Fe3+ achieved 90% solar-to-evaporation efficiency. Moreover, after the favorable structural design, the distillation rate could be further enhanced from 1.34 kg m−2 h−1 to 1.85 kg m−2 h−1. In a further study, they developed another composite coating based on a two-step's reaction of TA, APTES, and Fe3+. As depicted in Fig. 7d, this composite coating was a powerful tool to transform substrates into black photothermal materials, because it could be adhered firmly on the surfaces of diverse substrates with various shapes (wood, cotton, filter paper, polyurethane sponge, and PVDF membrane).150 They revealed the reaction mechanism of this composite coating: based on a combination of π–π interactions, hydrogen bonding, covalent bonds, and physical crosslinking among chains of TA and APTES, a mass of NPs were formed on the surfaces to turn the substrates brown. Afterwards, the abundant phenolic hydroxyl groups of TA further reacted with Fe3+ to form a coordination compound, which endowed the material with strong and broadband light absorption. Apart from producing a high spectral absorption across the entire solar spectra, another important strategy to enhance the interfacial solar distillation efficiency is to construct a more accessible water/air interface. Therefore, in a recent study, the aforementioned TA/APTES/Fe3+ composite coating was further applied on the porous sponge to generate a confinement capillarity of photothermal thin coating.72 As displayed in Fig. 7e, the confinement capillarity could promote water transportation via the plentiful channels among black/hydrophilic NPs. Moreover, this confinement capillarity was found to expose as much evaporation area as possible through increasing the vapor escape channel, which finally produced a high solar evaporation rate of up to 3.2 kg m−2 h−1.
Other natural polyphenols were also employed to fabricate photothermal composite materials. As shown in Fig. 8a, Chen and co-workers prepared LIG-based photothermal nanoparticles (L-NPs) via the self-assembly of LIG molecules.80 The obtained L-NPs were then coated on the surface of natural basswood to fabricate a solar distillation device, which exhibited an about 1.4-fold increase over distillation rate from natural basswood. Very recently, a bilayer LIG hydrogel-based evaporator was constructed by using polypyrrole as top layer for efficient light harvesting (Fig. 8b).87 Thanks to the 3D macro/mesoporous structure and excellent hydrophilic property, the LIG hydrogel at the bottom layer not only decreased the evaporation enthalpy of water, but also boosted the water transport. Therefore, the as-prepared LIG hydrogel-based evaporator demonstrated a high solar distillation rate of 2.25 kg m−2 h−1, as well as excellent stability, durability, and anti-salt accumulation performance. Inspired by tea stain, our group developed a series of photothermal nanocoatings on pristine silks by introducing metal ions (i.e., Zn2+, Ni2+, Fe3+, and Cu2+) to promote the polymerization of typical phenolic moieties of tea polyphenols (i.e., catechol and pyrogallol).74 The obtained nanocoatings exhibited favorable properties of strong adhesion, superb hydrophilicity and tunable light absorption, thus endowing the pristine silks with excellent solar distillation efficiency.
 Fig. 8  Solar distillation applications of other natural polyphenolic composites. (a) LIG NPs for solar distillation. Reproduced with permission80 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (b) LIG hydrogel-based solar-driven evaporator. Reproduced with permission87 Copyright 2022 Elsevier. (c) Oak-inspired anti-biofouling shape-memory scaffolds with stable solar distillation. Reproduced with permission152 Copyright 2022 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Together with the solar distillation, other interesting applications were also realized by natural polyphenolic composites. Considering that the numerous microorganisms in water environment would cause biofouling inside porous materials and inhibit the long-term use of solar driven evaporation. As depicted in Fig. 8c, Lu et al. recently exploited an anti-biofouling photothermal material, which was inspired by oak wood possessing antimicrobial polyphenolic compounds and vertically aligned channels.152 During the fabrication process of photothermal materials, chitosan was used as one of the primary substrates to impart the shape memory effect, which could facilitate the functionalization of photothermal and anti-biofouling coating inside the materials. This TA-based coating not only inhibited the adhesion and Dcolonization of bacteria, but also prevented the infection of fungus. Even after exposure in a microbe-rich environment for a long time, this oak-inspired polyphenolic photothermal composite still maintained about 90% of the solar distillation capacity. In consideration of the probable oil pollution in seawater evaporation, our group prepared a TA/Fe3+ MPNs-coated cellulose foam via the strong hydrogen bonding formation between TA and cellulose network.73 The as-prepared composite foam exhibited both anti-salt-fouling as well as anti-oil-fouling properties, and could realize highly efficient solar distillation performance even in oil-polluted seawater.
4.3 Adsorption
Adsorption is a mass transfer process where adsorbate is adsorbed onto the solid adsorbent by physical or/and chemical interaction from the gas or liquid phase. Therefore, it generally demonstrates advantages of easy operation, low cost and high effectiveness. Although the adsorption capacity of adsorbents is often affected by the limitation of reactive sites, it is easy to regenerate the adsorption active sites via a desorption process, thus achieving the recycle and ensuring the economic plausibility. Moreover, in consideration of the complexity of various contaminants in wastewater, the facility of designing adsorbents with multiple properties (e.g., different pore sizes and charged states), is anticipated to play essential roles in complicated water purification.153 Fortunately, the high reactivity of phenolic chemistry allows the multi-functionalization and even special customization of various natural polyphenols-based adsorbents according to the types of pollutants in wastewater, which will be discussed comprehensively in this chapter.
Taking LIG as an example, Budnyak et al. prepared two types of LIG-based adsorbents with numerous phenolic and carboxylic groups, and obtained different adsorption performance of Co2+ ions (Fig. 9a).154 With the excess discharge of industrial and agricultural wastewater, the increasing level of phosphate in water resources has raised concerns on aquatic ecosystems. However, LIG displayed a poor adsorption performance for these anionic contaminants due to the interference of negatively charged functional groups. Zhai's group recently developed an efficient adsorbent for phosphate capture by integrating the ultrahigh affinity of zirconium to phosphate (Fig. 9b).155 The obtained LIG-based adsorbent exhibited an adsorption amount of 167.7 mg g−1 for phosphate, in which the ligand exchange and electrostatic attraction were responsible for the whole adsorption process. Although boron is an essential micronutrient, an excessive increase of boron concentration has been observed recently in irrigation and drinking water, probably due to some natural and anthropogenic factors (e.g., deposits leaching and industrial activity). Accordingly, Xia et al. prepared a mesopore-dominated adsorbent via the electrostatic self-assembly of TA, lignosulfonate (LS) and cationic polyacrylamide (CPAM) (Fig. 9c).156 Thanks to the exposure of abundant catechol groups, the resulting adsorbent exhibited an adsorption amount of 119.05 mg g−1 for boron, through the formation of stable boron ester bonds. As shown in Fig. 9d, to avoid the difficult recycle of microspheres in water treatment, a magnetic nanogel was prepared by blending glycine-modified LIG with nano-Fe3O4.88 Apart from the remarkably enhanced adsorption capacities of both organic dyes and inorganic ions, the functionalized nanogels could be recycled easily and further regenerated the active sites in hydrochloric acid. Moreover, the functionalized nanogels also demonstrated effective decontamination capacity when applied to treat pulp bleaching water. Heavy metal ions are one type of pollutants that severely threaten the human health and environmental quality, exampled as hexavalent chromium (Cr6+). Recently, a magnetic hydrogel adsorbent was designed by immobilizing Fe3O4 NPs into the PEI/chitosan hydrogel substrate, followed by covalently chemical modification with GA.76 On one hand, it was found that the GA grafting obviously accelerated the Cr6+ being reduced to trivalent chromium (Cr3+), which was another oxidation state of chromium, yet with a much less toxicity. On the other hand, because of the proton consumption accompanied by Cr6+ reduction, the hydrogel adsorbent also showed enhanced chelating adsorption for Cr3+, thus leading to the synergistic promotion of Cr6+ detoxification and total chromium removal. Very recently, this synergistic adsorption-reduction effect of Cr6+ was also extended to a microsphere synthesized by pyrogallol polyphenol covalently incorporating tetraethylenepentamine. The maximum adsorption amount was enhanced to 714.29 mg g−1, because of the higher functional group contents.157
 Fig. 9  Adsorption applications of natural polyphenolic composites. (a) Tailored hydrophobic/hydrophilic LIG for sustainable Co2+ removal. Reprinted with permission154 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (b) Amino-modified LIG for selective phosphate adsorption. Reproduced with permission155 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (c) The mesopore-dominated adsorbent for the removal of boron. Reproduced with permission156 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (d) A reed roots-inspired LIG magnetic nanogel for bleaching effluents remediation. Reproduced with permission88 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
Besides, more natural polyphenolic composite adsorbents were also developed for other types of contaminants, such as caffeic acid-based adsorbent for dyes, antibiotics, and heavy metal ions,94,95,158 anthocyanin-based adsorbent for iodide,97 curcumin-based adsorbent for polychlorinated biphenyls,159 quercetin-based adsorbent for herbicides.96 Therefore, it could be concluded that the feasibility for complicated wastewater remediation is also one the most dominating advantages of natural polyphenolic composites in adsorption applications.
Owing to the advantages of large specific surface area, highly porous structure, tunable surface chemistry, and outstanding chemical stability, carbon materials have drawn special attentions to be used as adsorbents in environmental remediation.160 Generally, multiple porous carbon materials can be synthesized via carbonization by using different carbon sources. Among them, natural polyphenols have been regarded as an important type of nontoxic, low-cost, renewable carbon sources, owing to their unique features of strong bonding interactions with polymeric pore-forming agent, efficient chelating ability with metal/metal oxide, and powerful adhesive property with various substrates.161 As shown in Fig. 10a, Fechler et al. designed a hierarchical carbon nanomaterial based on the coordination of ellagic acid (EA) with Zn2+ ions.162 The desired control of coordination enabled the crystalline nanoplatelets to be tailored into micron-sized mesostructured particles. After a carbonization treatment, the resulting macro-, micro- and mesoporous architecture equipped the carbon particles with rapid removal for rhodamine B dyes as well as efficient CO2 adsorption. In another study, magnetic mesoporous carbon nanospheres were successfully prepared via direct pyrolysis of iron-phenolic coordination polymers.82 As illustrated in Fig. 10b, the carbon precursor was synthesized by using Fe3+ as a metal source and TA as a renewable carbon source. The as-prepared nanospheres exhibited not only a large specific surface area (512.3 m2 g−1), easy magnetic separation property, but also excellent adsorption capacity for Cr6+ removal (336.7 mg g−1) and further reduction ability to low-toxic Cr3+. Very recently, Hu's group designed a torrefaction biochar adsorbent via a direct carbonization of bamboo shoot shell. As shown in Fig. 10c, the catechol hydroxyl groups were responsible for the adsorption-coupled reduction of Cu3+ and Cr6+, together with the electron donating ability of unsaturated CC bond and C–O bond from methoxy and hydroxyl groups.163
 Fig. 10  Adsorption applications of natural polyphenolic carbon materials and uranium-adsorbents. (a) Hierarchically porous carbon of zinc-ZA mesocrystals. Reproduced with permission162 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) TA-based magnetic mesoporous carbon nanospheres. Reproduced with permission82 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (c) Adsorption mechanism of toxic metal ions by a torrefaction biochar. Reproduced with permission163 Copyright 2022 Elsevier. (d) Adsorption mechanism of UO22+ on BT-modified BSA nanospheres. Reproduced with permission92 Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) A bifunctional graphene aerogel for simultaneous solar distillation and marine uranium extraction. Reproduced with permission93 Copyright 2021 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Solar-powered “pump” for uranium recovery from seawater. Reproduced with permission164 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. 
Along with the fast development of nuclear technology, the isolation of uranium from sea water or radioactive waste water has raised global concerns on environmental sustainability.165 Bayberry tannin (BT), extracted from bark of Myrica esculenta, could selectively adsorb uranium ions through forming a chelate between the adjacent phenolic hydroxyls and UO22+.166 By immobilizing TA onto BSA nanospheres, Zhou et al. developed an effective uranium adsorbent with an adsorption amount of 487.8 mg g−1, which could be attributed to the multiple chelating active sites provided by the phenolic hydroxyls of BT, together with the –NH2 and –CO of BSA (Fig. 10d).92 Considering the abundance of uranium storage in ocean as well as its great importance in nuclear technology, freshwater regeneration and uranium extraction from seawater has been emerged as an attractive pathway for both environmental remediation and green energy. Recently, a bifunctional graphene aerogel (BGA) based on solar distillation and marine uranium extraction was developed via the directed assembly of BT.93 It was verified that BT molecules were uniformly distributed inside the porous channels of graphene aerogel, which integrated the efficient photothermal conversion of graphene aerogel and the outstanding uranium binding capacity of BT. Specifically, the hydrophilicity of BT facilitated the water transport in graphene aerogel during solar distillation, meanwhile, the distillation accelerated the diffusion rate of uranium near the BT molecules, thus promoting the marine uranium extraction process (Fig. 10e). Similarly, a bifunctional cellulose-based aerogel was constructed by incorporating TA to bind uranium, and incorporating carbon nanotubes to impart photothermal conversion ability.164 The bifunctional aerogel was called as a solar-powered “pump”, because it displayed superior performance in terms of both distillation and uranium extraction under solar illumination (Fig. 10f).
4.4 Advanced oxidation processes
In the above sections, we discussed three water remediation applications, including membrane filtration, solar distillation, and adsorption. In spite of their great advantages, it is necessary to mention that the above technologies mainly depend on a “separation” pathway of the clean water and other impurities, without a more thorough elimination for the toxic contaminants. Unfortunately, some organic pollutants are characterized by strong resistance to biodegradation, which may cause the increasing bioaccumulation, thus damaging the ecological environment and threatening human health. In recent years, advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) have been emerged as a powerful technique to produce free radicals with strong oxidation ability from various superoxides for the degradation of toxic organic contaminants into harmless mineral salts, CO2, and H2O.167 Fortunately, the ability to tune light absorption and interact with a variety of metals made natural polyphenolic composites attractive candidates as photocatalysts and metal catalysts for pollutants degradation. Moreover, the effective adsorption of pollutants by natural polyphenolic composites can also facilitate the sufficient contact of pollutants with catalysts, eventually accelerating the advanced oxidation processes. Therefore, in this section, we will discuss the application of natural polyphenolic composites in advanced oxidation processes, including photocatalysis, peroxymonosulfate-mediated activation and Fenton reaction.
Currently, visible light driven photocatalysis has attracted unique interests in degrading pollutants because of just utilizing inexhaustible sunlight.168 Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), a typical visible light responsive photocatalyst, has been investigated extensively for environmental remediation. Nevertheless, its photocatalytic activity is often inhibited by the concealment of active sites and quenching of photogenerated carriers.169 Recently, based on the self-polymerization of TA, the obtained PTA nanorod was used as both adhesive and carbonization template for the fabrication of a novel g-C3N4-based nanorod photocatalyst.170 The as-prepared porous PTA nanorods not only offered more molecule diffusion channels and adsorption active sites, but also enhanced the interfacial transfer capacity of photogenerated electrons via the generation of strong covalent bond with g-C3N4. Therefore, the PTA/g-C3N4 composite nanorods exhibited a significantly increased photocatalytic activity, which could degrade 97% rhodamine B dyes within 80 min and 78% tetracycline antibiotics within 3 h under visible light illumination. Mesoporous metal oxides also played an important role in photocatalysis because of their advantages of large specific surface areas as well as enhanced interfacial transport. As shown in Fig. 11a, Afewerki et al. prepared a nanofibrous Bi-doped TiO2 photocatalyst by employing collagen fibers as templates and TA as initiator. The abundant phenolic hydroxyl groups in TA could facilitate the formation of Bi3+/Ti4+/TA MPNs, which showed excellent interfacial adhesion ability to anchor bimetallic active ingredients on biomass-derived collagen fibers. The as-prepared bimetallic hybrid photocatalyst demonstrated a significantly higher photocatalytic activity than that of pure TiO2 nanofibers.83 In another study, TA was utilized to coordinate with Ru(III) ions to form TA-Ru(III) MPNs on the surface of BiVO4 substrate.171 As displayed in Fig. 11b, Pd NPs were generated ingeniously on the shell layer of core-shell BiVO4@Ru-TA photocatalyst by using TA as stabilizing and reducing sites. Thanks to the synergistic effect of BiVO4, TA-Ru(III) MPNs and Pd NPs, the as-prepared Pd/BiVO4@Ru-TA photocatalyst exhibited a 2.4-fold increase in the photocatalytic degradation capacity of rhodamine B dyes.
 Fig. 11  Advanced oxidation processes of natural polyphenolic composites. (a) Bi/Ti-phenolic network induced mesoporous hybrid nanocatalysts with photocatalytic performance. Reproduced with permission83 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (b) Multiple modifications of BiVO4 through the MPNs for enhanced photocatalytic activity. Reproduced with Permission171 Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (c) PMS activation for BPA removal by mesoporous carbon framework supported Cu-Fe oxides. Reproduced with permission151 Copyright 2022 Elsevier. (d) LIG-derived biochar to support CoFe2O4 for sulfamethoxazole degradation. Reproduced with permission89 Copyright 2022 Elsevier. (e) Hollow metal-phenolic capsules based on LIG nano- and microparticles for Fenton reactions. Reproduced with permission172 Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) GA-based catalyst for oxidative and reductive degradation of water pollutants. Reprinted with permission85 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. 
The peroxymonosulfate (PMS)-based AOPs rely on generating ˙OH and SO4˙− radicals to degrade organic pollutants in environment. For example, Cu2+ has been found to trigger PMS activation for organic pollutants degradation based on a transformation of Cu2+ to Cu+. However, this transformation was often limited by the narrow pH range, particularly under neutral or acidic conditions. In a work reported by Lambropoulou's group, the introduction of GA into PMS/Cu2+ system was found to be able to boost the degradation of tetrabromobisphenol A (TBBPA) even at a pH value of 4.3.173 Such a GA/PMS/Cu2+ system could degrade 84.6% of TBBPA just in 10 min, which was 2.2 times more rapid than that of PMS/Cu2+ system. The mechanism could be explained as follows. The adjacent phenolic hydroxyl groups in GA exhibited strong chelation and electron-donating ability, which could accelerate the reduction of Cu2+ to Cu+. In PMS system, the Cu+ was quickly oxidized to Cu3+, accompanied by the rapid generation of ˙OH with strong oxidation ability. Very recently, a mesoporous carbon supported Cu–Fe oxides catalyst (CuO/CuFe2O4) was designed based on the Cu–Fe–TA MPNs (Fig. 11c).151 Owing to the advantageous structure, the nanosized Cu–Fe oxides were highly dispersed in the mesoporous carbon framework, which could not only increase the adsorption capacity of bisphenol A, but also improve the electron transfer efficiency, finally enhancing the catalytic efficiency in PMS activation. As shown in Fig. 11d, Xu and co-workers developed a LIG-derived biochar to support cobalt ferrite (CoFe2O4).89 The obtained CoFe2O4@BC composite NPs showed easy magnetic separation ability as well as effective degradation capacity for sulfamethoxazole, which is an antibiotic widely existed in surface water.
Fenton reaction is one of the important AOPs for wastewater treatment, with the efficient ˙OH radical production by chain reaction of hydrogen peroxide and metal ions. As shown in Fig. 11e, Rojas et al. prepared a type of hollow MPNs capsules by introducing LIG particles as renewable and easily degradable templates.172 Owing to the presence of chelated Fe3+ ions, the as-prepared capsules could be used as catalysts for Fenton reactions, which finally achieved the efficient degradation of orange II only with minimal amounts of H2O2 in mildly acidic conditions. As displayed in Fig. 11f, Eisa et al. prepared a nanocomposite film of PVA-supported Cu2O NPs, in which GA played a key role owing to its co-polymerization ability and reducing potential.85 On one hand, GA acted as a crosslinking agent for the PVA matrix via the formation of rigid polymeric framework, thus avoiding the toxicity of chemical crosslinking agents, such as widely applied glutaraldehyde. On the other hand, owing to the co-existence of the hydroxyl and carboxylic groups, GA could reduce Cu2+ to Cu+, thus endowing the nanocomposite film with efficient catalytic performance. The results confirmed that the PVA/Cu2O nanocomposite film could efficiently remove multiple pollutants, such as methylene blue, malachite green, reactive red dyes, and 4-nitrophenol via catalytic oxidation and reduction reaction. Moreover, thanks to the support of free-standing film, the nanocomposite catalyst materials realized easier recycling, without the need of filtration, precipitation, or centrifugation treatments. Likewise, Hu's group developed a mesoporous 3D wood to reduce and support the Pd NPs simultaneously, whose advantages could be clarified from several perspectives. Firstly, the natural wood contained a large amount of LIG, whose abundant reducing groups could effectively reduce Pd2+ ions to Pd NPs, thus boosting the excellent catalytic efficiency. Secondly, the plentiful hydroxyl groups of cellulose promoted the immobilization of Pd NPs in wood. Finally, when water flowed through the entire mesoporous wood, the ingenious mesostructure of wood could facilitate the accessibility of wastewater contacting the anchored Pd NPs, which was essential for highly efficient wastewater treatment.174
4.5 Water disinfection
Apart from the physical and chemical pollutants, waterborne pathogens (e.g., bacteria, viruses, and protozoa) in water environments are another global problem that threatens human health.175 Up to now, drinking water contaminated by waterborne pathogens remains one of the most primary causes of morbidity and mortality, particularly in the areas lacking of sanitation facilities such as rural and disaster hit areas (Fig. 12a).176 Traditional chlorine-based disinfectants are commonly used in the water sterilization industry, however the hazardous effect of generated by-products is another concerning problem.177 As such, various biological fungicides have been explored as alternatives for water disinfection.178,179 Among them, natural polyphenols offer unique advantages owing to their high antimicrobial activity, good biocompatibility, tunable physicochemical properties, and low environmental/human toxicity. And various antimicrobial materials based on natural polyphenols have been developed to obtain clean and safe water in recent years.
 Fig. 12  Water disinfection applications of natural polyphenolic composites. (a) Schematic illustration of water disinfection. Reprinted with permission176 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) PA-based antibacterial hydrogels. Reproduced with permission180 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) Molecular engineering of hydrogels for rapid water disinfection. Reproduced with permission78 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. (d) TA-modified natural collagen microfiltration membrane for water disinfection. Reproduced with permission79 Copyright 2022 Elsevier. (e) Gravity-driven microporous membranes for simultaneous pathogenic disinfection, metal recycling, and biofouling mitigation. Reproduced with permission86 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (f) Photocatalytic anti-biofouling coatings for uranium separation from seawater. Reproduced with permission181 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. 
As shown in Fig. 12b, our group reported a rapid assembly of smart hydrogels by direct gelation of several naturally occurring building blocks (i.e., PA, aminoglycosides, and Fe3+) via the catechol-metal ion coordination and imine bond formation.180 The resultant hydrogels exhibited interesting responsiveness to multiple stimuli, including pH, redox, light, temperature, and electricity. Moreover, the favorable photothermal conversion effect and excellent antibacterial activity were also proved for these smart hydrogels, suggesting their potential in water remediation applications. In another study, Yu et al. developed an antibacterial hydrogel with catechol-activated molecular-level H2O2 generators and quinone-modified activated carbon particles for rapid water disinfection.78 As shown in Fig. 12c, the O2 in water and air triggered the autoxidation of catechol and further caused the gradual release of H2O2 from the bulk hydrogel network, thus enabling inactivation of bacteria in water. What is more, the quinone-functionalized activated carbon particles further enhanced the bactericidal effect by reacting with various biological sulfhydryl groups found in bacterial proteins and metabolites. The obtained hydrogel could be immersed directly in bacteria-containing water as a disinfecting tablet and achieved >99.999% inactivation of E. coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa), and Bacillus subtilis (B. subtilis) in 60 min with zero energy input. Such a bacteria inactivation and water purification efficacy were also verified by the creek, real river, and university building recycled water. Additionally, quinone-modified activated carbon particles throughout the polymeric network could also serve as solar photothermal materials to endow the hydrogel with excellent solar distillation performance.
The water disinfection treatment was often carried out through a membrane separation process. For example, Tang and co-workers prepared a cellulose filter-paper-based water disinfectant by combining with the TA-crosslinked gelatin polymer network through Schiff base bonds.182 It was found that the introduction of TA not only strengthened the mechanical property of polymer network, but also endowed the modified filter paper with bacterial deactivation efficiency of up to 99%. Liu et al. developed a new type of microfiltration membrane for water disinfection by immobilizing TA on the 3D hierarchically-fibrous network (Fig. 12d).79 Resulting from the reactive oxygen species produced by catechol functional groups, the TA-modified microfiltration membrane exhibited excellent water disinfection efficiency of >99.9% for four different bacteria (E. coli, S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, and MRSA) with a flux of ∼150 L m−2 h−1 even just under gravity-driven operation.
For the past few years, natural polyphenols were also combined with other antibacterial agents for water disinfection applications. For instance, Park et al. prepared a TA-mediated hybrid cellulose membrane via the in situ reduction of Ag NPs on the membrane surface, which finally demonstrated an efficient bacterial filtration performance against E. coli from contaminated water.183 Chaudhary's group further prepared a reusable and durable cellulose/chitosan composite filter paper decorated with Ag NPs by further integrating the antibacterial activity of chitosan.184 The obtained composite displayed a bacteria-killing rate of 99% for S. aureus, and could maintain providing a 98% bacteria-killing capacity after five cycles. As depicted in Fig. 12e, Ma et al. designed a multifunctional gravity-driven membrane for pathogenic disinfection and biofouling prevention. Through one-step co-deposition of GA and PEI, the PVDF microporous membrane was tailored with favorable hydrophilicity, enhanced positive charge and metal-binding ability, which eventually achieved 6.4 log decrease of E. coli, even in metal ions-containing simulated water. Moreover, the catechol moieties of GA and amino groups of PEI could capture metal ions by binding and reduction effect to form strong MPNs on the surface of polyphenol-functionalized membrane, eventually producing a synergistic antibacterial activity.86 In consideration of the renewable green source and disinfection effect of tea polyphenols, Feng and co-workers explored the disinfection effects of TP combined with ozone. Their result revealed that such a combination could extend the half-life of TP, providing an interesting pathway to ensure the safety of water.185
Because the microorganism in contaminated water often has an adverse effect on the durability of materials, the water disinfection can also play a positive role in other water remediation applications. For example, Wu et al. developed a TA-coated hybrid ZIF-8/polyacrylonitrile nanofibrous membrane with durable and excellent anti-fouling performance (Fig. 12f).181 Owing to the release of zinc ions and generation of reactive oxygen species from TA/ZIF-8 coating, the nanofibrous membrane exhibited high antibacterial and anti-algae activities, dynamic self-renewing surface and escorted a long service life of 25 day for effective uranium adsorption in natural seawater.
5 Conclusion and perspective
Over the past few decades, natural polyphenolic composites have been extensively investigated in various types of wastewater purification applications, owing to their cost-effective property, exceptional reusability, and unique chemical structure. This review started with the structural features and functional contributions of natural polyphenols, and then discussed the polyphenols-based building blocks for composites, especially focused on their water remediation applications, including membrane filtration, solar distillation, adsorption, advanced oxidation, and disinfection. Although many impressive progresses have been made, there are still some challenges that should be taken into consideration in the future. (1) Current works about polyphenolic composites mainly focused on the purified polyphenol with single-component. However, taking the cost into consideration, the polyphenol mixtures directly extracted from natural plants should be paid more attentions in the future. In these regards, more in-depth exploration on the component-processing-property relationships of natural extractives with multiple components is conducive for the optimal functionalization of natural polyphenolic composites. (2) The development of high-powered devices in water remediation applications will request superb control over both structural and functional characters of polyphenolic composites. Therefore, some emerging processing technologies with higher accuracy, such as 3D-printing and microfluidics, may be one of the future trends for the fabrication of natural polyphenolic composites. (3) The increasing complexity of functional devices will bring higher costs, and the recycle of materials is always a key point for water remediation. Despite the good reusability reported in current studies, the decrease of decontamination efficiency during the multiple use process was inevitable. Considering the abundant source of polyphenols in nature and in order to realize the reuse of functional devices, it is necessary to develop degradable materials to act as the functional portions (e.g., functional coating) of water purification devices. So that, peeling the functional portions and further functionalization again in a green way may be a new direction in the future. (4) The easy oxidation of natural polyphenols may affect the stable performance of composites. Therefore, the durability of natural polyphenols-based composites needs further investigation, especially in some extreme conditions. Above all, natural polyphenols have demonstrated great potentials in water treatment and will be applied more extensively in the future, accompanied by the further exploration of structure-function relationships and emerging composite materials fabrication strategies. We expect this review will offer helpful insights in the ingenious design of natural polyphenolic composites to achieve eco-friendly, highly-efficient, and long-term durable water remediation practical applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (21975167 and 52003179), the Research Fund from Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Advanced Functional Polymer Design and Application, Soochow University (KJS2116), and the Fundamental Research Funds for Central Universities.
Notes and references
T. Ma, S. Sun, G. Fu, J. W. Hall, Y. Ni, L. He, J. Yi, N. Zhao, Y. Du, T. Pei, W. Cheng, C. Song, C. Fang and C. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
UN, Water scarcity, https://www.unwater.org/un-world-water-development-report-2021-valuing-water/, accessed 21 March, 2021.
S. M. P. Sullivan, M. C. Rains, A. D. Rodewald, W. W. Buzbee and A. D. Rosemond, Science, 2020, 369, 766–768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Z. Xu, L. Zhao, B. Bhatia, Y. Zhong, S. Gong and E. N. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1771–1793 RSC .
Z.-C. Xiong, Y.-J. Zhu, Z.-Y. Wang, Y.-Q. Chen and H.-P. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2106978 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gagliano, M. Sgroi, P. P. Falciglia, F. G. A. Vagliasindi and P. Roccaro, Water Res., 2020, 171, 115381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dou, M. Xu, B. Wang, Z. Zhang, G. Wen, Y. Zheng, D. Luo, L. Zhao, A. Yu, L. Zhang, Z. Jiang and Z. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 986–1029 RSC .
G. Dong, B. Chen, B. Liu, L. J. Hounjet, Y. Cao, S. R. Stoyanov, M. Yang and B. Zhang, Water Res., 2022, 211, 118047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zou, Y. Zhang, Z. Cai, C. Li, Z. Sun, C. Yu, Z. Dong, L. Wu and Y. Song, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zeng, M. Chen, D. Huang, S. Lei, X. Zhang, L. Wang and Z. Cheng, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 758–802 RSC .
S. Rojas and P. Horcajada, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8378–8415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pal, A. Pal, K. Nakashima and B. K. Yadav, Chemosphere, 2021, 266, 128934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, S. Liu, J. Liu, J. Sun, Z. Zhang and Q. Zhu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2022, 285, 119251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Yaashikaa, P. S. Kumar, S. J. Varjani and A. Saravanan, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 292, 122030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, Z. Lin, Y. Ju, M. A. Rahim, J. J. Richardson and F. Caruso, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 1269–1278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Y. Wan, V. A. Co and H. El-Nezami, Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr., 2021, 61, 690–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Zou, J. Hu, Y. Li and Y. Cheng, Giant, 2020, 3, 100022 CrossRef .
H. Sun, Y. Zhao, P. Zhang, S. Zhai, W. Li and J. Cui, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 3040–3048 RSC .
X. Zhang, Z. Li, P. Yang, G. Duan, X. Liu, Z. Gu and Y. Li, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 145–167 RSC .
X. Fu, Y. L. Zhang, G. R. Zhang, X. G. Li, S. L. Ni and J. W. Cui, Appl. Mater. Today, 2022, 26, 101353 CrossRef .
Q. Dai, H. Geng, Q. Yu, J. Hao and J. Cui, Theranostics, 2019, 9, 3170–3190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, J. Zhao, Z. Yang, L. Xiong, L. Li, Z. Gu and Y. Li, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 3605–3622 RSC .
H. Geng, L. Zhuang, M. Li, H. Liu, F. Caruso, J. Hao and J. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 29826–29834 CAS .
H. Cao, L. Yang, R. Tian, H. Wu, Z. Gu and Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 4175–4198 RSC .
P. Yang, X. Zhou, J. Zhang, J. Zhong, F. Zhu, X. Liu, Z. Gu and Y. Li, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 1834–1839 RSC .
Z. Yang, W. Guo, P. Yang, J. Hu, G. Duan, X. Liu, Z. Gu and Y. Li, Polymer, 2021, 221, 123627 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Xu, K.-G. Neoh and E.-T. Kang, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2018, 87, 165–196 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Sileika, D. G. Barrett, R. Zhang, K. H. A. Lau and P. B. Messersmith, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10766–10770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ejima, J. J. Richardson, K. Liang, J. P. Best, M. P. van Koeverden, G. K. Such, J. Cui and F. Caruso, Science, 2013, 341, 154–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Geng, Q.-Z. Zhong, J. Li, Z. Lin, J. Cui, F. Caruso and J. Hao, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 11432–11473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Geng, P. Zhang, Q. Peng, J. Cui, J. Hao and H. Zeng, Acc. Chem. Res., 2022, 55, 1171–1182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shin, E. Park and H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903022 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, G. Xiao, F. Tian, J. J. Richardson, Y. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Guo, X. Liao and B. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 607–614 RSC .
Z. Wang, M. Han, J. Zhang, F. He, Z. Xu, S. Ji, S. Peng and Y. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 360, 299–312 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Z. Chen, H. Chen, K. Chen, W. Tao, X.-K. Ouyang, L. Mei and X. Zeng, Bioact. Mater., 2022, 17, 49–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mohammad, M. Lisiecki, K. Liang, A. Razmjou and V. Chen, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 21, 100884 CrossRef .
Z. Bao, J. Wang, Z. Zhang, H. Xing, Q. Yang, Y. Yang, H. Wu, R. Krishna, W. Zhou, B. Chen and Q. Ren, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16020–16025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Grape, J. Gabriel Flores, T. Hidalgo, E. Martinez-Ahumada, A. Gutierrez-Alejandre, A. Hautier, D. R. Williams, M. O'Keeffe, L. Ohrstrom, T. Willhammar, P. Horcajada, I. A. Ibarra and A. K. Inge, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 16795–16804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, W. Zhu, Y. Ping, C. Wang, N. Gao, X. Yin, C. Gu, D. Ding, C. J. Brinker and G. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14258–14264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Zhang, A. Yang, C. Jiang, G. Zhang, J. Mao and Q. Meng, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 635, 119521 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Bai, L. Meng, W. Zhang, J. Xia, Z. Xu, R. Sun, Y. Lv and T. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 437, 135289 CrossRef CAS .
X. Su, W. Xie, P. Wang, Z. Tian, H. Wang, Z. Yuan, X. Liu and J. Huang, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 2199–2207 RSC .
H. Zhang, Y. Xiao, P. Chen, H. Cao, W. Bai, Z. Yang, P. Yang, Y. Li and Z. Gu, Biomacromolecules, 2022 DOI:10.1021/acs.biomac.2c00704 .
L. Yang, C. Wang, L. Li, F. Zhu, X. Ren, Q. Huang, Y. Cheng and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2108749 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, L. Li, H. Li, T. Wang, X. Ren, Y. Cheng, Y. Li and Q. Huang, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2022, 2200112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, H. Geng, X. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Hao and J. Cui, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2022, 43, 2100830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Cheng, J. Yu, T. Arisawa, K. Hayashi, J. J. Richardson, Y. Shibuta and H. Ejima, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 1892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, H. D. Guo, S. Z. Leng, J. L. Yu, K. Feng, L. Y. Cao and J. F. Huang, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2021, 46, 330–348 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gao, H. Chen, S. Liu, J. Chen, Y. Xing, S. Ji, J. Chen, P. Zou and J. Cai, Chemosphere, 2022, 288, 132537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Singh, K. K. Senapati and K. C. Sarma, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 2214–2221 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, D. Sun and J. Yang, Mater. Lett., 2022, 313, 131738 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ding, Y. Zhou, W. L. Ong and G. W. Ho, Mater. Today, 2021, 42, 178–191 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zou, X. Chen, W. Guo, X. Liu and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 2634–2642 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zou, X. Chen, P. Yang, G. Liang, Y. Yang, Z. Gu and Y. Li, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabb4696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zou, J. Zhao, J. Zhu, X. Guo, P. Chen, G. Duan, X. Liu and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 7617–7624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Bai, P. Yang, H. Liu, Y. Zou, X. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Gu and Y. Li, Macromolecules, 2022, 55, 3493–3501 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zou, P. Yang, L. Yang, N. Li, G. Duan, X. Liu and Y. Li, Polymer, 2021, 217, 123464 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Yang, P. Yang, W. Guo, Q.-P. Zhang, X. Liu and Y. Li, Sci. China: Chem., 2020, 63, 1295–1305 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, X. Wang, P. Yang, S. Shi, G. Duan, X. Liu and Y. Li, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2022, 2100916 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Yang, S. Zhang, N. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Zhong, X. Sun, Y. Qi, X. Chen, Z. Li and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 42671–42679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, F. Zhu, Z. Zhang, Y. Cheng, Z. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 8319–8343 RSC .
P. Yang, S. Zhang, X. Chen, X. Liu, Z. Wang and Y. Li, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 746–761 RSC .
C. Wang, D. Wang, T. Dai, P. Xu, P. Wu, Y. Zou, P. Yang, J. Hu, Y. Li and Y. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802127 CrossRef .
P. Yang, Z. Gu, F. Zhu and Y. Li, CCS Chem., 2020, 2, 128–138 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zou, T. Wu, N. Li, X. Guo and Y. Li, Polymer, 2020, 186, 122042 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tien Thanh, N. Thanh Huyen, N. Thi An Hang, P. Dinh Dat, N. Duc Cuong, D. Danh Bich, N. Hoai Viet, H. Minh Hiep and N. Zoom Hoang, Desalination, 2021, 518, 115280 CrossRef .
J. Park, L. Chi, H.-Y. Kwon, J. Lee, S. Kim and S. Hong, Food Chem., 2022, 383, 132399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ren, F.-Y. Wang, R.-T. Lan, W.-Q. Fu, Z.-J. Chen, H. Lin, S. Huang, R. M. Gul, J. Wang, J.-Z. Xu and Z.-M. Li, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2021, 7, 373–381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. Yan, Y.-E. Miao, Y. Huang and T. Liu, Composites, Part B, 2015, 79, 217–223 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, T. Hu, B. Hu, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. He, Y. Li, K. Cai, X. Zhang and J. Guo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 431, 128441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. He, M. Han, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Wu, Y. Zhou, L. Jiang, S. Peng and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104650 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, X. Wu, F. He, S. Peng and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2011114 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zou, X. Wu, H. Li, L. Yang, C. Zhang, H. Wu, Y. Li and L. Xiao, Carbohydr. Polym., 2021, 254, 117404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, Y. Zou, W. Xia, H. Li, X. He, Y. Zhou, X. Liu, C. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 969–975 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, S. Ji, F. He, M. Cao, S. Peng and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3391–3396 RSC .
T. Lu, R. Ma, K. Ke, D. Zhang, D. Qi and H. Zhao, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 408, 127327 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Li, Y. Jiang, M. Li, Q. Xiao, T. Zhao, S. Yang, C. Qi, P. Qiu, J. Yang, Z. Jiang and W. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, e202200465,  DOI:10.1002/anie.202200465 .
Y. Guo, C. M. Dundas, X. Zhou, K. P. Johnston and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yu, H. Wang, R. Wang, P. Zhao, Y. Chen, G. Liu and X. Liao, Water Res., 2022, 218, 118469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, C. Huang, D. Xiao, P. Wang, X. Luo, W. Liu, S. Liu, J. Li, S. Li and Z. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 7600–7607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, Y. Xiao, W. Zhang, H. Lin, L. Shen, R. Li, Y. Jiao and B.-Q. Liao, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 618, 118726 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, G. Gao, S. Yang, Z. Wang, P. Jin and J. Wei, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2021, 310, 110623 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xiao, Y. Yin, W. Zheng, M. Dai, S. Afewerki, A. Chen, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, W. Zhang and Y. S. Zhang, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 629, 127518 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Y. He, L. Zhou, X. Yin, L. Zhang, J. Chen, Z. Li and Y. Bai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 11320–11331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Zayed, W. H. Eisa and B. Anis, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 279, 123826 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, D. Lu, J. Qi, P. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. Zhang and J. Ma, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 410, 128289 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jiang, Z. Zhang, T. Zhou, S. Duan, Z. Yang, Y. Ju, C. Jia, X. Lu and F. Chen, Desalination, 2022, 531, 115706 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Meng, T. Liu, S. Yu, Y. Cheng, J. Lu, X. Yuan and H. Wang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 8622–8631 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dong, W. Xu, S. Liu, Y. Gong, T. Yang, L. Du, Q. Chen, X. Tan and Y. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 132868 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Zhang, X. Long, Y. Zheng, Y. Zuo and F. Jiao, Prog. Org. Coat., 2022, 164, 106723 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, C. Liu, Y. Yuan, M. Fan, D. Zhang, D. Wang and Y. Xu, Bioresource Technol., 2020, 311, 123520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, X. Luo, B. Liu, J. Zhou, J. Feng, W. Zhu, S. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Lin and P. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15359–15370 RSC .
F. Wu, D. Liu, G. Li, L. Li, L. Yan, G. Hong and X. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 5419–5428 RSC .
R. Krishnamoorthi, R. Anbazhagan, H.-C. Tsai, C.-F. Wang and J.-Y. Lai, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 131920 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, Y. Li, Y. Gao, B. Ai, W. Gao and G. Peng, Water Sci. Technol., 2020, 81, 1461–1470 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Xu, Y. An, Q. Wang, J. Wang, L. Hao, C. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Zhou and Q. Wu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 412, 125307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Phanthuwongpakdee, S. Babel, K. Laohhasurayotin, S. Sattayaporn and T. Kaneko, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 104147 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, J. Xie, W. Liu and Y. Xia, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 1976–1987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liao, C.-H. Loh, M. Tian, R. Wang and A. G. Fane, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2018, 77, 69–94 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, D. Yuan, J. Bao, Y. Xie, M. He, Z. Shi, S. Chen, C. He, W. Zhao and C. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13359–13372 RSC .
Y. Xu, D. Yuan, Y. Guo, S. Chen, W. Lin, Y. Long, J. Bao, C. He, C. Cheng, C. Deng, Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, W. Zhao and C. Zhao, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 131685 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, Y. Guo, D. Yuan, C. He, J. Bao, S. Ai, F. Li, W. Zhao, Y. Xu and C. Zhao, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2021, 214, 108993 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, W. Lin, D. Yuan, S. Chen, F. Li, Y. Long, C. He, W. Zhao and C. Zhao, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2022, 124, 76–85 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, J. Bao, X. Zhang, W. Li, Y. Xie, S. Sun, W. Zhao and C. Zhao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 533, 526–538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, W. Lin, H. Wang, J. Guo, D. Yuan, J. Bao, S. Sun, W. Zhao and C. Zhao, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2020, 199, 108353 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. He, J. Yu, L. Zhang, S. Li and H. Li, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 287, 120569 CrossRef CAS .
M. Obaid, H. O. Mohamed, A. B. Alayande, Y. Kang, N. Ghaffour and I. S. Kim, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 272, 118954 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, Y. Ding, M. Zhang, S. Gao, Y. Li, C. Huang and G. Fu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 384, 121476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ji, Y. Wen, Z. Wang, S. Zhang and M. Guo, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 255, 120276 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, X. Wang, B. Januszewski, Y. Liu, D. Li, R. Fu, M. Elimelech and X. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 672–719 RSC .
A. Cassano, G. De Luca, C. Conidi and E. Drioli, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2017, 351, 45–75 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, Y. Xie, T. Xiao, W. Zhao, J. Li and C. Zhao, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 337, 122–132 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, S. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Shi, Z. Wei, J. Bao, W. Zhao and C. Zhao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 11689–11697 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Z. Qiu, G.-P. Wu and Z.-K. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 5902–5908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Y. Ma, Y.-R. Xue, H.-C. Yang, J. Wu and Z.-K. Xu, Macromolecules, 2022, 55, 3363–3383 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Tang, P. Yu, L.-S. Tang, Q.-Y. Wang, R.-Y. Bao, Z.-Y. Liu, M.-B. Yang and W. Yang, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2018, 165, 299–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Swain, S. Sultana and K. Parida, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 9908–9944 RSC .
C. Zhang, D.-F. Hu, J.-W. Xu, M.-Q. Ma, H. Xing, K. Yao, J. Ji and Z.-K. Xu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12347–12356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, Z. Li, Z. Yang, F. Zhu, W. Zhao, G. Duan and Y. Li, ACS Macro Lett., 2022, 11, 251–256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xiang, P. Yang, H. Guo, S. Zhang, X. Zhang, F. Zhu and Y. Li, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2017, 38, 1700446 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Yang, J. Zhang, S. Xiang, Z. Jin, F. Zhu, T. Wang, G. Duan, X. Liu, Z. Gu and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 39126–39134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, Q. Fan, J. Hong, Z. Chen, X. Zhou, J. Zhang, Y. Dai, H. Jiang, Z. Gu, Y. Cheng and Y. Li, Small, 2021, 17, 2102485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, R. Wan, L. Yang, L. Xiong, J. Hu, J. Tang, H. He, Z. Gu, L. Li and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2022 DOI:10.1007/s12274-022-4434-z .
Z. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Fu, L. Yang, F. Zhu, X. Liu, Z. Gu and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 7018–7023 RSC .
Z. Lin, X. Weng, G. Owens and Z. Chen, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 242, 118476 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xiao, H. Li, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang and X. Wang, J. Environ. Manage., 2020, 275, 111262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kumar, K. Bhardwaj, N. Cruz-Martins, E. Nepovimova, P. Oleksak, D. S. Dhanjal, S. Bhardwaj, R. Singh, C. Chopra, R. Verma, P. P. Chauhan, D. Kumar and K. Kuca, Molecules, 2021, 26, 3447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Song, R. Wang, W. Zhao, S. Sun and C. Zhao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 485, 39–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shi, Y. Zhang, R. Dai, S. Chen, M. Zhang, L. Jin, J. Wang, W. Zhao and C. Zhao, Colloids Surf., B, 2020, 186, 110728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dai, Y. Zhang, Z.-Q. Shi, F. Yang and C.-S. Zhao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 513, 647–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-L. Loo, L. Vasquez, A. Athanassiou and D. Fragouli, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 2100580 CrossRef .
F. Yu, P. Yang, Z. Yang, X. Zhang and J. Ma, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 131900 CrossRef CAS .
S.-L. Loo, A. G. Fane, T.-T. Lim, W. B. Krantz, Y.-N. Liang, X. Liu and X. Hu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 9363–9371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhu, L. Wang, B. Demir, M. An, Z. L. Wu, J. Yin, R. Xiao, Q. Zheng and J. Qian, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 3187–3195 RSC .
X. Lin, L. Zhang and B. Duan, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 2503–2512 RSC .
Y. Q. Zhang, X. Bin Yang, Z. X. Wang, J. Long and L. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7316–7325 RSC .
F. Ding and M. Gao, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 289, 102377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, H. Zhang, S. Guo, J. Luo and Y. Wan, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 629, 119287 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maehringer, M. Hennemann, T. Clark, T. Bein and D. D. Medina, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 5519–5526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liang, X. Zhang, Y. Xie, R.-B. Lin, R. Krishna, H. Cui, Z. Li, Y. Shi, H. Wu, W. Zhou and B. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 17795–17801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tao, Q. Li, Q. Wu and H. Li, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 1439–1445 RSC .
Y. Xiao, W. Zhang, Y. Jiao, Y. Xu and H. Lin, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 624, 119101 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Z. Qiu, Q.-Z. Zhong, Y. Du, Y. Lv and Z.-K. Xu, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 6205–6208 RSC .
Y. Qiu, M. Lee, J. Chen and Q. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 20387–20395 RSC .
W. Shang and T. Deng, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16133 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393–398 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, B. Rosenberger and G. Yu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw5484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1985–1992 RSC .
Z. Wang, M. Han, F. He, S. Peng, S. B. Darling and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104886 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, W. An, Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, S. Yang, P. Jin and D. Ding, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 133060 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, H. Xing, S. Chen, Q. Wang, L. Dong, K.-D. Hu, B. Wang, J. Xue and Y. Lu, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 7493–7501 RSC .
L. Wang, C. Shi, L. Wang, L. Pan, X. Zhang and J.-J. Zou, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 4790–4815 RSC .
T. M. Budnyak, S. Modersitzki, I. V. Pylypchuk, J. Piatek, A. Jaworski, O. Sevastyanova, M. E. Lindstrom and A. Slabon, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 16262–16273 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, X. Shan, Q. An, Z. Xiao and S. Zhai, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 398, 125561 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Xia, H. Y. Zhang, Z. H. Hu, F. Kong and F. He, Chemosphere, 2021, 263, 128202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Q. Liu, W. Ma, H. Liu, J. Zhu, L. Wang, H. Pei, Q. Liu and J. Yao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 609, 825–837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, S. Hua, C. Wang, M. Qiu, L. Jin and B. Hu, Chemosphere, 2021, 279, 130539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Gutierrez, R. Bhandari, J. Weng, A. Stromberg, T. D. Dziubla and J. Z. Hilt, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2020, 137, e49109 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Szczesniak, S. Borysiuk, J. Choma and M. Jaroniec, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1457–1473 RSC .
Y.-y Feng, Y.-q Chen, Z. Wang and J. Wei, New Carbon Mater., 2022, 37, 196–217 CrossRef .
S. J. Yang, M. Antonietti and N. Fechler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8269–8273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, J. Zhang, T. Wang and P. Wang, J. Cleaner Prod., 2022, 338, 130558 CrossRef CAS .
X. Luo, J. Zhang, J. Tao, X. Wang, S. Zhao, Z. Chen, S. Liu, J. Li and S. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 416, 129486 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, C. Chen, X. Ren, X. Wang, H. Wang and X. Wang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 103, 180–234 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, C. Yu, W. Zhu, G. He, Y. Wei and J. Zhou, Chemosphere, 2022, 286, 131626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Duan, H. Sun and S. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 678–687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, J. Ren, X. Zhang and D. Yang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 13297–13310 RSC .
D. Zhao, Y. Wang, C.-L. Dong, Y.-C. Huang, J. Chen, F. Xue, S. Shen and L. Guo, Nat. Energy, 2021, 388–397 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, W. Wang, K. An, Y. Chen, Z. Zhao, Y. Gao and Z. Jiang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 562, 150256 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen and Y. Hu, Catal. Commun., 2019, 123, 124–128 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Tardy, J. J. Richardson, J. Guo, J. Lehtonen, M. Ago and O. J. Rojas, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 1335–1344 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Wu, Y. Yu, T. Pan, D. Li, D. Lambropoulou and X. Yang, Water Res., 2020, 186, 116326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen, A. S. Gong, M. Zhu, G. Chen, S. D. Lacey, F. Jiang, Y. Li, Y. Wang, J. Dai, Y. Yao, J. Song, B. Liu, K. Fu, S. Das and L. Hu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4275–4282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, W. Tang, Y. Chen and W. Yin, Science, 2020, 368, 146–147 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Chu, E. C. Ryberg, S. K. Loeb, M.-J. Suh and J.-H. Kim, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 1187–1195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Richards, J. H. Harrhy, R. J. Lewis, A. G. R. Howe, G. M. Suldecki, A. Folli, D. J. Morgan, T. E. Davies, E. J. Loveridge, D. A. Crole, J. K. Edwards, P. Gaskin, C. J. Kiely, Q. He, D. M. Murphy, J.-Y. Maillard, S. J. Freakley and G. J. Hutchings, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 575–585 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Z. Yuan, H. E. Karahan, Y. Wang, X. Sui, F. Liu and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 9819–9839 RSC .
Z.-Y. Huo, D.-M. Lee, S. Wang, Y.-J. Kim and S.-W. Kim, Small Methods, 2021, 5, 2100093 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, H. Wang, J. Hu, J. Hu, S. Zhang, Z. Yang, Y. Li and Y. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 7678–7685 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, D. Ye, J. Zhao, X. Wu and Y. Wu, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 420, 129691 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Liu, J. Wang and F. Tang, Colloids Surf., A, 2020, 591, 124548 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hanif, Z. A. Khan, M. F. Siddiqui, M. Z. Tariq, S. Park and S. J. Park, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 231, 115746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chaudhary, K. M. Rao, S. M. Choi, S. Zo, M. Suneetha and S. S. Han, Fibers Polym., 2021, 22, 2979–2985 CrossRef CAS .
C. Feng, T. Wang, C. Wang, X. Chen, Z. Guo and Z. Chen, Ozone Sci. Eng., 2020, 42, 551–557 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Yuanting Xu
	Yuanting Xu obtained his BS (2010) and MS (2013) degree in polymer materials and engineering, and biomedical engineering at Sichuan University, respectively. He then worked at the College of Polymer Science and Engineering at Sichuan University as a lecturer, and then continue to obtain the PhD degree (2020) in biomedical Engineering under the supervision of Prof. Changsheng Zhao. He then joined Prof. Yiwen Li's group and currently focuses on the environmental remediation application of robust and multifunctional polyphenolic composite materials.

Yiwen Li
	Yiwen Li received his BS in Chemistry from University of Science and Technology of China (2008) and PhD in Polymer Science from the University of Akron (2013). After two years’ postdoctoral training at University of California, San Diego, he began his independent career at Sichuan University in 2016, where he is currently a professor. Yiwen was listed by MIT Technology Review as one of the top innovators under the age of 35 (TR35), and was the recipient of Polymer Young Investigator Award from CCS and Feng Xinde Polymer Prize from Elsevier. He has published 130+ peer-reviewed articles, and served as the editorial board members for Macromol. Rapid Commun., Giant, Chin. Chem. Lett., etc. His current research interests focus on the bioinspired polymers including synthetic melanin and polyphenolic materials.

 	Fig. 1  Overview of water remediation applications of natural polyphenolic composites.	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical structures of typical natural polyphenols used in water remediation.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of typical covalent and non-covalent interactions within natural polyphenolic composites.	 

 	Fig. 4  Functional contributions of natural polyphenols for water remediation.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of the polyphenols-based building blocks for composites.	 


TA	PEI, silane, Ag+, APTES	Membrane	Superhydrophobicity, positive charge, catalytic activity,	Oil/water separation, dye adsorption, catalytic degradation	2019	
34

ZIF-8	Membrane	
In situ growth of ZIF-8	Membrane filtration for desalination	2021	
81

Fe3+, APTES	Sponge	Photothermal conversion, confinement capillarity	Solar distillation	2021	
72

FeSO4	Carbon nanospheres	Mesoporous property	Adsorption for Cr6+	2021	
82

Meso-Bi/TiO2	Nanofiber	Improving light absorption	Photocatalytic degradation for methylene blue and bisphenol A	2021	
83

CS, AC	Hydrogel	Oxidation to release H2O2	Water sterilization	2021	
78

GA	TiO2, CNTs	Membrane	Superhydrophilicity, corrosive resistance	Corrosive oil/water separation	2021	
84

Fe3O4, PEI, CS	Hydrogel	Magnetic separation	Removal for Cr6+via synergistic adsorption-reduction	2021	
76

PVA, Cu2O	Membrane	Simultaneously crosslinking PVA and reducing Cu2+	Oxidative and reductive degradation for dyes	2021	
85

PVDF, PEI	Membrane	Co-deposition with PEI, binding and reduction of Ag+	Water sterilization	2021	
86

LIG	Polypyrrole	Hydrogel	Anti-salt accumulation	Solar distillation, adsorption for Cu2+, Cr6+, Co2+	2022	
87

Fe3O4	Nanoparticle	Magnetic separation	Adsorption for COD	2020	
88

CoFe2O4	Nanoparticle	Magnetic separation	PMS degradation for SMX	2022	
89

TP	APTES	Membrane	Superhydrophilicity	Oil/water separation	2022	
90

Acrylic acid	Hydrogel	Bond ability with metal ions	Static and dynamic adsorption for Cr3+, Pb2+, and Fe3+	2020	
91

Metal ions	Silk	Hydrophilicity, photothermal conversion,	Solar distillation	2021	
74

BT	BSA	Nanoparticle	Stability under γ-ray irradiation	Adsorption for uranium	2018	
92

Graphene	Aerogel	Hydrophilicity, photothermal conversion	Solar distillation, adsorption for U	2021	
93

CA	CS	Fibers	Superhydrophilicity	Oil/water separation, adsorption for dyes, and heavy metal ions	2022	
94

Graphene oxide	3D flake	Reducing graphene oxide	Adsorption for NOR and KP	2020	
95

QN	Fe3O4@SiO2	Nanoparticle	Magnetic separation, high porosity	Adsorption and detection for PUHs	2021	
96

ACN	None	Piece	Positively charged property	Adsorption for I−	2020	
97


 	Fig. 6  Membrane filtration applications of natural polyphenolic composites. (a) Schematic illustration of membrane filtration. Reprinted with permission136 Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The fabrication, structure and oil/water separation of a TA-based composite membrane. Reproduced with permission137 Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Design of preferable functional materials based on the secondary reactions of the TA/APTES coating. Reproduced with permission34 Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (d) Construction of dually charged membrane for dye/salt separation. Reproduced with permission138 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (e) MOF nanofiltration membrane based on TA-Zn2+ MPNs for desalination. Reproduced with permission81 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (f) Modification of PVDF membrane via GA-assisted accurate-deposition strategy for complex corrosive dyed emulsions separation. Reproduced with permission84 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Solar distillation applications of TA-based composites. (a) Schematic illustration of the structure and operation of an interfacial distillation system. Reproduced with permission145 Copyright 2016 Springer Nature. (b) Experimental functional device for solar distillation. Reproduced with permission146 Copyright 2016 Springer Nature. (c) Transformation of various woods into photothermal materials. Reproduced with permission71 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (d) Versatile photothermal coating for various types of substrates. Reproduced with permission150 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (e) The confinement capillarity of photothermal thin coating for boosting solar distillation. Reproduced with permission151 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  Solar distillation applications of other natural polyphenolic composites. (a) LIG NPs for solar distillation. Reproduced with permission80 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (b) LIG hydrogel-based solar-driven evaporator. Reproduced with permission87 Copyright 2022 Elsevier. (c) Oak-inspired anti-biofouling shape-memory scaffolds with stable solar distillation. Reproduced with permission152 Copyright 2022 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Adsorption applications of natural polyphenolic composites. (a) Tailored hydrophobic/hydrophilic LIG for sustainable Co2+ removal. Reprinted with permission154 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (b) Amino-modified LIG for selective phosphate adsorption. Reproduced with permission155 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (c) The mesopore-dominated adsorbent for the removal of boron. Reproduced with permission156 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (d) A reed roots-inspired LIG magnetic nanogel for bleaching effluents remediation. Reproduced with permission88 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Adsorption applications of natural polyphenolic carbon materials and uranium-adsorbents. (a) Hierarchically porous carbon of zinc-ZA mesocrystals. Reproduced with permission162 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) TA-based magnetic mesoporous carbon nanospheres. Reproduced with permission82 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (c) Adsorption mechanism of toxic metal ions by a torrefaction biochar. Reproduced with permission163 Copyright 2022 Elsevier. (d) Adsorption mechanism of UO22+ on BT-modified BSA nanospheres. Reproduced with permission92 Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) A bifunctional graphene aerogel for simultaneous solar distillation and marine uranium extraction. Reproduced with permission93 Copyright 2021 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Solar-powered “pump” for uranium recovery from seawater. Reproduced with permission164 Copyright 2021 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  Advanced oxidation processes of natural polyphenolic composites. (a) Bi/Ti-phenolic network induced mesoporous hybrid nanocatalysts with photocatalytic performance. Reproduced with permission83 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (b) Multiple modifications of BiVO4 through the MPNs for enhanced photocatalytic activity. Reproduced with Permission171 Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (c) PMS activation for BPA removal by mesoporous carbon framework supported Cu-Fe oxides. Reproduced with permission151 Copyright 2022 Elsevier. (d) LIG-derived biochar to support CoFe2O4 for sulfamethoxazole degradation. Reproduced with permission89 Copyright 2022 Elsevier. (e) Hollow metal-phenolic capsules based on LIG nano- and microparticles for Fenton reactions. Reproduced with permission172 Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) GA-based catalyst for oxidative and reductive degradation of water pollutants. Reprinted with permission85 Copyright 2021 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  Water disinfection applications of natural polyphenolic composites. (a) Schematic illustration of water disinfection. Reprinted with permission176 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) PA-based antibacterial hydrogels. Reproduced with permission180 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) Molecular engineering of hydrogels for rapid water disinfection. Reproduced with permission78 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. (d) TA-modified natural collagen microfiltration membrane for water disinfection. Reproduced with permission79 Copyright 2022 Elsevier. (e) Gravity-driven microporous membranes for simultaneous pathogenic disinfection, metal recycling, and biofouling mitigation. Reproduced with permission86 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (f) Photocatalytic anti-biofouling coatings for uranium separation from seawater. Reproduced with permission181 Copyright 2021 Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
