Non-precious-metal catalysts for alkaline water electrolysis: operando characterizations, theoretical calculations, and recent advances  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS00575D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00575D
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 9154-9196Non-precious-metal catalysts for alkaline water electrolysis: operando characterizations, theoretical calculations, and recent advances

        
          
            Jian 
            Wang†
*a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Gao†
b, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Kong
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Juwon 
            Kim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Subin 
            Choi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Francesco 
            Ciucci
          
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            Yong 
            Hao
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Shihe 
            Yang
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Zongping 
            Shao
          
        
      h and 

        
          
            Jongwoo 
            Lim
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea. E-mail: jwangbx@connect.ust.hk; jwlim@snu.ac.kr
bCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China
cSchool of Mechanical Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
dDepartment of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
eDepartment of Chemical and Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
fInstitute of Engineering Thermophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China
gGuangdong Provincial Key Lab of Nano-Micro Material Research, School of Chemical Biology and Biotechnology, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen 518055, China
hState Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, College of Chemistry & Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing 210009, China
Received 
      15th July 2020
    First published on 3rd November 2020AbstractRecent years have witnessed an upsurge in the development of non-precious catalysts (NPCs) for alkaline water electrolysis (AWE), especially with the strides made in experimental and computational techniques. In this contribution, the most recent advances in NPCs for AWE were systematically reviewed, emphasizing the application of in situ/operando experimental methods and density functional theory (DFT) calculations in their understanding and development. First, we briefly introduced the fundamentals of the anode and cathode reaction for AWE, i.e., the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), respectively. Next, the most popular in situ/operando approaches for characterizing AWE catalysts, including hard and soft XAS, ambient-pressure XPS, liquid and identical location TEM, electrochemical mass spectrometry, and Raman spectroscopy were thoroughly summarized. Subsequently, we carefully discussed the principles, computational methods, applications, and combinations of DFT with machine learning for modeling NPCs and predicting the alkaline OER and HER. With the improved understanding of the structure–property–performance relationship of NPCs for AWE, we proceeded to overview their current development, summarising state-of-the-art design strategies to boost their activity. In addition, advances in various extensively investigated NPCs for AWE were evaluated. By conveying these methods, progress, insights, and perspectives, this review will contribute to a better understanding and rational development of non-precious AWE electrocatalysts for hydrogen production.
Jian Wang
Jian Wang is currently a SNU Science Fellow at Seoul National University. He obtained the BEng in Energy, Power System and Automation Engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2013, and PhD in Mechanical Engineering from the HKUST in 2018. In 2017, he visited Northwestern University working with Prof. Sossina M. Haile as a pre-doctor fellow. He conducts experimental and fundamental investigation on sustainable energy conversion and storage systems including fuel cells, electrolyzers, and metal ion/air batteries.
Yang Gao
Yang Gao received his BS degree in Materials Chemistry from University of Science and Technology of China in 2013, and PhD degree in Mechanical Engineering from The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in 2017. He is now an Assistant Professor in College of Materials Science and Engineering, Hunan University. His current research focuses on the mechanistic understanding into electrochemical catalysis.Hui KongHui Kong received her Bachelor degree from Shandong University, China, and obtained her PhD from the Institute of Engineering Thermophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences under the supervision of Prof. Hongguang Jin and Yong Hao. She joined Prof. Sossina M. Haile's group at Northwestern University as a visiting scholar in 2016. And then she joined Tsinghua University as a Postdoctoral Fellow in Zheng Li's group in 2018. Hui is currently a research associate professor in Beijing Institute of Technology, China. Her research interest is related to solar energy utilization and techno-economic optimization analysis.Francesco CiucciFrancesco Ciucci is an Associate Professor at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. He obtained his PhD from the California Institute of Technology, USA, and did his postdoctoral work at the University of Heidelberg, Germany. Francesco's current research centers on solid-state energy technologies, including solid-oxide fuel cells, electrolyzers, and solid-state batteries, with particular emphasis on the modeling of these systems and the development of new functional materials.
Jongwoo Lim
Jongwoo Lim is an assistant professor from the Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University since 2017. He obtained his PhD degree from the University of California at Berkeley, USA (advisor: Prof. Peidong Yang) in 2014. After that he went to Stanford University working with Prof. William C. Chueh as a postdoctoral researcher. His current research topic is operando analysis of electrochemical systems (electrolyzers, batteries, fuel cells). He has a particular interest in synchrotron-based experiments and multi-length scale analysis using x-ray imaging, spectroscopy and scattering, etc.
1. Introduction
Water electrolysis is considered one of the most promising methods for producing hydrogen due to various advantages including abundant resources, no greenhouse gas emission, and high efficiency.1–4 Moreover, water electrolysis helps mitigate the problematic intermittency of some renewable energies (e.g., solar, wind) by storing the electricity in the form of chemical energy. According to the International Energy Agency, the market share of water electrolysis for hydrogen production will reach about 22% in 2050.5 Depending on the different operation temperatures and electrolytes, water electrolysis can be classified into alkaline water electrolysis (AWE), polymer electrolyte membrane water electrolysis (PEMWE) electrolysis, and solid oxide electrolysis (SOE).6 In contrast with SOE, which requires very high temperatures (about 700–800 °C) to transport charge carriers (i.e., O2− or H+) through the ceramic membrane electrolyte, the other two types of electrolysis with aqueous electrolytes are characterized by significantly lower operation temperatures (below 200 °C). Even though SOE has a higher theoretical efficiency (up to 100%) than AWE (59–70%) and PEMWE (65–82%) electrolysis, its much higher working temperature is detrimental to its operational durability and may cause safety issues.6 Low-temperature water electrolysis and SOE are schematically compared in Fig. 1.6
 Fig. 1  Comprehensive comparison of AWE, PEMWE, and SOE. Reproduced with permission from ref. 6, Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 
For low-temperature water electrolysis, two electrodes are immersed in the aqueous electrolyte and connected to an external circuit. When a suitable voltage is applied between the two electrodes, the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) take place at the anode and cathode, respectively; see eqn (1) and (2). The thermodynamic equilibrium potential of the OER and HER are 1.23 and 0 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE), respectively. To drive water electrolysis, the provided voltage should be high enough to overcome the overpotential of the OER/HER and the Ohmic drop caused by ion conduction in aqueous electrolytes. Anode: 2H2O → 4H+ + O2 + 4e− (acidic) 4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e− (alkaline)(1) Cathode: 2H+ + 2e− → H2 (acidic) 2H2O + 2e− → 2OH− + H2 (alkaline)(2)
The electrodes where the OER and HER take place play critical roles in determining the performance of a water electrolyzer.21 The existence of the triple-phase boundary where solid, aqueous, and gaseous phases meet at the electrode, complicates their physiochemical environment. An ideal electrode should at least have the following properties: (1) a large surface area to increase the density of active sites; (2) a high electronic conductivity to minimize the Ohmic loss; (3) favorable hydrophilicity and wettability to maximize the contact with the electrolyte; (4) high gas permeability to avoid blockage caused by bubbles; (5) excellent stability for long-term operation; and (6) high intrinsic activity toward the OER and HER. Fig. 2 gives the thermodynamically stable phases of many metals at pH = 0 and pH = 14 in the OER (higher than 1.23 V vs. RHE) and HER (below 0 V vs. RHE) potential regions.22 More metals are thermodynamically stable in alkaline electrolytes than in acidic ones at the water electrolysis potentials. In acidic media, the few stable materials are limited to ones based on precious metals, such as Pt and Ir. In contrast, in alkaline solution, many earth-abundant metals such as Ni and Co can be thermodynamically stable. The corrosion of many metals in acidic media significantly limits the choice of electrode materials to some earth-rare and precious-metal-based electrocatalysts, thereby restricting the large-scale application of PEMWE.
 Fig. 2  Chart of the thermodynamically stable phases for various metals at pH = 0 and pH = 14. 
Meanwhile, AWE enables utilizing non-noble-metal electrodes and has been established as the technology closest to large-scale industrial realization.23,24 For the mass adaptation of alkaline water electrolyzers toward hydrogen generation, further improving their conversion efficiency is key. Extensive research attention is now focused on designing novel non-precious-metal electrocatalysts toward more efficient AWE. The efforts and the methods they used have dramatically advanced with the progress of experimental and computational techniques. In situ/operando characterizations, which allow the in-place and real-time monitoring of the local structure/property/performance, provide valuable insights into the dynamic changes of active species and help clarify the catalytic mechanism. Ab initio simulations have also played a critical role in understanding the electronic configuration of catalysts and gaining insight into catalytic activity, and density functional theory (DFT) stands out as one of the most popular approaches with relatively high accuracy and low cost. With in situ/operando characterizations and DFT calculations, significant strides have been made in understanding and developing non-precious catalysts (NPCs) for AWE (see Scheme 1). An in-time summary of the current research status is thus critical. To the best of our knowledge, few reviews have elaborated on combined theoretical computations and in situ/operando experiments for non-precious alkaline water electrocatalysts. To eliminate this gap, this contribution gives a timely and comprehensive review of NPCs for AWE, highlighting the application of in situ/operando characterizations and DFT calculations in their understanding and development. First, the fundamentals of the OER and HER are introduced. Following that, the experimental methods, operating principles, and cell designs of the most popular in situ/operando techniques characterizing AWE electrocatalysts are carefully described. Next, we proceed to carefully discuss the principles, computational methods, and applications of DFT in modeling NPCs and predicting the alkaline OER and HER. After summarizing the state-of-the-art design strategies, the progress of the most extensively investigated OER and HER electrocatalysts for AWE is reviewed. Finally, challenges and perspectives regarding the development of NPCs for AWE are provided. Through this comprehensive review, we aim to help readers learn about the most current research progress, provide them with essential ideas to rationally design non-precious electrocatalysts, and inspire the research community to address the challenges, thereby advancing the wide application of AWE for hydrogen production.
 Scheme 1  Timeline of recent developments of NPCs for AWE. Reproduced from ref. 7–20. Ref. 7 from Wiley, copyright 2011; ref. 8 from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2011; ref. 9 from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013; ref. 10 and11: without the need of permission; ref. 12 and13 from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015; ref. 14 from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2016; ref. 15 from Springer Nature, copyright 2016; ref. 16 and17 from Springer Nature, copyright 2017; ref. 18 from Elsevier, copyright 2018; ref. 19 from Springer Nature, copyright 2019; ref. 20 from Springer Nature, copyright 2020. 
2. Fundamentals of the OER and HER
To be pedagogical and set a low barrier of entry for newcomers in this area, this review first introduces the fundamentals of AWE reactions in some detail. Moreover, understanding and developing electrocatalysts require carefully and accurately evaluating their activity, and hence, some common activity metrics are justified.
2.1. Reaction elemental steps
Both the OER and HER are multi-electron processes and contain multi-step reaction pathways involving many reacting intermediates such as Had, OHad, Oad. The HER in alkaline media can proceed by following the Volmer–Heyrovsky or Volmer–Tafel pathway, as shown in eqn (3)–(5). Volmer step: H2O + e− → Had + OH−(3) Heyrovsky step: Had + H2O + e− → H2 + OH−(4) Tafel step: 2Had → H2(5)
Both pathways involve H2O adsorption, the reduction of the H2O molecule to generate Had and OH−, the adsorption and desorption of OH−, and the formation of H intermediates for hydrogen evolution, as shown in Fig. 3(a). Specifically, through the Volmer step, the hydrogen atom is adsorbed on the active site of the electrocatalyst. In the next step, the adsorbed hydrogen atom is combined with either H2O (Heyrovsky step) or another adsorbed hydrogen atom (Tafel step) to generate H2. Assuming H adsorbs on catalyst surface too weakly, the Volmer substep will be the limit of the overall HER rate. In contrast, too strong binding leads to the desorption (Heyrovsky/Tafel) step-limited reaction rate. The HER rate-limiting step can be assessed from the Tafel slope. Slopes equal to 120, 40, and 30 mV per decade correspond to the Volmer, Heyrovsky, and Tafel reaction limitations, respectively.25
 Fig. 3  Elemental steps for the (a) HER and (b) OER in alkaline electrolytes, where “*” represents the active site. 
In alkaline media, the OER (Fig. 3(b)) can generally follow the pathway below: OH− → OHad + e−(6) OHad + OH− → Oad+ H2O + e−(7) 2Oad → O2(8)or Oad + OH− → OOHad + e−(9) OOHad + OH− → O2 + H2O + e−(10)It should be noted that generating O2 through the Oad intermediate can also involve two approaches: one is combining two OOad (eqn (8)) to produce O2, and the other pathway is to first form OOH (eqn (9)).26
2.2. Activity metrics
In practice, few reactions can happen at the thermodynamic equilibrium potential (1.23 V vs. RHE for the OER or 0 V vs. RHE for the HER). Extra energy must be consumed to overcome the energy barrier and drive electrochemical reactions. Such additional potential in reference to the standard equilibrium potential is called the overpotential (η), which originates from different factors including activation, concentration, and Ohmic loss. The activation overpotential reflects the intrinsic capacity of the electrode material to catalyze electrochemical reactions. Such overpotential varies among different electrode materials and can be decreased by selecting highly active electrocatalysts. The concentration overpotential is caused by the concentration polarization adjacent to the electrode surface, which can be mitigated by stirring the electrolyte solution. The resistance overpotential should be considered carefully when the electrolyte solution is not very conductive or the polarization current is large.27 Such overpotential can be removed by conducting Ohmic drop compensation when calculating the polarization potential. For the HER and OER, the overpotential required to deliver a current density of 10 mA cmgeo−2 (per geometric surface area) is a popular parameter for ranking different catalysts, termed η10mAcmgeo−2. Such current density corresponds to 10% of the solar-to-fuel (STF) conversion efficiency in solar water splitting cells.28 However, η10mAcmgeo−2 is not suitable for reflecting the intrinsic catalytic activity of a water splitting catalyst because its value can be significantly influenced by the catalyst loading.29
The Tafel equation is a simplified form of the Butler–Volmer equation (eqn (11)) when η is much larger than 0 and the contribution from the reverse reaction is negligible; see (11) (12)where j and j0 represent the electrode and exchange current density, respectively; αa and αc are the anodic and cathodic charge transfer coefficients, respectively, and αa + αc = 1; z is the transferred electron number; F is Faraday constant, R represents gas constant, and T stand for absolute temperature. After transforming eqn (12) into the logarithmic form, a linear dependence can be obtained between the current log(j) and η. (13)where the inverse of the term i.e., is the Tafel slope. One can note that the Tafel slope is inversely proportional to the charge transfer coefficient (α). A good catalyst with a high charge transferability necessarily has a small Tafel slope. When deriving the Tafel slope from the linear sweep voltammogram (LSV) curve, special attention should be paid to the potential scanning rate. A slower scanning rate generally results in a more accurate Tafel slope, especially when the catalyst surface is highly capacitive.30
As defined in the Butler–Volmer equation in (11), the exchange current density j0 is derived at the equilibrium (η = 0) condition where the anodic current is equal to the and cathodic current. The value of j0 indicates the inherent charge transfer or interaction between reactants and electrocatalysts, reflecting the intrinsic activity. A large j0 usually suggests an active electrocatalyst. However, at equilibrium conditions, the magnitudes of the cathodic and anodic current are identical, and the net current equals 0. As a result, the exchange current density cannot be measured directly. Its value is usually calculated from the Tafel plot by extrapolating the linear fit toward the corresponding current density on the logarithmic scale at the equilibrium potential.
Another parameter is the turnover frequency (TOF), which calculates the number of moles of O2 or H2 evolved by one mole of active sites per unit time, as described in eqn (14). (14)where NA is the Avogadro constant, n is the number of electrons transferred, and Γ is the surface concentration of active sites. Even though the definition of TOF is simple, it is challenging to precisely determine the number of active sites, especially when more than one element exists in the catalyst or the catalyst is not fully activated. There are several ways to estimate the number of active sites. First, the redox peak in the cyclic voltammogram (CV) can help gain insight into the activated surface concentration of the catalyst.31 The total concentration of the active atoms on the surface can be determined using the average particle size of the catalyst with the Avogadro's number method. Another method assumes the catalyst is in a monolayer. This method works when the catalyst surface is flat and smooth or when the catalyst exhibits a sheet morphology.
The faradaic efficiency describes the degree to which an electrocatalyst utilizes the transferred electrons provided by the external circuit for electrochemical reactions. In terms of the OER and HER, the faradaic efficiency can be calculated as the ratio of practical gas yield vs. the theoretical yield, where the quantity of practically evolved gas can be measured by several different methods. The first one is the conventional water drainage method,32 wherein the generated gases move water from the cylinders to a container, and the corresponding displacement can be used to estimate the volumes of gases. Another method utilizes gas chromatography, and the robustness of this method relies on the repeatability and reproducibility of flow measurements. For the OER, the faradaic efficiency can also be assessed with a rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE). The potential at the disk electrode is swept over the OER potential window, while the potential of Pt ring is set to a specific value to drive the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). The faradaic efficiency of the examined OER catalyst is defined as Iring/(Idisk × N), where Iring and Idisk are the currents at the ring and disc electrode, respectively, and N is the collection efficiency of the Pt ring and can be determined by studying the conventional ferrous/ferric redox couple's response at various rotation rates.
Since the current density normalized by the electrode geometric surface is easily influenced by the catalyst loading, the mass activity with the current normalized by the catalyst loading helps mitigate this issue. Additionally, the catalytic current normalized by the electrochemical surface area (ECSA) or the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of the catalyst is termed the specific activity. Similar to the TOF, the mass and specific activities of an electrocatalyst should be defined or compared at a certain overpotential.
The parameters mentioned above are standard for evaluating the activity of an electrocatalyst. However, each indicator alone cannot adequately demonstrate the property or the capacity of a catalyst. Thus, combining these different activity metrics is recommended to fairly evaluate the catalytic activity. In addition, standardized methods are required to evaluate and compare electrocatalysts. We should note that the testing setup has a crucial effect on the measured catalytic performance. For example, substrates such as glassy carbon, Au, Ni foam (NF), and indium–tin oxide have been demonstrated to yield substantially different activities for the same supported OER catalyst.33 Further, the stability of a modified electrode significantly depends on the ability of the binder to withstand corrosive electrochemical conditions, catalyst ink preparation methods, and drying methods. A frequently used binder, i.e., Nafion, which is a good proton conductor, has insufficient stability in alkaline conditions with increased electrical resistance after long-term operation.34 As a result, Nafion is not recommended for screening electrocatalysts that are highly active in alkaline conditions, wherein other alkali-stable binders may be better. Some fluorinated co- and ter-polymers have been conceived suitable for alkaline conditions.34 Moreover, the iR drop of the electrolyte should be carefully compensated to minimize the errors of calculated overpotentials.27 It is worth noting that the electrolyte pH has significant effects on the activity and stability of electrocatalysts for AWE. When comparing different NPCs, it is mandatory to clarify the electrolyte conditions (e.g., 0.1 M, 1 M, or 6 M KOH). Only with critical assessments of the activity parameters for water splitting electrocatalysis can the performance data be presented with precision and correctness.
2.3. Activity descriptors
For the OER and HER to proceed, many types of species including ions, atoms, or molecules must be adsorbed on the surface of the electrocatalyst. Additionally, the generated product should be desorbed to refresh the surface so that new reactants can bind again on the catalyst surface. As a result, the binding strengths between the electrocatalyst surface and the reactants, reaction intermediates, and products are critical to determining the activation energy of the electrochemical reactions. According to the Sabatier principle, such binding strength should not be too strong or too weak, thus keeping the adsorption and desorption balanced to achieve an optimal activity. Considering HO*, O*, and HOO* as the OER intermediates, previous DFT calculations found that a scaling relationships exist in the free energy diagrams between the binding energies of HO*, HOO*, and O* species on oxide surfaces.35 This means that there is only one free parameter for determining the free energy diagram and describing the OER activity. Using ΔGO* − ΔGOH* as the activity descriptor, a volcano plot has been constructed for the OER for a wide variety of metal oxides, including rutile, perovskite, spinel, rock salt, and bixbyite oxides, as shown in Fig. 4(a).7
 Fig. 4  (a) Dependence of the OER theoretical overpotential on ΔGO* − ΔGOH* for various kinds of transition metal oxides (TMOs), where the theoretical overpotential is defined as:  Reproduced with permission from ref. 7, copyright 2011 Wiley. (b) OER catalytic activity as a function of the eg symmetry electron of the transition metal in perovskite oxides, where the OER activity is defined by the overpotentials at 50 μA cmox−2 of the OER current. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8, copyright 2011 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) HER exchange current densities (log(i0)) on monometallic surfaces plotted as a function of the calculated hydrogen binding energy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9, copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Although the OER activity trend predicted by this descriptor agrees well with many experiments, using this method is not very straightforward. Because the binding strength of the adsorbate is significantly influenced by the electronic structure of the catalyst's surface, the electronic configuration of the catalyst surface can be linked to the OER activity. When it comes to perovskite oxide, the eg orbital occupancy has been proposed as another activity descriptor for the OER activity in an alkaline electrolyte.8 This works because surface transition metal ions are involved in the σ-bonding with a surface-anion adsorbate; therefore, the eg orbital occupancy can substantially influence the binding of oxygen-related intermediate species on the transition metal and thus the OER activity. It was found that the peak OER activity can be achieved with an eg occupancy close to unity (see Fig. 4(b)), and the intrinsic activity of Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ (BSCF) is at least an order of magnitude higher than that of IrO2 in alkaline media.8
For the HER, the overall reaction rate is largely determined by the hydrogen adsorption free energy, namely ΔGH.36 For an active HER catalyst, such binding should be neither too strong nor too weak. As a result, a necessary but insufficient requirement for an active HER catalyst is ΔGH ≈ 0.36 Similar to the HER in acids, a volcano-type relation also exists between ΔGH and the HER exchange current density in alkaline electrolytes; see Fig. 4(c).9 This indicates that the hydrogen binding energy can also serve as a useful descriptor for the HER in a basic medium.
The utilization of the above HER and OER activity descriptors has successfully guided the design of many novel, highly active electrocatalysts. However, when using the above descriptors to predict the activity, several challenges exist: (1) it is difficult to fully elucidate the surface structures for the catalytically active species, which could be different from the bulk structure, especially when cation leaching and surface restructuring happen during water electrolysis.37,38 As a result, the bulk properties of the electrocatalyst may not be suitable for predicting the activity. (2) During water electrolysis, the electronic and atomic structures of the electrocatalyst can change as a function of applied potentials, complicating the determination of its physicochemical properties. For example, with time-resolved X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), BSCF was found to experience a dynamic surface self-reconstruction during the OER, and self-assembled metal oxy(hydroxide) instead of BSCF was determined to be the active layer.39 (3) For the HER in alkaline media, ΔGH ≈ 0 is only a necessary but insufficient condition for highly active HER catalysts. For example, MoS2 has an optimal H binding strength similar to that of Pt. However, its HER activity in an alkaline electrolyte is quite inferior to that of Pt-based electrocatalysts.40 In addition to binding H, the ability to dissociate H2O is also vital in alkaline HER electrolysis.41 (4) The activity descriptor built based on experimental observations is usually limited by the number of samples and may not reflect the actual correlation. With the development of artificial intelligence and machine learning (ML), a larger number of electrocatalysts can be screened and forecasted within a shorter time, which can potentially contribute to the discovery of new activity descriptors in the future.42,43
3. 
        In situ/operando characterizations
“In situ” means “in the original position or place,” and “operando” implies that the experiment is conducted under the operating conditions. Even though ex situ characterization techniques can provide valuable information on the structure, composition, and electronic configuration of electrocatalysts, they cannot reveal the dynamic changes in material properties and intermediate stages. In addition, preparing, handling, and transferring samples for ex situ measurements pose the risk of contamination, relaxation, or irreversible changes in the reacted samples. In contrast, operando techniques can avoid those problems and allow the in situ monitoring of the local structure/property/performance, thus providing important insights into the electrochemical reaction mechanism and identifying the active centers and phases.44 In this section, the most popular in situ/operando characterizations applied in the AWE area are reviewed (Scheme 2), including hard XAS (hXAS), soft XAS (sXAS), ambient-pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (AP-XPS), electrochemical transmission electron microscopy (EC-TEM), electrochemical mass spectrometry, and Raman spectroscopy. The experimental methods, operating principles, and in situ cell designs are carefully described, and some representative examples of their specific applications in AWE are also given.
 Scheme 2  Experimental setup of various in situ/operando techniques for electrocatalysts. 
3.1. Hard XAS
XAS measures the X-ray absorption coefficient on the dependence of the X-ray photon energy below and above the absorption edge of a certain element. The X-ray source is typically a synchrotron, which can provide a full range of X-ray wavelengths. According to the energy range (wavelength) of the probing X-ray source, XAS can be divided into sXAS (<1 keV), hXAS (>5 keV), and tender XAS (1–5 keV). XAS typically contains two regions, i.e., X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS). XANES is typically tested from a few electron-volts below the absorption edge to approximately 30 eV above the edge and is strongly sensitive to the valence state and coordination structure (e.g., octahedral or tetrahedral coordination) of the absorbing atom.45 EXAFS, which extends from approximately 30 eV above the absorption edge to as much as 1000 eV, is used to determine the distances, coordination number, and neighboring species of the absorbing atom.45 For hXAS, the absorption coefficient μ(E) can be measured in two modes, i.e., transmission mode and fluorescence mode, by the following relations: μ(E) = log(I0/I)(15) μ(E) ∝ If/I0(16)where I0 is the intensity of X-rays incident on a sample, I is the intensity transmitted through the sample, and If is the intensity of the emitted fluorescence. The transmission mode measures the intensity difference between the incident and transmitted X-rays, where concentrated and homogeneous samples are beneficial to the signal quality. Meanwhile, the fluorescence mode measures the X-rays emitted from the element, which works well particularly for dilute samples.
With high photon energies and strong penetrating ability, hXAS can run under ambient conditions, making it easy to perform in situ/operando experiments. A typical setup for the operando hXAS test during water electrolysis is schematically illustrated in Fig. 5(a), where electrocatalysts loaded on the carbon cloth (CC) are examined by the commonly used three-electrode cell. A membrane (e.g., Kapton film) covers the backside of the working electrode to prevent the electrolyte from leaking while transmitting the X-rays. The fluorescence mode is used to collect the XAS spectra.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the operando electrochemical cell setup for in situ hXAS test of water electrolysis catalysts, where CE, WE, and RE represent the counter, working, and reference electrodes, respectively; (b) operando Co K-edge XANES spectra and (c) the corresponding k3-weighted FT EXAFS spectra of Co1/PCN recorded at different applied voltages from the open-circuit condition to −0.1 V during the electrocatalytic HER. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19, Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. 

Operando hXAS has frequently been used to track the evolution of the electronic configuration for water splitting electrocatalysts.46–48 Very recently, Wei and coworkers used operando hXAS to identify the dynamic active-site structure of cobalt single-atom catalysts during the alkaline HER.19 They prepared atomically dispersed cobalt catalysts immobilized in the framework of phosphorized carbon nitride (Co1-PCN), which outperformed commercial Pt/C in catalyzing the HER in 1 M KOH. According to the Co K-edge XANES recorded at different potentials (Fig. 5(b)), the absorption edge of the Co1/PCN catalyst is positively shifted to a higher energy, with a broadening of the white line peak during the HER, suggesting that the Co oxidation state increased. In addition, the Fourier transformed (FT) EXAFS detected an obvious low-R shift of the Co–O and/or Co–N coordination from 1.63 Å to 1.56 Å, as shown in Fig. 5(c). The least-squares EXAFS fitting further confirmed such shift corresponded to the formation of high-valence HO–Co1–N2 moiety via the binding between isolated Co1–N4 sites with the hydroxide, which was responsible for its high HER activity.19
3.2. Soft XAS
Unlike hXAS which is a bulk technique giving the average information of both the bulk and surface, soft XAS (sXAS) is sensitive to the surface, with a probing depth of a few nanometers. As a result, sXAS provides a powerful, efficient technique for directly evaluating surface properties for electrocatalysts. For sXAS, the EXAFS part is not considered, and XANES in sXAS is also called near-edge X-ray absorption fine-structure (NEXAFS) spectroscopy. sXAS can be measured in electron yield (EY) and fluorescence yield (FY) modes. Owing to the different penetration lengths of the photoelectrons and fluorescence photons, the electron yield signal mainly conveys information concerning the outmost surface, while the fluorescence yield signal is representative of the relative bulk. One advantage of sXAS over hXAS is that sXAS can examine the electronic configuration of ligand elements, which are pivotal for water electrocatalysts. Typical sXAS signal is collected on the K-edge for low-Z elements (e.g., C, N, and O) and L-edges for first-d block transition metals (e.g., Fe, Co, and Ni). The transition metal L-edges are dominated by dipole-allowed transitions from occupied 2p to unoccupied 3d orbitals, making them suitable for studying the partially unoccupied 3d orbitals. Information such as the oxidation state, spin states, and the interactions between transition metals and ligands (e.g., charge transfer and backbonding) can be obtained. However, in contrast with hXAS carried out at ambient conditions, sXAS requires ultra-high vacuum (UHV) due to the weak penetration of soft X-rays. This UHV requirement imposes a significant challenge in performing in situ sXAS experiments, especially for liquid electrolyte cells. To design in situ liquid cells, it is crucial to prevent the liquid electrolytes from leaking and to separate them from the vacuum region. The experimental setups of the in situ liquid cell for the sXAS test performed in fluorescence and transmission modes are schematically illustrated in Fig. 6(a) and (b), respectively. In both setups, a Si3N4 window separates the liquid from the vacuum region in the chamber where the soft X-rays propagate. The investigated electrocatalyst is coated onto the surface of a metallic substrate (e.g., Au) as a working electrode. For the transmission mode of operando sXAS test, the electrolyte and sample thickness must be sufficiently thin, because a large thickness significantly degrades the transmission signal.49 In contrast, fluorescence mode has the advantage of insensitivity to the sample and electrolyte thicknesses. However, FY spectra in the soft X-ray range may suffer from artifacts such as saturation or self-absorption effects.49
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the in situ liquid cell and experimental setup for sXAS test in (a) fluorescence and (b) transmission modes. In (a), X-ray absorption is detected by collecting X-ray fluorescence on the vacuum side. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50, copyright 2018 Springer Nature. In (b), the two chambers of the XAS cell (He-1 and He-2) are constantly purged with He during the test to remove air/water vapor and maximize the X-ray transmission signal, and the GaAs photodiode measures the X-rays transmitted through the electrolyte and membranes; (c) in situ O K-edge sXAS spectra of electrodeposited Ni–Fe catalyst measured at various applied potentials in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced without the need of permission from ref. 51. 
In a recent study, in situ sXAS of a well-known highly active OER electrocatalyst, i.e., electrodeposited Ni–Fe(OxHy), was measured for the first time.51 The experiment aimed to locate the active species and elucidate the mechanism underlying the high activity of Ni–Fe(OxHy). Fig. 6(c) reveals that when the OER was performed at various potentials in 0.1 M KOH, a pre-peak feature appeared in the O K-edge sXAS of Ni–Fe(OxHy), concurring with the oxidization of Ni. This pre-peak feature implied increased hybridization between O 2p and Ni 3d orbitals, inducing charge transfer from O to Ni and generating electron-deficient oxygen sites. These sites potentially came from undercoordinated μ1-O and μ2-O sites (“edge” or “defect” sites) of the oxyhydroxide, leading to the high OER activity.51
3.3. Ambient pressure XPS
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), also known as electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis (ESCA), provides a quantitative spectroscopic technique to examine the elemental composition and electronic state of a material. Owing to the short inelastic mean free path of photoelectrons, XPS is sensitive to the material surface. Moreover, the use of soft X-rays for XPS usually requires an UHV environment. UHV conditions can be avoided in AP-XPS, in which the measurement can be conducted in the Torr range or above.52 As illustrated in Fig. 7(a), a typical AP-XPS setup is composed of a high-pressure chamber separated from the electron analyzer (remaining in UHV conditions) by a differentially pumped electrostatic lens system and a series of apertures. When the electrochemical cell is coupled with the sample chamber (see the setup in Fig. 7(b)), in situ/operando AP-XPS can be conducted. In situ AP-XPS was recently performed on NiFe thin films during the OER process.53 The O 1s XPS spectra collected at different OER potentials (0.0, 0.3, 0.55, and 0.60 V vs. Ag/AgCl) shown in Fig. 7(c) revealed that increasing the positive potential contributed to a higher O/OH ratio, which was generated by the oxidation of Ni(OH)2 to NiOOH. The Ni and Fe 2p XPS spectra (Fig. 7(d) and (e)) also demonstrated the oxidation of Ni and Fe during the OER. The metallic Fe and Ni moieties in the original NiFe electrocatalysts were oxidized to Fe3+ and Ni2+/3+, respectively. Based on the in situ AP-XPS spectra, the as-prepared NiFe catalyst originally containing Fe and Ni in both metallic and oxidized states underwent oxidation during the OER process.53
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for ambient pressure XPS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the operando AP-XPS setup. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. Normalized (c) O 1s, (d) Ni 2p, and (e) Fe 2p XPS of NiFe thin film catalysts at different OER potentials (vs. Ag/AgCl) in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
X-ray techniques are thus powerful for the in situ/operando characterization of electrocatalysts. It is worth noting that X-rays can be destructive to the analyzed system, particularly some vulnerable polymer materials and reducible transition metal (e.g., Mn) oxides. Moreover, the beam damage effect could be more serious in the presence of evolved gases. As a result, to avoid misinterpretations, eventual beam damage effects should be carefully analyzed when using the above in situ/operando hXAS, sXAS, and AP-XPS to assess electrocatalytic materials.
3.4. Electrochemical transmission electron microscopy
Different from the above X-ray techniques providing information on electronic configurations, in situ EC-TEM enables the direct observation of structural and morphological changes of electrocatalysts in a real electrolyte environment.55 To realize this function, a microfabricated liquid cell with a silicon nitride layer is usually implemented, as illustrated in Fig. 8(a). Silicon nitride serves as both the image window and seal, i.e., it simultaneously encapsulates the liquid electrolyte and transmits high-energy electrons for TEM observations. Such an electrochemical liquid cell with the three-electrode setup is usually integrated onto a microfabricated chip. Many facility manufacturers have developed such analytical chips for TEM holders, such as Protochips, Hummingbird, DENSsolutions, and Zeptools. Fig. 8(b) and (c) show the in situ TEM holder and electrochemical chip fabricated by Protochips.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the liquid cell for in situ TEM. (b) In situ electrochemical TEM holder fabricated by protochips; inset: tip of the holder with an integrated electrochemical cell. (c) In situ disposable chip positioned at the sample holder tip and magnified view of the central area of the chip, showing the working (glassy carbon), counter (Pt), and reference (Pt) electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56, copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (d) In situ EC-TEM of Co3O4 during an OER chronopotentiometry test at 10 mA cm−2 in aqueous 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, with the HAADF-STEM images recorded at 90 s and 145 s as well as their superposition (red: 90 s; blue: 145 s). Reproduced with permission from ref. 56, copyright 2019 American Chemical Society (e) schematic of a popular IL-TEM setup for electrolysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57, copyright 2019 Elsevier. (f) IL-TEM of NiFe nanoparticles deposited on the Au TEM grid before and after the OER. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58, copyright 2018 Springer Nature. 
Very recently, in situ EC-TEM was applied to a highly active OER electrocatalyst, i.e., Co3O4, to gain insight into its structural change under OER conditions.56 The real-time morphological evolution of Co3O4 nanoparticles polarized at 10 mA cm−2 current density was monitored. Throughout the 120 s of the chronopotentiometry test in 0.1 M KOH, the overall area of the Co3O4 agglomerate expanded by 8%, as evidenced by the superposition of STEM images in Fig. 8(d). The persistence of bright areas in the high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) images suggested the dense nanodomains in the bulk were well maintained, and the less-dense solid on the surface indicated the amorphization process. Upon analysis, such an expanded surface region was assigned to amorphous cobalt (oxy)hydroxide, suggesting the in situ surface restructuring of spinel Co3O4 during the course of the OER, and the generated cobalt (oxy)hydroxide might be the real OER active species.56
In addition to surface restructuring, in situ liquid TEM has demonstrated to be effective for exploring the growth of nanostructured catalysts,59 as well as the agglomeration and degradation of nanostructured catalysts during electrolysis.60 Moreover, the development of multifunctional TEM holders can also provide new opportunities for understanding the structure–property relationships for water splitting electrocatalysts. For example, when a less-conductive ceramic membrane is built into the chip, it can generate heat in situ when an electric current is passed through the chip. For in situ EC-TEM with the SiNx-based liquid cell, insufficient lattice resolution and electron beam-induced damage ((i.e., water radiolysis or bubble formation)) are the major challenges that must be solved for its wide applications in research on water electrolysis.61
Another approach that enables us to observe the nanoscale changes before and after electrolysis at the same spot is identical location TEM (IL-TEM), which is typically realized using a special sample holder with tracking markers or numbered TEM grids. This technique can avoid the need for microfabricated chips, and commercial TEM grids are enough to provide conductive, corrosion-resistant supports for the investigated catalysts. Different setups are available for integrating the TEM grids into the electrolysis system. As shown in Fig. 8(e), TEM grids can be connected to an Au wire to pass the catalytic current to the collector. However, fragile TEM grids may be damaged with this method, resulting in the loss of tracked sites. To mitigate this issue, the TEM grids can be fixed with reverse tweezers. Another popular method is to position the TEM grid directly on the top of a rotating disk electrode tip by using a hollow cylindrical cap. Recently, IL-TEM was applied to investigate the stability of NiFe nanoparticles, which were demonstrated to be stable for catalyzing the alkaline OER for over 1000 h.58 With IL-TEM (Fig. 8(f)), no obvious changes in the nanoparticle shape or polycrystalline nature were detected before and after the OER.58 However, it should be noted both the high anodic potential and gas evolution can potentially degrade the typically used carbon-coated TEM grids. In addition, owing to the nature of Au dissolution, additional care should be taken to avoid Au precipitation on the investigated catalysts.
3.5. Electrochemical mass spectrometry
Mass spectrometry is a powerful analytical technique for quantifying the amount of an investigated material. A mass spectrometer generates multiple ions from the sample under investigation, basically by electron ionization. These molecular ions undergo fragmentation and are then separated in the mass spectrometer according to their mass-to-charge ratio. As a result, each ion type is recorded in proportion to its abundance. Electrochemical mass spectrometry combines electrochemical cell experimentation with mass spectrometry, allowing the in situ and time-resolved detection of electrochemical reactants, reaction intermediates, and/or products. Coupling a scanning flow cell (SFC) with an inductively coupled mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) enables the online detection of electrochemically dissolved ions; see the scheme in Fig. 9(a). The dissolved metal species during electrochemical measurements are transported downstream at a controlled flow rate driven by a peristaltic pump and then are introduced into the ICP-MS for analysis. The detected time-resolved signal of dissolved ions can be coordinated with the applied potentiostatic or galvanostatic conditions. To detect volatile or gaseous species formed on the working electrode, other types of electrochemical mass spectrometry are used, particularly on-line electrochemical mass spectrometry (OLEMS) or differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS). In typical OLEMS/DEMS cells, a gas permeable membrane is applied to separate the high vacuum of the mass spectrometer from the electrochemical environment. A classic SFC-OLEMS setup at the Max Planck Institute is shown in Fig. 9(b).
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for the SFC-ICP-MS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65, copyright 2019 Wiley. (b) A classic SFC-OLEMS setup at the Max Planck Institute. Change in the amount of Fe on the Fe-NiOxHy electrode during chronoamperometry measurements for 1 h in (c) KOH electrolyte containing 0.1 ppm 57Fe. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20, copyright 2020 Springer Nature. OLEMS-measured (d) 34O2/32O2 ratios (e) 36O2 signal during the first cycle of an electrochemical OER CV scan, where the OER was driven by 18O isotope-labeled SrCoO3−δ in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 16, copyright 2017 Springer Nature. 
SFC-ICP-MS provides an effective tool for characterizing the dissolution of electrocatalysts, which is an important factor leading to performance degradation. With the time- and potential-resolved dissolution data, the dissolution potentials and dissolution kinetics can be further identified. For example, a recent SFC-ICP-MS study on the benchmark OER catalysts, i.e., Ru/Ir and their oxides, found that the number of dissolved metals during OER LSV scanning followed the order of Ru ≫ Ir > RuO2 ≫ IrO2 in 0.05 M NaOH, and the amounts of dissolved Ru/Ir metals were ∼600–700 times higher than those of their corresponding metal oxides.62 Another example is based on nickel–iron (oxy)hydroxide (NiFeOxHy), which is among the most active OER electrocatalysts63 but suffers from severe corrosion in the alkaline media.64 Very recently, with in situ ICP-MS, Markovic and collaborators found that Fe impurities in the electrolyte helped prevent the OER performance degradation of NiFeOxHy. In a “Fe-free KOH electrolyte,” the OER current density dropped by more than 80% for NiFeOxHy over 1 h, which coincided with an approximately 80% decrease in the amount of Fe in the catalyst. In contrast, the OER activity of NiFeOxHy was well maintained in the electrolyte with Fe concentrations as low as 0.1 ppm, suggesting Fe was the active site for the OER in NiFeOxHy. By coupling the in situ ICP-MS with isotopic labeling, the concomitant dissolution and redeposition of Fe during water electrolysis were further verified.20 In their experiment, the researchers labeled NiFeOxHy with 56Fe and applied it for the OER in a 57Fe-labeled electrolyte. As shown in Fig. 9(c), about 70% of 56Fe in the catalyst was replaced by 57Fe from the electrolyte within only 10 min. The balance between dissolution and redeposition of active sites was critical to form a stable electrocatalyst–electrolyte interface and to further determine the stability of oxygen-evolving catalysts.20
In the field of water electrolysis, OLEMS/DEMS is particularly useful for quantifying the amounts of generated O2/H2 and dissolved electrocatalysts, which are critical to evaluating the performance of investigated catalysts and gaining insight into their catalytic reaction pathway.66,67 In a recent article, OLEMS was applied to monitor in situ the oxygen gases from 18O isotope-labeled perovskite-catalyzed OER.16 In addition to the 32O2 generated by the oxidization of the normal KOH electrolyte, OLEMS also detected 34O2 (16O18O) and 36O2 (18O18O) for some highly covalent perovskite oxides such as SrCoO3−δ, as shown in Fig. 9(d) and (e). Since the perovskite oxide was the only 18O source, the detection of oxygen gases containing 18O suggested that the lattice oxygen of perovskite oxide was also involved in the electrochemical OER process. That was the first direct experimental evidence that lattice oxygen redox chemistry was critical to the OER within the family of perovskite oxide catalysts.16
3.6. Raman spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy is typically used to measure the vibrational, rotational as well as other low-frequency modes of molecules. The principle of Raman spectroscopy relies on the inelastic (or Raman) scattering of single-wavelength light interacting with the material. Monochromatic light from a laser source (visible, near-infrared, or near-ultraviolet) interacts with the molecular vibrations, phonons, or other excitations in the material, thereby generating energy shifts for the incident laser photons. The common wavenumber range used for Raman scattering is from 200 to 4000 cm−1. Because Raman spectroscopy is versatile (applicable to solids, liquid, or powders), easily manageable, contactless, and rapid, it has been extensively used to monitor in situ the intermediates emerging during water electrolysis.68–70 One typical in situ electrochemical/Raman setup is illustrated in Fig. 10(a). The cell is a custom-made round Teflon dish, in which the working electrode is typically a disc sheathed in a Teflon fitting with its top exposed to the electrolyte. The Teflon film covering protects the objective of the Raman spectrometer from the electrolyte solution it is immersed in. During in situ measurements, the backscattered light collected by the water-immersed objective is filtered through an edge (or notch) filter and transferred into a spectrograph/charge-coupled device (CCD) for spectral readout.
 Fig. 10  (a) In situ electrochemical/Raman setup. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. In situ Raman spectra of (b) Ni films at different applied OER potentials (vs. Hg/HgO), (c) NiFe films with different Fe content, and (d) pristine and aged Ni films (0.6 V vs. Hg/HgO in 1 M KOH). Reproduced with permission from ref. 72, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Bell et al. attempted to establish the role of Fe doping in boosting the OER activity of Ni (oxy)hydroxide by recording in situ Raman spectra from NiFe oxide films under different applied potentials.72 Within 0–0.4 V vs. Hg/HgO, two Raman peaks at about 449 and 494 cm−1 assigned to A1g stretching modes of Ni–OH and Ni–O for Ni(OH)2, appeared, as shown in Fig. 10(b). At higher potentials than 0.47 V vs. Hg/HgO, the Ni(OH)2 species transformed into NiOOH, shifting the Raman peaks to ∼474 cm−1 (eg bending vibration of Ni–O in NiOOH) and 554 cm−1 (the A1g stretching vibration of Ni–O in NiOOH). Additionally, the relative intensities between the two characteristic 474 and 554 cm−1 bands for NiOOH decreased with the increase in the Fe doping content (Fig. 10(c)), suggesting that the Ni–O bonding changed. Interestingly, aging the Ni film resulted in a similar relative intensity change and an increased OER activity (Fig. 10(d)) as Fe doping. Consequently, the authors proposed that Ni in NiFe films is the active site for the OER.72 In contrast to the above hXAS, sXAS, AP-XPS which typically requires synchrotron-based light sources, and liquid TEM that needs expensive sample holders, Raman spectroscopy offers a powerful approach to characterize the electronic configuration of NPCs with better accessibility. However, there still exists tremendous challenges to interpret the Raman band positions and intensities. For better understanding of Raman spectroscopy, computational models and theoretical calculations are helpful.

In situ/operando characterization techniques have significantly contributed to the understanding of dynamic catalyst change, the clarification of catalytic mechanism, and identification of active sites, by allowing the in-place and real-time monitoring of the local structure, properties, and performance. The pros and cons of the above-introduced operando techniques are summarized in Table 1. However, the experimental setups and cell configurations are different among various in situ/operando techniques, thus failing to provide a comprehensive overview of the dynamic changes in electrocatalysts during water electrolysis. For example, the selective observation of the intermediates with different in situ techniques has revealed the divergent roles of Ni and Fe in NiFe-based OER electrocatalysts.44 Further work can continuously optimize these in situ techniques to increase their resolution and sensitivity. Researchers should pay the careful attention to understanding the electrochemical environment of in situ setup. Particularly, electrical resistance of electrode and mass transport in electrolyte can be uncontrollably varied for the customized in situ cells, and thus must be checked and calibrated In addition, monitoring the evolution of electronic configuration, lattice structure, and morphology simultaneously during water electrolysis can improve the determination of active species. This can be achieved by combining multiple in situ analyses in the same setup, e.g., in situ XAS and Raman spectroscopy in one operando cell. More than the catalytic mechanism and active sites, in situ techniques are also quite useful for clarifying the degradation mechanism of electrocatalysts during long-term water electrolysis operation, during which the morphology, composition, and crystal structure change along with variations in the active centers. Applying the above in situ/operando platforms to HER NPCs has not as actively attempted as to OER NPCs. Future opportunities can be found to utilize the above techniques to access the reaction pathway, phase transformation and degradation mechanism of various NPCs for HER. Regarding the OER, after identifying the active configurations with the above in situ/operando techniques, further controlling them precisely to develop higher-performance NPCs awaits future efforts.
Table 1 Summary of the pros and cons for operando techniques




Techniques
Spectroscopy
Electron microscopy
Mass spectroscopy


Hard XAS
Soft XAS
AP-XPS
Raman
IL-TEM
EC-TEM
ICP-MS
DEMS (OLEMS)




Advantages
High photon energy, strong penetration, easy operando setup
Surface/interfacial information, probe of light elements
Operational environment, probe of low Z element; gas product surface sensitive
Versatile application, probe electronic configuration
Direct observation easy process
Direct observation of structural change
Quantification of leached transition metal, stability evaluation
On-line detection of reaction products/adsorbates, kinetics evaluation


Disadvantages
Beam damage, element limitation, low accessibility
Weak penetration, UHV requirement, beam damage, hard operando setup
Weak penetration, low accessibility.
Interpretation of band position, low spatial resolution, unclear probing depth
Carbon film corrosion, Au dissolution and precipitation
High-cost sample holder, microfabrication requirement
Inability to chemical state of the dissolved elements
Hard quantification, limited to volatile products


OER/HER examples

19


50 and 51


53


72


58 and 60


56 and 60


20, 62 and 65


16, 63 and 67





4. Density functional theory simulations
4.1. Fundamental principles

Ab initio simulations, including Hartree–Fock, post-Hartree–Fock, and multi-reference methods, can be used to screen potential candidates, elucidate reaction mechanisms, and optimize catalysts. Among these methods, DFT has been widely applied to study electrochemical water splitting in alkaline solutions, due to its relatively low computational cost and high accuracy. Generally, ab initio calculations are used to obtain the electronic configurations of a collection of atoms from the Schrodinger equation (namely first-principle calculation): Ĥψ = Eψ(17)where Ĥ is the Hamiltonian operator, ψ is the eigenstate, and E is the associated eigenvalue of the energy. The Hamiltonian operator could be further expanded as: Ĥ =  +  + Û(18)where , , and Û represent the kinetic, potential, and Coulomb electronic interactions. Following the Hohenberg–Kohn theorems, the ground-state energy E can be expressed as a function of the electron density function n(r), which reduces the computational difficulty and determines the name of the DFT. With the Kohn–Sham theory, the ground state energy can be written as: E[n] = Ts[n] + Vext[n] + UH[n] + EXC[n](19)where Ts, Vext and UH are the functionals for the kinetic, external potential, and Coulomb interaction energies with known and simplified expressions, and EXC is the exchange–correlation energy functional. Therefore, the main problem is specifying the exchange–correlation functional. While the exact form of the exchange–correlation functional is unknown, several approximations have been derived. Starting from the uniform electron gas approximation, the local density approximation (LDA) has been proposed,73 followed by the generalized gradient approximation (GGA). Several GGA functionals are available for calculations, including the Becke–Lee–Yang–Parr (BLYP, usually used in chemistry) and the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE, usually used in solid-state physics) functionals.74,75 Meta-GGA functionals and hybrid functionals have also been developed and usually (but not always) lead to higher accuracy at a higher computational cost.76,77 Nevertheless, these exchange–correlation functionals generally cannot describe the nonlocal electron correlations for van der Waals (vdW) interactions. These systems require a correction to the conventional Kohn–Sham energy, such as the DFT-D2 or DFT-D3 method.78,79 In addition, bandgaps computed with conventional exchange–correlation functionals are usually underestimated, e.g., some semiconductors can be misunderstood to be metallic as predicted by the density of states (DOS), especially for catalysts containing 3d and 4f electrons, wherein strongly correlated electronic interactions exist.80 To solve this problem, on-site correction with an additional Hubbard-like term for the Coulomb interactions has been applied, known as the DFT+U method (e.g., LDA+U and GGA+U). Note that the calculation results are highly dependent on the Hubbard-U parameter, which is usually obtained semi-empirically.
To attain a numerical solution for eqn (19), a basis set is needed, and plane waves are usually used to ensure periodicity. Considering that the chemical properties are mostly determined by the valence electrons rather than the core electrons, pseudopotential approximation can be applied, wherein the overall ionic potential is replaced with a soft effective potential that includes the interactions between the nucleus and core electrons. The selection of pseudopotentials will influence the computational results, and methods without the pseudopotential approximation (e.g., WIEN2k) can usually give higher accuracy but with an increased computational cost.81
DFT provides information about the energy, structure, and electronic configurations of a given set of atoms (or molecules) with relatively lower computational cost and higher accuracy than other ab initio calculations. Therefore, DFT has been adopted as a standard technique for physics, chemistry, and materials science. In this chapter, we will examine some important results of DFT calculations, which have been widely applied for electrochemical water splitting in alkaline solutions, including Gibbs free energy diagrams, DOS, band structures, charge analysis, etc. We will show what insights can be obtained from these results, how they can be used to explain the experimental results or predict new catalysts, and what their prospects are with the help of advanced techniques such as ML.
4.2. Gibbs free energy diagram
One of the most commonly used activity indicators for electrochemical catalysis is the Gibbs free energy diagram, which gives the relative energy for each elementary step during the catalytic reaction. The activation energy barrier from one step to the next is directly related to the thermodynamics of the reaction and determines the corresponding overpotential. To calculate the Gibbs free energy diagram and consider the effect of applied potentials, the computational hydrogen electrode (CHE) developed by the Nørskov group is adopted.82 The zero-reference potential is defined as 0 V vs. RHE with the H2 pressure of 1 atm, where the protons and electrons are in equilibrium with hydrogen molecules. In other words: (20)where GH+, Ge− and GH2 are the Gibbs free energies of a proton, electron, and hydrogen molecule, respectively. When an external potential (U) is applied to the system, the Gibbs free energy of an electron is shifted by −eU and becomes: (21)
This allows us to replace the difficult-to-calculate Gibbs free energies of the proton and electron with the easy-to-calculate hydrogen molecule at different applied potentials. In alkaline solutions, we can use the water dissociation equilibrium to obtain the Gibbs free energy for hydroxide: GH+ + GOH− = GH2O(22)
With the CHE model and conversion of the Gibbs free energy, we can calculate the Gibbs free energy diagram for electrochemical catalysis. We first discuss the OER process in an alkaline solution, which is widely considered to proceed through four-electron reaction pathways, as stated in Section 2.1. Note that other mechanisms may also exist, e.g., one-electron oxidation prior to O–O bond formation may occur for very active OER complexes, which lowers the overall energy barriers.83
The Gibbs free energy change (ΔG) for each step is calculated as: ΔG = ΔE + ΔZPE − TΔS + ΔFsol + eU = ΔG0 + eU(23)where ΔE is the change in the DFT-calculated energies between the products and reactants, ΔZPE is the change of zero-point energy, T is the temperature, and ΔS is the entropy change. ΔFsol is the change of solvation energy which is usually (but not always) adopted when molecules or solid surfaces in solvent media are involved. It tries to approximate the effect of the solvent with different models and functionals.84,85 ΔG0 is the Gibbs free energy change at 0 V vs. RHE. ZPE can be derived from the vibrational frequency calculated with the following formula by DFT, where h is the Planck constant, and ν is the calculated vibrational frequency:82 (24)
The TΔS values of the chemically stable reactants can be retrieved from previous reports,86 while the entropy for these intermediates can be calculated with the harmonic approximation after obtaining the vibrational frequencies νi for all the degrees of freedoms, where kB is the Boltzmann constant:87 (25)With the ΔG of each step obtained as a function of the applied potential, the overpotential (η) is defined as the minimum potential U required for all four reactions to be exothermic (U|ΔGi=0) minus the equilibrium potential (Ueq): (26)
The Gibbs free energy diagram has been widely applied to compare the intrinsic activity of different catalysts. Fig. 11(a)–(d) shows an example of using Gibbs free energy diagram to evaluate the OER activity of differently oriented LaCoO3 (LCO) thin films. The binding energies for the reaction intermediates intrinsically vary for different lattice orientations and terminations, as revealed by the calculated energy diagrams. LCO (100) exhibits a lower potential than LCO(110) and LCO(111), indicating its better OER activity.88 The adsorption energies of the reaction intermediates are highly dependent on the structures, compositions, and defects. In particular, the partial coverage of S in MoS2 and the unsaturation of Co sites in ZIF-67 could change the chemical environment near the active sites, leading to the varied activity.89,90 The defects and dopants can also act as active sites for the adsorption of intermediates, resulting in completely different energy diagrams. Calculations have suggested that Sr and Fe doping enhances the OER activity of PrBaCo2O5+δ,91 Co doping into FeOOH could reduce the energy barrier,92 and Ni vacancies in BaNiO3 promote the OER kinetics.93 These results are consistent with experiments and provide important references for the design and prediction of catalysts and their behavior.
 Fig. 11  Reaction mechanism and DFT calculation of adsorption free energy. (a) Reaction mechanism for the OER. The OER free-energy diagrams for LCO (b) (100) films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88, copyright 2017 Elsevier. (c) Volcano plot of the OER overpotentials vs. ΔGO* − ΔGOH*. Each dot represents one doped carbon material. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94, copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (d) Two-dimensional map of the OER overpotentials concerning ΔGO* − ΔGOH* and ΔGOH*. Each dot represents one oxyhydroxide or oxide. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 copyright 2016 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Considering the scaling correlation between ΔGOH* and ΔGOOH* as found for a variety of catalysts, ΔGO* − ΔGOH* can be used as an indicator for the OER activity with a volcano plot, as shown in Fig. 11(c), where the peak activity is achieved when ΔGO* − ΔGOH* ≈ 1.6 eV.94 Considering ΔGOH*, a 2D map is usually used, as shown in Fig. 11(d), to derive the theoretical overpotentials.14 As metal oxide catalysts are usually subject to overly strong oxygen adsorption, which makes the reaction kinetics sluggish, ΔGO* has also been used as the sole OER indicator, where a smaller ΔGO* suggested better OER activity, as adopted for NiFe2O4/FeNi2S4 heterostructure nanosheets.95 Meanwhile, a stronger (more negative) ΔGOH* was concluded to accelerate the OER process for MoS2/Ni3S2 heterostructures.96 These indicators provide an efficient way to predict the activity for a series of catalysts with reduced computational cost, but the accuracy of these correlations should also be carefully checked.
The Gibbs free energy diagram of the HER is similar to (but simpler than) that of the OER because it involves fewer reaction substeps. In acidic solutions, the overall reaction rate is determined by the hydrogen adsorption energy ΔGH*. The H binding should be neither too strong nor too weak to favor both adsorption and desorption (known as the Sabatier principle), and the optimal ΔGH* should be close to zero.36 As a result, a volcano-type relation has been established between ΔGH* and the HER exchange current density in acidic solutions. In alkaline electrolytes, a similar volcano-type relationship has been observed, suggesting that the hydrogen binding energy remains a critical factor governing the HER activity in basic media.9 As a result, ΔGH* has been widely used as the sole indicator in alkaline solutions.97–100 One example is provided in Fig. 12(a), which shows the HER free energy diagram calculated over different Ni3S2 lattice planes.97
 Fig. 12  (a) Calculated free energy diagram of the HER over differently oriented Ni3S2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Typical free energy diagram for the HER at the Ni(OH)2/MoS2 interface. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2017 Elsevier. Standard free energy diagram for the (c) Volmer–Heyrovsky route and (d) Volmer–Tafel route on Pt(111). Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
To better understand the HER process in alkaline media, the Gibbs free energy for each intermediate during the HER can be calculated using a similar method to that for the OER. In the Volmer step, the adsorption of water molecule must be considered, and ΔGH2O* must be calculated. For MoS2, the ΔGH* was calculated to be −0.33 eV, a value relatively close to zero, suggesting a potentially high HER activity in acid solution. Meanwhile, it had a very high ΔGH2O* of up to 1.17 eV, which significantly hindered the dissociation of water to the H* intermediate and led to sluggish HER kinetics in alkaline solution. Notably, for the Ni(OH)2/MoS2 interface, the ΔGH2O* was decreased to 0.05 eV, as shown in Fig. 12(b), indicating the Ni(OH)2 effectively cleaved HO–H bonds. By hybridizing with Ni(OH)2, ΔGH* was optimized to be −0.06 eV, favoring the alkaline HER activity.101 We note that the Volmer step is sometimes considered an energy barrier rather than an actual transition step in the free energy diagram. When the energy barrier of H2O dissociation is negative or relatively small in such cases, ΔGH* may still be considered the sole descriptor for the HER activity.103
Aside from the Volmer step, energy barriers also exist for the Heyrovsky and Tafel steps, as shown in the free energy diagrams in Fig. 12(c) and (d).102 Nevertheless, owing to the limited knowledge on thermodynamic hydrogen adsorption, the kinetics of water dissociation, and both potential and pH dependency, the influence of these energy barriers toward the HER in alkaline solutions remains unclear, and further studies are still needed.104 For the OER catalysis of IrO2 in alkaline solution, DFT calculations with implicit solvation at constant potentials revealed the potential-dependent surface adsorption species, leading to the two linear regions of Tafel plot. As the overpotential increases, the dominant surface termination evolves from hydroxy to oxo. As a result, the reaction undergoes different microkinetics with different energy barriers, and the Tafel slope increased from 47 mV dec−1 to 240 mV dec−1.105 Recent quantum mechanics study with explicit considerations of solvent and applied voltages also found the pH-dependent water adsorption on noble metal surface. As the pH increases, the electrode tends to repel water, which in turn increases the hydrogen binding strength. Noted that the traditional calculation of ΔGH* is independent of pH, This finding explains the slower HER kinetics in alkaline solution.106
4.3. Density of states and band structure
The DOS gives the density of the occupied electronic energy levels and is usually derived from a non-self-consistent calculation after structural optimization and static calculation. The DOS acts as a semi-quantitative indicator for the electronic conductivity of catalysts, especially for catalysts with similar compositions and structures. The smaller bandgap between the valence and conduction bands and the higher DOS near the Fermi level suggest a higher concentration of charge carriers, favoring a higher electronic conductivity. Fig. 13(a) gives a straightforward example of applying the DOS to study AWE. Compared with Co3O4, the Co-defected Co3−xO4 showed a higher DOS for the occupied states from ∼0.50 eV above the Fermi level and a smaller energy gap, which are beneficial to the charge carrier transport. These results helped explain the higher OER activity of the Co-defected Co3−xO4.107 The DOS of catalysts can be tuned via several approaches. When O vacancies were introduced into NiO, new electronic states emerged near the Fermi level, resulting in higher electronic conductivity.108 Highly active perovskites for the HER were screened, showing that the bandgap of RBaCo2O6−x decreased as the valence state of Co increased.109 The grain boundaries in LaCoO3 and LaMnO3 with symmetry-broken atom configurations also showed a much higher DOS near the Fermi level, yielding much better OER activity.110
 Fig. 13  (a) Total and projected DOS for Co3O4 and the Co-defected Co3−xO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic rigid band diagrams of LaCoO3 and SrCoO3. Reproduced with permission.16 Copyright 2017 Springer Nature. (c) DFT model of La0.5Sr1.5NiO4. (d) Average spin-polarized PDOS for Ni-eg (gray), Fe-eg (blue) and O-2p (red). Reproduced without the need of permission from ref. 119. 
The total DOS (TDOS) can be further deconvoluted into the projected DOS (PDOS) of each electronic orbital. The PDOS reflects the electronic band structures of different elements, which are highly related to the electrochemical properties of the catalysts. The well-established d-band model developed by Hammer and Nørskov demonstrates that the binding energy of reaction intermediate (mostly for HER and ORR) on a metal or metal-containing surface is highly dependent on the d-band center (εd, referred to the Fermi level) of the metal.111,112 For example, Pt(111) surface shows the most favorable εd for HER, leading to the highest activity. The εd could also be tuned with strain or ligand effects. By imposing Pd monolayer on another layer of metals with different lattice parameters could introduce compressive or tensile strains, resulting in shifted εd and varied HER activity.113,114 Recent studies have looked into the band structures for transition metal oxides (TMOs). A negative O p-band center closer to the Fermi level has been suggested to boost the intrinsic OER activity, while further lifting it decreased stability.115 The O p-band center was also strongly correlated with the charge transfer energy for semi-metallic oxides, which played an important role in the OER process.116 Further study showed that a smaller gap between the metal-3d and O-2p band centers was thermodynamically favorable for the oxidation of lattice oxygen, as shown in Fig. 13(b).16 Generally, an O-2p band center closer to the Fermi level and a higher degree of covalency between metals and oxygen (usually represented by the overlapping between the metal-3d and oxygen-2p bands) are beneficial to the OER process. These indicators have been validated by experiments and used for material design and development.117,118 Meanwhile, the band structures of catalysts can be fine-tuned by introducing defects and dopants. The substitution of Ni with less electronegative Fe in La0.5Sr1.5Ni1−xFexO4±δ Ruddlesden–Popper oxides gradually changed the PDOS for Ni 3d, Fe 3d, and O 2p near the Fermi level, as shown in Fig. 13(c) and (d), and the triple overlapping substantially enhanced the OER activity.119 Computational studies showed that oxygen vacancies in PrBa0.5Sr0.5Co1.5Fe0.5O5+δ lowered the O 2p band center and decreased the OER activity,120 while Fe doping in LaNiO3 with oxygen-octahedron distortion increased the electronic states of the Fe-3d band near the Fermi level and improved the OER activity.121 The DOS and band structures are usually calculated as bulk configurations, while for electrochemical catalysis, the local environment near the active sites, surface–bulk interactions, and the geometry of the catalysts must be considered, and experimental data may be needed to calibrate the calculations.
4.4. Charge distribution analysis
The charge density (ρ) describes the spatial distribution of the electron density in the catalyst structure and is highly correlated with the formation of active sites and adsorption of reaction species during electrocatalytic reactions. In particular, when new bonds, interfaces, or heterojunctions form, the electronic interactions and redistributions can be studied through the charge density difference Δρ (also called the deformation charge density) between the original and the newly formed structure: Δρ = ρAB − ρA − ρB(27)where ρAB, ρA, and ρB are the charge densities of the hybrid AB, separated part A, and separated part B, and the atom positions are fixed to be the same.
The electronic distribution on each atom can be studied with the Bader charge analysis.122 The total electronic charge of the atom is defined as the charge density within the zero flux surface (namely, the Bader volume). One should note that the absolute value of the calculated charge is usually smaller than and not comparable to the experimental one. Fig. 14(a) gives an example of the charge density difference at a Co–Ni3N heterojunction, where Ni and Co cations near the interface gained and lost electrons, respectively. The Bader charge analysis in Fig. 14(b) shows that the average valence charge of Co increased with the decreasing distance from the interface, and the average valence charge of Ni decreased. The additional electrons on Ni stabilized the H adsorbed on Ni3N, leading to the high activity of the heterojunction.123 Besides heterointerfaces, introducing defects and dopants is also a common method for tuning the charge density and optimizing the catalytic activity.124Fig. 14(c) shows the charge density difference between MnO2 and Co-doped MnO2 with oxygen vacancies. The charge density was more delocalized on the latter, demonstrating an increased electronegativity, which was beneficial for the OER activity.125
 Fig. 14  (a) Co and Ni3N interface structure with the charge density difference displayed on the right, where yellow and cyan represent electron accumulation and depletion, respectively. (b) Bader charge analysis of Co and Ni near the interface and in bulk Co and Ni3N. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123, copyright 2018 Wiley. (c) Charge density distribution difference between MnO2 and Co-doped MnO2 with oxygen vacancies, where yellow and blue spheres represent positive and negative charges, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125, copyright 2018 Elsevier. (d) Bader charge of Co and H in adsorbed HO* on the surface of pristine and Mo doped β-CoOOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126, copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
In addition to the electronic configuration of catalysts, Bader charge analysis also helps understand the adsorption of intermediates during the electrochemical HER and OER.127 When Al was doped into CoP, calculations showed that Co obtained electrons from Al, which weakened the Co–H bond and optimized the ΔGH* for the HER.128 For Mo-doped CoOOH, the Bader charges of surface Co and H in OH* both decreased, as shown in Fig. 14(d). The charge modifications suggested that electrons transferred from Mo to Co and further to the H in OH*, thereby facilitating the deprotonation process during the OER.126 Because DFT obtains material properties based on the functional relationship to the electronic density, it is intrinsically efficient for analyzing the charge distribution. Different visualization and quantization methods such as the electron localization function and Mulliken population analysis may also be adopted for specific cases.129,130
4.5. Catalysts evaluation and prediction
The calculated Gibbs free energy diagram, DOS, band structure, and charge distribution are all effective indicators for evaluating catalysts and predicting their behavior, as discussed above, while additional indicators have also been reported. The bond length between the active site and the reactive species could be used as an indicator for the adsorption strength. Amine-functionalized phosphorene exhibited shorter P–O bonds than the pristine one, suggesting enhanced OH adsorption leading to increased OER activity.131 Moreover, other indicators could also be derived by fitting the DFT results with physicochemical parameters. In a computational work toward developing single-atom electrocatalysts, the authors carefully scanned 112 models with different transition metal centers and coordination environments and calculated their adsorption energies for OER intermediates. A universal descriptor φ was defined as follows: (28)where θd is the number of d-electrons for the metal element; EM, EN, EC, and EO are the electronegativities of the transition metal center, N, C, and O, respectively; nN and nC are the numbers of neighbor N and C atoms; and α is the correction coefficients. All these parameters ware obtained from the structure of the catalysts without calculations. A strong linear relationship between φ and the calculated ΔGOH* was found, as shown in Fig. 15(a). A volcano relationship between φ and the onset potential for the OER was also observed, and the optimized catalyst was predicted to be Co–pyrrole–N4.132
 Fig. 15  (a) Linear relationship between the proposed descriptor φ and the calculated ΔGOH* for different single-atom catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132, copyright 2018 Springer Nature. (b) Minimum energy pathway for Ni diffusion from the stable adsorption site to a neighboring site in Ni@C9N4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141, copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Bulk phase diagram of nickel phosphides. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143, copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Valence states of Zn, Fe, and Co in oxygen-excess ZnFexCo2−xO4 for different x values. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146, copyright 2018 Wiley. 
The linear scaling relationships (LSRs) and volcano plots provide efficient references for the design of highly active and selective catalysts from DFT calculations. Nevertheless, the peaks of the volcanoes may still be insufficient for practical applications. Pressures exist to circumvent the LSRs and go beyond the volcanoes.133,134 Geometric and electronic tuning turn out to be two effective way to break the LSRs.135,136 For OER catalysis, the LSRs among ΔGO*, ΔGOH* and ΔGOOH* could be decoupled by the stabilization of OOH* over OH* and the O–O direct coupling in the absence of OOH*.137 For example, Calculations on CaCu3Fe4O12 suggested the direct formation of O–O bond between the neighboring O connected to the nearest Fe. The absence of OOH* during the OER process broke the LSRs and led to the superior specific activities.138 DFT study on NiN4C4 single-atom catalyst found that O* and OH* preferred to adsorb on C, while OOH* was favorably adsorbed on Ni. The introduction of second adsorption site of C broke the LSRs and resulted in the exceptional intrinsic activity.139
In addition to these activity indicators, DFT calculations also contribute to assessing the stability of the catalysts via the atomic diffusion barrier, phase diagram, defect formation energy, etc. For a certain atom to diffuse from one site to another through the most energetically favorable pathway, the highest energy barrier that must be overcome is defined as the diffusion barrier. The value of this diffusion barrier represents the relative stability and mobility of the atom, and it is usually calculated using the climbing image nudged elastic band (CINEB) method.140Fig. 15(b) depicts the pathway for an adsorbed Ni atom on a monolayer of C9N4 to diffuse to a neighboring site. A high energy barrier of 2.91 eV was calculated, inhibiting Ni diffusion and suggesting the high stability of single-atom catalysts.141 The diffusion barrier also provides insights into the atomic redistribution during reactions. In CoO, the diffusion activation barrier of S was calculated to be 5.71 eV, much larger than that of Co (1.14 eV). The much faster Co diffusion kinetics than those of S resulted in the expansion of nanoparticle voids during the transformation from CoO to Co3S4 using sulfidation reagent, known as the Kirkendall effect.142
The phase diagram evaluates the thermodynamic stability of different structural configurations. A typical phase diagram calculates the formation energies of different compositions (either bulk or surface) and plots them as a function of chemical potentials of each component, as shown in Fig. 15(c). Each line here satisfied an equation: ΔGNixPy = xΔμNi + yΔμP. Ni3P stood out as the most stable composition among different Ni–P compounds at relatively low chemical potentials, and further calculations determined that the P-rich (110) facet of Ni3P was the most stable. Combined with its relatively low ΔGH*, the P-rich Ni3P(110) facet was considered the most active species for HER catalysis on the surface of Ni3P.143 In particular, the phase diagram plotted as a function of external potential U and pH is named the Pourbaix diagram, which gives the applicable conditions of a certain electrochemical catalyst.144,145
The defect formation energy (or enthalpy) describes the energy required to introduce a certain defect into an ideal crystal. It is usually calculated as the energy difference between the defect-free crystal and the defective one, plus the chemical potentials of the defects and electrons when involved. Since defect engineering plays an important role in catalyst optimization,147,148 the relative stability of different defects must be considered. As a highly active OER catalyst, the oxygen-excess spinel ZnCo2O4 may either have interstitial oxygen or Zn vacancies. DFT calculations revealed a higher formation enthalpy for the former one, suggesting that Zn vacancies were thermodynamically favorable. In addition, when Fe was substituted into the lattice, the formation enthalpies further decreased, suggesting that the incorporation of Fe promoted defect formation in the spinel lattice. The Zn vacancies were expected to attract electrons away from Co, which would increase the Co valence state, as shown in Fig. 15(d), thus contributing to the charge transfer during OER catalysis.146
The phase transformation and defects formation may also be a dynamic process during operation, which result in the degradation of the catalysts and reduced activity and stability.149 Such degradations are mostly characterized with in situ and operando experiments, while theoretical calculations could also provide valuable information. The Pourbaix diagrams at working potentials and defects formation energies in specific solvents help to understand the degradation mechanisms. For example, combined experimental and computational studies on Pt degradation in aqueous environments showed that the dissolution is driven by a synergy between potential-induced oxide formation and thermodynamic corrosion of Pt by Cl−, leading to the continuous degradation during OER catalysis.150 DFT studies on NiFe and CoFe layered double hydroxides also revealed the transition from α-phases to activated γ-phases and the Mars van Krevelen mechanism during OER.151
4.6. Prospects and machine learning
DFT calculations have played a significant role in designing catalysts and explaining the experimental results for alkaline water splitting, but certain limitations exist. They involve many approximations, and the exchange–correlation functionals are still not accurate enough.152 Additional tests are usually needed to determine the proper energy functionals and approximations. The highly correlated systems, van der Waals forces, time-dependent dynamics, and properties at excited states or high temperatures are hard to deal with. In particular, DFT calculations are typically limited to systems with a few thousand atoms and time scales of a few picoseconds. For large systems, continuum scales, and liquids, the computational costs are usually too high. The calculations are also too intensive for disordered structures such as partial occupancies and vacancies. Future opportunities lie in incorporating more physical parameters to expand the models, building databases and databanks (i.e., Materials Project),153 and developing new codes and computational techniques. For example, advanced quantum mechanics methods have been adopted to handle the localized unpaired spins, solve the problem of inconsistent U values in the DFT+U method, and further explore the reaction kinetics. With the help of the hybrid DFT and grand canonical quantum mechanics, scientists were able to identify two key steps including the formation of an active O radical species and the subsequent O–O coupling during the OER on NiOOH, which delivered the optimal performance.154 The random phase approximation (RPA) is another computational method which obtains the correlation energy from the linear density response function with exact exchange. It is less effective than conventional DFT but more effective than most wave function-based methods including Hartree–Fock and post-Hartree–Fock.155 In particular, RPA was found to be much more accurate than DFT at determining the surface and adsorption energies of transition metals.156 Meanwhile, the high computational cost of DFT calculation can be solved with the help of the recent development of advanced materials informatics, in particular, ML. Generally, ML techniques extract new knowledge or make fast predictions out of existing materials data, either from experiments or higher-precision calculations. In a standard ML workflow, a matrix of input features (i.e., the known or calculated structural and electronic properties) is constructed. A learning algorithm (i.e., a neural network, decision tree, kernel-based regression) can be used to find a function that relates the input matrix to the target properties such as the binding energies and overpotentials, as well as other activity and stability descriptors. Note that the physical meaning is usually limited, and the overfitting problem should be carefully noted.
ML has been widely applied in chemistry and materials science, and here, we briefly introduce how it benefited corresponding studies. Benchmark studies showed that ML could predict the molecular properties with higher accuracy than DFT at the B3LYP level based on the database with ∼131k molecules, and the computational time was reduced from multiple days to minutes.160 ML could also help predict chemical reactions, which are typically hard to deal with for traditional DFT calculations. For example, a surrogate model using the Gaussian process was constructed to predict the reaction step of syngas on Rh(111),161 and a Bayesian statistical learning model based on the local description of chemical environments was built to study the surface reconstruction of Si during chemical reactions.162 Crystal structures could be predicted by ML with relatively good accuracy and precision, where the initial structures for DFT calculations were no longer required.163 In particular, as branches of ML, generative adversarial network (GAN) and reinforcement learning (RL) have exhibited great potential when combined with theoretical calculations.164 Simply put, GAN trains a generative model that captures the distribution of data and a discriminative model that estimates the probability of the data coming from the training set or the generative model. Models based on objective-reinforced GAN (ORGAN) have proved to successfully generate new organic molecules from scratch.165 Meanwhile, RL is a dynamic process that learns from the interaction with the environments, and it has been employed to optimize chemical reactions by continuously modifying the experimental conditions and improving the results.166 Considering their similar design principles, these methods can be easily adopted or transplanted to the field of water splitting in alkaline solutions.
In a typical DFT screening of electrochemical catalysts toward water splitting, calculations of all the active sites, orientations, terminations, and adsorbates could be extremely time-consuming. Thankfully, the application of ML can usually reduce the number of DFT jobs while maintaining reasonable accuracy. In 2018, Tran and Ulissi proposed a theoretical and automated screening method for predicting the HER activities with a combination of ML and optimization to guide DFT calculations, as shown in Fig. 16(a)–(d). A total of 258 candidate surfaces among 102 alloys with 31 different elements for H2 evolution have been identified, including NiSi, AlPt, CuGe, etc. The ML guidance dramatically accelerated the theoretical study of HER catalysts, and instead of 1684908 potential adsorption sites, only 42785 were actually calculated.157 We note that most of the ML applications require the fingerprints of various chemical and physical features. As an alternative, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) utilize a graph representation of atomic structures and basic atomic information unrelaxed by DFT as inputs, which may further reduce the computational cost. An automated, high-throughput approach based on a CNN architecture was applied to predict the OER binding energies of IrOx, and the accuracy was comparable to those obtained by DFT; see Fig. 16(e). The results provided design strategies to boost the OER activity of Ir-based catalysts, including exposing more active low-index surfaces, making smaller nanoparticles, and increasing the oxidation states of surface Ir.158 Moreover, activity descriptors can be also extracted from ML, as the regularized random forests (RRFs) ML algorithm on Ni2P discovered the most important descriptors for the HER activity using the dataset from the DFT calculations, as shown in Fig. 16(f).159
 Fig. 16  (a) Experimental, (b) DFT, (c) conventional DFT-based (blue) and (d) ML (red) workflows for catalyst screening and selection. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157, copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (e) Parity plot of the CNN-predicted and DFT-calculated ΔG on different IrOx models for the OER. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (f) Relative importance of the RRF-calculated descriptors for the HER activity on Ni2P. Reproduced with permission from ref. 159, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Currently, the application of ML in materials science and the combination of ML with DFT calculations still face challenges owing to the limited development of software/algorithms/models, the difficulties in understanding the uncertainties of the prediction, and most importantly, the lack of standard and reliable datasets. Nevertheless, with the continuous development of materials informatics and the expansion of computational and experimental datasets, ML is expected to be widely adopted to further understand and develop electrocatalysts for AWE.
5. Developing non-precious alkaline water electrocatalysts
In this chapter, we provide an overview of current developments in NPCs for AWE, and we highlight the roles played by DFT and in situ/operando characterizations in guiding the design of highly active electrocatalysts and revealing the active sites/catalytic mechanism. Only with the identification of active species/sites, it is possible to further control them to fabricate more active electrocatalysts.
5.1. Design strategies
Generally, there are two major ways to boost the activity of electrocatalysts for water electrolysis, namely, improving their intrinsic activity or increasing the number of active sites (Scheme 3).167 For the former method, one can resort to heteroatom doping, strain engineering, or alloying,168,169 while strategies such as fabricating porous structures or constructing a nanomorphology can increase the number of active sites.170 The motivation to modify the electronic structures of electrocatalysts includes (1) improving the electronic conductivity and (2) optimizing the surface binding with the reaction intermediates.171,172
 Scheme 3  Design strategies of electrocatalysts. 

5.1.1. Doping. 
Doping is the intentional introduction of heteroatoms into a parent material to modulate its electrical and structural properties. Generally, heteroatoms can be introduced using one of two methods: (1) utilizing heteroatom-enriched precursors and (2) post-treatment of the product with reactive heteroatom sources.
For metal-free carbons, various heteroatoms such as N, B, O, P, S, Cl, Se, Br, and I have been investigated as dopants.173 Since 2013, when Nakanishi and coworkers reported an N-doped nanostructured carbon with an OER activity comparable to that of IrO2/C in 0.1 M KOH for the first time,174 various novel carbons have been developed for water electrolysis.175,176 The dopant in the carbon framework can take different configurations, as shown in Fig. 17(a). For example, N can be doped as pyridinic, pyrrolic, and quaternary N. Even though many attempts have been made to incorporate single or multiple heteroatoms into carbons, modulating the configuration of the introduced dopants is a tremendous challenge. Nakamura and coworkers fabricated a series of highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) with well-defined nitrogen dopants, i.e., pyridinic N-dominated (pyri-HOPG), graphitic N-dominated (grap-HOPG), edges patterned without N (edge-HOPG), and clean-HOPG.177 Ar+ etching was applied to prepare edge-HOPG samples (Fig. 17(b)) with masks, and annealing the samples in NH3 further yielded pyri-HOPG because pyridinic N groups preferentially located at the abundant edges in the etched samples. The XPS fitting in Fig. 17(c) confirmed the N species in the prepared samples.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of different heteroatoms doped into the carbon framework. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178, copyright 2016 Springer Nature. Structural characterization of N-HOPG model catalysts: (b) atomic force microscopy (AFM) image and corresponding line profile attributed the dark regions to the etched grooves, in contrast to the non-etched bright surface regions. (c) N 1s XPS fitting of four model samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177, copyright 2016 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Heteroatom doping is also a commonly used method for modulating the electronic structure of transition-metal-based electrocatalysts.179,180 One of the most well-known systems is based on NiFe. The incorporation of even a trace amount of Fe into a Ni-containing compound has been found to dramatically enhance the OER activity.181 Such synergistic activity enhancement has been observed in NiFe oxides,182–184 NiFe (oxy)hydroxides,185–190 and NiFe phosphides,191,192 regardless of the initial Ni charge state or the lattice structure (e.g., rock-salt NiO182 and layered LiNiO2193). Thanks to the beneficial coupling between Ni and Fe, the NiFe layered double hydroxide (LDH) was found to be among the most active OER species in alkaline electrolytes.194,195 Dai and coauthors reported the first crystalline NiFe LDH coupled with carbon nanotubes (CNTs), which outperformed the commercial Ir/C in catalyzing the OER in both 0.1 and 1 M KOH; see Fig. 18(a) and (b). The mechanism underlying the high OER activity in Fe-doped Ni catalysts has sparked extensive research interest.12,48,63,196,197 Combining DFT calculations and operando hXAS, Friebel and coworkers found that the Fe3+ sites with contracted Fe–O bonds in γ-Ni1−xFexOOH were more active than Ni sites for the OER.12 Upon oxidation under OER potentials (Fig. 18(c)), the Fe–O bond length was contracted by 7% in FexNi1−xOOH relative to that in γ-FeOOH. DFT calculations further demonstrated that the shortened Fe–O bond in γ-Ni1−xFexOOH optimized the adsorption energy of OER intermediates (–OH, –O, and –OOH) over those Fe sites, generating increased OER activity.12 In order to further tune the electronic structure and improve the OER activity of NiFe-based catalysts, introducing other dopant has been attempted, such as Al,198 V,199 Mn,200 Cr,201 Cu,202 and Co.203 In addition to the OER, Fe doping has also been demonstrated to be effective in boosting the HER activity of Ni-containing catalysts.69,204 As shown in Fig. 18(d), NiFe LDH was reported to require ∼0.1 fewer volts to afford the HER current density of 10 mA cm−2 relative to Ni(OH)2. In addition to metallic dopants, non-metallic ones also demonstrated to be effective to tune the catalytic properties of NPCs.205,206 For instance, doping C into NiO generated under-saturated Ni sites which improved the H adsorption and the further HER activity.205
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of the NiFe LDHCNT hybrid architecture and (b) its OER activity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 207, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) Fe K-edge XANES of Ni0.75Fe0.25OOH during the OER and the DFT-derived OER overpotential at Fe and Ni sites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 12, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (d) HER LSV comparison of Ni(OH)2 and NiFe LDH in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69, copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


5.1.2. Strain tuning. 
Strain engineering is another powerful strategy for tailoring the electronic structure and catalytic properties of electrode materials for AWE.208–212 Strain is defined as the deformation of a solid, which is usually induced by lattice mismatch in electrocatalysts and can take place at multiple scales such as among different crystal facets, particles, and heterostructures. When two planes with different lattice parameters are firmly connected, lattice mismatch and distortion are generated along with the interface. The generated compressive or tensile strain can propagate into the internal parts of the solid and gradually decay away from the interface due to relaxation. Generally, lattice-mismatch-induced strain modifies the energetics between the catalyst surface and HER/OER reaction intermediates and further influences the water splitting electrocatalytic kinetics.213 Lattice-mismatch-induced strain can be generated by epitaxial growth. For example, Shao-Horn and coworkers demonstrated that epitaxial strain could tune the OER activity of a TMO in alkaline media.214 In their work, a LaCoO3 (LCO) thin film was grown on the top of substrates (i.e., SrTiO3 (STO), (LaAlO3)0.3(Sr2AlTaO6)0.7 (LSAT), LaAlO3 (LAO)) with different lattice parameters by pulsed laser deposition. Owing to the mismatch between the lattice parameters of LCO and different substrates, tensile and compressive strain was generated, varying from −0.5% to +2.6% (Fig. 19(b)), yielding different OER activities.214
 Fig. 19  (a) XRD 2θ–ω scans of LCO thin films deposited on different substrates with corresponding strain. Reproduced with permission from ref. 214, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Dependence of DFT-calculated hydrogen adsorption free energy (ΔGH*) on tensile strain for the CoO(111)-Ov surface; (c) schematic illustration of the strain effect on the band center of CoO(111)-Ov surface; (d) HADDF-STEM image of two adjacent nano-sawtooth enclosed with (111) nanofacets for S-CoO NRs with the contour plots of the strain component, where the lattice strain component ε11 and ε22 represent strain in and perpendicular to the (111) plane, respectively. (e) Volcano plots of j0 as a function of the ΔGH* for various catalysts. Reproduced without the need of permission from ref. 215. 
The strained thin films prepared by epitaxial growth are critical to fundamental studies. However, it is challenging to apply them into practical applications due to their high preparation cost, low density of active sites, and unsatisfactory activities. It is desirable to introduce strain into nanostructured electrocatalysts with large surface areas and prepare some highly active electrocatalysts. Qiao and coworkers applied tensile strain and dramatically boosted the HER activity of a TMO, i.e., CoO, which was previously considered to be HER-inert in alkaline solutions.215 The effects of tensile strain on hydrogen absorption energy and band structures were firstly investigated by DFT calculations. When tensile strain was exerted on the CoO(111) surface containing oxygen vacancies, H* adsorption was found to be continuously weakened by the increasing strain magnitude (Fig. 19(b)). Particularly, 3.0% tensile strain contributed to a near-optimal ΔGH* close to 0 eV (−0.10 eV). Additionally, the tensile strain upshifted the O 2p band of CoO and improved the covalence between Co and O (Fig. 19(c)), which weakened its capability to withdraw electrons from the adsorbed H atom. Driven by this theoretical prediction, CoO nanorods (NRs) with strained surfaces were then fabricated via a cation exchange method. The strain state on the outmost surface of the nano-sawtooth structure was confirmed by HAADF-STEM imaging (Fig. 19(d)) and a strain component contour plot, which demonstrated that there was approximately no strain in the inner part of the NRs, while tensile strain gradually formed on the outermost surface of the nano-sawtooth structure. Thanks to the tensile strain-optimized ΔGH*, the 3.0% strained CoO NRs (S-CoO NRs) exhibited an HER activity comparable to that of Pt/C, with ΔGH* and j0 even surpassing those of many noble and transition metals (Fig. 19(e)).
It is worth noting that strain usually concurs with other factors such as vacancies or defects,215 complicating the identification and evaluation of the strain contribution on the modified catalytic properties. Well-defined model systems are required to generate precise strain and decouple it from the other effects. Moreover, the stability of that strain during water electrolysis is worth studying.


5.1.3. Alloying. 
According to Fig. 4(c) in Section 2.3, most monometallic non-precious metals have hydrogen binding energies significantly different from that of Pt and exhibit limited HER activity in alkaline electrolytes. Researchers have thus been motivated to alloy another element into the lattice of a given monometallic non-precious metal to improve the electrochemical properties, owing to the ligand effect originating from the formation of heteroatom bonds and the strain effect owing to the altered bond length.216,217 In addition, this strategy has the advantage of reducing the amount of costly metal and finding a balance between high efficiency and cost competitiveness. Transition metal alloys as water splitting electrocatalysts can be synthesized by methods including sintering218,219 and electrodeposition.220,221 Even though electrodeposition avoids the high-temperature conditions required for sintering and contributes to porous structures, this method requires substrates, thereby yielding only supported catalysts and confounding the direct characterization of their structures, properties, and performance. One of the most famous non-precious alloys used for the alkaline HER is NiMo.13,222–224 Aruraj et al. compared a series of Ni-based alloys and found that their alkaline HER activity followed the order Ni–Mo > Ni–Zn > Ni–Co > Ni–W > Ni–Fe > Ni–Cr > Ni-plated steel.225 Additionally, Jaramillo et al. found that after a short-term (2 h) stability test in 1 M NaOH, NiMo remained more active than the other alloys, even outperforming Pt; see Fig. 20(a).
 Fig. 20  (a) HER activity comparison of a serious of alloy-based electrocatalysts in 1 M NaOH after a 2 h stability test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 13, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of the possible bimetallic sites on the Ti-modified Cu surface; (c) dependence of the HER exchange current density on the calculated hydrogen binding energy (HBE); (d) HER LSV in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with the need of permission from ref. 226 (e) comprehensive plot of the OER activity and stability for various bimetallic alloys (MM′, M or M′ = Fe, Co, Ni, and Mn) supported on N-doped carbon. Produced with permission from ref. 227, copyright 2017 Wiley. 
Besides NiMo, many other non-precious alloys have been developed for AWE. With DFT calculations, Zhang and coworkers found that a Cu–Ti alloy had a similar hydrogen binding strength to Pt, in contrast with Cu alone; see Fig. 20(b) and (c). Driven by these DFT calculations, a Cu–Ti bimetallic electrocatalyst with a highly hierarchical porous structure (denoted by np-CuTi) was further synthesized, which exceeded the performance of Pt/C in catalyzing the HER with a more than twofold higher activity, as shown in Fig. 20(d).
In addition to the HER, non-precious transition metal alloys have also been applied for the OER228–233 and overall water splitting.32,234–236 For example, a series of transition metal alloy nanoparticles including FeCo, FeMn, NiFe, NiCo, MnCo, and NiMn have been examined for catalyzing the OER, as shown in Fig. 20(e). Those alloys were found to perform better than their corresponding monometallic counterparts in catalyzing the OER with improved binding with the reactions intermediates, and NiFe ranked the most active and stable OER catalyst among them.227 However, it is worth noting that transition metal alloys are potentially subjected to restructuring under OER potential regions, e.g., NiFe alloy can be converted in situ into the corresponding oxyhydroxide during the OER.237 This aspect complicates the identification of real active sites for alloy-based electrocatalysts.
In addition to modulating the electronic configuration, exposing the active sites is another way to boost the activities of electrocatalysts for water splitting. Specific methods include fabricating porous structure and nanostructuring.


5.1.4. Porous/nanoscale structure fabrication. 
Porous structures endow electrocatalysts with better electrolyte permeability and shorten the mass and electron transport pathways, thus favoring catalytic reactions. According to their size, pores can be classified into micropores (diameter <2 nm), mesopores (2 nm < diameter < 50 nm), and macropores (diameter >50 nm). Micropores provide high surface areas that contribute more reaction sites, while macropores are responsible for mass transfer to provide reactants to the reaction sites. Generally, porous electrocatalysts can be prepared by the following methods: (1) external template methods (hard or soft template); (2) self-template methods utilizing a porous precursor (e.g., metal–organic frameworks (MOFs)); (3) hybridizing with a porous substrate (e.g., NF); and (4) dealloying. Rigid hard templates including SiO2, MgO, and Al2O3, must be removed using etching agents such as HF or NaOH,238 while soft templates are relatively easier to remove.239 However, organic compounds are usually required for soft templating, which is not that eco-friendly.240,241 MOFs, which link organic and inorganic moieties through covalent coordination linkages, are gathering wide interest as a self-template method for fabricating porous electrocatalysts.242–245 MOF precursors are characterized by diverse and adjustable structures, contributing to electrocatalysts with large surface area and various pore sizes. For example, Wang, Lou, and coworkers prepared N-doped carbon nanotube frameworks (NCNTFs) by directly calcining ZIF-67 in H2.246 Thanks to the large surface area (513 m2 g−1) derived from the unique polyhedral shape and porous structure, the OER overpotential of NCNTFs at 10 mA cm−2 was ∼180 mV lower than that of Pt/C in 1 M KOH.246 NF with a 3D interconnected macroscopic porous structure offers large specific surface areas, high electrical conductivity, and structural integrity. Furthermore, it can effectively reduce bubble accumulation during the evolution of O2 or H2. As a result, NF has been frequently hybridized with other electrocatalysts to maximize the active sites, particularly under high current densities and strong gas evolution conditions.247–250 A representative example is the mesoporous NiFe hydroxide nanosheet electrodeposited onto NF substrates forming a hierarchically porous structure (NiFe/NF).251 The direct deposition method avoided the use of polymeric binders (e.g., Nafion), as these binders problematically decreased the contact area between the catalytic active sites and electrolytes and deteriorated the electrical conductivity. Thanks to the hierarchically porous structure, NiFe/NF could deliver extremely large current densities of 1000 mA cm−2 with an overpotential of 270 mV, showing great promise for industrial applications. In addition to the above approaches, dealloying, which is typically a corrosion reaction process, has been demonstrated as a useful method for fabricating a porous structure for electrocatalysts.252–255 For this treatment, alloys are firstly formed by incorporating the target component with one or two less stable metals. Subsequently, the incorporated components are selectively dissolved by acid, alkaline, or hydrogen peroxide solutions or other electrochemical approaches, leaving behind the nanoporous structures. This method is particularly effective for fabricating nanoporous metals.256 Moreover, the freshly dealloyed non-precious metal surfaces can spontaneously react with water in a strongly alkaline corroding solution, which can result in porous metal oxides255 or hydroxides.253 With one dealloying method, Detsi and coworkers fabricated a mesoporous NiFeMn-based OER electrocatalyst, composed of Ni60Fe30Mn10 alloy covered by NiFeMn ligaments. The small size of the ligaments and pores in the mesoporous catalyst (∼10 nm) contributed to a high BET surface area (43 m2 g−1) and a large number of OER-active sites, delivering a large OER current density of 500 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 0.36 V.257
Reducing the material size into the nanoscale is also beneficial to increasing the number of active sites per unit of macroscopic catalyst area.258 Various types of nanostructured materials have been fabricated for AWE, including but not limited to nanoparticles,259–262 nanotubes,263–265 nanosheets,266–268 nanorods,269–271 and nanowires.272–276 For instance, atomically thick nanosheets could be fabricated through the controllable exfoliation of their corresponding anisotropic layered bulk materials, such as TMOs, hydroxides, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), as well as metal-free carbons.277–279 One well-known example is the NiFe LDH nanosheets fabricated by Hu and Song.10 They proposed a general anion-exchange method for exfoliating LDH composed of edge-sharing MO6 (M represents transition metal) octahedral layers, as depicted in Fig. 21(a). Intercalating anions into the LDH, e.g., CO32− into the NiFe LDH and Br− into the CoCo and NiCo LDHs, expanded the interlayer spacing (d2 > d1), which enabled the delamination of the bulk LDHs into single-layer nanosheets. After being dispersed in purged formamide with stirring for 24 h, LDH nanosheets were formed. With large numbers of exposed actives, the OER current density was enhanced 2.6–4.5 fold in 1 M KOH after exfoliation.10
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the exfoliation process for LDHs, where purple, red, and gray spheres represent metal, oxygen atoms, and interlayer anions/water molecules, respectively. Reproduced without the need of permission from ref. 10. (b) HAADF-STEM image of an R-MoS2 monolayer with Mo-edge termination and structural defects (pores); scale bar: 1 nm; (c) HER LSV of ammoniated MoS2 (A-MoS2) in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 280, copyright 2018 Wiley. (d) TEM of Co3O4 nanosheets. (e) OER activity of Co3O4 nanosheets in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 281, copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to top-down methods like exfoliation,282 nanosheets can also be prepared by a bottom-up approach such as deposition.283–285 For example, 3D MoS2 nanosheets were grown on graphene-coated NF by chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and the HER activity of the nanostructure was demonstrated to be about two orders of magnitude higher than that of NF without MoS2 nanosheets in 0.1 M KOH.284 Beyond optimizing the electrocatalyst size and morphology, nanostructuring can also facilitate the water electrolysis kinetics by engineering the low-coordinated sites such as corners/edges/facets to. Very recently, all-in-one MoS2 nanosheets with exposed Mo edges, defective pores, and expanded interlayer spacing (R-MoS2) were prepared by the intercalation and subsequent removal of NH3 molecules.280 Atomic HAADF-STEM confirmed the exposed Mo edge termination; see Fig. 21(b). Owing to the exposed Mo edges as HER active sites, R-MoS2 hybridized with NF outperformed commercial Pt/C in the high-current region (>25 mA cm−2) in 1 M KOH, as shown in Fig. 21(c).
Despite the success of the exfoliation method used to prepare layered compound nanosheets, it remains a formidable challenge to exfoliate non-layered compounds, such as cubic Co3O4, without anisotropy. This problem arises from the difficulty in breaking their strong in-plane bonds and the lack of an intrinsic driving force for 2D anisotropic growth. Xie and coworkers designed a novel fast-heating strategy, succeeding in obtaining atomically thick and freestanding Co3O4 nanosheets.281 First, they prepared CoO nanosheets using Co(acac)3 as the precursor. At a high temperature (190 °C), CoO nucleated, accompanied by the partial oxidation of HOCH2–CH2OH into HOCH2COO−, which was further adsorbed on the CoO surface nuclei to decrease the surface energy. Driven by the electrostatic interactions and directional short-range attractions among HOCH2COO−, the CoO nuclei self-assembled into atomically thin CoO sheets.281 Heating these sheets in the air for a short time (5 min) yielded atomically thin Co3O4 nanosheets, as demonstrated by the TEM image in Fig. 21(d). Owing to their significantly exposed actives sites, the Co3O4 nanosheets exhibited an OER current density of up to 341.7 mA cm−2, roughly 50 times larger than that of the bulk Co3O4 counterpart.
We should note that increasing the number of active sites is physically limited by mass and charge transport problems. In contrast, improving the intrinsic activity mitigates the transport issues caused by a high catalyst loading.167 Moreover, a high intrinsic activity can also decrease both the catalyst loading and cost. These strategies introduced above are not mutually exclusive and can ideally be utilized simultaneously, which would significantly contribute to the development of NPCs for AWE.
In the following sections, the most recent progress in various types of electrocatalysts for AWE is reviewed, including TMOs, transition metal (oxy)hydroxides, transition metal phosphides (TMPs), TMDs, and modified carbons. Some of their representative structures are provided in Scheme 4.
 Scheme 4  Schematic illustration of the representative structure of (a) perovskite oxides, (b) spinel oxides, (c) oxyhydroxides, (d) transition metal disulfides, (e) TMPs, and (f) carbons. 

5.2. Advances in OER catalysts
TMOs and transition metal (oxy)hydroxides286–288 have been extensively investigated for the OER. In addition, TMPs and transition metal chalcogenides/nitrides are also gaining increasing attention as the anode material for alkaline water splitting. In this section, the progress in the most common OER catalysts for AWE is carefully reviewed.

5.2.1. Perovskite-type oxides. 
With the advantages of low cost, earth abundance, tunable structure, and high catalytic activity, perovskite oxides have been recently studied extensively as alternatives to noble-metal-based OER electrocatalysts in alkaline electrolytes.289–291 The A-site cations of primitive perovskite oxides (ABO3) are usually alkaline or rare-earth metals, and the B-site one are transition metals coordinated by six oxygen atoms. The electrochemical properties of perovskite oxides can be facilely tuned by A- or B-site substitution.292,293 The electronic configuration of B-site cations is crucial to the binding of reaction intermediates, and thus, these cations are usually regarded as the active centers.294 In addition to simple perovskites, many types of novel perovskite structures have recently been reported to demonstrate promising OER activity. Lee and coworkers found a new family of perovskite oxides, i.e., BaNi0.83O2.5 (Fig. 22(a)) with an OER activity exceeding that of many perovskite oxides.295 BaNi0.83O2.5 with an optimal O 2p band structure was obtained from the in situ transformation of BaNiO3 during the OER in alkaline solutions, and such transformation made it easier to form OOH (usually a rate-limiting step in the OER) and substantially improved the OER activity.295 Stevenson and coworkers prepared a series of Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) perovskite oxides, i.e., La0.5Sr1.5Ni1−xFexO4±δ (LSNF, x = 0 to 1).119 As shown schematically in Fig. 22(b), the RP crystal structure can be expressed with a formula of An+1BnO3n+1 or equivalently (AO)(ABO3 ± δ)n, wherein perovskite layers with BO6 octahedra are separated by rocksalt (AO)(OA) double layers. Sr substitution was found to cause the oxidization of Ni via charge compensation and enhance both Ni–O covalency and electronic conductivity, while partially replacing Ni with Fe tuned the overlap between Ni/Fe 3d and the O 2p band. Thanks to the specific structure and modified electronic structure, the optimized composition achieved a mass activity of 1930 mA mgox−1 at 1.63 V vs. RHE. Fe-Based perovskite oxides are investigated for AWE with less frequency than those based on Ni and Co. Nevertheless, Yagi and coworkers reported the Fe4+-based quadruple perovskite CaCu3Fe4O12 (Fig. 22(c)), which outperformed the-state-of-the-art Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ and the gold standard RuO2 in catalyzing the OER. The high OER activity of CaCu3Fe4O12 was attributed to its heavily bent Fe–O–Fe bonds (∼140°), shortening the distance between oxygen atoms bonded to the nearest neighboring Fe sites and permitting these oxygen atoms to interact with each other to form oxygen molecules.296 In contrast with high-temperature solid oxide electrochemical cells, in which oxygen vacancies usually play a positive role in the cathode performance,297–299 the effect of these vacancies on low-temperature water electrolysis remains inconclusive.117 For a perovskite-type OER electrocatalyst, Wang and coworkers demonstrated that with the increasing amount of oxygen vacancies, the simple perovskite oxide Nd0.5Ba0.5MnO3−δ experienced a series of structural changes, proceeding through cubic, hexagonal, and orthorhombic structures.300 The orthorhombic NdBaMn2O5.5 (NBM5.5, Fig. 22(d)) with an intermediate amount of oxygen vacancies (δ = 0.5) performed better than cubic Nd0.5Ba0.5MnO3−δ (NBM3−δ) and hexagonal NdBaMn2O5.5−δ (NBM5.5−δ) and NdBaMn2O5.5+δ (NBM5.5+δ) (δ < 0.5), and it achieved the best OER activity. Such activity enhancement was attributed to the structural distortion of NBM5.5 with optimized eg orbital filling and O 2p band location.
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic of the BaNi0.83O2.5 crystal structure, where green, gray, and red balls represented Ba, Ni, and O, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 295, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of La0.5Sr1.5Ni1−xFexO4±δ with a RP crystal structure. Orange, cyan, and red balls represent La/Sr, Ni/Fe, and O, respectively. Reproduced without the need of permission from ref. 119. (c) Schematic of the CaCu3Fe4O12 crystal structure; green, blue, brown, and red balls represent Ca, Cu, Fe, and O, respectively. Reproduced without the need of permission from ref. 296. (d) Schematic of the NdBaMn2O5.5 crystal structure. Green, orange, purple, and red balls represent Ba, Nd, Mn, and O, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 300, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (e) Lattice-oxygen-mediated (LOM) OER mechanism: OER positive potential oxidizes a ligand hole in the O 2p band, which allows the exchange of lattice oxygen with the adsorbed intermediate to form the superoxide ion. Reproduced without the need of permission from ref. 117 (f) non-concerted proton–electron transfer OER mechanisms that evolve 36O2, reproduced with permission from ref. 16, copyright 2017 Springer Nature. (g) Co K-edge XANES spectra recorded from the BSCF at different anodic potentials from 1.2 to 1.55 V vs. RHE in 0.1 M KOH. (h) Dynamic dissolution/redeposition forms a self-assembled CoO(OH0/FeO(OH)) layer on the BSCF surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17, copyright 2017 Springer Nature. 
B-Site transition metals were previously thought to play a dominant role in determining the water electrolysis activity, but recent studies have found that the lattice oxygen present in perovskite oxides can also be involved in the OER.16,17,301 Based on the observed correlation between the OER activity and oxygen vacancies/mobility of La1−xSrxCoO3−x, Mefford et al. proposed a new reaction pathway involving the participation of the lattice oxygen, which is different from the conventional four-step adsorbate evolution mechanism (AEM). In their proposed reaction mechanism shown in Fig. 22(e), lattice oxygen in La1−xSrxCoO3−x reacts with adsorbed oxygen on the Co sites, forming OO-intermediates and generating an oxygen vacancy in the lattice.117 Using isotope labeling experiments in alkaline electrolytes, Grimaud et al. confirmed that the lattice oxygen in highly-covalent perovskites such as La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−x and SrCoO3−x could be evolved into O2 gas during the OER.16 They further proposed that oxygen was adsorbed on the superficial lattice oxygen, and two oxygen vacancies were generated around the metal center when molecular oxygen gases evolved from the lattice oxygen sites;16 see Fig. 22(f). With time-resolved operando hXAS, Fabbri et al. detected the dynamic changes in the electronic configuration of Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ during the alkaline OER (Fig. 22(g)), and they further linked the self-assembly of surface CoO(OH) with the lattice oxygen evolution process. Further, the surface A-site cations of the perovskite oxide were dissolved in the alkaline electrolyte, leaving a short-range ordered (Co/Fe)O(OH) layer. Meanwhile, the B-site cations with limited solubility in the electrolyte promoted the redeposition of those cations on the catalyst surface, and the evolved oxygen was replenished by the surrounding OH− groups in the alkaline electrolyte,17 see Fig. 22(h). The verification of anionic lattice redox process significantly enriches insights into the OER catalytic mechanisms on TMOs, which have been utilized to design highly active OER electrocatalysts.302,303 However, no consensus has yet been reached regarding the specific reaction steps involved in the mechanism underlying the lattice oxygen evolution. Further experimental evidence is needed to support these suggested reaction steps.


5.2.2. Spinel-type oxides. 
The spinel oxides are a class of minerals with a general formulation of AxB3−xO4 where the A and B cations arrange at the octahedral and tetrahedral sites within the cubic close-packed lattice. With different B cations, spinel oxides can be roughly classified into aluminum-, iron-, and cobalt-based spinels.304–306 Among them, iron (e.g., NiFe2O4)307–309 and cobalt spinel oxides (e.g., Co3O4)310,311 have been extensively investigated as OER electrocatalysts in alkaline electrolytes. However, the existence of different octahedral and tetrahedral configurations in spinel oxides complicates the investigation of their active sites. By introducing different dopants (divalent Zn2+ and trivalent Al3+) into Co3O4, tetrahedral Co2+-dominant CoAl2O4 and octahedral Co3+-dominant ZnCo2O4 were prepared.46 An operando EXAFS study demonstrated that Co ions inside ZnCo2O4 and Co3O4 were oxidized to form CoOOH during the OER, wherein the Co–O bonds were slightly compressed in Co3O4 (Fig. 23(a)) and Co2+Td-predominated CoAl2O4 (Fig. 23(b)). In contrast, the Co–O bond in ZnCo2O4 did not change (Fig. 23(c)), which limited the affinity of oxygen ions on the catalyst surface and resulted in the significantly inferior activity of ZnCo2O4 in comparison with those of Co3O4 and CoAl2O4. These findings demonstrated that Co2+ at tetrahedral sites was the active site toward the OER.46
 Fig. 23  
Operando Co K-edge EXAFS spectra during the OER for (a) Co3O4, (b) ZnCo2O4, and (c) CoAl2O4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 312, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of creating oxygen vacancy defects on the surface of reduced NiCo2O4 (R-NCO) rich with oxygen vacancies; (e) overall water splitting activity of R-NCO in 1.0 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 313, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. Calculated (f) HER and (g) OER free energy diagrams for P-Co3O4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 314, copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Introducing oxygen vacancies has been demonstrated to effectively boost the water electrolysis activity of spinel oxides.314–316 One example is reduced NiCo2O4 (R-NCO). Oxygen vacancies were introduced onto its surface as defects by soaking NiCo2O4 in a NaBH4 solution; see Fig. 23(d). R-NCO afforded a 10 mA cm−2 current density for overall water splitting at 1.61 V in 1.0 M KOH, lower than that of pristine NiCo2O4 (NCO) and comparable to that of the benchmark RuO2//Pt/C electrode (Fig. 23(e)). The improved water splitting activity was attributed to the optimized adsorption energy owing to abundant oxygen vacancies.313 Although these vacancies are effective, their stability should be considered, especially under the highly oxidizing conditions of the OER.314 In a recent work, oxygen vacancies in Co3O4 were filled with P (P-Co3O4), which not only stabilized the oxygen vacancies by compensating the coordination numbers but also optimized the electronic structure of Co3O4.314 DFT calculations demonstrated that P filling contributed to a more favorable HER ΔGH* (ΔGH* = −0.08 eV, Fig. 23(f)) and smaller OER overpotential (ηOER = 0.39 V, Fig. 23(g)) than those of pristine Co3O4 (ΔGH* = 0.23 eV, ηOER = 0.47 V) and oxygen-vacancy-rich Co3O4 (VO–Co3O4, ΔGH* = 0.28 eV, ηOER = 0.42 V).314


5.2.3. Layered oxides/(oxy)hydroxides. 
The layered structure allows the intercalation of water molecules and anions, which potentially provides favorable bulk redox activity. One of the most famous layered TMOs is LiCoO2, which was developed by Prof. John B. Goodenough and still dominates today's lithium ion battery cathode market. However, the OER activity of layered LiCoO2 as the anode for AWE is not that satisfactory and is even inferior to its spinel counterpart in catalyzing the OER.317 Manthiram and coworkers prepared layered and spinel LiCoO2 by varying the calcination temperature; high-temperature (800 °C) sintering led to layered LiCoO2 (denoted by HT-LiCoO2), while low-temperature (400 °C) sintering formed spinel LiCoO2 (denoted by LT-LiCoO2).317 LT-LiCoO2 showed better OER activity in 0.1 M KOH than HT-LiCoO2. Moreover, layered LiCoO2 was found to undergo surface restructuring during OER electrolysis. Under OER potentials at 1 mA cm−2 in 1 M NaOH, lithium ions on the surface were leached into the electrolyte, generating spinel LiCo2O4 active species and boosting the OER activity.318 Cui and coworkers proposed a general method for boosting the OER activity of Li-containing layered oxides by electrochemical delithiation.319 Upon extracting Li by charging these Li-containing oxides to high potentials in a battery setup, the OER activity was significantly boosted with the increased higher-valent transition metal cations, as shown in Fig. 24(a).319 The same group further utilized DFT calculation to track the active planes of the electrochemically delithiated LiCoO2. They demonstrated that the most stable (0001) surface of layered LiCoO2 was always characterized by a large OER overpotential, independent of the lithium content. In contrast, edge sites such as the nonpolar (110) and polar (012) surfaces were highly active, and their activity highly depended on (de)lithiation, as shown in Fig. 24(b). The delithiation process increased Co4+ site densities and improved the covalent coupling with oxygen 2p states, rendering higher OER activity.320 In addition to chemical/electrochemical delithiation, exfoliating layered LiCoO2 to expose more active sites is another strategy for boosting its OER activity. For example, Mg2+ cations were doped into layered LiCoO2,321 which expanded the lattice spacing along the c-axis because of the large ionic radius of Mg2+. Then, upon shear-assisted exfoliation, LiCo0.95Mg0.05O2 nanosheets were obtained. In addition to assisting exfoliation, thus leading to a larger active surface area, Mg2+ doping contributed to the partial oxidization of Co3+ to Co4+ and enhanced the Co–O covalency, thereby increasing the intrinsic OER activity.321
 Fig. 24  (a) OER onset potentials (potentials required to reach 0.1 mA cm−2) of a series of layered TMOs before and after delithiation. Electrolyte: 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced without the need of permission from ref. 319 (b) DFT-calculated OER activity map of layered LiCoO2/Li0.5CoO2 system, where the orange (green) symbols show the position of the OER activity of LiCoO2 (Li0.5CoO2) individual surfaces, with the theoretical overpotential (ηTheory) shown in brackets. The arrows show the OER activity change upon delithiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 320, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) OER activity of different transition metal (oxy)hydroxides in 1 M KOH; (d) schematic of active electrolyte-permeated catalyst structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 322, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Layered transition metal (oxy)hydroxides are composed of cationic brucite-like layers that are separated by interlayer anions that balance the charge. Their comparatively open structures contribute to the rapid diffusion of reactants and products as well as the fast proton-coupled electron transfer. As a result, their catalytic active sites are highly accessible, yielding good OER activities.298,299 Some common methods for preparing layered (oxy)hydroxides include hydro/solvothermal methods, co-precipitation, and electrodeposition.323–325 Among various layered transition metal (oxy)hydroxides, NiFe-based ones are attracting particular attention due to their high OER activity in basic electrolytes.326–329 With a quartz-crystal microbalance electrode, Burke et al. determined the mass of various (deposited (oxy)hydroxide) thin films and their intrinsic OER activity.322 Their experimental results demonstrated that Ni(Fe)OxHy was characterized by the largest TOF among various (oxy)hydroxides, as shown in Fig. 24(c). They further estimated that the high intrinsic OER activity of Ni(Fe)OxHy likely came from Fe sites (orange octahedra in Fig. 24(d)), while the NiOOH host (gray octahedra in Fig. 24(d)) supported electronic transport and chemically stabilized the Fe.322
Despite promising OER activity, several shortcomings are associated with transition metal (oxy)hydroxides, such as low electrical conductivity, as well as easy aggregation.330,331 Hybridizing transition metal (oxy)hydroxides with porous conductive supports (e.g., graphene, NF) can help mitigate those issues. In a recent work, a new approach was proposed to prepare (Ni,Fe)OOH supported on NF that differed from conventional electrodeposition or hydrothermal synthesis.331 Metallic Ni was reacted with FeCl3 during mechanical stirring, yielding amorphous FeOOH and Ni(OH)2, which then evolved into (Ni,Fe)OOH during water electrolysis. The as-prepared (Ni,Fe)OOH/NF electrode delivered a large current density of 500 and 1000 mA cm−2 at overpotentials of only 259 mV and 289 mV in 1 M KOH, respectively, and it could sustain such high activity for dozens of hours.


5.2.4. Other transition-metal-based compounds. 
In addition to oxides/(oxy)hydroxides, other transition-metal-based compounds such as carbides,332,333 borides,334–336 nitrides,337,338 phosphides,339–342 and chalcogenides33,343–346 have been also extensively investigated for water oxidization. These compounds were originally investigated for HER electrocatalysis due to their promising activity, high conductivity, earth abundance, and cheap cost.30 With the motivation to develop symmetrical electrodes with bi-functionality for water electrolyzers, these compounds are gaining increasing attention for catalyzing the OER and overall water splitting.30 For example, several phosphide nanoparticles containing different transition metals (i.e., Fe, Co, Ni) were compared for the alkaline OER. Notable activity trends were observed, following the order of FeP < NiP < CoP < FeNiP < FeCoP < CoNiP < FeCoNiP; see the exchange current density comparison in Fig. 25(a).347 Moreover, introducing a secondary metal(s) into the monometallic TMP substantially boosted the OER performance, owing to the enhanced oxidizing power of bi- and tri-metallic phosphides, which facilitated the adsorption of OH− groups.347
 Fig. 25  (a) OER exchange current density comparison among a series of TMPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 347, copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Co K-edge XANES and (c) P 2p XPS of CoP before and after OER potential cycling in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 348, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (d) OER overpotential comparison of a series of dichalcogenide-derived TMOs by electrochemical tuning. Reproduced with permission from ref. 349, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Compared with TMOs, TMPs and transition metal carbides/nitrides/chalcogenides are thermodynamically less stable under oxidizing potentials and hence may undergo in situ restructuring during water oxidization.350–353 One example is CoP.348 Synchrotron-based XANES was applied to examine the cobalt charge state of CoP subjected to OER CV cycling. In Fig. 25(b), the adsorption edge in Co K-edge XANES shifted positively for cycled CoP, suggesting the irreversible oxidation of cobalt after the OER. P 2p XPS revealed a noticeable shift in the P 2p peak, suggesting the formation of phosphate groups (∼134 eV, PO42−, Fig. 25(c)).348 The in situ oxidization during the OER has made TMPs and transition metal nitrides/chalcogenides interesting pre-catalysts to render promising OER activities.126,354 A family of TMDs (MX, M = Co, Ni, Fe; X = S, Se, Te) as OER pre-catalysts was also examined.349 It was found that the TMDs were easily oxidized in alkaline media via an in situ electrochemical oxidation process, producing nanoporous TMOs (ECT-X-TMOs, where ECT means electrochemically transformed and X refers to the specific chalcogenides of S, Se, or Te) with significantly enhanced OER activity. Moreover, the ECT-X-TMOs showed even better OER activity with much lower onset overpotentials than the pristine TMOs (Fig. 25(d)) owing to their increased surface area and more exposed electroactive sites.349

In situ surface restructuring during water electrolysis significantly modifies the structural, electronic, and electrocatalytic properties of those pre-catalysts, but the mechanism behind such structural reconstruction remains elusive.355 To better understand the surface restructuring, in situ/operando techniques are ideal and compelling methods for obtaining real-time structural information. In addition to gaining a systematic understanding of self-reconstruction, rationally controlling this phenomenon to benefit the development of highly active water electrocatalysts is another considerable challenge.

5.3. Advances in HER catalysts
In this section, recent developments in representative HER electrocatalysts for AWE are reviewed, including TMPs, TMDs, TMOs, and modified carbons.

5.3.1. Transition metal phosphides. 
TMPs adopt trigonal prisms as fundamental building blocks in their crystal structures with metallic/covalent chemical bonds. With different P contents, the same metal phosphide can exhibit many different phases, such as FeP and Fe2P; CoP and Co2P; Ni2P, Ni5P4 and Ni12P5; and MoP and Mo3P. In addition, depending on the P amount, TMPs can exhibit semiconducting or metallic properties, i.e., metal-rich compounds such as MP or M2P are usually metallic, while phosphorus-rich TMPs often show semiconducting properties.356 In contrast with metal-rich phosphides, phosphorus-rich phosphides (y > x in TMxPy) exhibit a significant amount of P–P bonding; e.g., many MP2 compounds such as NiP2 and SiP2 adopt the pyrite-type structure wherein the phosphorus atoms are arranged in P–P dimers. P with larger electronegativity accepts electrons from transition metals, and the negatively charged P could also bind hydrogen during the electrochemical the HER.99 Further, P plays a role in the HER by influencing the electrical conductivity of TMPs: continuously introducing P into metals usually weakens their conductivity. This is because P atoms with larger electronegativity greatly restrict electron delocalization in metals.356 TMPs can be prepared by a variety of methods, such as solid-phase reaction,357 solvothermal methods,358 and electrodeposition.359 The specific P sources can be inorganic (e.g., NaH2PO2, NH4H2PO4, (NH4)2HPO4), or organic (e.g., trioctylphosphine (TOP), trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO)), in addition to other P sources (e.g., red phosphorus).360 Schaak and coworkers pioneered the first attempt to apply TMPs as HER catalysts in an alkaline solution.361 Their prepared Ni2P nanoparticles could deliver a cathodic current density of 20 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 205 mV in 1 M KOH.361 Since then, various novel Ni,358,362,363 Co,364,365 Fe,366 Mo,99 W,367 and Cu368 phosphides have been reported with promising alkaline HER activities. For example, oxygen has been incorporated into Co2P (O–Co2P) by the facile calcination of Co(CH3COO)2 mixed with Na2HPO2, which yielded a 15-fold enhancement in the HER activity in 1 M KOH.369 DFT calculations demonstrated that the oxygen incorporation induced higher valent Co atoms in Co2P, which not only facilitated water adsorption but also weakened the H–Co bonds and achieved a ΔGH value closer to 0 eV, thus improving the HER activity. Specifically, the Gibbs free energy of the water dissociation step ΔGH2O decreased from 0.88 eV in Co2P to 0.51 eV after oxygen incorporation, as shown in Fig. 26(a). The much smaller water-dissociation energy helped adsorb H on O–Co2P in alkaline media, contributing to faster kinetics during the first stage of the HER process. Moreover, the Gibbs free energy ΔGH of the final HER step that converted adsorbed H on Co2P into H2 decreased drastically from 0.70 to 0.19 eV after oxygen incorporation (Fig. 26(a)), optimizing the kinetics for the subsequent hydrogen-molecule evolution step on O–Co2P. An optimal amount of oxygen incorporation existed: an excessive amount of oxygen made the charge-density distribution of Co2P more localized (Fig. 26(b)) and reduced the electrical conductivity, thus decreasing the HER kinetics.369
 Fig. 26  (a) DFT-calculated HER reaction pathway of Co2P (orange) and O–Co2P (violet). (b) Charge density distribution of Co2P and O–Co2P. Reproduced with permission from ref. 369, copyright 2017 Wiley. (c) and (d) SEM image and (e) HER activity (normalized by ECSA) of Co2P before and after HER LSV for 2000 cycles in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 365, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
It is worth noting that TMPs as HER electrocatalysts could undergo surface reconstruction in alkaline electrolytes.370 In recent work, Co2P made by thermal phosphidization was found to lose P during HER cycling in 1 M KOH, and the cobalt remaining on the surface transformed into cobalt hydroxide.365 The morphology change after the HER cycling was clearly observed in high-magnification SEM images (Fig. 26(c) and (d)); specifically, more flake-shaped nanostructures resembling cobalt oxides or hydroxide were formed after stability testing in 1 M KOH. The corresponding EDX revealed that the composition ratio of Co to P increased from 2.0 ± 0.1 (before cycling) to 2.2 ± 0.1 (after cycling), corroborating the loss in P. Such surface transformation decreased the HER intrinsic activity (normalized by ECSA), as shown in Fig. 26(e). As a result, modulating the surface reconstruction of TMPs to boost the HER activity and stability in alkaline electrolytes remains a formidable challenge. In addition, the mechanism for such surface reconstruction requires further study.


5.3.2. Transition metal dichalcogenides. 
Another category of materials frequently investigated for HER electrolysis are TMDs with the general formula of MX2, where M is a transition metal such as Mo or W, while X is a chalcogen including S, Se, or Te.371,372 TMDs are composed of multiple trilayers stacked together by the out-of-plane van der Waals interactions, where these trilayers consist of one transition metal plane sandwiched between two layers of chalcogens. This unique structure endows TMDs with anisotropic properties, as the HER activities of basal and edge planes are different.373 TMDs can exhibit 2H, 1T, and 3R structures, where the digit represents the number of layers in the unit cell, and the letter suggests the type of symmetry (T for tetragonal, H for hexagonal, and R for rhombohedral). 1T phase has a stacking sequence of AbC AbC AbC, while the 2H phase is stacked following the sequence of AbA BaB, with the sulfur atoms overlapping along the z-axis with the metal atoms of the adjacent layer. The structure with 3R symmetry has a stacking sequence of AbA CaC BcB due to the shift in the metal and chalcogen atom positions in the unit cell.374 The common TMDs crystallize in 2H and 1T phases, where the transition metal and chalcogen atoms are bonded in trigonal prismatic or octahedral arrangement, respectively. The transition among those phases can significantly modify the electronic configuration of TMDs: e.g., 2H-MoS2 or 2H-WS2 is semiconductive, while 1T-MoS2 or 1T-WS2 is metallic.375 Owing to its high electrical conductivity, 1T-MoS2 is highly desirable for HER electrolysis,376 but 2H-MoS2 is thermodynamically more stable. As a result, 1T-MoS2 is usually obtained from the conversion of 2H-MoS2 triggered by doping,377 plasma treatment,378 electron beam,379 S vacancy,380etc.
Within various chalcogenides, MoS2 is among the most popular materials investigated for the HER, owing to its near-optimal hydrogen binding strength close to that of Pt. However, its capacity to catalyze the HER in the alkaline electrolyte is weak,40 which is attributed to its unsatisfactory conductivity, inefficient ability to adsorb hydroxyl species, and limited number of exposed active sites.383 To overcome these issues, researchers have proposed various methods for boosting its sluggish HER kinetics in a base, such as (1) doping other elements to adjust the electronic configuration of MoS2;383 (2) exposing more edge/active sites;284,384 and (3) hybridizing with other species that can effectively bind and dissociate the hydroxyl species, e.g., LDHs382,385 and perovskite oxides.386,387 For example, Co doping into MoS2 was found to decrease the bandgap of MoS2 from 1.7 eV (semiconductive) to ∼0 eV (metallic), as shown in Fig. 27(a) and (b). Thanks to the improved electrical conductivity, Co-doped MoS2 could deliver an HER current density of 10 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 48 mV in 1 M KOH.381 Even though MoS2 is favorable for the adsorption of H intermediate, they lack proper binding of hydroxyl species, leading to the inefficient water dissociation step.383 In order to mitigate this issue, Yang and coworkers fabricated a hybrid catalyst composed of MoS2 as a hydrogen acceptor and NiCo LDHs as a hydroxyl acceptor.382 The HER activity was substantially improved after hybridizing MoS2 with the NiCo-LDH hybrid: the resultant MoS2/NiCo-LDH required only a small overpotential of 78 mV to deliver 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH solution, as shown in Fig. 27(c). The high-resolution TEM (HRTEM, Fig. 27(d)) further confirmed that 2H-MoS2 and NiCo-LDH were closely connected, forming an interface between the (002) facet of MoS2 and the neighboring (015) facet of NiCo-LDH. This intimate connection enabled electronic interactions between the two components and synergistically enhanced the activity. DFT calculations demonstrated that hybridization reduced the activation energies of MoS2/NiCo-LDH composite for both the Heyrovsky and Volmer steps in reference to that of bare MoS2, as shown in Fig. 27(e). This accelerated the rate-determining water dissociation steps of the alkaline HER and boosted the HER activity of MoS2.382
 Fig. 27  DFT-calculated DOS for (a) pristine MoS2 and (b) Co-doped MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 381, copyright 2018 Wiley. (c) HER polarization curves of the MoS2/NiCo-LDH composite, carbon fiber paper (CFP) substrate, bare NiCo-LDH, and MoS2 in 1 M KOH; (d) HRTEM image of the MoS2/NiCo-LDH composite, wherein lattice fringes of 0.62 and 0.22 nm were attributed to (002) and (015) lattice spacings of the 2H-MoS2 and NiCo-LDH, respectively; (e) free energy diagram of the alkaline HER for bare MoS2 (blue) and MoS2/NiCo-LDH composite (red) catalysts, where  is for the HER Tafel step,  for the Heyrovsky step,  for the Volmer step, and ΔG0ad for the standard free energy of adsorption Had. Reproduced with permission from ref. 382, copyright 2017 Elsevier. 


5.3.3. Transition metal oxides. 
TMOs were originally regarded as catalytically inert for the HER owing to their inappropriate hydrogen adsorption strength.11 Additionally, their low electronic conductivity and limited number of active sites restrict their applications in alkaline HER electrocatalysis.11,388 However, in a pioneering work, Dai and coworkers hybridized nickel oxide with nickel metal and CNTs to synergistically enhance HER activity.11 NiO (shell) and Ni (core) formed a core–shell structure attached to multi-walled CNTs, confirmed by the high-resolution STEM image (Fig. 28(a)) and electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) mapping (Fig. 28(b)). The metal oxides (NiO) could serve as adsorption sites for OH− (generated by H2O disassociation) and function synergistically with metal (Ni) surfaces adsorbing H. Further, the presence of CNTs provided the hybrid with a large surface area (152.2 m2 g−1) and a high dispersion of active sites. As a result, NiO/Ni–CNT hybrid obtained an HER current density of 10 mA cm−2 with an overpotential of less than 100 mV in 1 M KOH, as shown in Fig. 28(c).
 Fig. 28  (a) STEM, (b) EELS mapping, and (c) HER LSV of NiO/Ni–CNT in 1 M KOH. Reproduced without the need of permission.11 (d) HER LSV of BSCF, Pr0.5BSC, F and commercial Pt/C catalysts in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41, copyright 2016 Wiley. (e) DFT-calculated hydrogen adsorption free energy (ΔGH*) on pristine CoO, Ni-doped CoO (≈11% Ni content), and the strained Ni-doped CoO (with 1% tensile strain); (f) HER LSV of Ni, Zn dual-doped CoO NRs compared with those of polycrystalline CoO (P-CoO), pure CoO, Zn-doped, Ni-doped CoO NRs, and commercial Pt/C in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 391, copyright 2019 Wiley. 
Encouraged by the success of the metal/metal oxide hybrid for the alkaline HER,11,388 researchers have also prepared pure TMOs as NPCs for the HER. Shao and coworkers reported an effective perovskite-type TMO, i.e., Pr0.5(Ba0.5Sr0.5)0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ (P0.5BSCF) with an HER activity comparable to that of Pt/C.41 Upon Pr doping, cobalt was partially oxidized, and the lattice oxygen concentration increased, potentially improving the binding of H atoms. As a result, P0.5BSCF outperformed pristine BSCF in catalyzing the HER in 1 M KOH (Fig. 28(d)).41 Subsequently, a trend emerged wherein perovskite oxides were applied to alkaline HER electrolysis. Several promising perovskite oxides have been reported as HER electrocatalysts, such as NdBaMn2O5.5,300 SrNb0.1Co0.7Fe0.2O3−δ,389 and La0.5Ba0.25Sr0.25CoO2.9−δF0.1.390
Despite the advances, the activities of many reported TMOs are usually inferior to that of the benchmark Pt-based HER electrocatalysts. Very recently, a co-doping strategy with Ni and Zn was proposed to boost the HER activity of CoO NRs.391 The introduction of these dopants generated large amounts of oxygen vacancies, which together with Ni dopant clusters optimized the electronic surface structure of the host oxide for intermediate hydrogen binding (Fig. 28(e)). Moreover, the Zn dopants decreased the bandgap of CoO and facilitated the electrical conduction. With the modulated electronic configuration induced by Ni and Zn co-doping, Ni/Zn-co-doped CoO NRs achieved an excellent HER activity in the alkaline media (Fig. 28(f)); in the higher current density region (e.g., >100 mA cm−2), they even outperformed commercial Pt/C, demonstrating the potential for practical applications.391 However, we should note that the onset overpotential of Ni/Zn dual-doped CoO NRs remains larger than that of Pt/C. Future efforts can be devoted to further improving the alkaline HER activity of TMOs with the aim to exceed the performance of Pt-based electrocatalysts with smaller onset overpotentials and larger cathodic current densities.


5.3.4. Modified carbons. 
Metal-free carbons are usually used as the conductive support for other electrode materials because of their advantages including low cost, large surface area, high conductivity, and multifunctionality.392 Recently, there has been a rise in research on directly utilizing modified carbons as electrocatalysts for water electrolysis.393–395 Generally, the structural, electronic, and electrochemical properties of carbons can be modified using methods including but not limited to heteroatom doping, porous structure fabrication, surface functionalization, and defect (e.g., voids, vacancies) and edge tailoring.396 As introduced in Section 5.1.1, doping heteroatoms into the carbon framework can redistribute charges and modify the chemisorption characteristics of reaction intermediates,397 while the porous structure contributes to a large dispersion of active sites.398 In terms of surface functionalization, modifying the carbon surface with some functional groups such as hydroxyl, epoxy, and carboxyl groups can help achieve good dispersion and an adequate mixing with the electrolyte solution.399 As for intrinsic defects and edges, they have unique electronic properties and reactivities and thus could be utilized to accelerate water electrolysis kinetics.147 In addition, carbons usually have better corrosion resistance under HER potentials than under OER polarization. As a result, metal-free carbons have been attempted as catalysts for the alkaline HER.400–402 For example, N/S-co-doped graphitic sheets with stereoscopic holes (SHG; see the TEM image in Fig. 29(a)) were fabricated, and their HER activity was examined in 0.1 M KOH.400 Thanks to its unique porous architecture with a large surface area and beneficial electronic transport properties, the alkaline activity of SHG was significantly better than that of graphite capsules (GC) and N/S-co-doped graphitic sheets without stereoscopic holes (GS), as shown in Fig. 29(b). However, the HER activities of metal-free carbons are always inferior to those of precious-metal-based electrocatalysts.400–402 As a result, carbons are usually modified with other active species to synergistically enhance their activities.403–405 Among them, transition-metal-modified and nitrogen-doped carbon (M–N/C) materials are particularly interesting for the alkaline HER.406–408 The effect of the transition metal nature on the structure and alkaline HER activity of M–N/C has been systematically investigated.409 Different transition-metal-modified (i.e., Fe, Co, Ni, Mn, Cu, Cr, Mo, W, and Zn) N-doped carbon materials have been prepared by the pyrolysis of metal salts and a Zn-based MOF. Adding Mo, Cu, W, and Zn was found to lead to amorphous carbons with a high specific area, while adding Fe, Co, Cr, Mn, and Ni contributed to a higher graphitization degree with a lower specific area. By comparison, the Co–, Ni–, and Fe–N–C catalysts were the most active among the investigated materials in catalyzing the HER at pH 13, as shown in Fig. 29(c).
 Fig. 29  (a) TEM image of N/S-co-doped graphitic sheets with stereoscopic holes (SHG); (b) HER LSV of SHG compared with those of GC and GS in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 400, copyright 2017 Wiley. (c) HER activity comparison of different transition metal supported on N-doped carbon at pH 13. Reproduced with permission from ref. 409, copyright 2015 IOP Publishing. (d) HAADF-STEM image of the W-SAC; (e) XANES and (f) k3-weighted FT W L3-edge EXAFS curves of the W-SAC; (g) HER LSV of the W-SAC in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 406, copyright 2018 Wiley. 
Despite the positive role played by the added transition metals in tuning the electrochemical properties of N-doped carbons, metal atoms are prone to aggregation into large particles, reducing the active site densities. Single-atom catalysts (SACs) with high atom utilization and unique catalytic performance are highly desired.18,19,410 Wang, Li, and coworkers recently reported a single-W-atom catalyst supported on MOF-derived N-doped carbon (W-SAC) as an efficient alkaline HER electrocatalyst.406 The atomic dispersion of W in the sample is confirmed in the HAADF-STEM shown in Fig. 29(d), where isolated bright dots representing single W atoms are marked by green circles. According to the W L3-edge XANES in Fig. 29(e), the white line intensity of the W-SAC was higher than that of the WC reference, suggesting that the average charge state of W in W-SAC was more positive, mainly due to nitrogen doping. Moreover, the absence of W–W bonds from the FT W L3-edge EXAFS (Fig. 29(f)) further supported the atomic dispersion of W in the W-SAC. Further, the fitting of the EXAFS demonstrated that in W-SAC, the atoms coordinated in the form of W1N1C3, which had an optimal hydrogen bonding strength, as revealed by DFT calculations. Thanks to this beneficial configuration, W-SAC exhibited excellent HER activity in 0.1 M KOH (Fig. 29(f)), comparable to that of the benchmark Pt/C.
The advance of single-atom catalysts with high atom utilization has significantly contributed to the development of carbon-based electrocatalysts. Carbons have been demonstrated to play more critical roles in supported SACs than conductive substrates.19 For modified carbon-based electrocatalysts, the interactions between the carbon substrate and the supported species are critical to determining the catalytic performance. Future studies are needed to establish the mechanism underlying such interactions and identify the active sites/species. Further, increasing the metal loading content of SACs on carbons and developing large-scale and cost-effective synthesis methods are two significant challenges in the field of carbon-supported SACs.411
Thanks to the strategies introduced above for optimizing the electronic structures and maximizing the active sites, many promising OER/HER NPCs have been reported. The OER and HER performance of some representative NPCs is summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of the OER & HER performance for the state-of-the-art NPCs




Catalysts
Synthesis method
Electrolyte

η (mV) at 10 mA cm−2
Stability
Ref.




OER


Ni0.75Fe0.25OOH
Electrodeposition
0.1 M KOH
375
—

12



NiFe-N/C
Pyrolysis
0.1 M KOH
320
2000 cycle

227



NiFe-NS
Hydrothermal process
1.0 M KOH
353
9 h @ 1.53 V vs. RHE

10



LSNF30
Crystallization and annealing
0.1 M KOH
360
100 cycle

119



R-NCO
Adsorption–calcination–reduction
1.0 M KOH
240
50 h @ 1.47 V vs. RHE

315



CaCu3Fe4O12
Polymerization
0.1 M KOH
383
100 cycle

296



O-NiFe LDH
Hydrothermal process
1.0 M KOH
184
100 h using full cell @ 1.7 V

69



NiFe-LDH/CNT
Solvothermal process
1.0 M KOH
247
2000 s @ 25 mA cm−2

207



FeCoNiP
Solution-based chemical reduction
1.0 M KOH
200
24 h @ 10 mA cm−2

344



NBM5.5
Sol–gel complexing process
1.0 M KOH
430
10 h @ 10 mA cm−2

300



P-Co3O4
Thermal coupled plasma modification
1.0 M KOH
280
40000 s @ 0.28 V vs. RHE

314



De-LiCo0.33Ni0.33Fe0.33O2
Electrochemical delithiation
0.1 M KOH
316
1000 cycle

319







HER


Co1/PCN
Pyrolysis
1.0 M KOH
89
24 h @ −0.13 V vs. RHE

19



R-NCO
Adsorption–calcination–reduction
1.0 M KOH
135
50 h @ −0.135 V vs. RHE

315



R-MoS2@NF
Sulfurization and reduction
1.0 M KOH
71
22 h @ −0.100 V vs. RHE

280



np-CuTi
Melt spinning and quenching
0.1 M KOH
47
5000 cycle

226



S-CoO NRs
Hydrothermal and cation exchange
1.0 M KOH
73
28 h @ −0.073 V vs. RHE

215



H-NiFe LDH
Hydrothermal process
1.0 M KOH
59
100 h using full cell @ 1.7 V

69



Co2P@CP
Thermal phosphidization
1.0 M KOH
70
2000 cycle

362



MoS2/NiCo-LDH
Hydrothermal process
1.0 M KOH
78
48 h @ −50 mA cm−2

379



NiO/Ni–CNT
Low-temperature hydrolysis
1.0 M KOH
<100
2 h @ −20 mA cm−2

11



NBM5.5
Sol–gel complexing process
1.0 M KOH
290
10 h @ −10 mA cm−2

300



P-Co3O4
Thermal coupled plasma modification
1.0 M KOH
120
40000 s @ −0.12 V vs. RHE

314






5.4. Advances in bifunctional/hybridized catalysts
Several categories of materials have been attempted as bifunctional electrocatalysts for both the anode and cathode in alkaline water splitting, such as TMPs,363,412–415 transition metal sulfides,416–419 nitrides, selenides,249,420,421 and borides,422,423 as well as spinel oxides,424 perovskite oxides,300,390 and (oxy)hydroxides.283,425,426 It is worth noting that bifunctional water splitting electrocatalysts can undergo different restructuring pathways under anodic and cathodic conditions.427,428 For example, FeS nanosheet arrays grown on iron foam (FeS/IF) have been fabricated as a pre-catalyst for water splitting.427 Upon chronoamperometric testing at the HER potential of −0.3 V vs. RHE in alkaline media, FeS nanosheets were found to transform in situ into core–shell-type Fe@FeOxSy nanoparticles on the FeS surface. On the other hand, when applying positive OER potential of 1.53 V vs. RHE in alkaline media, FeS/IF experienced complete desulfuration, forming a porous amorphous FeOx thin film, as illustrated in Fig. 30(a). Even though the FeS/IF pre-catalyst was inert in catalyzing the alkaline OER and HER, the activated FeS/IF materials (denoted by Fe–H2 cat and Fe–O2 cat, respectively) attained excellent bifunctional water splitting activities, outperforming RuO2 in catalyzing the OER and requiring a lower overpotential than Pt/C at large HER current densities. A similar transformation was also observed in TMPs: e.g., Ni12P5 and Ni2P were reported to transform into NiOOH/Ni(OH)2 shell–phosphite core structure during the alkaline OER, while the phosphate shell–phosphite core was formed during the alkaline HER.428
 Fig. 30  (a) Schematic illustration of the in situ surface transformation of FeS nanosheet catalysts during the OER and HER. Reproduced with permission from ref. 427, copyright 2018 Elsevier. (b) Schematic of CoOx@NC for overall water splitting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 388, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) OER and HER activity of the individual electrode tested in a three-electrode cell setup; (d) stability of the electrolyzer at 50 mA for 24 h, which was composed of NiCeOx on an Au-coated NF anode and NiMo on a NF cathode separated by an anion-exchange membrane in a 6 M KOH electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15, copyright 2016 Springer Nature. 
For many cases, the performance of a single composite catalyst is not as satisfactory as that of precious-metal-based catalysts. Coupling different metallic or non-metallic active components forming hybrids can potentially further improve the catalytic performance: (1) hybridization may expand the surface area with more dispersed active sites; (2) hybridization may overcome the low electrical conductivity of a component to facilitate electron/charge transfer; and (3) hybridization may modify the electronic structure/interaction to optimize the binding with reactants.429–433 These benefits can be obtained individually or synergistically. Many types of hybrids have been reported with enhanced performance for overall water splitting, such as hybrid oxides,434–436 hybrid phosphides,437 hybrid sulfides,438 transition-metal-decorated carbons,439,440 and their combinations.441–447 To exploit the superior carbon conductivity, the favorable H binding of metallic cobalt, and the promising OER activity of cobalt oxide, cobalt–cobalt oxide/N-doped carbon hybrids (CoOx@CN) were fabricated;388 see the scheme in Fig. 30(b). Owing to the synergistic interactions between metallic cobalt and cobalt oxide, the improved stability of carbon-encapsulated Co nanoparticles, and the introduction of electron-rich nitrogen, the alkaline electrolyzer using CoOx@CN as both anode and cathode afforded ∼20 mA cm−2 at a voltage of only 1.55 V.
In addition to developing bifunctional electrocatalysts, the direct integration of efficient OER and HER electrodes is another approach for fabricating a high-performance alkaline water electrolyzer. Vojvodic and coworkers fabricated a high-performance alkaline water electrolyzer with NiCeOx-based anode (NiCeOx on an Au-coated NF) and NiMo-based cathode (NiMo on a NF cathode).15 Ce doping into NiOx and coupling Ni with Mo altered their respective local electronic environments and contributed to the favorable binding energies of the OER/HER intermediates. As a result, both electrodes provided a very high activity in alkaline media: the NiCeOx-based anode required an overpotential of only 244 mV to drive the OER at 100 mA cm−2, and the NiMo-based cathode delivered the same amount of cathodic HER current at an overpotential of 103 mV, as shown in Fig. 30(c). The resultant electrolyzer incorporating those two electrodes exhibited excellent performance by stably delivering 50 mA (equivalent to 10 mA cm−2) at approximately 1.5 V for 24 h (Fig. 30(d)).
6. Challenges and perspectives
As discussed above, great strides have been made in the understanding and development of NPCs for AWE, in particular with the advances in experimental and theoretical techniques. Specifically, in situ/operando techniques can be utilized for the in-place/real-time monitoring of the local structures, properties, and performance and can reveal dynamic changes in the catalysts (e.g., surface restructuring) during water electrolysis. Meanwhile, DFT calculations provide a powerful tool for modeling the catalytic surface, clarifying the catalytic mechanism/active sites, and guiding the design of novel catalysts. These advances have enabled the design of many new promising electrocatalysts with activities comparable to or even better than those of noble metal catalysts, and some new theories (e.g., anionic redox) have been developed to better understand their catalytic behavior. However, many challenges must still be addressed:
(1) Even more advanced techniques are required to better understand electrocatalysts. Even though DFT calculations and in situ/operando techniques have considerably advanced electrocatalysts, they are subject to many limitations. The DFT calculation setup may vary from study to study, and the results are highly dependent on the choice of physical models and computational parameters including the exchange correlation functionals, pseudopotentials, DFT+U values, etc. The computational cost remains a considerable problem for catalyst screening and prediction, and the calculated systems and time scales are usually too small to represent the real reactions. Therefore, precisely modeling the working conditions of an electrocatalyst and rationally correlating the composition/structure/morphology with the apparent activities are tremendous challenges for the current theoretical calculations. Innovative computational methods (e.g., combining machine learning with DFT) need to be further developed to achieve high throughput screening of electrocatalysts. Furthermore, the experimental setups and cell configurations are different among various in situ/operando techniques, thus failing to capture and convey a comprehensive overview of the dynamic changes in electrocatalysts during water electrolysis. Further insight can be gained by continuously optimizing the theoretical methods to better predict the real working conditions with higher accuracy and lower computational cost with the help of advanced computer science techniques such as machine learning. Similar gains can be made by developing new in situ techniques with better resolution and sensitivity combining multiple analyses in the same setup. In addition to clarifying the catalytic mechanism and identifying the active sites, DFT calculations and in situ/operando techniques have great potential for revealing the degradation mechanism of electrocatalysts during long-term water electrolysis operation, during which the morphology, composition, and crystal structure change along with variations in the active centers.
(2) Standardized methods are required to evaluate and compare electrocatalysts. A three-electrode cell is superior to a two-electrode counterpart in better controlling the electrode potential and measuring the kinetic activity. Specific care should be paid on the electrolysis cell material, e.g., under alkaline solutions PTFE is better than glassware in resistance to etching. In addition, the electrolysis cell should be carefully cleaned before any measurement. RHE correction experiment is suggested to be conducted to calibrate the potential of used reference electrode. In order to avoid the potential contamination of the working electrode, graphite rod instead of Pt is recommended to be the counter electrode. For a fair comparison of the specific activity, the surface area of electrocatalysts needs to be precisely measured: ECSA and BET surface area are recommended to be used.
(3) The composition, structure, and active sites must be more precisely controlled. Although external dopants, intrinsic defects, and edge tailoring have proven effective in modulating the electronic structure, it remains a tremendous challenge to precisely control the specific doping site/type, defect amount, and edge facets, which is critical to determining the catalytic activity. In addition, many electrocatalysts are subject to in situ surface reconstruction during AWE,448 which not only affects the catalytic performance but also complicates the identification of active sites. Future work may make use of some well-defined samples or experimental setups to clarify their catalytic mechanism and identify their active sites and further to modulate them to expose more active sites and boost their intrinsic activity.
(4) Substantial room for improvement remains in catalyst performance. Although various novel materials demonstrated to outperform Ru- or Ir-based OER electrocatalysts, the HER activity of many non-precious electrocatalysts is still inferior to that of the benchmark Pt metal or their alloys in alkaline electrolyte. It is even more challenging to design bifunctional electrocatalysts that simultaneously offer better OER activity than Ru/Ir catalysts and better HER activity than Pt catalysts. In addition to the half-cell HER/OER activity, large-scale alkaline water electrolyzers should be built to evaluate their practical performance. For example, the Department of Energy (DOE) target of water electrolysis efficiency points to operate at 2000 mA cm−2 with a cell potential of 1.5 V.449 Besides a high current density, the stability is also imperative. Currently, most stability tests for newly developed catalysts are conducted at room temperature, under mild electrolyte conditions, and with limited numbers of cycles. For practical use, no obvious decay should be observed for several tens of thousands of hours under more harsh electrolytes and medium/elevated temperature conditions.
(5) The cost of electrocatalysts should be further reduced. To that end, non-precious electrocatalysts should lower the capital costs of alkaline water electrolyzers. However, some of the used precursors (e.g., MOFs) and preparation methods (e.g., atomic layer deposition (ALD), CVD) for fabricating those electrocatalysts are relatively expensive, making the as-obtained electrocatalysts less cost-competitive overall. As a result, future efforts should be dedicated to design facile, scalable methods for fabricating cost-efficient NPCs with excellent catalytic performance for AWE.
In conclusion, the development of NPCs for AWE is still in the growth stage, and there are many opportunities for further studies. For example, the experimental verification of anionic lattice redox would enrich insights into the OER catalytic mechanisms on TMOs, which can be further utilized to design more OER-active materials. In addition, in situ surface restructuring has been observed for many types of pre-catalysts during water electrolysis; clarifying the mechanism underlying this transformation and rationally modulating it could dramatically contribute to better catalytic performance. Moreover, the development of single-atom catalysts with high atom utilization will greatly advance the progress of water electrocatalysis. Last but not the least, the rise of artificial intelligence and machine learning will revolutionize the discovery of novel efficient water electrocatalysts. With continuous research efforts in this field, it is highly likely that in the near future we will witness the revolution of AWE based on NPCs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of a National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (MSIT). (No. NRF-2018M1A2A2063868, No. NRF-2018R1C1B6006854 and NRF-2019M3E6A1065102). This work is also supported by the Institute of Applied Physics of Seoul National University. Yong Hao acknowledges the Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51676189) and the Chinese Academy of Sciences International Collaboration Key Program (No. 182211KYSB20160043). Hui Kong acknowledges the Natural Science Foundation of China through No. 52006124.
Notes and references
J. Kibsgaard and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Energy, 2019, 1 Search PubMed .
A. Buttler and H. Spliethoff, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 2440–2454 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zeng and D. Zhang, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2010, 36, 307–326 CrossRef CAS .
I. Roger, M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0003 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Körner, C. Tam, S. Bennett and J. Gagné, International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France,  2015 .
F. M. Sapountzi, J. M. Gracia, H. O. Fredriksson and J. H. Niemantsverdriet, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2017, 58, 1–35 CrossRef .
I. C. Man, H. Y. Su, F. Calle-Vallejo, H. A. Hansen, J. I. Martínez, N. G. Inoglu, J. Kitchin, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and J. Rossmeisl, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 1159–1165 CrossRef CAS .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2011, 334, 1383–1385 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sheng, M. Myint, J. G. Chen and Y. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1509–1512 RSC .
F. Song and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4477 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gong, W. Zhou, M.-C. Tsai, J. Zhou, M. Guan, M.-C. Lin, B. Zhang, Y. Hu, D.-Y. Wang and J. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–6 Search PubMed .
D. Friebel, M. W. Louie, M. Bajdich, K. E. Sanwald, Y. Cai, A. M. Wise, M.-J. Cheng, D. Sokaras, T.-C. Weng, R. Alonso-Mori, R. C. Davis, J. R. Bargar, J. K. Nørskov, A. Nilsson and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1305–1313 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, I. M. Ferrer, S. M. Chatman, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4347–4357 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, X. Zheng, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Bajdich, M. García-Melchor, L. Han, J. Xu, M. Liu and L. Zheng, Science, 2016, 352, 333–337 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. D. Ng, M. García-Melchor, M. Bajdich, P. Chakthranont, C. Kirk, A. Vojvodic and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16053 CrossRef CAS .
A. Grimaud, O. Diaz-Morales, B. Han, W. T. Hong, Y.-L. Lee, L. Giordano, K. A. Stoerzinger, M. T. Koper and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 457 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fabbri, M. Nachtegaal, T. Binninger, X. Cheng, B.-J. Kim, J. Durst, F. Bozza, T. Graule, R. Schäublin, L. Wiles, M. Pertoso, N. Danilovic, K. E. Ayers and T. J. Schmidt, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 925 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Jia, G. Gao, X. Yan, N. Chen, J. Chen, M. T. Soo, B. Wood, D. Yang, A. Du and X. Yao, Chem, 2018, 4, 285–297 CAS .
L. Cao, Q. Luo, W. Liu, Y. Lin, X. Liu, Y. Cao, W. Zhang, Y. Wu, J. Yang, T. Yao and S. Wei, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 134–141 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Chung, P. P. Lopes, P. Farinazzo Bergamo Dias Martins, H. He, T. Kawaguchi, P. Zapol, H. You, D. Tripkovic, D. Strmcnik, Y. Zhu, S. Seifert, S. Lee, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 222–230 CrossRef .
J. Wang and F. Ciucci, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 292–299 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Pourbaix, Atlas of electrochemical equilibria in aqueous solutions, National Association of Corrosion Engineers, Houston, TX, 2nd edn,  1974, pp. 384–392 Search PubMed .
S. Marini, P. Salvi, P. Nelli, R. Pesenti, M. Villa, M. Berrettoni, G. Zangari and Y. Kiros, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 82, 384–391 CrossRef CAS .
F. Safizadeh, E. Ghali and G. Houlachi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 256–274 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shinagawa, A. T. Garcia-Esparza and K. Takanabe, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13801 CrossRef .
J. O. M. Bockris, J. Chem. Phys., 1956, 24, 817–827 CrossRef CAS .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Karthick, S. Sam Sankar, K. Sangeetha, P. E. Karthik and S. Kundu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 744–771 RSC .
C. C. McCrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977–16987 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wei and Z. J. Xu, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800168 CrossRef .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Sakthikumar, K. Karthick, S. Mishra and S. Kundu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8069–8097 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Benck, T. R. Hellstern, J. Kibsgaard, P. Chakthranont and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3957–3971 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Gao, T. L. You and F. Ciucci, J. Power Sources, 2018, 401, 312–321 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Swesi, J. Masud and M. Nath, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1771–1782 RSC .
Y.-J. Wang, J. Qiao, R. Baker and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5768–5787 RSC .
J. Rossmeisl, Z. W. Qu, H. Zhu, G. J. Kroes and J. K. Nørskov, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 607, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, A. Logadottir, J. Kitchin, J. G. Chen, S. Pandelov and U. Stimming, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, J23–J26 CrossRef .
G. Chen, W. Zhou, D. Guan, J. Sunarso, Y. Zhu, X. Hu, W. Zhang and Z. Shao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1603206 CrossRef .
K. J. May, C. E. Carlton, K. A. Stoerzinger, M. Risch, J. Suntivich, Y.-L. Lee, A. Grimaud and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3264–3270 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fabbri, M. Nachtegaal, T. Binninger, X. Cheng, B.-J. Kim, J. Durst, F. Bozza, T. Graule, R. Schäublin and L. Wiles, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 925 CrossRef CAS .
G.-Q. Han, X. Li, J. Xue, B. Dong, X. Shang, W.-H. Hu, Y.-R. Liu, J.-Q. Chi, K.-L. Yan, Y.-M. Chai and C.-G. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 2952–2960 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Y. Chen, W. Zhou, Z. Zhu, C. Su, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6442–6448 CrossRef CAS .
R. Palkovits and S. Palkovits, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8383–8387 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, J. Yan, M. Gu, T. Liu, Y. Dai, Y. Gu and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 7760–7766 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, X. Zhu and W. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1252–1265 CrossRef CAS .
M. Newville, Rev. Mineral. Geochem., 2014, 78, 33–74 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Wang, S.-F. Hung, H.-Y. Chen, T.-S. Chan, H. M. Chen and B. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 138, 36–39 CrossRef .
S. Song, J. Zhou, X. Su, Y. Wang, J. Li, L. Zhang, G. Xiao, C. Guan, R. Liu, S. Chen, H.-J. Lin, S. Zhang and J.-Q. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2945–2953 RSC .
D. F. Abbott, E. Fabbri, M. Borlaf, F. Bozza, R. Schäublin, M. Nachtegaal, T. Graule and T. J. Schmidt, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24534–24549 RSC .
C. Schwanke, L. Xi and K. M. Lange, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2016, 23, 1390–1394 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, B. Zhang, P. De Luna, Y. Liang, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, L. Han, F. P. García de Arquer, M. Liu, C. T. Dinh, T. Regier, J. J. Dynes, S. He, H. L. Xin, H. Peng, D. Prendergast, X. Du and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 149–154 CrossRef CAS .
D. Drevon, M. Görlin, P. Chernev, L. Xi, H. Dau and K. M. Lange, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Stoerzinger, W. T. Hong, E. J. Crumlin, H. Bluhm and Y. Shao-Horn, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 2976–2983 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ali-Löytty, M. W. Louie, M. R. Singh, L. Li, H. G. Sanchez Casalongue, H. Ogasawara, E. J. Crumlin, Z. Liu, A. T. Bell, A. Nilsson and D. Friebel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 2247–2253 CrossRef .
M. Favaro, W. S. Drisdell, M. A. Marcus, J. M. Gregoire, E. J. Crumlin, J. A. Haber and J. Yano, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1248–1258 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhong, R. R. Mitchell, Y. Liu, B. M. Gallant, C. V. Thompson, J. Y. Huang, S. X. Mao and Y. Shao-Horn, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2209–2214 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ortiz Peña, D. Ihiawakrim, M. Han, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, S. Carenco, C. Sanchez, C. Laberty-Robert, D. Portehault and O. Ersen, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11372–11381 CrossRef .
N. Hodnik and S. Cherevko, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2019, 15, 73–82 CrossRef CAS .
C. Roy, B. Sebok, S. Scott, E. Fiordaliso, J. Sørensen, A. Bodin, D. Trimarco, C. Damsgaard, P. Vesborg and O. Hansen, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 820–829 CrossRef CAS .
H.-G. Liao, L. Cui, S. Whitelam and H. Zheng, Science, 2012, 336, 1011–1014 CrossRef CAS .
V. Beermann, M. E. Holtz, E. Padgett, J. F. de Araujo, D. A. Muller and P. Strasser, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2476–2485 RSC .
S. Hwang, X. Chen, G. Zhou and D. Su, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 1902105 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cherevko, S. Geiger, O. Kasian, N. Kulyk, J.-P. Grote, A. Savan, B. R. Shrestha, S. Merzlikin, B. Breitbach, A. Ludwig and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Catal. Today, 2016, 262, 170–180 CrossRef CAS .
M. Görlin, J. Ferreira de Araújo, H. Schmies, D. Bernsmeier, S. Dresp, M. Gliech, Z. Jusys, P. Chernev, R. Kraehnert, H. Dau and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2070–2082 CrossRef .
F. D. Speck, K. E. Dettelbach, R. S. Sherbo, D. A. Salvatore, A. Huang and C. P. Berlinguette, Chem, 2017, 2, 590–597 CAS .
O. Kasian, S. Geiger, K. J. J. Mayrhofer and S. Cherevko, Chem. Rec., 2019, 19, 2130–2142 CrossRef CAS .
M. Görlin, M. Gliech, J. F. de Araújo, S. Dresp, A. Bergmann and P. Strasser, Catal. Today, 2016, 262, 65–73 CrossRef .
M. A. Oliver-Tolentino, J. Vázquez-Samperio, A. Manzo-Robledo, R. D. G. González-Huerta, J. L. Flores-Moreno, D. Ramírez-Rosales and A. Guzmán-Vargas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 22432–22438 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, A. D. Handoko, Y. Du, S. Xi and B. S. Yeo, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2473–2481 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qiu, C.-W. Tai, G. A. Niklasson and T. Edvinsson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 572–581 RSC .
K. S. Joya and X. Sala, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 21094–21103 RSC .
Y. Deng and B. S. Yeo, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7873–7889 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Louie and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12329–12337 CrossRef CAS .

          R. G. Parr, Horizons of Quantum Chemistry, Springer,  1980, pp. 5–15 Search PubMed .
A. D. Becke, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1988, 38, 3098 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, J. A. Chevary, S. H. Vosko, K. A. Jackson, M. R. Pederson, D. J. Singh and C. Fiolhais, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 46, 6671 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Stephens, F. Devlin, C. Chabalowski and M. J. Frisch, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1994, 98, 11623–11627 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2008, 120, 215–241 Search PubMed .
S. Grimme, J. Comput. Chem., 2006, 27, 1787–1799 CrossRef CAS .
S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich and H. Krieg, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 154104 CrossRef .
R. W. Godby, M. Schlüter and L. Sham, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1988, 37, 10159 CrossRef .
P. Blaha, K. Schwarz, F. Tran, R. Laskowski, G. K. Madsen and L. D. Marks, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 074101 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jonsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .
M. J. Craig, G. Coulter, E. Dolan, J. Soriano-López, E. Mates-Torres, W. Schmitt and M. García-Melchor, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4993 CrossRef .
R. Sundararaman and W. A. Goddard, J. Chem. Phys., 2015, 142, 064107 CrossRef .
T. Kou, T. Smart, B. Yao, I. Chen, D. Thota, Y. Ping and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703538 CrossRef .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jónsson, J. Chem. Phys. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .

          A. Asthagiri and M. Janik, Computational catalysis, Royal Society of Chemistry,  2014 Search PubMed .
Y. Tong, Y. Guo, P. Chen, H. Liu, M. Zhang, L. Zhang, W. Yan, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Chem, 2017, 3, 812–821 CAS .
B. Mohanty, M. Ghorbani-Asl, S. Kretschmer, A. Ghosh, P. Guha, S. K. Panda, B. Jena, A. V. Krasheninnikov and B. K. Jena, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1683–1689 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tao, C.-Y. Lin, S. Dou, S. Feng, D. Chen, D. Liu, J. Huo, Z. Xia and S. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 417–425 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, L. Zhang, D. Zhen, S. Yoo, Y. Ding, D. Chen, Y. Chen, Q. Zhang, B. Doyle and X. Xiong, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Feng, H. Xu, Y. T. Dong, S. H. Ye, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3694–3698 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Lee, J. Hwang, H. J. Hwang, O. S. Jeon, J. Jang, O. Kwon, Y. Lee, B. Han and Y.-G. Shul, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3541–3547 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Z. Xia and L. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 444–452 CrossRef CAS .
L. An, Z. Zhang, J. Feng, F. Lv, Y. Li, R. Wang, M. Lu, R. B. Gupta, P. Xi and S. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 17624–17631 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, D. Pohl, B. Rellinghaus, R. Dong, S. Liu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6702–6707 CrossRef CAS .
L.-L. Feng, G. Yu, Y. Wu, G.-D. Li, H. Li, Y. Sun, T. Asefa, W. Chen and X. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14023–14026 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, K. Sun, S. Liu, X. Chen, Y. Cheng, W. C. Cheong, Z. Chen, L. Zheng, J. Zhang and X. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901213 CrossRef .
P. Xiao, M. A. Sk, L. Thia, X. Ge, R. J. Lim, J.-Y. Wang, K. H. Lim and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2624–2629 RSC .
Y. Men, P. Li, J. Zhou, G. Cheng, S. Chen and W. Luo, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3744–3752 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Ruan, X. Ji, K. Xu, C. Chen, H. Wan, L. Miao and J. Jiang, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 74–80 CrossRef CAS .
E. Skulason, V. Tripkovic, M. Björketun, S. Gudmundsdottir, G. Karlberg, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard, H. Jonsson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18182–18197 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Xu, L. Yang, D. Cheng and D. Cao, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900653 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., 2018, 57, 7568–7579 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ping, R. J. Nielsen and W. A. Goddard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 149–155 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cheng, L. Wang, B. V. Merinov and W. A. Goddard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7787–7790 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, Y.-C. Zhang, L. Pan, G.-Q. Shen, N. Mahmood, Y.-H. Ma, Y. Shi, W. Jia, L. Wang and X. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3803–3811 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, M.-Y. Wu, D.-Y. Yan, J. Mao, H. Liu, W.-B. Hu, X.-W. Du, T. Ling and S.-Z. Qiao, Nano Energy, 2018, 43, 103–109 CrossRef CAS .
D. Guan, J. Zhou, Y.-C. Huang, C.-L. Dong, J.-Q. Wang, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Heo, S. Choi, J. Bak, H. S. Kim, H. B. Bae and S. Y. Chung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802481 CrossRef .

          B. Hammer and J. K. Nørskov, Advances in Catalysis, Academic Press,  2000, vol. 45, pp. 71–129 Search PubMed .
B. Hammer and J. K. Norskov, Nature, 1995, 376, 238–240 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
L. A. Kibler, A. M. El-Aziz, R. Hoyer and D. M. Kolb, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2080–2084 CrossRef CAS .
A. Grimaud, K. J. May, C. E. Carlton, Y.-L. Lee, M. Risch, W. T. Hong, J. Zhou and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2439 CrossRef .
W. T. Hong, K. A. Stoerzinger, Y.-L. Lee, L. Giordano, A. Grimaud, A. M. Johnson, J. Hwang, E. J. Crumlin, W. Yang and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2190–2200 RSC .
J. T. Mefford, X. Rong, A. M. Abakumov, W. G. Hardin, S. Dai, A. M. Kolpak, K. P. Johnston and K. J. Stevenson, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–11 Search PubMed .
J. Meng, Z. Cui, X. Yang, S. Zhu, Z. Li, K. Qi, L. Zheng and Y. Liang, J. Catal., 2018, 365, 227–237 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Forslund, W. G. Hardin, X. Rong, A. M. Abakumov, D. Filimonov, C. T. Alexander, J. T. Mefford, H. Iyer, A. M. Kolpak and K. P. Johnston, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, L. Zhang, B. Zhao, H. Chen, X. Liu, R. Zhao, X. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Chen and M. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901783 CrossRef .
J. Bak, H. B. Bae and S.-Y. Chung, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Bader, Atoms in Molecules: A Quantum Theory, Clarendon Press, Oxford England,  1994 Search PubMed .
C. Zhu, A. L. Wang, W. Xiao, D. Chao, X. Zhang, N. H. Tiep, S. Chen, J. Kang, X. Wang and J. Ding, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705516 CrossRef .
X. Hu, S. Zhang, J. Sun, L. Yu, X. Qian, R. Hu, Y. Wang, H. Zhao and J. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 109–117 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, W. Wu, X. Guo, P. Xiong, H. Liu and G. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 129–137 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guan, W. Xiao, H. Wu, X. Liu, W. Zang, H. Zhang, J. Ding, Y. P. Feng, S. J. Pennycook and J. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 73–80 CrossRef .
B.-J. Kim, E. Fabbri, D. F. Abbott, X. Cheng, A. H. Clark, M. Nachtegaal, M. Borlaf, I. E. Castelli, T. Graule and T. J. Schmidt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5231–5240 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, C. Tang, R. Kong, G. Du, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen and X. Sun, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4793–4800 RSC .
A. D. Becke and K. E. Edgecombe, J. Chem. Phys., 1990, 92, 5397–5403 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Mulliken, J. Chem. Phys., 1955, 23, 1833–1840 CrossRef CAS .
R. Prasannachandran, T. V. Vineesh, A. Anil, B. M. Krishna and M. M. Shaijumon, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11511–11519 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, D. Cheng, D. Cao and X. C. Zeng, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 339–348 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vojvodic and J. K. Norskov, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2015, 2, 140–149 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pérez-Ramírez and N. López, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 971–976 CrossRef .
H. Wang, X.-K. Gu, X. Zheng, H. Pan, J. Zhu, S. Chen, L. Cao, W.-X. Li and J. Lu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaat6413 CrossRef .
A. Khorshidi, J. Violet, J. Hashemi and A. A. Peterson, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 263–268 CrossRef .
Z.-F. Huang, J. Song, S. Dou, X. Li, J. Wang and X. Wang, Matter, 2019, 1, 1494–1518 CrossRef .
S. Yagi, I. Yamada, H. Tsukasaki, A. Seno, M. Murakami, H. Fujii, H. Chen, N. Umezawa, H. Abe, N. Nishiyama and S. Mori, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8249 CrossRef .
H. Fei, J. Dong, Y. Feng, C. S. Allen, C. Wan, B. Volosskiy, M. Li, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, H. Sun, P. An, W. Chen, Z. Guo, C. Lee, D. Chen, I. Shakir, M. Liu, T. Hu, Y. Li, A. I. Kirkland, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 63–72 CrossRef CAS .
G. Henkelman, B. P. Uberuaga and H. Jónsson, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 9901–9904 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, G. Gao, J. Kang, W. Chu and L.-W. Wang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 18169–18175 RSC .
H. Zhang, L. V. Solomon, D.-H. Ha, S. Honrao, R. G. Hennig and R. D. Robinson, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 12596–12599 RSC .
J. Hu, S. Zheng, X. Zhao, X. Yao and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7827–7834 RSC .
D. L. Ashford, B. D. Sherman, R. A. Binstead, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4778–4781 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fester, A. Makoveev, D. Grumelli, R. Gutzler, Z. Sun, J. Rodríguez-Fernández, K. Kern and J. V. Lauritsen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11893–11897 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, S. Sun, J. Song, S. Xi, B. Chen, Y. Du, A. C. Fisher, F. Cheng, X. Wang and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802912 CrossRef .
Y. Jia, L. Zhang, A. Du, G. Gao, J. Chen, X. Yan, C. L. Brown and X. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9532–9538 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, C. Chang, F. Teng, Y. Zhao, G. Chen, R. Shi, G. I. N. Waterhouse, W. Huang and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700005 CrossRef .
C. Spöri, J. T. H. Kwan, A. Bonakdarpour, D. P. Wilkinson and P. Strasser, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5994–6021 CrossRef .
P. P. Lopes, D. Strmcnik, D. Tripkovic, J. G. Connell, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2536–2544 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dionigi, Z. Zeng, I. Sinev, T. Merzdorf, S. Deshpande, M. B. Lopez, S. Kunze, I. Zegkinoglou, H. Sarodnik, D. Fan, A. Bergmann, J. Drnec, J. F. D. Araujo, M. Gliech, D. Teschner, J. Zhu, W.-X. Li, J. Greeley, B. R. Cuenya and P. Strasser, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2522 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hammes-Schiffer, Science, 2017, 355, 28–29 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder and K. A. Persson, APL Mater., 2013, 1, 011002 CrossRef .
H. Xiao, H. Shin and W. A. Goddard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 5872 CrossRef CAS .
F. Furche, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 195120 CrossRef .
P. S. Schmidt and K. S. Thygesen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 4381–4390 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tran and Z. W. Ulissi, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 696–703 CrossRef CAS .
S. Back, K. Tran and Z. W. Ulissi, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 7651–7659 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Wexler, J. M. P. Martirez and A. M. Rappe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4678–4683 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Faber, L. Hutchison, B. Huang, J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, G. E. Dahl, O. Vinyals, S. Kearnes, P. F. Riley and O. A. von Lilienfeld, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2017, 13, 5255–5264 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Ulissi, A. J. Medford, T. Bligaard and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14621 CrossRef .
A. P. Bartók, S. De, C. Poelking, N. Bernstein, J. R. Kermode, G. Csányi and M. Ceriotti, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701816 CrossRef .
J. Graser, S. K. Kauwe and T. D. Sparks, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3601–3612 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Butler, D. W. Davies, H. Cartwright, O. Isayev and A. Walsh, Nature, 2018, 559, 547–555 CrossRef CAS .

          G. L. Guimaraes, B. Sanchez-Lengeling, C. Outeiral, P. L. C. Farias and A. Aspuru-Guzik, 2017, arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.10843.
Z. Zhou, X. Li and R. N. Zare, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 1337–1344 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef .
M.-S. Balogun, W. Qiu, Y. Huang, H. Yang, R. Xu, W. Zhao, G.-R. Li, H. Ji and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702095 CrossRef .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, M. Jiang, Y. Kuang, X. Sun and X. Duan, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2251–2259 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, H. Zhao, Y. Gao, D. Chen, C. Chen, M. Saccoccio and F. Ciucci, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 10744–10754 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Z. Lin, S. Gao, J. Su, Z. Lun, G. Xia, J. Chen, R. Zhang and Q. Chen, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 469–479 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Zhang, H. Xu, Z. Wu, H. Wang and Y. Liang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606635 CrossRef .
H. Cui, Z. Zhou and D. Jia, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 7–19 RSC .
Y. Zhao, R. Nakamura, K. Kamiya, S. Nakanishi and K. Hashimoto, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
J. Lai, S. Li, F. Wu, M. Saqib, R. Luque and G. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1210–1214 RSC .
J. Wang, H. Kong, J. Zhang, Y. Hao, Z. Shao and F. Ciucci, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 100717 CrossRef .
D. Guo, R. Shibuya, C. Akiba, S. Saji, T. Kondo and J. Nakamura, Science, 2016, 351, 361–365 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16130 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tang, W.-J. Jiang, S. Niu, N. Liu, H. Luo, Y.-Y. Chen, S.-F. Jin, F. Gao, L.-J. Wan and J.-S. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8320–8328 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Ji, J. Nai, X. Niu, Y. Luo, L. Guo and S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1736–1741 RSC .
L. Trotochaud, S. L. Young, J. K. Ranney and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6744–6753 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fominykh, P. Chernev, I. Zaharieva, J. Sicklinger, G. Stefanic, M. Döblinger, A. Müller, A. Pokharel, S. Böcklein, C. Scheu, T. Bein and D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5180–5188 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Bates, Q. Jia, H. Doan, W. Liang and S. Mukerjee, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 155–161 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. He, W. Fu, C. Mu, X.-Z. Tang, Z. Liu, D. Chi and X. Hu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1439–1442 RSC .
C. Liang, P. Zou, A. Nairan, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, K. Liu, S. Hu, F. Kang, H. J. Fan and C. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 86–95 RSC .
D. Zhou, S. Wang, Y. Jia, X. Xiong, H. Yang, S. Liu, J. Tang, J. Zhang, D. Liu and L. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 736–740 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, L. Dang, M. J. Shearer, H. Sheng, W. Li, J. Chen, P. Xiao, Y. Zhang, R. J. Hamers and S. Jin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703189 CrossRef .
L. J. Enman, M. S. Burke, A. S. Batchellor and S. W. Boettcher, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2416–2423 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kou, S. Wang, J. L. Hauser, M. Chen, S. R. J. Oliver, Y. Ye, J. Guo and Y. Li, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 622–628 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shin, H. Xiao and W. A. Goddard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6745–6748 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liang, A. N. Gandi, C. Xia, M. N. Hedhili, D. H. Anjum, U. Schwingenschlögl and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1035–1042 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qu, Y. Jiang, M. Yang, S. Liu, Q. Guo, W. Shen, M. Li and R. He, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118324 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, T. Wu, Y. Zhu, X. Li, M. Li, R. Lu, J. Wang, X. Zhu and W. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1654–1660 CrossRef CAS .
F. Song, M. M. Busch, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, C.-S. Hsu, E. Petkucheva, M. Bensimon, H. M. Chen, C. Corminboeuf and X. Hu, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 558–568 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Ji, S. Zuo and Z. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700107 CrossRef .
N. Li, D. K. Bediako, R. G. Hadt, D. Hayes, T. J. Kempa, F. Von Cube, D. C. Bell, L. X. Chen and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 1486–1491 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Trześniewski, O. Diaz-Morales, D. A. Vermaas, A. Longo, W. Bras, M. T. Koper and W. A. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15112–15121 CrossRef .
J. B. Gerken, S. E. Shaner, R. C. Massé, N. J. Porubsky and S. S. Stahl, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2376–2382 RSC .
P. Li, X. Duan, Y. Kuang, Y. Li, G. Zhang, W. Liu and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703341 CrossRef .
D. Zhou, Z. Cai, Y. Jia, X. Xiong, Q. Xie, S. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. Liu, H. Duan and X. Sun, Nanoscale Horiz., 2018, 3, 532–537 RSC .
J.-S. Sun, Y.-T. Zhou, R.-Q. Yao, H. Shi, Z. Wen, X.-Y. Lang and Q. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9690–9697 RSC .
Y. Ma, K. Wang, D. Liu, X. Yang, H. Wu, C. Xiao and S. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22889–22897 RSC .
A. C. Thenuwara, N. H. Attanayake, J. Yu, J. P. Perdew, E. J. Elzinga, Q. Yan and D. R. Strongin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2018, 122, 847–854 CrossRef .
J. Luo, J.-H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N.-G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Grätzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593–1596 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kou, M. Chen, F. Wu, T. J. Smart, S. Wang, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, S. Li, S. Lall, Z. Zhang, Y.-S. Liu, J. Guo, G. Wang, Y. Ping and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 590 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zang, S. Niu, Y. Wu, X. Zheng, J. Cai, J. Ye, Y. Xie, Y. Liu, J. Zhou, J. Zhu, X. Liu, G. Wang and Y. Qian, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1217 CrossRef .
M. Gong, Y. Li, H. Wang, Y. Liang, J. Z. Wu, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier, F. Wei and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8452–8455 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Wygant, K. A. Jarvis, W. D. Chemelewski, O. Mabayoje, H. Celio and C. B. Mullins, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1122–1133 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wang, Z. Zhao, D. Hu, J. Niu, M. Zhang, K. Yan and G. Lu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 426–430 RSC .
E. E. Benson, M.-A. Ha, B. A. Gregg, J. van de Lagemaat, N. R. Neale and D. Svedruzic, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 15906 CrossRef .
X. P. Wang, H. J. Wu, S. B. Xi, W. S. V. Lee, J. Zhang, Z. H. Wu, J. O. Wang, T. D. Hu, L. M. Liu, Y. Han, S. W. Chee, S. C. Ning, U. Mirsaidov, Z. B. Wang, Y. W. Zhang, A. Borgna, J. Wang, Y. H. Du, Z. G. Yu, S. J. Pennycook and J. M. Xue, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 229–237 RSC .
G. Li, Q. Yang, J. Rao, C. Fu, S. C. Liou, G. Auffermann, Y. Sun and C. Felser, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 1907791 CrossRef CAS .
B. You, M. T. Tang, C. Tsai, F. Abild-Pedersen, X. Zheng and H. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807001 CrossRef .
K. A. Stoerzinger, W. S. Choi, H. Jeen, H. N. Lee and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 487–492 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ling, D.-Y. Yan, H. Wang, Y. Jiao, Z. Hu, Y. Zheng, L. Zheng, J. Mao, H. Liu, X.-W. Du, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1509 CrossRef .
V. M. Nikolic, S. L. Maslovara, G. S. Tasic, T. P. Brdaric, P. Z. Lausevic, B. B. Radak and M. P. Marceta Kaninski, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 179, 88–94 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Franceschini, G. I. Lacconi and H. R. Corti, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 159, 210–218 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, T. Lei, B. Nan, Y. Jiang, Y. He and C. Liu, Energy, 2016, 97, 498–505 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. McKone, B. F. Sadtler, C. A. Werlang, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 166–169 CrossRef CAS .
M. Negem and H. Nady, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 28386–28396 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Yu and Z. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 2173–2181 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, P. Li, D. Zhou, Z. Chang, Y. Kuang and X. Sun, Small, 2017, 13, 1701648 CrossRef .
A. Nairan, P. Zou, C. Liang, J. Liu, D. Wu, P. Liu and C. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903747 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zu, J. He, X. Liu, L. Zhang and K. Zhou, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 4650–4655 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Raj and K. Vasu, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1990, 20, 32–38 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, G. S. Hutchings, W. Yu, Y. Zhou, R. V. Forest, R. Tao, J. Rosen, B. T. Yonemoto, Z. Cao, H. Zheng, J. Q. Xiao, F. Jiao and J. G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6567 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang and F. Ciucci, Small, 2017, 13, 1604103 CrossRef .
R. V. Prataap and S. Mohan, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 3365–3368 RSC .
J. Fan, Z. Chen, H. Shi and G. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4290–4293 RSC .
M. Kumar, D. I. Jeong and D. H. Yoon, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 333, 135545 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, H. Yang, Y. Zhang and Q. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6099–6103 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Feng, X.-Y. Yu and U. Paik, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–8 CrossRef .
J. Jin, J. Xia, X. Qian, T. Wu, H. Ling, A. Hu, M. Li and T. Hang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 299, 567–574 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, H. Xu, X. Li, Y. Li, T. Yang and Y. Liang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 580–588 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, C. Yang, Q. Zhang, J. Zeng, X. Li, Y. Hua, C. Xu and P. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5797–5805 RSC .
J. Tian, N. Cheng, Q. Liu, X. Sun, Y. He and A. M. Asiri, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20056–20059 RSC .
S. Loos, I. Zaharieva, P. Chernev, A. Lißner and H. Dau, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1966–1976 CrossRef CAS .
L.-X. Zuo, W.-J. Wang, R.-B. Song, J.-J. Lv, L.-P. Jiang and J.-J. Zhu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 10275–10282 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, D. Kocaefe, C. Chen and Y. Kocaefe, J. Nanomater., 2016, 2016, 11 Search PubMed .
B. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23481–23488 RSC .
Z. Wu, R. Liu, J. Wang, J. Zhu, W. Xiao, C. Xuan, W. Lei and D. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 19086–19092 RSC .
M. H. Yap, K. L. Fow and G. Z. Chen, Green Energy Environ., 2017, 2, 218–245 CrossRef .
Z. Tao, T. Wang, X. Wang, J. Zheng and X. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 35390–35397 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, B. Zheng, L. Chen, J. Zhang, Z. Zhuang and B. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23222–23229 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yan, L. Cao, P. Dai, X. Gu, D. Liu, L. Li, Y. Wang and X. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703455 CrossRef .
B. Y. Xia, Y. Yan, N. Li, H. B. Wu, X. W. Lou and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15006 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, F. Xu, L. Luo, H. S. Abbo, S. J. Titinchi, P. K. Shen, P. Tsiakaras and S. Yin, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 317, 191–198 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, Y. Lu, J. Lin, X. Wang and Z. Shen, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700369 CrossRef .
A. Sivanantham and S. Shanmugam, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 485–493 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, Y. Xie, H. Deng, C. Zhang, J.-W. Su, Y. Dong and J. Lin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 7299–7306 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu and C. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–7 Search PubMed .
C. Xu, L. Wang, R. Wang, K. Wang, Y. Zhang, F. Tian and Y. Ding, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2165–2169 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dong, L. Han, C. Zhang and Z. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 16096–16104 CrossRef CAS .
L. Han, C. Dong, C. Zhang, Y. Gao, J. Zhang, H. Gao, Y. Wang and Z. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 16467–16475 RSC .
C. Dong, T. Kou, H. Gao, Z. Peng and Z. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701347 CrossRef .
X. Cui, B. Zhang, C. Zeng, H. Wen and S. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 15234–15244 CrossRef CAS .
E. Detsi, J. B. Cook, B. K. Lesel, C. L. Turner, Y.-L. Liang, S. Robbennolt and S. H. Tolbert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 540–549 RSC .
N. K. Chaudhari, H. Jin, B. Kim and K. Lee, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12231–12247 RSC .
X. Liu, H. Jia, Z. Sun, H. Chen, P. Xu and P. Du, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 46, 1–4 CrossRef CAS .
C.-F. Chen, G. King, R. M. Dickerson, P. A. Papin, S. Gupta, W. R. Kellogg and G. Wu, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 423–432 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, D. Gao, G. Wang, S. Miao, H. Wu, J. Li and X. Bao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20067–20074 RSC .
Y. Cheng, P. K. Shen and S. P. Jiang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 20662–20670 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ai, J. Su, M. Wang and J. Jiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 9912–9920 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ouyang, Y.-Q. Ye, C.-Y. Wu, K. Xiao and Z.-Q. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4923–4928 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Wang, T. Ouyang, N. Li, T. Ma and Z.-Q. Liu, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 1130–1140 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Q. Shao, S. Long and X. Huang, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 448–455 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, H. Zhong, F. Meng, D. Bao, X. Zhang and X. Wei, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1294–1300 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, X. Li, T. Wang and C. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9667–9675 RSC .
Y.-X. Zhang, X. Guo, X. Zhai, Y.-M. Yan and K.-N. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1761–1768 RSC .
J. Shi, Z. Pu, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri, J. Hu and X. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 154, 345–351 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Y. Yu, C.-C. Lang, M.-R. Gao, Y. Chen, Q.-Q. Fu, Y. Duan and S.-H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1890–1897 RSC .
Z. Chen, C. X. Kronawitter, Y.-W. Yeh, X. Yang, P. Zhao, N. Yao and B. E. Koel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 842–850 RSC .
X. Shang, K.-L. Yan, Y. Rao, B. Dong, J.-Q. Chi, Y.-R. Liu, X. Li, Y.-M. Chai and C.-G. Liu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12353–12363 RSC .
X.-D. Wang, H.-Y. Chen, Y.-F. Xu, J.-F. Liao, B.-X. Chen, H.-S. Rao, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7191–7199 RSC .
Y. Xue, Z. Zuo, Y. Li, H. Liu and Y. Li, Small, 2017, 13, 1700936 CrossRef .
Q. Gao, C.-Q. Huang, Y.-M. Ju, M.-R. Gao, J.-W. Liu, D. An, C.-H. Cui, Y.-R. Zheng, W.-X. Li and S.-H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7769–7773 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bao, X. Zhang, B. Fan, J. Zhang, M. Zhou, W. Yang, X. Hu, H. Wang, B. Pan and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7399–7404 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, F.-M. Li, X.-Y. Meng, S.-N. Li, J.-H. Zeng and Y. Chen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1913–1920 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Lukowski, A. S. Daniel, F. Meng, A. Forticaux, L. Li and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10274–10277 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. R. Anjum, H. Y. Jeong, M. H. Lee, H. S. Shin and J. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707105 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, S. Gao, F. Lei, J. Liu, L. Liang and Y. Xie, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 3976–3982 RSC .
P.-R. Wu, Z. Liu and Z.-L. Cheng, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 9823–9827 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pei, Y. Ge, H. Chu, W. Smith, P. Dong, P. M. Ajayan, M. Ye and J. Shen, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 583–593 CrossRef CAS .
X. Geng, W. Wu, N. Li, W. Sun, J. Armstrong, A. Al-hilo, M. Brozak, J. Cui and T.-P. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6123–6129 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, T. Wang, J. Zhang, P. Liu, H. Sun, X. Zhuang, M. Chen and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706279 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Liu, J. A. Koza and J. A. Switzer, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 140, 359–365 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, H. Liu, L. Dang, H. Zhang, X. Wu, B. Yang, Z. Li, X. Zhang, L. Lei and S. Jin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603904 CrossRef .
S. Jung, C. C. McCrory, I. M. Ferrer, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3068–3076 RSC .
K. Lam, Y. Gao, J. Wang and F. Ciucci, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 244, 139–145 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, J. Wang, Z. Zhang, Z. Shao and F. Ciucci, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10739–10742 RSC .
J. Wang, S. Choi, J. Kim, S. W. Cha and J. Lim, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 770 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, M. Saccoccio, D. Chen, Y. Gao, C. Chen and F. Ciucci, J. Power Sources, 2015, 297, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Chen, S. Tan, Z. Shao and D. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2018, 385, 76–83 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Hardin, J. T. Mefford, D. A. Slanac, B. B. Patel, X. Wang, S. Dai, X. Zhao, R. S. Ruoff, K. P. Johnston and K. J. Stevenson, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3368–3376 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Lee, J. Hwang, H. J. Hwang, O. S. Jeon, J. Jang, O. Kwon, Y. Lee, B. Han and Y.-G. Shul, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3541–3547 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yagi, I. Yamada, H. Tsukasaki, A. Seno, M. Murakami, H. Fujii, H. Chen, N. Umezawa, H. Abe and N. Nishiyama, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8249 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, D. Chen, J. Wang, S. Tan, X. Yu and Z. Shao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 2134–2142 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Wang, A. Belotti and F. Ciucci, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 5472–5480 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, K. Y. Lam, M. Saccoccio, Y. Gao, D. Chen and F. Ciucci, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 224–232 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Gao, D. Chen, J. Liu, Z. Zhang, Z. Shao and F. Ciucci, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 364–371 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Yoo, X. Rong, Y. Liu and A. M. Kolpak, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4628–4636 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-F. Huang, J. Song, Y. Du, S. Xi, S. Dou, J. M. V. Nsanzimana, C. Wang, Z. J. Xu and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 329–338 CrossRef CAS .
A. Grimaud, W. T. Hong, Y. Shao-Horn and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat.
Mater., 2016, 15, 121 CrossRef CAS .
X.-F. Lu, L.-F. Gu, J.-W. Wang, J.-X. Wu, P.-Q. Liao and G.-R. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604437 CrossRef .
T. Maiyalagan, K. R. Chemelewski and A. Manthiram, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 421–425 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Chen, J. T. Miller, J. B. Gerken and S. S. Stahl, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1382–1386 RSC .
S. Gao, B. Fan, R. Feng, C. Ye, X. Wei, J. Liu and X. Bu, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 462–470 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhuang, Y. Xie, H. Tan, Y. Deng, Y. Li and G. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 262, 18–26 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kashyap and S. Kurungot, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3715–3726 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, F. Wang, Y. Xia, J. Li, A. G. Tamirat, Y. Liu, L. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1443–1453 RSC .
I. Abidat, N. Bouchenafa-Saib, A. Habrioux, C. Comminges, C. Canaff, J. Rousseau, T. Napporn, D. Dambournet, O. Borkiewicz and K. Kokoh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17433–17444 RSC .
H.-Y. Wang, S.-F. Hung, H.-Y. Chen, T.-S. Chan, H. M. Chen and B. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 36–39 CrossRef CAS .
S. Peng, F. Gong, L. Li, D. Yu, D. Ji, T. Zhang, Z. Hu, Z. Zhang, S. Chou, Y. Du and S. Ramakrishna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 13644–13653 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Y. Wang, Y.-C. Huang, Z. Wei, C.-L. Dong, J. Ma, S. Shen, Y. Li and S. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2563–2569 RSC .
Z. Cai, Y. Bi, E. Hu, W. Liu, N. Dwarica, Y. Tian, X. Li, Y. Kuang, Y. Li and X. Q. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701694 CrossRef .
J. J. Zhang, H. H. Wang, T. J. Zhao, K. X. Zhang, X. Wei, Z. D. Jiang, S. I. Hirano, X. H. Li and J. S. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2875–2879 CrossRef CAS .
T. Maiyalagan, K. A. Jarvis, S. Therese, P. J. Ferreira and A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3949 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gardner, J. Al-Sharab, N. Danilovic, Y. B. Go, K. Ayers, M. Greenblatt and G. C. Dismukes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 184–192 RSC .
Z. Lu, H. Wang, D. Kong, K. Yan, P.-C. Hsu, G. Zheng, H. Yao, Z. Liang, X. Sun and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4345 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lu, G. Chen, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Xie, L. Liao, C. Liu, Y. Liu, T. Wu, Y. Li, A. C. Luntz, M. Bajdich and Y. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6270–6276 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, Y. Chen, X. Zheng, G. Zhao, K. Rui, P. Li, X. Xu, Z. Cheng, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803482 CrossRef .
M. S. Burke, L. J. Enman, A. S. Batchellor, S. Zou and S. W. Boettcher, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7549–7558 CrossRef CAS .
A.-L. Wang, H. Xu and G.-R. Li, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 445–453 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, A. Li, Y. Li, J. Liu, L. Wang, L. Huang, Y. Wang and X. Ge, ChemPlusChem, 2017, 82, 483–488 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ge, X. Ren, X. Ji, Z. Liu, G. Du, A. M. Asiri, X. Sun and L. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4004–4008 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Pérez-Alonso, C. Adán, S. Rojas, M. A. Peña and J. L. G. Fierro, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 5204–5212 CrossRef .
S. Klaus, M. W. Louie, L. Trotochaud and A. T. Bell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18303–18316 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Candelaria, N. M. Bedford, T. J. Woehl, N. S. Rentz, A. R. Showalter, S. Pylypenko, B. A. Bunker, S. Lee, B. Reinhart, Y. Ren, S. P. Ertem, E. B. Coughlin, N. A. Sather, J. L. Horan, A. M. Herring and L. F. Greenlee, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 365–379 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. H. Hoang and A. A. Gewirth, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1159–1164 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, M. Zhang, W. Yuan and G. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6921–6928 RSC .
H. Zhou, F. Yu, Q. Zhu, J. Sun, F. Qin, L. Yu, J. Bao, Y. Yu, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2858–2864 RSC .
Z. Kou, T. Wang, Q. Gu, M. Xiong, L. Zheng, X. Li, Z. Pan, H. Chen, F. Verpoort and A. K. Cheetham, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803768 CrossRef .
Y.-J. Tang, C.-H. Liu, W. Huang, X.-L. Wang, L.-Z. Dong, S.-L. Li and Y.-Q. Lan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 16977–16985 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gupta, M. Forster, A. Yadav, A. J. Cowan, N. Patel and M. Patel, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 7619–7628 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Jiang, M. Tang, Q. Zheng, Y. Huo, F. Xie and D. Lin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45(53), 28586–28597 CrossRef CAS .
J. Masa, I. Sinev, H. Mistry, E. Ventosa, M. de la Mata, J. Arbiol, M. Muhler, B. Roldan Cuenya and W. Schuhmann, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700381 CrossRef .
P. Chen, K. Xu, Y. Tong, X. Li, S. Tao, Z. Fang, W. Chu, X. Wu and C. Wu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 236–242 RSC .
S. Zhao, M. Li, M. Han, D. Xu, J. Yang, Y. Lin, N.-E. Shi, Y. Lu, R. Yang, B. Liu, Z. Dai and J. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706018 CrossRef .
X. Wang, W. Li, D. Xiong and L. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5639–5646 RSC .
J. Li, G. Liu, B. Liu, Z. Min, D. Qian, J. Jiang and J. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 1365–1374 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-P. Zhu, Y.-P. Liu, T.-Z. Ren and Z.-Y. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7337–7347 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chang, Y. Xiao, M. Xiao, J. Ge, C. Liu and W. Xing, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6874–6878 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4529–4532 RSC .
B. Dong, X. Zhao, G.-Q. Han, X. Li, X. Shang, Y.-R. Liu, W.-H. Hu, Y.-M. Chai, H. Zhao and C.-G. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13499–13508 RSC .
H. Wu, X. Lu, G. Zheng and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702704 CrossRef .
J.-Q. Chi, K.-L. Yan, Z. Xiao, B. Dong, X. Shang, W.-K. Gao, X. Li, Y.-M. Chai and C.-G. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 20599–20607 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, J. Li, D. Xiong, B. Zhang, Y. Liu, K.-H. Wu, I. Amorim, W. Li and L. Liu, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 3470–3476 RSC .
J. Ryu, N. Jung, J. H. Jang, H.-J. Kim and S. J. Yoo, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4066–4074 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Li, J. Sun, Y. Qiu, C. Liu, G. Zhou and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7588–7596 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, H. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Liu, J. Sun, S. Lee, J.-S. Lee and Y. Cui, ACS Cent. Sci., 2015, 1, 244–251 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, W. Li, D. Xiong, D. Y. Petrovykh and L. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4067–4077 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, N. Cheng, Z. Pu, W. Xing and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9351–9355 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Wygant, K. Kawashima and C. B. Mullins, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2956–2966 CAS .
M. Zhou, Q. Weng, X. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Xue, X. Zeng, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4335–4342 CAS .
H. Jiang, Q. He, Y. Zhang and L. Song, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 2968–2977 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi and B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1529–1541 RSC .
C. G. Read, J. F. Callejas, C. F. Holder and R. E. Schaak, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 12798–12803 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Laursen, K. R. Patraju, M. J. Whitaker, M. Retuerto, T. Sarkar, N. Yao, K. V. Ramanujachary, M. Greenblatt and G. C. Dismukes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1027–1034 RSC .
N. Bai, Q. Li, D. Mao, D. Li and H. Dong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 29400–29407 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sun, H. Liu, J. Qu and J. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600087 CrossRef .
E. J. Popczun, J. R. McKone, C. G. Read, A. J. Biacchi, A. M. Wiltrout, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9267–9270 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, G. Wei, Y. Zhu, Y. Xi, X. Pan, Y. Ji, I. V. Zatovsky and W. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14828–14837 RSC .
J. Li, J. Li, X. Zhou, Z. Xia, W. Gao, Y. Ma and Y. Qu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 10826–10834 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, X. Ren, S. Hao, R. Ge, Z. Liu, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, Q. Zhang and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1985–1990 RSC .
Y. Zhang, L. Gao, E. J. M. Hensen and J. P. Hofmann, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1360–1365 CrossRef CAS .
J. Masud, S. Umapathi, N. Ashokaan and M. Nath, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9750–9754 RSC .
Z. Pu, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21874–21879 CrossRef CAS .
A. Han, H. Zhang, R. Yuan, H. Ji and P. Du, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2240–2248 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, H. Ding, M. Zhang, M. Chen, Z. Hao, L. Zhang, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606980 CrossRef .
B. You, Y. Zhang, Y. Jiao, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11796–11800 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jiang, Q. Tang, M. Sheng, B. You, D.-E. Jiang and Y. Sun, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 1077–1084 RSC .
B. Liu, Y.-F. Zhao, H.-Q. Peng, Z.-Y. Zhang, C.-K. Sit, M.-F. Yuen, T.-R. Zhang, C.-S. Lee and W.-J. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606521 CrossRef .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chia, A. Y. S. Eng, A. Ambrosi, S. M. Tan and M. Pumera, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11941–11966 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mattheiss, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1973, 8, 3719 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, D. Zhang, B. Li, C. Zhang, Z. Du, H. Yin, X. Bi and S. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801345 CrossRef .
H. L. Zhuang, M. D. Johannes, A. K. Singh and R. G. Hennig, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96, 165305 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, Z. Wang, H. Yu, N. Li, J. Zhang, J. Meng, M. Liao, J. Zhao, X. Lu and L. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10216–10219 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Katagiri, T. Nakamura, A. Ishii, C. Ohata, M. Hasegawa, S. Katsumoto, T. Cusati, A. Fortunelli, G. Iannaccone and G. Fiori, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3788–3794 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cai, J. He, Q. Liu, T. Yao, L. Chen, W. Yan, F. Hu, Y. Jiang, Y. Zhao and T. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2622–2627 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiong, Y. Wang, P.-F. Liu, L.-R. Zheng, G. Wang, H.-G. Yang, P.-K. Wong, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801450 CrossRef .
J. Hu, C. Zhang, L. Jiang, H. Lin, Y. An, D. Zhou, M. K. Leung and S. Yang, Joule, 2017, 1, 383–393 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, P. Liu, S. Liu, R. Dong, X. Zhuang, M. Chen and X. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2789–2793 RSC .
M. A. R. Anjum, H. Y. Jeong, M. H. Lee, H. S. Shin and J. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707105 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, W. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Z. Shi, X. Cao, Y. Tang and Q. Gao, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 242, 132–139 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Gao and F. Ciucci, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1(11), 6409–6416 CrossRef .
N. K. Oh, C. Kim, J. Lee, O. Kwon, Y. Choi, G. Y. Jung, H. Y. Lim, S. K. Kwak, G. Kim and H. Park, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1723 CrossRef .
H. Jin, J. Wang, D. Su, Z. Wei, Z. Pang and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2688–2694 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, W. Zhou, Y. Zhong, Y. Bu, X. Chen, Q. Zhong, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602122 CrossRef .
B. Hua, M. Li, W. Pang, W. Tang, S. Zhao, Z. Jin, Y. Zeng, B. S. Amirkhiz and J.-L. Luo, Chem, 2018, 4, 2902–2916 CAS .
T. Ling, T. Zhang, B. Ge, L. Han, L. Zheng, F. Lin, Z. Xu, W.-B. Hu, X.-W. Du, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807771 CrossRef .
J. Wang, J. Kim, S. Choi, H. Wang and J. Lim, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 2000621 CrossRef .
H. Wang, S. Min, C. Ma, Z. Liu, W. Zhang, Q. Wang, D. Li, Y. Li, S. Turner and Y. Han, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 13592 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, Y. Lian, C. Yang, L. Xiong, P. Qi, Q. Mu, X. Zhao, J. Guo, Z. Deng and Y. Peng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2363–2371 RSC .
J. Wang, H. Zhao, Y. Gao, D. Chen, C. Chen, M. Saccoccio and F. Ciucci, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 10744–10754 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Wang, Engineering defective electrode materials for sustainable energy applications, PhD thesis, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,  2018 Search PubMed.
S. Cai, Z. Meng, H. Tang, Y. Wang and P. Tsiakaras, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 217, 477–484 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Balogun, W. Qiu, H. Yang, W. Fan, Y. Huang, P. Fang, G. Li, H. Ji and Y. Tong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3411–3416 RSC .
X. Lu, W.-L. Yim, B. H. Suryanto and C. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2901–2907 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604942 CrossRef .
B. Zhang, H.-H. Wang, H. Su, L.-B. Lv, T.-J. Zhao, J.-M. Ge, X. Wei, K.-X. Wang, X.-H. Li and J.-S. Chen, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2606–2615 CrossRef CAS .
F. Davodi, M. Tavakkoli, J. Lahtinen and T. Kallio, J. Catal., 2017, 353, 19–27 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, H. Li, B. Cao, J. Jiang, R. Gao and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801527 CrossRef .
S. Li, C. Cheng, A. Sagaltchik, P. Pachfule, C. Zhao and A. Thomas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807419 CrossRef .
D. Chanda, J. Hnát, A. S. Dobrota, I. A. Pašti, M. Paidar and K. Bouzek, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 26864–26874 RSC .
W. Chen, J. Pei, C.-T. He, J. Wan, H. Ren, Y. Wang, J. Dong, K. Wu, W.-C. Cheong, J. Mao, X. Zheng, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800396 CrossRef .
C. Lei, Y. Wang, Y. Hou, P. Liu, J. Yang, T. Zhang, X. Zhuang, M. Chen, B. Yang, L. Lei, C. Yuan, M. Qiu and X. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 149–156 RSC .
Y. Xu, W. Tu, B. Zhang, S. Yin, Y. Huang, M. Kraft and R. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605957 CrossRef .
A. Morozan, V. Goellner, Y. Nedellec, J. Hannauer and F. Jaouen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, H719–H726 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, J. Pei, C.-T. He, J. Wan, H. Ren, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Dong, S. Tian, W.-C. Cheong, S. Lu, L. Zheng, X. Zheng, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16086–16090 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Peng, B. Lu and S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801995 CrossRef .
P. Wang, Z. Pu, Y. Li, L. Wu, Z. Tu, M. Jiang, Z. Kou, I. S. Amiinu and S. Mu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26001–26007 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, M. Jiang, Q. Zhang, P. He and X. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702513 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, S. Liu, J. Xiao and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9691–9699 RSC .
W. Li, X. Gao, D. Xiong, F. Xia, J. Liu, W.-G. Song, J. Xu, S. M. Thalluri, M. F. Cerqueira, X. Fu and L. Liu, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 2952–2958 RSC .
X. Ma, W. Zhang, Y. Deng, C. Zhong, W. Hu and X. Han, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 4816–4824 RSC .
X. Wu, X. Han, X. Ma, W. Zhang, Y. Deng, C. Zhong and W. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12574–12583 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sivanantham, P. Ganesan and S. Shanmugam, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4661–4672 CrossRef CAS .
G.-F. Chen, T. Y. Ma, Z.-Q. Liu, N. Li, Y.-Z. Su, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3314–3323 CrossRef CAS .
J. Masud, A. T. Swesi, W. P. R. Liyanage and M. Nath, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 17292–17302 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, Q. Dong, J. Yang, Z. Dai, J. Lin, P. Chen, W. Huang and X. Dong, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2234–2243 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, T. Liu, L. Xie, C. Tang, D. Liu, S. Hao, F. Qu, G. Du, Y. Ma, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Small, 2017, 13, 1700805 CrossRef .
N. Xu, G. Cao, Z. Chen, Q. Kang, H. Dai and P. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12379–12384 RSC .
Z. Wang, H. Liu, R. Ge, X. Ren, J. Ren, D. Yang, L. Zhang and X. Sun, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2236–2241 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Liu, S. Yang, B. Zhang and H. G. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34474–34481 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, C. Tang, H.-F. Wang, B.-Q. Li, Q. Zhang, C. Li, C. Yang and F. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7245–7250 RSC .
X. Zou, Y. Wu, Y. Liu, D. Liu, W. Li, L. Gu, H. Liu, P. Wang, L. Sun and Y. Zhang, Chem, 2018, 4, 1139–1152 CAS .
P. W. Menezes, A. Indra, C. Das, C. Walter, C. Göbel, V. Gutkin, D. Schmeiβer and M. Driess, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 103–109 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, L. R. L. Ting, V. Molinari, C. Giordano and B. S. Yeo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8361–8368 RSC .
Y.-Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, T. Tang, H. Luo, S. Niu, Z.-H. Dai, L.-J. Wan and J.-S. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703311 CrossRef .
I. K. Mishra, H. Zhou, J. Sun, F. Qin, K. Dahal, J. Bao, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2246–2252 RSC .
M. Ledendecker, S. Krick Calderón, C. Papp, H.-P. Steinrück, M. Antonietti and M. Shalom, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12361–12365 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, J. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Lim, Y. Gao and S. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 119593 Search PubMed .
C. Xiao, Y. Li, X. Lu and C. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3515–3523 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kuang, P. Han, Q. Wang, J. Li and G. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8555–8561 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gong, W. Zhou, M. J. Kenney, R. Kapusta, S. Cowley, Y. Wu, B. Lu, M.-C. Lin, D.-Y. Wang, J. Yang, B.-J. Hwang and H. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11989–11993 CrossRef CAS .
C. Du, M. Shang, J. Mao and W. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15940–15949 RSC .
J. Bai, T. Meng, D. Guo, S. Wang, B. Mao and M. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1678–1689 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Z. Niu, J. Jiang and L. Ai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3204–3209 RSC .
Y. Hou, M. Qiu, T. Zhang, J. Ma, S. Liu, X. Zhuang, C. Yuan and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604480 CrossRef .
S. Deng, Y. Zhong, Y. Zeng, Y. Wang, X. Wang, X. Lu, X. Xia and J. Tu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700772 CrossRef .
J. Jiang, Q. Liu, C. Zeng and L. Ai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16929–16935 RSC .
L. Zeng, K. Sun, X. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Pan, Z. Liu, D. Cao, Y. Song, S. Liu and C. Liu, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 26–36 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, S. Zhang, C. Li, C. Zhu, Y. Chen, P. Gao, L. Qi and X. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10902–10907 RSC .
J. Wang, W. Yang and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4686–4690 RSC .
Q. Liang, H. Jin, Z. Wang, Y. Xiong, S. Yuan, X. Zeng, D. He and S. Mu, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 746–752 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, Y. Liu, S. Chen, J. Shi, J. Wang, A. Fan, W. Zan, S. Li, W. A. Goddard and X.-M. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–11 CrossRef .

          S. Jin, Are Metal Chalcogenides, Nitrides, and Phosphides Oxygen Evolution Catalysts or Bifunctional Catalysts?, ACS Publications,  2017 Search PubMed .
E. Fabbri, A. Habereder, K. Waltar, R. Kötz and T. J. Schmidt, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 3800–3821 RSC .

Footnote† Contribute equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Jian Wang
	Jian Wang is currently a SNU Science Fellow at Seoul National University. He obtained the BEng in Energy, Power System and Automation Engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2013, and PhD in Mechanical Engineering from the HKUST in 2018. In 2017, he visited Northwestern University working with Prof. Sossina M. Haile as a pre-doctor fellow. He conducts experimental and fundamental investigation on sustainable energy conversion and storage systems including fuel cells, electrolyzers, and metal ion/air batteries.

Yang Gao
	Yang Gao received his BS degree in Materials Chemistry from University of Science and Technology of China in 2013, and PhD degree in Mechanical Engineering from The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in 2017. He is now an Assistant Professor in College of Materials Science and Engineering, Hunan University. His current research focuses on the mechanistic understanding into electrochemical catalysis.
Hui Kong	Hui Kong received her Bachelor degree from Shandong University, China, and obtained her PhD from the Institute of Engineering Thermophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences under the supervision of Prof. Hongguang Jin and Yong Hao. She joined Prof. Sossina M. Haile's group at Northwestern University as a visiting scholar in 2016. And then she joined Tsinghua University as a Postdoctoral Fellow in Zheng Li's group in 2018. Hui is currently a research associate professor in Beijing Institute of Technology, China. Her research interest is related to solar energy utilization and techno-economic optimization analysis.
Francesco Ciucci	Francesco Ciucci is an Associate Professor at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. He obtained his PhD from the California Institute of Technology, USA, and did his postdoctoral work at the University of Heidelberg, Germany. Francesco's current research centers on solid-state energy technologies, including solid-oxide fuel cells, electrolyzers, and solid-state batteries, with particular emphasis on the modeling of these systems and the development of new functional materials.

Jongwoo Lim
	Jongwoo Lim is an assistant professor from the Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University since 2017. He obtained his PhD degree from the University of California at Berkeley, USA (advisor: Prof. Peidong Yang) in 2014. After that he went to Stanford University working with Prof. William C. Chueh as a postdoctoral researcher. His current research topic is operando analysis of electrochemical systems (electrolyzers, batteries, fuel cells). He has a particular interest in synchrotron-based experiments and multi-length scale analysis using x-ray imaging, spectroscopy and scattering, etc.

 	Fig. 1  Comprehensive comparison of AWE, PEMWE, and SOE. Reproduced with permission from ref. 6, Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 
Anode: 2H2O → 4H+ + O2 + 4e− (acidic) 4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e− (alkaline)	(1)
Cathode: 2H+ + 2e− → H2 (acidic) 2H2O + 2e− → 2OH− + H2 (alkaline)	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Chart of the thermodynamically stable phases for various metals at pH = 0 and pH = 14.	 

 	Scheme 1  Timeline of recent developments of NPCs for AWE. Reproduced from ref. 7–20. Ref. 7 from Wiley, copyright 2011; ref. 8 from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2011; ref. 9 from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013; ref. 10 and11: without the need of permission; ref. 12 and13 from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015; ref. 14 from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2016; ref. 15 from Springer Nature, copyright 2016; ref. 16 and17 from Springer Nature, copyright 2017; ref. 18 from Elsevier, copyright 2018; ref. 19 from Springer Nature, copyright 2019; ref. 20 from Springer Nature, copyright 2020.	 
Volmer step: H2O + e− → Had + OH−	(3)
Heyrovsky step: Had + H2O + e− → H2 + OH−	(4)
Tafel step: 2Had → H2	(5)

 	Fig. 3  Elemental steps for the (a) HER and (b) OER in alkaline electrolytes, where “*” represents the active site.	 
OH− → OHad + e−	(6)
OHad + OH− → Oad+ H2O + e−	(7)
2Oad → O2	(8)
Oad + OH− → OOHad + e−	(9)
OOHad + OH− → O2 + H2O + e−	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Dependence of the OER theoretical overpotential on ΔGO* − ΔGOH* for various kinds of transition metal oxides (TMOs), where the theoretical overpotential is defined as:  Reproduced with permission from ref. 7, copyright 2011 Wiley. (b) OER catalytic activity as a function of the eg symmetry electron of the transition metal in perovskite oxides, where the OER activity is defined by the overpotentials at 50 μA cmox−2 of the OER current. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8, copyright 2011 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) HER exchange current densities (log(i0)) on monometallic surfaces plotted as a function of the calculated hydrogen binding energy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9, copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 2  Experimental setup of various in situ/operando techniques for electrocatalysts.	 
μ(E) = log(I0/I)	(15)
μ(E) ∝ If/I0	(16)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the operando electrochemical cell setup for in situ hXAS test of water electrolysis catalysts, where CE, WE, and RE represent the counter, working, and reference electrodes, respectively; (b) operando Co K-edge XANES spectra and (c) the corresponding k3-weighted FT EXAFS spectra of Co1/PCN recorded at different applied voltages from the open-circuit condition to −0.1 V during the electrocatalytic HER. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19, Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the in situ liquid cell and experimental setup for sXAS test in (a) fluorescence and (b) transmission modes. In (a), X-ray absorption is detected by collecting X-ray fluorescence on the vacuum side. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50, copyright 2018 Springer Nature. In (b), the two chambers of the XAS cell (He-1 and He-2) are constantly purged with He during the test to remove air/water vapor and maximize the X-ray transmission signal, and the GaAs photodiode measures the X-rays transmitted through the electrolyte and membranes; (c) in situ O K-edge sXAS spectra of electrodeposited Ni–Fe catalyst measured at various applied potentials in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced without the need of permission from ref. 51.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for ambient pressure XPS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the operando AP-XPS setup. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. Normalized (c) O 1s, (d) Ni 2p, and (e) Fe 2p XPS of NiFe thin film catalysts at different OER potentials (vs. Ag/AgCl) in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the liquid cell for in situ TEM. (b) In situ electrochemical TEM holder fabricated by protochips; inset: tip of the holder with an integrated electrochemical cell. (c) In situ disposable chip positioned at the sample holder tip and magnified view of the central area of the chip, showing the working (glassy carbon), counter (Pt), and reference (Pt) electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56, copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (d) In situ EC-TEM of Co3O4 during an OER chronopotentiometry test at 10 mA cm−2 in aqueous 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, with the HAADF-STEM images recorded at 90 s and 145 s as well as their superposition (red: 90 s; blue: 145 s). Reproduced with permission from ref. 56, copyright 2019 American Chemical Society (e) schematic of a popular IL-TEM setup for electrolysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57, copyright 2019 Elsevier. (f) IL-TEM of NiFe nanoparticles deposited on the Au TEM grid before and after the OER. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58, copyright 2018 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for the SFC-ICP-MS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65, copyright 2019 Wiley. (b) A classic SFC-OLEMS setup at the Max Planck Institute. Change in the amount of Fe on the Fe-NiOxHy electrode during chronoamperometry measurements for 1 h in (c) KOH electrolyte containing 0.1 ppm 57Fe. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20, copyright 2020 Springer Nature. OLEMS-measured (d) 34O2/32O2 ratios (e) 36O2 signal during the first cycle of an electrochemical OER CV scan, where the OER was driven by 18O isotope-labeled SrCoO3−δ in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 16, copyright 2017 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) In situ electrochemical/Raman setup. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. In situ Raman spectra of (b) Ni films at different applied OER potentials (vs. Hg/HgO), (c) NiFe films with different Fe content, and (d) pristine and aged Ni films (0.6 V vs. Hg/HgO in 1 M KOH). Reproduced with permission from ref. 72, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 


Advantages	High photon energy, strong penetration, easy operando setup	Surface/interfacial information, probe of light elements	Operational environment, probe of low Z element; gas product surface sensitive	Versatile application, probe electronic configuration	Direct observation easy process	Direct observation of structural change	Quantification of leached transition metal, stability evaluation	On-line detection of reaction products/adsorbates, kinetics evaluation
Disadvantages	Beam damage, element limitation, low accessibility	Weak penetration, UHV requirement, beam damage, hard operando setup	Weak penetration, low accessibility.	Interpretation of band position, low spatial resolution, unclear probing depth	Carbon film corrosion, Au dissolution and precipitation	High-cost sample holder, microfabrication requirement	Inability to chemical state of the dissolved elements	Hard quantification, limited to volatile products
OER/HER examples	
19
	
50 and 51
	
53
	
72
	
58 and 60
	
56 and 60
	
20, 62 and 65
	
16, 63 and 67

Ĥψ = Eψ	(17)
Ĥ =  +  + Û	(18)
E[n] = Ts[n] + Vext[n] + UH[n] + EXC[n]	(19)
	(20)
	(21)
GH+ + GOH− = GH2O	(22)
ΔG = ΔE + ΔZPE − TΔS + ΔFsol + eU = ΔG0 + eU	(23)
	(24)
	(25)
	(26)

 	Fig. 11  Reaction mechanism and DFT calculation of adsorption free energy. (a) Reaction mechanism for the OER. The OER free-energy diagrams for LCO (b) (100) films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88, copyright 2017 Elsevier. (c) Volcano plot of the OER overpotentials vs. ΔGO* − ΔGOH*. Each dot represents one doped carbon material. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94, copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (d) Two-dimensional map of the OER overpotentials concerning ΔGO* − ΔGOH* and ΔGOH*. Each dot represents one oxyhydroxide or oxide. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 copyright 2016 The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Calculated free energy diagram of the HER over differently oriented Ni3S2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Typical free energy diagram for the HER at the Ni(OH)2/MoS2 interface. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2017 Elsevier. Standard free energy diagram for the (c) Volmer–Heyrovsky route and (d) Volmer–Tafel route on Pt(111). Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Total and projected DOS for Co3O4 and the Co-defected Co3−xO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic rigid band diagrams of LaCoO3 and SrCoO3. Reproduced with permission.16 Copyright 2017 Springer Nature. (c) DFT model of La0.5Sr1.5NiO4. (d) Average spin-polarized PDOS for Ni-eg (gray), Fe-eg (blue) and O-2p (red). Reproduced without the need of permission from ref. 119.	 
Δρ = ρAB − ρA − ρB	(27)

 	Fig. 14  (a) Co and Ni3N interface structure with the charge density difference displayed on the right, where yellow and cyan represent electron accumulation and depletion, respectively. (b) Bader charge analysis of Co and Ni near the interface and in bulk Co and Ni3N. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123, copyright 2018 Wiley. (c) Charge density distribution difference between MnO2 and Co-doped MnO2 with oxygen vacancies, where yellow and blue spheres represent positive and negative charges, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125, copyright 2018 Elsevier. (d) Bader charge of Co and H in adsorbed HO* on the surface of pristine and Mo doped β-CoOOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126, copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 
	(28)

 	Fig. 15  (a) Linear relationship between the proposed descriptor φ and the calculated ΔGOH* for different single-atom catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132, copyright 2018 Springer Nature. (b) Minimum energy pathway for Ni diffusion from the stable adsorption site to a neighboring site in Ni@C9N4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141, copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Bulk phase diagram of nickel phosphides. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143, copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Valence states of Zn, Fe, and Co in oxygen-excess ZnFexCo2−xO4 for different x values. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146, copyright 2018 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Experimental, (b) DFT, (c) conventional DFT-based (blue) and (d) ML (red) workflows for catalyst screening and selection. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157, copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (e) Parity plot of the CNN-predicted and DFT-calculated ΔG on different IrOx models for the OER. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (f) Relative importance of the RRF-calculated descriptors for the HER activity on Ni2P. Reproduced with permission from ref. 159, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 3  Design strategies of electrocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of different heteroatoms doped into the carbon framework. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178, copyright 2016 Springer Nature. Structural characterization of N-HOPG model catalysts: (b) atomic force microscopy (AFM) image and corresponding line profile attributed the dark regions to the etched grooves, in contrast to the non-etched bright surface regions. (c) N 1s XPS fitting of four model samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177, copyright 2016 The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of the NiFe LDHCNT hybrid architecture and (b) its OER activity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 207, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) Fe K-edge XANES of Ni0.75Fe0.25OOH during the OER and the DFT-derived OER overpotential at Fe and Ni sites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 12, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (d) HER LSV comparison of Ni(OH)2 and NiFe LDH in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69, copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) XRD 2θ–ω scans of LCO thin films deposited on different substrates with corresponding strain. Reproduced with permission from ref. 214, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Dependence of DFT-calculated hydrogen adsorption free energy (ΔGH*) on tensile strain for the CoO(111)-Ov surface; (c) schematic illustration of the strain effect on the band center of CoO(111)-Ov surface; (d) HADDF-STEM image of two adjacent nano-sawtooth enclosed with (111) nanofacets for S-CoO NRs with the contour plots of the strain component, where the lattice strain component ε11 and ε22 represent strain in and perpendicular to the (111) plane, respectively. (e) Volcano plots of j0 as a function of the ΔGH* for various catalysts. Reproduced without the need of permission from ref. 215.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) HER activity comparison of a serious of alloy-based electrocatalysts in 1 M NaOH after a 2 h stability test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 13, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of the possible bimetallic sites on the Ti-modified Cu surface; (c) dependence of the HER exchange current density on the calculated hydrogen binding energy (HBE); (d) HER LSV in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with the need of permission from ref. 226 (e) comprehensive plot of the OER activity and stability for various bimetallic alloys (MM′, M or M′ = Fe, Co, Ni, and Mn) supported on N-doped carbon. Produced with permission from ref. 227, copyright 2017 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the exfoliation process for LDHs, where purple, red, and gray spheres represent metal, oxygen atoms, and interlayer anions/water molecules, respectively. Reproduced without the need of permission from ref. 10. (b) HAADF-STEM image of an R-MoS2 monolayer with Mo-edge termination and structural defects (pores); scale bar: 1 nm; (c) HER LSV of ammoniated MoS2 (A-MoS2) in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 280, copyright 2018 Wiley. (d) TEM of Co3O4 nanosheets. (e) OER activity of Co3O4 nanosheets in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 281, copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 4  Schematic illustration of the representative structure of (a) perovskite oxides, (b) spinel oxides, (c) oxyhydroxides, (d) transition metal disulfides, (e) TMPs, and (f) carbons.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic of the BaNi0.83O2.5 crystal structure, where green, gray, and red balls represented Ba, Ni, and O, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 295, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of La0.5Sr1.5Ni1−xFexO4±δ with a RP crystal structure. Orange, cyan, and red balls represent La/Sr, Ni/Fe, and O, respectively. Reproduced without the need of permission from ref. 119. (c) Schematic of the CaCu3Fe4O12 crystal structure; green, blue, brown, and red balls represent Ca, Cu, Fe, and O, respectively. Reproduced without the need of permission from ref. 296. (d) Schematic of the NdBaMn2O5.5 crystal structure. Green, orange, purple, and red balls represent Ba, Nd, Mn, and O, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 300, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (e) Lattice-oxygen-mediated (LOM) OER mechanism: OER positive potential oxidizes a ligand hole in the O 2p band, which allows the exchange of lattice oxygen with the adsorbed intermediate to form the superoxide ion. Reproduced without the need of permission from ref. 117 (f) non-concerted proton–electron transfer OER mechanisms that evolve 36O2, reproduced with permission from ref. 16, copyright 2017 Springer Nature. (g) Co K-edge XANES spectra recorded from the BSCF at different anodic potentials from 1.2 to 1.55 V vs. RHE in 0.1 M KOH. (h) Dynamic dissolution/redeposition forms a self-assembled CoO(OH0/FeO(OH)) layer on the BSCF surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17, copyright 2017 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 23  
Operando Co K-edge EXAFS spectra during the OER for (a) Co3O4, (b) ZnCo2O4, and (c) CoAl2O4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 312, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of creating oxygen vacancy defects on the surface of reduced NiCo2O4 (R-NCO) rich with oxygen vacancies; (e) overall water splitting activity of R-NCO in 1.0 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 313, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. Calculated (f) HER and (g) OER free energy diagrams for P-Co3O4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 314, copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) OER onset potentials (potentials required to reach 0.1 mA cm−2) of a series of layered TMOs before and after delithiation. Electrolyte: 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced without the need of permission from ref. 319 (b) DFT-calculated OER activity map of layered LiCoO2/Li0.5CoO2 system, where the orange (green) symbols show the position of the OER activity of LiCoO2 (Li0.5CoO2) individual surfaces, with the theoretical overpotential (ηTheory) shown in brackets. The arrows show the OER activity change upon delithiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 320, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) OER activity of different transition metal (oxy)hydroxides in 1 M KOH; (d) schematic of active electrolyte-permeated catalyst structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 322, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) OER exchange current density comparison among a series of TMPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 347, copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Co K-edge XANES and (c) P 2p XPS of CoP before and after OER potential cycling in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 348, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (d) OER overpotential comparison of a series of dichalcogenide-derived TMOs by electrochemical tuning. Reproduced with permission from ref. 349, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) DFT-calculated HER reaction pathway of Co2P (orange) and O–Co2P (violet). (b) Charge density distribution of Co2P and O–Co2P. Reproduced with permission from ref. 369, copyright 2017 Wiley. (c) and (d) SEM image and (e) HER activity (normalized by ECSA) of Co2P before and after HER LSV for 2000 cycles in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 365, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  DFT-calculated DOS for (a) pristine MoS2 and (b) Co-doped MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 381, copyright 2018 Wiley. (c) HER polarization curves of the MoS2/NiCo-LDH composite, carbon fiber paper (CFP) substrate, bare NiCo-LDH, and MoS2 in 1 M KOH; (d) HRTEM image of the MoS2/NiCo-LDH composite, wherein lattice fringes of 0.62 and 0.22 nm were attributed to (002) and (015) lattice spacings of the 2H-MoS2 and NiCo-LDH, respectively; (e) free energy diagram of the alkaline HER for bare MoS2 (blue) and MoS2/NiCo-LDH composite (red) catalysts, where  is for the HER Tafel step,  for the Heyrovsky step,  for the Volmer step, and ΔG0ad for the standard free energy of adsorption Had. Reproduced with permission from ref. 382, copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) STEM, (b) EELS mapping, and (c) HER LSV of NiO/Ni–CNT in 1 M KOH. Reproduced without the need of permission.11 (d) HER LSV of BSCF, Pr0.5BSC, F and commercial Pt/C catalysts in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41, copyright 2016 Wiley. (e) DFT-calculated hydrogen adsorption free energy (ΔGH*) on pristine CoO, Ni-doped CoO (≈11% Ni content), and the strained Ni-doped CoO (with 1% tensile strain); (f) HER LSV of Ni, Zn dual-doped CoO NRs compared with those of polycrystalline CoO (P-CoO), pure CoO, Zn-doped, Ni-doped CoO NRs, and commercial Pt/C in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 391, copyright 2019 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) TEM image of N/S-co-doped graphitic sheets with stereoscopic holes (SHG); (b) HER LSV of SHG compared with those of GC and GS in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 400, copyright 2017 Wiley. (c) HER activity comparison of different transition metal supported on N-doped carbon at pH 13. Reproduced with permission from ref. 409, copyright 2015 IOP Publishing. (d) HAADF-STEM image of the W-SAC; (e) XANES and (f) k3-weighted FT W L3-edge EXAFS curves of the W-SAC; (g) HER LSV of the W-SAC in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 406, copyright 2018 Wiley.	 

OER
Ni0.75Fe0.25OOH	Electrodeposition	0.1 M KOH	375	—	
12

NiFe-N/C	Pyrolysis	0.1 M KOH	320	2000 cycle	
227

NiFe-NS	Hydrothermal process	1.0 M KOH	353	9 h @ 1.53 V vs. RHE	
10

LSNF30	Crystallization and annealing	0.1 M KOH	360	100 cycle	
119

R-NCO	Adsorption–calcination–reduction	1.0 M KOH	240	50 h @ 1.47 V vs. RHE	
315

CaCu3Fe4O12	Polymerization	0.1 M KOH	383	100 cycle	
296

O-NiFe LDH	Hydrothermal process	1.0 M KOH	184	100 h using full cell @ 1.7 V	
69

NiFe-LDH/CNT	Solvothermal process	1.0 M KOH	247	2000 s @ 25 mA cm−2	
207

FeCoNiP	Solution-based chemical reduction	1.0 M KOH	200	24 h @ 10 mA cm−2	
344

NBM5.5	Sol–gel complexing process	1.0 M KOH	430	10 h @ 10 mA cm−2	
300

P-Co3O4	Thermal coupled plasma modification	1.0 M KOH	280	40000 s @ 0.28 V vs. RHE	
314

De-LiCo0.33Ni0.33Fe0.33O2	Electrochemical delithiation	0.1 M KOH	316	1000 cycle	
319



HER
Co1/PCN	Pyrolysis	1.0 M KOH	89	24 h @ −0.13 V vs. RHE	
19

R-NCO	Adsorption–calcination–reduction	1.0 M KOH	135	50 h @ −0.135 V vs. RHE	
315

R-MoS2@NF	Sulfurization and reduction	1.0 M KOH	71	22 h @ −0.100 V vs. RHE	
280

np-CuTi	Melt spinning and quenching	0.1 M KOH	47	5000 cycle	
226

S-CoO NRs	Hydrothermal and cation exchange	1.0 M KOH	73	28 h @ −0.073 V vs. RHE	
215

H-NiFe LDH	Hydrothermal process	1.0 M KOH	59	100 h using full cell @ 1.7 V	
69

Co2P@CP	Thermal phosphidization	1.0 M KOH	70	2000 cycle	
362

MoS2/NiCo-LDH	Hydrothermal process	1.0 M KOH	78	48 h @ −50 mA cm−2	
379

NiO/Ni–CNT	Low-temperature hydrolysis	1.0 M KOH	<100	2 h @ −20 mA cm−2	
11

NBM5.5	Sol–gel complexing process	1.0 M KOH	290	10 h @ −10 mA cm−2	
300

P-Co3O4	Thermal coupled plasma modification	1.0 M KOH	120	40000 s @ −0.12 V vs. RHE	
314


 	Fig. 30  (a) Schematic illustration of the in situ surface transformation of FeS nanosheet catalysts during the OER and HER. Reproduced with permission from ref. 427, copyright 2018 Elsevier. (b) Schematic of CoOx@NC for overall water splitting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 388, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) OER and HER activity of the individual electrode tested in a three-electrode cell setup; (d) stability of the electrolyzer at 50 mA for 24 h, which was composed of NiCeOx on an Au-coated NF anode and NiMo on a NF cathode separated by an anion-exchange membrane in a 6 M KOH electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15, copyright 2016 Springer Nature.	 
Footnote
† Contribute equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
