Recent advances in graphene and its metal-oxide hybrid nanostructures for lithium-ion batteries  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4NR07068B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4NR07068B
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4820-4868Recent advances in graphene and its metal-oxide hybrid nanostructures for lithium-ion batteries

        
          
            Manish 
            Srivastava
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jay 
            Singh
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Tapas 
            Kuila
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Rama K. 
            Layek
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nam Hoon 
            Kim
          
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Joong Hee 
            Lee
          
          
        
      *ae
aAdvanced Materials Institute of BIN Technology (BK21 plus Global), Dept. of BIN Fusion Tech., Chonbuk National University, Jeonju, Jeonbuk 561-756, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jhl@chonbuk.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-63-270-2341;   Tel: +82-63-270-2342
bDepartment of Physics and Astrophysics, University of Delhi, Delhi-110007, India
cDepartment of Applied Chemistry, Delhi Technological University, Shahbad Daulatpur, Main Bawana Road, Delhi 110042, India
dSurface Engineering & Tribology Division, CSIR-Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur, 713209, India
eCarbon Composite Research Center & Department of Polymer & Nano Science and Technology, Chonbuk National University Jeonju, Jeonbuk 561-756, Republic of Korea
Received 
      29th November 2014
    , Accepted 4th February 2015First published on 5th February 2015AbstractToday, one of the major challenges is to provide green and powerful energy sources for a cleaner environment. Rechargeable lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are promising candidates for energy storage devices, and have attracted considerable attention due to their high energy density, rapid response, and relatively low self-discharge rate. The performance of LIBs greatly depends on the electrode materials; therefore, attention has been focused on designing a variety of electrode materials. Graphene is a two-dimensional carbon nanostructure, which has a high specific surface area and high electrical conductivity. Thus, various studies have been performed to design graphene-based electrode materials by exploiting these properties. Metal-oxide nanoparticles anchored on graphene surfaces in a hybrid form have been used to increase the efficiency of electrode materials. This review highlights the recent progress in graphene and graphene-based metal-oxide hybrids for use as electrode materials in LIBs. In particular, emphasis has been placed on the synthesis methods, structural properties, and synergetic effects of metal-oxide/graphene hybrids towards producing enhanced electrochemical response. The use of hybrid materials has shown significant improvement in the performance of electrodes.Manish SrivastavaManish Srivastava works as a DST inspired faculty fellow in the Department of Physics and Astrophysics, University of Delhi, India. He has worked as post doctorate fellow in the Department of BIN Fusion Technology, Chonbuk National University from August, 2012 to August 2013. He has also worked as an Assistant Prof. in the Department of Physics, DIT School of Engineering, Greater Noida, from July, 2011 to July 2012. He received his Ph. D. in Physics from Motila Nehru National Institute of Technology, Allahabad, India. He completed his MSc and BSc from Dr R. M. L Avadh University, Faizabad, India. Presently, he is working on the synthesis of graphene based metal oxide hybrids and their application as electrocatalysts.Jay SinghJay Singh has been working as an Assistant Professor under the DST Inspire Faculty program in the Department of Applied Chemistry & Polymer Technology, Delhi Technological University, Delhi since 2013. He received his PhD degree in Polymer science from Motilal Nehru National Institute of Technology in 2010. He obtained his MSc and BSc degrees from Allahabad University, Uttar Pradesh, India. Presently, he is working on the synthesis of nanomaterials, polymer modification, bioelectronics fabrication, and their application in nanobiosensors, tissue engineering, drug delivery, and food packaging. He has published 35 research papers and is actively engaged in the research and development of metal oxide based biosensors for clinical applications.Tapas KuilaDr Tapas Kuila has been working as a Post-doctoral researcher in the Department of BIN Fusion Technology, Chonbuk National University since November, 2010. He received his PhD in Chemistry from Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India. He obtained his MSc and BSc in Chemistry from Vidyasagar University, West Bengal, India.Rama K. LayekDr Rama K. Layek has been continuing his research as a Post-doctoral fellow in the Department of BIN Fusion Technology, Chonbuk National University since May 2013. He received his PhD in Chemistry from the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata, India. Currently he is working on the development of graphene-based advanced functional materials and investigating its gas barrier property.Nam Hoon KimDr Nam Hoon Kim obtained his Ph.D. in the Department of Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Engineering at Chonbuk National University in Korea. He works as a research professor in the Department of BIN Fusion Technology, Chonbuk National University in Korea.Joong Hee LeeProfessor Joong Hee Lee has more than 25 years of research experience in the fabrication of Polymer and Polymer Composites for electrical and electronic applications. He received his PhD in the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Minnesota, USA. He received the Korea Patent Award gold medal and the Best Scientist and Engineer Award of the Month in June of 2013 in Korea. His current research interests are focused on the preparation of functional nanocomposites for energy conversion/storage devices.
1. Introduction
In response to the needs of modern society and rapid industrial development, it is necessary to design high-efficiency, environmentally friendly, and low-cost energy sources.1–4 Conventional energy sources based on combustion technologies play a major role in meeting energy needs. Nevertheless, major issues are associated with these sources, such as rapidly increasing prices, environmental consequences, and global climate change. These serious problems have necessitated the development of alternative energy sources. In this regard, biomass,5 wind,6 solar cells,7 fuel cells,8 high energy density batteries,9 and supercapacitors10 are becoming appealing. High energy density batteries, supercapacitors, and fuel cells are based on electrochemical energy conversion and storage principles, and they can fulfill the requirements in applications ranging from portable electronics to heavy electric vehicles. Moreover, these devices are environmentally friendly, as they directly convert chemical energy into electrical energy with little or negligible pollution. Batteries and supercapacitors are electrochemical energy storage devices, whereas fuel cells are electrochemical energy conversion devices.11–13 Among these various types of energy storage devices, rechargeable LIBs are particularly important. They have revolutionized portable electronic devices, and are presently the dominating power sources used for laptops, digital cameras, camcorders, and cell phones. They can store energy with 2–3 times higher density than that of conventional rechargeable batteries. Since the release of the first commercial LIB product by the Sony Corporation in 1991, they have attracted great attention from both industrial and academic communities. The global market for LIBs is now valued at over 12 billion USD per annum, and is expected to reach ∼25 billion USD by 2017.14 Although LIBs are attractive energy storage devices with high energy density, their power density is generally low. This low power density is mainly due to the high level of polarization at high charge/discharge rates.15 In addition, they have major problems associated with high cost, charge/discharge cyclic stability, and operability, which are related to the electrode materials. The performance of LIBs significantly depends on the charging/discharging rates, which characterize the migration of electrons and Li+ through the electrode and electrolyte. Therefore, strategies have focused on the design of new electrode materials to facilitate high transport rates for Li+/electrons and to reduce the diffusion length.16 In order to improve the performance of LIBs, considerable effort has been made to design different types of electrode materials.1–3,11–17 Carbon has been widely studied as an electrode material in electrochemical energy storage devices due to its excellent chemical stability, environmental friendliness, and abundance.
Recently, various types of carbon nanostructures and their hybrids have been studied as electrode materials for LIBs, including carbon nanotubes,18–23 mesoporous carbon/CNTs,24 carbon fiber/CNTs,25 carbon nanocages/nanographene shells,26 CNTs/graphene nanosheets,27 CNTs/polymer hybrid,28,29 organic radical polymer/mesocellular carbon foam,30 activated carbon nanostructures, natural graphite, expended graphite,31–40 carbon/silicon hybrids,31–38 CNTs/silicon hybrid,39,40 nitrogen-doped porous carbon nanofiber and multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs),41,42 carbon-Li4Ti5O12,43–46 carbon/manganese oxide,47,48 carbon/lithium-based spinel-type metal oxide,49–53 carbon/vanadium oxide,54,55 carbon/titanium oxide,56–58 hybrid TiO2/α-Fe2O3 with core/shell arrays on carbon,59 and carbon/SnO2 hybrids.60–64
The discovery of mechanically exfoliated graphene (Novoselov et al.65 in 2004), a new form of carbonaceous material, has generated immense interest in graphene-based materials for diverse applications in various fields.66–71 Graphene-based hybrids have been successfully synthesized,72–78 and their potential has been explored for applications such as biomaterials,79,80 biosensors,81,82 environmental applications,83,84 catalysts,85,86 photocatalysts,87–89 solar cells,90 gas sensors,91 LIBs,92–97 supercapacitors,98–100 fuel cells,101,102 and electronic devices.103
Graphene-based hybrid materials are becoming important for electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices. It is important to understand the advantages and disadvantages of graphene-based hybrid electrode materials for LIBs to control their properties using different synthesis approaches. Although several review articles have been devoted to assessing graphene-based hybrid materials for their application in energy storage and conversion, little attention has been paid to graphene-based metal-oxide hybrid nanostructured as electrode materials for LIBs.11,96,104–107 Therefore, it was thought worthwhile to review studies on various types of graphene and metal oxide/graphene hybrid nanostructures for electrode materials in LIBs. Recent advances in various types of graphene and metal-oxide/graphene hybrids as electrode materials for LIBs are reviewed in detail. Outlines of the synthesis approaches, structural design, compositional relations, and mechanisms for enhanced electrochemical performance are discussed. This comprehensive review on graphene-based metal-oxide hybrids will provide a general understanding of the present research and guidance for developing electrode materials of LIBs in the near future.
2. Principle and mechanism of LIBs

Fig. 1 shows a schematic of an LIB. It operates on the principle of Faradaic reactions in the bulk of the active material, and provides high energy density (120–150 Wh kgcell−1), much higher than that of a supercapacitor.108 Typically, an LIB consists of a negative anode (such as graphite), a positive cathode (such as LiCoO2), and a Li+-conducting electrolyte (such as LiPF6).109 The charge/discharge process of LIB involves the reversible insertion and extraction of Li+ in a host matrix (the cathode or anode). In general, the charging process occurs via the extraction of Li+ from the cathode and insertion into the anode, whereas the discharging process is associated with the liberation of Li+ from the anode and is taken up again by the cathode. Basically, three types of electrode systems have been reported, on the basis of the insertion/extraction mechanisms of Li+: conversion, insertion, and Li-alloy reactions.110–112 These reaction mechanisms are given as follows:111
Mechanism for the conversion reaction:AaOb + 2bLi+ + 2be− ↔ aA + bLi2O
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of LIB. 
Mechanism for the insertion reaction:AOa + bLi+ + be− ↔ LibAOa
Mechanism for the Li-alloy reaction:AaOb + 2bLi+ + 2be− → aA + bLi2O (e.g. SnO2)A + cLi+ + ce− ↔ LicA
The fundamental science and technology of LIBs have been studied extensively and reported in several review articles9,12,17 and dedicated books.113–116 LIBs are attractive candidates for power-storage devices and feature high energy density; however, at high charge/discharge rates, they suffer from a high level of polarization and very low solid-state diffusion. LIBs therefore exhibit low power density (100–1000 W kg−1) and require several hours of charging time. The overall device performance regarding capacity, charging efficiency, and life cycle depends on the properties of the electrode materials. Therefore, significant interest has been given to the research and development of new electrode materials to improve the energy density, rate capability, and cycling stability.12,15
3. Factors affecting the performance of LIBs
The performance of LIBs basically depends on the development of the materials used for various components. The degradation of these components during the battery operation effectively determines the performance of LIBs. These components undergo different aging mechanisms, such as rusting of the separator or current collector, or decomposition of the binder and electrolyte. Degradation of the electrolyte causes an increase in the internal resistance and a reduction in the reversibility of the electroactive material. The temperature of the cell is another important factor that influences the life cycle of LIBs.
It is known that during the cycling process, a heterogeneous layer is usually formed on the surface of the electrode, which is known as the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI). The SEI forms due to the reduction of the electrolyte species. It acts as an electronically insulating protective layer between the electrolyte and the surface of the electrode; it also has its own advantages, since it prevents further decomposition of the electrolyte. Nevertheless, the SEI layer causes several disadvantages, including (i) low rate of charging and/or the power density, since the diffusion rate of Li+ through the SEI layer is lower than that within the electrode and electrolyte and (ii) significant loss in capacity due to the consumption of Li+. Thus, the performances of LIBs such as irreversible capacity loss, cycle life, Coulombic efficiency, and shelf life greatly depend on the SEI layer. The SEI layer should be well adhered to the electrode material, insoluble in the electrolyte at elevated temperatures, and also a good ionic conductor for Li+ and a good electronic insulator. In addition, the solvation shell around the Li+ needs to be removed to avoid the solvent co-intercalation associated with the exfoliation of active material. Also, the composition of the SEI influences the electronic insulating properties as well as its chemical stability. The thickness, porosity, and morphology of the SEI layer govern the conductivity of Li+. Therefore, the quality of the SEI layer can play a crucial role in the overall performance of LIBs. The structural morphology, including the thickness, size, and component of the SEI layer, could be further controlled and its demerits could be minimized through proper surface modification of the electrode material. In this context, graphene and its derivative can play a vital role due to the ease of surface modifications. Furthermore, electrodes face several aging mechanisms that essentially depend on the characteristics of the materials, such as the size of the particles, surface area, crystallinity, morphology, and structural phase. Nevertheless, the main concern is the design and synthesis of the electrode materials for exhibiting high lithium storage capacity.117
4. An overview of graphene and LIBs
Graphene consists of a monolayer of sp2-bonded carbon atoms, which is tightly packed into a hexagonal lattice structure. It is a group of all graphitic carbons that can be rolled into a carbon nanotube or fullerene and forms three-dimensional graphite by the stacking of 2D graphene layers as shown in Fig. 2.29 Graphene has attracted significant attention from researchers due to its unique electrical, mechanical, and thermal properties that are useful for various potential and technological applications.118 It has been found that graphene exhibits a large specific surface area (2630 m2 g−1), excellent intrinsic mobility of carriers at room temperature (200000 cm2 V−1 s−1), thermal conductivity (∼5000 W m−1 K−1), high Young's modulus (∼1.0 TPa), and excellent optical transmittance (∼97.7%).119 Particularly, the excellent electrical conductivity and high surface area of graphene have motivated considerable interest for use as an electrode material in LIBs. The theoretical specific surface area of graphene (2620 m2 g−1) is significantly higher than those of CNT (∼1300 m2 g−1) and graphite (10–20 m2 g−1), which can be further helpful for providing an ideal platform for the transportation of Li+ and electrons, and more electro-active sites for energy storage. Moreover, the high surface-to-volume ratio and open porous system of graphene are advantageous for fast ion transport, enabling higher rate capability compared to graphite. In addition, the flexibility of graphene compared to brittle graphite is beneficial for constructing flexible energy storage devices.120 It is believed that the highly conductive nature and interaction of Li+ on both sides of graphene can significantly enhance the lithium storage capacity, and that graphene can effectively overtake graphite, its 3D counterpart.121 Derivatives of graphene such as surface modified graphene or graphene oxide (GO) containing various types of oxygen functional groups can be used as a substrate for the anisotropic growth of metal-oxides/metal nanostructures.107 In addition, the aggregation of nanoparticles during the cycling process can be effectively suppressed by using graphene, reduced-GO (RGO), or GO as a substrate or a matrix. Thus, the incorporation of graphene into electrode materials can improve the performance of the LIBs significantly.108
 Fig. 2  Basis of all graphitic forms. Graphene is a 2D building material for carbon materials of all other dimensionalities. It can be wrapped up into 0D buckyballs, rolled into 1D nanotubes, or stacked into 3D graphite.29 
5. Graphene-based electrode materials for LIBs
5.1 Graphene nanosheets
Wang et al.121 synthesized graphene nanosheets (GNS) by oxidizing graphite into GO and subsequent reduction using hydrazine monohydrate. Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images revealed that the GNS were naturally crumpled into the shape of flower-petals. These GNS based anodes exhibited better lithium storage capacity compared to the original graphite anode. The prepared GNS electrode delivered a specific capacity of ∼945 mA h g−1 in the initial discharging and a reversible capacity of ∼650 mA h g−1 in the first charging. Moreover, it was able to maintain a specific capacity of ∼460 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles.121 Graphene with a larger specific surface area (and fewer layers) with a curled morphology could provide additional active sites for Li+ insertion; it therefore improved the electrochemical performance.122,123 GNS was synthesized using a wet chemical route and the thermal exfoliation of graphite at different temperatures.124 It was observed that the GNS synthesized using N2H4 as the reducing reagent exhibited better electrochemical performances. After 100 cycles, at a current density of 149 mA g−1, the specific capacity was maintained at ∼600 mA h g−1 (Coulombic efficiency ∼85% of the first 10 cycles). On the other hand, the electrochemical performance of GNS, prepared using KBH4 (GNS-KBH4) and thermal exfoliation at 300, 500, and 800 °C (denoted as GNS-300 GNS-500, GNS-800), was found to be poor.124 The GNS-KBH4 and GNS-800 exhibited specific capacity of ∼300 mA h g−1 only, at 149 mA g−1 after 100 cycles. Furthermore, while these authors also tried to establish a correlation between the structural features of these GNSs (e.g., disorder, inter-layer spacing, and specific surface area), unfortunately, no correlation between the structural features and reversible capacity was observed.124 Xiang et al.125 also synthesized various types of GNS by oxidizing graphite to different degrees, and subsequently reducing it using thermal or hydrazine assisted treatments. The graphene prepared using a low degree of oxidized GO was observed to be thick with a low specific surface area, as investigated through high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM), Brunauer–Emmet–Teller (BET) specific surface area, and Raman spectroscopy techniques. In contrast, the GNS synthesized using a high degree of oxidized GO showed a high specific surface area, disorder features, and sufficient pores. Furthermore, GNS prepared by the thermal treatment of high-grade GO at 1050 °C exhibited a specific surface area of 492.5 m2 g−1, which delivered a reversible capacity of 835 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 after 45 cycles with a Coulombic efficiency ∼95%. This reversible capacity and cyclic stability was found to be superior to that of the GNS prepared using medium-grade GO under the same conditions, which strongly depends on the specific surface area of GNS.125 It was assumed that by controlling the morphology, electrochemical performance can also be regulated, whereas GNS containing few layers and relatively low functional groups exhibited better electrochemical performance.126
Few-layered GNS (∼4 layers) with a specific surface area of 492.5 m2 g−1 were prepared by the rapid thermal exfoliation of GO at 1050 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere.127 The synthesized GNS exhibited curled morphology with a wrinkled paper-like structure. The XRD results further suggest that the periodic structure of bulk graphite and GO was destroyed in the GNS, suggesting the homogeneous exfoliation of graphitic layers. On the other hand, Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy investigation revealed the removal of oxygen functional groups from the surface of GO at high temperatures. Furthermore, when used as an anode, at a current density of 100 mA g−1, the first reversible specific capacity was found to be 1264 mA h g−1, whereas after 40 cycles, it was maintained at ∼848 mA h g−1. Furthermore, when cycled at a high current density of 500 mA g−1, a reversible specific capacity of ∼718 mA h g−1 was delivered. However, the initial irreversible capacity and large hysteresis observed in the discharge-cycles restrict their use in commercial LIBs.127 Fang et al.128 reported a unique approach to synthesis mesoporous GNS. In this method, a solution deposition process was first adopted to synthesize 2D mesoporous carbon nanosheets. These 2D mesoporous carbon nanosheets were prepared using a controlled low-concentration monomicelle close-packing assembly as shown in Fig. 3. These carbon nanosheets consisted of a single layer of an ordered-mesopore carbon structure which was investigated through atomic force microscopy (AFM). The formations of mesopores in the GNS were clearly visible in the SEM images as shown in Fig. 4. At a current density 100 mA g−1, this mesoporous GNS could deliver a reversible capacity of ∼770 mA h g−1 after 10 cycles. Notably, after the initial 15 cycles, columbic efficiency reached above 92%, whereas after 60 cycles at a high current density of 5 A g−1, it delivered a reversible capacity of ∼255 mA h g−1 as shown in Fig. 5. In addition, after 60 cycles at different current densities, the capacity was retained at ∼833 mA h g−1, when the current density was reset at 100 mA g−1. Vertically aligned GNS was synthesized using a microwave-assisted plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technique, and could be directly used as an electrode without a binder and conductive additives.129 When it was used as the anode, a reversible capacity of ∼280 mA h g−1 at a current rate of C/0.375 was achieved after 120 cycles. Nevertheless, after cycling at different rates (C/6 to C/0.375) when the current rate was reset at C/1.5, the capacity of ∼320 mA h g−1 (after 175 cycles) could be achieved, which was ∼85% of the capacity (after 50 cycles) at the same current rate. The vertical alignment of graphene with an effective electrical connection to the substrate minimized the electrical resistance and reduced the diffusion distance, which improved the lithium storage kinetics.130
 Fig. 3  Schematic of the formation process for the ordered mesoporous graphene nanosheets.133 
 Fig. 4  SEM images and schematic (bottom inset) of the mesoporous graphene nanosheets before removal of the AAO template. The remaining regular channels of the membranes are observed. Mesopores grown on the surface of the macroporous channels are ordered on the large domain to form carbon layers several nanometers thick (top inset). (b) SEM images and schematic (inset) of the mesoporous graphene nanosheets after removal of the AAO template. The nanosheet-like morphology grows along the prime AAO channels. (c) SEM images and schematic (inset) of the mesoporous graphene nanosheets observed along the nanosheets. (d) SEM images observed perpendicular to the side walls of the nanosheets. The white arrows indicate that the ultrathin nanosheets are composed of single layers of ordered mesopores.133 
 Fig. 5  (a) First and second cycles of galvanostatic discharge/charge curves of the mesoporous graphene nanosheets. (b) Cycling performance (red curve, discharge; black curve, charge) and the Coulombic efficiency (blue curve) of the mesoporous graphene nanosheets at different current densities. Each current density is labeled over the corresponding cycles.133 
The intercalation/deintercalation mechanisms of Li+ in GNS, synthesized using chemical methods, have been investigated by Lei et al.131 It was observed that GNS consisting of 10 layers exhibited an improved reversible capacity along with good cyclic stability. The high irreversible capacity in the first cycle was attributed to the spontaneous stacking of the GNS during the lithiation and the formation of a solid electrolyte film on the interphases of the GNS electrode and electrolyte. However, the first cycle's columbic efficiencies were found to be only 40.6%. Wei et al.132 synthesized graphene microspheres composed of multilayer graphene (MMG) using chemical reduction-assisted by thermal treatment. It was observed that the MMG exhibited a capacity superior to the multilayer graphene. After 40 cycles at a current density of 25 mA g−1, the capacities were observed to be 453 mA h g−1 and 229 mA h g−1 in the cases of MMG and multilayered graphene electrodes, respectively. MMG also exhibited high-rate charge/discharge and better cyclic properties compared to MG. The better performance of MMG was attributed to its unique structural features, including (i) a spherical structure that allows easy diffusion of Li+, (ii) Li+ can be adsorbed on graphene microparticles similar to a “house of cards” in hard carbons and mesocarbon microbeads, and (iii) several cavities composed of graphene microparticles can be largely contributed to the Li+ storage. In addition, Pollak et al.133 studied the interaction of Li+ with single-layered and few-layered graphene. The in situ Raman investigations during the electrochemical lithiation process revealed that few-layered GNS resembled a graphite structure. Single-layered graphene behaved differently and exhibited a low degree of Li+ absorption on both sides of the graphene layer. In addition, a study on the lithium intercalation into bilayer graphene by first-principles DFT calculation suggested the existence of AB and AA stacking. The AA staking was found to be more favorable for lithium storage. It has also been suggested that the structural defects can provide better conditions for lithium storage than those of pristine bilayer graphene.134 On the other hand, the theoretical calculations revealed that the same number of Li+ exposed to both sides of GNS could improve the lithium storage capacity.135,136 Consequently, the single-layered configuration was found to be promising to achieve the safest and most stable LIBs.137 Kim et al.138 reported functionalized graphene nanoplatelets as a new type of electrode material with a tunable energy and power density for LIBs. The high power and gravimetric energy density were attributed to the fast Faradaic reactions between the Li+ and functional groups of graphene. Moreover, the presence of a 3D network consisting of a porous morphology facilitates the accessibility of the electrolyte to the electrode. Therefore, functionalized graphene nanosheets could deliver a high energy density of 260 W h kg−1, even at a high power density of 20 kW kg−1 after 2000 cycles without fading capacity.138
5.2 Paper-like graphene nanostructures
Mukherjee et al.139 synthesized free-standing graphene papers (GP) following the photoflash and laser-assisted reduction of GO. In a typical procedure, instantaneous and extensive heating from a photoflash or laser causes the deoxygenation reaction of GO. A rapid outgassing also creates voids, microscale pores, and cracks in the GP, which facilitate efficient intercalation kinetics during the ultrafast charge/discharge rates. These properties significantly enhance the performance of the graphene paper-like electrode. Furthermore, the GP prepared using the photo-reduction method could deliver a storage capacity of 156 mA h g−1 over 1000 cycles at a charge/discharge rate of 40 C, along with a power density 10 kW kg−1. In addition, the photoflash reduced GP retained a Coulombic efficiency of ∼98.5% of the initial capacity for over 50 cycles. Meanwhile, the thermally reduced graphene showed inferior stability and retained a columbic efficiency of only ∼81.8%.139 The freeze-drying process of the aqueous dispersion of GO was used to produce a foam-like material, which was further thermally treated under an Ar atmosphere to produce foam-like graphene.140 This material was directly used as an anode, without using any type of conductive additive or binder during the assembly. At a current density of 50 mA g−1, this foam-like graphene material exhibited initial charge and discharge capacities of 732 and 1059 mA h g−1, respectively. However, at a higher current density of 4 A g−1, the reversible capacity was found to be ∼140 mA h g−1. The cycle stability of graphene foam, measured during 100 cycles at a current density 1 A g−1, exhibited a reversible capacity of ∼82% of the initial capacity.140 It was proposed that the freeze-drying technique may help us to increase the inter-layer distance between the graphene layers, thus improving the cycling stability and rate performance.141 Hu et al.142 synthesized free-standing GP with different thicknesses (∼1.5, 3, and 10 μm) using water-suspended reduced GNS, following a vacuum-assisted filtration method. Cyclic voltammetry studies suggest that the thickness of the GP significantly influences the electrochemical performance and the thinner GP exhibited better performance than the thicker GP. At a current density of 100 mA g−1, 1.5 μm thick GP could deliver an initial reversible specific capacity of ∼200 mA h g−1 (first 10 cycles). In contrast, 10 μm thick GP exhibited a specific capacity of only ∼80 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1. In addition, after 100 cycles, a specific capacity of ∼180 mA h g−1 was retained in the case of 1.5 μm thick GP, whereas the 10 μm thick GP exhibited only ∼65 mA h g−1. Furthermore, compared to the 3 μm thick GP, the 1.5 μm thick GP retained higher columbic efficiency and better cyclic stability during the 100 cycles. The inferior performance of the thicker GP was attributed to the lower surface area due to the dense restacking of graphene layers. This stacking of graphene increased the diffusion length through the cross-plane rather than in the plane of the GP.142 Recently, Dao et al.143 fabricated super-tough GP via the vacuum filtration of functionalized graphene. In this process, graphene was functionalized with polycaprolactone (PCL) brushes by the polymerization of caprolactone from the functional groups of graphene. The polymer brushes served as physical cross-linkers and gave the graphene paper a very high toughness (3.49 × 106 J m−3) of 5 times higher than that of un-functionalized graphene. This super-tough GP exhibited a stabile discharge capacity of ∼450 mA h g−1 at a current density of 300 mA g−1. The cyclic stability was also measured at a current density of 60 mA g−1 during 50 cycles, which exhibited a Coulombic efficiency of over 95%.
5.3 Reduced graphene oxide nanostructures
It has been reported that the large d-spacing and high specific surface area of graphene are not the only factors for enhanced capacity; the existence of surface defects along with functional groups of graphene also improved the electrochemical performances.144 Depending on the reduction process, the capacity of RGO was found to vary from 230 to 717 mA h g−1. The reduction procedures significantly influence the degree of reduction of GO and thus the lithium storage capacity. Wang et al.145 synthesized epoxide-enriched GO; without reduction, it can be used as a promising electrode material for LIB. This electrode material delivered a lithium storage capacity of 360.4 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1. The cycling stability, measured at 100 mA g−1 over the 60 cycles suggested good stability with Coulombic efficiency of over 100% of the initial capacity. It has been reported that the highly disordered feature of RGO can be beneficial for relatively higher lithium storage. The effect of different structural parameters on the lithium storage properties was systemically studied by Pan et al.146 They synthesized RGO by the reduction of GO using various methods, such as chemical reduction, electron beam irradiation, and pyrolysis. The experimental results suggest that these methods can produce different degrees of structural disorder or defects in RGO, which remarkably influenced the lithium storage properties. The disordered features were extensively studied using Raman spectroscopy. The electrochemical studies revealed that the additional reversible storage sites such as those at edges and other defects play a crucial role in enhancing capacity. In addition, highly disordered graphene prepared by electron beam irradiation and low-temperature pyrolysis at 300 °C exhibited high reversible capacities of 1054 mA h g−1 and 1013 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1, respectively, much higher than those of the previously reported pure graphene nanosheets (540 mA h g−1) and doped graphene nanosheets (730–784 mA h g−1).146,147 In particular, highly disordered graphene nanosheets prepared by low-temperature pyrolysis and electron beam irradiation exhibited an exceptionally high reversible capacity and good cyclic stability. The enhanced capacity in disordered graphene nanosheets was mainly ascribed to additional reversible storage sites such as edges and other defects. Kumar et al.148 synthesized Li+ intercalated RGO. The synthesis method involves reduction of GO in the presence of lithium metal and liquid ammonia. Intercalation and binding of Li+ with RGO was confirmed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic analysis. It was suggested that partial intercalations of Li+ between the layers of RGO can enhance storage capacity. Therefore, at a current density of 25 mA g−1, storage capacities of 300, 340, and 410 mA h g−1 could be achieved in the cases of graphite, RGO, and Li-RGO electrode, respectively. In addition, compared to graphite and RGO, the Li-RGO electrode showed better cyclic performance (40 cycles) with a Coulombic efficiency of ∼85% of initial capacity. Kuo et al.149 prepared RGO using a controlled chemical and thermal reduction process. The chemical reduction of GO into RGO was performed through the refluxing of GO solution in the presence of hydrazine at 100 °C for 24 h, whereas calcinations of GO at different temperatures in the presence of H2/N2 for a period of 2 h yielded the formation of thermally reduced GO. The specific functionalities of RGO were found to dominate the surface defects and large specific surface area for enhancing the reversible capacity. Furthermore, phenol and cyclic edge ether groups were responsible for contributing the capacities over the potential of 1.5 V and in the range of 0.8–1.5 V, respectively. However, other functional groups such as carbonyl, carboxyl, and lactone did not contribute to the reversible lithiation/de-lithiation processes.149
5.4 Nitrogen/boron/sulfur doped graphene nanostructures
The structural evolution of RGO under different refluxing times was studied by Shen et al.150 The reduction and functionalization of graphene were achieved in the presence of dimethylformamide at 140 °C using the solvothermal method. The evolution of structural changes was related to the simultaneous N-doping/dangling bonds, and was found to be dependent on refluxing time. Furthermore, it was observed that the increase of refluxing time led to the growth of more topological defects and the presence of less oxygen-containing functional groups as examined through XPS. Therefore, a better reversible Li+ insertion was observed in electrodes prepared with RGO, subjected to a higher refluxing time. The solvothermally reduced and functionalized RGO exhibited a reversible capacity of 180.1 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 50 mA g−1. However, it showed a poor cyclic stability and thus was not suitable for the electrode material in the LIB.150 Nitrogen (N)- and Boron (B)-doped graphene materials are expected to enhance the Li-storage capacity. Reddy et al.151 synthesized N-doped graphene using a liquid precursor based on the CVD technique. Growth was achieved directly on the Cu used as the current collector. This technique allows growth of the N-doped graphene films with a high percentage of pyridinic N atoms, which were found to be responsible for the enhanced Li+ intercalation. The induced topological defects in N-doped graphene were responsible for increasing the reversible discharge capacity compared to the pristine graphene.151,152 The thermal treatment of GO at 800 °C (for 2 h) under an ammonia atmosphere was used to produce N-doped graphene. The XPS results revealed 2% N doping, with the N binding configurations of the graphene including 7.6% graphitic, 35.0% pyrrolic, and 57.4% pyridinic N atoms.153 At a current density of 42 mA g−1 (1/20 C), the N-doped graphene electrode exhibited a reversible capacity of 900 mA h g−1. Moreover, a rate performance of 250 mA h g−1 at a current density of 2.1 A g−1 (2.5 C) and a significantly enhanced cycling stability compared to un-doped graphene were also observed. More importantly, when the N-doped graphene electrode was re-cycled at C/10 (after 60 cycles at different current densities), it surpassed the capacity delivered in the initial 20 cycles.153 Recently, Cai et al.154 synthesized highly N-doped graphene (7.04 at%) via a thermal annealing process. In this process, graphene sheets prepared by rapid thermal expansion were first mixed with melamine through grinding, and the mixture was then subjected to a combustion process at 700 °C under an Ar atmosphere. When used as an electrode, at a current density of 50 mA g−1, this N-doped graphene exhibited a high reversible specific capacity of 1123 mA h g−1, whereas at a high current density of (20 A g−1), it delivered a capacity of ∼241 mA h g−1.154
In N-doped graphene, the effect of the electron deficiency on the electrochemical properties has also been investigated through first-principle calculations using different models such as graphitic, pyrrolic, and pyridinic graphene.155 Among these, the graphitic structure was found to be the weakest, whereas pyridinic graphene was the most suitable candidate for high Li+ storage. In the case of a pyridinic structure, a reversible capacity of 1262 mA h g−1 was observed, which was higher than the experimental value of 1043 mA h g−1. The adsorption properties of Li+ on B-doped graphene were also investigated by DFT.156 The DFT calculation showed that the doping of boron into graphene makes the system more electron-deficient. Therefore, more Li+ could be captured around the B-doped centers compared to pristine graphene, and the lithium storage capacity was dramatically improved. Similarly, the doping of sulfur in graphene based anodes enhanced the capacity and rate performance, making it a promising anode material for lithium-ion batteries.157 Recently, Yun et al.158 studied the electrochemical performance of sulfur doped GNS (S-GNS). The S-GNS were prepared by thermal treatment of elemental sulfur and lyophilized GO mixtures. The electrochemical performance of S-GNS was observed to be superior to that of un-doped GNS. The S-GNS exhibited capacities of 285 mA h g−1 at a rate of 30 C (1 C = 372 mA g−1), which was nearly three times higher than that of un-doped GNS. The cycling stability of the S-GNS electrode was measured during the 500 charge/discharge cycles at a rate of 4 C, which showed a capacity of ∼300 mA h g−1 with a Coulombic efficiency of ∼75%. This improved rate performance of S-GNS was attributed to superior electrical properties compared to un-doped GNS.
5.5 Graphene/CNT hybrid nanostructures
The layered spacing between graphene influences the accommodation of Li+, which can further be controlled by the interaction with fullerenes (C60) and carbon nanotubes (CNT).147 The incorporation of CNT and C60 in the GNS enhanced the storage capacities to 730 mA h g−1 and 784 mA h g−1, respectively. The storage capacity was found to be higher than that of bare GNS (540 mA h g−1). The large d-spacing (0.40 nm) in the cases of the GNS + CNT and GNS + C60 hybrid electrodes were observed to be responsible for the enhanced storage capacity. The electrochemical measurements showed that after 20 cycles, the GNS, GNS + CNT, and GNS + C60 electrodes retained the reversible capacities of 54%, 66%, and 77%, respectively.147 A hybrid paper of graphene/CNTs exhibited high mechanical strength and flexibility. This hybrid paper-like electrode (CNT/graphene and optimized ratio of 2:1) delivered the highest Li+ storage capacities.159 At a current density of 100 mA g−1, a reversible specific capacity of ∼375 mA h g−1 was delivered and over 330 mA h g−1 was retained even after 100 cycles. The presence of CNTs restricts the restacking of GNS, which simultaneously increases the cross-plane electrical conductivity of the paper and the Li+ storage capacity. Furthermore, the electrode containing CNTs as a buffer exhibited better performance than the electrodes either containing a graphene buffer or not.160 Recently, Wang et al.161 synthesized a CNT/graphene hybrid using the CVD method with a mixture of H2 and C2H4, grown on copper foil, which was directly used as the electrode for LIBs (Fig. 6). The morphological investigations revealed that in this hybrid, CNT behaves similar to pillars between the graphene sheets. The seamless connection between the CNT pillars and graphene significantly enhances the charge transfer in the hybrid system. Therefore, this hybrid could deliver a reversible capacity that varies from 900 mA h g−1 to 526.26 mA h g−1 at a current density ranging from 100 mA g−1 to 900 mA g−1. The cycling performance and Coulombic efficiency of this hybrid electrode were tested at a current density of 600 mA g−1, and suggested good stability with a Coulombic efficiency of nearly 100% (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the pillared CNT and graphene nanostructure on a copper foil. (b) Photograph of centimeter-scale PGN on a copper foil. (c) Tilted-view SEM image showing both PGN regions and graphene regions at the same location. (d) Top-view SEM images of graphene and (e) pillared CNT regions. (f) High-magnification and (g) low-magnification cross-section SEM observation of the PGN. (h) High resolution TEM image of as-grown CNTs.161 
 Fig. 7  Galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles of (a) PGN electrode at a low current density of 100 mA g−1 and (b) PGN electrode under a range of current densities from100 mA g−1 to 900 mA g−1. (c) Cycling performance and Coulombic efficiency of the PGN electrode at a current density of 600 mA g−1. (d) High-rate cycling performance of the LIB with PGN anode.161 
Wang et al.162 also synthesized a self-assembled layer by layer CNT/GO hybrid, directly grown on a copper foil and used as an anode for LIB. These hybrids could store energy up to a different extent, depending on the thickness. It was observed that at a current density of 0.01 mA cm−2, an electrode having a thickness of 917.0 nm delivered a reversible capacity of 0.265 mA h cm−2. Furthermore, a reversible capacity of 0.030 mA h cm−2 was observed even at a higher current density of 0.4 mA cm−2. It was concluded that such hybrid electrodes having thicknesses of less than one micron might be promising candidates for energy storage in micro devices. Vinayan et al.163 synthesized a hybrid of graphene and MWCNTs. In this method, graphene synthesized by solar exfoliation and MWCNTs synthesized by CVD were chemically mixed after the surface functionalization. It was observed that the electrostatic interaction between graphene and the MWCNTs effectively suppressed the restacking of graphene, and provided a highly accessible electroactive surface area and a short diffusion path for Li+. These properties significantly improved the electrochemical performance of these hybrid electrodes.163,164 An array structure of 3D-MWCNTs/graphene was fabricated on a flexible and transparent polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film through a lamination process.165 The 3D column structure of MWCNTs onto graphene-PET film provides good structural integrity and low contact resistance even at high angle bending. When used as an anode, this hybrid exhibited a reversible specific capacity of ∼250 mA h g−1 at a current density 63 mA g−1 along with a good Coulombic efficiency of over 99%.165Table 1 summarizes the different types of carbon based electrode materials and their performances in LIBs. It was concluded that in most cases, graphene based electrode materials show their superiority over other materials.
Table 1 Different types of carbon nanostructures based anode materials and their performances in LIBs




System
Synthesis process
Structural morphology
Performance
Ref.




Amorphous carbon nanotubes (ACNTs)
Arc discharge method
Uniform & flexible type nanotubes having length ∼μm
ACNTs oxidized at 300 C exhibit reversible capacity of ∼530 mA h g−1 at 20 mA g−1 which retain 93% after 5 cycles, whereas ACNTs oxidized at 350 °C exhibit a capacity of ∼440 mA h g−1 after 20 cycles

22



MWCNT paper
CVD technique
Nearly uniformly grown nanotubes with several ∼μm in length
Reversible capacity of ∼330 mA h g−1 was measured up to 10 cycles at a current density of 74 mA g−1 whereas at 372 mA g−1 it delivered a reversible capacity over 225 mA h g−1 after 10 cycles and nearly 100% Coulombic efficiency

23



Mesoporous carbon/MWNT hybrid
Soft template approach at low carbonization temperatures
Mesoporous morphology
The specific capacity of ∼380 mA h g−1 at 2 C after 20 cycles and 94 mA h g−1 at 30 C after 50 cycles. However, the Coulombic efficiency of the electrode was ∼80% only, measured up to 20 cycles. Therefore, impedes its practical applications

24



Carbon nanotube/carbon fibre hybrid
CVD technique
Carbon nanotube networks onto carbon fibre paper as the support
Initial capacity was observed to be 643 mA h g−1 under the constant current discharge rate of 0.05 mA cm−2, whereas reversible capacities of 546 mA h g−1 and 338 mA h g−1 were delivered at current densities of 0.05 mA cm−2 and 0.05 mA cm−2, respectively, after 50 cycles

25



MWCNT-coated mesophase carbon microbeads hybrid
Chemical functionalization
MWNTs having diameter of 10–20 nm covered the surface of mesophase carbon microbead, exhibited a porous structure
Capacity of ∼300 mA h g−1 at a rate of 2.1 C up to 30 cycles and ∼160 mA h g−1 at a rate of 7.0 C up to 40 cycles

31



Activated microporous carbon
Carbonization phenol–melamine–formaldehyde resin, and activated by ZnCl2
Microspheres consisting of shallow concave pores
Reversible capacity of ∼300 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 up to 20 cycles, ∼200 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 up to 40 cycles, whereas ∼100 mA h g−1 at 300 mA g−1 up to 60 cycles

32



Activated nitrogen-containing carbon
Carbonization and activation process
Spherical particles ∼100 nm
At a current density of 100 mA g−1 the first cycle discharged and charged capacity up to 917 mA h g−1 and 377 mA h g−1, respectively. However, a reversible capacity of only ∼251 mA h g−1 after 20 cycles was delivered at the same current density with a Coulombic efficiency of ∼90%

33



Carbon nanofibers
Electrospun assisted by carbonization
Carbon fibers, forming 3-D structures
Specific capacity of ∼380 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 up to 100 cycles (with Coulombic efficiency of 99%), whereas ∼200 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 up to 35 cycles. Besides, when re-cycled at 20 mA g−1 after 40 cycles, delivered a capacity of ∼500 mA h g−1 compared to 550 mA h g−1 after 5 cycles

34



Porous nitrogen-doped carbon vegetable-sponges
Chemical treatment of the Cu@C precursors using HNO3
Porous micro-vegetable-sponges like along with the 3D interconnected framework
At a current density of 0.5 A g−1 capacity observed was ∼870 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles and exhibited a reversible capacity of ∼910 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 after cycled at different rates

35



CNTs with bamboo-like structure
CVD technique
Bend graphite-like sheets, form many separated cavities and resemble bamboo like structure
First cycle charged capacity of 710 mA h g−1; however, very low reversible capacity of ∼131 mA h g−1 during 30 cycles suggest that the electrode is not suitable for the anode in LIB

36



Carbon spheres

Via thermal decomposition of resorcinol–formaldehyde precursor
Carbon spheres ∼500 nm
At a current density of 0.2 mA cm−2, initial discharge capacity of ∼950 mA h g−1 was observed. However, a rapid fading of capacity occurred in the second cycle, and delivered a stable capacity of ∼350 mA h g−1 after 135 cycles

37



CNT film
Vacuum filtration technique
Thickness of film ∼61 μm and exhibited a porous CNT network
At a current density of 100 mA g−1, a reversible capacity was observed to be ∼200 mA h g−1 up to 40 cycles and it was nearly ∼200 mA h g−1 when cycled at 600 mA g−1 up to 100 cycles

38



Vertically aligned MWCNTs
Pyrolysis technique
Vertically aligned MWCNTs consisting of 8.6 ± 0.3 μm in length and diameter of 77 ± 23 nm
At a low current density of 57 mA g−1 the specific capacity was observed to be 782 mA h g−1 by 36 cycles but at a high current density of 26 A g−1 exhibited 166 mA h g−1

39



Graphene sheets, expanded graphite and natural graphite
Graphene prepared by the chemical method assisted by thermal and ultrasonication treatment
Graphene exhibited nearly transparent nanosheets along with a wrinkled structure
First cycle reversible capacities of the graphene electrode were observed to be 1130 and 636 mA h g−1 at low current densities of 0.2 and 1 mA cm−2, respectively, almost twice to that of the expanded graphite electrode, whereas three times to that of the natural graphite electrode. However, a graphene sheet delivered a reversible capacity only ∼400 mA h g−1 at 1 mA cm−2 after 30 cycles

40





5.6 Graphene oxide as the corrosion inhibitor for current collectors in LIB
It has been reported that graphene can also be helpful as a corrosion inhibitor for metals. However, using graphene as a corrosion inhibitor for the current collector in LIBs (with non-aqueous electrolytes) may not be effective. In the case of non-ionic graphene, unbiased ionic diffusion of the charges can take place, where an electrolyte would easily be swamped due to the high surface area of graphene. These phenomena may cause a higher rate of corrosion.166 Prabakar et al.166 reported that GO can be a better candidate as a corrosion inhibitor for aluminum (Al) current collectors in LIBs. The spin coating of GO onto Al was applied and used as a current collector. The strongly adhered GO on the Al can effectively inhibit the corrosion in the electrolyte. Moreover, the electrochemical results suggested that, compared to uncoated Al, the GO-coated Al current collector improved the performance of the system in terms of a relatively higher capacity and improved cyclability.
6. Metal oxide/graphene hybrid as anode materials
As electrode materials, nanostructured metal oxides have some advantages over bulk materials due to their high specific surface area. The high surface area can significantly improve the electrode–electrolyte interaction, and therefore create a shorter diffusion length for Li+ and electrons. However, some disadvantages are associated with the high specific surface area and low thermodynamic stability of the nanoparticles. Moreover, the large variation of volume during the cycling process causes pulverization of the electrode, which results in poor reversibility. It has been observed that the nanomaterials tend to agglomerate due to the high surface energy, and it is therefore very difficult to disperse or mix them with carbon black and binders to produce electrodes. These difficulties cause a higher contact resistance of the electrode compared to the bulk materials. During the cycling process, a pronounced agglomeration is observed and a risk of secondary reactions. These phenomena are associated with electrolyte decomposition between the electrode and electrolyte medium, which results in a high level of irreversibility and poor life cycle.112 On the other hand, graphene generally suffers from serious agglomeration and restacking due to van der Waals interactions, and consequently causes poor electrochemical performance. The difficulties associated with metal-oxide nanoparticles and graphene could be overcome by fabricating metal-oxide/graphene hybrid materials. Therefore, various types of metal-oxide/graphene hybrid nanostructures have been synthesized and studied as electrode materials for LIBs. In the hybrid state, the nanoparticles increase the space between graphene layers, avoiding the restacking of graphene sheets, and react as active materials to interact with Li+ ions; meanwhile, graphene avoids the problems of poor conductivity and volume changes of the nanoparticles during the cycling process. Therefore, metal-oxide/graphene hybrids can significantly improve the electrochemical properties of the system compared to their constituents.
6.1 Titanium dioxide/graphene hybrid
Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is an environmentally friendly transition metal oxide with a stable structure, which makes it an apt anode material for LIBs, despite a low theoretical capacity of 336 mA h g−1.167 However, the poor rate capability resulting from the inherent poor electrical conductivity (∼1 × 10−12 S m−1) and high electrical resistance between the electrode and current collector as well as low ionic conductivity (∼1.2 × 1020 S−1 m−2) limit its practical application. In order to improve the electrochemical properties, graphene has been used in its hybrid form, which reduces the irreversible heat and internal resistance during the charge/discharge process, thus improving the performance of these hybrid electrode materials.168–173 Xin et al.174 synthesized TiO2/graphene hybrid nanostructures through the chemical method assisted by thermal treatment. In this method, sodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate was used as a surfactant and hydroxyl titanium oxalate as the intermediate for TiO2. This hybrid exhibited flower-like TiO2 nanostructures grown on graphene sheets.174 The TiO2/graphene hybrid could deliver a capacity of 230 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C (with a current density of 17 mA g−1). However, after 45 cycles, at a high rate of 50 C, it delivered a capacity of 80 mA h g−1 (∼35% of the initial capacity), which was ∼30% higher than that of a bare TiO2 (60 mA h g−1) electrode. In addition, after this high rate test, the capacity was re-measured at a low rate of 1 C, yet exceeded that measured during the initial cycles at the same rate.174 Size-tunable surface-nitridated TiO2 nanospindles densely immobilized on GNS exhibited characteristics of a highly conductive matrix and boosted the cycling performance of LIBs.175 In this method, anatase TiO2 nanospindles of a controlled size were first synthesized via hydrothermal methods, where tubular titanates were used as the self-sacrificing precursors. Subsequently, the synthesized TiO2 nanospindles were densely dispersed onto functionalized GO through a spontaneous self-assembly process and further annealed in an NH3 gas flow. The above process led to the formation of a surface nitrated TiO2/graphene hybrid (TiO2@TiOxNy/TiN-GS). The TiO2@TiOxNy/TiN-GS hybrid exhibited an initial discharge capacity of ∼314 mA h g−1 at a rate of C/5, which is higher than that of the TiO2@TiOxNy/TiN (∼287 mA h g−1) anode. This improved electrochemical property was attributed to the conductive nitrated layer on the surface of the TiO2 nanoparticles and graphene sheet which enhanced the lithium insertion/extraction kinetics. Furthermore, the TiO2@TiOxNy/TiN-GS hybrid delivered the specific capacitances of 166 mA h g−1, 150 mA h g−1, and 130 mA h g−1 at a rate of 1 C, 3 C, and 12 C, respectively. In contrast, the TiO2@TiOxNy/TiN hybrid could deliver the specific capacities of only ∼149 mA h g−1, ∼110 mA h g−1, and ∼86 mA g−1 under the same conditions.175
A unique 3-D hybrid of graphene and TiO2 as a binder-free paper was fabricated by Hu et al.176 In this structure, TiO2 forms pillars between the graphene layers and significantly enhances the insertion and extraction rate of Li+. As a result, compared to bare TiO2 and graphene, significantly improved electrochemical performance was observed with this hybrid electrode.176 Li et al.177 fabricated anisotropic and isotropic TiO2/graphene sandwich paper via a vacuum filtration route assisted by hydrothermal reaction. A controlled chemical reaction under a hydrothermal condition led to the formation of TiO2 nanosheets parallel to the surface of the graphene paper. Fig. 8 shows SEM and TEM images of the TiO2/graphene hybrid material. It was observed that the anisotropic TiO2/graphene hybrid paper electrode exhibited the capacity of 112 mA h g−1 at a high rate of 100 C (corresponding to 36 s of charge/discharge), which was found to be 3 times higher than that of the isotropic TiO2/graphene paper electrode. Moreover, the anisotropic TiO2/graphene paper electrode exhibited stable cyclic performance when tested at 10 C up to 100 cycles, much better than that of the isotropic TiO2/graphene paper electrode. As shown in Fig. 9, the anisotropic TiO2/graphene paper also demonstrated rate capability superior to the isotropic TiO2/graphene paper electrode. This improved performance was ascribed to the easy intercalation of Li+ into the reactive surface of TiO2 of the anisotropic TiO2/graphene hybrid paper electrode during the electrochemical process. Qiu et al.178 synthesized a TiO2/RGO hybrid using a TiO2 assisted photo-catalytic reaction approach. Using this method, a homogeneous suspension of pre-synthesized TiO2 nanoparticles and GO was placed under the UV irradiation, which leads to the formation of a TiO2/RGO hybrid. The TiO2/RGO hybrid exhibited a reversible charge and discharge capacity of 270 and 310 mA h g−1 (at a current density 100 mA g−1), respectively, which was better than that of TiO2/GO and bare TiO2 nanoparticles electrodes. In addition, the TiO2/RGO hybrid electrode delivered a capacity of ∼200 mA h g−1, even after 100 cycles and shows a good rate performance. It has also been reported that the graphene improves the thermal stability of the hybrid electrode and prevents the phase transformation in TiO2; i.e., from monoclinic [TiO2 (B)] to anatase.179 The specific capacities in the TiO2-(B)/graphene hybrid were observed to be 215, 182, and 150 mA h g−1 at the current rates of 1, 5, and 10 C, respectively. On the other hand, bare TiO2 (B) exhibited specific capacities of 184, 121, and 99 mA h g−1 at 1, 5, and 10 C, respectively. The cycling performance of TiO2-(B)/graphene hybrid and bare TiO2(B) electrodes was examined at 1 C for 100 cycles. The TiO2-(B)/graphene hybrid electrode exhibited a discharge capacity starting at 232 mA h g−1 and retained ∼189 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles, with a capacity loss of 18%. In contrast, the bare TiO2(B) electrode showed much faster decay in capacity with a loss of 49% under the same conditions.179 This superior performance in the TiO2-(B)/graphene hybrid electrode was ascribed to the enhanced electrical conductivity and better accommodation to volume/strain change during the cycling process.180
 Fig. 8  Characterization of A-TO/GSP. (a) Photograph of a bent flexible A-TO/GSP. (b and c) Cross-sectional SEM images of the A-TO/GSP. (d) High magnification SEM image of LTO nanosheets in A-TO/GSP. (e) TEM image of the A-TO/GSP. (f) HRTEM image of a TiO2 nanosheet showing lattice fringes with a spacing of 0.19 nm. The lithium diffusion channels are clearly shown to be along [001] (perpendicular to the figure facet).177 
 Fig. 9  (a) Galvanostatic discharge–charge voltage profiles of A-TO/GSP cycled at different rates. Comparison of the (b) specific capacity at different rates and (c) cycling performance at 10 C between the A-TO/GSP and I-TO/GSP electrodes.177 
Recently, Li et al.181 synthesized graphene nanoscrolls encapsulated TiO2 (B) nanowires through a self-scrolling and template-free approach via a hydrothermal route followed by ion-exchange and subsequent heat treatment. TEM investigations revealed that GNS encompassed the TiO2 (B) nanowires to construct nanoscrolled architectures. The electrochemical measurement revealed that this hybrid electrode delivers a reversible specific capacity of 153 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles at 10 C and retains a capacity of ∼94%, which was much higher than that of the bare TiO2 (B) (60 mA h g−1) electrode. Furthermore, it has been proposed that the porous nanoscrolled architectures expedite the transportation of Li+ and alleviate the volume change during the process of lithiation and delithiation, thus improving the electrochemical performance of the hybrid electrode. The unique structural morphology of TiO2 nanowires/graphene may demonstrate that it is a promising electrode material for LIBs.182 A hydrothermal method was used to prepare the hybrid of TiO2/mesoporous 3D-graphene aerogels (GAs).183 This hybrid was composed of TiO2 single nanocrystals, uniformly grown on the surface of GAs. In the synthesis method, glucose was used as the linker and face-controlling agent, which led to the growth of (001) facets TiO2 and a hierarchical mesoporous structure. The TiO2/GA hybrid electrode exhibited a high rate capability, and cycling stability for LIBs compared to bare TiO2. The TiO2/GA hybrid could deliver a capacity of 200 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 after 50 cycles, whereas a reversible capacity of 99 mA h g−1 was delivered at a very high rate of 5 A g−1. These reversible capacities were 4 times higher than that of the bare TiO2 nanocrystals electrode, achieved under the same conditions. The doping of N further enhances the electrical conductivity and leads to more defects, therefore significantly improving the electrochemical performance of the N-TiO2/graphene hybrid compared to TiO2/graphene, TiO2, and graphene electrodes.184–186 Ban et al.187 fabricated TiO2/graphene hybrid through atomic layer deposition (ALD) techniques. In order to avoid the poor nucleation of TiO2, a layer of Al2O3 was initially deposited onto the graphene using the ALD technique, where the Al2O3 adhesion layers were nearly amorphous in nature. The TiO2/graphene hybrid electrode could deliver a capacity of ∼120 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 1 A g−1 and retained 95% of the initial capacity, even after 500 charge/discharge cycles. In addition, when cycled at different current rates (after 100 cycles) it delivered a reversible capacity of ∼175 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1, which was nearly the same when measured after 20 cycles. Menéndez et al.188 synthesized titania nanotubes (nt-TiO2)/RGO hybrid using an electro-deposition technique. In this method, amorphous TiO2 nanotubes were first grown on a TiO2 foil through the electrochemical anodization process. Graphene was then electrophoretically deposited on the surface of nt-TiO2. The FE-SEM micrographs of nt-TiO2 obtained through the anodization of the Ti foil revealed that the nanotubes were self-arranged with open mouths. The diameter and length of the nanotubes were about 50–80 nm and 5 μm, respectively. Subsequently, the deposition of graphene covered the mouths of nt-TiO2 with a 100 nm thick flat surface. The nt-TiO2/RGO hybrid electrode retained capacity values >200 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles for 1.0–2.6 V of potential range and >300 mA h g−1 for 0.0–3.0 V. Also, the capacities of 200 mA h g−1, 100 mA h g−1, and 50 mA h g−1 were achieved at rates of 15 C, 85 C, and 300 C, respectively.
6.2 Iron oxides/graphene hybrid
Iron oxide, particularly Fe2O3 and Fe3O4, is considered to be one of the most important and promising anode materials due to its natural abundance, non-toxicity, and low cost. Fe3O4 possesses a high theoretical capacity of 924 mA h g−1, whereas that of Fe2O3 is 1005 mA h g−1. However, during the cycling process, a large volume change usually occurs, which results in rapid fading of the capacity. In order to improve the reversible capacity and rate capability of the electrodes, graphene has been used as a conductive additive with these nanoparticles.189–195 Recently, Fe3O4/graphene hybrids have been extensively studied as anode materials for LIBs.196–210 Yang et al.211 synthesized iron oxide nanoribbons/graphene hybrid nanostructured by the controlled nucleation and growth of the iron precursor onto the surface of RGO and following the post calcination treatment at different temperatures (250–400 °C). It was observed that in the hybrid form, the unique structural features of iron oxide nanoribbons, including a large aspect ratio, a porous structure, and an enhanced open-edge, results in electrochemical performance superior to bare iron oxide nanostructured. This hybrid could deliver a reversible capacity of 1046 mA h g−1 at a current density of 74 mA g−1 during the initial charging process, and maintained nearly 100% even after 130 cycles. Moreover, after 30 cycles, reversible capacities of ∼900 mA h g−1, 615 mA h g−1, and 400 mA h g−1 were achieved at high current densities of 372, 1860, and 3720 mA g−1, respectively. This improved electrochemical performance of the Fe3O4/graphene hybrid was attributed to the fact that Fe3O4 nanoparticles act as redox sites and spacers. Moreover, the 3D architecture of the hybrid effectively facilitates the ionic diffusion of Li+, and improves the storage capacity.212,213 Using the in situ thermal decomposition of Fe(NO3)3·9H2O, mesoporous iron oxide (MIO) nanofilm was directly grown on GNS.214 The SEM and TEM investigations revealed that in the MIO/GNS hybrid, GNS were tightly sandwiched between the MIO nanofilms with an average thickness of ∼7 nm. The mesoporous structure partially accommodates the lithiation-induced strain and assists the access of the electrolyte while improving the Li+ diffusion. Consequently, this hybrid electrode exhibited an excellent cycling stability and rate capability with negligible fading of capacity. At a current density of 100 mA g−1, this hybrid electrode delivered a high specific capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 with a Coulombic efficiency of ∼100% after 400 cycles.214 Besides, microsphere-type Fe3O4 with an interstitial cluster structure allows for better percolation of the electrolyte, and efficient accommodation with stress and strain of volume change. Therefore, the electrochemical performance of the Fe3O4/pyrolytic GO hybrid was significantly improved compared to the bare Fe3O4 nanoparticles electrode.215 Luo et al.216 fabricated a 3-D graphene foam supported by a mesoporous Fe3O4 nanostructure, using a bottom-up strategy with ALD. In this method, the bi-continuous mesoporous nanostructure of Fe3O4 was deposited on the GNS using ZnO sacrificial layer assisted hydrolysis. Fig. 10 shows a schematic diagram of the sample structure. Due to the unique bi-continuous mesoporous structure, the 3-D graphene/Fe3O4 hybrid electrode exhibited a capacity of ∼785 mA h g−1 at a 1 C discharge/charge rate and maintained this capacity even up to 500 cycles. Also, a capacity of 800 mA h g−1 was measured when the C rate was reduced from 60 C to 1 C (after 60 cycles), implying a good stability and excellent reversibility. As shown in Fig. 11, the cyclic capacity profiles at rates of 6 C and 10 C measured during 500 cycles were reasonable and were retained at ∼400 and 300 mA h g−1, respectively.
 Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of the sample structure. (a) Graphene foam backbone. (b) Graphene foam coated with ZnO using atomic layer deposition (GF@ZnO). (c) Graphene foam supported Fe3O4 nanostructure electrodes (GF@Fe3O4).216 
 Fig. 11  Electrochemical properties of the GF@Fe3O4 LIB electrodes. (a) CV curves of the GF@Fe3O4 electrode. (b) Discharge–charge voltage capacity profiles of the GF@Fe3O4 electrode at a rate of 1 C. (c) Cycling profiles of the GF and GF@Fe3O4 electrodes at a rate of 1 C.216 
Zhao et al.217 synthesized graphene nanoscroll wrapped on Fe3O4 nanoparticles with a 1D tubular form resembling that of the MWCNT structure. This method involved quenching of GO in the presence of Fe3O4 nanoparticles in liquid nitrogen. It was observed that the wrapping structures depend on several factors, including the zeta potential of Fe3O4 nanoparticles, the initial temperature of the mixed solution, and the mode of quenching. Moreover, the wrapping structures greatly influence the electrochemical performance, and the 1D wrapping was more favorable over 2D wrapping for better lithium storage. The hybrid electrode with 1D wrapping of graphene on Fe3O4 nanoparticles delivered a capacity of ∼1010 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C (100 mA g−1) after 50 cycles and retained about 300 mA h g−1 at a high rate of 5 C, which was ∼33% of the initial capacity, measured at 0.1 C. In contrast, the 2D wrapped Fe3O4/graphene hybrid exhibited a capacity of ∼840 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C after 50 cycles. Chen et al.218 synthesized an α-Fe2O3/graphene hybrid using an in situ wet chemical method under atmospheric pressure. The SEM/TEM studies revealed that this hybrid comprised a 3D quasi-laminated architecture, where α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles with a diameter of ∼130 nm were homogeneously anchored on the GNS. The cycling performance of bare α-Fe2O3 and α-Fe2O3/graphene hybrid electrodes was measured at a current density of 100 mA g−1 for 50 cycles. The experimental measurements revealed that the bare α-Fe2O3 nanoparticle electrode lost its capacity from 809 mA h g−1 to 97 mA h g−1, which was only ∼6% of the initial capacity, suggesting poor capacity retention. In contrast, the α-Fe2O3/graphene hybrid electrode exhibited a relatively high discharge capacity of ∼827 mA h g−1 in the second cycle. Subsequently, the capacity slowly dropped to 742 mA h g−1 during the first 30 cycles, and then stabilized at ∼742 mA h g−1 without further loss in capacity up to the 50th cycle. This improved performance was ascribed to the combined effects of the 3D quasi-laminated, flexible architecture and the highly conductive/good structural stability of the electrode due to the presence of graphene.218 Using the ferrous ions as both a reducing agent and an iron source, the synthesis of Fe2O3/graphene hybrids was reported by Zhang et al.219 With this synthesis approach, a mixture of GO, FeCl2, and urea was refluxed under ambient conditions using a microwave heater and subsequent heat treatment at 493 K under an Ar atmosphere. The morphological studies further suggest that Fe2O3 nanoparticles (∼50 nm) were firmly wrapped by graphene sheets resembling a crumpled paper. When used as the anode material, this hybrid electrode delivered a reversible capacity of 800 mA h g−1 at a charge/discharge rate of 0.2 after 100 cycles. In addition, after 30 cycles, a capacity as high as 420 mA h g−1 at a rate of 5 C was achieved.
Recently, Yang et al.220 fabricated self-assembled 3-D nanoporous Fe2O3/Fe3C-graphene heterogeneous thin films using the CVD technique. It was observed that the electrode kinetics during the Li+ insertion/extraction was significantly improved due to the formation of a graphene protective shell and a heterogeneous structure in the thin film. This hybrid exhibits enhanced cyclability and rate capacity compared to that of pristine Fe2O3. The specific capacity of 1118 mA h g−1 was obtained at a discharge current density of 0.17 C with 88% retention after 100 cycles, whereas 518 mA h g−1 at a discharge current density of 6.6 C for 1000 cycles. Furthermore, a power density of 1834 W kg−1 and an energy density of 924 Wh kg−1 could also be attained. Wang et al.221 synthesized a hybrid electrode of Fe2O3/graphene sheet aerogels using a solvothermal-induced self-assembly approach. The Fe2O3/graphene sheet aerogels hybrid consists of an interconnected macroporous framework where the Fe2O3 nanoparticles are uniformly dispersed on GNS. Due to the unique macroporous structures, high electrical conductivity, and large specific surface area, this hybrid electrode showed a superior rate capability (930 and 520 mA h g−1 at current densities of 500 and 4000 mA g−1, respectively) and prolonged cycling stability at high rates (733 mA h g−1 at current density of 2000 mA g−1 for 1000 cycles). It has also been reported that the sheet type nanostructured Fe2O3 encapsulated with GNS is more beneficial than the spherical nanoparticles and exhibit superior electrochemical performance for lithium storage.222 Wu et al.223 synthesized Fe@Fe2O3 (core–shell) nanoparticles/graphene hybrid via a hydrothermal route followed by an in situ thermal reduction process. This hybrid exhibits a 3D porous structure, where the shell region of Fe@Fe2O3 consisted of amorphous Fe2O3. The electrochemical measurements suggest that the Fe@Fe2O3/graphene hybrid electrode delivered a reversible charge capacity of 959.3 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 for up to 90 cycles. In addition, the Fe@Fe2O3/graphene hybrid exhibits long-life cycling performance at high current density. When the current density was increased to 2000 mA g−1, the Fe@Fe2O3/graphene hybrid electrode achieved a reversible capacity of 524.8 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles. Furthermore, when the current was reduced to the initial rate of 100 mA g−1 (after 66 cycles), this hybrid electrode recovered to a slightly higher capacity (1090 mA g−1 for the 125 cycles), thus suggesting good reversibility and its suitability as a high rate anode material.
Doping of nitrogen into graphene is another possible approach to enhance the performance of the Fe2O3/graphene hybrid for lithium storage. The uniqueness of the hybrid including thin nanoplatelets and sandwiched space helps in the buffering of the volume expansion, which results in a high reversible capacity of 1100 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at a rate of C/5.224 Moreover, specific capacities as high as 887 mA h g−1, 739 mA h g−1, and 531 mA h g−1 were achieved when the current density was increased to 1 C, 2 C, and 5 C, respectively. In contrast, the un-doped Fe2O3/graphene hybrid electrode could deliver relatively low capacity (135 mA h g−1 at a rate of 1 C) even after only 15 cycles.224 This improved electrochemical performance was attributed to the small particle size of Fe2O3 and improved electronic conductivity due to the doping of N in graphene, which causes a synergistic effect.225 Hu et al.226 synthesized porous Fe2O3 nanorods anchored on N-doped graphene (Fe2O3/N-graphene) by a hydrothermal route, assisted by microwave treatment. The Fe2O3/N-graphene hybrid was further coated with ultrathin Al2O3 film through the ALD technique. The electrochemical results suggest that the coating of Al2O3 onto Fe2O3/N-graphene improved the rate performance, cycling stability, and Coulombic efficiency. The Al2O3 coated Fe2O3/N-graphene hybrid electrode exhibited a stable capacity of 508 mA h g−1 at a current density of 2 A g−1 during 200 cycles. Moreover, a capacity of ∼249 mA h g−1 at a current density of 20 A g−1 was maintained without capacity fading for 2000 cycles as shown in Fig. 12. This improved electrochemical performance was attributed to the porous structure of the Fe2O3 nanorods, N-doped graphene framework, and ultrathin coating of Al2O3. Recently, a non-aqueous sol–gel method was used to synthesize iron oxide/RGO hybrids in the presence of organic solvents (such as benzyl alcohol), following microwave treatment.227 The relationship between the structural properties and electrochemical performance of the iron oxide/RGO hybrids was thoroughly investigated using XPS and Raman spectroscopy. It was concluded that GO having features of homogeneity and fewer defects exhibited better electrochemical performance, even at high current density. In addition, it was suggested that poly(acrylic acid) acts as an efficient binder for γ-Fe2O3/RGO hybrid electrodes and the specific hybrid structures of γ-Fe2O3/RGO significantly suppress the agglomeration of nanoparticles and provide buffering spaces.227–229 Therefore, a reversible capacity of 690 mA h g−1 for up to 100 cycles even at a high current density of 500 mA g−1 was achieved by the γ-Fe2O3/RGO hybrid electrode. Furthermore, this hybrid exhibited good rate capability of 280 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 10 C (10000 mA g−1) after 35 cycles.227
 Fig. 12  Cycle performance of the prepared electrodes: (a) the NGr-I, NGr-I-2ALD, and NGr-I-M-2ALD electrodes when performing full discharge–charge at 2 A g−1 for 200 cycles. (b) Capacity performance of the NGr-I-M-2ALD at an extremely high current rate of 20 A g−1 for 2000 cycles. (A color version of this figure can be viewed online.)226 
Chen et al.230 studied the electrochemical performance of Fe2O3/CNT/graphene hybrid materials for LIB. The Fe2O3/CNT/GNS hybrid was synthesized using the CVD technique. In the synthesis process, a colloidal solution of GO and Fe(NO3)3·9H2O were mixed using ultra-sonication. This mixed solution was further dried in a vacuum oven at 80 °C to obtain a precursor of Fe(NO3)3/GO. Subsequently, this precursor was heated at 550 °C in a tubular furnace with Ar flow. C2H2 gas (C2H2: 10%, Ar: 90%) was then introduced before the furnace was gradually cooled to room temperature under an Ar atmosphere. The obtained product was once again calcined at 400 °C for 2 h in air to fabricate the Fe2O3/CNT/GNS hybrid material.230 This hybrid electrode exhibited the specific capacity of 984 mA h g−1 at a current density of 74.4 mA g−1 in the first cycle and maintained ∼812 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles. Furthermore, when the current density was increased to 3720 mA g−1 (5 C), it achieved a reversible capacity of 534 mA h g−1 and maintained 403 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles, with a retention ratio of 75.5%. On the other hand, a bare Fe2O3 electrode could only deliver a reversible capacity of 112 mA h g−1 at a current density of 74.4 mA g−1 after 100 cycles. The enhanced electrochemical properties were ascribed to the short path for the diffusion of Li+ through the bamboo-like CNTs and the extra lithium storage sites provided by the arc-like graphene layers inside the CNTs. The flexible and highly conductive GNS and open 3D architecture also contribute to improving the electrochemical performance.230–233 Lee et al.234 synthesized a bio-inspired 3D hierarchical structure based on graphene, carbon nanotubes, and iron oxide using a microwave-assisted irradiation method. In this 3D hierarchical structure, nanostructured CNTs were vertically grown on a graphene sheet and some of the iron nanoparticles were decorated on both the CNTs and the graphene surface. This hybrid electrode could deliver a reversible capacity of ∼1024 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 with a 99% Coulombic efficiency after 40 cycles. The coating of carbon onto the surface of Fe2O3 (core–shell type structure) in the presence of graphene can significantly improve the performance of the anode materials compared to bare Fe2O3 and Fe2O3/graphene hybrid electrodes.235
6.3 Tin oxide/graphene hybrid
Tin oxide (SnO2) exhibits a high theoretical Li+ storage capacity of 782 mA h g−1, more than double that of graphite (372 mA h g−1). Therefore, it could be a better replacement for the carbon in LIBs. However, during the cycling process, a large volume change of ∼300% causes cracking and degeneration of the electrode, which leads to inferior electrochemical performance. Enhanced lithium storage capacities have been achieved in SnO2/graphene hybrid electrode compared to bare SnO2.236–246 Kim et al.247 synthesized SnO2/graphene hybrid using a pH-controlled chemical method. In this synthesis method, tuning of the electrostatic attraction between the GNS and echinoid-like SnO2 particles under a controlled pH leads to the growth of uniformly dispersed SnO2 nanoparticles over the wrinkled GNS. Combined studies through SEM, TEM, and Zeta potential measurements suggest that a more uniform growth of SnO2 nanoparticles on the graphene could be achieved when the surface charge of SnO2 and graphene was opposed. This hybrid electrode exhibited a Coulombic efficiency of 98% and a reversible capacity 634 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 after 50 cycles. Furthermore, after cycling at different rates, the reversible capacity of ∼389 mA h g−1 at a current density of 2 A g−1 was achieved.247 It has also been observed that the initial source of tin (Sn2+ or Sn4+) affects the morphology and electrochemical performance of these hybrids.248 GO plays a critical role in the oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+, and the growth of SnO2, rather than SnO, was observed in the presence of GO. The electrochemical performance was found to be better when Sn2+ was used as the initial source.248 Chen et al.249 also reported that precursors of tin influence electrochemical performance. It was observed that the SnO2/graphene hybrids, synthesized using stannous oxalate as the tin precursor exhibited better electrochemical performance compared to SnCl4. In addition, a change in the ratio of GO to Sn2+ also influenced the morphology of the SnO2/GNS hybrids, and the better electrochemical performance was the result of the proper dispersion of SnO2 nanoparticles over the large GNS.250–263 Thomas et al.264 observed that the phase of tin oxide also varies with morphology, and the SnO phase with the nanoplates morphology exhibited higher discharge capacity and Coulombic efficiency. Furthermore, the platelet type morphology of SnO shows better reversible capacity compared to spherical nanoparticles of SnO2. At a current density of 23 μA cm−2, the initial discharge capacity for the SnO@GNS and SnO2@GNS hybrid electrodes was observed to be 1393 and 950 mA h g−1, respectively. After 40 cycles, a stable capacity of 1022 and 715 mA h g−1 was achieved at a current rate of 23 μA cm−2 for the SnO@GNS and SnO2@GNS hybrids, respectively. Meanwhile, Coulombic efficiencies for the SnO@GNS and SnO2@GNS hybrids were 94% and 89%, respectively.264
Ara et al.265 prepared SnO2/graphene hybrids by varying the content of SnO2 (25, 43, 60, and 82 wt%) through a controlled hydrothermal synthesis route. The TEM investigation suggests that the 25/75 wt% SnO2/graphene hybrid shows better dispersion of the particles (2–3 nm) along with ∼2 nm inter-particle spacing. However, a higher content of SnO2 led to a relatively larger particle size and reduction of the inter-particle spacing. Furthermore, the 25/75 wt% SnO2/graphene hybrid could deliver an enhanced specific capacity of ∼662 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 after 150 cycles, and better rate capabilities of 230, 445, and 525 mA h g−1 at current densities of 1000, 500, and 300 mA g−1, respectively. The TEM and EIS results further suggest that after 100 cycles, the nanoparticles retained their original size (2–3 nm) and the charge transfer resistance was decreased by 52%.265 Investigations of the effects of the structural phase/crystallinity on the electrochemical performance of the SnO2/graphene hybrid suggest that the amorphous-type SnO2/GNS could effectively buffer the shrinkage of the Sn lattice and volume expansion. Therefore, the amorphous-type SnO2/GNS hybrid was found to be more effective over the crystalline SnO2/GNS hybrid for better lithium storage.266–269 Lin et al.270 synthesized SnO2/graphene nanoribbon hybrid material. In this synthesis method, graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) were prepared by unzipping MWCNTs using sodium/potassium; chemical treatment of GNRs in the presence of SnCl2·2H2O and 2-pyrrolidinone was then performed, which led to the formation of SnO2GNR hybrids. The SnO2/GNR hybrid electrodes exhibited a reversible capacity of ∼825 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1, even after 50 cycles with a Coulombic efficiency of ∼98%. Moreover, the SnO2/GNRs hybrid electrode showed good power performance with a reversible capacity of ∼580 mA h g−1 at a current density of 2 A g−1 (Fig. 13). Ravikumar et al.271 synthesized GNS/SnO2 hybrid electrode materials. With this method, N-methylpyrrolidone was used as a solvent to exfoliate graphene, which was further treated with SnCl2·2H2O and CTAB in the presence of NH4OH to produce a sandwiched type GNS–SnO2 hybrid material. The SnO2/GNS hybrid electrode delivered a capacity of ∼1009.8 mA g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 after 10 cycles and retained 57% of the initial capacity, whereas at a high current density of 300 mA g−1, it retained 81% of the initial capacity (305.8 mA g−1). SnO2/graphene hybrids were synthesized using a ball milling process with a mechanochemical reaction between GO and Sn particles.272 The SnO2 nanocrystal/graphene composites were synthesized with different grinding times and various raw material ratios of Sn:GO. The experimental observations revealed that the SnO2/graphene composite with a grinding time of 8 h and a raw material ratio of 1:1 formed μm sized architected chips composed of composites sheets and exhibited a high tap density of 1.53 g cm−3. When used as the anode material for LIBs, the specific capacity of ∼891 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 was achieved even after 50 cycles, with a Coulombic efficiency of ∼94%. In addition, the capacities of 1017 mA h g−1 (3rd cycle), 817 mA h g−1 (8th cycle), 709 mA h g−1 (13th cycle), and 566 mA h g−1 (18th cycle) were delivered at a current density of 100 mA g−1, 200 mA g−1, 500 mA g−1, and 1000 mA g−1, respectively.272 Xu et al.273 synthesized a nitrogen doped graphene/SnO2 hybrid material using a direct hydrothermal method. Using this method, stannic chloride hydrate was dissolved in the aqueous solution of GO, then urea, and concentrated HCl were added. The as-prepared solution was hydrothermally treated at 120 °C for 24 h. The size/shape and morphological studies performed through the TEM showed that the SnO2 nanorods with sizes of 10–15 nm length and 2.5–4.0 nm diameter were uniformly and monodispersed on the surface of graphene. This hybrid electrode could deliver reversible discharge capacities of 803.1 mA h g−1 and 773.5 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at current densities of 100 mA g−1 and 200 mA g−1, respectively. Furthermore, at a high current density 400 mA g−1, stable reversible capacity of 642 mA h g−1 and Coulombic efficiency of ∼99.2% were achieved at the 80th cycle. Remarkably, the Coulombic efficiency was increased with increasing current density from 96.1% (at 50 mA g−1) to 97.2% (at 100 mA g−1), then to 98.5% (at 200 mA g−1), and then to 99.2% (at 400 mA g−1). The high capacity and good stability of the RGO/SnO2 hybrid electrode was attributed to the intimate contact between the RGO platelets and SnO2 nanoparticles, and to the enhanced electrical conductivity of the hybrid due to N-doping.274–276
 Fig. 13  Electrochemical performance of the GNR/SnO2 electrodes. The specific capacities are calculated based on the total mass of the GNRs/SnO2 in the anode electrodes. (a) CV curves of the first, second, and third cycles of the hybrid electrodes at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1 over the voltage range of 0.01–2.5 V. (b) The first, second and 30th charge/discharge curves of the hybrid electrode at a rate of 100 mA g−1. (c) Comparison of capacity retention and Coulombic efficiency of GNRs and the GNR/SnO2 electrode at a rate of 100 mA g−1. (d) Rate capability of the hybrid electrodes with various current densities.270 
The synthesis of the carbon-coated SnO2/graphene hybrid through a hydrothermal method assisted by a post calcination treatment has been reported by Zhang et al.277 The HR-TEM micrographs further suggest that, in addition to the crumpled GNS and SnO2 nanoparticles (∼5 nm in diameter), thin layers of carbon were developed on the edges of the SnO2 nanoparticles. The thin carbon layer was not only in contact with the GNS, but also covered the SnO2 nanoparticles. Therefore, the SnO2 nanoparticles were wrapped between the amorphous carbon coating layers and GNS. The combined effects of the graphene layer and carbon coating can effectively maintain the stability and significantly prevent the detachment of SnO2 nanoparticles, thus affording better electrochemical properties than those of the pristine SnO2 electrode. When used as an anode in LIBs, this hybrid exhibited a capacity of ∼757 mA h g−1 at a current density of 200 mA g−1, even after 150 cycles. Meanwhile, the corresponding Coulombic efficiency was observed to be nearly 100%. In addition, it showed better capacity retention than the SnO2/carbon and SnO2/graphene hybrid electrodes.277 It was noticed that the introduction of carbon shell restricts the undesirable reactions, whereas a porous structure can improve the diffusion of a liquid electrolyte into the bulk materials.278,279 Zhang et al.280 fabricated a SnO2/graphene/CNT hybrid based flexible paper. Using the synthesis method, GO and CNTs were mixed to obtain a homogeneous GO/CNT solution. Subsequently, SnCl4·5H2O was mixed in this solution and the supernate obtained through the centrifugation process was then passed through a membrane filter to produce a flexible paper. This paper was further calcined under an N2 atmosphere at 450 °C for 2 h to reduce the GO in graphene. In this hybrid, SnO2 nanoparticles (3–5 nm) were attached onto the surface of GNS (anchored with surface functional groups) and were encapsulated in pore channels formed by entangled GNS. It was perceived that the 3D conductive network and the presence of CNTs reduce the charge transfer resistance; therefore, the SnO2/graphene/CNT hybrid electrode exhibited better electrochemical performance than the SnO2/graphene hybrid, SnO2, and bare graphene anode. The SnO2/graphene/CNT hybrid electrode delivered capacities of 635 mA h g−1 and 345 mA h g−1 at current densities of 0.25 and 1.5 A g−1, respectively. In addition, it showed a stable capacity of 387 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 after 50 cycles.280,281
It has been reported that the sulphur-coated SnO2 further improves the performance of the SnO2/graphene hybrid electrode. The electrochemical performance revealed that compared to the SnO2/graphene hybrid, the sulphur-coated SnO2/graphene hybrid electrode exhibited a better response, which was attributed to the buffering effects of sulphur.282,283 Liu et al.284 fabricated a flexible graphene film decorated with spindle type Fe2O3@SnO2 nanoparticles. Using the synthesis approach, FeOOH@SnO2 nanospindles were synthesized using the hydrothermal method and FeOOH@SnO2/GO film was then prepared through a vacuum filtration technique (using a solution of FeOOH@SnO2/GO) and changed to hybrid Fe2O3@SnO2/GS films when annealed at 500 °C under an Ar atmosphere. It was observed that the Fe2O3@SnO2/GS films behave as a binder free electrode and exhibit a reversible discharge capacity of 1015 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 even after 200 cycles. Notably, a charge/discharge efficiency of ∼100% was maintained during the 100 cycles with a specific capacity of >700 mA h g−1 at a current density of 400 mA g−1. Furthermore, the Fe2O3@SnO2/GS hybrid film also showed much better electrochemical performance compared to the Fe2O3/GS and SnO2/GS hybrid electrodes.284 This phenomenon was attributed to the uniform dispersion of Fe2O3 around the SnO2 nanoparticles, which also contributed to suppress the aggregation of the SnO2 nanoparticles, therefore improving the electrochemical performance of the Fe2O3@SnO2/GS hybrids electrode.285 Electrochemical investigations suggested that a synergetic effect not only occurred between the graphene and metal-oxide nanoparticles, but also between the SnO2 and Fe3O4 nanoparticles. In the same way, the SnO2/In2O3/GNS,286 ZnO/SnO2/graphene,287 and SnO2/Sn/RGO hybrid288 electrodes exhibited better electrochemical performance than their single metal oxide NPs hybridized with graphene as summarized in Table 2].
Table 2 Different types of graphene/metal nanostructured oxide hybrids and their performance in LIBs




System
Synthesis process
Shape/size of metal oxide nanostructure
Performance
Ref.




SnO2–In2O3/graphene (anode)
Solvothermal
Particle size ∼6 nm
SnO2–In2O3/graphene hybrid exhibited a storage capacity of ∼962 mA h g−1 at 60 mA g−1 with Coulombic efficiency of ∼57.2%, cycling stability (after 50 cycles capacity retention of ∼60.8%), and rate capability (after 25 cycles at 600 mA g−1, a capacity of ∼393.25 mA h g−1). These electrochemical properties were observed to be better than SnO2/GNS and bare SnO2–In2O3 electrodes

286



ZnO–SnO2/graphene (anode)
Hydrothermal
—
Initial discharge capacity of ∼1287.6 mA h g−1 with a reversible capacity of ∼1209.4 mA h g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. The charge capacity could retain ∼1075.3 mA h g−1 after 10 cycles. And even after 50 cycles, the charge capacity retained was ∼800.9 mA h g−1

287



SnO2/Sn/RGO (anode)
Peroxide induced reduction followed by thermal treatment
Particle size ∼2.5 nm
After 90 cycles at a current density of 158 mA g−1 a discharge capacity of ∼700 mA h g−1 was delivered

288



Graphene/Y2O3/LiMn2O4 (cathode)

Ex-situ synthesis approach
Grain size ∼200 nm
An initial discharge capacity of ∼129.3 mA h g−1 and retained 89.3% even after 500 cycles at 1 C (at an elevated temperature of 55 °C). Meanwhile, at a high current density of 30 C, capacity of ∼90.0 mA h g−1 was achieved

402



NiFe2O4/graphene (anode)
Hydrothermal
Particle size ∼6.5 nm
Composite with 20% of graphene exhibited reversible capacity of ∼812 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at 100 mA g−1 (85% retention of the first cycle) whereas at 1000 mA g−1 delivered a reversible capacity of ∼445 mA h g−1 after 40 cycles

420



CoFe2O4-Co/RGO (anode)
Hydrothermal
Particle size 30 nm
After 515 cycles the specific capacity was maintained at ∼907.3 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 and even after 420 cycles at 9000 mA g−1, the capacity still retained was 907.3 mA h g−1 when recycled at 100 mA g−1

421



CoFe2O4/graphene (anode)
Hydrothermal
Particle size ∼10 nm
With 20 wt% of graphene the composite electrode exhibited a reversible specific capacity of 910 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1, and ∼500 mA h g−1 at 2000 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles, respectively

422



ZnFe2O4/graphene (anode)
Hydrothermal
Particle size 20–30 nm
At a current density of 100 mA g−1 a reversible capacity of ∼1000 mA h g−1 by the 10th cycle, whereas at 1000 mA g−1, the hybrid electrode could deliver a reversible capacity of ∼600 mA h g−1 even after 40 cycles (much higher than that of the pure ZnFe2O4 electrode ∼185 mA h g−1)

423



Zn2GeO4/N-doped graphene (anode)
Hydrothermal assisted by microwave
Nanorods (∼100 nm diameter and micrometer in length)
The capacities of 1463 mA h g−1 and 531 mA h g−1 at current densities of 100 mA g−1 and 3200 mA g−1, respectively, along with good cyclability and Columbic efficiency ∼100%

424



ZnO/graphene (anode)
Hydrothermal
Quasi-spherical with particle size of 30–40 nm
At 50 mA g−1, the ZnO/graphene hybrid electrode delivered a capacity of ∼300 mA h g−1 after 25 cycles (however, only ∼75% of first cycled capacity was retained)

425



ZnO@graphene (anode)
Microwave
Particle size 80–100 nm
Reversible capacity of 460 mA h g−1 at 1 C after 50 cycles. Coulombic efficiency of ∼82.1% at the 1st cycle, capacity retention of ∼60% at 5 C, and good cycling stability with capacity decay of ∼8% after 50 cycles

426



CeO2–graphene (anode)
Hydrothermal
Particle size ∼100 nm
After 100 cycles, specific capacity of ∼605 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 (∼75% of first cycled capacity) whereas at current densities of 100, 200, 400 and 800 mA g−1, specific capacities were observed to be 414, 320, 222 and 146 mA h g−1, respectively

427



(Fe2.5Ti0.5)1.04O4/graphene (anode)
Gas/liquid interface
Particle size ∼20 nm
After 60 cycles, at a current density of 300 mA g−1 the reversible specific capacity was 1048 mA h g−1, whereas at 2000 mA g−1, the reversible specific capacity was observed to be as high as 480 mA h g−1 and exhibit good cyclic stability (at 300 mA g−1 capacity was ∼1113 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles). Initial Coulombic efficiency of the hybrid was 61% but after the 3rd cycle the Coulombic efficiency was increased above 94% in the subsequent cycles

428



Mn2Mo3O8/graphene (anodes)
Chemical reduction using hydrazine assisted by annealing
Microspheres of 3–5 μm
After 40 cycles at a current density of 200 mA g−1 a reversible capacity of ∼950 mA h g−1 with a Coulombic efficiency of ∼98% (much higher than that of bare Mn2Mo3O8 ∼494 mA h g−1) whereas at 1000 mA g−1 a reversible capacity was ∼900 mA h g−1

429



Zn2SnO4/graphene (anode)
Hydrothermal
Quasi-sphere shape size of 10–20 nm
Charge capacity of ∼688 mA h g−1 could be retained after 50 cycles at 200 mA g−1, and after being cycled for 40 cycles at 800 mA g−1 a charge capacity >500 mA h g−1 was observed. However, the capacity of Zn2SnO4/G hybrid exhibited fluctuation with cycling

430



Fe2Mo3O8–RGO (anode)
Chemical reduction using hydrazine and assisted by the annealing process
Particle size 10–15 nm
Up to 40 cycles a specific capacity of 835 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 whereas the specific capacity was ∼574.8 mA h g−1 at 3000 mA g−1 (bare Fe2Mo3O8 exhibited poor capacity of ∼100 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 after 20 cycles

431



Carbon-doped Li2SnO3/graphene (anode)
Hydrothermal
Particle size ∼200 nm
Up to 50 cycles, specific capacity of 622.7 mA h g−1, 569.7 mA h g−1 and 518.4 mA h g−1 at a current density of 180 mA g−1 (0.3 C), 300 mA g−1 (0.5 C) and 600 mA g−1 (1 C), respectively

432



Li2MnSiO4/carbon/graphene (cathode)
Solid-state method
Particle size 20–60 nm
At 0.05 C, capacity of 290 mA h g−1 but at 1 C (166 mA g−1), capacity of 150 mA h g−1 along with nearly stable cycling life up to 700 cycles.

433



Poly-pyrrole(PPY)/Li2SnO3/graphene (anode)
De-oxidation approach
Particle size 30–50 nm
At 60 mA g−1 the reversible capacity of ∼699.4 mA h g−1 at the 30th cycle along with 95% Coulombic efficiency whereas at 300 mA g−1 and 600 mA g−1 a reversible capacity ∼493 mA h g−1 and ∼377.9 mA h g−1

434



LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2/graphene (cathode)
Ball-milling
Particle size 220–280 nm
At 0.05 C charge/discharge, capacities of 188/185 mA h g−1, during 25 cycles. Moreover, hybrid exhibited significantly higher columbic efficiency (99.1%) compared to bare LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 (89.7%)

435



LiNi0.8Co0.15A10.05O2/graphene (cathode)
Ball milling
Particle size ∼500 nm
At 0.2 C (1 C = 278 mA g−1) capacity of 180 mA h g−1 (with 97% retention after 80 cycles) whereas at 10 C and 20 C, capacity was ∼152 and 112 mA h g−1, respectively

436



Ni6MnO8/graphene (anode)
Co-precipitation assisted by calcinations
Particle size 20 nm
First cycle discharge capacity of 1030 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1; however, this hybrid delivered capacity of ∼400 mA h g−1 only, at a rate of 50 mA g−1 after 10 cycles. Moreover, this hybrid exhibited poor cyclic stability

437



Li2FeSiO4/C (resembled graphene) (cathode)
Sol–gel
Particle size 50–150 nm
Discharge capacity of 135.3 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 16 C after 40 cycles, whereas ∼100 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 1 C up to 30 cycles

438



ZnWO4/graphene (anode)
Sol–gel
—
At 50 mA g−1 after 20 cycles a reversible specific capacity of 585.7 mA h g−1 whereas at 200 mA g−1 capacity of ∼480 mA h g−1 was observed. However, the hybrid did not exhibit proper cyclic stability and therefore, may restrict its practical application in LIBs

439



SiO/graphene (anode)
Chemical reduction by hydrazine
Particle size 50–300 nm
When current density is back to the initial 100 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles reversible specific capacity of 910 mA h g−1 was observed. In addition, at current densities of 200, 400 and 800 mA g−1, this hybrid could deliver reversible capacities of 890, 701 and 441 mA h g−1, respectively

440



Carbon-coated graphene–Cr2O3 (anode)
Hydrothermal
Particle size 5–10 nm
Carbon-coated graphene–Cr2O3 hybrid exhibited a reversible capacity up to 630 at 0.1 C after 100 cycles and 315 mA h g−1 could remain at 1 C by 25 cycles which was better than that of the graphene–Cr2O3 hybrid electrode

441



NiCo2O4/graphene (anode)
Hydrothermal
NiCo2O4 consist of nanosheet sheets
At a current density of 300 mA g−1, the discharge capacity maintained around 806 mA h g−1 up to 90 cycles (in contrast bare NiCo2O4 delivered ∼600 mA h g−1 by 50 cycles) whereas ∼1000 mA h g−1 when cycled at 150 mA g−1 by 30 cycles

442



MgFe2O4/graphene (anode)
Sol–gel
Particle size ∼50–100 nm
At 0.34 C capacity of ∼600 mA h g−1 by 15 cycles whereas at 4.2 C a reversible capacity of ∼219.9 mA h g−1 after 40 cycles and columbic efficiency ∼95% when cycled at 0.04 C up to 60 cycles

443



CuGeO3/grapheme (anode)
Hydrothermal
Nanowires having length of several micrometers
Reversible capacities of 1428, 1242, 1092, 958 and 879 mA hg−1 at current densities of 100, 200, 400, 800, and 1000 mA g−1, respectively. Moreover, the specific capacity was increased to 1600 mA h g−1 when the current densities decreased from 1000 to 100 mA g−1, even higher than the specific capacity observed in the initial 10 cycles

444



Fe2GeO4/RGO (anode)
Hydrothermal
Particle size 10–20 nm
At current densities of 0.4, 1.6, 3.2, and 4.8 A g−1, the corresponding capacities were 980, 600, 450, and 340 mA h g−1 with a Coulombic efficiency of ∼98%. In addition, when the current density returned to 0.4 A g−1, a capacity of 990 mA h g−1 was recorded, suggesting good rate capability

445





6.4 Cobalt oxide/graphene hybrid
Cobalt oxides are well known as potential alternative anode materials because of their promising high theoretical capacities (Co3O4 ∼ 890 mA h g−1 & CoO ∼ 715 mA h g−1), low cost, and eco-friendliness. However, these materials have issues such as large volume variation and poor electronic conductivity during the cycling process. To circumvent these issues, graphene has been used as the template and the electrochemical performance of cobalt oxide nanomaterial was greatly improved in the hybrid form. Several studies on Co3O4/graphene289–302 and CoO/graphene303–305 hybrid electrode materials for LIB have been reported. Zhu et al.291 synthesized cobalt-oxide/graphene hybrid via a hydrothermal method assisted by thermal pyrolysis at different temperatures. In this hybrid, cobalt-oxide nanowall arrays were grown on RGO sheets. It was observed that the porosity of cobalt-oxide/RGO hybrids and the grain size of Co3O4 nanoparticles affect the electrochemical performance of these hybrids, which can be tailored by varying the annealing temperature. The Co3O4/RGO hybrid exhibited an optimized specific capacity of ∼673 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a current density of 180 mA g−1 (0.2 C). On the other hand the CoO/RGO hybrid delivered the specific capacity of 732 mA h g−1 at a discharge current density of 150 mA g−1 (0.2 C) after 100 cycles.291 Li et al.292 fabricated mesoporous Co3O4 with a controlled nanostructure, directly grown on graphene membrane by hydrothermal reaction assisted by annealing process. This Co3O4 nanowall@graphene hybrid membrane anode delivered a reversible capacity of ∼800 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1. Furthermore, it demonstrated good cyclic stability of >600 mA h g−1, without fading the capacity and a Coulombic efficiency of nearly 100% over 500 cycles. The mesoporous structure and uniform distribution of Co3O4 over the graphene can be favorable for better diffusion of Li+ and strain buffer of Co3O4 during the cycling process, rendering high performance for the electrodes.293–298 The improved performance of the Co3O4/GNS hybrid was attributed to the buffering effects of GNS on the aggregation and volume change of Co3O4 nanoparticles during the cycling processes, as well as the increased conductivity.289 In addition, the size and shape of the Co3O4 nanostructures can significantly affect the reversible capacity and cyclic stability. The Co3O4 nanorod/GNS hybrid electrode exhibited high reversible lithium storage capacity and much better rate capability compared to bare nanostructured Co3O4. The Co3O4 nanorod/GNS hybrid anode exhibited capacities of ∼1310 mA h g−1 and ∼1090 mA h g−1 after 40 cycles at current densities of 100 mA g−1 and 100 mA g−1, respectively. In contrast, bare Co3O4 and GNS electrodes could only deliver a capacity of 85 mA h g−1 and 252 mA h g−1, respectively, when measured at a current density of 100 mA g−1 after 40 cycles. Moreover, after 40 cycles, when the current density returned to the initial 100 mA g−1, this hybrid electrode recovered its original capacity or even a slightly higher capacity (reversible capacity was 1378 mA h g−1 for the 45th cycle), suggesting good rate capability.302
Pan et al.306 synthesized Co3O4/RGO hybrid electrode material using polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) as the surfactant under reflux conditions, assisted by post calcination treatment under a nitrogen atmosphere. The morphological investigation through FE-SEM/TEM micrographs revealed that when PVP was used during the synthesis, the loading of the Co3O4 nanoparticles (∼100 nm) over RGO was significantly enhanced with uniform distribution. Also, the Co3O4 nanoparticles were tightly wrapped by RGO. This hybrid electrode exhibited a discharge capacity of 860 mA h g−1 during 120 cycles at a current density of 40 mA g−1. The higher loading of the Co3O4 nanoparticles over RGO influenced the electrochemical performance and the Co3O4/RGO hybrid synthesized using PVP exhibited an improved rate performance. Particularly, when the current density was increased to 1000 mA g−1, the specific capacity of ∼400 mA h g−1 was maintained. However, the capacities of the hybrid synthesized without using the PVP reduced dramatically and retained only 10% of the initial capacity at the same current rate. Hu et al.307 synthesized a binder free Co3O4/graphene hybrid, directly deposited on a Cu foil using an electrostatic spray technique. Fig. 14 shows a schematic diagram of the synthesis process. A synergistic effect from spraying and subsequent heat treatment led to the formation of porous and 3D cross-linked nanostructured Co3O4/graphene hybrid. This hybrid electrode delivered a capacity of ∼631 mA h g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1, even after 58 cycles with a columbic efficiency of >97%. Moreover, at a higher current density of 5 A g−1, it retained a capacity of ∼321 mA h g−1 (Fig. 15). The morphological compatibility, along with a strong interfacial interaction between the graphene and Co3O4 nanoparticles, significantly stimulated the interfacial electron and Li+ transport, therefore improving the performance of these hybrid electrodes compared to bare Co3O4 electrodes.308,309
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram showing the wrapping up of the GO nanosheets on the Co3O4 nanoparticles; and (b) the fabrication of the GO–Co3O4 hybrid film by a direct ESD process on Cu foils. The optical image shows a uniform coating of the ESD deposited hybrid film.307 
 Fig. 15  Electrochemical performance of the G–Co3O4 hybrid electrode: (a) cyclic voltammograms of the G–Co3O4 electrode at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1 for three cycles between 0.01 and 3.0 V vs. Li+/Li; (b) charge and discharge curves after the first and 10th cycles at a current rate of 100 mA g−1; (c) cycling performance at different rates from 100 mA g−1 to 5 A g−1; and (d) capacity and Coulombic efficiency at 1 A g−1.307 
The synthesis of CoO/RGO hybrid by directly employing C4H6O4·Co·4H2O and hydrophilic GO as raw materials using in situ chemical reduction assisted by post calcination treatment has been reported.303 It was observed that dense and small-sized CoO (∼5 nm) nanoparticles, uniformly anchored onto the disordered RGO nanosheets provide an interfacial interaction between CoO nanoparticles and RGO nanosheets. This strong interfacial interaction efficiently improved the reversible capacity, rate capability, and cycle life of these hybrids.303 The CoO/RGO hybrid electrode could deliver a reversible capacity of ∼701.7 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 after 50 cycles. Furthermore, at even over 435 cycles after being cycled at different current rates from 100 to 4000 mA g−1, a specific capacity of ∼577.9 mA h g−1 was retained when the current density returned to 100 mA g−1. In contrast, the bare CoO nanoparticle electrode could deliver the specific capacity of ∼463.2 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 after 50 cycles. Peng et al.304 synthesized a CoO quantum dot/GNS hybrid using a facile ultrasonic method. With this method, GNS was mixed in hexane through ultra-sonication, and Co4(CO)12 was then directly added and mixed under sonication. The obtained products were then collected via centrifugation and dried at 60 °C in air to yield the amorphous CoO quantum dot (QD)/GNS hybrid. In order to increase the crystallinity, it was calcined at 550 °C under an N2 atmosphere. The morphological investigations revealed that in this hybrid, CoO QDs (∼5 nm) were uniformly dispersed on the surface of GNS. It has been reported that such a hybrid structure could be an ideal candidate for high lithium storage due to several unique characteristics. First, the very small size of CoO QD with high mass loading can provide very large electrochemical active sites, which was mainly responsible for the high capacity. Second, the firm anchoring of the CoO QDs on GNS could significantly restrict the aggregation and volume change of the particles during the cycling process, therefore providing high reversibility and cycling stability. Furthermore, the isolated CoO QDs on the highly conductive GNS support provide each CoO QD not only the required conductivity, but also a short diffusion length for Li+.310–312 The CoO quantum-dot/graphene hybrid electrode exhibited a high reversible storage capacity of 1592 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1 after 50 cycles, along with a high Coulombic efficiency of over 95%. In addition, it exhibited high rate capability (capacity of ∼1008 mA h g−1 with a retention of ∼77.6% after 50 cycles, measured at a current density of 1000 mA g−1), which was dramatically increased from the capacity at 50 mA g−1 after 10 cycles).304
3D-RGO hydrogels anchored with CoO nanoparticles were prepared using a hydrothermal method and a subsequent heat-treatment process.313 In the 3D-RGO hydrogel/CoO hybrid, CoO nanoparticles (∼10 nm) were encapsulated within a graphene-based hydrogel with robust interconnected networks. This hybrid electrode could deliver capacities of 457.0, 543.8, 690.4, and 890.2 mA h g−1 at current densities of 2400, 1600, 800, and 200 mA g−1, respectively. In addition, the specific capacity was increased up to 1025.8 mA h g−1 after 82 cycles, when the current density returned to 100 mA g−1, which suggests good rate capability and cyclic stability. Qi et al.314 synthesized highly CoO nanoparticles loaded CoO/graphene hybrids using a self-assembly approach via an oil-phase solution synthesis technique. This method involved the thermal decomposition of Co-acetylacetonate by oleylamine (OAm) in the presence of graphene, where Co nanoparticles of ∼15 nm were uniformly distributed onto GNS because of the complete miscibility between graphene and OAm. The CoO/graphene hybrids with different mass ratios (CoO/graphene) of 9:1, 7:3, and 4:6 exhibited reversible capacities of 1401, 937, and 669 mA h g−1, respectively, and were found to be much better than bare graphene (421 mA h g−1) at a current density of 100 mA g−1. In addition, at a high current density of 8.0 A g−1, this hybrid electrode was capable of delivering a stable capacity of ∼500 mA h g−1 after 35 cycles. Nevertheless, when the current density was decreased from 8.0 to 0.25 A g−1, about 83% of the initial capacity obtained at 0.25 A g−1 (∼950 mA h g−1) could be recovered.314 The superior electrochemical performance of the CoO/graphene hybrids electrode was attributed to structural stability and inhibited electrode pulverization during the cycling processes.315 Zhang et al.316 synthesized flexible mats composed of CoO, graphene, and carbon nanofibers by electrospinning and a subsequent thermal treatment. This CoO/graphene/carbon hybrid electrode exhibited discharge capacities of 760 (after 252 cycles) and 690 mA h g−1 (after 352 cycles), respectively, at a current density of 500 mA g−1. These storage capacities were found to be much higher than those of graphene/carbon, CoO/carbon nanofibers, and pure carbon electrodes at the respective cycles. In addition, after cycling at various current rates from 0.1 A g−1 to 2 A g−1 when the current density was returned to 0.1 A g−1 (after 30 cycles), this hybrid could deliver relatively higher capacity (∼800 mA h g−1), signifying good rate capability. The improved electrochemical performance was ascribed to a number of factors, including fast diffusion of Li+ due to the presence of carbon nanofiber, whereas enhanced electrical conductivity and mechanical properties were offered by graphene.316
6.5 Manganese oxide/graphene hybrid
Manganese oxide (MnO2) is an attractive anode material (theoretical capacity of ∼1232 mA h g−1) that has been widely used for LIBs. It possesses unique properties, including high energy density, low conversion potential (<0.8 V), low electrochemical motivation force (1.032 V vs. Li/Li+), high abundance, low cost, and environmental friendliness. Unfortunately, the practical application is mainly hampered by poor electrical conductivity and large volume expansion during the charge/discharge process. Nanostructured MnO2, hybridized with graphene has shown an effective approach to accommodate the strain of volume change with improved electrical conductivity.317–321 The electrochemical performances can significantly be improved in the hybrid state. Li et al.320 synthesized MnO2 nanoplatelet/graphene hybrid material using a chemical method. It was suggested that the unique porous structure of the hybrid could facilitate rapid transport of electrons and electrolyte ions throughout the hybrid material. Therefore, this hybrid electrode exhibited a much higher capacity of 905 mA h g−1 compared to pure MnO2 (416 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1). Furthermore, this hybrid electrode exhibited an irreversible capacity loss of ∼36% in comparison with 55% for the bare MnO2 electrode. In addition, the hybrid electrode exhibited much better rate capability compared to bare GNS and MnO2 electrodes at different rates. Notably, a reversible capacity of ∼341 mA h g−1 was achieved at the current density of 500 mA g−1, and a stable capacity of ∼630 mA h g−1 could be retained when the current rate was backed to 50 mA g−1.320 Radich et al.322 reported that RGO assists in the expulsion of ions from the MnO2 lattice and also enhances crystallinity. Moreover, it was able to repair the impure phases within the MnO2.322,323 Recently, Li et al.324 reported MnO2/3D porous graphene (3D PG–Mn) hybrid, synthesized through a self-controlled redox deposition process. The 3D porous network of graphene (Fig. 16) offers a highly conductive structure and a large surface area, which intensify the contact between MnO2 nanoparticles and increase the mechanical strength of the 3D PG–Mn hybrid during the cycling process. Therefore, the 3D PG–Mn hybrid exhibited an electrochemical performance superior to the bare MnO2 nanoparticles electrode. Furthermore, it was observed that 3D PG–Mn hybrid electrode with 62.7 wt% of MnO2 exhibited a stable capacity of ∼836 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 after 200 cycles (∼84.6% capacity retention). Moreover, after cycling at different current rates (100 mA g−1 to 1600 mA g−1), when the current was reduced to 100 mA g−1, the discharge capacity of ∼869 mA h g−1 could be achieved after 45 cycles (compared to ∼926 mA h g−1 after 10 cycles), suggesting good rate capability (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 16  SEM micrographs with different magnifications (A–C) and TEM images (D and E) of the 3D PG–1Mn hybrid and HRTEM images (F and its inset) of the MnO2 nanoflakes. (H) The walls of the 3D PG–1Mn hybrid and HRTEM images (I and its inset) of the MnO2 nanoflakes. (J and its inset) HRTEM image of the interface between the MnO2 and few-layered graphene-like materials of 3D PG.324 
 Fig. 17  Electrochemical performances of various anode materials. (A) Typical CV curves of the 3D PG–1Mn hybrid anode at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1, (B) the galvanostatic discharge–charge profiles of the 3D PG–1Mn hybrid electrode between 0.01 and 3 V at a current density of 100 mA g−1, (C) the cycling performance at a current density of 100 mA g−1 and (D) the specific capacity versus current densities for the 3D PG–xMn composite electrodes.324 
Wang et al.325 synthesized a Mn3O4/graphene hybrid using a hydrothermal method. The SEM/TEM studies revealed that Mn3O4 nanoparticles of ∼10–20 nm size were grown on RGO sheets. The intimate interaction between Mn3O4 nanoparticles and RGO causes a synergetic effect. Therefore, the Mn3O4/RGO hybrid electrode could afford a capacity of ∼900 mA h g−1 at a current density of 40 mA g−1. In addition, after cycling at different current rates, a capacity of ∼730 mA h g−1 (after 40 cycles) at 400 mA g−1 was retained compared to ∼780 mA h g−1 (after 15 cycles), suggesting good rate capability. In contrast, a bare Mn3O4 electrode could deliver a capacity below 300 mA h g−1, which was further decreased to ∼115 mA h g−1 (at 40 mA g−1) after only 10 cycles.325,326 Lavoie et al.327 studied the electrochemical performance of Mn3O4/graphene hybrids for LIB. In the process of electrode preparation they used two different types of binders: carboxymethyl cellulose and PVDF. On the basis of experimental results, they claimed that lithium carboxymethyl cellulose (LICMC) could be a better binder than the conventional PVDF, due to its easy processability in water. Furthermore, when LICMC was used as the binder, the hybrid electrode exhibited much better capacity than that of PVDF. At a current density of 75 mA h g−1, the capacities of ∼720 mA h g−1 (using LiCMC) and ∼365 mA h g−1 (using PVDF) were obtained after 100 cycles. This superior capacity retention was attributed to the formation of bonds between the hydroxyl groups present at the surface of the nanoparticles and carboxyl groups of the binder, which resulted in an enhanced interface interaction with the active materials.327 Recently, Park et al.328 synthesized an N-doped Mn3O4/graphene hybrid material using a hydrothermal method with hydrazine both as a reducing agent and a nitrogen source. N-doping can allow fast electron/ion transfer by decreasing the energy barrier, whereas uniform dispersion of the Mn3O4 nanoparticle graphene significantly enhances the electro-active surface area.329–331 Therefore, the N-doped Mn3O4/graphene hybrid electrode exhibited superior capacity and good rate capability. The electrochemical results suggest that without doping of nitrogen, the Mn3O4/graphene electrode exhibited a capacity of ∼703 mA h g−1 at a current density of 200 mA g−1, after 40 cycles. In contrast, the nitrogen doped Mn3O4/graphene (N-Mn3O4/graphene) electrode exhibited a specific capacity of 800 mA h g−1 under the same conditions. In addition, the N–Mn3O4/graphene hybrid electrode showed a rate capability superior to bare Mn3O4, graphene and Mn3O4/graphene hybrid electrodes. When cycled at various current rates (100 mA g−1 to 2 A g−1), the N–Mn3O4/graphene hybrid electrode could deliver a capacity of ∼400 mA h g−1 at 2.0 A g−1 after 25 cycles.
Mai et al.332 synthesized MnO/RGO hybrid via liquid phase deposition of MnCo3 nanoparticles over the surface of GNS and a subsequent heat treatment under a nitrogen atmosphere. In this hybrid, the surfaces of RGO sheets, which comprised 35 layers, were homogeneously covered with several MnO nanoparticles having a size of ∼10 nm. After 50 cycles, a reversible capacity of 665.5 mA h g−1 was observed at a current density of 100 mA g−1 in the case of the MnO/RGO hybrid electrode. On the other hand, the bare MnO electrode showed a continuous decay in reversible capacity as the cyclic number was increased, and after 20 cycles it levelled off with a capacity of ∼260 mA h g−1. Furthermore, upon increasing the current density to 400 and 800 mA g−1, the hybrid electrode could maintain a capacity of ∼454.2 and ∼325.6 mA h g−1, respectively. Also, the MnO/RGO hybrid electrode could regain higher specific capacity and better cyclic stability than the bare MnO electrode by reverting to a lower current density of 200 mA g−1 even after 40 cycles.332
Lithium intercalation behaviors in manganese oxide/graphene hybrid have been investigated by Sun et al.333 The electrochemical observation showed that a change of the oxidation state of Mn(II) to Mn(IV) and the interfacial lithium storage during the cycling process can enhance the specific capacity.333,334 The electrochemical studies revealed that the valence state of manganese oxide significantly influences the lithium storage capacity of the manganese-oxide/graphene hybrid material.335–340 Liu et al.335 reported that the MnO/graphene hybrid electrode has better storage and cycling stability than the Mn3O4/graphene hybrid electrode. Lee et al.341 synthesized graphene-MnO hybrid via a spray pyrolysis method using the colloidal solution of GO and manganese nitrate hexahydrate. Morphological studies through SEM/TEM micrographs revealed that the MnO/graphene hybrid possessed a crumpled structure (size ∼1 μm), where the MnO nanoparticles (several tens of nm) were uniformly distributed over the graphene sheets. In contrast, bare MnO showed a hollow structure with a size of several μm. This graphene-MnO hybrid electrode exhibited initial charge and discharge capacities of 849 and 1207 mA h g−1, respectively, at a current density of 500 mA g−1. In contrast, the hollow-structured MnO electrode exhibited charge and discharge capacities of 673 and 1004 mA h g−1, respectively. Furthermore, the hollow-structured MnO and graphene/MnO hybrid electrodes could deliver discharge capacities of ∼701 and 1313 mA h g−1, respectively, after 130 cycles. The MnO/graphene hybrid also exhibited a rate capability superior to the bare MnO electrode. Such a superior electrochemical performance was attributed to the very small size of MnO nanoparticles, high specific surface area, small charge transfer resistance, and high lithium diffusion coefficient in the MnO/graphene hybrid.
6.6 Nickel oxide/graphene hybrid
Because of the low cost, high safety, and ecofriendly features, NiO is considered to be a promising anode material. NiO exhibits a theoretical capacity of 718 mA h g−1, but it suffers problems associated with poor conductivity and cycling stability. To overcome these obstacles, strategies have been employed to fabricate NiO/graphene hybrid materials. Kottegoda et al.342 synthesized graphene/NiO hybrid via a controlled hydrothermal reaction method. Using this method, an appropriate amount of GO and metal salt was dispersed in ethylene glycol and then hydrothermally treated at 160 °C for 16 h. Subsequently, pyrolysis was carried out through post annealing at 500 °C. The FE-SEM studies revealed that this hybrid consisted of NiO nanoparticles (size around few nm) firmly attached to certain sites on graphene sheets. However, following the same synthesis route, a completely different structural growth was observed in the pristine NiO, which shows a much larger particle size (100–300 nm) than in the NiO/graphene hybrid. This hybrid electrode with an optimized concentration of NiO (wt% = 50%), exhibited a capacity as high as 450 mA h g−1 at 1 C (1 C = 300 mA g−1) after 100 cycles. Nevertheless, this electrode could deliver good capacities of ∼450 mA h g−1 and ∼400 mA h g−1 at current rates of 1 C and 2 C, respectively. In contrast, the hybrid electrode with NiO (wt% = 20%) showed a relatively higher capacity at higher current rates of 10 C and 20 C. NiO nanosheets (NS), grown on GNS, were synthesized using a hydrothermal method.343 The combined experimental and theoretical investigations suggested the formation of an oxygen bridge between the NiO nanosheet and graphene. It was concluded that the oxygen bridge between graphene and NiO NS contributes to good conductivity and causes a synergistic effect, thus improving the lithium storage properties. The NiO NS/graphene hybrid electrode exhibited a stable reversible capacity of ∼883 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1 after 50 cycles, and retained ∼90% of the initial capacity. This reversible capacity was observed to be superior to that of the NiO NS/graphene mixture (530 mA h g−1, retention of ∼76%) and the bare NiO NSs (210 mA h g−1 and retention of only 35%) electrode.
Hwang et al.334 synthesized a NiO/graphene hybrid by chemical precipitation followed by post calcination treatment. This hybrid material consists of plate type nanostructured NiO (90–120 nm), homogeneously anchored on GNS. The plate type NiO nanostructures work as spacers and keep the neighbouring GNS separated, thus forming a 3D hybrid structure. The 3D conducting network of NiO/graphene affords a fast electron transfer between the current collector and the active material. Furthermore, NiO/graphene hybrid with a higher content of NiO (59 wt%) exhibited better performance than the hybrid consisting of NiO (37 wt%). After 40 cycles, the NiO/graphene (NiO, 59 wt%), NiO/graphene (NiO, 37 wt%) and bare graphene electrode could deliver discharge capacities of ∼856, 604, and 302, mA h g−1 at 5 C (5000 mA g−1), respectively.344 In addition, Zhu et al.345 studied the electrochemical performance of NiO/RGO hybrid. The morphological investigations revealed that in this hybrid, NiO particles consisted of nanosheet-based microsphere structures that were uniformly anchored on the surface of RGO platelets. The NiO/RGO hybrid electrode exhibited the initial discharge and charge capacities of 1641 mA h g−1 and 1097 mA h g−1 (at 100 mA g−1), respectively. Moreover, after 50 cycles, a charge capacity of ∼727 mA h g−1 (at 1600 mA g−1) and a discharge capacity of ∼1041 mA h g−1 (at 100 mA g−1) were achieved. In contrast, after 50 cycles (at 100 mA g−1), the bare NiO electrode could deliver only a discharge and charge capacity of 91 and 90 mA h g−1, respectively. The NiO/graphene hybrid synthesized using a liquid-phase deposition method was also reported.346 In this hybrid, graphene was composed of 3–5 individual graphene layers and the size of the NiO nanoparticles was ∼5 nm. Fig. 18 shows that after 35 cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1, this NiO/graphene hybrid electrode was able to deliver a capacity of 646.1 mA h g−1, with a retention value of ∼86.3%. Moreover, capacities of 509 mA h g−1 and 368.5 mA h g−1 were obtained at current densities of 400 and 800 mA g−1, respectively.346 Recently, Zhu et al.347 synthesized Ni(OH)2/RGO hybrid material using a co-precipitation method following reduction using hydrazine. The Ni(OH)2/RGO hybrid electrode exhibited a reversible capacity of ∼1003 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 after 40 cycles. In contrast, the bare Ni(OH)2 and RGO electrodes exhibited reversible capacities of ∼160 mA h g−1 and ∼234 mA h g−1, respectively, under the same conditions. Furthermore, the performance of the Ni(OH)2/RGO hybrid electrode was observed to be even better than that of the β-Ni(OH)2@RGO hybrid electrode.348
 Fig. 18  (a) Cyclic stability at a current density of 100 mA g−1, (b) rate capability and (c) EIS results of NiO and NiO-graphene hybrid electrodes.346 
6.7 Copper oxide/graphene hybrid
Although copper oxides are attractive anode materials and exhibit theoretical capacities of 674 mA h g−1 (CuO) and 374 mA h g−1 (Cu2O), similar to other metal oxides, they also suffer from problems related to rapid fading of the capacity due to large volume expansion and contraction during the cycling process.349,350 Several studies have demonstrated that the combination of CuO/Cu2O and graphene can display some unique properties that are useful for practical application in LIB. CuO/RGO hybrid was synthesized using a pex-milled process by mixing CuO nanoparticles with GNS. The initial charge density (1043.3 mA h g−1) of the CuO/RGO hybrid electrode was found to be significantly higher than that of pure CuO nanoparticles (785.2 mA h g−1 at 0.1 mA cm−2). Furthermore, after 45 cycles, the reversible capacity was maintained at ∼516.4 mA h g−1 in the case of the CuO/RGO hybrid electrode at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2 with a columbic efficiency of ∼90%.351 It was observed that tight contact between the graphene and CuO nanoparticles forms a highly conductive network, and the issues with the volume change during the cycling process therefore efficiently diminished in the presence of the hollow CuO nanoparticles.352 Zhou et al.353 synthesized CuO a nano-leaves/graphene hybrid using a microwave-assisted method. The SEM/TEM investigations showed that leaf-shaped CuOs (rhombic) were uniformly dispersed on GNS having a length of 100–140 nm and width of 40 nm. Compared to pristine CuO, the CuO/GNS hybrid electrode exhibited superior electrochemical performance. The electrochemical result showed that after 50 cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1, the CuO/GNS hybrid electrode retained a capacity of ∼600 mA h g−1. Also, even when cycled (during 50 cycles) at different rates, a capacity of ∼600 mA h g−1 was recovered, suggesting good rate capability.353 Furthermore, parameters such as capacity, rate capability, cycling stability, and Coulombic efficiency can be controlled by tailoring the morphology of the CuO/graphene hybrids and structural features (shape/size) of CuO.354–356 It was proposed that compared to granules and slab-like morphology, the CuO nanoparticles with hierarchical structures afford a larger surface area. Therefore, they offer a better contact area between the electrode and electrolyte and enhance the reactivity of the electrode.357–359 Liu et al.360 synthesized flexible and free-standing CuO nanosheets/RGO hybrid lamellar paper via vacuum filtration and hydrothermal assisted reduction processes. This hybrid lamellar paper exhibited a 3-D nanoporous network, where sheets type nanostructured CuOs were homogeneously embedded within RGO layers. The CuO nanosheet/RGO hybrid electrode exhibited much better specific capacity (736.8 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at 0.1 C) than the pristine CuO nanosheet (219.1 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at 0.1 C) and the RGO electrode (67 mA g−1 after 50 cycles at 0.1 C).360
Recently, Li et al.361 fabricated core–shell Cu2O@Cu/graphene hybrids using a microwave-assisted synthesis approach. The unique dual-conducting system consisting of a graphene support and a coating of a Cu layer on the surface of Cu2O nanoparticles significantly improved the electrochemical performance. The Cu2O@Cu/graphene hybrid electrode exhibited a specific capacity of ∼775 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1, which was higher than those of the Cu2O@Cu nanospheres (∼100 mA h g−1) and the Cu2O-GS (416 mA h g−1) hybrid electrode. Moreover, the Cu2O@Cu/graphene electrode showed better rate capability than the Cu2O@Cu nanospheres and Cu2O/GS hybrid electrode. The Cu2O@Cu/graphene electrode could deliver a specific capacity of ∼410 mA h g−1 at 2000 mA g−1, and after cycling at different current rates, when returning to 50 mA g−1 (after 50 cycles), it delivered a capacity of ∼779 mA h g−1.361 Zhang et al.362 synthesized shape/size controlled Cu2O/GNS hierarchical nanohybrids using an ultrasound assisted approach with a mixed solution of copper acetate, glucose ethylene glycol, and GO. Fig. 19 shows TEM images of Cu2O/GNS and bare Cu2O spheres. This hierarchical Cu2O/GNS hybrid electrode exhibited a specific capacity of ∼400 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 after 20 cycles, which was much higher than that of bare Cu2O nanospheres (∼100 mA h g−1) (Fig. 20). In addition, the Cu2O/GNS hybrid electrode could achieve a Coulombic efficiency of ∼90% during the entire cycling (100 cycles) process. It has been reported that the small size of Cu2O nanoparticles consisting of hollow structures can exhibit better electrochemical performances.363,364
 Fig. 19  TEM images of Cu2O–GNS (a, b) and bare Cu2O spheres (c, d).361 
 Fig. 20  Electrochemical characterizations of Cu2O–GNS and bare Cu2O NPs. Charge and discharge curves of (a) Cu2O–GNS, (b) bare Cu2O NPs, and (c) Cu2O NPs–GNS for the 1st (red line), 5th (blue line), 10th (green line) cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1. (d) Capacity retentions of the as-obtained samples at various current densities (Cu2O–GNS: blue line; Cu2O NPs–GNS: red line; bare Cu2O sphere purple line).361 
6.8 Molybdenum oxides/graphene hybrid
Among the different types of transition metal oxides, MoO2 possesses a layered-type structure and has been considered a promising anode material. It exhibits a theoretical specific capacity of ∼838 mA h g−1. However, an intrinsic drawback of molybdenum oxides is volume expansion during the Li+ insertion/extraction. It is known that the irreversible volume change causes these particles to pulverize and crack, which essentially detaches the active material from the current collector and consequently leads to substantial reduction in capacity. Graphene has shown its potential to overcome the above mentioned problems by improving the electron kinetics. Sun et al.365 synthesized hierarchical nanostructured MoO2/graphene. The electrochemical studies revealed that due to hierarchical topology this hybrid electrode displays high columbic efficiency and reversible capacity. After 60 cycles, a reversible capacity of 1009.9 mA h g−1 was attained by the MoO2/graphene hybrid electrode at a current density of 100 mA g−1 with a Coulombic efficiency of ∼97.2%. Furthermore, it was noticed that after the second cycle, the charge capacity was gradually increased from 468.7 mA h g−1 to 1013.7 mA h g−1 in the 50th cycle. This phenomenon was attributed to the activation process of the electrode material. During this process, MoO2/graphene hybrid may gradually lose its crystallinity and become amorphous, thus improving the Li+ diffusion kinetics during charging/discharging.366 The electronic conductivity of the MoO2/graphene hybrid was observed to be greater by eight orders of magnitude than the bare MoO2. The high electronic conductivity expedited charge transfer between the graphene and MO2 nanoparticles. Thus, an improved cycling stability (reversible capacity of ∼550 mA h g−1) was retained after 1000 cycles and a capacity of ∼770 mA h g−1 was delivered at a current density of 540 mA g−1, even after 1000 cycles367 (Fig. 21). Furthermore, it has been reported that the presence of GO during the in situ synthesis of MoO3/graphene hybrid can change the crystalline phase of the MoO3 nanoparticles from orthorhombic to hexagonal.368,369 In addition, the increased content of GO in the precursor solution changes the phase of the MoO3 rods to MoO2 nanorods and subsequently to MoO2 nanoparticles. The MoO2/GO hybrid with 10 wt% GO could deliver a reversible capacity of ∼720 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 and 560 mA h g−1 at a current density of 800 mA g−1 after 30 cycles.370 Also, the uniform dispersion of MoO2 nanoparticles on graphene helps to improve the capacity and cycling stability.371
 Fig. 21  (a) Galvanostatic discharge/charge curves of the MoO2/graphene hybrid electrode at a current density 540 mA g−1 in the voltage range of 0.01–3.0 V, (b) the cycling performance of the MoO2/graphene at a current density of 540 mA g−1; (c) rate performance of the MoO2/graphene hybrid, and (d) the cycling performance of MoO2/graphene, neat MoO2, and neat graphene electrodes at different current densities.367 
Noerochim et al.372 synthesized a MoO3 nanobelt/graphene hybrid via a microwave-assisted hydrothermal method. With the synthesis method, an ultra-fast microwave-hydrothermal method was used to prepare GNS, which was then mixed with MoO3 solution. The morphological investigation revealed that this hybrid was composed of stacked GNS and uniform MoO3 nanobelts having lengths of 5–10 μm and widths of around 200–500 nm. Furthermore, the MoO3 nanobelt/graphene hybrid film displayed features of high flexibility and a binder-free electrode. Compared to the pristine MoO3, this hybrid electrode could deliver superior reversible capacity. After 100 cycles, the MoO3/graphene hybrid electrode delivered a discharge capacity of ∼172 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 with an initial Coulombic efficiency of ∼98%. In contrast, the discharge capacity for the bare MoO3 electrode was observed to be only 101 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1, with an initial Coulombic efficiency of ∼96%.372 Choi et al.373 synthesized a MoO2/graphene hybrid material using a spray pyrolysis method with a colloidal solution of GO in the presence of Mo ions. This crumpled MoO2/graphene hybrid was further transformed into a MoO3/graphene hybrid after post annealing treatment, and exhibited superior electrochemical behaviour compared to the bare MoO3 nanoparticle. The MoO3/graphene hybrid electrode delivered a reversible discharge capacity of 845 mA h g−1 at a current density of 3 A g−1. The capacity retention for the graphene/MoO3 hybrid electrode was ∼87% after the first cycle, while that of the bare MoO3 electrode was observed to be only ∼47% when measured after 100 cycles. Recently, graphene-encapsulated α-MoO3 nanoribbons as hybrid materials have been synthesized using a self-assembly approach by exploiting the interaction of positively charged MoO3 nanoribbons and negatively charged GO.374 The hybrid structure of graphene-encapsulated MoO3 nanoribbons not only exhibited high specific capacitance (∼823 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 after 70 cycles), but also superior cycling stability (>754 mA h g−1 at 1000 mA g−1 after 200 cycles) and enhanced rate capability (discharge capacity ∼710 mA h g−1 at 3000 mA g−1 after 30 cycles). The improved electrochemical performances are attributed to the inhibited volume change/aggregation of MoO3 nanobelts during the Li+ insertion/extraction, enhanced electrical conductivity, high surface area, and short diffusion length for Li+ offered by graphene as the substrate.375,376
6.9 Lithium-titanate/graphene hybrid
Spinel Li4Ti5O12 has attracted considerable attention as an anode material for LIBs because of the good reversibility of Li+ intercalation and deintercalation and the nearly zero structural changes during the charging and discharging process. However, its low conductivity (10−9 S cm−1) results in initial capacity loss and poor rate capability. The electrochemical performance of the Li4Ti5O12/graphene hybrid materials was significantly improved compared to bare Li4Ti5O12.377 Kim et al.378 synthesized Li4Ti5O12 nanoplatelet/RGO hybrid via a two-step microwave-assisted solvothermal reaction and post calcination treatment. A TEM study revealed that the Li4Ti5O12 nanoplatelets (sizes of 10–20 nm) were well dispersed on RGO nanosheets. The Li4Ti5O12 nanoplatelet/RGO hybrid electrode could deliver a discharge capacity of ∼101 mA h g−1 at a rate of 100 C. Moreover, it retained a capacity of ∼95% at rate of 1 C and ∼96% at a rate of 10 C over 100 cycles. This improved performance was attributed to the short diffusion lengths of Li+ through the Li4Ti5O12 nanoplatelets, and its uniform dispersion over the highly conductive RGO. In the hybrid form, graphene not only reduces the resistance and polarization of the electrode effectively, but also balances the electrical conductivity and initial Coulombic efficiency.379 The increased electrical conductivity and numerous electroactive sites of the hybrid electrode materials can improve the electrochemical properties.380–384
Guo et al.385 synthesized Li4Ti5O12/graphene hybrid using an in situ solid state reaction method. Using this method, Li4Ti5O12 nanoparticles were first coated with carbon. The carbon coating not only confines the aggregation of the Li4Ti5O12 particles, but also enhances the combination between graphene sheets and Li4Ti5O12 particles. Therefore, even at 80 C (after 30 cycles), the carbon coated Li4Ti5O12/graphene (C-Li4Ti5O12/graphene) hybrid electrode could deliver a capacity of ∼155 mA h g−1, which was twice that of the Li4Ti5O12/graphene hybrid electrode (70 mA h g−1 at 80 C). In addition, these authors studied the temperature dependent electrochemical performance of C-Li4Ti5O12/graphene and Li4Ti5O12/graphene, which showed that even at a lower temperature, C-Li4Ti5O12/graphene hybrid exhibits better reversible capacities than Li4Ti5O12/graphene.385 In the same way, compared to Li4Ti5O12/carbon hybrid, the Li4Ti5O12/graphene hybrid exhibited superior performance in terms of capacity and rate capability.386 The electrochemical measurements have also shown that the presence of graphene in Li4Ti5O12/graphene hybrid (wrapping of graphene on individual Li4Ti5O12 grains) offers better stability in Li4Ti5O12 crystal and enhanced reversible Li+ insertion/extraction even at high current rates, therefore improving the performance of the electrode material in the hybrid state.387,388 Ri et al.389 synthesized Li4Ti5O12/graphene-IL(IL implies ionic liquid) hybrid material using the microwave-assisted hydrothermal method. In this synthesis method, ionic liquid of C12H23ClN2 ([Omim]Cl) was used as the exfoliating agent, which controlled the microstructures of graphene sheets and induced the growth of Li4Ti5O12 nanoparticles (18–20 nm) on the graphene sheet. TEM studies also suggest that when synthesis was completed without using the [Omim]Cl, only a few Li4Ti5O12 nanoparticles were anchored on the graphene sheet, whereas most of the particles were aggregated and detached from the graphene sheets. The Li4Ti5O12/graphene-IL hybrid electrode delivered a reversible capacity of ∼159 mA h g−1 at 0.5 C after 100 cycles.389 In addition, the Li4Ti5O12/graphene-IL hybrid exhibited good rate capability. After cycling at different rates from 0.2 to 20 C, when the current rate was reduced to 0.2 C, the reversible capacity could be completely recovered and ∼162 mA h g−1 could be maintained after 80 cycles (Fig. 22). The EIS study further suggests that the lower charger transfer resistance and higher diffusion coefficient in Li4Ti5O12/graphene hybrid than in the bare Li4Ti5O12 nanoparticle electrode was the main reason for the improved electrochemical performance, attributed to good electrical contact between the RGO and Li4Ti5O12 nanoparticles.390,391
 Fig. 22  (a) Galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles of the LTO/graphene-IL electrode during 1st, 2nd, 50th, and 100th cycles at 0.5 C. (b) Cyclic performance of LTO, LTO/graphene, and LTO/graphene-IL electrodes at 0.5 C. (c) High-rate performance of LTO, LTO/graphene, and LTO/graphene-IL electrodes. (d) High rate performance of the LTO/graphene-IL electrode.389 
7. Metal-oxide/graphene hybrid as cathode materials
Although carbon materials cannot directly provide storage capacity for Li+ in the cathode, they can assist in improving the performance significantly. They are expected to improve the electrical conductivity and stability, and inhibit the agglomeration of the cathode materials.130 In this context, graphene is advantageous compared to other carbonaceous materials.392 The exceptional properties of graphene also provide a high specific surface area, higher electrical conductivity, and chemical and mechanical stability to cathode materials. In general, lithium-manganese oxide and vanadium oxides have been widely used with graphene to fabricate hybrid materials for cathodes in LIBs.
7.1 Lithium manganate/graphene hybrid
Although LiCoO2 has been widely used as a cathode material for LIBs, several drawbacks such as high cost and toxicity hinder its applicability. Alternatively, due to the high energy density, better operating safety, low toxicity, and low cost, spinel-type lithium manganate (LiMn2O4) has proven to be a promising cathode material.393 Nevertheless, low electrical conductivity and poor cycling performance are the main issues with this material.394 Xu et al.395 studied the Li storage property of LiMn2O4/graphene hybrid. In order to synthesize LiMn2O4/graphene hybrid, LiMn2O4 nanoparticles were prepared using the sol–gel method and then mixed with GNS by ultrasonic agitation. This hybrid was composed of LiMn2O4 nanoparticles (∼100 nm), dispersed on the surface of GNS. The LiMn2O4/graphene hybrid (with 5 wt% graphene) electrode delivered a reversible capacity of 107 mA h g−1 at a charge/discharge rate of 50 C, which was better than that of pristine LiMn2O4 (80 mA h g−1). Furthermore, after cycling at various current rates from 5 C to 100 C when reduced to 5 C, the reversible capacity could be completely achieved (∼115 mA h g−1) after 60 cycles and the corresponding Coulombic efficiency was observed to be ∼99%.395 Zhao et al.396 fabricated LiMn2O4/GNS hybrids via a self-assembly process, combined with solid-state lithiation. This synthesis process involves mixing of LiOH, H2O, dimethylformamide, and a suspension of Mn3O4 with hexane. A subsequent heat treatment of this mixture led to the growth of LiMn2O4 nanoparticles on GNS. The TEM investigation showed that in the LiMn2O4/GNS hybrid, LiMn2O4 nanoparticles (∼7 nm) were evenly deposited as a layer on the surface of GNS. The LiMn2O4/graphene (6 wt% graphene) electrode could deliver a capacity of ∼110 mA h g−1 at a constant rate of 0.2 C after 80 cycles; however, bare LiMn2O4 exhibited only ∼110 mA h g−1 under the same conditions. Also, this hybrid exhibited a significantly higher capacity retention of ∼91% than that of LiMn2O4 nanoparticles (only ∼77%).397 It has been reported that the flexible nature of GNS is capable of buffering the volume stain of the LiMn2O4 grains associated with Jahn–Teller distortion, which reduces the manganese dissolution into the electrolyte. Therefore, LiMn2O4/RGO hybrids exhibited improved storage capacity, cycle performance, and rate capability compared to the bare LiMn2O4 nanoparticle and RGO electrode for LIBs.398
Bak et al.399 synthesized a LiMn2O4/RGO hybrid using the microwave-assisted hydrothermal method. The morphological studies suggest that the surface of RGO nanosheets was well covered with thin layers of MnO2 nanoparticles with a size of 10–40 nm without agglomeration. Thus, this offered an inherent high electroactive surface area of individual LiMn2O4 nanoparticles in the hybrid state. Such unique structural/morphological features of LiMn2O4 on the highly conductive RGO sheets enabled high specific capacity, high rate capability and good cycling stability. This hybrid could deliver a specific capacity of 137 mA h g−1 at 1 C, and a discharge capacity of 117 mA h g−1 at a 50 C rate. Furthermore, the LiMn2O4/RGO hybrid exhibited the capacity retention of ∼90% at a rate of 1 C and ∼96% at a rate of 10 C over 100 cycles.399 The LiMn2O4 nanoparticles were in situ coated with a graphene-like membrane (GLM) using the liquid-polyacrylonitrile (LPAN) as the carbon source.400 The electrochemical performances suggest that coating of GLM can significantly improve the cycling stability and discharge capacity of the LiMn2O4 nanoparticle. In addition, LiMn2O4 nanoparticles coated with a calcined 20 wt% LPAN-GLM could deliver the discharge capacity of ∼131.1 mA h g−1 at a rate of 0.1 C and retain a 96% capacity after 50 cycles (Fig. 23). The improved electrochemical performance was ascribed to the reduced dissolution of manganese in the electrolyte and smaller charge transfer resistance generated by GLM. In order to improve the electrochemical performance of the LiMn2O4/graphene hybrid, a layer of ZnO was further coated through ALD.401 The ZnO-modified LiMn2O4/graphene electrode exhibited improved electrochemical performances over the LiMn2O4/graphene hybrid and bare LiMn2O4 nanoparticle. The ZnO modified LiMn2O4/graphene hybrid electrode retained a capacity of ∼122.9 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a rate of 1 C, which was higher than ∼115 mA h g−1 from the LiMn2O4/graphene hybrid and 109 mA h g−1 from the bare LiMn2O4 electrode. In addition, the modification of LiMn2O4/graphene by ZnO improved the rate capability compared to the LiMn2O4/graphene electrode. After cycling (50 cycles) at different current rates from 0.1 C to 2 C when the current rate was reduced to 0.1 C, a capacity of ∼180 mA h g−1 could be achieved, which was nearly the same as that measured after 10 cycles. Similarly, the graphene/Y2O3/LiMn2O4 hybrid electrode exhibited electrochemical performance superior to graphene/LiMn2O4, Y2O3/LiMn2O4, and pristine LiMn2O4 electrode as shown in Table 2.402
 Fig. 23  Initial charge–discharge curves (a) and cycling stability curves (b) for the LIB cells made from the LiMn2O4in situ coated with graphene-like membrane compared to the pristine membrane.400 
7.2 Vanadium oxide/graphene hybrid
V2O5 is a promising electrode material which exhibits theoretical capacities of 1471 mA h g−1 and 290 mA h g−1 as an anode and a cathode material, respectively. However, it suffers from problems related to volume expansion, structural collapse, and the formation of an unstable intermediate during the charge and discharge process, which leads to significant decay of capacity.403,404 Blending vanadium oxide nanostructured with graphene to form hybrid electrode materials can improve their electrochemical performance.405–408 Rui et al.409 synthesized RGO-supported polycrystalline V2O5 spheres via a solvothermal method assisted by post annealing treatment. Using this method, reduced vanadium oxide (rVO) nanoparticles (size 10–50 nm) were grown on RGO sheets through heterogeneous nucleation during the solvothermal process. Subsequently, rVO nanoparticles were oxidized in V2O5 by annealing in air at 350 °C. The morphological studies using FE-SEM/TEM revealed that V2O5 nanoparticles assembled into porous spheres having sizes of 200–800 nm and grown on RGO. This V2O5/RGO hybrid exhibited improved cycling stability/rate capability due to the conductive network, structural integrity, and inhibited particle agglomeration. The V2O5/RGO (∼46% RGO) hybrid electrode delivered a discharge capacity of ∼202 mA h g−1 at a current density of 90 mA g−1 during the 50th cycle, corresponding to 85% of the initial capacity. Furthermore, the Coulombic efficiency was maintained at ∼100% for the first 50 cycles, while at a high current density of 5700 mA g−1, a discharge capacity of ∼93 mA h g−1 during the 200th cycle was achieved.409
Choi et al.410 synthesized V2O5/RGO ball hybrid using the spray-pyrolysis method assisted by thermal treatment. In this synthesis approach, graphene/VO2 hybrid was prepared by spray pyrolysis using a colloidal solution of GO and ammonium vanadate and then calcined at 300 °C under an air atmosphere. The morphological investigation suggests that this hybrid composed of VO2 nanoparticles was decorated on crumbled-graphene balls, which resembled a hierarchical structure.410 When used as the cathode, at a current density of 1 A g−1, the initial charge and discharge capacities were observed to be 280 and 282 mA h g−1, respectively, with a Coulombic efficiency of ∼100%. In contrast, the macroporous V2O5 delivered initial charge and discharge capacities of 221 and 205 mA h g−1, respectively, and the corresponding Coulombic efficiency was observed to be only ∼93%. Furthermore, the V2O5 ball/RGO ball hybrid electrode exhibited good cyclability, rate capability, and columbic efficiency. At a current density of 600 mA g−1 and 1000 mA g−1, the V2O5 ball/RGO ball hybrid electrode delivered a reversible capacity of ∼250 mA h g−1 up to 100 cycles with 100% columbic efficiency. Similarly, the improved electrochemical performance of the V2O5 nanowire/graphene hybrid electrode was ascribed to the combined effect of using graphene with excellent conductivity and nanowires of V2O5, which provide a short diffusion pathway for Li+.411 Cong et al.412 synthesized V2O5 nanowires/RGO hybrid material using the electrospinning method. This hybrid consists of V2O5 nanowires which have diameters of about 100–200 nm and are several micrometers in length. It was observed that this hybrid with 1 wt% of RGO could deliver discharge capacities up to 225 mA h g−1 and 125 mA h g−1 (after 60 cycles with a rate of 0.2 C) when cycled between 2.0 and 4.0 V, respectively. Recently, Yang et al.413 synthesized a V2O5/GNRs (graphene nanoribbons) hybrid. In this hybrid, V2O5 nanoparticles were entrapped by GNRs and formed a 3-D conductive network (Fig. 24). This hybrid electrode could deliver a capacity of ∼278 mA h g−1 and 165 mA h g−1 at current rates of 0.1 C and 2 C, respectively (Fig. 25). However, it retained only 78% of its initial capacity (at 0.1 C) when measured after 100 cycles.
 Fig. 24  Synthesis scheme and microscopic images of the fabricated GNR-V2O5 NP hybrid. The composition of V2O5 entrapped in or on the GNRs could be tailored from 25, 40, and 60 wt%, and these are designated as GNR25VO, GNR40VO, and GNR60VO, respectively. (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process. (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of GNR25VO. (d) SEM and (e) TEM images of GNR40VO. (f) SEM and (g) TEM images of GNR60VO.413 
 Fig. 25  Rate performance and cyclability of the hybrid electrode. (a) Variation in the capacity of the hybrid with different applied current densities from 0.1 to 2 C. (b) Discharge/charge profiles of the GNR40VO at different current densities from 0.1 to 2 C. (c) 100 discharge/charge cycle testing of the composites at 0.1 C. (d) EIS of the hybrid electrode.413 
Among the metastable oxides of vanadium, VO2 can show superior performance compared to the well-known V2O5. Shi et al.414 synthesized a VO2-nanoribbon/graphene-woven hybrid via the hydrothermal method. This hybrid electrode exhibited a discharge capacity of 380 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.1 mA g−1, and 99% of the capacity was retained after 50 cycles. Similarly, an improved capacity (∼450 mA h g−1) of the VO2 nanotube/graphene hybrid compared to bare VO2 was ascribed to the interaction between the VO2 nanotubes and graphene. In the hybrid form, the graphene matrix inhibited the aggregation of the VO2 nanotubes while enhancing the charge-transfer process, which improves the cycling stability.415 Therefore, at current densities of 40 mA g−1 and 100 mA g−1, this hybrid electrode delivered capacities of ∼320 mA h g−1 and 160 mA h g−1 (after 20 cycles), respectively, measured in the potential range of 4.0–1.5 V.415 Recently, V2O5 quantum-dot (QD)/graphene hybrid was synthesized by Han et al.416 using a controlled hydrothermal method. It was observed that uniformly dispersed V2O5 QDs (∼2 nm) on the RGO can provide more electroactive sites and significantly reduce the diffusion length of Li+. Therefore, after 300 cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1, a reversible capacity of 245 mA h g−1 with a retention value of 89% was observed. In addition, it showed superior rate capability compared to the bare V2O5 nanowire electrode, when cycled at different current densities (∼100% capacity retention measured after 10th and 50th cycles at current density of 50 mA g−1).
Sun et al.417 synthesized free-standing hybrid film of V2O5·0.86H2O nanoribbons and RGO using the hydrothermal method. The SEM images revealed that the thickness of the film was ∼20 μm and this hybrid structure was formed by intertwining ribbons. Such a hybrid network can be helpful to achieve good contact between RGO and the V2O5·0.86H2O ribbon, essentially providing an easy electron pathway and a Li+ host. This hybrid film exhibited a reversible specific capacity of 160 mA h g−1 at a current density of 70 mA g−1 and retained 133 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles, whereas it delivered ∼60 mA h g−1 (by 30 cycles) and ∼110 mA h g−1 (10 cycles) at high current densities of 1120 mA g−1 and 320 mA h g−1, respectively. Recently, Nethravathi et al.418 synthesized N-doped graphene–VO2 nanotube hybrid material. This hybrid consists of a 3D flower-like structure, exhibiting high capacity (300 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 after 20 cycles), good cycling stability (251 mA h g−1 50 mA g−1 after 50 cycles), and columbic efficiency (only 0.79% fading) compared to bare VO2 electrode. This was attributed to the increased electronic conductivity and short diffusion length facilitated by ultrathin nanosheets of graphene. Reddy Channu et al.419 synthesized GO coated VO2 hybrid using vanadyl(IV) sulfate (VOSO4) using the hydrothermal method under an Ar atmosphere. The electrochemical studies revealed that, compared to carbon coated VO2 (∼110 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 by 20 cycles), the GO coated VO2 electrode could deliver higher discharge capacity (∼160 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 by 20 cycles). These observations suggest that graphene can be advantageous over the other carbon nanostructures for improving the performances of anode materials.
In addition, Table 2 summarizes the different types of metal-oxide/graphene hybrid electrode materials and their performances for LIBs.420–445
8. Graphene/metal oxide hybrids for flexible LIBs
The demand for flexible LIBs to design a variety of flexible portable electronic devices is rapidly increasing. Flexible LIBs possess several unique features such as good flexibility, easy portability and lightweight. However, compared to the conventional LIBs, the fabrication of flexible LIBs is very challenging. This is mainly because of the lack of reliable materials that combine high mechanical stability with electrical conductivity; meanwhile, they should also possess high stability during the electrochemical reactions. Therefore, several smart approaches including the growth of conductive nanomaterials onto textiles and paper have recently been reported.446,447 Due to good mechanical flexibility and electrical conductivity, graphene has also shown its potential in the design of flexible LIBs.448,449 Gwon et al.450 reported a novel approach to design the flexible LIB using the free-standing graphene paper as the electrode and the V2O5/graphene hybrid paper as the cathode. In this approach, graphene paper was prepared through a vacuum filtration process assisted by thermal treatment at 550 °C for 2 h under an Ar atmosphere. The V2O5/graphene hybrid paper was synthesized using the pulsed laser deposition (PLD) technique. The target of V2O5 was prepared by cold pressing from V2O5 powder, which was further deposited onto the graphene paper. The complete LIB was assembled with the lithiated graphene paper as the anode and the V2O5/graphene hybrid paper as the cathode, separated by a separator dipped in an electrolyte (1 M LiPF6 in ethyl carbonate/dimethyl carbonate). The cyclic performance of the assembled battery was measured between 1.7 and 3.8 V at a constant current density of 10 mA cm−2, showing the typical charge/discharge characteristic of the amorphous V2O5 cathode. The first charge/discharge capacities were observed to be ∼15 mA h cm−2 with a negligible initial irreversible capacity. Moreover, reversible charging/discharging was maintained during the prolonged cycling with a small decay in capacity. This flexible battery was also able to operate when rolled up or twisted and exhibited good charge/discharge capability with the full mechanical flexibility (Fig. 26).
 Fig. 26  (a) Assembled flexible Li battery based on graphene paper. V2O5/graphene paper and electrochemically lithiated-graphene paper were used as the cathode and the anode, respectively, which were separated by a separator dipped in liquid electrolyte. (b) The battery is thin, lightweight, and flexible enough to be rolled up or twisted. (c) Schematic drawing of the flexible Li battery based on graphene paper.450 
Recently, another flexible LIB was designed by Li et al.451 This battery was assembled from 3D graphene foam (GF) loaded with LiFePO4 and Li4Ti5O12, which were further used as the cathode and the anode, respectively. In order to prepare the anode, Li4Ti5O12 was synthesized using a hydrothermal reaction among Ti–(OC3H7)4, LiOH, and H2O2 in the presence of graphene foam and the synthesized sample was heated at 550 °C under an Ar atmosphere. On the other hand, the cathode was prepared by hydrothermal reactions among ammonium dihydrogen phosphate (NH4H2PO4), iron(III) nitrate hydrate (Fe(NO3)30.9H2O) and lithium acetate hydrate (CH3COOLi·2H2O) in the presence of graphene foam. The as-prepared sample was further heated at 720 °C under a mixture of hydrogen and argon gas. The complete battery comprised free-standing LiFePO4/GF and Li4Ti5O12/GF electrodes with a thickness of ∼100 μm, which were laminated on both sides of a polypropylene separator and subsequently sealed with poly(dimethyl siloxane) with a thickness of ∼250 μm. The LiPF6 in ethylene carbonate/dimethyl carbonate was used as the electrolyte. This flexible LIB exhibited an initial discharge capacity of ∼143 mA h g−1 at a rate of 0.2 C with a Coulombic efficiency of 98%. In addition, ∼97% capacity was retained after the first 15 cycles in the flat state, whereas ∼95% capacity was retained after another 15 cycles in the bent state (radius of bent was 5 mm). Furthermore, when the battery was operated at a rate of 10 C, it delivered a capacity of ∼117 mA h g−1 and could be cycled over 100 cycles while fading the capacity to only 4%.
Wang et al.452 synthesized a flexible and free-standing hybrid film of Fe3O4/graphene, through vacuum filtration and thermal reduction processes. This hybrid film comprised a 3D-graphene network in which hollow and porous Fe3O4 spindles were uniformly sandwiched between graphene layers. This hybrid film was further used as a binder-free and free-standing anode for LIB. The Fe3O4/graphene hybrid film with an optimized concentration of graphene (39.6 wt%) exhibited a specific capacity of ∼1555 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1. Moreover, at current densities of 200 and 500 mA g−1, it also showed capacities of 940 and 660 mA h g−1, respectively, after 50 cycles with a Coulombic efficiency of ∼100%.
Recently, nanoporous NiO/graphene, Co3O4/graphene, and Fe3O4/graphene hybrid have been investigated as flexible electrodes in LIBs.453 In these studies a controlled nanoporous graphene paper was synthesized using carbon nanofiber as the graphene precursor and spherical silica as hard templates with different diameters. The nanoporous graphene paper was further immersed in chemical solutions containing metal salts of nickel, cobalt, and iron; subsequently, thermal treatment led to the formation of a 3D flexible electrode. These hybrids could be directly used as the anode in the LIB. The Fe3O4/graphene hybrid electrode exhibited a specific capacity of ∼1427.5 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 1 A g−1 and showed good cycling ability. Moreover, it showed good rate capabilities of 3 A g−1 and 5 A g−1 at steady reversible capacities of 840.0 and 592.5 mA h g−1, respectively. On the other hand, NiO/graphene hybrid delivered a specific discharge capacity of ∼739.3 mA h g−1 after 70 cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1, whereas Co3O4/graphene exhibited a specific discharge capacity of ∼684.0 mA h g−1. These strategies could provide new opportunities for the development of flexible LIBs with high capacity to power flexible electronic devices in a broad range of unique applications.
9. Conclusions and future study
Graphene has shown potential for the fabrication of electrode materials in LIBs owing to unique properties such as 2D structure, excellent electrical/thermal conductivity, chemical and mechanical stability, and very high specific surface area. Recent advances in the synthesis of graphene and its hybrid with various types of metal-oxide nanoparticles have been discussed, along with their applications as electrode materials for LIBs. In contrast to other carbon materials such as graphite, C60, and CNTs, graphene not only serves as a 2D matrix for various types of inorganic nanostructures, it also acts as a building block and establishes inimitable superstructures with interconnected networks; this can be more helpful for the fast transportation of Li+, and can therefore dramatically improve the performance of electrode materials. An LIB electrode should satisfy basic requirements such as high capacity, high energy, and high power density with long cycling stability. The current research has shown that graphene in a hybrid form can accomplish synergetic effects and can therefore fulfill these requirements. Graphene and its derivatives such as RGO and functionalized GO can be introduced into a variety of metal-oxide nanoparticles to form graphene-based metal-oxide hybrid electrode materials. The incorporation of graphene into these nanoparticles can significantly improve their properties, and possibly lead to novel properties. Furthermore, in the hybrid form, graphene can serve as a 2D substrate or a template to provide a platform for the controlled growth of the nanoparticles. The presence of graphene can prevent the agglomeration of nanoparticles and volume change, whereas the existence of nanoparticles between the layers of graphene can effectively suppress the re-stacking of graphene sheets during the cycling process. The presence of graphene with nanoparticles can also form 3D interconnected porous structures. These features are helpful for providing a large surface area, high electrical conductivity, fast charge transport, and excellent wettability towards the electrolyte, and therefore they significantly improve the performance of the electrode materials for LIBs.
Research on metal-oxide/graphene hybrid nanostructure electrode materials is still in the early stage, and more studies on modifications and development of these hybrids are required to achieve the desired electrochemical properties. Several challenges still need to be overcome. First, as an important component of the metal-oxide/graphene hybrids, the synthesis of graphene itself is not mature in terms of the control of characteristics such as the morphology, defects, and functionalities. Therefore, new approaches to the synthesis of graphene with high quality on a large scale and low cost need to be developed. Second, the functionalization of graphene and control of the interface between the nanoparticles and graphene are crucial. The functionalization involves a charge transfer process that affects the performance of the hybrid materials. Thus, a good understanding of the surface chemistry between graphene and metal-oxide nanoparticles is needed. Third, the mechanism of improved performance is partially unclear, and the relationship between the number of graphene layers, defects, disordered features, and the lithium storage mechanism is also critical. Moreover, attention should be given to the synthesis approaches of the hybrid with controlled structures regarding morphology, phase composition, and reproducible features. The synthesis and modification of these hybrid nanostructures should not be the only focus, and hybrid materials with high capacity and cycling stability must also be designed. Graphene based metal oxide hybrids are expected to be developed as robust electrode materials for LIBs. It is believed that metal-oxide/graphene hybrid electrode materials will find practical applications in LIBs in the future.
Abbreviations

2DTwo dimensional
3D PG–MnMnO2/3D porous graphene
3DThree-dimensional
ACNTsAmorphous carbon nanotubes
AFMAtomic force microscopy
AlAluminum
ALDAtomic layer deposition
ArArgon
BETBrunauer–Emmet–Teller
C60Fullerene
C-Li4Ti5O12/grapheneCarbon coated Li4Ti5O12/graphene
cm2 V−1 s−1Centimeter2 volt−1 s−1
CNTCarbon nanotubes
Co3O4Cobalt(II,III) oxide
Cu2OCuprous oxide
CuOCupric oxide
CVDChemical vapor deposition
DFTDensity functional theory
EISElectrochemical impedance spectroscopy
Fe(NO3)3·9H2OFerric nitrate nonahydrate
Fe3O4Magnetite
FE-SEMField emission scanning electron microscope
FT-IRFourier transform infrared
GAsGraphene aerogels
GFGraphene foam
GLMGraphene-like membrane
GNRsGraphene nanoribbons
GNSGraphene nano-sheet
GOGraphene oxide
GPGraphene papers
HNO3Nitric acid
ILIonic liquid
In2O3Indium oxide
KBH4Potassium borohydride
kW kg−1Kilowatt kilogram−1
Li+Lithium ion
Li4Ti5O12Lithium-titanate
LIBsLithium-ion batteries
LICMCLithium carboxymethyl cellulose
LiCoO2Lithium cobalt oxide
LiFePO4Lithium iron phosphate
LiMn2O4Lithium manganate
LiPF6Lithium hexafluorophosphate
Li-RGOLi+ intercalated RGO
LPANLiquid-polyacrylonitrile
m2 g−1Meter2 gram−1
mA g−1Milli-ampere gram−1
mA h g−1Milli-ampere hour gram−1
MIOMesoporous iron oxide
MMGMicrospheres composed of multilayer graphene
Mn3O4Manganese(II,III) oxide
MnO2Manganese(IV) dioxide
MoO2Molybdenum dioxide
MoO3Molybdenum trioxide
MWNTsMulti-walled carbon nanotubes
N2H4Hydrazine
NiONickel oxide
NSNanosheets
nt-TiO2Titania nanotubes
PEIPoly(ethylene imine)
PVDFPolyvinylidene difluoride
QDsQuantum dots
RGOReduced graphene oxide
rVOReduced vanadium oxide
SEISolid electrolyte interphase
SEMScanning electron microscope
S-GNSSulfur doped graphene
SnO2Tin oxide
SRFGSolvothermally reduced and functionalized graphene
TEMTransmission electron microscope
TiO2 (B)Monoclinic titanium dioxide
TiO2Titanium dioxide
TiO2@TiOxNy/TiN-GSSurface nitrated TiO2/graphene
V2O5Vanadium penta-oxide
VO2Vanadium dioxide
Wm−1 K−1Watt per meter kelvin
XPSX-ray photoelectron
α-Fe2O3Hematite
γ-Fe2O3Maghemite

Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the Converging Research Center Program (2014M3C1A8048834) and the Basic Research Laboratory Program (2014R1A4A1008140) through the National Research Foundation (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning. Author M.S. acknowledges the Department of Science & Technology, Govt of India for awarding the DST-INSPIRE Fellowship [IFA-13 MS-02] 2014. J.S. acknowledges the Department of Science & Technology, Govt of India for awarding the DST-INSPIRE Fellowship [IFA-13 CH-105] 2013.
Notes and references
A. Vu, Y. Qian and A. Stein, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1056–1085 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, X. Pang and Z. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2013, 237, 229–242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu and R. Hartman, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 655–660 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yildirim, S. Sarac and A. Aslan, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 6770–6774 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Batidzirai, E. M. W. Smeets and A. P. C. Faaij, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 6598–6630 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Beaudin, H. Zareipour, A. Schellenberglabe and W. Rosehart, Energy Sustainable Dev., 2010, 14, 302–314 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wrightn and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 87–111 CrossRef PubMed .
B. P. Tripathi and V. K. Shahi, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 945–979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. X. Yuan, Z. H. Wang, W. X. Zhang, X. L. Hu, J. T. Chen, Y. H. Huang and J. B. Goodenough, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 269–284 CAS .
K. Sheng, Y. Sun, C. Li, W. Yuan and G. Shi, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 247–251 Search PubMed .
R. Liu, J. Duay and S. B. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1384–1404 RSC .
A. Manthiram, A. Vadivel Murugan, A. Sarkar and T. Muraliganth, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 621–638 CAS .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. V. Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J. M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Kim and J. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1497–1514 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10712–10783 CAS .
B. Y. G. Guo, J. S. Hu and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2878–2887 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, H. Feng, X. Wu, L. Wang, A. Zhang, T. Xia, H. Dong, X. Li and L. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 4889–4899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu, A. Goering, L. Qu and L. Dai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 12099–12104 RSC .
B. J. Landi, M. J. Ganter, C. D. Cress, R. A. DiLeo and R. P. Raffaelle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 638–654 CAS .
C. M. Schauerman, M. J. Ganter, G. Gaustad, C. W. Babbitt, R. P. Raffaelle and B. J. Landi, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12008–12015 RSC .
T. Zhao, Y. Liu, T. Li and X. Zhao, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 3873–3877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Landi, R. A. DiLeo, C. M. Schauerman, C. D. Cress, M. J. Ganter and R. P. Raffaelle, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 3406–3410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Guo, X. Wang, P. F. Fulvio, M. Chi, S. M. Mahurin, X. G. Sun and S. Dai1, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4661–4666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, J. Z. Wang, A. I. Minett, Y. Liu, C. Lynam, H. Liu and G. G. Wallace, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 393–396 CAS .
K. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Wang, H. Liu, J. Chen, J. Holmes and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9748–9753 RSC .
S. Chen, P. Chen and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4323–4329 RSC .
H. Lee, J. K. Yoo, J. H. Park, J. H. Kim, K. Kang and Y. S. Jung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 976–982 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, C. Jo, J. Lee, C. W. Lee and S. Yoon, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1453–1458 RSC .
J. Yang, J. Choi, H. Kim, M. Morita and S. Park, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2013, 19, 1648–1652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, X. Xiang, E. Liu, Y. Wu, H. Xie, Z. Wu and Y. Tian, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 2045–2050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Liu, H. Shen, X. Xiang, Z. Huang, Y. Tian, Y. Wu, Z. Wu and H. Xie, Mater. Lett., 2012, 67, 390–393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jin, Z. Shi and C. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 141, 302–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. B. Zhu, Y. Zhu, Z. Yuan, L. L. Si and Y. Qian, Carbon, 2014, 69, 515–524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zou, R. Lv, F. Kang, L. Gan and W. Shen, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 566–569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tien, M. Xu and J. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 1465–1467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Chew, S. H. Ng, J. Wang, P. Novák, F. Krumeich, S. L. Chou, J. Chen and H. K. Liu, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2976–2983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. Welna, L. Qu, B. E. Taylor, L. Dai and M. F. Durstock, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1455–1460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Z. Bai, D. L. Zhao, T. M. Zhang, W. G. Xie, J. M. Zhang and Z. M. Shen, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 107, 555–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qie, W. M. Chen, Z. H. Wang, Q. G. Shao, X. Li, L. X. Yuan, X. L. Hu, W. X. Zhang and Y. H. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2047–2050 CrossRef PubMed .
W. H. Shin, H. M. Jeong, B. G. Kim, J. K. Kang and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2283–2288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z. Huang, S. Oh, Y. Yu, Y. W. Mai and J. K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12133–12140 RSC .
G. N. Zhu, H. J. Liu, J. H. Zhuang, C. X. Wang, Y. G. Wang and Y. Y. Xia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4016–4022 CAS .
E. Kang, Y. S. Jung, G. H. Kim, J. Chun, U. Wiesner, A. C. Dillon, J. K. Kim and J. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4349–4357 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, X. Zhang, E. Uchaker, C. Yuan and G. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 691–698 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, Q. Liu, C. Wang and M. R. Zachariah, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 22, 803–811 CrossRef .
Z. Li, N. Liu, X. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Qi and L. Yin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16640–16648 RSC .
S. Lee, Y. Cho, H. K. Song, K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8748–8752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Julien, K. Zaghib, A. Mauger and H. Groult, Adv. Chem. Eng. Sci., 2012, 2, 321–329 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dimesso1, C. Spanheimer1, W. Jaegermann, Y. Zhang and A. L. Yarin, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 064307–064311 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Pan, J. Liu, J. G. Zhang, W. Xu, G. Cao, Z. Nie, B. W. Arey and S. Liang, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1674–1677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Luo, K. Wang, J. Wang, K. Jiang, Q. Li and S. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2294–2298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. J. Zhang, A. S. Admar, J. Luo, C. C. Wong, A. Borgna and J. Lin, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 5748–5753 RSC .
X. F. Zhang, K. X. Wang, X. Wei and J. S. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 5290–5292 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Bonino, L. Ji, Z. Lin, O. Toprakci, X. Zhang and S. A. Khan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2534–2542 CAS .
Z. Yang, G. Du, Z. Guo, X. Yu, Z. Chen, T. Guo and H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8591–8596 RSC .
Z. Wang, M. A. Fierke and A. Stein, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A658–A663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luo, J. Luo, J. Jiang, W. Zhou, H. Yang, X. Qi, H. Zhang, H. J. Fan, D. Y. W. Yu, C. M. Li and T. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6559–6566 CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. Li, Y. Ding and L. Guan, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 852–856 RSC .
J. Kong, Z. Liu, Z. Yang, H. R. Tan, S. Xiong, S. Y. Wong, X. Li and X. Lu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 525–530 RSC .
F. D. Lupo, C. Gerbaldi, G. Meligrana, S. Bodoardo and N. Penazzi, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2011, 6, 3580–3593 Search PubMed .
L. B. Chen, X. M. Yin, L. Mei, C. C. Li, D. N. Lei, M. Zhang, Q. H. Li, Z. Xu, C. M. Xu and T. H. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 035402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, A. Dhanabalan, L. Gu and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 238–244 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kuila, S. Bose, A. K. Mishra, P. Khanra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2012, 57, 1061–1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Meyer, A. K. Geim, M. I. Katsnelson, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth and S. Roth, Nature, 2007, 446, 60–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Yu, T. Kuila, N. H. Kim, P. Khanra and J. H. Lee, Carbon, 2013, 54, 310–322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, T. Kuila, N. H. Kim, B. C. Ku and J. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5892–5901 CAS .
A. Dato, Z. Lee, K. J. Jeon, R. Erni, V. Radmilovic, T. J. Richardson and M. Frenklach, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6095–6097 RSC .
S. Vadahanambi, J. H. Jung and I. K. Oh, Carbon, 2011, 49, 4449–4457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Zhang, L. J. Yue, L. F. Han, J. L. Chen, D. Z. Jia and F. Li, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2012, 56, 95–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Rafiee, J. Rafiee, I. Srivastava, Z. Wang, H. Song, Z. Z. Yu and N. Koratkar, Small, 2010, 6, 179–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kuilla, S. Bhadra, D. Yao, N. H. Kim, S. Bose and J. H. Lee, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 1350–1375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wanga, Z. Lia, G. Fana, H. Pana, Z. Chen and D. Zhang, Scr. Mater., 2012, 66, 594–597 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Goyal and A. A. Balandin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 073113–073116 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kuila, A. K. Mishra, P. Khanra, N. H. Kim, Md. E. Uddin and J. H. Lee, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 9825–9833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Santos, J. Mangadlao, F. Ahmed, A. Leon, R. C. Advincula and D. F. Rodrigues, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 395101–395110 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Balamurugan, M. Rajkumar, S. M. Chen and R. Saraswathi, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2012, 7, 3339–3349 CAS .
F. Xiao, Y. Li, X. Zan, K. Liao, R. Xu and H. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2487–2494 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kuila, S. Bose, P. Khanra, A. K. Mishra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 4637–4648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, S. Wei, H. Gu, S. B. Rapole, Q. Wang, Z. Luo, N. Haldolaarachchige, D. P. Young and Z. Guo, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 977–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, X. Ma, Q. Wu, C. Wang, X. Zang and Z. Wang, J. Sep. Sci., 2012, 35, 2266–2272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jahan, Q. Bao and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6707–6713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Srivastava, A. K. Das, P. Khanra, Md. E. Uddin, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9792–9801 CAS .
S. Ameen, H. K. Seo, M. S. Akhtar and H. S. Shin, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 210, 220–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. P. Luo, X. Y. Yu, B. X. Lei, H. Y. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8111–8117 CAS .
P. Madhusudan, J. Yu, W. Wang, B. Cheng and G. Liu, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 14345–14353 RSC .
A. Iwan and A. Chuchmała, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2012, 37, 1805–1828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wua, Z. Liu, L. A. Jauregui, Q. Yu, R. Pillai, H. Caoc, J. Bao, Y. P. Chen and S. S. Pei, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 150, 296–300 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Feng, J. Xie, G. S. Cao, T. J. Zhu and X. B. Zhao, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2012, 7, 5195–5203 CAS .
D. Wang, R. Kou, D. Choi, Z. Yang, Z. Nie, J. Li, L. V. Saraf, D. Hu, J. Zhang, G. L. Graff, J. Liu, M. A. Pope and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1587–1595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Lee, I. Y. Kim, S. Y. Han, T. W. Kim and S. J. Hwang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 13800–13809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, J. Xie, S. Liu, W. Song, G. Cao, T. Zhu and X. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2012, 202, 276–283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, G. Zhou, L. C. Yin, W. Ren, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 107–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, K. Jang, J. Choi, J. Jin, J. H. Park, H. J. Kim, D. H. Oh, J. R. Ahn and S. U. Son, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6244–6246 RSC .
S. Bose, T. Kuila, A. K. Mishra, R. Rajasekar, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 767–784 RSC .
L. Wang, D. Wang, X. Hu, J. Zhu and X. Liang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 76, 282–287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kuila, A. K. Mishra, P. Khanra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 52–71 RSC .
H. Huang, H. Chen, D. Sun and X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 204, 46–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. J. Aravind, R. I. Jafri, N. Rajalakshmi and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18199–18204 RSC .
W. I. Park, J. M. Yoon, M. Park, J. Lee, S. K. Kim, J. W. Jeong, K. Kim, H. Y. Jeong, S. Jeon, K. S. No, J. Y. Lee and Y. Sik Jung, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1235–1240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113–1132 CAS .
S. Han, D. Wu, S. Li, F. Zhang and X. Feng, Small, 2013, 9, 1173–1187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, Y. Shao, M. W. Ellis, R. B. Moored and B. Yie, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 15384–15402 RSC .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boeya and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
B. Z. Jang, C. Liu, D. Neff, Z. Yu, M. C. Wang, W. Xiong and A. Zhamu, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3785–3791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Parka, X. Zhanga, M. Chunga, G. B. Lessa and A. M. Sastry, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7904–7929 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Fergus, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 939–954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, S. Song, D. Xue and H. Zhang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 149–165 CrossRef PubMed .
S. W. Kim, D. H. Seo, X. Ma, G. Ceder and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 710–721 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Pistoia, Lithium Batteries: New Materials, Developments and Perspectives, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1994, vol. 5 Search PubMed .

          M. Wakihara and O. Yamamoto, Lithium Ion Batteries: Fundamentals and Performance, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1998 Search PubMed .

          W. Van Schalkwijk and B. Scrosati, Advances in Lithium-Ion Batteries, Kluwer Academic/Plenum, New York,  2002 Search PubMed .

          G. A. Nazri and G. Pistoia, Lithium Batteries: Science and Technology, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, MA,  2003 Search PubMed .
V. Agubra and J. Fergus, Materials, 2013, 6, 1310–1325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Mao, Y. H. Lu, J. D. Lin, S. Zhong, A. T. S. Wee and W. Chen, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2013, 88, 132–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pang, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2779–2795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pumera, Chem. Rec., 2009, 9, 211–223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, X. Shen, J. Yao and J. Park, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2049–2053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wan, Z. Ren, H. Wang, G. Wang, X. Tong, S. Gao and J. Bai, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2011, 20, 756–761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tong, H. Wang, G. Wang, L. Wan, Z. Ren, J. Bai and J. Bai, J. Solid State Chem., 2011, 184, 982–989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. A. Vargas C, Á. Caballero and J. Morales, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2083–2092 RSC .
H. F. Xiang, Z. D. Li, K. Xie, J. Z. Jiang, J. J. Chen, P. C. Lian, J. S. Wu, Y. Yu and H. H. Wang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 6792–6799 RSC .
W. Ahn, H. S. Song, S. H. Park, K. B. Kim, K. H. Shin, S. N. Lim and S. H. Yeon, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 132, 172–179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lian, X. Zhu, S. Liang, Z. Li, W. Yang and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 3909–3914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, Y. Lv, R. Che, H. Wu, X. Zhang, D. Gu, G. Zheng and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1524–1530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xiao, P. Liu, J. S. Wang, M. W. Verbrugge and M. P. Balogh, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 209–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sun, B. Wang, D. Su, L. Xiao, H. Ahn and G. Wang, Carbon, 2012, 50, 727–733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Lei, Z. Q. Chao, L. Jia, S. Y. Li, C. J. Peng, L. Feng and S. S. Gang, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2011, 56, 3204–3212 CrossRef .
T. Wei, F. Wang, J. Yan, J. Cheng, Z. Fan and H. Song, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 653, 45–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Pollak, B. Geng, K. J. Jeon, I. T. Lucas, T. J. Richardson, F. Wang and R. Kostecki, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3386–3388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Zhou, W. W. Zhou, C. M. Guan, J. Q. Shen, C. Y. Ouyang, M. Lei, S. Q. Shi and W. H. Tang, Sci. China: Phys., Mech. Astron., 2012, 55, 1376–1382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kheirabadi and A. Shafiekhani, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 124323–124327 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tachikawa, Y. Nagoya and T. Fukuzumi, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6148–6152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chan and J. M. Hill, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 203–208 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kim, H. D. Lim, S. W. Kim, J. Hong, D. H. Seo, D. Kim, S. Jeon, S. Park and K. Kang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1506–1513 Search PubMed .
R. Mukherjee, A. V. Thomas, A. Krishnamurthy and N. Koratkar, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7867–7878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou and Z. Liu, Inst. Phys. Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2011, 18, 062006 CrossRef .
D. Cai, S. Wang, L. Ding, P. Lian, S. Zhang, F. Peng and H. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 254, 198–203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, X. Li, D. Geng, M. Cai, R. Li and X. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 91, 227–233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. D. Dao, J. E. Hong, K. S. Ryu and H. M. Jeong, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 250, 257–266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Kuo, W. R. Liu and H. C. Wu, J. Chin. Chem. Soc., 2012, 59, 1220–1225 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Wang, C. Sun, G. Zhou, F. Li, L. Wen, B. C. Donose, G. Q. Lu, H. M. Cheng and I. R. Gentle, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3607–3612 CAS .
D. Pan, S. Wang, B. Zhao, M. Wu, H. Zhang, Y. Wang and Z. Jiao, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3136–3142 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Yoo, J. Kim, E. Hosono, H. S. Zhou, T. Kudo and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2277–2282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar, A. L. M. Reddy, A. Mukherjee, M. Dubey, X. Zhan, N. Singh, L. Ci, W. E. Billups, J. Nagurny, G. Mital and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2011, 6, 4345–4349 CrossRef PubMed .
S. L. Kuo, W. R. Liu, C. P. Kuo, N. L. Wu and H. C. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 552–556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shen, H. B. Zhang, H. Zhang, W. Ren, A. Dasari, G. S. Tang and Z. Z. Yu, Carbon, 2013, 56, 132–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. M. Reddy, A. Srivastava, S. R. Gowda, H. Gullapalli, M. Dubey and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6337–6342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hu, X. Sun, H. Sun, G. Xin, D. Shao, C. Liu and J. Lian, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 1060–1066 RSC .
H. Wang, C. Zhang, Z. Liu, L. Wang, P. Han, H. Xu, K. Zhang, S. Dong, J. Yao and G. Cui, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5430–5434 RSC .
D. Cai, S. Wang, P. Lian, X. Zhu, D. Li, W. Yang and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 90, 492–497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ma, X. Shao and D. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8911–8915 RSC .
X. Wang, Z. Zeng, H. Ahn and G. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 183103–183105 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yan, Y. X. Yin, S. Xin, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10663–10665 RSC .
Y. S. Yun, V. D. Le, H. Kim, S. J. Chang, S. J. Baek, S. Park, B. H. Kim, Y. H. Kim, K. Kang and H. J. Jin, J. Power Sources, 2014, 262, 79–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, X. Li, J. Wang, R. Li and X. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2013, 237, 41–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Jung, S. W. Han, J. H. Jeong and E. S. Oh, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2013, 695, 30–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, I. Ruiz, S. Guo, Z. Favors, H. H. Bay, M. Ozkan and C. S. Ozkan, Nano Energy, 2014, 3, 113–118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Wang, J. Yang, X. Y. Zhou, J. Xie, L. L. Ma and B. Huang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2014, 722–723, 141–147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Vinayan, R. Nagar, V. Raman, N. Rajalakshmi, K. S. Dhathathreyan and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9949–9956 RSC .
T. Chen, L. Pan, K. Yu and Z. Sun, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 229, 9–13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kang, R. Baskaran, J. Hwang, B. C. Ku and W. Choi, Carbon, 2014, 68, 493–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. R. Prabakar, Y. H. Hwang, E. G. Bae, D. K. Lee and M. Pyo, Carbon, 2013, 52, 128–136 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Su, Q. L. Wu, X. Zhan, J. Wu, S. Wei and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 2519–2534 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, D. Choi, J. Li, Z. Yang, Z. Nie, R. Kou, D. Hu, C. Wang, L. V. Saraf, J. Zhang, I. A. Aksay and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 907–914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Zhou, B. Xiong, Y. Zhao, X. Huang and Z. Shao, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 88, 847–857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Tao, L. Z. Fan, X. Yan and X. Qu, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 69, 328–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cao, B. Li, J. Zhang, F. Lian, X. Kong and M. Qu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9759–9766 RSC .
X. Zhang, P. S. Kumar, V. Aravindan, H. H. Liu, J. Sundaramurthy, S. G. Mhaisalkar, H. M. Duong, S. Ramakrishna and S. Madhavi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14780–14788 CAS .
L. Dong, M. Li, L. Dong, M. Zhao, J. Feng, Y. Han, J. Deng, X. Li, D. Li and X. Sun, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 16116–16122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xin, X. Zhou, J. Wu, X. Yao and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 11035–11043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiu, K. Yan, S. Yang, L. Jin, H. Deng and W. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6515–6526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hu, X. Sun, H. Sun, M. Yu, F. Lu, C. Liu and J. Lian, Carbon, 2013, 51, 322–326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, G. Zhou, R. Fang, F. Li and H. M. Chenga, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7780–7784 RSC .
J. Qiu, P. Zhang, M. Ling, S. Li, P. Liu, H. Zhao and S. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3636–3642 CAS .
Z. Zhang, Q. Chu, H. Li, J. Hao, W. Yang, B. Lu, X. Ke, J. Li and J. Tang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 409, 38–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Ren, Y. H. Ding, F. H. Chang, X. He, J. Q. Feng, C. F. Wang, Y. Jiang and P. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 263, 54–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Zhang, T. Li, Q. Zhong, H. Li and J. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 268, 372–378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, R. Wu, P. Zhao, A. Chang, G. Ji, B. Gao and Q. Zhao, Mater. Lett., 2013, 100, 173–176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5852–5855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, D. Shi, Z. Liu, H. Liu and Z. Guo, J. Nanopart. Res., 2013, 15, 1674 CrossRef .
J. Wang, L. Shen, H. Li, X. Wang, P. Nie, B. Ding, G. Xu, H. Dou and X. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 133, 209–216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Cai, D. Li, S. Wang, X. Zhu, W. Yang, S. Zhang and H. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 561, 54–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ban, M. Xie, X. Sun, J. J. Travis, G. Wang, H. Sun, A. C. Dillon, J. Lian, S. M. George and C. Ban, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 424002 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Menéndez, P. Alvarez, C. Botas, F. Nacimiento, R. Alcántara, J. L. Tirado and G. F. Ortiz, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 886–893 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xiao, Z. Wang, H. Guo, X. Li, J. Wang, S. Huang and L. Gan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 266, 148–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hu, X. Chen, Y. Tang, L. Yang, H. Xiao and B. Fan, Mater. Lett., 2013, 91, 315–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, L. Zhou and C. Yu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 495–499 RSC .
B. Zhao, R. Liu, X. Cai, Z. Jiao, M. Wu, X. Ling, B. Lu and Y. Jiang, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2014, 44, 53–60 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ye, J. Zhang, F. Wang, Q. Su and G. Du, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 113, 212–217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, G. Zhou, Z. Weng, X. Y. Shan, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Carbon, 2014, 67, 500–507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wei, J. Liang, Y. Zhu, J. Zhang, X. Li, K. Zhang, Z. Yuan and Y. Qian, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 114, 779–784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhou, D. W. Wang, F. Li, L. Zhang, N. Li, Z. S. Wu, L. Wen, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5306–5313 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Z. Wang, C. Zhong, D. Wexler, N. H. Idris, Z. X. Wang, L. Q. Chen and H. K. Liu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 661–667 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Behera, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8669–8674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang and M. Jia, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 551, 53–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lian, X. Zhu, H. Xiang, Z. Li, W. Yang and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 56, 834–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, W. Wu, Z. Liu, L. Li, J. Hu, H. Dai, L. Ding, K. Zhou, C. Wang and X. Song, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 95, 24–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Dong, R. G. Ma, M. J. Hu, H. Cheng, C. K. Tsang, Q. D. Yang, Y. Y. Li and J. A. Zapien, J. Solid State Chem., 2013, 201, 330–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yoon, J. Kim, J. Kim and J. K. Lee, Energies, 2013, 6, 4830–4840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fu, G. Zhao, H. Zhang and S. Li, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2014, 9, 46–60 CAS .
S. Bhuvaneswari, P. M. Pratheeksha, S. Anandan, D. Rangappa, R. Gopalan and T. N. Rao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 5284–5294 RSC .
T. Wang, X. L. Wang, Y. Lu, Q. Xiong, X. Zhao, J. Cai, S. Huang, C. Gu and J. Tu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 322–330 RSC .
Y. Li, S. Zhu, Z. Yu, Q. Meng, T. Zhang, Q. Liu, J. Gu, W. Zhang, Z. Tao, G. Chengling, M. Zaiping, Z. Jun and D. Zhang, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2014, 6, 283–289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ma, S. Yuan and Z. Ca, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2014, 59, 2017–2023 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jin, G. Chen, X. Zhong, Y. Liu, K. Zhou, P. Sun, P. Lu, W. Zhang and J. Liang, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 10359–10365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chang, J. Li, B. Wang, H. Luo and L. Zhi, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2014, 30, 759–764 Search PubMed .
S. Yang, Y. Sun, L. Chen, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 427–453 Search PubMed .
C. T. Hsieh, J. Y. Lin and C. Y. Mo, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 58, 119–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sathish, T. Tomai and I. Honma, J. Power Sources, 2012, 217, 85–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zheng, D. Qiu, B. Zhao, L. Ma, X. Wang, Z. Lin, L. Pan, Y. Zheng and Y. Shi, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 699–703 RSC .
B. Jin, A. H. Liu, G. Y. Liu, Z. Z. Yang, X. B. Zhong, X. Z. Ma, M. Yang and H. Y. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 90, 426–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, J. Liu, Z. Zeng, C. F. Ng, L. Ma, H. Zhang, J. Lin, Z. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6136–6143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, B. Yang, Z. Zheng, J. Yang, Z. Yang, P. Zhang, W. Ren and X. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9890–9896 CAS .
D. Chen, W. Wei, R. Wang, J. Zhu and L. Guo, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 1589–1595 RSC .
M. Zhang, B. Qu, D. Lei, Y. Chen, X. Yu, L. Chen, Q. Li, Y. Wang and T. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3868–3874 RSC .
Y. Yang, X. Fan, G. Casillas, Z. Peng, G. Ruan, G. Wang, M. J. Yacaman and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3939–3946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, C. Xu, M. Du, J. Sun, L. Gao, P. Zhang, H. Yao and C. Lin, Small, 2014, 10, 2260–2269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kan and Y. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3502–3511 Search PubMed .
C. Wu, H. Zhang, Y. X. Wu, Q. C. Zhuang, L. L. Tian and X. X. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 134, 18–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, W. Tian, D. Liu, C. Zhi, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 257–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Du, C. Xu, J. Sun and L. Gao, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 80, 302–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hu, M. Xie, J. Zhong, H. T. Sun, X. Sun, S. Scott, S. M. George, C. S. Liu and J. Lian, Carbon, 2014, 76, 141–147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Yu, D. E. Conte, S. Baek, D. C. Lee, S. K. Park, K. J. Lee, Y. Piao, Y. E. Sung and N. Pinna, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4293–4305 CrossRef CAS .
I. T. Kim, A. Magasinski, K. Jacob, G. Yushin and R. Tannenbaum, Carbon, 2013, 52, 56–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiao, Z. Wang, H. Guo, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, L. Gan, W. Xiao, Z. Wang, H. Guo, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang and L. Gan, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 560, 208–214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, P. Bao and G. Wang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 425–443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Xue, C. H. Ma, C. X. Cui and L. L. Xing, Solid State Sci., 2011, 13, 1526–1530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, T. Liu, Y. Luo, Y. Zhao, Z. Ren, J. Bai and H. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, L216–L220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3333–3338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lee, V. Sridhar, J. H. Jung, K. Karthikeyan, Y. S. Lee, R. Mukherjee, N. Koratkar and I. K. Oh, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4242–4251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, H. Wang, S. Cai, J. Bai, Z. Ren and J. Bai, J. Power Sources, 2013, 239, 37–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yao, X. Shen, B. Wang, H. Liu and G. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1849–1852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, D. Lei, Z. Du, X. Yin, L. Chen, Q. Li, Y. Wang and T. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1673–1676 RSC .
H. T. Wang, D. W. He, Y. S. Wang, H. P. Wu and J. G. Wang, Adv. Mater. Res., 2012, 465, 108–111 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Huang, L. Hao, H. Liu and X. Li, Ceram. Int., 2013, 39, 8623–8627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Paek, E. J. Yoo and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 72–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dhanabalan, X. Li, R. Agrawal, C. Chen and C. Wang, Nanomaterials, 2013, 3, 606–614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Wu, C. Wang and J. G. Ren, Ionics, 2013, 19, 1875–1882 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, P. Xu, Y. Ni, H. Geng, G. Zheng, B. Dong and Z. Jiaoa, J. Mater. Res., 2014, 29, 617–624 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gao, K. Huang, X. Qi, H. Li, L. Yang and J. Zhong, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 6891–6897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Guo, S. Chen and X. Qin, Mater. Lett., 2014, 119, 4–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, Z. Hou, N. Zhou, B. He, J. Cao and Y. Kuang, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 13903–13910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, S. W. Kim, Y. U. Park, H. Gwon, D. H. Seo, Y. Kim and K. Kang, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 813–821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, S. Y. Liu, X. F. Chen, Y. X. Zheng, W. T. Song, G. S. Cao, T. J. Zhu and X. B. Zhao, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2011, 6, 5539–5549 CAS .
B. Chen, H. Qian, J. Xu, L. Qin, Q. H. Wu, M. Zheng and Q. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9345–9352 CAS .
Y. Li, X. Lv, J. Lu and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21770–21774 CAS .
M. Sathish, S. Mitani, T. Tomai, A. Unemoto and I. Honma, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 16, 1767–1774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, Y. Wang, H. Ahn and G. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 216, 22–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Zhou, K. Yao, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Carbon, 2011, 49, 133–139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, J. Huang, X. Li, J. Liu, Y. Zhang and K. Du, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 4917–4921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yue, S. Yang, Y. Ren and X. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 92, 412–420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Guo, Z. Zheng, H. Gao, J. Ma and X. Qin, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 149–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Guo and X. Qin, ECS Solid State Lett., 2013, 2, M41–M43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, G. Zhang, X. Yu, Q. Li, B. Lu and Z. Xu, Nano Energy, 2014, 3, 80–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Birrozzi, R. Raccichini, F. Nobili, M. Marinaro, R. Tossici and R. Marassi, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 137, 228–234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lu, N. Li, M. Zheng, L. Qiu, S. Zhang, J. Zheng, G. Ji and J. Cao, Mater. Lett., 2014, 115, 125–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, B. Jiang, X. Zhang and H. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 262, 15–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shahid, N. Yesibolati, M. C. Reuter, F. M. Ross and H. N. Alshareef, J. Power Sources, 2014, 263, 239–245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, H. Sonsg, H. Cui and C. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 130, 670–678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Thomas and G. M. Rao, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 125, 380–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ara, K. Wadumesthrige, T. Meng, S. O. Salleya and K. Y. Simon Ng, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 20540–20547 RSC .
X. Li, X. Meng, J. Liu, D. Geng, Y. Zhang, M. N. Banis, Y. Li, J. Yang, R. Li, X. Sun, M. Cai and M. W. Verbrugge, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1647–1654 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, D. Su, J. Park, H. Ahn and G. Wang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 215 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jiang, Y. Xu, T. Yuan and M. Yan, Mater. Lett., 2013, 91, 16–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhao, G. Zhang, J. Song, Y. Jiang, H. Zhuang, P. Liu and T. Fang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 7340–7346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, Z. Peng, C. Xiang, G. Ruan, Z. Yan, D. Natelson and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6001–6006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ravikumar and S. Gopukumar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 3712–3717 RSC .
F. Ye, B. Zhao, R. Ran and Z. Shao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 4055–4063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, J. Sun and L. Gao, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5425–5430 RSC .
X. Zhu, Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller and R. S. Ruoff, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6473–6477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, L. J. Wan and Y. G. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2152–2157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Vinayan and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3865–3871 CAS .
C. Zhang, X. Peng, Z. Guo, C. Cai, Z. Chen, D. Wexler, S. Li and H. Liu, Carbon, 2012, 50, 1897–1903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wen and F. Lei, Adv. Mater. Res., 2011, 396–398, 2330–2333 Search PubMed .
P. Lian, J. Wang, D. Cai, L. Ding, Q. Jia and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 116, 103–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, Q. B. Zheng, Z. D. Huang, S. W. Oh and J. K. Kim, Carbon, 2011, 49, 4524–4534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cheng, H. Xin, H. Zheng and B. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 232, 152–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, D. Wang, L. Wang, X. Lang and W. You, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 91, 323–329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lian, S. Liang, X. Zhu, W. Yang and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 58, 81–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, R. Wang, M. Liu, J. Luo, X. Jin, J. Sun and L. Gaoa, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4598–4604 CAS .
G. Xia, N. Li, D. Li, R. Liu, C. Wang, Q. Li, X. Lü, J. S. Spendelow, J. Zhang and G. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8607–8614 CAS .
H. Yang, T. Song, S. Lee, H. Han, F. Xia, A. Devadoss, W. Sigmund and U. Paik, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 91, 275–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Guo, S. Chen and X. Qin, Mater. Lett., 2014, 128, 50–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sladkevich, J. Gun, P. V. Prikhodchenko, V. Gutkin, A. A. Mikhaylov, V. M. Novotortsev, J. X. Zhu, D. Yang, H. H. Hng, Y. Y. Tay, Z. Tsakadze and O. Lev, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 485601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, J. Liu, S. Tang, H. Li and D. Cao, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2011, 15, 2587–2592 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, H. Cao, J. Shao, G. Li, M. Qu and G. Yin, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 1628–1632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, Y. K. Sharma, Z. Zeng, X. Zhang, M. Srinivasan, S. Mhaisalkar, H. Zhang, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8400–8406 CAS .
L. Li, G. Zhou, X. Y. Shan, S. Pei, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, J. Power Sources, 2014, 255, 52–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, Y. Liu, Y. Yu, M. Ahmad, D. Nan and J. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 118, 1–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qiu, G. Bu, B. Zhao, Z. Lin, L. Pu, L. Pan and Y. Shi, Mater. Lett., 2014, 119, 12–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Sun, K. Huang, X. Qi, T. Gao, Y. Liu, X. Zou and J. Zhong, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 2523–2528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, C. Y. Zhang, X. B. Xia, L. L. Xing and X. Y. Xue, Mater. Lett., 2013, 112, 162–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chi, L. Chang, D. Xie, J. Zhang and G. Du, Mater. Lett., 2013, 106, 178–181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xue, L. Zhang, L. Zhang, X. Feng, Y. Zhang, W. Hao, H. Wang and H. Zheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 136, 330–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Park, H. Ahn and G. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 7778–7783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, D. H. Seo, S. W. Kim, J. Kim and K. Kang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 326–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Kim, D. W. Jung, V. H. Pham, J. S. Chung, B. S. Kong, J. K. Lee, K. Kim and E. S. Oh, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 69, 358–363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tao, J. Zai, K. Wang, H. Zhang, M. Xu, J. Shen, Y. Su and X. Qian, J. Power Sources, 2012, 202, 230–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, M. Jia, Y. Jin and X. Shi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 263, 573–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Peng, B. Chen, Y. Qin, S. Yang, C. Li, Y. Zuo, S. Liu and J. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1074–1081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bingdi, P. Chengxin and C. Zheng, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2012, 22, 2517–2522 CrossRef .
L. Pan, H. Zhao, W. Shen, X. Donga and J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7159–7166 CAS .
T. Hu, G. Xin, H. Sun, X. Sun, M. Yu, C. Liu and J. Lian, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 1521–1525 RSC .
R. Wang, C. Xu, J. Sun, Y. Liu, L. Gao and C. Lin, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6960–6967 RSC .
G. P. Kim, I. Nam, N. D. Kim, J. Park, S. Park and J. Yi, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 22, 93–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Huang, R. Wang, D. Xu, Z. Wang, H. Wang, J. Xu, Z. Wu, Q. Liu, Y. Zhang and X. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4345–4353,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.201203777 .
A. K. Rai, J. Gim, L. T. Anh and J. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 100, 63–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, D. Shi, Z. Chen, H. Liu, D. Jia and Z. Guo, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 5003–5008 RSC .
M. Zhang, Y. Wang and M. Jia, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 129, 425–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qi, H. Zhang, N. Dua and D. Yanga, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2337–2342 CAS .
F. Liu, J. Liu and D. Xue, Mater. Focus, 2012, 1, 160–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, F. Yan, X. Tang, Q. Li, T. Wang and G. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5890–5897 CAS .
L. Xing, C. Cui, C. Ma and X. Xue, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 2104–2106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Liu, Z. Zhu, K. Wong, R. Mi, J. Mei and W. Lau, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 108, 465–471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, A. R. O. Raji and J. M. Tour, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6298–6302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, H. Song, H. Wang, Y. Zhang, K. Du, H. Li and J. Huang, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2012, 42, 1065–1070 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yu, H. W. Park, A. Davies, D. C. Higgins, Z. Chen and X. Xiao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1855–1860 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Radich and P. V. Kamat, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 807–816 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Guo, M. Wang, T. Chen, X. W. Lou and C. M. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 736–741 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Q. Zhang, J. Zhu, X. L. Wei and P. K. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3163–3168 CAS .
H. Wang, L. F. Cui, Y. Yang, H. S. Casalongue, J. T. Robinson, Y. Liang, Y. Cui and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13978–13980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cheekati, Y. Xing, Y. Zhuang and H. Huang, ECS Trans., 2011, 33, 23–32 CAS .
N. Lavoie, P. R. L. Malenfant, F. M. Courtel, Y. A. Lebdeh and I. J. Davidson, J. Power Sources, 2012, 213, 249–254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Park, A. Jin, S. H. Yu, J. Ha, B. Jang, S. Bong, S. Woo, Y. E. Sung and Y. Piao, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 120, 452–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Z. Guo, A. Du and H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3600–3605 RSC .
C. Chen, H. Jian, X. Fu, Z. Ren, M. Yan, G. Qian and Z. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 5367–5370 RSC .
I. Nam, N. D. Kim, G. P. Kim, J. Park and J. Yi, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 56–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Mai, D. Zhang, Y. Q. Qiao, C. D. Gu, X. L. Wang and J. P. Tu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 216, 201–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, X. Hu, W. Luo, F. Xia and Y. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2436–2444 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qiu, L. Ma, M. Zheng, Z. Lin, B. Zhao, Z. Wen, Z. Hu, L. Pu and Y. Shi, Mater. Lett., 2012, 84, 9–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Liu, J. Xie, Y. X. Zheng, G. S. Cao, T. J. Zhu and X. B. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 66, 271–278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Cheekati, Z. Yao and H. Huang, J. Nano Mater., 2012, 2012, 1–10 Search PubMed .
K. Zhang, P. Han, L. Gu, L. Zhang, Z. Liu, Q. Kong, C. Zhang, S. Dong, Z. Zhang, J. Yao, H. Xu, G. Cui and L. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 658–664 CAS .
T. Wu, F. Tu, S. Liu, S. Zhuang, G. Jin and C. Pan, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 1861–1867 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zang, H. Qian, Z. Wei, Y. Cao, M. Zheng and Q. Dong, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 118, 112–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Hsieh, C. Y. Lin and J. Y. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 8861–8867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Lee, S. H. Choi, J. K. Lee and Y. C. Kang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 132, 441–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. R. M. Kottegoda, N. H. Idris, L. Lu, J. Z. Wang and H. K. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 5815–5822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhou, D. W. Wang, L. C. Yin, N. Li, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3214–3223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Hwang, G. O. Kim, S. R. Yun and K. S. Ryu, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 78, 406–411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Zhu, J. Hu, H. L. Dai, L. Ding and L. Jiang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 64, 23–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Mai, S. J. Shi, D. Zhang, Y. Lu, C. D. Gu and J. P. Tu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 204, 155–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, Y. Zhong, H. Zhai, Z. Yan and D. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 132, 364–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, H. Cao, J. Shao, H. Zheng, Y. Lu, J. Yin and M. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3159–3161 RSC .
Q. Wang, J. Zhao, W. Shan, X. Xia, L. Xing and X. Xue, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 590, 424–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qiu, B. Zhao, Z. Lin, L. Pu, L. Pan and Y. Shi, Mater. Lett., 2013, 105, 242–245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Rai, L. T. Anh, J. Gim, V. Mathew, J. Kang, B. J. Paul, N. K. Singh, J. Song and J. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 435–441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, L. Ma, H. Song, B. Wu and X. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1357–1360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, J. Zhang, Q. Su, J. Shi, Y. Liu and G. Du, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 125, 615–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, F. Feng, Z. Hu, F. Liu, W. Gong and K. Xiang, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2012, 22, 2523–2528 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Seo, D. H. Lee, J. C. Kim, G. H. Lee and D. W. Kim, Ceram. Int., 2013, 39, 1749–1755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Q. Lu and Y. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 14, 82–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Mai, X. L. Wang, J. Y. Xiang, Y. Q. Qiao, D. Zhang, C. D. Gu and J. P. Tu, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 2306–2311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, X. Wang, L. Yang and Y. Wu, J. Solid State Chem., 2009, 182, 2486–2490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, X. L. Wu, C. Y. Shu, Y. G. Guo and C. R. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10661–10664 RSC .
Y. Liu, W. Wang, L. Gu, Y. Wang, Y. Ying, Y. Mao, L. Sun and X. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9850–9855 CAS .
N. Li, Y. Xiao, C. Hu and M. Cao, Chem. – Asian J., 2013, 8, 1960–1965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Wang, L. Zeng, S. Song and D. Liu, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 4316–4319 RSC .
K. Chen, L. Jun and D. Xue, Energy Environ. Focus, 2012, 1, 50–56 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yan, X. Li, Z. Wang, H. Guo, Q. Zhang and W. Peng, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2013, 23, 3691–3696 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, X. Hu, W. Luo and Y. Huang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7100–7107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tang, Z. Shan, L. Wang and X. Qin, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 79, 148–153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bhaskar, M. Deepa, T. N. Rao and U. V. Varadaraju, J. Power Sources, 2012, 216, 169–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia, X. Hu, Y. Sun, W. Luo and Y. Huang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4707–4711 RSC .
Q. Tang, L. Wang, K. Zhu, Z. Shan and X. Qin, Mater. Lett., 2013, 100, 127–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, R. Yi, B. Yuan, X. Wu, M. Dunwell, Q. Lin, L. Fei, S. Deng, P. Andersen, D. Wang and H. Luo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 309–314 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, Q. Liang, J. Liu, S. Liang, S. Tang, P. Lu and Y. Lu, Mater. Lett., 2014, 127, 32–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Noerochim, J. Z. Wang, D. Wexler, Z. Chao and H. K. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2013, 228, 198–205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 523–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Lu, M. Lei and J. Liu, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 6745–6755 RSC .
C. L. Liu, Y. Wang, C. Zhang, X. S. Li and W. S. Dong, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2014, 143, 1111–1118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. Zhu, Y. Shi, J. Wong and H. Yang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9839–9845 RSC .
A. K. Rai, J. Gim, S. W. Kang, V. Mathew, L. T. Anh, J. Kang, J. Song, B. J. Paul and J. Kim, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 1044–1051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Kim, S. M. Bak and K. B. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1768–1771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, L. Wen, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8610–8617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiang, B. Tian, P. Lian, Z. Li and H. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 7205–7209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhu, W. Liu, M. Xue, Z. Xie, D. Zhao, M. Zhang, J. Chen and T. Cao, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 5813–5818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, F. Huang, W. Zhao, Z. Liu and D. Wan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11257–11260 RSC .
B. Rajagopalan, E. S. Oh and J. S. Chung, J. Power Sources, 2015, 275, 702–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pang, Y. Zhao, C. Zhang, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, X. Zhou, G. Li and G. Cui, Scr. Mater., 2013, 69, 171–174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, H. F. Xiang, T. P. Zhou, W. H. Li, X. W. Wang, J. X. Zhou and Y. Yu, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 109, 33–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ding, G. R. Li, C. W. Xiao and X. P. Gao, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 102, 282–289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Oh, S. Nam, S. Wi, J. Kang, T. Hwang, S. Lee, H. H. Park, J. Cabana, C. Kim and B. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2023–2027 CAS .
L. Shen, C. Yuan, H. Luo, X. Zhang, S. Yang and X. Lu, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 572–574 RSC .
S. G. Ri, L. Zhan, Y. Wang, L. Zhou, J. Hu and H. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 109, 389–394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ni, W. L. Song and L. Z. Fan, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 40, 1–4 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, W. Peng, Z. Wang, X. Li, X. Xiong, H. Guo, Z. Wang and F. Wu, Solid State Ionics, 2013, 236, 30–36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kucinskis, G. Bajars and J. Kleperis, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 66–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xia, Z. Luo and J. Xie, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2012, 22, 572–584 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Zeng, C. Xu, N. Xiao, Y. Gao, L. J. Li, X. Chen, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2012, 3, 513–523 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xu, B. Cheng, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, X. Duan, L. Wang, J. Yang and Y. Qian, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2012, 7, 10627–10632 CAS .
X. Zhao, C. M. Hayner and H. H. Kung, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17297–17303 RSC .
K. Y. Jo, S. Y. Han, J. M. Lee, I. Y. Kim, S. Nahm, J. W. Choi and S. J. Hwang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 92, 188–196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lin, Q. Yin, H. Hu, F. Lu and H. Xia, J. Solid State Chem., 2014, 209, 23–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Bak, K. W. Nam, C. W. Lee, K. H. Kim, H. C. Jung, X. Q. Yang and K. B. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17309–17315 RSC .
H. Zhuo, S. Wan, C. He, Q. Zhang, C. Li, D. Gui, C. Zhu, H. Niu and J. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 721–728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Aziz, J. Zhao, C. Cain and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2014, 30, 427–433 Search PubMed .
B. Ju, X. Wang, C. Wu, X. Yang, H. Shu, Y. Bai, W. Wen and X. Yi, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 584, 454–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, L. Pan, S. Xing, J. Luo and J. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2013, 222, 21–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Lee, S. Y. Lim, H. M. Jeong, T. H. Hwang, J. K. Kang and J. W. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9889–9894 CAS .
J. Cheng, B. Wang, H. L. Xin, G. Yang, H. Cai, F. Nie and H. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10814–10820 CAS .
D. Chen, R. Yi, S. Chen, T. Xu, M. L. Gordin, D. Lv and D. Wang, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2014, 185, 7–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, H. Quan, S. Luo, X. Luo, F. Deng and H. Jiang, Physica E, 2014, 56, 231–237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Du, K. H. Seng, Z. Guo, J. Liu, W. Li, D. Jia, C. Cook, Z. Liue and H. Liua, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 690–697 RSC .
X. Rui, J. Zhu, D. Sim, C. Xu, Y. Zeng, H. H. Hng, T. M. Lim and Q. Yan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4752–4758 RSC .
S. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 6294–6299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu and W. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4000–4008 CAS .
D. P. Cong, K. Ahn, S. W. Hong, S. Y. Jeong, J. H. Choi, C. H. Doh, J. S. Jin, E. D. Jeong and C. R. Cho, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2014, 14, 215–221 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, L. Li, H. Fei, Z. Peng, G. Ruan and J. M. Tour, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9590–9594 CAS .
Y. Shi, S. L. Chou, J. Z. Wang, H. J. Li, H. K. Liu and Y. P. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 684–689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Nethravathi, B. Viswanath, J. Michael and M. Rajamath, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4839–4846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Han, M. Yan, L. Mai, X. Tian, L. Xu, X. Xu, Q. An, Y. Zhao, X. Ma and J. Xie, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 916–922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, S. B. Yang, L. P. Lv, I. Lieberwirth, L. C. Zhang, C. X. Ding and C. H. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2013, 241, 168–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Nethravathi, C. R. Rajamathi, M. Rajamathi, U. K. Gautam, X. Wang, D. Golberg and Y. Bando, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2708–2714 CAS .
V. S. Reddy Channu, D. Ravichandran, B. Rambabu and R. Holze, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 305, 596–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, Y. Wan, H. Xia and X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 213, 338–342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, M. Jia, Y. Jin, Q. Wen and C. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 566, 131–136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xia, D. Zhu, Y. Fu and X. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 83, 166–174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xia, Y. Qian, Y. Fu and X. Wangg, Solid State Sci., 2013, 17, 67–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zou, X. Hu, Y. Sun, W. Luo, F. Xia, L. Qie, Y. Jiang and Y. Huang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 6027–6033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. T. Song, J. Xie, S. Y. Liu, Y. X. Zheng, G. S. Cao, T.-J. Zhu and X.-B. Zhao, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2012, 7, 2164–2174 CAS .
C. T. Hsieh, C. Y. Lin, Y. F. Chen and J. S. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 111, 359–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, J. Bai, Y. Wang, Z. Ren and J. Bai, Scr. Mater., 2011, 65, 339–342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lian, D. Cai, K. Luo, Y. Jia, Y. Sun and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 104, 267–273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, X. Hu, W. Luo and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17229–17235 RSC .
W. Song, J. Xie, W. Hu, S. Liu, G. Cao, T. Zhu and X. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2013, 229, 6–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, X. Hu, W. Luo, J. Shu and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4468–4474 CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. Huang, Q. Wang, X. Wang and M. Zong, Ceram. Int., 2013, 39, 1741–1747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. Wu, J. Li and L. Guan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3856–3859 CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. Huang and Q. Wang, Ceram. Int., 2013, 39, 6861–6866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. V. Rao, A. L. M. Reddy, Y. Ishikawa and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2966–2972 CAS .
S. Yoon, K. N. Jung, S. H. Yeon, C. S. Jin and K. H. Shin, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2012, 683, 88–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Sanchez, P. Atienzar, G. Abellan, M. Puche, V. Fornes, A. Ribera and H. Garcıa, Carbon, 2012, 50, 518–525 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yan, S. Cai, L. Miao, X. Zhou and Y. Zhao, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 511, 101–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Z. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Xing and Y. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2013, 108, 9–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Guo, D. Wang, Q. Wang, B. Wang and T. Liu, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2012, 7, 8745–8752 CAS .
W. Yue, S. Tao, J. Fu, Z. Gao and Y. Ren, Carbon, 2013, 65, 97–104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, J. Zhu, B. Qu, B. Lu and Z. Xu, Nano Energy, 2014, 3, 88–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Rai, T. V. Thi, J. Gim and J. Kim, Mater. Charact., 2014, 95, 259–265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Y. Yan, S. Xin, W. Li, J. Qu, Y. G. Guo and W. G. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11404–11409 CAS .
S. Jin and C. Wang, Nano Energy, 2014, 7, 63–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, J. Zhang, X. F. Wang, G. Chen, D. Chen, C. W. Zhou and G. Z. Shen, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Kim, Y. H. Lee, I. Lee, T. S. Kim, M. H. Ryou and J. W. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10862–10868 CAS .
Y. Meng, H. Wu, Y. Zhang and Z. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10842–10846 CAS .
K. M. Oh, S. W. Cho, G. O. Kim, K. S. Ryu and H. M. Jeong, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 135, 478–486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gwon, H. S. Kim, K. U. Lee, D. H. Seo, Y. C. Park, Y. S. Lee, B. T. Ahn and K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1277–1283 CAS .
N. Li, Z. Chen, W. Ren, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 17360–17365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, C. Xu, J. Sun, L. Gao and C. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1794–1800 CAS .
X. Huang, B. Sun, S. Chen and G. Wang, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 206–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Manish Srivastava	Manish Srivastava works as a DST inspired faculty fellow in the Department of Physics and Astrophysics, University of Delhi, India. He has worked as post doctorate fellow in the Department of BIN Fusion Technology, Chonbuk National University from August, 2012 to August 2013. He has also worked as an Assistant Prof. in the Department of Physics, DIT School of Engineering, Greater Noida, from July, 2011 to July 2012. He received his Ph. D. in Physics from Motila Nehru National Institute of Technology, Allahabad, India. He completed his MSc and BSc from Dr R. M. L Avadh University, Faizabad, India. Presently, he is working on the synthesis of graphene based metal oxide hybrids and their application as electrocatalysts.
Jay Singh	Jay Singh has been working as an Assistant Professor under the DST Inspire Faculty program in the Department of Applied Chemistry & Polymer Technology, Delhi Technological University, Delhi since 2013. He received his PhD degree in Polymer science from Motilal Nehru National Institute of Technology in 2010. He obtained his MSc and BSc degrees from Allahabad University, Uttar Pradesh, India. Presently, he is working on the synthesis of nanomaterials, polymer modification, bioelectronics fabrication, and their application in nanobiosensors, tissue engineering, drug delivery, and food packaging. He has published 35 research papers and is actively engaged in the research and development of metal oxide based biosensors for clinical applications.
Tapas Kuila	Dr Tapas Kuila has been working as a Post-doctoral researcher in the Department of BIN Fusion Technology, Chonbuk National University since November, 2010. He received his PhD in Chemistry from Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India. He obtained his MSc and BSc in Chemistry from Vidyasagar University, West Bengal, India.
Rama K. Layek	Dr Rama K. Layek has been continuing his research as a Post-doctoral fellow in the Department of BIN Fusion Technology, Chonbuk National University since May 2013. He received his PhD in Chemistry from the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata, India. Currently he is working on the development of graphene-based advanced functional materials and investigating its gas barrier property.
Nam Hoon Kim	Dr Nam Hoon Kim obtained his Ph.D. in the Department of Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Engineering at Chonbuk National University in Korea. He works as a research professor in the Department of BIN Fusion Technology, Chonbuk National University in Korea.
Joong Hee Lee	Professor Joong Hee Lee has more than 25 years of research experience in the fabrication of Polymer and Polymer Composites for electrical and electronic applications. He received his PhD in the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Minnesota, USA. He received the Korea Patent Award gold medal and the Best Scientist and Engineer Award of the Month in June of 2013 in Korea. His current research interests are focused on the preparation of functional nanocomposites for energy conversion/storage devices.
AaOb + 2bLi+ + 2be− ↔ aA + bLi2O

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of LIB.	 
AOa + bLi+ + be− ↔ LibAOa
AaOb + 2bLi+ + 2be− → aA + bLi2O (e.g. SnO2)
A + cLi+ + ce− ↔ LicA

 	Fig. 2  Basis of all graphitic forms. Graphene is a 2D building material for carbon materials of all other dimensionalities. It can be wrapped up into 0D buckyballs, rolled into 1D nanotubes, or stacked into 3D graphite.29	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of the formation process for the ordered mesoporous graphene nanosheets.133	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images and schematic (bottom inset) of the mesoporous graphene nanosheets before removal of the AAO template. The remaining regular channels of the membranes are observed. Mesopores grown on the surface of the macroporous channels are ordered on the large domain to form carbon layers several nanometers thick (top inset). (b) SEM images and schematic (inset) of the mesoporous graphene nanosheets after removal of the AAO template. The nanosheet-like morphology grows along the prime AAO channels. (c) SEM images and schematic (inset) of the mesoporous graphene nanosheets observed along the nanosheets. (d) SEM images observed perpendicular to the side walls of the nanosheets. The white arrows indicate that the ultrathin nanosheets are composed of single layers of ordered mesopores.133	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) First and second cycles of galvanostatic discharge/charge curves of the mesoporous graphene nanosheets. (b) Cycling performance (red curve, discharge; black curve, charge) and the Coulombic efficiency (blue curve) of the mesoporous graphene nanosheets at different current densities. Each current density is labeled over the corresponding cycles.133	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the pillared CNT and graphene nanostructure on a copper foil. (b) Photograph of centimeter-scale PGN on a copper foil. (c) Tilted-view SEM image showing both PGN regions and graphene regions at the same location. (d) Top-view SEM images of graphene and (e) pillared CNT regions. (f) High-magnification and (g) low-magnification cross-section SEM observation of the PGN. (h) High resolution TEM image of as-grown CNTs.161	 

 	Fig. 7  Galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles of (a) PGN electrode at a low current density of 100 mA g−1 and (b) PGN electrode under a range of current densities from100 mA g−1 to 900 mA g−1. (c) Cycling performance and Coulombic efficiency of the PGN electrode at a current density of 600 mA g−1. (d) High-rate cycling performance of the LIB with PGN anode.161	 

Amorphous carbon nanotubes (ACNTs)	Arc discharge method	Uniform & flexible type nanotubes having length ∼μm	ACNTs oxidized at 300 C exhibit reversible capacity of ∼530 mA h g−1 at 20 mA g−1 which retain 93% after 5 cycles, whereas ACNTs oxidized at 350 °C exhibit a capacity of ∼440 mA h g−1 after 20 cycles	
22

MWCNT paper	CVD technique	Nearly uniformly grown nanotubes with several ∼μm in length	Reversible capacity of ∼330 mA h g−1 was measured up to 10 cycles at a current density of 74 mA g−1 whereas at 372 mA g−1 it delivered a reversible capacity over 225 mA h g−1 after 10 cycles and nearly 100% Coulombic efficiency	
23

Mesoporous carbon/MWNT hybrid	Soft template approach at low carbonization temperatures	Mesoporous morphology	The specific capacity of ∼380 mA h g−1 at 2 C after 20 cycles and 94 mA h g−1 at 30 C after 50 cycles. However, the Coulombic efficiency of the electrode was ∼80% only, measured up to 20 cycles. Therefore, impedes its practical applications	
24

Carbon nanotube/carbon fibre hybrid	CVD technique	Carbon nanotube networks onto carbon fibre paper as the support	Initial capacity was observed to be 643 mA h g−1 under the constant current discharge rate of 0.05 mA cm−2, whereas reversible capacities of 546 mA h g−1 and 338 mA h g−1 were delivered at current densities of 0.05 mA cm−2 and 0.05 mA cm−2, respectively, after 50 cycles	
25

MWCNT-coated mesophase carbon microbeads hybrid	Chemical functionalization	MWNTs having diameter of 10–20 nm covered the surface of mesophase carbon microbead, exhibited a porous structure	Capacity of ∼300 mA h g−1 at a rate of 2.1 C up to 30 cycles and ∼160 mA h g−1 at a rate of 7.0 C up to 40 cycles	
31

Activated microporous carbon	Carbonization phenol–melamine–formaldehyde resin, and activated by ZnCl2	Microspheres consisting of shallow concave pores	Reversible capacity of ∼300 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 up to 20 cycles, ∼200 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 up to 40 cycles, whereas ∼100 mA h g−1 at 300 mA g−1 up to 60 cycles	
32

Activated nitrogen-containing carbon	Carbonization and activation process	Spherical particles ∼100 nm	At a current density of 100 mA g−1 the first cycle discharged and charged capacity up to 917 mA h g−1 and 377 mA h g−1, respectively. However, a reversible capacity of only ∼251 mA h g−1 after 20 cycles was delivered at the same current density with a Coulombic efficiency of ∼90%	
33

Carbon nanofibers	Electrospun assisted by carbonization	Carbon fibers, forming 3-D structures	Specific capacity of ∼380 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 up to 100 cycles (with Coulombic efficiency of 99%), whereas ∼200 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 up to 35 cycles. Besides, when re-cycled at 20 mA g−1 after 40 cycles, delivered a capacity of ∼500 mA h g−1 compared to 550 mA h g−1 after 5 cycles	
34

Porous nitrogen-doped carbon vegetable-sponges	Chemical treatment of the Cu@C precursors using HNO3	Porous micro-vegetable-sponges like along with the 3D interconnected framework	At a current density of 0.5 A g−1 capacity observed was ∼870 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles and exhibited a reversible capacity of ∼910 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 after cycled at different rates	
35

CNTs with bamboo-like structure	CVD technique	Bend graphite-like sheets, form many separated cavities and resemble bamboo like structure	First cycle charged capacity of 710 mA h g−1; however, very low reversible capacity of ∼131 mA h g−1 during 30 cycles suggest that the electrode is not suitable for the anode in LIB	
36

Carbon spheres	
Via thermal decomposition of resorcinol–formaldehyde precursor	Carbon spheres ∼500 nm	At a current density of 0.2 mA cm−2, initial discharge capacity of ∼950 mA h g−1 was observed. However, a rapid fading of capacity occurred in the second cycle, and delivered a stable capacity of ∼350 mA h g−1 after 135 cycles	
37

CNT film	Vacuum filtration technique	Thickness of film ∼61 μm and exhibited a porous CNT network	At a current density of 100 mA g−1, a reversible capacity was observed to be ∼200 mA h g−1 up to 40 cycles and it was nearly ∼200 mA h g−1 when cycled at 600 mA g−1 up to 100 cycles	
38

Vertically aligned MWCNTs	Pyrolysis technique	Vertically aligned MWCNTs consisting of 8.6 ± 0.3 μm in length and diameter of 77 ± 23 nm	At a low current density of 57 mA g−1 the specific capacity was observed to be 782 mA h g−1 by 36 cycles but at a high current density of 26 A g−1 exhibited 166 mA h g−1	
39

Graphene sheets, expanded graphite and natural graphite	Graphene prepared by the chemical method assisted by thermal and ultrasonication treatment	Graphene exhibited nearly transparent nanosheets along with a wrinkled structure	First cycle reversible capacities of the graphene electrode were observed to be 1130 and 636 mA h g−1 at low current densities of 0.2 and 1 mA cm−2, respectively, almost twice to that of the expanded graphite electrode, whereas three times to that of the natural graphite electrode. However, a graphene sheet delivered a reversible capacity only ∼400 mA h g−1 at 1 mA cm−2 after 30 cycles	
40


 	Fig. 8  Characterization of A-TO/GSP. (a) Photograph of a bent flexible A-TO/GSP. (b and c) Cross-sectional SEM images of the A-TO/GSP. (d) High magnification SEM image of LTO nanosheets in A-TO/GSP. (e) TEM image of the A-TO/GSP. (f) HRTEM image of a TiO2 nanosheet showing lattice fringes with a spacing of 0.19 nm. The lithium diffusion channels are clearly shown to be along [001] (perpendicular to the figure facet).177	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Galvanostatic discharge–charge voltage profiles of A-TO/GSP cycled at different rates. Comparison of the (b) specific capacity at different rates and (c) cycling performance at 10 C between the A-TO/GSP and I-TO/GSP electrodes.177	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of the sample structure. (a) Graphene foam backbone. (b) Graphene foam coated with ZnO using atomic layer deposition (GF@ZnO). (c) Graphene foam supported Fe3O4 nanostructure electrodes (GF@Fe3O4).216	 

 	Fig. 11  Electrochemical properties of the GF@Fe3O4 LIB electrodes. (a) CV curves of the GF@Fe3O4 electrode. (b) Discharge–charge voltage capacity profiles of the GF@Fe3O4 electrode at a rate of 1 C. (c) Cycling profiles of the GF and GF@Fe3O4 electrodes at a rate of 1 C.216	 

 	Fig. 12  Cycle performance of the prepared electrodes: (a) the NGr-I, NGr-I-2ALD, and NGr-I-M-2ALD electrodes when performing full discharge–charge at 2 A g−1 for 200 cycles. (b) Capacity performance of the NGr-I-M-2ALD at an extremely high current rate of 20 A g−1 for 2000 cycles. (A color version of this figure can be viewed online.)226	 

 	Fig. 13  Electrochemical performance of the GNR/SnO2 electrodes. The specific capacities are calculated based on the total mass of the GNRs/SnO2 in the anode electrodes. (a) CV curves of the first, second, and third cycles of the hybrid electrodes at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1 over the voltage range of 0.01–2.5 V. (b) The first, second and 30th charge/discharge curves of the hybrid electrode at a rate of 100 mA g−1. (c) Comparison of capacity retention and Coulombic efficiency of GNRs and the GNR/SnO2 electrode at a rate of 100 mA g−1. (d) Rate capability of the hybrid electrodes with various current densities.270	 

SnO2–In2O3/graphene (anode)	Solvothermal	Particle size ∼6 nm	SnO2–In2O3/graphene hybrid exhibited a storage capacity of ∼962 mA h g−1 at 60 mA g−1 with Coulombic efficiency of ∼57.2%, cycling stability (after 50 cycles capacity retention of ∼60.8%), and rate capability (after 25 cycles at 600 mA g−1, a capacity of ∼393.25 mA h g−1). These electrochemical properties were observed to be better than SnO2/GNS and bare SnO2–In2O3 electrodes	
286

ZnO–SnO2/graphene (anode)	Hydrothermal	—	Initial discharge capacity of ∼1287.6 mA h g−1 with a reversible capacity of ∼1209.4 mA h g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. The charge capacity could retain ∼1075.3 mA h g−1 after 10 cycles. And even after 50 cycles, the charge capacity retained was ∼800.9 mA h g−1	
287

SnO2/Sn/RGO (anode)	Peroxide induced reduction followed by thermal treatment	Particle size ∼2.5 nm	After 90 cycles at a current density of 158 mA g−1 a discharge capacity of ∼700 mA h g−1 was delivered	
288

Graphene/Y2O3/LiMn2O4 (cathode)	
Ex-situ synthesis approach	Grain size ∼200 nm	An initial discharge capacity of ∼129.3 mA h g−1 and retained 89.3% even after 500 cycles at 1 C (at an elevated temperature of 55 °C). Meanwhile, at a high current density of 30 C, capacity of ∼90.0 mA h g−1 was achieved	
402

NiFe2O4/graphene (anode)	Hydrothermal	Particle size ∼6.5 nm	Composite with 20% of graphene exhibited reversible capacity of ∼812 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at 100 mA g−1 (85% retention of the first cycle) whereas at 1000 mA g−1 delivered a reversible capacity of ∼445 mA h g−1 after 40 cycles	
420

CoFe2O4-Co/RGO (anode)	Hydrothermal	Particle size 30 nm	After 515 cycles the specific capacity was maintained at ∼907.3 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 and even after 420 cycles at 9000 mA g−1, the capacity still retained was 907.3 mA h g−1 when recycled at 100 mA g−1	
421

CoFe2O4/graphene (anode)	Hydrothermal	Particle size ∼10 nm	With 20 wt% of graphene the composite electrode exhibited a reversible specific capacity of 910 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1, and ∼500 mA h g−1 at 2000 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles, respectively	
422

ZnFe2O4/graphene (anode)	Hydrothermal	Particle size 20–30 nm	At a current density of 100 mA g−1 a reversible capacity of ∼1000 mA h g−1 by the 10th cycle, whereas at 1000 mA g−1, the hybrid electrode could deliver a reversible capacity of ∼600 mA h g−1 even after 40 cycles (much higher than that of the pure ZnFe2O4 electrode ∼185 mA h g−1)	
423

Zn2GeO4/N-doped graphene (anode)	Hydrothermal assisted by microwave	Nanorods (∼100 nm diameter and micrometer in length)	The capacities of 1463 mA h g−1 and 531 mA h g−1 at current densities of 100 mA g−1 and 3200 mA g−1, respectively, along with good cyclability and Columbic efficiency ∼100%	
424

ZnO/graphene (anode)	Hydrothermal	Quasi-spherical with particle size of 30–40 nm	At 50 mA g−1, the ZnO/graphene hybrid electrode delivered a capacity of ∼300 mA h g−1 after 25 cycles (however, only ∼75% of first cycled capacity was retained)	
425

ZnO@graphene (anode)	Microwave	Particle size 80–100 nm	Reversible capacity of 460 mA h g−1 at 1 C after 50 cycles. Coulombic efficiency of ∼82.1% at the 1st cycle, capacity retention of ∼60% at 5 C, and good cycling stability with capacity decay of ∼8% after 50 cycles	
426

CeO2–graphene (anode)	Hydrothermal	Particle size ∼100 nm	After 100 cycles, specific capacity of ∼605 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 (∼75% of first cycled capacity) whereas at current densities of 100, 200, 400 and 800 mA g−1, specific capacities were observed to be 414, 320, 222 and 146 mA h g−1, respectively	
427

(Fe2.5Ti0.5)1.04O4/graphene (anode)	Gas/liquid interface	Particle size ∼20 nm	After 60 cycles, at a current density of 300 mA g−1 the reversible specific capacity was 1048 mA h g−1, whereas at 2000 mA g−1, the reversible specific capacity was observed to be as high as 480 mA h g−1 and exhibit good cyclic stability (at 300 mA g−1 capacity was ∼1113 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles). Initial Coulombic efficiency of the hybrid was 61% but after the 3rd cycle the Coulombic efficiency was increased above 94% in the subsequent cycles	
428

Mn2Mo3O8/graphene (anodes)	Chemical reduction using hydrazine assisted by annealing	Microspheres of 3–5 μm	After 40 cycles at a current density of 200 mA g−1 a reversible capacity of ∼950 mA h g−1 with a Coulombic efficiency of ∼98% (much higher than that of bare Mn2Mo3O8 ∼494 mA h g−1) whereas at 1000 mA g−1 a reversible capacity was ∼900 mA h g−1	
429

Zn2SnO4/graphene (anode)	Hydrothermal	Quasi-sphere shape size of 10–20 nm	Charge capacity of ∼688 mA h g−1 could be retained after 50 cycles at 200 mA g−1, and after being cycled for 40 cycles at 800 mA g−1 a charge capacity >500 mA h g−1 was observed. However, the capacity of Zn2SnO4/G hybrid exhibited fluctuation with cycling	
430

Fe2Mo3O8–RGO (anode)	Chemical reduction using hydrazine and assisted by the annealing process	Particle size 10–15 nm	Up to 40 cycles a specific capacity of 835 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 whereas the specific capacity was ∼574.8 mA h g−1 at 3000 mA g−1 (bare Fe2Mo3O8 exhibited poor capacity of ∼100 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 after 20 cycles	
431

Carbon-doped Li2SnO3/graphene (anode)	Hydrothermal	Particle size ∼200 nm	Up to 50 cycles, specific capacity of 622.7 mA h g−1, 569.7 mA h g−1 and 518.4 mA h g−1 at a current density of 180 mA g−1 (0.3 C), 300 mA g−1 (0.5 C) and 600 mA g−1 (1 C), respectively	
432

Li2MnSiO4/carbon/graphene (cathode)	Solid-state method	Particle size 20–60 nm	At 0.05 C, capacity of 290 mA h g−1 but at 1 C (166 mA g−1), capacity of 150 mA h g−1 along with nearly stable cycling life up to 700 cycles.	
433

Poly-pyrrole(PPY)/Li2SnO3/graphene (anode)	De-oxidation approach	Particle size 30–50 nm	At 60 mA g−1 the reversible capacity of ∼699.4 mA h g−1 at the 30th cycle along with 95% Coulombic efficiency whereas at 300 mA g−1 and 600 mA g−1 a reversible capacity ∼493 mA h g−1 and ∼377.9 mA h g−1	
434

LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2/graphene (cathode)	Ball-milling	Particle size 220–280 nm	At 0.05 C charge/discharge, capacities of 188/185 mA h g−1, during 25 cycles. Moreover, hybrid exhibited significantly higher columbic efficiency (99.1%) compared to bare LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 (89.7%)	
435

LiNi0.8Co0.15A10.05O2/graphene (cathode)	Ball milling	Particle size ∼500 nm	At 0.2 C (1 C = 278 mA g−1) capacity of 180 mA h g−1 (with 97% retention after 80 cycles) whereas at 10 C and 20 C, capacity was ∼152 and 112 mA h g−1, respectively	
436

Ni6MnO8/graphene (anode)	Co-precipitation assisted by calcinations	Particle size 20 nm	First cycle discharge capacity of 1030 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1; however, this hybrid delivered capacity of ∼400 mA h g−1 only, at a rate of 50 mA g−1 after 10 cycles. Moreover, this hybrid exhibited poor cyclic stability	
437

Li2FeSiO4/C (resembled graphene) (cathode)	Sol–gel	Particle size 50–150 nm	Discharge capacity of 135.3 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 16 C after 40 cycles, whereas ∼100 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 1 C up to 30 cycles	
438

ZnWO4/graphene (anode)	Sol–gel	—	At 50 mA g−1 after 20 cycles a reversible specific capacity of 585.7 mA h g−1 whereas at 200 mA g−1 capacity of ∼480 mA h g−1 was observed. However, the hybrid did not exhibit proper cyclic stability and therefore, may restrict its practical application in LIBs	
439

SiO/graphene (anode)	Chemical reduction by hydrazine	Particle size 50–300 nm	When current density is back to the initial 100 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles reversible specific capacity of 910 mA h g−1 was observed. In addition, at current densities of 200, 400 and 800 mA g−1, this hybrid could deliver reversible capacities of 890, 701 and 441 mA h g−1, respectively	
440

Carbon-coated graphene–Cr2O3 (anode)	Hydrothermal	Particle size 5–10 nm	Carbon-coated graphene–Cr2O3 hybrid exhibited a reversible capacity up to 630 at 0.1 C after 100 cycles and 315 mA h g−1 could remain at 1 C by 25 cycles which was better than that of the graphene–Cr2O3 hybrid electrode	
441

NiCo2O4/graphene (anode)	Hydrothermal	NiCo2O4 consist of nanosheet sheets	At a current density of 300 mA g−1, the discharge capacity maintained around 806 mA h g−1 up to 90 cycles (in contrast bare NiCo2O4 delivered ∼600 mA h g−1 by 50 cycles) whereas ∼1000 mA h g−1 when cycled at 150 mA g−1 by 30 cycles	
442

MgFe2O4/graphene (anode)	Sol–gel	Particle size ∼50–100 nm	At 0.34 C capacity of ∼600 mA h g−1 by 15 cycles whereas at 4.2 C a reversible capacity of ∼219.9 mA h g−1 after 40 cycles and columbic efficiency ∼95% when cycled at 0.04 C up to 60 cycles	
443

CuGeO3/grapheme (anode)	Hydrothermal	Nanowires having length of several micrometers	Reversible capacities of 1428, 1242, 1092, 958 and 879 mA hg−1 at current densities of 100, 200, 400, 800, and 1000 mA g−1, respectively. Moreover, the specific capacity was increased to 1600 mA h g−1 when the current densities decreased from 1000 to 100 mA g−1, even higher than the specific capacity observed in the initial 10 cycles	
444

Fe2GeO4/RGO (anode)	Hydrothermal	Particle size 10–20 nm	At current densities of 0.4, 1.6, 3.2, and 4.8 A g−1, the corresponding capacities were 980, 600, 450, and 340 mA h g−1 with a Coulombic efficiency of ∼98%. In addition, when the current density returned to 0.4 A g−1, a capacity of 990 mA h g−1 was recorded, suggesting good rate capability	
445


 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram showing the wrapping up of the GO nanosheets on the Co3O4 nanoparticles; and (b) the fabrication of the GO–Co3O4 hybrid film by a direct ESD process on Cu foils. The optical image shows a uniform coating of the ESD deposited hybrid film.307	 

 	Fig. 15  Electrochemical performance of the G–Co3O4 hybrid electrode: (a) cyclic voltammograms of the G–Co3O4 electrode at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1 for three cycles between 0.01 and 3.0 V vs. Li+/Li; (b) charge and discharge curves after the first and 10th cycles at a current rate of 100 mA g−1; (c) cycling performance at different rates from 100 mA g−1 to 5 A g−1; and (d) capacity and Coulombic efficiency at 1 A g−1.307	 

 	Fig. 16  SEM micrographs with different magnifications (A–C) and TEM images (D and E) of the 3D PG–1Mn hybrid and HRTEM images (F and its inset) of the MnO2 nanoflakes. (H) The walls of the 3D PG–1Mn hybrid and HRTEM images (I and its inset) of the MnO2 nanoflakes. (J and its inset) HRTEM image of the interface between the MnO2 and few-layered graphene-like materials of 3D PG.324	 

 	Fig. 17  Electrochemical performances of various anode materials. (A) Typical CV curves of the 3D PG–1Mn hybrid anode at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1, (B) the galvanostatic discharge–charge profiles of the 3D PG–1Mn hybrid electrode between 0.01 and 3 V at a current density of 100 mA g−1, (C) the cycling performance at a current density of 100 mA g−1 and (D) the specific capacity versus current densities for the 3D PG–xMn composite electrodes.324	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Cyclic stability at a current density of 100 mA g−1, (b) rate capability and (c) EIS results of NiO and NiO-graphene hybrid electrodes.346	 

 	Fig. 19  TEM images of Cu2O–GNS (a, b) and bare Cu2O spheres (c, d).361	 

 	Fig. 20  Electrochemical characterizations of Cu2O–GNS and bare Cu2O NPs. Charge and discharge curves of (a) Cu2O–GNS, (b) bare Cu2O NPs, and (c) Cu2O NPs–GNS for the 1st (red line), 5th (blue line), 10th (green line) cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1. (d) Capacity retentions of the as-obtained samples at various current densities (Cu2O–GNS: blue line; Cu2O NPs–GNS: red line; bare Cu2O sphere purple line).361	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Galvanostatic discharge/charge curves of the MoO2/graphene hybrid electrode at a current density 540 mA g−1 in the voltage range of 0.01–3.0 V, (b) the cycling performance of the MoO2/graphene at a current density of 540 mA g−1; (c) rate performance of the MoO2/graphene hybrid, and (d) the cycling performance of MoO2/graphene, neat MoO2, and neat graphene electrodes at different current densities.367	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles of the LTO/graphene-IL electrode during 1st, 2nd, 50th, and 100th cycles at 0.5 C. (b) Cyclic performance of LTO, LTO/graphene, and LTO/graphene-IL electrodes at 0.5 C. (c) High-rate performance of LTO, LTO/graphene, and LTO/graphene-IL electrodes. (d) High rate performance of the LTO/graphene-IL electrode.389	 

 	Fig. 23  Initial charge–discharge curves (a) and cycling stability curves (b) for the LIB cells made from the LiMn2O4in situ coated with graphene-like membrane compared to the pristine membrane.400	 

 	Fig. 24  Synthesis scheme and microscopic images of the fabricated GNR-V2O5 NP hybrid. The composition of V2O5 entrapped in or on the GNRs could be tailored from 25, 40, and 60 wt%, and these are designated as GNR25VO, GNR40VO, and GNR60VO, respectively. (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process. (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of GNR25VO. (d) SEM and (e) TEM images of GNR40VO. (f) SEM and (g) TEM images of GNR60VO.413	 

 	Fig. 25  Rate performance and cyclability of the hybrid electrode. (a) Variation in the capacity of the hybrid with different applied current densities from 0.1 to 2 C. (b) Discharge/charge profiles of the GNR40VO at different current densities from 0.1 to 2 C. (c) 100 discharge/charge cycle testing of the composites at 0.1 C. (d) EIS of the hybrid electrode.413	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Assembled flexible Li battery based on graphene paper. V2O5/graphene paper and electrochemically lithiated-graphene paper were used as the cathode and the anode, respectively, which were separated by a separator dipped in liquid electrolyte. (b) The battery is thin, lightweight, and flexible enough to be rolled up or twisted. (c) Schematic drawing of the flexible Li battery based on graphene paper.450	 
2D	Two dimensional
3D PG–Mn	MnO2/3D porous graphene
3D	Three-dimensional
ACNTs	Amorphous carbon nanotubes
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
Al	Aluminum
ALD	Atomic layer deposition
Ar	Argon
BET	Brunauer–Emmet–Teller
C60	Fullerene
C-Li4Ti5O12/graphene	Carbon coated Li4Ti5O12/graphene
cm2 V−1 s−1	Centimeter2 volt−1 s−1
CNT	Carbon nanotubes
Co3O4	Cobalt(II,III) oxide
Cu2O	Cuprous oxide
CuO	Cupric oxide
CVD	Chemical vapor deposition
DFT	Density functional theory
EIS	Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
Fe(NO3)3·9H2O	Ferric nitrate nonahydrate
Fe3O4	Magnetite
FE-SEM	Field emission scanning electron microscope
FT-IR	Fourier transform infrared
GAs	Graphene aerogels
GF	Graphene foam
GLM	Graphene-like membrane
GNRs	Graphene nanoribbons
GNS	Graphene nano-sheet
GO	Graphene oxide
GP	Graphene papers
HNO3	Nitric acid
IL	Ionic liquid
In2O3	Indium oxide
KBH4	Potassium borohydride
kW kg−1	Kilowatt kilogram−1
Li+	Lithium ion
Li4Ti5O12	Lithium-titanate
LIBs	Lithium-ion batteries
LICMC	Lithium carboxymethyl cellulose
LiCoO2	Lithium cobalt oxide
LiFePO4	Lithium iron phosphate
LiMn2O4	Lithium manganate
LiPF6	Lithium hexafluorophosphate
Li-RGO	Li+ intercalated RGO
LPAN	Liquid-polyacrylonitrile
m2 g−1	Meter2 gram−1
mA g−1	Milli-ampere gram−1
mA h g−1	Milli-ampere hour gram−1
MIO	Mesoporous iron oxide
MMG	Microspheres composed of multilayer graphene
Mn3O4	Manganese(II,III) oxide
MnO2	Manganese(IV) dioxide
MoO2	Molybdenum dioxide
MoO3	Molybdenum trioxide
MWNTs	Multi-walled carbon nanotubes
N2H4	Hydrazine
NiO	Nickel oxide
NS	Nanosheets
nt-TiO2	Titania nanotubes
PEI	Poly(ethylene imine)
PVDF	Polyvinylidene difluoride
QDs	Quantum dots
RGO	Reduced graphene oxide
rVO	Reduced vanadium oxide
SEI	Solid electrolyte interphase
SEM	Scanning electron microscope
S-GNS	Sulfur doped graphene
SnO2	Tin oxide
SRFG	Solvothermally reduced and functionalized graphene
TEM	Transmission electron microscope
TiO2 (B)	Monoclinic titanium dioxide
TiO2	Titanium dioxide
TiO2@TiOxNy/TiN-GS	Surface nitrated TiO2/graphene
V2O5	Vanadium penta-oxide
VO2	Vanadium dioxide
Wm−1 K−1	Watt per meter kelvin
XPS	X-ray photoelectron
α-Fe2O3	Hematite
γ-Fe2O3	Maghemite

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
