Exogenous electricity flowing through cyanobacterial photosystem I drives CO 2 valorization with high energy efficiency   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE01526E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE01526E
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5480-5490Exogenous electricity flowing through cyanobacterial photosystem I drives CO2 valorization with high energy efficiency†

        
          
            Zhaodong 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chao 
            Wu‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Xiang 
            Gao‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Bennett 
            Addison
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shrameeta 
            Shinde
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xihan 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianping 
            Yu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Drazenka 
            Svedruzic
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jeffrey L. 
            Blackburn
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Wei 
            Xiong
          
        
      *a
aNational Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden CO 80401, USA. E-mail: Wei.Xiong@nrel.gov; Jeffrey.Blackburn@nrel.gov
bDepartment of Microbiology, Miami University, Oxford OH 45056, USA
Received 
      19th May 2021
    , Accepted 31st August 2021First published on 2nd September 2021AbstractNature's biocatalytic processes are driven by photosynthesis, whereby photosystems I and II are connected in series for light-stimulated generation of fuel products or electricity. Externally supplying electricity directly to the photosynthetic electron transfer chain (PETC) has numerous potential benefits, although strategies for achieving this goal have remained elusive. Here we report an integrated photo-electrochemical architecture which shuttles electrons directly to PETC in living cyanobacteria. The cathode of this architecture electrochemically interfaces with cyanobacterial cells that have a lack of photosystem II activity and cannot perform photosynthesis independently. Illumination of the cathode channels electrons from an external circuit to intracellular PETC through photosystem I, ultimately fueling cyanobacterial conversion of CO2 into acetate. We observed acetate formation when supplying both illumination and exogenous electrons under intermittent conditions (e.g., in a 30 s supply plus 30 min interval condition of both light and exogenous electrons). The energy conversion efficiency for acetate production under programmed intermittent LED illumination (400–700 nm) and exogenous electron supply reached ca. 9%, when taking into account the number of photons and electrons received by the biotic system, and ca. 3% for total photons and electrons supplied to the cyanobacteria. This approach is applicable for generating various CO2 reduction products by using engineered cyanobacteria, one of which has enabled electrophototrophic production of ethylene, a broadly used hydrocarbon in the chemical industry. The resulting bio-electrochemical hybrid has the potential to produce fuel chemicals with numerous potential advantages over standalone natural and artificial photosynthetic approaches.

Broader context
Natural photosynthesis with solar irradiance is the primary energy conversion process on earth, driving CO2 fixation and production of organic compounds. However, its efficiency is limited by the light-harvesting competition between photosystems (PSI and PSII) and the photorespiration process. To address these, we assemble an “artificial PSII” which can serve as a new electrochemical energy source in living cyanobacteria. This assembly enabled efficient synthesis of carbon compounds from PSII-inhibited cyanobacterial cells that cannot perform natural photosynthesis alone. The single photosystem (PSI) is powered without light absorption competition by the other (PSII); and production of organic compounds can be energized via photovoltaic electrons in addition to visible light. This new photosynthesis concept is proposed to elevate the efficiency ceiling of natural photosynthesis for selective production of fuel chemicals.

Introduction
Oxygenic photosynthesis is the primary energy conversion process on earth, driving CO2 fixation and production of organic compounds.1–3 The central photosynthetic process involves coupled photoexcitation of two reaction center photosystems (PS) I and II (Fig. 1a). Excitation of PSI initiates electron transfer to ferredoxin and NADPH that energizes CO2-fixing pathways such as the Calvin–Benson-Bassham (CBB) cycle.4 Photoexcitation of PSII results in oxygen evolution and electron transport from water to plastoquinone (PQ), which then regenerates neutral PSI through a series of reactions in the photosynthetic electron transfer chain (PETC).4
 Fig. 1  Electrophototrophic system. (a) The electrophototroph is designed for CO2-to-fuels conversion with external supply of light and electricity to a tailored photosynthetic microbe. To this end, photosystem II in natural photosynthesis (gray) can be genetically removed, and instead the external electrochemical circuit delivers high-energy electrons to photoexcited photosystem I (oxidized P700), and ultimately produces NADPH to drive CO2 fixation. This process could leverage electron acceptors in the PETC including plastoquinone (PQ), cytochrome b6f complex (Cytbf), special chlorophyll (A0), vitamin K (A1), iron–sulfur centers (4Fe-4S), and ferredoxin (fd) etc. Protons can be pumped across the thylakoid membrane establishing a proton-motive force that can be used for the synthesis of ATP. (b) Schematic illustration and photograph (inset of left panel) of electrochemical device to shuttle electrons to PSII deficient cyanobacteria. Component 1 and 8: PTFE anodic part and cathodic part; component 2: platinum counter electrode; component 3, 4, 5: medium inlet/outlet; component 6: Ag/AgCl reference electrode; component 7: Nafion membrane; component 9: seal O-ring; component 10: carbon felt; component 11: FTO glass; component 12: working electrode clamp. Right panel shows the loading of cyanobacterial cells and the electrons delivery process. 
Substantial research efforts have focused on leveraging biological photosystems (e.g. in algae and cyanobacteria) for sustainable production of energy products from sunlight.5,6 For example, photosynthetic cyanobacteria have been engineered to produce fuel chemicals and polymers from CO2.7–12 However, natural photosynthesis cannot use the full terrestrial solar irradiance, since photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) is limited to a subset of visible light (mostly 400–700 nm). Additionally, the natural photosynthetic CO2 fixation efficiency is diminished by the photorespiration process.13 Artificial photosynthetic solar-to-fuels cycles have been proposed as alternatives to natural photosynthesis.14–16 These cycles can achieve high intrinsic energy efficiencies, but typically terminate at hydrogen.17 To produce carbon-based biofuels, substantial efforts have been made in the past decade on reaction system design, enhancing energy and carbon conversion efficiencies for CO and formate production.18–21 Further C2 products (e.g., ethylene, ethanol, acetate) were also generated with single-pass efficiencies up to 68%.22–25 Nevertheless, more advances are still desired for upgrading CO2 into multi-carbon chemical feedstocks via attractive energy-saving routes. We hypothesize that the ultimate goal of producing high-order carbon products at high energy efficiency may be achieved by interfacing natural and artificial photosynthesis in a hybrid system where a photosynthetic organism is synergistically energized by exogenous electrons through PETC. In the inverse of this process, photosynthetic fuel cells utilize “photo-electrogenic” microbes to generate electrical currents.24,26–28 For example, cyanobacteria output electrons from PETC to external anode and have shown electrogenic regulation on the circadian rhythm.29 However, to date there is no integrated electron transfer strategy that generates chemical energy upon external supply of electricity to biological photosystems.
Here we design, assemble, and optimize a self-sustained hybrid photosynthesis system that aims to circumvent limitations in natural photosynthesis and artificial solar fuel approaches. The crux involves electrochemical reactivation of a PETC-modified cyanobacterium with no PSII activity that cannot perform photosynthesis alone. We introduce a device to shuttle high-energy electrons into this cyanobacterium and a strategy for intermittent light and electricity supply. We demonstrated CO2 conversion to fuel molecules such as acetate, amino acids and ethylene under this condition. Illuminating single photosystem (PSI) without the light absorption competition by the other (PSII) elevates the efficiency ceiling of natural photosynthesis. The external electricity driving this reaction can be further harvested from multiple renewable sources, such as solar or wind, which are not limited by PAR and therefore enable a broader photosynthetic platform. This innovation introduces the concept of electro-synthetic cyanobacteria with the capability to drive carbon metabolism by both light energy and exogenous electricity. We describe this hybrid as an “electrophototrophic” system, a novel biotic-abiotic platform with the potential to valorize CO2 in high energy conversion efficiency while producing more complex hydrocarbon fuels than artificial photosynthesis.
Results & discussion
A tailored photoelectrochemical system for electrophototrophy
To energize photosynthesis via extracellular electron transport, we first blocked the natural photosynthesis pathway in the cyanobacterium where initial electrons are generated from water splitting in PSII (Fig. 1a). This goal was achieved by either inhibiting PSII activity physiologically via site-specific inhibitors,30 or by leveraging a genetically generated PSII knockout mutant.31 A mutant strain of the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (hereto Synechocystis), deficient in chlorophyll a binding protein (CP47) in PSII, cannot grow photoautotrophically. In the mutant (hereafter ΔPSII), PSII inactivity was shown by an altered 77 K fluorescence spectrum (Fig. S1b, ESI†) and significantly decreased chlorophyll a level (Fig. S1c, ESI†).
Next, we designed an electrochemical architecture (Fig. 1b) for exogenous electron delivery to cyanobacteria. This architecture allows physical attachment of cyanobacterial cells to carbon felt and the transparent cathodic fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) electrode allows us to investigate light-activated photosystem driven by extracellular electricity. FTO glass substrate faced-up with porous carbon felt offers an extremely large interfacial area for bacteria loading (as shown in Fig. S2, ESI†), excellent electron transport properties, as well as short active species diffusion length for efficient electrochemical reactions.32
Light-dependent exogenous electron transfer to PETC
Electrochemical devices for electrogenesis from photoautotrophically grown Synechocystis on anode were reported previously.26,28,33 We first reproduced this electrogenesis process in our newly designed system and examined its electrochemical properties by interfacing biocompatible porous carbon felt with wild-type (WT) Synechocystis cells (Fig. 1b). WT Synechocystis cells displayed a strong electrogenic response to chopped light under anodic potential (0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl, Fig. 2a left panel, red solid line), suggesting that physical contact between cells and the extracellular electron-transduction surface enables interfacial electron transfer. In contrast, no photocurrent was observed for ΔPSII under the same conditions (Fig. 2a left panel, red dash line), consistent with previous reports that PSII is the primary source for electrogenesis.24,33
 Fig. 2  Electrochemical properties of the electrophototrophic hybrid. (a) i–t Measurement under chopped illumination when cyanobacterial cells (Synechocystis WT and ΔPSII mutant) were applied as electron donor (on anode, red solid and dash line) or acceptor (on cathode, black solid and dash line). Right panel comparing the light-response of WT and ΔPSII cells as electron donor and acceptor, respectively. (b) Current density changes in response to light/dark switch with addition of site-specific PETC inhibitors individually to cathodic ΔPSII culture. The time-course and differences of current density between light and dark are shown on the left and right panel, respectively. Left plot shows a representative result from biological replicates (n = 3). Error bars in the right panel represent standard deviations for replicates of photocurrent density (differences between light on and off (n = 5)). See Fig. S12 (ESI†) for a negative control, in which the current density changes are in response to light/dark switch with addition of all site-specific PETC inhibitors (DCMU, DBMIB and PMA). 
We next analyzed the properties of ΔPSII as an electron acceptor by applying a cathodic potential (−0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl). Under this condition, an anoxygenic environment was created in the cathode chamber and electrochemical O2 evolution occurring on the anode was separated from cathode by a Nafion membrane. The current density, in tens of μA cm−2 magnitude, is relatively steady for both WT and PSII mutant cultures. Intriguingly, illumination of ΔPSII under cathodic potential consistently increased cathodic current density (Fig. 2a left panel, black solid line), whereas the WT Synechocystis which carries functional PSII did not produce a photoelectrical response under cathodic bias (Fig. 2a left panel, black dash line). However, such WT strain showed the similar wave-like photoelectrical response in the presence of PSII inhibitor (3-3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea (DCMU) (Fig. S4 and S13, ESI†). A photoelectrical response was also not observed under cathodic bias with heat-treated dead cells on electrodes (Fig. S3, ESI†), confirming that the photocurrent observed for living ΔPSII cells, although small, is not an artifact. The active PETC components downstream of PSII in the ΔPSII mutant can accept electrons from the external circuit in lieu of the deactivated PSII. Since the electrons provided by PSII from water oxidation in wild type cells would have better electron transport kinetics compared to the external electrons supply to the bacteria, the existence of PSII would induce a more negative potential at the entry point (PQ) of the electron transport chain, which obstructs external electron injection to the bacteria. Without redox reactions by PSII, the light-dependent current response in ΔPSII is in line with the photo-reductive activity of PSI, the excitation of which can transfer electrons to the end of PETC, thus allowing continuous electron input from external circuit. In contrast, photoexcited PSII in the WT strain serves as the predominant electron donor, which could saturate the PETC and diminish photoelectrical response significantly when injecting exogenous electrons from cathode.
We next use site-specific redox inhibitors to demonstrate that PETC components downstream of PSII (see Fig. 1a) play a central role in electron flow from extracellular circuit to cyanobacteria. Supplementation of the herbicide DCMU, a specific inhibitor that blocks the binding site of QB in the photosystem34 (Fig. S4, ESI†) did not diminish the light-dependent electrical response in ΔPSII cells (Fig. 2b), suggesting that exogenous electrons can flow into the PETC downstream of QB. Either blocking cytochrome b6f activity with 2,5-dibromo-3-methyl-6-isopropylbenzoquinone (DBMIB)35 or inhibiting ferredoxin and NADP reduction with phenylmercuric acetate (PMA)36 resulted in a significant decrease in photoelectrical activity, as evinced by negligible changes of photocurrent density under light on and off (Fig. 2b). Interestingly, the photoelectric response after PMA addition did not completely disappear in the first 300 s (Fig. 2b blue curve in the left panel). It indicates a time course in which serial PETC components upstream of the PMA inhibition site (ferredoxin-NADP oxidoreductase) are reduced sequentially and thus can still trigger photoelectric response until full reduction. These site-specific inhibitions support the mechanism that exogenous electrons flow through cytochrome b6f, PSI and ultimately reach ferredoxin-NADP oxidoreductase in the PETC. The opposing effect of DBMIB and DCMU further implies that PQ is probably the entry point of exogenous electrons as it is the only PETC component between QB and cytochrome b6f.
To better understand the biological mechanism underlying the electrophototrophic metabolism observed above, we performed quantitative proteomics analysis on Synechocystis cells (ΔPSII). Specifically, a proteomics comparison was made between ΔPSII cells attached to the carbon felt that were harvested from the cathode chamber and the initial ΔPSII culture where no cathodic bias was ever applied. For cyanobacterial cells undergoing electrophototrophic metabolism (bias-exposed), we found global proteomic adaptation, relative to the initially cultured cells. Pathway enzyme allocation (Fig. S5, ESI†) displayed an increase of energy metabolism in the proteome including photosynthesis and electron transfer. As a trade-off, the section for translational processing was reduced for the electrophototrophic (bias-exposed) cells, indicating a systematic resource reallocation. Interestingly, we found that upregulated proteins (>1.5 fold changes) included those components for assembling pili, cytochrome b6-f complex iron–sulfur cluster, photosystem I reaction center, ferredoxin and ATP synthase (Fig. S6, ESI†). Upregulation of these gene products indicate their necessity during electrophototrophic process and is consistent with the proposed energetic mechanism. As such, we conclude that these gene products could potentially play important roles in transfer of exogenous electrons to PETC.
Exogenous electrons energize CO2-to-fuels conversion with high energy efficiency
Motivated by global demand for CO2 recycling and production of energetic chemicals, we asked whether the exogenous electrons in our hybrid “electrophototrophic” system could energize CO2 fixation and conversion to hydrocarbon fuels or fuel feedstocks. To answer this question, we incubated ΔPSII cultures and applied electrical potential with amperometric characterization. Light and electrical bias were systematically investigated as two key variables, and we observe photosynthetic CO2 fixation and carbon product formation only when supplying both illumination and exogenous electron (Fig. 3a, b and Fig. S7, S8, ESI†). Importantly, the longevity of carbon product formation is substantially enhanced under conditions of intermittent illumination and exogenous electron supply. Specifically, experiments discussed in Section S(II) (Fig. S17 and S18, ESI†) led us to adopt the condition of supplying photons and electrons for 30 seconds, followed by a 30-minute interval of no supply. Shown in Fig. 3a, this “30 s supply + 30 min interval” intermittent condition on the cathode (typical white LED for plant growth, 55 μmol m−2 s−1 on FTO glass) led to a 3.5-fold increase in acetate production compared to its initial value with only cathodic bias (−0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl, intermittent supply, Fig. S17, ESI†). In the dark, under the same cathodic bias, acetate concentrations in the culture slightly decreased (from ∼270 μM initial residual to ∼100 μM), presumably due to non-photoexcited PSI which cannot reduce NADP and fuel carbon metabolism. The cell viability, determined by optical density (OD730) measurements, indicate a slight increase under intermittent illumination, while the OD730 gradually declined ∼40% in dark after 8 days (Fig. S7, ESI†). In terms of exogenous electron supply, no acetate production was detected without negative electrical bias, even for cells that were illuminated constantly under intermittent program (Fig. S8, ESI†).
 Fig. 3  CO2 valorization by the electrophototrophic hybrid. (a) Electrophototrophic acetate production of ΔPSII by external electrical bias (−0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl) with and without illumination. (b) Time course of electrophototrophic productivity for ΔPSII under illumination with different electron supplies. Error bars represent standard deviations from biological triplicates. (c) 13C-Acetate production via fixation of 13CO2 (derived from 13C-bicarbonate) in illuminated ΔPSII, with or without application of external electrical bias (−0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl). (d) Fractional labeling of seven protein-bound amino acids that were directly produced from the central carbon metabolism via fixation of 13CO2 (derived from 13C-bicarbonate) in illuminated ΔPSII, with or without application of external electrical bias (−0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl). Green arrows indicate CO2-fixing reactions. Dashed lines are reactions for the synthesis of amino acids. Abbreviations: RuBP, ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate; GAP, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate; 3PG, 3-phosphoglycerate; PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate; PYR, pyruvate; AcCoA, acetyl coenzyme A; OAA, oxaloacetate; 2OG, 2-oxoglutarate. CBB, the Calvin–Benson–Bassham Cycle; TCA, the tricarboxylic acid cycle. Amino acids are presented by their 3-letter abbreviations. *Phe indicates partial carbons of phenylalanine (C1-3) synthesized from PEP. *C1 indicates that one carbon unit is the precursor of glycine's methylene group and can be represented by the Gly_85 fragment in GC-MS. All electricity and illumination supply were programed as “30 s supply + 30 min interval”. 
As shown in Fig. 3b, acetate production by intermittent illuminated ΔPSII was not found within the first 5 days for application of either no bias or −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl. In comparison, once more negative bias (−0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl, intermittent supply, Fig. S10, ESI†) was applied (day 6–10), acetate production ensued. Fig. S9 (ESI†) displays acetate yield as a function of various potentials (−0.15 to −0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl) and indicates that potentials more negative than −0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl can drive acetate production. Consistently, this threshold potential of −0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl is near the standard reducing potential of electrons in photoexcited PSII (Fig. S9, ESI†). This correlation implies an energy barrier which needs to be overcome for driving exogenous electron flow into downstream of PETC. Fig. 3b demonstrates that acetate concentration increased steadily for 5 days during incubation under −0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl, eventually reaching 650 μM. Cell counts for ΔPSII, inferred by OD730 measurements, decreased unless a certain bias was applied (Fig. S10, ESI†). These results support our hypothesis that the primary metabolic processes such as metabolite production and cell maintenance can be energized by highly reductive exogenous electrons, flowing through the PETC.
To further investigate the metabolic activities that can be driven by this electrophototrophic system, we performed an isotope tracer analysis by adding 13C-sodium bicarbonate into the ΔPSII culture on the cathode. Bicarbonate can be converted to CO2 by cyanobacterial carbonic anhydrase.37 This CO2 can then drive carbon product formation (acetate) and/or be fixed into biomass via cell metabolism. We first examined the labeling fraction of acetate excreted into the medium. The GC-MS revealed the production of 13C-acetic acid, indicating that newly fixed carbons end into this C2 product (Fig. 3c). 1H-NMR spectra demonstrate that acetate was labeled in both methyl and carboxyl carbons (Fig. S11, ESI†) and allow us to evaluate the energy conversion efficiency in the electro-photosynthetic process. Different from the conventional microbial electrosynthesis processes, both exogenous electrons supply from the electrochemical system and the photon excitation contribute to this electrophototrophic synthesis. The exogenous electrons for CO2 conversion to acetate can be quantified by defining the exogenous electrons utilization efficiency (EEUEacetate). Over half (61.8%) of exogenous electrons were utilized by ΔPSII for selective acetic acid generation. Taking into account the photon and electron flux received by the cyanobacterial cells, the overall light and electrons energy conversion efficiency on our electrophototrophic cyanobacteria is approximately 9.3%. For total photons and electrons supplied to the cyanobacteria, the energy conversion efficiency is approximately 2.8% (see Section S(I), Fig. S14–16 and Table S1 for further discussion of this efficiency calculation, ESI†). Note that this estimation only reflects the fixed carbons in acetate and does not count those fixed into biomass (vide infra).
We next analyzed the labeling patterns of seven proteinogenic amino acids that are digested from cell biomass and are directly produced from the central carbon metabolism (Fig. 3d). After four days incubation of ΔPSII with 13C-bicarbonate under white-light illumination, the cathodically biased cultures demonstrate partial 13C-labeling in proteinogenic amino acids and display significantly higher fractional labeling (FL, denoting the proportion of labeled carbons) than the negative control cultures without applied bias. Serine, which can be synthesized from 3-phosphoglycerate, the first CO2-fixation product of the CBB cycle, demonstrated a 3% FL in comparison with 1% in the negative control. This moderate 13C-accumulation is real because we indeed detected significant increase of the m + 1 13C-pattern in the carboxylic group of serine, consistent with the reaction skeleton of Ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO) (Table S2, ESI†). As another major CO2 entry point, 13C-bicarbonate can be fixed by amphibolic reactions (e.g. phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase) to generate oxaloacetate which is the precursor of aspartate and threonine. Consistently, biased cultures have much higher FL (7%) in these two amino acids than those in the unbiased cultures (1%).
Interestingly, we observed a new CO2 fixation pathway activated in cyanobacteria via the glycine cleavage system. This pathway was found recently in Synechocystis38 but with no detailed in vivo characterization. The metabolic activity of this CO2-fixing pathway can be reflected by the extremely high FL in glycine (>30%) when incubated ΔPSII with 13C-bicarbonate under constant white-light illumination for four days. Through this pathway, CO2 will enter the one-carbon (C1) metabolism via formate which then forms the methylene group of glycine. The GC-MS fragment of glycine (Gly_85) represents this methylene group, demonstrating high FL (30%) consistently. In line with labeling evidence, the high activity of the glycine pathway is also reflected by proteomic results that show 1.8-fold upregulation of glycine cleavage system H protein (gcvH) in bias-exposed cells (Fig. S6, ESI†). Altogether, our 13C-tracer analysis, as well as extracellular metabolite analysis, support that exogenous electron supply to cyanobacterial PETC may lead to CO2 fixation and conversion, demonstrating a functional bioenergetics system that fuels endergonic metabolism.
Electrophototrophic production of ethylene
We further evaluated the hybrid electrophototrophic system for its ability to generate value-added biofuel molecules in addition to acetate and amino acids. To this end, we recruited a Synechocystis strain JU547 in which the photosynthetic metabolism was remodeled for high-yield ethylene production.8 This strain is optimized for overexpression of the heterologous ethylene forming enzyme (EFE) and has achieved photoautotrophic production of ethylene.8 Here, we applied electric bias to JU547 in the gas-tight cathodic chamber and illuminated the culture. To realize electrophototrophic metabolism, DCMU was supplemented into the culture for inactivation of PSII and the headspace was monitored for ethylene. Shown in Fig. 4, ethylene detection indicates that cells were adapted to this new process. Electrophototrophic production of ethylene sustained for days (Fig. 4b, red circles) and led to the increase in accumulated charges over time (Fig. 4c). The ethylene titer reached 0.365 mmol L−1 OD730−1 in Day 8, as we estimated, with average exogenous electrons utilization efficiency (EEUEethylene) of 74.9% (see Section S(I) for efficiency approximation, ESI1). In comparison, the negative biological controls without either light or electrical input cannot produce ethylene upon DCMU supplementation (blue line and black line, respectively). Another control experiment, in which cyanobacterial cells were not applied, did not produce ethylene (data not shown), excluding the possibility of abiotic ethylene production upon electrochemistry alone. Collectively, these tests displayed the validity and generality of our electrophototrophic approach for tailored production of fuel molecules from cyanobacteria.
 Fig. 4  Electrophototrophic ethylene production in cyanobacteria. (a) The pathway for electrophototrophic ethylene production in engineered Synechocystis JU547.8 Electrophototrophic reactions are triggered by exogenous electricity supply, light illumination, and inhibition of PSII with DCMU. The conversion of CO2 into ethylene is then energized by ATP and NADPH and enabled through an heterologously expressed ethylene forming enzyme (EFE). (b) Successive ethylene production from electrophototrophic cyanobacteria in the presence (+) or absence (−) of electric bias (EC, −0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl) and light (55 μmol m−2 s−1). Error bars represent biological triplicates. (c) Total charges, in Coulombs, that were accumulatively applied to the cathodic culture for ethylene production. All electricity and illumination supply were programed as “30 s supply + 30 min interval”. 
Discussion
Electrification of biocatalysis, such as microbial electrosynthesis (MES), seeks efficient conversion of CO2 to fuels and chemical feedstocks,39–43 representing a strategic direction to meet global energy demand. As a novel MES form, our proof-of-concept electro-photosynthetic system leverages exogenous electrons to supplement photosynthetic energy conversion for driving CO2 fixation and conversion. Cyanobacterial cells without PSII can sustain their metabolic viability on an electrode surface and produce acetate, the primary excreting product as well as non-native ethylene (Fig. 3 and 4).
Compared with state-of-the-art microbial electrosynthesis systems, which have also realized acetate production from CO2, our system has merits that could ensure an enabling and practical technology. First, cyanobacteria have been well developed to be a photosynthetic cell factory for more than a decade. They can serve as microbial chasses for production of a variety of energy products with increasing productivities.44,45 Second, in contrast to current electrosynthetic microbes, most of which are strict anaerobes, cyanobacteria are much more tolerant to oxygen and can also grow anaerobically either in cathodal chamber or dark regime during day/night cycle. This flexibility offers additional ease in operations when preparing precultures and manipulating bio-electrochemical processes. Third, cyanobacteria can take up gaseous CO2 as well as soluble inorganic carbons (e.g., bicarbonate). Effective CO2 concentrating mechanisms (CCM) have evolved in cyanobacteria to facilitate transport and utilization of inorganic carbon substrates, offering an exceptional benefit in mass transfer.46 Last but not least, cyanobacterial metabolism has been tailored for CO2 fixation, while electrosynthetic microbes (e.g. acetogens) rely on the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway (WLP) for carbon fixation. WLP is one of the oldest biochemical pathways and has to couple CO2 fixation to energy conservation at the thermodynamic limit of life.47 Due to the complexity of WLP pathway enzymes, genetic engineering efforts that can improve WLP catalytic efficiency have not been reported. In contrast, cyanobacteria demonstrate evolutionary advantages in metabolism. The CBB cycle in cyanobacteria is the most broadly used CO2-fixation pathway on earth and is much less restricted thermodynamically. Moreover, other carbon-conserving pathways (e.g. phosphoketolase pathway)8 exist in cyanobacteria, allowing versatile metabolic functions and could enable more efficient electrosynthesis.
Here, growing photosystems-modified cyanobacteria in a photoelectrochemical architecture allows us to expand the means by which photosynthetic organisms produce fuels and chemicals. Such hybrid systems can access new pathways beyond canonical photosynthesis, the inefficiency of which largely arises from the use of two photochemical systems with similar absorption thresholds. The two photosystems (PSII, PSI) compete for the same regions of the solar spectrum, cutting energy efficiency nearly in half compared with what might be achieved if the bandgaps were optimized to use different regions of the spectrum.2,48 Additionally, as originally proposed by Blankenship and co-authors,2 new tandem configuration strategies that e.g. pair two photosystems activating in different spectral ranges, may increase the theoretical upper bound of natural photosynthesis. As a thought experiment, we discuss a potential vision (and associated challenges) of such a hybrid system, based on our electrophototroph, in the ESI† (Fig. S19 and associated discussion, Section S(III)).
An additional merit for this hybrid photosynthesis approach arises from the fact that inactivated PSII does not evolve O2 as the photosynthetic byproduct. Suppressed O2 evolution (locally in the cyanobacteria, not on the anode where O2 evolution is still necessary to provide the electrons needed at the cathode) minimizes the propensity for RuBisCO to fix O2 as a competitive substrate for CO2. In natural photosynthesis, substrate competition initiates an energy-intensive recovery process of photorespiration49 that can consume up to 25% of the initially stored energy,50 a substantial source of inefficiency. Interestingly, although photorespiration also plays a biosynthetic role in metabolic processes, e.g. supplying glycine as an essential metabolite,49 this role in hybrid photosynthesis seems to be substitutable with redundant pathways, such as the glycine cleavage system.38 This notion is strongly supported by the presence of pathway genes in cyanobacterial genome in line with isotope labeling patterns and proteomic data as we provided here. Decrease in photorespiration thus represents an additional opportunity in the hybrid system to raise the theoretical limits of photosynthesis.
More importantly, the hybrid system introduces a unique strategy for managing photosynthetic outcomes. In natural photosynthesis, linear electron flow occurring between two photochemical systems produces ATP and NADPH as energetic currency, and their proportions are regulated for various biosynthetic purposes. Phototrophs containing only PSI implement electron transport whereby electrons can be recycled from either reduced ferredoxin or NADPH to PQ, and subsequently to the cytochrome b6f complex.51 Such cyclic flow generates a pH gradient (and thus ATP), but without the accumulation of reduced species for biosynthesis.52 However, this study shows that Synechocystis carrying single PSI can be electrically energized to fix CO2 and generate building blocks of biomass, evinced by labeled proteinogenic amino acids from 13C-bicarbonate. This study further indicates that the hybrid photo-electrochemical process demonstrated here could enable on-demand control over the proportion of linear versus cyclic electron flow to tailor the stoichiometric ratios of ATP/NADPH and ultimate photosynthetic products. To achieve this goal, Nature evolved complicated regulatory mechanisms to tune the ratio of PSI to PSII.53,54 In the photoelectrochemical hybrid demonstrated here, the ratios of energetic currency and products could instead be regulated through the injection of exogenous electrons, which creates an artificial linear electron flux that can be varied on-demand relative to cyclic electron flow by tuning the cathodic current density and/or incident photon flux. Since this hybrid approach is not tailored by evolution, it will be less constrained by the natural needs/environments to implement. Instead, the hybrid can be optimized in well-designed conditions for targeted ATP/NADPH ratio. Reengineering the system, for example on the biotic-abiotic interface, is expected to improve overall efficiency for tunable electron transfer. Moving forward towards practical systems will also benefit from strategies for continuous supply of photons and exogenous electrons to the electrophototrophic hybrid system.
Taken together, the hybrid electrophototroph demonstrated here drives exogenous electrochemical energy to replenish the universal energy and redox currency in living cyanobacteria for biosynthesis. Considering its functionality and a number of advantages over pure natural/artificial photosynthesis, we posit that the development of this bio-electrochemical platform has the potential to enable new avenues to couple renewable electricity with photobiological activities, a practical approach for production of hydrocarbon fuels from sun and CO2.
Methods
Characterization of PSII knockout mutant in Synechocystis
The PSII deficient Synechocystis was a gift from Dr Wim Vermaas at Arizona State University. This mutant was generated by deleting the psbB gene which encodes chlorophyll-binding protein CP-47 in PSII of Synechocystis.31 The slr0906 open reading frame (ORF) encoding psbB was disrupted by inserting an antibiotic-resistance gene cassette, replacing a part of the coding sequence. The genotype of the mutant was verified by a PCR analysis using primers 0906_VF and 0906_VR (0906-VF: CGTTACTAGAAGGAGCGTCA, 0906-VR: GGTACCTGGGGAGAGTAGAT). The ΔPSII mutant and wild type Synechocystis were measured by fluorescence emission spectra (77 K) using a 435 nm excitation wavelength. The chlorophyll a level in the mutant was quantitated after methanol extraction by measuring the absorbance of the supernatant at 663 nm, using glass cuvettes.
Cyanobacteria-electrode hybrid system
The PSII deficient Synechocystis (Δslr0906) was first inoculated and cultured photoheterotrophically in BG11 medium with addition of 5 mM glucose, under 30–50 μmol m−2 s−1 illumination at 30 °C. Exponentially growing cells were collected for further applications.
In the following procedure, the tailored electrochemical H-cell with three-electrode configuration was applied for the electrochemical process. The reference and counter electrodes were silver/silver chloride electrode and Pt, respectively. The working electrode and reference electrode (CH Instruments, Inc.) were in the bottom chamber and the Pt wire counter electrode was in the top chamber. A Nafion 117 membrane (Sigma-Aldrich) separates the two chambers. Each chamber has an inlet/outlet. The exponentially growing culture was centrifuged 8 min at 4000 rpm, separated from the supernatant and re-dispersed in the medium (BG11+ bicarbonate, pH = 7.8). This process was repeated three times in order to remove the residual glucose. The cell pellet was then dispersed in the medium (BG11+ bicarbonate, pH = 7.8) for the electrophototrophic experiment. A ∼7 mL culture was transferred to the cathode chamber of the H-cell, where the culture was illuminated from the bottom transparent window. The device was air-tight and maintained at 30 °C for the duration of the electrochemical characterization.
Photoelectrochemical characterization
During the electrochemical incubation, a typical amperometry (i–t) procedure (CH Instruments, Inc.) was conducted to check the ability of ΔPSII cyanobacteria as an electron acceptor under illumination. The illumination used in the experiment is the typical white LED illumination for cyanobacteria growth (Photon Systems Instrument, Czech Republic). Photon flux was measured by Li-250A Light Meter with a quantum sensor (LI-COR Biosciences, NE, USA). It was conducted at different potentials (vs. Ag/AgCl, saturated KCl solution). Typically, the chopped light (60 s on/off) was used for the photocurrent response measurement in photoelectrochemical process. The programmed “30 s supply + 30 min interval” of both illumination and exogenous electron supply were utilized as the conditions for long-term electrophototrophic experiment. A 0.15 mL culture was taken every day for OD730 and metabolite analysis.
PETC inhibition assay
Three PETC inhibitors: 3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea (DCMU), 2,5-dibromomethylisopropyl-1,4-benzoquinone (DBMIB), and phenylmercury acetate (PMA) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. They were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide for use. The working concentrations of DCMU, DBMIB and PMA were based on previous report,24 which were 20 μM, 50 μM, 200 μM, respectively. The photoelectrochemical measurements were conducted after the inhibitors were supplemented into the culture for 10 min.
Proteome measurement and analysis
Proteome of electrophototrophic Synechocystis ΔPSII mutants 48 hours after a shift from non-EC (no electricity applied) to EC (electricity applied) condition was analyzed. The growth condition of ΔPSII mutant followed the same procedures as described above. Cells from biofilms on electrode and planktonic cells were separately harvested and analyzed. The proteomic analysis of ΔPSII mutant were conducted following the same method in our previous report.55 10 μg of trypsin digested peptides from each sample were loaded onto a C18 capillary column coupled to a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometry (Thermo-Scientific, Rockford, IL). The peptide identity was analyzed at the resolution of 30000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled in this case with the setup of repeat count of 1, repeat duration of 30 seconds, and exclusion duration of 90 seconds. The peptide identify was obtained by searching the tandem MS spectra using Patternlab for Proteomics.56
Electron microscopy characterization
After the electrochemistry process, the carbon felt electrode was fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde in phosphate buffer under 4 °C for 2 h. The samples then underwent a MilliQ water postfix wash and dehydration (∼24 h in a high vacuum desiccator). Scanning Electron Microscopy (Hitachi S-4800 SEM) was applied to characterize the surface morphology. Samples were imaged at 3 kV acceleration, 7–10 mm working distance.
Quantitative analysis of acetate
We measured the excretion of acetate from Synechocystis using the following method. The culture samples were collected and the supernatant was separated from cells by filtration through 0.2 μM-diameter nylon membrane (Acrodisc®). Acetate concentration in each culture was analyzed with High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC, Agilent Technologies1200 series) by injecting 25 μL samples into an HPLC column (Bio-Rad Aminex HPX-87H), eluting with 5 mM sulfuric acid at a flow rate of 0.6 mL min−1, and detecting by a refractive index detector (retention time for acetate: 15.2 min). Standard samples with five different acetate concentrations (2.5, 5, 10, 25, and 50 mM) were used for quantification (R2 = 0.99839).

13C-Isotope tracer analysis to track carbon fixation

13C-Bicarbonate was supplied during the electrochemical procedures to monitor carbon metabolism in the photoelectrochemical environment. The 13C-labeled fraction of acetate and protein-bound amino acids were measured by NMR and gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC-MS), respectively. Exponentially growing ΔPSII cells were suspended in BG-11 medium supplemented with 100 mM 13C-labeled sodium bicarbonate. The culture was applied in the electrochemical device under sunlight simulated illumination (white LED, 55 μmol m−2 s−1 on FTO glass). Cultures were sampled at 0 hour, 2 day, 4 day and 5 day.
The sample treatment and GC-MS analysis were performed as previous reported.57 Briefly, 5 mL of sampled cultures were centrifuged at 10000 g for 1 minute, the cell pellets were digested in 500 μL 6 M HCl at 105 °C for 12 hours. The hydrolysate was dried under nitrogen gas flow at 65 °C, dissolved in 50 μL water-free dimethylformamide. For the GC-MS measurement the proteinogenic amino acids were derivatized prior to analysis. The dried hydrolysate, dissolved in pyridine was derivatized by N-tert-butyldimethylsilyl-N-methyltrifluoroacetamide (TBDMS) with 1% tert-butyl-dimethylchlorosilane at 85 °C for 60 min. 1 μL of the sample in the organic phase was loaded on the Agilent GC-6890 gas chromatography equipped with a Agilent 19091J-413 column (30 m × 0.32 mm × 0.25 μm) directly connected to a MS-5975C mass spectrometer. Helium was used as the carrier gas. The oven temperature was initially held at 50 °C for 2 min; then raised to 150 °C at 5 °C min−1 and held at that value for 2 min; finally, it was raised to 320 °C at 7 °C min−1, and held at that final value for 2 min. Other settings included splitless and electron impact ionization (EI) at 70 eV. The FLs of alanine, aspartate, glutamate, glycine, phenylalanine, serine, threonine was analyzed.
To analyze the isotope labeling pattern of amino acids, a mass isotopomer distribution vector, MDVα, was assigned according to Nanchen et al.58 (1)where m0 is the fractional abundance of molecules with mono-isotopic mass and mi>0 is the abundance of fragments with heavier masses. The GC-MS data were corrected for the naturally occurring isotopes of oxygen (O), hydrogen (H) and carbon (C) atoms using a correction matrix (eqn (2)) as described by Nanchen et al.58 (2)where  is the corrected mass isotopomer distribution vector and Ccorr,COH−1 is the correction matrix. According to eqn (3), the resulting  values were then used to assess the fractional labeling (FL) of amino acids whose carbon skeletons are derived from their precursors in the central carbon metabolism (3)where n represents the number of carbon atoms in the amino acid and i is the mass isotopomer. Corrected MDV for seven proteinogenic amino acids is shown in Table S1 (ESI†).
NMR samples were prepared by spiking neat solution with 50 microliters of D2O with a 10× concentrated solution of Phosphate buffer and TMSP (sodium-3-trimethylsilylpropinoate-d4, Cambridge Isotopes), for a final solution of 550 microliters, 70 mM Phosphate buffer and 0.91 mM TMSP as an internal chemical shift and concentration standard. All 1H NMR experiments were collected on a 600 MHz Bruker Avance III NMR spectrometer equipped with a Bruker 5 mm 1H/X broadband probe with sample temperature controlled at 25 °C. Acquisition parameters were as follows: the 1D NOESY-presaturation experiment was used (Bruker pulse program noesypr1d) with a water presaturation pulse equivalent to 12 Hz field strength during both a 5 second relaxation delay and during a 50 millisecond NOESY mixing time. Data was collected with a 20 ppm spectral window, 256 scans with 8 dummy scans, and 128k acquired points equivalent to 5.5 seconds of acquisition time. All spectra were processed using MestreNova version 14, which included 0.2 Hz exponential line-broadening before Fourier transform, manual phase correction, polynomial baseline correction, and chemical shift referencing to TMSP at 0.0 ppm. To obtain quantifications and isotopomer ratios, 1H spectral deconvolution was performed using the MestreNova Line Fitting tool. Peak areas were exported to Microsoft Excel for further analysis.
Experimental analysis for electrophototrophic ethylene production
An engineered ethylene-producing strain Synechocystis JU547 was used. Its ability in ethylene production was verified under regular phototrophic condition.8 In terms of the electrophototrophic incubation, a typical amperometry (i–t) procedure (CH Instruments, Inc.) was conducted to check the ability of this strain as an electron acceptor under illumination and PSII inactivation. The PSII of the JU547 cells was inhibited by supplementing 20 μM DCMU. Exogenous electron supply was conducted at −0.7 V (vs. Ag/AgCl, saturated KCl solution). The culture was applied in the electrochemical device under illumination (white LED, 55 μmol m−2 s−1). To set up negative controls, we applied the same condition for Synechocystis JU547 cultures as well as electrochemical devices only except applying either illumination or light. All setups were gas tight. For ethylene quantification, a 200 μL gas sample was taken from the head space and injected into GC as our previous report described.59
Author contributions
W. X., J. B., D. S. project conception. Z. L., X. C., D. S., J. B., W. X. designed, performed, and/or analyzed photo-electrochemical experiments. Z. L., C. W., X. G., W. X. designed, performed, and/or analyzed biological experiments including cyanobacteria cultivation, spectroscopic analysis, metabolite analysis, 13C-labeling and GC-MS. B. A. performed NMR analysis. S. S., X. W., C. W. performed proteomics analysis. W. X., J. B. wrote the manuscript with input from all authors and revisions from D. S. and J. Y.
Conflicts of interest
Authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
This work was authored in part by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, operated by Alliance for Sustainable Energy, LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) under Contract No. DE-AC36-08GO28308. Funding for W. X., Z. L., and D. S., for cyanobacteria development, provided by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory Laboratory Directed Research and Development (LDRD) program. Funding for Z. L. and J. L. B., for photoelectrochemical design and experimentation, provided by the Solar Photochemistry Program, Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). The views expressed in the article do not necessarily represent the views of the DOE or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the U.S. Government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this work, or allow others to do so, for U.S. Government purposes. We acknowledge Dr Wim Vermaas at Arizona State University for providing a Synechocystis PSII deficient mutant. We also thank Dr Ji Hao for assistance on transport measurements.
References
M. F. Hohmann-Marriott and R. E. Blankenship, Annual Review of Plant Biology, 2011, 62, 515–548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Blankenship, D. M. Tiede, J. Barber, G. W. Brudvig, G. Fleming, M. Ghirardi, M. R. Gunner, W. Junge, D. M. Kramer, A. Melis, T. A. Moore, C. C. Moser, D. G. Nocera, A. J. Nozik, D. R. Ort, W. W. Parson, R. C. Prince and R. T. Sayre, Science, 2011, 332, 805–809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hambourger, G. F. Moore, D. M. Kramer, D. Gust, A. L. Moore and T. A. Moore, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 25–35 RSC .
J. H. A. Nugent, Eur. J. Biochem., 1996, 237, 519–531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Georgianna and S. P. Mayfield, Nature, 2012, 488, 329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rosenbaum, Z. He and L. T. Angenent, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol, 2010, 21, 259–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. E. Nozzi, J. W. K. Oliver and S. Atsumi, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 2013, 1, 7 Search PubMed .
W. Xiong, J. A. Morgan, J. Ungerer, B. Wang, P.-C. Maness and J. Yu, Nat. Plants, 2015, 1, 15053 CrossRef CAS .
E. I. Lan and J. C. Liao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 6018–6023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kusakabe, T. Tatsuke, K. Tsuruno, Y. Hirokawa, S. Atsumi, J. C. Liao and T. Hanai, Metab. Eng., 2013, 20, 101–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schirmer, M. A. Rude, X. Li, E. Popova and S. B. del Cardayre, Science, 2010, 329, 559–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Singh and N. Mallick, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 2017, 364 Search PubMed .
P. Pospíšil, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2009, 1787, 1151–1160 CrossRef PubMed .
D. K. Dogutan and D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3143–3148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, aad1920 CrossRef PubMed .
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-H. Cheng, M. H. Richter, I. Sullivan, D. M. Larson, C. Xiang, B. S. Brunschwig and H. A. Atwater, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 470–476 CrossRef CAS .
S. Verma, Y. Hamasaki, C. Kim, W. Huang, S. Lu, H.-R. M. Jhong, A. A. Gewirth, T. Fujigaya, N. Nakashima and P. J. A. Kenis, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 3, 193–198 CrossRef .
F. P. Garcia de Arquer, C. T. Dinh, A. Ozden, J. Wicks, C. McCallum, A. R. Kirmani, D. H. Nam, C. Gabardo, A. Seifitokaldani, X. Wang, Y. C. Li, F. Li, J. Edwards, L. J. Richter, S. J. Thorpe, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2020, 367, 661–666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Kuang, Y. Meng, X. Tian, W. H. Hung, X. Zhang, A. Li, M. Xu, W. Zhou, C. S. Ku, C. Y. Chiang, G. Zhu, J. Guo, X. Sun and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7276–7282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-T. Dinh, Y. C. Li and E. H. Sargent, Joule, 2019, 3, 13–15 CrossRef .
C. T. Dinh, T. Burdyny, M. G. Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C. M. Gabardo, F. P. Garcia de Arquer, A. Kiani, J. P. Edwards, P. De Luna, O. S. Bushuyev, C. Zou, R. Quintero-Bermudez, Y. Pang, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2018, 360, 783–787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Torimura, A. Miki, A. Wadano, K. Kano and T. Ikeda, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 496, 21–28 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, M. Sadakiyo, R. Luo, M. Heima, M. Yamauchi and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Power Sources, 2016, 301, 219–228 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Pisciotta, Y. Zou and I. V. Baskakov, PLoS One, 2010, 5, e10821 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Tanaka, N. Kashiwagi and T. Ogawa, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 1988, 42, 235–240 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sawa, A. Fantuzzi, P. Bombelli, C. J. Howe, K. Hellgardt and P. J. Nixon, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1327 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lu, K. Nishio, S. Matsuda, Y. Toshima, H. Ito, T. Konno, K. Ishihara, S. Kato, K. Hashimoto and S. Nakanishi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2208–2211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Trebst, Photosynthesis and Nitrogen Fixation, in Methods in Enzymology, ed. A. San Pietro, Academic Press, New York,  1980, vol. 69, pp. 675–715 Search PubMed .
W. F. J. Vermaas, J. G. K. Williams, A. W. Rutherford, P. Mathis and C. J. Arntzen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1986, 83, 9474–9477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, H. Li, S. Fu, D. Du and Y. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 517–531 RSC .
K. L. Saar, P. Bombelli, D. J. Lea-Smith, T. Call, E.-M. Aro, T. Müller, C. J. Howe and T. P. J. Knowles, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 75–81 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Mackay and P. J. O’Malley, Zeitschrift für Naturforschung C, 1993, 48, 191–198 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Roberts, M. K. Bowman and D. M. Kramer, Biochemistry, 2004, 43, 7707–7716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Honeycutt and D. W. Krogmann, Plant Physiol., 1972, 49, 376–380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Aizawa, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 1986, 39, 215–233 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wittmiß, S. Mikkat, M. Hagemann and H. Bauwe, Plant J., 2020, 103, 801–813 CrossRef PubMed .
E. M. Nichols, J. J. Gallagher, C. Liu, Y. Su, J. Resasco, Y. Yu, Y. Sun, P. Yang, M. C. Y. Chang and C. J. Chang, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 11461–11466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, B. C. Colón, M. Ziesack, P. A. Silver and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2016, 352, 1210–1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Sahoo, D. Pant, M. Kumar, S. K. Puri and S. S. V. Ramakumar, Trends Biotechnol., 2020, 38, 1245–1261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rabaey and R. A. Rozendal, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2010, 8, 706–716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Nevin, T. L. Woodard, A. E. Franks, Z. M. Summers and D. R. Lovley, mBio, 2010, 1, e00103–00110 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Gao, F. Gao, D. Liu, H. Zhang, X. Nie and C. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1400–1411 RSC .
M. Kanno, A. L. Carroll and S. Atsumi, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Badger and G. D. Price, J. Exp. Bot., 2003, 54, 609–622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Schuchmann and V. Muller, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2014, 12, 809–821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Hanna and A. J. Nozik, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 074510 CrossRef .
C. H. Foyer, A. J. Bloom, G. Queval and G. Noctor, Annu. Rev. Plant Biol., 2009, 60, 455–484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-G. Zhu, S. P. Long and D. R. Ort,, Annu. Rev. Plant Biol., 2010, 61, 235–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yamori and T. Shikanai, Annu. Rev. Plant Biol., 2016, 67, 81–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. G. K. Williams, Methods in Enzymology, Academic Press,  1988, vol. 167, pp. 766–778 Search PubMed .
A. Murakami, S. J. Kim and Y. Fujita, Plant Cell Physiol., 1997, 38, 392–397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Murakami and Y. Fujita, Plant Cell Physiol., 1993, 34, 1175–1180 CAS .
C. Wu, H. Jiang, I. Kalra, X. Wang, M. Cano, P. Maness, J. Yu and W. Xiong, Metab. Eng., 2020, 57, 140–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Carvalho, D. B. Lima, F. V. Leprevost, M. D. Santos, J. S. Fischer, P. F. Aquino, J. J. Moresco, J. R. Yates and V. C. Barbosa, Nat. Protocol., 2016, 11, 102–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiong, L. Liu, C. Wu, C. Yang and Q. Wu, Plant Physiol., 2010, 154, 1001–1011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nanchen, T. Fuhrer and U. Sauer, Methods Mol. Biol., 2007, 358, 177–197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ungerer, L. Tao, M. Davis, M. Ghirardi, P.-C. Maness and J. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8998–9006 RSC .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee01526e‡ Denotes equal contribution.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Broader context
Natural photosynthesis with solar irradiance is the primary energy conversion process on earth, driving CO2 fixation and production of organic compounds. However, its efficiency is limited by the light-harvesting competition between photosystems (PSI and PSII) and the photorespiration process. To address these, we assemble an “artificial PSII” which can serve as a new electrochemical energy source in living cyanobacteria. This assembly enabled efficient synthesis of carbon compounds from PSII-inhibited cyanobacterial cells that cannot perform natural photosynthesis alone. The single photosystem (PSI) is powered without light absorption competition by the other (PSII); and production of organic compounds can be energized via photovoltaic electrons in addition to visible light. This new photosynthesis concept is proposed to elevate the efficiency ceiling of natural photosynthesis for selective production of fuel chemicals.


 	Fig. 1  Electrophototrophic system. (a) The electrophototroph is designed for CO2-to-fuels conversion with external supply of light and electricity to a tailored photosynthetic microbe. To this end, photosystem II in natural photosynthesis (gray) can be genetically removed, and instead the external electrochemical circuit delivers high-energy electrons to photoexcited photosystem I (oxidized P700), and ultimately produces NADPH to drive CO2 fixation. This process could leverage electron acceptors in the PETC including plastoquinone (PQ), cytochrome b6f complex (Cytbf), special chlorophyll (A0), vitamin K (A1), iron–sulfur centers (4Fe-4S), and ferredoxin (fd) etc. Protons can be pumped across the thylakoid membrane establishing a proton-motive force that can be used for the synthesis of ATP. (b) Schematic illustration and photograph (inset of left panel) of electrochemical device to shuttle electrons to PSII deficient cyanobacteria. Component 1 and 8: PTFE anodic part and cathodic part; component 2: platinum counter electrode; component 3, 4, 5: medium inlet/outlet; component 6: Ag/AgCl reference electrode; component 7: Nafion membrane; component 9: seal O-ring; component 10: carbon felt; component 11: FTO glass; component 12: working electrode clamp. Right panel shows the loading of cyanobacterial cells and the electrons delivery process.	 

 	Fig. 2  Electrochemical properties of the electrophototrophic hybrid. (a) i–t Measurement under chopped illumination when cyanobacterial cells (Synechocystis WT and ΔPSII mutant) were applied as electron donor (on anode, red solid and dash line) or acceptor (on cathode, black solid and dash line). Right panel comparing the light-response of WT and ΔPSII cells as electron donor and acceptor, respectively. (b) Current density changes in response to light/dark switch with addition of site-specific PETC inhibitors individually to cathodic ΔPSII culture. The time-course and differences of current density between light and dark are shown on the left and right panel, respectively. Left plot shows a representative result from biological replicates (n = 3). Error bars in the right panel represent standard deviations for replicates of photocurrent density (differences between light on and off (n = 5)). See Fig. S12 (ESI†) for a negative control, in which the current density changes are in response to light/dark switch with addition of all site-specific PETC inhibitors (DCMU, DBMIB and PMA).	 

 	Fig. 3  CO2 valorization by the electrophototrophic hybrid. (a) Electrophototrophic acetate production of ΔPSII by external electrical bias (−0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl) with and without illumination. (b) Time course of electrophototrophic productivity for ΔPSII under illumination with different electron supplies. Error bars represent standard deviations from biological triplicates. (c) 13C-Acetate production via fixation of 13CO2 (derived from 13C-bicarbonate) in illuminated ΔPSII, with or without application of external electrical bias (−0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl). (d) Fractional labeling of seven protein-bound amino acids that were directly produced from the central carbon metabolism via fixation of 13CO2 (derived from 13C-bicarbonate) in illuminated ΔPSII, with or without application of external electrical bias (−0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl). Green arrows indicate CO2-fixing reactions. Dashed lines are reactions for the synthesis of amino acids. Abbreviations: RuBP, ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate; GAP, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate; 3PG, 3-phosphoglycerate; PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate; PYR, pyruvate; AcCoA, acetyl coenzyme A; OAA, oxaloacetate; 2OG, 2-oxoglutarate. CBB, the Calvin–Benson–Bassham Cycle; TCA, the tricarboxylic acid cycle. Amino acids are presented by their 3-letter abbreviations. *Phe indicates partial carbons of phenylalanine (C1-3) synthesized from PEP. *C1 indicates that one carbon unit is the precursor of glycine's methylene group and can be represented by the Gly_85 fragment in GC-MS. All electricity and illumination supply were programed as “30 s supply + 30 min interval”.	 

 	Fig. 4  Electrophototrophic ethylene production in cyanobacteria. (a) The pathway for electrophototrophic ethylene production in engineered Synechocystis JU547.8 Electrophototrophic reactions are triggered by exogenous electricity supply, light illumination, and inhibition of PSII with DCMU. The conversion of CO2 into ethylene is then energized by ATP and NADPH and enabled through an heterologously expressed ethylene forming enzyme (EFE). (b) Successive ethylene production from electrophototrophic cyanobacteria in the presence (+) or absence (−) of electric bias (EC, −0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl) and light (55 μmol m−2 s−1). Error bars represent biological triplicates. (c) Total charges, in Coulombs, that were accumulatively applied to the cathodic culture for ethylene production. All electricity and illumination supply were programed as “30 s supply + 30 min interval”.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee01526e
‡ Denotes equal contribution.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
