2D-Pnictogens: alloy-based anode battery materials with ultrahigh cycling stability  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00425K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00425K
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6964-69892D-Pnictogens: alloy-based anode battery materials with ultrahigh cycling stability

        
          
            Seyyed Mohsen 
            Beladi-Mousavi
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Martin 
            Pumera
          
          
        
      *
      Center for Advanced Functional Nanorobots, Department of Inorganic Chemistry, University of Chemistry and Technology Prague, Technicka 5, Prague 6 166 28, Czech Republic. E-mail: pumera.research@gmail.com
Received 
      27th May 2018
    First published on 4th September 2018AbstractThere is an increasing demand for efficient energy storage systems in our modern mobile society for a wide range of applications such as smart grids, portable electronic devices, and electric vehicles. The performance of advanced batteries in terms of energy density, power density, cyclability, and safety is mainly determined by the primary functional components, particularly by the electrode materials. Black phosphorus (BP) and the following elements in group V (pnictogens) including arsenic, antimony, and bismuth with layered structures have attracted tremendous attention to replace the graphite anode. This is due to their extremely high specific-capacities for lithium and sodium storage based on the alloying reaction mechanism; however, the same mechanism causes an irreversible volume expansion and thus low cycling stability. Since the discovery of single layer BP and its outstanding physical properties such as tunable band gap, strong in-plane anisotropy, and high carrier mobility, the battery community have intensively studied this material as well as the 2D structures of other pnictogens. In this review, first, the preparation and properties of 2D-pnictogens including crystal structure and chemical stability are briefly described. Second, the theoretical and experimental details of the intercalation and alloying mechanisms are discussed. Finally, the excellent performance of 2D-pnictogens for lithium ion and sodium ion batteries and their principal advantages compared to their parent 3D structures are presented.
Seyyed Mohsen Beladi-Mousavi
Seyyed Mohsen Beladi-Mousavi received his PhD degree in molecular electrochemistry and organic chemistry from Osnabrueck University, Germany, in 2017. After a postdoctoral stay at the same university with Prof. Lorenz Walder, he joined Prof. Martin Pumera in the Advanced Functional Nanorobot Laboratory in the University of Chemistry and Technology, Prague. His current research focuses on the synthesis, device fabrication, and energy storage application of novel 2D materials.
Martin Pumera
Martin Pumera has been the Director of the Center for Advanced Functional Nanorobots in UCT Prague, Czech Republic, since 2017. Before joining NTU, he was a tenured faculty member at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, from 2010. He received his PhD from Charles University, Czech Republic, in 2001. After two postdoctoral stays (in the United States, Spain), he joined the National Institute for Materials Science, Japan, in 2006 for a tenure-track arrangement and stayed there until Spring 2008 when he accepted a tenured position at NIMS, after which he joined NTU. Martin has broad interests in nanomaterials and microsystems, in the specific areas of electrochemistry and synthetic chemistry of 2D nanomaterials, energy generation and storage, micro and nanomachines, and 3D printing.
1. Introduction
Effective and novel energy conversion/storage strategies that can replace fossil fuels and traditional energy sources are one of the biggest current concerns of the scientific community. Since the first commercialization of Li-ion batteries (LIBs) by Sony in 1991, this intercalation-based battery system has become the most promising and fastest growing energy storage system on the market. The significant features of these batteries such as high gravimetric- and volumetric-energy density, high power density, excellent cycling performance and low self-discharge properties1,2 make them the best energy storage approach for different types of transportable devices such as cell-phones, laptops, smart watches and others.3,4 However, the energy density of LIBs is not sufficient for many emerging applications such as electrical vehicles and home batteries.5 The higher energy density can only be achieved (i) if higher voltage cathode materials are used6,7 or (ii) by developing high capacity cathode and anode materials.8 The high voltage cathode materials are limited by the electrolyte window of 4.2 V (vs. Li/Li+) and thus are hard to improve.9 However, the performance of advanced LIBs and even sodium ion batteries (NaIBs), including the energy density, power density, cyclability, and safety, is mainly determined by the electrode materials.10–16 The most common cathode materials are transition metal oxides or phosphates (e.g., LiCoO2, LiMn2O, LiCo1/3Mn1/3Ni1/3O2 and LiFePO4),17,18 while graphite is frequently used as anode material.19 The two electrodes are separated by a membrane (usually made of polypropylene/polyethylene) inhibiting their electrical contact, and an electrolyte containing lithium salt as an ion conductor (Scheme 1).20
 Scheme 1  Schematic depicting discharging of a LIB with a LiFePO4 cathode and a phosphorene anode. 
Graphite has been extensively studied and commercialized as anode material, because it provides excellent properties such as high specific and volumetric capacity, low average voltage and irreversible capacity, high power density and cyclability, good thermal stability, low volume variation during charge–discharge, high coulombic efficiency (CE) and electrical conductivity, and low cost of raw material.21 However, considering the growing demands for high-energy power sources for portable devices, graphite with a limited specific capacity of 372 mA h g−1 is not satisfying and new anodic materials with higher capacities are required. Moreover, the diffusion rate of lithium ions into the graphite is considerably slow, thus limiting the power density of the full-cell.22 Among the many possible alternatives investigated in recent years, group IV (Si, Ge, Sn)23–26 and group V (P, As, Sb, Bi)27–31 elements have attracted much attention. This is because they react reversibly with large amounts of Li and Na (to form alloys) leading to extremely high specific capacities up to 4200 mA h g−1 (silicon) (Table 1). Moreover, in contradiction to graphite, the potentials of lithium/sodium intercalations in these anodic materials have large enough gaps to inhibit their deposition and thus safer and longer battery life is expected. The biggest obstacle toward the development of these alloy-based anodes is their huge volume changes32–36 during (de)intercalation and (de)alloying reactions, causing cracking and pulverization of the anode material and consequently the full-cell. This leads to the unstable growth of the solid–electrolyte interphase (SEI) as well as contact loss between active material/conductive filler and composite/current collector, resulting in low CE and poor cycling stability.37–41 These problems become even more prominent for the practical applications in which high temperatures (>50 °C) are not avoidable.41–46
Table 1 Energy storage properties of alloy-based anodic materials for lithium-ion batteries






Theo. spec. cap.a (mA h g−1)
Theo. vol. cap. (mA h cm−3)8
Av. charge potential (V vs. Li+/Li)
Av. discharge potential (V vs. Li+/Li)
Vol. variationb (%)
Lithiated phase





a Capacities calculated based on the mass of active material before lithiation.
b Upon lithiation/delithiation.
c Based on theoretical studies.79





Graphite
372
837
0.1–0.1
0.17
12
LiC6


Si
4200
9786
0.2
0.45
420
Li4.4Si


Ge
1600
8645
0.4
0.65
370
Li4.4Ge


Sn
994
7216
0.4
0.6
257
Li4.4Sn






Pnictogens


BP
2596
2266
0.45
0.9
300
Li3BP


As
1073
2057
0.9
1.1
182c
Li3As


Sb
660
1750
0.8
1
150
Li3Sb


Bi
386
3765
0.7
0.9
215
Li3Bi




In the last few years great success has been achieved in improving the cyclability and CE of alloy-based anode materials such as (i) the approach of nanostructure material design providing a shorter diffusion path and a better electrical contact with carbon filler23,47 or (ii) core–shell systems in which the active core is surrounded by a non-electroactive carbon shell providing a mechanical buffer to accommodate the volume change.28,48 However, these approaches follow tedious and complicated synthesis methods and thus the electrodes prepared by these methods are often very expensive and still far away from commercialization.
Graphene and other 2D materials have beene profoundly studied in recent years; this is due to their promising performance in a diverse range of applications including electronics, valleytronics, catalysis, and biosensing.49–52 The ultimate thinness of 2D materials provides extraordinary properties including high carrier mobility, superconductivity, superior strength, mechanical flexibility, good thermal conductivity, high transparency as well as high optical and UV adsorption.53 These properties are dramatically different from those of their parent 3D material, providing a new degree of freedom, allowing a quick transition from research laboratories to industries.54,55 A wide range of 2D materials have been prepared including thin sheets containing multi-elements, e.g., transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs),56 MXenes,57 and van der Waals heterostructures,58 or consisting only one element such as graphene and phosphorene (2D form of black phosphorus).32
MXenes have variable chemical and structural properties and thus competitive with other 2D materials for energy storage applications. MXenes with low molecular weight subunits such as Ti2C, V2C, Sc2C and Nb2C provide the highest theoretical gravimetric capacity (<400 mA h g−1), which is similar to that of the conventional graphite anode.57,59 2D TMDs, particularly MoS2, have also attracted enormous attention as anode material for Li-ion batteries. This is because of the large van der Waals gaps between layers, allowing penetration of Li-ions into the crystal structure without significant volume expansion. The electrochemical reaction of MoS2 involves 4 Li+ per mole of active material, which can deliver approximately 2 times higher specific capacity than the graphite anode. However, the performance of these materials is limited by their poor cyclic stability and low electrical conductivity.60–62 It has been shown that stacking 2D material with different properties into heterostructured architectures could combine the advantages of the individual sheets and eliminate the associated limitations. This could lead to superior electrochemical performances, e.g., higher energy density and power density. The superior contact between individual 2D layers mostly affects the electronic properties; however at the same time the presence of stabilizing species including molecules and ions at the heterointerface could increase electrochemical stability and accelerate ion diffusion.63
Group V elements (also known as pnictogens) can form crystalline structures in layered form. A recent breakthrough study isolating single-layer black phosphorus (BP), namely phosphorene,64 revealed that this extremely thin material provides properties which are unattainable by the bulk structure, such as tunable direct band gap, large on/off ratios (>105), in-plane anisotropic properties and high carrier mobility.65,66 The remarkable performance of single- and few-layered pnictogens in many applications like field-effect transistors, solar cells, thermoelectric devices, gas sensors, supercapacitors and others provides a promising way to develop the future technological applications.67–74 Remarkably, the recent studies approved superior performance of few-layered BP (FL-BP) as anode material for long-life Li-ion (LIBs) and Na-ion batteries (NaIBs).32,75
Pnictogens (P, As, Sb, Bi) are elemental analogues of graphene with much higher specific- and volumetric-capacities (up to 2596 mA h g−1 and 3765 mA h cm−3, respectively) (Table 1). Thus, they have attracted significant attention in the research community to substitute carbon-based anodes for LIBs and NaIBs.32 Moreover, theoretical and experimental studies confirmed rapid ion (de)intercalation along pnictogen 2D-sheets, and therefore much higher power densities, compared to graphite anodes, are reported.32,75–77 Most importantly, in contrast to the bulk structure of pnictogens in which the volume expansion during charging is largely irreversible and cracking and pulverization of the crystals are unavoidable, the 2D-sheets provide much better reversibility. This is due to the enhanced distances between the exfoliated nanosheets, which facilitate ion movement and provide extra space for volume expansion.78 Notably, the best performances, i.e., excellent coulombic efficiency and cyclability, were observed where the 2D conductive fillers (e.g., graphene) were well-distributed between 2D-pnictogen sheets. In this case, the conductive additives not only provide better conductivity throughout the composite film but also act as an elastic buffer and accommodate the huge anisotropic changes during charging/discharging processes.32,76
This review is mainly focused on the energy storage performance of 2D-pnictogens for lithium ion and sodium batteries. In the first chapter, the physical and chemical properties of pnictogens including their crystal structure and their stability in ambient air and solvents are described. Next, the preparation of 2D pnictogens using different top-down methods, especially liquid phase exfoliation of the bulk material, is summarized. Finally, preparation of anodic electrodes and theoretical and experimental studies on the performance of 2D pnictogens and their advantages compared to their parent 3D crystals are presented.
2. Properties of pnictogens
The chemical elements in group 15 of the periodic table include nitrogen (z = 7), phosphorus (z = 15), arsenic (z = 33), antimony (z = 51), bismuth (z = 83), and the synthetic element moscovium (z = 115). Except for nitrogen with a boiling point of −196 °C, other elements are in the solid state at room temperature. The elements in this group have five electrons in their outer valence shell, corresponding to 3s2 3p3. The three unpaired electrons in the p subshell can accept 3 electrons and thus are of interest from the energy storage point of view.
2.1. Crystal structure: bulk allotrope of pnictogens

Black phosphorus. 
BP was first synthesized in 1914, by placing white phosphorus (WP) in a high-pressure cylinder and elevating the temperature to 200 °C and pressure up to 1.2 GPa.80,81 Since then, many synthesis methods have been reported and though in a few cases synthesis by lower pressures was suggested,82 high pressures and high temperatures were mostly necessary.65,83 Thus, the synthesis cost of BP is still higher than that of other allotropes and hence BP has the lowest commercial value. There are other recent review papers which have mainly focused on synthesis details.67,83
Under normal conditions, BP has a layered structure formed from puckered hexagonal rings in the orthorhombic crystal structure (Fig. 1a and b), while under higher pressures, it could reversibly transform to a rhombohedral phase and simple cubic phase.84 In the layered bulk BP, the single layer is formed by covalently bonded sp3 P atoms. Each individual layer consists of two atomic layers and in-plane/out-of-plane P–P bonds. This arrangement gives rise to armchair (AC) and zig-zag (ZZ) structures along the perpendicular crystallographic axes, leading to highly anisotropic properties within the ab plane.85 The in-plane bond is shorter (d1 = 0.2224 nm) and connects the nearest P atoms. The out-of-plane bonds are longer (d1 = 0.2244 nm) and connect P atoms between the top and bottom of a single layer.65 The P–P distance between the layers in BP is significantly greater than the P–P covalent bond length, implying that the nonbinding interaction makes the layers pack together (the interlayer distance between individual layers is 5.2–5.3 Å). This nonbinding interaction is the typical van der Waals interaction between the layers. However key structural parameters such as the lattice constant, interlayer spacing, bond length, and bond angle of both bulk BP and phosphorene are almost the same, and the geometric properties are different as a function of layer number.86
 Fig. 1  Crystalline structures of pnictogens. 3D representations and side views of orthorhombic layered black phosphorus (a and b)87 and rhombohedral (gray) layered arsenic, antimony, and bismuth (c and d).88 


Arsenic, antimony and bismuth. 
The most stable allotropic form of heavy pnictogens (As, Sb and Bi) is the rhombohedral layered structure (Fig. 1c and d). These modifications, also known as the β-form, are often named gray arsenic, gray antimony, and metallic bismuth. The rhombohedral crystal structures of As, Sb and Bi are formed from puckered, six-membered rings of atoms, which are stacked like graphene 2D sheets in graphite; nevertheless, the interactions between single layers are stronger. In contrast to BP, arsenic and the following pnictogens do not form a true van der Waals bonded layered structure. This difference is due to the interaction of atomic orbitals between double layers.89 The considerable interatomic distances between the out-of-plane and in-plane of As, Sb and Bi are 0.064, 0.05 and 0.037, respectively, which cause the anisotropic behavior in these layered materials.89 Arsenic with the biggest distance between planes has the highest anisotropy of 25%, followed by 17% and 12% for gray antimony and metallic bismuth, respectively. The semimetal behavior of these elements is originated from the interlayer interaction and thus they have a metallic sheen and are good conductors of electricity. The rhombohedral pnictogens are brittle and their pulverization is very simple; thus, their single/few layer sheets are easily prepared using “top-down” methods.90

2.2. Chemical stability of 2D-pnictogens
The thin 2D structures have higher surface area than the bulk structures and thus they are often more sensitive against the ambient condition, moisture, light irradiation, solvent and others.91,92 Their sensitivity particularly against moisture and ambient oxygen leads to a rapid oxidative degradation.93 This is a major challenge against the realization of single/few layered pnictogens that are prepared by solvent exfoliation and mechanical exfoliation and thus is needed to be well understood.

Phosphorene. 
The chemical stability of materials used for electronic applications against air, moisture, and temperature is an important property. The degradation rate of 2D phosphorene is normally much faster compared to the bulk crystal of BP. In a recent paper, the authors used scanning Raman spectroscopy (SRM) as a precise method to study the chemical stability of bulk and mechanically exfoliated BP under inert and environmental conditions.91 A typical Raman spectrum of BP is demonstrated in Fig. 2b and three Raman active modes at different frequencies, namely, 362 (A1g), 440 (B2g) and 466 (A2g), are identified. A previous study showed that the A1g/A2g ratio indicates the degradation degree of BP;94 however, the intensity of each Raman mode changes with respect to the relative angle in which the BP sample is rotated in the xz-plane (incoming laser direction along the z-axis).91 The authors have shown that rotation of the sample in the xz plane significantly alters the A1g/A2g ratio, i.e., at 0° the polarization direction of incident light is along the zigzag orientation of BP crystals and at 90° the orientation is along the armchair direction (Fig. 2a). Anyhow, it was shown by scanning Raman microscopy that A1g/A2g ratio along armchair is more sensitive to evaluate the degradation degree of BP. Exposing pristine BP to air and recording the Raman spectrum at different times for 72 hours of environmental degradation caused a decrease in the A1g/A2g ratio, which evidences the oxidation of BP (Fig. 2c and d). In a parallel experiment, AFM images were acquired, and the typical appearance of droplets was observed (Fig. 2j). The droplet sizes have increased over time and caused a significant volume enhancement. This was also observed in other studies.95 It was previously reported that the chemisorption of oxygen on BP in the environmental condition results in the formation of hydrophilic PxOy species, which absorb water and form phosphoric acid and phosphorus acid.96,97 It is worth noting that the surface of pristine BP is hydrophobic and oxygen-free water cannot oxidize it.98 The SRM analysis was also performed to investigate the relation between the flake size and degradation degree. As shown in Fig. 2e, the thinner flakes degrade faster, e.g., 7 nm thick few layer BP loses 50% of total Raman intensity and a 20 nm flake loses less than 10% intensity. Moreover, it was demonstrated that the oxidation rate of the BP flake is also determined by its area. As shown in Fig. 2f, 2 μm2 flakes degrade 2 times faster than 7 μm2 flakes, suggesting that degradation starts from the edge as previously found in other 2D materials.99
 Fig. 2  Degradation and stabilization of thin layer phosphorene. (a) SRM analysis of the same flake as in the inset of panel b showing the corresponding A1g/A2g band ratio mapping measured in the armchair, and (b) its corresponding mean Raman spectra (excitation at 532 nm) of the areas indicated in panel a. The inset is an optical microscopy image of the same flake. (c) Histogram of the A1g/A2g intensity ratio in the high ratio region (HRR) (armchair) of pristine BP measured under inert conditions and after 72 h exposure to environmental conditions. (d) A1g/A2g intensity ratio evolution with time for the HRR showing the typical exponential decay. (e) Influence of thickness on the environmental degradation: the evolution of the normalized A1g intensity with time indicates faster degradation of the flakes below 10 nm. (f) Influence of flake surface area on the environmental degradation: the extent of degradation is less than half for flakes of >ca. 7 μm2 compared to those of ca. 2 μm2. (g) Effect of NMP passivation compared to an inert solvent (THF) and a pristine sample on ca. 5 nm thick flakes with a comparable area. (h) Influence of thickness on the degradation of NMP-protected flakes stored in darkness, clearly surpassing 25 days of stability. (i) Influence of continuous visible light illumination of 5 and 9 nm thick flakes. (j) AFM height profile time study of a 9 nm flake protected with NMP after 2, 8, and 20 days under ambient conditions91 (reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (k) XPS of freshly cleaved bulk black phosphorus after exposure to ambient air and room light for 0 (black), 1 (blue), and 24 h (green). (l) XPS analysis of few-layer 2D phosphorus showing that the material prepared by liquid exfoliation was unoxidized (black). The few-layer sheets were controllably oxidized by exposure to light (λ = 460 nm) and oxygen with some water (blue). (m) Exfoliation of black phosphorus in a sealed vial with N2 (black) or air (blue) in the head space of the vial shows that the presence of air causes 28% of the phosphorus to become oxidized. Binding energies also increase, although the origin of this effect – whether sample charging, doping, or both – is not yet clear. (n) When few-layer 2D phosphorus (<6 layers) is suspended in isopropyl alcohol and exposed to light and air (λ = 460 nm), the apparent pH (recorded using a pH meter) decreases because of acid production100 (reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). 
The exfoliation of BP to single/few layers is more efficient in high boiling point solvents, e.g., NMP,95 and thus stability of flakes in such solvents is important.91,93 It was found that 5 nm thick BP flakes protected by NMP degrade much slower, whereas the THF-protected flakes (low boiling point) showed a similar lifetime as pristine samples (Fig. 2g).93,95 A similar trend, i.e., better stability in higher boiling point solvents, was also observed using N-cyclohexyl-2-pyrrolidone and IPA as high- and low-boiling point solvents, respectively.93 Furthermore, the kinetics of oxidation in NMP is dependent on the flake thickness, i.e., thicker layers are more stable than thinner ones (Fig. 2h). Exposure to visible light also significantly influences the lifetime of BP flakes; for example, 10 nm thick flakes that were kept in the dark had 30 days longer lifetime compared to those that were constantly illuminated (Fig. 2i).91
In another study, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and apparent pH measurements were used to evaluate the degree of oxidation of BP when it is exfoliated under an inert condition or in air.100 The XPS analysis of bulk BP showed 2p1/2 and 2p3/2 peaks that are characteristic of BP in the unoxidized state (Fig. 2k).101 After exfoliation/centrifugation of bulk BP to few-layer BP (<6 layers) in an inert atmosphere and a safe/oxygen-free transfer to an XPS instrument, the sample did not show any oxidation peak (Fig. 2l); this confirms the successful preparation of unoxidized FL-BP under an inert condition. However, after air exposure, a broad peak at ∼134 eV appeared, which is related to different types of P–O bonds.100 To determine the importance of exfoliation under the inert condition, the authors measured the XPS of FL-BP and observed that the samples prepared under air show substantial oxidation with 28% oxidized phosphorus (Fig. 2m). Furthermore, the authors measured the pH of FL-BP in isopropyl alcohol while exposing to air and light and observed rapid acidification of solution attributed to the production of phosphoric acid (Fig. 2n).80 These results clearly show the importance of an oxygen free system for the production of high-quality single/few layer phosphorene, which is a critical point for electronic applications.


Antimonene. 
The air stability of antimonene sheets was evaluated by AFM imaging of similar flakes just after exfoliation (Fig. 3a) and after air exposure for two months (Fig. 3b).88 The sample did not demonstrate any significant change upon air exposure. The same sample was then immersed in water for another period of two months to study its stability against moisture, showing again no significant changes (Fig. 3c). The compatible atomic periodicity (Fig. 3c – inset) of the water immersed sample to that of β-phase antimony as well as their similar height profile (Fig. 3d) further confirms low reactivity of the material toward moisture.88
 Fig. 3  Degradation and stabilization of thin layer antimonene. (a) The image was taken immediately after exfoliation. White scale bar 500 nm. (b) Same as in (a) but two months later. (c) The image was taken immediately after (b) but with the sample immersed in water. The inset shows atomic periodicity compatible with the antimonene atomic lattice. The selected region is the same as in Fig. 2c. (d) Profiles were taken along the lines drawn in (a)–(c). Please notice the similarity of the corrugation on the antimonene flakes confirming again the absence of environmental degradation88 (reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH). (e) Typical STM image (−2.0 V, −100 pA) of antimonene islands on the PdTe2 substrate before air exposure. The surface of the islands is smooth without impurities. (f) STM image (−2.0 V, −100 pA) of the same sample as in (e) after exposure to air for 20 min. (g) STM image of the same sample after annealing to 380 K. The small spots have disappeared and the surface of the antimonene islands has become clean and smooth again. (h) XPS measurements of the same sample. The upper (wine), middle (pink), and lower (orange) curves represent the Sb 4d spectrum before exposure to air, after air exposure, and after annealing to 380 K, respectively. The peaks’ positions and shapes in these three curves have not changed, demonstrating that the antimonene is chemically inert to air. The photon energy of XPS experiments for Sb 4d measurements is 180 eV102 (reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH). 
In another study, a monolayer of antimonene was exposed to venting air in a chamber.102 The monolayer was first characterized by STM and XPS. The STM image showed a smooth antimonene layer without any obvious impurity (Fig. 3e). Afterwards, the sample was treated with high pressure air (1 × 105 Pa) and then kept at room temperature for 20 minutes. The STM image after high-pressure air treatment (Fig. 3f) showed some bright spots on the surface of the layer; however, the XPS peaks remained unchanged (Fig. 3h), which indicated no chemical reaction and thus the spots are probably only some adsorbate. In the next step, the sample was annealed by heating to 380 K for 10 minutes (Fig. 3g). Interestingly, both STM images and XPS peaks again remained similar to that of the fresh sample, which demonstrates the high stability of antimonene.102 The extremely high chemical stability of antimonene is very important for electronic applications.


Arsenene and bismuthene. 
The bulk structure of gray arsenic slowly oxidizes (to As3+ and As5+) upon exposure to environmental conditions and forms a dark surface layer.103,104 Metallic bismuth is stable under exposure to air at room temperature; however, at high temperature, it could react with water and form bismuth(III) oxide.105 There are no reports on the air stability of single/few layer As and Bi; however, as it was seen for BP, a faster oxidation rate is expected.

3. Preparation of single/few layer pnictogens
2D materials are generally synthesized based on two methods, namely, “bottom-up methods” (e.g., chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and wet-chemical means) and “top-down methods” (e.g., liquid exfoliation, mechanical cleavage).106,107 The bottom-up methods are based on the direct synthesis of nanomaterials from certain precursors via chemical reactions. There has been some success in the synthesis of pnictogens – especially single/few layer phosphorene; however, the synthesized materials are often polycrystalline and defective,108 or the monolayers have highly disordered amorphous form.109 This is probably because of the high reactivity of phosphorene.110
The micromechanical exfoliation (the Scotch-tape method) – refers to a top-down approach – was initially used to produce monolayer BP.64,70 Although high-quality crystals were produced, this method is time-consuming and limited to lab-scale investigations. The inter-plane van der Waals interaction between sheets in the bulk structure of pnictogens is weak and applying driving forces could break this interaction and exfoliate the bulk materials. Therefore, liquid phase exfoliation (LPE) is a potentially scalable process. In this method, ultrasonic irradiation or high shear is applied to layered bulk crystals in stabilizing solvents to exfoliate layers and produce colloidal dispersions of nanosheets in solution.90,95 Considering the relatively similar calculated binding energy between sheets of graphite (G) and pnictogens (i.e., G: 20.3, P: 51.6, As: 35.6, Sb: 29.6 and Bi: 17.9 meV Å−2 (calculated by DF2-C09))111 and their similar out-of-plane distances (G: 3.4 Å, P: 3.214 Å (in the AB-stacking),72 rhombohedral layered As: 3.15, Sb: 3.37 and Bi: 3.47 Å),89 their exfoliation from the bulk crystal is a highly suitable method for large-scale production. Many experimental parameters, e.g., solvent, irradiation time and power, could alter the dimension and yield of the exfoliated sheets.106 It is known from previous studies on the LPE of graphite that the choice of solvent is a critical factor for high yield exfoliation of nanosheets.112 Interactions at the liquid−sheet interface decrease the net exfoliation energy and stabilize the sheets against aggregation and precipitation.113 It was found that exfoliation in solvents with high boiling points and surface tensions (∼40 mJ m−2), e.g., DMF and NMP, is more efficient.114
Phosphorene
The liquid-phase exfoliation of BP via ultrasonication was studied in a wide range of solvents.75,95,106,115 The same trend as that reported for exfoliation of graphite was observed in BP, i.e., thin sheets with the highest concentrations were obtained in solvents with the highest surface tension: formamide > dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) > DMF, NMP, IPA > ethanol or methanol > acetone, tetrahydrofuran (THF), water (Fig. 4a and b).75 In another study, exfoliation of BP in 18 solvents was examined and a high yield of 0.11 mg mL−1 was obtained in benzonitrile.100 Ionic liquids (ILs) are recognized as popular green solvents. It was shown that the yield of single/few layered BP exfoliated in ILs could reach up to 0.95 mg mL−1, which is the highest reported value.116
 Fig. 4  Liquid-phase exfoliation (LPE) of BP and Sb via ultrasonication. (a) Photographs of ground BP dispersions in solvents stored for 12 h after the sonication process. (b) Plot of surface tension versus phosphorene concentration in different solvents75 (reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH). (c) Photograph of BP dispersions in NMP following different centrifugation conditions (1: as-prepared, 2: 500 rpm, 3: 5000 rpm, 4: 10000 rpm, and 5: 15000 rpm). (d) Concentration of the five BP dispersions from part (c). (e) Thickness and lateral area histograms of the five BP dispersions from part (c) as obtained from AFM images95 (reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). (f) Extinction coefficient of BP dispersed in different solvents after the LPE process, plotted as a function of surface tension (lower axis) and surface energy (upper axis). Dots represent the low/nontoxic solvents (health code ≤1 NFPA704); crosses denote the highly toxic solvents (health code ≥2 NFPA704). Dots and crosses with colors from blue to light-green represent the solvents with bp <100 °C, while the ones from turquoise to orange represent solvents with bp >100 °C117 (reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). (g) Photograph of a dispersion of exfoliated FL-antimonene showing the Faraday–Tyndall effect. (h) Topographic AFM image of few-layer antimonene drop-cast onto SiO2 showing flakes with micrometer lateral dimensions (scale bar: 3 mm). (i) Height histogram of the image in (h) where the different thicknesses of the terraces can be readily seen. The constant minimum thickness of about 4 nm can be easily observed76 (reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH). 
It is worth mentioning that though the yield of exfoliation is an important factor, many additional aspects such as size distribution, lateral dimension, thickness, crystal defects and stability of colloidal solution against aggregation must be considered to choose the best solvent. In addition, the compatibility of solvent with the manufacturing process must be considered.106
Solvent exfoliated BP sheets of different lateral sizes and thicknesses can be isolated by altering the centrifugation speed. As shown in Fig. 4c, the color of the solution turned from brown to light yellow as centrifugation speed increased.95 This color change is due to different concentrations of BP sheets, with the lighter colors corresponding to lower concentrations. Moreover, an AFM study showed that the BP dispersion centrifuged at 5000 rpm includes many thick flakes (>50 nm); however, by increasing the centrifugation speed (up to 15000 rpm), the smaller and thinner flakes remained in the solution (Fig. 4d and e).95
Despite the higher efficiency of exfoliation in high boiling point organic solvents, their toxicity and the difficult solvent-removal-process could damage the devices and leave contaminants and impurities. Hence, non-toxic and low boiling point solvents are generally preferred.117 In a recent study, exfoliation of BP in 14 solvents (Fig. 4f) with a large variety of boiling points and surface tensions was analyzed. The highest exfoliation degree was observed in N-cyclohexyl-2-pyrrolidone (CHP), DMF, NMP, diethyl-carbonate, trichloroethylene, acetonitrile, and acetone. The last three solvents have boiling points below 100 °C and among them, acetone is the only non-toxic solvent. The concentration of BP sheets in acetone (BP: 56 °C) is 0.35 g L−1, while 0.6 g L−1 was reported for CHP as the high boiling point solvent (BP: 284 °C).117
A recent study has demonstrated the preparation of few-layer BP via the LPE method, in which the exfoliation process was assisted by microwaves. In this work, the bulk BP was immersed in NMP solution and heated with a microwave system for different periods of time. The obtained FL-BP was isolated via a centrifugation step. The thickness of the sheets was <10 nm with a lateral dimension ranging from hundreds of nanometers to ≈4 μm.118
Antimonene, arsenene and bismuthene
The calculated binding energy of As, Sb, and Bi is smaller than that of BP and thus an easier exfoliation procedure is expected.89 LPE methods are employed to exfoliate arsenene, antimonene, and bismuthene nanosheets in aqueous and organic solvents. In a recent study, a shear exfoliation method using rotating blade mixers was used to exfoliate As, Sb and Bi in the aqueous surfactant sodium cholate under ambient conditions. The highest production yield was from Bi (8.8%), which is in agreement with its lowest binding energy.111 In another study, ground antimony crystals were sonicated to exfoliate FL-antimonene sheets in a 4:1 isopropanol–water solvent mixture.119 The obtained dispersion was colorless, indicating the Faraday–Tyndall effect (Fig. 4g), with a concentration of ∼1.74 × 10−3 g L−1. The surface area and height of the FL-Sb were studied by AFM showing flakes with an average surface area of 1–3 μm2 and step heights in multiples of ∼4 nm attributed to mono/bilayers of antimonene (Fig. 4h and i).119 Isopropanol as a low boiling point solvent with a constant concentration of sodium hydroxide was also used to exfoliate antimonene nanosheets.76 The isolated samples had a lateral size in the range of 400 nm to several micrometers with a minimum thickness in the range of 3–4.3 nm. In a recent work, a mixture of NMP and ethanol was used to exfoliate 2D FL-antimonene nanosheets.120 The thickness of the as-synthesized FL-A (after centrifugation at 3000 rpm) was measured via AFM showing an average thickness of ∼7 nm (∼18 atomic layers). A statistical analysis of the obtained FL-A flakes showed that the thickness of 78.3% of flakes is below 10 nm and 23.3% of sheets are thinner than 5 nm.120
4. Energy storage performance
4.1. Electrode preparation
The large volumetric changes during charging–discharging of alloying electrode materials cause their rapid structural degradation and capacity fading after a few cycles; thus, mitigation of this negative impact is the key challenge toward the development and commercialization of these high capacity anode materials. The pioneering research on pnictogen-based anodes with superior performance is mostly based on preparation of their composites with conducting carbon-based fillers such as porous carbon, carbon black, graphite, carbon nanotubes and graphene.28,32,76,121,122
Active materials with bigger crystal structures suffer from longer diffusional paths for ions and electrons, and therefore smaller crystals (submicrometer range) are required for high power batteries. Exfoliation of bulk pnictogens to single/few layers is an efficient method to shorten the diffusion path for ions. However, it is obvious that the smaller is the size of the charge storing particles, the higher is the amount of ion/electron conductive fillers that have to be added to establish reasonable conductivity between them (and provide porous structures to facilitate ion movements), but the specific capacity of fillers is often negligible compared to that of the active material, and thus they considerably reduce the charge density. Therefore, self-assembly of exfoliated 2D single/few layer graphene32 or graphene oxide (GO)75,76 and exfoliated 2D-pnictogens in solution is considered as an effective method to prepare composite materials with high ratios of active materials/conductive additives.14,15

Phosphorene. 
Sun et al. prepared the phosphorene–graphene hybrid by initial exfoliation of phosphorus and graphene to few layer 2D sheets in NMP followed by simple solution mixing and self-assembly after NMP evaporation in an argon-filled glove box (Fig. 5a).32 A uniform distribution of phosphorene sheets between wider graphene sheets was obtained, which was evidenced by high resolution TEM (HRTEM) (Fig. 5b and c). The composites were prepared using different C/P ratios and significantly better cyclability was observed in composites with higher ratios. This confirms the importance of carbon additives in the performance of alloy-based anodes. In another study, the exfoliated BP sheets in formamide were mixed with GO using a GO/P ratio of 3.75 The homogeneous suspension was filtered and dried and the as-obtained paper was peeled off and dried in vacuum. Then spark plasma sintering was employed at 300 °C under a pressure of 10 MPa and vacuum condition (0.01 bar) for 3 min to transform GO to electrically conducting reduced graphene oxide (rGO). In another study, few-layer-phosphorene and -graphene were first separately prepared by tip sonication/centrifugation of their bulk crystal in water and NMP, respectively.123 Both dispersions were vacuum filtered and the powders were re-dispersed in NMP, followed by tip-sonication and vacuum filtration. The obtained BP–G paper was flexible and could bend up to ∼180° without any break (Fig. 5d). The top-view (Fig. 5e) and cross-sectional (Fig. 5f) SEM images confirmed the close contact between the 2D structures of graphene and BP sheets. The homogeneous distribution was further confirmed by TEM images and EDS elemental mapping (Fig. 5g–i).123
 Fig. 5  Preparation and structural characterization of anode electrodes. (a) Digital photographs of NMP dispersions of graphene (3 μg mL−1), phosphorene (17 μg mL−1) and a mixture prepared by mixing the dispersions of graphene and phosphorene at a volume ratio of 6:1, corresponding to a carbon–phosphorus molar ratio of 2.78:1. Red light beams were incident from the side to demonstrate the Tyndall effect. (b) TEM image of the phosphorene–graphene hybrid. Scale bar, 2 μm. (c) HRTEM image of the cross-section of the phosphorene–graphene hybrid (the turned-up right edge in “b”). Scale bar, 2 nm32 (reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing group). (d) Photograph of a BP–G hybrid paper, showing its good flexibility. (e) Top-view and (f) cross-sectional-view SEM images of the BP–G hybrid paper in (d), showing that the small BP nanosheets (indicated by blue arrows) are in close contact with the large graphene sheets (indicated by red arrows). (g) STEM-HAADF image and the corresponding EDS elemental mappings of the (h) C–K line and (i) P–K line of a region of the BP–G hybrid paper in (d)123 (reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH). (j) Scanning electron microscopy images of an electrode made of FL-BPacetone mixed with CB and PVdF deposited onto copper substrates. (k) Energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometry elemental mapping of carbon (cyan) and phosphorus (red) of FL-BPacetone. Electrochemical analysis of the FL-BP film (acetone-exfoliated sample data points shown in blue; CHP-exfoliated sample data points shown in orange)117 (reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). (l) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of SbNS-G film. Bulk Sb powders were first exfoliated in IPA solvent to obtain ultrathin Sb nanosheets; subsequently, the as-prepared Sb nanosheets were mixed with graphene (Sb:GO = 4:1) and then collected by vacuum filtration and chemically reduced to a uniform SbNS-G film. (m) Typical digital photograph of SbNS-G film, which shows the flexible feature. (n) Typical scanning transmission electron microscopy image of SbNS-G film, which shows the uniform property, and the corresponding elemental mapping images of (o) antimony, (p) carbon, and (q) oxygen in the pink rectangular frame area, which reflect the uniform distribution of Sb, C, and O in the film76 (reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH). 
In a recent study, a dispersion of FL-BP, carbon black and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVdF) (ratio: 3/1/1) was prepared in acetone, as a low boiling solvent.117 It was shown by SEM images and EDS analysis that fast evaporation of solvent allows rapid preparation of homogeneous thin films (Fig. 5j and k). Interestingly, the authors demonstrated that the same sample preparation condition using a high boiling point solvent (CHP) results in inhomogeneous material distribution, which is due to the slow drying/evaporation process.117


Antimonene. 
In an initial study on antimonene as anode material, a composite of antimonene–rGO was prepared by uniform mixing of FL-A and GO in IPA with a high mass ratio of active material Sb/GO = 4.76 The obtained dispersion was filtered and the GO content was chemically reduced to rGO using hydrazine hydrate (Fig. 5l). The obtained film was flexible (Fig. 5m) and it was directly used as the anode electrode without binder and additional carbon filler.76 The uniform combination of FL-A and graphene sheets was evidenced by elemental mapping in which antimony and carbon and oxygen atoms are homogeneously distributed (Fig. 5n–q). In another study on the antimonene composite, the electrode was prepared based on the traditional slurry preparation method, i.e., mixing the as-prepared 2D antimonene sheets, carbon black, and carboxymethyl cellulose at a ratio of 65:20:15 in water to form a slurry, followed by its deposition on a copper foil and vacuum-drying at 60 °C.120
There are no reports on battery application of 2D structures of arsenic and bismuth.

4.2. Diffusion–extraction mechanisms
Graphite is the most used anode material for LIBs.11 This is mainly due to its flat and low working potential (vs. Li/Li+), good electrical conductivity, low cost and excellent cycling performance.5 The intercalation mechanism in graphite is based on diffusion of only one lithium ion per six carbon (i.e., LiC6) and the kinetics of lithium diffusion in graphite is limited to 10−9–10−7 cm2 s−1, which results in low capacity and low power batteries.5 Moreover, intercalation of sodium ions into the graphite anode is difficult, which is due to its large ionic radius (0.95 Å for Na+ > 0.60 Å for Li+).124 Metallic lithium and sodium as anode materials offer high specific-capacities; however, dendrite formation and high reactivity with the electrolyte are still big challenges that have limited their usage in secondary batteries.9,125,126
Pnictogens can form binary alloys with lithium and sodium. It was shown that the storage of Li/Na in pnictogens proceeds according to two different reaction mechanisms of intercalation and alloying, leading to high storage of three Li/Na per pnictogen atom.32,120 However, a huge volume expansion during ion insertion causes low coulombic efficiency and cyclability.29,127–129 Recently, some studies have demonstrated that using single/few layers of pnictogens could significantly enhance the (de)intercalation reversibility.78 Therefore, a detailed study on the mechanism of ion adsorption and diffusion in mono/few layer pnictogens is vital to improve the performance of these high-capacity anodic materials.

Phosphorene (theoretical studies). 
It is essential for electrode materials to attract Li/Na with relatively strong binding energy. In the case of phosphorene, lithium ions are initially loaded to the surface of monolayer sheets and then they diffuse along armchair and/or zigzag directions (Fig. 6a).85,130,131 A density functional theory study showed a low shallow energy barrier of 0.08 eV of lithium diffusion (0.04 eV for sodium ions) along the zigzag direction on the monolayer phosphorene (Fig. 6b).85,131 This leads to ultrahigh diffusion, which is ∼100 times faster than that of MoS2 and graphene at room temperature.85 The energy barrier along the armchair direction is significantly higher (0.68 eV), which results in a nearly forbidden diffusion (Fig. 6b).85,132 This strong diffusion anisotropy of phosphorene is arising from its orthorhombic crystal structure which is in contrast with the isotropic (de)intercalation behavior in graphene and MoS2. Similar strong diffusion anisotropy was also reported for diffusion of sodium ions in BP.124 In the 3D structure of BP, the diffused lithium interacts with P atoms from two sides (top and down layers), which results in a stronger binding energy, compared to monolayer phosphorene in which the interaction is only from one side.85 This results in a smaller energy barrier for Li diffusion along both zigzag and armchair directions of the bulk structure of BP, i.e., 0.05 eV (0.08 eV for phosphorene) and 0.20 eV (0.68 eV for phosphorene), respectively (Fig. 6c).85
 Fig. 6  Theoretical studies on diffusion of Li+ and Na+ in BP, phosphorene and phosphorene–graphene composite. (a) Schematic of Li surface loading (adsorption process), and diffusion along armchair and zigzag directions on phosphorene surface; (b) energy profiles of Li diffusion along armchair and zigzag directions on phosphorene surface and (c) in black phosphorus85 (reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). (d) Insertion mechanism in black phosphorus with an increase in the concentration of Li and Na. The solid gray line represents a supercell containing 64 P atoms, and the number represents the formation energy124 (reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). (e) Calculated formation energy of NaxP systems133 (reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). (f) Top and side views of P/G (left) and Li adsorption sites (right) in P/G (Li/P/G, P/Li/G, and P/G/Li); energy barrier and diffusion path of one Li atom diffusion along the outside surface of graphene (P/G/Li) and phosphorene (Li/P/G) (g) and in the interlayer of P/G (P/Li/G) (h)134 (reproduced with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). 
Upon insertion of Li+/Na+ into the layered structure of BP, the crystal structure is preserved up to the composition of Li0.19P and Na0.25P (Fig. 6d).124 At this critical point, the insertion mechanism changes from an intercalation process to an alloying process resulting in the breaking of P–P bonds and formation of an amorphous phase, i.e., Lix/NaxP. Based on the calculated formation energies of various MxP systems (M = Li or Na), the first two Li atoms prefer to occupy adjacent layers in black phosphorus (columnar intercalation); in contrast, two Na atoms prefer to stay in the same layer (planar intercalation). Based on atomic charges of Li (+0.84e) and Na (+0.78e) and the repulsive forces between one another, distribution of cations in different layers is expected; however, intercalation of atoms into the same layer spaces causes a smaller increase of the interlayer space than in different layers and thus a lower energy cost is predicted.124 At M0.03P, the atomic charge of Na is lower than Li, which indicates the less repulsive forces between Na atoms in the same layer. Therefore, in contrast to Li, the energy compensation induced by occupying the same layer in the case of Na is higher than the energy loss induced by the Coulomb repulsion between Na atoms, and thus two Na atoms insert into the same layer and Li atoms occupy the different layers. This tendency for the intercalation process proceeds up to y = 25% coverage per phosphorene layer; however, there is no P–P bond breaking in Na0.25P, while in Li0.25P, the breaking of some P–P bonds after Na0.19P is predicted (Fig. 6d and e).124,133
Recent works have shown that interaction of 2D graphene and 2D phosphorene (single or few layers) could provide the composite material with exceptional cycling stability and high coulombic efficiency.32,76 Therefore, it is also important to understand the intercalation process in the graphene–phosphorene composite (Fig. 6f). The formation energy of G/P is 0.141 eV per atom (the equilibrium interlayer distance is 3.612 Å) showing an exothermic process indicating its suitability as an electrode material.134 Remarkably, the binding energy of Li adatom embedded in the interlayer of P/G (i.e., P/Li/G) is the most stable (2.59 eV), when compared with the binding energies on both individual phosphorene (1.99 eV) and graphene (1.301 eV) sheets; this shows the influence of both phosphorene and graphene on the energetic stability of the Li atom.134 Moreover, the higher stability of the P/Li/G system compared to both Li/P/G (P/G/Li) system and pristine single-layered Li/P (Li/G) system by 0.46 eV (1.11 eV) and 0.60 eV (1.28 eV), respectively, indicates that in a P/G system Li atoms first occupy the interlayer, then take the outside surfaces of phosphorene and graphene. Therefore, the experimentally shown safety and reversibility of the P/G Li-ion battery are related to the strong binding energy of Li and P/G, which inhibits the formation of metallic lithium.134
The diffusion rate of lithium atoms within P/G is an important factor for high power applications. The Li ions diffuse from the outside surface of phosphorene or graphene or from the interlayer of P/G (Fig. 6f). The energy barrier for diffusion of ions from outside surfaces is almost like that for their single layer, i.e., 0.09 eV (Hp, inside the grooves of P – zigzag direction) and 0.25 eV (Hg, across a C–C bridge) for phosphorene and graphene, respectively (Fig. 6g). The diffusion of Li in the interlayer of P/G has an energy barrier of 0.12 eV, which is quite similar to Li diffusion inside the grooves of pristine single layer phosphorene (0.09 eV) (Fig. 6h). Thus, the fast diffusion rate of Li atoms on pristine single layer P is still preserved in the P/G composite.134


Phosphorene (experimental studies). 
As already discussed, the storage of Li and Na ions in BP proceeds based on the initial intercalation mechanism, followed by the alloying process. These mechanisms are studied by an ex situ diffraction method.32 BP has two characteristic peaks at 16.9° (d = 5.24 Å) ((002) plane) and at 34.2° (d = 2.62 Å) ((004) plane). During initial sodiation, insertion of Na atoms between phosphorene layers causes a height increase along the z-axis, which was evidenced by the shifts of both diffraction peaks toward lower angles (Fig. 7a and b). These peaks were only visible until 0.54 V, indicating preserved crystal structure up to Na0.17P. Upon further sodiation, NaxP becomes the dominant species and XRD peaks disappear. At 0.1 V, the alloying reaction is almost completed and the peaks related to the Na3P phase ((110) and (103) peaks) appear.32
 Fig. 7  Experimental evidence for volume expansion of BP upon (de)sodiation and (de)lithiation. Ex situ XRD of the (002) (a) and (004) (b) diffraction peak of black phosphorus taken before charging and after charging down to different voltages; (c) schematics of black phosphorus with the first step of sodium-ion intercalation, and the second step of intercalation/alloying reactions to form Na3P. Time-lapse TEM images of sodiation in black phosphorus after 0 s (d) and 170 s (e) of potentiostatic sodiation. Sodium ions transport along the x-axis channel, causing volume expansion along the y-axis direction32 (reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group). In situ TEM electrochemical lithiation/delithiation experiments of a slightly thick phosphorene nanoflake prepared by shear-exfoliation in NMP and centrifugation at a rotation speed of 1000 rpm. (f–h) SAED pattern of the lithiated phosphorene nanoflake, revealing the formation of Li3P after lithiation. Time-resolved TEM images from video frames show morphological evolutions of the phosphorene nanoflakes during the electrochemical lithiation process, and a lateral expansion of around 30% was observed for the lithiated phosphorene nanoflakes. (i) SAED pattern of the lithiated phosphorene nanoflake. (j–l) Time-resolved TEM images from video frames show morphological evolutions of the phosphorene nanoflake during the electrochemical delithiation process. (m) SAED pattern of the delithiated phosphorene nanoflake, revealing Li3P residual after delithiation. Multi-cycle in situ TEM electrochemical lithiation/delithiation experiments of an individual few-layer phosphorene nanoflake prepared by shear-exfoliation in NMP and centrifugation at a rotation speed of 6000 rpm. No decomposition phenomena took place during the delithiation, proving the superior structural stability compared with the thick phosphorene nanoflakes. (n–q) Time-resolved TEM images of the first lithiation/delithiation cycle, showing superior morphological restorability and structural stability78 (reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2016 IOP Publishing). 
Although the exceptionally high specific capacity of BP is due to the alloying mechanism, it causes a volume increase of ∼500% (Na diffusion), resulting in mechanical and structural fracturing and thus a low coulombic efficiency (Fig. 7c).32 As discussed in the previous section, intercalation of sodium ions is only possible along the x-axis of BP,85 which is wide enough (x-axis: 3.08 Å, y-axis: 1.16 Å) to allow insertion of sodium ions (2.04 Å). An in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) study showed that potentiostatic sodiation of BP results in 0% (Fig. 7d) and 92% (Fig. 7e) expansion along the x-axis and y-axis, respectively. This study has also shown that the longer clean-cut edge of the particle is aligned along the x-axis direction. This agrees with the longer and thus weaker bonds along the x-axis (2.244 Å along the x-axis vs. 2.224 Å along the y-axis). Therefore, the anisotropic expansion along the y-axis is due to the easier diffusion of ions and weaker p–p bonds along the x-axis. Considering the theoretical volume expansion of 500% after full sodiation, a significant expansion (160%) along the z-axis is expected. Thus, the critical axial direction with the highest volume expansion is along z and y. Therefore, minimizing the width and thickness of BP could considerably suppress the built-up stress upon sodiation and increase the performance of the battery material. In this regard, phosphorene, a monolayer of black phosphorus, would be an ideal candidate.32
A recent study provides more insight into the mechanism of lithiation/de-lithiation of thick multilayer (>10 layers) phosphorene flakes.78 A time resolved TEM analysis during lithiation of flakes (applying −1 V vs. Li/Li+) showed that the phosphorene nanoflake longitudinally extended from 1.7 to 2.3 μm with 36% expansion rate (Fig. 7f–h). Remarkably, an almost similar expansion rate (35%) was observed in the lateral direction. This similar diffusion rate from both directions, i.e., isotropic lithiation behavior, contrasts with the anisotropic lithium diffusion reported in the theoretical studies, i.e., facile diffusion along the zigzag direction and nearly forbidden diffusion along the armchair direction (Fig. 6b and c). This isotropic behavior is probably because of the smaller difference in the diffusion energy barrier of armchair and zigzag in multilayer phosphorene flakes, as shown by theoretical studies.78 Selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) analysis after complete lithiation demonstrated diffraction spots, which can be indexed as hexagonal phase Li3P (Fig. 7i). Notably, the delithiation process did not result in dimensional shrinkage; instead, decomposition of phosphorene nanoflakes by forming isolated regions was observed (Fig. 7j–l). The SAED pattern of nanoflakes at this state confirmed that the Li3P phase is still present (Fig. 7m). These results illustrate that the huge capacity loss in the first charging–discharging scan of the BP anode is occurring during the delithiation process, rather than during volume expansion upon lithiation. This result was also reported by another group.135 Interestingly, few-layer-thick phosphorene (<10 layers) exhibits a different behavior. The delithiation process in these flakes caused an increase in the lateral dimension from 1.9 to 2.4 μm with an expansion rate of 26%, but no longitudinal expansion was observed (Fig. 7n and o). This anisotropic behavior during lithiation is explained by DFT calculations revealing a big difference in diffusion barriers along the zigzag and armchair directions in monolayer phosphorene (Fig. 6b).136 Notably, the delithiation process did not cause any degradation and an almost similar morphology was restored (Fig. 7p and q).78 The lithiation/delithiation cycle was repeated several times and no obvious changes in morphology and size were observed. The authors also applied a higher potential (−3 V) and although a larger lateral expansion rate was recorded, the anisotropic expansion did not harm the structure of the few layer phosphorene. This study shows the superior performance of thin few layer phosphorene compared to bulk BP. However, sufficient electrical and ionic conductivity in phosphorene-based anodes could only be achieved if some conductive fillers, e.g., graphene, are added to the matrix of active material.
As theoretical studies showed (Fig. 6h),131,134 diffusion barriers of Li/Na in the P/G composite are only slightly higher compared to that in the case of BP; however thin phosphorene sheets (up to 10 layers) sandwiched between graphene sheets could provide the following advantages: (i) the diffusion path for ions and electrons in the small and thin phosphorene is minimized and thus high power performance is expected; (ii) the graphene layers act as a high surface area current collector which accelerate electronic conduction throughout the composite; and (iii) the additional space between phosphorene nanosheets functions as an elastic buffer to accommodate anisotropic expansion along the y-axis.


Arsenene. 
The crystallinity of arsenic was measured by ex situ XRD analyses during lithiation at different potentials as shown in the differential capacity plot (Fig. 8a and b).137 At 0.85 V (corresponds to 1 mol of Li per one mole of As), the peaks related to the crystalline structure of arsenic (Fig. 8b, t0) disappeared and weak peaks attributed to the LiAs phase appeared (Fig. 8b, t1). This phase was confirmed by the high resolution TEM (HRTEM) images with lattice spacing, which approved extremely small LiAs crystallites (Fig. 8c). In the XRD pattern of As at 0.8 V (corresponding to two moles of Li per one mole of As), a new peak at 25.7° appeared, which is probably a sign of the metastable Li2As phase (Fig. 8b, t2). At 0 V, the electrode is completely discharged and XRD peaks corresponding to Li3As were observed (Fig. 8b, t3). During the charging process, the XRD peaks of As were not identified anymore (Fig. 8b, t4–t5); however at the fully charged state HRTEM showed very small crystallites of the As phase (Fig. 8d). Thus, the proposed reactions and crystal structures during the discharge process are as follows:As (rhombohedral) → LiAs (monoclinic) → Li2As → Li3As (hexagonal).
 Fig. 8  Electrochemical reaction mechanism of As/C and Bi/C nanocomposites. (a) Differential capacity plot, (b) XRD patterns of the As/C nanocomposite for the first cycle, (c) HRTEM image with the corresponding lattice spacing of the LiAs phase formed at 0.85 V during the first discharge reaction, and (d) HRTEM image with the corresponding lattice spacing of the As phase formed at 2.0 V during the first charge reaction. (e)–(g) Mechanism of quasi intercalation reaction between the As and LiAs phases (As atoms: yellow; Li atoms: red)137 (reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2016 Springer). (h) Differential capacity plot and (i) X-ray diffraction patterns (small Greek numbers correspond to the potential indicated in (h)) of the Bi/C nanocomposite for the first cycle138 (reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2009 Elsevier). 
As shown in Fig. 8e–g, a similar crystallographic relationship between the crystalline structures of rhombohedral As and monoclinic LiAs is observed: rhombohedral As (S.G. R3mH, a = 3.759 Å, b = 3.759 Å, c = 10.457 Å, α = 120°) and monoclinic LiAs (S.G. P121/c1, a = 5.79 Å, b = 5.24 Å, c = 10.70 Å, β = 117.4°). The suggested quasi-intercalation mechanism between As and LiAs is shown in Fig. 8e–g. Lithium diffusion into the puckered layer gaps during the lithiation causes cleavage of the As–As bonds (along the dotted lines); this is due to the little expansion between gaps, which contributes to the enhanced reversibility between the As and LiAs phases.


Antimonene (theoretical studies). 
The crystal structure of antimony is different from that of BP and thus a different mechanism of ion adsorption and diffusion is expected (Fig. 1). Three possible adsorption sites of Li/Na are the valley site and above the lower Sb atom (A), the hollow site and above the middle of a hexagonal ring (B), and the top site and above the higher Sb atom (C) (Fig. 9a).139 The diffusion paths for Li adatoms through two main routes of path-I and path-II are shown in Fig. 9b. In path-I, Li atoms move from site B along the Y axis to the next B site. The diffusion barrier for this direct translation from site B to the next is clearly high (2.39 eV) (Fig. 9c). For path-II, the Li atoms follow the B–A–B route, i.e., move from site-B towards the next stable adsorption site A and then again towards the next B site; the stable intermediate decreases the diffusion barrier to 0.337 eV (Fig. 9c). Interestingly, Na atoms show a much lower diffusion barrier of 0.45 eV and 0.114 eV for path I and II, respectively. This smaller diffusion barrier of Na ions, as the heavier species, is explained by the larger size of the Na atoms, which does not allow them to sit deep in the trough of the buckle (at site-B) compared to Li atoms. The intercalation of Na-ions in the single layer antimonene proceeds by Na-ion fast diffusion and alloying reactions to form crystalline (NaSb) and alloys (Na3Sb) along the a/b-axis.120,139
 Fig. 9  Theoretical and experimental studies on diffusion/extraction of Li and Na in antimonene. (a) Monolayer Sb supercell showing the possible adsorption sites. The buckled structure is color coded here in orange and green for easier identification of Sb atoms at different z co-ordinates from the top view. The Li/Na atoms’ adsorption sites are represented in blue from the side view; diffusion pathways (b) and diffusion barrier (c) for Li or Na adatoms on monolayer Sb surface are shown here. The equivalent paths along other chiral directions are also shown139 (reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2017 Elsevier). (d) Ex situ SAED patterns during sodiation at 1.5, 0.68, and 0.01 V and desodiation states at 0.96 and 1.5 V at 0.5C rate during the third discharging/charging cycle. (e) Schematic diagram showing the five states of the FL-A anode during sodiation/desodiation processes corresponding to the different crystalline phases/crystal structures of Sb, NaSb, and Na3Sb at the specific charging−discharging voltage. (f) Schematic diagram of the crystalline phase evolution (Sb  NaSb  Na3Sb) during the sodiation/desodiation process. (g) In situ XRD pattern evolution of FL-A anodes during the third sodiation/desodiation process at a current of 0.2C. (h) Change of Sb lattice constants of (003) and (110) planes corresponding to the c-axis and a/b-axis during sodiation/desodiation processes120 (reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 


Antimonene (experimental studies). 
The mechanism of (de)sodiation of few layer antimonene was monitored by ex situ SAED and in situ synchrotron XRD (Fig. 9d–h).120 The ex situ SAED images at different sodiation states 1.5, 0.68 and 0 V and desodiation states 0.96 and 1.5 V (Fig. 9e) confirm the crystallinity of samples at all voltages and can be indexed to hexagonal Sb (JCPDS No. 35-0732), monoclinic NaSb (JCPDS No. 74-0801), and hexagonal Na3Sb (JCPDS No. 04-0724) (Fig. 9d). During the charging process at 0.68 V, the first reactions between Na and Sb cause Sb phase transfer to crystalline NaSb. Upon further sodiation up to 0.01 V, Na3Sb gradually becomes the major species relative to NaSb. During desodiation at 0.96 V the crystalline Na3Sb transforms to the NaSb intermediate phase followed by reformation of the Sb phase at 1.5 V. Therefore, a reversible crystalline-phase transformation of Sb  NaSb  Na3Sb during charging and discharging of few layer antimonene is demonstrated (Fig. 9f).
The crystalline phase transformation was also confirmed by in situ synchrotron XRD (Fig. 9g).120 It was shown that during sodiation steps, the F-LA peaks of (003) and (110) planes initially shifted to smaller angles and then diminished. At the same time, the diffraction peaks of NaSb and Na3Sb became visible. During the desodiation process, the peaks related to NaSb and Na3Sb disappeared and Sb peaks reappeared; however, they shifted to larger angles. This angle change was larger for the (110) peak, which is attributed to a larger expansion along the (110) plane (a/b axial direction) upon sodiation. Fig. 9h demonstrates the rate of change of the lattice constant at the c-axis (Δd(003)/d(003)) and at the a/b axis (Δd(110)/d(110)). The small lattice increase during initial sodiation steps along the (003) direction (c lattice parameter) is related to Na-ion diffusion between layers. The lattice expansion was larger along the a/b axis ((110) plane) which is probably attributed to the alloying process (formation of NaSb and Na3Sb). The much larger lattice expansion along the (110) plane ((110)/(003) = 3) shows a strong anisotropic volume expansion along the a/b axis during the sodiation reaction. This large volume expansion along the a/b-axis was not constrained in the 2D FL-A, which explains the high structural stability of FL-A for Na-ion storage.120


Bismuthene. 
The mechanism of lithiation/delithiation of Bi in a Bi/C nanocomposite was studied by an ex situ XRD analysis (Fig. 8h and i).138 At the first cyclic voltammetry (CV) cycle, two peaks during charging and a bigger peak during the discharging process were observed. Ex situ XRD analysis at different voltages (indicated in Fig. 8h) was performed determining the crystal structure of Bi. The XRD peaks related to Bi before applying potential are shown in Fig. 8i (i). A phase change from Bi to LiBi was observed when the potential was swept from 2 to 0.73 V (corresponding to 1 mol Li/Bi). Also, some peaks related to Li3Bi already appeared at this potential (ii). At 0 V, when the electrodes are completely charged, the only phase detected by XRD was Li3Bi (iii). Notably, after complete discharge at 2 V, only peaks attributed to the Bi phase appeared, which shows the complete reversibility of lithiation/delithiation in the Bi composite. Thus, the following reactions were suggested:138,140Bi(rhombohedral) → LiBi(tetragonal) → Li3Bi(cubic).

4.3. Battery performance
The 2D materials are considered as the most promising materials to substitute the conventional bulk materials for electronic-related applications.62,141,142 The impressive impact of graphene discovery on many applications motivated scientists to develop other 2D materials that can form subnanometer-thick sheets. Indeed, more than 150 layered materials that can be readily exfoliated to single/few layers have been explored and used for different applications, including energy storage.143,144 The 2D-pnictogens have recently attracted much attention in the battery community. This is mainly due to their high theoretical specific and volumetric capacities, high power-density and their impressive cyclability, compared to their parent 3D materials.

Phosphorene. 
Phosphorus exists in three main allotropic forms: white, red and black phosphorus.145 White phosphorus (WP) is formed by tetrahedral P4 molecules and it is the starting material for all other phosphorus modifications. It is produced in millions of tons each year, but it is highly reactive, flammable and toxic and thus not suitable for energy-related applications.121,146
Amorphous red phosphorus (RP) is commercially available, abundant in nature, eco-friendly, chemically stable and has an exceptionally high theoretical capacity (2596 mA h g−1) by taking three cations (X = Li+ and Na+) to form X3P, and thus has been intensively investigated as an anode material for lithium-ion147–152 and sodium-ion batteries.33,75,122,129,151,153–158 However, many practical issues limited further development of RP as anode material, i.e., (i) the amorphous RP has low electrical conductivity (1 × 10−14 S cm−1),159 which causes overpotential in redox reactions. Thus, addition of a large quantity of nanosized conductive carbon is necessary, which decreases the gravimetric capacity of anode electrodes up to 60%.122,151,157 Besides, low electrical contact between carbon additives and RP as well as uncontrollable thickness of the carbon decorated RP particle surface156 results in a low initial coulombic efficiency;34 and (ii) the large volumetric change during Li+/Na+ insertion/extraction (∼300% and ∼400% for Li+ and Na+ insertion/extraction, respectively)121,157 caused by (de)intercalation of ions into the amorphous structure of RP results in irreversible detachment of RP particles from each other and from the conductive carbon additive. This causes pulverization of active materials, and thus undesirable growth of the solid electrolyte interphase. Therefore, low coulombic efficiency, low cyclability and complicated and expensive electrode preparation methods, e.g., preparation of nanosized particles or “controlled” core–shell or yolk–shell nanostructures, are often reported in RP based anodic electrodes.129,154,156,160
Black phosphorus (BP) is thermodynamically the most stable allotrope of phosphorus. In contrast to other allotropes, BP is insoluble in most solvents, cannot catch fire in air, and it has the least reactive form.161 Bulk BP has a layered orthorhombic crystalline structure with the highest density among phosphorus allotropes (BP: 2.69 g cm−3 > RP: 2.05–2.34 g cm−3 > WP: 1.83 g cm−3). BP has large interlayer channel size (3.08 Å), allowing facile (de)intercalation of lithium (1.52 Å) and sodium (2.04 Å) ions. Compared to RP, BP has a similar theoretical capacity (2596 mA h g−1), but significantly higher electronic conductivity (∼300 S m−1) and thus of much interest for battery application.27,121,162 Despite all the aforementioned advantages of BP, a similar problem, i.e., a large anisotropic volume expansion (e.g., ∼300% taking place from P to Li3P121 and 500% from P to Na3P32) during alloying reaction, causes the loss of electrical contact of active materials and thus the rapid capacity fading after a few cycles (Scheme 2a and b). Similar challenges were previously observed with other high capacity materials such as silicon48 and sulfur.163
 Scheme 2  Preparation of electrodes based on 3D- and 2D-pnictogens. The volume expansion of active alloy-based anodic material (left) upon intercalation-alloying reactions (right). (a) Active material; (b) active material–conductive carbon composite (c) chemically bonded active material–conductive carbon; (d) 2D active material–graphene composite. 
This issue was attacked by preparation of the BP–graphite composite using a mechanochemical reaction in which a strong bond between BP bulk particles and graphite is formed (Scheme 2c). In this system, during (de)lithiation the electrical contact between active and conducting materials is preserved.121 This strategy results in a high initial capacity of 2786 mA h g−1 and an acceptable cycle life, i.e., capacity retention of 80% after 100 cycles. This was decreased to the first cycle coulombic efficiency of 58% if the P–C bond is not formed. In this case, the large volume expansion causes detachment of the active material from conductive graphite.121 A similar strategy via formation of strong chemical P–C bonds in the case of red phosphorus–graphene has also significantly improved the coulombic efficiency and cycling stability.129
Although the P–C bond provided better cycling stability, the bulk BP with insufficient electrical conductivity within the layers is still used; this causes slow electrical and ionic conduction within the layers. The next suggested approach studied in the literature is using single/few layer 2D phosphorene sheets distributed uniformly between conductive additives, e.g., graphene. As discussed in the previous section, theoretical studies showed that though the diffusion energy barrier of Li and Na along the zigzag direction (the only allowed diffusion pathway) in the phosphorene monolayer (0.08 eV) and phosphorene–graphene (0.12 eV) is slightly higher compared to the bulk structure of BP (0.05 eV), it is still much faster than in graphene and MoS2. Moreover, in this design single/few layers of phosphorene are homogeneously distributed between graphene sheets. Hence, (i) a shorter diffusion path for ions – due to the well-separated layers of phosphorene – and (ii) significantly higher electronic conductivity – because of the well-dispersion of graphene sheets throughout the composite film – are achieved. Moreover, the flexible graphene sheets provide a space between phosphorene sheets, which functions as an elastic buffer to accommodate the anisotropic volumetric expansion during cation insertion (Scheme 2d).
In an initial study on the performance of phosphorene as anode material, Cui et al. prepared a hybrid mixture of few layer phosphorene–graphene and tested its capability as anodic material for Na-ion batteries.32 In addition to lower cost, abundant resources and cheaper price of sodium compared to lithium, the very small diffusion barrier of Na-ions on monolayer phosphorene and in between phosphorene sheets as shown by theoretical studies makes this material an ideal candidate for NaIBs.124,130 The composite material was prepared by simple mixing of exfoliated BP (thickness: 0.84–4.22 nm, width: 700–10000 nm) and exfoliated graphene in NMP. After solvent evaporation, a uniform distribution of phosphorene sheets between wider graphene sheets was evidenced by high resolution TEM (HRTEM) (Fig. 5c). The well-dispersed graphene sheets have two main functions: (1) as high surface area conductive 2D sheets that could minimize the necessary amount of filler to obtain sufficient conductivity throughout the composite; (2) as a buffer layer to accommodate the y-axis directional volume expansion of active material upon Na-ion insertion. The importance of graphene sheets was studied by examining the cycling stability of the anode material with different C/P ratios (3.46, 2.78, 2.07 and 1.39) (Fig. 10a). The best stability was achieved for ratios bigger than 2.78; however, because graphene is inactive for sodiation, 2.78 was chosen as the optimum ratio. The capacity loss observed in the case of smaller G/P ratios is probably due to the irreversible volume expansion and pulverization of the composite material. At the first discharge cycle at 0.02C rate, three distinct electrochemical reactions were observed (Fig. 10b). The plateau between 1.2 and 0.6 V (Fig. 10b-i) is related to the formation of SEI. This step is irreversible and responsible for the low coulombic efficiency of the first cycle (80%). The plateaus at 0.58 V (Fig. 10b-ii) and 0.2 V (Fig. 10b-iii) are attributed to intercalation and alloying reactions, respectively. The observed capacity of 2440 mA h g−1 was achieved at the first cycle, which is 94% of the theoretical capacity of the applied material. The rate performance of this material is also significant, e.g., capacity retention of 95%, 59.4% and 37.5% at 0.08C, 3C and 7.7C (Fig. 10c). In addition, excellent cycling stability during 100 cycles even at high charge–discharge rates was recorded, i.e., 85%, 84% and 77% capacity retention at charge–discharge rates of 0.02C, 3C and 10C, respectively (Fig. 10d).32
 Fig. 10  Electrochemical characterization of phosphorene–conductive carbon composite anodes. (a) Reversible desodiation capacities for the first 100 galvanostatic cycles of various phosphorene–graphene electrodes with different carbon–phosphorus mole ratios (C/P) of 1.39, 2.07, 2.78 and 3.46, between 0.02 and 1.5 V at a current density of 0.05 A g−1. (b) Galvanostatic discharge–charge curves of the phosphorene–graphene (48.3 wt% P) anode plotted for the first, second and 50th cycles. (c) Volumetric and mass capacities at different current densities (from 0.05 to 26 A g−1). (d) Reversible desodiation capacity and coulombic efficiency for the first 100 galvanostatic cycles of the phosphorene/graphene (48.3 wt% P) anode tested under different currents32 (reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group). (e) The second galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles of the BP nanosheet, G paper, and BP–G hybrid paper electrodes at a current density of 100 mA g−1 within a potential window of 0.001–3 V (vs. Li+/Li0). (f) Rate performance of the BP nanosheet, graphene paper, and BP–G hybrid paper electrodes at different current densities. (g) Cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of the BP–G hybrid paper electrode at 500 mA g−1 for 500 cycles after the rate capability test123 (reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH). 
In another study on the energy storage performance of FL-P, a flexible phosphorene–graphene paper was prepared using 80% active material and applied as anode material for a Li-ion battery (Fig. 5d–i).123 A close contact between phosphorene and graphene sheets leading to high electronic and ionic conductivity was confirmed by SEM images (Fig. 5f). This was evidenced by the much smaller voltage gap between charge and discharge potentials of BP–G paper compared to BP or G papers (Fig. 10e), which is due to the strong contact between BP and G even after crystalline/amorphous phase change after the first cycle. This preserved contact between BP and G also leads to a high-power density, e.g., at a current density of 100 mA g−1, the BP–G paper showed a much higher capacity (920 mA h g−1) compared to the BP electrode (180 mA h g−1) and G paper (435 mA h g−1) (Fig. 10f). In this study, small phosphorene sheets were wrapped by much larger graphene sheets, which could efficiently accommodate the volume expansion of active material during intercalation and alloying processes. This leads to the good reversibility and significantly higher specific capacities of hybrid paper at high current densities, as compared to BP and G electrodes. Notably, the cyclability of hybrid paper at a moderate current density of 500 mA g−1 was also promising, i.e., 80.2% capacity retention over 500 cycles with 100% average coulombic efficiency (Fig. 10g).123
In another study, FL-BP was prepared by exfoliation of bulk BP in formamide followed by addition of GO at a mass ratio of GO/FL-BP = 3.75 The solution was filtered and the GO content of the peeled off paper was transformed to rGO by high temperature (300 °C) annealing (PG) or by spark plasma sintering (SPS) at 300 °C under 10 MPa pressure (PG-SPS). The obvious difference between the two electrodes after GO/rGO transformation is the much smaller thickness of the PG-SPS electrode (29.3 μm) (Fig. 11a) compared to PG (57.2 μm) (Fig. 11b). The high packing efficiency of the PG-SPS electrode can significantly increase the volumetric capacity of the full cell. Moreover, it was shown that the packed structure of PG-SPS provides higher oxidation resistivity under air exposure.75 The charging–discharging performance of PG, PG-SPS, and FL-BP at the first cycle is shown in Fig. 11c. As expected, the big and irreversible volume change upon intercalation and alloying reactions (BP → LixP → Li3P) causes a low coulombic efficiency in the first cycle of FL-BP (11.5%, corresponding to 210 mA h g−1); however the addition of rGO improved the CE of PG-SPS and PG to 60.2% and 34.3%, respectively. Notably, the reversible specific capacity and CE of the densely packed PG-SPS are higher compared to that of PG. This is mainly due to the lower electrolyte exposed specific surface area and thus reduced side reactions as well as the enhanced electrical connection between FL-BP and rGO. Moreover, the PG-SPS electrode showed an excellent rate capability, e.g., 37.3% (10 A g−1) and 65.2% (1 A g−1) retained specific capacity compared to 1013.3 mA h g−1 reversible capacity obtained at a low current density of 0.1 A g−1 (Fig. 11d). The PG electrode showed relatively low specific capacities at the corresponding current densities. Remarkably, the volumetric capacity of the tightly packed PG-SPS electrode (170.8 mA h cm−3) after 50 cycles at 100 mA g−1 was 2.7 times higher than that of the PG electrode (Fig. 11e). Finally, PG-SPS showed an excellent cycling performance, i.e., 82.4% and 91.9% capacity retention after 200 cycles followed by 800 cycles at 0.5 A g−1 and 10 A g−1 current densities, respectively (Fig. 11f).75
 Fig. 11  Electrochemical characterization of phosphorene–conductive carbon composite anodes. Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) PG-SPS and (b) PG electrodes on Cu foil with the same mass loading of 0.65 mg cm−2. (c) The first galvanic charge/discharge measurements of few layered BP, PG, and PG-SPS at a current density of 100 mA g−1. (d) Rate capabilities of PG and PG-SPS electrodes at various current densities. (e) Cycling life of PG and PG-SPS electrodes based on volumetric capacities at a current density of 100 mA g−1. (f) Long-term cycle life of the PG-SPS electrode at high current densities of 500 mA g−1 (200 cycles) and 10 A g−175 (reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH). (g) Voltage profile upon galvanostatic charge/discharge of BP-based electrodes at 0.1 A g−1 between 50 mV and 3 V. Thick and thin lines correspond to the 1st and 20th cycle, respectively. Specific capacity and coulombic efficiency over galvanostatic charge/discharge and cycling (h) between 50 mV and 3 V at 0.1 A g−1 and (i) different specific currents, for both FL-BPacetone- and FL-BPCHP-based electrodes. Orange: FL-BPCHP, blue: FL-BPacetone117 (reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
In another study a mixture of FL-BP/carbon black (CB)/polyvinylidene fluoride (PVdF) (3/1/1) dispersed in acetone, as a low boiling point solvent, was used as an anodic material for Li-ion battery application.117 It was shown that fast evaporation of the solvent allows rapid preparation of homogeneous thin films (Fig. 5j and k). Notably, a significant capacity fading in the first 10 cycles was observed, which is probably due to the contact loss between FL-BP and CB during large volume expansion upon ion insertion at different LixP phases (Fig. 11g). This can be related to the inefficient contact between the 2D active material and 3D carbon filler. After the initial 10 cycles, no major capacity loss was observed and the anode was stable at a specific capacity density of 480 mA h g−1, with 99.6% coulombic efficiency (at a current density of 0.1 A g−1) (Fig. 11h). The authors also prepared the composite material and electrode applying a similar method using a high boiling solvent, namely, N-cyclohexyl-2-pyrrolidone (CHP), and observed a considerably smaller specific capacity at different current rates as compared to the composite prepared in acetone (Fig. 11g and h). This is probably due to the aggregation of FL-BP flakes during slow evaporation of the solvent. The rate performance of the composite prepared in acetone was also promising, i.e., only 30% specific capacity drop (480 to 345 mA h g−1) upon altering current density from 0.1 to 1 A g−1 (Fig. 11i).117


Arsenene. 
Arsenic with a high theoretical capacity of 1073 mA h g−1 is the fourth largest lithium-alloying element (after Ge, P and Si) employed as the anodic material for Li-ion batteries. The volumetric capacity of As is also exceptionally high (2057 mA h cm−3). Moreover, the electrical conductivity of arsenic (3.3 × 106 S m−1) as a semi-metal is 1000 times more than that of silicon.164 In contrast to the high potential of arsenic as anode material for Li and Na batteries, the research on As has been neglected; this is probably due to the toxicity of arsenic as well as the environmental issues.30 However, arsenic is a commercially important element and thousands of metric tons of this element are used each year in the preservation of wood, agricultural chemicals, semiconductors and lead acid batteries.30 Regarding the toxicity of As, the EPA drinking water maximum contaminant level of arsenic (10 μg L−1) is almost the same as Pb (15 μg L−1),30 which is largely consumed in the ubiquitous Pb-acid batteries in vehicles. Thus, careful and effective recycling could make As batteries environmentally acceptable (similar to Pb-acid batteries). The first study on the battery performance of As was reported more than 40 years ago;165 however there were no other reports until recently.30,137 The preparation and application of 2D arsenic is not reported yet. In a recent study on a composite of nanosized As and multiwall carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) using 57% active materials, the authors recorded a reversible capacity of 920 mA h g−1 in the initial scan with 24% capacity loss after 60 scans (Fig. 12a).30 The coulombic efficiency of the first scan was only 60%; however it was shown that limiting the loading cutoff voltage to 0.75 V increases the CE of the first cycle to 76%. In this manner, the SEI buildup on MWNT was much less and better cycling stability was achieved; however, the capacity was limited to 594 mA h g−1 (at the first scan) (Fig. 12b). The low CE efficiency and cycling stability reported in As-based batteries are probably mainly due to the irreversible volume expansion and thus increasing SEI layer and pulverization of active material.30,137,165,166 Gray arsenic is the most stable allotropic form of As and it has a rhombohedral layered structure formed from puckered, six-membered rings which are stacked together, similar to 2D graphene in graphite (Fig. 1). Therefore, top-down exfoliation of As and using arsenene as an active material – as in BP and Sb – could overcome the low coulombic efficiency and low cyclability of this high-performance anode material.
 Fig. 12  Electrochemical performance of 3D bulk structures of As and Bi. (a) Voltage profiles of the 1st, 30th, and 60th cycles of 57:30:13 Asnano:MWCNT:PAA (w:w) half cells in 1 M LiPF6 in 1:1 FEC:DEC w:w loaded to 0.02 V. (b) Voltage profiles of 57:30:13 Asnano:MWCNT:PAA half cells loaded to 0.75 V vs. Li. The first cycle load and unload is presented as a dashed line for clarity; PAA: polyacrylic acid; FEC: fluoroethylene carbonate30 (reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2017 The Electrochemical Society). (c) Charge/discharge curves of the Bi@C core–shell NWs at a current density of 100 mA g−1. (d) Cycling performance of commercial Bi microparticles, Bi2S3@C core–shell NWs and Bi@C core–shell NWs, at a current density of 100 mA g−1167 (reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). 


Antimonene. 
Antimony has very high theoretical gravimetric and volumetric capacities of 660 mA h g−1 and 1750 A h cm−3, respectively, provided by intercalation/alloying reactions (Sb + 3Li/3Na → Li3Sb/Na3Sb). These are almost two to three times higher than that of the commercially available graphite anode.69 Moreover, the insertion potentials of Li+ and Na+ into the Sb anode are around 0.5 to 0.8 V which are relatively small to provide wide potential windows but still large enough to inhibit their deposition.28,120,168,169 This is an important safety factor that could prevent a short circuit between cathode and anode. However, a similar problem as described for BP (Scheme 2a and b), i.e., vast volume expansion during intercalation and alloying reactions, inhibited further development of Sb as anode material.170 It was shown that this volume expansion upon transformation of the Sb anode to Li3Sb or Na3Sb is around 150% and 390%, respectively.170–172 This significant volume expansion has negative impacts on the performance of anodic materials such as (i) breaking the formed SEI layer on Sb and thus cation exhaustion to form a new SEI layer and (ii) pulverization of the active material and therefore disconnection of particles from each other and from the current collector.169,173 Many research groups focused on this problem by constructing Sb alloys (Sb–M). It was shown that the additional non-electroactive M (e.g., carbon fillers) can efficiently act as a buffer to accommodate the volume expansion.174–176 Although the Sb–M bond inhibits pulverization and provides a better cycling performance, the bulk Sb still suffers from low electrical and ionic conductivity. Another suggested approach to buffer the volume expansion is the synthesis of a protective layer (core–shell particles); however cracking of the shell is still unavoidable.177–179 The yolk–shell electrodes could provide enough void space to accommodate the volume expansion; however, the complicated and expensive synthesis route is a big drawback toward the realization of this method.48,180–182
The recent great success in using 2D-BP as an anodic material with high CE inspired researchers to develop this method further for application to other layered materials including metallic antimony with gray allotrope. As shown in Scheme 1, gray Sb is a graphite-like layered material consisting of ruffled, six membered rings. The close packed crystal structure of gray Sb provides a high density of 6.7 g cm−3183 and the weak bonds between layers allow the facile top-down preparation of 2D-Sb-nanosheets.76 The application of Sb nanosheets for Na-ion batteries was investigated by Gu et al.76 In this study, a flexible uniform film consisting of thin antimonene sheets with a large aspect ratio and reduced graphene oxide (SbNS-G) was prepared (Fig. 5l–q). Remarkably, the SbNS-G film with a mass loading of 1.6 mg cm−2 showed a high reversible volumetric capacity of 1226 mA h cm−3 in the first cycle at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2 (Fig. 13a). This volumetric capacity is much higher than that of the previously reported bulk Sb/C composites (up to 300 mA h cm−3)169,184,185 demonstrating the high density of metallic Sb. Increasing the mass loading to values above 1.6 mg cm−2 limits the diffusion of Na ions and thus the volumetric capacities of films decrease (Fig. 13b). The rate performance of SbNS-G was also significant, i.e., high volumetric capacities of 525, 417 and 216 mA h cm−3 at current densities of 0.4, 0.8 and 4 mA cm−2, respectively (Fig. 13c and d). Notably, at such a high current density (4 mA cm−2), pure graphene can only deliver 13 mA h cm−3 (Fig. 13d). In addition, the cyclability of the composite film at a fast charge–discharge rate of 4 mA cm−2 demonstrates ∼51% capacity retention after 100 cycles (Fig. 13e). This study approved that flexible 2D current collector (rGO) can efficiently alleviate the volume changes of metallic Sb.
 Fig. 13  Electrochemical characterization of antimonene–conductive carbon composite anodes. (a) Selected first-two charge–discharge curves of SbNS-G film (1.6 mg cm−2) at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2. (b) Cyclic performances of SbNS-G and graphene films at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2, respectively. (c) Selected charge–discharge curves of SbNS-G film (1.6 mg cm−2) at various current densities from 0.2 to 4.0 mA cm−2. (d) Rate performances of SbNS-G and graphene films at various current densities from 0.2 to 4.0 mA cm−2. (e) Cyclic performances of SbNS-G and graphene films at a current density of 4.0 mA cm−276 (reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH). (f) Long-term cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of the FL-A and bulk Sb powder at a rate of 0.5C. (g) Rate capability of FL-A. (h) CV profiles of FL-A between 0.01 and 1.5 V at a rate of 0.1 mV s−1120 (reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
In a recent study on the energy storage performance of 2D Sb-sheets for Na-ion batteries, few layer antimony (FL-A) with an average thickness of 7 nm (∼18 atomic layers) was used.120 The anode electrode was prepared by deposition of an aqueous slurry of FL-A/carbon black/carboxymethyl cellulose (65/20/15) (1 mg cm−2) on a current collector. The cycling performance of the FL-A anode and bulk Sb was analyzed at a current density of 0.5C. Remarkably, in contrast to the fast and steady capacity decay of bulk Sb, FL-A demonstrated a stable capacity (620 mA h g−1) with 99.7% capacity retention and ∼100% CE after the 10th cycle (Fig. 13f). The SEM images before and after 150 cycles demonstrated cracking and pulverization of bulk Sb; however, no clear change in the morphology of FL-A was observed. The initial low CE of FL-A is related to the high surface area of the electrode and side reactions at the electrode/electrolyte interface.186,187 The rate capability of the FL-A anode was also significant, i.e., 67% capacity retention at 5C corresponding to a specific capacity of 429 mA h g−1 (Fig. 13g). Additionally, the stability of the composite was further assessed by cyclic voltammetry analysis (Fig. 13h). A strong peak at the first cathodic scan of the FL-A electrode was observed, which was changed to three smaller peaks at the second scan. These cathodic peaks are related to different alloying reactions (Sb → Na–Sb → Na3Sb). The anodic peaks are attributed to desodiation of the FL-A electrode. The larger peak current at the first cathodic current is related to the formation of the SEI layer; however, the overlapping scans from the third CV cycle onward indicate cycling stability of the active material.120


Bismuthene. 
Bismuth, the last electroactive element in the pnictogen group, has the highest atomic mass and therefore the lowest gravimetric capacity of 386 mA h g−1 (Li3Bi). Although the gravimetric capacity of Bi is very similar to that of graphite (372 mA h g−1), this element has the highest density among other active pnictogens and thus a very high theoretical volumetric capacity of 3765 mA h cm−3. This value is much higher than that of other pnictogens (Table 1) and graphite (840 mA h cm−3). The high volumetric capacity in addition to the chemical stability and low toxicity of Bi makes this element attractive for energy storage applications.31,138,140,167,188–193 However a similar problem to other alloying anodes, i.e., volume expansion during ion insertion (Bi: 215%), causes pulverization of active materials and rapid capacity fading.138,188 Preparation of nanosized bismuth particles including Bi nanodisks and nanospheres194 partially alleviated the volume expansion problem; however aggregation of nanoparticles during charging–discharging reactions has limited the cyclability of anodes.195 Carbon coating and pore formation methods were also applied to reduce the aggregation of active materials and control the volume change; however, considering the low melting point of Bi (271 °C), a controlled coating of the carbon layer is a very challenging process. The other methodology reported in the literature is the preparation of the bismuth@carbon core–shell nanowire. The carbon shell functions as a buffer to control the volume expansion during ion insertion and alloy formation and prohibits aggregation of wires.167
Nevertheless, the galvanostatic charging–discharging study revealed a low coulombic efficiency of 63.1% at the first cycle (Fig. 12c) and a low cycling stability of 49% capacity retention after 100 cycles (Fig. 12d).167 The low cycling stability Bi based anodes caused by the irreversible volume expansion is the biggest challenge regarding further development of this high-performance element. Because of the similar layered crystal structure of Bi to that of Sb (Fig. 1), using 2D bismuth as the active material in combination with graphene or other carbon filler is probably an effective method that can overcome this problem.

5. Conclusion and outlook
2D materials opened a new gate to travel into the largely unknown regions of the materials space. On the one hand, their supreme thinness makes them tremendously promising for medical, environmental and electronic applications. On the other hand, monolayers offer the physical properties that are extremely different compared to their parent 3D materials, providing a new degree of freedom. The superior properties of the 2D structures of phosphorene and the following pnictogens compared to graphene, e.g., high gravimetric and volumetric capacities, high power density, excellent cycling stability and the reasonable potential gap from the deposition of lithium and sodium, make them ideal candidates as anode materials for the next generation of LIBs and SIBs. In recent years many new 2D materials, e.g., MXenes and TMDs, are introduced and their energy storage performances are tested; however, the higher specific capacity and cyclic stability of 2D pnictogens make them more interesting for the battery community.
This review introduced the top/down method as the most promising method for the large production of 2D-pnictogens. The weak inter-plane van der Waals interaction between sheets in the bulk materials allows preparation of colloidal dispersions of nanosheets via liquid phase exfoliation. It is shown that the exfoliation yield in solvents with high boiling point and surface tension is more efficient; however, non-toxic, low boiling point solvents, e.g., acetone and water, are not excluded. The sensitivity of thin sheets against the ambient condition, moisture, light irradiation, temperature, and solvent was also summarized. A rapid degradation in the ambient condition was reported for thinner layers of phosphorene and thus careful preparation and conservation is advised. Remarkably, antimonene is extremely resistant to air exposure, solvent, and temperature.
The energy storage performance of these 2D materials in terms of specific capacity, power density and cyclability, in comparison with their crystalline 3D structure, is also presented. It is pointed out from the theoretical studies that the diffusion barrier against intercalation of Li+ and Na+ into the crystals of 2D-pnictogens is considerably smaller compared to the conventional graphite anode, leading to high power performances. Notably, the in situ studies recorded the reversibility of volume change of ultrathin sheets (<10 layers) during the charging–discharging process, while structural decomposition was observed in the thicker layers. The coulombic efficiency of the first cycle and the overall cycling stability of pnictogens are significantly improved in their 2D structures. The best performances were reported for pnictogen nanosheets that were well-dispersed between graphene sheets. In this system, graphene acts as an elastic buffer to accommodate the vast anisotropic volume expansion during ion insertion. Moreover, the diffusion path in the exfoliated sheets is shorter and higher power densities are reported.
Although the study of phosphorene and the following 2D-pnictogens is still in the infant stage, there is little doubt about their role in the next generation of LIBs and NaIBs. However, there are still many fundamental and practical issues that need additional efforts, for example, exfoliation with higher yields and difficulty of removal of high-boiling-point solvents in the LPE method. Moreover, the air sensitivity of 2D-pnictogens (except antimonene) is still a big challenge against their large-scale production. Hence, the development of green and low-cost exfoliation methods to prepare high quality 2D-pnictogens is still mandatory. Concerning the battery performance, although carbon-based composites of 2D-pnictogens provide properties that were not attainable by the conventional 3D structures, many issues such as the necessity of addition of a large quantity of conductive fillers and low coulombic efficiency of the first cycle are still challenging. Therefore, additional works should be dedicated to the precise decoration of 2D-pnictogens with conductive fillers or preparation of their heterostructures with metal oxides, metal sulfides or redox organic polymers because of the synergistic effect.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the project Advanced Functional Nanorobots (reg. No. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15_003/0000444 financed by the EFRR).
References
J. B. Goodenough and K.-S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Goriparti, E. Miele, F. De Angelis, E. Di Fabrizio, R. Proietti Zaccaria and C. Capiglia, J. Power Sources, 2014, 257, 421 CrossRef .
W. Li, B. Song and A. Manthiram, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3006 RSC .
H. Kawai, M. Nagata, H. Tukamoto and A. R. West, J. Power Sources, 1999, 81, 67 CrossRef .
N. Nitta, F. Wu, J. T. Lee and G. Yushin, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 252 CrossRef .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11503 CrossRef PubMed .
T. H. Kim, J. S. Park, S. K. Chang, S. Choi, J. H. Ryu and H. K. Song, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 860 CrossRef .
B. Scrosati and J. Garche, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2419 CrossRef .
G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, A. C. Luntz, S. Swanson and W. Wilcke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2193 CrossRef .
A. Manthiram, Y. Fu, S.-H. Chung, C. Zu and Y.-S. Su, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11751 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Beladi-Mousavi, S. Sadaf, L. Walder, M. Gallei, C. Rüttiger, S. Eigler and C. E. Halbig, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600108 CrossRef .
S. M. Beladi-Mousavi, S. Sadaf, A. M. Mahmood and L. Walder, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8730 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 742 CrossRef .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, S. Dou, H. Liu and L. Dai, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 439 CrossRef .
M. Yoshio, H. Wang, K. Fukuda, T. Umeno, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1754 RSC .
H. Lee, M. Yanilmaz, O. Toprakci, K. Fu and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3857 RSC .
M. N. Obrovac and V. L. Chevrier, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11444 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, Y. Dou, Z. Wei, J. Ma, Y. Deng, Y. Li, H. Liu and S. Dou, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700146 CrossRef PubMed .
C. K. Chan, X. F. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 307 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ying and W.-Q. Han, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700298 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zuo, J. Zhu, P. Müller-Buschbaum and Y.-J. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 113 CrossRef .
N. Nitta and G. Yushin, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 31, 317 CrossRef .
G.-L. Xu, Z. Chen, G.-M. Zhong, Y. Liu, Y. Yang, T. Ma, Y. Ren, X. Zuo, X.-H. Wu, X. Zhang and K. Amine, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3955 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, L. Yu, C. Wu, Y. Wen, K. Yin, F.-K. Chiang, R. Hu, J. Liu, L. Sun, L. Gu, J. Maier, Y. Yu and M. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2034 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Pang, A. Bachmatiuk, Y. Yin, B. Trzebicka, L. Zhao, L. Fu, R. G. Mendes, T. Gemming, Z. Liu and M. H. Rummeli, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702093 CrossRef .
K. A. Hays, N. A. Banek and M. J. Wagner, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A1635 CrossRef .
F. Yang, F. Yu, Z. Zhang, K. Zhang, Y. Lai and J. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 2333 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sun, H.-W. Lee, M. Pasta, H. Yuan, G. Zheng, Y. Sun, Y. Li and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 980 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Qian, X. Wu, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4633 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Yabuuchi, Y. Matsuura, T. Ishikawa, S. Kuze, J.-Y. Son, Y.-T. Cui, H. Oji and S. Komaba, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 580 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16071 CrossRef .
C. Qiuhong, Z. Yeteng, P. Lu, Z. Hongyun, Y. Yijun, L. Dequan, T. Feng, B. Yoshio, Y. Jiannian and W. Xi, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700902 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-M. Park, J.-H. Kim, H. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3115 RSC .
H. Wu and Y. Cui, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 414 CrossRef .
R. Yi, F. Dai, M. L. Gordin, S. Chen and D. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 295 CrossRef .
J. Song, S. Chen, M. Zhou, T. Xu, D. Lv, M. L. Gordin, T. Long, M. Melnyk and D. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1257 RSC .
W.-J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 13 CrossRef .
U. von Sacken, E. Nodwell, A. Sundher and J. R. Dahn, J. Power Sources, 1995, 54, 240 CrossRef .
A. M. Andersson, K. Edström and J. O. Thomas, J. Power Sources, 1999, 81, 8 CrossRef .
S. Yoon and A. Manthiram, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3898 CrossRef .
Q. Hu, S. Osswald, R. Daniel, Y. Zhu, S. Wesel, L. Ortiz and D. R. Sadoway, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5604 CrossRef .
J. Shim, R. Kostecki, T. Richardson, X. Song and K. A. Striebel, J. Power Sources, 2002, 112, 222 CrossRef .
K. Kravchyk, L. Protesescu, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krumeich, M. Yarema, M. Walter, C. Guntlin and M. V. Kovalenko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4199 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Liu, Z. Lu, J. Zhao, M. T. McDowell, H.-W. Lee, W. Zhao and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 187 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Fiori, F. Bonaccorso, G. Iannaccone, T. Palacios, D. Neumaier, A. Seabaugh, S. K. Banerjee and L. Colombo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 768 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Schaibley, H. Yu, G. Clark, P. Rivera, J. S. Ross, K. L. Seyler, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16055 CrossRef .
D. Deng, K. S. Novoselov, Q. Fu, N. Zheng, Z. Tian and X. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 218 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chengzhou, D. Dan and L. Yuehe, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 032004 CrossRef .
Expanding our 2D vision (Editorial), Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16089 CrossRef .
A. Zurutuza and C. Marinelli, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 730 CrossRef PubMed .
A. C. Ferrari, F. Bonaccorso, V. Fal'ko, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roche and P. Boggild, 
            et al.
          , Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4598 RSC .
S. Manzeli, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Pasquier, O. V. Yazyev and A. Kis, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17033 CrossRef .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Eames and M. S. Islam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16270 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Peng-peng, S. Hongyu, J. Yongjun, L. Wenhai and W. Xun, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 964 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhe, W. Lixiu, Z. Kai, W. Jianbin, C. Fangyi, T. Zhanliang and C. Jun, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 13008 CrossRef .
W. Choi, N. Choudhary, G. H. Han, J. Park, D. Akinwande and Y. H. Lee, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 116 CrossRef .
E. Pomerantseva and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17089 CrossRef .
H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. Xu, D. Tománek and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4033 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Du, Y. Deng and P. D. Ye, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2732 RSC .
M. Batmunkh, M. Bat-Erdene and J. G. Shapter, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8586 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Akhtar, G. Anderson, R. Zhao, A. Alruqi, J. E. Mroczkowska, G. Sumanasekera and J. B. Jasinski, NPJ 2D Mater. Appl., 2017, 1, 5 CrossRef .
E. Martínez-Periñán, M. P. Down, C. Gibaja, E. Lorenzo, F. Zamora and C. E. Banks, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 1702606 Search PubMed .
P. Ares, J. J. Palacios, G. Abellán, J. Gómez-Herrero and F. Zamora, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703771 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Kou, C. Chen and S. C. Smith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2794 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Dai and X. C. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1289 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cai, G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6677 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, R. Xu, J. Pei, Y. W. Myint, F. Wang, Z. Wang, S. Zhang, Z. Yu and Y. Lu, Light: Sci. Appl., 2015, 4, e312 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, H. Wang, Z. Luo, H. T. Tan, B. Li, S. Sun, Z. Li, Y. Zong, Z. J. Xu, Y. Yang, K. A. Khor and Q. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600453 CrossRef .
J. Gu, Z. Du, C. Zhang, J. Ma, B. Li and S. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700447 CrossRef .
Q. Yao, C. Huang, Y. Yuan, Y. Liu, S. Liu, K. Deng and E. Kan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 6923 CrossRef .
X. Feng, G. Binghui, C. Jing, N. Arokia, L. X. Linhuo, M. Hongyu, M. Huihua, Z. Chongyang, X. Weiwei, L. Zhengrui, L. Shengli, Y. Kaihao, W. Lijun, C. Yiping, S. Litao and Z. Yimei, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 025005 CrossRef .
Y. R. Lim, F. Shojaei, K. Park, C. S. Jung, J. Park, W. I. Cho and H. S. Kang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 7047 RSC .
P. W. Bridgman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1914, 36, 1344 CrossRef .
P. W. Bridgman, Phys. Rev., 1914, 3, 489 CrossRef .
S. Lange, P. Schmidt and T. Nilges, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 4028 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Gusmão, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8052 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Morita, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1986, 39, 227 CrossRef .
W. Li, Y. Yang, G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1691 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Qiao, X. Kong, Z.-X. Hu, F. Yang and W. Ji, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4475 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, Z. Xie, Z. Chen, N. Cheng, J. Wang and G. Zhu, Materials, 2018, 11, 304 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Ares, F. Aguilar-Galindo, D. Rodríguez-San-Miguel, D. A. Aldave, S. Díaz-Tendero, M. Alcamí, F. Martín, J. Gómez-Herrero and F. Zamora, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6332 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Pumera and Z. Sofer, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605299 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Gusmão, Z. Sofer, D. Bouša and M. Pumera, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 14609 CrossRef .
G. Abellán, S. Wild, V. Lloret, N. Scheuschner, R. Gillen, U. Mundloch, J. Maultzsch, M. Varela, F. Hauke and A. Hirsch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10432 CrossRef PubMed .
O. I. Malyi, K. V. Sopiha, C. Draxl and C. Persson, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2428 RSC .
D. Hanlon, C. Backes, E. Doherty, C. S. Cucinotta, N. C. Berner, C. Boland, K. Lee, A. Harvey and P. Lynch, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8563 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Favron, E. Gaufrès, F. Fossard, A.-L. Phaneuf-L’Heureux, N. Y. W. Tang, P. L. Lévesque, A. Loiseau, R. Leonelli, S. Francoeur and R. Martel, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 826 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kang, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, J.-H. Lee, X. Liu, K.-S. Chen and M. C. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3596 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ziletti, A. Carvalho, D. K. Campbell, D. F. Coker and A. H. Castro Neto, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 046801 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huang, J. Qiao, K. He, S. Bliznakov, E. Sutter, X. Chen, D. Luo, F. Meng, D. Su, J. Decker, W. Ji, R. S. Ruoff and P. Sutter, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8330 CrossRef .
W. Sumeet, S. Ylias, A. Taimur, R. F. Matthew, R. Rajesh, A. Aram, K. B. Suresh, S. Sharath, B. Madhu, B. Vipul and B. Sivacarendran, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 015025 Search PubMed .
J. H. Han, S. Lee, D. Yoo, J.-H. Lee, S. Jeong, J.-G. Kim and J. Cheon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3736 CrossRef PubMed .
A. H. Woomer, T. W. Farnsworth, J. Hu, R. A. Wells, C. L. Donley and S. C. Warren, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8869 CrossRef PubMed .
N. B. Goodman, L. Ley and D. W. Bullett, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1983, 27, 7440 CrossRef .
X. Wu, Y. Shao, H. Liu, Z. Feng, Y.-L. Wang, J.-T. Sun, C. Liu, J.-O. Wang, Z.-L. Liu, S.-Y. Zhu, Y.-Q. Wang, S.-X. Du, Y.-G. Shi, K. Ibrahim and H.-J. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605407 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Díaz-Somoano, M. A. López-Antón, F. E. Huggins and M. R. Martínez-Tarazona, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 173, 450 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, M. Ye, M. Weng, J. Li, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Guo, Y. Pan, L. Xiao, J. Liu, F. Pan and J. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29273 CrossRef PubMed .

          H. Suzuki, N. Komatsu, T. Ogawa, T. Murafuji, T. Ikegami and Y. Matano, Organobismuth Chemistry, Elsevier Science, Amsterdam,  2001, pp. 1–20 Search PubMed .
E. A. Lewis, J. R. Brent, B. Derby, S. J. Haigh and D. J. Lewis, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 1445 RSC .
J.-Y. Hwang, Y.-M. Kim, K. H. Lee, H. Ohta and S. W. Kim, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6140 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Rui, Y. Tang, Y. Liu, J. Wei, S. Chen, W. R. Leow, W. Li, Y. Liu, J. Deng, B. Ma, Q. Yan and X. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502409 CrossRef .
Z. Yang, J. Hao, S. Yuan, S. Lin, H. M. Yau, J. Dai and S. P. Lau, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3748 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Gaoxue, J. S. William, P. Ravindra and P. K. Shashi, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 025011 CrossRef .
N. Mounet, M. Gibertini, P. Schwaller, D. Campi, A. Merkys, A. Marrazzo, T. Sohier, I. E. Castelli, A. Cepellotti, G. Pizzi and N. Marzari, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 246 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ciesielski and P. Samori, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 381 RSC .
J. N. Coleman, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 14 CrossRef PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O’Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H.-Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kang, S. A. Wells, J. D. Wood, J.-H. Lee, X. Liu, C. R. Ryder, J. Zhu, J. R. Guest, C. A. Husko and M. C. Hersam, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 11688 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhao, Z. Xue, J. Wang, J. Jiang, X. Zhao and T. Mu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27608 CrossRef PubMed .
A. E. Del Rio Castillo, V. Pellegrini, H. Sun, J. Buha, D. A. Dinh, E. Lago, A. Ansaldo, A. Capasso, L. Manna and F. Bonaccorso, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 506 CrossRef .
M. Bat-Erdene, M. Batmunkh, C. J. Shearer, S. A. Tawfik, M. J. Ford, L. Yu, A. J. Sibley, A. D. Slattery, J. S. Quinton, C. T. Gibson and J. G. Shapter, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700260 CrossRef .
C. Gibaja, D. Rodriguez-San-Miguel, P. Ares, J. Gómez-Herrero, M. Varela, R. Gillen, J. Maultzsch, F. Hauke, A. Hirsch, G. Abellán and F. Zamora, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14345 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Tian, S. Zhang, C. Huo, D. Zhu, Q. Li, L. Wang, X. Ren, L. Xie, S. Guo, P. K. Chu, H. Zeng and K. Huo, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1887 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sun, G. Zheng, H.-W. Lee, N. Liu, H. Wang, H. Yao, W. Yang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4573 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-J. Li, S.-L. Chou, J.-Z. Wang, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5480 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Chen, G. Zhou, Z. Liu, X. Ma, J. Chen, Z. Zhang, X. Ma, F. Li, H.-M. Cheng and W. Ren, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 510 CrossRef PubMed .
K. P. S. S. Hembram, H. Jung, B. C. Yeo, S. J. Pai, H. J. Lee, K.-R. Lee and S. S. Han, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 21391 RSC .
J. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 924 CrossRef .
E. Peled, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 2047 CrossRef .
Y. Xue, Q. Zhang, T. Zhang and L. Fu, ChemNanoMat, 2017, 3, 352 CrossRef .
X. Ren, P. Lian, D. Xie, Y. Yang, Y. Mei, X. Huang, Z. Wang and X. Yin, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 10364 CrossRef .
J. Song, Z. Yu, M. L. Gordin, S. Hu, R. Yi, D. Tang, T. Walter, M. Regula, D. Choi, X. Li, A. Manivannan and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6329 CrossRef PubMed .
V. V. Kulish, O. I. Malyi, C. Persson and P. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 13921 RSC .
W. Linxia, J. Zhiqiang, L. Wei, G. Xiao and H. Li, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 165501 CrossRef .
S. Zhao, W. Kang and J. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19046 RSC .
K. P. S. S. Hembram, H. Jung, B. C. Yeo, S. J. Pai, S. Kim, K.-R. Lee and S. S. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 15041 CrossRef .
G.-C. Guo, D. Wang, X.-L. Wei, Q. Zhang, H. Liu, W.-M. Lau and L.-M. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 5002 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xia, Q. Zhang, F. Xu, H. Ma, J. Chen, K. Qasim, B. Ge, C. Zhu and L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 5861 CrossRef .
X. Li, D. Xiao, H. Zheng, X. Wei, X. Wang, L. Gu, Y.-S. Hu, T. Yang and Q. Chen, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 194 CrossRef .
C.-M. Park, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2016, 20, 517 CrossRef .
C.-M. Park, S. Yoon, S.-I. Lee and H.-J. Sohn, J. Power Sources, 2009, 186, 206 CrossRef .
A. Sengupta and T. Frauenheim, Mater. Today Energy, 2017, 5, 347 CrossRef .
W. Xianming, T. Nishina and I. Uchida, J. Power Sources, 2002, 104, 90 CrossRef .
K.-S. Chen, I. Balla, N. S. Luu and M. C. Hersam, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2026 CrossRef .
L. Shi and T. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3735 RSC .
L. Peng, Y. Zhu, D. Chen, R. S. Ruoff and G. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600025 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, L. Hou, A. Ciesielski and P. Samorì, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600671 CrossRef .
A. H. Cowley, Chem. Rev., 1965, 65, 617 CrossRef .
D. Rabinovich, J. Chem. Educ., 2000, 77, 311 CrossRef .
J. Qian, D. Qiao, X. Ai, Y. Cao and H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8931 RSC .
Z. Yu, J. Song, M. L. Gordin, R. Yi, D. Tang and D. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1400020 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhao, B. Li, J. Zhang, X. Li, D. Xiao, C. Fu, L. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Li, D. Cao and C. Niu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3376 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-C. Chang, K.-W. Tseng and H.-Y. Tuan, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1240 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, Z. Yang, M. Li, Y. Jiang, X. Wei, X. Zhong, L. Gu and Y. Yu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1546 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, X. He, J. Li, W. Sun, J. Gao, J. Guo and C. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9034 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, A. Zhang, C. Shen, Q. Liu, X. Cao, Y. Ma, L. Chen, C. Lau, T.-C. Chen, F. Wei and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5530 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Liu, J. Feng, X. Bian, J. Liu, H. Xu and Y. An, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1222 RSC .
W. Li, S. Hu, X. Luo, Z. Li, X. Sun, M. Li, F. Liu and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605820 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Gao, T. Zhou, Y. Zheng, Y. Liu, J. Chen, H. Liu and Z. Guo, Adv. Energy
Mater., 2016, 6, 1601037 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, Y. Wen, X. Fan, T. Gao, F. Han, C. Luo, S.-C. Liou and C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3254 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kim, Y. Park, A. Choi, N.-S. Choi, J. Kim, J. Lee, J. H. Ryu, S. M. Oh and K. T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3045 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Extance and S. R. Elliott, Philos. Mag. B, 1981, 43, 469 Search PubMed .
W. Li, S. Hu, X. Luo, Z. Li, X. Sun, M. Li, F. Liu and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605820 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Park and H. J. Sohn, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2465 CrossRef .
C. Pengfei, L. Neng, C. Xingzhu, O. Wee-Jun and Z. Xiujian, 2D Mater., 2018, 5, 014002 Search PubMed .
W. Li, G. Zheng, Y. Yang, Z. W. Seh, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 7148 CrossRef PubMed .
C. D. Hodgman, Handbook of Chemistry and Physics: A Ready-Reference Book of Chemical and Physical Data. Twenty-Fifth edition, J. Chem. Educ., 1942, 19, 400 Search PubMed .
J. O. Besenhard and H. P. Fritz, Electrochim. Acta, 1975, 20, 513 CrossRef .
M. Mortazavi, Q. Ye, N. Birbilis and N. V. Medhekar, J. Power Sources, 2015, 285, 29 CrossRef .
R. Dai, Y. Wang, P. Da, H. Wu, M. Xu and G. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13236 RSC .
C.-M. Park, S. Yoon, S.-I. Lee, J.-H. Kim, J.-H. Jung and H.-J. Sohn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A917 CrossRef .
H. Hou, M. Jing, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang, W. Song, X. Yang, J. Chen, Q. Chen and X. Ji, J. Power Sources, 2015, 284, 227 CrossRef .
J. Liu, Z. Yang, J. Wang, L. Gu, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 389 CrossRef .
L. Yu, J. Liu, X. Xu, L. Zhang, R. Hu, J. Liu, L. Yang and M. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2516 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Wen, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6387 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wu, H. Lu, L. Xiao, X. Ai, H. Yang and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5708 RSC .
H. Y. Lü, F. Wan, L. H. Jiang, G. Wang and X. L. Wu, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2016, 33, 204 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, J. Xie, T. Zhu, G. Cao, X. Zhao and S. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 204 CrossRef .
F. Wan, H.-Y. Lü, X.-H. Zhang, D.-H. Liu, J.-P. Zhang, X. He and X.-L. Wu, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 672, 72 CrossRef .
X. Li, A. Dhanabalan, L. Gu and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 238 CrossRef .
C. Guan, X. Wang, Q. Zhang, Z. Fan, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4852 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Wang, Z. Bai, Y. Qian and J. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4126 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, K. Yan, H.-W. Lee, Z. Lu, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15029 CrossRef .
N. Liu, H. Wu, M. T. McDowell, Y. Yao, C. Wang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3315 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, J. Niu, Y. C. Zhao, K. P. So, C. Wang, C. A. Wang and J. Li, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7872 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, Z. Yan, Y. Li, Z. Chen and H. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3112 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhou, Y. Zhong, M. Yang, M. Hu, J. Wei and Z. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12888 RSC .
X. Liu, Y. Du, X. Xu, X. Zhou, Z. Dai and J. Bao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 3214 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao and A. Manthiram, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3096 CrossRef .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J. M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Crosnier, T. Brousse, X. Devaux, P. Fragnaud and D. M. Schleich, J. Power Sources, 2001, 94, 169 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Q. Wang, B. Wang, Y. Mei and P. Lian, Ionics, 2017, 23, 1407 CrossRef .
J. Sottmann, M. Herrmann, P. Vajeeston, Y. Hu, A. Ruud, C. Drathen, H. Emerich, H. Fjellvåg and D. S. Wragg, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2750 CrossRef .
L. D. Ellis, B. N. Wilkes, T. D. Hatchard and M. N. Obrovac, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A416 CrossRef .
J. L. Lan, Y. Jin, C. Qin, Y. Yu and X. Yang, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 7178 CrossRef .
D. Su, S. Dou and G. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 88 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, J. Chen, L. Chen, Y.-B. Chen and L.-M. Wu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 1578 CrossRef .
L. Ji and X. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1146 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Seyyed Mohsen Beladi-Mousavi
	Seyyed Mohsen Beladi-Mousavi received his PhD degree in molecular electrochemistry and organic chemistry from Osnabrueck University, Germany, in 2017. After a postdoctoral stay at the same university with Prof. Lorenz Walder, he joined Prof. Martin Pumera in the Advanced Functional Nanorobot Laboratory in the University of Chemistry and Technology, Prague. His current research focuses on the synthesis, device fabrication, and energy storage application of novel 2D materials.

Martin Pumera
	Martin Pumera has been the Director of the Center for Advanced Functional Nanorobots in UCT Prague, Czech Republic, since 2017. Before joining NTU, he was a tenured faculty member at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, from 2010. He received his PhD from Charles University, Czech Republic, in 2001. After two postdoctoral stays (in the United States, Spain), he joined the National Institute for Materials Science, Japan, in 2006 for a tenure-track arrangement and stayed there until Spring 2008 when he accepted a tenured position at NIMS, after which he joined NTU. Martin has broad interests in nanomaterials and microsystems, in the specific areas of electrochemistry and synthetic chemistry of 2D nanomaterials, energy generation and storage, micro and nanomachines, and 3D printing.

 	Scheme 1  Schematic depicting discharging of a LIB with a LiFePO4 cathode and a phosphorene anode.	 


Graphite	372	837	0.1–0.1	0.17	12	LiC6
Si	4200	9786	0.2	0.45	420	Li4.4Si
Ge	1600	8645	0.4	0.65	370	Li4.4Ge
Sn	994	7216	0.4	0.6	257	Li4.4Sn


Pnictogens
BP	2596	2266	0.45	0.9	300	Li3BP
As	1073	2057	0.9	1.1	182c	Li3As
Sb	660	1750	0.8	1	150	Li3Sb
Bi	386	3765	0.7	0.9	215	Li3Bi

 	Fig. 1  Crystalline structures of pnictogens. 3D representations and side views of orthorhombic layered black phosphorus (a and b)87 and rhombohedral (gray) layered arsenic, antimony, and bismuth (c and d).88	 

 	Fig. 2  Degradation and stabilization of thin layer phosphorene. (a) SRM analysis of the same flake as in the inset of panel b showing the corresponding A1g/A2g band ratio mapping measured in the armchair, and (b) its corresponding mean Raman spectra (excitation at 532 nm) of the areas indicated in panel a. The inset is an optical microscopy image of the same flake. (c) Histogram of the A1g/A2g intensity ratio in the high ratio region (HRR) (armchair) of pristine BP measured under inert conditions and after 72 h exposure to environmental conditions. (d) A1g/A2g intensity ratio evolution with time for the HRR showing the typical exponential decay. (e) Influence of thickness on the environmental degradation: the evolution of the normalized A1g intensity with time indicates faster degradation of the flakes below 10 nm. (f) Influence of flake surface area on the environmental degradation: the extent of degradation is less than half for flakes of >ca. 7 μm2 compared to those of ca. 2 μm2. (g) Effect of NMP passivation compared to an inert solvent (THF) and a pristine sample on ca. 5 nm thick flakes with a comparable area. (h) Influence of thickness on the degradation of NMP-protected flakes stored in darkness, clearly surpassing 25 days of stability. (i) Influence of continuous visible light illumination of 5 and 9 nm thick flakes. (j) AFM height profile time study of a 9 nm flake protected with NMP after 2, 8, and 20 days under ambient conditions91 (reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (k) XPS of freshly cleaved bulk black phosphorus after exposure to ambient air and room light for 0 (black), 1 (blue), and 24 h (green). (l) XPS analysis of few-layer 2D phosphorus showing that the material prepared by liquid exfoliation was unoxidized (black). The few-layer sheets were controllably oxidized by exposure to light (λ = 460 nm) and oxygen with some water (blue). (m) Exfoliation of black phosphorus in a sealed vial with N2 (black) or air (blue) in the head space of the vial shows that the presence of air causes 28% of the phosphorus to become oxidized. Binding energies also increase, although the origin of this effect – whether sample charging, doping, or both – is not yet clear. (n) When few-layer 2D phosphorus (<6 layers) is suspended in isopropyl alcohol and exposed to light and air (λ = 460 nm), the apparent pH (recorded using a pH meter) decreases because of acid production100 (reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 3  Degradation and stabilization of thin layer antimonene. (a) The image was taken immediately after exfoliation. White scale bar 500 nm. (b) Same as in (a) but two months later. (c) The image was taken immediately after (b) but with the sample immersed in water. The inset shows atomic periodicity compatible with the antimonene atomic lattice. The selected region is the same as in Fig. 2c. (d) Profiles were taken along the lines drawn in (a)–(c). Please notice the similarity of the corrugation on the antimonene flakes confirming again the absence of environmental degradation88 (reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH). (e) Typical STM image (−2.0 V, −100 pA) of antimonene islands on the PdTe2 substrate before air exposure. The surface of the islands is smooth without impurities. (f) STM image (−2.0 V, −100 pA) of the same sample as in (e) after exposure to air for 20 min. (g) STM image of the same sample after annealing to 380 K. The small spots have disappeared and the surface of the antimonene islands has become clean and smooth again. (h) XPS measurements of the same sample. The upper (wine), middle (pink), and lower (orange) curves represent the Sb 4d spectrum before exposure to air, after air exposure, and after annealing to 380 K, respectively. The peaks’ positions and shapes in these three curves have not changed, demonstrating that the antimonene is chemically inert to air. The photon energy of XPS experiments for Sb 4d measurements is 180 eV102 (reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH).	 

 	Fig. 4  Liquid-phase exfoliation (LPE) of BP and Sb via ultrasonication. (a) Photographs of ground BP dispersions in solvents stored for 12 h after the sonication process. (b) Plot of surface tension versus phosphorene concentration in different solvents75 (reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH). (c) Photograph of BP dispersions in NMP following different centrifugation conditions (1: as-prepared, 2: 500 rpm, 3: 5000 rpm, 4: 10000 rpm, and 5: 15000 rpm). (d) Concentration of the five BP dispersions from part (c). (e) Thickness and lateral area histograms of the five BP dispersions from part (c) as obtained from AFM images95 (reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). (f) Extinction coefficient of BP dispersed in different solvents after the LPE process, plotted as a function of surface tension (lower axis) and surface energy (upper axis). Dots represent the low/nontoxic solvents (health code ≤1 NFPA704); crosses denote the highly toxic solvents (health code ≥2 NFPA704). Dots and crosses with colors from blue to light-green represent the solvents with bp <100 °C, while the ones from turquoise to orange represent solvents with bp >100 °C117 (reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). (g) Photograph of a dispersion of exfoliated FL-antimonene showing the Faraday–Tyndall effect. (h) Topographic AFM image of few-layer antimonene drop-cast onto SiO2 showing flakes with micrometer lateral dimensions (scale bar: 3 mm). (i) Height histogram of the image in (h) where the different thicknesses of the terraces can be readily seen. The constant minimum thickness of about 4 nm can be easily observed76 (reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH).	 

 	Fig. 5  Preparation and structural characterization of anode electrodes. (a) Digital photographs of NMP dispersions of graphene (3 μg mL−1), phosphorene (17 μg mL−1) and a mixture prepared by mixing the dispersions of graphene and phosphorene at a volume ratio of 6:1, corresponding to a carbon–phosphorus molar ratio of 2.78:1. Red light beams were incident from the side to demonstrate the Tyndall effect. (b) TEM image of the phosphorene–graphene hybrid. Scale bar, 2 μm. (c) HRTEM image of the cross-section of the phosphorene–graphene hybrid (the turned-up right edge in “b”). Scale bar, 2 nm32 (reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing group). (d) Photograph of a BP–G hybrid paper, showing its good flexibility. (e) Top-view and (f) cross-sectional-view SEM images of the BP–G hybrid paper in (d), showing that the small BP nanosheets (indicated by blue arrows) are in close contact with the large graphene sheets (indicated by red arrows). (g) STEM-HAADF image and the corresponding EDS elemental mappings of the (h) C–K line and (i) P–K line of a region of the BP–G hybrid paper in (d)123 (reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH). (j) Scanning electron microscopy images of an electrode made of FL-BPacetone mixed with CB and PVdF deposited onto copper substrates. (k) Energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometry elemental mapping of carbon (cyan) and phosphorus (red) of FL-BPacetone. Electrochemical analysis of the FL-BP film (acetone-exfoliated sample data points shown in blue; CHP-exfoliated sample data points shown in orange)117 (reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). (l) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of SbNS-G film. Bulk Sb powders were first exfoliated in IPA solvent to obtain ultrathin Sb nanosheets; subsequently, the as-prepared Sb nanosheets were mixed with graphene (Sb:GO = 4:1) and then collected by vacuum filtration and chemically reduced to a uniform SbNS-G film. (m) Typical digital photograph of SbNS-G film, which shows the flexible feature. (n) Typical scanning transmission electron microscopy image of SbNS-G film, which shows the uniform property, and the corresponding elemental mapping images of (o) antimony, (p) carbon, and (q) oxygen in the pink rectangular frame area, which reflect the uniform distribution of Sb, C, and O in the film76 (reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH).	 

 	Fig. 6  Theoretical studies on diffusion of Li+ and Na+ in BP, phosphorene and phosphorene–graphene composite. (a) Schematic of Li surface loading (adsorption process), and diffusion along armchair and zigzag directions on phosphorene surface; (b) energy profiles of Li diffusion along armchair and zigzag directions on phosphorene surface and (c) in black phosphorus85 (reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). (d) Insertion mechanism in black phosphorus with an increase in the concentration of Li and Na. The solid gray line represents a supercell containing 64 P atoms, and the number represents the formation energy124 (reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). (e) Calculated formation energy of NaxP systems133 (reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). (f) Top and side views of P/G (left) and Li adsorption sites (right) in P/G (Li/P/G, P/Li/G, and P/G/Li); energy barrier and diffusion path of one Li atom diffusion along the outside surface of graphene (P/G/Li) and phosphorene (Li/P/G) (g) and in the interlayer of P/G (P/Li/G) (h)134 (reproduced with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 7  Experimental evidence for volume expansion of BP upon (de)sodiation and (de)lithiation. Ex situ XRD of the (002) (a) and (004) (b) diffraction peak of black phosphorus taken before charging and after charging down to different voltages; (c) schematics of black phosphorus with the first step of sodium-ion intercalation, and the second step of intercalation/alloying reactions to form Na3P. Time-lapse TEM images of sodiation in black phosphorus after 0 s (d) and 170 s (e) of potentiostatic sodiation. Sodium ions transport along the x-axis channel, causing volume expansion along the y-axis direction32 (reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group). In situ TEM electrochemical lithiation/delithiation experiments of a slightly thick phosphorene nanoflake prepared by shear-exfoliation in NMP and centrifugation at a rotation speed of 1000 rpm. (f–h) SAED pattern of the lithiated phosphorene nanoflake, revealing the formation of Li3P after lithiation. Time-resolved TEM images from video frames show morphological evolutions of the phosphorene nanoflakes during the electrochemical lithiation process, and a lateral expansion of around 30% was observed for the lithiated phosphorene nanoflakes. (i) SAED pattern of the lithiated phosphorene nanoflake. (j–l) Time-resolved TEM images from video frames show morphological evolutions of the phosphorene nanoflake during the electrochemical delithiation process. (m) SAED pattern of the delithiated phosphorene nanoflake, revealing Li3P residual after delithiation. Multi-cycle in situ TEM electrochemical lithiation/delithiation experiments of an individual few-layer phosphorene nanoflake prepared by shear-exfoliation in NMP and centrifugation at a rotation speed of 6000 rpm. No decomposition phenomena took place during the delithiation, proving the superior structural stability compared with the thick phosphorene nanoflakes. (n–q) Time-resolved TEM images of the first lithiation/delithiation cycle, showing superior morphological restorability and structural stability78 (reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2016 IOP Publishing).	 
As (rhombohedral) → LiAs (monoclinic) → Li2As → Li3As (hexagonal).

 	Fig. 8  Electrochemical reaction mechanism of As/C and Bi/C nanocomposites. (a) Differential capacity plot, (b) XRD patterns of the As/C nanocomposite for the first cycle, (c) HRTEM image with the corresponding lattice spacing of the LiAs phase formed at 0.85 V during the first discharge reaction, and (d) HRTEM image with the corresponding lattice spacing of the As phase formed at 2.0 V during the first charge reaction. (e)–(g) Mechanism of quasi intercalation reaction between the As and LiAs phases (As atoms: yellow; Li atoms: red)137 (reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2016 Springer). (h) Differential capacity plot and (i) X-ray diffraction patterns (small Greek numbers correspond to the potential indicated in (h)) of the Bi/C nanocomposite for the first cycle138 (reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2009 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 9  Theoretical and experimental studies on diffusion/extraction of Li and Na in antimonene. (a) Monolayer Sb supercell showing the possible adsorption sites. The buckled structure is color coded here in orange and green for easier identification of Sb atoms at different z co-ordinates from the top view. The Li/Na atoms’ adsorption sites are represented in blue from the side view; diffusion pathways (b) and diffusion barrier (c) for Li or Na adatoms on monolayer Sb surface are shown here. The equivalent paths along other chiral directions are also shown139 (reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2017 Elsevier). (d) Ex situ SAED patterns during sodiation at 1.5, 0.68, and 0.01 V and desodiation states at 0.96 and 1.5 V at 0.5C rate during the third discharging/charging cycle. (e) Schematic diagram showing the five states of the FL-A anode during sodiation/desodiation processes corresponding to the different crystalline phases/crystal structures of Sb, NaSb, and Na3Sb at the specific charging−discharging voltage. (f) Schematic diagram of the crystalline phase evolution (Sb  NaSb  Na3Sb) during the sodiation/desodiation process. (g) In situ XRD pattern evolution of FL-A anodes during the third sodiation/desodiation process at a current of 0.2C. (h) Change of Sb lattice constants of (003) and (110) planes corresponding to the c-axis and a/b-axis during sodiation/desodiation processes120 (reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 
Bi(rhombohedral) → LiBi(tetragonal) → Li3Bi(cubic).

 	Scheme 2  Preparation of electrodes based on 3D- and 2D-pnictogens. The volume expansion of active alloy-based anodic material (left) upon intercalation-alloying reactions (right). (a) Active material; (b) active material–conductive carbon composite (c) chemically bonded active material–conductive carbon; (d) 2D active material–graphene composite.	 

 	Fig. 10  Electrochemical characterization of phosphorene–conductive carbon composite anodes. (a) Reversible desodiation capacities for the first 100 galvanostatic cycles of various phosphorene–graphene electrodes with different carbon–phosphorus mole ratios (C/P) of 1.39, 2.07, 2.78 and 3.46, between 0.02 and 1.5 V at a current density of 0.05 A g−1. (b) Galvanostatic discharge–charge curves of the phosphorene–graphene (48.3 wt% P) anode plotted for the first, second and 50th cycles. (c) Volumetric and mass capacities at different current densities (from 0.05 to 26 A g−1). (d) Reversible desodiation capacity and coulombic efficiency for the first 100 galvanostatic cycles of the phosphorene/graphene (48.3 wt% P) anode tested under different currents32 (reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group). (e) The second galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles of the BP nanosheet, G paper, and BP–G hybrid paper electrodes at a current density of 100 mA g−1 within a potential window of 0.001–3 V (vs. Li+/Li0). (f) Rate performance of the BP nanosheet, graphene paper, and BP–G hybrid paper electrodes at different current densities. (g) Cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of the BP–G hybrid paper electrode at 500 mA g−1 for 500 cycles after the rate capability test123 (reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH).	 

 	Fig. 11  Electrochemical characterization of phosphorene–conductive carbon composite anodes. Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) PG-SPS and (b) PG electrodes on Cu foil with the same mass loading of 0.65 mg cm−2. (c) The first galvanic charge/discharge measurements of few layered BP, PG, and PG-SPS at a current density of 100 mA g−1. (d) Rate capabilities of PG and PG-SPS electrodes at various current densities. (e) Cycling life of PG and PG-SPS electrodes based on volumetric capacities at a current density of 100 mA g−1. (f) Long-term cycle life of the PG-SPS electrode at high current densities of 500 mA g−1 (200 cycles) and 10 A g−175 (reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH). (g) Voltage profile upon galvanostatic charge/discharge of BP-based electrodes at 0.1 A g−1 between 50 mV and 3 V. Thick and thin lines correspond to the 1st and 20th cycle, respectively. Specific capacity and coulombic efficiency over galvanostatic charge/discharge and cycling (h) between 50 mV and 3 V at 0.1 A g−1 and (i) different specific currents, for both FL-BPacetone- and FL-BPCHP-based electrodes. Orange: FL-BPCHP, blue: FL-BPacetone117 (reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 12  Electrochemical performance of 3D bulk structures of As and Bi. (a) Voltage profiles of the 1st, 30th, and 60th cycles of 57:30:13 Asnano:MWCNT:PAA (w:w) half cells in 1 M LiPF6 in 1:1 FEC:DEC w:w loaded to 0.02 V. (b) Voltage profiles of 57:30:13 Asnano:MWCNT:PAA half cells loaded to 0.75 V vs. Li. The first cycle load and unload is presented as a dashed line for clarity; PAA: polyacrylic acid; FEC: fluoroethylene carbonate30 (reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2017 The Electrochemical Society). (c) Charge/discharge curves of the Bi@C core–shell NWs at a current density of 100 mA g−1. (d) Cycling performance of commercial Bi microparticles, Bi2S3@C core–shell NWs and Bi@C core–shell NWs, at a current density of 100 mA g−1167 (reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 13  Electrochemical characterization of antimonene–conductive carbon composite anodes. (a) Selected first-two charge–discharge curves of SbNS-G film (1.6 mg cm−2) at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2. (b) Cyclic performances of SbNS-G and graphene films at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2, respectively. (c) Selected charge–discharge curves of SbNS-G film (1.6 mg cm−2) at various current densities from 0.2 to 4.0 mA cm−2. (d) Rate performances of SbNS-G and graphene films at various current densities from 0.2 to 4.0 mA cm−2. (e) Cyclic performances of SbNS-G and graphene films at a current density of 4.0 mA cm−276 (reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH). (f) Long-term cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of the FL-A and bulk Sb powder at a rate of 0.5C. (g) Rate capability of FL-A. (h) CV profiles of FL-A between 0.01 and 1.5 V at a rate of 0.1 mV s−1120 (reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
