Graphene on {116} faceted monocrystalline anatase nanosheet array for ultraviolet detection  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR08037A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR08037A
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 3606-3612Graphene on {116} faceted monocrystalline anatase nanosheet array for ultraviolet detection

        
          
            Yu 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Honglei 
            Cai
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Fangfang 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianlin 
            Wang
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Qiuping 
            Huang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Zhengping 
            Fu
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Yalin 
            Lu
          
        
      *c
aCAS Key Laboratory of Materials for Energy Conversion, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei 230026, P. R. China
bHefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei 230026, P. R. China
cQuantum Materials & Photonic Technology Laboratory National, Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory, Synergetic Innovation Center of Quantum Information & Quantum Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, P. R. China. E-mail: fuzp@ustc.edu.cn; yllu@ustc.edu.cn
dDepartment of Physics, School of Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan
Received 
      29th October 2017
    , Accepted 2nd January 2018First published on 2nd January 2018AbstractA structure composed of a nanosheet array may trap photons, which could be used to enhance the optical response via resonances; this may be highly useful in ultraviolet (UV) detection, photocatalysis, solar cells, etc. Moreover, anatase nanosheets exposed with the active {001}, {111}, and {116} facets are promising in applications such as Li-ion battery, photocatalysis, and electrochemistry. Therefore, in this study, the {116} faceted single-crystalline anatase nanosheet array with the sheet spacing in the range of several hundred nanometers was directly grown on the transparent conductive substrates. A photo-detector was fabricated by transferring a graphene electrode to the top of the anatase nanosheet array. The resultant device is inactive to visible-light irradiation and instantly responds to the UV light, which is due to the unique UV absorption property of the anatase nanosheet array and the advantage of the Schottky junction between the interfaces of graphene and anatase. The energy barrier between the two materials is 0.122 eV. We have provided a thorough research on graphene/monocrystal anatase-NSs.
1. Introduction
Ultraviolet (UV) detectors have wide applications in various fields, including medical, genetics research, space communication, virus monitoring, and military surveillance. Fast and broadband response in UV, toughness to the incident light and less affection to the visible light are few characteristics required for some specific applications.1–3 Traditional broad bandgap semiconductors, particularly metal oxides, such as tin oxide (SnO2), titanium oxide (TiO2), and zinc oxide (ZnO), have been extensively studied.4–6 Among them, anatase TiO2 draws vast attention due to its high dielectric constant, high refractive index, and excellent chemical stability. Moreover, anatase is a weak n-type semiconducting material, which makes it an ideal material to produce the composite junctions with other p-type materials.7
Recently, graphene-based photo-electric devices have drawn great attention because of its superior optical and electrical properties.8 Graphene has an almost flat absorption to the specific optical spectrum and has ballistic electronic transport and ultrahigh carrier mobility, which may lower the recombination possibility of electrons and holes.9,10 These properties make graphene an ideal material for photo-detecting devices when it is combined with other photo-sensitive materials.11 For example, Yu et al. used graphene and ZnO nanorod array to detect UV light. Taking the advantages of a single crystalized ZnO nanorod, they fabricated a UV photo-detector that was capable of monitoring a fast switching light with a frequency as high as 2.25 kHz.12 Luo et al. employed the anodization method to obtain a polycrystalline anatase nanotube array and covered it with a monolayer graphene. They conducted a comprehensive study of the fabricated UV detector and proposed an unique physical mechanism based on the band structure.13 However, the polycrystalline TiO2 nanotubes own the characteristics of low mobility and numerous defects, leading to the slow photoresponse.
Apparently, the room for further improvement in the performances of the photo-electric devices based on the graphene/anatase heterojunctions is still large if using single crystalline nanocrystals with various morphologies, such as nanorod, nanoflake, nanosheet, and nanoflower, is considered.14–16 Among various nanostructures, nanopore and nanosheet have greater advantages in both photoelectric conversion and solar-energy harvesting because of their flat and continuous walls, which could be used to enhance the light absorption by light-trapping due to multiple reflections.17 In fact, photoelectric devices based on single-crystalline nanocrystals may present a higher performance than that with polycrystalline nanocrystals. The grain boundaries in polycrystalline nanocrystals scatter and recapture the charge-carriers and may provide more secondary recombination sites than those in the single-crystalline nanocrystals.18–20 Therefore, in order to further optimize the device performance of the anatase-based UV photodetectors, we intentionally choose single-crystalline anatase nanosheets (NSs) with the {116} facets. In particular, the reasons to select this high Miller-index {116} facet include the exhibition of a much higher reduction capacity and a better electrochemical reversibility than those of anatase with other low index facets (including P25). Therefore, this unique combination of single-crystalline, nanosheet, and the {116} facet in this study may provide the better performances discussed above not only for the UV detectors, but also for the future opto-chemical sensors.21 We synthesized graphene by low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and hybridized the graphene with the {116} facet anatase NSs. The UV photo-detector, which we fabricated herein, has a fast response to the UV light, but unresponsive to the visible light. The rising time and recovery speed values of the UV detector are less than one second, which makes the device more practical in the applications.
2. Experimental section
2.1 Device fabrication
The anatase NSs were synthesized by a hydrothermal method following that reported in previous studies.21 The fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate was sequentially cleaned in acetone, ethanol, and deionized water. Then, it was immersed in a KOH solution for 24 h to obtain a clean surface. Subsequently, the FTO substrate was rinsed with deionized water and dried using a high-pressure nitrogen gas gun. We first spin-coated an anatase seed layer on the as-prepared FTO substrate for further growth of the anatase NSs. The precursor solution was made by adding 3 mL titanium butoxide dropwise to 20 mL toluene and then, the mixture was stirred for several minutes, followed by the addition of 1.2 mL hydrofluoric acid. After fully mixing, the as-prepared FTO coated with a seed layer was placed vertically inside a 50 ml Teflon-lined autoclave, which was kept at 180 °C for 24 h. Following this, the sample was washed with ethanol and deionized water for several times. Monolayer graphene was synthesized by a low-pressure CVD method using Cu as the substrate.22 Cu sheets (Alfa Aesar, CAS: 7440508) were cut into small pieces and pretreated with acetic acid and washed with deionized water before loading into the CVD reactor. Then, the chamber was evacuated to a low pressure and slowly heated up to 1030 °C. After being annealed at 1030 °C for 60 min, a mixed gas of 1 sccm methane and 100 sccm hydrogen was introduced. Graphene was synthesized during the next 30 min and then, the reactor was rapidly cooled to room temperature. The as-prepared graphene/Cu sheet was cut into small pieces, etched, and rinsed in deionized water.23

Fig. 1(a) shows the structure and the picture of our as-fabricated UV-photo detector, which is composed of anatase NSs and monolayer graphene. In the process of device fabrication, a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) dielectric film was used to prevent upper metal electrode from directly contacting the anatase layer in order to get a better contact of the junction of anatase and graphene. The Au electrode was sputtered onto the PET layer. Both the Au electrode and FTO were connected to an external electric circuit by silver paste and copper wires. The contact area of the junction was 0.5 mm2. To generate a good contact, the TiO2 NSs wafer was annealed in the air before use to get rid of the surface residues. The PMMA-supported graphene was transferred onto the nanosheet array by a wet transfer method. After Cu was etched, the PMMA-supported graphene was floated on the surface of DI water and was then salvaged by the TiO2 NSs wafer. There exists water between graphene and TiO2 NSs as a buffer layer. Then, the device was dried in the air and in an oven in turn. After the device was totally dried, graphene was covered on the TiO2 NSs like a thin layer of gauze kerchief.
 Fig. 1  (a) The schematic illustration of the graphene/anatase-NSs Schottky junction. (b) Photograph of the real detector. 
2.2 Structural analysis and device characterization
The morphology of the anatase nanosheet array was studied by field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JSM-6700F). High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image was recorded using a JEM-2011 (JEOL, Japan). High-resolution X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments were performed on a Rigaku four-circle diffractometer with a Ge(220) 2-bounce incident-beam monochromator with Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). All electric measurements were performed under ambient conditions. The electric characteristics of the devices were measured with/without illumination using the Keithley 2400 sourcemeters and the low-temperature electric characteristics were investigated using a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design). Ultra-violet illumination was carried out using UVLMS-38. The Raman spectrum was recorded on an inVia confocal Raman microscope (λ = 532 nm, Renishaw).
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Characterization

Fig. 2 presents the SEM images of anatase NSs on the FTO substrate. The top-view images (Fig. 2a–c) show very dense and uniform arrays of anatase NSs in a very large area. All sheets are of about 1 μm width and the thickness is less than 100 nm. Fig. 2(d) is the top-view SEM image of anatase NSs with graphene on the top. The magnification is the same as that for Fig. 2(c). We can observe that there is a gauze kerchief-like layer on the top of the anatase NSs. The SEM image shown in Fig. 2(d) was recorded without depositing a Pt layer. Comparing these two SEM images, we can observe that the resolutions are almost the same. This confirms that there is a conductive layer on the top of the anatase NSs in Fig. 2(d), which indicates the existence of graphene. From the cavities between anatase NSs, the depth of the field of Fig. 2(d) is weaker, which also proves that there is a layer of graphene blocking the electrons. Together with the Raman spectrum shown in Fig. 3(c), we are certain that graphene is well-contacted with anatase NSs. The cross-sectional SEM image in Fig. 2(e) shows that the average height of anatase NSs is about 2 μm with a 300 nm seed layer. The dimensional size of the NSs can be well-controlled by the preparation conditions. As shown in Fig. 2(c), the anatase NSs are almost perpendicular to the FTO substrate. They also cross and support each other to avoid the agglomeration and collapse, making this structure have a good stability. The distance between each nanosheet is approximately equal to the wavelength of UV light. The film surface appears to be smooth, which is more convenient for the future device preparation to trap the photons.
 Fig. 2  (a, b, c) Top-view SEM images of anatase NSs at different magnifications. (d) Top-view SEM image of anatase NSs with graphene on top. (e) Cross-sectional SEM image of the anatase NSs. 
 Fig. 3  (a) HRTEM image of one typical nanosheet. (b) XRD pattern of NSs array. The diffraction peaks marked by the red rhombuses belong to the FTO substrate. ‘A’ indicates the anatase phase TiO2. (c) Raman spectrum of anatase NSs with and without graphene. 
To further evaluate the crystallinity of the nanosheets, HRTEM and XRD techniques were adopted. Fig. 3(a) reveals the pristine single-crystalline NSs. The lattice constant of two-dimensional lattice fringes is 0.35 nm, which is attributed to the {101} plane of anatase.21 The corresponding XRD pattern (Fig. 3(b)) further demonstrates the anatase phase of NSs (according to JCPDF no. 89-4921, a = b = 0.3777 nm, and c = 0.9501 nm). The (220) and (211) diffraction peaks are greatly enhanced. In addition, the strongest diffraction peak is the (220) diffraction peak, indicating that the vertical growth direction of the nanosheets is along the axial direction of <10>, which is perpendicular to the {110} plane. The XRD pattern and the HRTEM fringe are identical to those in our previous reports, confirming that the nanosheets are exposed with the {116} crystal facet.21 Four Raman peaks at 145, 397, 514, and 631 cm−1 are attributed to anatase-phase TiO2.7,24 In addition, D band (∼1348 cm−1), G band (∼1591 cm−1) and 2D band (2678 cm−1), which are the characteristic peaks of graphene, are also observed.25 We also show the Raman spectrum of graphene on SiO2 to compare with graphene on the TiO2 NSs. According to the spectrum shown in Fig. 3(c), we can observe that the D band is not very clear before the transformation. The presence of the D band indicates the presence of are some sp3 carbon bonds. The 5 cm−1 up-shifting of the 2D band reveals the interlayer coupling effect between graphene and anatase NSs.26 The 2D/G intensity ratio is greater than 2, which indicates that graphene on both SiO2 and TiO2 is single-layered.
The graphene/anatase-NSs Schottky junction shows high sensitivity towards the UV light illumination. Fig. 4(a) compares the I–V characteristics of the UV detector at the bias voltage from −5 V to +1 V with and without the UV light irradiation. The UV light enhanced the backward current by reducing the Schottky junction barrier. Taking the incident UV light power into account, the responsivity of our as-fabricated UV detector is 0.5 A W−1 at −5 V bias voltage as calculated by the equation, (1)where Iph is the current increment generated by the UV light, Pin is the incident light power and A is the junction area. The external quantum efficiency is about 3% according to the equation, (2)where Iph is the current increment generated by the UV light, ϕ is the luminous flux, q is the basic electron charge, h is the Planck's constant, ν is the incident light frequency and Pin is the incident light power.27 To understand how the three different incident light irradiations make a difference, we measured the absorption spectrum of the anatase NSs. From Fig. 4(b), we can observe that the absorption edge of anatase NSs is around 367 nm, which corresponds to the bandgap. In addition, anatase NSs has the best absorption at 300 nm. Since single-crystalline anatase is a wide gap semiconductor with an indirect bandgap,28 the absorption edge can be obtained using the following formula, (αhν)1/2 = C(hν − Eg)(3)where α is the absorption coefficient, h is the Plank's constant, ν is the wave frequency, C is a constant and Eg is the bandgap. As shown in the inset in Fig. 4(b), the bandgap of our as-prepared anatase NSs is around 3.38 eV, which is very close to the value reported in the literature.28 It can be observed that the absorption will rise with an increase in photon energy according to the formula (or decrease of photon wavelength). Fig. 4(c) shows the photoresponse of our as-fabricated UV detector as a function of time under different wavelength irradiations. To evaluate the UV detecting performance, we carried out the measurement for eight cycles under each wavelength irradiation. The device was illuminated with UV light and a shutter was placed amid them to control the light incident on the device. The bias voltage was fixed to −5 V. The result indicates that the device is stable and has a fast response. The device functioned best at the 302 nm irradiation. In addition, the device is demonstrated to be unresponsive to visible light irradiation on testing it under a white LED light with the wavelength ranging from 400 nm to 800 nm. From Fig. 4(d) and (e), it can be inferred that the growing and decaying speeds are very fast. By fitting the raw data to the exponential equation, the time constants for response and recovery are 140 ms and 130 ms, respectively, at the 254 nm irradiation and 220 ms and 90 ms, respectively, at the 302 nm irradiation.29 The electron in the valence band will be activated to the conduction band when a photon with the energy higher than the band gap of the material is absorbed. The photon energy greater than the band gap will transform to the kinetic energy of the carriers, which may result in the faster response speed at the 254 nm illumination of because the photon energy is higher. Though the time constant (τ) is the fitting parameter, which is related to the electron separation and transfer, the value of τ cannot represent the characteristic speed of the inherent electric behaviour; however, τ can reflect the photo-response speed to some level.
 Fig. 4  (a) I–V curves of the graphene/anatase-NSs Schottky junction in the dark, under the illumination of 365 nm, 302 nm, and 254 nm and white LED lights. (b) Absorption spectrum of anatase NSs. The inset shows the absorption edge. (c) The photoresponse of the UV detector as a function of time under different wavelength radiations. (d) and (e) are the enlarged region of the blue area in (c) for 254 nm and 302 nm, respectively. 
The I–V curve of the monolayer graphene/anatase-NSs-Schottky junction (Fig. 5(a)) shows the rectifying characteristic. The Schottky junction acts as high-resistance state when the current flows from the graphene to the anatase NSs, thus leading to very small current. On the contrary, the Schottky junction acts as a low-resistance state when the current flows from the anatase NSs to the graphene, which results in a relatively large current. At the forward bias, the diode is already in an “ON” state. If the external electric field is the same direction with the Schottky junction, the photo-generated current contribution is negligible for the total current under the forward bias. To evaluate the barrier height (ΦB) between graphene and the anatase NSs, we measured and analyzed the temperature-dependent I–V behavior of the graphene/anatase-NSs junction structure.13 As shown in Fig. 5(b), when the temperature decreases from 350 K to 50 K, the current declines correspondingly because of series resistance and the interfacial layer effect.30,31 For an ideal Schottky junction, the current flowing through the Schottky junction can be described by the thermionic emission theory with the following equation,32,33 (4)where I0 is the reverse saturation current, which can be expressed as (5)q is the basic electron charge, n is the ideality factor for a diode, k is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature in Kelvin. In the eqn (5), S is the effective junction area, A* the effective Richardson constant, and ΦB is the Schottky barrier height between graphene and anatase (in units of eV). The above equation can be transformed into the following equation, (6)
 Fig. 5  (a) I–V curve of the monolayer graphene/anatase-NSs Schottky junction with different sweeping ranges. (b) I–V curves of the Schottky junction in the temperature ranging from 50 to 350 K. (c) Richardson curve of the Schottky junction as a function of the reciprocal of T and the linear fitting, the Richardson curve was measured at 1 V. 
Then, the Schottky barrier height ΦB between graphene and the anatase NSs can be extracted from the slope of the Richardson plot (logI0/T2vs. 1/T) using the reverse saturation current in the temperature region dominated by the thermionic emission as shown in Fig. 5(c).34 The abscissa coordinates are variables of the temperature and the vertical coordinates are variables of the reverse saturation currents in the temperature region dominated by the thermionic emission. This shows the Richardson plot at a reverse bias of 1 V and the linear best-fit, from which the barrier height (ΦB) is extracted to be 0.122 eV.
We simulated the electric field intensity of the anatase NSs array by solving the electromagnetic equations with the finite element method in the frequency domain. We applied the periodic boundary conditions in x- and y-direction and the perfectly matched layers have been used in propagation direction to absorb any reflected and transmitted field. The incident light on the top of the structure has a wavelength of 302 nm. The conductivity of graphene can be described by the Kubo formula,35 (7)where μ and Γ are the chemical potential and the scattering rate of graphene (μ = 0.5 eV and Γ = 1 THz), respectively. Moreover, the permittivity of polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) and anatase are taken as 2.3013 + 0.0014i12 and 10.394 + 5.6485i,36 respectively. Fig. 6 shows the electric field energy density distribution of the nanosheets. Fig. 6(a) and (c) show the electric field distribution without graphene, while Fig. 6(b) and (d) show the electric field distribution of the anatase nanosheets with monolayer graphene. The electric field distribution of the anatase nanosheet array with monolayer graphene is almost identical to that of the anatase nanosheets without monolayer graphene, which is consistent with the high transparency of monolayer graphene. The incident energy can be confined to the Schottky contact region. As a result, the light trapping effect will be highly beneficial to the UV light photodetection.
 Fig. 6  Simulated electric field energy density distribution of the anatase NSs array without (a, c) and with (b, d) graphene by the finite element method. (a) and (b) are the top-view images of anatase NS; (c) and (d) are the side-view images. 
3.2. Physical mechanism
To reveal the physical mechanism of the UV photo-detection, an energy level diagram of the graphene/anatase-NSs Schottky junction is shown in Fig. 7(a).13 Due to the wet transfer method, the CVD derived graphene is usually p-doped because of the influences of the etchant, organic residue, and the substrate.37 At the interface of graphene and anatase, a Schottky junction is formed, which makes the device work as a diode. When the metallic graphene contacts the semiconducting TiO2 layer, free electrons will transfer and flatten the Fermi level at the interface region. As a result, an internal field builds up and the vacuum level, the valence band, and the conduction band are bent. A negative bias voltage (Vr) was applied during the photoresponse experiments, which shifted the Fermi levels across the junction. The photo-induced electrons and holes will separate with the help of the junction, which will increase the current. A built-in electric field is formed at the space charge region. When a forward bias voltage was applied, the electrons were driven to the space charge region, making the Fermi level upward. Thus, the built-in electric field is smaller, which makes the Schottky junction act on the low-resistance stage. As a result, the forward current passes through the junction without any barrier. On the contrary, a backward bias voltage will lower the Fermi level and enlarge the built-in electric field, making the Schottky junction act as an “OFF” state of a diode. When the UV light is illuminated on the device, the photo-induced electrons and holes are generated in the anatase NSs layer and separated by the built-in electric field at the interface of graphene and anatase. The photo-induced electrons are driven to the space charge region, making the junction smaller. This leads to the generation of a large backward current. Therefore, the photo-current is generated at the backward bias voltage. We have mentioned previously that the Schottky barrier height ΦB between graphene and anatase NSs is only 0.122 eV, which is smaller than the value previously reported in the literature.13 Because the width of the junction is shorter if the Schottky barrier is smaller, the photo-generated carriers only need to move a shorter distance to be collected, which may decrease the response time and lead to the better performance. This leads to a fast response speed when the UV illumination is turned ON or OFF. Moreover, as illustrated in the red dashed box at the top right corner in Fig. 7(a), the vertical stack of the anatase NSs produces a large number of photon wells. This structure with the graphene layer acting as a “lid” can trap more photons, which makes our detector more efficient. In order to figure out the benefit of NSs, we simulated the absorption spectrums of NSs and NRs using the same parameters as discussed before. Fig. 7(b) and (c) show the basic units of the periodic arrays, such as the length and width. Fig. 7(d) shows the simulated absorption results. The absorption data are normalized to the volume of anatase in both structures. We can observe that the absorption of NSs structure is clearly higher than that of TiO2 NRs in the UV region from 300 nm to 400 nm.
 Fig. 7  (a) Energy level diagram of the graphene/anatase-NSs Schottky junction with the UV illumination at a negative bias voltage. (b, c) Basic units of the periodic arrays of NSs and NRs in the simulation. (d) The simulated absorption spectra of NSs and NRs in the range from 300 nm to 400 nm. 
4. Conclusions
In conclusion, we took the advantages of the anatase NSs with the high index facets grown by a hydrothermal method, which own numerous merits such as the rich amount of photon wells, single crystals, and stable physical and chemical properties. The anatase NSs array was combined with monolayer graphene synthesized by CVD to fabricate the UV detection device. Due to the built-in electric field generated at the Schottky junction, the electrons and holes generated by the anatase absorbed ultraviolet photons were effectively separated. We studied the temperature influence on our as-fabricated UV detector and obtained the Schottky junction barrier height of only 0.122 eV. The response and the recovery time of our as-fabricated device to the UV light at the different wavelengths were both less than 1 second. The UV detector effectively utilizes the optical property of the monocrystalline anatase. It is UV sensitive, but not response to visible-light irradiation. Through our experiments, it is proven that this type of structure prepared by single-crystalline anatase NSs and monolayer graphene exhibits a good performance in UV detection.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51627901), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2016YFA0401004) and the Chinese Universities Scientific Fund (CUSF, WK2310000055), and also was partially carried out at the USTC Center for Micro and Nanoscale Research and Fabrication. Dr J. Wang appreciates the support from China Scholarship Council (201606345024).
References
E. Monroy, F. Omnès and F. Calle, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2003, 18, R33 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, L. M. Wong, Z. Zhang, Z. Wu, S. Wang, D. Chi, R. Hong and W. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 355, 398–402 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang, L. Hu, K. Huo, B. Gao, L. Zhao, M. Liao, P. K. Chu, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3907–3915 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, C. Gao, H. Duan, B. Lu, Y. Wang, L. Chen, Z. Zhang, X. Pan and E. Xie, Small, 2013, 9, 2005–2011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chinnamuthu, J. Dhar, A. Mondal, A. Bhattacharyya and N. Singh, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2012, 45, 135102 CrossRef .
M. Liu and H. K. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 173–175 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, M. Li, Z. Feng, J. Chen and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 927–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. Ferrari, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611–622 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. I. Bolotin, K. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fudenberg, J. Hone, P. Kim and H. Stormer, Solid State Commun., 2008, 146, 351–355 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chitara, L. Panchakarla, S. Krupanidhi and C. Rao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5419–5424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Nie, J. G. Hu, L. B. Luo, C. Xie, L. H. Zeng, P. Lv, F. Z. Li, J. S. Jie, M. Feng and C. Y. Wu, Small, 2013, 9, 2872–2879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Wang, F. X. Liang, B. Nie, L. H. Zeng, L. X. Zheng, P. Lv, Y. Q. Yu, C. Xie, Y. Y. Li and L. B. Luo, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2013, 30, 630–636 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, L. Wei, G. Wei, Q. Li, D. Wang, Y. Chen, S. Yan, G. Liu, L. Mei and J. Jiao, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 188 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Tang, P. Wee, Y. Lai, X. Wang, D. Gong, P. D. Kanhere, T.-T. Lim, Z. Dong and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2772–2780 CAS .
B. Zhao, F. Chen, Q. Huang and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5115–5117 RSC .
S. Mokkapati and K. Catchpole, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 101101 CrossRef .
C. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Jia, J. Yang, P. Sun and Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22276–22285 CAS .
C. Battaglia, J. Escarré, K. Söderström, M. Charrière, M. Despeisse, F.-J. Haug and C. Ballif, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 535–538 CrossRef CAS .
A. Polman and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 174–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, X. Li, R. Peng, X. Zhai, S. Yang, Z. Fu and Y. Lu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12434–12439 RSC .
X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung and E. Tutuc, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. W. Suk, A. Kitt, C. W. Magnuson, Y. Hao, S. Ahmed, J. An, A. K. Swan, B. B. Goldberg and R. S. Ruoff, Transfer of CVD-grown monolayer graphene onto arbitrary substrates, Texas Univ At Austin Dept of Mechanical Engineering,  2011 Search PubMed .
J. Xian, D. Li, J. Chen, X. Li, M. He, Y. Shao, L. Yu and J. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13157–13166 CAS .
M. S. Dresselhaus, A. Jorio, M. Hofmann, G. Dresselhaus and R. Saito, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Ferrari and D. M. Basko, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 235–246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Koppens, T. Mueller, P. Avouris, A. Ferrari, M. Vitiello and M. Polini, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 780–793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Lee, K. H. You and C. B. Park, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1084–1088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, Z. Liu, J. Li, G. A. Tai, S. P. Lau and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5878–5883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Pakma, N. Serin, T. Serin and Ş. Altındal, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2008, 23, 105014 CrossRef .
S. Chand and J. Kumar, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 1995, 10, 1680 CrossRef CAS .
J. Osvald, Solid State Commun., 2006, 138, 39–42 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Chen, M. Aykol, C.-C. Chang, A. Levi and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1863–1867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Mtangi, F. Auret, C. Nyamhere, P. J. Van Rensburg, M. Diale and A. Chawanda, Phys. B, 2009, 404, 1092–1096 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gusynin, S. Sharapov and J. Carbotte, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2006, 19, 026222 CrossRef .
D. Franta, D. Nečas and I. Ohlídal, Appl. Opt., 2015, 54, 9108–9119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, H. Luo, H. Wang, I. Usov, N. Suvorova, M. Jain, D. Feldmann, P. Dowden, R. DePaula and Q. Jia, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 102113 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) The schematic illustration of the graphene/anatase-NSs Schottky junction. (b) Photograph of the real detector.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a, b, c) Top-view SEM images of anatase NSs at different magnifications. (d) Top-view SEM image of anatase NSs with graphene on top. (e) Cross-sectional SEM image of the anatase NSs.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) HRTEM image of one typical nanosheet. (b) XRD pattern of NSs array. The diffraction peaks marked by the red rhombuses belong to the FTO substrate. ‘A’ indicates the anatase phase TiO2. (c) Raman spectrum of anatase NSs with and without graphene.	 
	(1)
	(2)
(αhν)1/2 = C(hν − Eg)	(3)

 	Fig. 4  (a) I–V curves of the graphene/anatase-NSs Schottky junction in the dark, under the illumination of 365 nm, 302 nm, and 254 nm and white LED lights. (b) Absorption spectrum of anatase NSs. The inset shows the absorption edge. (c) The photoresponse of the UV detector as a function of time under different wavelength radiations. (d) and (e) are the enlarged region of the blue area in (c) for 254 nm and 302 nm, respectively.	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 5  (a) I–V curve of the monolayer graphene/anatase-NSs Schottky junction with different sweeping ranges. (b) I–V curves of the Schottky junction in the temperature ranging from 50 to 350 K. (c) Richardson curve of the Schottky junction as a function of the reciprocal of T and the linear fitting, the Richardson curve was measured at 1 V.	 
	(7)

 	Fig. 6  Simulated electric field energy density distribution of the anatase NSs array without (a, c) and with (b, d) graphene by the finite element method. (a) and (b) are the top-view images of anatase NS; (c) and (d) are the side-view images.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Energy level diagram of the graphene/anatase-NSs Schottky junction with the UV illumination at a negative bias voltage. (b, c) Basic units of the periodic arrays of NSs and NRs in the simulation. (d) The simulated absorption spectra of NSs and NRs in the range from 300 nm to 400 nm.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
