One-dimensional nanostructures of II–VI ternary alloys: synthesis, optical properties, and applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NR05019H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NR05019H
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 17456-17476One-dimensional nanostructures of II–VI ternary alloys: synthesis, optical properties, and applications

        
          
            Junpeng 
            Lu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Hongwei 
            Liu
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Xinhai 
            Zhang
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Chorng Haur 
            Sow
          
        
      d
aSchool of Physics, Southeast University, 2 Southeast University Road, Nanjing 211189, China. E-mail: phyljp@seu.edu.cn
bJiangsu Key Lab on Opto-Electronic Technology, School of Physics and Technology, Nanjing Normal University, 1 Wenyuan Road, Nanjing 210023, China. E-mail: phylhw@njnu.edu.cn
cDepartment of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, South University of Science and Technology of China, 1088 Xueyuan Road, Nanshan District, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China
dDepartment of Physics, National University of Singapore, 2 Science Drive 3, Singapore 117542
Received 
      21st June 2018
    , Accepted 29th August 2018First published on 5th September 2018AbstractOne-dimensional (1D) nanostructures of II–VI ternary alloys are of prime interest due to their compatible features of both 1D nanostructures and semiconducting alloys. These features can facilitate materials with tunable bandgaps, which are crucial to the performance of photoelectrical devices. Herein, we present a comprehensive review summarizing the recent research progress pertinent to the diverse synthesis, optical fundamentals and applications of 1D nanostructures of II–VI ternary alloys. Considering multifunctional applications, the different growth mechanisms of the rational design and synthesis techniques are highlighted. Investigations of the fundamentals of the optical and photoelectrical properties of ternary alloyed II–VI semiconductors via the corresponding characterization techniques are also particularly discussed. Furthermore, we present the versatile potential practical applications of these materials. Finally, we extend the discussion to the most recent research advances on quaternary alloys, which provides a possible prospective forecast for the sustained development of alloyed 1D nanostructures.
Introduction
Numerous fascinating properties and potential applications have been demonstrated with 1D nanostructure systems. The recent increase in research interest for these systems is due to their properties that can be tuned by varying their size and morphology, where the relevance of the quantum confinement effect is greater.1,2 Utilizing the quantum confinement effect is a common approach to tune the bandgap of materials by controlling their dimensions. Due to the flexibility of achieving confinement in two dimensions of 1D structures, this approach is particularly favoured in 1D nanomaterials. However, for specific applications, an extreme reduction in size may not be desirable. For example, for the optical applications of nanolasers and waveguides,3–5 the Fabry–Perot cavity is an essential component, which requires reasonably large dimensions to avoid the diffraction limit. Therefore, alternative approaches to control and alter the bandgap of semiconductors are clearly desirable. 1D nanostructures of ternary alloys have been proposed and demonstrated as an effective bandgap-engineering strategy, which engineer the bandgap by modifying the constituent composition of certain semiconductor alloys.6,7
II–VI compound semiconductors, particularly cadmium chalcogenides and zinc chalcogenides, are a typical class of materials that have been intensively investigated in the field of 1D nanostructures.8–10 These materials have promising potential due to their superior optical properties, such as high quantum efficiency and light sensitivity.8 In addition, the wide range of their direct bandgap indicates the possibility of manufacturing optoelectronic devices that respond to multi-spectrum wavelengths. However, the response range and flexibility of these devices are limited by the distinct bandgap of individual materials. Therefore, alloying of 1D semiconductors with variable stoichiometry is an emerging method to achieve precise control and continuously tunable bandgaps.11–14 The synthesis of high quality 1D nanostructures of ternary alloys with elaborate control and reproducibility has been achieved via numerous investigations in this research field recently. In the last decade, rapid progress in the field of alloyed nanostructures has been made. Ternary alloyed nanostructures based on II–VI compound semiconductors have been prepared as emerging building blocks for ultra-broad wavelength tunable nanolasers, color-engineered light devices and displays, full spectrum solar cells and multispectral photodetectors.15–18 Therefore, this review provides a comprehensive summary on the growth mechanism and techniques for the preparation of ternary alloyed II–VI nanostructures. Subsequently, we discuss the fundamentals of the optical and photoelectrical properties relevant to these nanostructures, and their multitudinous potential in photonic and optoelectronic applications. Furthermore, we extend the discussion to the most recent research advances on quaternary alloys, which provides a possible prospective forecast for the sustained development of alloyed 1D nanostructures. Finally, we further review the existing challenges and forecast the feasible development directions of 1D nanostructures of II–VI ternary alloys ranging from their functional structure design and property improvement to extension of their application potentials.
Synthesis and construction of 1D ternary II–VI nanostructures
Synthesis is the foundation to investigate both the intrinsic properties and practical applications of nanostructures. Therefore, it is a prerequisite to develop reliable approaches with the ability to precisely prepare ternary nanostructures with the desired features of flexibly controlled morphology, stoichiometry, and phase purity. In this regard, various synthesis techniques have been inventively explored to prepare 1D ternary nanostructures with good reproducibility and reasonable cost. The synthesis of 1D nanostructures is facilitated through nucleation, crystallization, and growth in one direction either via a vapor or a solution process. In the following sections, we summarize the recently developed 1D ternary nanostructure systems and briefly discuss their growth mechanism. Furthermore, the brief principles of the exploited techniques developed for the production of high quality and critically controlled stoichiometry will also be discussed.
Growth mechanism

Vapor–solid growth. 
The vapor–solid (VS) process is usually classified as the growth of 1D nanomaterials without the use of catalysts. It is the spontaneous condensation conversion of vapor into a solid, which is induced by the decrease in supersaturation or the decrease in Gibbs free energy from crystallization. The competition between the kinetics of crystal growth and surface energy minimization determines the growth direction during the VS growth process. When the vapor species condense on the substrate, the anion–cation adatoms form a small nucleus while maintaining structural symmetry and balance of local charge. Due to the difference in the kinetic parameters of each crystal plane, anisotropic growth is facilitated and the nucleus guides well-defined low-index crystallographic faces. However, when the temperature is sufficiently high, the accumulation of arriving atoms onto the smooth low-index surface is masked by the high diffusivity of the adatoms, thus enabling the expansion of surface area as more atoms stick on the rougher growth face to form structures with partial dimensional confinement. Since the growth process does not involve the use of catalysts, only the growth temperature, supersaturation ratio and growth time are adjusted to optimize the quality of the products. Therefore, the VS growth process is frequently used to synthesize ternary 1D nanostructures. For example, Hark et al. synthesized tetrapod-like ZnSxSe1−x nanowires via a VS growth process,19 in which Zn, S, Se and SeS2 powders were used as the precursors. The central temperature was controlled at 800–850 °C, the pressure was maintained at 1 atm and the growth time was 30 min. Products of different composition were obtained from different downstream regions along the tube (SEM images are shown in Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  SEM images of ZnSxSe1−x tetrapod-like nanowires. (a, b) x = 1, (c, d) x = ∼0.72. Adapted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2008 John Wiley and Sons. 
Although numerous ternary II–VI 1D nanostructures have been synthesized via the VS method, it is not the most appropriate approach for synthesis. For example, the required high temperature does not satisfy the low-cost requirement, while the high supersaturation of the vapor phase increases the probability of 2D nucleation and produces sheet-like products. Therefore, growth methods that can induce the formation of 1D structures and performed at low temperature conditions are desirable. For this purpose, catalysts are employed in the growth process, and the vapor–liquid–solid growth mechanism is involved.20,21


Vapor–liquid–solid growth. 
Vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) growth is probably the most extensively employed growth process to synthesize 1D nanostructures. The kinetic processes of this growth method have been extensively examined.22,23Fig. 2a schematically illuminates the VLS growth mechanism, which is facilitated by the following steps. (1) Noble metal thin films, particularly Au, are deposited onto the substrate, and act as the catalysts. (2) The metallic thin film is annealed into particle droplets during the temperature-ramping process. (3) The droplet absorbs vapor species of the desired materials to form a liquid alloy. (4) The alloy continuously adsorbs the vapor species until the adsorption is supersaturated. As a result, nucleation occurs, and 1D axial growth is facilitated at the liquid alloy and solid interface. Due to the higher energy required than that for the crystal step growth, the secondary nucleation is suppressed and growth only occurs at a single liquid/solid interface.24 Several processing parameters such as pressure, evaporation and deposition temperature, carrier gas speed, and duration should be optimized for different materials. Due to the role of the catalysts, a relatively low temperature is required in the VLS process compared with that in the VS process. In addition, the catalysts help induce the formation of a 1D growth direction, and the aspect ratio of the products can be further controlled by the size of the catalysts. Due to these advantages, Pan et al. reported the synthesis of CdSxSe1−x nanowires via a fast-cooling VLS process.25 This method produced CdSxSe1−x nanowires with composition grading along the substrate-length direction due to the high sensitivity of the stoichiometry of the alloys to the local temperature.26 To achieve CdSxSe1−x with good uniformity and stoichiometry selectivity, Lu et al. reported a modified VLS approach to synthesize desirable CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons (Fig. 2b–d).27 The highly uniform composition was facilitated by using a specially designed substrate holder (Fig. 2b). This holder maintained the substrate at a fixed deposition temperature zone. In this case, the influence of the deposition temperature on the stoichiometry was avoided.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the VLS growth process. (b) Growth setup and structural characterization (optical images), (c) TEM and (d) XRD patterns of the CdSxSe1−x products, where the XRD patterns indicate the gradual change in composition. (b), (c), and (d) are adapted with permission from ref. 27 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Although the VLS process involves a relatively lower temperature compared with that of the VS process, it is still regarded as a high-temperature reaction process. Moreover, the use of noble metals increases the cost of production. Therefore, growth methods with significantly lower cost that occur at lower temperature conditions are required. In addition, the yield of vapor phase-based growth methods is relatively low. This restricts the practical application of nanostructures. To overcome this issue, solution-based methods have been devised to achieve mass production.


Solution-liquid–solid growth. 
Solution-liquid–solid (SLS) growth is a typical solution synthesis method for 1D nanostructures. Different from the vapor phase methods, precursors are employed, and the reactions are performed in the solution phase rather than the vapor phase. The entire growth process is analogous to that of the VLS technique. Metals with a low melting point were chosen as the catalysts. Organometallic precursors are dissolved in an organic solvent to supply the desired species. The increased solution temperature facilitates the formation of liquid–metal droplets, which catalyze the disassembly of the precursors. The desired elements dissolve in the droplets until supersaturation is reached. Then, nucleation occurs, followed by the growth of 1D structures. SLS exhibits many advantages compared with VS and VLS, such as reasonably low temperature (<250 °C), low cost, scalability, high mass and ease of handling. More importantly, solution methods facilitate a wider choice of substrates. Due to these strongpoints, solution phase techniques have been employed for the synthesis of ternary alloyed II–VI semiconductor nanowires. Dong et al. synthesized high-quality ZnSexTe1−x nanowires using the SLS method with zinc stearate (Zn(St)2) and diethyl zinc (Zn(Et)2) as Zn precursors.28 The products grew along the [001](WZ)/[111](ZB) direction. More recently, Zhong et al. successfully synthesized ultralong CdSexS1−x nanowires using the SLS method (Fig. 3).13 Moreover, solution-phase growth has also been successfully employed for the production of other 1D nanostructures of II–VI semiconductor ternary alloys, such as ZnxCd1−xS nanostructures29–33 and CdSxSe1−x nanorods.34,35
 Fig. 3  TEM images of the CdSe1−xSx nanowires. (a) Low-magnification and (b) high-magnification images. (c, d) HRTEM images of the nanowires with x = 0.45 and 0.75, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 13 Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. 

Growth techniques

Chemical vapor deposition. 
The chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technique is the most frequently used approach for the synthesis of ternary II–VI 1D nanostructures. It is commonly regarded as a simple and effective technique for synthesizing nanostructures. Most of the growth-based vapor phase methods (including VS and VLS) are performed via the CVD technique. The setup consists of a tube furnace, and a typical schematic of the setup is shown in Fig. 2b. CVD is a process where one or more precursors are transported by the vapor phase to the reaction chamber, where they decompose on a heated substrate. Thus, several parameters need to be carefully considered to optimize the growth, including (1) type of precursor, (b) temperature used to vaporize the source species, (c) temperature of the substrate (deposition temperature), (d) type of carrier gas and the flow rate, (e) pressure inside the chamber, and (f) growth time. In special cases where the evaporation temperature of the source material is very high, laser ablation is integrated into the CVD technique to help ablate the source target via the high energy density of lasers.36


Metal–organic chemical vapor deposition. 
Different from the typical CVD, metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) is a special technique in which the precursor species are organic compounds attached to metallic atoms. The metal–organic precursors undergo pyrolytic reactions at elevated temperatures. Following this, the organic compound is removed, while the metallic atom is deposited on the substrate. The deposited atoms undergo a self-catalytic process to absorb the desirable vapor species and grow to the required 1D nanostructures. Due to the lower evaporation temperature of metal–organics, the temperature required for growth is lower than that of CVD. Moreover, the self-catalytic process avoids the use of noble metals, which reduces the cost of the synthesis. However, the toxicity of metal–organics is a disadvantage. Another virtue of the MOCVD technique is the easier implementation of epitaxial growth. The epitaxial growth of vertically aligned ZnSxSe1−x alloy nanowire arrays on a GaAs (111)B substrate has been demonstrated using the MOCVD technique.37 For epitaxial growth, the crystal structural elements of a nanomaterial are ranked in order by consistently observing a specific orientational relation. If the orientation plane of the nanomaterial is the heterointerface plane with the substrate, the 1D nanomaterials grow vertically with the substrate to form aligned arrays, which is indispensable in scalable applications. Such alignment can be used to investigate certain orientation-dependent physical properties or phenomena. Heteroepitaxy creates covalent bonds at the heterointerface, which requires in-plane lattice matching between the nanomaterials and the substrate. Therefore, Liang et al. chose GaAs (111)B as the substrate to match with the lattice of the products. Fig. 4a and b present the SEM images of vertically aligned nanowire arrays and Fig. 4c schematically presents the epitaxial growth mechanism of vertically aligned ZnSxSe1−x nanowire arrays.
 Fig. 4  (a, b) SEM images of ZnSxSe1−x vertical aligned nanowires with different compositions. (c) Schematic of the growth mechanism of vertically aligned ZnSxSe1−x nanowire arrays. Adapted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 


Molecular beam epitaxy. 
Although CVD and MOCVD are the most frequently utilized techniques for the synthesis of ternary II–VI 1D nanostructures, molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) is another epitaxial growth technique for the synthesis of nanostructures based on the reactions of thermal molecular beams. The reactions are performed under high vacuum conditions. When the vacuum level is ultra-high, the phenomenon called Knudsen regime diffusion occurs, which indicates the mean free path of the molecules exceed the distance between the source and substrate. This facilitates the molecular beam to generate structures with highly controlled precision, growth rate, and stoichiometry. Cooley et al. demonstrated the ability of this technique for the synthesis of ternary Zn1−xMnxSe nanowires.38 However, due to the rigid requirement of very high purity sources, impracticality of ultra-high vacuum, and low growth rate, MBE is not frequently used for the growth of ternary 1D nanostructures.

Growth extension
To extend the application potentials and improve the physical properties of 1D nanomaterials, complex nanostructures constructed through the assembly of anisotropic 1D nanomaterials connected via single crystalline junctions are desired.39–41 These complex nanostructures possess the features of each constituent and their junctions endow the entire structure with superior performances due to their interface effects.42

Core/shell nanostructures. 
Core/shell nanostructures, namely, coaxial nanostructures, present the strongpoints of facilitation of carrier separation at the radial direction versus the longer axial direction, and the carrier collection distance is comparable or even shorter than the minority carrier diffusion length.43–49 Vapor phase techniques are suitable for the synthesis of core/shell nanostructures since multi-step deposition can be used to sequentially control the deposition of the desired precursors. Park et al. and Lu et al. obtained TiO2/CdSxSe1−x and ZnO/CdSxSe1−x core/shell nanowires by coating a CdSxSe1−x outer layer on ZnO or TiO2 nanowires via a two-step CVD process.50,51 ZnO or TiO2 nanowires were first synthesized, and the CdSxSe1−x shell was deposited in a second vapor deposition step. The epitaxial growth of single crystalline shells on the ZnO nanowires is demonstrated by low- and high-resolution TEM images, as shown in Fig. 5a. The corresponding EDX mapping and line-scan indicate that Zn and O are present in the core and Cd, S, and Se in the shell. To simplify the growth process, Pan et al. reported a one-step method to synthesize Si/CdSxSe1−x core/shell nanowires through the thermal evaporation of multiple sources.52 In their experiment, the Si source was easier and faster to deposit onto the Si substrate to grow Si nanowires. Subsequently, CdSxSe1−x preferred to deposit onto the surface of the Si nanowires to form the core/shell structure. The corresponding SEM and low-magnification TEM images are shown in Fig. 5b.
 Fig. 5  (a) TEM images, EDX mapping and line scan of ZnO/CdSxSe1−x nanowires. (b) SEM and TEM images of Si/CdSxSe1−x core/shell nanowires. (a) Is adapted with permission from ref. 50 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society and (b) is adapted with permission from ref. 52 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 


Composition gradient on single nanowires. 
For core/shell structures, functional interfaces are formed along the radial direction. According the requirements of the practical applications, the functional junctions along the axial directions are also important. Therefore, the growth of nanowires with a band gap gradient was developed. In the vapor phase-based growth process, the chemical stoichiometry of the products can be easily controlled by altering the element concentration in the precursor species or mounting the substrate in different deposition temperature zones.24,55,56 Based on this principle, which is associated with the in situ altering of the evaporation ratio of the precursor reagents, single nanowires with gradient composition of several alloy systems have been obtained. Recently, Gu et al. reported the growth of CdSxSe1−x nanowires with a spatial bandgap on a single wire.53 The composition of CdSxSe1−x could be gradually altered along the length of the nanowires. The designed source-movable set-up is schematically shown in Fig. 6a.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the specially designed source-movable tube furnace. (b) TEM and FM images of the composition gradient CdSxSe1−x nanowires. (c) SEM, TEM and EDX of CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons with lateral heterostructures. (d) TEM images and absorption spectra of ZnSexTe1−x nanowires. (b) Is adapted with permission from ref. 53 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society, (c) is adapted with permission from ref. 71 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society, and (d) is adapted with permission from ref. 54 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
During the growth process, CdS, CdSxSe1−x and CdSe compounds were sequentially formed as the products with composition graded CdSxSe1−x on individual nanowires, as displayed by the TEM and FM images shown in Fig. 6b. Precursor shifting is the obstacle in achieving in situ concentration alteration of a single nanowire. Utilizing similar modified CVD techniques, various complex 1D nanostructures have been developed, including CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons with lateral heterostructures57,58 (Fig. 6c), composition-symmetric CdSxSe1−x nanowires59 and branched CdSxSe1−x nanostructures.60
In addition to the vapor phase growth approach, Buhro et al. employed the SLS growth process to synthesize ZnSexTe1−x nanowires with composition gradient.54 The growth process was performed in a solvent with a dispersion of surface-capping ligands. By injecting the reagents in a sequential order, ZnSexTe1−x-alloyed nanowires with sharp heterojunctions could be obtained. Following this process, nanowire alloys with three-segment heterostructures were achieved, as shown by the TEM image in Fig. 6d. From the EDS analysis, ZnSe and ZnTe were determined to be localized at the two ends.

Fundamentals of optical properties
The carrier contribution to the optical properties of semiconductors is facilitated by the transitions among the energy bands. Thus, a deep understanding of the band structure of semiconductors is indispensable to investigate the optical and photoelectrical processes of potential devices. In ternary II–VI semiconductors, wurtzite-type structures are one of the most common structures. Their valence bands arise from their atomic p-like states, where the symmetry is lower than that in the diamond and zincblende structures. Inversely, the minimum of the conduction band is Γ7 symmetry with an s-like state.61 The valence band is split into three sub-bands due to the spin–orbit coupling and crystal field. This facilitates a series of exciton states of A (Γ9 or heavy hole), B (Γ7 or light hole), and C (Γ7 or split-off (SO) band), with a decrease in order of energy.62,63 In order to investigate the different excitonic transitions, the selection rules of polarization should be considered. Typical optical techniques such as low-temperature absorption, reflection, photoreflectance, and photoluminescence spectroscopy techniques are usually employed to measure the transition energies of intrinsic excitons.
Exciton and photoluminescence
Since II–VI compound semiconductors are traditionally light-emitting materials, investigation of their luminescence properties is necessary. Excitons are basic elements for luminescence. An exciton is a quasi-Bosonic particle, which freely moves in the crystal lattice. It describes the bound state of an electron–hole pair with electrostatic coulombic force interactions. Compared with free charge carriers, excitons exhibit superior features, such as narrow energy distribution of optical gain, large oscillator strength, and various interaction possibilities with electrons and phonons. In addition, the dynamic electric dipole of excitons can couple with a certain wavelength electromagnetic wave. In principle, the coupling between a field (electromagnetic cavity mode) and a particle (exciton) can facilitate a zero threshold laser diode.64 In comparison to their bulk counterparts, nanostructures present higher exciton–polariton coupling strength.65 In a typical luminescence process, the emission of photons occurs after electrons sequentially undergo excitation and relaxation and return to the ground state. Fig. 7a schematically illustrates the possible transitions that might occur during a luminescence process. The realization of these transitions depends on the material and experimental conditions.
 Fig. 7  (a) Recombination processes in semiconductors. (b) Bandgap engineering of ternary semiconductors. (c) PL spectra of CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons of different compositions. (d) Temperature-dependent PL spectra of CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons. (b) and (c) are adapted with permission from ref. 27 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (d) Is adapted with permission from ref. 66 Copyright 2012 AIP Publishing LLC. 
II–VI compounds are generally direct bandgap semiconductors and present good photoluminescence (PL) properties. In ternary alloys, the PL emission peak can gradually shift with controlled stoichiometry due to their tunable bandgap. Fig. 7b schematically illustrates the tunability of the ternary ABxC1−x bandgap. It can be continuously tuned from the bandgap of AB to the bandgap of AC with decreasing x from 1 to 0. Fig. 7c depicts the normalized PL spectra of CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons with varying x. The peak positions gradually shift from 507 nm (x = 1) to 713 nm (x = 0) due to the decrease in bandgap. The bandgaps can be described by the following quadratic function: Eg(x) = ECdSe + (ECdS − ECdSe − b)x + bx2(1)where ECdS, ECdSe, and Eg(x) are the bandgaps of CdS, CdSe, and CdSxSe1−x, respectively, and b is a bowing parameter. The small value of b indicates the good miscibility of CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons.
For 1D nanostructures of II–VI ternary alloys, a high aspect ratio can make their optical quality different from that of their bulk counterparts, while alloying introduces more energy states and facilitates different optical properties. To obtain a deeper understanding of the optical properties of the 1D nanostructures of II–VI ternary alloys, PL investigation at low temperature is required. This is because a variation in temperature would induce different densities of state (DOS) in a material. Moreover, more information about the exciton, phonon, and donor binding energy can be revealed by recording PL spectra at low temperature. In addition, more emission bands can be observed at low temperature due to crystal-field and spin–orbit coupling, bounded excitons and surface-related defect states. These parameters are crucial to determine the optical quality of a material. The PL spectra of CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons at low temperature (∼10 K) were measured by Liu et al.66 Two emission bands arising from the exciton bound to a neutral donor and the emission related to surface defect states were observed. For ternary alloys, the surface defect-related PL emission is much weaker than that in binary CdS and CdSe, suggesting much weaker surface emission in ternary nanoribbons. The largely reduced surface emission is mainly attributed to the carrier localization caused by composition disorder in ternary CdSxSe1−x, as described by the Mott–Anderson localization theory,67 as well as the formation of type-I core–shell-like heterostructures during the ternary alloy synthesis process, as analyzed in ref. 66. With an increase in temperature, the relative PL intensity arising from the recombination of excitons bounded to different states in CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons presents a very different trend (Fig. 7d). A redshift in the emission peaks were observed, and the shrinkage of the bandgap is related to exciton–phonon interactions as well as thermal expansion.68
Since the optical properties of 1D nanostructures of II–VI ternary alloys are dominated by robust excitonic effects, the lifetime of excitons becomes crucial. Accurate probing of the lifetime of excitons provides a deep understanding of the carrier relaxation dynamics in the nanostructures and provides theoretical guidance for the optimization of optoelectronic devices. Time-resolved PL (TRPL) is the most frequently used technique to probe the excitonic dynamics in semiconductors. The exciton lifetime is highly sensitive to crystal quality. Thus, samples with a reduced defect density and good crystal quality would present longer exciton lifetime. Previous studies by Liu et al. and Yang et al. demonstrated that CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons with different x present different exciton lifetimes and different decay dynamics.66,69
Carrier dynamics and transient photoconductivity
After absorbing photons with a relatively high energy (>bandgap), electrons are excited to high energy states to form bound carriers or free carriers. These carriers in the non-equilibrium state return to equilibrium by appropriate decay paths. This process determines many properties of materials. A high aspect ratio facilitates surface states and ternary alloying induces more energy states; thus, the carrier dynamics of 1D nanostructures of II–VI ternary alloys is more complex than that of traditional semiconductors. Therefore, systematic investigation of the carrier dynamics in these nanostructures is important. Ultrafast spectroscopy is a highly sensitive technique to monitor the carrier decay processes, in which the time expended by the carriers traversed in each path can be measured and the fundamental mechanism of the energy loss from the interactions of electron–phonon, electron–exciton, exciton–phonon, and exciton–exciton can be clearly understood. The general ultrafast spectroscopy techniques include TRPL and transient absorption spectroscopy. As mentioned in the previous section, TRPL is mainly used for the detection of the lifetime of excitons. For transient absorption spectroscopy, continuous white light is generally employed to probe the carrier dynamics around the near band edge, where the carriers usually remain in bound states. For the 1D nanostructures of II–VI ternary alloys, their main applications are focused on optoelectronics, where photoelectric conversion is important, and the behavior of free carriers is critical to the conversion efficiency. Therefore, understanding the free carrier dynamics is crucial.
Optical pump-terahertz (THz) probe spectroscopy (OPTP) is a specific technique to investigate the free carrier dynamics in nanostructures since the THz wave is sensitive to conductivity, which is the product of the free carrier density and mobility.72 Compared with other common ultrafast spectroscopy techniques, the powerful nature of OPTP spectroscopy stems from the fact that it is a coherent technique that can record both amplitude and phase measurements. This reveals a wealth of information about materials that interact with the THz wave, where the typical charge carrier scattering time is in the picosecond range, which corresponds to the THz frequency range in the electromagnetic spectrum (Fig. 8a). This enables THz radiation to interact in a specific manner with charge carriers, making THz waves the ideal probe for carrier dynamics.
 Fig. 8  (a) THz frequency regime in the electromagnetic spectrum. (b) Composition-dependent carrier dynamics of ternary CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons at different excitation fluences. (c) Complex photoconductivity of three samples (x = 1, 0.65, and 0) recorded at t = 3.5 ps. The solid lines are the Drude–Smith fitting curves. (a) Is adapted with permission from ref. 70 Copyright 2002 Nature Publishing Group. (b and c) Are adapted with permission from ref. 71 Copyright 2013 Springer. 
More importantly, OPTP can reveal information on both carrier dynamics from pump scans and transient photoconductivity from probe scans. By collecting pump scans, the carrier dynamics in CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons were observed (Fig. 8b),71,73 which present distinct composition dependence. The dynamics spectra display a clear picture of the decay paths of the photocarriers. Briefly, the surface defect-induced recombination dominates the photocarrier decay in binary nanoribbons. In contrast, the structural defect-related recombination is the preferred decay path for the carriers in ternary nanoribbons.
Photoconductivity is one of the key parameters of optoelectronics. Materials with 1D nanostructures have been demonstrated to show improvement in both carrier density and mobility, which are the two basic components contributing to photoconductivity. To increase the photoconductivity, either increasing the photocarrier density or mobility is a feasible approach. In addition, the formation of ternary alloys is a possible way to increase the photocarrier density since the as-formed alloys have higher DOS. Recently, ternary CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons have been demonstrated as a new photoconducting material with much higher photoconductivity than binary compounds (Fig. 8c).71 The photoconductivity of materials can be easily determined from OPTP probe scans. The information of photoconductivity, Δσ(ω,t), can be extracted from the recorded transient change in THz transmission before and after photoexcitation. The expression of photoconductivity is derived as (2)where t is the pump–probe delay time, ε0 is the free space permittivity, n is the refractive index, c is the speed of light, d is the thickness of the sample and ω is the radial frequency. The experimental data in Fig. 8c could be fitted well by the Drude–Smith model:74 (3)where ωp2 = Ne2/(m*ε0) is the plasma frequency, in which No is free carrier density, e is the charge of a single electron and m* is the electron effective mass, and τ is the scattering time between collisions.
The higher photoconductivity observed for ternary alloys in comparison with their binary counterparts is attributed to the reduction of surface trapping decay, which facilitates higher photocarrier densities in ternary compounds. These results indicate the high responsivity of ternary CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons to light and demonstrate their promising potential for application in photoelectric devices. To realize even higher photoconductivity, bandgap-graded CdSxSe1−x nanowires have been designed and synthesized.75 On characterization via OPTP spectroscopy, their measured photoconductivity was as high as 2000 Ω−1 cm−1. This high photoconductivity arises from the formation of a series of type-II band alignments along the nanowires.
Lasing
Many researchers have demonstrated optically pumped stimulated emissions (SE) from 1D nanostructures of II–VI ternary alloys.76 As mentioned above, excitonic emission is the prerequisite of lasing with a low threshold. Excitonic emission at room temperature could be easily enabled when the exciton binding energy of a semiconductor is higher than its thermal energy. This is the case for typical II–VI semiconductors; for example, the binding energy of CdS, ZnS and ZnO is ∼28 meV,77 ∼40 meV,78 and ∼60 meV,79 respectively. However, an optical cavity to obtain positive feedback is required by lasing action. In the case of 1D nanomaterials, the cavity is naturally achieved via pumping in the wire/ribbon (whispering gallery or Fabry–Perot mode lasing). In addition to the advantages of 1D II–VI semiconductors, ternary alloys present the advantage of wavelength tunability of their emission light. Therefore, 1D nanostructures of II–VI ternary alloys are suitable for multicolored lasing.
Tunable wavelength lasing from the visible range to near infrared range, i.e., from 503 nm to 692 nm, was observed in CdSxSe1−x nanowires with different compositions (Fig. 9a).80 In addition the demonstration of lasing in CdSxSe1−x nanostructures, lasing in other ternary II–VI nanomaterials, such as ZnSxSe1−x nanowires81 and ZnxCd1−xS82,83 nanoribbons, was also observed, which can cover the wavelength regime from ultraviolet to near infrared. With the development of synthesis techniques for complex 1D ternary nanostructures, more superior lasing properties were facilitated. For example, a dual-wavelength laser was realized from CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons with lateral heterostructures (Fig. 9b),58 and low-threshold and multicolor lasing was realized from CdSxSe1−x composition-symmetric nanowires (Fig. 9c and d).59,84,85
 Fig. 9  (a) Wavelength-tunable lasing from CdSxSe1−x nanowires on a single substrate. (b) Dual wavelength, (c) low-threshold and (d) multicolor lasing from complex nanostructures. (a) Is adapted with permission from ref. 80 Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (b, c, d) are adapted with permission from ref. 58 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society, ref. 59 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society, and ref. 85 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society, respectively. 
Phonons
Phonons are often referred to as quasiparticles, which represent the quanta of lattice vibrations. Phonons play a major role in many physical properties including the thermal, electrical, and optical properties of a material. The importance of phonons in 1D nanostructures is also embodied in various interesting phenomena, such as anisotropy of electron–phonon interactions, phonon confinement in single nanowires, surface resonant Raman scattering, phonon bottleneck effects in nanoscale electronic devices, and determination of carrier mobility.86,87 The vibrational modes of phonons are either Raman-active or IR-active.
Since the Raman effect has attracted attention for more than eight decades,88 Raman spectroscopy is one of the most effective techniques to investigate phonons. The excitation energy covers a broad range of wavelengths from UV to NIR. The first order inelastic Raman scattering process involves two events: the generation of a scattered photon and simultaneous annihilation of an incident photon; these events are modulated by the electron–phonon and electron–photon interactions, respectively. During this process, the conservation of momentum and energy occurs simultaneously. The photon momentum (wave vector) is less than 106 cm−1 in the visible and NIR range, which is much smaller than the magnitude of phonons near the Brillouin zone boundary. Therefore, the first-order process only involves phonons at or near the Brillouin zone center, which is the  Raman selection rule.
In 1D nanomaterials, the phonon dispersion relation can be observed from folding the Brillouin zone of bulk materials. However, some new modes (e.g. surface phonons) will emerge due to the interface and surface vibrations in nanostructures, which become more significant with an increase in the surface to volume ratio. Surface phonons only propagate along a surface or interface, which is actually the solution of Maxwell's equations with appropriate boundary conditions.89 Since surface optical phonons cannot be obtained due to the momentum conservation, the formation of these phonons in 1D nanomaterials usually originates from the breaking of translational symmetry. Nevertheless, they can be optically observed in nanostructures because the modulation of the size facilitates surface translational asymmetry. The lattice vibrations in ternary alloys are more complex since they involve the behaviors of individual components and the combined modes.
The phonon modes varying with composition in ZnSxSe1−x nanoribbons were observed via Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 10a).21 For the binary ZnS, besides the traditional photon modes, the surface optical phonon modes are observed at ∼340 cm−1. The phonon vibrations of ZnSxSe1−x present a two-mode behavior, which involves the vibrations of both ZnS- and ZnSe-like phonons. Moreover, additional modes from the combination of ZnS-like LO + ZnSe-like LO were also observed. All the phonon modes gradually shifted with the variation in composition. Furthermore, the trends of both the ZnSe- and ZnS-like modes are described well with the modified random-element-isodisplacement model.90
 Fig. 10  (a) Raman spectra of ZnSxSe1−x nanowires. (b) Low-frequency phonon resonance in ternary CdSxS1−x nanoribbons probed by THz-TDS. (a) Is adapted with permission from ref. 21 Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry and (b) is adapted with permission from ref. 87 Copyright 2014 OSA publishing. 
The IR-active phonon modes with low-frequency have been demonstrated with a highly sensitive response to time-domain terahertz spectroscopy (THz-TDS). Due to this reason, THz-TDS has been successfully employed to probe the IR-active vibrational modes of polymers,91 biomolecules,92 saccharides93 and low-energy phonons in II–VI semiconductors, such as crystalline ZnTe and CdTe,94 and nanostructures of ZnS and ZnO95 by measuring the real and imaginary parts of their dielectric functions. Low-frequency phonons exhibit major contributions to carrier scattering and electrical conductivity. Thus, they are significant to the phonon modes of ternary-alloyed nanostructures for their potential applications in optoelectronics.
In the THz regime, the dielectric function εm(ω) consists of the contributions of the high-frequency dielectric constant, transport of free carriers, and lattice vibrations, which is described by (4)where ε∞ is the high-frequency dielectric constant, the second term describes the contribution from free carriers or plasmons, and the last term presents the behavior of optical phonons, in which the summation involves all the lattice oscillations with the jth transverse optical phonon frequency, ωTOj, phonon damping constant, Γj, and oscillator strength, εstj.
The low-frequency phonon resonance in ternary CdSxS1−x nanoribbons probed by THz-TDS has been reported (Fig. 10b),87 where composition-dependent optical phonons were observed. The experimental spectra could be effectively described by the theoretical models of eqn (4). The composition dependence of the CdSe-like TO mode frequencies could be described well by a modified random-element-isodisplacement model,90 while the oscillator strength showed a linear variation with composition x.90
Applications
The fabrication of practical devices with desired nanoforms is the ultimate goal of nanotechnology. 1D nanostructures of II–VI ternary alloys provide abundant potential applications, particularly in electronic, photonics, and optoelectronics. This section will highlight a few of the attractive examples of the applications of 1D II–VI ternary alloys.
Field-effect transistors (FETs)
FETs are building blocks in many electrical devices, including integrated circuits, digital data storage devices, and flat panel displays. Metal oxide semiconductor FETS (MOSFETs) are the most common species among the different structures of FETs, which play a crucial role in current electrical technology. The typical architecture of normal MOSFETs mainly consists of four components: drain/source electrodes, gate electrode, gate dielectric layer, and conduction channel. MOSFETs originate from silicon electronic techniques. To date, they have been widely utilized in many other semiconductors. The 1D geometry of 1D nanomaterials make them natural candidates as conduction channels. The architecture of the nanowire-MOSFETs is schematically illustrated in Fig. 11a.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of a single-nanowire FET. (b) and (c) FET performance characteristics of CdSxSe1−x single-nanoribbon FET. Adapted with permission from ref. 96 Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Single nanowire FETs
An FET device constructed from single nanowires/nanoribbons has been demonstrated to exhibit superior performances due to its features of high-quality single crystal, reduced phonon scattering in low-dimensionality, device material decoupled from substrate material, large surface-to-volume ratio and quantum confinement. The inset of Fig. 11b depicts the SEM image of an MOSFET fabricated using a single CdS0.25Se0.75 nanoribbon.96 This device was created on a p-doped Si/SiO2 substrate with a global back-gate configuration. The typical fabrication process involves nanoribbon transfer, lithography for electrode formation, evaporation for electrode deposition and lift-off of photoresist. The device was demonstrated to have a pronounced gating effect, as revealed by the gate-dependent Ids–Vds curves (Fig. 11b). The relationship of the conductance increasing correspondingly with an increase in Vg revealed the n-type conductivity of the CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons. An ON/OFF ratio of 105 and threshold voltage of 4.9 V were measured from the output curves. Its electron mobility and concentration were calculated to be 14.8 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 3.9 × 1016 cm−3 using the equations μ = gmCo−1Vds−1W/L and nc = CoVT/eD, respectively, where Co is the gate capacitance, gm is the transconductance, D is the thickness of the nanoribbon and W/L is the ratio of channel width to length. All the parameters show better values than those of reported binary CdS and CdSe nanoribbons.97,98 In addition, the FET fabricated from single bandgap-graded CdSxSe1−x nanowires also presented high performance with an electron mobility of 1.5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and concentration of 2.1 × 1017 cm−3.99
Nano-networks FETs
In addition to the rapid development of nanoscale devices, great efforts have been made in recent years to enlarge the device size with the aim to build a new paradigm referred to as macrodevices, where integrated microdevices are constructed over substrates larger than several millimeters in scale. However, the fabrication of large-area devices from 1D nanostructures is challenging. Thus, direct-contact printing was developed as a promising method to realize the transfer of randomly grown nanowire/ribbons to form aligned networks (Fig. 12a). Lu et al. employed the contact printing method to fabricate aligned CdSxSe1−x networks as the conduction channel of wafer-scale FETs (Fig. 12b).27 The nanonet-FET exhibited significant gating effect and typical n-channel depletion mode behavior with good saturation (Fig. 12c). Light irradiation on II–VI ternary alloys generates photocarriers and increases their conductivity. Consequently, the outputs of nanonet-FETs are significantly influenced by light irradiation. As shown by the Ids–Vg curves under different light intensities (Fig. 12d), the threshold voltage left-shifted significantly, while the ON/OFF ratio decreased with an increase in the illumination intensity due to the increase in carrier density.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of the nano-network FET. (b)–(d) SEM image and FET performance characteristics of the CdSxSe1−x nano-net FET. (e) SEM image and electrical property characteristics of the ZnSxSe1−x nano-net FET. (b)–(d) are adapted with permission from ref. 27 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society and (e) is adapted with permission from ref. 21 Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Similarly, the contact printing method was used to fabricate large-area FET based on ZnSxSe1−x nanowires.21 In addition, the ternary ZnSxSe1−x was demonstrated to present higher conductivity and higher gating effect than those of binary ZnS and ZnSe (Fig. 12e).
Photodetectors/sensors
Photodetectors are crucial applications of nanoscale photoelectrical devices, which enable to realize photoelectric conversion. Since bandgaps can be controlled and designed to range from UV to NIR by adjusting chemical stoichiometry, the 1D nanostructures of II–VI ternary alloys are expected to be promising building blocks of photodetectors and photosensors. The working principle of photodetectors based on semiconductors is as follows: (1) electron–hole pair generation by photons, (2) electron and hole separation and (3) free carrier transport and collection. However, the performance of photodetectors in nanoscale is affected by the following parameters: (1) carrier trapping, (2) excitons, (3) surface band bending and (4) ambient effect.
Photodetectors based on the CdSxSe1−x nanonetwork were first reported by Lu et al.,27 which exhibited high photoresponsivity and a reasonably fast response speed. Subsequently, Ali et al. reported tunable photodetectors built on CdSxSe1−x nanowires of different stoichiometry fabricated via the same contact printing method.100 The devices with different stoichiometry nanowires presented different spectrum response ranges. Moreover, the photodetector devices from ternary CdSxSe1−x and the photoresponse of ZnSxSe1−x nanowires were also reported recently.101,102 Different from the architecture of parallel-aligned nanonetworks, Park et al. reported CdSxSe1−x nanowire photosensors based on a network-bridge structure,103 which presented distinct photoresponse to UV light. In addition, the complex 1D nanostructures of ternary II–VI compounds present superior performances as photodetectors. CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons with lateral heterostructures were demonstrated as high-performance photodetectors, where higher ON/OFF ratios, photoresponsivity and EQE were shown (Fig. 13).57 Furthermore, considering the effect of post-treatment, Lu et al. improved the performance of CdSxSe1−x nanoribbon photodetectors using focused laser modification.101
 Fig. 13  Characterization of the photodetector based on CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons with lateral heterostructures. Adapted with permission from ref. 57 Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. 
Waveguides
In photonics, waveguides confine and propagate electromagnetic waves along specific directions. 1D nanostructures are expected to function as waveguides due to their special configurations, and can guide and manipulate light on the sub-wavelength scale. Furthermore, ternary II–VI semiconductors exhibit wide tunable bandgaps and large dielectric constants, which facilitate higher refractive index than the surroundings. This is helpful to enable the total internal reflection of light during propagation.
Several demonstrations of waveguides based on ternary II–VI 1D nanostructures were reported by Pan et al. and Fang et al. in the last decade.104,105 Active waveguiding, where the light is operated in the spectrum range near the band edge of 1D nanostructures, was demonstrated in CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons.106 The active waveguiding mode involves excited band edge PL emission inside nanoribbons, where the emission is propagated along the ribbon. After propagation, the light is emitted at the end of the ribbon, while there is no appreciable emission from the other region of the ribbon. The guided light shows a significant redshift with the propagating distance (Fig. 14a), and the magnitude of the redshift is strongly related to the chemical concentration and the crystallization degree of the nanostructures. Based on the as-synthesized branched architecture of CdSxSe1−x nanostructures, waveguides can be further designed as a splitter, where light can be propagated along the trunk and shunted into the branches. According to the chemical composition of the branches, light with different wavelengths can be emitted at the ends of the branches (Fig. 14b).60
 Fig. 14  (a) Waveguide demonstration of CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons. (b) Selective waveguide from the branched architecture of the CdSxSe1−x nanostructures. (a) Is adapted with permission from Ref. 106 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society and (b) is adapted with permission from ref. 60 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
The realization of waveguides in nanowires/ribbons offers the possibility of using 1D nanostructures in highly integrated and compact photonic circuits, which will potentially alleviate the speed limitation and power dissipation in electronics. It can be anticipated that the manipulation of light on the sub-wavelength scale with efficient injection and propagation inside 1D nanostructures will definitely be an essential research direction. This will help develop the promising potential of ternary II–VI 1D nanostructures in integrated photonic circuits.
Multicolored displays
Electroluminescence (EL) is a phenomenon of light emission driven from electricity. Similar to PL, the EL process involves carrier injection and recombination. EL properties of 1D semiconductors promote the possibility of integrating them into electronic circuits to provide wide applications in lighting and displays.
Ternary II–VI semiconductors are ideal candidates for light-emitting diodes (LEDs) due to the unique EL phenomenon, which can be tuned by their large bandgap coverage, controllable direct bandgap, large aspect ratio, small size, and high crystalline quality. A continually tunable bandgap facilitates their coverage of the spectrum, ranging from UV to IR, to realize desired color light emission. Their large aspect ratio can promote the manipulation of their integration and their small size can generate a smaller emission beam spot, which will facilitate higher display resolution. In addition, their high crystalline quality will improve the efficiency of radiative recombination. Currently, the main challenge of LEDs based on 1D nanostructures is improving the device stability and conversion efficiency.
Wong et al. demonstrated a multicolored LED based on the heterostructure of n-CdSxSe1−x nanowires/p-SiC substrate.107 Multicolored emission from yellow to red was achieved by tuning its chemical composition (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  LED structure and EL characteristics of the n-CdSxSe1−x nanowires/p-SiC substrate heterostructure. Adapted with permission from ref. 107 Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Solar cells
The abundance of solar energy renders it promising as a renewable energy source. The tunable bandgaps of ternary II–VI semiconductors cover the entire solar spectrum, which makes them the excellent material platforms for the design of solar cells with a full-spectrum response.
However, despite the rapid expansion of binary II–VI nanostructure solar cells, the practical fabrication of solar cells based on ternary II–VI 1D nanostructures has not been experimentally realized. Recently, Ning et al. theoretically proposed a lateral multiple junction solar cell with CdxPb1−xS as the platform.108 In their design, each of the lateral junctions could absorb the desired wavelength of solar radiation due to the controllable bandgap optimization (Fig. 16). The simulation results indicated a proposed conversion efficiency of ∼40%. Their proposed design demonstrates that spatially composition-graded ternary CdxPb1−xS nanowires present potential to deliver competitive efficiencies with other high efficiency solar cells on market today. However, many challenges remain unresolved in research and industry before this proposal becomes practical.
 Fig. 16  Schematic of a lateral multiple junction solar cell with a spectral splitting concentration optics layer. Adapted with permission from ref. 108 Copyright 2011 OSA publishing. 
Conclusions and outlook
We have provided a review of the research progress regarding the material synthesis, fundamentals of optical properties, and promising electronic, optoelectronic and photonic applications of 1D nanostructures of II–VI ternary alloys. Inspired by the rapid development of technology during the last decade, it is increasingly imperative to consider the marketability of the promising products that the 1D nanostructures of II–VI ternary alloys can render. Although most of the nanostructures and their corresponding applications are still in the infancy of technological development, the research on ternary II–VI 1D nanostructures will be continuously attractive and highly rewarding. Undoubtedly, many solutions and innovations will be realized on the route towards the practical application of nanotechnology. However, some issues need to be urgently resolved.
As an important foundation, efficient and low-cost technology must be developed to synthesize ternary II–VI 1D nanostructures with high quality and large quantities. It is necessary for the improved preparation techniques to be more controllable with simultaneous precision of composition, orientation, location, alignment and dimension, so that engineering the physical properties of nanostructures would be more suitable for massive-scale device integration. For this purpose, a few points are proposed to facilitate the extension of synthesis. (a) Quaternary or polycompounds should be designed and synthesized to enable a full spectrum response. Recently, many researchers have realized the advantages of quaternary alloys. For example, quaternary ZnCdSSe nanowires have been synthesized,109,110 and their bandgap can be tuned from 1.75 eV to 3.55 eV, which covers the entire visible spectral range. Based on these nanowires, white light emission has been obtained (Fig. 17a).111 More recently, a monolithic white laser has been demonstrated based on quaternary ZnCdSSe lateral structures (Fig. 17b and c).112 (b) Tellurides should be considered for the synthesis of ternary II–VI 1D nanostructures of Cd(S/Se)xTe1−x and Zn(S/Se)xTe1−x. Consequently, flexible n-/p-type conversion can be achieved in materials by tuning the atomic ratio between S/Se and Te. Extensive research has been conducted on the synthesis of binary CdTe and ZnTe nanowires, and the products have been demonstrated to present p-type behavior. However, there are few reports on the synthesis of ternary II–VI 1D nanostructures with tellurides, which might be due to their lower miscibility compared with S and Se. Therefore, growth techniques that can facilitate the alloying of Te and S/Se are desirable. (c) Symmetric, ordered and seriate structures of p/n junctions or superlattices should be designed and fabricated, which will promote electronic and photonic applications.
 Fig. 17  (a) Tunable color emissions based on a ZnSSe nanowire, and the CIE chromaticity diagram indicates the white light emission. (b) Lasing spectra with tunable colors based on ZnSSe lateral structures. (c) CIE chromaticity diagram indicating the white lasing. (a) Is adapted with permission from ref. 111 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. (b) and (c) Are adapted with permission from ref. 112 Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
A detailed and deeper understanding of the correlation between material fundamentals and device behavior is required. In particular, more intensive research should be devoted to realizing a deep comprehension of the interaction of quanta such as excitons, photons, plasmons and phonons in these nanostructures and investigate their coupling mechanism, where their overall optical properties and applications will be greatly influenced by the interactions and coupling. However, these studies require optical spectroscopy techniques with higher spatial and temporal resolution and wider spectrum detection range. In addition, it is worthwhile to further investigate the optical properties exhibited by hybrid complex nanostructures. Based on the development of synthesis techniques, type-I or type-II junctions can be fabricated to engineer band gaps and band energy alignment. The type-I junction can promote the fluorescence and light emitter yield of these nanostructures, while the type-II junction can facilitate the separation of electron–hole pairs and thus improve the light-electron energy conversion efficiency. After the optical properties are understood via systematic investigations, these hybrid nanostructures can be appropriately applied in various optoelectronic applications. Type-I hybrid structures can be used as a platform for light-emitting devices such as LEDs, lasers and LDs. Furthermore, type-II hybrid nanostructures can be employed as building blocks for energy conversion devices such as photodetectors and solar cells. Additionally, the development of techniques to assemble and integrate ternary II–VI 1D nanostructures into electronic and optoelectronic circuits are also required. Finally, it is also important to enhance the device endurance and to consider important side-issues such as pollution, toxicology, and explosives.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
H. Liu acknowledges the support of National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61705106). J. Lu acknowledges the support of National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11704068) and Jiangsu Province Basic Research Plan (Natural Science Foundation, Grant No. BK20170694). The project is supported by “the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities”.
Notes and references
Y. Xia, P. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. Yin, F. Kim and H. Yan, One-Dimensional Nanostructures: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353–389 CrossRef .
C. M. Lieber and Z. L. Wang, Functional Nanowires, MRS Bull., 2011, 32, 99–108 CrossRef .
M. H. Huang, S. Mao, H. Feick, H. Yan, Y. Wu, H. Kind, E. Weber, R. Russo and P. Yang, Room-Temperature Ultraviolet Nanowire Nanolasers, Science, 2001, 292, 1897–1899 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-J. Choi, J. C. Johnson, R. He, S.-K. Lee, F. Kim, P. Pauzauskie, J. Goldberger, R. J. Saykally and P. Yang, Self-Organized GaN Quantum Wire UV Lasers, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8721–8725 CrossRef .
X. Duan, Y. Huang, R. Agarwal and C. M. Lieber, Single-nanowire electrically driven lasers, Nature, 2003, 421, 241–245 CrossRef PubMed .
R. E. Bailey and S. Nie, Alloyed Semiconductor Quantum Dots: Tuning the Optical Properties without Changing the Particle Size, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 7100–7106 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xing, Q. Zhang, Z. Huang, Z. Lu, J. Zhang, H. Li, H. Zeng and T. Zhai, Strain Driven Spectral Broadening of Pb Ion Exchanged CdS Nanowires, Small, 2016, 12, 874–881 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jie, W. Zhang, I. Bello, C.-S. Lee and S.-T. Lee, One-dimensional II–VI nanostructures: Synthesis, properties and optoelectronic applications, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 313–336 CrossRef .
T. Zhai, X. Fang, L. Li, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, One-dimensional CdS nanostructures: synthesis, properties, and applications, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 168–187 RSC .
X. Fang, L. Wu and L. Hu, ZnS Nanostructure Arrays: A Developing Material Star, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 585–598 CrossRef PubMed .
L.-J. Chen and J.-H. Dai, Growth, morphological and optical characteristics of ZnSSe nanorods, Opt. Mater., 2017, 64, 356–360 CrossRef .
R. Mendil, Z. B. Ayadi, C. Vázquez-Vázquez, M. A. López-Quintela and K. Djessas, A new procedure to synthesis of ZnS1−xSex nanoparticles by a facile solvothermal method, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 0957–4522 Search PubMed .
G. Yang, H. Zhong, Z. Bai, R. Liu and B. Zou, Ultralong Homogeneously Alloyed CdSexS1-x Nanowires with Highly Polarized and Color-Tunable Emissions, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 885–891 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, X. Xing, X. Zhou, X. Xiong and T. Zhai, Stoichiometric Effect on Optoelectronic Properties of Composition-Tunable CdS1−xSex Nanowires, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1600877 CrossRef .
X. Zhuang, C. Z. Ning and A. Pan, Composition and Bandgap-Graded Semiconductor Alloy Nanowires, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 13–33 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Dai, H. Zou, X. Wang, Y. Zhou, P. Wang, Y. Ding, Y. Zhang, J. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Piezo-phototronic Effect Enhanced Responsivity of Photon Sensor Based on Composition-Tunable Ternary CdSxSe1–x Nanowires, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2495–2503 CrossRef .
M. Shoaib, X. Wang, X. Zhang, Q. Zhang and A. Pan, Controllable Vapor Growth of Large-Area Aligned CdS x Se1−x Nanowires for Visible Range Integratable Photodetectors, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 58 CrossRef .
W. Tian, T. Zhai, C. Zhang, S.-L. Li, X. Wang, F. Liu, D. Liu, X. Cai, K. Tsukagoshi, D. Golberg and Y. Bando, Low-Cost Fully Transparent Ultraviolet Photodetectors Based on Electrospun ZnO-SnO2 Heterojunction Nanofibers, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4625–4630 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xu, Y. Liang, Z. Liu, X. Zhang and S. Hark, Synthesis and Optical Properties of Tetrapod-Like ZnSSe Alloy Nanostructures, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3294–3297 CrossRef .
M. Wang, G. T. Fei, Y. G. Zhang, M. G. Kong and L. D. Zhang, Tunable and Predetermined Bandgap Emissions in Alloyed ZnSx,Se1–x Nanowires, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4491–4494 CrossRef .
J. Lu, H. Liu, C. Sun, M. Zheng, M. Nripan, G. S. Chen, G. M. Subodh, X. Zhang and C. H. Sow, Optical and electrical applications of ZnSx,Se1−x nanowires-network with uniform and controllable stoichiometry, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 976–981 RSC .
S. Kodambaka, J. Tersoff, M. C. Reuter and F. M. Ross, Diameter-Independent Kinetics in the Vapor-Liquid-Solid Growth of Si Nanowires, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 096105 CrossRef PubMed .
V. G. Dubrovskii, N. V. Sibirev, J. C. Harmand and F. Glas, Growth kinetics and crystal structure of semiconductor nanowires, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 235301 CrossRef .
Y. Wu and P. Yang, Direct Observation of Vapor−Liquid−Solid Nanowire Growth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 3165–3166 CrossRef .
A. Pan, H. Yang, R. Liu, R. Yu, B. Zou and Z. Wang, Color-Tunable Photoluminescence of Alloyed CdSxSe1-x Nanobelts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15692–15693 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Pan, R. Liu, M. Sun and C.-Z. Ning, Quaternary Alloy Semiconductor Nanobelts with Bandgap Spanning the Entire Visible Spectrum, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9502–9503 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lu, C. Sun, M. Zheng, N. Mathews, H. Liu, G. S. Chen, X. Zhang, S. G. Mhaisalkar and C. H. Sow, Facile One-Step Synthesis of CdSxSe1−x Nanobelts with Uniform and Controllable Stoichiometry, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19538–19545 CrossRef .
F. Xu, B. Xue, F. Wang and A. Dong, Ternary Alloyed ZnSexTe1–x Nanowires: Solution-Phase Synthesis and Band Gap Bowing, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1140–1146 CrossRef .
M. D. Regulacio and M.-Y. Han, Composition-Tunable Alloyed Semiconductor Nanocrystals, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 621–630 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, D. Li, W. Zhang, Y. Hu, Y. He and X. Fu, Microwave Synthesis of ZnxCd1−xS Nanorods and Their Photocatalytic Activity under Visible Light, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2154–2159 CrossRef .
H. Lee and P. M. Holooway, Synthesis and characterization of colloidal ternary ZnCdSe semiconductor nanorods, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 164711 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. C. Li, M. F. Ye, C. H. Yang, X. H. Li and Y. F. Li, Composition- and Shape-Controlled Synthesis and Optical Properties of ZnxCd1–xS Alloyed Nanocrystals, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 433–441 CrossRef .
S. Xie, X. Lu, T. Zhai, J. Gan, W. Li, M. Xu, M. Yu, Y.-M. Zhang and Y. Tong, Controllable Synthesis of ZnxCd1–xS@ZnO Core–Shell Nanorods with Enhanced Photocatalytic Activity, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 10558–10564 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Liu, S. Singh, Y. Guo, J.-J. Wang, H. Xu, C. Silien, N. Liu and K. M. Ryan, Assembling Ordered Nanorod Superstructures and Their Application as Microcavity Lasers, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 43884 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Singh, A. Singh, K. Palaniappan and K. M. Ryan, Colloidal synthesis of homogeneously alloyed CdSexS1−x nanorods with compositionally tunable photoluminescence, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10293–10295 RSC .
X. Duan and C. M. Lieber, General Synthesis of Compound Semiconductor Nanowires, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 298–302 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, H. Xu and S. Hark, Epitaxial Growth and Composition-Dependent Optical Properties of Vertically Aligned ZnS1−xSex Alloy Nanowire Arrays, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 4206–4210 CrossRef .
B. J. Cooley, T. E. Clark, B. Z. Liu, C. M. Eichfeld, E. C. Dickey, S. E. Mohney, S. A. Crooker and N. Samarth, Growth of Magneto-optically Active (Zn,Mn)Se Nanowires, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3142–3146 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Manna, D. J. Milliron, A. Meisel, E. C. Scher and A. P. Alivisatos, Controlled growth of tetrapod-branched inorganic nanocrystals, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 382–385 CrossRef PubMed .
A. G. Kanaras, C. Sönnichsen, H. Liu and A. P. Alivisatos, Controlled Synthesis of Hyperbranched Inorganic Nanocrystals with Rich Three-Dimensional Structures, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2164–2167 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang, F. Qian, C. Yang, Z. Zhong and C. M. Lieber, Rational Growth of Branched and Hyperbranched Nanowire Structures, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 871–874 CrossRef .
X. Liu, Y. Lin, S. Zhou, S. Sheehan and D. Wang, Complex Nanostructures: Synthesis and Energetic Applications, Energies, 2010, 3, 285–300 CrossRef .
B. M. Kayes, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Comparison of the device physics principles of planar and radial p-n junction nanorod solar cells, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 114302–114311 CrossRef .
Y. J. Hwang, A. Boukai and P. Yang, High Density n-Si/n-TiO2 Core/Shell Nanowire Arrays with Enhanced Photoactivity, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 410–415 CrossRef PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Toward Cost-Effective Solar Energy Use, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Tian, T. J. Kempa and C. M. Lieber, Single nanowire photovoltaics, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 16–24 RSC .
Y. Zhang and A. Mascarenhas, “Quantum Coaxial Cables” for Solar Energy Harvesting, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1264–1269 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Tian, X. Zheng, T. J. Kempa, Y. Fang, N. Yu, G. Yu, J. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Coaxial silicon nanowires as solar cells and nanoelectronic power sources, Nature, 2007, 449, 885–889 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Schrier, D. O. Demchenko and L. Wang, Optical Properties of ZnO/ZnS and ZnO/ZnTe Heterostructures for Photovoltaic Applications, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2377–2382 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Myung, D. M. Jang, T. K. Sung, Y. J. Sohn, G. B. Jung, Y. J. Cho, H. S. Kim and J. Park, Composition-Tuned ZnO−CdSSe Core−Shell Nanowire Arrays, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3789–3800 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lu, H. Liu, M. Zheng, H. Zhang, S. X. Lim, E. S. Tok and C. H. Sow, Laser Modified ZnO/CdSSe Core-Shell Nanowire Arrays for Micro-Steganography and Improved Photoconduction, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6350 CrossRef PubMed .
A. L. Pan, L. Yao, Y. Qin, Y. Yang, D. S. Kim, R. Yu, B. Zou, P. Werner, M. Zacharias and U. Gösele, Si-CdSSe Core/Shell Nanowires with Continuously Tunable Light Emission, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3413–3417 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Gu, Z. Yang, H. Yu, J. Xu, P. Wang, L. Tong and A. Pan, Spatial Bandgap Engineering along Single Alloy Nanowires, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2037–2039 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Dong, F. Wang, T. L. Daulton and W. E. Buhro, Solution−Liquid−Solid (SLS) Growth of ZnSe−ZnTe Quantum Wires having Axial Heterojunctions, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1308–1313 CrossRef PubMed .
R. S. Wagner and W. C. Ellis, Vapor-liquid-solid mechanism of single crystal growth, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1964, 4, 89–90 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, H. Liu, P. Guo, D. Li, P. Fan, W. Zheng, X. Zhu, Y. Jiang, H. Zhou, W. Hu, X. Zhuang, H. Liu, X. Duan and A. Pan, Vapor growth and interfacial carrier dynamics of high-quality CdS-CdSSe-CdS axial nanowire heterostructures, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 28–35 CrossRef .
P. Guo, W. Hu, Q. Zhang, X. Zhuang, X. Zhu, H. Zhou, Z. Shan, J. Xu and A. Pan, Semiconductor Alloy Nanoribbon Lateral Heterostructures for High-Performance Photodetectors, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2844–2849 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, L. Ma, P. Guo, X. Zhuang, X. Zhu, W. Hu, X. Duan and A. Pan, Room-Temperature Dual-Wavelength Lasing from Single-Nanoribbon Lateral Heterostructures, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12394–12397 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Guo, X. Zhuang, J. Xu, Q. Zhang, W. Hu, X. Zhu, X. Wang, Q. Wan, P. He, H. Zhou and A. Pan, Low-Threshold Nanowire Laser Based on Composition-Symmetric Semiconductor Nanowires, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1251–1256 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, X. Zhuang, P. Guo, Q. Zhang, W. Huang, Q. Wan, W. Hu, X. Wang, X. Zhu, C. Fan, Z. Yang, L. Tong, X. Duan and A. Pan, Wavelength-Converted/Selective Waveguiding Based on Composition-Graded Semiconductor Nanowires, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5003–5007 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Mang, K. Reimann and S. Rübenacke, Band gaps, crystal-field splitting, spin-orbit coupling, and exciton binding energies in ZnO under hydrostatic pressure, Solid State Commun., 1995, 94, 251–254 CrossRef .

          C. Klingshirn, Semiconductor Optics, Springer, Berlin,  2007 Search PubMed .
N. O. Lipari, Exciton Energy Levels in Wurtzite-Type Crystals, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1971, 4, 4535–4538 CrossRef .
C. Weisbuch, M. Nishioka, A. Ishikawa and Y. Arakawa, Observation of the coupled exciton-photon mode splitting in a semiconductor quantum microcavity, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1992, 69, 3314–3317 CrossRef PubMed .
L. K. van Vugt, B. Piccione, C.-H. Cho, P. Nukala and R. Agarwal, One-dimensional polaritons with size-tunable and enhanced coupling strengths in semiconductor nanowires, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 10050–10055 CrossRef PubMed .
H. W. Liu, J. P. Lu, H. M. Fan, C. H. Sow, S. H. Tang and X. H. Zhang, Temperature and composition dependence of photoluminescence dynamics in CdSxSe1−x (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) nanobelts, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 073112 CrossRef .
P. W. Anderson, Absence of Diffusion in Certain Random Lattices, Phys. Rev., 1958, 109, 1492–1505 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, X. Zhang and J. Y. Zhang, Size-Dependent Time-Resolved Photoluminescence of Colloidal CdSe Nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9512–9515 CrossRef .
G. Yang, Z. Ma, H. Zhong, S. Zou, C. Chen, J. Han and B. Zou, Probing Exciton Move and Localization in Solution-Grown Colloidal CdSexS1–x Alloyed Nanowires by Temperature- and Time-Resolved Spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 22709–22717 CrossRef .
B. Ferguson and X.-C. Zhang, Materials for terahertz science and technology, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 26–33 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, J. Lu, M. Zheng, S. Tang, X. Zhang and C. Sow, Composition-dependent ultra-high photoconductivity in ternary CdS x Se1−x nanobelts as measured by optical pump-terahertz probe spectroscopy, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 808–821 CrossRef .
L. V. Titova, T. B. Hoang, H. E. Jackson, L. M. Smith, J. M. Yarrison-Rice, Y. Kim, H. J. Joyce, H. H. Tan and C. Jagadish, Temperature dependence of photoluminescence from single core-shell GaAs–AlGaAs nanowires, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 173126 CrossRef .
H. Liu, J. Lu, H. F. Teoh, D. Li, Y. P. Feng, S. H. Tang, C. H. Sow and X. Zhang, Defect Engineering in CdSxSe1-x Nanobelts: An Insight into Carrier Relaxation Dynamics via Optical Pump-Terahertz Probe Spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 26036–26042 CrossRef .
N. V. Smith, Classical generalization of the Drude formula for the optical conductivity, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 155106 CrossRef .
H. Liu, J. Lu, Z. Yang, J. Teng, L. Ke, X. Zhang, L. Tong and C. H. Sow, Ultrahigh photoconductivity of bandgap-graded CdSxSe1−x nanowires probed by terahertz spectroscopy, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 27387 CrossRef PubMed .
M. I. B. Utama, J. Zhang, R. Chen, X. Xu, D. Li, H. Sun and Q. Xiong, Synthesis and optical properties of II-VI 1D nanostructures, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1422–1435 RSC .
U. Woggon, K. Hild, F. Gindele, W. Langbein, M. Hetterich, M. Grün and C. Klingshirn, Huge binding energy of localized biexcitons in CdS/ZnS quantum structures, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 61, 12632–12635 CrossRef .
T. K. Tran, W. Park, W. Tong, M. M. Kyi, B. K. Wagner and C. J. Summers, Photoluminescence properties of ZnS epilayers, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 81, 2803–2809 CrossRef .
H. D. Sun, T. Makino, N. T. Tuan, Y. Segawa, M. Kawasaki, A. Ohtomo, K. Tamura and H. Koinuma, Temperature dependence of excitonic absorption spectra in ZnO/Zn0.88Mg0.12O multiquantum wells grown on lattice-matched substrates, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 2464–2466 CrossRef .
A. Pan, W. Zhou, E. S. P. Leong, R. Liu, A. H. Chin, B. Zou and C. Z. Ning, Continuous Alloy-Composition Spatial Grading and Superbroad Wavelength-Tunable Nanowire Lasers on a Single Chip, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 784–788 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Shafiq, A. Sharif and L. C. Sing, ZnSxSe1−x nanowire arrays with tunable optical properties grown on ZnS nanoribbon substrates, Phys. E, 2009, 41, 739–745 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, J. A. Zapien, Y. Y. Shan, C. Y. Geng, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, Wavelength-Controlled Lasing in Znx,Cd1–xS Single-Crystal Nanoribbons, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1372–1377 CrossRef .
J. A. Zapien, Y. K. Liu, Y. Y. Shan, H. Tang, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, Continuous near-infrared-to-ultraviolet lasing from II-VI nanoribbons, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 213114–213113 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, F. Gu, C. Meng, H. Yu, Y. Ma, W. Fang and L. Tong, Multicolour laser from a single bandgap-graded CdSSe alloy nanoribbon, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 22314–22319 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, L. Yin, H. Ning, Z. Yang, L. Tong and C.-Z. Ning, Dynamical Color-Controllable Lasing with Extremely Wide Tuning Range from Red to Green in a Single Alloy Nanowire Using Nanoscale Manipulation, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4945–4950 CrossRef PubMed .

          M. A. Stroscio and M. Dutta, Phonons in Nanostructures, Cambridge University Press,  2001 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, J. Lu, S. H. Tang, C. H. Sow and X. Zhang, Composition-dependent electron transport in CdSxSe1−x nanobelts: a THz spectroscopy study, Opt. Lett., 2014, 39, 567–570 CrossRef PubMed .
C. V. Raman and K. S. Krishnan, A New Type of Secondary Radiation, Nature, 1928, 121, 2 Search PubMed .

          B. E. Sernelius, Surface Modes in Physics, Wiley-VCH, Berlin,  2001 Search PubMed .
I. F. Chang and S. S. Mitra, Application of a Modified Random-Element-Isodisplacement Model to Long-Wavelength Optic Phonons of Mixed Crystals, Phys. Rev., 1968, 172, 924–933 CrossRef .
K. Yamamoto, M. Yamaguchi, M. Tani, M. Hangyo, S. Teramura, T. Isu and N. Tomita, Degradation diagnosis of ultrahigh-molecular weight polyethylene with terahertz-time-domain spectroscopy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5194–5196 CrossRef .
M. Walther, B. Fischer, M. Schall and H. P. U. Jepsen, Far-infrared vibrational spectra of all-trans, 9-cis and 13-cis retinal measured by THz time-domain spectroscopy, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 332, 389–395 CrossRef .
M. Walther, B. M. Fischer and P. Uhd Jepsen, Noncovalent intermolecular forces in polycrystalline and amorphous saccharides in the far infrared, Chem. Phys., 2003, 288, 261–268 CrossRef .
M. Schall, M. Walther and P. Uhd Jepsen, Fundamental and second-order phonon processes in CdTe and ZnTe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 094301 CrossRef .
J. Han, W. Zhang, W. Chen, L. Thamizhmani, A. K. Azad and Z. Zhu, Far-Infrared Characteristics of ZnS Nanoparticles Measured by Terahertz Time-Domain Spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 1989–1993 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Li, Y. Jiang, Y. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Sheng, J. Jie, J. A. Zapien, W. Zhang and S.-T. Lee, Synthesis of CdSXSe1−X Nanoribbons with Uniform and Controllable Compositions via Sulfurization: Optical and Electronic Properties Studies, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17183–17188 CrossRef .
J. S. Jie, W. J. Zhang, Y. Jiang and S. T. Lee, Transport properties of single-crystal CdS nanoribbons, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 223117–223113 CrossRef .
J. S. Jie, W. J. Zhang, Y. Jiang and S. T. Lee, Single-crystal CdSe nanoribbon field-effect transistors and photoelectric applications, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 133118–133113 CrossRef .
L. Li, H. Lu, Z. Yang, L. Tong, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Bandgap-Graded CdSxSe1–x Nanowires for High-Performance Field-Effect Transistors and Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1109–1113 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Toshitake, N. Patricia, T. Kuniharu, C. F. Alexandra, J. Arash, C. W. Ming, C. Z. Ning and J. Ali, Contact printing of compositionally graded CdS x Se 1− x nanowire parallel arrays for tunable photodetectors, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 045201 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lu, X. Lim, M. Zheng, S. G. Mhaisalkar and C.-H. Sow, Direct Laser Pruning of CdSxSe1–x Nanobelts en Route to a Multicolored Pattern with Controlled Functionalities, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8298–8307 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wu, Y. Chang, Z. Lou, T. Xu, J. Xu, Z. Shi, Y. Tian and X. Li, Controllable synthesis of ternary ZnSxSe1-x nanowires with tunable band-gaps for optoelectronic applications, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 708, 623–627 CrossRef .
Y. J. Choi, K. S. Park and J. G. Park, Network-bridge structure of CdSxSe1−x nanowire-based optical sensors, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 505605 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Pan, R. Liu, F. Wang, S. Xie, B. Zou, M. Zacharias and Z. L. Wang, High-Quality Alloyed CdSxSe1-x Whiskers as Waveguides with Tunable Stimulated Emission, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22313–22317 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Fang, S. Huang, Y. Lu, A. Pan, F. Lin and X. Zhu, Color-changeable properties of plasmonic waveguides based on Se-doped CdS nanoribbons, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 085403 CrossRef .
A. Pan, X. Wang, P. He, Q. Zhang, Q. Wan, M. Zacharias, X. Zhu and B. Zou, Color-Changeable Optical Transport through Se-Doped CdS 1D Nanostructures, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2970–2975 CrossRef PubMed .
J. I. Wong, H. Y. Yang, H. Li, T. Chen and H. J. Fan, Wavelength tunable electroluminescence from randomly assembled n-CdSxSe1-x nanowires/p+ -SiC heterojunction, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1467–1470 RSC .
D. A. Caselli and C. Z. Ning, High-performance laterally-arranged multiple-bandgap solar cells using spatially composition-graded CdxPb1-xS nanowires on a single substrate: a design study, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, A686–A694 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Pan, R. Liu, M. Sun and C.-Z. Ning, Spatial Composition Grading of Quaternary ZnCdSSe Alloy Nanowires with Tunable Light Emission between 350 and 710 nm on a Single Substrate, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 671–680 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Kwon, H.-M. Jeong, K. Jung, D.-H. Ko, H. Ko, I.-K. Han, G. T. Kim and J.-G. Park, Structural Origin of the Band Gap Anomaly of Quaternary Alloy CdxZn1–xSySe1–y Nanowires, Nanobelts, and Nanosheets in the Visible Spectrum, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5486–5499 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Xu, P. Wang, X. Zhuang, A. Pan and L. Tong, On-Nanowire Spatial Band Gap Design for White Light Emission, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5085–5089 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Fan, S. Turkdogan, Z. Liu, D. Shelhammer and C. Z. Ning, A monolithic white laser, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 796–803 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  SEM images of ZnSxSe1−x tetrapod-like nanowires. (a, b) x = 1, (c, d) x = ∼0.72. Adapted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2008 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the VLS growth process. (b) Growth setup and structural characterization (optical images), (c) TEM and (d) XRD patterns of the CdSxSe1−x products, where the XRD patterns indicate the gradual change in composition. (b), (c), and (d) are adapted with permission from ref. 27 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  TEM images of the CdSe1−xSx nanowires. (a) Low-magnification and (b) high-magnification images. (c, d) HRTEM images of the nanowires with x = 0.45 and 0.75, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 13 Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a, b) SEM images of ZnSxSe1−x vertical aligned nanowires with different compositions. (c) Schematic of the growth mechanism of vertically aligned ZnSxSe1−x nanowire arrays. Adapted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) TEM images, EDX mapping and line scan of ZnO/CdSxSe1−x nanowires. (b) SEM and TEM images of Si/CdSxSe1−x core/shell nanowires. (a) Is adapted with permission from ref. 50 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society and (b) is adapted with permission from ref. 52 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the specially designed source-movable tube furnace. (b) TEM and FM images of the composition gradient CdSxSe1−x nanowires. (c) SEM, TEM and EDX of CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons with lateral heterostructures. (d) TEM images and absorption spectra of ZnSexTe1−x nanowires. (b) Is adapted with permission from ref. 53 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society, (c) is adapted with permission from ref. 71 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society, and (d) is adapted with permission from ref. 54 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Recombination processes in semiconductors. (b) Bandgap engineering of ternary semiconductors. (c) PL spectra of CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons of different compositions. (d) Temperature-dependent PL spectra of CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons. (b) and (c) are adapted with permission from ref. 27 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (d) Is adapted with permission from ref. 66 Copyright 2012 AIP Publishing LLC.	 
Eg(x) = ECdSe + (ECdS − ECdSe − b)x + bx2	(1)

 	Fig. 8  (a) THz frequency regime in the electromagnetic spectrum. (b) Composition-dependent carrier dynamics of ternary CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons at different excitation fluences. (c) Complex photoconductivity of three samples (x = 1, 0.65, and 0) recorded at t = 3.5 ps. The solid lines are the Drude–Smith fitting curves. (a) Is adapted with permission from ref. 70 Copyright 2002 Nature Publishing Group. (b and c) Are adapted with permission from ref. 71 Copyright 2013 Springer.	 
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 9  (a) Wavelength-tunable lasing from CdSxSe1−x nanowires on a single substrate. (b) Dual wavelength, (c) low-threshold and (d) multicolor lasing from complex nanostructures. (a) Is adapted with permission from ref. 80 Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (b, c, d) are adapted with permission from ref. 58 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society, ref. 59 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society, and ref. 85 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Raman spectra of ZnSxSe1−x nanowires. (b) Low-frequency phonon resonance in ternary CdSxS1−x nanoribbons probed by THz-TDS. (a) Is adapted with permission from ref. 21 Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry and (b) is adapted with permission from ref. 87 Copyright 2014 OSA publishing.	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of a single-nanowire FET. (b) and (c) FET performance characteristics of CdSxSe1−x single-nanoribbon FET. Adapted with permission from ref. 96 Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of the nano-network FET. (b)–(d) SEM image and FET performance characteristics of the CdSxSe1−x nano-net FET. (e) SEM image and electrical property characteristics of the ZnSxSe1−x nano-net FET. (b)–(d) are adapted with permission from ref. 27 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society and (e) is adapted with permission from ref. 21 Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  Characterization of the photodetector based on CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons with lateral heterostructures. Adapted with permission from ref. 57 Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Waveguide demonstration of CdSxSe1−x nanoribbons. (b) Selective waveguide from the branched architecture of the CdSxSe1−x nanostructures. (a) Is adapted with permission from Ref. 106 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society and (b) is adapted with permission from ref. 60 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  LED structure and EL characteristics of the n-CdSxSe1−x nanowires/p-SiC substrate heterostructure. Adapted with permission from ref. 107 Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic of a lateral multiple junction solar cell with a spectral splitting concentration optics layer. Adapted with permission from ref. 108 Copyright 2011 OSA publishing.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Tunable color emissions based on a ZnSSe nanowire, and the CIE chromaticity diagram indicates the white light emission. (b) Lasing spectra with tunable colors based on ZnSSe lateral structures. (c) CIE chromaticity diagram indicating the white lasing. (a) Is adapted with permission from ref. 111 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. (b) and (c) Are adapted with permission from ref. 112 Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
