Branched ZnO nanostructures as building blocks of photoelectrodes for efficient solar energy conversion  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP41272A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP41272A
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 10872-10881Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsBranched ZnO nanostructures as building blocks of photoelectrodes for efficient solar energy conversion

        
          
            Wei 
            Chen
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yongcai 
            Qiu
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Shihe 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *b
aMichael Grätzel Centre for Mesoscopic Solar Cells, Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, P. R. China. E-mail: wnlochenwei@hust.edu.cn;  Fax: 86 8779 3867;   Tel: 86 8779 3867
bDepartment of Chemistry, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong. E-mail: chsyang@ust.hk;  Fax: 852 2358 1594;   Tel: 852 2358 7362
Received 
      20th April 2012
    , Accepted 31st May 2012First published on 31st May 2012AbstractZnO nanotetrapods are distinguished by their unique nanocrystalline geometric form with four tetrahedrally directed arms, which endows them the ability to handily assemble three-dimensional network structures. Such network structures, coupled with the intrinsically excellent electronic properties of the semiconducting ZnO, have proved advantageous for building photoelectrodes in energy conversion devices since they allow fast vectorial electron transport. In this review article, we summarize recent efforts, with partial emphasis on our own, in the development of ZnO nanotetrapod-based devices for solar energy conversion, including dye-sensitized solar cells and photoelectrochemical cells for water splitting. A pure ZnO nanotetrapod network was firstly demonstrated to have excellent charge collection properties even with just physical contacts. Composition design of ZnO nanotetrapods/SnO2 nanoparticles yielded a high efficiency of 4.91% in flexible DSSCs. More significantly, by secondary branching and nitrogen doping, a record performance for water splitting has been achieved. A perspective on future research directions in ZnO nanotetrapod-based solar energy conversion devices is also discussed together with possible strategies of pursuit. It is hoped that the results obtained so far with the ZnO nanotetrapods could inspire and catalyze future developments of solar energy conversion systems based on branched nanostructural materials, contributing to solving global energy and environmental issues.
Wei Chen
Wei Chen received his BS (2003) and PhD (2008) in Materials Science and Engineering, both from Tsinghua University in China. He then did his post-doctoral research from 2008 to 2010 in the Department of Chemistry at The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. In April 2010, he joined Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China, as an associate professor. His research interests cover the synthesis, understanding, and applications of functional nanomaterials in the next generation solar cells, including dye or quantum dot-sensitized solar cells, printable inorganic or hybrid solar cells, etc.
Yongcai Qiu
Yongcai Qiu is currently a postgraduate student working towards a PhD degree in the Nano Science and Technology program and the Department of Chemistry of the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. His research interests are focused on developing novel nanostructured materials and applying them in new generation energy conversion and storage devices.
Shihe Yang
Shihe Yang received his BS (1982) in Chemistry from Sun Yat-Sen University in China. Through the US–China CGP program, he was admitted to Rice University in 1983 and obtained a PhD in Physical Chemistry in 1988 (with Prof. Richard E. Smalley). He did his post-doctoral research at Argonne National Laboratory and the University of Toronto (with Prof. John C. Polanyi) before joining the faculty at The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in 1992, where he is currently a full Professor. His current research interests include the understanding, manipulation and applications of zero-, one-, and two-dimensional nanosystems.
1. Introduction
Sunlight is the most appealing alternative to fossil fuel as a sustainable and renewable energy source of environmental and climatic benignity.1 The central question of modern time is how to efficiently harvest solar energy and convert it to useful forms. Photovoltaic technology involves the direct generation of electricity from sunlight.2 The rapid advance of nanomaterials and nanotechnology has galvanized the emergence of the third generation photovoltaic cells, of which dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) are an obvious example.3–6 Impressively, the power conversion efficiencies of DSSCs have as of now reached ∼12%,3 which, if implemented properly, may meet the requirements of many practical applications. In parallel, photoelectrochemical cells (PEC) for water splitting have also been developed, in effect even earlier,6 and are currently progressing at a rapid pace. PECs and DSSCs, despite their different energy product forms, are both photoelectrochemical systems, share similar principles, and both require photoelectrodes made of thin porous films of semiconductor nanocrystallites.7–9
Metal oxides, by virtue of their physical and chemical stability, semiconducting properties, low-cost and easy availability, have been widely explored as photoelectrode materials in DSSC and PEC systems.9–11 Critical to the device performance of both of these photoelectrochemical systems are photoinduced electron transport processes.12–13 The processes include, but are not limited to, the “semiconductor-electrolyte” interfacial exciton separation and electron transport (collection) in the porous network of photoelectrodes. Achieving a high contact area between the electrolyte and solid semiconductor to facilitate the separation of photo-generated e−/h+ pairs necessitates the use of nanocrystalline building blocks of high surface-to-volume ratios (meaning small sizes) to construct the photoelectrode films.14 However, the small nanocrystalline size in a film in many cases comes with a high density of defects such as grain boundaries in the electron transport pathways, which lead to multiple trapping events and thus hinders electron transport.15–16 In recent years, researchers have resorted to morphology control of photoelectrode nanostructures to resolve this seemingly conflicting issue.7–8,15–26 Examples include the direct use of TiO2 and ZnO nanowire/nanotube/nanosheet arrays and their derived secondary branching nanostructures as photoelectrodes for photoelectrochemical systems.24,17–22 From the purely geometric viewpoint, the nanoarrays provide the shortest electron transport path to the charge collection substrate, a feature certainly favorable for device performance.15–16 Unfortunately, the efficiency record of practical DSSCs is still held by nanoparticle photoanodes.3 The primary limitation of the nanoarrays mostly rests with their relatively low surface area, arising from the lack of synthetic technologies which could tune the packing density and the size parameters of the nanoarrays.24,17–20
The peculiar tetrapod architecture consisting of four rod-shaped structures joined at tetrahedral angles to a central core, has recently attracted much attention in the development of next generation solar cells.27 The key advantage of the tetrapod over other nanocrystalline geometric forms, intuitively, takes root in its three-dimensional (tetrahedral) directionality effectuated by its four arms which allows network assembly with bundling-rod like joints (see Fig. 2d) and thus promotes directional charge transport to the collection substrate. This concept has been brought to effect in a number of photoelectrochemical energy conversion systems.28–36 For example, in composite polymer/nanocrystal solar cells, CdSe nanotetrapod based photoelectrodes showed improved electron extraction in comparison to randomly assembled nanorod and nanoparticle photoelectrodes.28,29 More recently, ZnO nanotetrapods have been introduced to photoelectrochemical energy conversion systems, manifesting notably high charge collection capability.31–36
This review article will provide a round up of our recent results on the application of ZnO nanotetrapods and their derived branched nanostructures in DSSC and PEC solar energy conversion systems.34–37 Notably, ZnO nanotetrapod photoelectrodes even without calcination have proved capable of effective electron transport, which prompted us to systematically improve their performance for solar energy conversion by nanomaterial engineering innovations. We will conclude by suggesting ways forward for further developments of this type of solar energy conversion photoelectrodes.
2. Structure and assembly of ZnO nanotetrapods
ZnO is widely known as a direct wide band gap (3.37 eV) semiconductor with a large exciton binding energy (60 meV) and a high electron mobility (about 17 cm2 V−1 s−1 for single-crystal ZnO nanowires).38,39 These features make it very promising in optoelectronic and photovoltaic applications.40–44 To cap it all, ZnO is amenable to be processed into variegated morphologies in terms of nanostructural synthesis. So far, shape controlled nanoparticles, nanorods/nanowires, nanobelts, nanotubes, nanosheets, nanotetrapods, and their arrays to that effect have been reported in the literature and many of them have been exploited for constructing photoelectrodes in DSSCs and PECs.7,17,19,31–37,43,45,46
In Fig. 1 we draw a comparison of four typical ZnO nanostructural morphologies to illustrate their pros and cons for building solar energy conversion photoelectrodes, including randomly assembled nanoparticles, nanorods, nanotetrapods and well-aligned nanowire arrays. Among them, randomly assembled nanoparticles and nanorods suffer from numerous grain boundaries which hinder electron transport, while nanowire arrays are difficult to control and currently fall short of cost-effective ways to systematically increase the needed roughness factor. On balance, the nanotetrapod morphology owes its attractiveness for DSSC and PEC devices to its unique structural characteristics. Firstly, it is itself constructed from four one-dimensional (1-D) nanorod units, which when assembled into a film with bundling-rod like joints (see Fig. 2d) should facilitate electron transport to the charge collection electrode thanks to the minimization of grain boundaries in the network.15,16 Secondly, the nanotetrapod as a building block is amenable to assembly compatible with low-cost and scalable printing technologies for the photoelectrode film deposition.34 Thirdly, by directing the constituent nanorods in the four tetrahedral directions, nanotetrapods can always transport electrons in the direction perpendicular to the conductive substrate plane.28,29 This is in stark contrast to the randomly assembled nanorods, which despite their shared 1-D morphology largely lie down on the photoelectrode and hence make no use of the advantageous 1-D electron transport in the vertical direction.28,29 It appears from the aforementioned points, electron transport rates for the four different morphologies in Fig. 1 can be put in the sequence of nanoparticle-film<nanorod-film<nanotetrapod-film<nanorod-array. However, for high speed, high throughput and large area film deposition required for low-cost device manufacturing, the nanorod array is still difficult to achieve. In this regard, the sequence for the ease of large scale manufacturing turns out to be nanoparticle-film ≈ nanorod-film ≈ nanotetrapod-film >> nanorod-array. Together, among the different morphologies, the nanotetrapod seems to be the building block of choice for constructing solar energy conversion photoelectrodes.
 Fig. 1  Schematic showing four typical architectures of photoelectrodes constructed from different nanoscale building blocks for solar energy conversion devices. 
 Fig. 2  Structural characteristics of a 30 μm thick ZnO nanotetrapod film deposited without calcination. (a–d) SEM images viewed from top (a), at high resolution (b), in cross-section (c), and at the detailed inter-tetrapod connections (d). (e) Schematic showing a possible electron transport pathway through the ZnO nanotetrapod film. Reprinted fromref. 34with permission from Elsevier. 
Controlled synthesis of ZnO tetrapods is one of the most important issues with respect to the photoelectrochemical energy conversion applications. The arm diameter determines the surface-to-volume ratio (or BET surface area) while the arm length-to-diameter ratio influences the packing density of the tetrapods. Those are important parameters that determine the number of active sites for charge separation at the semiconductor/electrolyte interfaces for a film of certain thickness (which is henceforth termed the roughness factor)19 and as well as the electron transport property of the resultant photoelectrode film.36 In most of the reported works up to date, the synthesis of the ZnO tetrapod has been accomplished via chemical vapor transport and deposition (CVTD).27,31–33,38,47 The ZnO tetrapods reported range from >100 μm to ∼100 nm in arm length and from >10 μm to 10–20 nm in arm diameter.38,47 It is noticed that ZnO tetrapods with an arm length of 13 nm and an arm diameter of 6 nm,48 have been synthesized under solvothermal conditions which as we will suggest towards the end of this paper should be explored for use in photoelectrochemical energy conversion devices.
Our strategy to separate nucleation and growth has provided a handle to control the synthesis of ZnO tetrapods. By systematically optimizing a serial of synthesis parameters, such as Zn vapor pressure, deposition temperature, gas flow rate, O2 concentration, moisture, etc., we have achieved high-quality ZnO tetrapods with tunable size and morphology. In particular, well dispersed and uniformly shaped tetrapods could be synthesized with an arm diameter down to 13 nm and an arm length down to 150 nm.38 In our studies reviewed here, two kinds of ZnO tetrapods with different sizes were chosen for DSSC34–37 and PEC37 applications, due to the different design requirements for the photoelectrode architectures. One is 40 nm in arm diameter and 500 nm in arm length and utilized in DSSCs; the other is 100 nm in arm diameter and 1.5 μm in arm length and is employed in PECs.
3. ZnO nanotetrapod photoanodes in DSSCs
ZnO is, next only to TiO2, a popular photoelectrode material in DSSCs by virtue of its morphological versatility. Researchers are interested in exploiting this advantage of ZnO in diverse DSSC applications, such as flexible DSSCs which necessitate low temperature film deposition on plastic conductive substrates.49–53 The advantage of the material versatility of ZnO is heightened by utilising the tetrapod building block in assembling photoelectrodes for solar energy conversion devices.
3.1. DSSCs based on pure ZnO nanotetrapod film
Since the successful synthesis of size-tunable ZnO nanotetrapods in 2007 in our laboratory,38 we have started to use them as building blocks to construct solar energy conversion photoelectrodes. In our initial experiment, the ZnO nanotetrapods we used were ∼40 nm in arm diameter and ∼500 nm in arm length. The nanotetrapods had good dispersion and wetting properties in a butanol solvent, affording a binder free paste with a proper viscosity for the doctor blading deposition of high quality mesoscopic ZnO films. Such non-calcined ZnO nanotetrapod films were found to be crack-free with good inter-tetrapod linkages even when they were as thick as 30 μm (Fig. 2a–c). In more detail, the inter-tetrapod connections are mostly of the bundling-rod type (Fig. 2d) and each neighboring nanotetrapod pair is well joined with at least one stout contact. Such robust inter-tetrapod connections are achievable even at room temperature to give a mesoscopic film with good structural stability as well as continuous electron transport pathways all the way down to the collection electrode (Fig. 2e).
The afore-described ZnO nanotetrapod network has proven to be efficient for charge collection. Firstly, the sublinear dependence of Jsc up to 10.31 mA cm−2 on the nanotetrapod film thickness up to about 36.0 μm (Fig. 3a) suggests that the effective diffusion length of ZnO nanotetrapod film is at least over 36.0 μm. As we know, the optimized thickness of mesoscopic TiO2 films for DSSCs are much thinner, typically ∼10 μm.54 The cell efficiency has reached the saturation level of 3.27% at a relatively small thickness of about 31.2 μm due to the linear decreasing trends of Voc and fill factor with increasing film thickness (Fig. 3b). Nevertheless, this efficiency is still more than twice those of the best ZnO nanowire arrays,19 presumably due to the higher roughness factor achieved with the nanotetrapod network. Second, IMPS/IMVS measurements have shown that the charge collection efficiency (ηcc = 1 − τt/τr, where τt/τr represents electron transport/recombination time) for the ZnO nanotetrapod films is much higher than that of the reference nanoparticle films (Fig. 4).55,56 In particular, τt for the nanotetrapod film is ∼1–2 orders of magnitude higher than that of the ZnO nanoparticle film, providing direct evidence of the excellent electron transport in the nanotetrapod network.
 Fig. 3  ZnO nanotetrapod film thickness dependence of: (a) energy conversion efficiency and short-circuit photocurrent density; (b) open-circuit photovoltage and fill factor. All of the ZnO nanotetrapod films studied were deposited without calcination. Reprinted fromref. 34with permission from Elsevier. 
 Fig. 4  Comparison of light intensity dependent electron transport time and recombination time between ZnO nanotetrapod and nanoparticle photoelectrodes. The ZnO nanoparticles used in this study are ∼40 nm in size and were deposited in a way similar to that for the ZnO nanotetrapod photoelectrode. 
In the process of publishing the aforementioned results, it came to our notice that a DSSC based on rather large ZnO tetrapods had been just reported.32 The employed tetrapods were over 100 nm in arm diameter and over 4 μm in arm length. The lack of roughness factor was countered by increasing the film thickness of the tetrapods up to 380 μm, but the photocurrent density, Jsc, was still limited to 5.33 mA cm−2, even though the films were calcined at high temperatures.
Chiu et al. later reported ZnO nanotetrapod based DSSCs with efficiencies up to 4.9% using a metal free dye with high light extinction coefficient and a common calcination procedure.31 Similarly, the saturated Jsc was only achieved at a high film thickness of 42 μm. This result is somewhat consistent with our finding on a photoelectrode made of non-calcined ZnO nanotetrapods,34 but a notable difference of our nanotetrapod film is that it was made of uniform tetrapods, binder free, and without high temperature calcination.
3.2. ZnO nanotetrapod/SnO2 nanoparticle composite photoelectrode
Even with our relatively small ZnO nanotetrapods for the DSSC photoelectrodes, the roughness factor remained low for profuse dye adsorption and thorough light extinction, which was calculated to be 400 for a 35 μm thick nanotetrapod film, much lower than 1000 held for TiO2 nanoparticle based DSSCs.19,34 Further increasing the nanotetrapod film thickness was a logical option, but it could run into some practical problems. For example, when the thickness of binder free nanotetrapod films is increased to more than 40 μm, solvent evaporation could inflict stress and then cracks in the films, which are detrimental to charge collection. One avenue we have pursued was to introduce apposite nanoparticles into the nanotetrapod matrix, given that there is ample space left between the nanotetrapods in the matrix. Key to the idea is that the ZnO nanotetrapod network figures as a global electron transport highway while the encapsulated nanoparticles serve to increase the roughness factor and take part in the local charge transport. The design principle is schematically shown in Fig. 5. This has been confirmed by our symmetric studies with (1) traditional high temperature calcined ZnO nanotetrapod/SnO2 nanoparticle composite photoelectrodes on FTO glass36 and (2) low temperature treated ZnO nanotetrapod/SnO2 nanoparticle composite photoelectrodes on a ITO/PEN flexible substrate.35
 Fig. 5  Schematic showing possible electron transport pathways in the ZnO nanotetrapod/SnO2 nanoparticle composite photoelectrode. 
For the high temperature calcined photoelectrodes, among three compositions tested, the best performance (efficiency = 6.31%) was obtained with a weight ratio of SnO2:ZnO = 2:1 rather than 1:1 and 1: 2. Composite films with high ZnO nanotetrapod contents were found to require a thicker film in order to harvest a reasonable portion of solar light, and this then had the effect of reducing charge collection due to the much increased electron transport path length. Such charge collection loss appears to be a main limiting factor on IPCE and therefore Jsc, which could undermine the gain from their favorable light scattering ability. Interestingly, an ultrathin layer of ZnO spontaneously shelled on the SnO2 nanoparticles, has been established, which was held responsible for enhancing Voc by lifting the conduction band edges rather than by suppressing charge recombination. Finally, by intensity modulated photocurrent/photovoltage spectroscopy (IMPS/IMVS), we have uncovered that charge recombination time in SnO2/ZnO composite films is mainly determined by the ZnO shell condition on SnO2, whereas electron transport time is for the most part influenced by the morphologies and sizes of the ZnO crystalline additives. In particular, ZnO nanotetrapods have proved to be superior in electron transport and therefore charge collection over ZnO particles additives in the SnO2/ZnO composites based DSSCs.36
As a continuing work, the composite photoanode design was later extended to flexible DSSCs.35 This is credited to the excellent network forming ability of ZnO nanotetrapods making low-temperature processing possible. An effective low temperature fabrication technique of “acetic acid gelation–mechanical press–ammonia activation” has been developed for the deposition of the binder free paste of the SnO2 nanoparticle/ZnO nanotetrapod composites on ITO/PEN flexible substrates. Photoelectrodes with these films have scored a cell efficiency of 4.91% after a light scattering layer consisting of 3 μm pure nanotetrapods was introduced (Fig. 6). The scattering layer was shown through IPCE measurements to benefit the near infra-red light harvesting. The bending tests of the two films on flexible substrates (see inset of Fig. 6) indicate good mechanical adhesion and demonstrate the practicability of the low temperature treated photoelectrodes. This was the first time such a composite photoanode design was used to fabricate efficient flexible DSSCs by combining both materials' advantages. To reveal their role, we have replaced the ZnO nanotetrapods with large ZnO particles in the composite photoelectrode while keeping the same ratio of ZnO to SnO2.57 We found that charge collection efficiency was relatively lower under the working condition of one sun, clearly due to slower electron transport in the large ZnO particle based composite photoelectrode (Fig. 7). Straightforwardly, the fact that the ZnO nanotetrapods support faster electron transport in the composite film than the ZnO big particles is rooted in their structural difference: the big ZnO particles are separated from each other in the film, whereas for the ZnO nanotetrapods in the film, the 1D arms ensure facile directional charge transport and the symmetrical branching structure guarantees the formation of an excellent electron transport network (see inset of Fig. 7).
 Fig. 6  
J–V characteristic curves of DSSCs based on the films shown in the insets, from left to right, single–layer composite film (■) and double–layer–structured film (●) on FTO–coated glasses, and single–layer composite film (□) and double–layer–structured film (○) on flexible substrates. Reproduced fromRef. 35. 
 Fig. 7  Dependence of Jsc and efficiency (charge collection efficiency) on film thickness for two kinds of nanocomposite films: squares, SnO2 nanoparticles/ZnO nanotetrapods; circles, SnO2 nanoparticles/large ZnO particles. Charge collection efficiencies were calculated from the data measured by IMPS/IMVS at 70 W m−2. Reproduced fromRef. 35. 
3.3. Tandem structured photoelectrodes based on ZnO nanotetrapods
The versatility of assembling ZnO nanotetrapod films in a layer-by-layer fashion has allowed us to design a tandem structured photoelectrode by employing two spectrally complementary dyes as sensitizers and position them separately one above the other in a single integrated film. Our strategy is broken down into three steps as schematically depicted in Fig. 8. Firstly, we employ dye 1 (yellow color) and dye 2 (red color) to sensitize, separately, the nanoparticle layer on substrate 1 (FTO-coated conductive glass) and the nanotetrapod layer on substrate 2 (glass slide). Secondly, we bring the two layers to touch each other and then mechanically press the joined two layers via the two substrates. Thirdly, we lift the bare substrate 2 off, which could be easily accomplished because the adhesion strength of the ZnO nanotetrapods on the flat glass substrate is much weaker than that of the nanoparticle underlayer on the FTO-coated glass. This led to the formation of an integrated film with two layers sensitized by two different dyes. This approach appears to be advantageous in cleanly separating the two dye layers, in contrast to the previously reported “cocktail” method, which relies on the sequential adsorption of different dyes in different layers of a porous film and hence is afflicted by intermixing between the two different dyes.58 The method advocated here is also simpler and faster than the polymer-protected sequential dye adsorption scheme reported previously by N-G Park et al.59 Moreover, this method can sidestep the problems of assembling traditional tandem cells by stacking two separate cells above one another,60 for which light absorption by the intermediate Pt electrode and electrolyte layers is inexorable.
 Fig. 8  Schematic depicting fabrication steps of the tandem structured DSSC based on ZnO nanotetrapods. Step 1: deposit a nanoparticle film and a nanotetrapod film on two separate substrates sensitized with two different dyes; Step 2: bring the two films together face-to-face and mechanically press towards each other; Step 3: lift off bare substrate 2, leaving behind a double-layered film with two dyes sensitizing the different layers on substrate 1. 
A double-layered film consisting of a 4 μm thick ZnO nanoparticle underlayer and a 1.5 μm thick pure ZnO nanotetrapod toplayer was chosen for the demonstration of the principle. The underlayer was sensitized with a yellow coloured mercurochrome dye with an optical absorption edge at 570 nm, and the ZnO nanotetrapod toplayer was sensitized by the common N719 dye covering the light absorption range in the red up to 750 nm. Shown in Fig. 9 are J–V characteristic curves of the single layered film based DSSC and the double-layered film based DSSC. It is clearly seen that the overlaid nanotetrapod toplayer is effective in improving the total Jsc since the only difference between the two DSSCs lies in the extra top layer in the double-layered device. The Jsc improvement is attributed to this additional light harvesting, as evidenced by the improved IPCE in the extended spectral region down to 750 nm (Fig. 10). This result is of significance for seeking further breakthroughs on the DSSC performance because one of the present bottlenecks in DSSCs is the lack of an efficient dye that can cover the entire range of the solar spectrum.61 If two dyes positioned in different layers of a photoelectrode could efficiently absorb solar light in spectrally complementary and spatially separated regions, the efficiency record of DSSCs could be rewritten.58 It should be mentioned that our choice of the dyes and films' structure has by no means been optimized. In particular, the mercurochrome dye is not efficient for photo-to-current conversion.62 The low Jsc, Voc and fill factor imply serious charge recombination. Notwithstanding those, the incorporation of the nanotetrapod toplayer could still add 1.8 mA cm−2 to the total photocurrent of 3.0 mA cm−2 for the tandem structured film (Fig. 9). Considering the possible loss of charge carriers in passing through the interface from the toplayer to the underlayer due to any possible mismatch between the two layers, this additional 1.8 mA cm−2 due to the tandem pressed toplayer only 1.5 μm thick is considerably high. Again, this should be ascribed to the superior charge collection of the ZnO nanotetrapod network. We are confident that with more efficient near-infra red dyes and other optimization efforts,63,64 such a tetrapod-based tandem design will lead to much more efficient DSSCs.
 Fig. 9  
J–V characteristic curves of the single layered photoelectrode made of mercurochrome dye sensitized ZnO nanoparticles (circle) and the double-layered photoelectrode with an additional toplayer made of N719 dye sensitized ZnO nanotetrapods (square). 
 Fig. 10  IPCE curves of the corresponding photoelectrodes in Fig. 9. 
4. Modified ZnO nanotetrapods for PEC photoanodes
In PEC water splitting systems, solar light absorption generates electron-hole pairs (excitons) in a photocatalyst (typically a semiconductor), which can separate the electrons and holes at semiconductor-electrolyte interfaces.65 This technology converts solar energy into chemical energy stored in the bond of H2, which is clean as well as transportable in contrast to solar cells. The efforts dedicated to maximizing PCE have been continued for over 40 years ever since the pioneering work of Honda and Fujishima in 1972,66 but the efficiencies (less than 4%) remain low.67 The critical challenge is to identify suitable photocatalysts with novel nanostructures which can meet the complex demands for water splitting. Firstly, a narrow bandgap photocatalyst (∼1.23 eV without considering overpotentials) with a proper band edge position is preferable for maximizing sunlight harvest. Secondly, a high contact area between the photocatalyst and the electrolyte (consequently a small photocatalyst size) is beneficial for maximizing the separation of the e−h+ pairs before their recombination. Third, a sufficiently thick photocatalyst film in consideration of its light extinction coefficient is required to ensure complete absorption of sunlight. The advent of nanotechnology has spawned nanomaterials of all shades. Particularly noteworthy are the 1-D nanomaterials which have been explored for PEC applications including C doped TiO2 nanotubes,68 Si-TiO2 core shell nanowires,67 N doped or quantum dot modified ZnO nanowires,7,69 H doped TiO2 nanowires,70 BiVO4 nanowires,71etc. However, the PEC photoanode efficiencies reported so far are generally low. For example, the reported PEC photoanode efficiency of N-doped ZnO nanowires was only 0.15%.7 In a way similar to DSSCs, ZnO nanotetrapods could be used for constructing PEC photoelectrodes for splitting water.
For the PEC water splitting application, two modifications have been made on the ZnO nanotetrapods: N-doping for narrowing the semiconductor band gap and secondary branching for increasing the roughness factor. The advantages of the branched N-doped tetrapod network for photocatalytic water splitting can be gleaned from Fig. 11: (1) the improved light harvesting due to N-doping;7 (2) the rapid electron transport paths in much the same way as in the DSSC counterpart,34 which should enhance exciton migration and separation and hence water splitting efficiency; and (3) the increased roughness factor due to the secondary branching and thus increased interfacial area for exciton dissociation and water oxidation. The branched ZnO nanotetrapods are hierarchically structured in such as way that the trunks are thicker than the outer branches. For example, the trunk of the nanotetrapods is nearly 100 nm thick whereas the outer branches are a few tens of nanometers thick. As such, the trunk is sufficiently thick to support radial electric field in the depletion layer at the solid-electrolyte interface, which is impossible in smaller size nano-entities.19 Such upward band bending at the nanotetrapod trunk surface should help to direct the electron flow from the outer branches to the trunk as well as to expedite charge separation and suppress charge recombination at the interface by corralling the electrons inside the trunk core of the nanotetrapods.
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustrating interfacial exciton dissociation, electron injection and transport in secondary branched ZnO nanotetrapod photoelectrode of PEC. 
The high quality of the ZnO nanotetrapods with very smooth surfaces obtained from the vapor phase growth made the further branching challenging. We have developed a three-step procedure to accomplish the secondary branching of the nanotetrapods: (1) surface etching of ZnO nanotetrapods; (2) repeated nucleation and growth of ZnO seeds forming ZnO spines; and (3) growth of ZnO branches. The anisotropic growth of rod-like branches could continue until the cavities between the nanotetrapod trunks were fully filled. The actual morphological details of the branched ZnO nanotetrapods we obtained are shown in Fig. 12. The pristine ZnO nanotetrapods were about 1.2–1.5 μm in arm length and about 100 nm in arm diameter, which were easily assembled into a ∼20 μm thick film with a largely open structure (Fig. 12a and b). After seed coating on the ZnO nanotetrapods, one can see clearly the secondary branched ZnO nanorods sprouting from the tetrapods (compare Fig. 12c, d, without seed coating and Fig. 12e, f with seed coating). Also evident is the largely increased density of rod-like branches grown from the seed coating procedure. By repeating a specially designed growth cycle three times, the secondary branched ZnO nanorods could grow from the initial 200 nm length, 20 nm thick (Fig. 12e) up to on average 1 μm length, 80 nm thick (Fig. 12f). The numerous cavities, which were clearly observable after only one round of branching growth giving too short ZnO branches (Fig. 12e), also got filled as expected (Fig. 12f). Another notable feature of the new generation of ZnO branches is that they are almost parallel to each other and together make an angle of ∼110° with the parent arm (Fig. 12g), which appears to arise from the fixed angle between the (001) planes of the branches and the (30) planes of the arm with the common zone axis of [110].72 The special angle could be also related to twins involving the {112} planes.38
 Fig. 12  (a) SEM of a film made of the pristine ZnO nanotetrapods. (b) TEM images of the pristine ZnO nanotetrapods. (c) Low-amplification and (d) high-amplification SEM images of the branched ZnO nanotetrapods without seed coating. (e) SEM image of ZnO nanotetrapods with seed coating, showing secondary ZnO branches on nanotetrapods after one round of growth. (f) SEM image of secondary ZnO branches on nanotetrapods after three rounds of growth. (g) Typical TEM image of one arm of a branched ZnO nanotetrapod after one round of growth. (h) High-resolution TEM image taken from the circled region in (g). Reprinted (adapted) with permission fromref. 37. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. 
When the N-doped, secondary branched ZnO nanotetrapods were used to construct PEC photoelectrodes for water splitting, we found dramatic performance enhancement in comparison with the pristine ZnO nanotetrapod photoelectrode. The results are presented in Fig. 13. With the pristine ZnO nanotetrapods, the photocurrent density was only 0.046 mA cm−2 at +0.31 V versus Ag/AgCl under one-sun illumination while in the dark, the current was almost negligible in the range of 10−7 A cm−2. The resulting maximum photo-conversion efficiency was 0.016% at the applied voltage of +0.86 V versus RHE. However, the secondary branched ZnO nanotetrapods obtained after three rounds of branching growth yielded a much higher photocurrent density of 0.12 mA cm−2 at +0.31 V versus Ag/AgCl and a maximum efficiency of 0.045% at the applied voltage of +0.82 V versus RHE. Moreover, the N-doped, fully branched ZnO nanotetrapods showed by far the largest photoresponse enhancement, resulting in a photocurrent density of 0.99 mA cm−2 which is about 20 times higher than that with the pristine ZnO nanotetrapods. Correspondingly, the maximum photoelectrode efficiency was elevated to 0.31% at the applied voltage of +0.92 V vs. RHE, which is 19 times higher than that with the pristine ZnO nanotetrapods. Gratifyingly, this efficiency is approximately two times higher than that obtained with a ZnO:N nanowire array,7 and also much higher than the recently reported values for undoped and N-doped ZnO films.73,74 As set out in the work, the photoelectrode efficiency enhancement from the unique features of our N-doped branched ZnO nanotetrapods photoanodes: a large increase in roughness factor and a large red-shift in the absorption towards the visible region. The IPCE result in Fig. 13c has verified the magnitude enhancement and the red-shift of the photocurrent response. In comparison with the pristine ZnO nanotetrapods, the branched ZnO nanotetrapods showed substantially enhanced IPCE at λ < 400 nm due to the significantly increased roughness factor. Equally important, the N-doped branched ZnO nanotetrapods contributed additional IPCE enhancement, as evidenced by the red shift towards 450 nm due to the N-doping induced band gap narrowing.
 Fig. 13  (a) J–V curves and (b) photo-conversion efficiency as a function of applied potential recorded for pristine ZnO nanotetrapods in the dark (dot-dashed line), pristine ZnO nanotetrapods (solid line), branched ZnO nanotetrapods (dashed line), and N-doped branched ZnO nanotetrapods (dotted line). (c) IPCEs for pristine ZnO nanotetrapods (square), branched ZnO nanotetrapods (circle), and N-doped branched ZnO nanotetrapods (triangle). Reprinted (adapted) with permission fromref. 37. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. 
The PEC work together has shown that our strategy of branching and N-doping the ZnO nanotetrapods works well for enhancing the photo-conversion efficiency for water splitting. It is however understood that the light absorption is still limited to below 450 nm even after the N doping, leaving much room for further improvement of the PEC performance by more efficiently harvesting sunlight in the visible wavelength region.
5. Future directions
Although the potential benefits of ZnO nanotetrapods for solar energy conversion photoelectrochemical devices have been amply demonstrated, further improvements on the performance of the ZnO nanotetrapods based DSSCs and PCEs are warranted. Chief among the future directions down the road is to raise the roughness factor by a large margin in order to fully harvest solar light within the effective electron diffusion length. This can go hand in hand with efforts in other aspects such as developments of doping, sensitizers, electrolytes, and counter electrodes. The following gives a few somewhat more concrete propositions towards those directions.
(1) Develop and apply higher-level branched ZnO nanotetrapods for DSSC and PCE systems with the goal to fully fill the remaining space between the tetrapod trunks with rod-like higher-level branches. This will significantly increase the roughness factor to about 1000, which is sorely needed for both DSSCs and PCEs.
(2) Further reduce the nanotetrapod size. There is still room for this size reduction with the vapor transport technique banking on our metal vapor transport oxidation method. It is also interesting to modify the solvothermal method, previously used for generating ultrasmall ZnO nanotetrapods, so as to obtain ZnO nanotetrapods with suitable size.48
(3) Employ more efficient near infrared dyes and their combinations to replace the currently used dyes in tandem structured, ZnO nanotetrapods DSSCs, especially the inefficient mercurochrome dye. Here the goal is to cover as broad the solar spectral range as possible. The recently reported squaraine and porphyrin derived dyes would be among the sensitizers of choice.64,75
(4) Replace the dyes with semiconductor quantum dots in sensitized solar cells and for PECs to enhance solar light harvesting.69,76 Quantum dots have much higher extinction coefficients. Moreover, the band gaps of quantum dots and the band alignment between quantum dots and semiconductor ZnO can be easily tuned by adjusting the quantum dot size.77 In fact, some efficient near-infrared light absorbing quantum dots, such as PbS, PbSe, etc., have already been demonstrated.4–5
(5) Coat the ZnO nanotetrapods with oxygen evolution catalyst for PECs. This will for one thing enhance the stability of ZnO immersed in electrolytes, and for another lower the oxygen evolution barrier and facilitate water splitting. Another common strategy to mitigate the instability problem of ZnO in electrolytes is to modify the ZnO surface with a more stable shell of, e.g., TiO2, deposited by atomic layer deposition or sol–gel process.78,79 Such surface passivation of ZnO holds equal significance to the applications of the resulting nanostructures in both PEC and DSSC.80
6. Conclusions
We have reviewed our recent efforts and findings in the development of solar energy conversion photoelectrodes based on ZnO nanotetrapods, used in DSSC and PEC systems. Some features specific to this type of photoelectrode and the associated mechanisms have been identified and elucidated: (1) ZnO nanotetrapods can be easily assembled into a network which is superior for electron transport and collection; (2) the roughness factor of the tetrapod network could be raised further to increase light harvesting by introducing nanoparticles or branching to higher levels; (3) the tetrapod network provides a convenient base for designing flexible solar cells and tandem solar cells; (4) we have achieved notably high performance with the ZnO nanotetrapod photoelectrodes for both DCCS and PEC devices, by systematic optimization of the photoelectrode structure in conjunction with mechanistic studies. Amazingly, even with a relatively loose ZnO nanotetrapod network, the energy conversion devices could still work remarkably well because the nanotetrapods could effectively transport electrons across their joint contacts. This is a unique characteristic of the ZnO nanotetrapod network, which is essentially a 3-D organization of 1-D nanorods. Although our results have pointed at the tantalizing prospect of ZnO nanotetrapods based solar energy conversion devices, the device performance needs to be significantly improved by systematic research in the right directions, some of which has been put forth in the above section. It is anticipated that sustained efforts will advance the field to a new level in developing cost-effective photoelectrochemical devices for the future.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the HK-RGC General Research Funds (GRF No. HKUST 604809 and 605710) and the NSFC/HK-RGC Joint Research Scheme (N_HKUST609/09).
Notes and references
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Blankenship, D. M. Tiede, J. Barber, G. W. Brudvig, G. Fleming, M. Ghirardi, M. R. Gunner, W. Junge, D. M. Kramer, A. Melis, T. A. Moore, C. C. Moser, D. G. Nocera, A. J. Nozik, D. R. Ort, W. W. Parson, R. C. Prince and R. T. Sayre, Science, 2011, 332, 805 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Sambur, T. Novet and B. A. Parkinson, Science, 2010, 330, 63 CrossRef CAS .
O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther, S. Choi, H.-Y. Chen, J. Gao, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Science, 2011, 334, 1530 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, A. Wolcott, G. Wang, A. Sobo, R. C. Fitzmorris, F. Qian, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2331 CrossRef CAS .
J. Su, X. Feng, J. D. Sloppy, L. Guo and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 203 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Park and J. K. Holt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1028 CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC .
R. Jose, V. Thavasi and S. Ramakrishna, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 92, 289 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 1999, 4, 314 CrossRef .
A. B. F. Martinson, T. W. Hamann, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4458 CrossRef CAS .
E. Martinez-Ferrero, J. Albero and E. Palomares, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3039 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam, J. T. Hupp and M. J. Pellin, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2183 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 592 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu and E. S. Aydil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3985 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, K. Shankar, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, T. J. Latempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3781 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, S. Kim and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 24 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gonzalez-Valls and M. Lira-Cantu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 19 CAS .
F. Xu, M. Da, Y. Lu and L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2776 CAS .
F. Xu and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 818 CAS .
N. Tetreault and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5 Search PubMed  , DOI: 10.1039/C2EE03242B.
M. C. Newton and P. A. Warburton, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 50 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, E. Marx and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 961 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, C.-P. Chen, A. G. Kanaras and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 409 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS .
W.-H. Chiu, C.-H. Lee, H.-M. Cheng, H.-F. Lin, S.-C. Liao, J.-M. Wub and W.-F. Hsieh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 694 CAS .
Y. F. Hsu, Y. Y. Xi, C. T. Yip, A. B. Djurisic and W. K. Chan, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 083114 CrossRef .
R. R. Bacsa, J. Dexpert-Ghys, M. Verelst, A. Falqui, B. Machado, W. S. Bacsa, P. Chen, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and P. Serp, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 875 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, H. F. Zhang, I. M. Hsing and S. H. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1057 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, Y. C. Qiu and S. H. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 9494 RSC .
W. Chen, Y. C. Qiu, Y. C. Zhong, K. S. Wong and S. H. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 3127 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Qiu, K. Y. Yan, H. Deng and S. H. Yang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 407 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Qiu and S. H. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1345 CrossRef CAS .
L. Schmidt-Mende and J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 40 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nomura, H. Ohta, K. Ueda, T. Kamiya, M. Hirano and H. Hosono, Science, 2003, 300, 1269 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 873 CrossRef .
Y. Ushio, M. Miyayama and H. Yanagida, Sens. Actuators, B, 1994, B17, 221 CrossRef .
Q. F. Zhang, C. S. Dandeneau, X. Y. Zhou and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4087 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wolcott, W. A. Smith, T. R. Kuykendall, Y. Zhao and J. Z. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1849 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Qiu, W. Chen and S. H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1001 RSC .
Y. Shi, C. Zhan, L. Wang, B. Ma, R. Gao, Y. Zhu and Y. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 437 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, W. Peng, S. Ke and H. Deng, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 1999, 89–90, 415 CrossRef .
X. Zhong, Y. Feng, Y. Zhang, I. Lieberwirth and W. Knoll, Small, 2007, 3, 1194 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saito and S. Fujihara, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 280 CAS .
T. Yoshida, J. B. Zhang, D. Komatsu, S. Sawatani, H. Minoura, T. Pauporte, D. Lincot, T. Oekermann, D. Schlettwein, H. Tada, D. Wohrle, K. Funabiki, M. Matsui, H. Miura and H. Yanagi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 17 CrossRef CAS .
B. Weintraub, Y. Wei and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2009, 121, 9143 CrossRef .
C. Y. Jiang, X. W. Sun, K. W. Tan, G. Q. Lo, A. K. K. Kyaw and D. L. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 143101 CrossRef .
X. Z. Liu, Y. H. Luo, H. Li, Y. Z. Fan, Z. X. Yu, Y. Lin, L. Q. Chen and Q. B. Meng, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2847 Search PubMed .
S. Nakade, Y. Saito, W. Kubo, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8607 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schlichthörl, N. G. Park and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 782 CrossRef .
T. Oekermann, D. Zhang, T. Yoshida and H. Minoura, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2227 CrossRef CAS .
D. Niinobe, Y. Makari, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17892 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Cid, J.-H. Yum, S.-R. Jang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. Martinez-Ferrero, E. Palomares, J. Ko, M. Grätzel and T. Torres, Angew. Chem., 2007, 119, 8510 CrossRef .
K. Lee, S. W. Park, M. J. Ko, K. Kim and N.-G. Park, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 665 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kubo, A. Sakamoto, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 33 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mishra, M. K. R. Fischer and P. Bauerle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2474 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Wu, G.-R. Chen, H.-H. Yang, C.-H. Ku and J.-Y. Lai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 213109 CrossRef .
F. Z. Huang, D. H. Chen, L. Cao, R. A. Caruso and Y. B. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2803 CAS .
Q. Miao, L. Wu, J. Cui, M. Huang and T. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2764 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Hwang, A. Boukai and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 410 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, S. Kim and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 24 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, Y.-C. Chang, C.-W. Tsai, R.-S. Liu, S.-F. Hu, W.-S. Chang and K.-H. Chen, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 6102 CrossRef .
G. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Tang, X. Yang, R. C. Fitzmorris, C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3026 CrossRef CAS .
J. Su, L. Guo, S. Yoriya and C. A. Grimes, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 856 CAS .
C. Wu, W. Liao and J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2871 RSC .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Bisquert, P. Bogdanoff and A. Zaban, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, E293 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mora-Sero, F. Fabregat-Santiago, B. Denier, J. Bisquert, R. Tena-Zaera, J. Elias and C. Levy-Clement, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 203117 CrossRef .
T. Geiger, S. Kuster, J.-H. Yum, S.-J. Moon, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. Nuesch, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2720 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kongkanand, K. Tvrdy, K. Takechi, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4007 CrossRef CAS .
I. Robel, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4136 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, A. Radenovic, T. Kuykendall, J. Liphardt and P. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22652 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Lee, I.-C. Leu, M.-C. Hsu, Y.-W. Chung and M.-H. Hon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13056 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Anta, E. Guillen and R. Tena-Zaera, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11413 CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:

Wei Chen
	Wei Chen received his BS (2003) and PhD (2008) in Materials Science and Engineering, both from Tsinghua University in China. He then did his post-doctoral research from 2008 to 2010 in the Department of Chemistry at The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. In April 2010, he joined Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China, as an associate professor. His research interests cover the synthesis, understanding, and applications of functional nanomaterials in the next generation solar cells, including dye or quantum dot-sensitized solar cells, printable inorganic or hybrid solar cells, etc.

Yongcai Qiu
	Yongcai Qiu is currently a postgraduate student working towards a PhD degree in the Nano Science and Technology program and the Department of Chemistry of the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. His research interests are focused on developing novel nanostructured materials and applying them in new generation energy conversion and storage devices.

Shihe Yang
	Shihe Yang received his BS (1982) in Chemistry from Sun Yat-Sen University in China. Through the US–China CGP program, he was admitted to Rice University in 1983 and obtained a PhD in Physical Chemistry in 1988 (with Prof. Richard E. Smalley). He did his post-doctoral research at Argonne National Laboratory and the University of Toronto (with Prof. John C. Polanyi) before joining the faculty at The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in 1992, where he is currently a full Professor. His current research interests include the understanding, manipulation and applications of zero-, one-, and two-dimensional nanosystems.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic showing four typical architectures of photoelectrodes constructed from different nanoscale building blocks for solar energy conversion devices.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structural characteristics of a 30 μm thick ZnO nanotetrapod film deposited without calcination. (a–d) SEM images viewed from top (a), at high resolution (b), in cross-section (c), and at the detailed inter-tetrapod connections (d). (e) Schematic showing a possible electron transport pathway through the ZnO nanotetrapod film. Reprinted fromref. 34with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  ZnO nanotetrapod film thickness dependence of: (a) energy conversion efficiency and short-circuit photocurrent density; (b) open-circuit photovoltage and fill factor. All of the ZnO nanotetrapod films studied were deposited without calcination. Reprinted fromref. 34with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of light intensity dependent electron transport time and recombination time between ZnO nanotetrapod and nanoparticle photoelectrodes. The ZnO nanoparticles used in this study are ∼40 nm in size and were deposited in a way similar to that for the ZnO nanotetrapod photoelectrode.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic showing possible electron transport pathways in the ZnO nanotetrapod/SnO2 nanoparticle composite photoelectrode.	 

 	Fig. 6  
J–V characteristic curves of DSSCs based on the films shown in the insets, from left to right, single–layer composite film (■) and double–layer–structured film (●) on FTO–coated glasses, and single–layer composite film (□) and double–layer–structured film (○) on flexible substrates. Reproduced fromRef. 35.	 

 	Fig. 7  Dependence of Jsc and efficiency (charge collection efficiency) on film thickness for two kinds of nanocomposite films: squares, SnO2 nanoparticles/ZnO nanotetrapods; circles, SnO2 nanoparticles/large ZnO particles. Charge collection efficiencies were calculated from the data measured by IMPS/IMVS at 70 W m−2. Reproduced fromRef. 35.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic depicting fabrication steps of the tandem structured DSSC based on ZnO nanotetrapods. Step 1: deposit a nanoparticle film and a nanotetrapod film on two separate substrates sensitized with two different dyes; Step 2: bring the two films together face-to-face and mechanically press towards each other; Step 3: lift off bare substrate 2, leaving behind a double-layered film with two dyes sensitizing the different layers on substrate 1.	 

 	Fig. 9  
J–V characteristic curves of the single layered photoelectrode made of mercurochrome dye sensitized ZnO nanoparticles (circle) and the double-layered photoelectrode with an additional toplayer made of N719 dye sensitized ZnO nanotetrapods (square).	 

 	Fig. 10  IPCE curves of the corresponding photoelectrodes in Fig. 9.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustrating interfacial exciton dissociation, electron injection and transport in secondary branched ZnO nanotetrapod photoelectrode of PEC.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) SEM of a film made of the pristine ZnO nanotetrapods. (b) TEM images of the pristine ZnO nanotetrapods. (c) Low-amplification and (d) high-amplification SEM images of the branched ZnO nanotetrapods without seed coating. (e) SEM image of ZnO nanotetrapods with seed coating, showing secondary ZnO branches on nanotetrapods after one round of growth. (f) SEM image of secondary ZnO branches on nanotetrapods after three rounds of growth. (g) Typical TEM image of one arm of a branched ZnO nanotetrapod after one round of growth. (h) High-resolution TEM image taken from the circled region in (g). Reprinted (adapted) with permission fromref. 37. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) J–V curves and (b) photo-conversion efficiency as a function of applied potential recorded for pristine ZnO nanotetrapods in the dark (dot-dashed line), pristine ZnO nanotetrapods (solid line), branched ZnO nanotetrapods (dashed line), and N-doped branched ZnO nanotetrapods (dotted line). (c) IPCEs for pristine ZnO nanotetrapods (square), branched ZnO nanotetrapods (circle), and N-doped branched ZnO nanotetrapods (triangle). Reprinted (adapted) with permission fromref. 37. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
