Defect tolerant perovskite solar cells from blade coated non-toxic solvents   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA06771F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA06771F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19085-19093Defect tolerant perovskite solar cells from blade coated non-toxic solvents†

        
          
            Zhuoneng 
            Bi
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xabier 
            Rodríguez-Martínez
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Clara 
            Aranda
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Enrique 
            Pascual-San-José
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Alejandro R. 
            Goñi
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Mariano 
            Campoy-Quiles
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Xueqing 
            Xu
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Antonio 
            Guerrero
          
        
      *a
aInstitute of Advanced Materials (INAM), Universitat Jaume I, 12006 Castelló, Spain. E-mail: aguerrer@uji.es
bKey Laboratory of Renewable Energy, Guangdong Key Laboratory of New and Renewable Energy Research and Development, Guangzhou Institute of Energy Conversion, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510640, China. E-mail: xuxq@ms.giec.ac.cn
cInstitut de Ciència de Materials de Barcelona (ICMAB-CSIC), Campus de la UAB, 08193 Bellaterra, Spain. E-mail: mcampoy@icmab.es
dICREA, Passeig Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain
Received 
      13th July 2018
    , Accepted 10th September 2018First published on 10th September 2018AbstractThe process of crystallization of lead halide perovskites by industrially relevant techniques involving non-toxic solvents is not understood completely and needs improvement. To this date, devices with the highest efficiency are prepared by deposition of the perovskite layer using non-scalable techniques, toxic solvents and/or require additional processing steps. In this work, we show that perovskite solar cells can be obtained efficiently in one step by doctor blade. The perovskite film is formed under a supersaturation regime from non-toxic solvents following spherulitic growth. This method results in highly crystalline perovskite films with preferential crystal orientation. Co-local photoluminescence and light-beam induced current experiments show that the generated chemical defects are confined at the boundary of spherulites and do not have a negative effect on the extracted photocurrent. Strikingly, spherulite formation, rather than being detrimental, could lead to better photovoltaic performance in hybrid perovskite films. This is further confirmed in the photovoltaic devices, which were fabricated using non-toxic solvents by doctor blade process, with record efficiencies of 18.0% for MAPbI3 (MA = methyl ammonium). Moreover, devices with large area (1.53 cm2) fabricated using doctor blade show remarkable efficiencies (14.2%) reinforcing the viability of this solar technology towards industrialization.
1. Introduction
Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite materials have recently emerged as a significant alternative for producing high-power, conversion-efficient (PCE) photovoltaic devices at low costs.1,2 Photoactive perovskite films can be produced by depositing precursor inks from solution, which is a huge economic advantage over commercially available photovoltaic technologies that rely on high vacuum processes. Recently, impressive efficiencies of ∼22% have been reported at the lab scale for small area devices (i.e. 0.16 cm2) using a non-continuous technique, namely spin coating.1,3 Unfortunately, devices with such high efficiencies are typically produced with toxic solvents such as N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and require further steps to improve the uniformity of the films reducing chemical defects.4–6 Finding alternatives to spin coating and DMF that meet the stringent requirements demanded by large scale production is of high priority.
Different industrially compatible deposition techniques such as doctor blade,7–11 inkjet printing,12 slot die13 or spray coating14,15 have been relatively successful with the efficiencies ranging from 10% to 18%. Among these techniques, doctor blade is a promising lab-scale deposition method since the rheological properties of the precursor solution, drying dynamics as well as mechanical shearing can be partially transferred to other continuous-like deposition techniques such as slot die coating.8–11 In the doctor blade technique, the precursor solution is placed between the edge of the blade and the substrate. Then, the substrate (or the blade) is unidirectionally moved spreading the solution homogeneously (Fig. 1a) and leaving a wet thin film on the substrate, which dries upon solvent evaporation. Until now, achieving crystallization using doctor blade has been problematic since kinetics of the growth has not been understood fully, thus leading to irregular film thickness and/or pinholes.8,10 One strategy to reduce the presence of pinholes and achieve high efficiencies (15%) is to increase the thickness of the perovskite layer to values beyond 1 μm.9 Recently, the problem with crystallization kinetics in doctor bladed devices has been overcome by means of an additional step such as anti-solvent extraction.7 All these results highlight the fact that one-step crystallization has not been successfully accomplished using doctor blade.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the doctor blade set up under operational conditions to produce MAPbI3 films. SEM images of films and complete devices fabricated using (b–d) undersaturated conditions and (e, f) saturated conditions. The inset in (f) shows a representative spherulite-type domain. (b), (c) and (e) are cross-sectional views at different magnifications. (d) and (f) are top view images. 
On the other hand, the precursor inks employed in the preparation of lead halide perovskites by doctor blade have been formulated to contain the toxic solvent DMF.8,9 The role of DMF in ink formulation is to dissolve the lead halide precursor. However, difficulties in removing DMF from the films yield non-uniform perovskite films. For this reason, additional steps such as anti-solvent treatment7 that washes out the excess solvent are required. A suitable non-toxic alternative to DMF is dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO).16 Removing DMSO from the film, however, is still less favorable than that of DMF due to the higher boiling point of DMSO and its stronger coordination with Pb.17 Therefore, further development is required in ink formulation in order to meet the industrial standards of safety and environmental protection.
In this work, we present a one-step method to obtain high quality MAPbI3 under the saturation regime using doctor blade in combination with non-toxic solvents. This method produces highly crystalline perovskite films in a single step by using inks at the solubility limit of the precursors and relatively high deposition temperatures of up to 150 °C. The process readily forms highly oriented perovskite layers that crystallize via spherulitic growth. The space filling nature of this type of growth means that the gaps between the primary branches of spherulites are filled with smaller branches, thus minimizing the presence of pinholes. Interestingly, we show that the chemical defects are confined mainly at the spherulite grain boundaries and do not have a negative impact on the device performance. The efficiency of devices fabricated by doctor blade using non-toxic solvents could be further improved by deposition of the film under dry conditions leading to a record efficiency of 18.0%.
2. Results and discussion
2.1. Ink and deposition optimization
In order to show the potential of the blade coating deposition process, we worked with the most simple and studied perovskite formulation containing MAPbI3 (MA = methyl ammonium). The optimization of film quality involves precise control of some key parameters namely concentration and deposited volume of the precursor solution, speed of the moving blade, height of the gap and temperature of the substrate. Moreover, the solvent formulation is important since it must contain a highly polar solvent to dissolve the lead halide (PbI2) completely. DMF, DMSO and their mixtures have been the reported widely in literature. As crystallization of perovskite takes place via intermediate coordination complexes (MAPbI3·DMSO), it is clear that the nature of coordination chemistry of the solvents will determine the crystallization kinetics.4,18,19 In our work, DMSO (b.p. 190 °C) was selected as the solvent for PbI2 as it adequately assists the crystallization of perovskite.20 One drawback of using highly coordinating solvents is them being trapped within the perovskite film, which makes their removal difficult.18 In addition, a secondary solvent like γ-butyrolactone (GBL) is introduced to control the solvent evaporation rate and crystallization of perovskite due to its lower coordination ability than DMSO, thus allowing modification of multiple ink properties simultaneously.
A thorough optimization was carried out using GBL:DMSO as described in the ESI† and Methods. The best results were obtained with a volume ratio of 3:2 (GBL:DMSO), as it provided a good combination of the ability of DMSO to dissolve PbI2 and control of evaporation kinetics by GBL. Using a 1 M solution of MAI:PbI2 in the GBL:DMSO mixture, we were able to reproduce the concentric ring morphology (Fig. 1d) reported by Huang et al. for a totally different ink formulation containing DMF.10 It is not surprising that this structure produces relatively low PCE (∼12%) as the dark rings represent areas where the thickness of the perovskite is too thin (Fig. 1b and c). Indeed, in photovoltaic devices the Electron Transport Layer (ETL, TiO2) is exposed to the Hole Transport Layer (ETL) in these dark areas and lead to charge shunting pathways as confirmed by the cross section images. Here, we note that this type of morphology has been observed previously for different polymers exhibiting spherulitic growth such as poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) or poly(vinylidene fluoride).21,22
Importantly, the solubility limit in this solvent mixture is reached when the concentration of the perovskite precursors increases to 1.2 M in this work and saturation of the ink during crystallization provides high quality perovskite layers in one step. The SEM image of the cross-section (Fig. 1e) shows a highly ordered morphology with a regular thickness of MAPbI3 of about 550 nm on top of the mesoporous TiO2 layer. Importantly, the perovskite layer does not contain areas of exposed TiO2 as can be seen in the analysis of large area image scans in cross section (ESI†). The top view (Fig. 1f) shows radial fibrous units that arrange around a central crystallization seed with domains spreading over hundreds of microns. This type of crystal growth is often referred to as spherulitic and space filling in nature stopping only when two spherulites meet each other. During spherulitic growth, impurities are characteristically pushed towards the grain boundaries. Indeed, the spherulites are delimited by grain boundaries, which are observed in the SEM as white lines. These bright edges are likely because of the boundaries being enriched with heavy atoms such as Pb or I as confirmed by EDX. In this respect, self-passivation through generation of PbI2 has been reported previously to have a beneficial effect in photovoltaic devices.23 The presence of perfectly formed spherulites can be detected in several areas of the film (see inset in Fig. 1f).
2.2. Structural and optical properties of the film
The crystalline properties of the MAPbI3 films fabricated under saturation conditions (1.2 M) were further evaluated by XRD diffraction patterns and compared with those fabricated by spin coating with the standard antisolvent washing and DMF:DMSO mixtures (Fig. 2a). These measurements were performed on the same substrates used in the photovoltaic devices (Glass/FTO/TiO2-cp/TiO2-ms/MAPbI3) discussed in the final section. Perovskite from both deposition methods exhibit the same crystalline structure. There are, however, differences in the crystallite orientation with respect to the substrate. Whilst the perovskite films fabricated by spin coating are highly oriented preferentially over the 110 plane on the substrate, those fabricated by doctor blade are mostly oriented over the 112 plane. The two crystallographic planes are schematically shown in Fig. 2b. The peak intensities corresponding to the 112 plane are much higher than those of the 110 plane. Moreover, these peaks are strongly enhanced in our films compared to other reported doctor bladed devices fabricated using DMF solution, which reflects the highly crystalline nature of the prepared samples.9 We noted that the ratio of crystallization plane 110 or 112 do not vary much in the blade coated devices using the two selected solvents in varying concentrations, see Fig. SI2.† For this reason, we believe that crystallization is compatible with the Landau–Levich regime induced by doctor blade, in which drying of the solution is achieved by the moving blade that is pulled out of the liquid surface. The cross-section SEM image of 112 plane (Fig. 1e) indicates the preferential cleavage of the film on this plane for cross-section sample preparation.
 Fig. 2  (a) XRD diffraction patterns of perovskite films deposited by spin coating and doctor blade on Glass/FTO/TiO2-cp/TiO2-ms. (b) Schematic of the main crystallographic planes of perovskites observed in graph (a). (c) Absorption spectra of MAPbI3 prepared by doctor blade in atmospheric air conditions (R.H. ∼ 45%) and inside a dry box (<0.01 vol% H2O). 
We have previously reported that different polyplumbate ions (PbIS5+, PbI2S4, PbI3S3−, PbI4S22−,…) are formed during the crystallization of MAPbI3 if the solvent and ambient conditions are not properly controlled.17 These species have been detected by their absorption peaks measured in the 300–450 nm region and can act as chemical defects impacting the solar cell performance.17,18 Here, we performed absorption measurements to discern whether such chemical impurities are present in the films prepared by doctor blade. Under-coordinated polyplumbate ions were present in the films prepared under different solvent formulations in ambient conditions (see Fig. SI3†). In particular, under-coordinated lead atoms were identified by absorption measurements in the presence of high proportion of fibers and uncovered surfaces. This result pointed to the presence of undercoordinated lead close to the boundary of the fibers. Interestingly, we will discuss below that these type of chemical defects do not have a negative impact on the PL intensity. Therefore, these defects do not act as non-radiative recombination centers. Fig. 2c shows the effect of processing in ambient conditions (under a relative humidity of ca. 45%), in which case, coordinated plumbate ions are inevitably present. Moreover, we note that the detector is nearly saturated due to the high intensity of the signal and hence, the signal is noisy in this region. These impurities can be attributed to the coordinated complexes formed with water molecules as they are not detected when blade coating was performed inside a dry box (less than 0.01 vol% H2O). In this sense, we have recently reported that crystallized water is usually present when devices are processed in R.H. 45% and relates to the bulk properties of the films.24 As discussed below, devices prepared under dry conditions perform better than those prepared under ambient conditions. Therefore, we highlight that not only the morphology of the perovskite layer, but the actual chemical impurities present in the film are also important.
2.3. Electrical properties of spherulites and chemical defects
In order to unravel the morphology-performance dependence in the blade coated samples, co-local photoluminescence (PL) and light-beam induced current (LBIC) were measured in fully functional photovoltaic devices. PL serves to identify the different microstructures and morphologies that coexist in the perovskite film as well as to detect the presence of defects, which typically act as non-radiative recombination centers for photogenerated carriers. On the other hand, the LBIC signal provides the corresponding local device photocurrent. For this purpose, we used a 633 nm He–Ne laser to probe the different perovskite morphologies according to the shift and intensity of their main PL peak, while simultaneously we collected the output photocurrent produced due to exposure of the device to the focused laser beam. We noted the same phenomenon when we repeated some of the experiments using a 785 nm solid state laser for excitation. In Fig. 3, we compare the data from representative spin coated and blade coated devices; the latter contains the spherulites.
 Fig. 3  (a) PL and LBIC maps of spin coated (red rectangle) and blade coated (green rectangle) perovskite devices. The top row images correspond to the integrated PL intensity. The middle row images correspond to the location of PL maximum. The bottom row images represent the electrical response of the device (short circuit photocurrent) upon exposure to the 633 nm laser used to measure PL. The XY scale bar corresponds to 400 microns in all panels. The intensity scale was kept constant in each pair of images (integrated PL, PL maximum and photocurrent) for easy comparison between the deposition methods. (b) Statistical distribution of the data for the same spin coated (red line) and blade coated (green line) devices presented in the images. PL intensities as well as photocurrent values were normalized accounting for the incident laser power. 
The PL intensity maps of the spin-coated complete devices (left top image in Fig. 3a) exhibit stripes of alternating intensity distributed all over the background of the image. These correspond to the thickness oscillations throughout the solution processed perovskite films. Although not so pronounced, we have also observed small thickness oscillations in the blade coated samples. Spin coated films also exhibit small black spots, which have been previously associated to the Spiro-OMeTAD layer. On the other hand, the spherulites obtained with blade coating are seen clearly in the PL images. Generally, in short-circuit conditions the PL intensity is strongly quenched at defects and particularly, at the spherulite borders, where impurities are concentrated. Interestingly, when measured in open circuit or regions without the top electrode, the PL is stronger precisely at the center and boundaries of the spherulites than the other parts (see e.g. Fig. SI3 and SI4†). In addition, the shift of the PL peak energy may reflect a slightly different local morphology or stoichiometry. The shifts observed in both types of samples are, however, smaller than those observed when the phase of the perovskite is changed from tetragonal to cubic.
The PL maps along with the electrical response of the devices (Fig. 3a) clearly show the location of the defects, which correlate perfectly with the large variations in the PL shift and the spikes (or drops) in photocurrent. While the equipment resolution when measured through glass is low compared to the characteristic features, we can observe that the larger defects consist of a central core in which no current flows and the PL is quenched and blue shifted. They are also surrounded by a halo with the exact opposite behavior (higher than average current and red shifted PL). Higher resolution images taken by focusing the laser directly on the surface of the perovskite in an area without electrode confirms this defect topology (see Fig. SI4 and SI5†). For the blade coated samples, the spherulites are clearly apparent in the maps of the three monitored magnitudes: PL intensity, maximum position as well as photocurrent. The first observation would be that the photocurrent at the spherulites appears larger than in the regions between spherulites, while the PL intensity is the opposite (see e.g. highlighted blue square in Fig. 3a). The texture of the photocurrent images is, however, much more diffuse than that of the PL features, suggesting in part a more homogeneous photocurrent distribution compared to the distribution of optical properties (vide infra). Fig. 3b shows the histograms for the three quantities obtained from the statistical analysis of the corresponding images after normalization for the incident laser power. In particular, the variation in position of the PL maximum (PL shift) with several maxima for the spin coated sample suggests that the microstructure of the perovskite film varies significantly. The photocurrent, on the other hand, exhibits a narrower modal distribution compared to the PL properties. This indicates that the perovskite films are rather tolerant to the presence of defects and small morphological variations, which is key for the industrialization of this technology.
A very interesting observation for the blade coated sample is that the spherulites display the weakest PL emission but simultaneously the strongest light beam induced current. This can be interpreted as evidence that the photovoltaic action is more efficient at the spherulites since radiative recombination and charge generation are mutually exclusive relaxation channels for the photogenerated electron–hole pairs at short-circuit conditions. If we do not consider the small spherulite nucleus in which both PL and photocurrent vanish, there seems to be an anti-correlation between LBIC and PL both spatially and in terms of integrated values. For spatial anti-correlation, see the area highlighted by the blue squares in Fig. 3a. As for the integrated values, Fig. 3b shows that the peak photocurrent is more than twice as large in the blade coated sample as in the spin coated sample. This is relevant especially since spin coated devices (350 nm) are thinner than the doctor blade devices (550 nm). Conversely, the PL is much less intense in doctor blade sample than the spin coated case despite its lower thickness. Strikingly, this implies that spherulite formation, rather than being detrimental, can lead to better photovoltaic performance in hybrid perovskite films. Considering that the PL maximum is located at the domain boundaries (Fig. 3a, middle image) and the photocurrent does not decrease at this position (bottom image), we can conclude that these defects do not compromise the performance because they do not introduce additional non-radiative recombination pathways. As shown below, the macroscopic device performance also follows this trend.
2.4. Crystallization mechanism
Spherulites aka spherical crystallites are associated with a type of crystal growth common to many materials including minerals, synthetic polymers, organic compounds and inorganic salts.25 Growth starts at the primary nuclei (Fig. 4a) and unlike single crystal growth, the growth progresses in a space filling manner by branching from the radial crystallites in slightly different crystallographic orientations (Fig. 4b). The radially symmetric polycrystalline aggregates grow until the fibers impinge either an external boundary or another spherulite growing from a neighboring nucleus (Fig. 4c). The size of the spherulites depends on a complex interplay between the number of nuclei, the crystal growth velocity, solvent evaporation rate, diffusion coefficients of the different components, temperature, etc.
 Fig. 4  Different spherulitic growth stages of the perovskite layer. 
The formation of ring-like or radial fibrillar structures is strongly related to the concentration of the solution.26 For unsaturated solutions, rings are formed due to the alternating occurrence of locally saturated regions and solute depleted regions as the spherical aggregate grows. Kajioka and co-workers have shown that the periodicity and amplitude of the ring structure is associated with the available volume as well as the substrate temperature.22 Saturated solutions, however, give rise to spherulitic textures more similar to those observed in polymers quenched from the melt or minerals crystallized from magmas, in which crystallites are radially oriented. The two key aspects for this to occur are very high viscosity and relatively slow crystal growth. In this work, we casted the precursor ink at 1.2 M, which corresponds to the saturation regime. Moreover, we maintained the temperature ∼50 °C below the boiling point of the solvents to enable relatively slow solvent drying. The high viscosity conferred by the saturation conditions clarifies the reason for no rings being observed in the films formed by blade coating, i.e. as no regions of solute depleted solvent were present. On the other hand, the need for relatively slow crystallization is evident from the observation that no spherulites were formed in the fast dried spin coated films even in saturating concentrations. It is apparent that most of the blade coated samples have regions with spherulites and regions that appear homogeneous, or homogeneous regions between spherulites (like in Fig. 3a).
The PL images serve to obtain further insights regarding the crystal formation. We have not found differences in the PL intensity upon vertical or horizontal polarization of the laser beam (see ESI†), which suggests that either the crystallites are not oriented radially or the degree of optical anisotropy is very small in the tetragonal phase as that in the dielectric tensor.27 Polarized optical microscopy (POM) did not reveal anisotropy in transmission with cross-polarizer configuration, i.e. no Maltese cross either.
As the MAPbI3 crystallites grow radially from a nucleus, they branch out filling the whole space. This has several consequences. First, no pin-holes appear in the perovskite layer. Secondly, slightly less crystalline regions may appear between the radial crystallites. Some evidence of this is seen in the PL images as variations in PL intensity and PL maximum (Fig. 3a). Impurities are expelled from the spherulite (only a limited number of defects can be accommodated in the polycrystalline structure) and get accumulated at the spherulite boundaries. Evidence of the presence of self-passivated PbI2 between adjacent spherulites is seen in the SEM images (Fig. 1) as brighter boundaries and in the PL maps as strong PL shifts (Fig. 3a). Finally, for many of the large spherulites visualized with substantial resolution in the PL/LBIC experiment, an increase in the PL intensity and a decrease in photocurrent could be observed at the nucleus of the spherulite, which suggests that the crystallite seeds might also be unconverted precursors or impurities.
In any case, judging by the local and macroscopic (discussed below) performances, it is clear that reaching a rapid saturation regime is beneficial to obtain a MAPbI3 morphology that will lead to high efficiency of devices in one deposition step.
2.5. Device preparation and characterization
Photovoltaic devices were fabricated following the device architecture Glass/FTO/TiO2-cp/TiO2-ms/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au and using optimum conditions to minimize byproducts according to the optical properties discussed above. Further details on the preparation can be found in the Methods section. It is important to highlight, however, that the deposition of MAPbI3 by doctor blade does not require any additional step such as the use of antisolvent to wash out undesired solvents present in the precursor solution or thermal or solvent annealing. The photovoltaic results are summarized in Table 1 and representative J–V curves are shown in Fig. 5a. Further performance results using different solvent mixtures are presented as ESI.† Reference spin coated devices show efficiencies exceeding 16–17%, which is in good agreement with reported devices fabricated in ambient conditions with a relative humidity of 45 ± 10%.18
Table 1 Photovoltaic performance parameters for champion devices fabricated under different conditions by doctor blade using GBL:DMSO (3:2) and reference cells fabricated by spin coating. Illuminated area: 0.11 cm2. In parenthesis, average values over >10 independent devicesa







J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)





a Conditions: R.H. = 45 ± 10%, dry box: dry air with R.H. < 0.01%.





Spin coating in ambient
20.9 (20.0)
1.06 (1.03)
73 (72)
16.2 (16.0 ± 0.4)


Blade in ambient
20.6 (19.3)
1.01 (0.97)
75 (73)
15.6 (13.7 ± 0.6)


Blade in dry box
22.9 (22.3)
1.04 (1.00)
77 (72)
18.0 (16.1 ± 1.2)




 Fig. 5  (a) J–V curves of devices fabricated by spin coating and doctor blade (GBL:DMSO, 3:2); measurement carried out under reverse bias at 50 mV s−1 at 1 sun illumination. (b) Statistical data of the efficiency of 45 devices fabricated by doctor blade under dry air conditions. (c) Stabilized efficiency measured at maximum power point tracking under 1 sun illumination conditions. (d) Representative illumination J–V curve of device fabricated with an active area of 1.53 cm2 measured under same conditions as in (a). 
Similarly, we also prepared devices by doctor blade using the optimum ink in ambient conditions at R.H. of ∼45%. Maximum efficiencies of 15.6% are obtained with Voc ≈ 40 mV lower than the Voc of samples obtained by spin coating with similar photocurrent densities and fill factors (FFs). This reduction in efficiency could be attributed to the chemical species observed in the absorption spectra (Fig. 1b) that lead to recombination of carriers. In order to avoid the presence of undesirable water molecules during perovskite deposition, the doctor blade setup was placed in a dry air environment (R.H. < 0.01%). The devices fabricated under these conditions show considerably higher efficiency up to 18.0% using non-toxic solvents. J–V curves of selected devices are shown in Fig. 5a. As it can be observed, perovskites with spherulitic morphology show higher photocurrent and FF than the spin coated devices. Photocurrents are in good agreement with the integrated photocurrent extracted from EQE measurements, see ESI.†Fig. 5b shows statistical data of efficiencies of devices with their perovskite layer deposited under dry conditions. The average efficiency over 45 devices is 16.1%, ranging efficiencies from 14% up to 18.0%. It was observed that the dispersion of the data was related to the ambient humidity during deposition of the compact and mesoporous layers of TiO2. Unfortunately, the deposition techniques used to manufacture TiO2 cannot be transferred to the dry box due to our experimental limitations. In general, the best efficiencies were obtained when the TiO2 layers were deposited under low humidity conditions (R.H. < 35%). Therefore, we can conclude that doctor blade deposition technique for perovskite deposition is robust.
Hysteresis was observed in the J–V curves of all the doctor bladed and spin coated devices (see ESI†). It has been previously reported that hysteretic behavior in the J–V curve is related to ion migration towards the external interfaces of the perovskite.28,29 For example, Sargent et al. have recently been able to cancel hysteresis by chemically modifying the TiO2 electron selective layer.2 As modification of the external layers is outside the scope of this work, further optimization of the external contacts may lead to higher efficiencies. In order to test the stability, devices were tracked at the point of maximum power as a function of time (Fig. 5c). The dynamic effects leading to hysteresis were also observed with the photocurrent stabilizing after the initial 50 s to provide stable efficiencies of around 16.1%. Similarly, degradation experiments are beyond our scope and have not been carried out due to lack of adequate equipment to achieve degradation under well controlled conditions.30 However, we have evidence to state that, in general, the devices were as stable as spin coated devices prepared and stored under similar ambient conditions (see ESI†).
Finally, to prove the scalability of doctor blade technique, devices with large area were produced and evaluated. Table 2 shows a summary of the average photovoltaic parameters for devices fabricated with areas ranging from 0.23 to 1.53 cm2. The efficiencies of larger cells are slightly lower than the smaller devices (14.82%). Surprisingly, in all the cases, the photovoltaic parameters did not exhibit clear dependence on the active area, but seemed to depend more on other factors such as the reproducibility of perovskite deposition or the crystallization processes. Reduction of FF is expected in larger devices compared to small devices due to their increased series resistance, where no special engineering layouts are employed. Fig. 5d shows the representative J–V curve of a device with 2.2 cm2 active area measured with a mask of 1.53 cm2 (device image in the inset). In any case, the efficiencies for large area devices are well within the highest reported for perovskite devices fabricated in one step using non-toxic solvents and are in agreement with the observed small proportion of pinholes that slightly reduce the Voc and FF.16
Table 2 Summary of average photovoltaic performance parameters for devices fabricated with different active areas




Area

I
sc (mA)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)




0.23 cm2
5.22
22.7
0.96
67
14.8 ± 1.3


0.56 cm2
12.9
22.5
0.99
62
14.0 ± 1.6


1.53 cm2
34.7
22.7
0.99
63
14.2 ± 1.5




3. Conclusions
In this work, we presented a simplified method to produce highly crystalline perovskite films using doctor blade in combination with non-toxic solvents. The process follows spherulitic growth in the supersaturation regime to form highly crystalline perovskite layers. Spherulitic growth is shown to be beneficial for the device performance since the chemical defects are confined at the grain boundaries of the spherulites and do not have a negative impact on charge extraction. Very importantly, the method does not require additional steps such as antisolvent addition or solvent annealing to obtain desired morphology, which is clearly a great advantage in the commercialization of this technology.
4. Methods
4.1. Materials and precursor solutions
All the following materials were used as received: FTO glasses (25 × 25 mm, Pilkington TEC15, ∼15 Ω sq−1 resistance), TiO2 paste (Dyesol 30NRD, 300 nm average particle size), CH3NH3I (DYESOL), PbI2 (TCI, 99.99%), titanium diisopropoxidebis (acetylacetonate) (75% in isopropanol, Sigma-Aldrich), and spiro-OMeTAD (Merck). The perovskite precursor solution was prepared by mixing GBL and DMSO solutions with MAI and PbI2 (1:1 mol%). The GBL:DMSO ratio was modified as required for optimization. In the best condition, concentration of 1.2 M and 3:2 volume ratio corresponding PbI2 553.2 mg, MAI 190.8 mg, GBL 600 μL, and DMSO 400 μL were used. The spiro-OMeTAD solution was prepared by dissolving 72.3 mg of (2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N′-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene), 28.8 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine, and 17.5 μL of a 520 mg mL−1 stock solution of lithium bis-(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (in acetonitrile) in 1 mL of chlorobenzene.
4.2. Fabrication of the MAPbI3 photovoltaic devices
Prior to the deposition of TiO2 compact layer, the FTO substrate was partially etched with zinc powder and HCl (2 M) and cleaned in an ultra-sonic bath with Hellmanex detergent, rinsed with Milli-Q water and in a solution of ethanol:isopropanol (1:1 v/v). The substrates were then treated in a UV–O3 cleaner for 10 min. The TiO2 compact layer was deposited by aerosol spray pyrolysis at 450 °C using a commercial titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) solution (75% in 2-propanol, Sigma-Aldrich) diluted in ethanol (1:9, v/v) as the precursor and oxygen as the carrier gas. A total volume of 5 mL (approx.) was sprayed in 3 steps of 6 s each and a waiting time of 30 s between the steps. To form the mesoporous TiO2 layer, a paste of TiO2 (Dyesol 30NRD) was diluted in ethanol (1:5, weight ratio) and was spin-coated at 2000 rpm for 10 s. The sample was initially heated to 100 °C for 10 min followed by a sintering step at 500 °C for 30 min in atmospheric condition. The perovskite precursor solution (50 μL) was coated on a doctor blade coater (Zehntner automatic film applicator coater, model ZAA 2300) with the substrate heated at 150 °C. The blade speed was 1 mm s−1 and the gap between the blade and the substrate was 150 μm. The perovskite dark phase was formed within the first few seconds. Perovskite precursor deposition was performed either in ambient conditions (R.H. = 45 ± 10%) or in a dry chamber containing dry air (R.H. < 0.01%). The Spiro-OMeTAD precursor was prepared by mixing 72.3 mg of (2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N′-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene), 28.8 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine and 17.5 μL lithium bis-(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide in acetonitrile (from a stock solution of 520 mg mL−1) and 1 mL of chlorobenzene. The perovskite films were then covered with 50 μL of the HTL solution and spin coated at 4000 rpm for 30 s with an acceleration of 800 rpm s−1. Finally, 60 nm of gold was thermally evaporated on top of the device as a back contact using a commercial Univex 250 chamber in the Oerlikon Leybold Vacuum chamber.
4.3. Film and device characterization
The film morphology was analysed using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (JEOL 7001F) and XRD. The photovoltaic devices were characterized using an Abett Solar simulator equipped with a 1.5 AM filter. The light intensity was adjusted to 100 mW cm−2 using a calibrated Si solar cell. The devices were measured using a mask with different sizes as described in the manuscript.
Photoluminescence (PL) and light-beam induced current (LBIC) were measured co-locally (simultaneously) using a 633 nm He–Ne laser in a WITec alpha 300 RA+ confocal setup. Alternatively, a 785 nm diode laser was also employed for some measurements. Linearly polarized light from the laser was incident on the sample. We employed a Zeiss LD “Plan-Neofluar” 40× magnification objective with a glass correction collar to measure through the glass substrate of the perovskite devices (glass correction set to 2.0 mm). The focused laser spot on the perovskite film was less than 10 microns in size with a typical confocality of 1 micron. PL was collected in backscattering mode. After passing through the Raman filter set (to eliminate the laser component), PL was redirected through a multimode optical fiber to a lens-based (300 mm focal length) UHTS300 spectrometer dispersed with a 600 lines per mm grating, BLA at 500 nm and collected using a Peltier-cooled front-illuminated CCD camera. Additional polarizers were also introduced after the filters in some measurements to evaluate if PL was polarized. Due to the large PL efficiency of the MAPI, laser power of the order of a few μW (<50 μW in all cases) was employed to collect PL without saturating the CCD camera and to avoid photodegradation of the film. The acquisition time was set to 50 ms per point. The PL and photocurrent images typically consisted of 2 × 2 mm2 regions analyzed in lateral steps of 20 μm, thus collecting a total of 10000 spectra per image. PL images were taken either by focusing on the perovskite film illuminating electrode less areas (Fig. SI4 and SI5†) or through the glass in complete device structures (Fig. 3). For the latter, LBIC was measured simultaneously as along with PL measurement using the same laser as the LBIC excitation source. The photocurrent was collected in short circuit conditions. As it was photogenerated, the signal was current–voltage amplified close to the sample and then processed using WITec electronics through an auxiliary channel of the WITec current sensing module. Analysis was performed using the WITec Project FOUR software.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for the financial support by the Spanish Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad (MINECO) under projects MAT2016-76892-C3-1-R, MAT2015-70850-P (HIBRI2), Ramón y Cajal Fellowship number RYC-2014-16809 and through Grant No. SEV-2015-0496 in the framework of the Spanish Severo Ochoa Centre of Excellence (ICMAB). X. X. and Z. B. would like to thank the Project on the Collaborative Innovation and Environmental Construction Platform of Guangdong Province (2014A050503051). We also thank University Jaume I for the financial support (UJI-B2017-32) and acknowledge its Serveis Centrals (SCIC) for the SEM measurement assistance. Finally, the authors at ICMAB would like to acknowledge financial support from the European Research Council (ERC) under grant agreement no. 648901.
References
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tan, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, F. P. García de Arquer, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Yuan, B. Zhang, Y. Zhao, F. Fan, P. Li, L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, Z.-H. Lu, Z. Yang, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2017, 355, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
NREL Efficiency Chart,https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/images/efficiency-chart.png.
N. Ahn, D.-Y. Son, I.-H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503–6509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yang, Z. Li, M. O. Reese, O. G. Reid, D. H. Kim, S. Siol, T. R. Klein, Y. Yan, J. J. Berry, M. F. A. M. van Hest and K. Zhu, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17038 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, C.-C. Chueh, F. Zuo, J. H. Kim, P.-W. Liang and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500328 CrossRef .
Y. Deng, E. Peng, Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, Q. Dong and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1544–1550 RSC .
Y. Deng, Q. Wang, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 578–583 RSC .
Y. Deng, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600372 CrossRef .
F. Mathies, T. Abzieher, A. Hochstuhl, K. Glaser, A. Colsmann, U. W. Paetzold, G. Hernandez-Sosa, U. Lemmer and A. Quintilla, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 19207–19213 RSC .
T. Qin, W. Huang, J.-E. Kim, D. Vak, C. Forsyth, C. R. McNeill and Y.-B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 210–217 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bi, Z. Liang, X. Xu, Z. Chai, H. Jin, D. Xu, J. Li, M. Li and G. Xu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 162, 13–20 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Bishop, D. K. Mohamad, M. Wong-Stringer, A. Smith and D. G. Lidzey, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 7962 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, F. Di Giacomo, J. Brüls, H. Gorter, I. Katsouras, P. Groen, A. J. Janssen René, R. Andriessen and Y. Galagan, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1700091 CrossRef .
S. Rahimnejad, A. Kovalenko, S. Martí-Forés, C. Aranda and A. Guerrero, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 2795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Aranda, C. Cristobal, L. Shooshtari, C. Li, S. Huettner and A. Guerrero, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 540–547 RSC .
J. Li, Q. Dong, N. Li and L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602922 CrossRef .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, B.-H. Guo, G.-Q. Chen and Z.-M. Zhang, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2003, 41, 2128–2134 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kajioka, M. Hikosaka, K. Taguchi and A. Toda, Polymer, 2008, 49, 1685–1692 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, T.-B. Song, S. Luo, Z. Hong, H.-S. Duan, L. Dou, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4158–4163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Contreras-Bernal, C. Aranda, M. Valles-Pelarda, T. T. Ngo, S. Ramos-Terrón, J. J. Gallardo, J. Navas, A. Guerrero, I. Mora-Seró, J. Idígoras and J. A. Anta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 5341–5348 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Keith and F. J. Padden, J. Appl. Phys., 1963, 34, 2409–2421 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Shtukenberg, Y. O. Punin, E. Gunn and B. Kahr, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1805–1838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. A. Leguy, P. Azarhoosh, M. I. Alonso, M. Campoy-Quiles, O. J. Weber, J. Yao, D. Bryant, M. T. Weller, J. Nelson, A. Walsh, M. van Schilfgaarde and P. R. F. Barnes, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6317–6327 RSC .
J. Carrillo, A. Guerrero, S. Rahimnejad, O. Almora, I. Zarazua, E. Mas-Marza, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502246 CrossRef .
S. Ravishankar, O. Almora, C. Echeverría-Arrondo, E. Ghahremanirad, C. Aranda, A. Guerrero, F. Fabregat-Santiago, A. Zaban, G. Garcia-Belmonte and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 915–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, M. Stolterfoht, C. M. Wolff, D. Neher and A. Abate, Joule, 2018, 2, 1019–1024 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Photovoltaic optimization parameters, additional SEM images, polarized PL images of spherulites of different dimensions, and J–V curves. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta06771fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the doctor blade set up under operational conditions to produce MAPbI3 films. SEM images of films and complete devices fabricated using (b–d) undersaturated conditions and (e, f) saturated conditions. The inset in (f) shows a representative spherulite-type domain. (b), (c) and (e) are cross-sectional views at different magnifications. (d) and (f) are top view images.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) XRD diffraction patterns of perovskite films deposited by spin coating and doctor blade on Glass/FTO/TiO2-cp/TiO2-ms. (b) Schematic of the main crystallographic planes of perovskites observed in graph (a). (c) Absorption spectra of MAPbI3 prepared by doctor blade in atmospheric air conditions (R.H. ∼ 45%) and inside a dry box (<0.01 vol% H2O).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) PL and LBIC maps of spin coated (red rectangle) and blade coated (green rectangle) perovskite devices. The top row images correspond to the integrated PL intensity. The middle row images correspond to the location of PL maximum. The bottom row images represent the electrical response of the device (short circuit photocurrent) upon exposure to the 633 nm laser used to measure PL. The XY scale bar corresponds to 400 microns in all panels. The intensity scale was kept constant in each pair of images (integrated PL, PL maximum and photocurrent) for easy comparison between the deposition methods. (b) Statistical distribution of the data for the same spin coated (red line) and blade coated (green line) devices presented in the images. PL intensities as well as photocurrent values were normalized accounting for the incident laser power.	 

 	Fig. 4  Different spherulitic growth stages of the perovskite layer.	 


Spin coating in ambient	20.9 (20.0)	1.06 (1.03)	73 (72)	16.2 (16.0 ± 0.4)
Blade in ambient	20.6 (19.3)	1.01 (0.97)	75 (73)	15.6 (13.7 ± 0.6)
Blade in dry box	22.9 (22.3)	1.04 (1.00)	77 (72)	18.0 (16.1 ± 1.2)

 	Fig. 5  (a) J–V curves of devices fabricated by spin coating and doctor blade (GBL:DMSO, 3:2); measurement carried out under reverse bias at 50 mV s−1 at 1 sun illumination. (b) Statistical data of the efficiency of 45 devices fabricated by doctor blade under dry air conditions. (c) Stabilized efficiency measured at maximum power point tracking under 1 sun illumination conditions. (d) Representative illumination J–V curve of device fabricated with an active area of 1.53 cm2 measured under same conditions as in (a).	 

0.23 cm2	5.22	22.7	0.96	67	14.8 ± 1.3
0.56 cm2	12.9	22.5	0.99	62	14.0 ± 1.6
1.53 cm2	34.7	22.7	0.99	63	14.2 ± 1.5
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Photovoltaic optimization parameters, additional SEM images, polarized PL images of spherulites of different dimensions, and J–V curves. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta06771f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
