Metal-organic frameworks containing solid-state electrolytes for lithium metal batteries and beyond  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0QM00856G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0QM00856G
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 1771-1794Metal-organic frameworks containing solid-state electrolytes for lithium metal batteries and beyond

        
          
            Tianhua 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shimou 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *bc, 
      
        
          
            Yong 
            Chen
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Ming 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Dusan 
            Losic
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Suojiang 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *b
aSchool of Chemical Engineering and Advanced Materials, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia. E-mail: dusan.losic@adelaide.edu.au
bInstitute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100190, Beijing, China. E-mail: chenshimou@ipe.ac.cn; sjzhang@ipe.ac.cn
cState Key Laboratory of Organic–Inorganic Composites, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, 100029, China
dSchool of Chemical & Environmental Engineering, China University of Mining & Technology, 100083, Beijing, China
Received 
      26th October 2020
    , Accepted 13th December 2020First published on 15th December 2020AbstractFor solid-state Li and other metal batteries, solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) are a bridge between electrodes, and are significant in determining the behavior of batteries. Thus, constructing stable and excellent SSEs is vital for the feasible application of metal batteries. Because of their unique and multifunctional properties, namely unsaturated metal sites, tunable structure, and high specific surface area, porous metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have been applied to SSEs to enhance the performance of metal batteries. In this review, the mechanisms of MOFs within polymer electrolytes on improving the Li-ion movement, stabilizing the solid/solid interfacial contact, and prohibiting the Li dendrite are briefly summarized. The multiple factors of MOF-based SSEs, including MOF structures, unsaturated metal sites, incorporation with ionic liquids, different organic ligands, pore size and nano/micro hierarchical structure that affect the battery performance are comprehensively discussed. Moreover, the mechanism and advancement of MOF-based SSEs for other metal batteries, including Na, Zn, and Mg batteries, are also illustrated. Eventually, new insights and future prospects in terms of MOF-based SSEs are proposed to stimulate more innovative approaches for the commercial applications of Li and other metal batteries.
Tianhua Chen
Tianhua Chen received her BS degree from the University of Jinan in 2012, and Master's degree from the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2016. She is currently pursuing PhD in the School of Chemical Engineering and Advanced Materials, the University of Adelaide. Her research mainly focuses on exploring the design and applications of solid-state electrolytes for lithium metal batteries.
Shimou Chen
Prof. Shimou Chen received his BS degree from Zhengzhou University in 2002, and his PhD degree from the Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007. In April 2008, he moved to Nagoya University as a JSPS postdoctoral fellow. From 2011 to 2012, he was a Research Associate at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan. In April 2012, he joined the Institute of Processing and Engineering as a professor funded by the “Hundred Talent Project” of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include lithium-ion battery, lithium metal battery, Zn ion battery, and other advanced energy storage systems.
Yong Chen
Yong Chen obtained his BS degree from the University of South China in 2012. He is currently working as a graduate student (towards a Master's degree) at the School of Chemical & Environmental Engineering, China University of Mining & Technology. His research interests mainly focus on the design, synthesis and applications of novel composite polymer electrolytes for lithium metal batteries.
Ming Zhao
Ming Zhao received his MS degree in the College of Chemical Engineering from China University of Petroleum. He is now pursuing a PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Jieshan Qiu in Beijing University of Chemical Engineering. His research focuses on the development of novel electrode materials, structures and electrolytes for rechargeable lithium-sulfur batteries and solid-state lithium batteries.
Dusan Losic
Prof. Dusan Losic completed his PhD degree in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology at Flinders University, followed by a one-year postdoctoral position at Monash University. He then spent 3 years as a Research Fellow at Flinders University, and was the ARC Future Fellow from 2012 at the University of Adelaide. Since 2017, he has been leading the Graphene Research Hub for Industry Transformation, the first Australian integrated research program for the translation of graphene research. His interdisciplinary research encompassing several disciplines focuses on applying nanoscience and nanotechnology to engineer new nanomaterials, processes and devices to address fundamental, health, environmental, energy and agriculture problems.
Suojiang Zhang
Prof. Suojiang Zhang obtained his Bachelor's degree from Henan University in 1986, Master's degree from Henan Normal University in 1989, and received his PhD from Zhejiang University in 1994. He is now the Deputy Director at the General of Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He is also the winner of the National Science Foundation for Distinguished Young Scholars (China), Chief Scientist of “973”, and member of the Royal Society of Chemistry. His research interests focus on the fundamental applications of ionic liquids, which include molecular design, structure–properties, large scale preparation, industrial applications, and green integrations.
1. Introduction
The booming development of portable electronics, electric vehicles and stationary energy storage systems are calling for batteries with high energy/power densities. In consideration of the high theoretical capacity of lithium metal (3860 mA h g−1) and lowest negative reduction potential (−3.04 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode), lithium metal batteries (LMBs) hold a promise for the next generation of energy storage technologies.14–16 Nevertheless, the flammable and toxic commercial organic liquid electrolytes have caused safety hazards, such as several explosion accidents. In addition, the leakage of organic liquid electrolytes hinders the realization of flexibility and stretchability for some soft applications.18–21 The solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) with inorganic materials or polymers as matrices are one of the key components in LMBs that determine the performance of LMBs. During past decades, manifold efforts have been made to enhance the electrochemical behavior of SSEs, for instance, improving the ionic conductivity,24–27 stabilizing the interfacial contact between electrodes and SSEs29–31 and the prevention of lithium dendrites.32–34 However, substantial improvements on the SSEs properties are still urgent, driven by the ever increasing high energy/power requirements for practical applications.
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are a kind of porous crystalline solids consisting of metal ions linked through various multi-functional organic ligands to build a vigorous multi-dimensional skeleton.36,37 Due to their outstanding properties, such as high crystallinity, uniform pore sizes, large surface area, uniform and controllable morphologies, and excellent thermal stability, MOFs and their derivatives are widely investigated and applied in the realms of gas storage and separation, water purification, catalysis, energy storage systems (such as electrodes of the rechargeable batteries),39,40 modification of separators,11,41 supercapacitors,42,43 oxygen electrocatalysts,46 solar cells47 and sensors.49 They can be manageably converted into multicomponent systems, such as carbon materials and metal-doped hybrid solid polymer systems, which often show excellent electrochemical performance. Since Long and co-workers first reported the possibility of MOFs as an addition to modify electrolyte separators for lithium batteries in 2011,50 MOFs have been considered as a kind of functional material as fillers or ionic sieves in SSEs to realize the application of SSEs. As multifunctional materials, the special structure of MOFs enables the high performance of SSEs: (i) the porous structure as Li-ion channels can also help to fix the anions, and improve the Li-ion transference numbers (t+). In liquid electrolytes, the cations and anions are all mobile; thus, the t+ is usually lower (0.2–0.4).51 On the contrary, anions can be locked in the pores or integrated with the unsaturated metal site (such as Zn4O6+) of MOFs, as a function of ‘cage’ to immobilize anions to improve the t+ during cycling. Furthermore, the long-range ordered, controllable and uniformly distributed pores can host trace gases and liquids. The pores trap the byproducts generated during the battery operation process, and therefore increase the lifetime of the batteries. (ii) In particular, the MOFs components barely provide high-density mobile electrons or holes, which endow the materials with excellent electrical insulation. This insulation feature is instrumental in the electrolyte in order to separate the electrodes and prevent short circuits. (iii) The tunable synthesis of MOFs, such as the controllability to design the pore size, feasibility of grafting various functional ligands, and the expected particle size and density, is beneficial to meet the standards of a variety of specific devices.52,53
1.1 Principles and challenges of SSEs for Li metal batteries
Coexisting with the advantages of SSEs, the Li metal anode is considered as ‘unsafe’ and ‘unstable’ in commercial application due to the formation and growth of dendritic and mossy metal deposits, unstable interfacial contact and subsequent degradation process during the charging/discharging progress. Generally, SSEs are classified into two kinds: solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs) and inorganic ceramic electrolytes. Featured on the basis of the current progress in this field, the challenges and principles are summarized as below.

1.1.1 Principles. 
Tremendous strides have been made to address the issues mentioned above. However, there is still a huge room for advancement in terms of SSEs. In order to implement LMBs into practical application, efforts on the SSEs must be made in the following areas:
(i) Effective ionic channels to support the Li-ion transport.54 For solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs), the relatively low ionic conductivity and narrow electrochemical window restrict their high-voltage applications. Designing effective ionic channels to bestow the SPEs with highly ionically conductive and electronically insulating properties is needed in this system.55
(ii) Suitable Young's modulus. SSEs are a key factor affecting the dendrite formation and growth. To some extent, mechanically robust SSEs with a shear modulus higher than 6 GPa can mechanically block the dendrite formation and growth on a macro level.56,57
(iii) Stable interfacial contact with electrodes.58,59 Although inorganic ceramics have favorable ionic conductivity and high modulus, the lack of compatibility with Li has an adverse effect on the homogeneous electrodeposition of Li during cycling. How to design a fully contacted interface between electrolyte and electrode, as well as keep the contact stable, is the key for LMBs. The SPEs have the same issues to some degree.
(iv) Stable chemical and electrochemical property of SSEs. For the ceramic based SSEs with a high Li ionic conductivity, such as Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO) and Li10GeP2S12 (LGPS), the materials tend to be oxidized and decomposed. Thus, the battery performances are compromised. The polymer SSEs are easy to be decomposed at high voltage, and lead to severe capacity decay.60,61 Thus, stable materials are developed, and other protective strategies are explored to realize stable SSEs for high performance LMBs. The chemical and electrochemical stability of SSEs highly affect the long cycling stability and capacity of LMBs.62
In addition, the favorable SSEs require fillers or conductors with properties, such as the abundant surface charge, strong compatibility with electrodes, high mechanical stability, and high specific surface area, among others.


1.1.2 Challenges of SSEs. 
Low ionic conductivity. 
The function of the electrolyte is to build a channel for the lithium ion to move between the cathode and anode electrodes in the charging and discharging process. The indicator that determines the lithium ion transmission is the ionic conductivity. The level of ionic conductivity directly affects the overall impedance and rate performance of the battery.63 For single element polymer electrolyte systems, the ionic conductivity is 10−5–10−9 S cm−1, and their stabilities at high voltage are unsatisfactory, although they possess low resistances at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces.64 The conductivity of the sulfide electrolyte is relatively high, which is only limited to the comparison with the lowest ones. Inorganic ceramics possess higher ionic conductivities of 10−4–10−2 S cm−1.65 Obviously, compared to commercial LIBs, the low ionic conductivity of SSEs is a tricky problem that hampers the advancement of LMBs, especially at room temperature and below.
Lithium dendrite growth. 
The uneven charge distribution and inevitable defects on the surface of Li metal cause the unstable Li electrodeposition, which eventually evolves into the formation of the Li dendrite.33,34 The unexpected Li dendrite can penetrate separators or soft SPEs and cause an internal short circuit. This leads to a low coulombic efficiency and severe safety risk, thus hindering the capacity of high energy density. Furthermore, the nucleation and growth of the dendrite have a close relationship with the surface contact between the SSE and Li metal anode.66 That is, the Li dendrites covered by the reaction outcomes of solid electrolyte interface (SEI) films during the repeated Li insertion and deinsertion process increases the interfacial resistance, which conversely accelerates the Li dendrites. Dendrite growth can be relieved by tailoring the surface of the Li metal and delicate structural design of SSEs. However, there is a long way to go to suppress the dendrite growth.
Unstable interfacial contact. 
Another major issue that hinders the practical applications of solid-state batteries is the large interfacial resistance rising from the poor interfacial contact between the SSEs and the electrodes.29,67 Because of their high crystallization, high rigidity and poor compatibility with the Li metal, SSEs present unexpected wettability towards the lithium anode on the surface. The hard interfacial solid-to-solid contact substantially prevents the overall Li-ions transport, and causes the uneven deposition of the Li metal, which could cause the formation of a dendrite that penetrates the separators and finally leads to the short circuit of batteries. As a result, the energy capacity is substantially decreased, which accelerates the cell failure.

1.2 Mechanism of MOFs-based electrolytes for Li metal batteries
Due to their low electrical conductivity, the ability to be easily structurally tailored, and the porous structure providing a channel for Li-ion transport and ion-sieving capability, MOFs have proven to be promising materials for Li+ conductors in SSEs by inhibiting the recrystallization of the polymer. Meanwhile, by maintaining a good distribution in the polymer matrix, MOFs are in favor of more interaction sites to stabilize the interfacial contact between solid interfaces.68 During the last decades, endeavors have been made to explore the performance of MOFs as solid hosts for Li salts to benefit Li+ transport and thus improve the ionic conductivity, or serve as active fillers for SPEs to improve their mechanical robustness during the charging/discharging process. This review covers the mechanism of MOFs used as solid-state electrolytes, the structural fabrication and modification of MOF-based SSEs, and the future directions in terms of this field.

1.2.1 Li-ion transport. 
Two mainly accepted mechanisms are developed to illustrate the function of MOFs to immobilize anions in a three-dimensional pore framework: the combination of anions with the coordinatively open metal sites in charge-neutral skeletons, and directly binding negatively charged ingredients; and the intrinsic nanoporous structure of the MOF material to restrain the large size anions to facilitate Li ions transport.22,69,70 The metallic centre of the MOF materials can bind the anions of the Li salt, leaving the cation to move comparatively freely along the pores. Also, due to the fact that the anions of the Li salt are much larger than the Li-ions, the porous structure of MOFs is considered as a ‘cage’ or ‘host’ to trap anions, thus facilitating Li ion transport. The Chen group confirmed the mechanism by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR).9 The SNS and OSO peaks of the TFSI− anion in the FTIR spectra indicate the strong interactions between the MOF metallic centre and the anion of the Li salt in the electrolyte. Raman data also showed that the MOF stimulates the dissociation of the Li salt. Huang and coworkers further confirmed the interaction between Li+ and the MOF through X-ray phosphorescence (XPS).71 Long and co-workers pointed that in MOFs containing SSEs systems, the ionic transportation is determined by through-the-pore diffusion. Conversely, in polymer electrolytes, the ionic conductivity relies on the polymer chain mobility.7,72 Therefore, the bifunctional MOF electrolytes can realize both high conductivity and mechanical properties.
DFT-based MD simulations are widely used to measure the ionic diffusivity in battery systems. The Zhou group conducted DFT-MD calculations to illustrate the diffusion kinetics of the original liquid electrolyte and MOF-tailored electrolyte,5 as shown in Fig. 1(a–g). The results show the similarity of the ionic transport in the pristine electrolyte and MOF-modified electrolyte. For a traditional electrolyte, the rapidly diffused Li+ and TFSI− ions reacted quickly to generate uneven Li peeling behavior on the surface of the Li metal caused by the random fluctuations during the lithium position, thus resulting in Li dendrite growth by self-amplification. On the contrary, in the MOF-modified electrolyte system, the MOF scaffolding with well-ordered and confined pore structure restricted the TFSI− diffusion spatially, which consequently led to a homogenous Li+ flux and almost TFSI− ‘‘cage’’ (Fig. 1g). This opinion was consistent with that of the Chen group that the IL ions and anions were trapped inside the MOF pores. In addition, there was excessive ionogel electrolyte adsorbed on the outer surfaces of the MOF nanoparticles, thus the Li+ ions are continuously conducted on the surfaces and within the nanopores of the MOF (Fig. 1h).9
 Fig. 1  Mechanism of MOF materials for Li+ transport: (a–g) Molecular/crystal structures used in the MD simulation (reproduced with permission,5 Copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V.). (a) Molecular structure of the LiTFSI salt and DOL/DME solvent. (b) Typical solvation structures of the LiTFSI@DOL/DME electrolyte during the MD operation. (c) Calculated mean square displacement (MSD) of Li+ and TFSI− in the pristine electrolyte as a function of the simulation time. (d) Schematic illustration of the MOF-modified electrolyte, where the LiTFSI@DOL/DME electrolyte is incorporated into the MOF host. (e) Li+-solvation structures of the MOF-modified electrolyte during the MD operation, wherein the MOF host participated in the Li+ solvation process. (f) The MSD of Li+ and TFSI ions in MOF-modified electrolyte as a function of the simulation time. (g) Schematic of the selective Li+ ionic transport imposed by the MOF host. (h) A schematic representation of the synthesis method of ILE@MOF, and schematic illustration of Li+ transport paths (reproduced with permission,9 Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry). (i) Mechanism of SSZ-13 addition interaction with PEO and LiTFSI, improved ionic conductivity and schematic of the CPE-Li metal battery cell (reproduced with permission,21 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). (j) Schematic illustration for the architecture and nanowetted interfacial mechanism of the solid-state battery with a magnification showing crystal structures of the MOF. [EMIM]+and [TFSI]− ions in space-filling model are randomly displayed in the pores of the MOF. The migrating Li+ ions are highlighted by glowing pink spheres. Hydrogen atoms are omitted in MOF structure for clarity (reproduced with permission,2 Copyright 2018 John Wiley & Sons). 
On account of the electrostatic forces of Li+ and TFSI− in the neutral LiTFSI and the confined TFSI− diffusion, the Li+ ions are distributed homogeneously in the MOF-modified electrolyte, thus leading to a uniform electrodeposition on the Li-metal surface. As shown in Fig. 1(i), the nanoporous adsorption effect and Lewis acid derived from the highly ordered porous MOF nanoparticles are the keys to transporting Li+ ions. The MOF material used is the sponge-like SSZ-13, which is an aluminosilicate that includes Si and Al linked by O atoms with a three-dimensional open structure. The absorption ability of the porous MOF surface can accelerate the dissociation of the Li salt (LiTFSI).21 Meanwhile, the −25 mV zeta potential of the SSZ-13 nanoparticles suggested that the nanoparticles possess a Lewis acid property on the surface, and thus can disperse uniformly in a PEO suspension system without clustering. Thus, the interaction between LiTFSI and the surface groups on the MOF material are closely enhanced. As a plasticizer, the homogeneous SSZ-13 in the formed CPE can greatly decrease the PEO crystallinity and expand the amorphous polymer region. The charged silica group on the surface of SSZ-13 further enables the dissociation of LiTFSI to shape a Li+-rich layer on the surface of the porous structure. Complexation between the Li+ ions with the lone-pair electrons in the dissociated EO units endows the Li+ ions to transport in a high speed. Also, the competition between SSZ-13 and PEO to react with Li+ ions can lead to a high t+. Simultaneously, the [N(SO2CF3)2]− anions of the LiTFSI were restrained by the aluminol groups of the SSZ-13 nanoparticles, which can also increase the t+ of the CPE. As a result, high ionic conductivity was realized and the t+ of the SPE was 0.5, which was two times higher than the other PEO-based SSEs (0.25).
The Kitagawa group investigated the inclusion and dynamics of Li+ from a polyethylene glycol (PEG)–LiBF4 complex in the nanochannels of [Zn2(terephthalate)2(triethylenediamine)]n.68 The Li+ complexation and mobility in the host pores were studied by 7Li NMR and relaxation analysis, separately. The Lorentzian line shape between the +1/2 and −1/2 transition implied a liquid-shape movement pattern of the Li+ in the PEG chains and MOF nanochannels. In addition, the low Ea (0.18 eV) value shows that the composite possesses high ionic mobility, which was similar to the values reported in other composite systems, such as bulk polymer–Li salt complexes, composites with inorganic nanoparticles, and composites with mesoporous alumina.
The ionic liquids (ILs) have been extensively employed in liquid/solid electrolytes as conductors or fillers due to their excellent properties of relatively high ionic conductivity, ecofriendliness, low interfacial resistance and high safety.73–75 The Feng group designed a MOF-based solid-like electrolyte impregnated with ionic liquid (Li-IL@MOF), as Fig. 1j shows.2 In this system, the sizes of [EMIM]+ and [TFSI]− are much smaller than the pore size of MOF-525(Cu) (7.9 Å, 7.6 Å, 12 × 7 Å, respectively). Thus, the porous structure can confine the [EMIM]+ and [TFSI]− ions inside the pores to slow down their movement, and simultaneously enable the Li-IL ions to smoothly pass through. The Li+ ions migrate inside the pores and through the MOF's framework. Greenbaum reported that fillers with Lewis acid–base groups can improve the mobility of the Li+ ions by strong interaction between the lithium salt and composite polymer electrolytes (CPEs).76 Lately, the Kitagawa group studied the lithium ion diffusion in ZIF-8 mediated by an incorporated ionic liquid (IL)-[EMI0.8Li0.2][TFSA], which is a mixture of [EMI][TFSA] and LiTFSA.77 Results show that the ILs in the microchannels display quite different phase performance due to the nano size effect in microchannels or the interaction with the inner surface of ZIF-8. In the system, the movement of the TFSA− increases with increasing temperature, and the incorporated ILs in the porous structure were protected from freezing and unexpected glass transition. The movement of the Li+ ions is not broken by the MOF due to the solvation and exchange effect. In addition, the Li+ in the bulk spread with the exchange of the solvating TFSA− on account of the low comparable activation energies. The nano channels of MOFs are favorable for improving the ionic conductivity.
Overall, the Li+ transport across the MOF-Li salt (IL) crystals can be concluded. In the system, the polyhedral nanostructured MOF-Li (IL) salt crystals are densely arranged. Thus, the open porous frameworks as Li+ channels are tightly linked with each other by face-sharing mechanism, and the anions of the Li salt are bonded and restricted by the unsaturated metallic centre and the apertures of the MOFs. Thus, the Li+ can move easily from one crystal to another through the channels, and across the surface of MOF materials. The interactions between the MOF nanoparticles and other composites have multifunctional effects: significantly lower the crystallinity of polymers, improve mechanical strength of the SSEs, and greatly change the transmission pathway of Li+ ions and meanwhile restrain the movement of Li salt anions.


1.2.2 Interfacial behavior. 
For Li metal batteries, the interfacial behavior determines the SEI film, cycling stability and battery life. Stephan et al.11 supposed that the improved interfacial properties of MOF-based SSEs is due to the eliminating ability of the nano-porous structure in MOFs to track the solvent impurities. The large surface area and porous structure of the MOF nanoparticles facilitate the absorbing of trace impurities, thus preventing them from accumulating at the solid–solid interface and protecting the metal anode. To further explore the compatibility of the MOF-containing SSEs, the morphologies of the Li|Li-IL@MOF interfaces were clearly observed. Because of the irregularity and mismatching of the Li metal and the SSE layer, nano-gaps can be seen obviously between the two surfaces before cycling (Fig. 2a). While after the charging/discharging process, these gaps were eliminated and a seamlessly connected interface was formed with a slightly reduced resistance. As shown in Fig. 2(b), after cycling, the initial gaps were solid with a growth-inhibited “Li dendrite” layer, and a smooth and dense morphology was obtained on the Li anode surface. This is attributed to the nano-wetted interfaces (formed by the addition of IL) and high mechanical stability of the Li-IL@MOF SSE layer that facilitates the uniform Li deposition. Besides, in the SSEs with nanometer scale feather particle sizes, the specific surface area and surface tension are clearly higher than in those with larger particle sizes, thus leading to a tight solid-to-solid interfacial contact. The time-dependent voltage of the Li|Li-IL@MOF|Li cell shown in Fig. 2(c) displayed a small polarization voltage (less than 100 mV) under different current densities. In detail, the voltage of each cycle was quite flat and stayed stable during the cycling (1000 h).
 Fig. 2  SEM morphologies of (a) the as-synthesized MOF and (b) the cross-sectional of Li-IL@MOF pellet. The interface between the Li foil and the Li-IL@MOF (a) before and (b) after Li plating/stripping cycles. (c) Voltage profiles for the Li|Li-IL@MOF|Li symmetric cell at current densities of 0.05 and 0.2 mA cm−2. (d) EIS of the Li|Li-IL@MOF|Li symmetric cell before and after the Li-plating/stripping cycles. (e) Schematic illustration for the improved interfacial contact after Li-plating/stripping cycles (reproduced with permission,2 Copyright 2018 John Wiley & Sons). (f) Schematic of the SEI formation at lithium electrolyte interface. XPS spectra of the lithium surface in contact with Mg-TMA: (g) C 1s, (h) F 1s (reproduced with permission,5,10,11 Copyright 2019 Elsevier B.V.). 
Interfacial resistance is a significant factor that reflects the stability of contact. The EIS Nyquist plot shows the comparison of the Li|Li-IL@MOF|Li cell before and after Li plating/stripping (Fig. 2d).2 After the cycling process, the total resistance is 10 Ω lower than that of the cell before cycling, which is about 130 Ω. The nano structural particles and Li+ transport framework of SSEs explain the excellent compatibility of the Li-IL@MOF SSE with the Li metal anode, as well as the small interfacial resistance between them. In summary, the mechanism of the interfacial contact is schematically elaborated in Fig. 2e.
In terms of the interfacial stability, exploring the formation and composition of the solid electrolyte interface (SEI) layer is significant. Fig. 2(f) shows the schematic of the formation of SEI at the lithium and electrolyte interface. Fig. 2(g and h) shows the composition of the lithium surface in contact with Mg-TMA. The figures prove that Li2CO3 and LiF were formed on the surface of the lithium anode, which originated from various hydrocarbon species, and LiTFSI salt, separately. To be specific, F came from the contact of the lithium surface and CPEs. Meanwhile, the influence of the organic ligands of Mg-TPA and Mg-TMA SSEs on the electrochemical and interfacial behaviors matching with LiTFSI as salt was studied and compared.10 In their study, the Lewis-acid groups of the MOFs compete against the Lewis acidic Li+ with the alkoxide of PEO chains and TFSI− to form complexes. To some extent, the specific actions of the polar surface groups lead to the structural modifications on the MOF surfaces. Also, by the formation of the ‘ion-filler complex’, the ionic coupling can be decreased and the salt dissolution is further improved. In addition, the Lewis acid center on the MOFs can react with the TFSI−, and clearly reduce the crystallinity of PEO with the individual impregnating of Mg-TPA and Mg-TMA MOF. In this way, the interfacial impendence is highly decreased. In addition, the ambient condition has an influence on the physical/chemical stability of SSEs.
The stability between the MOF-containing SSEs with air or water was also studied. The Kitagawa group found that the MOF-PEG-LiBF4 SSE was not steady in water vapor, but was integral in air and exhibits a thermal stability up to 220 °C.68 As mentioned before, the thermal stability of MOFs-containing SSEs are much higher than practical requirements, which enables the solid-state batteries to work stably at changing temperatures without destructive deformation.


1.2.3 Lithium electrochemical deposition. 
In consideration of the inherently ordered pores of the crystalline MOF lattice being able to store various guest liquids and gaseous, the application of the compatible pores of MOF materials for SSEs may offer ordered ionic transport channels that consequently lead to homogeneous Li electrodeposition.

Fig. 3(a–e) displays the schematic illustration of the Li dendrite and dendrite-free Li growth of liquid electrolytes and MOF-modified electrolytes.5 Due to the pore chemistry mentioned before, the introduction of the porous structure of the MOF species into the electrolyte highly improves the Li+ transport, and subsequently realizes stable Li electrodeposition. In other words, the caged anions in MOF generate uniform Li-ion flux, thus inhibiting the formation of harmful dendrites, and finally achieving stable Li electrodeposition. Fig. 3(f and g) compares the SSEs with and without MOF materials. Considering this, MOFs are applied as a protective layer to protect the Li metal anode.25,78,79 During Li deposition, the coordination of the –NH2 modified MOF with PEO within the SSE system led to dendrite-free Li anodes.28 As shown in the figures, according to simulation, a small concentration gradient of Li+ ions were formed in the anion-fixed CPE, restraining the formation of the dendrite in a large area, and thus displaying excellent rate and cycle behavior matched with the LiFePO4 and LiFe0.15Mn0.85PO4 cathodes. Another important factor that enables uniform lithium electrodeposition is the high lithium-ion transference number tLi+ in MOF-based SSEs, which is due to the 3D polymer network crosslinking with the MOF framework.80
 Fig. 3  Schematic showing the Li-metal electrode (a) with pristine electrolyte (b and c). The inhomogeneous Li-ion flux results in the overgrown Li dendrites. (d and e) Schematic of the Li-metal electrode (d) with MOF-modified electrolyte (e). The homogeneous Li-ion flux facilitating a uniform Li growth on the Li-metal surface enables an efficient Li-metal electrode. The cyan dashed region indicates the ionic transport pathway provided by the MOF host (reproduced with permission,5 Copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V.). Schematic of the Li deposition behavior with the (f) PEO(LiTFSI) electrolyte and (g) anion-immobilized P@CMOF electrolyte (reproduced with permission,28 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society). 
Owing to the special function of the MOF structure and properties, which facilitate the homogeneous lithium flux and stabilize the interfacial contact, the Li uniformly deposits on the surface of the Li metal without dendrite formation. In other words, the ‘caged’ anions within the MOF can enable a uniform Li-ion flux, inhibiting the formation and growth of detrimental dendrites. As a result, a stable Li electrodeposition can be realized.

2. Fabrication and modification of MOFs-based SSEs
2.1 Composition of electrolytes
Usually, the MOF-containing SSEs consist of a polymer matrix, lithium salt, MOF nanoparticles, and other fillers. To explore the benefits of the MOFs materials in SSEs, multicomponent systems are being developed, where single ingredients merging into higher complexity structures introduces new functionality. In the MOF-based SSEs, MOF materials serve as a cation cage to confine cations of the Li salt and boost the Li ions transport.48,81,82 Apart from that, MOF materials also form the skeleton of the SSE to enhance the stiffness and mechanical strength of the soft polymer matrix in composite SSEs, with the polymer matrix offering the multidimensional Li ion pathway. Besides, there are additions like ILs that serve as ‘wetting’ agents to stabilize the solid/solid interfaces.9,13 Other fillers, such as ceramic materials and inert oxides, are added to enhance the electrochemical performances of LMBs. Every component works in coordination with each other.
2.2 Gel to solid electrolytes
The polymer-based SSEs offer good flexibility and therefore excellent interfacial contact with the Li metal anode, while suffering relatively low ionic conductivity and narrow operation window. Ceramic-based SSEs have advantages of a higher modulus to alleviate the dendrite and higher ionic conductivity, but are rigid to achieve a better interfacial contact with Li. Thus, complex SSEs is a compromise to utilize both merits.27

2.2.1 Gel electrolytes. 
To stabilize the lithium anode, through the vacuum-filtration method, Gao's group explored a Mg-MOF-74-modified PVDF-based gel polymer electrolyte (GPE) with immobilized anions for a quasi-solid-state Li–S battery.4 Matched with a sulfur–carbon composite cathode, cells with three different types of electrolytes were tested in the research: liquid electrolyte with Celgard separator, PVDF GPE, and MOF-modified PVDF (MOF-PVDF) GPE. As shown in Fig. 4a, the as-prepared MOF-PVDF GPE fully utilizing the abundant pores of the MOF skeleton to fix the polysulfide anions with large size. Meanwhile, the cages trap the electrolyte anions TFSI− into the pores, thus endowing a homogeneous transport of Li+ effectively and advantageously to the even Li deposition. Thus, the lithium anode matched with MOF-PVDF GPE kept a uniform morphology and formed a stable SEI film. Because of the excessive consumption of soluble polysulfides towards the Li anode, the Celgard 2325 cell formed a solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) film with a thickness from 4 to 9 μm. The lithium anode with MOF-PVDF GPE exhibits a more dense and homogeneous SEI film with only 5 μm thickness (Fig. 4b). In addition, the patchy SEI film of the pristine PVDF. Supposedly, GPE can assist soluble polysulfides in corroding the surface of the Li anode. The sharp redox peaks in Fig. 4c suggest the cells with this MOF-tailored GPE deliver lower polarization and excellent reversibility. Moreover, the polarization voltage of the Li/Li symmetrical cell with the MOF-PVDF electrolyte is only 31 mV during 120 cycles without short-circuit (Fig. 4d). In addition, the cells with the MOF-PVDF GPE remain stable at a high current density of 2 mA cm−2, which illustrates the advantage of the MOF material on Li electrodeposition. Also, the MOF-PVDF GPE improved the t+ value from 0.37 to 0.66, which is consistent with the MOFs being capable of caging the counter anions of Li+, leading to a fluent Li+ pathway (Fig. 4e). XPS spectra were collected to investigate the chemical composition of the Li anode surface. The results show that the formation of the SEI film, containing inorganic components –NSO2CF3 (688.3 eV) and inorganic LiF (684.7 eV), is significant to prevent the deposition of Li2S/Li2S2 on the surface of the Li anode, thus exhibiting high charge/discharge and high-rate capability. As Fig. 4f shows, in terms of the long-term cycling at 0.1C rate, the cell with the MOF-modified GPE delivers the lowest capacity decay after 200 cycles with a high capacity retention compared to the cells with the Celgard separator and PVDF electrolyte.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of MOF-PVDF GPE with anions immobilized for the lithium-sulfur battery. (b) SEM images of the prepared MOF-PVDF film. (c) CVs of the cell using MOF-PVDF GPE. (d) Li plating/stripping behavior of Li/Li symmetrical cells using various electrolytes at a low current density of 0.5 mA cm−2. (e) The t+ values of Celgard, PVDF, and MOF-PVDF GPE. (f) The cycling ability at a rate of 0.1C with different electrolytes (reproduced with permission,4 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society). (g) Structure illustration of MOF-688. (h) Nyquist plots of the Li|MOF-688|Li cell before and after polarization. (i) Discharge capacity and coulombic efficiency of the Li|MOF-688|LiFePO4 cell. (j) Charge and discharge profile of the Li|MOF-688|LiFePO4 cell for the 1st, 2nd, 100th, and 200th cycle (reproduced with permission,22 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society). 


2.2.2 Hybrid solid-state polymer electrolyte (HSPE). 
HSPE is also called composite polymer electrolyte (CPE). Yuan et al. incorporated MOF-5 as a filler into the PEO matrix, highly improving the electrochemical performance of the CPE.83 Mixed with PVDF by a 3:1 weight ratio, MOF-688 greatly improved the performance of HSPE.22 In their work, Yaghi et al. developed a new three-dimensional MOF-688 by connecting ditopic amino functionalized polyoxometalate [N(C4H9)4]3[MnMo6O18((OCH2)3CNH2)2] with 4-linked tetrahedral tetrakis(4-formylphenyl)methane building units through imine condensation. The accessible void space of MOF-688 possesses a 3-layer interpenetrated structure, as Fig. 4g shows. TBA+ of the MOF material can be exchanged with Li+, leading to a high ionic conductivity of 3.4 × 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature. The t+ of MOF-688 is 0.87, which is enormously higher than that of conventional liquid electrolytes (0.2–0.4) and single-ionic polymer electrolytes. This implies that most of the charges in the MOF is transported by Li+, confirming that the polyoxometalate anions are caged in the backbone of the framework. The low interfacial resistance of 353 Ω against the lithium anode in the measurements from the Li|MOF-688|LiFePO4 cell before and after cycling shows that the material is a stable and suitable candidate as a solid-state electrolyte (Fig. 4h). Excluding the first cycle, the mean coulombic efficiency was about 99.6%, which indicates limited side reactions on both cathode and anode (Fig. 4i). In Fig. 4j, over the process of 200 cycles, the charge/discharge voltage gap remained stable. The improvement of the PVDF polymer electrolyte is due to the special structural framework. Carrying more than one charge, the triply interpenetrated diamond-based dia topology MOF-688 delivers excellent charge density, which is different from traditional building units of MOFs and COFs. In this framework, TBA+ would fill the pores and simultaneously neutralize the charge of the anions.


2.2.3 Ionic liquid and MOFs composite electrolyte. 
Feng Pan's group developed a solid-like electrolyte consisting of MOF-525 (Cu) and ionic liquid [EMIM][TFSI].2 The novel ionic-liquid-impregnated MOF nanocrystals (Li-IL@MOF) demonstrated excellent electrochemical properties, such as the amelioration of the interfacial issue and realization of high energy density. The pore size of MOF-525 (Cu) is about 12 × 7 Å, which enables the Li-IL ions to transport. Simultaneously, the structure can also lower the mobility of [EMIM]+ and [TFSI]− ions by confining them into the pores, therefore improving the t+ to 0.36. The electrochemical performance remained stable under a wide temperature range. In Fig. 5(a), we can see that the corresponding Arrhenius plot of ionic conductivity are 2.2 × 10−5, 3.0 × 10−4, and 4.9 × 10−3 S cm−1 at different temperatures: −20 °C, room temperature, and 100 °C, respectively. The UV-Vis result also confirms that by hot-pressing and with a high content of encapsulated Li-IL, the densely packed highly porous MOF nanocrystals exhibit the high ionic conductivity, which corresponds to a low interfacial resistance. The Li-IL@MOF SSE is further studied in the rechargeable Li|SSE|LiFePO4 cell with a high active loading of 25 mg cm−2 from −20 to 150 °C. The charge/discharge capacity increased with the rising temperature from −20 °C to RM, and remained stable up to 150 °C, indicating that the electrolyte can operate well over a wide temperature range with remarkable performance, especially at high temperature (Fig. 5b). As a result, the nanowetted interfaces introduced by the addition of IL, the good mechanical stability of the Li-IL@MOF electrolyte and the nanoconfined Li-IL guests lead to the uniform Li deposition, improving the compatibility of the Li-IL@MOF electrolyte with the Li metal. The effective 3D Li+ conductive network created by the coordination throughout the whole battery determines the remarkable performance of this SSB system.
 Fig. 5  (a) Corresponding Arrhenius plot of the ionic conductivity. (b) Temperature-dependent cyclability of the Li|Li-IL@MOF|LFP SSB with corresponding charge/discharge curves (reproduced with permission,2 Copyright 2018 John Wiley & Sons). (c) Digital photograph of the CPE and (d) SEM image of the CPE (reproduced with permission,11 Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry). (e) Cycle performance of the Li/HSPE-1–8/LFP. (f) Image of the cell of Li/HSPE-1–8/LFP powering LEDs of different colors at room temperature (reproduced with permission,38 Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry). 


2.2.4 All solid electrolytes. 
All solid electrolytes were prepared without the attendance of solvents to suppress the growth of dendrites, and thus prevent the short circuit caused by the puncture of the dendrite with high ionic conductivity. However, the disadvantage of all solid-state electrolytes is that the interfacial contact still needs a long way to explore. Even neat MOF materials are used as SSEs at the earlier stage to propose the concept of MOF-based SSEs.1,84Fig. 5(c) and (d) show the visual appearance of the Ni3-(BTC)2-MOF SSE and the surface morphology of one sample, respectively. The seamless polymeric SSE is thin, bendable and nonsticking. The flat surface morphology membrane in Fig. 5(d) is ascribed to the uniform distribution of Ni3-(BTC)2-MOF particles.11 By hot-pressing, Stephan and co-workers prepared a copper benzene dicarboxylate MOF (Cu-BDC MOF) and employed it in the PEO-LiTFSI electrolyte,85 delivering a stable discharge capacity of 110 mA h g−1 at 70 °C with 1C rate, which is much higher and stable than most of the SSEs. In addition, the Li|CPE|LiFePO4 cell could be cycled over a wide temperature range, which guaranteed its safety. Besides, other electrochemical performance, such as the ionic conductivity, compatibility and thermal stability of SSE were also improved by the incorporation of Cu-BDC MOF. Fig. 5(e) illustrates the charge and discharge performances of the Li/SSE-1–8 sample/LFP cell at various C rates. Stable and high discharge capacities are delivered at the corresponding rates, which imply the stable and sustainable interface of the cell at high current rates and long cycling conditions.38 Notably, in Fig. 5(f), the cell of the Li/HSPE-1–8 sample/LFP can light LEDs of different colors at room temperature, practically supporting that the electrolyte is a potential solid-state electrolyte for commercial application. However, for batteries with all-solid-state polymer electrolytes, low ionic conductivity and poor solid/solid interfacial contact, especially at low temperature still prevent the operating of the cells.

2.3 Modification of MOFs-based SSE
To fully use the unique structure of MOFs, like the open metal centers, modifications are implemented via covalent modification of organic ligands, grafting ligands on to open sites, or transplanting useful functional groups of organic liquids.
In 2011, Long and co-workers reported novel hybrid SSEs by tailoring the Mg2(dobdc) through organic liquids.1 In their work, three steps were taken to modify the initial Mg2(dobdc): the grafting of lithium isopropoxide (LiOiPr) in Mg2(dobdc) (dobdc4− = 1,4-dioxido-2,5-benzenedicarboxylate), followed by infiltrating with LiBF4 in a typical ethylene carbonate (EC), and with diethyl carbonate (DEC) electrolyte solution. As a result, the new solid lithium electrolyte Mg2(dobdc)·0.35LiOiPr·0.25LiBF4·EC·DEC was formed. As shown in Fig. 6(a), the grifted Mg2(dobdc) shows a framework with one-dimensional hexagonal pores (mean diameter of ∼14 Å) and the lined coordinatively unsaturated Mg2+ cation sites. These open sites preferentially coordinate with the lithium alkoxide ions, and pin the ions in the framework, while smoothing the transportation of Li+ along the channel. The delicate design improves the ionic conductivity to 3.1 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 300 K, as shown by the two-point AC impedance data (Fig. 6b). The novel isopropoxide-grafted MOFs can be considered as a superionic conductor since the variable-temperature measurements displays a low activation energy of just 0.15 eV, as shown in Fig. 6c. A pellet with only this grifted MOFs delivered a much lower ionic conductivity of 10−7 S cm−1. Clearly, without the existence of additional lithium salts, it is hard to realize the excellent interparticle ionic conductivity and good interfacial contacts between the compact MOFs pellet and the electrodes. Lithium salts offer Li+ ions that can move effectively in the SSE system. Their work significantly implied the function of the unsaturated metal sites of MOFs and micropore channels in the dissociation of Li salts and Li+ transportation in MOF-based SSEs. However, more systematic investigations including both theoretical modeling and experimental study, such as testing of the behavior of MOF material upon cycling within a lithium metal battery, were absent to further support the novel system. The grifting strategy paved the way for the use of MOFs as SSEs for the next-generation Li batteries, and could be extended to exploit other ionic conductors, such as Na, Mg, Zn metal batteries.
 Fig. 6  (a) Structure of Mg2(dobdc) and the scheme for its modification to form the solid electrolyte (reproduced with permission,1 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society). Different approaches of modifying the Uio-66 MOF: (d) TEM images of: (1) Uio-66 and (2) UIO/Li-IL, and the corresponding EELS element mappings of Zr, Li and S (reproduced with permission,13 Copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons). (e) Synthetic route of the hybrid covalently linked MOF PEGDA-based all-SSEs (reproduced with permission,38 Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry). (f) Synthetic route and the schematic UiO-66-LiSS structure (reproduced with permission,44 Copyright 2019 Elsevier B.V.). (g) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of Co-MOF (reproduced with permission,21,45 Copyright 2019 Elsevier B.V.). (h) Representation of the grafting process, involving insertion of a lithium alkoxide in dehydrated UiO-66 (reproduced with permission,48 Copyright 2013 John Wiley & Sons). 
Nanostructured Uio-66 and its derivative are widely used in the SSEs, owing to their abundant nanopores, large specific area and long-term performance stability properties.2,13,38,44,45,48,86,87 The transition metals in this kind of MOFs does not provide redox-active centers, and the Zr4+ ions are difficult to decrease. Therefore, it avoids the induction of electronic conduction, while forming a contact with the Li metal anode.13 At the structural level, Uio-66 is easily tailored by various functional groups, and can retain a stable structure for a relatively long time period. The morphologies of Uio-66 and UIO/Li-IL were observed by TEM images in Fig. 6d. The crystallite sizes of Uio-66 are about 50 nm, which holds the nanostructure after incorporation with Li-IL (UIO/Li-IL). The nanoparticles of pristine Uio-66 and UIO/Li-IL are mostly octahedral, which belong to the face center cubic lattice structure. By face-sharing, the quadrate structure is prone to be densified seamlessly with each crystal connected closely. In Fig. 6(e), the MOF with –CC– bonds (M-UiO-66-NH2) was synthesized by the combination of UiO-66-NH2 and methacryloyl chloride (MC).38
The Wu group synthesized a single lithium-ion conductor by covalently immobilizing 4-styrenesulfonate anions to the skeleton of Uio-66 structures (Fig. 6f).44 The functionalized UiO-66 containing SSE delivered a wide electrochemical stability window to 5.2 V vs. Li|Li+, and higher ionic conductivity at a wide temperature range. Further characterizations of the UiO-66-NaSS and UiO-66-LiSS suggested that the crystallinity of the MOF structure is still stable with the grafting of sodium p-styrenesulfonate and after exchanging the Na+ ions with Li+ ions. Notably, the tailored single-ion conductor achieved a super high t+ of 0.90 at 25 °C without any plasticizer. Benefiting from the incorporation of EC and propylene carbonate (PC) into the modified Uio-66 MOF structure, the ionic conductivity even reached 7.8 × 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature. The MOF SSE has been investigated with all-solid-state Li|SSE|LiFePO4 batteries at room temperature, displaying remarkable rate capacity and stable cycling properties. Sun et al. gifted the –NH2 group to UiO-66 by exchanging a guest and removing the DMF and CHCl3 solvents. The D-UiO-66-NH2 was activated before synthesis, followed by being soaked in fresh DMF and CHCl3 solvents (Fig. 6g).45 After further dipping and dying process, the cationic D-UiO-66-NH2 (CMOF) was obtained. Through hydrogen bonds, the –NH2 group would boost the successive linking with effective EO branches in PEO chains to obtain a stable structure of SSE and widen the electrochemical window. Moreover, the pyridine N with unsaturated electrons as the nucleophilic reagent was easy to replace the I in CH3I and bind with the –CH3 group. Once the nucleophilic substitution was completed, the charging center –N+CH3 was formed and thus the CMOF was successfully prepared. It is known that the small amount of free I− from CH3I penetrated into the SSEs has no adverse effect because LiI was also adopted as an additive into SPEs before.
Long's group adopted lithium salt, tert-butoxide (LiOtBu), to grift a dehydrated UiO-66 by a two-step modification procedure, as Fig. 6(h) shows.48 Simultaneously, propylene carbonate (PC) was also added to Uio-66 to solvate the Li+ ions in the channels of MOFs. By adding the free Li+ salt together with the introduction of PC at room temperature, the LiOtBu-grafted UiO-66 delivers an ionic conductivity of 1.8 × 10−5 S cm−1, which is two orders of magnitude higher than the pristine UiO-66 material. The improvement can be explained by the hypothesis of the effective pinning of Li–salt anions by the open Zr4+ sites. The bulky aliphatic group delocalized the negative charge of tBuO−, which consequently weakens the interaction of Li+-tBuO, resulting in the fast movement of dissociated Li+ in the channels and high Li-ion transference number. This hypothesis of open metal sites in the Li-ion conduction was validated by synthesizing hydrated UiO-66 after being grifted without open metal sites. Although the Li+ content in the deprotonated UiO-66 was four times the amount of the grifted unsaturated one, it delivered a much lower ionic conductivity of 3.3 × 10−6 S cm−1 when measured as the Li+ conductor under room temperature. Notably, the activation energy of Li+ transport of the hydrated-grafted UiO-66 is about two times higher than that of the dehydrated-grafted UiO-66 (0.35 eV, 0.18 eV, separately), which implies that the different coordination situation of the Li+ ions in MOFs play a crucial role in the movement of Li+. By the addition of a SiO2 precursor, UiO-66-NH2@SiO2 was prepared and applied in SSE, enabling more uniform Li-ion flux and enhanced solid–solid interfacial properties.87 Thus, the overall performance was highly enhanced. Although it delivered high ionic conductivity, the electrochemical windows of Uio-66s are supposed to be confined by the redox-active Cu(II) center.
3. MOFs-based SSEs in lithium metal batteries
3.1 Enhancement of ionic conductivity
As mentioned in the mechanism of Li+ transport dominated in the MOF-containing SSEs systems, the special properties of nanosized MOF particles are considered to boost the ionic conductivity. To deal with the large interfacial impendence of materials in the LMBs caused by the unstable solid/solid contact, assistant ionic conductors are implemented to speed up the Li+ transport of interfacial SSEs. One strategy of improving the ionic conductivity is by embedding an ionic liquid and Li salt (Li-IL) into the porous MOF channels. MOFs are also adopted as an addition in the oxide-based SSEs to highly enhance the interfacial Li+ transport kinetics. The Pan group found that when coordinated with LLZO SSEs, the solidified Li-IL composite enabled a close contact with the LLZO particles directly due to the open and well-confined channels in the MOF nanoparticles.88 The original unstable solid/solid contact changed into “nanowetted” interfaces, which boosted the Li+ transport. With these closely connected interfaces, the SSE delivers a high ionic conductivity of 10−4 magnitude S cm−1 with a wider electrochemical window (reaches to 5.2 V). Simultaneously, the compatibility of SSE with the Li metal anode is highly improved. Moreover, the unique LiCoO4 and LiFePO4 SSBs obtained a low capacity decay of only 3% after 150 cycles at 0.1C. In this system of SSEs, the IL acts as a function of moisturizing, which enhances the stability between the electrolyte and electrodes. Through the nanostructured MOF-derived SSEs, the low resistances of the Li/SSE and cathode/SSE interfaces guarantee the fast Li+ transportation kinetics in the LMBs. The room temperature conductivity reached 2.0 × 10−4 S cm−1 due to the bilayer heterostructure solid electrolyte.89
3.2 Interfacial compatibility and stability of SSE with Li metal
The Li symmetrical cells were packaged to investigate the long-term electrochemical stability of MOF SSE against the Li metal.9 The morphology is shown in Fig. 7(a). A layer was formed on the surface of the Li metal to protect the anode. Fig. 7(b) displays the interfacial compatibility between the SSEs and Li metal anodes. Over the first 4 days, the interfacial resistance decreased. During the subsequent evaluation period of 10 days, the resistance remained constant. This constant interface impedance illustrates that under high-temperature, a stable interface was formed between the Li and the electrolyte. At the same time, the electrolyte can stop the successive side reaction between the Li metal and the electrolyte. The electrochemical window can be broadened to a high voltage of 5.4 V (Fig. 7c). Fig. 7(d–f) shows the small changes under different current density, flat and even lithium deposition and small polarization voltage, which indicates that the adoption of this MOF containing gel electrolyte is a potential strategy to further suppress Li dendrite formation and growth, and thus enhance the effective and high-temperature durability of Li metal batteries. The Huang group also tested the Li plating/stripping stability.71 In their work, the Li|MOF|Li symmetric cell had an initial overpotential of only 46 mV, and the final overpotential slightly increased to 100 mV after 600 h. The voltage profiles remained even, and no sign of short circuit occurred during the process, indicating a stable and uniform Li plating/stripping process and suppressed Li dendrite growth. The Sun group reported that the discharge/charge voltage profiles of the MOF-based gel SSE remained stable even after long-time cycling at a high current density.90 In addition, the pouch cell worked well after folding with different angles. Considering the potential safety concerns of LMBs, the battery abuse test of the pouch cells was performed by a destructive cutting experiment. The folding test and safety evaluation can also confirm the interfacial compatibility and stability between SSE and electrodes.
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM morphology of the contact area of the Li metal and ILE@MOF. (b) Time evolution of the impedance response of a symmetrical Li/ILE@MOF/Li cell. (c) LSV curve of a Li/ILE@MOF/stainless steel (SS) cell. (d) Voltage profiles of the Li/ILE@MOF/Li cell cycling. (e) SEM morphology of the Li anode in the Li/ILE@MOF/Li cell. (f) Voltage profile of the Li/ILE@MOF/Li cell cycling (reproduced with permission,9 Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
3.3 Suppressing of Li dendrite
According to the formation and growth mechanism of Li dendrites, it is significant to deposit the Li ions uniformly on the Li metal to eliminate the dendrite Li. By forming a particle-rich layer on the solid/solid contact side of the lithium anode, the introduction of MOF highly suppressed the formation of dendrite Li.9 The protective layer markedly prevented the anode from generating dendrite at high temperatures. In detail, the Zhou group characterized Li electrodeposition by top-scanning electron microscopy using a MOF electrolyte with pristine electrolyte for comparison.5 The SEM images confirmed that the MOF-based electrolyte can regulate the Li deposition, and effectively suppress the formation and growth of dendritic Li. Fig. 8(a and b) shows that for the symmetric cell with pristine electrolyte, the contiguous delithiation led to obvious breaks on the Li metal surface. The spikes represent Li dendrites, which are randomly orientated with a large portion having a length of ∼10 mm. These overgrown Li dendrites can pierce the separator easily and pose severe safety problems, significantly hindering the application of LMBs. Fig. 8(c and d) displays the Li metal anode of the symmetric cell using the MOF-modified electrolyte. It can be observed that the surface of the Li metal anode is flat with low roughness even at high areal capacity. Almost no Li dendrite was observed on the surface of the Li metal anode after 2000 cycles. The Li metal surface still remained smooth and intact after 800 h with the increasing of the current density (Fig. 8e and f). Fig. 8(g and h) demonstrate that when the areal capacity and cycling time were increased, only a slight morphological roughness was seen on the Li metal surface, while no obviously substantial Li dendrites and excessive cracks occurred. The set of SEM images show the process of the function MOF served. Benefiting from the HKUST-1 containing SPE, a stable interfacial contact was obtained, which illustrated the Li deposition with the modification of MOF material.89 Instead of Li dendrites, many flake-shaped structures with nanoscale thickness can be observed, as compared in Fig. 8(i and j). Instead of dendritic deposition, Li tended to deposit in a flaky form in the cells under the suppression of Li-IL@MCM-41.35
 Fig. 8  Surface morphologies of the cycled Li-metal electrode at different current densities: (a and b) top-view scanning EM images of the Li-metal electrode with pristine electrolyte at the areal capacity of 10 mA h cm−2 after 120 h. (b) The overgrown Li dendrites (a) can be clearly observed in the enlarged view. (c–h): Top-view scanning EM images of the Li-metal electrode with MOF-modified electrolyte (c and d) at the areal capacity of 2.5 mA h cm−2 after 1000 h, (e and f) 5 mA h cm−2 after 800 h, and (g and h) 10 mA h cm−2 after 800 h. (i) Schematic illustration of the dendritic Li growth (reproduced with permission,5 Copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V.). (j) Schematic illustrations of the Li deposition process in conventional liquid electrolytes (upper panel) and the Li-IL@MCM-41 SSE (lower panel) (reproduced with permission,35 Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
3.4 Lithium–sulfur batteries
For solid state lithium–sulfur batteries, there are other several issues:91–93 (i) the polysulfide shuttle effect, which lies in the high solubility of lithium polysulfides (LiPSs) in the matrixes, especially in the liquid electrolytes and polymer involved solid-state electrolyte systems. Once the concentration gradient and electric field force in the battery were close to their critical values, the polysulfide shuttled between the electrodes, resulting in the fading of the fast capacity, low coulombic efficiencies, and the corrosion of the Li metal anode. (ii) The chemical/electrochemical instabilities. The vulnerable sulfide-based SSEs are sensitive to the ambient environment. Ineluctable exposure to O2 and H2O can generate hazardous H2S, followed by the decomposition of SSEs.94 (iii) Insulating properties of S and Li2S. In SSLSBs systems, the charge/discharge end products generated by active materials (S, LiPSs, or Li2S) are S and Li2S, offering high electrical conductivities and insulating ionic conductivities, and extremely slow Li+ transportation. The conversion between S and Li2S is quite limited, leading to inefficient active material utilization and low discharge availability.95 (iv) Large volumetric changes during lithium insertion and extraction process caused by different densities of Li2S and S, which can induce the cathode and cathode fracture, as well as separate the active materials from the Li+/e− conductors, finally giving rise to fast capacity decay.
MOF materials have been used to fabricate the electrodes and separators of Li–S batteries for their excellent performance.96–98 There are several approaches to block the polysulfide shuttle. One strategy is through the utilization of the size difference of the MOF channels and polysulfides. Another way is the chemical interactions produced by the active unsaturated metal sites of MOFs. According to these strategies, Zhou et al. reported a MOF coating graphene oxide (MOF@GO) separator to ease the shuttling problem of the Li–S batteries.99 Within the tailored separator, the small pore of MOF can significantly inhibit the pierce of the long chain polysulfides through the separator. The free-standing HKUST-1@GO separator was fabricated by the in situ growth method through vacuum filtration. For solid Li–S batteries, these strategies are also suitable.
Mg-MOF-74 was used in a quasi SSE to stabilize the Li anode for the Li–S battery.4Fig. 9(a) shows the ion transport in the electrolyte. Results show that the polysulfide shuttle was inhibited due to the porous structure and Lewis acid effect mentioned before. For the long cycling performance at 0.1C rate during 200 cycles, the MOF-PVDF GPE batteries delivered a comparatively low capacity fading with a slight capacity decay. In Fig. 9(c), the mobile TFSI− from the electrolyte with smaller t+ traveled easily to the direction opposite to the Li+ ions, thus plaguing the Li+ transportation. On the contrary, the Mg-MOF-74 material can effectively restrain the TFSI− anions within the well-ordered pores, based on the steric hindrance effect and Lewis acid-based effect. According to the space charge theory, once the large TFSI− anions are immobilized, the Li-ions can transport smoothly from the electrolyte to the Li metal anode within the channels. Thus, due to the influence of anions, the MOF fabricated GPE is more stable and compatible for the Li anode. The shuttle effect of the polysulfide seriously affects the performance of the battery. They also found that after 7 days, the polysulfide was still inhibited by the MOF SSE, indicating a chemical stability and excellent polysulfide inhibiting effect. This was first ascribed to the confinement ability of the nanopores of MOF, which can suppress the penetration of the polysulfide species. In addition, the negatively charged polysulfides can bond with the positive charged metallic centre, thus boosting the Li ion mitigation. Fig. 9(c) illustrates the fabrication of SSE using Uio-66.17 The results of the Li symmetric cells suggested the stable solid/solid interfacial contact. The Gao group developed a GPE to stabilize the lithium–sulfur battery.4 With the bi-functional MOF-based GPE, the rate capability and cycle life span of the Li–S battery were highly improved.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of MOF-PVDF GPE with anions immobilized for the lithium–sulfur battery. (b) The cycling ability at a rate of 0.1C of the cells with various electrolytes (reproduced with permission,4 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society). (c) Schematic structures of UIO (Universitetet i Oslo) material, UIOS (UIO grafted with SO3H), and UIOSLi (UIO grafted with SO3Li). The results of the Li symmetric cells suggested the stable solid/solid interfacial contact. 
3.5 Li–oxygen batteries
Because of their large theoretical energy density of 3505 W h kg−1, numerous efforts have been put into the rechargeable lithium oxygen batteries (LOBs).100–102 However, there are several factors that plague the practical applications of the Li–O2 batteries, including the unexpected high overpotential, poor cycling stability and relatively low rate capacity. Besides, the electrolytes and byproducts deposited on the surface of the cathode lead to the poor O2 diffusion, severely deteriorating the battery performance.103,104 Hollow materials are adopted to advance the catalysts of the O2 electrodes for the Li–O2 batteries with high performance.105,106
In consideration of the great potential of MOFs as adsorbents and separators for CO2 capture and other gas separation, constructing a MOF-based film that can highly permeate O2, while blocking the moisture and CO2 are is promising. To block the moisture and CO2, Lu and colleagues first set up a mixed matrix membrane (MMM) by coating Al-based MOF (CAU-1-NH2) with polydopamine (CAU-1-NH2@PDA) and polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) for the Li–air batteries.6 In the system, CO2 is fully absorbed by the extensive –NH2 from CAU-1-NH2. In addition, the PMMA confers the film with highly hydrophobic property. Results show that under an ambient atmosphere, the Li–air battery with this MMM film exhibited a much better cycling stability and significantly higher charge/discharge capacity than those without the MMM film, as Fig. 10(a) shows. The structures of CAU-1-NH2@PDA-PMMA are displayed in Fig. 10(b and c). This would render the well-defined MOF coatings as a promising application, because the MOF materials have abundant ion transport channels, which could promote ion movement and therefore increase the electrode capacity. In addition, the amount of CO2 molecules entering the cell can be significantly decreased by the abundant functional groups (–NH2, –OH and –CO groups) within the MOF@PDA structure and PMMA matrix. Thus, the formation of lithium carbonates that can be reversible are inhibited, resulting in enhanced cycling performance and efficiency. A Grotthuss-like single-ion and versatile SSE was prepared by Wang and coworkers for dendrite-free LMBs.23 As Fig. 10(d) shows, the Cu2+ ions can coordinate with the Li salt anions ClO4−, and then be confined in the one-dimensional pores of Cu-MOF-74. The Li-ion transport is shown in Fig. 10(e), as discussed in Section 1.2.1. Fig. 10(f) displays the single-ion mechanism for Li+. The low active energy for the hopping of Li ions between the ClO4− anchored onto the open metal sites of Cu-MOF-74 indicate that the Li+ hooping mechanism dominates the Li+ migration, leading to an improved cycle life with reduced overpotential for the dendrite-free Li–O2 batteries.
 Fig. 10  (a) The schematic illustration of the MMM based on CAU-1-NH2@PDA (PDA = polydopamine) and PMMA polymer for repelling H2O and CO2 molecules. The framework of CAU-1-NH2 viewed along the c axis (f) and symbol: Al, pink; O, red; C, gray; H, blue. (b and c) Top and side view of the MMM based on CAU-1-NH2@PDA-PMMA. The inset image in d is the 25 times magnified MOF particle indicated in the circle6 (reproduced with permission, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry). Synthesis and characterization of the single-ion electrolyte: (d) schematic illustration of the structure of Cu-MOF-74. (e) Schematic illustration of the Li diffusion path in the pore of the MOF (O atoms: red, Cl atoms: yellow; Cu atoms: blue; Li atoms: grey). (f) Quantum chemistry investigation of Li migration in the single-ion electrolyte (reproduced with permission,23 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
In summary, besides the great potentials as electrocatalysis or MOF-derived carbon coating layers, MOFs also exhibit an effective O2 selective separator for both Li–O2 and Li–air batteries. As separators for Li–air batteries, MOFs are favored because of the high CO2 absorption ability and the hydrophobic quality. To date, only limited efforts were put into exploring MOFs on Li–O2 batteries. The various organic ligands, adjustable pore structure of MOFs show great opportunities to enable Li–O2 batteries with high performance.
4. MOFs-based SSEs for other metal batteries
Although the inherent properties, such as high theoretically energy capacity and reversible redox activity of the Li metal, enable Li and Li-ion batteries as the most promising energy sources, safety issues and Li abundance are still obstacles that need to be resolved in order to optimize the cell performance. In a comprehensive view of the safety, electrochemical performance, and abundance, other metals, namely Na, Mg, Al, K, Ca and Zn, have attracted increasing exploration for battery applications in the past few decades.
4.1 Sodium–metal batteries
Except for the Li-metal batteries, the research of Na-metal batteries are also booming because of their theoretical capacity of 1166 mA h g−1, low redox potential (ENa+/Na = −2.71 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode), low cost of abundant metallic Na, and can meet with large-scale energy storage application.107 The similar storage mechanisms as Li metal batteries enable Na metal batteries as one of the most promising generation for commercial and large-scale applications.108 However, the large size of Na+ ions hinders their insertion and extraction from the active materials.109 Although the MOF materials are adopted to fabricate the electrodes for better performance,110,111 the use of MOF-based SSEs on Na metal batteries is not widely developed.
Liu first reported the adoption of MOF in SPE for sodium-sulfur batteries.3 In their work, a flexible PEO-NaCF3SO3-MIL-53(Al) SSE was prepared. Fig. 11(a) shows that the SSE film was flexible enough for preparing batteries with special shape requirements. In addition, the ionic conductivity of the MOF-modified SSE was higher than the SSE without MOF from 40 to 100 °C (Fig. 11b and c). This improvement is mainly caused by the existence of MIL-53(Al) that improves the segment motion of PEO units through lowering the crystallization. Besides, the Lewis acidity on the surface of MIL-53(AL) enhanced the dissociation of sodium salts as well. Fig. 11(d–f) shows that the interfacial resistance was also highly decreased. In addition, the cycling and realized rate performance showed higher capacity and longer cycling stability after the addition of MOF material.
 Fig. 11  (a) A photo of the PNM membrane. (b) Ionic conductivities of PNM with the EO:Na ratios of 10:1, 15:1, 20:1, and 25:1. (c) Ionic conductivities of PNM with 0.00, 1.62, 3.24, and 4.86 wt% of MIL-53(Al). (d) Nyquist profiles of PNM-based ASSBs. (e) Cycling performance of the PNM- and PN-based ASSBs at 60 °C and (e) 0.1C and (f) 0.5C (reproduced with permission,3 Copyright 2020 Springer Nature). 
4.2 Zn batteries
In view of its high theoretical capacity (820 mA h g−1), eco-friendly nature, low redox potential (−0.76 V vs. SHE), abundant and available resources/low cost, metallic Zn is considered as a potential candidate for the anode material.112,113 However, in aqueous electrolytes, the Zn metal batteries still suffer from dendrite formation and growth, resulting in poor deposition reversibility, which plague its practical applications.114
The Zhi group used the property of catalysis of the Fe-based MOF fabricated with an elastic polyacrylamide hydrogen-based electrolyte, and tailored the Zn electrode, as shown in Fig. 12(a–c).8 The SSE can still maintain high elasticity in the corrosive alkaline environment. With almost no charge/discharge and output power deterioration, the obtained battery can be condensed by up to 54% strain and bent up to 90°. The MOF used in this system functioned as an oxygen catalyst. Furthermore, a novel single ion Zn2+ SSE was fabricated using post-synthetic modified MOF-808 ([Zr6O4(OH)4(HCOO)6(BTC)2]) for a dendrite-free Zn battery.12 After being treated by HCl, the neutral MOF-808 was charged negatively, along with a high charge density. Simultaneously, Zn(H2O)62+ took the place of the H+ counter ions in the pores. As a result, high ionic conductivity, minor activation energy, and high Zn2+ transference number were realized, accompanied by stable mechanical and electrochemical performance. Because the Zn(H2O)62+ ions were caged in the nanowetted Zn/SSE interface, the uniform Zn deposition revealed excellent compatibility on the interfaces between the Zn anode and the SSE. This was consistent with the stable Zn plating/stripping performance, leading to a uniform, dense and smooth Zn deposition layer. The function of the MOF SSE was further confirmed by VS2/Zn batteries, which exhibited a high and reversible capacity during long-term cycling without serious capacity decay.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of the origin of high compressibility for a PAM hydrogel electrolyte. The inset is the molecular formula of PAM. (b) SEM image of a freeze-dried polyacrylamide (PAM) hydrogel. (c) Compression–release process of the as-assembled compressible zinc–air battery. The inset is a schematic diagram of the construction process for the solid-state zinc–air battery (reproduced with permission,8 copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). (d) Scheme for the post-synthetic modification chemistry, inset: size of the SSE pellet for EIS test. (e) Zn plating/stripping performance of the Zn|WZM|Zn symmetric cell under a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2 at room temperature. SEM images of the Zn foils after plating/stripping cycles of (f) the Zn|ZnSO4|Zn cell and (g) Zn|WZM|Zn cell. (h) Proposed mechanism for the different deposition behaviors of the ZnSO4 aqueous electrolyte (left column), WZM SSE (middle column) and HZM electrolyte (right column) (reproduced with permission,12 Copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V.). 

Fig. 12(e) shows the compatibility between the crystalline single-ion water@ZnMOF-808 (WZM) SSE and the Zn metal anode.12 Under the current density of 0.1 mA cm−2, the cycle can be stable within 360 h. During this period, the voltage distribution of each cycle is relatively smooth, and the potential increases from 0.10 V to 0.12 V. Because of the slack interfacial contact between SSE and the Zn anode during the aging time, the polarization of the initial cycle is larger than other cycles. By repeating the Zn plating/stripping process, the interfacial resistance can be reduced after cycling, thus boosting the interfacial contact. The electrolyte can highly determine the deposition morphologies of the Zn metal. SEM images show the morphologies of the Zn foil with liquid and MOF-based SSE after cycling in Fig. 12(f and g). It is clear that for the batteries with MOF-based SSE, a compact and uniform Zn deposition was formed on the Zn anode without Zn dendrite. After cycling, further analysis showed that there was no impure ZnO phase generated by the unwanted Zn(OH)2 deposition.
For comparison in Fig. 12h, after the charge/discharge process in the ZnSO4 electrolyte, numerous micro-sized Zn flakes with sharp edges were formed on the Zn foil, which consequently formed a porous and loose Zn layer, causing large pulverization. On the contrary, the Zn(H2O)62+ ions transport into the sub-nano channels of the MOF host. The nano-wetted interface was also beneficial to the movement of Zn2+, which enabled the uniform and dendrite-free Zn deposition. The results show that the MOF-fabricated SSE has better compatibility with the Zn anode than traditional liquid electrolytes, and can effectively avoid the loose deposition and dendrite Zn deposition.
4.3 Mg batteries
As a promising candidate to lithium-ion batteries, magnesium batteries have been studied because of their higher volumetric capacity of 3832 mA h cm−3, low cost and abundant resource compared to Li metal.115 In addition, Mg possesses the safety property in that Mg metal is not sensitive to dendrite.116 However, finding the suitable electrolytes is still the challenge that blocks the application of Mg batteries.117 For the first time, the Long group investigated a series of solid magnesium electrolytes through MOFs soaked with three different magnesium phenolates.7 The mechanically robust transparent electrolytes exhibited unprecedentedly high room-temperature ionic conductivities of 0.25 mS cm−1. As shown in Fig. 13, several MOF-based magnesium electrolytes were constructed, and their ionic conductivity were also tested and compared. It was found that the ionic conductivity values can vary by over four orders of magnitude, through changing the pore sizes and altering the anion basicity of the guest electrolyte salts. The highest values can also reach 0.25 mS cm−1. Mircea Dincă's group probed the Mg2+ ion conductivity in the Cu-azolate MOF.84,118 The result showed that MOF-MgBr2 possessed a high ionic conductivity of 1.3 × 10−4 S cm−1 with relatively low active energy, which can be the good conductive media of Mg2+ ion SSE.84 Although there is quite limited research on the study of SSEs for Mg batteries, the MOF material can be the most advanced candidate for exploring new methods to construct and design Mg batteries.
 Fig. 13  AC impedance data (1 MHz to 1 Hz) at 298 K. Center: Bode plot illustrating the bulk impedance as a plateau for Mg(OPhCF3)2 < 1 (light red), Mg(TFSI)2 < 1 (light blue), Mg(OPhCF3)2·Mg(TFSI)2 < 1 (light purple), Mg(OPhCF3)2 < 2 (dark red), Mg(TFSI)2 < 1 (dark blue), and Mg(OPhCF3)2·Mg(TFSI)2 < 1 (dark purple). Left: Nyquist plots for the host framework 1, and right: Nyquist plots for the host framework 2; colors match those in the Bode plot. The leftmost point in the Nyquist plots corresponds to an AC frequency of 1 MHz (reproduced with permission,7 Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
5. Conclusions and perspectives
As a good choice for the solid-state electrolytes for Li metal and other metal batteries, MOF-based solid electrolytes hold the promise of achieving high performance batteries in recent years. In this paper, the current research on MOFs and their derivatives as SSE materials for Li and other metal batteries is reviewed. These MOF-based solid electrolytes can realize the flexibility and mechanical robustness, thus enhancing the performance of the Li metal batteries. Research progress has illustrated that the MOF-based SSEs serve as multifunctional SSEs with impressive performances. The unique properties of the porous MOF materials with tunable components and unsaturated sites have been widely used for high performance metal batteries. Although they have been widely studied, lithium and other metal batteries are still in the initial stages for commercial application, and the interface problem, safety issues, and lithium dendrite still hinder the advance of metal batteries. MOFs and their derived metal oxides are still facing some challenges in the following aspects.
(1) The stability of MOFs, especially the porous structure, is still the most important issue to be used in metal batteries. However, the long-term stability of MOFs in the complex electrochemical environment of batteries is still not so good, which is also the reason for the limited rate and cycle stability of the MOFs-based electrode or SSEs. Pre- or post-modification of the MOF material with different methods can be fully developed to enhance the stability, and meet the requirement of SSEs for metal batteries.
(2) The intrinsic ionic conductivity of MOFs and MOF-derivatives needs to be improved, which is very important for the capacity and rate performance of lithium and other metal batteries. New MOF materials and an effective modification method need to be deeply developed. Effects of the MOF structure, including pore size, nanoparticle morphology, crystallite size, and framework topology, on the charge transport properties are expected to be explored. In addition, the cations and anions of the guest salt, solvent polarity, and cathode material matching have an impact on the behavior of SSEs.
(3) The lack of efficient approaches to fabricate the film of MOF containing SSEs. Currently, there are two main ways to prepare the film, including doctor blading method and hot-pressing method. The Doctor blading method needs a relatively long time, and the films are sensitive to temperature. Prepared films made by hot-pressing method are too thick for the transport of Li ions, and are rigid to stabilize the interfacial contact. Moreover, the uneven distribution of each component is inevitable. Other advanced ways, like 3D printing, can be explored in terms of producing the film.
(4) A deep investigation of the electrochemical mechanism of MOFs in SSEs should be further studied. The compatibility of bulk MOF with polymers is not fully studied. One main function of fillers is to decrease the crystalline of polymers, thus boosting the metal ion transport. Through suitable regulation, such as changing the pore size or reducing the grain boundary, the crystallinity of the polymers would be highly decreased and the compatibility can also be improved.
(5) Other functions of MOF materials, including the absorption of trace gas and liquids, are not investigated and fully developed. For instance, in the process of in situ polymerization induced by AIBN (azodiisobutyronitrile) inside the battery, trace gas nitrogen will be produced, which poses a threat to the battery system. The existence of nanoporous MOF particles can absorb the trace gas to guarantee the safety. The metallic cation and Lewis acid can induce the ring opening polymerization, which are not explored in the system. In addition, careful research on the safety tests, like the thermal runaway, need to be carried out to extend the application of this type of SSE.
Overall, although the application of MOF-based SSEs for metal batteries have been widely studied, the full utilization of MOF materials need innovative exploration.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51922099), Innovation Academy for Light-duty Gas Turbine, Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. CXYJJ20-MS-05), and Natural Science Foundation of Hebei Province for Distinguished Young Scholars (E2020103052).
References
B. M. Wiers, 
            et al., A Solid Lithium Electrolyte via Addition of Lithium Isopropoxide to a Metal–Organic Framework with Open Metal Sites, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(37), 14522–14525 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, 
            et al., A Metal–Organic-Framework-Based Electrolyte with Nanowetted Interfaces for High-Energy-Density Solid-State Lithium Battery, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(2), 1704436 CrossRef .
Z. Ge, J. Li and J. Liu, Enhanced electrochemical performance of all-solid-state sodium-sulfur batteries by PEO-NaCF3SO3-MIL-53(Al) solid electrolyte, Ionics, 2020, 26(4), 1787–1795 CrossRef CAS .
D.-D. Han, 
            et al., Metal–Organic-Framework-Based Gel Polymer Electrolyte with Immobilized Anions To Stabilize a Lithium Anode for a Quasi-Solid-State Lithium–Sulfur Battery, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(20), 18427–18435 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, 
            et al., High-Power Li-Metal Anode Enabled by Metal-Organic Framework Modified Electrolyte, Joule, 2018, 2(10), 2117–2132 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, 
            et al., A high performance O2 selective membrane based on CAU-1-NH2@polydopamine and the PMMA polymer for Li–air batteries, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51(21), 4364–4367 RSC .
M. L. Aubrey, 
            et al., Metal–organic frameworks as solid magnesium electrolytes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7(2), 667–671 RSC .
L. Ma, 
            et al., Single-Site Active Iron-Based Bifunctional Oxygen Catalyst for a Compressible and Rechargeable Zinc–Air Battery, ACS Nano, 2018, 12(2), 1949–1958 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, 
            et al., A Li+ conductive metal organic framework electrolyte boosts the high-temperature performance of dendrite-free lithium batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(16), 9530–9536 RSC .
D. E. Mathew, 
            et al., Influence of MOF ligands on the electrochemical and interfacial properties of PEO-based electrolytes for all-solid-state lithium batteries, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 319, 189–200 CrossRef CAS .
S. Suriyakumar, 
            et al., Charge–discharge studies of all-solid-state Li/LiFePO4 cells with PEO-based composite electrolytes encompassing metal organic frameworks, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(99), 97180–97186 RSC .
Z. Wang, 
            et al., A MOF-based single-ion Zn2+ solid electrolyte leading to dendrite-free rechargeable Zn batteries, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 92–99 CrossRef CAS .
J.-F. Wu and X. Guo, Nanostructured Metal–Organic Framework (MOF)-Derived Solid Electrolytes Realizing Fast Lithium Ion Transportation Kinetics in Solid-State Batteries, Small, 2019, 15(5), 1804413 CrossRef .
N.-W. Li, 
            et al., Passivation of Lithium Metal Anode via Hybrid Ionic Liquid Electrolyte toward Stable Li Plating/Stripping, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4(2), 1600400 CrossRef .
D. Rehnlund, 
            et al., Lithium trapping in alloy forming electrodes and current collectors for lithium based batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10(6), 1350–1357 RSC .
D. Fang, 
            et al., ZnS quantum dots@multilayered carbon: geological-plate-movement-inspired design for high-energy Li-ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(18), 8358–8365 RSC .
P. Chiochan, 
            et al., A Metal Organic Framework Derived Solid Electrolyte for Lithium–Sulfur Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(27), 2001285 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, 
            et al., Supercritical fluid-assisted preparation of Si/CNTs@FG composites with hierarchical conductive networks as a high-performance anode material, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 522, 146507 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wen, 
            et al., Solid–Liquid Electrolyte as a Nanoion Modulator for Dendrite-Free Lithium Anodes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(24), 20412–20421 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, 
            et al., Recent progress in all-solid-state lithium batteries: the emerging strategies for advanced electrolytes and their interfaces, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 31, 401–433 CrossRef .
W. Li, 
            et al., Nanoporous Adsorption Effect on Alteration of the Li+ Diffusion Pathway by a Highly Ordered Porous Electrolyte Additive for High-Rate All-Solid-State Lithium Metal Batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(28), 23874–23882 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, 
            et al., A Metal–Organic Framework of Organic Vertices and Polyoxometalate Linkers as a Solid-State Electrolyte, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(44), 17522–17526 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yuan, 
            et al., A versatile single-ion electrolyte with a Grotthuss-like Li conduction mechanism for dendrite-free Li metal batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12(9), 2741–2750 RSC .
L. Buannic, 
            et al., Dual Substitution Strategy to Enhance Li+ Ionic Conductivity in Li7La3Zr2O12 Solid Electrolyte, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(4), 1769–1778 CrossRef CAS .
N.-W. Li, 
            et al., An Artificial Solid Electrolyte Interphase Layer for Stable Lithium Metal Anodes, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(9), 1853–1858 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mizuno, 
            et al., New, Highly Ion-Conductive Crystals Precipitated from Li2S–P2S5 Glasses, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17(7), 918–921 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wen, 
            et al., Fast Li-ion transport and uniform Li-ion flux enabled by a double-layered polymer electrolyte for high performance Li metal battery, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 32, 55–64 CrossRef .
F. Chu, 
            et al., Metal–Organic Frameworks as Electrolyte Additives To Enable Ultrastable Plating/Stripping of Li Anode with Dendrite Inhibition, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(4), 3869–3879 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hou, 
            et al., Lithium Dendrite Suppression and Enhanced Interfacial Compatibility Enabled by an Ex Situ SEI on Li Anode for LAGP-Based All-Solid-State Batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(22), 18610–18618 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, 
            et al., Enhancing interfacial contact in all solid state batteries with a cathode-supported solid electrolyte membrane framework, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12(3), 938–944 RSC .
K. Pan, 
            et al., A Flexible Ceramic/Polymer Hybrid Solid Electrolyte for Solid-State Lithium Metal Batteries, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(17), 2000399 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, 
            et al., Interfacial Chemistry in Solid-State Batteries: Formation of Interphase and Its Consequences, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(1), 250–257 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wu, 
            et al., The role of the solid electrolyte interphase layer in preventing Li dendrite growth in solid-state batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11(7), 1803–1810 RSC .
H. Huo, 
            et al., Rational Design of Hierarchical “Ceramic-in-Polymer” and “Polymer-in-Ceramic” Electrolytes for Dendrite-Free Solid-State Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(17), 1804004 CrossRef .
L. Han, 
            et al., An ordered mesoporous silica framework based electrolyte with nanowetted interfaces for solid-state lithium batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(43), 21280–21286 RSC .
M. Eddaoudi, 
            et al., Systematic Design of Pore Size and Functionality in Isoreticular MOFs and Their Application in Methane Storage, Science, 2002, 295(5554), 469–472 CrossRef CAS .
O. M. Yaghi, 
            et al., Reticular synthesis and the design of new materials, Nature, 2003, 423(6941), 705–714 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, 
            et al., Covalently linked metal–organic framework (MOF)-polymer all-solid-state electrolyte membranes for room temperature high performance lithium batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(35), 17227–17234 RSC .
D. Fang, 
            et al., Synergistic Regulation of Polysulfides Conversion and Deposition by MOF-Derived Hierarchically Ordered Carbonaceous Composite for High-Energy Lithium–Sulfur Batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(19), 1900875 CrossRef .
L. Wei, 
            et al., MOF-derived lithiophilic CuO nanorod arrays for stable lithium metal anodes, Nanoscale, 2020, 12(17), 9416–9422 RSC .
D. Fang, 
            et al., Spider-Web-Inspired Nanocomposite-Modified Separator: Structural and Chemical Cooperativity Inhibiting the Shuttle Effect in Li–S Batteries, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(2), 1563–1573 CAS .
D. Sheberla, 
            et al., Conductive MOF electrodes for stable supercapacitors with high areal capacitance, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16(2), 220–224 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xin, 
            et al., In-situ construction of metal organic frameworks derived Co/Zn–S sandwiched graphene film as free-standing electrodes for ultra-high energy density supercapacitors, J. Power Sources, 2020, 451, 227772 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, 
            et al., A Single-Ion Conducting UiO-66 Metal–Organic Framework Electrolyte for All-Solid-State Lithium Batteries, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3(4), 4007–4013 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huo, 
            et al., Anion-immobilized polymer electrolyte achieved by cationic metal-organic framework filler for dendrite-free solid-state batteries, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 18, 59–67 CrossRef .
B. Y. Xia, 
            et al., A metal–organic framework-derived bifunctional oxygen electrocatalyst, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1(1), 15006 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Ahn, 
            et al., Novel Solid-State Solar Cell Based on Hole-Conducting MOF-Sensitizer Demonstrating Power Conversion Efficiency of 2.1%, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(15), 12930–12935 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ameloot, 
            et al., Ionic Conductivity in the Metal–Organic Framework UiO-66 by Dehydration and Insertion of Lithium tert-Butoxide, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19(18), 5533–5536 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gui, 
            et al., Tuning the Photoinduced Electron Transfer in a Zr-MOF: Toward Solid-State Fluorescent Molecular Switch and Turn-On Sensor, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(34), 1802329 CrossRef .
B. M. Wiers, 
            et al., A Solid Lithium Electrolyte via Addition of Lithium Isopropoxide to a Metal–Organic Framework with Open Metal Sites, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(37), 14522–14525 CrossRef CAS .
C.-E. Lin, 
            et al., Carboxylated polyimide separator with excellent lithium ion transport properties for a high-power density lithium-ion battery, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(3), 991–998 RSC .
E. M. Miner and M. Dincă, Metal- and covalent-organic frameworks as solid-state electrolytes for metal-ion batteries, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2019, 377(2149), 20180225 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhao, 
            et al., Metal–organic frameworks for solid-state electrolytes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13(8), 2386–2403 RSC .
Q. Zhao, 
            et al., Designing solid-state electrolytes for safe, energy-dense batteries, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5(3), 229–252 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, X. Yu and S. Wang, Lithium battery chemistries enabled by solid-state electrolytes, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2(4), 16103 CrossRef CAS .
C. Monroe and J. Newman, The Impact of Elastic Deformation on Deposition Kinetics at Lithium/Polymer Interfaces, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152(2), A396 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Stone, 
            et al., Resolution of the Modulus versus Adhesion Dilemma in Solid Polymer Electrolytes for Rechargeable Lithium Metal Batteries, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159(3), A222–A227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shen, 
            et al., Unlocking the Energy Capabilities of Lithium Metal Electrode with Solid-State Electrolytes, Joule, 2018, 2(9), 1674–1689 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Richards, 
            et al., Interface Stability in Solid-State Batteries, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28(1), 266–273 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, X. He and Y. Mo, First principles study on electrochemical and chemical stability of solid electrolyte–electrode interfaces in all-solid-state Li-ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(9), 3253–3266 RSC .
C. F. N. Marchiori, 
            et al., Understanding the Electrochemical Stability Window of Polymer Electrolytes in Solid-State Batteries from Atomic-Scale Modeling: The Role of Li-Ion Salts, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32(17), 7237–7246 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, 
            et al., Designing composite solid-state electrolytes for high performance lithium ion or lithium metal batteries, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11(33), 8686–8707 RSC .
S. Chen, 
            et al., Progress and future prospects of high-voltage and high-safety electrolytes in advanced lithium batteries: from liquid to solid electrolytes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(25), 11631–11663 RSC .
B. Liu, J.-G. Zhang and W. Xu, Advancing Lithium Metal Batteries, Joule, 2018, 2(5), 833–845 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, 
            et al., Utmost limits of various solid electrolytes in all-solid-state lithium batteries: a critical review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 109, 367–385 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lin, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Reviving the lithium metal anode for high-energy batteries, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12(3), 194–206 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Z. Zhao, 
            et al., Liquid phase therapy to solid electrolyte–electrode interface in solid-state Li metal batteries: a review, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 24, 75–84 CrossRef .
N. Yanai, 
            et al., Inclusion and dynamics of a polymer–Li salt complex in coordination nanochannels, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47(6), 1722–1724 RSC .
K. Fujie, 
            et al., Introduction of an Ionic Liquid into the Micropores of a Metal–Organic Framework and Its Anomalous Phase Behavior, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53(42), 11302–11305 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ban, 
            et al., Confinement of Ionic Liquids in Nanocages: Tailoring the Molecular Sieving Properties of ZIF-8 for Membrane-Based CO2 Capture, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54(51), 15483–15487 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, 
            et al., The Optimized Interfacial Compatibility of Metal–Organic Frameworks Enables a High-Performance Quasi-Solid Metal Battery, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5(9), 2919–2926 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dutta and A. Kumar, Probing the ionic transport dynamics in ionic liquid incorporated CuBTC-Metal-Organic Framework based PVdF-HFP nanocomposite membranes, Solid State Sci., 2020, 100, 106115 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li and H. Ardebili, Flexible thin-film battery based on solid-like ionic liquid-polymer electrolyte, J. Power Sources, 2016, 303, 17–21 CrossRef CAS .
M. Forsyth, 
            et al., Innovative Electrolytes Based on Ionic Liquids and Polymers for Next-Generation Solid-State Batteries, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52(3), 686–694 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Singh, 
            et al., Solid polymer electrolytes based on Li+/ionic liquid for lithium secondary batteries, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2017, 21(6), 1713–1723 CrossRef CAS .
D. Golodnitsky, 
            et al., Review—On Order and Disorder in Polymer Electrolytes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162(14), A2551–A2566 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fujie, 
            et al., Lithium Ion Diffusion in a Metal–Organic Framework Mediated by an Ionic Liquid, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27(21), 7355–7361 CrossRef CAS .
T.-S. Wang, 
            et al., High Areal Capacity Dendrite-Free Li Anode Enabled by Metal–Organic Framework-Derived Nanorod Array Modified Carbon Cloth for Solid State Li Metal Batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2001973 CrossRef .
J. Qian, 
            et al., Protecting lithium/sodium metal anode with metal-organic framework based compact and robust shield, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 866–874 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, P. He and L.-Z. Fan, Asymmetric Polymer Electrolyte Constructed by Metal–Organic Framework for Solid-State, Dendrite-Free Lithium Metal Battery, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2007198 CrossRef .
C. Gerbaldi, 
            et al., Innovative High Performing Metal Organic Framework (MOF)-Laden Composite Polymer Electrolytes for All Solid State Lithium Batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2(26), 9948–9954 RSC .
R. Senthil Kumar, 
            et al., Metal organic framework-laden composite polymer electrolytes for efficient and durable all-solid-state-lithium batteries, RSC Adv., 2014, 4(50), 26171–26175 RSC .
C. Yuan, 
            et al., Enhanced electrochemical performance of poly(ethylene oxide) based composite polymer electrolyte by incorporation of nano-sized metal-organic framework, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 653–658 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Miner, S. S. Park and M. Dincă, High Li+ and Mg2+ Conductivity in a Cu-Azolate Metal–Organic Framework, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(10), 4422–4427 CrossRef CAS .
N. Angulakshmi, 
            et al., Composite Polymer Electrolytes Encompassing Metal Organic Frame Works: A New Strategy for All-Solid-State Lithium Batteries, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(42), 24240–24247 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, 
            et al., MOF-derived ionic conductor enhancing polymer electrolytes with superior electrochemical performances for all solid lithium metal batteries, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 598, 117800 CrossRef CAS .
N. Angulakshmi, 
            et al., Microporous Metal–Organic Framework (MOF)-Based Composite Polymer Electrolyte (CPE) Mitigating Lithium Dendrite Formation in All-Solid-State-Lithium Batteries, ACS Omega, 2020, 5(14), 7885–7894 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, 
            et al., Boosting interfacial Li+ transport with a MOF-based ionic conductor for solid-state batteries, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 580–587 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, 
            et al., Facilitating Interfacial Stability Via Bilayer Heterostructure Solid Electrolyte Toward High-energy, Safe and Adaptable Lithium Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(31), 2000709 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, 
            et al., Thiol-Branched Solid Polymer Electrolyte Featuring High Strength, Toughness, and Lithium Ionic Conductivity for Lithium-Metal Batteries, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(37), 2001259 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, 
            et al., From interlayer to lightweight capping layer: Rational design of mesoporous TiO2 threaded with CNTs for advanced Li–S batteries, Carbon, 2019, 143, 523–530 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, 
            et al., Hierarchically Porous C/Fe3C Membranes with Fast Ion-Transporting Channels and Polysulfide-Trapping Networks for High-Areal-Capacity Li–S Batteries, Nano Lett., 2020, 20(1), 701–708 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, 
            et al., Engineering stable electrode-separator interfaces with ultrathin conductive polymer layer for high-energy-density Li-S batteries, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 261–268 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, 
            et al., High-capacity lithium sulfur battery and beyond: a review of metal anode protection layers and perspective of solid-state electrolytes, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54(5), 3671–3693 CrossRef CAS .
X.-B. Cheng, J.-Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Review—Li Metal Anode in Working Lithium-Sulfur Batteries, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 165(1), A6058–A6072 CrossRef .
J. Zheng, 
            et al., Lewis Acid–Base Interactions between Polysulfides and Metal Organic Framework in Lithium Sulfur Batteries, Nano Lett., 2014, 14(5), 2345–2352 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, 
            et al., Metal–Organic Frameworks for High Charge–Discharge Rates in Lithium–Sulfur Batteries, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57(15), 3916–3921 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, 
            et al., A new cathode material synthesized by a thiol-modified metal–organic framework (MOF) covalently connecting sulfur for superior long-cycling stability in lithium–sulfur batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(42), 24515–24523 RSC .
S. Bai, 
            et al., Metal–organic framework-based separator for lithium–sulfur batteries, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1(7), 16094 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-C. Liu, 
            et al., Artificial Protection Film on Lithium Metal Anode toward Long-Cycle-Life Lithium–Oxygen Batteries, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(35), 5241–5247 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Lu, 
            et al., Lithium–oxygen batteries: bridging mechanistic understanding and battery performance, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6(3), 750–768 RSC .
L. Feng, 
            et al., Heterostructured CoO–Co3O4 nanoparticles anchored on nitrogen-doped hollow carbon spheres as cathode catalysts for Li–O2 batteries, Nanoscale, 2019, 11(31), 14769–14776 RSC .
C. Shu, 
            et al., Understanding the Reaction Chemistry during Charging in Aprotic Lithium–Oxygen Batteries: Existing Problems and Solutions, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(15), 1804587 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, 
            et al., A versatile functionalized ionic liquid to boost the solution-mediated performances of lithium-oxygen batteries, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 602 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bi, 
            et al., 3D Hollow α-MnO2 Framework as an Efficient Electrocatalyst for Lithium–Oxygen Batteries, Small, 2019, 15(10), 1804958 CrossRef .
A. Hu, 
            et al., Improved Cyclability of Lithium–Oxygen Batteries by Synergistic Catalytic Effects of Two-Dimensional MoS2 Nanosheets Anchored on Hollow Carbon Spheres, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7(7), 6929–6938 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lee, 
            et al., Sodium Metal Anodes: Emerging Solutions to Dendrite Growth, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119(8), 5416–5460 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, 
            et al., Electrolyte and Interface Engineering for Solid-State Sodium Batteries, Joule, 2018, 2(9), 1747–1770 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, 
            et al., Electrospun carbon nanofibers as anode materials for sodium ion batteries with excellent cycle performance, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2(12), 4117–4121 RSC .
X. Ge, Z. Li and L. Yin, Metal-organic frameworks derived porous core/shell CoP@C polyhedrons anchored on 3D reduced graphene oxide networks as anode for sodium-ion battery, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 117–124 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, 
            et al., Core-shell structured CoP/FeP porous microcubes interconnected by reduced graphene oxide as high performance anodes for sodium ion batteries, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 494–502 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, 
            et al., Flexible and Free-Standing Ti3C2Tx MXene@Zn Paper for Dendrite-Free Aqueous Zinc Metal Batteries and Nonaqueous Lithium Metal Batteries, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(10), 11676–11685 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hong, Z. Ahmad and V. Viswanathan, Design Principles for Dendrite Suppression with Porous Polymer/Aqueous Solution Hybrid Electrolyte for Zn Metal Anodes, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5(8), 2466–2474 CrossRef CAS .
S. Deng, 
            et al., Electrochemically Induced MOF-Derived Amorphous V2O5 for Superior Rate Aqueous Zn-Ion Batteries, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 132(49), 22186–22190 CrossRef .
P. W. Jaschin, 
            et al., A materials perspective on magnesium-ion-based solid-state electrolytes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(6), 2875–2897 RSC .
J. Song, 
            et al., Mapping the Challenges of Magnesium Battery, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7(9), 1736–1749 CrossRef CAS .
J. Muldoon, 
            et al., Electrolyte roadblocks to a magnesium rechargeable battery, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5(3), 5941–5950 RSC .
S. S. Park, Y. Tulchinsky and M. Dincă, Single-Ion Li+, Na+, and Mg2+ Solid Electrolytes Supported by a Mesoporous Anionic Cu–Azolate Metal–Organic Framework, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(38), 13260–13263 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

Tianhua Chen
	Tianhua Chen received her BS degree from the University of Jinan in 2012, and Master's degree from the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2016. She is currently pursuing PhD in the School of Chemical Engineering and Advanced Materials, the University of Adelaide. Her research mainly focuses on exploring the design and applications of solid-state electrolytes for lithium metal batteries.

Shimou Chen
	Prof. Shimou Chen received his BS degree from Zhengzhou University in 2002, and his PhD degree from the Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007. In April 2008, he moved to Nagoya University as a JSPS postdoctoral fellow. From 2011 to 2012, he was a Research Associate at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan. In April 2012, he joined the Institute of Processing and Engineering as a professor funded by the “Hundred Talent Project” of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include lithium-ion battery, lithium metal battery, Zn ion battery, and other advanced energy storage systems.

Yong Chen
	Yong Chen obtained his BS degree from the University of South China in 2012. He is currently working as a graduate student (towards a Master's degree) at the School of Chemical & Environmental Engineering, China University of Mining & Technology. His research interests mainly focus on the design, synthesis and applications of novel composite polymer electrolytes for lithium metal batteries.

Ming Zhao
	Ming Zhao received his MS degree in the College of Chemical Engineering from China University of Petroleum. He is now pursuing a PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Jieshan Qiu in Beijing University of Chemical Engineering. His research focuses on the development of novel electrode materials, structures and electrolytes for rechargeable lithium-sulfur batteries and solid-state lithium batteries.

Dusan Losic
	Prof. Dusan Losic completed his PhD degree in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology at Flinders University, followed by a one-year postdoctoral position at Monash University. He then spent 3 years as a Research Fellow at Flinders University, and was the ARC Future Fellow from 2012 at the University of Adelaide. Since 2017, he has been leading the Graphene Research Hub for Industry Transformation, the first Australian integrated research program for the translation of graphene research. His interdisciplinary research encompassing several disciplines focuses on applying nanoscience and nanotechnology to engineer new nanomaterials, processes and devices to address fundamental, health, environmental, energy and agriculture problems.

Suojiang Zhang
	Prof. Suojiang Zhang obtained his Bachelor's degree from Henan University in 1986, Master's degree from Henan Normal University in 1989, and received his PhD from Zhejiang University in 1994. He is now the Deputy Director at the General of Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He is also the winner of the National Science Foundation for Distinguished Young Scholars (China), Chief Scientist of “973”, and member of the Royal Society of Chemistry. His research interests focus on the fundamental applications of ionic liquids, which include molecular design, structure–properties, large scale preparation, industrial applications, and green integrations.

 	Fig. 1  Mechanism of MOF materials for Li+ transport: (a–g) Molecular/crystal structures used in the MD simulation (reproduced with permission,5 Copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V.). (a) Molecular structure of the LiTFSI salt and DOL/DME solvent. (b) Typical solvation structures of the LiTFSI@DOL/DME electrolyte during the MD operation. (c) Calculated mean square displacement (MSD) of Li+ and TFSI− in the pristine electrolyte as a function of the simulation time. (d) Schematic illustration of the MOF-modified electrolyte, where the LiTFSI@DOL/DME electrolyte is incorporated into the MOF host. (e) Li+-solvation structures of the MOF-modified electrolyte during the MD operation, wherein the MOF host participated in the Li+ solvation process. (f) The MSD of Li+ and TFSI ions in MOF-modified electrolyte as a function of the simulation time. (g) Schematic of the selective Li+ ionic transport imposed by the MOF host. (h) A schematic representation of the synthesis method of ILE@MOF, and schematic illustration of Li+ transport paths (reproduced with permission,9 Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry). (i) Mechanism of SSZ-13 addition interaction with PEO and LiTFSI, improved ionic conductivity and schematic of the CPE-Li metal battery cell (reproduced with permission,21 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). (j) Schematic illustration for the architecture and nanowetted interfacial mechanism of the solid-state battery with a magnification showing crystal structures of the MOF. [EMIM]+and [TFSI]− ions in space-filling model are randomly displayed in the pores of the MOF. The migrating Li+ ions are highlighted by glowing pink spheres. Hydrogen atoms are omitted in MOF structure for clarity (reproduced with permission,2 Copyright 2018 John Wiley & Sons).	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM morphologies of (a) the as-synthesized MOF and (b) the cross-sectional of Li-IL@MOF pellet. The interface between the Li foil and the Li-IL@MOF (a) before and (b) after Li plating/stripping cycles. (c) Voltage profiles for the Li|Li-IL@MOF|Li symmetric cell at current densities of 0.05 and 0.2 mA cm−2. (d) EIS of the Li|Li-IL@MOF|Li symmetric cell before and after the Li-plating/stripping cycles. (e) Schematic illustration for the improved interfacial contact after Li-plating/stripping cycles (reproduced with permission,2 Copyright 2018 John Wiley & Sons). (f) Schematic of the SEI formation at lithium electrolyte interface. XPS spectra of the lithium surface in contact with Mg-TMA: (g) C 1s, (h) F 1s (reproduced with permission,5,10,11 Copyright 2019 Elsevier B.V.).	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic showing the Li-metal electrode (a) with pristine electrolyte (b and c). The inhomogeneous Li-ion flux results in the overgrown Li dendrites. (d and e) Schematic of the Li-metal electrode (d) with MOF-modified electrolyte (e). The homogeneous Li-ion flux facilitating a uniform Li growth on the Li-metal surface enables an efficient Li-metal electrode. The cyan dashed region indicates the ionic transport pathway provided by the MOF host (reproduced with permission,5 Copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V.). Schematic of the Li deposition behavior with the (f) PEO(LiTFSI) electrolyte and (g) anion-immobilized P@CMOF electrolyte (reproduced with permission,28 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of MOF-PVDF GPE with anions immobilized for the lithium-sulfur battery. (b) SEM images of the prepared MOF-PVDF film. (c) CVs of the cell using MOF-PVDF GPE. (d) Li plating/stripping behavior of Li/Li symmetrical cells using various electrolytes at a low current density of 0.5 mA cm−2. (e) The t+ values of Celgard, PVDF, and MOF-PVDF GPE. (f) The cycling ability at a rate of 0.1C with different electrolytes (reproduced with permission,4 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society). (g) Structure illustration of MOF-688. (h) Nyquist plots of the Li|MOF-688|Li cell before and after polarization. (i) Discharge capacity and coulombic efficiency of the Li|MOF-688|LiFePO4 cell. (j) Charge and discharge profile of the Li|MOF-688|LiFePO4 cell for the 1st, 2nd, 100th, and 200th cycle (reproduced with permission,22 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Corresponding Arrhenius plot of the ionic conductivity. (b) Temperature-dependent cyclability of the Li|Li-IL@MOF|LFP SSB with corresponding charge/discharge curves (reproduced with permission,2 Copyright 2018 John Wiley & Sons). (c) Digital photograph of the CPE and (d) SEM image of the CPE (reproduced with permission,11 Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry). (e) Cycle performance of the Li/HSPE-1–8/LFP. (f) Image of the cell of Li/HSPE-1–8/LFP powering LEDs of different colors at room temperature (reproduced with permission,38 Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Structure of Mg2(dobdc) and the scheme for its modification to form the solid electrolyte (reproduced with permission,1 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society). Different approaches of modifying the Uio-66 MOF: (d) TEM images of: (1) Uio-66 and (2) UIO/Li-IL, and the corresponding EELS element mappings of Zr, Li and S (reproduced with permission,13 Copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons). (e) Synthetic route of the hybrid covalently linked MOF PEGDA-based all-SSEs (reproduced with permission,38 Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry). (f) Synthetic route and the schematic UiO-66-LiSS structure (reproduced with permission,44 Copyright 2019 Elsevier B.V.). (g) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of Co-MOF (reproduced with permission,21,45 Copyright 2019 Elsevier B.V.). (h) Representation of the grafting process, involving insertion of a lithium alkoxide in dehydrated UiO-66 (reproduced with permission,48 Copyright 2013 John Wiley & Sons).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM morphology of the contact area of the Li metal and ILE@MOF. (b) Time evolution of the impedance response of a symmetrical Li/ILE@MOF/Li cell. (c) LSV curve of a Li/ILE@MOF/stainless steel (SS) cell. (d) Voltage profiles of the Li/ILE@MOF/Li cell cycling. (e) SEM morphology of the Li anode in the Li/ILE@MOF/Li cell. (f) Voltage profile of the Li/ILE@MOF/Li cell cycling (reproduced with permission,9 Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 8  Surface morphologies of the cycled Li-metal electrode at different current densities: (a and b) top-view scanning EM images of the Li-metal electrode with pristine electrolyte at the areal capacity of 10 mA h cm−2 after 120 h. (b) The overgrown Li dendrites (a) can be clearly observed in the enlarged view. (c–h): Top-view scanning EM images of the Li-metal electrode with MOF-modified electrolyte (c and d) at the areal capacity of 2.5 mA h cm−2 after 1000 h, (e and f) 5 mA h cm−2 after 800 h, and (g and h) 10 mA h cm−2 after 800 h. (i) Schematic illustration of the dendritic Li growth (reproduced with permission,5 Copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V.). (j) Schematic illustrations of the Li deposition process in conventional liquid electrolytes (upper panel) and the Li-IL@MCM-41 SSE (lower panel) (reproduced with permission,35 Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of MOF-PVDF GPE with anions immobilized for the lithium–sulfur battery. (b) The cycling ability at a rate of 0.1C of the cells with various electrolytes (reproduced with permission,4 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society). (c) Schematic structures of UIO (Universitetet i Oslo) material, UIOS (UIO grafted with SO3H), and UIOSLi (UIO grafted with SO3Li). The results of the Li symmetric cells suggested the stable solid/solid interfacial contact.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The schematic illustration of the MMM based on CAU-1-NH2@PDA (PDA = polydopamine) and PMMA polymer for repelling H2O and CO2 molecules. The framework of CAU-1-NH2 viewed along the c axis (f) and symbol: Al, pink; O, red; C, gray; H, blue. (b and c) Top and side view of the MMM based on CAU-1-NH2@PDA-PMMA. The inset image in d is the 25 times magnified MOF particle indicated in the circle6 (reproduced with permission, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry). Synthesis and characterization of the single-ion electrolyte: (d) schematic illustration of the structure of Cu-MOF-74. (e) Schematic illustration of the Li diffusion path in the pore of the MOF (O atoms: red, Cl atoms: yellow; Cu atoms: blue; Li atoms: grey). (f) Quantum chemistry investigation of Li migration in the single-ion electrolyte (reproduced with permission,23 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) A photo of the PNM membrane. (b) Ionic conductivities of PNM with the EO:Na ratios of 10:1, 15:1, 20:1, and 25:1. (c) Ionic conductivities of PNM with 0.00, 1.62, 3.24, and 4.86 wt% of MIL-53(Al). (d) Nyquist profiles of PNM-based ASSBs. (e) Cycling performance of the PNM- and PN-based ASSBs at 60 °C and (e) 0.1C and (f) 0.5C (reproduced with permission,3 Copyright 2020 Springer Nature).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of the origin of high compressibility for a PAM hydrogel electrolyte. The inset is the molecular formula of PAM. (b) SEM image of a freeze-dried polyacrylamide (PAM) hydrogel. (c) Compression–release process of the as-assembled compressible zinc–air battery. The inset is a schematic diagram of the construction process for the solid-state zinc–air battery (reproduced with permission,8 copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). (d) Scheme for the post-synthetic modification chemistry, inset: size of the SSE pellet for EIS test. (e) Zn plating/stripping performance of the Zn|WZM|Zn symmetric cell under a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2 at room temperature. SEM images of the Zn foils after plating/stripping cycles of (f) the Zn|ZnSO4|Zn cell and (g) Zn|WZM|Zn cell. (h) Proposed mechanism for the different deposition behaviors of the ZnSO4 aqueous electrolyte (left column), WZM SSE (middle column) and HZM electrolyte (right column) (reproduced with permission,12 Copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V.).	 

 	Fig. 13  AC impedance data (1 MHz to 1 Hz) at 298 K. Center: Bode plot illustrating the bulk impedance as a plateau for Mg(OPhCF3)2 < 1 (light red), Mg(TFSI)2 < 1 (light blue), Mg(OPhCF3)2·Mg(TFSI)2 < 1 (light purple), Mg(OPhCF3)2 < 2 (dark red), Mg(TFSI)2 < 1 (dark blue), and Mg(OPhCF3)2·Mg(TFSI)2 < 1 (dark purple). Left: Nyquist plots for the host framework 1, and right: Nyquist plots for the host framework 2; colors match those in the Bode plot. The leftmost point in the Nyquist plots corresponds to an AC frequency of 1 MHz (reproduced with permission,7 Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
