Surface and subsurface morphology of operating nanowire : fullerene solar cells revealed by photoconductive-AFM   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01944A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01944A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3646-3651Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSurface and subsurface morphology of operating nanowire:fullerene solar cells revealed by photoconductive-AFM†

        
          
            Wing C. 
            Tsoi
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Patrick G. 
            Nicholson
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jong Soo 
            Kim
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Debdulal 
            Roy
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tim L. 
            Burnett
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Craig E. 
            Murphy
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jenny 
            Nelson
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Donal D. C. 
            Bradley
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Ji-Seon 
            Kim
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Fernando A. 
            Castro
          
        
      *a
aNational Physical Laboratory (NPL), Teddington, Middlesex TW11 0LW, United Kingdom. E-mail: fernando.castro@npl.co.uk
bDepartment of Physics & Centre for Plastic Electronics, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom. E-mail: ji-seon.kim@imperial.ac.uk
Received 
      13th June 2011
    , Accepted 11th July 2011First published on 29th July 2011AbstractThe 3D nanometer scale phase separated morphology of organic solar cells crucially affects performance. We demonstrate that photoconductive atomic force microscopy can provide both surface and subsurface information in operating organic solar cells providing direct correlation between 3D film morphology, local nanoscale optoelectronic properties and device characteristics. P3HT nanowire:PCBM bulk-heterojunction working devices were investigated. The macroscopic solar cell performance improvements upon thermal annealing, such as an increase in the short circuit current, the open circuit voltage and the fill factor, are consistent with observed enrichment of PCBM at the air interface and increased nanowire crystallinity. PC-AFM is able to directly resolve the associated changes in charge transport and collection at the local scale, with an estimated depth resolution of at least 20 nm inside the film.

Broader context

Polymer/fullerene thin films exhibiting phase separation on the nanometre scale have attracted widespread interest as the active layer in organic solar cells. It is now clear that the arrangement of donor and acceptor phases in the film strongly affects device behaviour and needs to be controlled in order to allow high efficient solar cells to be developed. The 3D film morphology depends on material, processing and post processing parameters in a complex way. Therefore characterisation should ideally be made in real operating devices to avoid change in morphology due to differences in processing conditions. Despite intensive development of novel measurement methods over the last decades, there is no technique today that allows morphological and electrical characterisation with nanoscale resolution at the same time. The work presented here represents a significant step in this direction. We demonstrate that photoconductive AFM can provide subsurface information at least 20 nm inside the 80 nm thick active layer, providing direct correlation between nanoscale film morphology and device characteristics.

1. Introduction
Power conversion efficiency of organic solar cells (OPVs) has recently overcome the 8% barrier.1 A major driving force in the development of the field has been the growing understanding of the complex but crucial effect of the 3D nanometre scale morphology on device efficiency.2–4 The morphological requirements for an optimal device include the formation of a large surface area between the electron donor and electron acceptor components, with domain sizes in the few nanometers range to maximize charge generation, whilst having percolated paths in the donor and the acceptor phases to ensure loss-free charge collection at the anode and cathode electrodes, respectively.2,3 However, controlling film morphology is challenging and, unfortunately, there are no techniques so far that can characterise the 3D nanoscale domain structure and optoelectronic properties at the same time in operating device conditions.2
In the last decade the morphology of thin films has been investigated by several methods,2 including electron tomography,5 cross-sectional electron microscopy,6secondary ion mass spectroscopy,7 near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure,8X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy,9small angle neutron scattering,10 and grazing incidence X-ray difraction.11 Though these techniques are ideal for revealing structural and crystallographic information, they do not provide optoelectronic information. In parallel, scanning probe microscopies have been used to probe both structural and electrical information at the nanoscale via surface 2D mapping.2,12 In this work we show that photoconductive atomic force microscopy (PC-AFM) can provide both surface and subsurface information in operating organic solar cells providing direct correlation between 3D film morphology, local nanoscale optoelectronic properties and device characteristics.
PC-AFM is a promising recent variant of AFM, where a conductive probe in contact-mode is used to simultaneously measure the topography and the photocurrent generated by a sample under illumination. Being reported for the first time in 1999,13 it started to receive significant attention from 2007 following publications by Ginger's group where they demonstrated 2D mapping of nanoscale photocurrent generation and local electrical characteristics in different polymer:fullerene systems, including poly(3-butylthiophene) nanowire:phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) blends.14–16 The group of T.-Q. Nguyen reported PC-AFM studies of small molecule:fullerene devices17 as well as adding a tunable light source to their setup allowing the determination of local incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency.18 Moreover, recently NIST has published PC-AFM results on variations in photoresponse in poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT):PCBM films19 where they concluded that the observed inhomogeneities are due to local variations at the surface, not reflecting the 3D arrangement throughout the film. In fact, in common with most scanning probe microscopies, non-destructive approaches have restricted this method to the investigation of local surface variations.
In contrast, we demonstrate here that PC-AFM indeed can provide subsurface morphological and electrical information and clearly show the distribution of donor and acceptor phases within a blend, allowing a direct correlation of local nanoscale properties with macroscopic device characteristics. As a sample of interest we used bulk-heterojunction solar cells with PCBM and P3HT nanowires as electron acceptor and electron donor, respectively. There is a growing interest in the use of semiconducting polymer nanowires for a number of applications,20 including photovoltaics. These wires are partially crystalline which improves charge transport21 and, in principle, by adjusting the width and density of the wires it should be possible to maximise charge generation. At the same time, the large wire length (∼hundreds nm) facilitates percolation of charges through the device reducing series resistance.20
2. Materials and methods

        P3HT
        nanowire:PCBM solutions have been prepared by using a marginal solvent (dichloromethane (DCM)) procedure as described elsewhere.22P3HT and PCBM at 1:1 weight ratio were blended in DCM to a concentration of 3mg mL−1 by stirring above 50 °C. Sequentially, the hot plate was turned off and the solution was left to cool down to room temperature. Films were spin coated onto poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) coated ITO substrates to form around 80 nm thick films. Finally, metal top electrodes (Ca(20nm)/Al(100nm)) were evaporated sequentially through a shadow mask to form 6 devices on each film. Annealed cells were heated on a hot plate at 150 °C for 20 min, before cathode deposition. All samples were prepared and characterized under inert atmosphere.
Current density vs. voltage (JV) curves were measured using a computer controlled Keithley source meter. Power conversion efficiency was calculated as the ratio of maximum generated electrical power (given by the product: open circuit voltage (Voc) × short circuit current (Jsc) × fill factor (FF)) to the incident light power (AM1.5G spectrum at 1000 W m−2). The fill factor is given by the ratio of the maximum power point (maximum product of voltage and current) to the product of Voc and Jsc.

AFM, SKPM and EFM measurements were performed on a Bruker Dimension Icon (double pass in air, 30 nm lift) using 40 N m−1Ir/Pt coated tips (Budget Sensors). PC-AFM (including topography measurements) was performed on an Asylum Research MFP-3D mounted on top of an inverted microscope, using 0.2 N m−1Cr/Au coated tips (Budget Sensors) under inert nitrogen atmosphere. A 532 nm laser beam was used through a 50x microscope objective to form a 100 micrometre diameter spot on the active layer (power density of ∼6600 W m−2). This wavelength was chosen to match the absorbance peak of P3HT.
3. Results and discussion

Fig. 1 shows the macroscopic current density vs. voltage (JV) characteristics under 1000 W m−2 AM1.5G white light for a typical P3HT nanowire:PCBM solar cell before (blue open circles) and after (solid line) thermal annealing. Annealing induces an increase in device efficiency from 2.0% to 2.8%. However, it is not possible, from the JV characteristics alone, to determine the mechanisms responsible for the increase in performance, since all parameters change at the same time. Short circuit current (Jsc) increases from 7.5 mA cm−2 to 8.4 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage (VOC) increases from 0.53 V to 0.60 V and fill factor (FF) changes from 50% to 55%. Thermal annealing is widely used for post processing organic solar cells23 but its effect on device parameters is highly material dependent.2 Often, the main effect in bulk heterojunction devices is a change in film morphology,24 although changes in material crystallinity and interface mixing (or demixing) have also been reported.25,26
 Fig. 1  Current density vs. voltage characteristics of P3HT nanowire:PCBM solar cells before (blue open circles) and after thermal annealing at 150 °C for 20 min (black line). Jsc is the short circuit current (current at zero bias) and Voc is the open circuit voltage (voltage at zero current). 
To shed some light on the mechanisms at play behind the increase in performance, we employed several scanning probe microscopies to investigate the morphology and electrical properties of operating devices. Fig. 2 shows standard AFM, electrostatic force microscopy (EFM) and scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM) taken at the exact same location, and PC-AFM images taken on a similar area of the annealed sample where the blend is not covered by the Al top electrode. Standard AFM (Fig. 2a) shows that the film is relatively flat (∼2 nm RMS roughness) and, in common with the EFM results (Fig. 2c), some nanowire features are just discernable on the surface of the film. The SKPM image (Fig. 2b) is almost featureless and the small variation in surface potential (26 mV peak-to-trough) seems to suggest just one material present on the surface. These results indicate that the nanowires are embedded within the film but don't give us any information about how they are arranged.
 Fig. 2  a) AFM topography, b) SKPM, c) EFM, and d) PC-AFM photocurrent measurements of a P3HT nanowire:PCBM solar cell after thermal annealing; e) magnification of cross point between two nanowires highlighting inhomogeneous current generation within wires. Represented in color contrast, the scales range from zero to, respectively, a) 15 nm; b) 26 mV; c) 0.31° and d) from −8 pA to 28 pA. 
The PC-AFM photocurrent image (Fig. 2d) is far clearer, showing a remarkable level of quantitative detail about the distribution of P3HT nanowires in the sample. Taking into account tip convolution effects, the width (ca. 20 nm full width at half maximum) and length (over a micrometer) of the nanowire features revealed by the PC-AFM compare remarkably well with previously reported TEM images.27 Note that PC-AFM was measured under short-circuit conditions (no applied bias) and the image represents local photocurrent under 532 nm excitation only. From the difference in current levels (z scale ranges from −8 pA, dark region, to +28 pA, bright regions) and the shape of the features it is plausible to suggest that the negative (dark) areas correspond to PCBM-rich zones and the positive, high current (bright) regions represent the P3HT nanowires. Note that the work functions of the AFM gold-coated tip (top electrode) and PEDOT:PSS (bottom electrode) are similar (measured difference of 100 mV, see Electronic Supplementary Information†) and therefore there is no significant electric field present to drive charges to either electrode. This means that the PC-AFM current is formed mainly by charge diffusion and the AFM tip is able to collect both positive and negative charges. In a first approximation, a change in photocurrent polarity then indicates a change in material type on the surface if the probed area is formed of areas rich in electrons and areas rich in holes. In our samples these areas are formed by, PCBM and P3HT, respectively. However, we expect this ability to discriminate between materials with different electrical properties to be general and therefore applicable also to, for instance, quantum dots and inorganic semiconductor nanowires.
The PC-AFM images show that the photocurrent from the nanowires is not uniform. Though the overall value is within what would be expected from the macroscale JV characteristics (tens of pA), there seems to be significant variation along single wires (Fig. 2e). This could suggest different partial PCBM coverage of the wires, local variation in molecular orientation or different levels of P3HT crystallisation. Note that the junction shown in Fig. 2e) is composed of two ∼20 nm thick P3HT nanowires, while the top surface of the film is essentially flat (RMS ∼ 2 nm); this morphology implies that the nanowires are, for the most part, embedded in the spin coated film. The fact that PC-AFM is able to display this junction, both as positive (scale colour yellow-red, Fig. 2e) and slightly negative (scale colour blue-green) photocurrent, means that subsurface information is collected at least 20 nm deep inside the film by this method.
Given the distinct advantage offered by PC-AFM we focused our attention on this technique. Fig. 3 shows PC-AFM images of annealed (3a, 3c) and non-annealed (3b, 3d) devices at an applied forward bias of 0.5 V. A bias was applied here to allow better visualisation by means of higher contrast. As expected, the overall current level in the annealed image is greater although the difference (over 50%) does not directly correlate with that seen in the macroscopic short-circuit current (ca. 11%, Fig. 1) suggesting additional contributing factors (see below).
 Fig. 3  Current map at an applied bias of +0.5V for annealed (a) and not annealed (b) P3HT nanowire:PCBM blends. c) and d) are exactly the same images as, respectively, a) and b) but the scale is such that negative current is represented in blue. 
The most striking differences between the annealed (3a) and the non-annealed samples (3b) are the apparent width of the nanowires (narrower for the annealed sample) and the apparent density of nanowires present in the image (higher for the annealed sample). Note that these trends were consistently observed when measuring different areas of the film, on different days and using different tips. A decrease in nanowire width with thermal annealing could be a signature of increased nanowire crystallinity27 due to closer molecular packing, which would induce better charge transport leading to higher Jsc and better FF.
To further investigate the information contained in the images we changed the current scale of Fig. 3a and 3b to highlight only the positive current (Fig. 3c and 3d). Note that Fig. 3c and 3d are exactly the same as Fig. 3a and 3b, except that all negative current (electrons collected by the tip) is shown in blue. Such a change in scale allows visualising only the positive current regions (holes collected by the tip), which should be a signature of nanowires directly exposed on the surface. Apparently, some nanowires are completely exposed to the air interface (providing positive current), some are buried under the PCBM-rich matrix and others are just partially covered by PCBM-rich areas (at the subsurface of the blend) as highlighted (white circles) in Fig. 3a(3b) and 3c(3d). If the wire was completely exposed at the top surface (or completely buried) we would expect the same current polarity everywhere, as discussed above. The fact that we can visualise nanowires that are not exposed at the surface (Fig. 3a and 3b) again indicates that PC-AFM is providing subsurface information.
The apparent increase in nanowire density (Fig. 3a and 3b) can be a result of the higher current generation and better transport in the annealed device, which increases the PC-AFM image contrast allowing us to distinguish nanowire features deeper into the film. However, we cannot exclude the possibility of more nanowires being formed during annealing (presumably from P3HT crystallites within the PCBM phase) although the observed density difference is probably too large to be entirely due to this.
Interestingly, by decoupling the surface information in the PC-AFM data from that of the subsurface (Fig. 3), we observe a lower nanowire density (48%) on the film surface after annealing when compared to the non-annealed device (50%) (Fig. 3c and 3d, respectively). A similar increase in PCBM coverage was recently observed by other authors in a nanowire:PCBM blend system.28 This is consistent with an increase of Voc for the macroscopic device data (Fig. 1), since the presence of P3HT bridges between top and bottom electrode is known to result in photovoltage loss.29 It is also supported by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy of these devices that indicate PCBM enrichment at the surface with annealing. A detailed device study including XPS data will be published elsewhere.

Fig. 4 provides further evidence that PC-AFM is able to probe and differentiate subsurface information. Fig. 4a and 4b show, respectively, a high-resolution photocurrent map and the corresponding topography. The solid line indicates where the cross section shown in Fig. 4c was measured. The topography is again quite smooth (∼2 nm RMS), consistent with that observed in Fig. 2, and the depressed regions correspond to locations where the nanowire features are evident. This anticorrelation was also observed for non-annealed devices. As expected, we observe more positive current (up to 30 pA) where the P3HT wires are. However, despite exhibiting similar topography, the difference in the current image of the two nanowires included in the cross section is striking. The one on the left shows positive current and has a similar shape to that observed in the topography whereas the one on the right shows only a decrease in negative current and the shape in the current image has blurred slightly with respect to the topography. We believe this is due to different depths of the nanowires relative to the film surface, as shown schematically in Fig. 4d.
 Fig. 4  a) Photocurrent and b) topography (z-scale ranges from 0 to 10 nm) maps of the annealed P3HT nanowire:PCBM blend. c) Cross section line of the current (red dashed line) and height (black line) maps as shown, respectively, in a) and b). d) Schematic drawing of the proposed film morphology at the cross section view under illumination. The grey area represents the electron-rich PCBM phase and black circles represent the hole-rich P3HT nanowires partially exposed (left) and buried (right). Arrows represent position of local current measurements during scanning. 
While the wire on the left is partially exposed on the top surface, we expect the one on the right to be covered with a thin PCBM rich layer, similar to the highlighted features observed in Fig. 3. The decrease in negative current could be explained by an increased charge recombination (electrons from PCBM with holes from P3HT) due to the presence of a thin PCBM layer covering the nanowire (Fig. 4d).
4. Conclusions
In conclusion, we demonstrated that PC-AFM reveals both thin film morphological and opto-electronic information in operating organic solar cells, providing direct correlation between surface and subsurface structure, local optoelectronic properties and device characteristics. PC-AFM has shown that thermal annealing of P3HT nanowire:PCBM blends induces much improved local charge generation and transport, possibly due to increased nanowire crystallinity improving short-circuit current and fill factor. The morphology of the devices is complex: the nanowires exist at different depth planes and contribute differently to the overall device photocurrent, with variations present even within a single nanowire. Our results indicate an increase of PCBM at the top film surface with annealing, which agrees with the observed increase in Voc of the solar cell. The apparent reduction in nanowire width after thermal annealing could be an indication of increased crystallisation, which would explain the higher current level from the nanowires in the annealed blends.
A main advantage of PC-AFM when characterising organic solar cells and phase separated films is related to the fact that photocurrent needs to travel vertically through the film to be collected at the surface with the AFM tip, meaning that both surface and subsurface information is contained in the recorded current signal. Previous work by other groups have tried to gain insight into vertical material concentration gradients by analysing the intensity dependence of the photocurrent30 and tried to correlate changes in conductive-AFM dark current with surface composition.28,31 Here, we demonstrated that surface and subsurface signals can be decoupled which allows investigation of the internal thin film morphology. Moreover, PC-AFM only probes material that is active in the photovoltaic process (i.e. an isolated donor or acceptor region buried deep in the sample will not contribute to the signal) making this technique particularly attractive to study organic solar cells. It is expected that the depth information that can be discerned by PC-AFM will have a material dependent range and a detailed investigation will be part of further studies. Our results so far indicate that we can probe at least ∼20 nm below the surface of the 80 nm thick film. The ability to discriminate between electron-rich and hole-rich nanoscale phases in operating device structures and to directly correlate that to optoelectronic properties makes PC-AFM a valuable tool for the intelligent design of thin film devices based on nanoscale structures.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Andy Wain (NPL), Joanna Lee (NPL) and Roland Hany (EMPA, Switzerland) for discussions. The work was supported by the EPSRC-NPL Post-Doctoral Research Partnership (EP/G062056/1) and the SUPERGEN Excitonic Solar Cell Consortium Grant (EP/G031088/1).
References
See 2010 press releases from Heliatek http://www.heliatek.com (8.3%), Konarka http://www.konarka.com (8.3%) and Solarmer http://www.solarmer.com (8.1%).
P. G. Nicholson and F. A. Castro, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 492001 CrossRef .
B. Kippelen and J. L. Brédas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 251 CAS .
D. H. Wang, J. K. Kim, O. O. Park and J. H. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1434 CAS .
S. D. Oosterhout, M. M. Wienk, S. S. van Bavel, R. Thiedmann, L. J. A. Koster, J. Gilot, J. Loos, V. Schmidt and R. A. J. Janssen, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 818 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Moon, J. K. Lee, S. Cho, J. Byun and A. J. Heeger, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 230 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Bjorstrom, S. Nilsson, A. Bernasik, A. Budkowski, M. Andersson, K. O. Magnusson and E. Moons, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 3906 CrossRef .
B. Xue, B. Vaughan, C.-H. Poh, K. B. Burke, L. Thomsen, A. Stapleton, X. Zhou, G. W. Bryant, W. Belcher and P. C. Dastoor, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15797 CAS .
W. C. Tsoi, S. J. Spencer, L. Yang, A. M. Ballantyne, P. G. Nicholson, A. Turnbull, A. G. Shard, C. E. Murphy, D. D. C. Bradley, J. Nelson and J. S. Kim, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 2944 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, A. Nakahara, D. G. Wei, D. Nordlund and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 561 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Lin, Y. Y. Lin, S. S. Li, C. C. Yu, C. L. Huang, S. H. Lee, C. H. Du, J. J. Lee, H. L. Chen and C. W. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1434 Search PubMed .
O. Douheret, A. Swinnen, S. Bertho, I. Haeldermans, J. D'Haen, M. D'Olieslaeger, D. Vanderzande and J. V. Manca, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2007, 15, 713 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sakaguchi, F. Iwata, A. Hirai, A. Sasaki and T. Nagamura, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 38, 3908 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Coffey, O. G. Reid, D. B. Rodovsky, G. P. Bartholomew and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 738 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. C. Pingree, O. G. Reid and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2946 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xin, O. G. Reid, G. Ren, F. S. Kim, D. S. Ginger and S. A. Jenekhe, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1861 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Dang, A. B. Tamayo, J. Seo, C. V. Hoven, B. Walker and T. Q. Nguyen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3314 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Dang, A. Mikhailovsky and T. Q. Nguyen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 113303 CrossRef .
B. H. Hamadani, S. Jung, P. M. Haney, L. J. Richter and N. B. Zhitenev, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1611 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Kim, G. Q. Ren and S. A. Jenekhe, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 682 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qiu, W. H. Lee, X. Wang, J. S. Kim, J. A. Lim, D. Kwak, S. Lee and K. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1349 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Kim, J. H. Lee, J. H. Park, C. Shim, M. Sim and K. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 480 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, S. Cook and J. R. Durant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 1371 Search PubMed .
M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Ferenczi, T. Agostinelli, P. G. Etchegoin, Y. Kim, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 158 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michaels and R. A. J. Janseen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. de Castro, J. Heier, F. Nuesch and R. Hany, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2010, 16, 1690 CrossRef .
J. H. Kim, J. H. Park, J. H. Lee, J. S. Kim, M. Sim, C. Shim and K. Cho, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7398 RSC .
A. H. Rice, R. Giridharagopal, S. X. Zheng, F. S. Ohuchi, D. S. Ginger and C. K. Luscombe, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3132 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, N. C. Greenham and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1640 CrossRef CAS .
O. G. Reid, H. Xin, S. A. Jenekhe and D. S. Ginger, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 084320 CrossRef .
M. Dante, J. Peet and T. Q. Nguyen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7241 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01944aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context

Polymer/fullerene thin films exhibiting phase separation on the nanometre scale have attracted widespread interest as the active layer in organic solar cells. It is now clear that the arrangement of donor and acceptor phases in the film strongly affects device behaviour and needs to be controlled in order to allow high efficient solar cells to be developed. The 3D film morphology depends on material, processing and post processing parameters in a complex way. Therefore characterisation should ideally be made in real operating devices to avoid change in morphology due to differences in processing conditions. Despite intensive development of novel measurement methods over the last decades, there is no technique today that allows morphological and electrical characterisation with nanoscale resolution at the same time. The work presented here represents a significant step in this direction. We demonstrate that photoconductive AFM can provide subsurface information at least 20 nm inside the 80 nm thick active layer, providing direct correlation between nanoscale film morphology and device characteristics.


 	Fig. 1  Current density vs. voltage characteristics of P3HT nanowire:PCBM solar cells before (blue open circles) and after thermal annealing at 150 °C for 20 min (black line). Jsc is the short circuit current (current at zero bias) and Voc is the open circuit voltage (voltage at zero current).	 

 	Fig. 2  a) AFM topography, b) SKPM, c) EFM, and d) PC-AFM photocurrent measurements of a P3HT nanowire:PCBM solar cell after thermal annealing; e) magnification of cross point between two nanowires highlighting inhomogeneous current generation within wires. Represented in color contrast, the scales range from zero to, respectively, a) 15 nm; b) 26 mV; c) 0.31° and d) from −8 pA to 28 pA.	 

 	Fig. 3  Current map at an applied bias of +0.5V for annealed (a) and not annealed (b) P3HT nanowire:PCBM blends. c) and d) are exactly the same images as, respectively, a) and b) but the scale is such that negative current is represented in blue.	 

 	Fig. 4  a) Photocurrent and b) topography (z-scale ranges from 0 to 10 nm) maps of the annealed P3HT nanowire:PCBM blend. c) Cross section line of the current (red dashed line) and height (black line) maps as shown, respectively, in a) and b). d) Schematic drawing of the proposed film morphology at the cross section view under illumination. The grey area represents the electron-rich PCBM phase and black circles represent the hole-rich P3HT nanowires partially exposed (left) and buried (right). Arrows represent position of local current measurements during scanning.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01944a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
