2D phosphorene as a water splitting photocatalyst: fundamentals to applications  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5EE03732H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5EE03732H
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 709-7282D phosphorene as a water splitting photocatalyst: fundamentals to applications

        
          
            Mohammad Ziaur 
            Rahman
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chi Wai 
            Kwong
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kenneth 
            Davey
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Shi Zhang 
            Qiao
          
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Chemical Engineering, The University of Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia. E-mail: s.qiao@adelaide.edu.au
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, P. R. China
Received 
      11th December 2015
    , Accepted 18th January 2016First published on 18th January 2016AbstractHydrogen from direct splitting of water molecules using photons is reckoned to be a sustainable and renewable energy solution for the post fossil-fuel era. Efficient photocatalysts, including metal-free photocatalysts, are key determinants of cost-effective hydrogen generation at a large-scale. The search for new materials that are metal-free is therefore ongoing. Recently, 2D phosphorene, a phosphorus analogue of graphene, has been added as a new semiconductor to the family of monolayer-flatland materials. In this review, we focus on analysing the fundamental electronic, optical and chemical properties of 2D phosphorene and assess its suitability as a metal-free water splitting photocatalyst. We also critically analyse its stability against claims from environmental antagonists and attempt to predict its future as a photocatalyst. This review provides timely information for researchers, scientists and professionals devoted to materials research for photocatalysis.
Mohammad Ziaur Rahman
Mohammad Ziaur Rahman is pursuing a PhD under the supervision of Prof. Shi-Zhang Qiao, School of Chemical Engineering, The University of Adelaide, Australia. He was an Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering (EEE), Ahsanullah University of Science and Technology (AUST), Bangladesh. His research focuses on the design, fabrication and characterization of functional nano-materials with tailored electro-optical properties. He is currently working on the synthesis of metal-free photocatalysts for water-splitting hydrogen production through harvesting solar photons. He obtained his BSc in EEE from AUST and MSc in EEE from Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET).
Chi Wai Kwong
Dr Philip Kwong received his MPhil and PhD from the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. He is a Senior Lecturer in the School of Chemical Engineering, The University of Adelaide, Australia. Dr Kwong specializes in greenhouse gas emission control and thermal–chemical conversion of biomass, but works also in environmental catalysis and sustainable waste-management. His research focuses on developing low cost technologies to assist various industries with the transition from fossil to sustainable economy. He has published more than 40 articles, peer reviewed conferences and technical reports.
Kenneth Davey
Dr Kenneth Davey FIChemE CEng received his MEngSc and PhD from Melbourne University. He then worked as a Postdoctoral Researcher and Senior Research Scientist with CSIRO and subsequently at The University of Adelaide where he is a Senior Lecturer. Dr Davey has published more than 120 refereed articles and patents. He has received numerous awards for his work. He is involved in interdisciplinary research in (bio)chemical process engineering and in the development of new quantitative risk assessments for improved efficiencies, reliability and safety.
Shi Zhang Qiao
Shi-Zhang Qiao received his PhD in chemical engineering from Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Currently, he is a chair professor at School of Chemical Engineering of The University of Adelaide, and an adjunct professor at Tianjin University. His research expertise is in nanostructured materials for new energy technologies. He has coauthored more than 240 papers in refereed journals with over 14700 citations (H-index 64). In recognition of his achievements in research, he was honored with prestigious ARC Discovery Outstanding Researcher Award (2013), Emerging Researcher Award (2013, ENFL Division of the American Chemical Society), ARC ARF and APD Fellowships.

Broader context
Phosphorene as a new metal-free photocatalyst has shown exceptional chemical, electronic, and optical properties with extended photon absorption window up to the near infrared region of the solar spectrum. In this review, computational results from molecular-dynamics simulations and available experimental data are analysed critically to envisage the future viability of phosphorene as a water splitting photocatalyst.

1. Introduction
Abundant energy is the causal key factor for developments in the modern world. Fossil-fuels provide only a finite energy resource. An additional drawback is energy extraction from these fuels comes with the potential for environmental pollution and added pressures on climate change, especially with an increasing global population. This situation presents significant pressures to discover renewable energy sources as sustainable alternatives to current use of limited fossil-fuels.1
Given the natural abundance of water and sunlight, artificial photosynthesis however might be used to sustainably produce hydrogen to be used as an alternative clean-fuel and become a part-solution to increasing global energy demands.1,2 It has been proposed that photocatalytic splitting of water could provide a practical and reliable route to clean hydrogen fuel generation.3,4 The ‘Holy Grail’ for realizing this is a stable and efficient photocatalyst. A photocatalyst is a material that can absorb photons from sunlight and create electron–hole pairs to initiate redox reactions.5,6
Following from the first experimental demonstration of water splitting on a titanium oxide electrode in 1972, a number of photocatalyst materials have been developed.7–9 These materials synthesized as photocatalysts in the intervening 43 years can be conveniently categorised into three generational types. The first consists of metals with ultraviolet-only absorption; the second of metals with visible light absorption, and the third of two-dimensional (2D) metals/non-metals, with extended visible light absorption. A significant disadvantage with the first generation was their restricted photon absorption window to UV light only, which resulted in poor solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiencies. The STH efficiency was improved for the second generation of photocatalysts because of their capacity to absorb photons of visible light. However, the efficiency was actually poor – owing to inefficient charge transfer kinetics, high recombination rate of photogenerated carriers, and, instability in the acidic/alkaline medium.10–14
The first and second generations of photocatalysts were dominated mainly by oxides, sulfides and nitride of titanium, cadmium, tungsten and transition-metal-dichalcogenides (TMD). A serious drawback is that metal-based photocatalysts are humanly toxic, and corrosive. These can work only in the presence of co-catalysts of precious metals (Pt, Au, Ag etc.).15
In the search for alternatives to metal-based systems, metal-free elementals and compound photocatalysts have recently been developed. Red-P, alpha-sulfur and boron are celebrated examples reported in the literature.16–18 However, these elemental photocatalysts exhibit low photocatalytic activity.
A key breakthrough in photocatalysts was the development of metal-free graphitic carbon nitride. This is non-toxic and highly stable in both acidic and alkaline solution, and is independent of noble metal cocatalysts for photocatalytic performance.19 However, its water splitting efficiency is poor (<10%). As a result, despite some 40 years of intensive research in photocatalytic water splitting, a sustainable and robust metal-free photocatalyst is yet to be demonstrated. A change in research emphasis was therefore to look at materials that were only a few atomic layers thick but which were highly functional when compared with bulkier counterparts.
Extended visible light driven photocatalysts, just a few layers or single layer 2D materials, became the focus of research. 2D materials have unusual structural and electro-optical properties.
In 2004, demonstration of ‘sticky-tape peeling’ of atomically thin sheets of carbon atoms from a mass of graphite set off a revolution in 2D materials research. This thinnest manufactured material ever is known as ‘graphene’. It is characterized by extraordinary chemical, mechanical and electrical properties.20 For example, graphene is 100 times harder than steel, superior to copper in terms of electrical and thermal conductivity, and is flexible and transparent. Projected future applications include its use as computer chips and flexible displays for batteries and fuel cells.21 However this extraordinary material lacks a natural band gap (a range of energy states in which electrons cannot exist freely). The result is that it can only be used as a photocatalyst in combination with other materials.22 The potential of graphene however has encouraged material scientists to search for other 2D sheet-like materials but with properties that graphene lacks. Out of this search, hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), silicene, germanene, stanene and a series of 2D TMD have been developed, Fig. 1.23–28
 Fig. 1  Examples of 2D materials with their calculated band gaps. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright © 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
In 2014, a monolayer of black phosphorous (BP) was synthesized using the same sticky-tape technique as for graphene; the material was titled ‘phosphorene’.29,30 Phosphorene has favourable properties of niche 2D materials. It exhibits (i) quantum confinement in the direction perpendicular to the 2D plane, which results in noble electronic and optical properties; (ii) natural surface passivation without any dangling bond (a suppressed carrier recombination is expected); (iii) no lattice mismatch issues for constructing a vertical heterostructure with other 2D materials; (iv) large lateral size with ultra-high specific surface area and high ratios of exposed surface atoms; and (v) strong interaction with light.24,31,32 These properties are all considered highly desirable in photocatalysis applications.
Further, phosphorene has a tunable band gap and anisotropic properties, which could make it useful in a variety of applications, ranging from infrared optoelectronics to high mobility quantum transport. Interestingly, phosphorene has already found application in transistors, optoelectronics, batteries and gas storage.33 In line with these applications, it was anticipated that, like red phosphorous, phosphorene might also add to current metal-free photocatalysts.16 However, successful application of phosphorene as a photocatalyst is yet to be convincingly demonstrated.
In this timely review, we critically analyse the structural, electronic, optical and chemical properties of phosphorene from the perspective of application to water splitting dynamics. We also discuss its stability as influenced by ambient conditions such as water, air, light and temperature, and attempt throughout to predict its future use as a photocatalyst.
The manuscript is organised as follows. The evolution of 2D phosphorene, its fundamentals of synthesis, atomic structure, and electronic and optical properties that are essential to a photocatalyst are discussed, and the chemical interaction of phosphorene with adsorbed atoms and molecules is highlighted. The central photocatalytic water splitting mechanisms, the role of phosphorene as a photocatalyst and its stability under environmental ambient conditions are then elucidated, and recent phosphorene heterostructures are analysed to assess their viability as active photocatalysts. The review concludes with a perspective on future research directions.
2. Evolution and synthesis
2D structures with exotic electronic properties and a high specific surface area are being produced from a class of layered materials, characterized by strong in-plane bonds and a weak van der Waals force between the layers. Because 2D materials have unusual structural, physical and chemical properties compared with bulk materials, the fabrication of a few-layer, or a mono-layer, 2D structure from layered bulk materials (for example, graphene and MoS2) is popular in condensed-matter physics and materials sciences. In line with the current investigation of layered solids cleaved to 2D crystals, bulk black phosphorous has recently been exfoliated to produce a 2D layered structure. The name ‘phosphorene’ was coined as a generic term to introduce the 2D monolayer or a few-layer counterpart of bulk black phosphorous (it is thought this title was inspired by the suffix ‘ene’ in graphene).29
Black phosphorous is the most stable allotrope of phosphorous and has a layered structure which is characterized by in-plane strong bonds along with weak van der Waals interlayer interaction.29,34 This layered structure allows the production of atomically thin layers of phosphorous by exfoliation from a bulk crystal.
The simple, feasible and reliable fabrication of 2D nanomaterials is categorized chiefly into two approaches: ‘top-down’ (such as mechanical cleavage, liquid exfoliation, ion-intercalation and exfoliation, selective etching and exfoliation) and ‘bottom-up’ (such as chemical vapor deposition and wet-chemical synthesis). The reported fabrication of phosphorene using 2D nanomaterial production methods so far is based on micromechanical cleavage using sticky-tape and solvent exfoliation methods.29,35,36
The traditional sticky-tape method used for graphene production was used to produce an atomically thin phosphorene by micromechanical cleaving of layered bulk BP.20,29 Monolayer phosphorene has also been fabricated by combing mechanical exfoliation with plasma thinning.37 This sticky-tape micromechanical exfoliation can produce phosphorene of high crystal quality, but the density of the yield is low. A drawback is that it leaves traces of sticky adhesive on the surface. This problem of adhesive residue has been overcome by employing a sticky-tape with an intermediate viscoelastic surface. In this modified mechanical exfoliation technique, the sticky-tape containing the exfoliated sample presses slightly against a poly-dimethylsiloxane (PDMS)-based substrate from where it peels rapidly. This process increases the yields substantially and reduces the contamination of phosphorene flakes.35 However, mechanically exfoliated phosphorene flakes irreversibly degrade to oxidized phosphorous compounds when exposed to ambient conditions.38,39
Another widely used synthesis for 2D materials is liquid exfoliation of bulk materials in a suitable solvent with sonication. Recently, successful fabrication of electronic-grade 2D BP nanosheets via direct liquid exfoliation in organic solvents has been reported.36 Unlike graphene or transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD), which are sufficiently inert in aqueous surfactant solutions, BP shows chemical instability due to the presence of oxidizing agents in many common dispersants in organic solvents. To avoid chemical degradation, BP must be exfoliated using anhydrous and oxygen-free solvents such as acetone, chloroform, hexane, ethanol, isopropyl alcohol (IPA), dimethylformamide (DMF) and N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP). Liquid exfoliation with sonication results in low cost and high yield of 2D phosphorene. It appears suitable as a process for development in a large-scale. However, it becomes practical only (i) when there is a good matching of the surface tension between the layer crystal and the solvent, and (ii) if the solvent can stabilize the nanosheet to circumvent restacking and aggregation.40
3. Atomic structure and lattice symmetry
BP has an orthorhombic, simple cubic and rhombohedral crystalline structure with five valence electrons in its outer shell.41 Each P atom becomes saturated by making a covalent bond – two of which exist on the same plane, whilst another is on a neighbouring plan via 3p orbitals leaving a lone-electron pair. This hybridization leads to a quadrangular pyramid structure that resembles a puckered honeycomb structure, Fig. 2, resulting in a highly asymmetric band structure and unique in-plane anisotropic properties.34,42 Each puckered layer can be viewed as a bilayer of two parallel atomic planes where P atoms on each plane constitute a zigzag and armchair chain running along y and x-axes, respectively. Among the three crystalline structures: semiconducting, puckered and orthorhombic-BP is of most importance.43,44 Phosphorene shares the same in-plane translation symmetry with bulk BP where the space group is base-centred orthorhombic. It is given the international number and symbol 64:Cmca.45
 Fig. 2  (a) The puckered structure of a few layer BP sheet. (b) Top view of monolayer BP. The x and z axes are along zigzag and armchair directions, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
In layered bulk BP, the single layer is formed by covalently bonded sp3 P atoms. Each individual layer consists of two atomic layers and in-plane/out of-plane P–P bonds. The in-plane bond is short (0.2224 nm) and connects the nearest P atoms. The out-plane bonds are long (0.2244 nm) and connect P atoms between the top and bottom of a single layer.47,48 The P–P distance between the layers in BP is significantly greater than the P–P covalent bond length, implying that nonbinding interaction makes the layers pack together.49 This nonbinding interaction is the typical van der Waals type interaction between the layers. Both the bulk and monolayer BP exhibit structural similarity. Changes of geometric properties as a function of layer number are summarized in Table 1. From the table it can be seen that key structural parameters such as, the lattice constant, interlayer spacing, bond length and bond angle of both bulk BP and phosphorene are almost the same.
Table 1 Structural information of bulk BP and phosphorene46




 
Bulk BP
Monolayer BP
 





a (Å)
4.47
4.58
Lattice constant



b (Å)
3.34
3.32


Δc (Å)
3.2
3.2
Int. layer spacing



R
1 (Å)
2.28
2.28
Bond length



R
2 (Å)
2.25
2.24



θ
1 (°)
102.42
103.51
Bond angle



θ
2 (°)
96.16
96




3.1 Characterization
Although black phosphorous has been known for some 100 years, the discovery of phosphorene is just over two-years old. Therefore, as might be expected, reported research relates to theoretical investigations of phosphorene rather than experimental research. Theoretical unfolding of phosphorene characteristics have mainly been accomplished by several ab initio simulation packages.50–52
There are also published reports in which the structural, chemical, electronic and optical properties of phosphorene have been evaluated by using state-of-the art characterization techniques, including atomic force microscopy, Raman spectroscopy, time resolved photoluminescence, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and selected area electron diffraction (SAED).53,54 Combining and comparing simulations with experimental results has proven effective for increased understanding of phosphorene.
For example, the layer thickness and crystal orientation of phosphorene can be measured by combining atomic force microscopy with Raman spectroscopy. As per spectroscopy data, the nominal monolayer thickness of BP varies between 0.53 and 0.7 nm.34 In such an ultrathin phosphorene sheet, a high quantum confinement effect can be anticipated. In Raman spectra, there are three characteristic peaks observed near 470, 440 and 365 cm−1 under experimental conditions when a phosphorene sheet is excited with a linearly polarized green laser incident along the z-direction, perpendicular to the x–y plane as illustrated in Fig. 3.34 These peaks are attributed to Ag2, B2g and Ag1 vibration modes, respectively.55
 Fig. 3  (a) Structural view and crystal orientation of phosphorene. (b) Optical micrograph of exfoliated monolayer BP. (c) Polarization resolved Raman spectra of phosphorene. (d) Intensity of the Ag2 modes as a function of excitation laser polarization angle in the x–y plane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright © 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
Polarization resolved photoluminescence (PL) spectra (Fig. 4) have revealed that phosphorene is highly anisotropic in nature and strongly bound to excitons. A possible reason for tightly bound excitons is quantum confinement and a reduced screening which increases the Coulomb interaction between carriers.56 The emitted light from phosphorene is linearly polarized along the effective mass direction, and centres at around 1.3 eV.34 Although monolayer BP is a 2D material, its excitonic properties closely resemble those of quasi-1D materials like carbon nano-tubes (CNTs).57 Similar to bulk BP, phosphorene has shown almost perfect linear dichroism due to its quantum confinement perpendicular to the 2D-plane.34,58 The quasiparticle and exciton binding energy of phosphorene are 2.2 eV and 0.9 eV, respectively. The absorption spectra of phosphorene therefore increase abruptly around the quasiparticle band edge and then decays. This is shown in Fig. 4.34
 Fig. 4  (a) PL intensity map. (b) Selected PL spectra. (c) Top: Ground-state exciton energy and quasiparticle band edge energy. Bottom: Calculated optical absorption of phosphorene with/without e–h interactions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright © 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
A number of theoretical studies of phosphorene have been carried out using molecular-dynamics simulations to develop an understanding of its carrier transport properties (details are discussed in Section 4). For example, density functional theory (DFT) calculations showed that effective mass anisotropy exists between the armchair and zigzag directions of phosphorene. The effective masses of charge carriers in the armchair configuration are at about one-order of magnitude smaller than those in the zigzag direction. This appears to be the reason why the armchair direction is more favourable for carrier transport.59
3.2 Phosphorene nanostructures
A number of phosphorene nanostructures, such as nanoribbons, nanotubes, nanosheets, and quantum dots have been reported.60–63
Two kinds of phosphorene nanoribbons (PNRs), namely armchair phosphorene nanoribbons (APNRs) and zigzag phosphorene nanoribbons (ZPNRs) can be produced by cutting monolayer phosphorene in an armchair or a zigzag direction, respectively. This is illustrated in Fig. 5.60 The edges and width govern the fundamental electronic, thermal and mechanical properties of PNRs. It has been shown that ‘pristine’ phosphorene is a direct band gap semiconductor, while PNRs are indirect.46,64 DFT computations reveal that APNRs are semiconducting whilst ZPNRs are metallic. The transformation of the metallic state of ZPNRs into a semiconductor or widening the band gap of APNRs whilst retaining their semiconducting behaviour can be achieved by hydrogen passivation of the P atoms at the edges of ZPNRs and APNRs, respectively. On the other hand, the band gap of APNRs decreases monotonically with increasing ribbon width due to quantum confinement.60,61 In addition, the band gap of both APNRs and ZPNRs can be tuned by a transverse electric field, irrespective of their sensitivity to perpendicular electric fields.62
 Fig. 5  The ball-and-stick model of armchair phosphorene nanoribbon: (a) is top-view, and (b) is side-view. The zigzag counterpart is plotted in (c) and (d), respectively. The unit cell is outlined by the dashed lines and the arrow indicates the translation direction of the nanoribbons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright © 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
Computational results for formation energy have shown that the 1D-APNRs are energetically less favourable than 2D phosphorene, whilst ZPNRs are energetically more favourable than APNRs. However, APNRs and ZPNRs have smaller formation energies than graphene nanoribbons.65 The width of a phosphorene nano-ribbon influences the magnitude of formation energy. For example, formation energy of both APNRs and ZPNRs decrease monotonically with increasing width of nanoribbons eventually reaching zero, indicating that a wider nanoribbon has relatively higher stability as highlighted in Fig. 6. Other studies based on Boltzmann theory and relaxation time approximation have shown that the semiconducting PNR exhibits large values of the Seebeck coefficient, suggesting appealing useful thermoelectric application.60
 Fig. 6  (a) Formation energy as a function of ribbon width and (b) band gap energy as a function of layer number. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright © 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
A 1D single-walled phosphorene nanotube (SW-PNT) was reported as being constructed by directly rolling a monolayer phosphorene with a ridge structure.61 Like PNRs, a SW-PNT is categorized as an armchair PNT (A-PNT) and a zigzag PNT (Z-PNT), depending on the rolling of the monolayer phosphorene in an armchair or a zigzag direction as shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Schematic plots of SW-PNTs which can be viewed as rolling up a phosphorene sheet following the roll-up vector R = n1a1 + n2a2. Top and side views of a structure of (b) armchair and (c) zigzag SW-PNTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Both A-PNTs and Z-PNTs manifest unique characteristics when subjected to strain, stress and electric fields. In PNTs, the unit-cell length plays a crucial role in developing both the strain energy and cohesive energy difference between PNTs and a perfect monolayer of phosphorene. The unit-cell length of A-PNTs is independent of the diameter of the tube, whilst this gradually increases with diameter for Z-PNTs. Moreover, both the unit-cell length and strain energy per atom of A-PNTs is smaller than those of Z-PNTs for a given diameter, indicating that A-PNTs are energetically more favourable.61
Both A-PNTs and Z-PNTs have shown characteristics of direct band gap semiconductors with their corresponding valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) located at Γ and I points, respectively, as presented in Fig. 8. The VBM of A-PNTs exhibits a bonding character between the inner and outer P atoms, but in the case of Z-PNTs this is due mainly to the bonding states between the inner P atoms. A diffusive state of outer or inner P–P bonds has been observed in A-PNT's CBM, in contrast to only isolated Pz states of outer atoms for Z-PNT's CBM. Nonetheless, their band gap increases with the diameter of the respective tube.61
 Fig. 8  Computed band structure (PBE) and partial charge density distribution corresponding to the VBM and CBM of (a) armchair and (b) zigzag SW-PNTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
The band gap can also be modified by applying strain or a transverse electric field in the axial direction. Irrespective of strain types, both the A-PNT and Z-PNT might experience widening in their respective band gap under a critical tensile/compressive strain. When subjected to strains, the bandgap widening is due to the up-shifting of the CBM or down-shifting of the VBM from their neutral positions. Alternatively, when A-PNTs and Z-PNTs are subjected to a transverse electric field the band gap changes inversely with the applied electric field i.e. the greater the electric field, the less the band gap. In addition, a semiconductor-to-metal transition might occur for a critical value of the applied electric field.61
Synthesis of nanomaterials via solution with tunable electro-optical properties is considered a potential building basis for photocatalytic applications. Nanosheets and quantum dot nanoparticles are notable solution processed nanomaterials. Because BP is an AB stacked layered structure, monolayer to multilayer phosphorene nanosheet formation is possible.46
Recently, a scalable method of producing 2D nanosheets through the liquid exfoliation of bulk BP crystals in organic solution was reported.36,53 Interestingly, although the sticky-tape exfoliated BP nanosheet is unstable in the co-presence of air, water and light, it has been shown that the synthesis of an ultrathin nanosheet of BP is possible. This can be synthesized even in distilled water, if the water is bubbled with Ar to eliminate the dissolved oxygen molecules to avoid oxidation.
The exfoliated nanosheets can remain stable for more than two weeks in water, and in the organic solvents, stability is maintained over a significant time. For example, BP nanosheets dispersed in N-methylpyrrolidinone (NMP) can remain stable for one month.53 This discovery represents a breakthrough in material handling as it allows for black phosphorous to be used in photocatalytic water splitting. The structural and morphological attributes of 2D phosphorene nanosheets are depicted in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  (a) AFM height image of solvent-exfoliated BP nanosheets, (b) false-coloured SEM image of solvent-exfoliated BP nanosheets and (c) low-resolution TEM image of solvent-exfoliated BP nanosheets. (d) Schematic showing the atomic structure of BP. High-resolution TEM images of solvent-exfoliated BP nanosheets along direction (e) A and (f) B. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.36 
It should be noted that the band gap decreases as the number of exfoliated phosphorene layers increases.29 According to theoretical computations the band gap varies between 0.84 and 0.16 eV for single layer-to-four layer phosphorene nanosheets.61 The phosphorene nanosheet, regardless of the layer number, is predominantly a direct band gap semiconductor. When nanosheets are subjected to a vertical electric field, a layer-dependent band gap reduction has been noticed. Customarily, the band gap reduction becomes more pronounced with increasing layer numbers due to the Stark effect.66
In addition to nanosheets, phosphorene quantum dots are particularly important due to their size-dependent electronic structure and, importantly, controllable physical properties. The fabrication of black phosphorous quantum dots (BPQDs) from bulk BP crystals using solution-based liquid exfoliation has been reported. The method combines probe sonication and bath sonication.63,67
The morphological features of BPQDs are illustrated in Fig. 10. The fabricated BPQDs have a lateral size of 4.9 ± 1.6 nm and a thickness of 1.9 ± 0.9 nm (ca. 4 ± 2 layers) and show good stability in NMP. The UV-vis optical absorption spectra have shown that the absorption of BPQDs spans from UV to near infrared. Corresponding Raman spectra show a red shift when compared to bulk BP (see Fig. 11), which is very similar to the mode change phenomena of boron nitride QDs and MoS2 QDs.68–71 The BPQDs dispersed in NMP is stable, as it showed no noticeable aggregation for more than a month.63
 Fig. 10  (a) TEM image of BPQDs. (b) Enlarged TEM image of BPQDs. (c and d) HRTEM images of BPQDs with different lattice fringes. Scale bar = 5 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 11  (a) UV/Vis absorption spectrum of BPQDs in NMP. Inset: Photos of the BPQD suspension (left) and the Tyndall effect of the BPQD suspension (right). (b) Raman spectra of BPQDs and bulk crystalline BP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
4. Electron–hole transport
4.1 Band gap and band structure
The experimental band gap of bulk BP is 0.35 eV, whilst for monolayer phosphorene it is at around 2.0 eV.1,34,46,51 Theoretical tight-binding, pseudopotential and ab initio methods have been used to reveal the band structure of both bulk BP and phosphorene.49,50,52,58,72 The band structure resembles the p-type direct semiconductor in the visible or infrared region, and the theoretical band gap varies between 0.08 and 0.3 eV for bulk BP and 0.70 and 2.29 eV for phosphorene (Fig. 12 and Table 2).29,35,46,49,50,72–75 The reduction in the band gap is highly layer dependent. Moving from a monolayer to a few layers reduces the gap correlated by power law Na, where N is the layer number and 0 < a < 2.29,46,73
 Fig. 12  The evolution of band gap calculated by different methods and optical absorption peaks according to the stacking layer number of few-layer phosphorene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright © 2014, American Physical Society. 
Table 2 Calculated theoretical band gap of phosphorene




Method

E
g (eV)




PBE
0.9–0.92


HSE06@PBE
1–1.54


optB88
0.76


G0W0@PBE
2.08


GW0@PBE
2.29


GGA
0.7


HSE06@optB88
1.49–1.51


G0W0
2


BSE
1.2–1.4


GW
1.6


Absorb. peak
1.45




Importantly, a significant disparity exists between theoretical and experimental values because the number of layers in the experimental samples is not able to be clearly determined.35,50
The shape of the band structure of bulk BP and phosphorene are similar. This is because they have the same translational structural symmetry and the same bond interactions in both bulk and single layers (see Fig. 13). Differences exist only near the Fermi level and close to the Γ points where the energy gap has a wide opening. This difference may originate from van der Waals interactions that alter the charge distribution on each P atom along the direction vertical to the layer plane.49 The change in charge distribution results in a permanent dipole near each P atom. Unlike other orbitals, the Py orbital shows a long tail in the energy range near the Fermi level, which is one reason for the dipole creation. The creation of a dipole is evidence that the van der Waals interaction in BP is mainly a Keesom force.49
 Fig. 13  Band structures for n-layer BP calculated within the GW approach for n = 1–4. Zero energy corresponds to the centre of the band gap. Blue circles show the band splitting near the gap. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright © 2014, American Physical Society. 
It has been confirmed from the calculation of density of states (DOS) that the van der Waals interaction plays a crucial role in decreasing the energy gap with increasing layer numbers in BP and its 2D derivatives (Fig. 14). The addition of multilayers results in the band splitting over the entire Brillouin zones, which leads to a decrease in the band gap. At the Γ points, CB and VB are composed of a mixture of s and p orbitals with pz making the greatest contribution whilst py makes zero. The contribution of orbital composition in the formation of CB and VB of BP has clearly shown a contrast with that of graphite (graphene) whose relevant bands are solely composed of pz states.20,32,50,76,77
 Fig. 14  Calculation of total DOS and single layer DOS of BP by the smearing tetrahedron method with Blöchl corrections. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright © 2010, American Institute of Physics. 
4.2 Effective mass, mobility and conductivity
Mobility is a key parameter on which electron–hole transport depends. Mobility is a function of carrier mass, and is due to the reciprocal relationship between mass and mobility.78 It is anticipated that phosphorene would exhibit a high carrier mobility compared with bulk BP.
There have been few theoretical studies reporting the mobility of phosphorene. These reports have involved phonon-scattering and Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) methods to study mobility.46,79 These theoretical studies have predicted a highly asymmetric and anisotropic mobility between the electron and the hole. The effective masses of monolayer BP are 0.17 mo for electrons and 0.15 mo for holes in the x-direction, and 1.12 mo for electrons and 6.35 mo for holes in the y-direction.
Regarding directional anisotropy, the electron mobility in the x-direction is 14 times the value along y (1100 to 1140 cm2 V−1 s−1vs. 80 cm2 V−1 s−1), whereas the hole mobility in the x-direction is 16–38 times smaller than that along y (600 to 700 cm2 V−1 s−1vs. 10000 to 26000 cm2 V−1 s−1).46 It is evident that mobility is hole-dominated in phosphorene. Despite the holes in fact being dense in the y-direction, the exceptionally high hole mobility in this direction is claimed to be a consequence of the exceedingly small (one-order smaller than other 2D material, e.g. graphene, MoS2, h-BN, AlGaAs) deformation potential.80–83 In monolayer BP, the interlayer and stacking-induced intra-layer VB wave function overlapping is absent. As a result, structural deformations along y due to longitudinal phonon oscillations have almost no impact on this wave function and cause little change in its energy. The result is predominantly small deformational potential.46
4.3 Bandgap engineering
The tuning of the band gap (band gap engineering) is critical for tailored electronic and optical properties. In phosphorene, band gap tailoring has been achieved by applying strain and doping with heteroatoms, with strain induced band gap modulation emerging as a popular technique.51,52,59,64,72,73,84–89
In phosphorene-like nanostructure fabrications, strain is somewhat inevitable and will manifest in the form of ridges and buckling.59 Strain is introduced as a result of lattice mismatch, functional wrapping, material doping, and/or, direct mechanical application. The impact of strain on phosphorene has mainly been studied in theoretical simulations. These studies are based on ‘first principles’ calculations and have shown that, due to its strong anisotropic atomic structure, the electronic conductivity and optical response of phosphorene is sensitive to the strain magnitude and orientation (tensile/compressive). Density functional theory and tight binding model computations carried out by Rodin et al.52 have shown that deformation in the direction normal to the crystal plan is crucial in changing the size of the energy band gap, and could induce a semiconductor–metal transition. Liu et al.29 have computed that a compressive strain of 3% could trigger direct-to-indirect band gap transition.29,30,75,76 Peng et al.59 have shown that with an 11.3% tensile strain or 10.2% compressive strain, the gap can be tuned from indirect-to-direct. With appropriate biaxial or uniaxial strain, Fei et al.86 have reported that the preferred conduction direction in phosphorene can be rotated by 90°.
Moreover, by applying biaxial or uniaxial strain, free-carrier mobility can be controlled in phosphorene. For example, although effective masses of carriers in the armchair direction are an order of magnitude smaller than that in the zigzag axis, tensile strain has been shown to significantly enhance electron transport along the zigzag direction of phosphorene nanoribbons.85,86 Han et al.64 have reported three types of passivated nanoribbons (armchair, zigzag and diagonal) whose band gap is tuned between 1.4 and 2.6, eV by applying suitable strain. Further, the effective masses start changing with tensile/compressive strain, achieving a strong quantum-size effect. However, carrier-effective masses in diagonal nanoribbons are insensitive to quantum size. This is assumed to be beneficial for effective electron–hole separation in photocatalysis application.
Li et al.72 have studied the doping dependent band gap modification within the frame work of density functional theory (DFT). Their studies have shown that with sulfur, silicon or aluminium doping, the band gap of phosphorene can be increased by 0.24 eV relative to an undoped one. Jing et al.90 investigated the doping effect of the three organic molecules, tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ), tetracyanoethylene (TCNE) and tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) on the electronic and optical properties of phosphorene via dispersion-corrected DFT computations. These three molecules were found responsible for an indirect-to-direct gap transformation in the phosphorene with a change in the band gap between 0.16 and 0.42, eV. This change in the band gap was attributed to the strong non-covalent interaction and significant charge transfer between the phosphorene and the molecules.
5. Optical absorption
The optical absorption properties of phosphorene have been studied by using the spatial time resolved polarization technique and real time dependent DFT method.46,85,91,92 Phosphorene demonstrates anisotropic electrical and optical properties which make it promising for photoresponse devices. Phosphorene was found to exhibit a strong absorption spectrum, mainly in the ultraviolet region.92 However, the light absorption can be significantly enhanced by increasing the number of layers. Further, the spectral band can be extended eventually to the entire, near-infrared region.84,91,92 Using a time dependent DFT method, Lin et al.92 calculated that the optical band gap for mono, bi and tri-layered phosphorene was 1.04, 0.6 and 0.31, eV, respectively, in the low energy zone.84,85,92,93 Deniz et al.85 tuned strain-induced optical absorption energy. Their studies confirmed that with 4% compressive strain, the phosphorene absorption window is shifted to the infrared region (energies between 1.1 and 1.7, eV) whilst with 4% tensile strain, phosphorene became active over almost the entire visible range.
The variation of optical absorption however depends significantly on the prototype orientation of phosphorene. For example, the armchair phosphorene nanoribbons have been shown to exhibit optically active direct band gaps, whereas the zigzag nanoribbons have been found to be optically inactive around the band gap.93 Jiaqi et al.91 calculated the absorption coefficient in both armchair and zigzag directions. They found that the absorption coefficient in the zigzag direction is about 10 times smaller than that along the armchair direction. Their studies further revealed that the diffusion coefficient of the photo-carrier in the armchair direction is about 16 times greater than that in the zigzag direction. The greater diffusion coefficient manifests as a reduced recombination rate in the armchair direction. Therefore armchair nanoribbons might be used as a photocatalyst with enhanced solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency. Because phosphorene has the modulation ability of an excitation wavelength from the ultraviolet to near-infrared region, it is expected it will find application in photocatalysis, solar cells and other photo-energy-conversion processes in the future.
6. Chemical reactivity with adatoms
An adatom, as defined in surface chemistry, is a contracted form of adsorbed atoms. In principle, the adatom is any atom that lies on a crystal surface that can significantly change the structure, and magnetic and electronic properties of the host crystal. Adatoms include a wide range of materials such as metals, transition metals, semiconductors, noble metals and non-metals.94
The ways in which adatoms change the fundamental properties of phosphorene have been researched in an effort to find possible applications in noble electronic, optoelectronic and nano-mechanical devices. For example, the surface reactivity and its oxidation behaviour can be interpreted from the absorption of hydrogen and oxygen on phosphorene. There is the possibility of producing high electron sheet densities as demonstrated by the alkali atom adsorption on phosphorene. In addition, Li and Na atom interaction offer possibilities for devising Li-ion and Na-ion batteries. Additionally, atomic decoration of transition metals, metals and semiconductors on phosphorene could provide rich opportunities in the design of new nano materials for catalysis, gas storage and spintronics.94–96
The absorption sites of adatoms have been classified as H, B, B1 and T sites (H standing for hexagon, B for bottom and T for top). This is shown schematically in Fig. 15. A categorical analysis of the interaction of different adatoms with phosphorene is expounded below.
 Fig. 15  Typical adatom adsorption sites on phosphorene: (a) H, (b) B, (c) B1, and (d) T. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
6.1 Alkaline–phosphorene interaction
Alkali adatoms such as Li, Na and K tend to adsorb on preferential H-sites of phosphorene. Interaction between phosphorene and alkali adatoms is characterized by a high adsorption energy, small molecular distortion and high affinity for electron transfer. A result is that this might make phosphorene a preferred material over graphene for battery-like applications.94
Amongst Li, Na and K, Li exhibits the greatest adsorption energy (and Na exhibits the lowest). Because the adsorption energy of Li, Na and K exceeds that of the bulk cohesive energy, it follows that the formation of 2D layers on phosphorene is possible without ‘clustering’.94 (Clustering of adatoms is a common problem in grapheme; this makes graphene unsuitable as an anode material for batteries.74,97,98) Kulish et al.96 have shown that without any special defect/doping, Li and Na can readily bind to phosphorene with a 0.01 nm maximum vertical displacement of P atoms, revealing its potential as an anode material for Li- or Na-ion batteries. Alkaline adatom intercalated phosphorous might facilitate the production of monolayer phosphorene nanosheets with a large specific surface. These are highly advantageous for photo-redox reaction in photocatalysis.
6.2 Transition metal–phosphorene interaction
H-sites are the preferred sites for transition metal (TM) adsorption in phosphorene. Inclusion of 3d transition metals (Sc, Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni and Cu) in a phosphorene monolayer could introduce magnetic properties with diverse adsorption energies and form a volcano-curve with the maximum value at the Cr atom.94,99
The adsorption energies of TM adatoms on phosphorene range between −1.66 (Cr) to −4.09 eV (Ti); these are greater than on graphene. This suggests a stronger interaction between TM metals and phosphorene than with graphene.94 However, adsorption of all transition metals will not result in magnetic properties in phosphorene. For example, Sc, Cu and Co-doped systems do not show any magnetic state.99 Moreover, it has found that the magnetic moments of TM adatoms are reduced by 1 to 2, μB from their free atom states when they are adsorbed on phosphorene. This reduction is the result of the transfer of spin-polarized electrons from adatoms to non-spin-polarized phosphorene, and promotion of the 4s electrons of TMs to 3d orbitals.94,100
Bader charge analysis has shown that an electron charge is transferred from the d orbital of a TM atom to the p orbital of a phosphorous atom, except for Co- and Ni-doped phosphorous atoms where no meaningful charge transfer is observed. The different charge densities are shown graphically in Fig. 16. The difference in charge density shown in the figure confirms the nature of the charge transfer and bonding between TMs and phosphorene.
 Fig. 16  Different charge density plots induced by substitutional-doped TM atom. The gold colour (i.e. 0.004 e Å−3) in the plot indicates an increase in the electron density after bonding, and the cyan colour (i.e. 0.004 e Å−3) indicates an electron density loss. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.99 
It has been reported that Sc, Ti, V, Mn and Fe doped systems exhibit covalent interaction with the nearest P atoms whilst Cr, Co, Ni and Cu exhibit a mixture of covalent and ionic interactions.99 In addition, when TMs are incorporated into phosphorene they alter the conducting behaviour of phosphorene to a level similar to that between a semiconductor and a half-metal. For example, Sc-, Cu- and Co-doped systems retain the semiconducting behaviour of phosphorene, but V- and Fe-doped systems turn phosphorene into a half-metallic state. It is concluded that TM-doped phosphorene characterised by an adjustable conductivity and magnetic properties appears as a promising new material for a plasmonic photocatalyst for hydrogen production from water splitting and spintronic applications.99,101
6.3 Noble metal–phosphorene interaction
Hybrid nanostructures that are functionalized by noble metals are of overriding interest to researchers in catalysis and nanoelectronic devices.48,102,103 The selection of a noble metal such as Pt, Pd, Ag and Au is determined by the purpose for which it is going to be used, and by the metal electronic structure.
Because phosphorene is a potential multipurpose material, a noble metal–phosphorene inter-connection would be desirable. It has been reported that Pd and Pt not only form a strong bond with phosphorene but are also highly reactive in phosphorene; whilst the reactivity of Ag and Au are (relatively) weak.94 The strength of bonding and reactivity of a particular noble metal adatom depends on the status of its d-band filling (fully/partially), as well as d-band crossing of the Fermi level.104 Interestingly, the d bands of Ag and Au are fully filled and do not cross the Fermi level. As a result, Ag and Au exhibit weak reactivity with phosphorene. In case of Pt and Pd, the d bands are partially filled and cross the Fermi level as well.
When noble metal adatoms are adsorbed on phosphorene, they will, like any other metal doping, turn the intrinsic phosphorene into a p-type or an n-type semiconductor. For example, Pt- and Au-doped phosphorene is a p-type semiconductor.94 An isotopic p–n junction between p-doped and n-doped phosphorene therefore can have an electric field as an internal driving force to separate electron–hole pairs. Like carbon nitride homojunction, an isotopic homojunction of phosphorene might also have a significant impact on applications to water splitting for hydrogen production.105
When metal adatoms are adsorbed on the surface of another material, two things need to be carefully considered. First, the adsorption energy, and, second, the distortion diameter caused by the adsorbed adatoms. Greater adsorption energy and lower distortion are highly beneficial for stability. From this perspective, the adsorption energy of metal adatoms is about two times greater than that of the metal on graphene, and the distortion diameter is one-order of magnitude lower than CNTs and silicene.106,107 In light of this, noble metal-doped phosphorene is expected to be superior to other 2D materials for many applications, particularly in catalysis.
6.4 Semiconductor–phosphorene interaction
The interaction of elemental semiconducting adatoms with phosphorene has not been extensively studied. A recent study94 carried out on Si and Ge showed that these two elemental semiconductors prefer to adsorb at the B-site of phosphorene. Si and Ge form a covalent bond with phosphorene and their p orbitals subsequently are hybridized.
6.5 Non-metal–phosphorene interaction
The deliberate introduction of non-metals (O, H, B, C, N and F) can modify the electronic properties of phosphorene. Oxygen preferentially adsorbs at the T-site of phosphorene with an optimized O–P distance of 1.5 Å.94 No matter whether it is monoatomic oxygen (O) or molecular oxygen (O2), the interaction of oxygen with phosphorene is always very strong. However, the binding energy of an oxygen molecule (0.78 eV) is less than that of two separated oxygen atoms (of 2.3 eV).108,109 When oxygen is adsorbed on phosphorene, it can simultaneously form a P–O single bond as well as a PO double bond. Significantly, this unusual behaviour of oxygen has not been observed with graphene, silicene or MoS2.94,110,111 Moreover, due to the greater electronegativity of oxygen, it extracts a significant amount of charge from phosphorene. This makes phosphorene unique in comparison with graphene, silicene and MoS2. Such robust bonding is one of the reasons for rapid degradation of layered BP when exposed to ambient air.35,39,89
Oxygen adsorption significantly modifies the electronic and emission properties of phosphorene. Phonon dispersion curve analysis has defined the nature of band gap variation when phosphorene becomes functionalized by oxygen. Although bare phosphorene is a direct band gap 2D material, when it is functionalized by non-stoichiometric oxides e.g. PO0.125, PO0.25 and PO0.5 it is turned into an indirect gap semiconductor. However, the stoichiometric PO exhibits a crossover from an indirect to a direct band gap transition for phosphorene. These indirect and direct band gaps transition with respect to the stoichiometric and non-stoichiometric oxides. This is shown schematically in Fig. 17. Additionally, the work function increases steadily with the degree of oxygen functionalization of bare phosphorene from 4.5 to 7.2 eV.109 An increase in work function prevents electrons from moving to vacuum. Oxygen functionalized phosphorene shows interesting tunnelling characteristics. In bare phosphorene, a large tunnelling current is usually observed for positive bias (similar to diode behavior), but with oxygen adsorption, this situation reverses.109
 Fig. 17  The variation of band gap as a degree of functionalization of the bare phosphorene. Open and solid circles represent the values of indirect and direct band gaps, respectively. The direct band gap is taken to be at Γ. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Hydrogen also preferentially adsorbs at the T-site of phosphorene, with an optimized P–H distance of 1.45 and an adsorption energy of −1.29 eV. Hydrogenated P atoms are vertically displaced with chemisorption of the H atom, maintaining other P atoms close to their original positions.94 Except for the one reported observation that when hydrogen is adsorbed on phosphorene it creates a small magnetic moment, no further research has been reported on H–phosphorene interactions. This knowledge gap is currently the basis for opportunities for researchers to investigate, as yet unknown, characteristics of the semiconductor–phosphorene coupling.
In addition to O and H, the adsorption mechanisms of B, C, N and F adatoms are dominated by the electronegativity of the adatom and the surface electronic structure of phosphorene. The B and C have electronegativity close to P. They prefer to break the sp3 bonds of phosphorene, reside at the interstitial sites in 2D lattice, and form sp2 bonds with native P-atoms. In contrast, the N and F are more electronegative than P. N and F tend to surface sites by attracting lone pairs of phosphorene. However, in both cases, B, C, N and F adatom adsorption can lead to the band gap modification of phosphorene toward metallic transverse tunnelling characteristics.108
7. Atomistic insight of phosphorene as a photocatalyst
7.1 Mechanistic understanding of water splitting photocatalysts
A photocatalyst is a chemical substance that can trigger the chemical reactions of a reagent on absorption of solar photons and transform the reagent into a final product – without being consumed in the reaction.112 It is different from a thermal catalyst in that it is effective only in its excited states, and it activates the reagent by transferring an atom or electron, rather than transferring energy.
In order to illustrate this process, a photocatalyst C and a reagent R are considered. On being struck by a solar photon, of a specific wavelength, C is lifted from its ground state to an excited state (C*) and an electron–hole pair (EHP) is created in this process. The EHP is transferred to the reagent R, which activates the chemical reactions, and an intermediate I (radicals or radical ions) is formed. The intermediate I gives I′ which regenerates C, while giving an end product P. The process transforms R into P while the C remains un-consumed. This process is called photocatalysis. This overall process is depicted in Fig. 18.
 Fig. 18  Schematic of reaction cycles of a photocatalyst C in reagent R to product P transformation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright © 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Photocatalysis differs greatly from photochemical reactions. In photochemical reactions, a photon absorptive substance R acts as both a reagent and catalyst, and is consumed during the reaction processes to produce the end product P.
Photocatalytic water splitting decomposes water into hydrogen and oxygen in the presence of a semiconductor material that can absorb photons when irradiated by sunlight. This is the nub of the whole photocatalytic process and is demonstrated in eqn (1).113 (1)
The photocatalytic water splitting reaction is an ‘uphill’ reaction that involves a significant change in Gibbs energy, ΔG (+237 kJ mol−1). Therefore the minimum energy required by the photocatalyst from the stand point of thermodynamics is 1.23 eV according to eqn (2). (2)where E0 is the electrode potential, n is the number of electrons per mole product (2 in this instance) and F is the Faraday constant in C mol−1.
However, when energy losses due to over-potential are counted, the practical minimum energy band gap rises to ca. 2.03 eV. Moreover, not all materials having a band gap greater than 1.23 eV can be used as a water splitting photocatalyst. The respective conduction band minimum of the material must lie at a more negative potential than the reduction potential (H+/H2: 0.0 eV vs. NHE at pH 0) and the valence band maximum must exhibit more positive potential than the oxidation potential (O2/H2O: +1.23 eV vs. NHE at pH 0) of water as illustrated in Fig. 19.3,6,114
 Fig. 19  Illustration of thermodynamic limits of water splitting hydrogen and oxygen production. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright © 2010, American Chemical Society. 
If a photocatalyst is irradiated by a photon with energy being equal to or greater than the intrinsic band gap of the photocatalyst material, an electron from the valence band will be excited to the conduction band, leaving behind a hole in the valence band. These photogenerated carriers have a general tendency to radiatively combine and annihilate each other. If the electron–hole pair can survive the recombination, it will reach the surface of the photocatalyst where it will react to adsorb molecules and initiate water reduction and oxidation reactions.
The postulated overall water splitting reactions therefore comprise three main actions: (i) generation of electron–hole pairs by absorption of particular wavelength photons; (ii) transportation of the photogenerated carriers from the bulk to the surface of the photocatalyst; and (iii) the transfer of electrons and holes from the photocatalyst surface to the reactant molecules where the redox chemistry will take place. This postulated water splitting process is shown schematically in Fig. 20.3,115
 Fig. 20  A postulated photocatalytic water splitting process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110. Copyright © 1995, American Chemical Society. 
7.2 Phosphorene as a water splitting photocatalyst
The potential of phosphorene as a material for electronic and optoelectronic devices and energy storage has been demonstrated.30,39,58,116–120 However, its suitability as a photocatalyst has not yet been comprehensively studied or demonstrated, although Sa et al.121 recently demonstrated the potential of strain-engineered phosphorene as a water splitting photocatalyst.
The band gap of phosphorene can be tuned sufficiently for photon absorption in the ultraviolet, visible light and also the near-infrared region of the solar spectrum as highlighted in Fig. 21. This tunability is across a wide range electromagnetic spectrum. Whilst this was seen as highly beneficial, it was unexpected. Phosphorene appears therefore a good candidate as a metal-free photocatalyst. (It must be recalled that for the selection of a material as a photocatalyst, the band positions are as important as the band gap.)
 Fig. 21  Optical spectra of phosphorene under ambient conditions (25 °C), under 7% tensile strain along the a axis and under 5% tensile strain along the b axis. Solid vertical lines show the wavelength range of visible light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
It has been reported from DFT calculations121 that the valence band maximum (VBM) of phosphorene is not more positive than that of the redox potential of O2/H2O (+1.23 eV vs. NHE at pH 0) under ambient conditions (25 °C). However, its conduction band minimum (CBM) is more negative than that of the H+/H2 reduction potential (0.0 eV vs. NHE at pH 0), meaning that phosphorene is capable of effecting half of the water splitting. Nevertheless, the redox potential of water changes with the pH of solution. Sa et al. showed that if the pH of the solution is 8.0, the VBM and CBM of phosphorene were well suited to the redox potential of the water, Fig. 22. This finding suggests that phosphorene could be readily used in solar water splitting.
 Fig. 22  Energy alignment of phosphorene under ambient conditions, under 5% tensile strain along the a axis and under 7% tensile strain along the b axis with pH = 8.0. The dashed lines are water redox potential in pH = 8.0 solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Studies on charge density difference have further underscored potential water splitting capability of phosphorene. It has been observed that while absorption of H or H+ accumulates charges on one side of the phosphorene, OH or OH− absorption depletes these charges on the other side, Fig. 23. This suggests water reduction and oxidation might take place on different sides of the same phosphorene.
 Fig. 23  Plot of charge density difference (violet: charge depletion, cyan: charge accumulation) for (a) H, (b) H+, (c) OH, and (d) OH− absorbed on top of phosphorene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Apart from these theoretical studies, there is actually no published work that demonstrates conclusively the water splitting capability of phosphorene in the laboratory-scale. However, a hybrid of black phosphorous and TiO2 has recently been reported as a photocatalyst for environmental and biomedical applications.122 In this study, it was demonstrated that the exposure of bare BP to visible light increased its degradation after multiple runs. However, when TiO2 was added to form TiO2@BP hybrid, the degradation was reduced by 90%. The reason for this (robust) stability can be explained as being due to the substitution of Ti atoms into the BP lattice to make BP resistant to moisture and oxygen.122 This finding suggests that hybridization of phosphorene with alternate semiconductors might be a solution to reduce vulnerability of phosphorene to ambient degradation; and could lead to a ‘best’ use of phosphorene as a photocatalyst.
Aware of the instability of sticky-tape exfoliated monolayer BP under ambient conditions, Wang and co-workers53 recently reported the synthesis of water stable phosphorene via liquid exfoliation, and demonstrated its application in photocatalytic oxygen generation and methyl-orange decompositions. These studies confirmed that liquid exfoliated phosphorene nanosheets have a greater number of active sites for surface atoms, reduced electron–hole recombination rate and faster charge carrier mobility than bulk BP. These properties are the defining characteristics of a good photocatalyst.53 However, the problem of degradation of ultrathin BP nanosheets with prolonged exposure to light needs to be resolved before large-scale applications in photocatalysis.
8. Potential phosphorene heterostructures as photocatalysts
8.1 Importance of heterostructures in photocatalysis
When a photocatalyst is irradiated by photons where the photon energy matches the energy gap of the photocatalyst, electron–hole pairs (EHP) are created.3 To maintain equilibrium, electrons try to recombine with the holes and perish. If the photogenerated charge carriers can survive the recombination, they will promote photo-induced redox reactions to take place. Therefore, following photogeneration of electrons and holes, the most important, and challenging task, is to avoid recombination and maintain efficient separation.
A heterostructure can prevent EHP recombination by separating electrons and holes.123–125 Moreover, as the heterostructure is usually made from multiple semiconductors of different band gaps, it also promotes the absorption of more photons with different wavelengths. This has the effect of increasing the photogeneration rate of EHP, which is essential for widening of the photon absorption window. A heterostructure can also obstruct electron–hole recombination by accumulating holes in the valence band of one semiconductor whilst accumulating electrons in the conduction band of another. This is made possible by a conduction and valence band straddling effect.126–129
Undoubtedly heterostructures are beneficial to limit recombination. It is anticipated that making phosphorene a hybrid with semiconducting materials could introduce a new archetype in photocatalysis research. A list of proven photocatalyst materials with which phosphorene could possibly combine to form heterostructures is illustrated in Fig. 24.
 Fig. 24  Illustration of redox potentials of selected semiconductor photocatalysts for water oxidation and reduction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright © 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
8.2 Phosphorene/sulfide hybrid
The fabrication of heterostructures from van der Waals materials and their application in electronics has been known for many years. The development of graphene ignited the conceptualization and pursuit of techniques for forming 2D heterostructures.32,130 In this connection, recently, a successful demonstration of MoS2/phosphorene and WS2/phosphorene hybrids as CMOS inverters has been reported.61
MoS2/phosphorene and WS2/phosphorene hybrids exhibit a type II heterostructure (where in semiconductor A, the CB is more negative and the VB is less positive than that of the corresponding CB and VB of semiconductor B. Amongst heterostructure type I, II and III, type II is more advantageous for electron–hole separation). The band gap of MoS2/phosphorene varies between 0.59 to 1.06 eV, whereas it varies between 0.89 to 1.44 eV for the WS2/phosphorene hybrid.61,131 It appears that MoS2/phosphorene cannot be used as a water splitting photocatalyst because its band gap is below the thermodynamics band gap requirement (of 1.23 eV) for a photocatalyst.
Other potential 2D sulfide/phosphorene hybrids (i.e. CdS/phosphorene, CdSe/phosphorene, and WS2/phosphorene) are yet to be developed. However, sulfide compounds are readily degraded in water when they are illuminated by light.132 Therefore, along with band gap congruency, stability is a major drawback with sulfide semiconductor materials.
8.3 Phosphorene/oxide hybrid
Oxide compounds are now studied extensively as possible photocatalysts following the seminal work of Fujishima and Honda on TiO2.7 A major drawback of most oxides as photocatalysts however is their restricted photon absorption, which is confined to the ultraviolet light of the solar spectrum.8 Making hybrids by combining phosphorene with other semiconductors or doping with heteroatoms is considered to be an effective way to extend the photon absorption of oxide photocatalysts in visible light.133
Recently, a BP@TiO2 was reported. This was manufactured by taking advantage of characteristics of BP i.e. insolubility in most solvents, non-flammability, and thermodynamic stability. This BP@TiO2 hybrid exhibited the photocatalytic performance for RB 5 (an anionic dye model) degradation. The postulated photocatalytic mechanism is illustrated schematically in Fig. 25.122
 Fig. 25  Proposed photocatalytic mechanism for BP@TiO2 hybrid photocatalysts under visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. Copyright © 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
BP@TiO2 showed a strong photo-absorption in the range of a solar spectrum between 250 to 1200 nm, i.e. this hybrid can cover the entire solar spectrum including ultra-violet, visible and infrared light. The stability of the BP@TiO2 hybrid in a water solution has been evaluated by comparing the colloidal behaviour of respective BP and the BP@TiO2 hybrid. It has been hypothesised that BP gets strongly hydrolyzed to form PO42− but BP@TiO2 does not. Further studies however are needed to determine the electronic band positions and the stability of this hybrid under simulated, solar light. If the band gap and band edges match closely the water redox potential, BP@TiO2 might be a contender as a water splitting photocatalyst, provided that it does not prove prone to light induced degradation.
In addition to BP@TiO2, the manufacture of phosphorene/WO3 hybrids are desired as photocatalysts; no published work however has been reported.
8.4 Phosphorene/nitride hybrid
Metal-based photocatalysts are unstable, corrosive and toxic.15 Most importantly, their photocatalytic performance significantly depends on noble precious metals such as, Pt, Au, and Rd as co-catalysts.9,115 Therefore the search for metal-free photocatalysts is a rapidly expanding topic in photocatalysis research. Boron nitrides (BN) and carbon nitrides (CN) are currently two metal-free photocatalysts, which are made from earth-abundant materials and which have been widely investigated.134,135
The fabrication of a phosphorene/h-BN hybrid was reported recently. This hybrid forms a type I heterostructure in which both the CB and VB of semiconductor A lies between the band gap of the semiconductor B.136 Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) is essentially an insulator and cannot be used therefore in water splitting as a result of its uncompetitive band positions. However carbon-doped h-BN nanosheets exhibited water splitting activity after incorporation of sp2 carbon into the B–N lattice.134 From the view point of making robust photocatalysts using lightweight elements i.e. carbon, boron, nitrogen, phosphorous, formation of a hybrid combining phosphorene and carbon doped h-BN could prove to be highly effective.
Graphitic carbon nitride (GCN), the most stable polymer conjugate of CN, has been established as a water splitting photocatalyst, despite the absence of sacrificial agents and precious noble metals as cocatalysts.19 Shortcomings of pristine GCN however are a relatively rapid recombination of charge carrier and a high charge transfer resistance. However GCN could be used to suppress the recombination and efficiently separate the charge carriers when in a heterostructure with a narrow band gap semiconductor like phosphorene.137 It is anticipated therefore that a phosphorene/GCN hybrid is a promising photocatalyst for splitting water under visible light excitation.
8.5 Phosphorene/graphene hybrid
Because graphene is a zero band gap material, and in phosphorene the band gap can be tuned between 0.3 to 2.29 eV, a cocatalyst effect might be reasonably expected when graphene is combined with phosphorene.
Cai et al.136 reported that graphene could be suitable either as a capping/supporting layer for encapsulating phosphorene, or, as a sandwiched layer, between phosphorene and a metal electrode to improve contact performance and provide synergistic effects. In another study, it was shown that the interaction between graphene and phosphorene increases the band gap of phosphorene from 1.51 to 1.64 eV. This means that graphene could be used to usefully tune the position of the band structure.138,139
9. Stability of phosphorene as a water splitting photocatalyst under ambient conditions
The development of phosphorene brings with it new and possibly many prospects for original applications. Because of its exploitable electrical, optical and chemical properties, phosphorene application in photocatalytic hydrogen production from water can be confidently anticipated. However the downside of phosphorene instability under ambient conditions requires detailed and careful assessment before it can be confidently considered as a water splitting photocatalyst. The key ambient parameters that limit its synthesis, processing and applications are its degradation by oxygen, light, water and temperature.35,140–142
With phosphorene it is the surface reactions with oxygen that are the overriding cause of degradation.88,89,141 Surface oxidation results in increased contact resistance, lower carrier mobility and in the worst cases, mechanical breakdown.141 Both the chemisorbed and interstitial oxygen have been shown to be detrimental to phosphorene through initiating its degradation.84,137
The interstitial oxygen occupies numerous positions in phosphorene by forming metastable bridge-type (diagonal and horizontal) surface defects with positive binding energy. The interstitial oxygen bridges create significant structural deformation of the lattice and contribute to the carrier scattering. In addition, they introduce an acceptor state and perturb the valence band state which can increase the carrier recombination rate.141
Chemisorbed oxygen forms ‘dangling’ bonds on the surface of phosphorene and activates surface recombination whilst increasing hydrophilicity. The possible mechanisms for phosphorene oxidation are shown in Fig. 26. It is seen in the figure that molecular oxygen dissociation is very unlikely as it requires high activation energy. However, most stable oxygen adsorbed forms are electrically inactive except those lower energy metastable forms which introduce donor/acceptor states in the energy gap of phosphorene.
 Fig. 26  Possible mechanisms for phosphorene oxidation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright © 2015, American Physical Society. 
Water and phosphorene present strong dipoles. The dipole–dipole interactions result in large distortions of the phosphorene lattice. It has been demonstrated experimentally35 that non-spherical micro-droplets of water grow on the surface of exfoliated phosphorous flakes when they are exposed to ambient conditions. This indicates a strong dipolar moment out of plane which makes it hydrophilic. These droplets coalesce and spread over the surface of the phosphorene with increasing humidity, Fig. 27. As is illustrated in the figure, the stability of phosphorous on absorption of moisture from air is layer-dependent. A monolayer exhibits faster aging than the bulk counterpart, whilst few-layer (>2) phosphorous are stable for several days.
 Fig. 27  Water condensation on black phosphorus flakes. (a–d) The humidity increases from (a) to (d). Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright © 2014, Institute of Science. 
Photoinduced oxidation studies of monolayer phosphorous have been carried out by Favron et al.140 Their work revealed that light alone, despite exposure for long periods with a high photon flux (up to 6 × 104 W cm−2), does not induce significant change in the phosphorene structure.140 Prolonged exposure (for several hours) to an oxygen water mix in the dark does not result in measurable degradation. Photoinduced degradation occurs only in the presence of air or a mixture of pure oxygen and water vapour. This observation underscores that the three environmental parameters, i.e. oxygen, water and visible light, are needed concurrently to initiate degradation. It was shown that the ‘rate of oxidation depends linearly on the oxygen concentration and light intensity and exponentially on the square of the energy gap’.140
The thermal stability of phosphorene during synthesis and processing presents a further difficulty to use as a photocatalyst for water splitting for sustainable hydrogen fuel production. This is because the in situ sublimation temperature of exfoliated 2D phosphorous is around 400 °C. Above this temperature, the BP is actually transformed to an eye-shaped red-phosphorous-like skeleton.142
Work is being done to develop processes to overcome degradation of phosphorene. There is experimental evidence89 that the dry transfer of both graphene and h-BN, onto ultrathin BP exfoliated in an inert Ar gas environment, can passivate phosphorene. This deters degradation with exposure to ambient atmosphere without alteration to the pristine phosphorene surface. This passivation was reported to also enhance n-type charge transport, which resulted in symmetric electron and hole transconductance characteristics.89
In one study,53 water- and light-stable phosphorene nanosheets were produced successfully. Capacity of these nanosheets as a photosensitizer for singlet oxygen generation with a high quantum yield was demonstrated. The nanosheets were shown to be active in oxidizing the double-bond containing reagents undergoing a Diels–Alder addition, implying significant catalytic activity. This study appears therefore to anticipate a future application of phosphorene nanosheets in catalysis and photodynamic therapy.
10. Conclusions and perspective
The search for new materials is an ongoing process. Here we have critically reviewed the fundamental electronic, optical and chemical properties of phosphorene and throughout have sought to assess its suitability and stability as a future water splitting photocatalyst against potential applications.
A key driver for research is that fossil-fuel energy reserves are expected to be depleted within several hundred years.143 Given a general global abundance of water and sunlight, phosphorene as a water splitting photocatalyst could be used to sustainably produce hydrogen as an alternative clean-fuel and be part-solution to the diminishing global fossil-fuel energy reserves.
Significant progress on elemental photocatalysts144 such as red-P,16 alpha-sulfur17 and boron18 has been seen in recent years. As a new elemental photocatalyst, phosphorene has unique properties that make it more attractive as a photocatalyst than alternative 2D materials, including graphene and TMD. Its tunable electronic band gap, extended photon absorption window beyond the visible spectrum and chemical stability with adatom adsorption means that phosphorene is a likely next generation photocatalyst material. Significantly, phosphorene requires air, water and light to be concurrently present for degradation to occur. Degradation can be limited however if a thin encapsulation is used on its layers – or if it is synthesised in the dark.
Phosphorene, as a phosphorus analogue of graphene, contrasts with wider trends to water splitting photocatalysts that are metal-based. Significant problems with metal-based photocatalysts are a narrower photon absorption range, complex processes of tuning the band gap, poor charge transfer kinetics, and greater charge carrier recombination(s).9 A comparable material to phosphorene is metal-free graphitic carbon nitride. Graphitic carbon nitride has a natural band gap to work under visible light excitation, and is non-toxic, and it can split water in the absence of cocatalysts and sacrificial agents. However graphitic carbon nitride has poor photon absorption above 450 nm. Pristine graphitic carbon nitride further suffers from a high rate of charge carrier recombination and high charge transfer resistance with nominal surface reactive sites. However, it provided the needed impetus for photocatalyst researchers to look beyond traditional metal-based systems.
Phosphorene exhibits high absorbance, being a direct and narrow band gap semiconductor, and could effectively harvest low energy photons during photocatalysis. However, the probability of radiative recombination of photo-excited electron–hole pairs is relatively high. The ability of a tunable band gap with phosphorene might change the band-edge positions frequently. In some circumstances these might become incompatible with water splitting electrochemical potential.
Additionally, the charge transfer to surface, over-potential of redox reactions and susceptibility of photo-corrosion need to be manipulated by regulating the surface energy and chemisorption properties of phosphorene.
Because phosphorene offers a flexible and adjustable electronic band gap (0.3 to 2.29 eV), and exhibits visible to infrared photon absorption capabilities, with a resilient lattice structure on absorption of adatoms, we conclude that it will become a wide-spread metal-free photocatalyst in the coming years. It is predicted that bulk and air-stable phosphorous will be an excellent cocatalyst, whereas standalone phosphorene will be a catalyst.
A lingering problem however is to overcome phosphorene degradation when it is exposed to air, water and light.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Australian Research Council (ARC) through the Discovery Project program (DP130104459, DP140104062, DP160104866).
References
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983–2002 CAS .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1890–1898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 100–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kazuhito, I. Hiroshi and F. Akira, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 8269 CrossRef .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
F. Zuo, L. Wang, T. Wu, Z. Zhang, D. Borchardt and P. Feng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11856–11857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, N. Kikugawa and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3816–3819 CrossRef CAS .
C. Z. Wen, Q. H. Hu, Y. N. Guo, X. Q. Gong, S. Z. Qiao and H. G. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6138–6140 RSC .
Q. Li, H. Meng, P. Zhou, Y. Zheng, J. Wang, J. Yu and J. Gong, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 882–889 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen, A. Du, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3783 Search PubMed .
F. Wang, W. K. H. Ng, J. C. Yu, H. Zhu, C. Li, L. Zhang, Z. Liu and Q. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111–112, 409–414 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, P. Niu, L. Yin and H.-M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9070–9073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, L.-C. Yin, P. Niu, W. Jiao and H.-M. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6242–6245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Choi, I. Lahiri, R. Seelaboyina and Y. S. Kang, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2010, 35, 52–71 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiang and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 753–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Balendhran, S. Walia, H. Nili, S. Sriram and M. Bhaskaran, Small, 2015, 11, 640–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia, H. Wang, D. Xiao, M. Dubey and A. Ramasubramaniam, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 899–907 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2713–2731 RSC .
X. Huang, Z. Zeng and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1934–1946 RSC .
H. Li, J. Wu, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1067–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, C. Tan, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2185–2204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. Xu, D. Tománek and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4033–4041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Low, S. Cao, J. Yu and S. Wageh, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10768–10777 RSC .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kou, C. Chen and S. C. Smith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2794–2805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, A. M. Jones, K. L. Seyler, V. Tran, Y. Jia, H. Zhao, H. Wang, L. Yang, X. Xu and F. Xia, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 517–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-G. Andres, V. Leonardo, P. Elsa, O. I. Joshua, K. L. Narasimha-Acharya, I. B. Sofya, J. G. Dirk, B. Michele, A. S. Gary, J. V. Alvarez, W. Z. Henny, J. J. Palacios and S. J. v. d. Z. Herre, 2D Mater., 2014, 1, 025001 CrossRef .
J. Kang, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, J.-H. Lee, X. Liu, K.-S. Chen and M. C. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3596–3604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu, H. Nan, J. Hong, Y. Chen, C. Zhu, Z. Liang, X. Ma, Z. Ni, C. Jin and Z. Zhang, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 853–859 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, D. Jariwala, K.-S. Chen, E. Cho, V. K. Sangwan, X. Liu, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6964–6970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Koenig, R. A. Doganov, H. Schmidt, A. H. Castro Neto and B. Özyilmaz, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 103106 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 10, 9451–9469 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Morita, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1986, 39, 227–242 CrossRef .
J. Wu, N. Mao, L. Xie, H. Xu and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2366–2369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2014, 64, 547–553 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Zhang, J. C. Lian, W. Yi, Y. H. Jiang, L. W. Liu, H. Hu, W. D. Xiao, S. X. Du, L. L. Sun and H. J. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18823–18826 CAS .
P. Li and I. Appelbaum, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 115439 CrossRef .
J. Qiao, X. Kong, Z.-X. Hu, F. Yang and W. Ji, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4475 CAS .
H. Asahina, K. Shindo and A. Morita, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1982, 51, 1193–1199 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ling, H. Wang, S. Huang, F. Xia and M. S. Dresselhaus, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 4523–4530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Du, C. Ouyang, S. Shi and M. Lei, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 093718 CrossRef .
A. N. Rudenko and M. I. Katsnelson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 201408 CrossRef .
E. Motohiko, New J. Phys., 2014, 16, 115004 CrossRef .
A. S. Rodin, A. Carvalho and A. H. Castro Neto, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 176801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Yang, W. Shao, S. Chen, J. Xie, X. Zhang, J. Wang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11376–11382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 324–327 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sugai and I. Shirotani, Solid State Commun., 1985, 53, 753–755 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes and G. Rumbles, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 683–696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, G. Dukovic, L. E. Brus and T. F. Heinz, Science, 2005, 308, 838–841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia, H. Wang and Y. Jia, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4458 CAS .
X. Peng, Q. Wei and A. Copple, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 085402 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, H. J. Liu, L. Cheng, J. Wei, J. H. Liang, D. D. Fan, J. Shi, X. F. Tang and Q. J. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, N. Lu, J. Dai, X. Wu and X. C. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14051–14059 CAS .
V. Sorkin and Y. W. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 235707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Xie, Z. Liu, C. Tan, Z. Luo, H. Li, J. Lin, L. Sun, W. Chen, Z. Xu, L. Xie, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3653–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, H. Morgan Stewart, S. A. Shevlin, C. R. A. Catlow and Z. X. Guo, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4607–4614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Barone, O. Hod and G. E. Scuseria, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2748–2754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dai and X. C. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1289–1293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, H. Xie, S. Tang, X.-F. Yu, Z. Guo, J. Shao, H. Zhang, H. Huang, H. Wang and P. K. Chu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11581 CrossRef .
L. Lin, Y. Xu, S. Zhang, I. M. Ross, A. C. M. Ong and D. A. Allwood, Small, 2014, 10, 60–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin and S. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10177–10179 RSC .
V. Stengl and J. Henych, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3387–3394 RSC .
J. Ouyang, C.-W. Chu, C. R. Szmanda, L. Ma and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 918–922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Li, P. Guo, T. F. Cao, H. Liu, W. M. Lau and L. M. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Tran, R. Soklaski, Y. Liang and L. Yang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 235319 CrossRef .
X. Liu, Y. Wen, Z. Chen, B. Shan and R. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 16398–16404 RSC .
T.-H. Liu and C.-C. Chang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10648–10654 RSC .
A. C. Ferrari, J. C. Meyer, V. Scardaci, C. Casiraghi, M. Lazzeri, F. Mauri, S. Piscanec, D. Jiang, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roth and A. K. Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 187401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Ferrari, F. Bonaccorso, V. Fal'ko, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roche, P. Boggild, S. Borini, F. H. L. Koppens, V. Palermo, N. Pugno, J. A. Garrido, R. Sordan, A. Bianco, L. Ballerini, M. Prato, E. Lidorikis, J. Kivioja, C. Marinelli, T. Ryhanen, A. Morpurgo, J. N. Coleman, V. Nicolosi, L. Colombo, A. Fert, M. Garcia-Hernandez, A. Bachtold, G. F. Schneider, F. Guinea, C. Dekker, M. Barbone, Z. Sun, C. Galiotis, A. N. Grigorenko, G. Konstantatos, A. Kis, M. Katsnelson, L. Vandersypen, A. Loiseau, V. Morandi, D. Neumaier, E. Treossi, V. Pellegrini, M. Polini, A. Tredicucci, G. M. Williams, B. Hee Hong, J.-H. Ahn, J. Min Kim, H. Zirath, B. J. van Wees, H. van der Zant, L. Occhipinti, A. Di Matteo, I. A. Kinloch, T. Seyller, E. Quesnel, X. Feng, K. Teo, N. Rupesinghe, P. Hakonen, S. R. T. Neil, Q. Tannock, T. Lofwander and J. Kinaret, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4598–4810 RSC .
R. W. Keyes, J. Appl. Phys., 1959, 30, 454 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, M. Long, X. Zhang, J. Ouyang, H. Xu and Y. Gao, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Walukiewicz, H. E. Ruda, J. Lagowski and H. C. Gatos, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1984, 30, 4571–4582 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kaasbjerg, K. S. Thygesen and K. W. Jacobsen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 115317 CrossRef .
S. Bruzzone and G. Fiori, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 222108 CrossRef .
J. Xi, M. Long, L. Tang, D. Wang and Z. Shuai, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4348–4369 RSC .
V. Tran and L. Yang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 245407 CrossRef .
D. Çakır, H. Sahin and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 205421 CrossRef .
R. Fei and L. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2884–2889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Srivastava, K. P. S. S. Hembram, H. Mizuseki, K.-R. Lee, S. S. Han and S. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 6530–6538 CAS .
A. Ziletti, A. Carvalho, P. E. Trevisanutto, D. K. Campbell, D. F. Coker and A. H. Castro Neto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 085407 CrossRef .
R. A. Doganov, E. C. T. O'Farrell, S. P. Koenig, Y. Yeo, A. Ziletti, A. Carvalho, D. K. Campbell, D. F. Coker, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, A. H. C. Neto and B. Ozyilmaz, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, T. Qing, H. Peng, Z. Zhen and S. Panwen, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 095201 CrossRef PubMed .
J. He, D. He, Y. Wang, Q. Cui, M. Z. Bellus, H.-Y. Chiu and H. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6436–6442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Lin, H. Zhang and X.-L. Cheng, Front. Phys., 2015, 10, 1–9 CrossRef .
M. Buscema, D. J. Groenendijk, G. A. Steele, H. S. J. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Kulish, O. I. Malyi, C. Persson and P. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 992–1000 RSC .
J. Sun, G. Zheng, H.-W. Lee, N. Liu, H. Wang, H. Yao, W. Yang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4573–4580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Kulish, O. I. Malyi, C. Persson and P. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 13921–13928 RSC .
X. Fan, W. T. Zheng, J.-L. Kuo and D. J. Singh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7793–7797 CAS .
Y. Liu, V. I. Artyukhov, M. Liu, A. R. Harutyunyan and B. I. Yakobson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1737–1742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hashmi and J. Hong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 9198–9204 CAS .
Y. Yagi, T. M. Briere, M. H. F. Sluiter, V. Kumar, A. A. Farajian and Y. Kawazoe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 075414 CrossRef .
P. Zhang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5328–5342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, C. Liang, W. Zhou, J. Qiu, Z. Zhou, G. Sun and Q. Xin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 6292–6299 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Seo, S. M. Choi, H. J. Kim and W. B. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 182–185 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, N. W. Franklin, R. J. Chen and H. Dai, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 331, 35–41 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, M. Zhang, R.-Q. Sun and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 10292–10296 CrossRef .
X. Lin and J. Ni, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 075440 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, A. Buldum, J. Han and J. Ping Lu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 85, 1706–1709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, R. Pandey and S. P. Karna, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 173104 CrossRef .
G. Wang, R. Pandey and S. P. Karna, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 524–531 RSC .
M. Topsakal and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 205402 CrossRef .
Y. Wang and Y. Ding, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2013, 7, 410–413 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ravelli, D. Dondi, M. Fagnoni and A. Albini, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1999–2011 RSC .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .
A. Avsar, I. J. Vera-Marun, J. Y. Tan, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, A. H. Castro Neto and B. Özyilmaz, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4138–4145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yuan, X. Liu, F. Afshinmanesh, W. Li, G. Xu, J. Sun, B. Lian, A. G. Curto, G. Ye, Y. Hikita, Z. Shen, S.-C. Zhang, X. Chen, M. Brongersma, H. Y. Hwang and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 707–7013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhao, W. Kang and J. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19046–19052 CAS .
P. Gehring, R. Urcuyo, D. L. Duong, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 233110 CrossRef .
C. M. Park and H. J. Sohn, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2465–2468 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sa, Y.-L. Li, J. Qi, R. Ahuja and Z. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 26560–26568 CAS .
H. Uk Lee, S. C. Lee, J. Won, B.-C. Son, S. Choi, Y. Kim, S. Y. Park, H.-S. Kim, Y.-C. Lee and J. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8691 CrossRef PubMed .
G.-J. A. H. Wetzelaer, M. Scheepers, A. M. Sempere, C. Momblona, J. Ávila and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1837–1841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhong, H. Choi, J. Y. Kim, H. Y. Woo, T. L. Nguyen, F. Huang, Y. Cao and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2036–2041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. E. Castelli, F. Hüser, M. Pandey, H. Li, K. S. Thygesen, B. Seger, A. Jain, K. A. Persson, G. Ceder and K. W. Jacobsen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400915 Search PubMed .
M. A. Caro, J. Määttä, O. Lopez-Acevedo and T. Laurila, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, 034502 CrossRef .
A. J. Cowan and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2281–2293 RSC .
A. V. Akimov, A. J. Neukirch and O. V. Prezhdo, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 4496–4565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Q. Wang, X. Zhan, F. Wang, M. Safdar and J. He, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8326–8339 RSC .
B. V. Lotsch, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2015, 45, 85–109 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, N. Huo, Y. Li, H. Chen, J. Yang, Z. Wei, J. Li and S.-S. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2483–2488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-P. Yuan, L.-W. Ruan, J. Barber, S. C. Joachim Loo and C. Xue, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3934–3951 CAS .
M. Pelaez, N. T. Nolan, S. C. Pillai, M. K. Seery, P. Falaras, A. G. Kontos, P. S. M. Dunlop, J. W. J. Hamilton, J. A. Byrne, K. O'Shea, M. H. Entezari and D. D. Dionysiou, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 125, 331–349 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, C. Chen, M. Zhang, L. Lin, X. Ye, S. Lin, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7698 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, J. Liu, J. Liang, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6717–6731 CAS .
Y. Cai, G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 24, 6717–6731 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, J. Feng, S. Yan, H. Zhang, Z. Li and Z. Zou, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 295, 253–259 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Padilha, A. Fazzio and A. J. R. da Silva, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 066803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hu, T. Wang and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 4756–4761 RSC .
A. Favron, E. Gaufres, F. Fossard, A.-L. Phaneuf-Lheureux, N. Y. W. Tang, P. L. Levesque, A. Loiseau, R. Leonelli, S. Francoeur and R. Martel, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 826–832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ziletti, A. Carvalho, D. K. Campbell, D. F. Coker and A. H. Castro Neto, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 046801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, J. D. Wood, K.-S. Chen, E. Cho and M. C. Hersam, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 773–778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Ball, M. Ball and M. Wietschel, The hydrogen Economy: Opportunities and Challenges,  2009, pp. 46–114 Search PubMed .
G. Liu, P. Niu and H.-M. Cheng, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 885–892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Mohammad Ziaur Rahman
	Mohammad Ziaur Rahman is pursuing a PhD under the supervision of Prof. Shi-Zhang Qiao, School of Chemical Engineering, The University of Adelaide, Australia. He was an Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering (EEE), Ahsanullah University of Science and Technology (AUST), Bangladesh. His research focuses on the design, fabrication and characterization of functional nano-materials with tailored electro-optical properties. He is currently working on the synthesis of metal-free photocatalysts for water-splitting hydrogen production through harvesting solar photons. He obtained his BSc in EEE from AUST and MSc in EEE from Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET).

Chi Wai Kwong
	Dr Philip Kwong received his MPhil and PhD from the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. He is a Senior Lecturer in the School of Chemical Engineering, The University of Adelaide, Australia. Dr Kwong specializes in greenhouse gas emission control and thermal–chemical conversion of biomass, but works also in environmental catalysis and sustainable waste-management. His research focuses on developing low cost technologies to assist various industries with the transition from fossil to sustainable economy. He has published more than 40 articles, peer reviewed conferences and technical reports.

Kenneth Davey
	Dr Kenneth Davey FIChemE CEng received his MEngSc and PhD from Melbourne University. He then worked as a Postdoctoral Researcher and Senior Research Scientist with CSIRO and subsequently at The University of Adelaide where he is a Senior Lecturer. Dr Davey has published more than 120 refereed articles and patents. He has received numerous awards for his work. He is involved in interdisciplinary research in (bio)chemical process engineering and in the development of new quantitative risk assessments for improved efficiencies, reliability and safety.

Shi Zhang Qiao
	Shi-Zhang Qiao received his PhD in chemical engineering from Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Currently, he is a chair professor at School of Chemical Engineering of The University of Adelaide, and an adjunct professor at Tianjin University. His research expertise is in nanostructured materials for new energy technologies. He has coauthored more than 240 papers in refereed journals with over 14700 citations (H-index 64). In recognition of his achievements in research, he was honored with prestigious ARC Discovery Outstanding Researcher Award (2013), Emerging Researcher Award (2013, ENFL Division of the American Chemical Society), ARC ARF and APD Fellowships.

Broader context
Phosphorene as a new metal-free photocatalyst has shown exceptional chemical, electronic, and optical properties with extended photon absorption window up to the near infrared region of the solar spectrum. In this review, computational results from molecular-dynamics simulations and available experimental data are analysed critically to envisage the future viability of phosphorene as a water splitting photocatalyst.


 	Fig. 1  Examples of 2D materials with their calculated band gaps. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright © 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The puckered structure of a few layer BP sheet. (b) Top view of monolayer BP. The x and z axes are along zigzag and armchair directions, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 


a (Å)	4.47	4.58	Lattice constant

b (Å)	3.34	3.32
Δc (Å)	3.2	3.2	Int. layer spacing

R
1 (Å)	2.28	2.28	Bond length

R
2 (Å)	2.25	2.24

θ
1 (°)	102.42	103.51	Bond angle

θ
2 (°)	96.16	96

 	Fig. 3  (a) Structural view and crystal orientation of phosphorene. (b) Optical micrograph of exfoliated monolayer BP. (c) Polarization resolved Raman spectra of phosphorene. (d) Intensity of the Ag2 modes as a function of excitation laser polarization angle in the x–y plane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright © 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) PL intensity map. (b) Selected PL spectra. (c) Top: Ground-state exciton energy and quasiparticle band edge energy. Bottom: Calculated optical absorption of phosphorene with/without e–h interactions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright © 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  The ball-and-stick model of armchair phosphorene nanoribbon: (a) is top-view, and (b) is side-view. The zigzag counterpart is plotted in (c) and (d), respectively. The unit cell is outlined by the dashed lines and the arrow indicates the translation direction of the nanoribbons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright © 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Formation energy as a function of ribbon width and (b) band gap energy as a function of layer number. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright © 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic plots of SW-PNTs which can be viewed as rolling up a phosphorene sheet following the roll-up vector R = n1a1 + n2a2. Top and side views of a structure of (b) armchair and (c) zigzag SW-PNTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Computed band structure (PBE) and partial charge density distribution corresponding to the VBM and CBM of (a) armchair and (b) zigzag SW-PNTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) AFM height image of solvent-exfoliated BP nanosheets, (b) false-coloured SEM image of solvent-exfoliated BP nanosheets and (c) low-resolution TEM image of solvent-exfoliated BP nanosheets. (d) Schematic showing the atomic structure of BP. High-resolution TEM images of solvent-exfoliated BP nanosheets along direction (e) A and (f) B. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.36	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) TEM image of BPQDs. (b) Enlarged TEM image of BPQDs. (c and d) HRTEM images of BPQDs with different lattice fringes. Scale bar = 5 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) UV/Vis absorption spectrum of BPQDs in NMP. Inset: Photos of the BPQD suspension (left) and the Tyndall effect of the BPQD suspension (right). (b) Raman spectra of BPQDs and bulk crystalline BP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  The evolution of band gap calculated by different methods and optical absorption peaks according to the stacking layer number of few-layer phosphorene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright © 2014, American Physical Society.	 

PBE	0.9–0.92
HSE06@PBE	1–1.54
optB88	0.76
G0W0@PBE	2.08
GW0@PBE	2.29
GGA	0.7
HSE06@optB88	1.49–1.51
G0W0	2
BSE	1.2–1.4
GW	1.6
Absorb. peak	1.45

 	Fig. 13  Band structures for n-layer BP calculated within the GW approach for n = 1–4. Zero energy corresponds to the centre of the band gap. Blue circles show the band splitting near the gap. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright © 2014, American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Calculation of total DOS and single layer DOS of BP by the smearing tetrahedron method with Blöchl corrections. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright © 2010, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 15  Typical adatom adsorption sites on phosphorene: (a) H, (b) B, (c) B1, and (d) T. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  Different charge density plots induced by substitutional-doped TM atom. The gold colour (i.e. 0.004 e Å−3) in the plot indicates an increase in the electron density after bonding, and the cyan colour (i.e. 0.004 e Å−3) indicates an electron density loss. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.99	 

 	Fig. 17  The variation of band gap as a degree of functionalization of the bare phosphorene. Open and solid circles represent the values of indirect and direct band gaps, respectively. The direct band gap is taken to be at Γ. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic of reaction cycles of a photocatalyst C in reagent R to product P transformation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright © 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 19  Illustration of thermodynamic limits of water splitting hydrogen and oxygen production. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright © 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  A postulated photocatalytic water splitting process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110. Copyright © 1995, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Optical spectra of phosphorene under ambient conditions (25 °C), under 7% tensile strain along the a axis and under 5% tensile strain along the b axis. Solid vertical lines show the wavelength range of visible light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Energy alignment of phosphorene under ambient conditions, under 5% tensile strain along the a axis and under 7% tensile strain along the b axis with pH = 8.0. The dashed lines are water redox potential in pH = 8.0 solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Plot of charge density difference (violet: charge depletion, cyan: charge accumulation) for (a) H, (b) H+, (c) OH, and (d) OH− absorbed on top of phosphorene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Illustration of redox potentials of selected semiconductor photocatalysts for water oxidation and reduction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright © 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  Proposed photocatalytic mechanism for BP@TiO2 hybrid photocatalysts under visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. Copyright © 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 26  Possible mechanisms for phosphorene oxidation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright © 2015, American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  Water condensation on black phosphorus flakes. (a–d) The humidity increases from (a) to (d). Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright © 2014, Institute of Science.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
