Pulsed laser induced heat transfer from a phthalocyanine-based thin film to a Bi, Al-substituted DyIG substrate: photothermal demagnetization observed ...  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CP01789A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CP01789A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 12241-12247Pulsed laser induced heat transfer from a phthalocyanine-based thin film to a Bi, Al-substituted DyIG substrate: photothermal demagnetization observed by magnetic circular dichroism and numerical analysis

        
          
            Masanobu 
            Karasawa
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Kazuyuki 
            Ishii
          
        
      *
      Institute of Industrial Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 153-8505, Japan. E-mail: k-ishii@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Received 
      4th December 2017
    , Accepted 30th March 2018First published on 3rd April 2018AbstractWe have investigated the demagnetization of a ferrimagnetic substrate, Bi, Al-substituted dysprosium iron garnet (Bi0.8Dy2.2Fe4.3Al0.7O12), based on selective pulsed laser irradiation of a molecular thin film consisting of μ-oxo-bis[hydroxyl{2,9(or 10),16(or 17),23(or 24)-tetra-tert-butylphthalocyanato}silicon] ((SiPc)2) and poly(vinylidene fluoride), and succeeded in reproducing photothermal energy transfer from a molecular thin film to an inorganic magnetic substrate in a submicrometer-order and a submicrosecond time scale using numerical analysis. After the instant temperature rise due to nanosecond pulsed laser irradiation of the (SiPc)2-based film, followed by heat transfer from the film to the neighboring magnetic substrate, demagnetization of the magnetic substrate was spectroscopically monitored by the decrease in its magnetic circular dichroism (MCD) intensity. The MCD intensity decreased with increasing pulsed laser energy, which reflects the fact that the submicrometer-order region of the substrate was demagnetized as a result of temperature rise reaching high Curie temperature. This heat transfer phenomenon resulting in the demagnetization of the magnetic substrate was numerically analyzed in a submicrometer-order and a submicrosecond time scale using the finite difference method: the demagnetized regions were calculated to be the same order of magnitude as those experimentally evaluated. These results would provide a more detailed understanding of photothermal energy transfer in organic–inorganic hybrid materials, which would be useful for developing photofunctional materials.
Introduction
The photofunctions of organic–inorganic hybrid materials have been intensively studied for use in a wide range of applications, such as organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) and organic solar cells.1,2 One problem with these optoelectronic devices is heat generation in organic active layers, which dissipates toward inorganic materials, causing performance degradation. Therefore, it is quite important to study heat transfer between organic materials and inorganic materials using experimental measurements and theoretical calculations.3,4 Chung et al. reported that the thermal conductivity of inorganic substrates affected the heat dissipation and lifetime of an OLED:5 in comparison with the glass substrate, the Si substrate with high thermal conductivity reduced the peak temperature of the OLED during operation, resulting in an increase in the lifetime. Qi et al. investigated the transient thermal response of OLEDs after application of a pulsed-current with 1–10 ms pulse width, and showed that their calculation was in agreement with the observed thermal images.6 These analyses provided several insights into heat transfer via the organic–inorganic interface, which is crucial for designing photofunctions. However, it is difficult to directly obtain information regarding heat transfer events that occur within micrometers and microseconds using thermal imaging systems, because the frame rate is less than 106 Hz even in recent advanced systems, and because their spatial resolution is limited by the diffraction limit of light.7 Thus, heat transfer from organic materials to inorganic substrates after pulsed laser irradiation of the organic materials has not been investigated in depth in spite of its importance.
Recently, while studying the development of novel molecule-based magneto optical memory devices (Fig. 1),8 we succeeded in demagnetizing ferrimagnetic substrates by selective nanosecond pulsed laser irradiation of the phthalocyanine (Pc)-based organic thin film casted onto ferrimagnetic substrates (Fig. 2).9 This new experiment consists of (1) the instant temperature rise due to nanosecond pulsed laser irradiation of the Pc-based thin film, (2) the magnetic circular dichroism (MCD) spectroscopic monitoring of demagnetization resulting from the temperature rise reaching high Curie temperature (TC), and (3) the heat transfer from the organic film to the inorganic substrate in a submicrometer-order scale. This novel, characteristic evaluation of instant temperature rise is based on MCD detection by converting the transient temperature rise above TC to the permanent demagnetization of the magnetic substrate. Thus, since this system is appropriate for investigating thermal behavior in a submicrometer-order and a submicrosecond time scale, detailed studies on both the fast heat generation due to the pulsed laser and the heat transfer between the Pc-based thin film and the inorganic magnetic substrate are important for developing not only the molecule-based magneto optical memory but also a novel method for analyzing the instant heat dissipation between organic–inorganic materials.
 Fig. 1  Concept for novel molecular magneto-optical memory. Tetraazaporphyrin (TAP, Q band at 600 nm), Pc (Q band at 700 nm), and naphthalocyanine (Nc, Q band at 800 nm) complexes are deposited onto each magnetic domain of an appropriate magnetic substrate, which provides magneto-optical signals (1,1,1) by magnetization. Here, if the magnetic domain for Pc is selectively demagnetized by 700 nm laser irradiation, the (101) magneto-optical signal can be observed by disappearance of the magneto-optical signal of Pc. As a result, 2N information is expected to be memorized by integrating N kinds of dyes. 
 Fig. 2  Demagnetization of a ferrimagnetic Bi0.8Dy2.2Fe4.3Al0.7O12 substrate based on selective pulsed laser irradiation of a molecular thin film consisting of (SiPc)2 and PVDF. The MCD of the Pc-based film on a ferrimagnetic substrate without an external magnetic field (a, signal ON), demagnetization of the ferrimagnetic substrate by photothermal effects of Pcs (b), and no MCD of Pc-based films (c, signal OFF). 
Herein, we have investigated the heat transfer from the photoexcited Pc-based thin film to the inorganic magnetic substrate in a submicrometer-order and a submicrosecond time scale not only by experiments but also by numerical calculations. In this system, we employed ferrimagnetic Bi, Al-substituted dysprosium iron garnet (Bi0.8Dy2.2Fe4.3Al0.7O12) as the substrate, as well as a molecular thin film consisting of μ-oxo-bis[hydroxyl{2,9(or 10),16(or 17),23(or 24)-tetra-tert-butylphthalocyanato}silicon] ((SiPc)2) and poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF), which function in terms of high efficiency of photothermal energy conversion and the protection of the reactions with molecular oxygen, respectively.10 After pulsed laser irradiation of the (SiPc)2-based thin film, demagnetization of the ferrimagnetic substrate was experimentally observed due to the temperature of the ferrimagnetic substrate increasing above TCvia heat transfer from the (SiPc)2-based thin film. This demagnetization behavior was monitored using the difference in the magnetic circular dichroism (MCD) intensity before and after pulsed laser irradiation of the Pc-based film, and thus, the demagnetized region of the magnetic substrate could be spectroscopically evaluated.11 The demagnetized region experimentally evaluated was compared with the numerical calculations,12,13 which allowed the heat transfer process from an organic material to an inorganic substrate after pulsed laser irradiation to be quantitatively investigated in a submicrometer-order and a submicrosecond time scale.
Experimental
The ferrimagnetic garnet substrate was prepared as previously reported.14,15 Bi(NO)3·5H2O, Dy(NO)3·5H2O, Fe(NO)3·9H2O, and Al(NO)3·9H2O were dissolved in acetylacetone in stoichiometric proportions. The concentrations of Bi3+, Dy3+, Fe3+, and Al3+ in acetylacetone were 0.08, 0.22, 0.43, and 0.07 M, respectively. The solution dropped onto a quartz glass substrate (20 × 25 mm2) was dried on a hot plate at 130 °C for 5 min, then heated at 370 °C for 5 min. This process was repeated to achieve the desired thickness. The substrate was finally annealed in an electric furnace at 670 °C for 3 h. Its thickness was measured to be 6 × 102 nm by cross sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  A cross sectional SEM image of the ferrimagnetic garnet substrate on the quartz glass substrate. 
(SiPc)2 was prepared using the previously reported method.16 The (SiPc)2-based film consisting of (SiPc)2 and PVDF was prepared using the cast method. A solution of 0.21 mM of (SiPc)2 and 0.6 mg L−1 of PVDF in a mixed solvent (ethanol:N,N-dimethylformamide = 4:1) was dropped onto an area (5 × 10 mm2, determined by masking tape) of the Bi0.8Dy2.2Fe4.3Al0.7O12 substrate.
Diffuse transmission spectra were measured using a JASCO U570 spectrophotometer with an integral sphere accessory.17 The diffuse transmission spectra were measured in the absorbance mode with regular reflection. The MCD measurements were performed using a JASCO E-250 equipped with a JASCO electromagnet (+1.35 to −1.35 T).8,9 In the MCD measurements, the monochromatic circularly polarized light, emitted from a Xe lamp equipped with a monochromator, a polarizer and a photoelastic modulator, travelled through a sample in the JASCO electromagnet (+1.35 or −1.35 T), followed by the detection using a photomultiplier. The photomultiplier signals obtained through a lock-in amplifier were recorded using a computer. During measurements, the sample surface was set to be perpendicular to the axis of the propagation direction of light. For the light irradiation experiment, a CW diode laser (LDX-2615-650-T03, S/N Q1963-1, 650 nm, Yamaki), and a pulsed dye laser (Sirah CSTR-LG532-TRI-T; 640 or 650 nm) pumped with an Nd:YAG laser (Spectra Physics INDI 40, 10 Hz, FWHM 7 ns) were used. Laser beam profiles of this pulsed dye laser were measured using a beam profiler, LaseView-CA50-NCG (Kokyo, Inc.). Thermal images based on 8–14 μm infrared rays were acquired with a frame rate of 9 Hz using an FLIR E4 thermal imaging camera (FLIR Systems, Inc.). The SEM images for the cross-sections of the magnetic substrates were observed by using a JSM 7001F (JEOL).
Results and interpretations
Optical and magneto-optical properties of the (SiPc)2-based film on the magnetic substrate
To investigate the optical and magneto-optical properties of the (SiPc)2-based film on the magnetic substrate, electronic absorption and MCD spectra were measured, as shown in Fig. 4a and b, respectively.9 In the diffuse transmission spectrum, a sharp Q absorption band of (SiPc)2 is seen at around 640 nm, in addition to an absorption band of the magnetic substrate at 400–500 nm. In the MCD spectrum, a dispersion-type spectral pattern corresponding to the Q absorption band of (SiPc)2 is seen at around 640 nm,18–20 while a broad band due to the magnetic substrate is observed at around 450 nm. As shown in Fig. 4c and d, even at room temperature, the magnetic field dependence of the MCD signals of (SiPc)2 exhibited magnetic hysteresis, which is similar to that of the magnetic substrate at 450 nm.†9 Thus, at 450 nm, the MCD signal of the magnetic substrate could be observed even without applying an external magnetic field. Since the magnetic substrate is demagnetized when its temperature is raised above TC, the MCD signal intensities under zero magnetic field should be a good measure of the temperature increase.
 Fig. 4  The diffuse transmission spectrum and the MCD spectrum of the (SiPc)2-based film on the magnetic substrate (a and b). Magnetic field dependence of the MCD signals for the (SiPc)2-based film on the magnetic substrate at 450 nm (c), half-difference between the positive (635 nm) and negative (650 nm) signals (d).† 
Pulsed laser irradiation
To quantitatively investigate the relationship between pulsed laser energy and demagnetization, the dependence of the MCD intensity of the magnetic substrate with the (SiPc)2-based film on the laser energy was examined (Fig. 5a): the MCD spectra were measured after applying an external magnetic field followed by the pulsed laser irradiation of the (SiPc)2-based film.‡9 As shown in Fig. 5b, the intensities due to the MCD signals of the magnetic substrate decreased with increasing pulsed laser energy. For example, when the (SiPc)2-based film was selectively irradiated by a pulsed laser whose energy was 8.4 mJ per pulse, the MCD signal decreased to 40% of the initial MCD intensity: this indicated that 60% of the magnetic substrate was demagnetized because the temperature of the magnetic substrate reached TC. This result demonstrates that the temperature increase due to heat transfer from the laser-irradiated molecular thin film to the inorganic material can be monitored using MCD.
 Fig. 5  (a) The MCD spectra of the magnetic substrate with the (SiPc)2-based film before and after laser irradiation. (b) The intensities of the MCD signals at 450 nm after laser irradiation. 
CW laser irradiation
As described in the previous paper, the MCD intensity of the magnetic substrate at around 450 nm under zero magnetic field was not changed by CW laser irradiation (650 nm, 96 mW, 3(w) × 4(h) in mm). This indicates that CW laser irradiation could not demagnetize the magnetic substrate, and that the temperature of the magnetic substrate remained below TC during CW diode laser irradiation of the (SiPc)2-based film.9 To quantitatively investigate the rise in temperature, both thermal and optical images of the organic–inorganic hybrid material were measured during CW laser irradiation (Fig. 6). Typical temperature values at several locations are summarized in Table 1. In the absence of CW laser irradiation, the temperature of the organic–inorganic hybrid material was 24 °C, which was similar to room temperature. On the other hand, the temperature of the laser-irradiated area increased to 32 °C during CW laser irradiation (Fig. 6d), while the temperature of the magnetic substrate outside the laser irradiated area remained at 25 °C even during CW laser irradiation. Additionally, the temperature of the side opposite to the irradiation surface was found to be 30 °C during CW laser irradiation. This photothermal effect is reasonably attributable to the irradiation of the (SiPc)2-based film, because the temperature rise was not observed for the magnetic substrate without the (SiPc)2-based film even during CW laser irradiation.
 Fig. 6  Optical images (a, c, e and g) and thermal images (b, d, f and h) of the (SiPc)2-based film deposited on the magnetic substrate before laser irradiation (a and b) and during laser irradiation (c and d), as well as those of the side opposite to the irradiation surface during laser irradiation (e and f) and the magnetic substrate without the (SiPc)2-based film during laser irradiation (g and h). In the optical images, the central blue section, light orange section, and black and white section are the (SiPc)2-based film, the magnetic substrate, and the sample holder, respectively. The thermal images during CW laser irradiation were measured 10 minutes after the start of irradiation. 
Table 1 Typical temperatures measured at several locations




Monitoring side
(SiPc)2-based film
Laser irradiation
Temperature (°C)


Inside laser irradiation
Outside laser irradiation




Irradiation surface
w/
w/o
24
24


Irradiation surface
w/
w/
32
25


Opposite to the irradiation surface
w/
w/
30
25


Irradiation surface
w/o
w/
24
24




Discussion
The selective pulsed laser irradiation of the organic thin film resulted in demagnetization of the inorganic magnetic substrate. This demagnetization is attributable to the temperature of the magnetic substrate reaching TC due to heat transfer from the organic thin film excited by pulsed laser irradiation. Interestingly, by measuring the demagnetization process of the magnetic substrate using MCD, this organic–inorganic heat transfer process can be observed spectroscopically. The demagnetization did not occur by CW diode laser irradiation even when the power of CW laser was higher than that of pulsed laser. This indicated that the temperature rise reaching TC was caused only by the high energy spike of the pulsed laser. Therefore, it is necessary to analyze the time-dependent heat transfer for understanding the demagnetization of the substrate. Since there are few reports regarding time dependent heat transfer through an organic–inorganic interface, we attempted to quantitatively analyze this heat transfer using the three-dimensional numerical analysis, the finite difference method (FDM), based on the following equation:12,13 (1)where Tki,j is the temperature [K] at a point (i, j) at time k. These three-dimensional calculations were represented by cylindrical coordinates: the distance between points (i, j) and (i + 1, j), i.e., the radial distance, is represented by Δr, while the distance between points (i, j) and (i, j + 1), i.e., height, is expressed by Δz. The λ, thermal conductivity [W m−1 K−1], ρ, density [kg m−3], and c, specific heat [J kg−1 K−1] values of the materials are summarized in Table 2.21–23 At boundary points, the average λ, ρ, and c values of the materials were used, as previously described in the literature.24
Table 2 Physical and thermal properties of materials used for calculations21–23




Heat conductivity, λ [W m−1 K−1]


PVDF
0.13


Magnetic substrate
5.0


Quartz glass
1.38






Specific heat, c [J kg−1 K−1]


PVDF
1250


Magnetic substrate
602


Quartz glass
670






Density, ρ [kg m−3]


PVDF
1780


Magnetic substrate
6670


Quartz glass
2200




In this analysis, the calculation model was built up in order to reproduce the decrease in MCD, which should reflect the amount of demagnetized magnetic substrate within the MCD measurement area: demagnetization occurs by heat transfer from the photoexcited (SiPc)2-based film. In the calculations, the cross section of the laser beam and the MCD measurement area were approximated to a circle and a square, respectively.§¶ The thicknesses of the magnetic substrate and the (SiPc)2-based film were determined to be 600 nm and 200 nm based on the SEM measurement and the amount of casted compounds, respectively, while that of the quartz glass was set to 10 μm, which will be shown to be adequate later in this analysis.
In this numerical analysis, the drastic temperature rise was set to occur in the (SiPc)2-based film immediately after pulsed laser irradiation for the following reasons: (1) the temperature rise of the organic–inorganic hybrid materials was observed only when the (SiPc)2-based film was selectively irradiated. (2) The heat generation process occurs within 7 ns, i.e., the pulse width of the laser, since 95% of the photoexcited (SiPc)2 should deactivate with 24 ps of the excited singlet state lifetime.25 Thus, in this numerical analysis, the heat transfer was calculated starting at 7 ns, at which time the photothermal energy conversion process had completed after pulsed laser irradiation of the (SiPc)2-based film. The initial temperature distribution in the (SiPc)2-based film was set to be the laser beam profile-based Gaussian function: since the photothermal energy conversion in (SiPc)2 has been shown to be >99% based on the very low fluorescence quantum yield (<0.01),10 the initial temperature was estimated by the thermal energy converted from the absorbed laser energy, which was evaluated using the absorbance of the (SiPc)2-based film at the wavelength of the pulsed laser (640 nm) and the physical parameters of PVDF (Table 2). The initial temperature of the magnetic substrate and quartz glass was set to be 25 °C. The heat dissipation from the (SiPc)2-based film to air was negligible (<10 μJ) within 1 μs based on the calculation using the heat transfer coefficient, α [W m−2 K−1], represented by :26 the α value was experimentally evaluated to be 30 using the temperature difference, ΔT [K], evaluated using the thermal camera and the Q [W] value corresponding to the absorbed light energy in the steady state (96 mW).||

Fig. 7 shows the calculated isothermal surfaces at TC (210 °C) at different time intervals after pulsed laser irradiation. In the calculations, the FWHM of the Gaussian function of the laser beam profile and the square side length of the MCD measurement area were set to be 1.3 and 2 mm: these are similar to their short axes experimentally evaluated. 10 ns after pulsed laser irradiation with an energy of 8.4 mJ per pulse, the region over TC is almost entirely within the (SiPc)2-based film (Fig. 7a), although the heat transfer to the magnetic substrate occurs with increasing time (300 ns, Fig. 7b). 600 ns after pulsed laser irradiation, the region over TC in the magnetic substrate becomes maximized (80%, Fig. 7c), followed by heat dissipation to the quartz glass (Fig. 7d). These figures clearly indicate the three dimensional thermal energy transfer from the (SiPc)2-based film to the magnetic substrate. When the energy of the pulsed laser is 1.7 mJ per pulse, the region over TC in the magnetic substrate is obviously small compared with an energy of 8.4 mJ per pulse, even at 600 ns (Fig. 7e and f). This clearly indicates the relationship between the decrease in the MCD and the pulsed laser energy. The temperature rise on the opposite side of the irradiation surface was calculated to be within 0.01 °C even at 1.2 μs, and therefore, a thickness of 10 μm for the quartz glass was sufficient to analyze this system.
 Fig. 7  Calculated isothermal surfaces at TC after the pulsed laser irradiation with an energy of 8.4 mJ per pulse (a–d) and 1.7 mJ per pulse (e–h), at different time intervals (a, e: 10 ns, b, f: 300 ns, c, g: 600 ns, d, h: 1.2 μs). 
At 600 ns, 80% of the magnetic substrate become over TC: 80% of the magnetic substrate should be demagnetized by pulsed laser irradiation, because the previous report demonstrated that the spin relaxation time of the magnetic garnet was <1 ns which was much shorter than the heat transfer time (several 100 ns).27 Thus, the amount of demagnetization was evaluated. Fig. 8 shows laser-energy dependent demagnetization. Although the numerically calculated demagnetization is a little overestimated compared with the experimental results, this numerical calculation result well reproduced the experimental tendency. Thus, these calculations clearly indicate that demagnetization of the magnetic substrate can be caused by photothermal energy transfer from the photoexcited molecular thin film to the inorganic magnetic substrate.
 Fig. 8  Calculated ratios of the magnetized substrate after pulsed laser irradiation. 
Conclusions
In this study, we investigated the demagnetization process of a magnetic substrate by using selective pulsed-laser irradiation of the Pc-based film, and analyzed the heat transfer from an organic material to an inorganic substrate in a submicrometer-order and a submicrosecond time scale. The temperature distributions within the Pc-based film and the magnetic substrate were calculated using a numerical method: the calculation results successfully explained the pulsed-laser induced demagnetization of the magnetic substrate. These results would provide not only a novel approach to monitoring such rapid temperature rises by spectroscopy, but also a better understanding of photothermal energy transfer from organic materials to inorganic materials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers 17H06375 and JP16H04128. A part of this work was conducted at Advanced Characterization Nanotechnology Platform of the University of Tokyo, supported by “Nanotechnology Platform” of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT), Japan.
References
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1924–1945 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. D’Andrade and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1585–1595 CrossRef .
K. J. Bergemann, R. Krasny and S. R. Forrest, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 1565–1568 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jin, C. Shao, J. Kieffer, K. P. Pipe and M. Shtein, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 093503 CrossRef .
S. Chung, J. H. Lee, J. Jeong, J. J. Kim and Y. Hong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 253302 CrossRef .
X. Qi and S. R. Forrest, Thermal analysis of high intensity organic light-emitting diodes based on a transmission matrix approach, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 124516 CrossRef .
Telops, http://telops.com/products/high-speed-cameras, accessed Octprber 25, 2017.
K. Ishii and K. Ozawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18897–18901 CAS .
M. Karasawa and K. Ishii, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 21811–21817 CAS .
L. Oddos-Marcel, F. Madeore, A. Bock, D. Neher, A. Ferencz, H. Rengel, G. Wegner, C. Kryschi and H. P. Trommsdorff, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 11850–11856 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Shinagawa, in Magneto-optics, ed. S. Sugano and N. Kojima, Springer, Berlin, Germany,  1999, pp. 137–177 Search PubMed .

          H. S. Carslaw and J. C. Jeager, Conduction of heat in solids, Oxford University Press, London, UK,  1959 Search PubMed .

          G. M. Dusinberre, Heat-transfer calculations by finite difference, International textbook company, Pennsylvania,  1961 Search PubMed .
J. Cho, M. Gomi and M. Abe, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1989, 28, 1593–1595 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mizuno and M. Gomi, IEEE Trans. Magn., 1986, 22, 1236–1238 CrossRef .
K. Ishii and N. Sakai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 15354–15357 RSC .
K. Ishii, Y. Kikukawa, M. Shiine, N. Kobayashi, T. Tsuru, Y. Sakai and A. Sakoda, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 2975–2981 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Ishii and N. Kobayashi, in The Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. Kadish, R. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Academic Press, San Diego,  2003, vol. 16, pp. 1–42 Search PubMed .
J. Michl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 6812–6818 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mack, M. J. Stillman and N. Kobayashi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2007, 251, 429–453 CrossRef CAS .

Landolt-Börnstein – Group III Condensed Matter 12A (Part A: Garnets and Perovskites), ed. K.-H. Hellwege and A. M. Hellwege, Springer Materials, Berlin, Germany,  1978 Search PubMed .

          The Chemical Society of Japan, Handbook of Chemistry: Pure Chemistry, Maruzen. Corp. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan, 5th edn,  2004 Search PubMed .

          The Chemical Society of Japan, Handbook of Chemistry: Applied Chemistry, Maruzen. Corp. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan, 7th edn,  2014 Search PubMed .
K. Katayama and S. Saito, Trans. Jpn. Soc. Mech. Eng., 1968, 34, 2165–2171 CrossRef .
M. Fujitsuka, O. Ito and H. Konami, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2001, 74, 1823–1829 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Mochizuki and A. Murata, Fundamentals of heat-transfer engineering (in Japanese), Nissin-Shuppan, Tokyo, Japan,  1994 Search PubMed .

          R. E. Teale, in Physics of magnetic garnets, Proc. Int. Sch. Phys. “Enrico Fermi”; course LXX, Varenna on Lake Como, Italy, June 27-July 9, 1977, ed. A. Paoletti, North-Holland, New York,  1978, pp. 270–317 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† In order to extract the magnetic field dependence of the MCD signal due to the Q band of (SiPc)2, the half-difference of the magnetic field dependence between the positive (635 nm) and negative (650 nm) signals was calculated (Fig. 4d), by which the magnetic hysteresis owing to the magnetic substrate was removed.‡ When laser irradiation with an energy greater than 8.4 mJ per pulse was used, the intensity of the MCD signal due to (SiPc)2 decreased, indicating that (SiPc)2 underwent decomposition due to pulsed laser irradiation. Therefore, a pulsed laser energy of 8.4 mJ per pulse is near the upper limit under these conditions.§ The laser beam profile was experimentally measured, and its cross section was an ellipse. In the calculations, it was approximated to a circle.¶ Since the MCD measurement area was a rectangle, which was almost entirely similar in the aspect ratio to the ellipse of the laser beam, the MCD measurement area was approximated to a square in the calculations.|| Under CW laser irradiation, the temperatures of the (SiPc)2-based film (∼200 nm) and the magnetic substrate (∼600 nm) were estimated to be similar to the surface temperature (32 °C) because the thermal imaging camera can detect the temperature at a depth of ∼10 μm from the surface. This estimation is consistent with the calculation using the thermal conductivities of the materials and the temperature at the front side (32 °C) and the back side (30 °C).This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Concept for novel molecular magneto-optical memory. Tetraazaporphyrin (TAP, Q band at 600 nm), Pc (Q band at 700 nm), and naphthalocyanine (Nc, Q band at 800 nm) complexes are deposited onto each magnetic domain of an appropriate magnetic substrate, which provides magneto-optical signals (1,1,1) by magnetization. Here, if the magnetic domain for Pc is selectively demagnetized by 700 nm laser irradiation, the (101) magneto-optical signal can be observed by disappearance of the magneto-optical signal of Pc. As a result, 2N information is expected to be memorized by integrating N kinds of dyes.	 

 	Fig. 2  Demagnetization of a ferrimagnetic Bi0.8Dy2.2Fe4.3Al0.7O12 substrate based on selective pulsed laser irradiation of a molecular thin film consisting of (SiPc)2 and PVDF. The MCD of the Pc-based film on a ferrimagnetic substrate without an external magnetic field (a, signal ON), demagnetization of the ferrimagnetic substrate by photothermal effects of Pcs (b), and no MCD of Pc-based films (c, signal OFF).	 

 	Fig. 3  A cross sectional SEM image of the ferrimagnetic garnet substrate on the quartz glass substrate.	 

 	Fig. 4  The diffuse transmission spectrum and the MCD spectrum of the (SiPc)2-based film on the magnetic substrate (a and b). Magnetic field dependence of the MCD signals for the (SiPc)2-based film on the magnetic substrate at 450 nm (c), half-difference between the positive (635 nm) and negative (650 nm) signals (d).†	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The MCD spectra of the magnetic substrate with the (SiPc)2-based film before and after laser irradiation. (b) The intensities of the MCD signals at 450 nm after laser irradiation.	 

 	Fig. 6  Optical images (a, c, e and g) and thermal images (b, d, f and h) of the (SiPc)2-based film deposited on the magnetic substrate before laser irradiation (a and b) and during laser irradiation (c and d), as well as those of the side opposite to the irradiation surface during laser irradiation (e and f) and the magnetic substrate without the (SiPc)2-based film during laser irradiation (g and h). In the optical images, the central blue section, light orange section, and black and white section are the (SiPc)2-based film, the magnetic substrate, and the sample holder, respectively. The thermal images during CW laser irradiation were measured 10 minutes after the start of irradiation.	 


Irradiation surface	w/	w/o	24	24
Irradiation surface	w/	w/	32	25
Opposite to the irradiation surface	w/	w/	30	25
Irradiation surface	w/o	w/	24	24
	(1)
Heat conductivity, λ [W m−1 K−1]
PVDF	0.13
Magnetic substrate	5.0
Quartz glass	1.38


Specific heat, c [J kg−1 K−1]
PVDF	1250
Magnetic substrate	602
Quartz glass	670


Density, ρ [kg m−3]
PVDF	1780
Magnetic substrate	6670
Quartz glass	2200

 	Fig. 7  Calculated isothermal surfaces at TC after the pulsed laser irradiation with an energy of 8.4 mJ per pulse (a–d) and 1.7 mJ per pulse (e–h), at different time intervals (a, e: 10 ns, b, f: 300 ns, c, g: 600 ns, d, h: 1.2 μs).	 

 	Fig. 8  Calculated ratios of the magnetized substrate after pulsed laser irradiation.	 
Footnotes
† In order to extract the magnetic field dependence of the MCD signal due to the Q band of (SiPc)2, the half-difference of the magnetic field dependence between the positive (635 nm) and negative (650 nm) signals was calculated (Fig. 4d), by which the magnetic hysteresis owing to the magnetic substrate was removed.
‡ When laser irradiation with an energy greater than 8.4 mJ per pulse was used, the intensity of the MCD signal due to (SiPc)2 decreased, indicating that (SiPc)2 underwent decomposition due to pulsed laser irradiation. Therefore, a pulsed laser energy of 8.4 mJ per pulse is near the upper limit under these conditions.
§ The laser beam profile was experimentally measured, and its cross section was an ellipse. In the calculations, it was approximated to a circle.
¶ Since the MCD measurement area was a rectangle, which was almost entirely similar in the aspect ratio to the ellipse of the laser beam, the MCD measurement area was approximated to a square in the calculations.
|| Under CW laser irradiation, the temperatures of the (SiPc)2-based film (∼200 nm) and the magnetic substrate (∼600 nm) were estimated to be similar to the surface temperature (32 °C) because the thermal imaging camera can detect the temperature at a depth of ∼10 μm from the surface. This estimation is consistent with the calculation using the thermal conductivities of the materials and the temperature at the front side (32 °C) and the back side (30 °C).

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
