Relating open-circuit voltage losses to the active layer morphology and contact selectivity in organic solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA01195H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA01195H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12574-12581Relating open-circuit voltage losses to the active layer morphology and contact selectivity in organic solar cells†

        
          
            Zheng 
            Tang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Armantas 
            Melianas
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Wu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Renee 
            Kroon
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Weiwei 
            Li
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Ma
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Mats R. 
            Andersson
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Zaifei 
            Ma
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Wanzhu 
            Cai
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Wolfgang 
            Tress
          
        
      *g and 

        
          
            Olle 
            Inganäs
          
        
      *b
aState Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, Center for Advanced Low-dimension Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai, 201620, P. R. China. E-mail: mazaifei@dhu.edu.cn
bBiomolecular and Organic Electronics, IFM, Center of Organic Electronics, Linköping University, Linköping, SE-581 83, Sweden. E-mail: wanzhu.cai@liu.se; oling@ifm.liu.se
cState Key Laboratory for Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, P. R. China
dDepartment of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg, 41296, Sweden
eBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, CAS Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 10090, China
fFlinders Institute for NanoScale Science and Technology, Flinders University, Sturt Road, Bedford Park, 5042, Australia
gLaboratory of Photomolecular Science, Institute of Chemical Sciences, Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: wolfgang.tress@epfl.ch
Received 
      5th February 2018
    , Accepted 11th June 2018First published on 13th June 2018AbstractWe demonstrate that voltage losses due to both radiative and non-radiative recombination of charge carriers are strongly dependent on D/A phase separation. By processing the active layer with various solvent additives, we create distinct morphologies that lead to significantly different device open-circuit voltages (VOC), even though the charge transfer state energy (ECT) of the D/A blend remains rather constant. We find that radiative recombination losses are significantly increased for a finely intermixed morphology, due to the large D/A interface area. This leads to a total recombination loss of ECT − qVOC ≈ 0.7 eV. However, considerably smaller losses (0.5 eV), due to suppressed non-radiative recombination, are possible in solar cells where the D/A materials are organized to only allow for selective charge carrier extraction. Using a drift diffusion model, we show that the origin of the reduced non-radiative recombination losses is related to an effect which has not been considered for ‘optimized’ solar cells – the suppression of minority carrier diffusion to the ‘wrong’ contact. Our results suggest that the built-in field is not sufficiently strong even in ‘optimized’ organic solar cells and that selective carrier extraction is critical for further improvements in VOC.
1. Introduction
The most efficient organic solar cells (OSC) are based on the concept of a bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) where an electron donating material is mixed with an electron accepting material, forming the photo active layer.1 However, even fully ‘optimized’ BHJ morphologies with an external quantum efficiency (EQE) of ≈80% still lead to large voltage losses,2–4 thereby severely limiting the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OSC. This is highlighted by the large difference between the optical bandgap (Eg) and the open-circuit voltage (VOC) of OSC – voltage losses which are considerably larger than for other, for instance, inorganic solar cell technologies.5
There are several factors that determine the voltage losses. In the early days of OSC, the role of work function of the contacts and its influence on the device built-in electric field and VOC were intensively discussed.6,7 Through empirical optimizations, better electrode or interlayer materials were found,8–10 and the research focus regarding voltage losses shifted to the donor/acceptor (D/A) blend.11,12 It was found that radiative recombination at the D/A interface plays a critical role in determining VOC of OSC,13,14 causing a voltage loss ≈ 0.25 V. Additionally, non-radiative recombination reduces VOC typically by ≈0.35 V, leading to an empirical relation of qVOC ≈ ECT − 0.6 eV,15 where q is the elementary charge and ECT is the energy of the charge transfer (CT) state between donor and acceptor in the BHJ.
However, the origin of the considerably larger recombination losses in OSC, compared to inorganic devices, is still unclear. Previously, by carefully varying the donor content (or D/A ratio in other words) in vacuum deposited small molecule solar cells, Vandewal et al.16 have shown that the density of CT states significantly affects the recombination probability of the photogenerated charge carriers, thereby affecting the radiative recombination losses. Recently, Benduhn et al. demonstrated a correlation between non-radiative recombination losses and thermally activated molecular vibrations, also for vacuum deposited OSC.17
Nevertheless, additional mechanisms affecting the dynamics of charge carrier recombination may still be present in OSCs. This is especially the case for efficient solution processed polymer/fullerene BHJ solar cells which have complicated active layer morphologies due to the complex hierarchical arrangement of polymer chains. It is therefore rational to ask: (1) whether the active layer morphology of polymer/fullerene OSCs – formed by deposition from solution – can influence radiative and/or non-radiative recombination losses and thereby affect VOC and (2) whether, with the VOC increased to around 1 V in efficient polymer/fullerene OSC, the conditions for optimized contacts and sufficient built-in electric field need to be reconsidered.
Here, we demonstrate that in polymer/fullerene OSCs with an optimal D/A ratio, voltage losses due to both radiative and non-radiative charge carrier recombination depend on the active layer morphology. By processing the active layer with various PC71BM selective solvent additives, we create distinctly different active layer morphologies with an accompanying variation in the device VOC (0.8–1.0 V). We show that in finely intermixed morphologies, radiative recombination losses are increased, leading to a total recombination loss of ≈0.7 eV. This is ascribed to the large D/A interface area, leading to an increase in charge carrier recombination probability. However, even for coarser morphologies that are optimized for PCE, regardless of the solvent additive used, significant losses due to non-radiative recombination are still present. In contrast, a reduction of the non-radiative recombination losses by ≈0.1 eV is obtained when the donor and the acceptor materials are organized to only allow for selective charge carrier extraction, thereby leading to a significantly improved VOC (1 V). Using a drift diffusion model, we show that the reduction of non-radiative recombination losses is related to a suppression of minority carrier diffusion to the ‘wrong’ contact (electrons to the anode/holes to the cathode), which suggests insufficient built-in electric field even in ‘optimized’ solar cells, and the importance of selective contacts for minimizing voltage losses in OSC.
2. Results and discussions
2.1. Active layer morphology
To study voltage losses related to changes in the active layer morphology, or the degree of D/A phase separation, we have used poly(2,5-thiophene-alt-2,7-(5,10-bis((2-hexyldecyl)oxy)dithieno[3,2-c:3′,2′-h][1,5]naphthyridine)) (PTNT) as the donor polymer18 and [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) as acceptor. PTNT was chosen as a model system, because ECT of OSC based on PTNT:PC71BM is known to be independent of the processing conditions and thus the active layer morphology, and the device performance has been well optimized in the previous literature.18 The molecular structure of PTNT and absorption coefficients of the materials used are given in Fig. 1a.
 Fig. 1  (a) Absorption coefficient of neat PTNT, PC71BM and blend PTNT:PC71BM (2:3), and the molecular structure of PTNT. (b) A schematic picture of the solar cell device architecture studied in this work. (c) J–V characteristics of solar cells with active layers cast from the different solvent additives. 
To create sufficiently different active layer morphologies, we used o-xylene, which has moderate solubility for PC71BM, as the host solvent, whereas solvents with good solubility for PC71BM, such as N-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP),19 1,2-dimethylnaphthalene (DMN),20 1-chloronaphthalene (CN),21 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO),22 and 1,8-octanedithiol (ODT)23 were used as the solvent additive. These additives were chosen because they lead to very different active layer drying kinetics after processing of the active layer, as indicated by the in situ reflectance measurements24 during active layer drying, shown in Fig. S2 (ESI).† Therefore, active layers cast from solutions with the different solvent additives are expected to have distinctly different morphologies with concomitant variations in the photovoltaic performance. Indeed, the performance of the solar cells fabricated (in a standard device architecture, Fig. 1b) using the different solvent additives is very different. The short circuit current (JSC) varies in the range between 5–8 mA cm−2 (Fig. 1c), and more importantly for this work, we achieve a significant change of VOC of 0.2 V by simply using different solvent additives.
To evaluate the reason for the difference in VOC, the complex spatial arrangement of D/A materials was measured with Grazing-Incidence Wide-Angle X-ray Scattering (GIWAXS) experiments for the pure PTNT film and the BHJ blends cast from different solvent additives. From the GIWAXS results of pure PTNT (Fig. 2), we observe a preference for face-on orientation with distinct (100) and (010) diffractions at ≈0.29 Å−1 and ≈1.75 Å−1. This suggests a lamellar and π–π stacking with d100 ≈ 22 Å and d010 ≈ 3.6 Å (Table S1, ESI†). These diffractions are also identified in the blends of PTNT and PC71BM cast from the different additives, indicating a similar texture in the pure and the blend films, regardless of the additive used. However, coherence lengths (CL), estimated using the Scherrer equation,25 are found to be different in the BHJ films cast from different additives. The largest CL of lamellar packing (265 Å) and π–π stacking (55 Å), which indicate a formation of relatively large crystals, are obtained when DMN is used, whereas the smallest CL of lamellar packing (208.51 Å) and π–π stacking (43 Å) are obtained for the film cast from NMP. The relative polymer crystal sizes obtained with GIWAXS correlate with the domain sizes predicted by Resonant Soft X-ray Scattering (RSoXS) measurements (Fig. S4†): the average domain size in a blend film decreases from 61 nm for the film cast from DMN to 40 nm for the film from NMP. As such, DMN is expected to give rise to the largest, whereas NMP to the smallest phase separation. Below we further elucidate the morphological properties of the blends cast from different solvent additives by complementary optical and electrical measurements performed on the corresponding solar cell devices.
 Fig. 2  In-plane and out-of-plane cuts of 2D-GIWAXS patterns (shown in Fig. S3, ESI†) for a pure PTNT film cast from o-xylene and BHJ blend films cast from o-xylene and different solvent additives. Deposition conditions for the films are the same as those used for the corresponding solar cell devices. 
To quantitatively compare the active layer morphologies, sensitive photoluminescence (PL)26 measurements were performed. Because of the short diffusion length of excitons, a higher quenching efficiency is directly related to better mixed D/A phases and smaller donor or acceptor domains. Therefore, PL measurements are highly reliable for probing the morphology of BHJ blends, especially so as the measurement can be performed on solar cell devices.27 We used an excitation wavelength of 450 nm to determine the PL quenching efficiency (ηquenching(λ)) in the polymer and in the fullerene phase upon making a BHJ: (1)where ηpristine_emission_BHJ(λ) is the PL intensity of the BHJ active layer at a specific wavelength λ, similarly ηpristine_emission_pure(λ) is the PL intensity of the corresponding pure film. Both spectra are scaled by sample absorption at the excitation wavelength.
PL results from the solar cell devices, shown in Fig. 3, indicate that the quenching of polymer emission, peaked at 625 nm, is efficient (ηquenching_PTNT ≈ 90%) for all the devices regardless of the solvent additive used. The relative sizes of the neat polymer domains in the different active layers, as revealed by PL data, agree well with the sizes of crystals from GIWAXS measurements, with DMN giving rise to the largest and NMP to the smallest polymer domains. Additionally, photons are also absorbed by the PC71BM (see Fig. 1a), which results in emission predominantly at wavelengths around 750 nm. We notice that quenching of the PC71BM emission also increases from DMN to CN/DIO/ODT, and then to NMP, indicating the largest PC71BM domains in devices cast from DMN, and the smallest from NMP.
 Fig. 3  PL spectra of the active layers (PTNT:PC71BM 2:3) cast from o-xylene mixed with different solvent additives. Photoluminescence spectra of pure PTNT (light grey) and PC71BM (dark grey) are shown for comparison. All spectra are corrected by sample absorption at the excitation wavelength (450 nm). 
Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics and internal quantum efficiency (IQE) analysis further corroborate the above observations, see ESI† for a more detailed discussion. In view of this, we conclude that the solar cells with different VOC have different morphologies. Whereas solar cells constructed from NMP, with a highly-intermixed morphology allowing for very efficient exciton dissociation in both the polymer and the PC71BM phase, are expected to be limited by a high rate of charge carrier recombination (due to a large number of D/A interfaces). This is thus the reason for the strongly field dependent current extraction seen in the J–V characteristics (Fig. S1, ESI†).
2.2. Voltage losses due to charge carrier recombination
For the solvent additives DMN, CN and DIO, the same VOC (≈0.9 V) is obtained. Whereas a lower VOC (≈0.8 V) is obtained using NMP and a higher VOC (≈1.0 V) is obtained using ODT. We now elucidate the relation between D/A phase separation and how it affects voltage losses due to radiative and non-radiative recombination which dictates device VOC.
We rely on the well-established model that it is predominantly the energy of the CT state that determines the VOC of the operating photovoltaic device.13 To estimate the energy of the CT state we have performed highly sensitive EQE measurements by Fourier transform photocurrent spectroscopy (FTPS),28 as shown in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  FTPS-EQE for solar cells cast from o-xylene with the different solvent additives. (a) NMP, (b) DMN/CN/DIO, and (c) ODT. The orange and the red rectangles indicate the contribution of non-radiative and radiative recombination losses to losses in VOC. ECT is determined by fitting the low energy EQE tail using eqn (2), non-radiative recombination losses are calculated using eqn (5), and radiative losses are calculated using eqn (3). The fitting curve given in (b) is for DIO. 
The lower energy part of the EQE spectra – the CT state manifold – can be fitted by Marcus theory to estimate the energy of the CT state:11 (2)where f is the oscillator absorption strength, proportional to the D/A (CT state) interface area and the D/A interaction strength, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is absolute temperature, and λ is the reorganization energy.
Despite the difference in active layer morphologies, we find a nearly identical ECT ≈ 1.51 ± 0.01 eV for all of the blends processed with the different solvent additives. This means that, at least for this material system, ECT appears to be morphology independent. However, as the VOC of NMP and ODT devices differs by as much as 0.2 V, we conclude that changes in ECT alone cannot explain the difference in VOC.
It can be shown that when detailed balance theory is applied, eqn (3) can be used to relate the VOC of the operating device to radiative (ΔErad) and non-radiative (ΔEnonrad) recombination losses via experimentally determined parameters related to the interfacial CT state:13 qVOC = ECT − ΔErad − ΔEnonrad,(3) (4) ΔEnonrad = −kTln(EQEEL),(5)where q is the elementary charge and EQEEL is the external quantum efficiency of electroluminescence of the device. Therefore, we further discuss how these energy losses are related to D/A phase separation and lead to different device VOC, by measuring EQEEL for all of the solar cells.
From the EQEEL measurements (Table S2, ESI†), we found that EQEEL of the device cast from ODT is about one order of magnitude higher than that of the others. This leads to calculated non-radiative recombination losses, ΔEnonrad, of 0.36 eV for the ODT device, about 0.07–0.08 eV lower than that of the devices cast from other solvent additives. These different losses are illustrated in Fig. 4 to highlight their contribution to the total loss of ECT − qVOC and show that losses due to non-radiative recombination (organic shaded areas) are morphology dependent. Before we discuss the origin of this difference, we first discuss radiative recombination losses.
Radiative recombination losses, ΔErad, can be calculated using eqn (3). Results are also shown in Fig. 4 as red shaded areas. Similar ΔErad are found for solar cells cast from DMN, CN, DIO and ODT (0.18–0.19 eV). However, we find significantly higher ΔErad (0.25 eV) in the well intermixed BHJ of NMP, which is due to a large number of D/A (CT) interfaces as confirmed by fitting the CT state manifold according to eqn (2): the fitting allows for an approximate quantification of f, proportional to the D/A (CT state) interface area, and we find the largest value of f for the device cast from NMP (Table S2, ESI†). This agrees well with our morphology analysis based on sensitive PL measurements and IQE analysis (in ESI†). These results show that energy losses due to radiative recombination in solution processed polymer/fullerene OSC are also morphology dependent and that well intermixed polymer/fullerene blends have high radiative recombination losses.
The larger interface area in the device cast from NMP also leads to the highest ΔEnonrad, leading to a total recombination loss of ≈0.7 eV, considerably higher than the standard value of ≈0.6 eV, and thus the lowest VOC of 0.8 V. On the other hand, the device cast from ODT has the lowest non-radiative recombination losses, which results in a total recombination loss as low as 0.54 eV, and the highest VOC (1 V). We will further discuss the origin of the reduced losses due to non-radiative recombination in the solar cell cast from ODT and offer a suggestion on how VOC can be improved in other BHJ systems.
2.3. Origin of suppressed non-radiative recombination losses
The highest reported VOC for PTNT:PC71BM is 0.9 V,18 and in this work, we also obtain a VOC of 0.9 V for devices cast using, for instance, o-xylene and the DIO additive. However, solar cells cast from ODT indicate a VOC close to 1 V. This shows that an additional ≈0.1 V in VOC, a significant number for a photovoltaic device, can be gained if non-radiative recombination losses are suppressed.
The suppression of non-radiative recombination losses cannot all be ascribed to a change (reduction) of the D/A interface area, as the degree of D/A intermixing in the solar cell cast from ODT does not differ significantly from that from DIO, as indicated by their similar PL quenching efficiency and a similar value of the fit parameter f, according to eqn (2). This means that some additional charge carrier loss mechanism is avoided in the ODT based device. We thus focus our attention on the S-shaped J–V observed for the solar cell processed from ODT, known to be related to carrier injection/extraction limitations at the active layer/contact interface.29
Drift-diffusion simulation (DDS) was previously utilized to show that S-shaped J–V curves were due to extraction barriers of either majority or minority charge carriers generated by photo excitation.30 For the later, the S-shape disappears under weak illumination. Therefore, we have performed light-intensity dependent J–V measurements for the solar cell cast from ODT. From the normalized light-intensity dependent J–V curves shown in Fig. 5a, the S-shape indeed vanishes at lower illumination intensity. This indicates that: (1) the origin of the S-shaped J–V curve is due to the existence of an extraction barrier, preventing diffusion of the minority carriers to the ‘wrong’ contacts (holes to the cathode and electrons to the anode), and (2) that the internal electric field is weak and it changes direction before the open-circuit condition is reached.
 Fig. 5  (a) Light-intensity dependent J–V characteristics for the solar cell based on ODT. The curves are normalized at a reverse bias of (below which the normalized curves coincide). (b) Simulated light-intensity dependent J–V characteristics of the solar cells based on ODT, using a drift diffusion model. Selective contacts and a low built-in field are needed in the simulation to reproduce the vanishing S-shape for weak illumination intensities. (c) Experimental and simulated J–V characteristics for the solar cell cast from ODT under one sun illumination. Removal of the contact selectivity in simulation leads to a reduced VOC and a non-S-shaped curve. Parameters used in the simulations are given in Table S3, ESI.† 
To confirm the above conclusion, we have performed DDS to reproduce the light intensity dependent J–V curves (Fig. 5b). Indeed, the S-shape and its trend with light intensity can be simulated assuming a low built-in potential (Vbi, lower than the device VOC at 1 sun) and selective contacts (providing ‘extraction barriers’ for minority carriers). Simulations details are given in Table S3 (ESI).†
Based on the results from the illumination intensity dependent J–V characteristics, we further manage to fit the J–V curve measured under 1 sun illumination, using DDS, for the device cast from ODT (Fig. 5c). The best fit was obtained with a Vbi of approximately 0.95 V (Table S3, ESI†), lower than the device VOC (0.99 V). In addition, removal of the contact selectivity (extraction barrier for minority charge carriers) leads to a non-S-shaped curve and a reduction of VOC to ≈0.9 V. This value matches the experimental VOC of the non-S-shaped ‘optimized’ device case from DIO.
Thereby, from the DDS, we confirm that the improved VOC of the solar cell cast from ODT, compared to that from DIO, is due to suppression of charge carrier extraction (diffusion) at the ‘wrong’ contact. This is a result of the formation of extraction barriers for minority charge carriers which lead to an improved contact selectivity. However, the only difference between the solar cell cast from ODT and from other solvent additives is the morphology of the active layer. Therefore, the increased contact selectivity (extraction barrier) is likely due to the existence of a PC71BM enriched cathode/active layer interface and/or a polymer enriched anode/active layer interface, induced by the use of ODT that facilitates highly selective contacts for the majority carriers only. Although the stratification, localized at the electrode/active layer interface, is difficult to resolve experimentally on a device level, strong vertical phase separations are known and observed in organic BHJ blends.31,32 To confirm our speculation, we have performed Kelvin Probe measurements on pure PTNT and PCBM, as well as the active layers cast from different solvent additives. As shown in Fig. S5,† the work function (WF) of pure PCBM and PTNT are −4.7 eV and −4.6 eV, respectively, and the WF of the blend active layer cast from ODT is close to that of pure PCBM (−4.7 eV). This indicates that the surface of the active layer cast from ODT is PCBM enriched. On the other hand, the WF of the blend cast from DIO is close to that of pure PTNT, indicating a polymer enriched surface. This observation strongly suggests that the surface composition of the active layer cast from ODT is different from that cast from DIO, and the enrichment of PCBM at the top surface is the reason for the improved contact selectivity of the devices cast from ODT.
It is important to note that minority charge carrier extraction barriers improve VOC only when losses due to the diffusion of minority carriers to the ‘wrong’ contact, or in other words, surface recombination losses, are already significant without the extraction barriers.33 This is why, in simulation, VOC of the ODT device reduces down to that of the ‘optimized’ device (0.9 V), when the extraction barrier is removed. The result is critically important, as it suggests that even in the highest efficiency device, i.e. ‘optimized’ solar cells, (1) significant losses due to the diffusion of minority charge carriers to the ‘wrong’ contact are already present, (2) the built-in electric field is actually not sufficient in a sense that it does not suppress minority carrier diffusion to the ‘wrong’ contact at open circuit, and (3) the non-radiative recombination losses in OSCs, limiting VOC, are at least partially related to the diffusion losses. Our studies suggest that truly selective contacts are necessary for further improvements in VOC, even for ‘fully’ optimized OSCs, as we have demonstrated here, where an additional ≈0.1 V has been gained.
It should be noted that although the PCBM enriched top surface and reduced diffusion losses have led to an improved VOC, the overall performance of the solar cell cast with ODT was considerably worse compared to the most efficient solar cell cast from DIO. This is because there also exists an extraction barrier for the majority carriers in the ODT solar cell, which limits the FF of the operating device. The presence of an extraction barrier for the majority carriers is confirmed by the transient photocurrent measurements shown in Fig. S6:† the negative overshoot observed at early times when the OSC is operating close to VOC conditions indicates a piling up of majority charge carriers close to the extracting electrodes. This suggests that the morphology of the bulk of the active layer cast from ODT is still undesired for an efficient extraction of majority charge carriers. To eliminate the extraction losses, limiting FF of the photovoltaic devices, and achieve a balance in the photovoltaic performance parameters, the active layer morphology should be further optimized. This means that interpenetrating networks of donor and acceptor materials are still required for an efficient charge carrier extraction, while the surface of the active layer is covered by either a pristine donor or acceptor for reduced diffusion losses and improved VOC.
3. Conclusion
To conclude, we have shown that in polymer/fullerene solar cells voltage losses due to radiative and non-radiative charge carrier recombination are related to the D/A phase separation in the active layer, which we have systematically varied using different solvent additives. Both radiative and non-radiative recombination losses are significant in finely mixed morphologies, leading to a much lower device VOC (≈0.8 V), as compared to that of an ‘optimized’ cell (VOC ≈ 0.9 V). This is because finely mixed morphologies lead to a high carrier recombination probability due to the large D/A interface area. Hence, the D/A interface area must be small enough to not only allow for efficient charge transport, as is commonly believed, but also for a minimal voltage loss originating from charge carrier recombination at the D/A interface.
Reducing voltage losses due to non-radiative recombination is possible in ‘optimized’ solar cells, since non-radiative losses do not only occur at the D/A interface, but also at the active layer/electrode interface. Suppression of non-radiative recombination losses can be realized through minimizing minority carrier diffusion to the ‘wrong’ contact, which in this work, is achieved by tuning the active layer morphology: for the studied materials, improved charge carrier extraction selectivity has led to an increase in device VOC by as high as 0.1 V, leading to a VOC of 1.0 V. This also suggests that the built-in electric field can in general be insufficient to prevent diffusion losses even in ‘optimized’ organic solar cells. Therefore, selective charge carrier extraction is critical for future improvements in device VOC. We thus propose that the importance of the built-in electric field and the selectivity for charge carrier extraction should be reconsidered in future high efficient solar cell device design.
4. Experimental section
Solar cells were fabricated on ITO (80 nm) coated glass substrates. The substrates were cleaned by detergent, then by TL-1 treatment. Then, PEDOT:PSS purchased from Heraeus was spin-coated on top of the clean substrate in a laminar flow bench at 3000 rpm for 1 min. The PEDOT:PSS coated substrate was annealed at 130° for 5 min, and was then transferred to a glove box filled with nitrogen. The BHJ active layer (PTNT:PC71BM 2:3) was deposited in the glove box, and the top bilayer LiF (0.6 nm)/Al (80 nm) electrode was deposited in a vacuum chamber through a shadow mask at a pressure of 5 × 10−6 mbar. The active area of the solar cell was 4 mm2. Synthesis of the polymer donor PTNT was described in a previous report.23 The fullerene acceptor PC71BM was purchased from Solenne BV. For DMN, CN, DIO and ODT, the optimum additive concentration was 4%, and for NMP, the optimum concentration was 2%.

J–V curves were measured with a Keithley 2400 source meter with the solar cell illuminated under a simulated AM1.5 solar illumination (100 mW cm−2). Light-intensity dependent J–V curves were measured using a set of neutral density filters. Absorption spectra were measured using a Perkin Elmer Lambda 900 UV-VIS-NIR spectrometer. FTPS-EQE spectra were recorded by a Vertex 70 from Bruker optics. Photoluminescence measurements were measured with a Shamrock sr 303i spectrograph from Andor Tech., and a Newton EM-CCD Si array detector. The thicknesses of the active layers were determined by a Dektak Surface profilometer. EQEEL was measured by a Hamamatsu silicon diode 1010B, a Keithley 485 current meter and a Keithley 2400 source meter. Reflectance imaging for the dry active layers was done using a CMOS camera IDS uEye UI-1220SE. The active layers were dried under an elevated temperature (50 °C). GIWAXS measurements were performed at beamline 7.3.3 (ref. 34) at the Advanced Light Source. Samples were prepared on Si substrates using identical blend solutions as those used in devices. The 10 keV X-ray beam was incident at a grazing angle of 0.12–0.16°, selected to maximize the scattering intensity from the samples. The scattered X-rays were detected using a Dectris Pilatus 2M photon counting detector. Kelvin probe measurements were done using a UHV Kelvin probe system UHVKP030 from KP technology.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Swedish Energy Agency, the Swedish Science Council and the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation, through a Wallenberg Scholar grant to O. I.; W. Ma thanks for the support from Ministry of Science and Technology (No. 2016YFA0200700), NSFC (21504066, 21534003). W. T. acknowledges an Ambizione fellowship from the Swiss National Science Foundation. X-ray data was acquired at beamlines 7.3.3 and 11.0.1.2 at the Advanced Light Source, which is supported by the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231.
References
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CrossRef .
M. Wang, D. Cai, Z. Yin, S.-C. Chen, C.-F. Du and Q. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3359 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupré, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297 CrossRef .
A. Melianas, F. Etzold, T. J. Savenije, F. Laquai, O. Inganäs and M. Kemerink, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8778 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yao, T. Kirchartz, M. S. Vezie, M. A. Faist, W. Gong, Z. He, H. Wu, J. Troughton, T. Watson, D. Bryant and J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2015, 4, 014020 CrossRef .
C. J. Brabec, A. Cravino, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, T. Fromherz and M. T. Rispens, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 374 CrossRef .
V. D. Mihailetchi, P. W. M. Blom, J. C. Hummelen and M. T. Rispens, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 6849 CrossRef .
Z. He, C. Zhong, S. Su, M. Xu, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 591 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, J. Shim, J. Meyer, A. J. Giordano, H. Li, P. Winget, T. Papadopoulos, H. Cheun, J. Kim, M. Fenoll, A. Dindar, W. Haske, E. Najafabadi, T. M. Khan, H. Sojoudi, S. Barlow, S. Graham, J.-L. Brédas, S. R. Marder, A. Kahn and B. Kippelen, Science, 2012, 336, 327 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Tang, L. M. Andersson, Z. George, K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, P. Heriksson, R. Kroon, M. R. Andersson and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 554 CrossRef PubMed .
N. K. Elumalai and A. Uddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 391 RSC .
B. Ray and M. A. Alam, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 013307 CrossRef .
K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganäs and J. V. Manca, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 125204 CrossRef .
K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, J. V. Manca and O. Inganäs, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2010, 16, 1676 Search PubMed .

Quantum Effic. Complex Syst. Pt Ii Mol. Aggreg., ed. U. Wurfel, M. Thorwart and E. R. Weber, Elsevier Academic Press Inc, San Diego,  2011, p. 261 Search PubMed .
K. Vandewal, J. Widmer, T. Heumueller, C. J. Brabec, M. D. McGehee, K. Leo, M. Riede and A. Salleo, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3839 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Benduhn, K. Tvingstedt, F. Piersimoni, S. Ullbrich, Y. Fan, M. Tropiano, K. A. McGarry, O. Zeika, M. K. Riede, C. J. Douglas, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder, D. Neher, D. Spoltore and K. Vandewal, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 201753 Search PubMed .
R. Kroon, A. Diaz de Zerio Mendaza, S. Himmelberger, J. Bergqvist, O. Bäcke, G. C. Faria, F. Gao, A. Obaid, W. Zhuang, D. Gedefaw, E. Olsson, O. Inganäs, A. Salleo, C. Müller and M. R. Andersson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11578 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Guo, M. Zhang, C. Cui, J. Hou and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8190 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-C. Chueh, K. Yao, H.-L. Yip, C.-Y. Chang, Y.-X. Xu, K.-S. Chen, C.-Z. Li, P. Liu, F. Huang, Y. Chen, W.-C. Chen and A. K.-Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3241 RSC .
C. V. Hoven, X.-D. Dang, R. C. Coffin, J. Peet, T.-Q. Nguyen and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E63 CrossRef PubMed .
J. K. Lee, W. L. Ma, C. J. Brabec, J. Yuen, J. S. Moon, J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3619 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Bergqvist, S. A. Mauger, K. Tvingstedt, H. Arwin and O. Inganäs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 114, 89 CrossRef .
D.-M. Smilgies, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2013, 46, 286 CrossRef .
H. Hoppe, M. Niggemann, C. Winder, J. Kraut, R. Hiesgen, A. Hinsch, D. Meissner and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1005 CrossRef .
K. Tvingstedt, K. Vandewal, F. Zhang and O. Inganäs, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21824 CrossRef .
M. Vanecek and A. Poruba, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 719 CrossRef .
W. Tress, K. Leo and M. Riede, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2140 CrossRef .
W. Tress and O. Inganäs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 599 CrossRef .
C. M. Björström, A. Bernasik, J. Rysz, A. Budkowski, S. Nilsson, M. Svensson, M. R. Andersson, K. O. Magnusson and E. Moons, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2005, 17, L529 CrossRef .
C. M. Björström, S. Nilsson, A. Bernasik, A. Budkowski, M. Andersson, K. O. Magnusson and E. Moons, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 3906 CrossRef .
W. Tress, K. Leo and M. Riede, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 155201 CrossRef .
A. Hexemer, W. Bras, J. Glossinger, E. Schaible, E. Gann, R. Kirian, A. MacDowell, M. Church, B. Rude and H. Padmore, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2010, 247, 012007 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta01195hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Absorption coefficient of neat PTNT, PC71BM and blend PTNT:PC71BM (2:3), and the molecular structure of PTNT. (b) A schematic picture of the solar cell device architecture studied in this work. (c) J–V characteristics of solar cells with active layers cast from the different solvent additives.	 

 	Fig. 2  In-plane and out-of-plane cuts of 2D-GIWAXS patterns (shown in Fig. S3, ESI†) for a pure PTNT film cast from o-xylene and BHJ blend films cast from o-xylene and different solvent additives. Deposition conditions for the films are the same as those used for the corresponding solar cell devices.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  PL spectra of the active layers (PTNT:PC71BM 2:3) cast from o-xylene mixed with different solvent additives. Photoluminescence spectra of pure PTNT (light grey) and PC71BM (dark grey) are shown for comparison. All spectra are corrected by sample absorption at the excitation wavelength (450 nm).	 

 	Fig. 4  FTPS-EQE for solar cells cast from o-xylene with the different solvent additives. (a) NMP, (b) DMN/CN/DIO, and (c) ODT. The orange and the red rectangles indicate the contribution of non-radiative and radiative recombination losses to losses in VOC. ECT is determined by fitting the low energy EQE tail using eqn (2), non-radiative recombination losses are calculated using eqn (5), and radiative losses are calculated using eqn (3). The fitting curve given in (b) is for DIO.	 
	(2)
qVOC = ECT − ΔErad − ΔEnonrad,	(3)
	(4)
ΔEnonrad = −kTln(EQEEL),	(5)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Light-intensity dependent J–V characteristics for the solar cell based on ODT. The curves are normalized at a reverse bias of (below which the normalized curves coincide). (b) Simulated light-intensity dependent J–V characteristics of the solar cells based on ODT, using a drift diffusion model. Selective contacts and a low built-in field are needed in the simulation to reproduce the vanishing S-shape for weak illumination intensities. (c) Experimental and simulated J–V characteristics for the solar cell cast from ODT under one sun illumination. Removal of the contact selectivity in simulation leads to a reduced VOC and a non-S-shaped curve. Parameters used in the simulations are given in Table S3, ESI.†	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta01195h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
