Plexcitonics: plasmon–exciton coupling for enhancing spectroscopy, optical chirality, and nonlinearity  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3NR01388J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3NR01388J
(Minireview)
Nanoscale, 2023, 15, 11834-11851Plexcitonics: plasmon–exciton coupling for enhancing spectroscopy, optical chirality, and nonlinearity

        
          
            Yichuan 
            Chen
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Mengtao 
            Sun
          
        
      *
      School of Mathematics and Physics, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, P. R. China. E-mail: mengtaosun@ustb.edu.cn
Received 
      25th March 2023
    , Accepted 24th June 2023First published on 26th June 2023AbstractPlexcitonics is a rapidly developing interdisciplinary field that holds immense potential for the creation of innovative optical technologies and devices. This field focuses on investigating the interactions between plasmons and excitons in hybrid systems. In this review, we provide an overview of the fundamental principles of plasmonics and plexcitonics and discuss the latest advancements in plexcitonics. Specifically, we highlight the ability to manipulate plasmon–exciton interactions, the emerging field of tip-enhanced spectroscopy, and advancements in optical chirality and nonlinearity. These recent developments have spurred further research in the field of plexcitonics and offer inspiration for the design of advanced materials and devices with enhanced optical properties and functionalities.
1. Introduction
The plexcitonics has become a rapidly growing interdisciplinary field in the past few decades, involving the study of hybrid quasiparticles that are formed when plasmons (collective oscillation of electrons in the metallic nanostructure) coherently couple with excitons (bound states of an electron and a hole in the semiconductor).1 These hybrid quasiparticles known as plasmon–exciton polaritons or plexcitons,2 can be exhibited in hybrid nanostructures, including metal–semiconductor nanocomposites,3 metal–semiconductor hybrid nanostructures,4 and metallic nanostructures embedded in semiconducting matrices.5,6 The interactions between plasmons and excitons in these hybrid nanostructures results in the formation of hybrid excitation modes, which exhibit properties that are distinct from those of plasmons and excitons alone. Moreover, plexcitons have properties that are intermediate between plasmons and excitons, which enables them to exhibit the best features of both. For example, plexcitons have the high energy-density of plasmons and the long coherence length of excitons, allowing them to reach distances of around 20 μm.7 Additionally, it is crucial to consider that the advantages of plexcitons are dependent on the particular system and intended application.8,9 The inherent properties of the material, as well as the configuration and environment in which plexcitons, plasmons, and excitons are generated and interact, can significantly influence their observed values.10–12 Therefore, it is essential to perform a meticulous evaluation of the performance metrics relevant to the specific application and to assess the feasibility of incorporating plexcitons into practical devices involved.
Plexciton is essentially the polariton formed by coupling plasmon and exciton, which can undergo Bose–Einstein condensation,13 leading to the formation of a macroscopically occupied polariton state. This effect promotes polariton-mediated interactions between light and matter. A conspicuous expression is enhanced light–matter interactions, resulting from the strong local electromagnetic field enhancement near metallic nanostructures.14,15 The strong response to light makes plexcitonic systems ideal for energy-related applications, such as solar cells,16,17 LEDs,18,19 and light-emitting devices.20 The hybrid nature of plexciton results in unique molecular spectroscopy, such as Fano resonances, which can be used for sensors.21–23 The interactions between plasmon and exciton can result in the transfer of energy, momentum, and charge between these quasiparticles,24,25 leading to a range of interesting optical and electronic properties. For example, plasmons can transfer energy to excitons, resulting in increased exciton lifetime and improved photoluminescence efficiency.26,27 Furthermore, the properties of plexcitons can be easily tuned by varying the geometry of the plasmonic structure or the composition of the material, which makes them highly versatile and suitable for a wide range of applications. The high optical nonlinearity of plexcitonic system is also worth emphasizing. In nonlinear optics, the response of the medium to light is not directly proportional to the light intensity, but instead depends on the higher-order nonlinear susceptibility which describes the relationship between the incident electric field and the induced polarization in the medium, leading to inherently weak optical nonlinearity.28 However, the strong interaction between light and plexciton polaritons in metallic nanostructures can lead to enhanced light–matter interaction and reduced light losses, and the resulting strong electromagnetic field allows weak nonlinear processes to be significantly enhanced. This makes plexcitonics highly attractive in nonlinear optics, and can be used to control and manipulate light in new and interesting ways.
According to the above mentioned, plexcitonics has attracted significant attention in the field of optoelectronics due to its potential for creating new and more efficient devices for energy conversion, light generation and detection, and information processing.29 It is important to acknowledge that the study of plexcitonics is still in the nascent stage, and significant ongoing research efforts are directed towards addressing prominent problems and uncovering the distinctive properties. The exact mechanism of plexciton formation, the role of plasmon–exciton coupling in plexciton properties, and the effects of interactions between plexcitons remain incompletely understood. Moreover, the lack of stability and reproducibility of the plexcitonic materials and devices, as well as the challenge of maintaining the quantum coherence of the plexcitons over long distances and timescales, significantly limit their potential for commercial applications.30 As a result, it is imperative to develop scalable fabrication methods capable of producing uniform and reproducible plexcitonic structures, and to integrate plexcitonic devices with established technologies for realizing their diverse applications.
In this review, we aim to provide an overview of the fundamental principles of plasmonics and plexcitonics and discuss the latest advancements in plexcitonic hybrid systems. The relevant concepts of plasmons are introduced, followed by the mechanisms of plasmon–exciton coupling in hybrid plexcitonic systems. More importantly, the recent outstanding breakthrough in plexcitonics is highlighted, focusing on the ability to manipulate plasmon–exciton, the advancements in tip-enhanced spectroscopy, and the emerging fields of the plexcitonic optical chirality and nonlinearity. These excellent performance offers unprecedented avenue for high spatial resolution measurements and ultrafast optical switching, and endows deeper insights into the complex coupling dynamics. Overall, the recent developments in plexcitonics have led to exciting new possibilities in the design of advanced materials and devices with enhanced optical properties and functionalities. We believe that this review will provide readers with a comprehensive understanding of the latest advancements in the field of plexcitonics and inspire further research in this exciting area of study.
2. Background and physical principles
2.1. Plasmon photonics
The plasmon photonics has been developed for more than a century. During this period, a proliferation of literature with inconsistent and convoluted explanations of key conceptual terms frequently confuses novices, or even misleads them. In view of this, clear explanations of the conceptual terms involved are necessary. First of all, what is the plasma and plasmon? A specifical definition of plasma is as follows: the fourth state of matter in which electrons are separated from their nuclei, characterized by the presence of a significant portion of charged particles in any combination of electrons or ions. In other words, plasma is a description of ionized gas that can conduct electricity and respond to electromagnetic fields,31 as if metal ions are steeped in the electron cloud according to Drude model.32 Under this framework, massive metal ions are relatively static, while electrons exhibit coherently collective oscillation around metal ions, and “plasmon” is introduced to quantify this plasma oscillation. Plasmon is a quantum quasiparticle, meaning it can exhibit the collective excitation that behaves like a particle, but is actually a phenomenon arising from the interactions of many individual particles. There are different types of plasmons, including volume plasmon, surface plasmon, and dark plasmon.

2.1.1. Volume plasmon. 
Volume plasmons are collective oscillations of electrons with a longitudinal wave or compressional wave, which can be induced by electron beams or charged particles, but can not be excited by electromagnetic wave in the form of transverse wave, such as light.33 The bounded electrons experience displacement and a resulting change in charge density due to the Coulomb force of the incident electron beam, as shown in Fig. 1(a). This gives rise to collective oscillations of the electrons with the plasma frequency. While volume plasmons are originally associated with free electrons, they have also been observed in semiconductors and insulators as a collective oscillation of the entire valence electron. The energy of the volume plasmon (EP) can be observed by the electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), expressed by the following equation.34 (1)where, ωp is plasma frequency, and e, N, and m represent elementary charge, free electron density, and electron mass, respectively.
 Fig. 1  (a) Scheme of volume plasmons, where brown dots and blue circles respectively show positive ions and valence electrons. (b) SPP dispersion relation curve. (c) SPP propagation behavior at the metal-dielectric interface. Scheme of (d) propagating surface plasmon and (e) localized surface plasmon modes. (f) Scheme of the plasmonic hybridization models of dark and bright plasmons. 


2.1.2. Surface plasmon. 
Surface plasmons (SPs) are collective oscillations of electrons that occur at the interface between a metal and a dielectric material.35 In fact, SPs share a similar nature to volume plasmons, both of which are electron oscillations waves. However, while volume plasmons can only be induced by charged particles, surface plasmons can be excited by both electron beams and light. This is because of the creating energy exchange channel between the metal and dielectric, allowing electrons in the metal to move freely and couple with the electromagnetic fields in the dielectric material. When the frequency of ambient electromagnetic field, typically photons, matches the natural frequency of the surface plasmon, the electrons on the metal surface can be excited into a collective oscillation. This phenomenon is known as surface plasmon resonance (SPR), and it can induce a new electromagnetic surface mode called surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs).36 Strictly speaking, SPs and SPPs are different types of collective oscillations of electrons. SPs are electromagnetic waves at the metal–dielectric interface, while SPPs are coupled SPs with photons that form a new mode. However, plasmons can exist as either pure plasmons or mixed plasmon–photon modes (plasmon polaritons), and “pure” SP modes are only an approximation of SPPs, where the photon contribution is small or negligible, such as in the electrostatic approximation.37 Consequently, most literature conventionally considers the terms SP and SPP to be interchangeable, but in reality, they are fundamentally different.
Next, we briefly discuss the SPPs dispersion relationship and propagation behavior of SPPs under transverse magnetic (TM) polarization condition. The SPPs dispersion relation is an important mathematical expression that describes the relationship between the frequency of the SPP and the wave vector, which can be derived from the Maxwell's equations. Specifically, the SPP dispersion relation is given by the following equation. More detailed formula derivation can be found in these ref. 38–40. (2)where, kspp represents wave vector along metal–dielectric interface, k0 = ω/c is free-space wave vector, ω is frequency, εd and εm(ω) are dielectric constants of environmental medium and metal, respectively.
The presence of k0 implies that the SPP mode is the interaction of charge motion with surface electromagnetic wave. The SPP dispersion relation curve is plotted in Fig. 1b. For the photon in the air, the momentum is proportional to its frequency, because dielectric constant is independent of frequency ω. But for SPP dispersion relation, εm(ω) is a function of ω, and thus momentum mismatching between photon and SPP (k0 < kspp). Because of that, SPPs can not be directly excited by light, but must introduce an additional wave vector (Δk = kspp − k0) to satisfy the momentum match, such as through grating coupling, prism coupling, or using nanostructures that can enhance the local electromagnetic field. By the way, it is inaccurate to say that a photon directly excites SPP mode through SPR, but rather that the photon induces a collective oscillation of free electrons (SP) that generates SPPs.
Now, we focus on the propagation behavior of SPPs. When absorption effect is ignored, the surface wave associated with SPP modes continues to propagate along the metal–dielectric interface. However, once losses (Im(ε) > 0) are included, the energy of surface wave is damped due to the absorption of the metal, and then the field intensity decays as exp(−2Im(kspp)δspp), where δspp represents the propagation length of SPP wave.41 This defines the SPP propagation length as: (3)
In terms of eqn (2), δspp can be expressed as a function of ε for simple. Writing εm(ω) = ε′m(ω) + iε′′m(ω), a more useful expression is obtained in the case, where ε′′m(ω) remains small compared to ε′m(ω) and ε′m(ω) < −εd: (4)
From eqn (4), the δspp can be much larger than incident wavelength, especially when ε′′m(ω) is small sufficiently. Besides, the δspp is also larger when |ε′m(ω)| is large, i.e., at a longer wavelength for metal.
It is interesting to compare the propagation behavior of SPP along the metal–dielectric interface to the field confinement along the dielectric or metal. Similarly, the fields intensities in the dielectric and metal decay as exp(−2Im(k0)δd) and exp(−2Im(k0)δm), where δd and δm are the penetration depths in the dielectric and metal, respectively. While, in terms of eqn (2), the corresponding penetration lengths are given by eqn (5) and (6).42 (5) (6)
This demonstrates the field confinement effect by SPPs, meaning that the field can only exist within a certain distance near the interface, as shown in Fig. 1c, with several orders of magnitude shorter than the surface propagation length and the decay length smaller than a wavelength. Therefore, SPP modes serve as channels through which photons can be efficiently coupled, making them ideal candidates for high confinement waveguides and nanolasers.43,44
In addition, SPs can be classified into two main categories: propagating surface plasmons (PSPs) and localized surface plasmons (LSPs), as shown in Fig. 1d and e, respectively. PSPs can propagate along the metal surface, while LSPs are confined to a small region due to the structure being smaller than the incident wavelength, causing them only to perform collective back-and-forth oscillation.45 As discussed above, PSPs can interact with photons and have a certain propagation length at the metal–dielectric interface, forming propagating surface plasmon polariton (PSPP) modes, while LSPs are characterized by their locality and are confined to the vicinity of metallic nanoparticles (NPs), strongly influenced by their size, shape, and composition. The resonant optical response resulting from the interactions between the incident light and LSPs is known as localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR).46 Different from PSPPs, that can not be directly excited by incident photons, requiring momentum matching. Under the LSPR condition, the photons can directly interact with the LSPs, and form localized surface plasmon polaritons (LSPP) mode. This is because that LSPs generate an extremely intense and highly localized electromagnetic field and can oscillate at a wide range of frequencies. It is worth mentioning that, similar to SPs and SPPs, there is an essential difference between LSPs and LSPPs. The elementary excitation of LSPs is plasmon, while the elementary excitation of LSPPs is polariton. However, plenty of literature directly equates LSPs with LSPPs, probably because LSPs generally directly couple with photons via LSPR, which is non-canonical. Even worse, LSPR is equated with LSPPs, which is an obviously wrong statement, because LSPR only exhibits the harmonic resonance between plasmons and photons. Furthermore, PSPPs are associated with the absorption of photons by the metal, whereas LSPPs are radiative modes that not only appear in absorption, but also in scattering or extinction. LSPR produce internal polarization inside NPs, and this perturbation creates a scattered electromagnetic field that is radiated away from the NPs, producing detectable scattered light. Therefore, LSPPs are responsible for enhanced absorption and scattering cross-sections, as well as strongly enhanced electromagnetic fields in close vicinity of the NPs surface. Referring to obtain spectra of well-separated NPs, Mie's solutions to Maxwell's equations well interpret the physical mechanisms, see these references for details.47–49


2.1.3. Dark plasmon. 
Plasmon modes can be classified as either “bright” or “dark”, depending on whether they are radiative or non-radiative. The distinction between bright and dark plasmons applies specifically to LSPRs in metal nanostructures, where bright plasmons are radiative, meaning that they can absorb and scatter photons, and produce an electromagnetic field that can be detected outside of the nanostructures, while dark plasmons refer to plasmonic modes that can not couple to far-field radiation and are therefore “invisible” to conventional optical spectroscopy techniques.50 Dark plasmons are pure near-field modes that occur in a variety of metal NPs, and arising from the plasmonic hybridization in a set of interacting NPs.51 When the electric field of one plasmon mode destructively interferes with that of another plasmon mode, the possible plasmonic hybridization is the cancellation of the oppositely oriented dipole moments, exhibiting the non-radiative nature of dark plasmons. Scheme of the different plasmonic hybridization models is shown in Fig. 1f. Therefore, experimentally probing dark plasmons is more difficult than their radiative counterparts, such as LSPs, and their properties are still not well understood in many cases. However, dark plasmons can be indirectly excited through several strategies such as electron tunneling, nonradiative energy transfer, and can interact strongly with nearby molecules or other nanoscale objects, leading to changes in their optical properties that can be detected.52 Interestingly, dark plasmons fare better in optical applications due to their longer lifetimes, because they do not couple efficiently with far-field radiation, which means they have a relatively low radiative decay rate and more time for interactions with their environment.53 Additionally, dark plasmons can contribute to energy transfer processes in metal nanostructures, which can be useful for applications such as plasmon-enhanced catalysis or sensing.

2.2. Plexciton photonics
We have discussed the metallic plasmon systems in the previous section. Next, we will introduce the background and principles of molecular exciton systems and the molecular exciton–metallic plasmon systems, focusing on the plasmon–exciton interactions.

2.2.1. Molecular exciton system. 
Excitons are quasiparticles that arise from the interaction between an electron and a hole in a semiconductor or an insulator. When an electron is excited from its ground state to a higher energy level, it leaves behind a positively charged hole. The electron and the hole interact through the Coulomb force, forming a bound state known as the exciton. This bound state behaves like a quasiparticle with its own characteristic energy, momentum, and lifetime. Excitons can be divided into two typical categories: Frenkel excitons and Wannier excitons, as shown in Fig. 2a. Frenkel excitons are formed when an electron is excited, resulting in an electron–hole pair that is localized within a single molecule. Wannier excitons, on the other hand, are formed when an electron is excited from the ground state to a higher energy state, resulting in an electron–hole pair that is delocalized over several molecules. Excitons have a finite lifetime, as they eventually dissociate into free electrons and holes. The exciton lifetime is determined by the rate of (non-)radiative decay, and the rate of exciton diffusion, governed by the exciton diffusion equation:54 (7)where, n is exciton density, D is diffusion coefficient, and τ0 is exciton lifetime. Eqn (7) describes the exciton diffusion by taking into account both the exciton lifetime when exciton diffuses in the material and decays due to dissociation or recombination.
 Fig. 2  (a) Models and electronic transition energy level of Frenkel exciton and Wannier exciton. (b) Scheme of interactions between plasmons and excitons. Scheme of (c) classical and (d) quantum theoretical models based on coupled metal nanoparticle and quantum dot. (e) Distinct spectral line shapes of strong coupling and weak coupling. 
The exciton mobility μ determines the rate of exciton diffusion, D = μkBT, where kB is Boltzmann constant, and T is absolute temperature. The exciton mobility is related to the exciton lifetime τ0 through the relation, μ = L2/(2τ0), where L is the length of exciton diffusion. Therefore, the diffusion rate is inversely proportional to the exciton lifetime, D = L2kBT/(2τ0), meaning the slower diffusion rates, the longer exciton lifetimes. Additionally, exciton diffusion is affected by the presence of impurities and defects in the medium, as well as by the presence of electric and magnetic fields.55
Excitons can recombine in a radiative decay, and emit a photon. When molecular exciton system is assembled into a microcavity, emitted photon can also induce exciton generation, so repeated, like a match placed between two mirrors, leading to an increase in the exciton–photon interaction and the formation of exciton polaritons. When exciton system is assembled into a metallic microcavity, e.g. a metallic NPs plasmonic system shown in Fig. 2b, excitons can also interact with plasmons, and give rise to a new class of quasiparticles known as plexcitons.


2.2.2. Molecular exciton–metallic plasmon system. 
Molecule–metal hybrid nanostructures provide an effective route to interact excitons with plasmons, enabling a broad range of applications. Understanding the fundamental physics behind the plasmon–exciton coupling and how to control it is essential for designing and optimizing plexcitonic systems. The integration of a metallic microcavity is a viable strategy for the generation of plexcitons, where the metal component supports LSPRs, while the semiconductor component hosts excitonic resonances. The energy exchange between molecular exciton system and metallic plasmon system contribute to plasmon–exciton coupling in the microcavity. This plasmon–exciton coupling process not only enhances the light–matter interaction, but also enables the tuning of the optical properties of the hybrid nanostructure for various applications. Additionally, the plexciton modes can also occur in a bulk material, such as a thin film of a molecular material deposited on a metal surface. In this case, the excitons are generated within the molecular material and couple with the SPs supported by the metal surface.
The plasmon–exciton coupling, e.g. the interaction of metal NPs and quantum dots (QDs), can be described by classical and quantum theoretical models, as well as the semi-classical model.56–59 In this section, we briefly deduce the coupling mechanisms from classical and quantum perspectives, and verify the consistent rule of plasmon–exciton coupling.
In the classical model, the exciton and plasmon modes are simply treated as two coupled harmonic oscillators, as plotted in Fig. 2c. One oscillator is the NP plasmon mode described as an oscillating electric dipole with frequency ωp, and the other is the excitonic transition of the QD with frequency ωq. The two oscillators are coupled together through the interaction of the electric dipoles, and the equation of motion for the two can be written as: mpẍp + γpẋp + ωp2xp = −αxq(8) mqẍq + γqẋq + ωq2xq = −αxp(9)where, mp and mq are masses of the NP and QD, γp and γq are damping coefficients, and α is the coupling strength between the two oscillators. The solution to this equation of motion is given by: (10) (11)where, Ap and Aq are the amplitudes of the oscillations, Ω is the angular frequency of the coupled oscillators, and ϕp and ϕq are the initial phases of the oscillators. The equations for the amplitudes and angular frequency of the coupled oscillators can be derived from eqn (10) and (11), which are given by: (12) (13) (14)where, Δ = ωp − ωq is the detuning between the two oscillators. These equations demonstrate the energy exchange between the exciton and plasmon, while also highlighting the suitable conditions for the coupling to occur. Specifically, the analysis indicates that the frequencies of the oscillators must be in close proximity in order to achieve efficient coupling.
While in the quantum model, plasmon–exciton coupling is considered as a two-level system of QD interacted with the quantization of electromagnetic fields of the NP plasmon, as plotted in Fig. 2d. Therefore, the Hamiltonian of this system is given by the sum of free Hamiltonian Ĥ0 and interaction Hamiltonian ĤI: Ĥ = Ĥ0 + ĤI(15) (16) (17)where, â† and â are creation and annihilation operators for the NP plasmon mode,  and  are raising and lowering operators for the QD excitonic transition, and g is coupling strength between the plasmon mode and the excitonic transition. The equations of motion for the system can be derived from the Hamiltonian and are given by: (18) (19)
The solution to eqn (18) and (19) is given by: (20) (21)
Therefore, the equations for the amplitudes and angular frequency of the coupled oscillators can be derived from the equations of motion: (22) (23) (24)
The main difference between the two models is that the quantum model takes into account the quantization of the electromagnetic fields of the NP plasmon mode. This leads to a more accurate description of the system and allows for a more precise prediction of the behavior of the coupled oscillators. Comparing eqn (24) and (14), the equations for both the classical and quantum models of plasmon–exciton coupling are very similar. In both models, the coupling between the two excitation modes leads to an energy exchange between them. The energy exchange is dependent on the coupling strength and the detuning Δ = ωp − ωq between the two oscillators. If the detuning is small, the energy exchange will be maximized and the two oscillators can be in resonance.
Recently, the theory of plasmon–exciton interaction has been redefined in terms of coupling strength referring to strong or weak coupling.60 In the case of strong coupling, the interaction between the resonant systems is so strong that their hybridization states occur, leading to a single excitation mode splitting into two modes with distinct energies and properties. In other words, the energy of the coupled system is split into two distinct energy levels, referred to as the lower and upper polariton states, which is known as Rabi splitting.61 When plasmon–exciton coupling is relatively weak, this system can be described as a superposition of the two uncoupled states, and the energy of the system is the linear combination of the two resonant systems. Thus, by examining the spectral features of the plasmon–exciton system, it is possible to distinguish between strong and weak coupling regimes and gain insight into the nature of the coupling between the two modes. As shown in Fig. 2e, in the strong coupling regime, the energy splitting larger than the linewidth of either mode and the resulting spectra exhibiting clear anti-crossing behavior, manifests as the Rabi splitting, which results from that the coupling strength exceeds the dissipation rate and the energy is exchanged coherently between cavity photons and atoms. As the coupling becomes weaker, the Fano line shape is much more symmetric and does not exhibit the sharp peak and dip features seen in the strong coupling regime, but the individual resonances are still distinguishable. The spectral properties of plexciton polaritons can be tuned by adjusting the strength of the plasmon–exciton coupling and the parameters of the system. The coupling strength is influenced by factors such as the separation distance between plasmonic and excitonic components, the dielectric environment, and the materials used. By controlling these parameters, researchers can manipulate the spectral characteristics of plexciton polaritons, including their energies, linewidths, and dispersion relations.62–64
The expression of the extinction spectrum can further describe the mechanisms of strong and weak plasmon–exciton coupling. The extinction cross section of the coupled oscillator model can be derived from the linear susceptibility of the system, which is given by:65 (25)where, N is the number of excitons, ε0 is the permittivity of free space. The extinction cross section Cext(ω) of the coupled oscillator model is then given by: (26)
In the strong coupling regime, the Cext(ω) is given by: (27)where, Δ is detuning term (or Rabi splitting term). eqn (27) shows that the extinction cross section is now two Lorentzian peaks, centered at the exciton frequency ωq and the plasmon frequency ωp, with a width determined by the damping constants γq and γp. Importantly, the Rabi splitting term can result in a significant enhancement of the extinction cross section at the resonant frequencies of these hybrid states. In the weak coupling regime, the Cext(ω) is given by: (28)

Eqn (28) shows that the extinction cross section is a Lorentzian peak centered at the exciton frequency ωq, with a width determined by the damping constants γq and γp. The detuning term is negligible and the extinction cross section is mainly determined by the damping rates of the exciton and plasmon.

3. Recent breakthrough of plexcitonics
In this section, we delve into the recent breakthrough in the plexcitonic hybrid systems, including the control of plasmon–exciton coupling in plexcitonic lattices, plexcitonic tip-enhanced spectroscopy, plexcitonic optical chirality, and nonlinear plexcitonics. Collectively, this section provides a comprehensive overview of the recent progress in plexcitonics and demonstrate its potential for newly-developing research and practical applications.
3.1. Control of plasmon–exciton coupling in plexcitonic lattices
The ability to control the plasmon–exciton coupling is of great significance for designing and optimizing plexcitonic systems for various applications. Researchers have explored various methods to manipulate the plasmon–exciton coupling, including changing the size and shape of metallic nanoparticles,66–69 adjusting the distance between the excitonic and plasmonic components, modifying the dielectric environment,70–72 and altering the energy levels of excitons. For instance, controlling the exciton energy levels can be accomplished by using different materials, such as quantum dots or organic molecules with different bandgap energies, or by modifying the electronic structure of the materials. Additionally, the use of hybrid materials, anisotropic materials, and applying external stimuli like magnetic fields, can also be used to achieve better control over the coupling strength. Recently, progress has been made in developing ultrasharp surface lattice resonances (SLRs) in plexcitonic lattices.73,74 SLRs are characterized by ultra-narrow linewidths, high quality factors, strong field enhancements, and polarization sensitivity, and the collective modes creates unlimited potential for tunable coupling properties. While SLRs are commonly observed in metallic nanostructure arrays,75 studies have also demonstrated the advantages of SLRs in other types of periodic nanostructures integrated with carbon nanotubes,76 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs),77 organic dyes,78–80 and photosensitive complexes.81,82
Recently, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have been demonstrated as accessible plexcitonic platforms and functional luminescent systems by Liu73 and Sample et al.74 MOFs consist of organic ligands arranged between metal ion nodes, and chromophore-based organic ligands can serve as organized molecular emitters to overcome self-quenching effect.83Fig. 3a shows the depiction of growing MOF conformally assembled on Ag NP arrays, where MOF is comprised of Zn paddlewheel node (green dots) and luminescent porphyrin derivative (orange dots) as the molecular emitter. When the coupling strength between Ag lattice plasmons and MOF excitons exceeds the losses, new hybrid modes of upper polariton (UP) and lower polariton (LP) occur with a characteristic Rabi splitting energy (Ω), as shown in Fig. 3b. According to this feature, plexciton generation and its coupling strength can be identified. Furthermore, MOFs are porous structures that can easily adjusts their coupling with NP arrays through external stimulus such as solvent exchange, which provides a feasible method to control plasmon–exciton interactions. By changing the dielectric environment within the MOF pores, the SLR energies over the separated exciton bands of the MOF are detuned in a reversible and continuous evolution between strong and weak coupling. Fig. 3c shows the dielectric refractive index (n) dependent transmission spectra of Ag NPs@MOF systems, revealing that with the increase of the refractive index, the plasmon–exciton interactions gradually transition from the strong coupling to the weak coupling regime. In additional, the comparison between bare Ag NPs (plasmonic) and Ag NPs@MOF (plexcitonic) is still important. Fig. 3d indicates that the energy of SLR-MOF mode is distinct from both the Q4-band exciton and the pure SLR, which is assigned as the coupling between lattice plasmons in Ag NPs and Q4-band excitons in MOFs. Thus, despite the Q-band excitons are less elastic in the emitters, the excitons frequencies close to SLR in spatially organized Ag NPs@MOF are shown to make significant contributions to the SLR-dominated mixed state. Fig. 3e depicts the peak wavelength of SLR–MOF modes as a function of refractive indices. It can be seen that hybrid SLR–MOF modes support a broader wavelength range and greater tolerance of surrounding dielectric environment than bare Ag NP SLR mode, reflecting a wider application range for plexcitonic lattices.
 Fig. 3  (a) Depiction of growing MOF conformally assembled on Ag NP arrays. (b) Scheme of strong coupling between Ag lattice plasmons and MOF excitons. (c) Transmission spectra of Ag NPs@MOF systems with variable refractive indices.74 (d) Transmission spectra of bare Ag NP array and Ag NPs@MOF system. (e) Peak wavelength versus refractive index, where SLR for bare Ag NP arrays and SLR-MOF for coupled Ag NPs@MOF systems.73 
3.2. Plexcitonic tip-enhanced spectroscopy
The strong light–matter interactions in plexcitonic structures can exhibit remarkably enhanced spectroscopic signals at the nanoscale. By virtue of the LSPRs, plasmonic nanostructures behave as optical nanocavities capable of confining light to the nanoscale, and result in orders of magnitude enhancements of electromagnetic fields, which especially work in surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS),84,85 and surface-enhanced fluorescence (SEF),86,87etc.88 It is known that the excitation probabilities of the molecule incorporated with nanocavities generally depend on the plasmon–exciton coupling, for the plasmonic and excitonic resonances are spectrally matched. Moreover, the plexciton states can be used to enhance the sensitivity and spatial resolution of spectroscopy even at the single-molecule level, which opens up new avenues for probing fundamental photophysical processes, such as energy transfer and exciton dynamics. Recently, tip-enhanced spectroscopy (TES) technique that combines scanning probe microscopy with optical spectroscopy, has provided unprecedented sensitivity and sub-nanometer spatial resolution,89 enabling researchers to explore new frontiers in single-molecule spectroscopy and imaging.90 For instance, Zhang and co-workers independently developed a “scanning Raman picoscopy” technique combining TES and scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM), which can be utilized to intuitively construct the chemical structure of a single molecule.91 Furthermore, their team achieved precise control over the coherent coupling between a single molecule and a plasmonic nanocavity by monitoring the evolution of Fano line shapes and photonic Lamb shifts at a sub-nanometer scale.92 By utilizing STM combined with optical spectroscopy, they were able to position a single molecule within the nanocavity with sub-nanometer accuracy, allowing them to manipulate the interactions between the molecule and the confined light. This manipulation led to the formation of hybrid plexciton polaritons, which exhibited strong coupling and tunable energy properties. These findings have profound implications for advanced technique capable of detecting single molecule.
Kim's group also made outstanding contributions in TES for the detection and analysis of individual molecule.93–95 In a Raman spectroscopy study on the isolated CuNc molecule,93 they used STM with tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS) to unveil the critical role of perpendicular electromagnetic field components under resonance excitation conditions. Considering both the electromagnetic and chemical enhancement components pose limitations to the applicability of TERS, designing a new TES model is necessary. For electromagnetic enhancement, due to the parallel enhanced field to the tip stronger than that perpendicular to the tip, small and flat molecules must adsorb perpendicular or tilted to the substrate, and larger molecules must have vibrational modes with perpendicular components to the surface to benefit from electromagnetic enhancement in TES.96 On the other hand, for chemical enhancement, such as charge transfer (CT) states, molecules must be adsorbed on the metal surface, which causes significant perturbations to the electronic structures of the molecules, making it difficult to analyze their intrinsic vibrational characteristics. To solve that, Kim and his colleagues employed an ultrathin NaCl insulating film to electronically decouple the molecule from the metal surface, as illustrated in Fig. 4a. The STM–TERS spectra of isolated CuNc molecule for different tip locations are shown in Fig. 4b and c, where the insets are STM images, and the Raman spectra with different colors correspond to the tip locations indicated by the corresponding colors in the insets. The distinct Raman spectral features with three kinds of vibrational symmetries in Fig. 4b allow to explore the correlation between the plasmonic nanocavity and the molecule. Note that the Raman signals exhibit minimal enhancement at the center of the molecule, which can be attributed to the fact that the plasmon–exciton coupling efficiency decreases to zero when the symmetric center of plasmonic field is located directly above the center of the molecule.97 Additionally, the difference of Raman spectra shown in Fig. 4c implies that the CuNc molecule retains the intrinsic electronic structure when adsorbed on NaCl instead of directly on the Ag substrate. The TES technique based on plexcitons can not only be used to amplify Raman spectral signals, but also provides opportunities to microscopically understand the individual electronic states. For example, applying narrow-line tunable laser combined with STM–TES can achieve PL spectra of single-molecule electronic and vibrational states with micro-electron volt energy resolution.94 Experiments have shown that electroluminescence (EL) spectroscopy can feasibly provide information on excitation dynamics by combining the analysis of photon signals with STM–TES.98–100 However, EL suffers from low versatility and state-selectivity that can be overcome by PL spectroscopy. Fig. 4d uses EL-TES as a reference, and shows PL-TES spectra of H2Pc on the NaCl insulating film acquired at different tip locations, see the STM image in the inset. When the tip is away from the H2Pc molecule, the PL-TES spectrum shows almost no photon signal. When the tip approaches the molecule gradually, the photon signal rapidly increases, and the PL spectrum exhibits vibrational peaks that correspond to those in the EL-TES spectrum. The PL-TES investigation reveals that the PL process can be strongly enhanced by the plasmon–exciton interactions. Additionally, the peaks in the PL-TES spectra are sharper than those in the corresponding EL-TES spectra, and the PL excitations need lower photon energies and are solely induced without charge injection than EL.
 Fig. 4  (a) Scheme of experimental configuration for STM–TES single-molecule investigation. (b) STM–TERS spectra of isolated CuNc molecule based on different tip locations, where the inset is STM images and the colors of tip location dots match the Raman spectra with corresponding colors. (c) STM–TERS spectra when the tip is located near molecule on NaCl, on NaCl, and near molecule on Ag substrate, where insets are STM images and show the tip locations.93 (d) PL-TES and EL-TES spectra of the H2Pc molecule, where the inset is STM image of H2Pc molecule and colors of tip location dots match corresponding spectra.94 (e) Photocurrent versus time trace measured on the FBPc molecule and bare NaCl film. (f) The molecular structure and STM image of FBPc, where the tip locations with different colors match the spectra in (e). (g) The photocurrent images on the FBPc molecule under the laser-off and laser-on states.95 
More recently, Kim's group achieved direct atomic-scale visualization of photocurrent channels of an individual free-base phthalocyanine (FBPc) molecule on the insulating NaCl film using STM–TES technique.95Fig. 4e shows the photocurrent versus time trace measured on the FBPc molecule and bare NaCl film at bias voltage Vs = −2.0 V while turning on and off the incident laser irradiation at 1 Hz, where the molecular structure and STM image of FBPc, and tip locations during the measurement can be seen in Fig. 4f. This irradiation-induced photocurrent switching can be observed when the tip approaches the FBPc molecule by approximately 0.2 nm, but can not be detected on the bare NaCl film away from the molecule, proving the laser-induced current is generated in the molecular junction. Fig. 4g is the photocurrent images under laser-off and laser-on states, revealing a fourfold symmetric mode with lobes and nodes consistent with the molecular orbital of phthalocyanines. In addition, the photocurrent signal (right) is far exceeding the noise level (left) obtained under illumination, successfully visualizing photocurrent flows through the molecular orbital at an atomic resolution. Furthermore, they demonstrated that the photocurrent generation was also governed by the molecule coupling to the metallic electrode, which can be tuned though the variation of the tip-molecular distance. Certainly, many effective approaches have been implemented to manipulate the plasmon–exciton coupling within the context of TES research.101–103 Therefore, while the plexciton-enhanced spectroscopy realize technical impact on single-molecule detection, accompanying techniques in a well-defined system can provide a fundamental comprehension of the optical processes occurring in the a molecular system coupled to the plasmonic nanocavity, and facilitate a deeper understanding of the plexcitonic mechanism behind the spectroscopic enhancement.
3.3. Plexcitonic optical chirality
Optical chirality is the lack of mirror symmetry in the response of materials or molecules to circularly polarized light, arising from their chiral nature. A primary tool for studying optical chirality is the circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy, by characterizing the differential absorption of left-handed and right-handed circularly polarized light, providing a means to determine their stereochemistry and the underlying mechanisms of chiral optical activity. Plexcitonic optical chirality is a specific field of chiral optics that studies the strong coupling between plasmons and excitons in chiral nanostructures, as well as hybrid systems consisting of achiral nanostructures and chiral materials, resulting in enhanced chiral optical responses.104–106 More and more interesting experimental and theoretical phenomena resulting from the interactions between hybrid complexes of chiral molecules and plasmonic nanostructures have attracted great attention and extensive research.107–109 Research progress has focused on developing new chiral plexcitonic nanostructures with enhanced optical chirality and coupling,110,111 and have solved several important issues, including the selective detection of chiral molecules and observation of circularly polarized emission using plexcitonic systems.112,113 Lan et al. devoted DNA-templated strategies to manipulating chiral self-assembly of achiral chromophores on Au NP surfaces with tuned exciton transitions, achieving strongly enhanced molecular CD signal of chromophores and an induced plasmonic CD signals at visible wavelengths.114 Wu et al. experimentally investigated the optical chirality of plexcitonic system consisting of composite metal NPs and chiral J-aggregates, and developed a quasistatic theory to understand the chiral optical responses of the hybrid system.115 Chaitanya Indukuri et al. demonstrated the successful use of negative-index metamaterial (NIM) cavities as plexcitonic nanocavities to enhance fluorescence detection CD sensing, achieving background-free chiral sensing with globally enhanced volume super chiral fields, and enabling the detection of few chiral molecules at the zeptomole level.116 Gong et al. studied chirality inversion in self-assembled nanocomposites directed by curvature-mediated interactions, showing that the assembly process is highly sensitive to size of the NPs and the overall curvature of the composite structure.117 These studies have proved the potential of plexcitonic optical chirality in various fields. Nevertheless, plexcitonic optical chirality still faces lots of challenges, such as achieving greater control over plexcitonic systems, developing new experimental and theoretical models, and finding ways to effectively integrate plexcitonic systems into practical applications.
Rational theoretical frameworks facilitate unraveling the mechanisms of chirality evolution. Govorov et al.118 have made significant theoretical contributions in the field of plexcitonic chirality. They have proposed two mechanisms by which nanocrystals can influence the CD effect, where the first involves the modification of the internal electromagnetic field of chiral molecules induced by plasmon–exciton interactions, and the second is the optical absorption of the nanocavity–molecule complex due to the chiral currents inside the metal nanocavity induced by the dipole of the chiral molecule. Ultimately, it is confirmed that an achiral nanocrystal can dramatically alter the CD of a chiral molecule, when the nanocrystal and molecule form a complex and coherently couple through dipole and multipole Coulomb interactions. Yuan and co-workers proposed a theoretical model to interpret multi-scale chiral interactions based on high-order chiroplasmonic superstructures assembled using DNA-bound chromophores (K21) and Au@Ag NPs.119 As depicted in Fig. 5a, the complex chirality of the one-dimensional (1D) hybrid chain involves plasmon coupling (type 1), exciton coupling (type 2), and plasmon–exciton coupling (type 3), and based on this model, the simulation results can be well matched with the experimental findings. The absorption spectra of CavAu@Ag series with K21 are shown in Fig. 5b, which reveal the formation of K21 J-aggregates on the CavAu@Ag NPs. The Au@Ag NPs surfaces assembled with DNA matrix are expected to dramatically influence the plasmon–exciton coupling and the resultant CD line shape of the chiral hybrids. Specifically, CavAu@Ag-3 sample (Fig. 5c) shows a double-peak J-band CD spectrum with a dip, changing from the original peak-dip bisignate line shape, demonstrating the existence of plexcitonic optical chirality. The chiroptical activities of single Au@Ag NPs and 1D NP chain interacting with K21 molecules are shown in Fig. 5d and e, respectively. It is suggested that the chiroptical activities arises from both local chiral properties of the NPs and overall chirality of the DNA scaffold, further demonstrating that the chiral response can be modulated by the order of assembly of the NPs on the DNA scaffold. The CD signals of single NP hybrids (Fig. 5d) are weaker than those of corresponding 1D NP chain (Fig. 5e), attributed to the 1D chain's global structural chirality resulting from the dynamic deformation or curvature of the DNA origami tube, known as metastable twists. Therefore, it can be concluded that the complex chiral properties are the synergistic effect of multiple excitation modes couplings. Wang et al. recently carried out an investigation combined experimental and theoretical approaches referring to transferring the optical asymmetry from chiral π-conjugated molecules to the plasmonic Ag NP assemblies though CH–π interaction.120 They found that the absorption of 1,3,5-triphenylbenzenetricarboxamides (TPBA) in the UV-vis region would not interfere the plasmonic bands of Ag NPs, indicating that the intense CD signals over 500 mdeg shown in Fig. 5f are attributed to the plasmonic chirality from Ag NP assemblies, which demonstrates the possible transfer of the chirality from chiral molecular systems to achiral Ag NP assemblies. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations notarize the mechanisms of chirality transfer, as shown in Fig. 5g. At t = 0 ns, no contact can be observed between the aliphatic (red) and polystyrene (blue) chains, while after t = 20 ns, the aliphatic chains are penetrated into the layer of polystyrene functionalized Ag NP, suggesting a strong interaction between them probably due to the CH–π interaction. Furthermore, controlling the plexcitonic optical chirality remains an important and challenging task. Interestingly, in certain plasmon–exciton systems, such as coherently coupled 2D TMD-metal systems,121 optical chirality exhibits a strong magneto-optical response, which offers a viable approach. The normalized extinction spectrum inspected in Fig. 5h shows respective Fano interference line shape with a narrow dip, which provides fundamental criteria of subsequent plexcitonic optical chirality in the weak coupling regime. Fig. 5i and j illustrate that the magneto-induced CD becomes increasingly pronounced with rising magnetic field, and the CD spectra feature reversal signs at magnetic fields with reversed directions. As such, magneto-chiroptical effects could be exploited to manipulate nonreciprocal phenomena with magnetic fields, which enables the unidirectional circularly polarized photons to flow as required for information transmission in quantum networks.122
 Fig. 5  (a) Scheme of distinct complex chirality mechanisms and chiral interactions in the 1D DNA-assembled NP hybrid chain. (b) Absorption spectra of coupled Au@Ag NPs with K21 molecules, where the inset is absorption spectrum of pure Au@Ag NPs. (c) CD spectra of CavAu@Ag-3 sample with or without K21, where “w/o” stands for with or without K21 and “1 × K21” represents 1 × 0.0168 mM K21. CD spectra of (d) single NP hybrid systems and (e) 1D NP hybrid chains with or without K21.119 (f) CD and absorption spectra of TPBA/Ag assemblies dispersed in the water, where (R)-TPBA and (S)-TPBA denote the homochiral TPBA molecules. (g) MD simulations revealing aliphatic chains (red) are penetrated into polystyrene chains (blue) due to CH–π interactions.120 (h) Simulated extinction spectrum of coupled monolayer TMD-metal system. CD spectra of the coupled monolayer TMD-metal systems under (i) different magnetic field intensities and (j) different magnetic field directions.121 
3.4. Nonlinear plexcitonics
Optical nonlinearity has emerged as a critical area of research in recent years, owing to its potential to enable new applications in ultrafast optical switches, frequency conversion, optical signal processing, etc.123 However, the complexity of nonlinear optical processes involved a variety of mechanisms and interactions between multiple particles, presents significant difficulties for understanding and controlling these phenomena. Studies of polariton nonlinearities are receiving increased attention as a promising avenue for overcoming some of the limitations.124,125 These limitations refer to challenges or drawbacks encountered in traditional nonlinear optical systems or approaches. While the specific limitations can vary depending on the system and application, some common limitations in the field of nonlinear optics and polaritonics are encountered, such as high threshold power, limited tunability, nonlinear losses, slow response time, material compatibility, etc. In particular, the recent emergence of plexcitonic systems has opened up new possibilities for achieving enhanced nonlinear effects in novel ways.126–129 When excitons are brought into close proximity, their Coulomb interaction can lead to modifications in the plexciton properties. The strength of the Coulomb interaction between excitons affects the energy and lifetime of these plexcitonic systems, thereby influencing their optical and electronic characteristics. Specifically, the Coulomb interaction can induce a strong coupling between the electronic excitations of the molecule and the confined photons in the plasmonic nanocavity, stimulating the formation of hybrid light–matter states known as plexcitons. The Pauli exclusion principled plays a crucial role in the strong nonlinearity observed in plexcitonic systems. It leads to a limited number of available electronic states within the molecule or material, causing confined photons in the plasmonic nanocavity to interact with specific electronic states. This restricted availability of electronic states results in enhanced optical and electronic response, leading to strong nonlinearity. The Pauli exclusion principle facilitates efficient exchange of energy and momentum between confined photons and electronic excitations, enabling the observed strong nonlinear behavior in plexcitonic systems. Furthermore, in comparison to exciton polaritons in microcavities, plasmonic nanocavities play a distinct role in determining the nonlinearity of the system. Plasmonic nanocavities exhibit a low Q-factor, indicating high efficiency in trapping and confining light. This efficiency enables rapid energy exchange between confined photons and the material, resulting in enhanced nonlinearity. Moreover, the small mode volume of plasmonic nanocavities confines the interaction to an extremely compact spatial region, intensifying the interaction and yielding stronger nonlinearity compared to microcavities. The combination of a low Q-factor and small mode volume in plasmonic nanocavities facilitates efficient energy transfer and robust light–matter coupling, thereby inducing notable nonlinear effects in the system.
The investigation of nonlinear plexcitonics is expected to yield valuable insights into light–matter interactions, such as giant Lamb shift and single-photon nonlinearity,130,131 and to inspire new approaches for developing practical applications.132 Artuso et al.133 theoretically investigated the optical response of a semiconductor QD coupled with a metal NP, and demonstrated nonlinear Fano effect due to the significant self-interaction of the semiconductor QD via metal NP feedback. Fofang et al.134 studied the ultrafast optical dynamics of nanoshell-J-aggregate complexes where plasmons and excitons interacted strongly, and ultrafast characteristics indicated that these hybrid nanostructures could possess enhanced, tunable, and on/off-resonance nonlinear optical properties. Nan et al.135 investigated the ultrafast one-photon nonlinear responses of strongly coupled hybrid plexcitonic Fano systems, revealing that the severely suppressed linear absorption around the Fano dip significantly enhanced the unidirectional energy transfer from the plasmons to the excitons and further allowed one-photon nonlinearity to be drastically and reversibly tuned. Even so, it can be said that the development of nonlinear plexcitonics is highly challenging and tortuous. One of the main bottlenecks is the lack of suitable nonlinear materials with strong plexcitonic interactions and high stability. Many of the materials used in current research are limited by their low quantum yield, poor stability, or difficulty in fabrication. Additionally, the development of techniques for controlling the nonlinear response of plexcitonic systems remains a challenge task. Furthermore, the optimization of nonlinear plexcitonic manifestation demands a comprehensive understanding of the intricate interplay between a multitude of parameters that govern the behavior of the plexcitonic systems. These parameters can include, but are not limited to, the coupling strength of plasmon–exciton hybrid modes, the phonon-stimulated regime, and the pump power. These bottlenecks necessitate the interdisciplinary collaborations and the development of new materials, along with the advanced theoretical and experimental support.
Second-order nonlinear process in hybrid systems play a crucial role in the study of nonlinear plexcitonics. However, the conversion efficiency of second-harmonic generation (SHG) is typically low due to the centrosymmetry of bulk noble metals. To enhance SHG, precise control of the shape, size, or arrangement of plasmonic structures is necessary to optimize the momentum, spatial, and spectral matching between the fundamental light and second harmonics (SH). Chervy et al. reported the second-order nonlinear susceptibility of c-porphyrin nanofiber crystals by hybridization with plasmonic microcavities in the strong coupling regime.136 An intense SHG peak at 420 nm can be observed outside the cavity, as shown in Fig. 6a, which is the direct demonstration of the plasmon enhanced SHG effect. Fig. 6b is the wavelength-dependent SHG measurement under the same conditions for a c-porphyrin nanofiber inside the cavity. Instead of one maximum peak at 420 nm, the SHG intensity in the cavity has two peaks at 390 and 460 nm corresponding to the enhanced SHG from polaritonic states. Moreover, the polarization-dependent SHG signal (Fig. 6c) follows a cosine fourth curve as expected for resonantly enhanced SHG. Fig. 6d shows the SHG intensity map, and it clearly outlines the coupled fiber-cavity structure, giving a much higher SHG signal than the nearby non-coupled Ag-coated fibers, revealing that the SHG efficiency is strongly enhanced by the plasmon–exciton coupling. This proof of principle opens the door for the enhanced SHG by hybrid plexciton states. Zhang et al. engineered a nonlinear plexcitonic system with an efficient and tunable second-order susceptibility.137 More than 3000-fold enhancement of SHG can be achieved at the plexciton states in a nanoparticle-on-mirror (NPOM) configuration embedded with multilayer WSe2 compared with that in the bare exciton material on the film. All the scattering spectra in Fig. 6e show two obvious peaks with anti-crossing behavior for the upper plexciton branch and lower plexciton branch, indicating the appearance of the strong plasmon–exciton coupling. The SHG spectrum of the hybrid NPOM system with 11-layer WSe2 is shown in Fig. 6f. In this case, maximum enhancement factor (EF) values are achieved at 725 and 800 nm, as shown in Fig. 6h. Noting that the SHG response of the bare WSe2 on film shows a single Lorentz peak (Fig. 6h), the double-peak feature of the SHG enhancement indicates the effective tailoring of the second-order susceptibility by the strong plasmon–exciton coupling. The similar SHG measurements involving the even layer (8-layer WSe2) can be seen in Fig. 6g and i. The qualitative double peaks feature of SHG spectrum implies that the SH response of the hybrid system inherits the plexciton characteristics. Moreover, the comparison of the SHG response of the two cases can best elucidate the interplay of plasmon or exciton in nonlinear conversion, that is, the spectral profile of the SHG response of the hybrid system is independent on whether the exciton has a strong SH response or not. However, the total nonlinear conversion efficiency does depend on the SH response of both the plasmon and exciton, resulting from the cooperative effort of the increased local field from the plasmon component, the second-order susceptibility from the exciton component, and their coherent coupling.
 Fig. 6  SHG spectra of the c-porphyrin fiber (a) outside and (b) inside the plasmonic cavity, where the insets show the power-dependent SHG intensity. (c) Polarization-dependent SHG signal from the fiber inside the cavity. (d) SHG intensity scan map, where the inset shows the transmission image.136 (e) Scattering spectra of a series of hybrid NPOMs. SHG spectra of the NPOM with (f) 11-layer and (g) 8-layer WSe2, where the shadows represent linear scattering spectra for comparison. EF of SHG against the SH (fundamental) wavelength for (h) 11-layer and (i) 8-layer WSe2, where the red lines are wavelength-dependent SHG intensities of bare WSe2 on the films for comparison.137 
Recently, hybrid systems of monolayer WS2 coupled to Ag nanodisk arrays stand out a giant room-temperature nonlinearity produced in the strong coupling regime, which can result in the ultrafast modification of nonlinear absorption.138,139 The reasons for choosing monolayer WS2 as the molecular exciton system lie in its sub-wavelength localized characteristic and pronounced excitonic oscillator strength. The relevant schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 7a, where the femtosecond pump–probe microscopy is adopted to study the ultrafast optical responses to figure out the photophysical dynamics of coherent plexcitons, such as the incoherent exciton/plasmon populations, the plexciton lifetimes, and the heat effect.139 It can be observed from Fig. 7b that the energy of lower branch (ELB) blue shifts after pump excitation, then red shifts and returns to equilibrium within tens of picoseconds, while the energy of upper branch (EUB) red shifts initially, and returns to equilibrium in dozens of picoseconds. The distinct time evolutions of ELB and EUB significantly imply the optical responses at different time scales, and is expected to show nonlinear responses according to the pump-induced interactions, including the perturbation from pump-induced exciton/plasmon populations, pump-induced coherent plexciton generation, and the modification from pump-induced heat effect. To best study plexcitonic nonlinearity, the probe reflection should be measured during or shortly after the pump excitation duration, and t = 100 fs is appropriate. Fig. 7c presents reflection spectra of Ag nanodisk–WS2 plexcitonic systems at 100 fs under varying pump fluences. It can be observed that as the incident fluence density increases, a reduction of spectral splitting and considerable linewidth broadening of the LB and UB plexcitons lead to an apparent rise of splitting window (SW), revealing the strong interactions of plexcitons. Identifying the role of excitonic and plasmonic components in plexcitonic nonlinearity is the prerequisite to specify the types of nonlinear interactions, which can be obtained by selectively exciting either the excitonic or plasmonic component using different pump energies, while monitoring the ultrafast optical response of the whole hybrid system. It is suggested that excitonic excitation (Fig. 7e) produces the identical signal as the plexcitonic excitation (Fig. 7d), while the plasmonic excitation (Fig. 7f) does not work. Therefore, the plexcitonic nonlinearity in such hybrid systems originates from their excitonic component rather than the plasmonic component. The primary mechanisms governing the optical nonlinearity in the WS2-based plexcitonic microcavity is similar to the case of microcavity polaritons,140,141 that is, the repulsive Coulomb exchange interaction between excitons, and the excitonic fermionic saturation interaction induced by the phase space filling. In the realm of solid-state systems, the inherently nonlinear interactions in plexcitonic systems provide an exciting avenue to tailor the high-order optical nonlinearity at low excitation energy. By altering structural parameters such as the dielectric interlayer thickness and the diameter of Ag nanodisks, the ultrafast nonlinear absorption properties of the systems can be arbitrarily tuned, as shown in Fig. 7g and h. The results demonstrate that the spectral dip in the reflection spectra of Ag nanodisk-WS2 system decreases for the thicker Al2O3 interlayers, and the dip position shifts with the plasmon energy due to coherent destructive suppression and constructive enhancement effect in the Fano interference. The adjustable ultrafast nonlinear properties verify nonlinear plexcitonics a promising platform for nonlinear applications, meeting the fundamental requirements for ultrafast optical modulation and optical neuromorphic computing.
 Fig. 7  (a) Scheme of the Ag nanodisk-WS2 hybrid system. (b) Femtosecond time-resolved reflection spectra of Ag nanodisk-WS2 plexcitonic systems under 2.0 eV pump excitation at 5 μJ cm−2 incident fluence condition. (c) Reflection spectra of the Ag nanodisk-WS2 plexcitonic systems at t = 100 fs with different pump fluences. Reflection spectra of the Ag nanodisk-WS2 plexcitonic systems at 100 fs under (d) plexcitonic excitation, (e) excitonic excitation, and (f) plasmonic excitation, where the insets are the schematic illustration of corresponding excitation modes. Reflection spectra of Ag nanodisk-WS2 systems (g) with different dielectric interlayer thicknesses and (h) different disk diameters.139 
4. Conclusions and perspectives
In summary, this review has shown how plexcitons, which arise from the strong coupling between surface plasmons and excitons, exhibit unique optical properties that have stimulated extensive investigations in nanophotonics and materials science. Furthermore, notable advances in plexcitonics have been highlighted, including the ability to manipulate plasmon–exciton coupling in plexcitonic lattices, the use of plexcitonic tip-enhanced spectroscopy for single-molecule probing, the demonstration of plexcitonic optical chirality, and the emergence of nonlinear plexcitonic effects. These advances not only expand our fundamental understanding of light–matter interactions but also hold great promise for the development of new optical devices and technologies. Looking ahead, there are several key directions that could further advance the field of plexcitonics. Firstly, researchers could explore more complex plexcitonic systems that involve multiple plasmonic and excitonic resonances or incorporating other materials to reveal new phenomena and enhance functionality. Secondly, efforts could be made to integrate plexcitonic structures into practical devices, such as sensors, LEDs, and photovoltaic cells, to demonstrate their real-world applications. Thirdly, the development of new fabrication techniques, such as bottom-up assembly or lithography-based approaches, could enable the creation of large-scale plexcitonic structures with precise control over their properties. Finally, exploring the fundamental physics of plexcitons in extreme conditions, such as ultrafast timescales or strong magnetic fields, could reveal novel quantum effects and pave the way for new types of quantum technologies. Despite the challenging and demanding nature of scientific progress, it is believed that continued research on plexcitonic systems and their underlying physics will result in further breakthroughs and discoveries in the coming years.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11874407, 91436102 and 1374353), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (06500067).
References
A. Manjavacas, F. J. García de Abajo and P. Nordlander, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2318–2323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. T. Fofang, T. H. Park, O. Neumann, N. A. Mirin, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3481–3487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Singh, S. Gurung, R. Chari and J. Jayabalan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 28584–28592 CrossRef CAS .
F. V. A. Camargo, Y. Ben-Shahar, T. Nagahara, Y. E. Panfil, M. Russo, U. Banin and G. Cerullo, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 1461–1468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, H. Hu, D. Zheng, D. Zhang, Q. Deng, S. Zhang and H. Xu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10393–10402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zheng, S. Kasani and N. Wu, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 516–525 RSC .
Y. Zakharko, M. Rother, A. Graf, B. Hähnlein, M. Brohmann, J. Pezoldt and J. Zaumseil, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4927–4933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kumar, J. Dey, M. S. Verma and M. Chandra, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 11612–11618 RSC .
Y. Niu, L. Gao, H. Xu and H. Wei, Nanophotonics, 2023, 12, 735–742 CrossRef CAS .
F. Todisco, M. De Giorgi, M. Esposito, L. De Marco, A. Zizzari, M. Bianco, L. Dominici, D. Ballarini, V. Arima, G. Gigli and D. Sanvitto, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 143–150 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zheng, P. Raj, T. Mizutani, M. Szabo, W. A. Hanson and I. Barman, Small, 2021, 17, 2102596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hassan, T. Abdallah, S. Negm and H. Talaat, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 441, 341–346 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuen Zhou, S. K. Saikin, T. Zhu, M. C. Onbasli, C. A. Ross, V. Bulovic and M. A. Baldo, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, Y. Cheng and M. Sun, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 10712–10725 RSC .
Y. Wang, M. Sun and L. Meng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 576, 151835 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green and S. Pillai, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 130–132 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Cheng and M. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 21301–21309 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shi, Y. Li, S. Li, X. Li, D. Wu, T. Xu, Y. Tian, Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, B. Zhang, C. Shan and G. Du, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707031 CrossRef .
J. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Ji, X. Sheng, H. Ma, X. Xu, L. Yu, J. Xu and K. Chen, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800693 CrossRef .
M. A. Fusella, R. Saramak, R. Bushati, V. M. Menon, M. S. Weaver, N. J. Thompson and J. J. Brown, Nature, 2020, 585, 379–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, Z. Wu, A. Krasnok, T. Zhang, M. Liu, H. Liu, L. Scarabelli, J. Fang, L. M. Liz Marzán, M. Terrones, A. Alù and Y. Zheng, Small, 2019, 15, 1900982 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Shen, Z. Chen, L. Tao, B. Sun, X. Xu, J. Zheng and J. Xu, ACS Photonics, 2021, 8, 3583–3590 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, S. Li, W. He, M. Yuan, J. Chen and S. Lan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2022, 126, 3109–3117 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imada, K. Miwa, M. Imai Imada, S. Kawahara, K. Kimura and Y. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 013901 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Qin, Y. H. Chen, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, R. J. Blaikie, B. Ding and M. Qiu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2020, 124, 063902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lin, Y. Shi, X. Yang, J. Li, E. Cao, X. Xu, T. Pullerits, W. Liang and M. Sun, Mater. Today Phys., 2017, 3, 33–40 CrossRef .
S. R. K. Rodriguez, J. Feist, M. A. Verschuuren, F. J. Garcia Vidal and J. Gómez Rivas, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 111, 166802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Zhong, J. Vogelsang, J. M. Yi, D. Wang, L. Wittenbecher, S. Mikaelsson, A. Korte, A. Chimeh, C. L. Arnold, P. Schaaf, E. Runge, A. L. Huillier, A. Mikkelsen and C. Lienau, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, D. J. Jeon and J. S. Yeo, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mennucci and S. Corni, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2019, 3, 315–330 CrossRef .
I. Langmuir, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1928, 14, 627–637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yu, L. M. Liz Marzán and F. J. García de Abajo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6710–6724 RSC .
C. Xia, C. Yin and V. V. Kresin, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 156802 CrossRef PubMed .
R. F. Egerton, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2009, 72, 016502 CrossRef .
W. L. Barnes, A. Dereux and T. W. Ebbesen, Nature, 2003, 424, 824–830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. Min, X. Dou, X. Wang, H. P. Urbach, M. G. Somekh and X. Yuan, Light: Sci. Appl., 2021, 10, 59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Davis and D. E. Gómez, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2017, 89, 011003 CrossRef .
J. M. Pitarke, V. M. Silkin, E. V. Chulkov and P. M. Echenique, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2007, 70, 1 CrossRef CAS .
W. X. Tang, H. C. Zhang, H. F. Ma, W. X. Jiang and T. J. Cui, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1800421 CrossRef .
F. J. Garcia Vidal, A. I. Fernández Domínguez, L. Martin Moreno, H. C. Zhang, W. Tang, R. Peng and T. J. Cui, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2022, 94, 025004 CrossRef .
K. Yang, X. Yao, B. Liu and B. Ren, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, L. Zhang and W. Xu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2012, 45, 113001 CrossRef .
Y. Fang and M. Sun, Light: Sci. Appl., 2015, 4, e294–e294 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Azzam, A. V. Kildishev, R. M. Ma, C. Z. Ning, R. Oulton, V. M. Shalaev, M. I. Stockman, J. L. Xu and X. Zhang, Light: Sci. Appl., 2020, 9, 90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Hutter and J. H. Fendler, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1685–1706 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Mayer and J. H. Hafner, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3828–3857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pérez Juste, I. Pastoriza Santos, L. M. Liz Marzán and P. Mulvaney, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 1870–1901 CrossRef .
Y. Cheng and M. Sun, New J. Phys., 2022, 24, 033026 CrossRef .
Y. Cheng and M. Sun, New J. Phys., 2023, 25, 033028 CrossRef .
N. J. Halas, S. Lal, S. Link, W. S. Chang, D. Natelson, J. H. Hafner and P. Nordlander, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4842–4877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kneipp, H. Kneipp and J. Kneipp, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 2721–2726 RSC .
W. S. Chang, B. Willingham, L. S. Slaughter, S. Dominguez Medina, P. Swanglap and S. Link, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1936–1945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Klinkova, R. M. Choueiri and E. Kumacheva, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3976–3991 RSC .
M. Kulig, J. Zipfel, P. Nagler, S. Blanter, C. Schüller, T. Korn, N. Paradiso, M. M. Glazov and A. Chernikov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2018, 120, 207401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Kozin, V. A. Shabashov, A. V. Kavokin and I. A. Shelykh, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2021, 126, 036801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luo and J. Zhao, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2164–2171 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Gupta, O. Bitton, T. Neuman, R. Esteban, L. Chuntonov, J. Aizpurua and G. Haran, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Schneider, K. Winkler, M. D. Fraser, M. Kamp, Y. Yamamoto, E. A. Ostrovskaya and S. Höfling, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2017, 80, 016503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, W. J. Zhou, Y. H. Deng, Y. Q. Zheng, Z. H. Shi, L. Kee Ang, Z. K. Zhou and L. Wu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2022, 55, 203002 CrossRef .
X. Li, L. Zhou, Z. Hao and Q. Q. Wang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800275 CrossRef .
O. Bitton, S. N. Gupta and G. Haran, Nanophotonics, 2019, 8, 559–575 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Lu, A. Srivastava, S. D. Storm, R. Gelfand, M. Pelton, M. Sukharev and H. Harutyunyan, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 1599–1605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liang, J. Guo, Y. Huang and L. Yu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 23069–23076 RSC .
F. Ge, X. Han and J. Xu, Laser Photonics Rev., 2021, 15, 2000514 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng and M. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2023, 127, 5457–5466 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zheng, S. Zhang, Q. Deng, M. Kang, P. Nordlander and H. Xu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3809–3814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Z. Han, Y. Huang, K. Liang, X. Wang, F. Wu, X. Qi, Y. Shang, L. Yu and B. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 7672–7678 RSC .
S. Huang, T. Ming, Y. Lin, X. Ling, Q. Ruan, T. Palacios, J. Wang, M. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Small, 2016, 12, 5190–5199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan and H. Wei, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 9708–9716 RSC .
J. Cuadra, D. G. Baranov, M. Wersäll, R. Verre, T. J. Antosiewicz and T. Shegai, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1777–1785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, K. Wang, Y. Jiang, X. Xing, S. Li, H. Hu, W. Liu, B. Wang and P. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 43554–43561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Lo, Q. Zhang, M. Qiu, X. Guo, Y. Meng, Y. Zhu, J. J. Xiao, W. Jin, C. W. Leung and D. Lei, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 411–421 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, W. Wang, D. Wang, J. Hu, W. Ding, R. D. Schaller, G. C. Schatz and T. W. Odom, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 5925–5930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Sample, J. Guan, J. Hu, T. Reese, C. R. Cherqui, J. E. Park, F. Freire Fernández, R. D. Schaller, G. C. Schatz and T. W. Odom, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 7775–7780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. G. Kravets, A. V. Kabashin, W. L. Barnes and A. N. Grigorenko, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 5912–5951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zakharko, A. Graf and J. Zaumseil, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6504–6510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lee, J. Park, G. H. Han, H. S. Ee, C. H. Naylor, W. Liu, A. T. C. Johnson and R. Agarwal, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3646–3653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Väkeväinen, R. J. Moerland, H. T. Rekola, A. P. Eskelinen, J. P. Martikainen, D. H. Kim and P. Törmä, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1721–1727 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. K. Rodriguez and J. G. Rivas, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 27411–27421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, T. K. Hakala, H. T. Rekola, J. P. Martikainen, R. J. Moerland and P. Törmä, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 153002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tsargorodska, M. L. Cartron, C. Vasilev, G. Kodali, O. A. Mass, J. J. Baumberg, P. L. Dutton, C. N. Hunter, P. Törmä and G. J. Leggett, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6850–6856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lishchuk, G. Kodali, J. A. Mancini, M. Broadbent, B. Darroch, O. A. Mass, A. Nabok, P. L. Dutton, C. N. Hunter, P. Törmä and G. J. Leggett, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 13064–13073 RSC .
Y. Cui, Y. Yue, G. Qian and B. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1126–1162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. J. Bell, G. Charron, E. Cortés, J. Kneipp, M. L. de la Chapelle, J. Langer, M. Procházka, V. Tran and S. Schlücker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 5454–5462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, W. Chen, T. Fu, J. Sun, D. Zhang, Y. Li, S. Zhang and H. Xu, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6284–6291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He, Z. Han, J. Yuan, A. M. Sinyukov, H. Eleuch, C. Niu, Z. Zhang, J. Lou, J. Hu, D. V. Voronine and M. O. Scully, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaau8763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, G. Chen, A. Ghafoor, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Luo, J. Yang, V. Sandoghdar, J. Aizpurua, Z. Dong and J. G. Hou, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 693–699 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. G. Tizei, V. Mkhitaryan, H. Lourenço Martins, L. Scarabelli, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, M. Tencé, J. D. Blazit, X. Li, A. Gloter, A. Zobelli, F. P. Schmidt, L. M. Liz Marzán, F. J. García de Abajo, O. Stéphan and M. Kociak, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 2973–2979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, K. T. Crampton, N. Tallarida and V. A. Apkarian, Nature, 2019, 568, 78–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kumagai, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 653–655 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Yang, A. Ghafoor, Y. Zhang, Y. F. Zhang, R. P. Wang, J. L. Yang, Y. Luo, Z. C. Dong and J. G. Hou, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2019, 6, 1169–1175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Q. S. Meng, L. Zhang, Y. Luo, Y. J. Yu, B. Yang, Y. Zhang, R. Esteban, J. Aizpurua, Y. Luo, J. L. Yang, Z. C. Dong and J. G. Hou, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Jaculbia, H. Imada, K. Miwa, T. Iwasa, M. Takenaka, B. Yang, E. Kazuma, N. Hayazawa, T. Taketsugu and Y. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 105–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Imada, M. Imai Imada, K. Miwa, H. Yamane, T. Iwasa, Y. Tanaka, N. Toriumi, K. Kimura, N. Yokoshi, A. Muranaka, M. Uchiyama, T. Taketsugu, Y. K. Kato, H. Ishihara and Y. Kim, Science, 2021, 373, 95–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Imai Imada, H. Imada, K. Miwa, Y. Tanaka, K. Kimura, I. Zoh, R. B. Jaculbia, H. Yoshino, A. Muranaka, M. Uchiyama and Y. Kim, Nature, 2022, 603, 829–834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Jiang, N. Chiang, L. R. Madison, E. A. Pozzi, M. R. Wasielewski, T. Seideman, M. A. Ratner, M. C. Hersam, G. C. Schatz and R. P. Van Duyne, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3898–3904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Neuman, R. Esteban, D. Casanova, F. J. García Vidal and J. Aizpurua, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2358–2364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Luo, Y. Zhang, Y. J. Yu, Y. M. Kuang, L. Zhang, Q.-S. Meng, Y. Luo, J. L. Yang, Z. C. Dong and J. G. Hou, Nature, 2016, 531, 623–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Doppagne, M. C. Chong, H. Bulou, A. Boeglin, F. Scheurer and G. Schull, Science, 2018, 361, 251–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. C. Dong, X. L. Zhang, H. Y. Gao, Y. Luo, C. Zhang, L. G. Chen, R. Zhang, X. Tao, Y. Zhang, J. L. Yang and J. G. Hou, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 50–54 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Koo, Y. Kim, S. H. Choi, H. Lee, J. Choi, D. Y. Lee, M. Kang, H. S. Lee, K. K. Kim, G. Lee and K. D. Park, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Koo, H. Lee, T. Ivanova, A. Kefayati, V. Perebeinos, E. Khestanova, V. Kravtsov and K.-D. Park, Light: Sci. Appl., 2023, 12, 59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Park, M. A. May, H. Leng, J. Wang, J. A. Kropp, T. Gougousi, M. Pelton and M. B. Raschke, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav5931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, G. Song, Y. Huang, K. Liang, F. Wu, R. Jiao and L. Yu, ACS Photonics, 2021, 8, 901–906 CrossRef CAS .
W. P. Guo, W. Y. Liang, C. W. Cheng, W. L. Wu, Y. T. Wang, Q. Sun, S. Zu, H. Misawa, P. J. Cheng, S. W. Chang, H. Ahn, M. T. Lin and S. Gwo, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 2857–2864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, H. Hu, D. Pan, S. Zhang and H. Xu, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 4953–4959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Sadeghi and J. Z. Wu, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 2441–2449 CrossRef CAS .
O. Ávalos Ovando, E. Y. Santiago, A. Movsesyan, X. T. Kong, P. Yu, L. V. Besteiro, L. K. Khorashad, H. Okamoto, J. M. Slocik, M. A. Correa Duarte, M. Comesaña Hermo, T. Liedl, Z. Wang, G. Markovich, S. Burger and A. O. Govorov, ACS Photonics, 2022, 9, 2219–2236 CrossRef .
H. L. Zhou, X. Y. Zhang, X. M. Xue, Y. Yang, S. J. Wang, D. Su, Z. R. Yang, Y. F. Wang, Y. Song, J. Wu, W. Wu and T. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 6923–6929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, X. Zheng, H. Liu, J. Yin, C. Ke, W. Yang, Y. Wu, Z. Wu, X. Li, C. Zhang and J. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 35097–35104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, F. Wu, Z. Han, Y. Shang, F. Liu, H. Yu, L. Yu, N. Li and B. Ding, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 3573–3580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Lin, P. C. Wu, H. Akbari, G. R. Rossman, N. C. Yeh and H. A. Atwater, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2104863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ding, Z. Zhang, Y. H. Chen, Y. Zhang, R. J. Blaikie and M. Qiu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 1333–1341 CAS .
X. Lan, X. Zhou, L. A. McCarthy, A. O. Govorov, Y. Liu and S. Link, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19336–19341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wu, J. Guo, Y. Huang, K. Liang, L. Jin, J. Li, X. Deng, R. Jiao, Y. Liu, J. Zhang, W. Zhang and L. Yu, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 2292–2300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. K. C. Indukuri, C. Frydendahl, N. Sharma, N. Mazurski, Y. Paltiel and U. Levy, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 17289–17297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, Z. Cao, Z. Zhang, R. Liu, F. Zhang, J. Wei and Z. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202117406 CAS .
A. O. Govorov, Z. Fan, P. Hernandez, J. M. Slocik and R. R. Naik, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1374–1382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, H. Li, H. Yang, C. Han, H. Hu, A. O. Govorov, H. Yan and X. Lan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202210730 CAS .
Y. Wang, R. Liu, Z. Zhang, J. Wei and Z. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2023, 145, 4035–4044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Vadia, J. Scherzer, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and A. Högele, Nano Lett., 2023, 23, 614–618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ai, X. Xia, H. Zhang, K. K. Chui and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2023, 17, 2356–2367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kauranen and A. V. Zayats, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 737–748 CrossRef CAS .
R. Su, A. Fieramosca, Q. Zhang, H. S. Nguyen, E. Deleporte, Z. Chen, D. Sanvitto, T. C. H. Liew and Q. Xiong, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 1315–1324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dufferwiel, T. P. Lyons, D. D. Solnyshkov, A. A. P. Trichet, A. Catanzaro, F. Withers, G. Malpuech, J. M. Smith, K. S. Novoselov, M. S. Skolnick, D. N. Krizhanovskii and A. I. Tartakovskii, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Cheng and M. Sun, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 7269–7279 RSC .
S. Bhagyaraj, S. Perumbilavil, R. Udayabashkar, R. V. Mangalaraja, S. Thomas, N. Kalarikkal and O. S. Oluwafemi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 11424–11434 RSC .
A. C. Kuriakose, U. Sony, V. P. N. Nampoori and S. Thomas, Opt. Laser Technol., 2021, 134, 106626 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gridyakina, H. Bordyuh, G. Klimusheva, S. Bugaychuk, D. Fedorenko, D. Zhulai, T. Mirnaya, G. Yaremchuk and A. Polishchuk, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 298, 112042 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Zasedatelev, A. V. Baranikov, D. Sannikov, D. Urbonas, F. Scafirimuto, V. Y. Shishkov, E. S. Andrianov, Y. E. Lozovik, U. Scherf, T. Stöferle, R. F. Mahrt and P. G. Lagoudakis, Nature, 2021, 597, 493–497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Y. Wen, K. T. Lin, A. F. Kockum, B. Suri, H. Ian, J. C. Chen, S. Y. Mao, C. C. Chiu, P. Delsing, F. Nori, G. D. Lin and I. C. Hoi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2019, 123, 233602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, H. Hu, W. Chen, P. Suo, Y. Zhang, S. Zhang and H. Xu, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 12711–12719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Artuso and G. W. Bryant, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2106–2111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. T. Fofang, N. K. Grady, Z. Fan, A. O. Govorov and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1556–1560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Nan, Y. F. Zhang, X. Li, X. T. Zhang, H. Li, X. Zhang, R. Jiang, J. Wang, W. Zhang, L. Zhou, J. H. Wang, Q. Q. Wang and Z. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2705–2710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chervy, J. Xu, Y. Duan, C. Wang, L. Mager, M. Frerejean, J. A. W. Münninghoff, P. Tinnemans, J. A. Hutchison, C. Genet, A. E. Rowan, T. Rasing and T. W. Ebbesen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7352–7356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, Q. Guo, Z. Shi, S. Zhang and H. Xu, ACS Photonics, 2023, 10, 1529–1537 CrossRef CAS .
W. Du, J. Zhao, W. Zhao, S. Zhang, H. Xu and Q. Xiong, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 2832–2840 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, Y. Zhang, Q. Liu, K. Wei, X. A. Cheng, L. Shi and T. Jiang, Light: Sci. Appl., 2022, 11, 94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, F. Wu, S. Hou, Z. Zhang, Y. H. Chou, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. R. Forrest and H. Deng, Nature, 2021, 591, 61–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Stepanov, A. Vashisht, M. Klaas, N. Lundt, S. Tongay, M. Blei, S. Höfling, T. Volz, A. Minguzzi, J. Renard, C. Schneider and M. Richard, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2021, 126, 167401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Scheme of volume plasmons, where brown dots and blue circles respectively show positive ions and valence electrons. (b) SPP dispersion relation curve. (c) SPP propagation behavior at the metal-dielectric interface. Scheme of (d) propagating surface plasmon and (e) localized surface plasmon modes. (f) Scheme of the plasmonic hybridization models of dark and bright plasmons.	 
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Models and electronic transition energy level of Frenkel exciton and Wannier exciton. (b) Scheme of interactions between plasmons and excitons. Scheme of (c) classical and (d) quantum theoretical models based on coupled metal nanoparticle and quantum dot. (e) Distinct spectral line shapes of strong coupling and weak coupling.	 
mpẍp + γpẋp + ωp2xp = −αxq	(8)
mqẍq + γqẋq + ωq2xq = −αxp	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
Ĥ = Ĥ0 + ĤI	(15)
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)
	(19)
	(20)
	(21)
	(22)
	(23)
	(24)
	(25)
	(26)
	(27)
	(28)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Depiction of growing MOF conformally assembled on Ag NP arrays. (b) Scheme of strong coupling between Ag lattice plasmons and MOF excitons. (c) Transmission spectra of Ag NPs@MOF systems with variable refractive indices.74 (d) Transmission spectra of bare Ag NP array and Ag NPs@MOF system. (e) Peak wavelength versus refractive index, where SLR for bare Ag NP arrays and SLR-MOF for coupled Ag NPs@MOF systems.73	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Scheme of experimental configuration for STM–TES single-molecule investigation. (b) STM–TERS spectra of isolated CuNc molecule based on different tip locations, where the inset is STM images and the colors of tip location dots match the Raman spectra with corresponding colors. (c) STM–TERS spectra when the tip is located near molecule on NaCl, on NaCl, and near molecule on Ag substrate, where insets are STM images and show the tip locations.93 (d) PL-TES and EL-TES spectra of the H2Pc molecule, where the inset is STM image of H2Pc molecule and colors of tip location dots match corresponding spectra.94 (e) Photocurrent versus time trace measured on the FBPc molecule and bare NaCl film. (f) The molecular structure and STM image of FBPc, where the tip locations with different colors match the spectra in (e). (g) The photocurrent images on the FBPc molecule under the laser-off and laser-on states.95	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Scheme of distinct complex chirality mechanisms and chiral interactions in the 1D DNA-assembled NP hybrid chain. (b) Absorption spectra of coupled Au@Ag NPs with K21 molecules, where the inset is absorption spectrum of pure Au@Ag NPs. (c) CD spectra of CavAu@Ag-3 sample with or without K21, where “w/o” stands for with or without K21 and “1 × K21” represents 1 × 0.0168 mM K21. CD spectra of (d) single NP hybrid systems and (e) 1D NP hybrid chains with or without K21.119 (f) CD and absorption spectra of TPBA/Ag assemblies dispersed in the water, where (R)-TPBA and (S)-TPBA denote the homochiral TPBA molecules. (g) MD simulations revealing aliphatic chains (red) are penetrated into polystyrene chains (blue) due to CH–π interactions.120 (h) Simulated extinction spectrum of coupled monolayer TMD-metal system. CD spectra of the coupled monolayer TMD-metal systems under (i) different magnetic field intensities and (j) different magnetic field directions.121	 

 	Fig. 6  SHG spectra of the c-porphyrin fiber (a) outside and (b) inside the plasmonic cavity, where the insets show the power-dependent SHG intensity. (c) Polarization-dependent SHG signal from the fiber inside the cavity. (d) SHG intensity scan map, where the inset shows the transmission image.136 (e) Scattering spectra of a series of hybrid NPOMs. SHG spectra of the NPOM with (f) 11-layer and (g) 8-layer WSe2, where the shadows represent linear scattering spectra for comparison. EF of SHG against the SH (fundamental) wavelength for (h) 11-layer and (i) 8-layer WSe2, where the red lines are wavelength-dependent SHG intensities of bare WSe2 on the films for comparison.137	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Scheme of the Ag nanodisk-WS2 hybrid system. (b) Femtosecond time-resolved reflection spectra of Ag nanodisk-WS2 plexcitonic systems under 2.0 eV pump excitation at 5 μJ cm−2 incident fluence condition. (c) Reflection spectra of the Ag nanodisk-WS2 plexcitonic systems at t = 100 fs with different pump fluences. Reflection spectra of the Ag nanodisk-WS2 plexcitonic systems at 100 fs under (d) plexcitonic excitation, (e) excitonic excitation, and (f) plasmonic excitation, where the insets are the schematic illustration of corresponding excitation modes. Reflection spectra of Ag nanodisk-WS2 systems (g) with different dielectric interlayer thicknesses and (h) different disk diameters.139	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
