Flexible electrodes with high areal capacity based on electrospun fiber mats  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR05681F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR05681F
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 18391-18409Flexible electrodes with high areal capacity based on electrospun fiber mats

        
          
            Qian 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chenghao 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xitong 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Haiyan 
            Liu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hao 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Han 
            Hu
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Mingbo 
            Wu
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Heavy Oil Processing, Institute of New Energy, College of Chemical Engineering, China University of Petroleum (East China), Qingdao 266580, China. E-mail: hhu@upc.edu.cn; wumb@upc.edu.cn
bNew Energy Division, ShanDong Energy Group CO., LTD, Zoucheng 273500, China
Received 
      29th August 2021
    , Accepted 18th October 2021First published on 20th October 2021AbstractThe ever-growing portable, flexible, and wearable devices impose new requirements from power sources. In contrast to gravitational metrics, areal metrics are more reliable performance indicators of energy storage systems for portable and wearable devices. For energy storage devices with high areal metrics, a high mass loading of the active species is generally required, which imposes formidable challenges on the current electrode fabrication technology. In this regard, integrated electrodes made by electrospinning technology have attracted increasing attention due to their high controllability, excellent mechanical strength, and flexibility. In addition, electrospun electrodes avoid the use of current collectors, conductive additives, and polymer binders, which can essentially increase the content of the active species in the electrodes as well as reduce the unnecessary physically contacted interfaces. In this review, the electrospinning technology for fabricating flexible and high areal capacity electrodes is first highlighted by comparing with the typical methods for this purpose. Then, the principles of electrospinning technology and the recent progress of electrospun electrodes with high areal capacity and flexibility are elaborately discussed. Finally, we address the future perspectives for the construction of high areal capacity electrodes using electrospinning technology to meet the increasing demands of flexible energy storage systems.
1. Introduction
Nowadays, the exploration of clean energy such as solar energy and wind power has accelerated to optimize the fossil fuel-dominated energy structure for eco-friendly development.2–4 To adapt to these intermittent energy sources, the energy storage system is indispensable.5,6 In addition, the increased use of wearable and flexible devices imposes a significant requirement on newly configured energy storage devices, which could be achieved by employing high-performance electrode materials and flexible electrode design.7,8 As a result, the rational design and controlled synthesis of electrode materials for boosting the performance of energy storage devices have been actively pursued for years with remarkable progress. To harvest the electrochemical performance of electrode materials, the active species and the auxiliary components such as conductive additives and polymer binders are loaded on the current collectors. In a typical process, a slurry containing a limited amount of active species (70–80 wt%) mixed with the polymer binder and conductive additive is firstly prepared and then casted on a metal current collector to produce an electrode.10 Generally, the excellent electrochemical performance is mainly expressed in the form of gravitational metrics at a low mass loading (<1 mg cm−2).11 Obviously, the proportion of the active species remains low and the gravitational metrics could not reasonably reflect the capability of the electrode materials in the final devices. In this regard, the areal capacity has been considered as a more reliable indicator for the electrode since the areal metrics are also dependent on the loading mass of the active species, in addition to the properties of the electrode materials.12–15 Nevertheless, the areal metrics are usually unsatisfactory due to the increased tortuosity and a large number of physically contacted interfaces at high mass loadings,24–26 both of which largely deteriorate the mass and charge transfer within the electrodes.27–29 In addition, such electrode architectures could easily break down under deformed conditions, prohibiting their use in flexible and wearable devices.14,30,31
Integrated electrode design has been demonstrated as an effective strategy to resolve the aforementioned issues.32,33 Such electrode architectures could avoid the use of conductive additives, polymer binders, and current collectors, leading to more compacted electrode architectures. In this regard, the possibility of cracking and shedding caused by uneven distribution and agglomeration of the components at high mass loadings will be largely relieved. Meanwhile, the decreased physically contacted interfaces can effectively reduce the internal resistance. In recent years, considerable efforts have been made in the construction of integrated electrodes with high areal metrics, where the employment of a series of novel technologies, including flow-directed assembly,34–38 3D printing,39–41 and electrospinning,42,43 has been successfully realized. However, the flow-directed assembly has a high requirement for the loaded active component, and the complex pretreatment process of the substrate with mixed acid restricts its practical application. Besides, the 3D printing technology mainly focuses on the macro-control of the electrodes with realizable ultrahigh loading, the accurate control of internal shape, and regular channels at the micro/nanoscale, which is difficult. In contrast, the facile and universal electrospinning technology resolves the aforementioned restrictive issues. Of particular note is the electrospinning technology where the in situ formed nanofibers (CNFs) are self-assembled into continuous networks with excellent permeability and flexibility. In this context, the mass transfer at high mass loadings (thick electrodes) could be essentially ameliorated. In addition, the microstructures and electronic conductivity of the electrospun mats could be controllably regulated and enhanced via post-treatments including thermal treatment, laser irradiation, template-mediated regulation, and hydrothermal treatment. Combined with the flexibility of the electrospun mats, the architecture derived from this technology has been used in many energy storage systems, such as lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries, and supercapacitors, as reflected from Fig. 1. Table 1 provides some detailed examples in this rising field. In contrast to the traditional electrode manufacturing process, the advantages of electrospinning technology are summarized as follows.
 Fig. 1  Combination of electrospinning technology with other material treatment methods to obtain electrospun nanofiber-based electrodes and their applications in electrochemical energy storage. 
Table 1 Summary of the fabrication method, mechanical properties, and application of the electrospun fiber mats




Electrode
Fabrication method
Electrical data
Electrochemical data
Application
Ref.


Conductivity [S m−1]
Diameter [nm]
Tensile strength [MPa]
Strain-to-failure [%]




Fe1Co1-CNF
Electrospinning & stabilization & carbonization
N/A
500
1.6
1.01
201.7 mW cm−2 in liquid-electrolyte Zn-air batteries

16



am-Fe2O3/rGO/CNFs
Electrospinning & carbonization
N/A
140
1.06
N/A
811 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 in LIBs

17



HCC-NFs
Electrospinning & coating
170
450
8.3
7.3
High-rate supercapacitors and EMI shielding

18



NCNFs
Electrospinning & pyrolysis
147
300
1.89
0.7
185 mW cm−2 in Zn-air batteries

19



PU/CNT/PAni
Electrospinning & in situ polymerization
N/A
250
8.3
80.3
Capacitance retention of 93% after 1000 cycles in SCs

20



FCNF
Electrospinning & peroxidation & carbonization
N/A
300
3.3
0.87
630 mA h g−1 over 100 cycles in LIBs

21







140
1.0
3.3






Lignin/PAN CNFs
Electrospinning & stabilization & carbonization
103.5
200
N/A
N/A
4.49 W h kg−1 and 2.63 kW kg−1 in flexible supercapacitors

22



WOx-C-NF film
Electrospinning & heat treatment
N/A
135
6.13
0.9
481 mA h g−1 in LIBs

23





(1) The fabrication process is simple and versatile, which is suitable for mass production at a low cost.
(2) The microstructure of the in situ formed nanofibers is highly tunable.
(3) The electrospun electrodes are compatible with many technologies such as electrodeposition and chemical vapor deposition, providing versatile opportunities for performance regulation.
(4) The electrospinning nanofibers, which possess a high aspect ratio, are intertwined with each other, which efficiently improves the strength of the thick electrodes.
Considering the rapid development of flexible electrodes with high areal capacities using the electrospinning technology, a timely summary of this rising field is urgently required. After a brief introduction of the principle of the electrospinning technology, the unique features of this technology for constructing the electrode architecture are presented. Then, the recent progresses in the use of electrospun nanofiber mats as high areal capacity electrodes for Li–S batteries, supercapacitors, alkali ion batteries, and so on is presented in great detail. After that, the challenges and future perspectives of using electrospun nanofiber mats for high areal energy storage are discussed at the end of this review.
2. Principle of electrospinning technology
In 1934, A. Formhals invented an effective and feasible method to prepare ultrafine polymer fibers by electrostatic repulsion, which was considered the beginning of electrospinning technology.44 Afterward, G. Taylor investigated the process of droplet splitting induced by electric field force in the 1960s,45–47 and proposed that the electrostatic repulsion of the droplet is in balance with the surface tension of the polymer. The suspended hemispherical droplets would deform into a cone (Taylor cone) and eject a liquid jet.45 It was not until the early 1990s that the increased accessibility of electron microscopes made it possible to resolve the features of this process down to the nanometer scale and the term “electrospinning” was popularized for describing this technique. Since then, electrospinning technology ushered in a new life after 20 years of stagnancy.9 Nowadays, the research on electrospun fibers has experienced the transition from preparation and characterization to application, and from a small scale to mass manufacture.
Electrospinning can be considered as a special case of the electrospraying technique, both of which rely on the jet of the polymer liquid at high voltage. The main differences between the two technologies are the molecular size of the polymer precursor and viscosity of the precursor solutions as well as the behavior of the jet. The setup for electrospinning generally consists of four major parts including high-voltage power, syringe pump, spinneret, and collector (Fig. 2a).1 During a typical electrospinning process, a high voltage electric field is generated by high voltage power applied between the spinneret and the conductive collector. When the electrostatic force on the liquid surface exceeds its surface tension, a conical-shaped droplet, known as the Taylor cone, is formed at the end of the nozzle (Fig. 2b). Then, the Taylor cone deforms and the polymer jet is ejected from the tip of the Taylor cone.45,48 After a short distance of stable linear motion, followed by whipping motions originated from bending instability, these jets finally deposit on the grounded collector to form polymer fibers after the stretching, solvent evaporation, and solidification processes.49,50
 Fig. 2  (a) Basic setup for electrospinning. Reproduced with permission: Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.1 (b) Formation process of Talor cone. Reproduced with permission: Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.9 
A variety of nanofibers such as organic nanofibers, inorganic nanofibers, and composite nanofibers could be produced by the electrospinning technology. According to the source of the raw materials, the categories of precursors usually include natural polymers (e.g., cellulose51,52 and lignin53–55), synthetic polymers (e.g., polyacrylonitrile (PAN), polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), and polyethylene (PE)), mesophase pitch, and their mixtures.
There are many tunable parameters during the electrospinning processes, which could control the structures and morphologies of the nanofibers for tunable properties.
The composition of the precursors endows the as-spun nanofibers with tunable structures, either solid or porous. Specifically, solid fibers are generally obtained using single component precursors, while rich pores in the nanofibers could be obtained from precursors with multi-components because of the poor stability of some components in the precursors.56,57 Moreover, the choice of highly volatile solvents can also lead to the formation of porous structures.58
The processing/operating parameters, such as the applied voltage and concentration of precursors, have a strong impact on the morphologies of the obtained nanofibers. The threaded bead-like nanofibers can be achieved by regulating the concentration and molecular weight of the precursor.59,60 Meanwhile, the necklace-like structures can be prepared when the particles (SiO2, MOFs, COFs,) with special morphologies are added into the precursor solutions.61–64
Changing the setup geometries, such as the needle gauge and the distance between the spinneret and the collector, is an important strategy to control the quality of the electrospun nanofibers. For example, the position and morphology of the deposited fibers can be controlled precisely by reducing the distance because the fibers are collected from the straight segment of the jet in the near field and the whipping instability is avoided.62,63 Coaxial needles electrospinning (multi-nozzle) instead of a single needle is an effective way to enrich the components and structures of electrospun nanofibers. An array of materials with complex structures such as core–shell nanofibers,65–67 hollow nanofibers,68,69 multiple core nanofibers, and multichannel nanofibers,70,71 have been fabricated by adjusting the number of capillaries in the spinneret.
Because of the high tunability of the electrospun mats, their use as electrodes could ameliorate the inherent problems of blade-casted thick electrodes, such as insufficient contact between the electrolyte and the electrode materials, slow ion transport kinetics, and low specific surface area. Porous structures with a high specific surface area can significantly increase the capacity from ion adsorption/desorption as well as the contact area between the electrode materials and the electrolytes. In addition, sufficient ion transport channels provided by rational structural design can improve the accessibility of electrolyte ions and accelerate ion transport kinetics. The hierarchical structure of the electrodes provides ample space for the high active component to accommodate the volume change, and the confinement effect can also prevent the aggregation of active nanoparticles. All of the advantages make it possible to prepare electrodes with high mass loading for high areal metrics.
3. Electrospun high areal capacity electrodes
3.1 Li–S batteries
Li–S batteries consisting of Li anodes and S cathodes, which achieve energy storage based on the multi-step redox reactions between sulfur and Li ions,72,73 are a promising alternative to next-generation energy storage systems because of the high theoretical capacity of the sulfur cathode, high energy density, and resource abundance of sulfur.74,75 Inspite of these considerable merits, the practical application of Li–S batteries is largely impeded by low sulfur utilization, the “shuttle effect” of polysulfide, and dendrite formation in the lithium metal anode. In practice, Li–S batteries can outperform the state-of-the-art LIBs only if the areal capacity is up to 6 mA h cm−2.76 Generally, sulfur loading (mg cm−2) and content (wt%) display a straightforward impact on the areal capacity of Li–S batteries. Nevertheless, the high areal capacity requiring high sulfur loading inevitably decreases the conductivity of sulfur cathodes and deteriorates the mass/ion transport.
Conductive nanofiber mats with high porosity are promising for loading a high content of sulfur at a high mass loading. Another prospective feature of this kind of sulfur host is to eliminate the polymer binders and current collectors, providing a promising possibility to compete with LIBs.77 Yun et al.78 prepared a CNFs-S electrode comprising CNF and sublimed sulfur particles by facial electrospinning and immersion methods (Fig. 3a), offering excellent performance. The CNFs are randomly distributed and the junctions between the fibers contribute to surface tension, enabling new regions for the infusion of sulfur (Fig. 3b). Meanwhile, the cohesive force between the narrow gaps in the matrix originated from the regulated wetting angles at the junctions of the CNF network, leading to well-adhered polysulfides. The as-constructed geometric model on the basis of the wetting angles proved that the amount of concave sulfur associated with the total sulfur loading (4.4 mg cm−2) led to a high areal specific capacity. Due to the cohesive force that can inhibit the shuttle effect of polysulfide, the freestanding CNF achieved a high S loading of 10.5 mg cm−2 and a high areal capacity of 7.9 mA h cm−2 with a capacity retention of 90.3% after 100 cycles.
 Fig. 3  (a) Fabrication of the CNF-S electrode using electrospun PAN. (b) Schematic of the deposition of sulfur species during the electrochemical reaction via the cohesive force of viscous polysulfides. Reproduced with permission: Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.78 (c) Schematic diagram of fabrication of the freestanding CoS2-SPAN-CNT electrodes. Reproduced with permission: Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.86 (d) Areal capacities of layer-by-layer structured LRC/S@EFG electrodes during cycling at a current density of 1.2 mA cm−2. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature.88 (e) Working principle of the integrated flexible Li–S battery system. (f–i) Flexibility testing of S-CNTs/CoNCNFs/PVDF membrane before and after bending 100 times. Reproduced with permission: Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.91 (j) Schematic illustration of the production of freestanding flexible Li2S@NCNF paper electrodes. (k) The multilayered Li2S@NCNF paper and punched disc electrode. Reproduced with permission: Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.92 
To further improve the performance of electrospun fibers for sulfur loading, hierarchical pores are introduced in the CNF mats, through which the volume expansion of the sulfur species during electrochemical processes could be effectively eliminated.79 For example, the root-like hierarchically porous fibers fabricated by Ahn et al. were considered as an efficient matrix to buffer the volume expansion of the reduction products and ensure the redistribution of polysulfides.80 Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), such as ZIF-8 and ZIF-67, have been considered as a promising precursor for building hierarchically porous nanoarchitectures.81–84 The incorporation of ZIF-8/ZIF-67 in the electrospinning process could produce hierarchically porous fibers composed of interconnected hollow nanobubbles.81,85 Deng and co-workers86 reported a sulfurized polyacrylonitrile (SPAN) film with an ultrahigh initial areal capacity, in which ZIF-67 was formed in situ on the as-electrospun PAN-CNT-MeIM films by a solution impregnation process. Subsequently, CoS2-SPAN-CNT cathodes were fabricated after a vulcanization treatment (Fig. 3c). The pores induced by interconnected CNTs and the inherent high porosity of the ZIF-67-derived CoS2 inhibited swelling and volume expansion, and the redox kinetics of sulfur conversion was also accelerated. The as-fabricated cathodes achieved an ultrahigh initial areal capacity of 8.1 mA h cm−2 at a high loading of 5.9 mg cm−2. The integrative design of the battery system indicates a series of superiorities compared with the conventional discrete stacking design, in avoiding the negative interface effects and harnessing the benefits of individual components.87
The concept of interlayers has been widely accepted to localize the polysulfides but the extra mass of traditional carbon-based interlayer inevitably decreases the sulfur content. Lou et al.88 reported a pie-like electrode with a lotus root-like multichannel carbon nanofibers (LRC/S electrode) filling and a thin ethylenediamine-functionalized reduced graphene oxide (EFG) crust by electrospinning and subsequent dip methods. As a result, a high sulfur loading of 85 wt% was realized because of the sufficient void space provided by the highly parallel channels. Besides, the EFG layers played a similar function as the traditional interlayers to anchor the polysulfides. In particular, because the internal structure of the electrode was completely wrapped by the EFG crust, the migration of the polysulfides could be prevented in all the directions, even the weight fraction of EFG was as low as 15 wt%, resulting in high areal capacity accompanied with the excellent cycling stability of Li–S batteries at different sulfur loadings (Fig. 3d).
Recently, the preparation of separators via electrospinning technology for Li–S batteries has drawn extensive attention.89,90 However, the direct coating of powdered cathode materials on the separator results in the increase of the ion-diffusion resistance inevitably as well as the decrease of the flexibility and structural integrity at high sulfur loading. Ding and co-workers91 created an integrated three-in-one fibrous membranes by electrospinning and base-coating technology to address the aforementioned issues. The S-CNTs/Co-NCNFs/PVDF membranes with three functional units were assembled into an integrated flexible Li–S battery (Fig. 3e), in which the dual functional middle layer (Co-NCNFs) served as both the high-loading current collector and the conductive interlayer. The three-in-one system consisting of active components, dual functional middle layer, and a high-flux polymer separator created synergistic effects for improving the effective polysulfide confinement, electron transfer, and lithium-ion diffusion. Benefiting from its ultrahigh flexibility, no fracture or crease was observed on the membranes even after 100 bendings (Fig. 3f and i), and the original state was well maintained after flexing through angles from 0° to 180° (Fig. 3g and h). Finally, the as-assembled flexible Li–S battery exhibited a high areal capacity of 11.4 mA h cm−2 at a sulfur loading of 13.2 mg cm−2, and an array of over 30 light-emitting diodes (LEDs) can be powered.
The poor structural stability and huge volume expansion (about 80%) of sulfur are still stumbling blocks in the practical use of Li–S batteries. The full lithiated phase of sulfur (Li2S) with 66.67 at% of Li in the structure shows superior structural stability to sulfur. Besides, the Li2S phase with the maximum volume of polysulfide during the dis/charging process reserves enough space for the lithiation/delithiation process, which providing an attractive strategy for addressing the aforementioned issues. Qiu et al.92 reported a facial and low-cost strategy combining electrospinning technology and carbothermal reduction process to prepare integrated Li2S@NCNF electrodes (Fig. 3j). The customized cavity made by the largest Li2S phase during the whole charging–discharging process avoided volume expansion, leading to high structural stability and fast reaction kinetics. Besides, the unique freestanding structure also made it possible to multiply the Li2S loading amount via a facial layer-by-layer stacking of the integrated electrodes (Fig. 3k). As a result, an outstanding areal capacity of 5.76 mA h cm−2 was obtained by the triple-layered cathode with a sulfur loading of 9 mg cm−2.
To operate the high-mass loading electrodes, the current density will be relatively high. In this regard, the Li metal anode for Li–S batteries will have a high risk of dendrite formation, a fatal effect that can cause severe safety issues.93–95 As a result, the rational design and construction of a dendrite-free Li metal anode operable at high current densities has aroused tremendous interest. 3D hosts with high specific surface area have proved as a suitable substrate to facilitate the homogeneous nucleation of Li metal, thus inhibiting the formation of lithium dendrite.96 Compared with 3D metal skeletons (i.e., Cu nanowires97,98 and nickel foam99), 3D carbon materials such as graphite microtubes,95 graphitized carbon fibers,100 carbon nanotubes,101 and composite carbon fibers are superior for hosting the Li metal, in which the electrospun nanofibers have recently received increasing attention.
To effectively host Li with the 3D carbon skeletons, the wettability of the carbon toward molten Li should be regulated to reduce the large nucleation overpotential of Li deposition.102–104 Liu and coworkers105 reported an amine-functionalized mesoporous carbon nanofibers via the electrospinning technology, followed by soaking in an ammonia solution. The pristine nanofibers with poor wettability toward molten Li were changed into the super-wetting state due to the introduction of amine functional groups. The mesopores with functional groups serves as the initial nucleation sites, thus depositing Li along the rough electrode surface uniformly. As a result, the self-smooth feature was achieved.
Aside from the amine functional groups (–NH), oxygenated functional groups (–OH, –OOH, CO, etc.) can also facilitate the homogeneous nucleation of lithium on the carbon host. Kim's group106 proved that porous carbon nanofibers (PCNF) with oxygenated functional groups could be synthesized by immersing the pre-electrospun nanofibers in HNO3. Due to the effect of the oxygenated surface functional groups on the reduction of the energy barrier, the plating and growth of lithium were modeled and controlled precisely, and excellent performance was achieved in Li–S batteries. Likewise, Lin and coworkers107 reported a surface ozonolysis method for the first time to deal with electrospun lignin carbon fibers (Fig. 4a). The introduction of oxygen-containing functional groups modulated the surface properties, decelerated lithium consumption, and guided even lithium growth. The merits of stable coulombic efficiency, long cycle life, and small voltage hysteresis made the lignin-derived carbon membranes (OLCMs) a promising material for stabilizing lean Li metal anodes. Pan and coworkers108 introduced LiF into electrospun polymer fiber networks with polar functional groups, which weakened the “tip effect” by guiding a bottom-up deposition and confinement of lithium in the 3D host (Fig. 4b).
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process of the LCM and OLCM. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.107 (b) Schematic illustration of Li plating on OPAN-LiF. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.108 (c) Scheme of Li-plating and stripping behavior for CNF and CNF-Sn-5% composite electrode. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.112 (d) Schematic of MgZnO/CNF as the triple-gradient host for LMAs. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.116 (e) Schematic diagram of the preparation procedure of NCH@CFs. (f) Voltage profiles of metallic Li plating/stripping in symmetric cells using different electrodes. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.117 
Metal compounds are also high-profile alternatives to promote the uniform nucleation of Li by alloying reactions or conversion reactions between lithium and metal compounds.109–111 Recently, the Sn layer-coated CNF collectors was fabricated by Wang and co-workers via a facial electrospinning method.112 Because of the low energy barrier of Li–Sn alloying and enhanced electric contact of the Sn interlayer, unusual and reversible conformal Li plating behavior appeared on the lithiophilic and alloyable Li–Sn surface (Fig. 4c). The volume expansion and formation of Li dendrites were mitigated, and the Sn layer-coated CNF became a promising strategy to achieve practically applicable Li metal anodes. To overcome the low electrical conductivity of the conversion reaction and the vast volume expansion of the alloying reactions,112–114 Li and co-workers115 proposed a strategy of ultrafine TiN nanoparticles anchored on CNF as both the collector and the metal lithium host. The lithiophilic TiN sheath enhanced controllable nucleation behavior and charge-transfer kinetics, which paved a new way for the development of high-density lithium metal anodes. Yang et al.116 synthesized MgZnO/CNF to serve as the triple-gradient host for Li metal. Specifically, the conversion reactions between MgZnO nanoparticles and molten Li improved the wettability of CNFs, while the triple-gradient structure achieved stable Li stripping/plating (Fig. 4d). As a result, the formation of lithium dendrites was effectively avoided, and the MgZnO/CNF with nearly zero Li nucleation overpotential exhibited a high areal capacity of 10 mA h cm−2.
The huge volumetric change and voltage hysteresis during the plating/stripping processes are also critical issues that limit the application of lithium metal anodes. Lou and Yu et al.117 prepared lotus-root-like Ni–Co hollow prisms@carbon fibers (NCH@CFs) by a facial carbonization of the electrospun nanofibers as both the lithium host and current collectors for lithium metal anodes (Fig. 4e). The highly dispersed Ni–Co nanoparticles and lotus-root-like hollow structure provided uniform Li nuclear sites, accompanied by sufficient void space for volumetric change. Owing to the above metrics of the 3D Li host, long lifespan with low voltage hysteresis was realized in lithium metal anodes (Fig. 4f), which provided a new inspiration for the commercial application of lithium metal anodes.
Yu and co-workers118 designed a dual-functional free-standing TiN-VN@CNFs by the electrospinning method, the 3D-interconnected multichannel carbon fibers with embedded TiN-VN heterostructures served as hosts for both the sulfur and lithium (Fig. 5a), and then a Li–S full cell was assembled (Fig. 5b). The TiN-VN@CNFs played an important role in physical constraints and chemical anchoring of polysulfides on the S cathode side (Fig. 5c), as well as homogeneous lithium deposition on the Li anode side. The S/TiN-VN@CNFs||Li/TiN-VN@CNFs full battery exhibited a high areal capacity of 5.5 mA h cm−2 with an ultrahigh S loading of 5.6 mg cm−2 (Fig. 5d). Moreover, CoNi@PNCFs with multiple Co/Ni–N active sites fabricated by Liang and co-workers also achieved an exceptional performance when acting as the hosts of both sulfur and lithium (Fig. 5e), and the Li–S pouch cell with ultrahigh flexibility demonstrated its application in flexible electronic devices (Fig. 5f).123 A detailed comparison of the electrospun mats for Li–S batteries is provided in Table 2, revealing remarkable progress.
 Fig. 5  (a) Synthesis schematic for the S/TiN-VN@CNFs cathode and the Li/TiN-VN@CNFs anode. (b) Diagrammatic sketch of the S/TiN-VN@CNFs||Li/TiN-VN@CNFs full battery configuration. (c) Digital photos of different samples after soaking in the Li2S6 solution for 12 h and (d) Real capacity of the full batteries with high sulfur loading of 5.6 mg cm−2. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.118 (e) Schematic diagram of synthetic procedures of CoNi@PNCFs electrode and an electronic watch powered by Li–S full cell. (f) schematic illustration of Li–S pouch cell. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.119 
Table 2 Electrochemical performance comparison of different electrospun fibers mats for Li–S batteries




Type of CNFs
Precursor
Method
Structures
S loading [mg cm−2]
Electrochemical performance
Ref.




CNFs
PAN
Electrospinning & carbonization
Porous nanofibers
10.5
Initial capacity: 7.91 mA h cm−2

78











7.14 mA h cm−2 after 100 cycles




NFO/NCFs
PAN + 2-MIM + Ni(NO3)2 + Zn(NO3)2
Electrospinning & hydrothermal
NFO nanoparticles decorated on rough nanofibers
10.2
Initial capacity: 8.35 mA h cm−2 (0.1C)

119











6.01 mA h cm−2 after 150 cycles (0.1C)




Co,N-CNFs
ZIF-67 + PAN
Electrospinning & calcination
Nanoparticle-decorated nanofibers
7.11
Initial capacity: 6.47 mA h cm−2 (0.2C)

120











Capacity retention: 84.4% after 100 cycles




CoS2-SPAN-CNT
PAN + CNT + Co2+ + MeIM
Electrospinning & in situ growth
1D nanofibers with pores and rough surface
5.9
Initial capacity: 8.1 mA h cm−2 (0.2C)

86











1322 mA h g−1 in pouch cell




CFTG
PVP + TBOT + PVP + CH4
Electrospinning & calcination & CVD
Multi-yolk/shell-structured TiC@C nanofibers
10.5
6.81 mA h cm−2 at S loading of 10.5 mg and 530 mA h g−1 at S loading of 10.5 mg in soft package battery

121



BCN@HCS fibers
SiO2@BP/SiO2 + NH3 H2O + TEOS + PAN
Electrospinning & calcination & HF etching
Interconnected yolk–shell carbon nanosphere-assembled fiber network
16
15.5 mA h cm−2 after 50 cycles (0.1C)

122



CoNi@PNCFs
PAN + PVP + PMMA + Co(Ac)2 + Ni(Ac)2
Electrospinning & carbonization
Ultrafine metal particles in porous interconnected 3D framework
7.0
5.5 mA h cm−2 after 50 cycles (0.2C)

123











Excellent stability in highly flexible electronic devices




TiN-VN@CNFs
PS + C10H14O5Ti + C10H14O5V
Electrospinning & calcination in NH3
TiN-VN nanoparticles dispersed on the multichannel fibers
5.6
5.5 mA h cm−2 in flexible Li–S full batteries (0.1C)

118



NiCo2O4 nanofiber
PAN + Co(Ac)2 + Ni(Ac)2
Electrospinning & calcination in air
Irregular nanocrystals rough and hollow nanofibers
5
487 mA h cm−3 after 1500 cycles (1C)

124



CNF-PEO/LLTO
LLTO + LiTFSI + CH3CN + PEO + PAN
Electrospinning & casting & integration
Integrated electrolyte/electrode bilayer structure
1.27
415 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles

87





3.2 Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors, capable of charging/discharging at ultra-fast rates using the ion-adsorption manner, have been regarded as one of the most promising electrochemical energy storage systems due to their indispensable role for many high-power applications.49,125,126 Generally, supercapacitors can be classified into electrochemical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) and psedocapacitors.127,128 Among them, EDLCs store electrical charges through the fast adsorption/desorption process of ions on the surface of active materials, while the capacity of pseudocapacitors is dominantly contributed by the reversible redox reactions between the electrode materials and electrolytes.129–131 However, the areal metrics including areal capacitance and energy density have largely limited the further development of supercapacitors,132,133 which can be surmounted by the direct employment of free-standing electrospun membranes as the electrodes. Carbon-based 1D structures with large specific surface area are promising as electrodes for electrochemical double layer capacitors (EDLCs).130,134 Meanwhile, the easy-to-obtain electrospun composite nanofibers will profit the pseudocapacitors.131,135–137
Electrospun nanofibers with high defects (heteroatom doping, vacancy-type defects, etc.) and hierarchical porosity can efficiently improve the properties of the electrodes,138,139 such as electric conductivity, surface area, and wettability. For example, Xue's team140 prepared hierarchically porous carbon nanofibers (HPCNFs) (Fig. 6a) by electrospinning a mixed solution of (P(AN-co-AA)) and terephthalic with subsequent thermal treatment. Specifically, PTA could sublimate at elevated temperatures to produce multiscale porosity and a high surface area so that the ion accessibility was essentially improved. The degradation of the AA segments introduced enormous vacancy-type defects (Fig. 6b) and micropores. The trapezoidal structure with high-content of the N–P band remarkably increased the redox active sites, making the HPCNFs with vacancy-type defects a promising electrode material for high-performance supercapacitors (327 F g−1 and 80.5 mF cm−2).
 Fig. 6  (a) Scheme of fabrication of the HPCNFs. (b) Elemental analyses and plausible structure of the HPCNFs after carbonization. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.140 (c) Schematic flow chart for the synthesis of SnO2@C via electrospinning, followed by calcination at two different temperatures. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.141 (d) Schematic diagram of the non-polar FSC and photographs of the flexible VCO/CNFs membranes. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.132 (e) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of CNF/HSP-Co3O4. (f) SEM image of CNF/HSP-Co3O4 and the digital image of the prepared freestanding and flexible film. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.145 
1D nanofibers composited with active metal oxides as electrodes of supercapacitors also show high potential due to the pseudocapacitance produced by redox reactions. Ingole et al.141 synthesized porous carbon nanofibers modified by SnO2 nanoparticles via electrospinning and post-calcination (Fig. 6c). Due to the extra capacitance of SnO2 nanoparticles, the flexible supercapacitor exhibited unprecedented performance of 0.08 W h cm−2 and 4.87 W cm−2. Moreover, the introduction of low-electronegativity elements can promote the formation of metal oxides by adjusting the electronic configurations, which is crucial to the promotion of electrochemical performance. For example, Long's group132 introduced vanadium/cobalt oxides on carbon nanofibers (VCO/CNFs) by the electrospinning technology, in which CoO provided high capacitance, and the low-electronegativity of vanadium promoted the formation of the CoO phase, as well as conquered the slow reaction kinetics of CoO nanoparticles. Benefiting from the coexistence of EDLC and faradaic behavior, the flexible asymmetric supercapacitor assembled by the binder-free non-polarity electrodes (Fig. 6d) delivered an exceptional areal capacitance of 1.83 F cm−2, which proved its accessibility for real applications.
In the typical products of electrospun fibers, quite some active sites are deeply embedded in the bulk of the nanofibers, resulting in the insufficient utilization of the active sites. Meanwhile, the evolution of active phases such as metal oxides also causes damage to the structural stability.142 The construction of a hierarchical structure is a widely accepted strategy to resolve the aforementioned issues, which generally requires the rational combination of electrospinning technology with other technologies such as self-assembly, surface coating, and in situ growth.143,144 Chen et al.145 reported a novel bubble-nanofiber-structure via the rational combination of the electrospinning and solution-phase self-assembly (Fig. 6e). During the self-assembly process, ultrafine Co3O4 nanoparticles were formed by the modification of polydopamine (PDA) (Fig. 6f). Hollow Co3O4 superparticles have been demonstrated to afford more accessible reactive sites and shorten the transport length for charge. The thin carbon originated from PDA can connect individual Co3O4 NPs so as to lower the interparticle resistance and achieve excellent electrochemical stability (92.3% retention after 10000 cycles).
The core–shell structure originated from the surface coating of the electrospun nanofibers is also promising for improved energy storage due to its promotion of flexibility, resilience, and capacitance. For example, Yoon's team achieved a carbon-core and silver-shell structure by electrospinning and subsequent electroplating process, which achieved high performance (31 mF cm−2) at different electrolyte concentrations (Fig. 7a). Due to the excellent bending capability of the silver-shell layer, the ultrahigh flexible Ag/CNF showed immense potential for wearable electron devices.146 Similarly, Lee's group147 utilized e-beam deposition and electrospinning techniques to prepare the Cu@Ni nanofibers core. After a potentiostatic deposition technique, core–shell Cu@Ni@NiCoS nanofibers were obtained (Fig. 7b). Due to the excellent flexibility and electro-optical performance of the Cu@Ni nanofibers core as well as the high porosity and abundant active sites of the NiCoS shell, the flexible symmetric supercapacitor with high transparency (65%) achieved remarkable energy density (0.48 μW h cm−2) and power density (11.15 μW cm−2), demonstrating its prospect in transparent wearable electronic gadgets. The core–shell structure achieved by surface growth is also an effective strategy for the improvement of conductivity and activity. PEDOT:PSS-coated 1D P(VDF-TrFE) nanofiber was prepared by electrospinning and the subsequent drop-and-casting method, serving as a conducting scaffold for active components. After a ZnO-seeding and immersion process (Fig. 7c), a pine-needle-inspired 1D–1D hybrid nanostructure with excellent mechanical durability and robustness was constructed, and the addition of ZnO nanorods enhanced the specific capacitance by 59%.148
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of electrospinning setup (left) and application performance (right). Copyright 2018, Elsevier.146 (b) Schematic illustration for the fabrication of intertwined Cu@Ni@NiCoS NFs network transparent flexible supercapacitor electrodes and transparent flexible SSC device. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.147 (c) Fabrication process of ZnO/PEDOT:PSS/P(VDF-TrFE) nanofibers. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.148 (d) The scheme for the preparation of RGO/PA66-nano. (e) The scheme for assembling the supercapacitor. Copyright 2014, Elsevier.149 (f) Schematic of the production of Ti3C2Tx MXene/carbon nanofibers via electrospinning. (g) TEM image of the fiber cross-section. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.153 
To further improve the flexibility and conductivity of the electrode without sacrificing the mass loading and areal capacitance, attention was focused on the composite of 1D electrospun nanofibers with 2D materials such as graphene oxide (GO)149–151 and 2D transition metal carbides and nitrides (MXene).128,152 Hu et al.149 reported a carbon nanofibers/reduced graphene oxides (RGO) composite by immersing the electrospun mats into the GO aqueous dispersion, followed by a hydrazine reduction process (Fig. 7d). Medium-sized RGO (M-RGO) nanosheets with suitable size (250–450 nm) could effectively penetrate the pores of the mats and build a bridge for electric transmission between different fibers. Also, the sandwich-like symmetric supercapacitor composed of the folded RGO/PA66-nanocomposite (Fig. 7e) achieved both high-volume (38.79 F cm−3) and high areal (0.931 F cm−2) specific capacitance. However, the flaking off of the post-introduced 2D materials and the bottleneck of active mass loading still limits the application of 1D/2D composite electrodes. To resolve the problems, integrated MXene fiber composites with superior flexibility were obtained by the direct electrospinning strategy, through which MXene flakes were embedded into nanofibers (Fig. 7f), and the content of MXene is up to 16 wt% with layers of MXene flakes inside the fibers (Fig. 7g). The areal capacitance of MXene/CNF electrodes was up to 205 mF cm−2, almost 3 times that of pure PAN electrodes (70 mF cm−2).153 The electrochemical performance of the supercapacitors based on electrospun mats are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3 Electrochemical performance comparison of the electrospun fibers mats for supercapacitors




Type of CNFs
Method
Structure
Application
Electrolyte
Electrochemical performance
Ref.




PCF
Electrospinning & hard-templating
Nanofibers tunable multi-level pores
Symmetrical supercapacitor
Ionic liquid (IL)
1.2 F cm−2 (10 mg cm−2)

154



a-PCNF
Electrospinning & KOH activation
Porous CNFs
Freestanding gel IL cell
IL-rich ionogel
151 mF cm−2 (5.1 mg cm−2)

155



SCAB-derived CNFs
Electrospinning & carbonization
Hierarchically porous CNF
Flexible all-solid-state symmetric supercapacitor (ASSC)
1 M H2SO4
64.2 μF cm−2 (0.5 A g−1)

156









6 M KOH
55.3 μF cm−2 (0.5 A g−1)




ESCNF@Bi2O3
Electrospinning & solvothermal
Bi2O3 sheath layer on the smooth nanofiber
Flexible asymmetric supercapacitor
1 M KOH
530 mF cm−2 (1 mA cm−2)

157



VCO/CNFs
Electrospinning & post-calcination
Porous nanofibers with nanoparticles
Non-polar flexible supercapacitor
PVA-KOH gel
1.83 F cm−2 (8 mA cm−2)

132



Kraft lignin-derived CNF mats
Electrospinning & reducing carbonization
Porous CNFs
Swagelok-type cell
6 M KOH
350 mF cm−2

158











92.5% retention after 6000 cycles




MnO2/Au nanofiber
Electrospinning & electrodeposition
Core–shell structure
Transparent and stretchable supercapacitor
1 M Na2SO4
3.68 mF cm−2

159





Multilayer stacking structure










MnO2@AuNF
Electrospinning & thermal vacuum deposition & electrodeposition
Core–shell hollow nanofiber
Flexible transparent solid-state supercapacitor
LiCl-PVA gel
8.26 mF cm−2 (5 mV s−1)

160



Cu@Ni@NiCoS NFs
Electrospinning & metal deposition & electrodeposition
Core–shell nanofiber
Transparent flexible symmetric supercapacitor
PVA-KOH gel
7.43 μA h cm−2

147





Rough surface










PEDOT:PSS-coated P(VDF-TrFE) nanofibers
Electrospinning & drop-casting & in situ growth
Hybrid structure of 1D nanorods on electrospun nanofibers
Flexible all-solid full-cell supercapacitor
PVA-H2SO4 gel
1.22 mF cm−2 (0.1 mA cm−2)

148











96% retention after 1000 cycles




C-web@Ni-cotton
Polymer-assisted metal deposition & electrospinning
Corrugated and rough nanofibers with beads
Wearable solid-state wristband
1 M Na2SO4
973.5 mF cm−2 (2.5 mA cm−2)

161





3.3 Lithium-ion batteries
As the dominant energy storage devices, LIBs have been widely used in numerous fields. However, the gravitational specific capacity of commercial LIBs has almost reached the upper limit. In order to meet the increasing demand of large-scale energy storage and portable devices,162,163 it is urgent to find new materials that can replace traditional graphite and develop methods to improve the areal capacity. In this regard, electrospinning technology provides a new insight for the construction of self-supporting integrated electrodes with improved electrochemical performance.
A series of electrospun composites have been reported to enhance the performance of anodes of LIBs, such as LiCuVO4/LiVO3/C nanotubes, MOFs-derived CoFe2O4@CNF, and LiNi0.4Co0.2Mn0.4O2 nanobelts.164–166 Considering the merits of thick electrodes, Yang and co-workers167 prepared the N,P co-doped porous film (Fe3O4@PCNF) via electrospinning and a subsequent high-temperature steam etching (Fig. 8a). The interconnected network with hierarchical porosity (Fig. 8b) could facilitate ion transport. Besides, stacked layered structure composed of intertwined nanofibers with a thickness of 242 μm (Fig. 8c) ensured the stability and mechanical properties of the self-supported electrode. When the as-prepared Fe3O4@PCNF films were used as the anode of LIBs, the enhanced pseudocapacitance originated from fast electric and ion transport, leading to a high areal capacity of 1.0 mA h cm−2 at 2 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation strategy for the Fe3O4@PeCNF electrode. (b) SEM image and (c) cross-section of Fe3O4@PeCNF. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.167 (d) The synthetic procedure of the LiFePO4-based paper electrodes. (e) Areal capacities and (f) volumetric capacity of LiFePO4 paper cathodes. (g) Comparison of the electrochemical performances of the LiFePO4 paper cathodes and reported high areal capacity electrodes. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.168 
Apart from anode materials of LIBs, the high mass loaded cathodes are equally important for the real device. Wang et al.168 reported a simple and effective airbrush-spraying/electrospinning strategy (ECAS) to fabricate free-standing LiFePO4 paper electrodes (Fig. 8d). With the interlaced 3D framework consisting of PAN nanofibers and MWNTs, ultrahigh mass loading was realized by layer-by-layer approach for the first time. The performance comparison of the integrated electrodes with different LiFePO4 loadings (Fig. 8e) demonstrated that the areal capacity increased almost linearly with the electrode thickness (Fig. 8f). The cathode prepared by the ECAS technique exhibits superior areal capacity even at an ultrahigh mass loading of 79 mg cm−2 (577 μm in thickness), making ECAS an advanced technology for other battery technologies (Fig. 8g).
3.4 Other batteries
In recent years, the design of high areal capacity electrodes has been gradually extended to emerging energy storage systems including sodium ion batteries (SIBs), Li-CO2 batteries, Li–O2 batteries, and lithium–selenium sulfide batteries.169–174
The merits of earth-abundance and cost-effectiveness have made SIBs a promising alternative to LIBs175,176 but the large radius of Na ions denies the direct use of traditional graphite anodes for sodium uptake/release.177 The exploration of high performance active materials at high mass loadings to catch up the energy density of LIBs has become an urgent subject. Recently, Zhou and co-workers178 fabricated a uniform Sn-based anode (Sn@CFC) by a scalable electrospinning method. The conductivity of nitrogen-doped carbon fiber reduced the polarization effects. Ultrafine Sn particles with nanoscale effect were decorated on the CNFs. As a result, the pathway for sodium ions and electrons was shortened, and the strain during the alloying/dealloying process was decreased (Fig. 9a). High reversible areal capacity (1.68 mA h cm−2) and rate performance were exhibited, which promoted the further development of SIBs.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the structural revolution of the free-standing Sn@CFC electrode. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.178 (b) SEM image of MnO@NMCNFs. (c) Cycling performance of the Li-CO2 pouch cell bent at different angles. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.182 (d) Schematic illustrations of the BLB structured hybrid fiber and one bubble before, after the selenium sulfide loading, and with fast electron transport pathways. (e) Comparisons of the areal capacity of this work and the values from the previous reports on the lithium–selenium sulphide/lithium–sulfur batteries. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.186 
Li-CO2 batteries have gradually attracted attention toward both energy storage and capture of CO2 to alleviate environmental issues.179–181 Owing to the existence of extra gas diffusion layers (GDLs) at the cathode side, the shortcoming of low energy density has become an insurmountable issue. Recently, Wang's team182 suggested an effective strategy to address this issue by constructing mesoporous nanofibers modified with ultrafine MnO nanoparticles (MnO@NMCNFs). The addition of Mn-based metal–organic framework in the electrospun solution permits the uniform dispersion of catalytic MnO nanoparticles and abundant mesopores after a controlled pyrolysis process (Fig. 9b). The electrospun electrodes showed “4H features” (high flexibility, high interface accessibility, high catalytic activity, and high conductivity) as a freestanding gas cathode, which presented ultrahigh areal capacity (19.07 mA h cm−2) and ultralow overpotential in Li-CO2 cell. The as-assembled pouch cells exhibited unchanged voltage curves under different deformation states (Fig. 9c), proving its potential in wearable energy storage systems.
The large volume change of Li–S batteries and low energy density of Li–Se batteries have become crucial issues.183,184 Selenium-sulfide electrodes185 are promising alternatives to overcome these drawbacks; however, the poor stability and low electronic conductivity have limited their application. Deng et al.186 fabricated “bubble-linking-bubble” (BLB) hierarchical hybrid fibers via a dual-nozzle electrospinning method as hosts to load selenium sulfides and anchor polysulfide. Ultrafine TiN nanoparticles filled in the hollow carbon bubbles facilitated the electrolyte penetration and increased loading of the SeS2 active material (about 71.8 wt%). Besides, the porous framework with well-reserved voids provided bicontinuous electronic pathways (Fig. 9d), which favored fast kinetics and superior electrochemical performance. As a result, high areal capacity and long cycle stability could be obtained even at high mass loadings (Fig. 9e), providing an excellent platform for the practical application of selenium sulfide electrodes.
4. Summary and outlook
With the increasing requirement of high energy density of energy storage devices, electrodes with high areal capacities have been widely studied, which benefit from the decreased proportion of inactive components. However, electrodes with high mass loading fabricated by traditional blade-casting process are prone to deteriorate and lower the reaction kinetics, making it difficult to achieve commercial-level applications. Recently, the emerging electrospinning technology has become an effective method to resolve the aforementioned bottlenecks. The electrospun electrodes without extra inactive components (polymer binders, conductive additives, and current collectors) could effectively eliminate the interface effect among different electrode components, which accelerates electron conduction and increases the energy density of devices. The enhanced conductivity and mechanical stability achieved by the interlaced conductive carbon network show great significance for the construction of electrodes with high areal capacities. In addition, the inherent flexibility and high controllability of the electrospun fiber mats satisfy the increased requirements of wearable and flexible devices. In this review, the basic principles of electrospinning technology were first introduced. Composites with active species of various morphologies and structures (e.g., porous, core–shell, hollow, grafted, necklace, and multichannel), produced by combining electrospinning and other advanced techniques such as hydrothermal, CVD, self-assembly, and electrospray, are capable of further improving the electrochemical performance at high mass loading. Finally, excellent electrochemical performance of the free-standing integrated electrodes demonstrated their application in a myriad of electrochemical energy storage devices.
Inspite of the significant success of electrospun integrated electrodes for energy storage, there are still a great deal of challenges that remain to be overcome in this rising field. The inherent small specific surface area of solid electrospun nanofibers results in low capacities, which makes the introduction of porous structures imperative. However, the precise control of multiscale porous structures remains difficult, and the reduction of conductivity caused by the inevitable increase in the porosity partially offsets the advantages of electrospun electrodes with a high thickness. As a result, the trade-off between the improvement of the conductivity and appropriate porosity should be noticed in the future. In addition, in consideration of the volume expansion and stability of composite electrodes based on 1D electrospun mats, the content of extra components (metal oxide, metal sulfide, etc.) is low; thus, miniaturization and monodispersity of the active components remain a promising direction to improve the loading of highly active components without decreasing the mechanical strength. Aside from the design of the electrode material and structure, a fundamental understanding of the mechanism is also essential for the further development of energy storage devices, including the research on the synergistic effect between the morphology (porous structure, hetero-structure, etc.) and composition, exploration of the relationship between electrochemical performance and electrode structural engineering, and dynamic monitoring of long distance transport behavior of ions in electrodes with high thickness.
Despite the aforementioned challenges, electrospinning technology has been turned out to be a potential strategy for manufacturing high-areal-capacity electrodes. The integrated electrodes with exceptional structure designability, abundant active sites, and high conductivity have attracted extensive attention in increasing the sulfur loading and restraining lithium dendrites. Nevertheless, most of the current researches have failed to evaluate the performance of the as-prepared electrodes in real devices. The design of full batteries with both electrospun integrated cathodes and anodes or anode-free batteries provides a new thought for future development. On the other hand, ultrahigh flexibility and foldability of the electrospun integrated electrodes make it possible to be applied in emerging energy devices such as foldable equipment, 1D stretchable devices, and flexible wearable electronics. In view of this consideration, we believe that the integrated design of electrodes based on the electrospinning technology will play an increasingly importance role in future energy storage systems and occupy a place in commercialized applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support from National Natural Science Foundation of China (2217050185, 21975258), the startup support grant from China University of Petroleum (East China), Taishan Scholar Project (No. ts201712020), New Energy Division Shandong Energy Group Co., Ltd., and Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation (ZR2020ZD08).
Notes and references
J. Xue, J. Xie, W. Liu and Y. Xia, Electrospun Nanofibers: New Concepts, Materials, and Applications, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 1976–1987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Hong, D.-H. Jung, J.-H. Kim, Y.-H. Lee, S.-J. Cho, S. H. Joo, H.-W. Lee, K.-S. Lee and S.-Y. Lee, Electrical Conductivity Gradient Based on Heterofibrous Scaffolds for Stable Lithium-Metal Batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908868 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, F. Li, L.-P. Ma and H.-M. Cheng, Advanced Materials for Energy Storage, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E28–E62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Qian, Y. Huang, M. Zhang, Z. Xia, H. Liu, L. Guan, H. Hu and M. Wu, Non-corrosive and low-cost synthesis of hierarchically porous carbon frameworks for high-performance lithium-ion capacitors, Carbon, 2021, 173, 646–654 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, An Outlook on Lithium Ion Battery Technology, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 1063–1069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and K.-S. Park, The Li-Ion Rechargeable Battery: A Perspective, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Cao, M. Ren, J. Xiong, L. Pan, Y. Wang, X. Ji, T. Qiu, J. Yang and C. Zhang, Self-assembly of hierarchical Ti3C2Tx-CNT/SiNPs resilient films for high performance lithium ion battery electrodes, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 348, 136211 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, M. Zou, H. Zhang, W. Zhao, M. Yousaf, L. Yang, A. Cao and R. P. S. Han, Densification by Compaction as an Effective Low-Cost Method to Attain a High Areal Lithium Storage Capacity in a CNT@Co3O4 Sponge, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702981 CrossRef .
J. Xue, T. Wu, Y. Dai and Y. Xia, Electrospinning and Electrospun Nanofibers: Methods, Materials, and Applications, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 5298–5415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-F. Ren, J.-T. Li, Z.-G. Huang, L. Deng, Y. Zhou, L. Huang and S.-G. Sun, Fabrication of Si Nanoparticles@Conductive Carbon Framework@Polymer Composite as High-Areal-Capacity Anode of Lithium-Ion Batteries, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 3258–3265 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhu, Y. Jin, Y. Tan, L. Zong, Y. Hu, L. Chen, Y. Chen, Q. Zhang and J. Zhu, Scalable Production of Si Nanoparticles Directly from Low Grade Sources for Lithium-Ion Battery Anode, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5750–5754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, H. Yang, T. Xiong, D. Adekoya, W. Qiu, Z. Wang, S. Zhang and M. S. Balogun, Adsorption energy engineering of nickel oxide hybrid nanosheets for high areal capacity flexible lithium-ion batteries, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 25, 41–51 CrossRef .
S. M. Hosseini, A. Varzi, S. Ito, Y. Aihara and S. Passerini, High loading CuS-based cathodes for all-solid-state lithium sulfur batteries with enhanced volumetric capacity, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 61–68 CrossRef .
D. Liu, X. Xu, J. Tan, J. Zhu, Q. Li, Y. Luo, P. Wu, X. Zhang, C. Han and L. Mai, Micrometer-Sized Porous Fe2N/C Bulk for High-Areal-Capacity and Stable Lithium Storage, Small, 2019, 15, 1803572 Search PubMed .
S. K. Solanki and N. A. Krivova, Analyzing Solar Cycles, Science, 2011, 334, 916–917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Li, P. Zhang, Y. Pan, Y. Zhang, Q. Cai, S. R. P. Silva, J. Liu, G. Zhang, X. Sun and Z. Yan, Flexible carbon nanofiber film with diatomic Fe-Co sites for efficient oxygen reduction and evolution reactions in wearable zinc-air batteries, Nano Energy, 2021, 87, 106147 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, J. Liu, X. Li, Z. Xia, Q. Zhang, M. Zhou, W. Tian, M. Wang, H. Hu, Z. Li, W. Wu, H. Ning and M. Wu, Graphene oxide-induced synthesis of button-shaped amorphous Fe2O3/rGO/CNFs films as flexible anode for high-performance lithium-ion batteries, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 369, 215–222 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lai, W. Li, L. Xu, X. Wang, H. Jiao, Z. Fan, Z. Lei and Y. Yuan, Scalable fabrication of highly crosslinked conductive nanofibrous films and their applications in energy storage and electromagnetic interference shielding, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 400, 125322 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Y. Wang, L. Dai and J. Yao, Scalable Fabrication of Nanoporous Carbon Fiber Films as Bifunctional Catalytic Electrodes for Flexible Zn-Air Batteries, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3000–3006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Khosrozadeh, M. A. Darabi, Q. Wang and M. Xing, Polyaniline nanoflowers grown on vibration-isolator-mimetic polyurethane nanofibers for flexible supercapacitors with prolonged cycle life, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7933–7943 RSC .
R. Chen, Y. Hu, Z. Shen, P. Pan, X. He, K. Wu, X. Zhang and Z. Cheng, Facile fabrication of foldable electrospun polyacrylonitrile-based carbon nanofibers for flexible lithium-ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12914–12921 RSC .
J. H. Park, H. H. Rana, J. Y. Lee and H. S. Park, Renewable flexible supercapacitors based on all-lignin-based hydrogel electrolytes and nanofiber electrodes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16962–16968 RSC .
J. Lee, C. Jo, B. Park, W. Hwang, H. I. Lee, S. Yoon and J. Lee, Simple fabrication of flexible electrodes with high metal-oxide content: electrospun reduced tungsten oxide/carbon nanofibers for lithium ion battery applications, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10147–10155 RSC .
B. Wang, J. Ryu, S. Choi, G. Song, D. Hong, C. Hwang, X. Chen, B. Wang, W. Li, H. K. Song, S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Folding Graphene Film Yields High Areal Energy Storage in Lithium-Ion Batteries, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1739–1746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Self, R. Wycisk and P. N. Pintauro, Electrospun titania-based fibers for high areal capacity Li-ion battery anodes, J. Power Sources, 2015, 282, 187–193 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Self, E. C. McRen and P. N. Pintauro, High Performance Particle/Polymer Nanofiber Anodes for Li-ion Batteries using Electrospinning, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 208–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zheng, J. Li, X. Song, G. Liu and V. S. Battaglia, A comprehensive understanding of electrode thickness effects on the electrochemical performances of Li-ion battery cathodes, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 71, 258–265 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Su, W. Ren, H. Guo, X. Peng, X. Chen and C. Zhao, Ultrahigh Areal Capacity Hydrogen-Ion Batteries with MoO3 Loading Over 90 mg cm−2, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2005477 CrossRef CAS .
H.-M. Cheng and F. Li, Charge delivery goes the distance, Science, 2017, 356, 582–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Shi, Y. Shang, Y. Pei, S. Pei, L. Wang, D. Heider, Y. Y. Zhao, C. Zheng, B. Yang, S. Yarlagadda, T. W. Chou and K. K. Fu, Low Tortuous, Highly Conductive, and High-Areal-Capacity Battery Electrodes Enabled by Through-thickness Aligned Carbon Fiber Framework, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 5504–5512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Nitta and G. Yushin, High-Capacity Anode Materials for Lithium-Ion Batteries: Choice of Elements and Structures for Active Particles, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 31, 317–336 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Kim, B. Lee, M. Li, S. Noda, C. Kim, J. Kim, W. J. Song, S. W. Lee and O. Brand, All-Soft Supercapacitors Based on Liquid Metal Electrodes with Integrated Functionalized Carbon Nanotubes, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 5659–5667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, D. Liu, X. Zhu, D. Qu, Z. Xie, J. Li, H. Tang, D. Zheng and D. Qu, Integrated 3D electrodes based on metal-nitrogen-doped graphitic ordered mesoporous carbon and carbon paper for high-loading lithium-sulfur batteries, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104763 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, R. Xu, Z. Hu, S. Ye, S. Zeng, Y. Yao, S. Li and Y. Yu, Regulating Lithium Nucleation via CNTs Modifying Carbon Cloth Film for Stable Li Metal Anode, Small, 2019, 15, 1803734 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, X. Wang, L. Acauan, E. Kalfon-Cohen, X. Ni, Y. Stein, K. K. Gleason and B. L. Wardle, Ultrahigh-Areal-Capacitance Flexible Supercapacitor Electrodes Enabled by Conformal P3MT on Horizontally Aligned Carbon-Nanotube Arrays, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901916 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhang, X. Teng, W. Shi, Y. Song, J. Zhang, X. Wang, H. Li, Q. Li, S. Li and H. Hu, SnO2 nanoflower arrays on an amorphous buffer layer as binder-free electrodes for flexible lithium-ion batteries, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 527, 146910 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yousaf, Y. Chen, H. Tabassum, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, A. Y. Abid, A. Mahmood, N. Mahmood, S. Guo, R. P. S. Han and P. Gao, A Dual Protection System for Heterostructured 3D CNT/CoSe2/C as High Areal Capacity Anode for Sodium Storage, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-F. Li, Y.-H. Shi, S.-G. Wang, J.-H. Liu, J. Lin, Y. Xia, X.-L. Wu, C.-Y. Fan, J.-P. Zhang, H.-M. Xie, H.-Z. Sun and Z.-M. Su, Carbon/Binder-Free NiO@NiO/NF with In Situ Formed Interlayer for High-Areal-Capacity Lithium Storage, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803690 CrossRef .
X. Li, H. Li, X. Fan, X. Shi and J. Liang, 3D-Printed Stretchable Micro-Supercapacitor with Remarkable Areal Performance, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903794 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lu, Z. Sun, L. Yu, X. Lian, Y. Yi, J. Li, Z. Liu, S. Dou and J. Sun, Enhanced Kinetics Harvested in Heteroatom Dual-Doped Graphitic Hollow Architectures toward High Rate Printable Potassium-Ion Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001161 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Z. Feng, X. Teng, L. Guan, H. Hu and M. Wu, Three-dimensional printing of high-mass loading electrodes for energy storage applications, InfoMat, 2021, 3, 631–647 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Wang, Z. Mao, R. Wang, B. He, Y. Gong and X. Hu, Mesopore-Induced Ultrafast Na+-Storage in T-Nb2O5/Carbon Nanofiber Films toward Flexible High-Power Na-Ion Capacitors, Small, 2019, 15, 1804539 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Narsimulu, B. N. Rao, N. Satyanarayana and E. S. Srinadhu, High Capacity Electrospun MgFe2O4-C Composite Nanofibers as an Anode Material for Lithium Ion Batteries, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 8010–8017 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Formhals, Process and apparatus for preparing artificial threads, US, 1975504[P],  1934 Search PubMed .
G. Taylor, Disintegration of Water Drops in an Electric Field, Proc. R. Soc. London, 1964, 280, 383–397 Search PubMed .
G. I. Taylor and M. D. V. Dyke, The force exerted by an electric field on a long cylindrical conductor, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1966, 291, 145–158 Search PubMed .
G. I. Taylor and M. D. V. Dyke, Electrically driven jets, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1969, 313, 453–475 Search PubMed .
S. N. Reznik, A. L. Yarin, A. Theron and E. Zussman, Transient and steady shapes of droplets attached to a surface in a strong electric field, J. Fluid Mech., 2004, 516, 349–377 CrossRef .
J. Liang, H. Zhao, L. Yue, G. Fan, T. Li, S. Lu, G. Chen, S. Gao, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Recent advances in electrospun nanofibers for supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16747–16789 RSC .
S. Chen, L. Qiu and H. M. Cheng, Carbon-Based Fibers for Advanced Electrochemical Energy Storage Devices, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 2811–2878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Lewandowska, C. Soutis, L. Savage and S. J. Eichhorn, Carbon fibres with ordered graphitic-like aggregate structures from a regenerated cellulose fibre precursor, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2015, 116, 50–57 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Spörl, R. Beyer, F. Abels, T. Cwik, A. Müller, F. Hermanutz and M. R. Buchmeiser, Cellulose-Derived Carbon Fibers with Improved Carbon Yield and Mechanical Properties, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2017, 302, 1700195 CrossRef .
J. Jin, J. Ding, A. Klett, M. C. Thies and A. A. Ogale, Carbon Fibers Derived from Fractionated-Solvated Lignin Precursors for Enhanced Mechanical Performance, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 14135–14142 CrossRef CAS .
L. Szabó, R. Milotskyi, H. Ueda, T. Tsukegi, N. Wada and K. Takahashi, Controlled acetylation of kraft lignin for tailoring polyacrylonitrile-kraft lignin interactions towards the production of quality carbon nanofibers, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 405, 126640 CrossRef .
M. Zhu, H. Liu, Q. Cao, H. Zheng, D. Xu, H. Guo, S. Wang, Y. Li and J. Zhou, Electrospun Lignin-Based Carbon Nanofibers as Supercapacitor Electrodes, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 12831–12841 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lu and Y. Xia, Maneuvering the Internal Porosity and Surface Morphology of Electrospun Polystyrene Yarns by Controlling the Solvent and Relative Humidity, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 7070–7078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, M. Shoaib, H. Fei, T. Wang, J. Zhong, L. Fan, L. Wang, H. Luo, S. Tan, Y. Wang, J. Zhu, J. Hu and B. Lu, Hierarchically Porous N-Doped Carbon Fibers as a Free-Standing Anode for High-Capacity Potassium-Based Dual-Ion Battery, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901663 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. McCann, M. Marquez and Y. Xia, Highly Porous Fibers by Electrospinning into a Cryogenic Liquid, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1436–1437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Givens, K. H. Gardner, J. F. Rabolt and D. B. Chase, High-Temperature Electrospinning of Polyethylene Microfibers from Solution, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 608–610 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gupta, C. Elkins, T. E. Long and G. L. Wilkes, Electrospinning of linear homopolymers of poly (methyl methacrylate): exploring relationships
between fiber formation, viscosity, molecular weight and concentration in a good solvent, Polymer, 2005, 46, 4799–4810 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Dinh, Z. Pei, Z. Yuan, V. C. Hoang, L. Wei, Q. Huang, X. Liao, C. Liu, Y. Chen and Q. Yan, The on-demand engineering of metal-doped porous carbon nanofibers as efficient bifunctional oxygen catalysts for high-performance flexible Zn-air batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 7297–7308 RSC .
H. Huang, J. Wang, X. Yang, R. Hu, J. Liu, L. Zhang and M. Zhu, Unveiling the Advances of Nanostructure Design for Alloy-Type Potassium-Ion Battery Anodes via In Situ TEM, Angew. Chem., 2020, 59, 14504–14510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. J. Bombin, N. J. Dunne and H. O. McCarthy, Electrospinning of natural polymers for the production of nanofibres for wound healing applications, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2020, 114, 110994 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, X. Kong, I. Usman, X. Xie, S. Liang, G. Cao and A. Pan, Rational design of the pea-pod structure of SiOx/C nanofibers as a high-performance anode for lithium ion batteries, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 1762–1769 RSC .
J. Zhu, Y. Wu, X. Huang, L. Huang, M. Cao, G. Song, X. Guo, X. Sui, R. Ren and J. Chen, Self-healing liquid metal nanoparticles encapsulated in hollow carbon fibers as a free-standing anode for lithium-ion batteries, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 883–889 CrossRef CAS .
V. Maneeratana, D. Portehault, J. Chaste, D. Mailly, M. Antonietti and C. Sanchez, Original Electrospun Core-Shell Nanostructured Magnéli Titanium Oxide Fibers and their Electrical Properties, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2654–2658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jin, Q. Saiding, X. Wang, M. Qin, Y. Xiang, R. Cheng, W. Cui and X. Chen, Rapid Extracellular Matrix Remodeling via Gene-Electrospun Fibers as a “Patch” for Tissue Regeneration, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009879 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li and Y. Xia, Direct Fabrication of Composite and Ceramic Hollow Nanofibers by Electrospinning, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 933–938 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, Z. Dai, S. Liu, J. Bao and Y.-G. Guo, Ultra-Uniform SnOx/Carbon Nanohybrids toward Advanced Lithium-Ion Battery Anodes, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3943–3949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jun, J. S. Lee, D. H. Shin, S. G. Kim and J. Jang, Multidimensional MnO2 nanohair-decorated hybrid multichannel carbon nanofiber as an electrode material for high-performance supercapacitors, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16026–16033 RSC .
Y. Zhao, X. Cao and L. Jiang, Bio-mimic Multichannel Microtubes by a Facile Method, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 764–765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, Q. Guo, Q. Zhang, Y. Cui and Z. Zheng, Fibrous Materials for Flexible Li-S Battery, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2002580 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, Y. Fu, S.-H. Chung, C. Zu and Y.-S. Su, Rechargeable Lithium-Sulfur Batteries, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11751–11787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, W. Chen, T. Lei, Y. Jiao, J. Huang, A. Hu, C. Gong, C. Yan, X. Wang and J. Xiong, Strategies toward High-Loading Lithium-Sulfur Battery, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000082 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Chang, S.-H. Chung and A. Manthiram, Highly flexible, freestanding tandem sulfur cathodes for foldable Li-S batteries with a high areal capacity, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 249–258 RSC .
M. Rana, S. A. Ahad, M. Li, B. Luo, L. Wang, I. Gentle and R. Knibbe, Review on areal capacities and long-term cycling performances of lithium sulfur battery at high sulfur loading, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 18, 289–310 CrossRef .
K. Fu, Y. Li, M. Dirican, C. Chen, Y. Lu, J. Zhu, Y. Li, L. Cao, P. D. Bradford and X. Zhang, Sulfur gradient-distributed CNF composite: a self-inhibiting cathode for binder-free lithium-sulfur batteries, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10277–10280 RSC .
J. H. Yun, J. H. Kim, D. K. Kim and H. W. Lee, Suppressing Polysulfide Dissolution via Cohesive Forces by Interwoven Carbon Nanofibers for High-Areal-Capacity Lithium-Sulfur Batteries, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 475–481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-C. Zeng, W.-H. Li, Y. Jiang and Y. Yu, Recent progress in Li-S and Li–Se batteries, Rare Met., 2017, 36, 339–364 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, M. Kim, Y. Liu, H.-J. Ahn, K.-W. Kim, K.-K. Cho and J.-H. Ahn, Root-like porous carbon nanofibers with high sulfur loading enabling superior areal capacity of lithium sulfur batteries, Carbon, 2018, 128, 138–146 CrossRef CAS .
L.-F. Chen, Y. Lu, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Designed formation of hollow particle-based nitrogen-doped carbon nanofibers for high-performance supercapacitors, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1777–1783 RSC .
J. Peng, J. Tao, Z. Liu, Y. Yang, L. Yu, M. Zhang, F. Wang and Y. Ding, Ultra-stable and high capacity flexible lithium-ion batteries based on bimetallic MOFs derivatives aiming for wearable electronic devices, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 417, 129200 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Zhang, Z.-H. Jiang, B.-R. Lu, J.-T. Liu, F.-H. Cao, H. Li, Z.-L. Yu and S.-H. Yu, MoS2 nanoplates assembled on electrospun polyacrylonitrile-metal organic framework-derived carbon fibers for lithium storage, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 104–110 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lian, N. Xu, Y. Ma, F. Hu, H. Wei, H.-Y. Chen, Y. Wu, L. Li, D. Li and S. Peng, In-situ formation of Co1−xS hollow polyhedrons anchored on multichannel carbon nanofibers as self-supporting anode for lithium/sodium-ion batteries, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 421, 127755 CrossRef .
H. Pan, Z. Cheng, J. Chen, R. Wang and X. Li, High sulfur content and volumetric capacity promised by a compact freestanding cathode for high-performance lithium-sulfur batteries, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 435–442 CrossRef .
A. A. Razzaq, X. Yuan, Y. Chen, J. Hu, Q. Mu, Y. Ma, X. Zhao, L. Miao, J.-H. Ahn, Y. Peng and Z. Deng, Anchoring MOF-derived CoS2 on sulfurized polyacrylonitrile nanofibers for high areal capacity lithium-sulfur batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1298–1306 RSC .
P. Zhu, C. Yan, J. Zhu, J. Zang, Y. Li, H. Jia, X. Dong, Z. Du, C. Zhang, N. Wu, M. Dirican and X. Zhang, Flexible electrolyte-cathode bilayer framework with stabilized interface for room-temperature all-solid-state lithium-sulfur batteries, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 17, 220–225 CrossRef .
Z. Li, J. T. Zhang, Y. M. Chen, J. Li and X. W. Lou, Pie-like electrode design for high-energy density lithium-sulfur batteries, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ren, Q. Wang, Y. Li, C. Hu, Y. Zhao, L. Qiao, H. Zhou, W. Liu, H. Xu and X. Sun, Catalytic separators with Co-N-C nanoreactors for high-performance lithium-sulfur batteries, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2021, 8, 3066–3076 RSC .
K. Zhang, L. Wang, W. Cai, L.-F. Chen, D. Wang, Y. Chen, H. Pan, L. Wang and Y. Qian, Pyridinic and pyrrolic nitrogen-enriched carbon as a polysulfide blocker for high-performance lithium-sulfur batteries, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 955–960 RSC .
J. Wang, G. Yang, J. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, C.-Y. Lao, K. Xi, D. Yang, C. J. Harris, W. Yan, S. Ding and R. V. Kumar, Flexible and High-Loading Lithium-Sulfur Batteries Enabled by Integrated Three-In-One Fibrous Membranes, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902001 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Dong and J. Qiu, Freestanding Flexible Li2S Paper Electrode with High Mass and Capacity Loading for High-Energy Li-S Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700018 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, W. Chen, T. Lei, Y. Jiao, H. Wang, X. Wang, G. Rao, X. Wang, B. Chen and J. Xiong, Graphene quantum dots as the nucleation sites and interfacial regulator to suppress lithium dendrites for high-loading lithium-sulfur battery, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104373 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, Z. Liu, Q. Huang, Y. Gao, M. Regula, D. Wang, L.-Q. Chen and D. Wang, Stable metal battery anodes enabled by polyethylenimine sponge hosts by way of electrokinetic effects, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1076–1083 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jin, Z. Sun, Y. Guo, Z. Qi, C. Guo, X. Kong, Y. Zhu and H. Ji, High Areal Capacity and Lithium Utilization in Anodes Made of Covalently Connected Graphite Microtubes, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700783 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. S. Sand III, On the concentration at the electrodes in a solution, with special reference to the liberation of hydrogen by electrolysis of a mixture of copper sulphate and sulphuric acid, London, Edinburgh Dublin Philos. Mag. J. Sci., 2010, 1, 45–79 CrossRef .
A. Fu, C. Wang, J. Peng, M. Su, F. Pei, J. Cui, X. Fang, J.-F. Li and N. Zheng, Lithiophilic and Antioxidative Copper Current Collectors for Highly Stable Lithium Metal Batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009805 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shang, Z. Zuo and Y. Li, Highly Lithiophilic Graphdiyne Nanofilm on 3D Free-Standing Cu Nanowires for High-Energy-Density Electrodes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 17678–17685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-S. Chi, Y. Liu, W.-L. Song, L.-Z. Fan and Q. Zhang, Prestoring Lithium into Stable 3D Nickel Foam Host as Dendrite-Free Lithium Metal Anode, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700348 CrossRef .
T.-T. Zuo, X.-W. Wu, C.-P. Yang, Y.-X. Yin, H. Ye, N.-W. Li and Y.-G. Guo, Graphitized Carbon Fibers as Multifunctional 3D Current Collectors for High Areal Capacity Li Anodes, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700389 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Y. Wang, Z. X. Lu, W. Guo, Q. Luo, Y. H. Yin, X. B. Liu, Y. S. Li, B. Y. Xia and Z. P. Wu, A Dendrite-Free Lithium/Carbon Nanotube Hybrid for Lithium-Metal Batteries, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Matsuda, Y. Kubo, K. Uosaki and S. Nakanishi, Lithium-metal deposition/dissolution within internal space of CNT 3D matrix results in prolonged cycle of lithium-metal negative electrode, Carbon, 2017, 119, 119–123 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lopez, A. Pei, J. Y. Oh, G. N. Wang, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Effects of Polymer Coatings on Electrodeposited Lithium Metal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11735–11744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, X. Xiong, Z. Lin, J. Zheng, Z. Fenghua, Y. Li, Y. Liu, C. Yang, Y. Tang and M. Liu, Uniform Li deposition regulated via three-dimensional polyvinyl alcohol nanofiber networks for effective Li metal anodes, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 10018–10024 RSC .
C. Niu, H. Pan, W. Xu, J. Xiao, J.-G. Zhang, L. Luo, C. Wang, D. Mei, J. Meng, X. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Mai and J. Liu, Self-smoothing anode for achieving high-energy lithium metal batteries under realistic conditions, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 594–601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui, S. Yao, M. Ihsan-Ul-Haq, J. Wu and J.-K. Kim, Correlation between Li Plating Behavior and Surface Characteristics of Carbon Matrix toward Stable Li Metal Anodes, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802777 CrossRef .
L. Tao, Z. Xu, C. Kuai, X. Zheng, C. E. Wall, C. Jiang, A. R. Esker, Z. Zheng and F. Lin, Flexible lignin carbon membranes with surface ozonolysis to host lean lithium metal anodes for nickel-rich layered oxide batteries, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 24, 129–137 CrossRef .
S. Zhou, Y. Zhang, S. Chai, I. Usman, Y. Qiao, S. Luo, X. Xie, J. Chen, S. Liang, A. Pan and H. Zhou, Incorporation of LiF into functionalized polymer fiber networks enabling high capacity and high rate cycling of lithium metal composite anodes, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 404, 126508 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, L. Deng, W. Guo, C. Zhang, X. Liu and J. Luo, Bulk Nanostructured Materials Design for Fracture-Resistant Lithium Metal Anodes, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807585 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, Z. Huang, W. Lv, Q. Yun, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Carbon enables the practical use of lithium metal in a battery, Carbon, 2017, 123, 744–755 CrossRef CAS .
A. Susca, J. Liu, J. Cui, N. Mubarak, J. Wu, M. Ihsan-Ul-Haq, F. Ciucci and J.-K. Kim, Affinity-engineered carbon nanofibers as a scaffold for Na metal anodes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14757–14768 RSC .
T. Liu, J. Hu, C. Li and Y. Wang, Unusual Conformal Li Plating on Alloyable Nanofiber Frameworks to Enable Dendrite Suppression of Li Metal Anode, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4379–4388 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guan, A. Wang, S. Liu, G. Li, F. Liang, Y.-W. Yang, X. Liu and J. Luo, Controlling Nucleation in Lithium Metal Anodes, Small, 2018, 14, 1801423 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, X. Li, X. He, L. Cao, G. Cao, H. Xu, J. Hu and G. Shao, Two-pronged approach to regulate Li etching for a stable anode, J. Power Sources, 2020, 455, 227988 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lin, X. Qin, M. Liu, X. Xu, G. Liang, J. Wu, F. Kang, G. Chen and B. Li, Ultrafine Titanium Nitride Sheath Decorated Carbon Nanofiber Network Enabling Stable Lithium Metal Anodes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903229 CrossRef CAS .
T. Le, Q. Liang, M. Chen, C. Yang, Z. Yu, J. Cheng, F. Kang and Y. Yang, A Triple-Gradient Host for Long Cycling Lithium Metal Anodes at Ultrahigh Current Density, Small, 2020, 16, 2001992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, J. Guan, N. W. Li, Y. Lu, D. Luan, C. H. Zhang, G. Cheng, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Lotus-Root-Like Carbon Fibers Embedded with Ni-Co Nanoparticles for Dendrite-Free Lithium Metal Anodes, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2100608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, H. Wang, H. Yang, S. Zeng, R. Xu, F. Liu, P. Shi, Y. Feng, K. Wang, W. Yang, X. Wu, W. Luo and Y. Yu, A Dual-Functional Conductive Framework Embedded with TiN-VN Heterostructures for Highly Efficient Polysulfide and Lithium Regulation toward Stable Li-S Full Batteries, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yao, R. Guo, F. Xie, Z. Wu, K. Gao, C. Zhang, X. Shen, T. Li and S. Qin, Electrospun three-dimensional cobalt decorated nitrogen doped carbon nanofibers network as freestanding electrode for lithium/sulfur batteries, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 337, 135765 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yao, Y. He, Y. Wang, M. Bi, Y. Liang, A. Majeed, Z. Yang and X. Shen, Porous N-doped carbon nanofibers assembled with nickel ferrite nanoparticles as efficient chemical anchors and polysulfide conversion catalyst for lithium-sulfur batteries, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 601, 209–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, P. Zhang, B. Li, S. Zhang, K. Liu, R. Hou, X. Zhang, S. R. P. Silva and G. Shao, Vertically aligned graphene nanosheets on multi-yolk/shell structured TiC@C nanofibers for stable Li-S batteries, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 159–168 CrossRef .
L. Lin, F. Pei, J. Peng, A. Fu, J. Cui, X. Fang and N. Zheng, Fiber network composed of interconnected yolk-shell carbon nanospheres for high-performance lithium-sulfur batteries, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 50–58 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, M. Li, Y. Zhang, Z. Shan, Y. Zhao, J. Li, G. Liu, C. Liang, Z. Bakenov and Q. Li, All-Purpose Electrode Design of Flexible Conductive Scaffold toward High-Performance Li-S Batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000613 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-T. Liu, D.-D. Han, L. Wang, G.-R. Li, S. Liu and X.-P. Gao, NiCo2O4 Nanofibers as Carbon-Free Sulfur Immobilizer to Fabricate Sulfur-Based Composite with High Volumetric Capacity for Lithium-Sulfur Battery, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803477 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, J. Zhu, Y. Li, L. Wang, Y. Dong, Z. Jiang, C. Fan, Y. Cao, R. Sheng, A. Liu, S. Zhang, H. Song, D. Jia and Z. Fan, Graphene Quantum Dot Reinforced Electrospun Carbon Nanofiber Fabrics with High Surface Area for Ultrahigh Rate Supercapacitors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 11669–11678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Kuzmenko, N. Wang, M. Haque, O. Naboka, M. Flygare, K. Svensson, P. Gatenholm, J. Liu and P. Enoksson, Cellulose-derived carbon nanofibers/graphene composite electrodes for powerful compact supercapacitors, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 45968–45977 RSC .
C. Liu, Z. Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu and B. Z. Jang, Graphene-Based Supercapacitor with an Ultrahigh Energy Density, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4863–4868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, W. Panatdasirisuk, T. S. Mathis, B. Anasori, C. Lu, X. Zhang, Z. Liao, Y. Gogotsi and S. Yang, Layer-by-layer assembly of MXene and carbon nanotubes on electrospun polymer films for flexible energy storage, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6005–6013 RSC .
X. Lu, C. Wang, F. Favier and N. Pinna, Electrospun Nanomaterials for Supercapacitor Electrodes: Designed Architectures and Electrochemical Performance, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601301 CrossRef .
Y. Zhai, Y. Dou, D. Zhao, P. F. Fulvio, R. T. Mayes and S. Dai, Carbon Materials for Chemical Capacitive Energy Storage, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4828–4850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Y. Liang and H. Dai, Ni(OH)2 Nanoplates Grown on Graphene as Advanced Electrochemical Pseudocapacitor Materials, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7472–7477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Nie, X. Zhao, J. Jiang, Y. Luan, J. Shi, J. Liu, Z. Kou, J. Wang and Y.-Z. Long, Flexible supercapacitor of high areal performance with vanadium/cobalt oxides on carbon nanofibers as a binder-free membrane electrode, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 402, 126294 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jeon, J. H. Jeong, H. Yoo, H. K. Yu, B.-H. Kim and M. H. Kim, RuO2 Nanorods on Electrospun Carbon Nanofibers for Supercapacitors, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 3847–3858 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xia, Q. Gao, J. Jiang and J. Hu, Hierarchical porous carbons with controlled micropores and mesopores for supercapacitor electrode materials, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1718–1726 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Chuang, C.-W. Huang, H. Teng and J.-M. Ting, Hydrothermally synthesized RuO2/Carbon nanofibers composites for use in high-rate supercapacitor electrodes, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2012, 72, 1524–1529 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Kim and B.-H. Kim, Zinc oxide/activated carbon nanofiber composites for high-performance supercapacitor electrodes, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 512–520 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, X. Wu and C. Guo, Hybrid MnO2@NiCo2O4 nanosheets for high performance asymmetric supercapacitors, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 1378–1385 RSC .
L. Fan, L. Yang, X. Ni, J. Han, R. Guo and C. Zhang, Nitrogen-enriched meso-macroporous carbon fiber network as a binder-free flexible electrode for supercapacitors, Carbon, 2016, 107, 629–637 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, T. Liu, A. U. Khan and G. Liu, Block copolymer–based porous carbon fibers, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaau6852 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, W. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. Huo, J. Liang, L. Wu, Y. Liu, J. Gao, H. Pang and H. Xue, Copolymer derived micro/meso-porous carbon nanofibers with vacancy-type defects for high-performance supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2463–2471 RSC .
R. Barik, V. Tanwar, R. Kumar and P. P. Ingole, A high energy density and high rate capability flexible supercapacitor based on electro-spun highly porous SnO2@carbon nanofibers, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15110–15121 RSC .
H. Hu, B. Guan, B. Xia and X. W. Lou, Designed Formation of Co3O4/NiCo2O4 Double-Shelled Nanocages with Enhanced Pseudocapacitive and Electrocatalytic Properties, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5590–5595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Z. Wang, R. Bi, F. Mao, K. Wang, H. Wu and X. Wang, A polythreaded MnII-MOF and its super-performances for dye adsorption and supercapacitors, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 718–730 RSC .
S. Zhao, H. Wu, Y. Li, Q. Li, J. Zhou, X. Yu, H. Chen, K. Tao and L. Han, Core-shell assembly of carbon nanofibers and a 2D conductive metal-organic framework as a flexible free-standing membrane for high-performance supercapacitors, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 1824–1830 RSC .
J. Huang, Y. Xiao, Z. Peng, Y. Xu, L. Li, L. Tan, K. Yuan and Y. Chen, Co3O4 Supraparticle-Based Bubble Nanofiber and Bubble Nanosheet with Remarkable Electrochemical Performance, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900107 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. I. Kim, E. Samuel, B. Joshi, M.-W. Kim, T. G. Kim, M. T. Swihart and S. S. Yoon, Highly efficient electrodes for supercapacitors using silver-plated carbon nanofibers with enhanced mechanical flexibility and long-term stability, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 353, 189–196 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Soram, I. S. Thangjam, J. Y. Dai, T. Kshetri, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Flexible transparent supercapacitor with core-shell Cu@Ni@NiCoS nanofibers network electrode, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 395, 125019 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Sami, S. Siddiqui, S. Shrivastava, N.-E. Lee and C.-H. Chung, The Pine-Needle-Inspired Structure of Zinc Oxide Nanorods Grown on Electrospun Nanofibers for High-Performance Flexible Supercapacitors, Small, 2017, 13, 1702142 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-S. Wang, S.-M. Li, S.-T. Hsiao, W.-H. Liao, P.-H. Chen, S.-Y. Yang, H.-W. Tien, C.-C. M. Ma and C.-C. Hu, Integration of tailored reduced graphene oxide nanosheets and electrospun polyamide-66 nanofabrics for a flexible supercapacitor with high-volume- and high-area-specific capacitance, Carbon, 2014, 73, 87–98 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Song, C. Ye and L. Xu, Structure and electrochemical performance of electrospun-ordered porous carbon/graphene composite nanofibers, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2020, 11, 1280–1290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Chen, Y. Zhao, Y. Deng, J. Zhu, S. Jiang and R. Wang, Flexible all-solid-state supercapacitors based on an integrated electrode of hollow N-doped carbon nanofibers embedded with graphene nanosheets, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 332, 135398 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sobolciak, A. Ali, M. K. Hassan, M. I. Helal, A. Tanvir, A. Popelka, M. A. Al-Maadeed, I. Krupa and K. A. Mahmoud, 2D Ti3C2Tx (MXene)-reinforced polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) nanofibers with enhanced mechanical and electrical properties, PLoS One, 2017, 12, e0183705 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Levitt, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, A. Sarycheva, G. Dion and Y. Gogotsi, Electrospun MXene/carbon nanofibers as supercapacitor electrodes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 269–277 RSC .
Y. Sun, J. Xue, Z. Li, B. Ding, Y. An, S. Zang, H. Dou, J. Jiang and X. Zhang, Rational design of ZIF-8 assimilated hierarchical porous carbon nanofibers as binder-free electrodes for supercapacitors, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2021, 895, 115471 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Simotwo, P. R. Chinnam, S. L. Wunder and V. Kalra, Highly Durable, Self-Standing Solid-State Supercapacitor Based on an Ionic Liquid-Rich Ionogel and Porous Carbon Nanofiber Electrodes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33749–33757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, H. Wang, W. Lan, D. Li, A. Zhang and C. Liu, Construction of sugarcane bagasse-derived porous and flexible carbon nanofibers by electrospinning for supercapacitors, Ind. Crops Prod., 2021, 170, 113700 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, M. Zhang, L. Cong, Y. Pan and S. Lin, A bismuth oxide nanosheet-coated electrospun carbon nanofiber film: a free-standing negative electrode for flexible asymmetric supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16635–16644 RSC .
P. Schlee, S. Herou, R. Jervis, P. R. Shearing, D. J. L. Brett, D. Baker, O. Hosseinaei, P. Tomani, M. M. Murshed, Y. Li, M. J. Mostazo-López, D. Cazorla-Amorós, A. B. J. Sobrido and M.-M. Titirici, Free-standing supercapacitors from Kraft lignin nanofibers with remarkable volumetric energy density, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 2980–2988 RSC .
Y. Lee, S. Chae, H. Park, J. Kim and S.-H. Jeong, Stretchable and transparent supercapacitors based on extremely long MnO2/Au nanofiber networks, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 382, 122798 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Singh, T. I. Singh, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, A core-shell MnO2@Au nanofiber network as a high-performance flexible transparent supercapacitor electrode, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10672–10683 RSC .
Q. Huang, L. Liu, D. Wang, J. Liu, Z. Huang and Z. Zheng, One-step electrospinning of carbon nanowebs on metallic textiles for high-capacitance supercapacitor fabrics, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6802–6808 RSC .
J.-M. Kim, C.-H. Park, Q. Wu and S.-Y. Lee, 1D Building Blocks-Intermingled Heteronanomats as a Platform Architecture For High-Performance Ultrahigh-Capacity Lithium-Ion Battery Cathodes, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501594 CrossRef .
X. Yu, J. Deng, X. Yang, J. Li, Z.-H. Huang, B. Li and F. Kang, A dual-carbon-anchoring strategy to fabricate flexible LiMn2O4 cathode for advanced lithium-ion batteries with high areal capacity, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104256 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cui, J. Lin, X. Cao, P. Hao, X. Xie, S. Zhou, Y. Wang, S. Liang and A. Pan, In situ formation of porous LiCuVO4/LiVO3/C nanotubes as a high-capacity anode material for lithium ion batteries, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 340–346 RSC .
F. Xue, Y. Li, C. Liu, Z. Zhang, J. Lin, J. Hao and Q. Li, Engineering flexible carbon nanofiber concatenated MOF-derived hollow octahedral CoFe2O4 as an anode material for enhanced lithium storage, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2021, 8, 3363–3370 RSC .
C. Lv, Y. Peng, J. Yang, X. Duan, J. Ma and T. Wang, Electrospun Nb-doped LiNi0.4Co0.2Mn0.4O2 nanobelts for lithium-ion batteries, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 1126–1132 RSC .
Z. Liu, J. Kang, Z. Zhao, Y. Zheng, Y. Liu, C. Xiong, S. Wang and Q. Yang, Rationally designed N, P Co-doped porous film via steam etching as self-supported binder-free anode for high-performance lithium-ion battery, Carbon, 2021, 171, 36–44 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, X. Ju, P. Deng, S. Li, B. Qu and T. Wang, General Airbrush-Spraying/Electrospinning Strategy for Ultrahigh Areal-Capacity LiFePO4-Based Cathodes, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 2330–2335 CrossRef CAS .
A. Du, Y. Zhao, Z. Zhang, S. Dong, Z. Cui, K. Tang, C. Lu, P. Han, X. Zhou and G. Cui, Selenium sulfide cathode with copper foam interlayer for promising magnesium electrochemistry, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 26, 23–31 CrossRef .
M.-G. Jeong, W.-J. Kwak, H.-J. Shin, Y.-K. Sun and H.-G. Jung, Perpendicularly aligned TiC-coated carbon cloth cathode for high-performance Li-O2 batteries, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 399, 125699 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lv, M. Yue, M. Ling, H. Zhang, J. Yan, Q. Zheng and X. Li, Controllable Design Coupled with Finite Element Analysis of Low-Tortuosity Electrode Architecture for Advanced Sodium-Ion Batteries with Ultra-High Mass Loading, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003725 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiao, J. Wu, J. Zhao, Q. Li, P. Zhang, C. Hao, X. Liu, S. Yang and Y. Liu, Synergistic effect of bifunctional catalytic sites and defect engineering for high-performance Li-CO2 batteries, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 133–139 CrossRef .
N. Voronina, H. J. Kim, A. Konarov, N. Yaqoob, K.-S. Lee, P. Kaghazchi, O. Guillon and S.-T. Myung, Electronic Structure Engineering of Honeycomb Layered Cathode Material for Sodium-Ion Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003399 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chao, H. Qin, M. Zhang, Y. Huang, L. Cao, H. Guo, K. Wang, X. Teng, J. Cheng, Y. Lu, H. Hu and M. Wu, Boosting the Pseudocapacitive and High Mass-Loaded Lithium/Sodium Storage through Bonding Polyoxometalate Nanoparticles on MXene Nanosheets, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2007636 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang and X.-B. Zhang, N-Doped C@Zn3B2O6 as a Low Cost and Environmentally Friendly Anode Material for Na-Ion Batteries: High Performance and New Reaction Mechanism, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805432 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qiao, X. Cheng, Y. Liu, R. Han, M. Ma, Q. Li, H. Dong, X. Li and S. Yang, Architecture design of nitrogen-doped 3D bubble-like porous graphene for high performance sodium ion batteries, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2017, 4, 2017–2023 RSC .
D. Zhao, R. Zhao, S. Dong, X. Miao, Z. Zhang, C. Wang and L. Yin, Alkali-induced 3D crinkled porous Ti3C2 MXene architectures coupled with NiCoP bimetallic phosphide nanoparticles as anodes for high-performance sodium-ion batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2422–2432 RSC .
W. He, K. Chen, R. Pathak, M. Hummel, K. M. Reza, N. Ghimire, J. Pokharel, S. Lu, Z. Gu, Q. Qiao and Y. Zhou, High-mass-loading Sn-based anode boosted by pseudocapacitance for long-life sodium-ion batteries, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 414, 128638 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Y. Sun, L. Liu, J. Chen, B. Yang, S. Xu and X. Yan, Recent advances in understanding Li-CO2 electrochemistry, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 887–922 RSC .
K. Takechi, T. Shiga and T. Asaoka, A Li-O2/CO2 battery, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3463–3465 RSC .
Z. Xie, X. Zhang, Z. Zhang and Z. Zhou, Metal-CO2 Batteries on the Road: CO2 from Contamination Gas to Energy Source, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605891 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, Y. Liu, X. Gao, J. Wang, J. Zhou, L. Wang and B. Wang, Improving areal capacity of flexible Li-CO2 batteries by constructing a freestanding cathode with monodispersed MnO nanoparticles in N-doped mesoporous carbon nanofibers, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10354–10362 RSC .
Q. Sun, B. He, X.-Q. Zhang and A.-H. Lu, Engineering of Hollow Core-Shell Interlinked Carbon Spheres for Highly Stable Lithium-Sulfur Batteries, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8504–8513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Eftekhari, The rise of lithium-selenium batteries, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 14–29 RSC .
H.-N. Fan, S.-L. Chen, X.-H. Chen, Q.-L. Tang, A.-P. Hu, W.-B. Luo, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, 3D Selenium Sulfide@Carbon Nanotube Array as Long-Life and High-Rate Cathode
Material for Lithium Storage, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1805018 CrossRef .
B. Han, X. Li, Y. Zhou, X. Gao, W. Qu, S. Zhang and C. Deng, “Bubble-linking-bubble” hybrid fibers filled with ultrafine TiN: a robust and efficient platform achieving fast kinetics, strong ion anchoring and high areal loading for selenium sulfide, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18404–18416 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Combination of electrospinning technology with other material treatment methods to obtain electrospun nanofiber-based electrodes and their applications in electrochemical energy storage.	 


Fe1Co1-CNF	Electrospinning & stabilization & carbonization	N/A	500	1.6	1.01	201.7 mW cm−2 in liquid-electrolyte Zn-air batteries	
16

am-Fe2O3/rGO/CNFs	Electrospinning & carbonization	N/A	140	1.06	N/A	811 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 in LIBs	
17

HCC-NFs	Electrospinning & coating	170	450	8.3	7.3	High-rate supercapacitors and EMI shielding	
18

NCNFs	Electrospinning & pyrolysis	147	300	1.89	0.7	185 mW cm−2 in Zn-air batteries	
19

PU/CNT/PAni	Electrospinning & in situ polymerization	N/A	250	8.3	80.3	Capacitance retention of 93% after 1000 cycles in SCs	
20

FCNF	Electrospinning & peroxidation & carbonization	N/A	300	3.3	0.87	630 mA h g−1 over 100 cycles in LIBs	
21


	
	140	1.0	3.3	
	

Lignin/PAN CNFs	Electrospinning & stabilization & carbonization	103.5	200	N/A	N/A	4.49 W h kg−1 and 2.63 kW kg−1 in flexible supercapacitors	
22

WOx-C-NF film	Electrospinning & heat treatment	N/A	135	6.13	0.9	481 mA h g−1 in LIBs	
23


 	Fig. 2  (a) Basic setup for electrospinning. Reproduced with permission: Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.1 (b) Formation process of Talor cone. Reproduced with permission: Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.9	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Fabrication of the CNF-S electrode using electrospun PAN. (b) Schematic of the deposition of sulfur species during the electrochemical reaction via the cohesive force of viscous polysulfides. Reproduced with permission: Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.78 (c) Schematic diagram of fabrication of the freestanding CoS2-SPAN-CNT electrodes. Reproduced with permission: Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.86 (d) Areal capacities of layer-by-layer structured LRC/S@EFG electrodes during cycling at a current density of 1.2 mA cm−2. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature.88 (e) Working principle of the integrated flexible Li–S battery system. (f–i) Flexibility testing of S-CNTs/CoNCNFs/PVDF membrane before and after bending 100 times. Reproduced with permission: Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.91 (j) Schematic illustration of the production of freestanding flexible Li2S@NCNF paper electrodes. (k) The multilayered Li2S@NCNF paper and punched disc electrode. Reproduced with permission: Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.92	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process of the LCM and OLCM. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.107 (b) Schematic illustration of Li plating on OPAN-LiF. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.108 (c) Scheme of Li-plating and stripping behavior for CNF and CNF-Sn-5% composite electrode. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.112 (d) Schematic of MgZnO/CNF as the triple-gradient host for LMAs. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.116 (e) Schematic diagram of the preparation procedure of NCH@CFs. (f) Voltage profiles of metallic Li plating/stripping in symmetric cells using different electrodes. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.117	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Synthesis schematic for the S/TiN-VN@CNFs cathode and the Li/TiN-VN@CNFs anode. (b) Diagrammatic sketch of the S/TiN-VN@CNFs||Li/TiN-VN@CNFs full battery configuration. (c) Digital photos of different samples after soaking in the Li2S6 solution for 12 h and (d) Real capacity of the full batteries with high sulfur loading of 5.6 mg cm−2. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.118 (e) Schematic diagram of synthetic procedures of CoNi@PNCFs electrode and an electronic watch powered by Li–S full cell. (f) schematic illustration of Li–S pouch cell. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.119	 

CNFs	PAN	Electrospinning & carbonization	Porous nanofibers	10.5	Initial capacity: 7.91 mA h cm−2	
78


	
	
	
	7.14 mA h cm−2 after 100 cycles	

NFO/NCFs	PAN + 2-MIM + Ni(NO3)2 + Zn(NO3)2	Electrospinning & hydrothermal	NFO nanoparticles decorated on rough nanofibers	10.2	Initial capacity: 8.35 mA h cm−2 (0.1C)	
119


	
	
	
	6.01 mA h cm−2 after 150 cycles (0.1C)	

Co,N-CNFs	ZIF-67 + PAN	Electrospinning & calcination	Nanoparticle-decorated nanofibers	7.11	Initial capacity: 6.47 mA h cm−2 (0.2C)	
120


	
	
	
	Capacity retention: 84.4% after 100 cycles	

CoS2-SPAN-CNT	PAN + CNT + Co2+ + MeIM	Electrospinning & in situ growth	1D nanofibers with pores and rough surface	5.9	Initial capacity: 8.1 mA h cm−2 (0.2C)	
86


	
	
	
	1322 mA h g−1 in pouch cell	

CFTG	PVP + TBOT + PVP + CH4	Electrospinning & calcination & CVD	Multi-yolk/shell-structured TiC@C nanofibers	10.5	6.81 mA h cm−2 at S loading of 10.5 mg and 530 mA h g−1 at S loading of 10.5 mg in soft package battery	
121

BCN@HCS fibers	SiO2@BP/SiO2 + NH3 H2O + TEOS + PAN	Electrospinning & calcination & HF etching	Interconnected yolk–shell carbon nanosphere-assembled fiber network	16	15.5 mA h cm−2 after 50 cycles (0.1C)	
122

CoNi@PNCFs	PAN + PVP + PMMA + Co(Ac)2 + Ni(Ac)2	Electrospinning & carbonization	Ultrafine metal particles in porous interconnected 3D framework	7.0	5.5 mA h cm−2 after 50 cycles (0.2C)	
123


	
	
	
	Excellent stability in highly flexible electronic devices	

TiN-VN@CNFs	PS + C10H14O5Ti + C10H14O5V	Electrospinning & calcination in NH3	TiN-VN nanoparticles dispersed on the multichannel fibers	5.6	5.5 mA h cm−2 in flexible Li–S full batteries (0.1C)	
118

NiCo2O4 nanofiber	PAN + Co(Ac)2 + Ni(Ac)2	Electrospinning & calcination in air	Irregular nanocrystals rough and hollow nanofibers	5	487 mA h cm−3 after 1500 cycles (1C)	
124

CNF-PEO/LLTO	LLTO + LiTFSI + CH3CN + PEO + PAN	Electrospinning & casting & integration	Integrated electrolyte/electrode bilayer structure	1.27	415 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles	
87


 	Fig. 6  (a) Scheme of fabrication of the HPCNFs. (b) Elemental analyses and plausible structure of the HPCNFs after carbonization. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.140 (c) Schematic flow chart for the synthesis of SnO2@C via electrospinning, followed by calcination at two different temperatures. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.141 (d) Schematic diagram of the non-polar FSC and photographs of the flexible VCO/CNFs membranes. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.132 (e) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of CNF/HSP-Co3O4. (f) SEM image of CNF/HSP-Co3O4 and the digital image of the prepared freestanding and flexible film. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.145	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of electrospinning setup (left) and application performance (right). Copyright 2018, Elsevier.146 (b) Schematic illustration for the fabrication of intertwined Cu@Ni@NiCoS NFs network transparent flexible supercapacitor electrodes and transparent flexible SSC device. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.147 (c) Fabrication process of ZnO/PEDOT:PSS/P(VDF-TrFE) nanofibers. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.148 (d) The scheme for the preparation of RGO/PA66-nano. (e) The scheme for assembling the supercapacitor. Copyright 2014, Elsevier.149 (f) Schematic of the production of Ti3C2Tx MXene/carbon nanofibers via electrospinning. (g) TEM image of the fiber cross-section. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.153	 

PCF	Electrospinning & hard-templating	Nanofibers tunable multi-level pores	Symmetrical supercapacitor	Ionic liquid (IL)	1.2 F cm−2 (10 mg cm−2)	
154

a-PCNF	Electrospinning & KOH activation	Porous CNFs	Freestanding gel IL cell	IL-rich ionogel	151 mF cm−2 (5.1 mg cm−2)	
155

SCAB-derived CNFs	Electrospinning & carbonization	Hierarchically porous CNF	Flexible all-solid-state symmetric supercapacitor (ASSC)	1 M H2SO4	64.2 μF cm−2 (0.5 A g−1)	
156


	
	
	6 M KOH	55.3 μF cm−2 (0.5 A g−1)	

ESCNF@Bi2O3	Electrospinning & solvothermal	Bi2O3 sheath layer on the smooth nanofiber	Flexible asymmetric supercapacitor	1 M KOH	530 mF cm−2 (1 mA cm−2)	
157

VCO/CNFs	Electrospinning & post-calcination	Porous nanofibers with nanoparticles	Non-polar flexible supercapacitor	PVA-KOH gel	1.83 F cm−2 (8 mA cm−2)	
132

Kraft lignin-derived CNF mats	Electrospinning & reducing carbonization	Porous CNFs	Swagelok-type cell	6 M KOH	350 mF cm−2	
158


	
	
	
	92.5% retention after 6000 cycles	

MnO2/Au nanofiber	Electrospinning & electrodeposition	Core–shell structure	Transparent and stretchable supercapacitor	1 M Na2SO4	3.68 mF cm−2	
159


	Multilayer stacking structure	
	
	
	

MnO2@AuNF	Electrospinning & thermal vacuum deposition & electrodeposition	Core–shell hollow nanofiber	Flexible transparent solid-state supercapacitor	LiCl-PVA gel	8.26 mF cm−2 (5 mV s−1)	
160

Cu@Ni@NiCoS NFs	Electrospinning & metal deposition & electrodeposition	Core–shell nanofiber	Transparent flexible symmetric supercapacitor	PVA-KOH gel	7.43 μA h cm−2	
147


	Rough surface	
	
	
	

PEDOT:PSS-coated P(VDF-TrFE) nanofibers	Electrospinning & drop-casting & in situ growth	Hybrid structure of 1D nanorods on electrospun nanofibers	Flexible all-solid full-cell supercapacitor	PVA-H2SO4 gel	1.22 mF cm−2 (0.1 mA cm−2)	
148


	
	
	
	96% retention after 1000 cycles	

C-web@Ni-cotton	Polymer-assisted metal deposition & electrospinning	Corrugated and rough nanofibers with beads	Wearable solid-state wristband	1 M Na2SO4	973.5 mF cm−2 (2.5 mA cm−2)	
161


 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation strategy for the Fe3O4@PeCNF electrode. (b) SEM image and (c) cross-section of Fe3O4@PeCNF. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.167 (d) The synthetic procedure of the LiFePO4-based paper electrodes. (e) Areal capacities and (f) volumetric capacity of LiFePO4 paper cathodes. (g) Comparison of the electrochemical performances of the LiFePO4 paper cathodes and reported high areal capacity electrodes. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.168	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the structural revolution of the free-standing Sn@CFC electrode. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.178 (b) SEM image of MnO@NMCNFs. (c) Cycling performance of the Li-CO2 pouch cell bent at different angles. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.182 (d) Schematic illustrations of the BLB structured hybrid fiber and one bubble before, after the selenium sulfide loading, and with fast electron transport pathways. (e) Comparisons of the areal capacity of this work and the values from the previous reports on the lithium–selenium sulphide/lithium–sulfur batteries. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.186	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
