Fabrication, functionalization and advanced applications of magnetic hollow materials in confined catalysis and environmental remediation  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR01010G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR01010G
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 10967-11003Fabrication, functionalization and advanced applications of magnetic hollow materials in confined catalysis and environmental remediation

        
          
            Gunjan 
            Arora
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Manavi 
            Yadav
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Rashmi 
            Gaur
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Radhika 
            Gupta
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Priya 
            Yadav
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ranjana 
            Dixit
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Rakesh Kumar 
            Sharma
          
          
        
      *a
aGreen Chemistry Network Centre, Department of Chemistry, University of Delhi, Delhi-110007, India. E-mail: rksharmagreenchem@hotmail.com
bDepartment of Chemistry, Hindu College, University of Delhi, Delhi-110007, India
Received 
      15th February 2021
    , Accepted 13th May 2021First published on 18th May 2021AbstractMagnetic hollow-structured functional hybrid materials with unique architectures and preeminent properties have always been an area of extensive research. They represent a subtle collaboration of hollow architecture, mesoporous nanostructure and magnetic character. Owing to the merits of a large void space, low density, high specific surface area, well-defined active sites and facile magnetic recovery, these materials present promising application projections in numerous fields, such as drug delivery, adsorption, storage, catalysis and many others. In this review, recent progress in the design, synthesis, functionalization and applications of magnetic hollow-meso/nanostructured materials are discussed. The first part of the review has been dedicated to the preparation and functionalization of the materials. The synthetic protocols have been broadly classified into template-assisted and template-free methods and major trends in their synthesis have been elaborated in detail. Furthermore, the benefits and drawbacks of each method are compared. The later part summarizes the application aspects of confined catalysis in organic transformations and environmental remediation such as degradation of organic pollutants, dyes and antibiotics and adsorption of heavy metal ions. Finally, an outlook of future directions in this research field is highlighted.Gunjan AroraGunjan Arora received her Bachelor's degree in Chemistry in 2013; and Master's degree specialized in Inorganic Chemistry in 2015 from Hansraj College, University of Delhi, India. She then joined the Green Chemistry Network Centre at the University of Delhi to pursue her doctoral studies under the supervision of Prof. Sharma. She is currently a senior research fellow and member of GCNC. Besides, she is the Treasurer of the ACS International Student Chapter University of Delhi, India. She is working in the area of green chemistry and nanocatalysis. Her research interests include the design and development of sustainable magnetically retrievable heterogeneous catalysts for various organic transformations.Manavi YadavDr Manavi Yadav is currently Assistant Professor at Hindu College, University of Delhi and Treasurer, Royal Society of Chemistry North India Section. She completed her graduation and post-graduation in Chemistry from the University of Delhi. In 2017, she was awarded a doctoral degree in chemistry under the supervision of Prof. R. K. Sharma. Her research area includes the design and synthesis of heterogeneous catalysts for sustainable development. She has numerous publications in journals and books of international repute. She has received the Young Researcher Award from Save the Environment for her magnificent contribution to contemporary research.Rashmi GaurDr Rashmi Gaur completed her graduation and post-graduation from Kirori Mal College, University of Delhi. She joined the Green Chemistry Network Centre (GCNC) in 2013 as a PhD scholar under the supervision of Prof. R. K. Sharma and completed her PhD degree in the year 2019. Her research domain includes the design and synthesis of magnetic nanocatalysts for the conversion of carbon dioxide into value-added products. She has been awarded a junior research Fellowship from the University Grant Commission, India. Recently, she joined as Officer-Catalysis at the Hindustan Petroleum Green R&D Centre, Bangalore India.Radhika GuptaRadhika Gupta is pursuing her doctoral studies under the supervision of Professor R. K. Sharma at the Green Chemistry Network Centre, University of Delhi, India. She obtained her Master's degree in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi in 2015 and Bachelor's degree in Chemistry from Hansraj College, University of Delhi in 2013. She even secured first position in her undergraduate studies. She is presently acting as the Vice-Chair of the ACS International Student Chapter University of Delhi. Her area of research includes green chemistry, catalysis through hydrogen bonding interactions, immobilization of ionic liquids and fabrication of magnetic nanocatalysts for organic transformations.Priya YadavPriya Yadav received her graduation degree in Chemistry from the University of Rajasthan, Jaipur in 2013 and post-graduation degree from Banasthali Vidyapith, Rajasthan in 2016. Presently, she is working at the Green Chemistry Network Centre as a senior research fellow. She has various publications in renowned journals of the RSC, ACS and Wiley. Her research interest focuses on the fabrication of core–shell structured magnetic nanocatalysts and their applications in diverse organic transformations.Ranjana DixitDr Ranjana Dixit is an Associate Professor at Ramjas College, University of Delhi, India and an active member of the Green Chemistry Network Centre, D.U. She has completed her Ph.D. under the supervision of Prof. B. S. Garg from the Department of Chemistry, D.U. in 1987. She has teaching experience of more than 30 years. Her research interests include green synthetic processes, management of e-waste, catalysis, bioinorganic chemistry as well as the chemistry and application of nanomaterials.Rakesh Kumar SharmaDr R. K. Sharma is a professor and coordinator of the Green Chemistry Network Centre at the University of Delhi, India. He is also an Honorary Professor at Deakin University, Australia. He went to the University of Tokyo and Kumamoto University on a JSPS Post-Doctoral Fellowship. He has published numerous book chapters, reviews and research articles in renowned international journals. He has also written/edited various books on green chemistry published by the RSC, World Scientific and Wiley. Dr Sharma is also the Honorary Secretary of the RSC (North India Section) and faculty advisor of the ACS International Student Chapter University of Delhi. http://greenchem.du.ac.in/.
1. Introduction
Nanotechnology has gathered tremendous attention from the scientific community and has a myriad of applications in the real world.1–12 Long before the approval of nanotechnology, Richard Feynman highlighted the concept of micro/nano-scale work in his visionary lecture “There's plenty of room at the bottom”.13,14 However, it took several years to understand the power of this concept and its impact on science, technology and the economy. With the advancement in electronic microscopic techniques, scientists were finally able to explore the mysteries of the nanoscale world. Nanotechnology has delivered many revolutionary inventions and is still continuously flourishing. Efforts are being made to develop multifunctional nanomaterials for new applications and to improve the existing ones. One such novel and creative invention is the development of hollow nano/microstructures.15–19
Hollow-structured materials are advanced functional materials that have an easy-to-manipulate microstructure and delimited local voids. These materials have a unique architecture and exhibit various outstanding features such as high specific surface area, isolated cavity, low density, multifunctionalities, extensive presence of mesoporous channels in the shell, numerous accessible surface sites, high permeability and many more.16,17,20–24 Due to these fascinating properties, hollow-structured materials have been extensively used in various fields including catalysis, lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, storage, adsorption, separation, biomedicine, proton-exchange-membrane fuel cells, chemical sensors, etc.16,18,25–39 Due to the presence of the internal void, these materials exhibit superior performance in the biomedical field as nanocontainers or nanocarriers to load and transport drugs.18,40,41
The first example of a hollow mesoporous material (HMM) was described in 1996 through the formation of porous lamellar silica with a vesicular morphology (Fig. 1a and b).42 The biomimetic approach was based on hydrolysis and cross-linking of a neutral inorganic alkoxide precursor in the interlayered regions of multilamellar vesicles formed from neutral bora-amphiphile surfactant molecules containing two polar head groups linked by a hydrophobic alkyl chain. The produced porous vesicle-like lamellar silicas have a high specific surface area and pore volume. Meanwhile, Lin et al. have also introduced an alternative way to synthesize hollow tubular MCM-41 (Fig. 1c and d) via sequential separation of the self-organization of silicate template and subsequent condensation.43 By delaying the formation of the rigid structure of the silicates, hierarchically ordered “tubules-within-a-tubule” of MCM-41 were obtained through a liquid-crystal phase-transformation mechanism. Shortly thereafter, Schacht et al. reported the synthesis of hollow mesoporous spheres through interfacial reactions in oil-in-water emulsion formed by the addition of tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) dissolved in an organic solvent to an acidic solution of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB).44 Subsequently, hollow mesoporous materials with a variety of structural features (such as porous, yolk–shell nanos (YSN) and nano-rattles) and diverse compositions including metal, metal oxides, alloys, silica, carbon, polymer and so on have been prepared by using a variety of chemical routes.43,45–56
 Fig. 1  (a) Proposed formation mechanism of HMM, (b) TEM image of HMM, (c) proposed formation mechanism of hollow tubular MCM-41 and (d) SEM image of hollow tubular MCM-41. This figure (a and b) has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 1996 and (c and d) has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 1996. 
1.1. Hollow nanomaterials as catalytic support
Owing to their high activity and robust stability, these materials are highly attractive as nanoreactors for confined catalysis. Hollow materials have a self-supported 3D structure that uplifts the robustness to prevent agglomeration and degeneration of the reaction sites. The channels present in the shell allow a fast mass transfer of reactants and products into and out of the void. The isolated cavity provides close proximity to the reactants and also enables the trapping of metastable reactive intermediates on active sites, which facilitates further reactions. Moreover, these materials present a great scope for surface modification; therefore multiple well-defined reaction sites and functionalities can be integrated into one particle, which permits the smooth conduction of complex reactions.20,27,28,57–59 As illustrated in Fig. 2, hollow nanostructures comprise various structural segments that can be tuned, such as an external surface, inner shell, cavity and channels. With the latest advancements in synthetic protocols, the dimensions of these materials can be easily controlled and manipulated, which enables a precise reactor design for efficient catalysis.60
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of a hollow nanomaterial. 
However, there is a limitation associated with the use of microporous hollow materials. Since the reactive sites are mainly located within the inner void or at the surface of hollow catalysts, they are accessible to reactants through diffusion via the outer shell; therefore the overall reaction rate also depends on the magnitude of diffusion, porosity and thickness of the shell, the nature of the reactants which need to be diffused, the nature of the products which are diffused out from the cavity and the reaction conditions. Certain diffusion limitations are there in case of shell materials having narrow pores (e.g., micropores) because of restricted diffusional access for some bulkier reactants or the product molecules. This issue can be addressed by adding mesopore networks into microporous materials which are responsible for facilitating the permeation of substrates, particularly bulkier ones.28,61
Advantages of hollow spheres encapsulating catalytically active species over traditional catalysts can be well understood from Fig. 3. Inside the cavity, active catalytic species are well protected from aggregation and the outer harsh environment. Interestingly, the mesoporous channels present on the shell fulfil the purpose of a selective gateway as only molecules of a size smaller than the pore size can enter and exit the system, giving a special sieving effect desirable for shape/size-selective catalysis.62 On these grounds, hollow nanomaterials are considered as magnificent candidates for modern catalysis.
 Fig. 3  Comparison of the reaction processes between catalytic-entity-loaded hollow spheres and conventional catalysts. 
1.2. Hollow nanomaterials as adsorbents
Adsorption refers to a process of adhesion of ions, atoms or molecules on a solid surface generally known as an adsorbent. The characteristic properties of adsorbents useful for industrial applications include good thermal stability, distinct pore structure, tuneable pore dimensions and high surface-to-volume ratio, which creates a higher exposed surface to promote the adsorption capacity.63,64 In this regard, hollow nanomaterials are found to be excellent candidates for adsorption because of their high chemical and thermal stability, high porosity, large surface area and low density. Therefore, in the past few years, many hollow nano/mesoporous materials have been explored as adsorbents to effectively adsorb heavy metal ions, organic pollutants, gaseous molecules, hazardous substances, etc.34 Many examples can be found in the literature to support the superiority of hollow materials as adsorbents over core–shell structures.65–67 The adsorption capacity of certain pollutants depends on their concentration. At a high concentration of pollutant, a large amount of pollutants gets adsorbed over adsorbents; however, at a certain value, active sites on adsorbents are fully occupied, resulting in a constant adsorption capacity. In contrast to core–shell composites, hollow materials possess a much higher number of active sites, and thus showcase better adsorptivity. Additionally, they also offer much room for modification and functionalization, which can further improve their adsorption capacity.
1.3. Magnetic hollow materials
The past few decades have witnessed a continuous thriving of the field of magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs). To date four types of MNPs are known, i.e., metal-based (iron, nickel, cobalt), metal oxides/mixed-metal oxides (FeO, Fe2O3, Fe3O4), alloys (FePt) and ferrites (CuFe2O4).68 Due to inimitable features of facile detection, easy magnetic recoverability and recyclability, MNPs have been extensively explored as support materials for the immobilization of catalytic active species.69–74 The scope of MNPs has been further extended to many areas such as adsorption, sensing, biomedical, bioimaging, etc.
Considering the advantages of MNPs they have been actively coupled with materials having a hollow morphology. Incorporation of a magnetic component either in the form of a core or a shell maintains the easy recovery character while retaining the advantages of a hollow architecture. In fact, the confined hollow geometry and pronouncedly curved surfaces also impart some unique physical properties to the magnetic hollow spheres which are substantially different from their flat thin films and solid counterparts of similar sizes.75–77 Coercivity is dependent on domain-wall motion. Since the barrier to domain-wall propagation is larger along a curved surface, a large domain-wall curvature would lead to the enhancement of coercivity.78 Therefore, the coercivity would be higher for curved surfaces, such as hollow spheres. Hence, a spherical hollow-structural geometry could be expected to provide a means to overcome the superparamagnetic limit. Hollow magnetic spheres can preserve single-domain behaviour at a much larger diameter than can a solid sphere; for instance, a single-domain size for FePt hollow spheres having extremely thin shells was found to be more than double that for the bulk particles.79 Furthermore, the curved surfaces could induce lattice defects, which would afford domain-wall pinning positions and/or induce weak ferromagnetism in antiferromagnetic materials. Yan et al. have studied the influence of hollow morphology on the magnetic properties of Fe3O4 submicron spheres.80 For this, they synthesized Fe3O4 hollow and solid submicron spheres with a diameter about 300 and 500 nm, respectively. The submicron spheres were composed of nanometer-sized grains, with grain sizes of 21 and 28 nm for the hollow and solid spheres, respectively. Magnetic hysteresis measurements indicated that the hollow structure possessed higher coercive force and lower saturation magnetization than the solid submicron spheres. The coercive force (Hc) and saturation magnetization (Ms) corresponding to solid submicron spheres were found to be 5.0 and 141.2 Oe and 72.6 and 84.1 emu g−1 at 300 K and 5 K, respectively, while these values were 48.3 and 184.6 Oe and 64.9 and 71.4 emu g−1 for the hollow structure at 300 K and 5 K, respectively. The existence of smaller particle and grain sizes in hollow spheres is responsible for this observation. According to Stoner–Wohlfarth theory, the greater coercivity of the hollow structure results from an increase in the anisotropy constant and a decrease in the saturation magnetization.81 Furthermore, due to a void in the centre, a relatively weaker magnetic coupling between magnetic grains was observed in hollow submicron spheres, resulting in a larger Hc. Furthermore, a peak at 107 K in the zero-field-cooled (ZFC) runs for the hollow structure was observed during the measurement of magnetization versus temperature curves, which corresponds to the blocking temperature of the nanograins. This suggests that hollow structures show the magnetic properties of discrete nanograins because of the weak coupling among them. However, this feature cannot be seen in the solid spheres, since a stronger magnetic coupling takes place between the grains.
Therefore, the integration of magnetic nanoparticles and hollow materials is very beneficial to enhance the properties of the material. Also, the easy magnetic separation, recyclability and reusability of materials make the process simple, fast, economic and efficient and desirable from industrial viewpoints. Moreover, the magnetic character contemplates the green chemistry principle of “development of sustainable catalysts”.82–84
In the present review, a comprehensive overview of the magnetic hollow core and nano-rattle architectures is presented. Further highlights are focused on the emerging trends of their synthetic protocols, functionalization approaches and applications in the field of confined catalysis and environmental remediation including degradation of organic pollutants, dyes and antibiotics and adsorption of heavy metal ions. To date, some important reviews are available that focus on the synthetic methods and general applications of hollow nanomaterials; however, limited reviews have discussed functionalization techniques.22,34,40,54,60,62,85–87 Moreover, to the best of our knowledge there is no review available on the development of magnetic hollow nanostructures for advanced catalysis and environmental applications. Thus, in this review article, we have thoroughly summarized recent advancements in the development, functionalization and applications of magnetic hollow nanostructures.
2. Designing hollow materials
A wide variety of techniques have been developed so far to introduce voids during the construction of mesostructures that integrate hollow interiors and mesoporous shells. These methods include template-based and template-free approaches. Furthermore, various functionalization methods have been developed that permit the specialized design of catalysts. Functionalization of hollow nanomaterials results in a modification of their physical and chemical properties and affords an isolated environment with functionalized segments which are crucial for several applications. A wide variety of functionalization techniques are known to date (Fig. 4).60 In this section, we will briefly touch on each of the techniques and the detailed examples will be taken up in sections 3 and 4.
 Fig. 4  Functionalization approaches for hollow nanomaterials. 

(i) Encapsulation: In this method, catalytic active species (e.g. nanoparticles (NPs)) are encapsulated into the void space via the ship-in-a-bottle approach. The encapsulated NPs are protected against leaching and aggregation, leading to enhanced stability. Furthermore, the NPs are free to move inside the cavity, which enhances the overall catalytic efficiency of these nanomaterials when compared with core–shell composites.58,88–90

(ii) Geometric and composition modifications: There are various reactions that are sensitive to the structure and composition of the catalyst. Geometric modification refers to the alterations in morphology, dimensions (shell/cavity thickness, pore size, etc.) and crystallinity, while doping or the addition of external elements to form alloys or mixed cation/anion compounds is termed a compositional modification. Both of these modifications change the arrangement of catalytic sites and when optimized improve the activity of resulting composites.91–93

(iii) Introduction of multi-shell: Hollow nanomaterials with multi-shells have a complex architecture which is a highly desirable quality of nanomaterials to efficiently catalyze target reactions. Introduction of multiple shells elevates the structural diversity of hollow nanomaterials and provides more reaction sites, which further improves their properties. These complex structures have better stability, high surface area and high volume capacity.94,95 However, the synthesis of these structures is quite complicated and challenging.

(iv) Surface molecular engineering: In this technique, the surface of hollow nanomaterials is modified using organic molecules such as polymers, surfactants and enzymes. Various polymers are available that deliver different functional groups such as thiol, carboxylic acid, amine, etc. This method helps in significant enhancement of catalytic performance due to grafting of reactive sites and size-sieving effects.96–98

(v) Modifications with single atomic sites: Single atom catalysts have recently gained attention due to their high atom efficiency and atomically dispersed nature, which results in excellent activity and selectivity.99,100 However, single atoms, being easily agglomerated, are unstable; therefore, they are immobilized over solid support materials. For this, hollow nanomaterials pyrolyzed with metal–organic frameworks (MOFs)/polymers are of great choice because they create dense single atomic sites. Single atom sites endow exceptional activity and selectivity while the high specific surface area of the hollow supports ensures the stability of these sites.101,102
3. Synthesis and functionalization of hollow magnetic materials
Numerous synthetic routes have been reported to synthesize hollow magnetic materials. In general, these routes can be categorized as selective etching or dissolution methods, hard- and soft-templating routes and template-free processes such as the Ostwald ripening mechanism, Kirkendall method and self-templating/assembly approaches. In this section, each of these techniques is discussed. Moreover, the combination of these methodologies is also discussed, which fascinatingly allows the preparation of nanomaterials with an advanced level of complexity and precision. Furthermore, a comprehensive comparison of these methods is also provided.
3.1. Selective etching and hard templating methods
Selective etching or dissolution methods have gathered a lot of attention and have become common methodologies for the synthesis of hollow mesoporous structures. They involve selective removal of either a shell or a part of shell or core using etching agents or calcination.103–108 Three types of selective etching method are known i.e., partial etching, surface-protected etching and shell-formation through a chemical reaction (Fig. 5). These methods can be defined as follows:

(i) Partial etching: In this method, a part of the core or shell is removed instead of the entire core/shell to create a void in the material (Fig. 5a). By optimizing the amount of etchant one can control the size of the core and shell thickness.

(ii) Surface protected etching: In this method, the outer surface of the shell is protected by coating it with an appropriate protecting agent. So, on addition of etchant, preferential etching of material from the interior of the particles takes place, causing no harm to the outer part of the shell (Fig. 5b). Hence, voids are introduced in the material while it retains its original size.

(iii) Shell-formation through chemical reaction: This is a spontaneous self-formation method in which a typical core–shell structure is first formed and later the shell reacts with the core, which results in the generation of a void (Fig. 5c).
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the formation of hollow/YSN structures through (a) partial etching, (b) surface-protected etching and (c) shell formation through chemical reaction. 
The hard-templating method is another very popular method for the formation of hollow nanostructures. In this method, solid rigid particles are employed as the core template and provide a surface for the formation of a mesoporous shell. These templates can be easily removed via calcination, dissolution, or etching after the formation of the shells, leading to the introduction of void spaces in the mesoporous structure.109,110Fig. 6 illustrates the hard-templating route for synthesizing hollow mesostructures (HMS). In these routes, the involvement of a hard template is a necessity and is a special parameter for the dimensional and morphological control of the final HMSs. After forming the mesoporous shell, selective removal of the template core is another essential step. Therefore, the hard-templating route involves multi-steps. The properties of the resultant HMSs, such as the size of the void space and the monodispersity, are generally tuneable and depend on the hard template employed. There are mainly three types of the most frequently used hard template: polymer latex (usually polystyrene (PS)), carbon, and silica spheres.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustrations of hard-templating routes. 
The detailed examples and case-studies on both these methods will be taken up simultaneously in this section.

3.1.1. Silica-template-based methods. 
SiO2 spheres are suitable hard and readily used sacrificial templates. The synthesis of monodisperse silica spheres (or shells) with varied dimensions and properties has been widely investigated by employing the well-known Stöber method. The hollow structures derived from the silica template usually retain the size and shape of that template. This method permits the formation of hollow architectures having a high surface area and tuneable dimensions.111,112 Fe3O4@MnO2 hollow spheres were synthesized using a hydrothermal method by Zhang et al.113 The synthesis begins with the formation of SiO2 spheres followed by hydrothermal synthesis of SiO2@Fe3O4/C in which the SiO2 spheres were used as a template along with ferrocene, which acted as a source of both iron and carbon. Hierarchical MnO2 nanosheets were subsequently grown on SiO2@Fe3O4/C spheres via a redox reaction between KMnO4 and carbon followed by etching of the SiO2 core using NaOH to obtain hollow Fe3O4@MnO2 spheres (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of Fe3O4@MnO2 hollow spheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016. 
Wang et al. have described another interesting two-step process for the formation of Fe3O4@Zr(OH)x yolk–shell nanospheres (FZY).114 The first step involved the coating of silica on the surface of Fe3O4 particles via the Stöber method and then subsequent coating with Zr(OH)x by hydrolysis of ZBOT (Zirconium(IV) (80% in butanol)) to form Fe3O4@SiO2@Zr(OH)x core–shell spheres (FSZC). The next step was the etching of a silica layer using NaOH solution to get FZY.
These nanospheres possess a large cavity between the Zr(OH)x layer and the Fe3O4 core and exhibit a uniform and non-aggregated nature. Fig. 8 illustrates the FE-SEM and TEM images of each step. The as-synthesized material was used as an adsorbent for the removal of Pb(II). The authors demonstrated that the cavities in Fe3O4@Zr(OH)x YSNs were responsible for the improved performance as the presence of the internal cavity generated more activated sites for storage of the targeted ions.
 Fig. 8  (a) Structure of FZY; (b) FE-SEM and (c) TEM image of FSZC; (d) FE-SEM and (e) TEM image of FZY. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016. 
The work by Yu et al. described a surfactant-free synthesis of rattle-type magnetic mesoporous hollow carbon (RMMHC) NPs by employing magnetite NPs as the core and tetrapropylorthosilicate (TPOS) and resorcinol–formaldehyde (RF) as the shell-forming precursors (Fig. 9).115 On account of the relatively faster polymerization and condensation rate of TPOS as compared with RF precursors, it first gets coated on the surface of the magnetite NPs, forming magnetite@SiO2 core–shell structures. Later, RF also polymerizes along with silica primary NPs, resulting in magnetite@SiO2@SiO2/RF core–shell–shell structures. The incorporation of silica NPs and their aggregates in the outer shell leads to the formation of large mesopores. After carbonization and selective etching of the SiO2 component, RMMHC NPs were formed. The authors demonstrated that just by varying the carbonization temperature, parameters such as pore size, specific surface area and pore volume can be smoothly altered. At 700 °C, the highest specific surface area of 579 m2 g−1, pore volume of 0.795 cm3 g−1 and pore size of 7.6 nm was obtained. Furthermore, it was observed that when the carbonization temperature was increased from 500 to 700 °C, there was a slight decrease in particle size and a slight increase in shell thickness, resulting in an overall decrease in void size. This unusual observation was due to shrinkage of the carbon and silicate frameworks with high-temperature heating. When the temperature was further increased to 900 °C, a lower particle size reduction was observed due to the highly condensed silica framework. The authors also varied the silica precursor (TEOS instead of TPOS). A thin carbon layer was obtained with TEOS because the rate of polymerization and condensation of TEOS is higher than that of TPOS; most of the silica primary NPs formed the inner SiO2 shell while fewer silica primary NPs were available to co-condense with the RF precursor. Moreover, the pore volume and specific surface area of RMMHC–TEOS were negligible when compared with RMMHC–TPOS.
 Fig. 9  Schematic representation of the formation of RMMHC. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. 
Doping of nanomaterials is a flexible way to tune their properties. Doping of heteroatoms in the carbon skeleton changes the polarity of the neighbouring carbon atom, thus increasing its catalytic potential, especially in oxidation–reduction reactions.116–119 In a report by Wang et al., the formation of hierarchical hollow core–shell structured N-doped carbon spheres (HCSC) encapsulated with Fe3O4 NPs has been described (Fig. 10).120 In this process RF and TEOS were employed as precursors in the presence of surfactant, CTAB. At first, a typical sol–gel process took place between negatively charged RF emulsion droplets and silicate oligomers through a surfactant-directing co-assembly of CTAB. Initially, RF emulsion droplets polymerized into a spherical polymer. After some time, the silicate oligomers together with the rest of the RF droplets co-assembled on the surface of the preformed RF polymer to obtain CPS–SiO2, which on carbonization formed core–shell-structured HCSC–SiO2. After the removal of silica and impregnation with Fe3+ ions, HCSC samples were calcinated with melamine to form Fe3O4/N–HCSC. Due to the synergistic effect between the Fe3O4 and protective nitrogen-doped graphitic layers, the synthesized Fe3O4/N–HCSC exhibited a remarkable catalytic performance toward catalytic oxidation–reduction reactions.
 Fig. 10  Illustration for the formation of Fe3O4/N-HCSC. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
Recently, a multiple stimulus-responsive rattle-type magnetic hollow poly-ionic liquid nanosphere molecular imprinted polymer(Fe3O4@void@PILMIP) was developed for the specific recognition of proteins by adopting a hard templating method with silica as template.121 In this route, a specific ionic liquid (IL), 1-vinyl-3-(2-amino-2-oxoethyl) imidazolium chloride ([VAMIM]Cl), was employed as the functional monomer whereas N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAm) and α-methacrylic acid (MAA) were used as co-monomers. Firstly, a silica-coated core–shell structure, Fe3O4@SiO2, was formed whose surface was functionalized with carbon–carbon double bonds after vinyltrimethoxysilane (VTMOS) modification. Subsequently, vinyl-modified Fe3O4@SiO2 was coated with a poly-ionic liquid molecularly imprinted polymer (PILMIP) shell to form multi-shelled Fe3O4@SiO2@PILMIP nanospheres. Finally, the silica shell was removed using aqueous HF solution to give rattle-type magnetic Fe3O4@void@PILMIP nanospheres (Fig. 11 and 12). The resultant rattle-type nanospheres were easily manipulated by an external magnet and its imprinting effects could be modified by varying the temperature and pH. The adsorption capacity of Fe3O4@void@PILMIP nanoparticles toward BSA was much higher while the imprinting factor was lower than that of other nanoparticles. This is because Fe3O4@void@PILMIP nanoparticles had a lot of imprinting sites which were complementary to the template BSA in shape and the rattle-type structure, which could enhance recognition efficiency. However, the non-specific adsorption was also increased, which results in a lower imprinting factor.
 Fig. 11  The schematic illustration of the preparation of rattle-type magnetic Fe3O4@void@PILMIP nanospheres. BSA is bovine serum albumin and MBA is N,N′-methylenebis(acrylamide) used as a cross-linker. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
 Fig. 12  TEM images of (a) Fe3O4@SiO2, (b) Fe3O4@SiO2@PILMIP, (c) Fe3O4@void@PILMIP nanospheres, and (d, e and f) their corresponding high-resolution TEM images respectively of the selected area and (g, h and i) EDS results. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 


3.1.2. Carbon-template-based methods. 
Carbon spheres are another fascinating sacrificial hard template. They can be prepared from easily available precursors such as glucose, polysaccharide and RF resin under hydrothermal conditions.94,122,123 These spheres have inherent various functional groups such as –OH and –CO on their surface which are responsible for the adsorption of precursors for further processes.124 Based on this, Zhang et al. have prepared mesoporous magnetic yolk–shell nanoparticles (MYSNs) with two different morphologies, Fe3O4@SiO2@hollow@fibrousSiO2 and Fe3O4@SiO2@hollow@mesoporousSiO2, consisting of a silica-protected movable magnetic core, through a template-assistant selective etching method.125 As depicted in Fig. 13, the Fe3O4 NPs were first coated with a SiO2 shell which was subsequently coated with an RF shell to obtain a sandwiched composite. This composite was further coated with mesoporous fibrous silica (KCC) and mesoporous silica, respectively, to obtain two morphologically different yolk shell structures (fibrous and non-fibrous). Finally, selective etching of CTAB and the middle RF layer results in hollow structures. Both materials possess large and open mesopores (20–50 nm) with a surface area of 457.78–625.54 m2 g−1. These materials were further functionalized with amino groups and lipase was immobilized using glutaraldehyde as a linker. Due to the yolk configuration, the thermal stability, resistance to pH, recycling and storage capacity were improved as compared with free lipase. It was observed that the relative activity of ICRL was sustained above 90.85% of the initial activity even after 28 days, while only 40% activity was left in case of free enzyme. Thus, the storage stability of lipase was improved significantly, implicating that the stable configuration of immobilized lipase is maintained on carriers having a yolk–shell configuration, even after a period of one month. This is because the immobilization of lipase on yolk–shells restricted its freedom to undergo distortion in the stable conformational state, stabilizing it against denaturing for a long period of time as compared with the free lipase.
 Fig. 13  Synthesis of (a) magnetic yolk–shell fibrous silica and (b) magnetic yolk shell mesoporous silica. 
Wang et al. designed special hollow ZnFe2O4/ZnO hybrid spheres using a hydrothermal approach (Fig. 14).126 Carbon spheres were employed as a template on which Fe3+ and Zn2+ were homogeneously immobilized by electrostatic adsorption and then hydrolyzed to Zn(OH)2 and Fe(OH)3. The resulted C@Zn/Fe-precursor core–shell structure was further calcinated under an air atmosphere. Calcination generates interior voids and an outer shell structure due to the contraction and combustion of the carbon spheres. Moreover, the nanocrystals of ZnO and ZnFe2O4 were produced from their hydroxides during calcination. The reported hybrid ZnFe2O4/ZnO hollow spheres possessed a porous shell with a thickness of approximately 30 nm. Furthermore, the material showed excellent sensing properties towards acetone, with a fast response/recovery speed. This was due to the presence of the hollow structure. The hollow structure could provide rapid diffusion of target molecules easily and enable gas molecules to adsorb onto the inner and outer surfaces of the materials.
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the synthetic process for hybrid ZnFe2O4/ZnO hollow spheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. 


3.1.3. Polymer-template-based methods. 
Polymer spheres also serve as excellent core templates for preparing hollow materials owing to their easy availability and well-defined and tuneable particle sizes.127 Among all, PS spheres are most explored since PS spheres of the desired size with a narrow diameter distribution can be easily achieved, and thus the dimensions of the resulting hollow composites can be conveniently controlled. In addition, PS thermally decomposes above 400 °C or can be dissolved in DMF and THF, so eliminates the need for harsh etching agents.128
Wang et al. have designed silica nanoshuttles consisting of multiple nanopores on the surface and embedded with magnetic and gold NPs (MGNS) via etching of a PS template.129 Firstly, the template was prepared by attaching 50 nm PS satellites over poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA)-modified PS cores of size 200 nm. The positively charged template was then electrostatically attached to negatively charged carboxylic-acid-functionalized iron oxide and gold NPs. Furthermore, a silica layer was grown on the iron-oxide and gold-embedded template, followed by removal of the PS core and satellites by suspending and incubating in DMF to get hollow MGNS (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of formation of MGNS and (b) TEM image of MGNS. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017. 
Another controllable and facile strategy was developed by Mao et al. for preparing hydrophilic magnetic polydopamine (PDA) hollow spheres, Fe3O4@PDA (Fig. 16).130 The synthetic method was based on the oxidation polymerization route in which a layer of iron oxide nanoparticles was immobilized on the surface of modified PS (PS-COOH) nanospheres (with a mean diameter of ∼300 nm) by utilizing a co-precipitation process of Fe2+ and Fe3+ ions. Then, the core–shell structure was coated with a layer of PDA, which self-polymerized under weakly alkaline conditions and formed a biocompatible layer. The PS templates were removed by stirring in THF solution to generate the hollow structure containing Fe3O4 NPs with an average diameter of about 18.2 nm and a PDA shell with a thickness of about 50 nm.
 Fig. 16  Schematic of the preparation process of Fe3O4@PDA hollow composites. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. 
In another example, a facile “template-dissolving” strategy was developed by Zhang et al. to obtain hollow periodic mesoporous organosilica (HPMO) particles with perpendicularly ordered mesopores, yolk–shell periodic mesoporous organosilica (YS-PMO) and functional magnetic YS-PMO particles.131 PS latex of size 250 nm with a narrow size distribution was synthesized by emulsion polymerization. Then in the presence of CTAB, hydrolysis–condensation of bis-triethoxysilyl ethane (BTEE) was carried out on the surface of the PS latex. Later, PS and CTAB were removed by treatment with THF and hot ethanol, respectively, to form HPMO with a specific surface area of 1246.7 m2 g−1, pore volume of 1.38 cm3 g−1 and uniform pore size of 2.36 nm (Fig. 17a and c). Furthermore, multifunctional HPMO having a movable functional component inside the cavity (YS-PMO) was prepared by replacing PS latex template with SiO2@PS particles (Fig. 17b). This route was highly synthetically flexible as, by regulating the amount of BTEE and thickness of the PS shell, the thickness of the PMO shell and interior cavity of the YS-PMO particles can be tuned easily (Fig. 17d and e). Next, magnetic YS-PMO were also synthesized. In this protocol, MNPs were firstly coated with a protective cover of vinyl-modified amorphous SiO2 shell followed by polymerization of PS, hydrolysis–condensation of BTEE and destruction of the template. Magnetic YS-PMO of overall size ca. 540 nm were composed of an outer PMO eggshell (∼45 nm) with perpendicularly ordered mesopores and Fe3O4@SiO2 core–shell particles as the yolk (Fig. 17f).
 Fig. 17  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of (a) HPMO particles and (b) YS-PMO particles; TEM images of (c) HPMO particles, (d) YS-PMO particles with a thicker PMO shell, (e) YS-PMO particles with a larger hollow cavity and (f) magnetic YS-PMO particles. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. 
Dai et al. have adopted a layer-by-layer technique followed by a chemical reduction method to prepare silver-loaded ZnO/ZnFe2O4 (Zn/ZnFe2O4/Ag) mesoporous hollow spheres (Fig. 18).132 In this method, monodisperse PS spheres were used as templates, CTAB as surfactant and zinc nitrate and iron nitrate as metal precursors. To synthesise Zn/ZnFe2O4, PS spheres were mixed with CTAB, aqueous ammonia and metal precursors (atom ratio of Zn:Fe = 1:1). This mixture was then subjected to hydrothermal conditions (80 °C, 5 h). Finally, the obtained composite was calcined to remove the template and surfactant, yielding the desired hollow spheres. The main chemical reactions involved are outlined as follows (eqn (1)–(5)): Zn2+ + 2OH− → Zn(OH)2(1) Fe3+ + 3OH− → Fe(OH)3(2) Zn(OH)2 → ZnO + H2O(3) 2Fe(OH)3 → Fe2O3 + 3H2O(4) ZnO + Fe2O3 → ZnFe2O4(5)
 Fig. 18  Schematic diagram of the preparation protocol for ZnO/ZnFe2O4/Ag mesoporous hollow spheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
Next, the resultant Zn/ZnFe2O4 were decorated with silver to obtain Zn/ZnFe2O4/Ag. Furthermore, the photodegradation activities of silver-loaded ZnO/ZnFe2O4 were investigated towards degradation of 2,4-dichlorophenol under UV and visible light irradiation. SEM and TEM images of ZnO/ZnFe2O4 and ZnO/ZnFe2O4/Ag have been depicted in Fig. 19, which states that the outer surface of ZnO/ZnFe2O4 has a smooth appearance with a narrow size distribution of about 810 nm in diameter. The size of the cavity was calculated to be 740 nm with a shell thickness of about 45 nm. Immobilization of Ag NPs had no effect on the morphology of the hollow structures. Furthermore, the uniformly distributed Ag NPs with sizes of 10–30 nm can be clearly seen. ZnO/ZnFe2O4/Ag mesoporous hollow spheres possessed better photocatalytic activities under both UV and visible light irradiation, which could be accredited to their larger surface area, the excellent capability of visible light harvesting and photoinduced charge carrier separation.
 Fig. 19  SEM images of (a) ZnO/ZnFe2O4 at lower magnification, (b) ZnO/ZnFe2O4 at higher magnification, and (c) ZnO/ZnFe2O4/Ag; TEM images of (d) ZnO/ZnFe2O4 and (e) ZnO/ZnFe2O4/Ag; and (f) HRTEM image of ZnO/ZnFe2O4/Ag. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 

3.2. Soft template assembly
Soft templating is a simple and flexible route to prepare functional yolk–shell or hollow porous materials. These processes utilize colloidal systems formed by precursor molecules/additives as templates. The most common soft templates are surfactant, emulsion, droplets, micelles, etc. having a hydrophilic head and hydrophobic chain. When the core material is mixed with the soft-template mixture, spontaneous attachment of template to core takes place, giving core–shell NPs with well-defined assemblies under certain conditions.133–135 In contrast to hard-templating approaches, elimination of template in these methods is quite easy. However, due to the polydispersity and dynamics of soft templates, the morphology and monodisperse nature of the materials formed are less than ideal.
Liu et al. have introduced a facile method for the preparation of double-shelled ZnFe2O4 hollow microspheres.136 The developed strategy was based on the self-templated solvothermal and annealing method. Soft template was developed from glycerol dissolved in isopropanol. When precursors of Zn2+ and Fe3+ were added, solid spheres of zinc–iron glycerate were formed that were further calcinated. The interior of the microspheres was precisely modulated by varying the temperature ramping rate during the calcination process. On the grounds of the interface layer effect of the adhesion and contraction forces, a formation mechanism of hollow structures with complex interior architectures was described (Fig. 20). At a heating rate (R) of 1 °C min−1 ZnFe2O4 solid spheres of size 700 nm were obtained, which was attributed to homogeneous heating from the surface to the centre. So, to minimize surface energy it attains a solid-sphere architecture. At R > 1 °C min−1, a temperature gradient (ΔT) along the radial direction would arise, leading to an initial core–shell structure. The rigid shell hinders the shrinkage of the outer ZnFe2O4, and meanwhile the inner ZnFe–glycerate core contracts due to oxidation of glycerate. Thus, two opposite forces exist at the interfacial layer of the core–shell structure, i.e., forces of contraction (Fc) from the decomposition of organic species, and forces of adhesion (Fa) from the dense shell that restrict inward shrinkage. When Fc > Fa, a yolk–shell structure will be formed. At R = 5–10 °C min−1, Fc = Fa, suggesting that ΔT is quite low to form another rigid layer and the inner yolk would transform ZnFe2O4 solid spheres for a contraction effect. When R is increased to 20 °C min−1, ΔT is sufficiently high to generate another dense layer, resulting in the formation of double-shelled hollow spheres. With a further rise in R value up to 50 °C min−1, the structure collapsed due to a much faster rate of heating.
 Fig. 20  Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of ZnFe2O4 hollow spheres with complex interior structures. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
Goswami et al. have designed a micelle-driven solvothermal method to synthesize magnetite hollow nanospheres.137 As depicted in Fig. 21, oleylamine surfactant was used which formed a spherical micelle template. Smaller magnetic NPs unite with each other and get deposited on the surface of the micelles, thus forming a shell around the template. After heat treatment during the solvothermal process, the surfactant molecules move out from the inner core and relocate on the edges of particles, resulting in the formation of hollow magnetite spheres.
 Fig. 21  Schematic diagram of the formation mechanism of hollow sphere particles by oleylamine micelles. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016. 
Similarly, the formation of hollow Fe3O4 sub-micron spheres (HFOS) with a size ranging from 350–450 nm was described by Yang et al. via a controlled solvothermal synthesis (Fig. 22).138 Ferric chloride hexahydrate and sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS) were employed as an iron source and surfactant respectively. SDBS played a dominant role in regulating the morphologies and size distribution for the samples and facilitated the formation of monodisperse Fe3O4 hollow particles with good dispersibility and a narrow size distribution. Due to its high hydrophilicity, SDBS provides protection to Fe3O4 particles by completely enclosing them. Furthermore, the presence of SDBS greatly increases the viscosity of the solution, which slows down the agglomeration rate of Fe3O4 particles, helping them to aggregate orderly and grow into the uniform hollow Fe3O4 spheres. Owing to their high purity and ideal spherical morphologies, the HFOS exhibited good intrinsic magnetic properties including high saturation magnetization (75.7–80.6 A m2 kg−1) and low coercivity (6–8 Oe). The hollow-sphere particles have a much larger specific surface area as compared with their solid counterparts of the same particle size; therefore they exhibit improved electrochemical performances. Hence, HFOS showed potential application for high-performance supercapacitors.
 Fig. 22  Schematic illustration of the formation of hollow Fe3O4 sub-micron spheres prepared with SDBS addition. 
Another report by Yeh et al. demonstrated the synthesis of silica-coated hollow carbon nanospheres having a yolk–shell type morphology and encapsulating iron oxide NPs clusters via mixed micellization, polymerization/hollowing, sol–gel (hydration–condensation) and pyrolysis processes (Fig. 23).139 The combination of sodium oleate (SO) and poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(propylene glycol)-block-poly(ethylene glycol) (P123) was employed as a surfactant to obtain mixed micelles through the hydrophobic interaction. MNPs were blended in this solution to give micelles. With the addition of 2,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid/hexamethylenetetramine (HMT), an emulsion was synthesized which under hydrothermal conditions formed hollow polymer spheres containing Fe3O4 NPs. However, when polyethylenimine (PEI) was adsorbed onto the surface of the h-Fe3O4@P before pyrolysis, the surface became positively charged. Then by a sol–gel approach, a silica layer was coated on the spheres. Finally, pyrolysis and carbonization formed dispersed particles.
 Fig. 23  (a) Illustration of the synthesis of SiO2/h-Fe3O4@C, and TEM images of (b) Fe3O4 NPs, (c) h-Fe3O4@P, (d) SiO2/h-Fe3O4@P and (e) SiO2/h-Fe3O4@C. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from The American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
3.3. Template-free routes
In addition to the traditional soft/hard templates employed for the synthesis of hollow architectures, alternative template-free protocols have been widely used. Hollow micro- and nanostructures can be developed involving metastable processes such as Ostwald ripening, the Kirkendall effect or chemically induced self-transformation.

3.3.1. The Ostwald ripening method. 
The Ostwald ripening process generally refer to the physical phenomenon of recrystallization of particles in the solution phase. In the terms of IUPAC, Ostwald ripening is defined as “the growth of larger crystals from those of smaller size which have a higher solubility than the larger ones”.140–142 This method has been widely explored for the efficient and facile synthesis of micro/meso/nano structures having hollow/YSN morphologies.
Smart magneto-responsive magnetorheological (MR) fluids can show a reversible phase transition from a liquid-like to a solid-like state under an applied magnetic field. During this phase transition, magnetic particles form a column-like structure under an applied magnetic field which results in magnetic dipole–dipole interactions among the particles. Due to this, a quick and reversible change is observed in the rheological properties (apparent shear viscosity, yield stress and dynamic modulus) of the fluid. These MR fluids can change from a Newtonian fluid to a Bingham fluid, and hence are beneficial in various engineering devices, including vibration dampers, shock absorbers, active damper systems, MR polishing devices, etc.143–146 Among other materials, hollow magnetic materials are considered as a potential candidate due to their low density. High-density materials have a fatal sedimentation problem. Considering this, An et al. have reported the Ostwald-ripening-based self-transformation of magnetite spherical nanoparticles to hollow NPs (Fig. 24).147 The driving force for the self-assembly of these nanoparticles was the inherent magnetic interactions among magnetite, hydrogen bonds and van der Waals forces among the F127 molecules, which were used as a capping agent over Fe3O4. According to Ostwald ripening, the difference in the increasing size between the outer and inner aggregates causes the movement of particles from the centre to the outer areas, thus creating cavities in the NPs. The size distribution and particle density of the hollow magnetite spheres were found to be 200–300 nm and 4.37 g cm−3, respectively. The hollow magnetite-based MR suspension (10 vol%) showed typical Bingham fluid behaviour with a slope of 1.0 for the dynamic and elastic yield stress.
 Fig. 24  Schematic diagram for synthesizing hollow magnetite due to self-assembly and Ostwald ripening. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. 
On a similar basis, hollow spherical MgFe2O4 was prepared by Yin et al. by employing a one-step solvothermal method (Fig. 25).148 Studies showed that two processes were involved in the synthesis: self-assembly of the nano crystal particles and Ostwald ripening. Urea was employed as a structure-directing agent (SDA) which decomposed to produce NH3 and CO2 gases, which acted as bubble templates and provided a liquid–gas interface to facilitate the growth of Fe3+ and Mg2+ tiny complexes, yielding nano olive particles. However, in order to minimize the surface energy, these olive-shaped particles self-transform to spherical particles. Later, due to the difference in solubility of the inner and outer spheres, the inner cavities slowly became large, thus forming MgFe2O4 hollow spheres.
 Fig. 25  Schematic illustrations of the synthetic procedure of hollow spherical MgFe2O4. 
Similarly, Sharma et al. presented a template-free synthesis of multifunctional double-shelled Fe3O4–C hollow microspheres.149 The described strategy involved one-pot synergism of the gas-bubble-assisted Ostwald ripening method and polymerization of RF using solid Fe3O4 spheres (magnetite source), RF (carbon source) and ammonium hydroxide (SDA). Firstly, magnetite solid microspheres were formed, which were converted to hollow spheres and subsequently self-coated with RF shell in a one-pot synthesis (Fig. 26). The obtained composite was further carbonized to obtain Fe3O4–C hollow spheres. The gas-bubble-assisted Ostwald ripening process played a dominant role in this transformation.
 Fig. 26  Synthetic procedure for the formation of Fe3O4–C double-shelled hollow spheres. 
Generally, ferrites have advantages for magnetic targeting and they have good microwave-absorbing properties. They can alone convert electromagnetic waves to heat through a dual mechanism. But the electron transfer reactions taking place between Fe2+ and Fe3+ ions lead to increased permittivity values, resulting in a poor impedance match and decreased microwave absorption of Fe3O4.150,151 In this regard, partial substitution of the ferrous ions with cobaltous ions may enhance impedance matching and increase magnetocrystalline anisotropy and resonance frequency, which improve the overall microwave absorption performance.152 Meanwhile, a hollow porous structure could also make the microwave absorption more effective due to multiple reflections in a confined space. Based on this, a CTAB-assisted solvothermal method was described by Chen et al. to synthesize hollow-mesoporous-structured cobalt ferrite (H-mCoxFe3−xO4) nanocarriers.153 The template for the synthesis was provided by the amphiphilic CTAB molecules, which self-assembled into spherical micelles in the solution. The electrostatic interaction between Co2+ and Fe3+ resulted in the accumulation of these ions around the exterior of the micelles. Addition of sodium acetate releases hydroxide ions. Under solvothermal conditions, CoxFe3−xO4 crystalline particles were formed and deposited at the surface of the micelles. The CoxFe3−xO4 hollow microspheres containing CTAB were then formed according to Ostwald ripening. The magnetic H-mCoxFe3−xO4 nanoparticles were produced after deletion of the template molecules (Fig. 27). H-mCoxFe3−xO4 microspheres were uniform with a mean diameter of about 280 nm and had a high surface area of 58.03 m2 g−1 with a pore size of 7.21 nm. Furthermore, the material showed high saturation magnetization of 42.2 emu g−1.
 Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of the formation process of multifunctional H-mCoxFe3−xO4 nanocarriers. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. 


3.3.2. The Kirkendall method. 
The Kirkendall method is a less-explored classical technique to form hollow structures based on the Kirkendall effect. As illustrated in Fig. 28a, the mechanism behind the Kirkendall effect is the formation of cavity at the interface between diverse materials due to dissimilar rates of inter-diffusion in a bulk-diffusion couple. The flux of vacancies balances the net flow of mass in one direction and may coalesce into voids at the interfaces.17,87 For example, in the case of zinc and copper, brass grows in the direction of zinc, which is a faster moving species. This leaves voids which ultimately combine into large pores. The pioneering work by Yin et al. in 2004 was the first to apply and explain this effect for preparing hollow nanocrystals of cobalt oxide and chalcogenides (CoS and CoSe) with a size ranging from 10 to 20 nm (Fig. 28b and c).154 In Co@S YSN, the diffusion is mainly the outward diffusion of the Co, producing a single void in each NP. In the Co@Se system, the process is comparatively slow and the void was formed between the Co core and CoSe shell.
 Fig. 28  (a) The Kirkendall effect at the boundary between two solids diffusing into each other at different rates. (b) At the nanoscale, the Kirkendall effect explains why a fast-diffusing cobalt nanocrystal leaves a hollow center, and (c) TEM images at different times during the formation of hollow nanocrystals, from top-left to bottom-right: 0 s, 10 s, 20 s, 1 min, 2 min, and 30 min. The Co/Se molar ratio was 1:1. This figure (a and b) has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 17 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2011 and (c) has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2004. 
Based on this effect, recently, a convenient two-step route was developed by Zhao et al. for preparing yolk–shell ternary composites consisting of a magnetic nickel core and a SnO2(Ni3Sn2) shell (Fig. 29).155 The authors proposed a mechanism for the formation of the yolk–shell structures based on time-dependent studies. The yolk–shell configuration was achieved by combined synergism of an etching reaction, a galvanic replacement reaction and the Kirkendall effect. The authors also reported that at different reaction times, yolk–shell microspheres with different core sizes, interstitial void volumes and shell thicknesses can be obtained.
 Fig. 29  TEM images of SnO2(Ni3Sn2)@Ni ternary composites at different magnifications (a) 500 nm and (b) 200 nm. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016. 


3.3.3. Self-assembly approach. 
The self-assembly approach allows materials to be designed with hierarchical order and complexities. Self-assembly of nanostructured materials holds promise as a low-cost, high-yield technique in which NPs organize themselves into regular patterns or structures by using local forces to adapt to the lowest-energy configuration.87,156 Following this, a facile layer-by-layer self-assembly method for the controllable synthesis of single- and multi-shelled NiO hollow nanospheres was described by calcining Ni(OH)2/C precursors formed at different stages as shown in Fig. 30. Ni(OH)2 precursors organize on the surface of carbon spheres through a self-assembly growth process leading to the formation of external nanoflakes of NiO hollow nanospheres. The inner shells are inherited from the formation of different Ni(OH)2 layers within the carbon spheres during different preparation cycles. The obtained hollow nanospheres possessed a high surface area. The reported methodology was superior over others in terms of designing multiple shells that were less affected by heating rate.157
 Fig. 30  Synthetic scheme of multishelled NiO hollow nanospheres via layer-by-layer self-assembly. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2014. 
Very recently, Teng et al. reported an oil-in-water microemulsion method for obtaining magnetic iron oxide nanoparticle hollow mesoporous silica spheres (IONP-HMSSs).158 A self-assembling process of square-shaped IONPs and the formation of mesoporous silica shells yielded IONP-HMSSs with a well-defined cavity. The schematic illustration for the formation of IONP-HMSSs has been depicted in Fig. 31. Firstly, IONPs were prepared by the thermal decomposition method. Then these IONPs were modified and capped with oleic acid; the carboxylic group of oleic acid has a strong affinity for the surface atoms of IONPs. Next, to form an oil-in-water emulsion, modified IONPs were dispersed in chloroform and transferred to an aqueous solution of CTAB. CTAB encapsulated IONP-containing spheres were used as templates to govern the formation of hollow mesoporous silica spheres. CTAB acts as a phase transfer reagent for modified IONPs by coupling with oleic acid through its alkyl chain via hydrophobic van der Waals interactions. Simultaneously, the hydrophilic group of CTAB promotes the aqueous dispersion of IONPs with thermodynamically defined bilayer structures. When TEOS is added, hydrolyzation and condensation processes take place, forming silica shells on the surface of the IONPs. This method furnishes a facile route to form composites with hollow architectures without any complicated template-removing procedures.
 Fig. 31  Schematic illustration of (a) the synthesis process of square-shaped IONP and (b) the preparation procedures of IONP–HMSSs. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 

3.4. Combined methods
A combination of two or more methods demonstrates an important role in preparing structurally diverse more complex hollow mesospheres. A good example of this is the work reported by Xia and group which presented a facile route to prepare fluorescent-magnetic α-Fe2O3@Y2O3:Eu3+ bifunctional hollow microspheres (BHMs) with mesoporous shells and hollow-core structures (Fig. 32).159 The methodology combined the assisted-template approach with a homogeneous co-precipitation method and a high-temperature calcination process. The reported BHMs exhibited uniformly spherical morphologies with good dispersibility, photofluorescence, magnetic responsiveness in solution and excellent drug loading capacity.
 Fig. 32  Illustration showing the preparation of fluorescent-magnetic α-Fe2O3@Y2O3:Eu3+ BHMs. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from The American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
Another example was demonstrated by Li and co-workers through the formation of aminated hollow magnetic nanospheres (AHMNs) with an oxidized mesoporous carbon matrix (Fig. 33).160 A facile one-step template-free hydrothermal approach makes use of nitric acid to oxidize the ordered mesoporous carbon matrix (OC). Urea was used for the amination of iron nanospheres. Furthermore, these AHMNs were immobilized into the OC by post-synthesis. The presence of functional groups on the AHMNs and matrix resulted in the good dispersion and encapsulation of AHMNs in the matrix.
 Fig. 33  Systematic formation of aminated hollow magnetic nanospheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from The American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
Recently, Elahimehr et al. have reported the synthesis of a yolk–shell nanoreactor catalyst (h-Fe3O4@h-Cu0@m-SiO2) by utilizing Ostwald ripening and selective etching methods.161 As depicted in Fig. 34, the methodology comprises five steps that begin with the formation of hollow Fe3O4 (h-Fe3O4) particles based on the Ostwald ripening mechanism. Next, h-Fe3O4 were coated with a layer of silica via the sol–gel method to form h-Fe3O4@SiO2, which was surface-modified using 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) to introduce amino groups. Furthermore, Cu0 nanoparticles were immobilized on the exterior of the h-Fe3O4@SiO2–NH2, which was again covered by a layer of silica by using CTAB as a template. Finally, the inner SiO2 layer was chemically etched by means of sodium carbonate solution followed by extraction of the template. The resulting h-Fe3O4@h-Cu0@m-SiO2 yolk–shell nanoreactor has a high Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface area of 287.36 m2 g−1 and a pore width of 2–50 nm.
 Fig. 34  Schematic representation for the preparation of an h-Fe3O4@h-Cu0@mSiO2 yolk–shell nanoreactor. 
Zhou and co-workers proposed a synthetic protocol for the formation of yolk–shell magnetic porous organic nanospheres (YS-MPONs) by combining a hyper-cross-linking-mediated self-assembly method with ship-in-bottle technology, Fig. 35.162 Hollow porous organic nanospheres (HPONs) were first synthesized by making the use of a self-assembly approach in which PLA170-b-PS120 was used as precursor, anhydrous FeCl3 as catalyst and CCl4 as both cross-linker and solvent. With this approach hollow spheres with diameter of about 35 nm were formed. Next, by using ship-in-bottle technology, YS-MPONs were obtained by finely tuning the loading amount of single iron precursors Fe2+ in the hollow cavity of HPONs and the subsequent formation of Fe3O4 NPs. YS-MPONs possess a high surface area, excellent chemical inertness, and magnetic and adsorption properties.
 Fig. 35  Synthesis of core–shell (CS-MPONs) and yolk–shell (YS-MPONs) magnetic porous organic nanospheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from The American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
3.5. Comparison
The controlled synthesis of meso/nanoporous hollow materials having a magnetic character and varied framework composition is quite a considerable challenge. Synthetic protocols can be broadly categorized as template-assisted or template-free methods. In template-assisted methods, template selection requires a deep understanding as it plays a dominant role in deciding the properties and dimensional parameters of the obtained composites. Moreover, some hard templates require harsh acids/bases for their removal, which thus may lead to deterioration of the outer shell and/or organic groups. Furthermore, these methods are lengthier and expensive. Template-free methods on the other hand are usually more environmentally benign, spontaneous and economical. But controlling the size and morphology of nanomaterials using these methods is challenging. Table 1 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of each method discussed above.
Table 1 Advantages and disadvantages of synthetic methods




Synthesis method
Structure of composite
Complexity
Uniformity (high (+)/moderate to low (−))
Advantages
Disadvantages




Selective etching and dissolution
Spherical and non-spherical
Moderate
−
Tuneable dimensions
Trial-and-error-based selection of etching agent/surfactant


Hard templating
Generally spherical
Simple
+
Easy to control and highly reproducible
Large amount of etching agent required, costly


Soft templating
Generally spherical
Simple
−
Flexible, soft templates are easy to remove
Need for surfactants


Ostwald ripening
Complex
Moderate
+
Thermodynamically favourable and spontaneous
Long reaction times


Kirkendall effect
Complex
Moderate
−
NPs with unique compositions and complex structures can be formed
Non-tuneable




4. Applications of magnetic hollow nanomaterials
In this section, we will discuss the catalytic and adsorption applications of magnetic hollow nanomaterials synthesized and functionalized using the methods discussed above. This section has been divided into two parts. First, we will discuss the catalytic potential of these nanomaterials in diverse organic transformations and environmental applications including degradation of organic pollutants and dyes. The second section deals with the adsorption applications of magnetic hollow nanomaterials.
4.1. Role of hollow nanomaterials as catalyst
Hollow structures are vital in the field of catalysis due to a number of possible key features. The architecture of these materials might favourably contribute to their catalytic performance. When compared with the corresponding chemically identical non-hollow materials, these materials have shown superior properties as well as much-reduced material usage because of the absence of a catalytically less active bulk interior. In these materials, the inner surface in addition to the outer surface is also available for the catalysis. Intra-shell porosity and structural defects effectively connect the inner cavity with the external medium. In addition to the central points discussed in the introduction, there are a number of other advantages which are beneficial in catalytic applications of hollow structures. Li et al. have demonstrated that magnetic multi-shell hollow Co/nitrogen/carbon dodecahedrons (Co@NC), having well-defined and precisely controlled architectures, when employed as catalysts in the hydrogenation of furfural exhibited enhanced catalytic efficiency in contrast to their solid or single-shell analogs. Improved mass diffusion, high dispersity of metal active sites, multiphase heterogeneous interfaces and increased surface area due to the presence of hollow multi-shells are responsible for significantly enhanced catalytic performances.27
The confinement effect of hollow materials prevents catalytic species being leached into the bulk solution. Due to the presence of multiple channels in the shell, the pathway for the diffusion of the nanoparticles is increased significantly. So the redeposition of NPs within the same shell is the major phenomenon, and leaching of the NPs gets prevented. These materials also prohibit the aggregation of loaded nanoparticles via establishing the interaction between the loaded nanoparticles and the support material. Aggregation of nanoparticles leads to a decrease in total surface area of the active species, which in turn results in reduced catalyst efficiency. This undesirable aggregation could take place via Ostwald ripening or through contact coalescence. Since nanoparticles are trapped within the cavity of hollow materials, the dissolution and redeposition of nanoparticles over other nanoparticles is reduced because of increased diffusion pathways. On the other hand, the presence of a protecting shell restricts the merging of nanoparticles through contact coalescence. Hollow materials therefore show anti-leaching and anti-growth properties which help in preserving the catalytic activity. Furthermore, the unique architecture of these materials allows synergistic effects to be developed between loaded nanoparticles and the employed supports. Synergistic effects in particular may improve the catalytic activity of the catalyst due to charge transfer and chemical interactions between the active species and the support material. Recently, hollow-structural microporous organocatalytic polymers (MOPs) bearing pyrrolidines have shown a dramatic enhancement of catalytic performance when compared with non-hollow material of the same chemical composition. This is because the post-synthetic modification of the inner chemical components of non-hollow MOPs is somewhat tough due to the longer diffusion pathways of reagents. Furthermore, since substrates should diffuse into the inner part of MOPs to react with catalytic species, non-hollow MOPs might be inferior to hollow MOPs in terms of catalytic performance. Thus, the structural control of MOPs is critical for the efficient use of catalytic species.163
Hollow materials are also used to tune the selectivity of a reaction. Both reactants and products have different diffusion rates through the porous shells of the catalyst. This difference in the rate of diffusion is used to determine and control the selectivity of an overall catalytic reaction. Hollow structures made from stimulus-responsive materials may further boost selectivity as their pore channel diffusivity can be altered by changing the reaction parameters, such as pH and temperature. Selective chemical interaction with pore channels may also serve as external stimulation. As an illustration, Zeng et al. have prepared integrated nanocatalyst, Pd–mSiO2@ZIF-8, for reactant-selective hydrogenation of alkenes.164 Alkene molecules show different interactions with the shell structure of ZIF-8, which in turn influence the flexible gate-opening of ZIF-8. Although styrene and cyclohexene have a comparable kinetic diameter (∼6.0 Å) their conversion varied drastically (71.1% for styrene and 5.7% for cyclohexene) when hydrogenated using Pd–mSiO2@ZIF-8. π–π Stacking interactions between styrene and linkers of the ZIF–8 framework served as an external stimulation that facilitate gate-opening of channels, thus allow styrene to diffuse through. On the other hand, no such interaction is shown by cyclohexene, and therefore much reduced conversion was seen.
In general, these structures also tend to improve mass transfer as compared with the same mass of bulk-supported catalysts. Furthermore, reaction rates are improved by enrichment effects. By adjusting the hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity of the material, it is possible to increase the concentration of reactants inside the interior void. The enrichment effect is beneficial towards increasing the selectivity of a particular product,165,166 for example, the oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde by 1D hollow mesoporous catalyst having carbon nanotubes (as a backbone to support catalytic-component Au–Pd alloy nanoparticles) and a mesoporous silica shell. Benzaldehyde produced from the oxidation of benzyl alcohol is usually oxidized further to benzoic acid, which can again react with benzyl alcohol to form benzyl benzoate as one of the products. Selectivity of the reaction towards benzaldehyde was improved by providing a confined reaction space which had a high concentration of benzyl alcohol and a low concentration of benzaldehyde (reactant for the further by-products). Zeng and co-workers demonstrated that, due to the difference in molecular sizes, benzaldehyde (6.64 Å) could diffuse out of the mesoporous shell faster than benzyl alcohol (7.05 Å).166 As a result, the internal cavity will become rich in benzyl alcohol and poor with respect to benzaldehyde, thereby restricting the undesired oxidation of benzaldehyde without compromising its production rate. Wu et al. have also reported that a yolk–shell Fe3O4@C/Fenton system could improve the octane removal efficiency. When compared with an Fe3O4/Fenton system, a 24.7% increase and 89.4% decrease was observed in octane removal efficiency and main intermediate or by-product levels, respectively. This is because the yolk–shell Fe3O4@C displayed higher catalytic and mass transfer efficiencies for octane degradation than Fe3O4. A synergistic effect of mass transfer enhancement and catalytic oxidation was observed in the yolk–shell Fe3O4@C/Fenton system. Yolk–shell Fe3O4@C provides three reaction regions with different reaction conditions for the Fenton reaction. The carbon shell enriches the reactants and catalysts, and by restricting the oxidation reaction by providing relatively high concentrations of reactants and catalysts in the yolk–shell microenvironment, a high degradation rate and synergistic effect were achieved.
The hollow architecture of these materials in particular is highly beneficial in photocatalysis as they are expected to improve scattering of light and thereby produce better light absorption. Due to the presence of thin shells in these materials, the probability of reactions leading to a recombination of electron–hole pairs before active electrons may reach the surface of the material where catalytic turnovers take place is decreased due to the shorter charge carrier lengths. Moreover, additional ‘light-trapping’ effects have been observed due to the presence of an internal cavity. Hollow materials may promote multiple scattering events that might take place within the voluminous internal cavity and are assumed to improve the overall absorption efficiency by the internal surface of the material, hence contributing to boosting light harvesting. On the other hand, solid catalysts (non-hollow) can only absorb a fraction of incident light while the rest is reflected from the surface. As an illustrative example, Zhang et al. have prepared magnetic hollow triple-shelled FeCo2O4 (TS-FeCo2O4) microspheres with a 3D architecture which were anchored directly on cotton cellulose fiber (CCFs) substrates.167 They demonstrated that the presence of a multi-shelled hollow structure allowed various multiple reflections of the incident light, thereby offering efficient utilization of the incident light within the internal void. Additionally, the multi-shelled structure increased the number of catalytic active sites and exposed edge sites, resulting in enhanced catalytic activity to excite more photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Meanwhile, due to the synergistic effect of CCFs, the separation of the photogenerated charge carrier was also enhanced. Therefore, TS-FeCo2O4, offers high light-harvesting capabilities and improved mass transfer when compared with other materials such as single-shelled FeCo2O4/CCFs, and hence exhibited superior photocatalytic activity.
4.2. Catalytic applications of magnetic hollow nanomaterials

4.2.1. Applications in organic transformations. 
Coupling reactions. 
Carbon–carbon/carbon–heteroatom bond formation reactions are undoubtedly the most important reactions in chemistry and are widely applied in diverse areas, i.e. from the synthesis of simple to complex molecules to drugs, polymer chemistry, supramolecular chemistry, material sciences and many more.168–171 Considering the importance of C–C coupling reactions, a lightweight and magnetically recoverable heterogeneous catalyst, Fe3O4@TiO2–NH2/Pd, was developed by Elhampour et al.172 Hollow Fe3O4 spheres, formed by hydrothermal treatment, were coated with a TiO2 layer and further functionalized with APTES. Finally, Pd NPs were immobilized over it via reduction process (Fig. 36a). The catalytic potential of Fe3O4@TiO2–NH2/Pd spheres was utilized for conducting a Suzuki cross-coupling reaction (Fig. 36b). Good product yields, high stability of the catalyst, easy separation and reusability for up to five cycles were striking features of the described protocol.
 Fig. 36  (a) Synthesis of hollow Fe3O4@TiO2–NH2/Pd catalyst and (b) hollow Fe3O4@TiO2–NH2/Pd-catalyzed Suzuki cross-coupling reaction. 
Other triple-shelled hollow CuNiFe2O4 spheres were synthesized by Rajabzadeh et al. via a simple and environmentally benign one-pot approach in which carbon spheres were used as a template (Fig. 37).173 Metal precursors (ferric nitrate, copper nitrate and nickel nitrate) were dissolved in an aqueous solution of glucose and the mixture was treated under hydrothermal conditions, which caused the in situ preparation of metal precursors on the surface of carbon spheres. The carbon core was later removed through calcination to obtain CuNiFe2O4 hollow spheres. These micro-/nanostructures possess a large surface area, high magnetization power and greater number of active sites. Furthermore, the catalytic potential of the synthesized spheres was examined for a Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction between various aryl halides (R–X, where X = I, Br and Cl) and phenylboronic acids. The catalyst showed high yields of the coupled products under mild conditions. Both electron-withdrawing and electron-donating groups on aryl halides were well tolerated.
 Fig. 37  Synthesis of triple-shell hollow CuNiFe2O4 spheres from hydrothermally treated glucose/metal salt mixtures. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
A report by Sadjadi and co-workers described the preparation of magnetically separable hollow Fe2O3@SiO2 spheres covalently decorated with Cl-functionalized cyclodextrin nanosponge (CDNS).174 The resultant hybrid h-Fe2O3@SiO2-CDNS was used as a support to immobilize Pd NPs, which were derived through a bio-based approach (use of green tea extract). It is estimated that CDNS is capable of forming inclusion complexes with hydrophobic substrates, thus helping them to be transferred into aqueous solution and in close proximity to the Pd NPs. The catalyst showed its supremacy in Heck and Sonogashira coupling reactions (Scheme 1). The catalyst offers various green advantages such as ligand- and copper-free reaction conditions, use of bio-based reductant, water as solvent, high yields, large substrate scope and excellent reusability up to 10 cycles.
 Scheme 1  h-Fe2O3@SiO2–CDNS@Pd-catalyzed Sonogashira and Heck coupling reactions. 
Recently, Sharma et al. have developed an environmentally benign magnetic carbon double-shelled nanoreactor based on a template-free gas bubble-assisted Ostwald ripening process.175 The transformation of solid Fe3O4 microspheres to hollow magnetic spheres and their coating with RF was done in a one-pot approach with a lower temperature and time. This material was further loaded with Ni2+ by the impregnation method and employed as a catalyst in oxidative C–S coupling reaction of arenethiols and arylhydrazines leading to unsymmetrical diaryl sulfides under aerobic conditions (Fig. 38). The as-synthesized catalyst showed excellent catalytic performance and reusability. Oxidant and ligand free conditions, room temperature synthesis and use of aqueous medium were some of the striking features offered by the catalyst. Furthermore, a wide range of functional groups were screened and both electron-donating and electron-withdrawing groups were tolerated well.
 Fig. 38  (a) Synthesis of Ni@Fe3O4–C catalyst and (b) Ni@Fe3O4–C catalyzed oxidative C–S coupling reaction. 
Oxidation reactions. 
Oxidation reactions are crucial transformations in industrial chemistry. The implication of magnetically recoverable hollow nanomaterials as catalysts in oxidation reactions has proved to be a great effort to make reaction conditions more environment friendly. For example, Du et al. have synthesized iron-modified hollow carbon spheres (Fe-MHCs) as a high-performance catalyst for the selective oxidation of ethylbenzene to acetophenone.176 Fe-MHCs were synthesized through a simple pyrolysis and simultaneous deposition method (Fig. 39) in which SiO2@Fe–mSiO2 was used as a hard template (synthesized by taking SiO2 NPs as the core and SDA for the formation of a mesoporous silica shell followed by impregnation of iron species and calcination), while PS was used as a carbon precursor. When PS was pyrolyzed with a template, the small organic molecules obtained from pyrolysis of PS were deposited on the template due to catalysis of iron species and mesopores present on the shell. Later, the silica shell was etched using NaOH. The synthesized material possessed a uniform size, large cavity, mesoporous shell and high surface area of 924 m2 g−1. Fe-MHCs exhibited high conversion of 94.5% with 97.4% selectivity for the targeted product during oxidation of styrene.
 Fig. 39  Synthesis of iron-modified hollow carbon spheres for oxidation of ethylbenzene to acetophenone. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017. 
Due to the continuous rise in environmental pollution and crisis in energy supply, the conversion of renewable biomass resources into clean fuels is a thoughtful alternative. In this direction, the selective oxidation of an important biomass-derived platform chemical, 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF), to multifunctional molecules remains a key challenge.177 Fang et al. reported the direct transformation of HMF to 2,5-diformylfuran (DFF) using a sustainable and highly efficient MOF-derived magnetic hollow Fe–Co nanocatalyst.178 The proposed strategy was simple, efficient, tuneable and environmentally benign, and required the synthesis of a bimetallic MOF (MIL-45b) containing Co and Fe via a hydrothermal method and its subsequent thermal decomposition to FeCo/C nanocomposite. The formation of the hollow architecture was interpreted to be based on the Kirkendall effect. During high-temperature calcination of the MOF template, well-organized metal ions and organic ligands in the MOF structure moved outwards to minimize the surface energy. Therefore, an inside-out formation occurs which creates a void in the structure. Moreover, the rate of migration of carbon atoms derived from organic ligands was found to be faster than that of metal ions, thus forming mesoporous metal NPs and thin carbon layers between the metal particles. The obtained material was used for the oxidation of HMF to DFF. It was observed that the calcination temperature significantly affects the yield of the product; with an increase in the thermolysis temperature, the yield of DFF was decreased (Fig. 40). Notably, the unique architecture of the nanocatalyst is beneficial for HMF diffusion and surface adsorption (favourably adsorbs HMF and quickly desorbs the formed DFF), leading to complete conversion of HMF with >99% selectivity for the desired DFF. The magnetic nature of the catalyst facilitates its easy recovery from the reaction mixture and subsequent reuse.
 Fig. 40  DFF yield as a function of reaction time over the FeCo/C catalysts. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. 
Halogenation reactions. 
Sharma et al. have synthesized a magnetic carbon double-shelled nanoreactor based on a template-free gas-bubble-assisted Ostwald ripening process.149 This material was further used as a support to encapsulate copper metal in the shell and cavity by impregnation. The as-synthesized catalyst showed excellent catalytic performance with perfect reusability for the oxidative bromination reaction (Scheme 2). A library of substrates was converted to their halogenated products. Substrates including both electron-donating and electron-withdrawing functionalities are tolerated well and selectively converted to their monobrominated products.
 Scheme 2  Oxidative bromination reaction catalyzed by a Cu@Fe3O4–C nanoreactor. 
Multicomponent reactions. 
Multicomponent reactions (MCRs) are important synthetic tools for the preparation of highly functionalized complex organic molecules in a one-pot fashion. MCRs are highly atom-efficient reactions since the majority of the atoms of the reactants are retained in the product. Moreover, there is no need for the separation and purification of intermediates, thereby decreasing the use of solvent and energy requirements, which is highly beneficial from the green chemistry viewpoint.179–181 Facile one-pot three-component synthesis of ethyl-2-amino-5,10-dihydro-5,10-dioxo-4-phenyl-4H benzo[g]chromene-3-carboxylates was reported by Safaei-Ghomi et al.182 They synthesized 4-(4′-diamino-di-phenyl)-sulfone supported on hollow magnetic mesoporous (HMMS) Fe3O4@SiO2 NPs by a selective etching method in which polyethylene glycol (PEG) was taken as a hard template (Fig. 41a). This hollow nanocatalyst, when refluxed with aldehydes, ethyl cyanoacetate and 2-hydroxynaphthalene-1,4-dione in ethanol, yields a wide library of desired multicomponent products in good to excellent yields (Fig. 41b). Some of the salient features of the protocol include short reaction times, low catalyst loading, excellent reusability and an environmentally benign nature.
 Fig. 41  (a) Synthesis of HMMS@ 4-(4′-diamino-di-phenyl)-sulfone and (b) synthesis of benzo[g]chromene-3-carboxylates using HMMS@ 4-(4′-diamino-di-phenyl)-sulfone. 
Mirhosseyni et al. described the synthesis of Fe3O4-supported dopamine sulfamic acid, H-Fe3O4@DA–SO3H, as a highly stable and efficient superparamagnetic catalyst for one-pot MCRs for the synthesis of 1,4-dihydropyridine and 1,8-dioxodecahydroacridine derivatives as depicted in Scheme 3.183 The synthesized catalyst was formed by coating a hollow Fe3O4 core, synthesized by a hydrothermal template-free method, with dopamine as the shell. The interaction of Fe3O4 with dopamine has been shown in Fig. 42a. The dopamine-coated hollow Fe3O4 spheres were later functionalized with chlorosulfonic acid to form sulfamic-acid-functionalized catalyst (Fig. 42b). Facile recovery and reusability up to six successive runs makes the reported protocol an attractive strategy for conducting MCRs.
 Scheme 3  Synthesis of (a) 1,4-dihydropyridine derivatives and (b) 1,8-dioxodecahydroacridine derivatives. 
 Fig. 42  (a) Interaction of dopamine with H–Fe3O4 and (b) preparation of hollow Fe3O4@DA–SO3H catalyst. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016. 
Solid-acid catalysts are proved to be powerful catalysts in MCRs. Immobilization of acidic groups over a solid support helps to decrease environmental pollution and allows the conduction of reactions in a clean and sustainable manner.184–186 To immobilize acidic groups, hollow materials are considered to be superior as a support because they extend the scope of ‘double functionalization’, i.e., the acidic groups can be immobilized on both the internal and external surfaces, which provides higher acid loading than their solid counterparts. Recently, sulfamic-acid-functionalized hollow magnetite spheres have been reported as an efficient solid-acid catalyst for the one-pot three-component synthesis of medicinally important tri-substituted imidazoles.187
Among MCRs, A3 and KA2 coupling reactions are highly admired due to the easy and flexible synthesis of propargylamine. A3 and KA2 reactions are defined as one-pot three-component reactions of amine, alkyne and aldehyde or ketone respectively (Scheme 4).74,188 The synthesized propargylamines are important flexible key intermediates and used to synthesize many nitrogen-containing active biological and pharmaceutical compounds.189
 Scheme 4  Three-component A3 coupling reaction of aldehyde, secondary amine and terminal alkyne. 
Sadjadi et al. have developed a hybrid system which synergistically combines the advantages of magnetic core–shell hollow structures, g-C3N4 nanosheets and Ag NPs.190 This synergistic effect proved to be very beneficial in improving the catalytic activity of a Fe2O3@SiO2/g-C3N4/Ag system. The competence of the catalyst was explored in ultrasonic-assisted A3, KA2 coupling reactions (Table 2, entry 1) and in the synthesis of 5-substituted 1H–tetrazoles through two-component reactions of nitriles and sodium azide. The results confirmed that high product yields were obtained in short reaction times. Furthermore, the catalyst showed wide substrate scope, high stability, low silver leaching, good recyclability and recoverability for up to five cycles without a noticeable change in catalytic ability.
Table 2 Various catalysts for one-pot A3 and KA2 coupling reactions




S. no.
Catalyst
Functionalization
Textural properties
Reaction conditions
Yield




1.
Fe2O3@SiO2/g-C3N4/Ag
Hybridization of hollow Fe2O3@SiO2 with graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) and Ag doping

S
BET = 30 m2 g−1
Water, ultrasonic radiation of 80 W
73–95%


Total pore volume = 0.22 cm3 g−1


Average pore diameter = 29.3 nm


2.
Fe2O3@SiO2–IL/Ag
Modification with 1-methyl-3-(trimethoxysilylpropyl)imidazolium chloride ([pmim]Cl) ionic liquid and Ag doping

S
BET = 21 m2 g−1
Water, ultrasonic radiation of 100 W
80–95%


Total pore volume = 0.18 cm3 g−1


Average pore diameter = 35 nm


3.
h-Fe3O4@m-TiO2/Ag
Ag doping

S
BET = 57.1 m2 g−1
Solvent-free, 100 °C
80–87%


Total pore volume = 0.139 cm3 g−1


Average pore diameter = 19.8 nm


4.
h-Fe2O3@SiO2–CD/Ag
Functionalization with an amine group using (3-N-(2-(trimethoxysilyl)ethyl)methanediamine) and then with β-cyclodextrin and Ag doping

S
BET = 21.067 m2 g−1
Water, ultrasonic radiation of 70 W
85–97%


Total pore volume = 0.1834 cm3 g−1


Average pore diameter = 34.822 nm




The same group also synthesized a nano-magnetic Fe2O3@SiO2–IL/Ag hybrid composite that comprised Fe2O3 hollow spheres, silica shell, [pmim]Cl ionic liquid and silver NPs obtained using bio-based Achillea millefolium flower as a reducing and stabilizing agent.191 The composite was used as a catalyst for green and ultrasonic-assisted A3 and KA2 coupling reactions (Table 2, entry 2) as well as benzo[b]furan synthesis.
In another report silver-NP-doped magnetic hollow spheres with mesoporous TiO2 shells were developed and employed as a catalyst for the same coupling under mild reaction conditions (Table 2, entry 3). The catalyst was easily separated and reused up to five times without significant loss of activity and selectivity. Short reaction times, mild reaction conditions and excellent yields of propargylamine derivatives were the major outcomes of the described strategy.192
A green and template-free approach was developed to prepare h-Fe2O3@SiO2–CD/Ag hollow spheres as a novel and heterogeneous catalyst for MCRs. The hollow spheres of γ-Fe2O3 were coated with a SiO2 shell to form core–shell h-Fe2O3@SiO2, followed by amine functionalization, reaction with tosylated cyclodextrin and subsequent Ag(0) doping using hollyhock flowers. The catalyst successfully catalyzed A3 and KA2 coupling reactions under mild and green conditions (Table 2, entry 4). The catalyst was easily recovered and reused for up to five runs.193


4.2.2. Applications in environmental remediation. 
Degradation of organic pollutants. 
With the vigorous industrialization, the pollution of drinking water and water resources by chemicals has become a very serious problem worldwide.194 Among nitroaromatics, nitrophenols are major refractory pollutants because of their high stability and solubility in water. Various processes such as extraction, adsorption, sonolysis, etc. have been developed for their removal.195,196 In this quest, functionalized hollow magnetic nanomaterials have also contributed to a great extent towards the adsorption and degradation of nitroaromatics and other organic pollutants. For example, gold-supported hollow spheres as catalyst were reported by Chia and group for the catalytic reduction of 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) to 4-aminophenol (4-AP).197 For the synthesis of the catalyst, hollow Fe3O4 spheres were first formed under modified solvothermal conditions. Subsequently, hollow Fe3O4 spheres were functionalized with amino groups using APTES, which was used as a template to support gold nanoseeds. The Fe3O4@Au hollow spheres were prepared via seeded growth in situ by reducing Au3+ directly onto the surface of Fe3O4@Au nanoseeds (Fig. 43). Towards the catalytic reduction of 4-NP, Fe3O4@Au hollow spheres showed excellent activity and selectivity in the presence of NaBH4 in water. Furthermore, the catalyst also efficiently degraded potassium hexacyanoferrate(III).
 Fig. 43  Preparation process and evaluation of catalytic activity of Fe3O4@Au hollow spheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 197 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. 
Zhang et al. anticipated that the modification of hollow nanocomposites with (i) shell-in-shell hierarchical architecture, (ii) protected magnetic hollow particles, (iii) an external mesoporous shell and (iv) ultrafine NPs evenly dispersed on the surfaces within the interlayer cavities would highly improve the properties of YSNs leading to remarkable stability and uniform distribution of immobilized active sites, which will be beneficial for advanced catalysis.198 Therefore, they synthesized highly active and selective yolk–shell magnetic MFSVmS–Au nanocomposites as a catalyst for the reduction of 4-NP. The nanocomposite comprised double-layered ellipsoidal mesoporous silica shells, magnetic core and sub-4 nm gold NPs. The sol–gel template-assisted method was employed for the synthesis of α-Fe2O3@mSiO2/mSiO2 as a yolk–shell composite using α-Fe2O3 ellipsoids and RF resins as cores and sacrificial templates. α-Fe2O3@mSiO2/mSiO2 nanocomposites were then functionalized with plenty of ultrafine gold NPs via post-encapsulation within interlayer cavities through the deposition–precipitation (DP) method mediated with Au(en)2Cl3 compounds (Fig. 44). Ethylenediamine complexes react with [AuCl4]− to form a stable cationic complex of [Au(en)2]3+ which under alkaline conditions undergoes a deprotonation reaction to chemically modify mesoporous silica. A subsequent two-stage programmed hydrogen reduction leads to in situ formation of Au NPs and the reduction of α-Fe2O3 to magnetic Fe with inner voids. Notably, the synthesized Au NPs were highly stable and resistant to harsh thermal sintering even at 700 °C.
 Fig. 44  Synthetic route for the formation of Au NPs embedded in ellipsoidal nanocapsules via the DP process mediated with Au(en)2Cl3 compounds. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from The American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
With a view to achieving quick and effective degradation of NP to 4-AP, the same group also developed Au-loaded magnetic SiO2/carbon yolk–shell ellipsoids (Fe@SiO2–Au@H–C).120 The catalyst was composed of Fe@SiO2 yolks, a mesoporous carbon shell and plenty of ultrasmall Au NPs of about 3 nm. The methodology combined a surfactant-free one-pot extended Stöber technique, carbonization and etching to form Fe2O3@SiO2@H–C, which was then used as a support to immobilize Au NPs. For this, a unique Au(en)2Cl3-mediated DP strategy was employed that permits in situ encapsulation and excellent dispersion of Au NPs and integration of inner entrapped Fe cores with strong magnetism. The tightly embedded Au NPs exhibited remarkable thermal stability because of the protection of ethylenediamine stabilizer. Through this process, [AuCl2]3+ species spread through mesoporous carbon shells and under alkaline conditions get immobilized with the negatively charged surfaces in Fe2O3@SiO2@H–C. Due to the π–π stacking interactions induced by the carbon surface, the ethylenediamine–Au3+ chelated complex was incorporated into the carbon framework. On the other hand, with the help of a deprotonation reaction, inner SiO2 surfaces would chemically modify unbound [AuCl2]3+. Now, when Fe2O3@SiO2–Au@H–C undergoes high-temperature H2 reduction, the chelated Au3+ ions auto-reduce to give ethylenediamine-stabilized Au NPs within the YSNs. Simultaneously, Fe2O3 cores also transformed into magnetic Fe particles. Furthermore, when Fe2O3@SiO2–Au@H–C was employed as a catalyst, reduction of 4-NP to 4-AP was achieved in just 4 min.
Another exciting development for the catalytic reduction of 4-NP was reported by Li et al.199 They prepared a palladium-NP-supported hollow magnetic nanoreactor, HMN/Pd, that combines the advantages of various structures: hollow cavity, magnetic shell and MOF shell. The design thought for the preparation of nanoreactor was quite simple (Fig. 45). Initially, hollow Fe3O4 spheres were formed using a hard templating method in which SiO2 was taken as a template and later etched. Next, the surface of hollow Fe3O4 was covered with an MOF layer through a one-step self-assembly method. The modification with MOF created reaction sites for metal NP attachment. Finally, PdCl2 was added and reduced to obtain the HMN/Pd nanoreactor. Notably, the ‘k value’ of nanoparticles without etching decreased by approximately 25%. This indicates that nanoreactors (nanoparticles with an internal cavity) exhibit better reduction efficiency. This probably can be due to the cavity effect, in which the hollow structure of the catalyst provides sufficient space for the reaction and improves the rates of mass transfer and reaction. Salient features of the reported nanoreactor were (i) a large cavity that increased the specific surface area; the rate of the reaction is also accelerated due to the micropower that was generated by different concentrations inside and outside, (ii) modification with ZIF-8 MOF helped in the better dispersion of Pd NPs and also protected the entire structure, (iii) Pd NPs proved an efficient catalyst for the degradation of 4-NP as a high concentration of both just faded in 120 s and (iv) the presence of the Fe3O4 layer imparts a magnetic property, thus offering facile recovery and reusability up to 10 times.
 Fig. 45  Preparation of HMN/Pd nanospheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. 
A yolk–shell nanocatalyst, Au@hmC–FeCo/GC, was developed by Hong et al. by thermal decomposition of Fe and Co precursors in an Au core/silica shell nanosphere template, followed by an ethylene chemical vapor deposition method and etching of silica.200 The catalyst was composed of a hollow mesoporous carbon (hmC) shell with a diameter and thickness of about 120 nm and 15 nm respectively. The hmC further contains ∼6 nm FeCo/graphitic carbon shell (FeCo/GC) and encapsulated Au NPs (∼13 nm). The unique morphology (hmC embedded with FeCo/GC) prevents the coalescence of Au NPs, thus providing protection to the active core. The catalyst was reported to have uniformly distributed meso-channels of about 3.5 nm that facilitated the fast and easy diffusion of small molecules. Au@hmC–FeCo/GC acted as a highly stable and powerful catalyst towards the reduction of nitroaromatics (4-NP and 4-nitrotoluene) in the presence of NaBH4 (Fig. 46). The efficiency of the catalyst was found to be higher than that of pure gold NPs, which was attributed to the yolk–shell structure characteristics and hydrophobic nature of the catalyst.
 Fig. 46  Time-dependent UV-vis spectral changes of the reaction mixture catalyzed by Au@hmCFeCo/GCs for (a) 4-nitrophenol and (b) 4-nitrotoluene, and plot of ln(C0/Ct) versus reaction time for each nanocatalyst for the reduction reactions of (c) 4-nitrophenol and (d) 4-nitrotoluene. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from Nature, copyright 2018. 
Tetrabromobisphenol A (TBBPA) is one of the most common brominated flame retardants and also used in plastic paints, electrical devices and synthetic textiles. Due to its structural similarities to the thyroid hormone thyroxine (T4), it is anticipated that it may interfere with the metabolism and transport of thyroid hormone. Its toxicological effects include neurotoxicity, cytotoxicity and immunotoxicity.201,202 Therefore, it is necessary to invent an effective way to clean TBBPA from the environment. Considering this, He et al. have developed a nanoscale zerovalent iron (nZVI)-loaded magnetic hollow mesoporous bimetallic Fenton-like catalyst, Fe0@C@MnFe2O4, via a one-pot solvothermal method.239 Dopamine was taken as a carbon source, which self-oxidizes in the solution containing MnFe2O4 hollow spheres to form a PDA carbon shell. Subsequently, ferrous ions were adsorbed on the PDA shell which ultimately forms nZVI through calcination. The reliability of the catalyst was appreciated when over 90% of TBBPA was removed within 120 min in the presence of H2O2 and NH2OH. The authors predicted that the mesoporous carbon shell helps to concentrate the pollutant around the catalyst. A high concentration of TBBPA outside enables its fast transportation to the interior of the catalyst to achieve a high catalytic performance.
Liu et al. described a template-induced assembly and etching mechanism to prepare magnetic Fe3O4–polydopamine hybrid hollow microspheres.203 The synthetic route has been depicted in Fig. 47. Initially, PS microspheres and Fe3O4 NPs were prepared using DP and a co-precipitation method in the presence of PDA spheres respectively. Active polydopamine formed via self-polymerization of dopamine in a weakly alkaline solution embeds Fe3O4 NPs, thereby forming a PS/Fe3O4–PDA core–shell composite. Later, PS core was etched in THF solution. The merits of the method can be listed out as (i) room-temperature synthesis of high-performance and non-toxic magnetic hybrid hollow microspheres, (ii) Fe3O4 NPs were tightly incorporated in the cross-linked PDA shell, so there were no leaching or aggregation issues and (iii) magnetic Fe3O4–polydopamine demonstrated high magnetic sensitivity, intrinsic peroxidase-like activity and excellent catalytic ability for the oxidation of organic substrate, 3,30,5,50-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB), Scheme 5. The oxidation–reduction processes generate HO2− intermediate which oxidizes TMB to non-toxic product.
 Fig. 47  Schematic illustration of the preparation procedure of magnetic Fe3O4–PDA hybrid hollow microspheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016. 
 Scheme 5  The peroxidase mimetic reaction of the TMB substrate by Fe3O4–PDA hybrid hollow microsphere catalyst. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016. 
Degradation of organic dyes. 
Synthetic dyes are an integral part of the textile, printing and paper industries. Every year a large number of highly toxic dye effluents are being released into water bodies, which increases water and land pollution issues many times. These effluents contain suspended solids, chemicals, dyes and heavy metals which are carcinogenic or mutagenic to living organisms.204,205 Therefore, the development of effective technologies, adsorbents and catalysts to adsorb and degrade organic dyes present in water has become an urgent necessity. In this regard, advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) have harvested immense importance.206 The non-selective nature and high oxidation power of hydroxyl radicals (˙OH) used in AOPs have the ability to effectively remove a variety of organic pollutants. Among AOPs, heterogeneous Fenton-like processes are widely adopted as they are simple, economical and offer high activity under relatively mild reaction conditions.207 Inspired by this, Wu et al. have synthesized Cu–CuFe2O4/SiO2 hollow spheres with double-mesoporous shells as an excellent Fenton catalyst to degrade methylene blue (MB) dye.208 Degradation efficiency was reported to be 98.1% within 120 min at neutral pH. The admirable catalytic activity was accredited to the high surface area and the synergetic effect between Fe3+/Fe2+ and Cu2+/Cu+ redox pairs. Furthermore, the presence of Cu0 facilitated the reduction of Fe3+ resulting in more ˙OH radicals, which further boosted the Fenton-like activity (Scheme 6). The composite was highly stable and reusable, and therefore is a great choice for wastewater treatment.
 Scheme 6  Schematic diagram for the degradation mechanism of MB over the Cu–CuFe2O4/SiO2 double-shelled hollow spheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 
Another photo-Fenton catalytic system, hollow CuFe2O4/H2O2, was reported for the degradation of MB dye under UV-visible light irradiation.209 Hollow CuFe2O4 catalyst was formed by a polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)-directed solvothermal method. The effects of various parameters such as crystallization temperature, reaction times, sodium acetate and surfactant dosage on the crystal form and morphology of hollow CuFe2O4 nanospheres were investigated. One interesting observation was that the variation in temperature gives rise to different physicochemical properties. It was found that a crystallization temperature of 180 °C was most suitable for the formation. At these temperatures, hydroxide present on the surface of nanoparticles strongly attracts the other particles, hence forming a self-assembling sphere. This variation was observed due to the interaction between the colloidal CuFe2O4 nanocrystalline material and the surfactant PVP. A lower crystallization temperature reduces the deposition of hydroxide on the surface of CuFe2O4 nanocrystals while a higher temperature separates surfactant PVP molecules from the CuFe2O4 nanocrystal surface, thus preventing the self-assembly process. Furthermore, the influence of structural and morphological changes of the nanospheres towards dye degradation was also examined. Good degradation efficiencies were recorded with nanospheres obtained at crystallization temperatures of 170 and 180 °C. However, this efficiency was decreased at higher temperatures due to the destruction of the multi-layered porous structure.
The credibility of hollow architecture was further justified through the development of ZnFe2O4/SiO2 magnetic double-mesoporous-shelled hollow spheres (MDSHSs) that demonstrated excellent synergetic adsorption and degradation for MB dye.210 With the use of MDSHS, the adsorption equilibrium was attained in only 1 min. 50% MB was adsorbed by the ZnFe2O4/SiO2 composite, and the remaining 50% MB was degraded under a further photo-Fenton process. A high total organic carbon (TOC) reduction of 90% was obtained with 60 mg L−1 of MB in 90 min. Furthermore, the composite demonstrated remarkable stability and reusability.
MnFe2O4 is a mixed-valence (Mn2+–Fe3+) metal oxide having high saturation magnetization. The high catalytic activity in cubic-spinel-type MnFe2O4 is ascribed to Verwey hopping which arises due to electron transfer between Mn and Fe ions on octahedral sites (Mn2+ + Fe3+ ↔ Mn3+ + Fe2+).211 Taking this into consideration, Indranil and group synthesized MnFe2O4 nano-hollow spheres (NHSs) through a template-free solvothermal process based on Ostwald ripening and these were further functionalized with organic disodium tartrate dihydrate ligand. The surface-modified T–MnFe2O4 NHSs exhibited multicolour fluorescence starting from blue, green to red and proved to be an excellent reusable photocatalyst for the degradation of the cationic dye MB, with a rate constant of 2.64 × 10−2 min.212
Similarly, Farhadi et al. have also synthesized transition-metal-oxide-based catalyst, i.e., Co3O4 hollow microspheres by a template-free facile hydrothermal route.213 The strategy involved the use of the classic coordination complex, tetraammine(carbonato)cobalt(III) nitrate, [Co(NH3)4CO3]NO3, as a single-source precursor, which eliminates the need to use any template or surfactant, organic reagent and additional calcination. The described route was based on the mutual influences of the carbonate ligand, which releases CO2 bubbles and provides aggregation centres to Co3O4 NPs (Fig. 48). The microspheres exhibited a good photocatalytic activity for the H2O2-assisted degradation of MB dye under visible light irradiation.
 Fig. 48  Schematic illustration of the Co3O4 hollow-sphere formation process. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. 
In order to achieve fast and effective degradation of MB dye, hierarchical Fe3O4@MnO2 ball-in-ball hollow spheres (Fe3O4@MnO2 BBHs) were synthesized by in situ growth of SiO2@Fe3O4@MnO2 followed by etching (Fig. 49).214 The first step was to prepare the silica spheres template, which was further modified to form SiO2@Fe3O4/C using ferrocene as the source of iron and carbon. Hierarchical MnO2 nanosheets were then grown on SiO2@Fe3O4/C spheres through a redox reaction between KMnO4 and carbon. Finally, the silica template was etched with NaOH to yield Fe3O4@MnO2 BBHs. The material when added as catalyst, in the presence of peroxymonosulfate (PMS), quickly degraded MB completely within ∼30 min (Fig. 50). Interestingly, the catalyst exhibited a synergistic effect between the outer MnO2 nanosheets that accumulate and transport the pollutants by electrostatic interactions and catalyze the formation of active radicals; and the inner MnO2 and Fe3O4 hollow balls which produce more active radicals to speed up the degradation process. Furthermore, the catalyst showed easy separation, good stability and recyclability up to six consecutive cycles.
 Fig. 49  Schematic illustration for the preparation of Fe3O4@MnO2 BBHs. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 214 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. 
 Fig. 50  (A) MB removal in different PMS systems (Ccatalyst = 300 mg L−1, C0 = 30 mg L−1, CPMS = 20 mM, pH ∼ 7.94), (B) effect of initial pH, (C) effect of foreign ions on MB degradation by PMS and (D) the catalytic activities of Fe3O4@MnO2 BBHs for the degradation of various model pollutants. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 214 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. 
Zhang and co-workers utilized a by-product of the wood-pulping industry, lignin, to synthesize magnetic lignin spheres (MLS) having a high performance in wastewater treatment.215 Lignin hollow spheres (LHM) were first formed by esterified organosolv lignin with maleic anhydride through self-assembly in THF–Fe3O4 NPs aqueous media (Fig. 51). The authors used two types of lignin, i.e., larch lignin and poplar lignin. It was observed that LHM from larch lignin were uniform spherical particles with a dense surface; however, poplar lignin was less efficient, as the obtained spheres were not rigid enough to maintain their shape. Furthermore, the adsorption capacity obtained using MLS from larch lignin was better than that from poplar lignin. The adsorption capacities for MB and rhodamine B (RhB) dyes were 31.23 mg g−1 and 17.62 mg g−1 respectively with MLS from larch lignin.
 Fig. 51  Reduction of dyes using magnetic lignin spheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 215 with permission from The American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
Photocatalytic degradation of dyes and other organic pollutants using heterogeneous photocatalysis is an intensively pursued research practice. The basic principle behind the process is the transfer of electrons from the valence band to the conduction band of a semiconductor surface (such as metal oxides) on irradiation with light of proper wavelength. The so-formed excitons react with oxygen or water to form highly oxidizing superoxide and hydroxide radicals. These radicals are powerful enough to degrade a variety of organic pollutants.216 In this regard, a visible light active photocatalyst (Fe3O4/P(MAA–MBAA)–PPy/Au/void/TiO2 yolk–shell microspheres) was designed and prepared by Ma et al.217 The Fe3O4/P(MAA–MBAA)–PPy support contributes to the easy magnetic recovery and provides sites for the immobilization of gold NPs, thus improving their stability. The outermost TiO2 shell allows the absorption of sunlight and enhances electron hole separation. This composite was used as a photocatalyst towards the degradation of RhB. The degradation rate of 98.5% was obtained in 90 min with a stoichiometric amount of catalyst (4 mg). The performance of the catalyst was owing to its yolk–shell structure and composition that greatly expands the absorption of light and allows high contact with the dye. Furthermore, a possible mechanism of degradation was also proposed (Scheme 7). Briefly, photoelectrons were formed in Au NPs due to excitation with visible light. These electrons are then transferred to the conduction band of TiO2, leaving holes in Au NPs. From TiO2 these electrons are further shifted to the catalyst surface where they form superoxide radicals by reacting with dissolved oxygen. Subsequently, holes in Au NPs react with water to form ˙OH radicals. Later, O2− and ˙OH undergo oxidation/reduction reactions with RhB dye, leading to its degradation.
 Scheme 7  Mechanism of degradation of RhB dye by Fe3O4/P(MAA–MBAA)PPy/Au/void/TiO2 photocatalyst under visible light. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 217 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. 
Similarly, SiO2/Fe3O4 magnetic double-mesoporous-shelled hollow spheres (DMSHSs) were prepared by a solvothermal method for the degradation of RhB dye. The catalyst showed high activity, offering 97% degradation within 180 min under pH = 6.12 with 0.2 g L−1 of DMSHSs, 1 mL of H2O2 and 20 mg L−1 of RhB under visible light irradiation.218
A well-defined partially inverse spinel cobalt ferrite/mesoporous silica ((CoxFe1−x)[Co1−xFe1+x]O4@mSiO2) nanostructured catalyst having a yolk–shell architecture was synthesized by Zhu et al. through a hard-templating method.219 The synthesized catalyst was composed of (Co0.21Fe0.79)[Co0.79Fe1.21]O4 NPs encapsulated in mesoporous silica hollow spheres. The catalyst was further used as a peroxymonosulfate catalytic activator for the degradation of Orange II dye. During the degradation process, both sulfate and hydroxyl radicals were identified as active intermediate species. Moreover, the structural benefits of the yolk–shell architecture were realized by comparing its performance with conventional mSiO2-supported and naked cobalt ferrites (Fig. 52), with the yolk–shell catalyst offering more than 90% removal of Orange II within 35 min. YSN exhibited higher activity, excellent reaction stability and sintering resistance.
 Fig. 52  Orange II adsorption on (a) yolk–shell catalyst and (b) supported catalyst, and Orange II degradation by PMS activation without (c) catalysts and with (d) yolk–shell catalyst, (e) supported catalyst, (f) naked cobalt ferrite (0.05 g L−1) and (g) mSiO2. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 219 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017. 
With similar motives, magnetic hollow poly(cyclotriphosphazene-co-4,40-sulfonyldiphenol)–Fe3O4 (PZS–Fe3O4) hybrid nanocapsules were developed via a hard template-induced assembly strategy.220 The adsorption behaviour of the nanocapsules was assessed using Safranine T (ST) dye. The adsorbent showed high adsorption capacity, 39.20 to 43.60 mg g−1 in the pH range of 3.13 to 10.19. Electrostatic interaction and π–π interaction between the benzene ring of PZS and the benzene ring of the dye was responsible for the effective removal of safranine T (Fig. 53).
 Fig. 53  Schematic illustration of the interaction mechanism between the hollow PZS–Fe3O4 nanocapsules and ST dye. 
Degradation of antibiotics. 
Every year significant amounts of pharmaceuticals have been released into the environment.221,222 Antibiotics being the largest groups of pharmaceutical compounds, have become an emerging pollutant in aquatic ecosystems.223,224 Therefore, much attention is needed to remove these pollutants from water bodies. In this regard, fast and complete removal of the antibiotics tetracycline (TC) and enrofloxacin (ENR) was achieved using hierarchical hollow SiO2–Fe2O3@TiO2 (SFT) photocatalyst.225 The catalyst possessed a unique morphology in which Fe2O3 NPs (2–6 nm) were spatially confined and introduced as a modifier of TiO2; the inner SiO2 shell supports these smaller Fe2O3 NPs while the outer TiO2 protects the Fe2O3 NPs from aggregation, Fig. 54. This unique architecture promotes the adsorption of antibiotics, enables the separation of electron–hole pairs and enhances the trapping of incident light. Therefore, with the use of SFT photocatalyst, a 100% rate of degradation of antibiotics was noted under natural solar light irradiation.
 Fig. 54  (a) SEM, (b, c) TEM, (d) HRTEM and (e–j) EDS elemental mapping images of SFT photocatalyst. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 225 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 
Xiang et al. have prepared yolk–shell ZnFe2O4 as a photo-Fenton catalyst for the effective degradation of TC.226 Notably, the performance of yolk–shell ZnFe2O4 under visible light irradiation was 5 times higher that of solid ZnFe2O4 particles. This observation was attributed to a large surface area, increased active sites, improved light absorption and enhanced charge separation imparted by the yolk–shell configuration. On a similar note, Cao et al. have also synthesized porous hollow spinel-cube ZnFe2O4 through calcination using Prussian Blue (PB) as the MOF precursor.227 The formation mechanism involved two major steps. The first step was the shape-controlled synthesis of PB which was achieved by HCl-mediated oxidation of Fe2+ to Fe3+. In this process, PVP was added as a capping agent, which drives Fe2+ and [Fe(CN)6]3− to self-assemble into a cubic morphology. The second step involved the formation of ZnFe2O4 on the surface of the cubes by dispersing Zn2+ in PB and later calcinating it. Due to this, the organic moieties of PB and cyanide ligand slowly decomposed leading to voids in the structure. Finally, the porous hollow ZnFe2O4 cubes were formed after complete consumption of PB precursor (Fig. 55). The catalytic performance of the hollow ZnFe2O4 cubes was tested in the degradation of tetracycline hydrochloride, which showed 80% degradation in 20 min under visible light. Furthermore, the degradation rate obtained using hollow-cube ZnFe2O4 was compared with commercially available ZnFe2O4 and ZnFe2O4 synthesized via a coprecipitation method. A higher degradation effect of hollow ZnFe2O4 cubes than other materials justified the role of the controlled microstructure of the material on its photocatalytic activity. The porous hollow morphology intensifies the time of light scattering; thus a larger light irradiation area is available for photocatalytic material, giving more light absorption and enhanced activity.
 Fig. 55  Formation mechanism of porous hollow ZnFe2O4. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 227 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 

4.3. Adsorption applications of magnetic hollow materials
Heavy metal ions (HMIs) are one of the major pollutants present in aquatic systems. Sources of metal contamination include industrial wastewater from mining, metal processing, tanneries, pharmaceuticals, pesticides, organic chemicals, plastics and many more.228 HMIs are non-biodegradable and tend to bioaccumulate in food chains, hence posing a significant danger to human health and the environment. Even acute intoxications of heavy metals may damage the central nervous system, cardiovascular and gastrointestinal systems, lungs, kidneys, liver and bones.228 Therefore, removal/recovery of HMIs from contaminated water has always been a hot topic of research. Various water purification technologies have been developed to date including adsorption, chemical precipitation, membrane processes, ion exchange, electrocoagulation, solvent extraction, etc.229 Among them all, adsorption in particular has gained much attention due to its cost-effectiveness, high efficiency, regeneration of adsorbent, low consumption of reagents and possibility of metal recovery.230 In this regard, functionalized hollow nanomaterials have shown their constant predominance as adsorbents for the effective removal/recovery of HMIs from wastewater.
Lv et al. have developed a magnetic, well-ordered chestnut-shell-like hollow sphere structure composite via pyrolyzing an MOF containing nickel as a self-sacrificed precursor which served as a fascinating adsorbent for As5+ removal.231 They prepared a series of NiOx/Ni@C composites by varying the pyrolysis temperature (300–600 °C). As depicted in Fig. 56, among all of them, the composite obtained at 400 °C (NiO/Ni@C400) showed maximum adsorption capacity due to the presence of oxygen-containing functional groups and a large specific surface area. Furthermore, it presented a wide range of pH applicability (1–10) with the highest removal capacity of 454.94 mg g−1 at a pH value of 3.0. Additionally, the presence of co-existing ions does not affect the adsorption process of As5+. The interaction mechanism of As5+ with MOF-derived NiOx/Ni@C composites was studied using FT-IR and XPS analysis, which suggested that electrostatic interaction and surface complexation (As–O bond) were responsible for this effective removal.
 Fig. 56  (a) Adsorption isotherms and (b) comparison of adsorption capacities of Ni-MOFs, NiO@C300, NiO/Ni@C400, Ni@C500 and Ni@C600 for As5+ removal (pH 3.0 ± 0.1, m V−1 = 0.15 g L−1, and T = 298 K). This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 231 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. 
Recently, Chang and group proposed an interesting sol–gel synthetic route for the formation of multi-shelled magnetic hollow porous spheres (MSMPSs) in which they demonstrated how one reagent (formaldehyde in this case) can direct the morphology of the resultant spheres.232 They developed a series of SiO2/FexOy hollow spheres with a single shell, yolk–shell, double shells and triple shells by simply regulating the amount of formaldehyde with Fe(acac)3 as the shell-forming promoter (Fig. 57a). With increasing formaldehyde volume, the morphology of the hollow spheres transformed from single-shelled to yolk-shelled to double-shelled to triple-shelled and then turned back. The TEM images shown in Fig. 57b–e reflects that all MSMPSs have a spherical morphology but have different interior structures. CTAB, TEOS, 3-aminophenol, formaldehyde, Fe(acac)3, aqueous ammonia, ethanol and water were used in the synthesis. A formation mechanism was proposed depending on the sequence in which the reagents were added. Formaldehyde has a greater hydrolysis rate than TEOS; therefore it would be the first to attack the 3-aminophenol (at the ortho- and para-positions of the phenol ring or the amino group), forming phenolic resin microspheres (PRMSs). PRMSs serve as a sacrificial template on which SiO2 along with CTAB gets deposited. Subsequently, Fe(acac)3 gets adsorbed over it to form MSMPS composite. Since formaldehyde induces the formation of PRMS, the higher the number of PRMSs formed, the lesser is the thickness of the SiO2/CTAB layer, which means that Fe(acac)3 can easily pass through the SiO2/CTAB layer and adsorb on the resin microspheres. After this process, the composite was subjected to calcination, which removed all the organic components to form meso- and micropores and FexOy was formed. Meanwhile, adsorbed Fe(acac)3 and SiO2/CTAB simultaneously experience forces from the inner resin and outer shell, i.e., cohesive (σco) and adhesive force (σad) respectively. Cohesive force is responsible for inward shrinkage of the inner phenolic resin while σad restricts the inward shrink at the time of organic phase elimination, which directed the morphology of MSMPSs. Simultaneously, bulk and electron densities of PRMSs (directly or indirectly related to formaldehyde amount) will influence the amount of deposition of SiO2/CTAB and Fe(acac)3 on the composite, thus adjusting the MSMPS morphology. Furthermore, MSMPSs were employed as nanoreactors to form MSMPSs–graft-polyacrylonitrile (MSMPSs–g-PAN) which later converted to MSMPSs–g-polyamidoxime (MSMPSs–g-PAO) by transforming the cyano groups to amidoxime groups. MSMPSs–g-PAO were finally used as an adsorbent to in-situ-adsorb and reduce heavy metal ions. With an adsorption capacity of 47 mg g−1, Cr6+ was quickly adsorbed and reduced to Cr3+.
 Fig. 57  (a) Synthesis strategy of MSMPSs with different shell numbers tuned by formaldehyde. TEM images of the MSMPSs obtained with formaldehyde (b) 0.3 mL (c) 0.6 mL (d) 0.9 mL and (e) 1.2 mL. All scale bars are 100 nm. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 232 with permission from The American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
A facile one-pot route was prepared for the synthesis of core–shell hollow magnetic polydopamine nanoparticles (Fe3O4@PDA) for the efficient removal of Pb2+ and Cu2+ from wastewater.233 The outer PDA shell has numerous functional groups such as amine, imine and catechol groups that offer favourable sites for binding metal ions. The authors reported that the adsorption capacity was dependent on the pH of the suspension while independent of ionic strength, suggesting the presence of inner-sphere surface complexes of Pb2+ and Cu2+ on Fe3O4@PDA. The supremacy of the adsorbent was reflected by the fast kinetics (equilibrium within 3 h). Moreover, a removal capacity of 57.25 mg g−1 and 86.35 mg g−1 was reported for Pb2+ and Cu2+ respectively. Additionally, the adsorbent was highly recoverable and reusable, demonstrating an adsorption efficiency of ∼71% for Pb2+ and ∼70% for Cu2+ even after five cycles.
With the advancement in the field of nuclear energy, one of the major concerns worldwide lies in the leakage of radionuclides. They are highly toxic, mobile and carcinogenic, and therefore are a great threat to human beings, groundwater and soil.234 Furthermore, humic acid (HA, a natural organic matter) has a strong affinity towards many radionuclide pollutants and contributes a key role in their environmental fate.235 So, it has become of utmost urgency to develop a highly efficient adsorbent that eliminates and recovers radionuclides from contaminated water in the presence of HA. Considering this, Song and co-workers developed multi-shelled Fe3O4@MnOx hollow microspheres, which served as an effective adsorbent towards radionuclide pollutants in co-existence with HA.236 To synthesize hollow spheres, a hard-templating route was followed in which SiO2 served as a self-sacrificial template and the Fe3O4/C shell was coated on SiO2 in the hydrothermal treatment using ferrocene. Furthermore, the carbon layer was converted to MnOx by treating it with KMnO4 (Fig. 58). This adsorbent exhibited high sorption capacities towards uranium(VI) and europium(III). In the presence of HA, a pseudo-second-order model was followed and sorption isotherms (according to the Langmuir model) exhibited maximum sorption capacities (Qmax) of 106.72 and 138.13 mg−1 for U6+ and Eu3+ respectively. It was observed that sorption was dependent on the environmental temperature and pH of the solution. Further, in presence of HA enhanced sorption rates and amounts was recorded. The authors also performed spectroscopic studies which revealed that U6+ was mainly adsorbed on MnIII–O–H sites while MnIV–O–H was the Langmuir model major functional group for Eu3+ adsorption.
 Fig. 58  (a) Preparation process, (b) SEM image and (c) TEM image of the multi-shelled Fe3O4@MnOx. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 236 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. 
With the aim of cleaning up U6+ from aqueous solutions, bifunctional material core–shell–shell layered double hydroxide (LDH)-decorated hollow magnetic polydopamine microspheres (MPL) were designed and prepared by Yang and co-workers.237 The design thought behind the preparation was quite notable and involved the formation of hollow Fe3O4 spheres, their coating with PDA using Tris buffer solution and dopamine, and subsequent in situ growth of LDH nanosheets on the surface (Fig. 59). The formed MPL were used to remove U6+ from water through specific adsorption. The adsorption kinetics was represented by the pseudo-second-order model with a high uptake percentage of 94.8%. Moreover, the maximum adsorption performance could be varied by tuning the thickness of the PDA shell and the amount of LDH, in the order of MP2L2 (344 mg g−1) > MP2L3 (291 mg g−1) > MP3L2 (245 mg g−1) > MP2L1 (211 mg g−1) > ML2 (142 mg g−1) > MP1L2 (141 mg g−1) > MP2 (71 mg g−1) > Fe3O4 (34 mg g−1) at 298.15 K and pH 5.0 (in MPxLy, x and y stands for the quantity of LDH and PDA respectively). Furthermore, it was observed that the adsorption capacity was affected by the pH value while the ionic strength did not hold much role, indicating that the interaction was mainly dominated by inner-sphere surface complexation due to the presence of multiple functional groups such as, imine, catechol, amine, and hydroxyl groups.
 Fig. 59  Schematic illustration for the preparation of MP2L2 microspheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 237 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
For fast adsorption of Eu3+, hollow Fe3O4/polydopamine dual-shelled microspheres were synthesized by Fang et al.238 The synthetic route was based up on the Ostwald ripening process of Fe3+–polyacrylamide complex nanospheres to form hollow Fe3O4. The enrichment of Fe3O4 spheres with polyacrylamide chains was beneficial for effective in situ polymerization of dopamine. Fe3O4/PDA was an excellent adsorbent and showed 151.05 mg g−1 removal of Eu3+ ions from aqueous solution. The authors conducted various studies to investigate the adsorption capacity of Fe3O4/PDA spheres. One such important study was the effect of pH on Eu3+ entrapment. Fig. 60a reflects that as pH increased from 4 to 8, adsorption capacity increased from 40% to nearly 99%. A further increase in pH value from 8 to 12 leads to a reduction in adsorption efficiency from 99% to 58%. This observation was explained on the basis of different species distribution under divergent pH ranges (Fig. 60b). At pH 3–8, Eu3+, Eu(OH)2+ and Eu(OH)2 were the major Eu3+ species that existed in the solution. Since the surface of the PDA was negatively charged, these species formed strong complexes with adsorbent, which resulted in a high adsorption capacity. In contrast, when the pH was increased (8–10), Eu3+ species precipitated out. A further increase in pH formed negatively charged Eu(OH)4− that repelled the PDA surface. Thus, entrapment capacity decreases.
 Fig. 60  (a) Effect of pH and ionic strength on the adsorption of Eu3+ onto Fe3O4@PDA and (b) distribution of Eu3+ species as a function of solution pH values. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 238 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
5. Conclusion and future outlook
Hollow magnetic hybrid materials have been an area of extensive research due to the unique combination of hollow architecture, mesoporous nanostructure and magnetic character. The hollow space inside these materials awards them with admirable properties which are beneficial in diverse applications including catalysis, adsorption, drug delivery, storage and many more. The hollow morphology of these materials bestows on them various attractive features that make them an excellent support on which a variety of catalytic functionalities can be incorporated. Moreover, a number of auxiliary functions have been observed in these materials which are absent in conventional catalysts, such as molecular sieving effects, stimulus-response, mass-transfer, confinement effects, etc. These additional functions largely contribute to the catalytic performance, particularly selectivity. The hollow cores are used to encapsulate catalytic nanoparticles. During the reaction, these catalytically active nanoparticles are prevented from external environment and self-aggregation, so that the catalytic performance is enhanced significantly, while the mesoporous channels on the shell serve as pathways for catalyst loading and diffusion of reactants and product molecules in and out of the material. Furthermore, the channels function as a selective gateway, and therefore hollow materials are potential candidates in shape- and size-selective catalysis. On the other hand, in adsorption applications, the cavity is used to hold guest species, while channels present on the shell are pathways for the storage of guest materials. In contrast to core–shell composites, hollow materials possess a much higher number of active sites and a large surface-to-volume ratio, and thus showcase better adsorption capacity.
In the past few years, numerous synthetic and functionalization approaches have been explored and established for the preparation of these hybrid materials. Therefore, at the present time, the preparation of hollow structures with controllable sizes, shapes, core–shell structures, functionalities, compositions and properties can be easily achieved. In this review, we summarise many substantial research contributions with respect to synthetic approaches, functionalization techniques and potential applications of magnetic hollow materials as catalysts in organic transformations and degradation of organic pollutants, dyes and antibiotics and adsorbents. The synthetic strategies for hollow magnetic materials have been broadly classified as template-assisted and template-free approaches. Synthetic processes based on hard-templating methods are relatively simple and the morphology of the resulting hollow materials can be controlled well. However, multi-steps and large amounts of harsh etchants are required, which may damage the desired configuration and makes the overall process environmentally unfriendly. Soft-templating methods are less preferable due to the polydispersity and dynamics of soft templates. Furthermore, the materials obtained by this method are non-uniform in size and sometimes highly aggregated. Therefore, among templating methods, hard-templating methods are more effective and successful in delivering hollow magnetic materials with well-defined and tuneable particle sizes and good monodispersity. In contrast to template-assisted methods, in template-free methods the control of the size and morphology of nanomaterials is challenging. But these methods are usually more environmentally benign, spontaneous and economical. Moreover, the superiority of these methods has been reflected towards the formation of non-spherical hollow structures having complicated architectures. The continuous efforts towards synthesizing hollow magnetic materials have provided numerous opportunities to design specialized materials which are valuable to fundamental research as well as practical applications. Various functionalization techniques are known for the modification of their physical and chemical properties. These advances have resulted in a quick expansion of the applications of these materials in various fields including catalysis and adsorption.
Nevertheless, there exist certain fundamental aspects which have not been fully addressed with sufficient thoroughness. In our view, these aspects need to be completely addressed in the near future to validate the interpretations drawn from the existing literature and to extend a wide scope for future developments. As discussed in the review, some reports have reasoned confinement effects and molecular sieving phenomena for the enhanced catalytic performance of the catalyst. Although comparisons made with non-hollow catalysts serve as a benchmark and make it reasonable to assume that superior activity indeed results from their unique morphology, however there is no systematic proof. Likewise, the significance of mass transfer processes and the kinetics of diffusion of reactants toward active sites needs to be systematically examined. In addition, it is infrequently claimed that the magnetic feature of these materials further diversifies varies functionalities and contributes to the facile and fast recovery of these innovative solid catalysts from the reaction media. However, the relationship between the structure of hollow materials and the magnetic properties, and the merits of this integration in terms of performance of the material, was found to be missing in most of the literature. Furthermore, the deactivation and stability of the catalytic materials have been evaluated by the consistent product yield or the reactant conversion after a few consecutive recyclable test reactions. A thorough evaluation of the variations of the recycled materials should also be conducted in order to have precise judgement about the deactivation of the catalyst. Similar aspects are also valid for adsorbents based on hollow morphology. In our opinion, these unanswered questions might be related to the emergence and rapid evolution of this field.
In spite of all the considerable accomplishments towards the synthesis of magnetic hollow structures, it still has many milestones to achieve. The state-of-the-art is to develop novel, cost-effective and quick methods for synthesizing high-quality complex hollow magnetic hybrid materials with controllable and tuneable dimensions and compositions. In terms of modern catalysis, there is still great room for improvement and advancement in hollow magnetic materials. There are various opportunities that are worth exploring in the near future to obtain new or enhanced properties:
• Design of materials with multiple core–shell structures that can induce positive synergism with original active sites on the framework and active guest species.
• Selective functionalization to enable multiple reactions to be performed simultaneously.
• Modulation in the texture of hollow materials to open new dimensions in intricate catalysis such as asymmetric synthesis, tandem reactions, etc.
• Expansion of the scope and techniques to introduce and stabilize localized single atoms.
• The development of hollow materials having a highly crystalline framework with better thermal stability is highly desirable. By inducing compositional modifications in the framework of these composites, it is possible to make them catalytically active without encapsulating any external guest species.
• Scale-up and the production of commercial-scale quantities is the most important issue that needs to be addressed immediately. Although laboratory-scale productions have provided promising results they need to be tested at pilot-scale and industrial plants to be evaluated under real reaction conditions.
• Another area which needs to be expanded is the development of nanoreactors having several, spatially compartmentalized catalytic functions. Recent research has described the synthesis of hollow nanomaterials having multiple structural subunits in which different catalytic functions are regioselectively compartmentalized and external shells are equipped with stimulus-responsive permeability. Efforts should be directed towards the development of such nanoreactors and towards their applications in more demanding sequential transformations.
• Understanding the hollowing mechanisms, especially for self-assembled synthesis, through in situ real-time characterization techniques such as in situ TEM studies. Such knowledge will assist in altering the synthetic protocols to get desired hollow structures.
These opportunities and challenges require a dynamic merger of researchers working in multi-disciplinary areas. We envision that precise tuning of morphology, particle size and functionalities in hollow magnetic materials will bring a wide applicability extension of these nanomaterials in many future applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Authors G. A., R. G. and P. Y. gratefully acknowledge CSIR, Delhi, India and UGC, Delhi, India for providing research fellowships.
References

          B. Bhushan, Springer Handbook of Nanotechnology, Springer, Heidelberg, Germany,  2017 Search PubMed .

          C. P. Poole Jr. and F. J. Owens, Introduction to Nanotechnology, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey,  2003 Search PubMed .
F. Wickson, K. Grieger and A. Baun, Int. J. Emerg. Technol. Soc., 2010, 8, 5–23 Search PubMed .

          V. Pokropivny, R. Lohmus, I. Hussainova, A. Pokropivny and S. Vlassov, Introduction to Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology, Tartu University Press Ukraine,  2007 Search PubMed .
P. Grodzinski, M. Silver and L. K. Molnar, Expert Rev. Mol. Diagn., 2006, 6, 307–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Kung and M. C. Kung, Catal. Today, 2004, 97, 219–224 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, M. Chen, X. Fang and L. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5472–5491 RSC .
J. Chen, Z. Li, F. Ni, W. Ouyang and X. Fang, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1828–1833 RSC .
D. Periyanagounder, T. C. Wei, T. Y. Li, C. H. Lin, T. P. Gonçalves, H. C. Fu, D. S. Tsai, J. J. Ke, H. W. Kuo and K. W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1904634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Shi, Q. Liu, Y. Ma, Z. Fang, Z. Liang, G. Shao, B. Tang, W. Yang, L. Qin and X. Fang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903854 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, L. Hu, N. Gao, S. Liu, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi, A. Alshahrie and X. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 445–454 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. DiStefano, A. A. Murthy, S. Hao, R. Dos Reis, C. Wolverton and V. P. Dravid, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 23897–23919 RSC .
R. P. Feynman, Eng. Sci., 1959, 23, 22–36 Search PubMed .

          R. P. Feynman, in APS Annual Meeting,  1959 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3621–3638 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, L. Zhang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803900 CrossRef .
J. Liu, S. Z. Qiao, J. S. Chen, X. W. D. Lou, X. Xing and G. Q. M. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12578–12591 RSC .
K. An and T. Hyeon, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 359–373 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-F. Huang, J. Song, K. Li, M. Tahir, Y.-T. Wang, L. Pan, L. Wang, X. Zhang and J.-J. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1359–1365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Yang and Q. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1525–1535 RSC .
W. Wei, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, Y. Liu, L. He, D. Chen, A. Umar, L. Guo and J. Li, J. Power Sources, 2013, 238, 376–387 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. El-Toni, M. A. Habila, J. P. Labis, Z. A. ALOthman, M. Alhoshan, A. A. Elzatahry and F. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2510–2531 RSC .
L. Yu, X. Y. Yu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800939 CrossRef PubMed .

          S. Athira, V. Akhil, X. Joseph, J. Ashtami and P. Mohanan, Layered 2D Advanced Materials and Their Allied Applications,  2020, pp. 211–248 Search PubMed .
M. Xiao, Z. Wang, M. Lyu, B. Luo, S. Wang, G. Liu, H. M. Cheng and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801369 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-M. Yoon, J. Ryu, J. Yun, Y. K. Kim and J. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6570–6579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, K. Shen, Y. Tan and Y. Li, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7800–7810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Prieto, H. Tüysüz, N. Duyckaerts, J. Knossalla, G.-H. Wang and F. Schüth, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14056–14119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. M. Zhang, J. S. Hu, Y. G. Guo, S. F. Zheng, L. S. Zhong, W. G. Song and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1160–1165 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zheng, M. He, Y. Yang and Q. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3410–3417 RSC .
L.-F. Chen, Y. Lu, L. Yu and X. W. D. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1777–1783 RSC .
X.-C. Xie, K.-J. Huang and X. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6754–6771 RSC .
R. Soltani, A. Marjani, R. Soltani and S. Shirazian, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 9788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z. He, H. Wang, L. Qi, G. Liu and X. Zhang, Front. Environ. Sci. Eng., 2015, 9, 770–783 CrossRef .
Y.-P. Zhu, Y.-L. Liu, T.-Z. Ren and Z.-Y. Yuan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6627–6636 RSC .
C. Zhou, Y. Ren, J. Han, Q. Xu and R. Guo, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3534–3544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shi, F. Chen and W. Cai, Nanomedicine, 2013, 8, 2027–2039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fıçıcılar, A. Bayrakçeken and İ. Eroğlu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 9924–9933 CrossRef .
L. Wang, Z. Lou, T. Fei and T. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4767–4771 RSC .
W. Zhao, H. Chen, Y. Li, L. Li, M. Lang and J. Shi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2780–2788 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Ziarani, M. Malmir, N. Lashgari and A. Badiei, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 25094–25106 RSC .
P. T. Tanev and T. J. Pinnavaia, Science, 1996, 271, 1267–1269 CrossRef CAS .
H.-P. Lin and C.-Y. Mou, Science, 1996, 273, 765–768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Schacht, Q. Huo, I. Voigt-Martin, G. Stucky and F. Schüth, Science, 1996, 273, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, F. Su, J. Y. Lee and X. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1347–1353 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, O. Noonan, X. Huang, Y. Yang, C. Xu, L. Zhou and C. Yu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4579–4586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Zhang, B. Y. Guan and X. W. Lou, Small, 2019, 15, 1805324 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Andersen, U. Waag, L. Schneider, G. Stephani and B. Kieback, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2000, 2, 192–195 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Chen, R.-S. Liu, M.-Y. Lo, S.-C. Chang, L.-D. Tsai, Y.-M. Peng and J.-F. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7522–7526 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, G. Wu, Y. Ren, X. Li and L. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 8864–8871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang and D. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 5971–5974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, M. Li, X. Liang and Z. Zhuang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 11, 1267–1273 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kim, E. Kim, J. Lee, S. Hong, W. Sung, N. Lim, C. G. Park and K. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9908–9919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Larrañaga, M. Lomora, J.-R. Sarasua, C. G. Palivan and A. Pandit, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2017, 90, 325–357 CrossRef .
D. Chen, L. Li, F. Tang and S. Qi, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3804–3807 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, D. Chen, L. Li, T. Liu, L. Tan, X. Wu and F. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 891–895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kaur and B. Singh, Chem. Sci. J., 2018, 9, 1000192 Search PubMed .
P. M. Arnal, M. Comotti and F. Schüth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 8224–8227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li and H. C. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801104 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhu, Z. Chen, Y. Pan, R. Dai, Y. Wu, Z. Zhuang, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1800426 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Schneider, D. Mehlhorn, P. Zeigermann, J. Kärger and R. Valiullin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3439–3467 RSC .
Y. Li and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3176–3205 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Roque-Malherbe and C. d. l. P. del Rio, in Appl. Surface Sci, IntechOpen,  2019 Search PubMed .

          G. Mckay, Use of Adsorbents for the Removal of Pollutants from Wastewater, CRC press,  1995 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhuang, Y. Yang, G. Xiang and X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10441–10445 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zong, K. Li, R. Tian, Y. Lin and C. Lu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 23191–23197 RSC .
J. Han, J. Dai and R. Guo, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 356, 749–756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. Heck, Magnetic Materials and their Applications, Elsevier, Netherlands,  2013 Search PubMed .
R. K. Sharma, M. Yadav, Y. Monga, R. Gaur, A. Adholeya, R. Zboril, R. S. Varma and M. B. Gawande, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 1123–1130 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Sharma, M. Yadav, R. Gaur, R. Gupta, A. Adholeya and M. B. Gawande, ChemPlusChem, 2016, 81, 1312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gaur, M. Yadav, R. Gupta, G. Arora, P. Rana and R. K. Sharma, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 2502–2508 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Sharma, R. Gaur, M. Yadav, A. Goswami, R. Zbořil and M. B. Gawande, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1901 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Gupta, M. Yadav, R. Gaur, G. Arora and R. K. Sharma, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 3801–3812 RSC .
R. Gupta, M. Yadav, R. Gaur, G. Arora, P. Rana, P. Yadav, A. Adholeya and R. K. Sharma, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 21529–21539 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-L. Ye, H. Yoshikawa and K. Awaga, Materials, 2010, 3, 1244–1268 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Liu, Y. Yang, C. T. Ng, L. Y. Zhao, Y. Zhang, B. H. Bay, H. M. Fan and J. Ding, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1939–1944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, B. Yan, Y. Li, X. Ma, W. Jiao, K. Shi, T. Zhang, S. Chen, Y. He and X.-J. Liang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 1936–1950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Skomski, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 81, 5627–5629 CrossRef CAS .
D. Goll, A. Berkowitz and H. Bertram, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 184432 CrossRef .
S. Yan, J. Tang, P. Liu, Q. Gao, G. Hong and L. Zhen, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 07B535 CrossRef .
Q. Chen and Z. J. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 3156–3158 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, H. Gu and B. Xu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1097–1107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Indira and P. Lakshmi, Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 3, 1035–1042 CAS .
I. Vedernikova, Rev. J. Chem., 2015, 5, 256–280 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, A. Pasc, V. Fierro and A. Celzard, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12686–12713 RSC .
S. S. Park and C. S. Ha, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1703814 CrossRef .
M. Wang, Y. Boyjoo, J. Pan, S. Wang and J. Liu, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 970–990 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, F. Xiao, J. Xi, T. Sun, S. Xiao, H. Wang, S. Wang and Y. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4053 CrossRef .
S. Ikeda, S. Ishino, T. Harada, N. Okamoto, T. Sakata, H. Mori, S. Kuwabata, T. Torimoto and M. Matsumura, Angew. Chem., 2006, 118, 7221–7224 CrossRef .
G. Cai, M. Ding, Q. Wu and H.-L. Jiang, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2020, 7, 37–45 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, L. Peng, P. Huang, X. Wang, Y. Sun, C. Cao and W. Song, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 4084–4088 CrossRef .
D. Ni, W. Sun, Z. Wang, Y. Bai, H. Lei, X. Lai and K. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900036 CrossRef .
M. Xu, M. Du, L. Zhao, Y. Yin, X. Shao, W. Li and X. Pu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2010, 45, 1056–1063 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qi, X. Lai, J. Wang, H. Tang, H. Ren, Y. Yang, Q. Jin, L. Zhang, R. Yu and G. Ma, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6749–6773 RSC .
J. Wang, H. Tang, H. Wang, R. Yu and D. Wang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 414–430 RSC .
J.-G. Wang, F. Li, H.-J. Zhou, P.-C. Sun, D.-T. Ding and T.-H. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 612–620 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, X. Zhang, Y. Lu, S. Liu and J. Liu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 7403–7407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, J. Chen, X. Li, M. Wang, X. Zhang, F. Tan, S. Xu and J. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 444, 38–41 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liang, C. Hao and Y. Shi, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 2559–2567 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 65–81 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, X. Ling, D. Yu, D. Xie, L. Li, S. Peng, C. Zhong, N. Zhao, Y. Deng and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1905622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, Y.-G. Wang, W. Chen, J. Dong, L. Zheng, J. Luo, J. Wan, S. Tian, W.-C. Cheong and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10976–10979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, H. Chen, L. Guo, Q. He, F. Chen, J. Zhou, J. Feng and J. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 529–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yildirim and M. Bayindir, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3839–3846 RSC .
X. Hu, F. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Zhang and L. Zhang, J. Nanomater., 2019, 2019, 7430687 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, J. Ge, J. Goebl, Y. Hu, Z. Lu and Y. Yin, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 583–591 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Cheng, R. Che, J. Xu, M. Liu and Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2503–2509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, J. C. Park and H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1523–1528 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, H. Chen, L. Guo, Q. He, F. Chen, J. Zhou, J. Feng and J. Shi, ACS Nano, 2009, 4, 529–539 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zeng, X. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Dong, Y. Ma and J. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4312–4314 RSC .
Y. Chen, H.-R. Chen and J.-L. Shi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 125–137 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Yoon, K. Sohn, J. Y. Kim, C. H. Shin, J. S. Yu and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 19–21 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Guo, Y. Li, S. Pan, X. Chen and J. Xu, J. Mol. Liq., 2016, 223, 534–540 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pan, J. Li, G. Wan, C. Liu, W. Fan and L. Wang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 309, 1–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kalantari, M. Yu, O. Noonan, H. Song, C. Xu, X. Huang, F. Xiang, X. Wang and C. Yu, Chemosphere, 2017, 166, 109–117 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, H. Nie, Z. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Jin, Y. Lu, Z. Xiao and S. Huang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3283–3288 RSC .
R. A. Sidik, A. B. Anderson, N. P. Subramanian, S. P. Kumaraguru and B. N. Popov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 1787–1793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang and L. Dai, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 7244–7253 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rana, G. Arora and U. K. Gautam, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2015, 16, 014803 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, W. Wang, Y. Y. Xu, S. Dong, J. Xiao, F. Wang, H. Liu and B. Y. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 10610–10617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-P. Fan, J.-X. Yu, X.-M. Yang, X.-H. Zhang, T.-T. Yuan and H.-L. Peng, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 337, 722–732 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mi, W. Hu, Y. Dan and Y. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 1194–1196 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, J. Liu and Y. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2006, 12, 2039–2047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shen, Y. Zhu, X. Dong, J. Gu and J. Shi, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 840–841 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ali, L. Tian, B. Zhang, N. Ali, M. Khan and Q. Zhang, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2017, 103, 42–52 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, T. Zhang, T. Zhou, Z. Lou, J. Deng and L. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 66738–66744 RSC .
J. Han, G. Xu, B. Ding, J. Pan, H. Dou and D. R. MacFarlane, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5352–5357 RSC .
F. P. Hu, Z. Wang, Y. Li, C. Li, X. Zhang and P. K. Shen, J. Power Sources, 2008, 177, 61–66 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, G. Jang, D. K. Ban, V. Sant, J. Seth, S. Kazmi, N. Patel, Q. Yang, J. Lee and W. Janetanakit, Bone Res., 2017, 5, 17051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-Q. Mao, Q.-D. An, Z.-Y. Xiao and S.-R. Zhai, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 1235–1244 RSC .
L. Yang, H. Guo, L. Wang and J. Zhang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 239, 173–179 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dai, M. Wu, T. Jiang, H. Hu, X. Yu and Z. Bai, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 107, 339–346 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu and W. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2007, 119, 1511–1514 CrossRef .
Y. Bao, T. Wang, Q. Kang, C. Shi and J. Ma, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 46638 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Li and Z. Tang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3995–4011 RSC .
B. Liu, X. Li, Q. Zhao, Y. Hou and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8909–8915 RSC .
M. M. Goswami, C. Dey, A. Bandyopadhyay, D. Sarkar and M. Ahir, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2016, 417, 376–381 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zeng, B. Yang, X. Li, R. Li and R. Yu, Mater. Des., 2016, 101, 35–43 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-K. Huang, C.-H. Su, J.-J. Chen, C.-T. Chang, Y.-H. Tsai, S.-F. Syu, T.-T. Tseng and C.-S. Yeh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14470–14480 CrossRef PubMed .
H. C. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7511–7526 RSC .
C. C. Yec and H. C. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4843–4851 RSC .
H. Chun Zeng, Curr. Nanosci., 2007, 3, 177–181 CrossRef .
H. Cheng, L. Zuo, J. Song, Q. Zhang and N. Wereley, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 09B507 CrossRef .
W. Li, Y. Zhou and T. Tian, Rheol. Acta, 2010, 49, 733–740 CrossRef CAS .
S. Alves, M. R. Alcantara and A. Figueiredo Neto, J. Rheol., 2009, 53, 651–662 CrossRef CAS .
R. Upadhyay, Z. Laherisheth and K. Shah, Smart Mater. Struct., 2013, 23, 015002 CrossRef .
J. S. An, W. J. Han and H. J. Choi, Colloids Surf., A, 2017, 535, 16–23 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin, N. Huo, W. Liu, Z. Shi, Q. Wang, Y. Ding, J. Zhang and S. Yang, Scr. Mater., 2016, 110, 92–95 CrossRef CAS .
G. Arora, M. Yadav, R. Gaur, R. Gupta and R. K. Sharma, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 10871–10879 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Han, D. Li, X. Liu, D. Geng, J. Li and Z. Zhang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 055008 CrossRef .
Z. Yang, Z. Li, Y. Yang and Z. J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21911–21915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ji, C. Cao, Z. Chen, H. Zhai and J. Bai, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 5944–5953 RSC .
P. Chen, B. Cui, X. Cui, W. Zhao, Y. Bu and Y. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 699, 526–533 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin, R. M. Rioux, C. K. Erdonmez, S. Hughes, G. A. Somorjai and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2004, 304, 711–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhao, X. Guo, W. Zhao, J. Deng, B. Fan, G. Shao, Z. Bai and R. Zhang, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 331–343 CrossRef CAS .
F. Caruso, Chem. – Eur. J., 2000, 6, 413–419 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, F. Xu, W. Zhang, Z. Mei, B. Pei and X. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 24–31 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Teng, Y. Du, J. Shi and P. W. Pong, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2020, 20, 320–325 CrossRef .
L. Xia, X. Li, F. Zhu, S. Hu and L. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 20279–20286 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, W.-C. Cao, Y.-G. Liu, G.-M. Zeng, W. Zeng, L. Qin and T.-T. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 179–188 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Elahimehr, F. Nemati and A. Elhampour, Arabian J. Chem., 2020, 13, 3372–3382 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, T. Wang, Z. He, Y. Xu, W. Yu, B. Shi and K. Huang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 2924–2932 CrossRef CAS .
K. Cho, J. Yoo, H.-W. Noh, S. M. Lee, H. J. Kim, Y.-J. Ko, H.-Y. Jang and S. U. Son, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8922–8926 RSC .
B. Xi, Y. C. Tan and H. C. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 326–336 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhuang, S. Yuan, J. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Du, C. Wu, P. Zhao, H. Chen and Y. Pei, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 379, 122262 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhan and H. C. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 726–734 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, G. Zhang and L. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 330, 792–803 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Diederich and P. J. Stang, Metal-Catalyzed Cross-Coupling Reactions, John Wiley & Sons, Weinheim, Germany,  2008 Search PubMed .
X. F. Wu, P. Anbarasan, H. Neumann and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9047–9050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Sharma, M. Yadav, R. Gaur, Y. Monga and A. Adholeya, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 2728–2740 RSC .
R. K. Sharma, R. Gaur, M. Yadav, A. K. Rathi, J. Pechousek, M. Petr, R. Zboril and M. B. Gawande, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 3495–3502 CrossRef CAS .
A. Elhampour, M. S. Mirhosseyni and F. Nemati, J. Chin. Chem. Soc., 2018, 65, 875–882 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rajabzadeh, R. Khalifeh, H. Eshghi and M. Bakavoli, J. Catal., 2018, 360, 261–269 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sadjadi, M. H. Majid and M. Malmir, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2018, 86, 240–251 CrossRef CAS .
G. Arora, M. Yadav, R. Gaur, R. Gupta, P. Rana, P. Yadav and R. K. Sharma, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 19390–19396 RSC .
J. Du, L. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Yu, Y. Gao and A. Chen, Sci. China Mater., 2017, 60, 1227–1233 CrossRef CAS .
R.-J. van Putten, J. C. Van Der Waal, E. De Jong, C. B. Rasrendra, H. J. Heeres and J. G. de Vries, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 1499–1597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fang, R. Luque and Y. Li, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 3152–3157 RSC .
E. Ruijter, R. Scheffelaar and R. V. Orru, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6234–6246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Zhu, Q. Wang and M. Wang, Multicomponent Reactions in Organic Synthesis, John Wiley & Sons, Weinheim, Germany,  2014 Search PubMed .
R. C. Cioc, E. Ruijter and R. V. Orru, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 2958–2975 RSC .
J. Safaei-Ghomi, N. Enayat-Mehri and F. Eshteghal, J. Saudi Chem. Soc., 2018, 22, 485–495 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Mirhosseyni, F. Nemati and A. Elhampour, J. Iran. Chem. Soc., 2016, 4, 791–801 Search PubMed .
A. Ramazani, H. Ahankar, Z. T. Nafeh and S. W. Joo, Curr. Org. Chem., 2019, 23, 2783–2801 CrossRef CAS .
A. Corma, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 1997, 2, 63–75 CrossRef CAS .
F. Su and Y. Guo, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 2934–2957 RSC .
L. Rao, Resonance, 2007, 12, 65–75 CrossRef CAS .
G. Arora, R. Gupta, P. Yadav, R. Dixit, A. Srivastava and R. K. Sharma, Curr. Res. Green Sustainable Chem., 2021, 4, 100050 CrossRef .
P. H. Yu, B. A. Davis and A. A. Boulton, J. Med. Chem., 1992, 35, 3705–3713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sadjadi, M. Malmir and M. M. Heravi, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2018, 32, e4413 CrossRef .
S. Sadjadi, M. M. Heravi and M. Malmir, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2018, 32, e4029 Search PubMed .
A. Elhampour, F. Nemati and M. M. Heravi, Monatsh. Chem., 2017, 148, 1793–1805 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sadjadi, M. Malmir and M. Heravi, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 36807–36818 RSC .
J. N. Halder and M. N. Islam, J. Environ. Hum., 2015, 2, 36–46 CrossRef .
N. Masqué, R. M. Marcé, F. Borrull, P. A. Cormack and D. C. Sherrington, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 4122–4126 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Liu, F. Yang, Y. Zou and Y. Peng, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2014, 59, 1476–1482 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xia, S. Fu, G. Ren, F. Chai, J. Jiang and F. Qu, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 818–824 RSC .
J. Fang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhou, S. Zhao, C. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Sheng and K. Wang, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 2698–2708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, D. Liu, M. Hao, Z. Huang, P. Sun and L. Zhou, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 479, 77–85 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hong, I. A. Choi and W. S. Seo, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 7469 CrossRef PubMed .
C. A. De Wit, Chemosphere, 2002, 46, 583–624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Meerts, J. J. Van Zanden, E. A. Luijks, I. van Leeuwen-Bol, G. Marsh, E. Jakobsson, Å. Bergman and A. Brouwer, Toxicol. Sci., 2000, 56, 95–104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, J. Fu, M. Wang, Y. Yan, Q. Xin, L. Cai and Q. Xu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 469, 69–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. D. Chequer, G. A. R. de Oliveira, E. A. Ferraz, J. C. Cardoso, M. B. Zanoni and D. P. de Oliveira, Eco-Friendly Textile Dyeing and Finishing,  2013, vol. 6, pp. 151–176 Search PubMed .
B. Lellis, C. Z. Fávaro-Polonio, J. A. Pamphile and J. C. Polonio, Biotechnol. Res. Innov., 2019, 3, 275–290 CrossRef .

          S. Atalay and G. Ersöz, Green Chemistry for Dyes Removal from Wastewater: Research Trends and Applications,  2015, pp. 83–117 Search PubMed .
Y. Deng and R. Zhao, Curr. Pollut. Rep., 2015, 1, 167–176 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, F. Xia and Z. Nan, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 242, 122490 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, Y. Xu, K. Wang, F. Zha, X. Tang and H. Tian, Res. Chem. Int., 2020, 46, 853–869 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang and Z. Nan, Environ. Technol., 2020, 1–13 Search PubMed .
F. Lotgering, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1964, 25, 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
I. Chakraborty, R. Rakshit and K. Mandal, Surf. Interfaces, 2017, 7, 106–112 CrossRef CAS .
S. Farhadi, Z. Heydari-Chegeni and M. Mousavi, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 692, 923–933 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Q. Fan, H. Gao, Y. Huang, X. Liu, J. Li, X. Xu and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1414–1422 RSC .
Y. Li, M. Wu, B. Wang, Y. Wu, M. Ma and X. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 5523–5532 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rauf and S. S. Ashraf, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 151, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ma, Y. Yang, W. Li, Y. Ma, Z. Tong, W. Huang, L. Chen, G. Wu, H. Wang and P. Lyu, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 810, 151807 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu and Z. Nan, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 227, 302–312 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, C. Jin, Z. Klencsár and J. Wang, Catal. Lett., 2017, 147, 1732–1743 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. Lin, Z. Wang, Z. Chen, J. Chen, Y. Chen, S. Liu and J. Fu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 556, 278–291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Halling-Sørensen, S. N. Nielsen, P. Lanzky, F. Ingerslev, H. H. Lützhøft and S. Jørgensen, Chemosphere, 1998, 36, 357–393 CrossRef .
M. L. Richardson and J. M. Bowron, J. Pharm. Pharmacol., 1985, 37, 1–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, R. Zhuan and L. Chu, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 646, 1385–1397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li and W. Shi, Chin. J. Catal., 2016, 37, 792–799 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, J. Yi, J. Chen, Z. Yin, T. Tang, W. Wei, S. Cao and H. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 380, 122583 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiang, Y. Huang, B. Xiao, X. Wu and G. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 513, 145820 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, X. Lei, Q. Chen, C. Kang, W. Li and B. Liu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 364, 794–800 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Yadav, R. Gupta, G. Arora, P. Yadav, A. Srivastava and R. K. Sharma, in Contaminants in Our Water: Identification and Remediation Methods, ACS Publications,  2020, pp. 41–64 Search PubMed .

          M. Yadav, R. Gupta and R. K. Sharma, in Advances in Water Purification Techniques, Elsevier,  2019, pp. 355–383 Search PubMed .
D. Lakherwal, Int. J. Environ. Res. Dev., 2014, 4, 41–48 Search PubMed .
Z. Lv, Q. Fan, Y. Xie, Z. Chen, A. Alsaedi, T. Hayat, X. Wang and C. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 362, 413–421 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chang, Y. Li, J. Song, M. Zhao, J. Guo, Q. An, Y. Gong and Q. Guo, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 8223–8229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, D. Yang, X. Wang, S. Yu, H. Wang, T. Wen, G. Song, Z. Yu and X. Wang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 2174–2182 RSC .
J. Li, X. Wang, G. Zhao, C. Chen, Z. Chai, A. Alsaedi, T. Hayat and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2322–2356 RSC .
C. Chen, X. Yang, J. Wei, X. Tan and X. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 393, 249–256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Song, S. Zhang, S. Huang, R. Zhang, L. Yin, Y. Hu, T. Wen, L. Zhuang, B. Hu and X. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 355, 697–709 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, X. Wang, N. Wang, G. Zhao, G. Song, D. Chen, Y. Liang, T. Wen, H. Wang and T. Hayat, J. Cleaner Prod., 2018, 172, 2033–2044 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fang, S. Duan, J. Zhang, J. Li and K. C.-F. Leung, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2947–2958 RSC .
F. He, Y. Ji, Y. Wang and Y. Zhang, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2017, 80, 553–562 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Gunjan Arora	Gunjan Arora received her Bachelor's degree in Chemistry in 2013; and Master's degree specialized in Inorganic Chemistry in 2015 from Hansraj College, University of Delhi, India. She then joined the Green Chemistry Network Centre at the University of Delhi to pursue her doctoral studies under the supervision of Prof. Sharma. She is currently a senior research fellow and member of GCNC. Besides, she is the Treasurer of the ACS International Student Chapter University of Delhi, India. She is working in the area of green chemistry and nanocatalysis. Her research interests include the design and development of sustainable magnetically retrievable heterogeneous catalysts for various organic transformations.
Manavi Yadav	Dr Manavi Yadav is currently Assistant Professor at Hindu College, University of Delhi and Treasurer, Royal Society of Chemistry North India Section. She completed her graduation and post-graduation in Chemistry from the University of Delhi. In 2017, she was awarded a doctoral degree in chemistry under the supervision of Prof. R. K. Sharma. Her research area includes the design and synthesis of heterogeneous catalysts for sustainable development. She has numerous publications in journals and books of international repute. She has received the Young Researcher Award from Save the Environment for her magnificent contribution to contemporary research.
Rashmi Gaur	Dr Rashmi Gaur completed her graduation and post-graduation from Kirori Mal College, University of Delhi. She joined the Green Chemistry Network Centre (GCNC) in 2013 as a PhD scholar under the supervision of Prof. R. K. Sharma and completed her PhD degree in the year 2019. Her research domain includes the design and synthesis of magnetic nanocatalysts for the conversion of carbon dioxide into value-added products. She has been awarded a junior research Fellowship from the University Grant Commission, India. Recently, she joined as Officer-Catalysis at the Hindustan Petroleum Green R&D Centre, Bangalore India.
Radhika Gupta	Radhika Gupta is pursuing her doctoral studies under the supervision of Professor R. K. Sharma at the Green Chemistry Network Centre, University of Delhi, India. She obtained her Master's degree in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi in 2015 and Bachelor's degree in Chemistry from Hansraj College, University of Delhi in 2013. She even secured first position in her undergraduate studies. She is presently acting as the Vice-Chair of the ACS International Student Chapter University of Delhi. Her area of research includes green chemistry, catalysis through hydrogen bonding interactions, immobilization of ionic liquids and fabrication of magnetic nanocatalysts for organic transformations.
Priya Yadav	Priya Yadav received her graduation degree in Chemistry from the University of Rajasthan, Jaipur in 2013 and post-graduation degree from Banasthali Vidyapith, Rajasthan in 2016. Presently, she is working at the Green Chemistry Network Centre as a senior research fellow. She has various publications in renowned journals of the RSC, ACS and Wiley. Her research interest focuses on the fabrication of core–shell structured magnetic nanocatalysts and their applications in diverse organic transformations.
Ranjana Dixit	Dr Ranjana Dixit is an Associate Professor at Ramjas College, University of Delhi, India and an active member of the Green Chemistry Network Centre, D.U. She has completed her Ph.D. under the supervision of Prof. B. S. Garg from the Department of Chemistry, D.U. in 1987. She has teaching experience of more than 30 years. Her research interests include green synthetic processes, management of e-waste, catalysis, bioinorganic chemistry as well as the chemistry and application of nanomaterials.
Rakesh Kumar Sharma	Dr R. K. Sharma is a professor and coordinator of the Green Chemistry Network Centre at the University of Delhi, India. He is also an Honorary Professor at Deakin University, Australia. He went to the University of Tokyo and Kumamoto University on a JSPS Post-Doctoral Fellowship. He has published numerous book chapters, reviews and research articles in renowned international journals. He has also written/edited various books on green chemistry published by the RSC, World Scientific and Wiley. Dr Sharma is also the Honorary Secretary of the RSC (North India Section) and faculty advisor of the ACS International Student Chapter University of Delhi. http://greenchem.du.ac.in/.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Proposed formation mechanism of HMM, (b) TEM image of HMM, (c) proposed formation mechanism of hollow tubular MCM-41 and (d) SEM image of hollow tubular MCM-41. This figure (a and b) has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 1996 and (c and d) has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 1996.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of a hollow nanomaterial.	 

 	Fig. 3  Comparison of the reaction processes between catalytic-entity-loaded hollow spheres and conventional catalysts.	 

 	Fig. 4  Functionalization approaches for hollow nanomaterials.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the formation of hollow/YSN structures through (a) partial etching, (b) surface-protected etching and (c) shell formation through chemical reaction.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustrations of hard-templating routes.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of Fe3O4@MnO2 hollow spheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Structure of FZY; (b) FE-SEM and (c) TEM image of FSZC; (d) FE-SEM and (e) TEM image of FZY. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic representation of the formation of RMMHC. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 10  Illustration for the formation of Fe3O4/N-HCSC. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 11  The schematic illustration of the preparation of rattle-type magnetic Fe3O4@void@PILMIP nanospheres. BSA is bovine serum albumin and MBA is N,N′-methylenebis(acrylamide) used as a cross-linker. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 12  TEM images of (a) Fe3O4@SiO2, (b) Fe3O4@SiO2@PILMIP, (c) Fe3O4@void@PILMIP nanospheres, and (d, e and f) their corresponding high-resolution TEM images respectively of the selected area and (g, h and i) EDS results. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 13  Synthesis of (a) magnetic yolk–shell fibrous silica and (b) magnetic yolk shell mesoporous silica.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the synthetic process for hybrid ZnFe2O4/ZnO hollow spheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of formation of MGNS and (b) TEM image of MGNS. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic of the preparation process of Fe3O4@PDA hollow composites. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of (a) HPMO particles and (b) YS-PMO particles; TEM images of (c) HPMO particles, (d) YS-PMO particles with a thicker PMO shell, (e) YS-PMO particles with a larger hollow cavity and (f) magnetic YS-PMO particles. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017.	 
Zn2+ + 2OH− → Zn(OH)2	(1)
Fe3+ + 3OH− → Fe(OH)3	(2)
Zn(OH)2 → ZnO + H2O	(3)
2Fe(OH)3 → Fe2O3 + 3H2O	(4)
ZnO + Fe2O3 → ZnFe2O4	(5)

 	Fig. 18  Schematic diagram of the preparation protocol for ZnO/ZnFe2O4/Ag mesoporous hollow spheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 19  SEM images of (a) ZnO/ZnFe2O4 at lower magnification, (b) ZnO/ZnFe2O4 at higher magnification, and (c) ZnO/ZnFe2O4/Ag; TEM images of (d) ZnO/ZnFe2O4 and (e) ZnO/ZnFe2O4/Ag; and (f) HRTEM image of ZnO/ZnFe2O4/Ag. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of ZnFe2O4 hollow spheres with complex interior structures. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic diagram of the formation mechanism of hollow sphere particles by oleylamine micelles. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic illustration of the formation of hollow Fe3O4 sub-micron spheres prepared with SDBS addition.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Illustration of the synthesis of SiO2/h-Fe3O4@C, and TEM images of (b) Fe3O4 NPs, (c) h-Fe3O4@P, (d) SiO2/h-Fe3O4@P and (e) SiO2/h-Fe3O4@C. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from The American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 24  Schematic diagram for synthesizing hollow magnetite due to self-assembly and Ostwald ripening. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic illustrations of the synthetic procedure of hollow spherical MgFe2O4.	 

 	Fig. 26  Synthetic procedure for the formation of Fe3O4–C double-shelled hollow spheres.	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of the formation process of multifunctional H-mCoxFe3−xO4 nanocarriers. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) The Kirkendall effect at the boundary between two solids diffusing into each other at different rates. (b) At the nanoscale, the Kirkendall effect explains why a fast-diffusing cobalt nanocrystal leaves a hollow center, and (c) TEM images at different times during the formation of hollow nanocrystals, from top-left to bottom-right: 0 s, 10 s, 20 s, 1 min, 2 min, and 30 min. The Co/Se molar ratio was 1:1. This figure (a and b) has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 17 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2011 and (c) has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2004.	 

 	Fig. 29  TEM images of SnO2(Ni3Sn2)@Ni ternary composites at different magnifications (a) 500 nm and (b) 200 nm. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 30  Synthetic scheme of multishelled NiO hollow nanospheres via layer-by-layer self-assembly. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 31  Schematic illustration of (a) the synthesis process of square-shaped IONP and (b) the preparation procedures of IONP–HMSSs. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 32  Illustration showing the preparation of fluorescent-magnetic α-Fe2O3@Y2O3:Eu3+ BHMs. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from The American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 33  Systematic formation of aminated hollow magnetic nanospheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from The American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 34  Schematic representation for the preparation of an h-Fe3O4@h-Cu0@mSiO2 yolk–shell nanoreactor.	 

 	Fig. 35  Synthesis of core–shell (CS-MPONs) and yolk–shell (YS-MPONs) magnetic porous organic nanospheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from The American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

Selective etching and dissolution	Spherical and non-spherical	Moderate	−	Tuneable dimensions	Trial-and-error-based selection of etching agent/surfactant
Hard templating	Generally spherical	Simple	+	Easy to control and highly reproducible	Large amount of etching agent required, costly
Soft templating	Generally spherical	Simple	−	Flexible, soft templates are easy to remove	Need for surfactants
Ostwald ripening	Complex	Moderate	+	Thermodynamically favourable and spontaneous	Long reaction times
Kirkendall effect	Complex	Moderate	−	NPs with unique compositions and complex structures can be formed	Non-tuneable

 	Fig. 36  (a) Synthesis of hollow Fe3O4@TiO2–NH2/Pd catalyst and (b) hollow Fe3O4@TiO2–NH2/Pd-catalyzed Suzuki cross-coupling reaction.	 

 	Fig. 37  Synthesis of triple-shell hollow CuNiFe2O4 spheres from hydrothermally treated glucose/metal salt mixtures. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

 	Scheme 1  h-Fe2O3@SiO2–CDNS@Pd-catalyzed Sonogashira and Heck coupling reactions.	 

 	Fig. 38  (a) Synthesis of Ni@Fe3O4–C catalyst and (b) Ni@Fe3O4–C catalyzed oxidative C–S coupling reaction.	 

 	Fig. 39  Synthesis of iron-modified hollow carbon spheres for oxidation of ethylbenzene to acetophenone. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 40  DFF yield as a function of reaction time over the FeCo/C catalysts. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016.	 

 	Scheme 2  Oxidative bromination reaction catalyzed by a Cu@Fe3O4–C nanoreactor.	 

 	Fig. 41  (a) Synthesis of HMMS@ 4-(4′-diamino-di-phenyl)-sulfone and (b) synthesis of benzo[g]chromene-3-carboxylates using HMMS@ 4-(4′-diamino-di-phenyl)-sulfone.	 

 	Scheme 3  Synthesis of (a) 1,4-dihydropyridine derivatives and (b) 1,8-dioxodecahydroacridine derivatives.	 

 	Fig. 42  (a) Interaction of dopamine with H–Fe3O4 and (b) preparation of hollow Fe3O4@DA–SO3H catalyst. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016.	 

 	Scheme 4  Three-component A3 coupling reaction of aldehyde, secondary amine and terminal alkyne.	 

1.	Fe2O3@SiO2/g-C3N4/Ag	Hybridization of hollow Fe2O3@SiO2 with graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) and Ag doping	
S
BET = 30 m2 g−1	Water, ultrasonic radiation of 80 W	73–95%
Total pore volume = 0.22 cm3 g−1
Average pore diameter = 29.3 nm
2.	Fe2O3@SiO2–IL/Ag	Modification with 1-methyl-3-(trimethoxysilylpropyl)imidazolium chloride ([pmim]Cl) ionic liquid and Ag doping	
S
BET = 21 m2 g−1	Water, ultrasonic radiation of 100 W	80–95%
Total pore volume = 0.18 cm3 g−1
Average pore diameter = 35 nm
3.	h-Fe3O4@m-TiO2/Ag	Ag doping	
S
BET = 57.1 m2 g−1	Solvent-free, 100 °C	80–87%
Total pore volume = 0.139 cm3 g−1
Average pore diameter = 19.8 nm
4.	h-Fe2O3@SiO2–CD/Ag	Functionalization with an amine group using (3-N-(2-(trimethoxysilyl)ethyl)methanediamine) and then with β-cyclodextrin and Ag doping	
S
BET = 21.067 m2 g−1	Water, ultrasonic radiation of 70 W	85–97%
Total pore volume = 0.1834 cm3 g−1
Average pore diameter = 34.822 nm

 	Fig. 43  Preparation process and evaluation of catalytic activity of Fe3O4@Au hollow spheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 197 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 44  Synthetic route for the formation of Au NPs embedded in ellipsoidal nanocapsules via the DP process mediated with Au(en)2Cl3 compounds. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from The American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 45  Preparation of HMN/Pd nanospheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 46  Time-dependent UV-vis spectral changes of the reaction mixture catalyzed by Au@hmCFeCo/GCs for (a) 4-nitrophenol and (b) 4-nitrotoluene, and plot of ln(C0/Ct) versus reaction time for each nanocatalyst for the reduction reactions of (c) 4-nitrophenol and (d) 4-nitrotoluene. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from Nature, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 47  Schematic illustration of the preparation procedure of magnetic Fe3O4–PDA hybrid hollow microspheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016.	 

 	Scheme 5  The peroxidase mimetic reaction of the TMB substrate by Fe3O4–PDA hybrid hollow microsphere catalyst. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016.	 

 	Scheme 6  Schematic diagram for the degradation mechanism of MB over the Cu–CuFe2O4/SiO2 double-shelled hollow spheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 48  Schematic illustration of the Co3O4 hollow-sphere formation process. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 49  Schematic illustration for the preparation of Fe3O4@MnO2 BBHs. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 214 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 50  (A) MB removal in different PMS systems (Ccatalyst = 300 mg L−1, C0 = 30 mg L−1, CPMS = 20 mM, pH ∼ 7.94), (B) effect of initial pH, (C) effect of foreign ions on MB degradation by PMS and (D) the catalytic activities of Fe3O4@MnO2 BBHs for the degradation of various model pollutants. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 214 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 51  Reduction of dyes using magnetic lignin spheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 215 with permission from The American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Scheme 7  Mechanism of degradation of RhB dye by Fe3O4/P(MAA–MBAA)PPy/Au/void/TiO2 photocatalyst under visible light. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 217 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 52  Orange II adsorption on (a) yolk–shell catalyst and (b) supported catalyst, and Orange II degradation by PMS activation without (c) catalysts and with (d) yolk–shell catalyst, (e) supported catalyst, (f) naked cobalt ferrite (0.05 g L−1) and (g) mSiO2. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 219 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 53  Schematic illustration of the interaction mechanism between the hollow PZS–Fe3O4 nanocapsules and ST dye.	 

 	Fig. 54  (a) SEM, (b, c) TEM, (d) HRTEM and (e–j) EDS elemental mapping images of SFT photocatalyst. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 225 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 55  Formation mechanism of porous hollow ZnFe2O4. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 227 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 56  (a) Adsorption isotherms and (b) comparison of adsorption capacities of Ni-MOFs, NiO@C300, NiO/Ni@C400, Ni@C500 and Ni@C600 for As5+ removal (pH 3.0 ± 0.1, m V−1 = 0.15 g L−1, and T = 298 K). This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 231 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 57  (a) Synthesis strategy of MSMPSs with different shell numbers tuned by formaldehyde. TEM images of the MSMPSs obtained with formaldehyde (b) 0.3 mL (c) 0.6 mL (d) 0.9 mL and (e) 1.2 mL. All scale bars are 100 nm. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 232 with permission from The American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 58  (a) Preparation process, (b) SEM image and (c) TEM image of the multi-shelled Fe3O4@MnOx. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 236 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 59  Schematic illustration for the preparation of MP2L2 microspheres. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 237 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 60  (a) Effect of pH and ionic strength on the adsorption of Eu3+ onto Fe3O4@PDA and (b) distribution of Eu3+ species as a function of solution pH values. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 238 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
