Unveiling general rules governing the dimensional evolution of branched TiO 2 and impacts on photoelectrochemical behaviors   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA05218G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA05218G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 23313-23322Unveiling general rules governing the dimensional evolution of branched TiO2 and impacts on photoelectrochemical behaviors†

        
          
            Teera 
            Butburee
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Bai
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Lianzhou 
            Wang
          
        
      *b
aNational Nanotechnology Center, National Science and Technology Development Agency, 111 Thailand Science Park, Phahonyothin Rd., Khlong Nueng, Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand. E-mail: teera.but@nanotec.or.th; l.wang@uq.edu.au
bNanomaterials Centre, School of Chemical Engineering and Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia
Received 
      21st June 2021
    , Accepted 18th August 2021First published on 18th August 2021AbstractBranched nanostructures represent a unique group of nanoarchitectures exhibiting an advantageous high surface area and excellent charge transport for energy conversion applications compared to their bulk counterparts. Especially, branched titanium dioxide (TiO2) has been reported as a promising photocatalyst in several applications. However, precise control of its nanostructures and crystal phases remains challenging. Normally, branched TiO2 nanostructures (BTNs) have been fabricated by a multi-step synthesis, and only a particular dimension is achieved. Herein, we present generic rules governing the structural evolution of BTNs from zero-dimensional (0D) to one-dimensional (1D) and two-dimensional (2D) structures by a facile one-pot hydrothermal synthesis with controlled isotropic and anisotropic crystal growth and symmetry breaking. Various dimensional BTNs with a controllable number of branches and crystal phases are obtained. In addition, these nanoarchitectures are directly grown on a conductive substrate and could be readily used as a photoelectrode. The dimension-dependent photocatalytic behaviors are carefully investigated in photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting. An optimized 1D nanostructure produces a photocurrent density of up to 0.87 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE. The excellent PEC performance could be attributed to the appropriate band alignment and the unique structure that is beneficial for charge transport and separation.
Introduction
Titanium dioxide (TiO2) has been one of the major semiconductors playing important roles in various photocatalytic applications, due to its excellent photo- and chemical stability, non-toxicity, low cost, and respectable photocatalytic reactivity.1,2 Regardless of whether it is used as a single reactive material or combined with other semiconductors to form heterojunction composites, TiO2 is an integral part determining the overall performance of devices. Especially, high-quality thin-film TiO2 on transparent conductive substrates is a prerequisite for various applications such as solar cells, protective coating, air and water purification, carbon dioxide reduction, organic synthesis, and water splitting.3–10 Conventional techniques to prepare TiO2 thin films used TiO2 nanoparticles mixed with additives and then deposited on conductive substrates by doctor blading, spin coating, and electrolysis. Despite being widely employed, these thin films usually suffer from severe charge recombination at grain boundaries among particles,11 as well as inefficient charge collection due to the poor contact with conductive substrates. Moreover, residual organic binders are also detrimental to charge transport within the film.12
Recent advances in chemical synthesis enable the direct growth of TiO2 nanostructured thin films on conductive substrates.13–16 This elegant technique provides precise morphologically controlled nanostructures simultaneously with an intimate contact between the materials and the substrate at crystallite interfaces.17 Therefore, the charge collection is more effective, and the interference from organic additives is mitigated. Especially, symmetric dimensional nanomaterials such as faceted crystals, nanorods, nanotubes, nanowires, and nanosheets have been expected to have significantly higher efficiency than the conventional nanoparticle-based films. It has been proven that the functionality and reactivity of nanomaterials are highly dependent on their different dimensions.18,19 However, compared with nanoparticle-based films, these nanostructured films usually do not show significantly improved overall photocatalytic performance due to their insufficient surface area.20 Recently, a strategy to increase the surface area by growing asymmetric hierarchical branches on nanostructures has gained significant research interest.21,22 A superior photocatalytic performance of TiO2 nanorods with additional branches over their bare nanorod counterparts has been reported.20 The enhancement of photocatalytic activity can be attributed to several advantages of the branched TiO2 nanostructures (BTNs), namely, (1) an enormous increase in the surface area, (2) enhancement of charge separation and collection efficiency, and (3) improvement in light absorption.23 Nevertheless, to date, the fabrication of branched TiO2 nanostructures has been relying on multi-step synthesis, and the resultant structures are restricted to just a particular dimension. To the best of our knowledge, there is no report on the successful control of branched TiO2 in a wide variety of dimensions by a one-step synthesis due to limited understanding of its crystal growth nature.
Herein, we reveal a general strategy to comprehensively manipulate the morphologies of BTNs, evolving from 0D to 1D and 2D by a facile one-pot synthesis. Underlying factors that cause dimensional evolution are insightfully investigated. Growth mechanisms, dimensional breaking, and crystal phase transformations are proposed. With this new understanding, BTNs with arbitrarily controllable dimensions, crystal phases, and numbers of branches in a form of high-quality thin films on a fluorene-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate can be synthesized. In addition, the dimension-dependent photocatalytic behaviors of these direct growth BTNs are carefully studied in photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting. It was found that 1D-branched TiO2 with an appropriate diameter and crystal phases showed impressive catalytic activity with a photocurrent of 0.87 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE under simulated sun (AM 1.5G).
Results and discussion
Three environmentally friendly reactants namely potassium titanium oxalate (PTO), diethylene glycol (DEG), and water were used to synthesize titania with diverse morphologies and crystal phases via one-pot hydrothermal synthesis. The schematic in Fig. 1a roughly summarizes the synthetic steps for the dimensional evolution of TiO2 films. For the synthesis of BTNs on an FTO substrate, the seeded FTO glass was put in a mixture of PTO, water and DEG with a variable ratio between the three components. The conductive side of the FTO glass can be switched up or down against the autoclave's wall, depending on the desired dimensional structures (details in the Experimental section). For example, in 1D synthesis, 0.438 g of PTO was dissolved in 7.5 mL water:32.5 mL DEG (water 18.875 v%) containing FTO glass with the conductive side facing down, followed by a hydrothermal reaction at 180 °C for 10 hours. The resultant of this reaction was 1D TiO2 (pure anatase) with a diameter of around 200 nm as shown in Fig. 1e. Within a certain appropriate range of water:DEG ratios (water can be increased up to ∼50 v%), the structures can remain 1D with larger diameters as shown in Fig. 1f and g, and the crystal phase turns into a mixture between anatase and rutile (see XRD in Fig. 2c). However, if water was decreased to 7.5 v% (PTO remained 0.438 g), the dimension of the nanostructures became 2D, as shown in Fig. 1h, with an anatase and potassium titanate (K-titanate) mixture (see XRD in Fig. 2d). Interestingly, for the 2D-branched nanostructures, the branches preferably grew on the edges of the 2D main plate first, which was evidenced by the very small hair-like shoots growing on the edges. With a slight increase of the water ratio to 8.125 v%, branches selectively grew on the edges, exposing bare 2D main plates in the middle (Fig. 1i). However, when water was further increased to 9.5 v%, the branches were forced to grow fully on the 2D main plates, as shown in Fig. 1j. On the other hand, when we kept the water ratio at 18.875 v% and PTO at 0.438 g with the conductive side of the FTO substrate facing up against the autoclave's wall, the structure evolved to 0D branched as shown in Fig. 1b. To keep the dimension as 0D, the ratio of PTO was controlled in the range of ∼0.4 to 0.7 g with a slight increase of the amount of water (ESI S1†), but the structures appeared to have fewer branches, and the size of the branches was larger as shown in Fig. 1c and d.
 Fig. 1  The structural and dimensional evolutions of branched titania. (a) Schematic illustration summarizing the general strategy to control the dimensional evolution of TiO2 films with various morphologies. (b–d) Morphological evolution of 0D, (e–g) morphological evolution of 1D, and (h–j) morphological evolution of 2D titania without dimensional changes, respectively (scale bars = 500 nm). 
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematics illustrating the structural growth and phase transformation mechanisms of 0D, 1D, and 2D nanostructures. (b–d) XRD patterns of various dimensional nanostructures (F = FTO, A = anatase, R = rutile, and K = potassium titanate). 
The synthetic conditions of the example structures illustrated in Fig. 1 as well as the systematic study about the dimensional evolutions of the nanostructures with respect to the variation of the reactants are summarized and discussed in ESI S1.† The crystal phases are highly dependent on the ratio of water in the solution mixture (Fig. 2b–d). With a low concentration of water (<16 v%), the crystal phases of the structures appeared to be K-titanate with some trace amount of anatase. When the ratio of water was gradually increased to ∼16–27.5, and ∼27.5–50 v%, the crystal phases of the thin films changed to pure anatase, and a mixture of anatase and rutile, respectively. Irregular morphologies could be observed if the ratios between PTO, water, and DEG were not in these appropriate ranges (Fig. S2†).
The general processes for synthesizing various dimensions of branched titania are summarized in Fig. 2a. Comparing the synthetic conditions of the sample shown in Fig. 1e with the sample in Fig. 1h (see Table S1†), when the ratio of water was decreased from 18.75 to 7.5 v%, the structure changed from 1D to 2D. On the other hand, when the ratio between PTO : water : DEG was kept the same as the condition to synthesize 1D BTNs (condition e in Table S1†) but the conductive side was switched up against the autoclave's wall, the structure became 0D (Fig. 1b). To elucidate the nature of these massive structural and crystal transformations, the environment in the synthesis conditions was carefully investigated. We used the conditions for synthesizing the samples shown in Fig. 1b (0D), Fig. 1e (1D), and Fig. 1h (2D) (details in Table S1†) as models for explaining crystal phase and morphological transformations. In an aqueous solution, the PTO precursor should be dissociated in the following way.24 K2TiO(C2O4)2 + H2O → [Ti(OH)2(C2O4)2]2− + 2K+(1)
Under more acidic conditions, Ti(OH)2(C2O4)22− will be further dissociated as follows: [Ti(OH)2(C2O4)2]2− + 2H+ + 2e− → [Ti(C2O4)2]− + H2(2)
When we added more water, the pH of the solution became more acidic. The pH of the solution for synthesizing 2D (water = 3mL) was 5.1, while that for 0D and 1D (water = 7.5 mL) was 4.8. The colour of the solution also changed from colourless to yellowish when more water was added (see Fig. S3†), which is in good agreement with a previous study.25 As shown in Fig. 2a, the growth of nanostructures could follow the Liquid–Solid–Solution (LSS) process, involving cation exchange across the solid and solution interface, and ligand exchange via solid and liquid phases.26 A phase transfer spontaneously occurred across titanium oxalate (solid) and water–DEG (solution) based on ion exchange, releasing K+ into aqueous phases. Then at the reaction temperature (all fixed at 180 °C), Ti-oxalate-complex ions were dehydrated and changed into titanium oxide and/or K-titanate, gradually exchanging oxalate ligands and derivatives into the liquid phase. The in situ solid recrystallization through this process thus yielded crystal growth of different phases and dimensions, depending on the synthesis conditions. When the percentage of water was lower than 16 v%, nanocrystals were likely to be K-titanate because Ti(OH)2(C2O4)22− ions needed K+ ions to stabilize their divalent complex. On the other hand, the monovalent [Ti(C2O4)2]− complex, which was formed when the percentage of water was more than 16 v%, could turn into TiO2 directly via hydrolysis. With a relatively higher percentage of water, TiO2 could have a mixed phase of anatase and rutile. The content of rutile tended to increase with respect to the increased water content because rutile is likely to be formed when the hydrothermal synthesis conditions are more acidic27,28 (water appears to decrease the pH of the solution). The crystal phases of the samples in Fig. 1 were determined by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD), as shown in Fig. 2b–d.
Fourier Transform Infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) analysis of the solid films indicated that the dimension of the structures could be directly dependent on the number of oxalate ligands. The intensity of the ν(CO) peak at ∼1700 cm−1 of 2D was significantly higher than that of 1D and 0D (see S4†). This evidence suggested that the more oxalate ligands involved in the crystal growth, the higher dimension and the larger crystal size could be achieved. According to this observation, we suggested that a crystal growth mechanism in the reaction batches could be divided into two major steps. The first step is the growth of “core structures” such as the trunks in 1D or the main plates in the 2D structures, followed by the addition of “hair-like branches” in the second step. To investigate this phenomenon, we observed the time-dependent structural evolution, using the 2D-branched structure as the study model because this structure clearly contained both “core structures” and “hair-like branches”, which could reveal the step-wise crystal growth. Based on SEM analysis (Fig. S5†), it was found that the crystal growth of this structure was quite slow. The development of seeds was observed after two-hour hydrothermal treatment, followed by the growth of the 2D main plates after a six-hour reaction. Some buds of branches began to grow on the edges of the structure after eight hours, and further grew into fully developed branches after ten hours. The solid films on FTO were then investigated by FTIR. The spectra showed that the intensity of ν(CO) peaks gradually decreased as the reaction was prolonged (Fig. S6†). This evidence suggested that the oxalate ligands could be on the crystal surface and were gradually consumed or released into the aqueous phase via ligand exchange in LSS. Water also accelerated oxalate exchange to a liquid phase. Therefore, we further investigated the amount of oxalate in the supernatants (liquid phase) by High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC). The time-dependent HPLC profile showed that the amount of oxalate in the liquid phase also decreased with respect to the prolonged reaction time (Fig. S7†). Moreover, there were three intermediate peaks that appeared at a retention time of ∼12.2, 13.8, and 14.7 minutes. These peaks became stronger when the reaction time was longer. This evidence indicated that the oxalate ligand might be decomposed and/or polymerized when the reaction carried on further.
Based on this evidence, we propose the growth mechanism of these various dimensional-branched TiO2 nanostructures as shown in Fig. 2a. The nanostructures were grown in two steps. The first step was the growth of “core structures” when the concentration of the oxalate ligand in the system was high. Because oxalate ligands formed quite strong bonding with Ti ions, these molecules always capped on surfaces of the re-crystallized solids during solution-solid transformation. Polyol solvents can lower the hydrolysis rate of metal alkoxides by acting as a strong chelating agent with metal ions, and the anisotropic growth of the dimensional core structures results from the polymerization of these polyol-complex units.29 As long as the number of oxalate molecules in the system was high enough to cover the surfaces, large-size crystals preferred to grow rather than branches. This hypothesis was confirmed by additional experiments, in which we added extra potassium oxalate (50 mg) into the 2D synthesizing batch after 6 hour synthesis. The result indicated that there were no branches although the reaction was processed for 10 hours (see Fig. S8†). Then, the growth of “hair-like branches” in the second step occurred when the oxalate ligands were insufficient to cover the surface of the core structures. The isotropic growth of branches occurred because of fast hydrolysis. A larger amount of water could increase the decomposition rate of oxalate ligands and increase the exchange rate of oxalate ligands to a liquid phase. Thus, the core structures could not grow larger and were covered by hair-like branches.
It was found that switching the sides of FTO against the autoclave wall also had a significant impact on the morphology of the nanostructured films. When the FTO side was up against the autoclave wall, the structures were likely to be 0D. On the other hand, 1D and 2D appeared to grow when the FTO side was down against the autoclave wall. This would probably cause the difference in nucleation sites. As summarized in Fig. 2a, the nuclei for 0D would be formed in the solution, while that of 1D and 2D would be formed on the seeded FTO. In a relatively high volume of water that promoted the growth of branches rather than core structures as mentioned before, the branches of 0D structures grew quickly, impeding the development of the core. When these 0D particles had grown to a high mass, they then deposited on the glass by gravity and formed a 3D network. This process occurred quickly, and thus simultaneously prohibited the development of core structures. So, higher dimensional structures such as 1D and 2D could not be grown. This was supported by the SEM analysis, showing that mixed 1D and 0D was observed when a significantly lower proportion of water was used (see the detailed discussion in S9†). This phenomenon occurred because the lower percentage of water promoted more development of core structures than branches. Therefore, the 1D core had more time to develop, resulting in a 0D–1D mixture. On the other hand, when the FTO side was faced down against the autoclave wall, 1D and 2D core structures were developed freely without interference from 0D. The nucleation sites of these 1D and 2D were on the seeded FTO, and the structures were continuously grown on these sites, resulting in vertically aligned structures on FTO.
The dimension dependent photocatalytic behaviors of these BTNs were studied in PEC water splitting. The morphology of the best cells of each dimensional structure is presented in Fig. 5a–f. The UV-visible light absorption spectra of the dimensional films are illustrated in Fig. 3a. It is noticeable that the light absorption band edges of 0D and 2D are around 400 nm, while that of 1D red-shifted to ∼410 nm. This is possible because the crystal phases of 1D are a mixture of anatase and rutile, which has a slightly smaller bandgap than anatase,30 while the crystal phase of 0D is pure anatase and that of 2D is a mixture of K-titanate/anatase (XRD data of these films are shown in S10†). The corresponding Kubelka–Munk (KM) function plots (see S11†) indicate that the 0D and 2D films have a bandgap of ∼3.20 eV while the 1D film has a bandgap of ∼3.16 eV. Fig. 3b shows the linear sweep voltammetry profile to evaluate the photocurrent density versus potential (I–V curve) of the samples under simulated sunlight (AM 1.5G) with chopped light in 1 M potassium hydroxide (KOH). Bare FTO was used as the control experiment. As shown in Fig. 3b, the FTO did not show increased photocurrent upon irradiation while the photocurrents of the dimensional BTNs surged to the maximum values when the light was turned on and suddenly dropped to zero when the light was switched off, indicating the light dependence of the photocurrent. Moreover, according to the analysis of gas products by gas chromatography (GC), only oxygen (O2) and hydrogen (H2) peaks as the products from gas evolution at the electrodes were observed (see S12†). This evidence ruled out other possible faradaic reactions, which could also be a source of the photocurrent such as the oxidation of impurities in the electrolyte or water oxidation to hydrogen peroxide. At the oxygen evolution potential of water (1.23 V vs. RHE), the as-synthesized 2D could generate a photocurrent of 0.13 mA cm−2, clearly lower than that of 0D and 1D, which generated 0.36 and 0.87 mA cm−2, respectively. This possibly occurs because the 2D is composed mainly of K-titanate, which is less photocatalytic reactive than TiO2 (anatase in the case of 0D and anatase/rutile in the case of 1D). However, the PEC performance of 2D could be further improved by the ion-exchange technique to create a 2D porous single-crystalline structure, according to our previous report.14
 Fig. 3  (a) UV-vis light absorption spectra, (b) linear sweep voltammogram, (c) IPCE, and (d) EIS of various dimensional films. 
The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was determined (at an open applied voltage of 0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl) to measure the quantum efficiency of various films. As seen in Fig. 3c, the photocurrent for 0D and 2D was located in the wavelength region below 400 nm, while that of 1D extended to around 420 nm, suggesting a reduced band gap of the 1D sample. This result is in agreement with the UV-visible light absorption spectra and the KM function plots. The 1D sample had a maximum IPCE of 76%, which was higher than that of 0D (34%) and 2D (14%), indicating a more efficient solar conversion efficiency of the 1D structure. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) was performed to gain insight into the charge transport and collection properties of the electrodes. Nyquist plots fitted with the equivalent circuit (inset) of the dimensional films are illustrated in Fig. 3d. According to Fig. 3d, the Z′ intercepts of 0D and 1D are similar and significantly lower than that of 2D, indicating that the intrinsic resistance of K-titanate (2D) is significantly higher than that of TiO2 (0D and 1D). In other words, the 2D K-titanate is less conductive compared to the anatase and rutile phases of TiO2.31 The charge-transfer resistance (R1) derived from the semicircle in the medium frequency range is a crucial parameter determining electrocatalytic activity. Obviously, 1D and 2D deliver smaller semicircles than 0D, suggesting that the samples have smaller charge transfer resistance, and more efficient charge transport and collection dynamics.32 This would be likely because of the unique charge transport characteristics in the structure. Moreover, all the BTN films delivered stable photocurrents for a long period of reaction (3 h), indicating their high structural stability (see the stability test in S13†).
Considering the morphologies of the best film of each structure (see Fig. 5a–c), it is clear that 2D and 1D have core structures like the spinal of the structures that directly connect to the FTO substrate, while 0D does not have this character as revealed by TEM images (inset of Fig. 5a–c, and the cross-sectional SEM images Fig. 5d–f). In addition, the crystals of 1D are the mixed phases of TiO2 (rutile-anatase), which have been proved to show superior performance to the single polymorph due to the band alignment.33–36 This was evidently confirmed by the open-circuit photovoltage decay measurement (OCPVD), showing that the 1D with the rutile-anatase mixture has a much longer electron lifetime than the 1D with the pure anatase phase (discussed in S14†). Combining the evidence from time-dependent structural and crystal observations (by SEM and XRD), high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) techniques unveils an interesting unique nanoarchitecture (separately discussed in S15†). In order to give more insight into the structural details, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) was performed. Note that all “fully-grown 1D branched TiO2” nanostructures are densely covered by small hair-like branches, thus making it difficult to observe structural details. To reveal the architecture of the structure, we tried to elaborately control the synthesis conditions to get the branches just partially cover the trunk. As shown in Fig. 4a, partially grown 1D branched TiO2 was successfully synthesized, exposing both trunk and branch surfaces that make the observation of the architectural details by HRTEM possible. Fig. 4b shows an HRTEM micrograph of the trunk (area 1 in Fig. 4a), showing clear lattice planes. The lattice fringe space is ∼0.19 nm, corresponding to the distance between the (200) planes of anatase. The inset of Fig. 4b shows the corresponding SAED pattern of area 1, which shows a well-ordered lattice plane (200) of the trunk. Fig. 4c shows the HRTEM image of the branch, which is the highlighted area 2 of Fig. 4a, revealing well-resolved lattice fringes, indicating their good crystallinity. The lattice constant along (101) planes is 0.35 nm, which is the characteristics of anatase TiO2. Fig. 4d represents the SAED pattern of area 3 in Fig. 4a, where both the branches and the trunk are selected. The diffraction rings are composed of small diffraction spots, which are the characteristics of a multi-crystalline structure. The clear pattern of several rings with good intensity indicates that the area is composed of more than one crystalline phase. The pattern was indexed to mix crystallites of anatase (A) and rutile (R), as seen in the first 6 diffraction rings of A(101)/R(110), A (004), A(200), A(211)/R(220), R(211), and A(220), respectively.
 Fig. 4  TEM, HRTEM, and SAED characterization of the 1D nanostructure. (a) Low magnification TEM image. (b) HRTEM image of the core structure (inset shows the SAED pattern). (c) HRTEM image of a selected branch. (d) SAED pattern of the whole structure in area 3, indicating that the structure is composed of rutile and anatase diffraction rings. 
It is beneficial to have anatase as the trunk, as a previous study has shown that anatase has better electron conductivity and a longer carrier diffusion length than rutile.37 Moreover, much collected evidence reveals that anatase has better electron affinity than rutile, although it has a higher conduction band edge.38,39 Therefore, electrons are likely to move from rutile to anatase, while holes move in the opposite direction,40 as shown in Fig. 5g. This band alignment occurs only when the solid–solid interface between the two phases is in intimate contact. The in situ growth of nanostructures in the present method is ideal for offering a close interfacial contact. Noticeably, the core structures of 0D BTNs do not connect to each other and interparticle boundaries are formed. These boundaries could obstruct the migration of electrons (the inset of Fig. 5d), retarding charge transport in the film. This could be the reason why the 0D film needs relatively high applied voltage to achieve a desirable photocurrent, compared to the 1D and 2D films. Interestingly, its photocurrent appears surging at high voltages (from 0.8 to 1.8 V vs. RHE, see Fig. 3b). This characteristic suggests that 0D needs high voltage to help efficient charge separation. In contrast, 1D and 2D have spinal cores, which straightforwardly connect to the substrate with fewer interparticle boundaries. The charge transport in these spinals is also vertical to the FTO substrate, shortening charge migration paths (Fig. 5d–f insets). The core structures could act as a fast track for delivering electrons and enhance charge transport efficiency, which is evidently supported by the EIS results. Therefore, these structures (1D and 2D) need significantly lower applied voltages to reach high photocurrents compared to 0D. Moreover, as shown in Fig. 5h that represents the full circuit of the working system, the nanodendrites are directly grown on the FTO substrate, and therefore, the contact between the two is excellent. Hence, the electron transport to the counter electrode to perform hydrogen evolution could occur efficiently when a small bias is applied. Simultaneously, since the holes are left on the working electrode, they are likely to move to the branch because the smaller size of the branches can result in efficient charge collection.23 The ultra-thin branches are effective for transporting holes to the material–electrolyte interface,20 thus promoting oxygen evolution. In this study, it is found that the thickness of the films has less effect on the overall PEC performance than the dimension and crystal phases. For example, the 0D-BTN and 1D-BTN films have similar thickness (∼25 μm, Fig. 5d and e), but the 1D-BTN film shows significantly higher PEC performance. Moreover, the 2D-BNT film which has the lowest thickness (∼11 μm, Fig. 5f) among the three samples should theoretically have the fastest charge transport. However, the film shows the highest charge transfer resistance due to the low conductivity of K-titanate (see EIS results, Fig. 3d).
 Fig. 5  (a–c) SEM images showing the morphologies of the best film of each dimensional structure (insets show TEM images, illustrating the architectures of the nanostructures). (d–f) Cross-sectional SEM images of the structures in (a–c) (insets show the schematic figures, illustrating the electron transport partway of each dimensional nanostructure) (scale bars = 1 μm). (g) Energy-band alignment between anatase and rutile in 1D which promotes charge separation. (h) Schematic figure showing the charge carrier moving pathway and reactions in the full system. 
Conclusions
In conclusion, we revealed general principles governing the growth mechanism of highly reactive branched TiO2 nanostructures. With this finding, we demonstrated ability to control a wide range of dimensions and crystal phases by only a one-pot synthesis of environmentally friendly chemicals. The dimension-dependent photocatalytic behaviors of the nanostructures were studied. An appropriate structural design which is directly grown on the current collector could facilitate fast electron transport. Moreover, this unique nanostructure benefits not only from the large reactive surface area, but also from the band alignment that encourages charge separation. These synergistic effects lead to high PEC performance. We believe that this work could inspire new applications and designs of other semiconductor photocatalysts for more efficient solar energy conversion.
Experimental
Synthesis of various dimensionally branched titanium dioxide thin films
Titanium tetrachloride (TiCl4, ≥99%), potassium titanium oxalate (PTO, ≥90%), diethylene glycol (DEG, 99%), and potassium hydroxide (KOH, 99.99%) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and were used without further purification. Deionized (DI) water was used throughout the experiments. Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrates (7–8 Ω □−1, OPV Tech, China) were respectively cleaned with acetone, ethanol, and DI water (each for 30 min), and kept in DI water. After being blow-dried with N2, the FTO-coated glass substrates were seeded by immersing in 0.04 M TiCl4 for 30 min, and calcined at 450 °C for 1 h. Seeds on FTO-coated glass can enhance the density and uniformity of TiO2 films. In the typical synthesis of different dimensional titania thin films, designated amounts of PTO were mixed with x mL of water (where x is variable from 5.00–8.50 mL for zero-dimensional, 7.50–20.00 mL for one-dimensional (1D), and 2.75–4.00 mL for two-dimensional (2D) TiO2, respectively) under mechanical stirring. After stirring for 15 min, 40 − x mL of DEG was added into the mixture, and further stirred for 15 minutes before transferring to an autoclave (250 mL), which contains the pre-seeded FTO glass inside. The conductive side of the glass was faced down against the autoclave wall in the cases of 1D and 2D, and up against the autoclave wall in the case of 0D. The angle of the FTO substrate was adjusted to be around 25–45°. Then, the Teflon-lined autoclave was fitted in a stainless steel shell. The reactor was then transferred to an oven, which was set at 180 °C, and the reaction proceeded for a desirable period of time (10 h, except for the partially grown structures). Under these synthesis conditions, a ten-hour reaction was sufficient to synthesize the targeted structures. A longer reaction time could lead to undesired particle shapes under some conditions (see S16†). After that, the reactor was allowed to naturally cool down to room temperature. The acquired TiO2-coated FTO was gently rinsed with a copious amount of ethanol. The film was then dried in a vacuum oven which was set at 70 °C for 12 h. To remove possible organic residues and to enhance the contact between the nanostructured TiO2 film and the FTO substrate, the dried TiO2-coated FTO was calcined at 400 °C with a ramp rate of 1 °C min−1 for 2 h in a tube furnace which was flowed with compressed air.
Characterization
SEM was performed by using a JEOL JSM-7100F (operated at 10–20 kV) to observe the morphology of the nanostructures. TEM, HRTEM, and SAED were conducted using a JEOL 2100F which was operated at 200 kV. XRD was performed using a Bruker Advanced X-ray Diffractometer (40 kV, 30 mA) with Cu Kα radiation. The UV-Vis light absorption properties of the films were measured by using a Shimadzu 2200 UV-vis spectrophotometer. A Nicolet 6700 FT-IR was used to record the FTIR spectra of the samples.
Evaluation of photoelectrochemical properties
PEC, EIS, and stability tests were measured on a CHI 660 electrochemical workstation (CHI Instruments). In the measurements, TiO2-coated FTO, Pt plate, and Ag/AgCl were respectively used as working, counter and reference electrodes in a standard 3-electrode configuration. 1 M KOH was used as an electrolyte. The potentials versus Ag/AgCl reference electrode were converted to the RHE scale by using the Nernst equation: E(RHE) = E(Ag/AgCl) + 0.21 V + 0.0591 × pH. The reaction chamber was purged with N2 for 30 min before tests. A xenon lamp (150 W, Newport Model 818P-040-25) equipped with an AM 1.5G filter (100 mW cm−2) was used as a simulated solar light source. All photocatalytic measurement tests were conducted by illuminating at the front-side of the working electrode. The gas products from water splitting were collected after two-hour illumination with an applied bias of 0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl, and analysed by using a gas chromatograph (SHIMUDZU GC 2010Plus) equipped with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD). RESTEK ShinCarbon ST 80/100 and argon were used as a column and a carrier gas, respectively. For IPCE, the electrolyte, the electrochemical workstation, and the configuration of the electrodes were the same as those used for PEC and EIS measurements. An applied voltage of 1.23 V vs. RHE from the electrochemical workstation was supplied to the system. An oriel xenon lamp (300 W) equipped with an Oriel Cornerstone 260 1/4 m monochromator was used as the light source. The power density at a specific wavelength was measured by using a Newport 1918-c power meter.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the Australian Research Council through its Discovery Project programs and Laureate Fellowship program. T. B. acknowledges the financial support from the Royal Thai Government Scholarship, and National Nanotechnology Center (NANOTEC), and National Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA) (via grant No. P1951553). Proofreading from the Professional Authorship Center (PAC, NSTDA) is also appreciated.
References
X. Chen and A. Selloni, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9281–9282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919–9986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Anpo and P. V. Kamat, Environmentally Benign Photocatalysts: Applications of Titanium Oxide-Based Materials, Springer Science & Business Media,  2010 Search PubMed .
T. Butburee, Y. Bai, J. Pan, X. Zong, C. Sun, G. Liu and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12776–12784 RSC .
Y. Wang, M. Zu, S. Li, T. Butburee, L. Wang, F. Peng and S. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 250, 307–314 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, T. Butburee, H. Yu, Z. Li, R. Amal, G. M. Lu and L. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 449, 246–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Butburee, Z. Sun, A. Centeno, F. Xie, Z. Zhao, D. Wu, P. Peerakiatkhajohn, S. Thaweesak, H. Wang and L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 426–433 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xing, X. Zong, T. Butburee, J. Pan, Y. Bai and L. Wang, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 521, 96–103 CrossRef CAS .
J. Poolwong, T. Kiatboonyarit, S. Achiwawanich, T. Butburee, P. Khemthong and S. Kityakarn, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 1715 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Peerakiatkhajohn, T. Butburee, J.-H. Yun, H. Chen, R. M. Richards and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20127–20133 RSC .
P. Docampo, S. Guldin, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 698–703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Y. Lin, C. P. Lee, K. W. Tsai, M. H. Yeh, C. Y. Chen, R. Vittal, C. G. Wu and K. C. Ho, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 181–190 CAS .
C. Phawa, S. Prayoonpokarach, K. Sinthiptharakoon, P. Chakthranont, W. Sangkhun, K. Faungnawakij and T. Butburee, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 2116–2124 CrossRef CAS .
T. Butburee, Y. Bai, H. Wang, H. Chen, Z. Wang, G. Liu, J. Zou, P. Khemthong, G. Q. M. Lu and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705666 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-Q. Wu, Y.-F. Xu, C.-Y. Su and D.-B. Kuang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 644–649 RSC .
T. Butburee, P. Kotchasarn, P. Hirunsit, Z. Sun, Q. Tang, P. Khemthong, W. Sangkhun, W. Thongsuwan, P. Kumnorkaew and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8156–8166 RSC .
B. Liu and E. S. Aydil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3985–3990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, X. W. D. Lou and Y. Xie, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 598–618 CrossRef CAS .
V. J. Babu, S. Vempati, T. Uyar and S. Ramakrishna, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 2960–2986 RSC .
I. S. Cho, Z. Chen, A. J. Forman, D. R. Kim, P. M. Rao, T. F. Jaramillo and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4978–4984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, X. Sun, K. Lozano and Y. Mao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 13467–13475 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiu, K. Yan, H. Deng and S. Yang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 407–413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mao, Nanomater. Energy, 2014, 3, 103–128 CrossRef .
G. Van De Velde, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1977, 39, 1357–1362 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Pecsok, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1951, 73, 1304–1308 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Nature, 2005, 437, 121–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, J. Ma, Z. Zhao and L. Qi, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 663–671 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Wang and J. Y. Ying, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 3113–3120 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, Y. Wang, T. Herricks and Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 695–703 RSC .
L. Kavan, M. Grätzel, S. Gilbert, C. Klemenz and H. Scheel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 6716–6723 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, X. Lin, A. Hagfeldt and T. Ma, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 3582–3586 CrossRef .
H. Xia, Y. Wang, J. Lin and L. Lu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
D. C. Hurum, K. A. Gray, T. Rajh and M. C. Thurnauer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 977–980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li and K. A. Gray, Chem. Phys., 2007, 339, 173–187 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Kumar and L. G. Devi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 13211–13241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zachariah, K. Baiju, S. Shukla, K. Deepa, J. James and K. Warrier, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11345–11356 CrossRef CAS .
T. Luttrell, S. Halpegamage, J. Tao, A. Kramer, E. Sutter and M. Batzill, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 1–8 Search PubMed .
D. O. Scanlon, C. W. Dunnill, J. Buckeridge, S. A. Shevlin, A. J. Logsdail, S. M. Woodley, C. R. A. Catlow, M. J. Powell, R. G. Palgrave and I. P. Parkin, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hurum, A. Agrios, S. Crist, K. Gray, T. Rajh and M. Thurnauer, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2006, 150, 155–163 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Hurum, A. G. Agrios, K. A. Gray, T. Rajh and M. C. Thurnauer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 4545–4549 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta05218gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The structural and dimensional evolutions of branched titania. (a) Schematic illustration summarizing the general strategy to control the dimensional evolution of TiO2 films with various morphologies. (b–d) Morphological evolution of 0D, (e–g) morphological evolution of 1D, and (h–j) morphological evolution of 2D titania without dimensional changes, respectively (scale bars = 500 nm).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematics illustrating the structural growth and phase transformation mechanisms of 0D, 1D, and 2D nanostructures. (b–d) XRD patterns of various dimensional nanostructures (F = FTO, A = anatase, R = rutile, and K = potassium titanate).	 
K2TiO(C2O4)2 + H2O → [Ti(OH)2(C2O4)2]2− + 2K+	(1)
[Ti(OH)2(C2O4)2]2− + 2H+ + 2e− → [Ti(C2O4)2]− + H2	(2)

 	Fig. 3  (a) UV-vis light absorption spectra, (b) linear sweep voltammogram, (c) IPCE, and (d) EIS of various dimensional films.	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM, HRTEM, and SAED characterization of the 1D nanostructure. (a) Low magnification TEM image. (b) HRTEM image of the core structure (inset shows the SAED pattern). (c) HRTEM image of a selected branch. (d) SAED pattern of the whole structure in area 3, indicating that the structure is composed of rutile and anatase diffraction rings.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a–c) SEM images showing the morphologies of the best film of each dimensional structure (insets show TEM images, illustrating the architectures of the nanostructures). (d–f) Cross-sectional SEM images of the structures in (a–c) (insets show the schematic figures, illustrating the electron transport partway of each dimensional nanostructure) (scale bars = 1 μm). (g) Energy-band alignment between anatase and rutile in 1D which promotes charge separation. (h) Schematic figure showing the charge carrier moving pathway and reactions in the full system.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta05218g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
